Che 


are 


mt 
Bess 


\ JOLUME XXII 


Contents 


ME Week <= 5 LecayntupleoseAlGuenbaea4cvenuenel lt 184 
| Editorials 
' Cox: Away From the White House.............. 187 
me Hitting the Rafters.........ceseeces A he a nanan 188 
me The Anderson Decision .......2.eceeceesecncees 189 
The Crux of European Disorder................. 191 
' Mr. Hearst and a Third Party..........0++ssees 193 
Perea Modern Instance ...5 isc dso cde wambaee geen cass 194 
General Articles | : 
Me RR PTANCHOG :.< iwieis'n cele ddaeddcin eh Bruce Bliven 196 
Walls Against Eden (Verse)...Louis Untermeyer 197 
On Being a Stockholder............ Vida Scudder 198 
Bore Acid’ Teck c cee sies Norman Hapgood 200 
The Tragedy of Mark Twain..... Alvin Johnson 201 
Bee Lectures 2. oc. e ieee sce ccensene James Weber Linn 204 
r ee en Ce Rn palbene pio e gO Lees 
. views of Books 
' Gordon Craig—Advancing....... Oliver M. Sayler 206 
PERS PRABOCC 5.0 diving waedd cea qubwun ees C. B. 207 
The New Social Order.......... Charles A. Beard 208 
The Week 
[R. COX takes the field against Mr. 


: i Harding upon a platform more liberal in 
or e respects than the credo of the Republicans. 
Por this we have the Resolutions Committee to 
bank, and not the delegates assembled in conven- 
For the delegates accepted their Committee’s 
port without nullifying reservations. ‘They did 
‘cross a t nor dot ani. To be sure, there was 
a real debate on the floor of the San Francisco 
onvention, And debate of any sort was lacking 
t Chicago. But the Democrats made no changes 
| the work of their Committee. They voted down 
linnovations. Mr, Bryan, of course, was hard- 


f the most determined efforts of a long and active 
fe. “If you can’t get alcohol enough to make 
mu drunk,” he demanded, “why do you want al- 
hol at all?’ But the delegates weren’t to be 
ampeded. All correspondents agree that. Mr. 
yan scored a personal triumph. He received a 
rer y minute demonstration. But all five of his 
tered planks were buried. It was a typical 
‘yar victory. | 


i) 
he 


New York, WEDNESDAY, JULY 14, 1920 


t hit. His plea for bone-dry prohibition was one 


New - 


REPUBLIC 


A Journal of Opinion 


NUMBER 293 


WHAT gives the Democratic platform a liberal 
outline is its comparison with the platform of the 
Republicans. And here the difference is largely a 
matter of two totally unrelated but important 
planks. The Democrats, like the Republicans, 
gave the League of Women Voters practically what . 
it asked for, practically in the words in which it 
asked. But the Democrats have gone one step far- 
ther than the Republicans. They have been bold. 
enough, where their competitors lacked boldness, 
to name specifically the governors of three states 
and call upon them to summon special sessions for 
ratification of the suffrage amendment. A second 
point in which the Democrats have outmatched the 
Republicans in their appeal for the votes of liber- 
als, is in the party’s declaration of its policy toward 
Mexico. Nowhere do the Democrats say specific- 
ally that under any and all circumstances they 
reject intervention, But they come closer to saying 
that than do the Republicans. They do not assail 
the policy of ‘futile written protests.” They put 
less emphasis upon what they will do to ‘‘enforce” 
respect for flag and oil-field. They have, in our 
opinion, left in their platform a little larger space 


for Mexico and the Mexicans. 


THESE planks on Mexico, woman suffrage, and 
women in industry are high points in the Demo- 
cratic platform. On most other issues the program 
drawn in San Francisco is as nebulous as the pro- 
gram of the Republicans. The Democrats want 
development of a mercharit marine; but whether 


by government or by private initiative they do not. 


say; they simply specify “under proper legislation.” 
They want the cost of living to come down; but 
they are as helpless about it as the Republicans are 
—except that they find one additional cause for our 
present difficulties: the inertia cf a Republican 
Congress. They want tax reform; but they decline 
to state specifically that it is the excess profits tax 
they would repeal. They want the railways to run 


185 


nicely; but, after praising their.own federal admini- 
stration of the roads, and assailing the Republicans, 
they come out for a brand of private ownership 
which is somehow to demand no subsidy. ‘The 
Democrats trim as cautiously as the Republicans 
_ do. 
even worse. ‘That is in their plank on free speech. 
Free speech they. support—but with reservations. 
And they actually undertake to defend the tactics 
of Messrs. Palmer and Burleson. “No utterance 
from any quarter has been assailed,” they say, ‘‘and 
no publication has been repressed which has not 
been animated by treasonable purpose and directed 
against the nation’s peace, order and security in 
time of war.”’ That simply isn’t true. | 


ON what the Democratic platform would say re- 


garding labor, Mr. Gompers had staked consider- 
able prestige, Having insisted upon a “nonparti- 
san” policy which must support one or the other of 
the two major parties, and having then energetical- 
ly denounced the Republicans and all their works, 
it was clearly Mr. Gompers’s hope to find in the 
Democratic platform something to cheer about. He 
is not immediately enthusiastic. 
form was adopted Friday evening, on Sunday Mr. 
Gompers asserted it was still ‘“‘too early to say 
anything regarding the declarations of the conven- 
tion which is still in session.” Those declarations 
include certain satisfactory planks, such as the one 
defending labor’s right of collective bargaining and 
“of speaking through representatives of their own 
selection.” But there is nothing, for instance, about 
the use of the injunction, and nothing about repeal 
of the labor clauses which the A. F. of L. wanted 
struck from the Esch-Cummins law. “It might be 
worse; let’s take it.” Either Mr. Gompers will 
have to say something of that sort, or else describe 
his present nonpartisan program as a failure, even 
in its effect on campaign platforms. And in cam- 
paign platforms it is comparatively easy for any- 
one to make promises. 


A plank in the Democratic platform which sur- 
prises nobody is that one dealing with the Treaty 
and the League of Nations. The Democrats want 
“immediate ratification of the Treaty without re- 
servations which wouldimpair its essential integrity, 
but’’—this doubtful concession was won by Sen- 
ator Walsh—‘‘do not oppose the acceptance of re- 
servations making clearer or more specific the ob- 
ligations of the United States to the League asso- 
ciates.” From Paris one of the correspondents of 
the New York Times cables that ‘the League of 
Nations is dying of malnutrition and inattention.” 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


On one point particularly their trimming is. 


ing them more unitedly, to make the statesmen of — 


Though the plat- 


more than trade relations and something less than 


We can save it? “No rational man,” said Mr. 
Balfour a week ago in London, “would suggest 
that it is the League’s task to rescue the world from q 
chaos, That is a task for the Supreme Council.” ” 
The League dies, not so much because America — 
stands outside of it, as because the ruling statesmen — 
of Europe prefer the old method of the alliance. © 
We should need delegates more canny than those | 
we had at Versailles, and a public opinion support. 


Europe abandon their alliances in favor of the 
League. As matters stand in Europe now, it is to 
an offensive alliance and not a League of Nations — 
that our support would be contributed. 


FOUR hours difference in time, and a wire ser- — 
vice out of San Francisco incomparable with the — 
service from Chicago, made reporting the Demo- | 
cratic convention a difficult task for eastern news- — 
papers. What some of these journals accomplish- — 
ed, despite all difficulties, is remarkable. Take the — 
case of the New York Times. Unable to lease a _ 
direct wire to San Francisco, the Times succeeded — 


in obtaining one from Vancouver to Montreal. To 


complete the circuit, telephone wires were leased — 
from San Francisco to Vancouver and from Mon- — 
treal to New York, and to these wires Morse in-— 
struments were attached. Over this improvised 
line the ‘Times achieved exceptional results. It was _ 
12:39 Friday morning in New York when Thurs- 
day evening’s session started; yet the first edition of 
the Times, going to press at 12:45, carried a col- 
umn and a half of news about the opening of the > 
session. ‘This instance is typical. The Times’s re-_ 
porting of the convention, particularly in its atten- 
tion to detail, stands out as a feat in modern jour- 
nalism. | 


TO the departure of Leonid Krassin for Moscow © 
various interpretations are being given. The Soviet — 
Minister of Trade and Commerce, in the opinion — 


_of some observers, has left London because his 


conferences with Lloyd George have brought him — 
nowhere. He is going home because his mission — 
is a failure. Perhaps that is true. The conférences — 
in London, of unusual importance to all the world, 
have been as well protected from public scrutiny 
as were the councils of Versailles. There is, how-— 
ever, a second guess ventured in explanation of | 
Krassin’s return to Moscow, and this one assumes 
his mission has been a success and not a failure. 
Some of the London papers believe that Lloyd 
George has proposed a bargain covering something — 


recognition, and that Krassin is obliged to go per- 


oe 


July 14, 1920 THE NEW 


sonally to persuade his government to agree to 
i various concessions. Which guess is right— 
patience for another month may tell us. 


IF Krassin’s return to Russia does in fact mean an 
end to negotiations, what alternatives remain?. 
Either the Allies can follow a policy of watchful 
_ waiting, hoping for a new coup d’etat in Moscow 
and continuing meanwhile to deny medicines and 
hospital supplies to the many millions of Russian 
- men and women who can in no way be held ac- 

complices in the Soviet adventure; or they can try 
- once again the tactics of interyention. Kolchak, 
- Denikin and Yudenitch, to be sure, are no longer 
on the scene; and the Polish army, despite assist- 

ance from our own country, is apparently not to 
_ reach Moscow: “‘It is generally believed,” says Mr. 
_ James in a cable to the Times, “that the Polish fight 
_ against the Bolsheviki is going worse than news 
_ dispatches are allowed to tell, and in that fact is 
much sadness for the French.” Nevertheless, all 
hope of invading Russia is not dead. General 
- Wrangel is still manipulating remnants of Denikin’s 
army in the South, with reports of many thousands 
_ of prisoners taken.. And in the North, Mr. Guch- 
koff, Minister of War and Navy under the Tsar, 
claims to have 60,000 well-armed men and a mil- 
lion marks ready to march on Moscow. A few 
- successes in the field, and we are likely to begin 
hearing what a democrat Guchkoff has always been. 


_ ‘THE question of a Russian policy, said a dispatch 
to the New York World, was to have had the at- 
tention of the Premiers in the Inter-Allied confer- 
ence held in Brussels. The Supreme Council was 

there to focus its intelligence upon ‘‘the whole Rus- 
sian situation.” That it may have done; but the 
results, if any, are not worth posting. There was 

- another question to be discussed in the Brussels con- 

_ ference, and, because the French insisted, that ques- 

tion was given precedence over Russia. This was 

the old task of deciding how to collect an indemnity 

_ from Germany. Méillerand’s most recent estimate 

_ of the amount due France is 62,000,000,000 francs, 

_ on a pre-war standard, and four times that much, 

as francs are at present valued. The indemnity, 

' particularly that part of it which goes to France, 

has always had precedence over other issues—Rus- 

sia, for instance—in the councils of the Premiers. 

' French insistence on that point is natural enough. 

_ But the indemnity will begin to flow only when 

' Europe is at peace, And Europe will not be at 

" peace so long as the Allies make war in Russia. 


THE conference in Brussels failed not only to ar- 
Tive at a Russian policy, but also to reach any 
“agreement concerning the indemnity. The arrange- 


REPUBLIC 186 
ment tentatively accepted awards 52 per cent of 
the total indemnity to France, 22 per cent to Eng- 
land, 8 per cent to Belgium (plus the amount guar- 
anteed her separately under the Treaty), 5 per cent 
to Jugoslavia, and the remaining 13 per cent di- 
vided between Rumania, Portugal, Japan and Italy. 
‘With this division the French are apparently satis- 
fied; but not the Italians. Instead of sharing 13 
per cent with three other countries, the Italians ask 
20 per cent for themselves alone. Their dissatis- 
faction prevented any agreement from being reach- 
ed. But the Brussels conference, though it left the 
indemnity and Russia in mid-air, made one decision 
of importance: #t will re-admit German representa- 
tives into the council of European statesmen. That 
represents substantial progress, even though Mil- 
lerand has apparently insistedthat all meetings with 
German delegates shall be preceeded by Allied 
meetings to determine what policy will be followed. 


IN Mexico conferences between the Provisional 
Government and various petroleum interests have 
failed to bring an agreement. From the beginning 
of these conferences Mexico has been ready to 
agree to apply no retroactive interpretation of the 
Constitution regarding sub-soil rights in petroleum. 
But that has not been enough for the oil men, Dis- 
covering that they would readily be conceded all 
that they might fairly ask they at once demanded 
more. What they asked included nullification of 
all petroleum legislation based upon Article 27 of 
the Constitution, cancellation of seventy-five permits 
which the government had already granted for 
drilling operations on national lands, and abolition 
of the tonnage tax imposed by the Carranza 
régime. With such demands as the price of agree- 
ment, conferences in Mexico City came to grief. 


DESPITE attacks from many quarters, and fre- 
quent prophecies of its collapse, the Farmers’ Non- 
partisan League again has been indorsed by the 
people of North Dakota. In the Republican pri- 
maries the entire state ticket of the League came 
through successfully. Simultaneous with this vic- 
tory comes an announcement from the National 
Grange that it will have nothing to do with polit- 
ical organization. The farmers of the country, it 
believes, can work successfully through the two old 
parties. How successfully did they work through 
the Democrats, last week in San Francisco? Farm- 
ers represented by the American Farm Bureau Fed- 
eration, by the Farmers’ National Council, by the © 
National Bureau of Farmers’ Organizations, etc., 
asked for retention of “the highest rates of taxa- 
tion levied during the war on estates, incomes, war 
and excess profits”; for “legislation to establish con- 
trol of the meat-packing industry”; and for “‘gov- 


187 


ernment ownership and democratic operation of the 
railways.” None of these planks found its way 
into the Democratic platform. 


THE decision to publish the report on the steel: 


strike made for the Interchurch World Movement 
is most whelesome. The fact that it has been long 
‘in coming, the fact that its coming is associated 
with sensational rumors connecting it with the gen- 
eral debacle of the Interchurch Movement, should 
not obscure the main value of the report. That 
value lies in its being the first and the only un- 
hurried, disinterested inquiry into one of the his- 
_ toric incidents of our time. We have not seen the 
report, and we do not know its findings. But we 
do know that it was made by highly competent men 
working under a committee of eminent churchmen. 


Cox: Away From the White 


House 


AVING proclaimed the League of Nations 

and the record of the Wilson administration 

the transcendent issues of the campaign, the con- 
vention nominated a man as far removed as it was 
possible for any candidate to be both from the 
League and the record of the administration. Look 
ever the list of possibilities, and find a man if you 
can so little identified: with the League or the re- 
cord. Mr. McAdoo was an exponent of the 
original Wilsonism; Mr. Palmer is identified with 
_ the outstanding features of the party’s history more 
or less since the armistice; Mr. Davis is the re- 
presentative of the administration at its most 
critical post; Mr. Marshall, whatever his personal 
reservations, is committed; Mr. Cummings is the 
beloved disciple; Mr.Owen has been an administra- 

tion man most of the time; Mr, Glass was the Pre- 
sident’s spokesman. None of these was chosen. 
Governor Cox was chosen, and what is Governor 
Cox’s experience? He has been a successful 

Governor, has had no part in the federal ad- 


ministration, has played no conspicuous part in the | 


League controversy, is known nationally at the 
moment for just two things: that he seems to 
know how to carry Ohio, and that he is somewhat 
wet. | | 

No doubt Governor Cox will have to stand on 
the platform provided for him. He will have 
difficulty in running on it. His experience has 
centered entirely on the politics of one state. Sud- 
_ denly he finds himself projected as the.exponent of 
_a radically new foreign policy, involving intimate 
association with the most bewildering set of facts 
that confront the human mind. It will not be 


enough to “approve’’ the League; it will be neces- 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


less he chooses to cut loose from the platform. For 


‘the candidate shall not eat each other up. His next 


| Harding will win in a walk. Mr. Harding wills 


Ba 
a 


July 14, ee 


sary for Governor Cox to expound the main ele 

ments of the policy he proposes to pursue if by his 
election the people approve his platform. We 
venture to predict that Governor Cox will have to 


improvise such a policy in the next few weeks, un- 


he has received a nomination on the basis of active 
participation in the present League of Nations 
This means that if elected he will for four years 
guide American policy in the League. When a 
thinks over his plight he must feel a little as if he’ 
had been nominated for Prime Minister say of 
Armenia or Poland or any other country. but the 
one he knows something about. 4 
In one sense he will have less difficulty in adjust: 
ing himself to the domestic phase of the platform.” 
As an honest man and a progressive, he will, of 
course, stutter when he comes to defend the com: | 
plete defense of Palmer and Burleson and all that 
they signify. But for the future the convention has 
left him a fairly free hand. The authors of the | 
platform were so exhausted by the delight of. con-~ 
templating their own past, that they refrained _ 
wisely, considering that past, from any definite” F 
convictions about the future. 4 
We do not know from Governor Cox’s record 
where he will alight on domestic issues. As Gover-~ 
nor he has not had, naturally, to deal with Mexico, _ 
with the railroad problem, with post-bellum © 
finance, with the tariff, with the relation of the © q 
government to the great utilities and natural re- 
sources, or with federal intervention in labor dis- 
putes. Our own investigation of his work in Ohio © 
leads us to believe that his convictions are uns | 
formed on these matters. The record, as we know 4 
it, after study that was by no means exhaustive, © | 
seems to reveal a man of good intentions and exe 
cellent sympathies, shrewd and competent in local ~ 
affairs, but without particular grasp of national | 
affairs. He has been a sound and progressive | 
Governor; on the crucial question of civil liberty his | 
record is splendid by contrast with that of his 
neighbor Governor Sproul of Pennsylvania. It reg 
mains to be seen what he can do. 
He goes forth not especially equipped to deal 
with a situation of extraordinary intellectual com. | 
plexity. His first problem is to adjust himself” 
somehow to a platform that is alien to him, so that” 
the words of the platform and the experience off 


problem is to lift himself out of obscurity and con- 
fusion by some positive contribution of his own. q 1 

He is too good a politician not to know that if 
the whole issue is the Wilson administration, Mr. 


win because he is gradually defining a plausible al- 
ternative to progressivism. Mr. Harding stand 
for a kind of candid and unpretentious reaction 


) 


July 14, 1920 THE NEW 
F that any one can respect, and that a great many 
a People momentarily desire. The Wilson ad- 
" ministration is such a mixture of high purpose and 
"mean surrender that it repels the conservative and 
" leaves most liberals cold: Governor Cox will find 
little guidance in his platform. Perhaps the bosses 
* who nominated him intended that to be the case. 

4 Why else did that convention go as far away from 
' the White House as it could to find a leader? 


Hitting the Rafters 
VERY reader who is familiar with the 
A brighter parts of the New York Tribune 
’ knows certain facts about F. P. A. and Briggs and 
_ Heywood Broun. Every such reader knows, for 
q example, that Mr. Broun dislikes bunk, and that in 
"Chicago and San Francisco, which he has lately 
_ visited, this dislike grew and waxed mighty on the 
food set before him. ‘Whenever a speaker faces 
_ an audience of more than a thousand persons,” Mr. 
' Broun says, “he becomes an orator. The ordinary 
’ language of our day is discarded for phrases that 
will hit the rafters. Curious gestures come into 
_ being Nothing is casual, calm or reasoned.” Mr. 
_ Broun evidently agrees with Pascal, who said sus- 
_ tained eloquence made him tired. L’éloquence 
i continue ennuie. 
_ How much time was spent | on nominating and 
' seconding speeches at .Chicago? We have for- 
_ gotten. At San Francisco it totted up to four or 
' five stricken hours. The tediousness of such per- 
' formances might be forgiven if they did any good. 
ql Most of them do not gain or even lose a vote. At 
a generous estimate one in ten of the orators may 
" Pel his hearers a thing or two that they wanted to 
_ know. Most of the orators are content to unload 
BS _ good old words in good old phrases. 
less leader of men, that militant Democrat, Senator 
| Furnifold M. Simmons of North Carolina.” But 
all Democrats are militant in Presidential years, 
Bs all leaders are matchless, so what is the use? Did 
Ba single one of Mr. J. H. Bigelow’s hearers think 
he was talking sense when he called Mr. A. 
"Mitchell Palmer “Pennsylvania’s finest product’’? 
' Probably not. Everybody knows Pennsylvania’s 
"finest product is steel. 
4 We should be surprised, all of us, if one of our 
_ orators suddenly grew sick of the old stuff and 
_ took to declaring that his candidate had run a 
hundred i in nine seconds flat, had made thirty-two 


in his stockings. We should think our orator had 
j gone crazy. But would these assertions be much 
Temoter from reality than what we listen to, with- 
‘out marked impatience, every four years, whee one 


4 


‘That match- 


home runs in one year, and measured eight feet six’ 


REPUBLIC 188 


of us is recommending another of us to the rest of 
us? Why do we Americans suffer our orators to 
bore us with this special cruelty? Other civilized 
nations are not afflicted in just this way. An Eng- 
lish audience would be rude to a speaker who 
rolled and roared through his man-who-ing perora- 
tion until he reached his peerless leader’s 
proper name. Ce chef unique et incomparable, ce 
chef hors de pair et sans égal—if they ended all — 
their eulogies of one another in such words, could 
French politicians get away with it? In the last 
two years many arrant lies have been told about 
Soviet Russia, yet no liar, however accomplished, 
has gone so far as to accuse a single Bolshevik 
orator of perorating, after our American fashion, 
thus: Synok liubimy vsei Sovietskoi Rossii, chel- | 
oviek kotorovo nikto ne kommunisticheskyei, nikto 
ne stoprotsentnoprotivokapitalisticheskyei—Leon J. 
Trotsky. ‘There are, after all, some kinds of out- 
rages that a Bolshevik regime will not stand for. 
It is not as if writing or speaking about a human 
being, in such a way as to interest other human 
beings in your subject, were an impossible feat. 
The thing has been done more than once. Take 
any of the well-known instances: “Not many days 
ago I saw at breakfast the notablest of all your 
Notabilities, Daniel Webster. He is a magnificent 
specimen: you might say to all the world, This is 
your Yankee Englishman, such Limbs we make in 
Yankeeland. As a Logic-fencer, Advocate, or Par- 
liamentary Hercules, one would incline at first 
sight to back him against all the extant world. The 
tanned complexion, that amorphous crag-like face; 
the dull black eyes under their precipice of brows, 
like dull anthracite furnaces, needing only to be 
blown; the mastiff-mouth, accurately closed:— 
I have not traced as much of silent Berserkir-rage, - 
that I remember of, in any other man.” This, to 
be sure, is from a private letter, not written for 
publication, but even if he had been “facing an — 
audience of more than a thousand persons”, Car- 
lyle would have drawn as exact a likeness, would 
have stuck as close to what his eyes saw and his 
mind had inferred. His words are not a eulogy 
in intention, they are a faithful report of things — 
seen and things guessed at, but no eulogy could 
focus one’s attention more sharply upon Webster. 
Even a eulogy can do the trick, if only the eulogist 
knows his business. Even at this late day who can 
read Fontenelle’s eulogy of Vauban without feel- 
ing that a vote for Vauban, had the office he filled 
been elective, would have been a vote for the best 
man? | | 
One of these Presidential years an American 
orator, unknown and at first unpopular, will kick 
over the traces. He will realize that American 


voters, in most of their political campaigns, have 


189 


been shut up to a choice between two rather com- 
monplace candidates. He will know why he pre- 
fers one commonplace candidate to the other. He 
will not talk as if his candidate were not a fallible 
human being. His most startling innovation will 
be his sincerity. He will not only believe every 
word he says: he will know how to say what he be- 
lieves so as to make his hearers believe that he 
believes it. His speeches or hers, for this unconven- 
tional and innovating campaigner is as likely as not 
to be a woman, will at first seem rather tame. But 
little by little the campaign managers will discover 
that this speaker has a way not only of interesting 
her audiences, but of disposing them to agree with 
her. Her eulogy, when she does eulogize, will not 
- smoothly iron every human lineament out of her 
candidate. Little by little she will change the 
public demand. She will make the ordinary cam- 
paigner seem to more and more voters as unreal as 
he now seems to Mr. Heywood Broun. May we 
live to see this day, for in this day will begin a 
necessary work of. subversion and undermining, a 
revolt against bunk. Historians will describe this 
change in.American taste for political poking as 


The Fall of the House of Gusher. 


The Anderson Decision | 
‘UDGE George W. Anderson has rendered an 


opinion in the communist deportation cases 
which will stand out as one of the permanent land- 
marks in the history of human freedom. Tem- 
perate in its language, critical.in its weighing of 
evidence, impersonal in its approach, Judge Ander- 
son’s opinion is nevertheless in its marshaling of 
indisputable facts the most deadly indictment 
which could be brought against the methods and 
policies of Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer. 
It is more than-that. Judge Anderson has set 
down principles of jurisprudence and administra- 


tion which, if they are accepted by American courts 


and executives, will establish civil and political 
rights in America upon a aster ie and solid 
foundation, : 

Judge Anderson’s approach to the cases, as re- 
vealed by the opinion he has rendered, is scrupul- 
ously judicial. It was not his function to try over 
again the cases of the twenty aliens who are seeking 
their freedom under the time honored writ of 
habeas corpus. ‘The duty of trying them, under 
the statutes, falls on the Department of Labor. 


Judge Anderson’s duty was to try the tryers’ 


_—to see whether in their treatment of the aliens 
those fundamental notions of fairness and decency 
which we term due process of law had been ob- 
served. | 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


t a , 
ee 
Se 

vale 


July 14, 1920 


His conclusion is that these notions of fairness 
and decency were not observed—that due process” 
of law was flagrantly, repeatedly, and shamefully 
violated, and that for this denial of due process” 
the twenty aliens were entitled to their release.” 
He does not severely blame the Department of 
Labor, although it is apparent from his opinion © 
that some officials at least of that Department were ~ 
far from blameless. It was the Department of 
Justice however, under Mr. Palmer’s guidance and 
control, which planned, engineered and. ace 
complished the colossal conspiracy against consti- 
tutional rights which is now at last so thorough 
exposed. q 

Judge Anderson’s narrative is detailed and con- 
vincing. The Socialist party, which had about | 
100,000 members, had split into several discordant — 
factions. The right wing socialists, numbering ~ 
about 25,000, remained in control of the party ~ 
machinery; about 50,000 either seceded or were 
expelled, and became the Communist party; of the 
balance, perhaps half formed the Communist La- — 
bor party and the others dissolved or suffered — 
further schisms. The unit of secession or expul-— 
sion was generally the “local”, the individual 
members becoming automatically, and often with-— 
out knowledge of what was happening, membesii j 
of the new party. ‘The great mass of former — 
socialists who had thus become alleged Commun- — F 
ists had no real comprehension of any important — 
or material change in their associations or in the © 
political or economic purposes sought to be a-— 
chieved by their negligibly weak organizations. — 
Social educational purposes, and race sympa 
rather than political agitation constituted the con- 
trolling motives with a large share of them. They | 
joined the local Russian or Polish or Lithuanian ' 
Socialist or Communist Club, ‘just as citizens joing | 
neighborhood clubs, social or religious or civic or 
fraternal.” | 

The doctrines taught by these various off-shootil 
of the Socialist party were the traditional doctrines — 4 
of Marxian socialism. They did not advocate 
bombing, assassination or destruction of property. 
They met openly, in halls, ‘‘not secretly, not in — 
armories, not in laboratories where explosives | 
might be compounded.’? They believed in “‘propa- 
ganda by words, not by deed.” “No weapons of © : 
the cutting or exploding kind with which modern © 
Wally insurrections, and revolutions are carried — 
on,” were found on their premises. They believed - 
in fundamental industrial and social changes, to. be 
attained through the general strike. “Practically _ 
all the propositions set forth in the present turgid, 
rhetorical Program are found in the Manifesto of © 
1847 of Marx and Engels.” 7 

A United States statute oh se the deportation 


oa 


THE NEW 


July 14, 1920 


organization that advocates or believes in “the 
_ overthrow by force or violence of the Government 
of the United States.” Administration of the law 
' is in the hands of the Department of Labor. 
' in the latter part of 1919 the Department of 
; Justice, (which has ‘rightfully nothing to do with 
_ the statute) promulgated an opinion that the Com- 
- munist and Communist Labor parties did believe 
" in and advocate the overthrow by force or violence 
' of the government of the United States, and pro- 
ceeded to put its views as to the law in effect. 
' On December 27, 1919, the chief of the Bureau 
_ of Investigation of the Department of Justice in 
_ Washington sent a “‘strictly confidential” telegram 
' to the head of his local bureau in Boston, inform- 
- ing him that January 2, 1920, had been fixed as the 
date for the wholesale arrest of all members of 
Communist or Communist Labor parties. The 
: telegram directed that agents of the Department 
of Justice on that date should enter and thoroughly 
search the offices and private residences of mem- 
' bers of these two parties. “I leave it entirely to 
_ your diseretion,” the telegram read, ‘‘as to the 
' method by which you should gain access to such 
_ places.” Search warrants were to be obtained only 
' “if, due to the local conditions in your territory, 
_ you find that it is absolutely necessary” to obtain 
them. All literature, books, papers, correspon- 
- dence, and ‘“‘anything hanging on the walls” were to 
_ be gathered up. All aliens caught in the net were 
_ to be handed over to the Immigrant authorities. 
_ “If possible” the telegram suggests, ‘“‘you should 
arrange with your under-cover informants to have 
_meetings of the Communist party and Communist 


_ formed by some of the bureau officers that such ar- 
" rangements will be made.” 

Kellecher, the head of the Department of Justice 
_ bureau at Boston transmitted these instructions, in 
' summarized form, to his local agents, adding, a- 
_ mong other things, that the persons taken into cus- 
_ tody were “not to be permitted to communicate 
with any outside person until after examination by 


- fice,” and that “‘if a person claims American citizen- 
- ship, he must produce documentary evidence of 
same, if native born, through birth records, if 
naturalized, through producing for agent copy of 
: Seealization papers.” 

' On January 2nd, from 300 to 500 men at a 
4 “moderate estimate,” employed or temporarily en- 
“sted by the ap pertrient of Justice, ‘generally 
without warrants,’ carried out these instructions in 
"detail. All night long this governmental mob raid- 
ed private houses, club rooms, offices, arresting 


_ of aliens who are members of or affiliated with an ~ 


Yet. 


_ Labor party held on the night set. I have been in- 


this office and until permission is given by this of- _ 


REPUBLIC 190 


everyone in sight, and herding them into ‘‘concen- 
tration points.” Probably from 800 to 1,200 were 


arrested in New England. Where public meetings 


under the auspices of the Communist or Communist 
Labor parties were being held, the whole audience 
would frequently be gathered in. In Worcester, 
about 100 out of the audience at a public mass- 
meeting were rounded up and thrown into jail, and 
kept through all or a part of the night; yet by 
morning it had been discovered that as to all but 
sixteen of them there was not sufficient evidence to 
warrant further detention. In Lynn, thirty-nine 
persons, half of them citizens of the United States, — 
had gathered in a hall to discuss the formation of 
a cooperative bakery. All thirty-nine were arrest- 
ed, held in police cells overnight, and docketed as 
“suspects.” Next morning thirty-eight of them 
were discharged for lack of evidence. 

In all from one-third to a half of the prisoners 


were released, after detention in cells ranging from 


a few hours to two or three days, either because 
they were citizens, or for lack of evidence. The 
remainder, about 440 in number, were taken to 
Deer Island. Even at this time for over 100 of 


these prisoners no warrants had been issued by the 


Department of Labor. The searches, and the 
seizure of papers and other private belongings, 
were invariably conducted without the search war- 
rants required under the Constitution. 

Individual outrages were naturally frequent. A 
woman, with her thirteen year old daughter, was 
arrested, taken in a police wagon to the police sta- 
tion, and put in a cell. At midnight her daughter 
was turned out by the officials, to find her way alone 
to her home in a remote part of the city. Another 
woman was arrested at her home, while in bed, at 
six o’clock in the morning, forced to dress in her 


closet while the men waited in her room, taken to 


the police station, and there finally released when 
it was found that she was an American citizen. In 


‘Nashua five women were kept in a cell from Fri- 


day night to Saturday afternoon, without even a 
matress to lay upon. 

On their way to Deer Island, ‘‘pains were taken 
to give spectacular publicity to the raid,” and the 
arrested aliens, “in most instances perfectly quiet 
and harmless working people,” were marched, two 
by two, in handcuffs, through the streets of Boston, 
while batteries of newspaper photographers were 
permitted and apparently encouraged to take their 
pictures. At Deer Island the aliens were held in- 
communicado for days, in cold, unsanitary, inade- 
quate quarters. One alien committed suicide by 
dashing out his brains on the pavement below be- 
fore the eyes of his fellow prisoners. Another 


191 Oe Ee Ve 
went insane. Several others were driven “nearly, 
if not quite, to the verge of insanity.” A regula- 
tion of the Department of Labor, of long standing, 
requiring aliens arrested for deportation to be at 


once apprised of their right to counsel, was amend- _ 


ed two days before the raid so that the right 
to representation by counsel was denied until 
after the government agents had conducted a 
complete, and to them ST examination 
of the alien. 

‘The picture,” says Fade Anderson, ‘ ‘of a non- 
English-speaking Russian peasant, arrested under 
‘circumstances such as described above, held for 
days in jail, then for weeks in the city prison at 
Deer Island; and then summoned for a so-called 
‘trial’ before an inspector, assisted by the Depart- 
ment of Justice agent under stringent instructions 
‘emanating from the Department of Justice in 
Washington, to make every possible effort to ob- 
tain evidence of the alien’s membership in one of 
the proscribed parties, is not a picture of a sober, 
dispassionate, due-process-of-law attempt to ascer- 
tain and report the true facts.” 

Yet so flimsy was the government’s case against 
these aliens and so unreliable the information upon 
which the Department of Justice acted, that even 
of the 440 who were taken to Deer Island—them- 
selves sifted and winnowed out of more than twice 
that number of arrests—more than half were in the 
course of time released on the ground that there 
was no evidence against them. 

These facts, amply and ' powerfully corroborated 
by documents, admissions of government agents, 
and unquestionable testimony, constitute the record 
upon which Judge Anderson’s conclusions are _bas- 
ed. He concludes, first, that the Communist party 
does not believe in or advocate force or violence 
within the meaning of the deportation laws, and 
hence that the Departments of Justice and Labor 
committed an error of law in interpreting the 
statute to cover the party. As to all but four of 
the aliens he further concludes that they were not 
tried by the Department of Labor according to 


the due process of law guaranteed by the Consti- _ 


tution. 

Within the scrupulously observed limits of his 
judicial office, the only action which Judge Ander- 
son could take was to release from custody the 
twenty victims of the Department of Justice who 
were before the court. But from the trenchant 
opinion which he has rendered one cannot help 
drawing some further conclusions. The opinion 
discloses a wilful, concerted and persistent effort 
to subvert some of the most cherished guarantees of 
the Constitution, an effort all the more revolting 
because the victims were as a rule ignorant, un- 


REPUBLIC 


* States. 


educated aliens lacking in either the money or the © 
influence to procure an adequate defense. Although 4 
his name is nowhere mentioned in the opinion, 3 
every one knows that the man who was the re. : 
‘sponsible head and guiding spirit of the Depart: . 
ment which perpetrated the outrage was A. — 
Mitchel Palmer, Attorney General of the United 4 
As to him, the matter should not end with 4 
Judge Anderson’s decision. As soon as Congress . 
re-convenes it should demonstrate that it is as _ 
courageous within its sphere as Judge Anderson — 
is within his. Attorney-General Palmer should be © 
impeached. : a 


The Crux of European 


Disorder 


T is easy to find fault with the Conference at — 
Spa for failing to make more substantial pro- — 
gress toward the redemption of Europe from — 
chaos. It is easier to find. fault with America for — 
failing to intervene against the destructive cross — 
purposes of a pacified Europe after her colossal 
enterprise of intervention in the Great War. But | 
the task of easing off the strains consequent upon — 
the most destructive of all wars and the most un- — 
workable of all peace settlements is not an easy 
one. 
We ought to think of Europe as analogous to 4 
a new continent raised above the surface of the — 
waters by a geologic upheaval. What would be ~ 
inevitable after such an event would be an era of © 
subsidiary subsidences and upheavals, of seismic — 
shocks felt to the ends of the earth. Just so the — 
real forces in European life have been left in a — 
state of tension and strain that produces and will 
continue to produce movements of readjustment ac- 
companied by seismic shocks of which we in Amer- © 
ica shall be painfully aware in spite of the stable 
character of our own life. | 
The chief immediate object of European states- 
manship is to get Germany back to work, under 
conditions that contribute in the fullest measure to — 
the prosperity of her late enemies. All Europe is 
suffering from German disability. With Germany : 
out of the market, Italy can not get the coal, the 
half manufactures and the machinery needed to re- 


= 


habilitate her own industry. She is therefore los- — 
ing priceless opportunities for establishing herself 
commercially in the world market, and ee : 

ment and underemployment add enormously to the © 

flood of unrest that threatens to engulf her exist- 

‘ing institutions. Poland is in as great need of 
machinery and half manufactures. Czecho-Slovakia 7 
and Austria need German coal. France and Bel- 3 
| : 


a 
& 
‘ 
Y 
7 
a 
% 
‘a 
‘i 
2 
4 
. 
‘a 
bg 
* 
a 
® 
iz 
q 
P 


“4 ; 
7a 
is 


a a ‘dnt 


iy: 14, 1920 THE NEW 


<0 e. 


~ gium need most of all t to realize upon ide indem- 
' nity claims to the relief of their national budgets. 
q _ There can be no solution of the exchange problem 
a until Germany again takes her place among the 
_ actively producing nations. ‘That implies that there 
_ can be no return of European prosperity, and no 
q _ security against the spread of revolutionary forces. 
4 _ And it is not propaganda but sober sense of which 
the German representatives avail themselves in 
; asserting that in order to return to work, Germany 
- must have the help of the Allies. 
But all this is really too plain to dwell upon. It 
is impossible to believe that there can be any wide 
_ divergence of opinion among European statesmen 
_ as to what ought to be done. The German indem- 
_ nity ought to be fixed at a sum that can be paid 
_ without excessive strain when Germany is again on 
"her feet, and on the basis of German financial pros- 
a ~ pects left unmortgaged to the indemnity, Germany 
_ ought to be furnished credit to enable her to get on 
q her feet promptly. But though both the Allied and 
_ the German statesmen must recognize these general 
' principles, they can not be expected to get together 
ona working plan until many conferences have been 
held, with a thick web of diplomatic interchanges 
* between. The weakness of the European states- 
_ men is not intellectual or even moral, but political. 
' Most European governments are standing on a 
- quaking footing. | 
_ Weakest of all is the German government. It 
is based upon a coalition of parties far from har- 
_ monious among themselves, and together making 
"up much less than a majority of the Reichstag. 
' Fehrenbach governs merely because an effective 
» coalition can not now be formed of the opposition 
late A minority conservative government may 
act with a certain degree of confidence if the great- 
er part of the opposition is moderate. But the 
" effect of the late elections was to thin out the mod- 
"erates and multiply extremists in both camps. The 
; E existing government, then, is in no position to enter 
Bon relations with the Allies involving give and 
take. It can take, but it dare not give, since any 
"real concessions would serve the purposes of op- 
" position propaganda. 
But like its predecessor, the Fehrenbach govern- 
“ment can capitalize its domestic weakness. The 
' preceding government stood between Germany and 
'the Reds. The present government stands be- 
"tween Germany and the Junkers and revolutionists. 
_ The Allies may try to exact onerous terms, but they 
“must expect the German government to reject them, 
or set in motion another current toward the ex. 
“treme left. The Allies, by their uncompromising 


i¢rate socialistic government. It is not reasonable 


REPUBLIC 


- disturbed the judgment of the electors. 


attitude, destroyed the foundations under the mod- . 


192 
to suppose that they will repeat the experiment with 
the only other moderate tendency in German pol- 
itics. 

The French and British governments are weak 
because they are not representative of current 
shades of opinion. In both cases the appeal to the 
electorate took place at a time when the war spirit — 
| An acute 
French critic declared at the outset that the Cham- 


ber was still-born, and nothing has happened since 


to indicate that there is living force in it. The 
British parliament is likewise a product of war ex- 
citement and war weariness. The outcome of the 
by-elections has proved that very soon after the 
election the parliament ceased to represent any- 
thing. But it is the habit of British governments 
to keep close watch of public opinion and to rely 
more upon the backing of the country than upon 
the formal support that can be produced in par- 
liament. If England sickened thoroughly of Lloyd 
George it would not require another election to get 
rid of him. One cannot say the same thing of Mil- 
lerand, The French government—like our own, 
for that matter—rests upon its formal mandate, . 
whatever may have happened in the way of new 
currents of public opinion. Méillerand speaks for 
France only in a legalistic sense. 

Within limits the British government can play 
a game of give and take. It can not play the game 
boldly, but only after a tactful preparation of the © 
public mind to accept the better alternative. The 
French government, on the other hand, is limited 
very narrowly in the concessions it can make. Abeve 
all, it can not afford serious concessions in the mat- 
ter of the indemnity, for such concessions would 
touch the pocketbook of the self-conscious bour- 
geoisie, the only political force ee which Miller- 
and can rely. 

Italy is relatively free to pursue a rational policy 
toward Germany. ‘The Giolitti government does 
not depend for its existence upon the size or the 
distribution of the German indemnity. But Italian 
influence, everyone recognizes, is weak. England, 
France and Germany hold the acting parts; the 
rest of the nations represented in European con- 
ferences are little more than supernumeraries. 
And England, France and Germany cannot yet get 
together on a working plan. The German govern- 
ment dares not yield as far as Germany can yield 
and ought to yield. The French government can 
not concede as much as France can and ought to 
concede. And the British government, though per- 
haps inclined to a reasonable middle ground, does 
not command the mete for compelling an agree- 
ment. 

But if America were officially represented in the 


193 
Supreme Council, could she not break the dead- 
_ lock? ‘That question can be answered by another: 
What would America be prepared to do? Supply 
good intentions and sage advice? They would not 
be appreciated. If America proposed to employ 
her financial power to restore European economic 
life, she could make conditions. But neither the 
Republicans nor the Democrats dare to come be- 
fore the American people with a request for 
authority to employ American financial power in. 
Europe—the one instrument of negotiations that 
would really count.. 

European equilibrium can not be immediately 
restored, but must await the result of a long seties 
of readjustments of strain effected directly through 
the parties immediately concerned. America could 

make herself a party, and play a significant role 
in accelerating progress toward equilibrium, but 
only if she were willing to employ material forces 
and take risks. Let us not cajole ourselves with 
the idea that by merely signing the League coven- 
ant we could wield influence without risk or ex- 
pense. 
George has said, is work not for the League but 
for the Supreme Council. That Council has its 
all but fatal weaknesses, but at least it recognizes 
that real interests and preparation for real sacri- 
fices alone give voting power. 


Mr. Hearst and a Third Party 


FHATEVER reasons there may be for 
- organizing a new party this year are to be 

found in its educational results. No new party 
could hope to win this year, or could sincerely wish 
to win with a scratch organization and with the 
_ little preparation that could be had between July 
and November, The prospects of a new party 
are for the Congressional election of 1922 and the 
Presidential election of 1924. The only conceiv- 
able purpose this year would be to make a begin- 
ning and lay the foundations for winning the fut- 
ure confidence of a majority of Americans. 

Upon this scene Mr. Hearst projects himself 
in a statement from San Francisco (June 29th). 
He begins by saying: “I cannot support any third 
party which does not have as its head a real demo- 
crat wholly opposed to the League of Nations.” 
From stating the terms on which he will support 
the ticket, he proceeds a big step further towards 
control by announcing that ‘We (sic) must make 
our plans, therefore ... . 2° etc.’’ and proposes 
Senator Reed of Missouri. 

There are thus two distinct phases of Mr. 
Hearst’s participation—The first is conditional 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


Redeeming Europe from chaos , as Lloyd 


tween Mr. Hearst and all liberals there is an un- — 


support; the second leadership. ‘Both are incon- 
ceivable to any group ‘of men seriously proposing” 
to offer the people of this country a new party 
worthy of their confidence. The opposition of Mr. — 
Hearst to the League of Nations is wholly illiberal, E 
wholly jingo, wholly reactionary, A liberal party 
which did not radically dissociate its criticism of the — 
present treaty from the type of opposition rep-_ 
resented by Reed and Hearst is headed straight for 
destruction. The Hearst foreign policy is sinister — 
from top to bottom. It is based on a vendetta” 
against England, a poisonous hatred of the 
Japanese, a greedy appetite for Mexico, and an ap- 
peal to the prejudice of the foreign born sympa- — 
thizers in the great cities where the Hearst Papers , 
circulate. The Hearst foreign policy is insincere © 
when it is not purely vindictive. It argues loudly © 
for no foreign entanglements, but it insists upon — 
intervention, even at the risk of war, in Ireland. © 
There is no common ground of foreign policy on — 
which a genuine liberal and Mr. Hearst can stand. — 
Deep as are the differences between those liberals 
who support the present treaty and those who op- 
pose it, they are wholly differences of practical — 
judgment. There is no fundamental difference of — 
aim, of desire, of purpose, or of sympathy. But be- — 


bridgeable gulf. : 
At home, the leadership of Mr. Hearst is utter- 
ly intolerable, and would in practice prove entirely 
destructive. ‘There are some excellent men work- — 
ing for Mr. Hearst. There are excellent measures — 
which Mr. Hearst alone supports. There have 
been times when the influence of his papers has on — 
some specific issue been extraordinarily useful. But — 
Mr. Hearst as a political leader is unscrupulous — 
and unprincipled, For him to talk about “prin- | 
ciple” rather than ‘“‘patronage” when he is the chief — 
supporter of the execrable Thompson machine in — 
Chicago and the silly Hylan machine in New York — 
and the noisy Reed in Missouri is downright non- — 
sense. Mr. Hearst is a political exploiter, all the — 
more dangerous because he so often exploits the — 
democratic impulse. | 
There is no way of making terms with Mr. 
Hearst. The only way is to disregard him wholly, — 
let him follow or oppose as he chooses, and owe 
him no gratitude whatever. As for giving him a _ 
position of influence, the fact is that such a sur- 
render would mean that the liberals would have © 
to clean house before they could even. think of — 
seeking power. ‘There is no way to start, suppos- — 
ing it is desirable to start, except to start clean. — 
That means among other things to start clean of — 
| 

; 


eee 


the whole complex of influences and appetites rep- q 
resented by Mr. Hearst. : 


re 


| July ) 14, 1920 


A cdcrh Sc aranice 


ITUATED at Middletown, Connecticut, there 
4 is an Episcopal seminary called the Berkeley 
Divinity School. It is a small institution whose 

| faculty consists of six members, but it occupies a 
place of its own in the community of the Episcopal 
divinity schools in this country. More explicitly 

_ perhaps than any other school it has adjusted its 
4 _ teaching to the idea that a Christian minister needs 
to understand modern industrial and social prob- 

E tems and that the Christian religion provides a 
necessary clue to their solution. The Dean of the 
' School, the Reverend Dr. William P. Ladd, and at 
j least one of the faculty were members of the 
- Church League for Industrial Democracy, an or- 
ganization composed entirely of Episcopalians, but 
quite without official connection with the Episcopal 
' Church, whose object was “to invite for interces- 
_ sion and labor those within our church who believe 
it an essential part of the church’s function to make 
justice and love the controlling motive in all social 
conditions and who as Christians wish to promote 
all sound movements looking towards the democrat- 
_ ization of industry and the socialization of life.” 
- On account of the Dean’s connection with the 
_ League and the hospitality afforded by the school 
' to “radical” ideas and speakers, its behavior be- 
' came the subject of unfavorable comment in 
_ Middletown and thereabouts. It was accused of 
_ being a “‘center of radical socialism”. The hostile 
comment culminated in December of last year 


THE 2 NEW 


Lo 


" when, after an address delivered at the school by 


Mr. Wilfrid Humphries, it was further accused 
_ of being a “spawning place for Bolshevik propa- 
_ ganda.” Mr. Humphries was one of the staff of 
_ the Y. M. C. A., who, when he returned from 
- Russia, seeing that the newspapers were misin- 
_ forming the American people about what was tak- 


fine 
as 


eran £.'2 wes, 


a Fe 


_ at schools and colleges in which he gave out of his 
_ own experience a less unfavorable account of Soviet 
_ Russia. The accusation of Bolshevism brought 
_ upon the school much injurious publicity and Dr. 
Ladd, for the purpose of quieting the agitation, 
_ asked for an investigation by a committee of the 
school’s trustees. The committee have finally re- 
" ported, after spending six months in making their 
investigation. The report will count as one of the 
classics of contemporary. heresy-hunting in Amer- 
ica. It is perhaps the most illuminating document 
_ to which the prevailing suspicion among educated 
’ and well-to-do people of unorthodox thinking in 
" politics and ecenomics has given birth. 
_ Its authors ‘have taken their responsibility 
" seriously. They intended to conduct a discriminat- 
a ping investigation and to render a verdict on the 


, ha Sith sak 2 
= \s el Vm 
as 


oy PR ae 


ane 


REPUBLIC 


ing place in that country, delivered many addresses 


194 
facts. They ‘“‘conclude” that Mr. Humphries “was 
not a Bolshevik propagandist’’; but they are “satis- 
fied that it would have been much better had the 
lecture not been given at Berkeley and that Hum- 
phries ought not to have been allowed to use the 
platform there.” However, inasmuch as the same 
lecture had been given at Smith, Vassar, Simmons, 
Clark and other neighboring institutions ‘‘no apol- 
ogy is required for his appearance at Berkeleywhich 
should not be required at these other places where 
his lecture seems to have been received without dis- 
sent.” Thus in respect to the Humphries lecture 
they exonerate the School from the charge of be- 
ing “‘a spawning place for Bolshevik propaganda” 
but they chide its management for admitting to the 
platform of the school a speaker who was in the 
habit of addressing “radical groups” and whose 
lectures seem to have been “more or less of an 
apology for or even a defense of the Soviet govern- 
ment.” They take for granted that a man who ad- 
dressed ‘‘radical groups” or gave lectures which 
an unfriendly critic would interpret as an apology 
for the Soviet government should be disqualified 
from speaking to young men who were studying 
to be Christian clergymen. 

On the whole, however, the committee are inclin- 
ed to pooh-pooh the Humphries incident. It is mere- 
ly one symptom of a general tendency towards “‘rad- 
icalism,’’ which they consider baleful; and the chief 
object of the report is to expose and denounce 
this dangerous tendency. Their exposure and their 
admonitions are not indiscriminate. They find 
Dean Ladd’s “Americanism is beyond question’’. 
They exonerate him and all members of his faculty — 
from “approving of anything of a violent or re- 
volutionary nature.” They deny that “socialism 
in an advanced form’ is taught in the school. 
Still they “fear that in one or .two cases among the 
students advanced tendencies might have been pro- 
moted” and they “feel very strongly that in some 
unfortunate way, the school has received a reputa- 
tion which hinders her progress and her influence.” © 
They attribute it to the fact that Dean Ladd once 
joined the Intercollegiate Socialist Society, that he 
was a member of the Committee of 48 and that he 
was connected with the Church League for In- 
dustrial Democracy. These connections have injur- 
ed the school which in their opinion should give it- 
self up to teaching “God’s Word”? and “‘that alone.” — 

It is Dean Ladd’s connection with the Church 
League for Industrial Democracy which gives the 
committee their richest opportunity to betray what 
they think about the relation between Christianity 


_and industry. After quoting the object of the League 
_ in the words which we have reproduced above, they 


continue: ‘‘We are of the opinion that there can 
be no objection to such a platform from the stand- | 


re As if ASG { ; 
195” 


point of Christianity, so far as the application of 
the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is in- 
volved. These principles hold the solution of in- 
dustrial and social problems, if they could be freely 
and fully applied. In the present state of the 
_ public mind and from the standpoint of the citizen 


of the world, whether he calls himself a Christian 


or not, we think it unwise, however, for the mem- 
bers of the faculty of the Berkeley Divinity School 
to associate themselves with this and other similar 
organizations.” ‘This is the frankest confession 
which we have yet seen of the unabashed worldliness 
with which so many nominal Christians greet any 
_ proposal to apply Christian ethics to modern soci- 
ety. This committee of Christian gentlemen assert 
grudgingly that the principles of the Gospel ‘‘freely 
and fully applied” “hold the solution of industrial 
and social problems.”’ Yet they scold a Christian 
clergyman for the offense of seeking some means 
to apply Christianity freely and fully to modern 
society. They actually consider him blameworthy 
for acting on his religious convictions instead of 
yielding to the “present state of the public mind.” 
The next Church conference which discusses why 
Christianity is losing its hold upon the popular 
imagination should closely consider this artless re- 
velation. How can any religion hope to inspire 
liberating conviction among its followers when its 


_ laymen can with impunity chide a priest for act- 


ing on what they admit to be the principles of the 
Gospel instead of those of a “‘citizen of the world’’? 

The most extraordinary aspect of this exposure 
is the complete unconsciousness on the part of the 
committee of their own infidelity. In admonish- 
ing Dr. Ladd for joining an organization whose 
principles if “fully and freely applied” would, ac- 
cording to ‘their own assertion, “hold the solution 
of modern industrial and social problems,” they 
are frankly obeying the orders of a worldly mob. 
The only public which they know, condemns as 
disreputable all “radicalism” 


orthodox. The majority of well-to-do and educated 
people will not send their sons and daughters to a 
school to which any taint of “radicalism” was at- 
tached. As trustees of the school it was their duty, 
as they conceived it, not to protect the school against 
an ignorant and silly prejudice, but to protect the 
prejudice from the possibility of being undermined 


by the educational work of the school. Their report — 


is an attempt to act on this sense of obligation. They 
not only admonish Dr. Ladd but they propose in 
the future to exercise a more effective supervision 
over the conduct of the school by its faculty. They 
propose to represent the world and the public state 
of mind in the counsels of an institution which is 
supposed to teach “God’s Word” and “that alone.” 


“THE NEW ‘REPUBLIC eae 


—that is all opinions 
about social and political questions which are not 


= ie 1. Rat 
my { 


hae 14) 1 


If they succeed, the will fasten an indelible 
grace on the Episcopal Church in the United States 
Now that the benighted men have raised the iss 
American Episcopalianism cannot decently allo 
the Berkeley School to be delivered into the hand 
of “citizens of the world.” As Dr. Ladd say: 
“If the Dean were to attempt to administer hi 
school with one eye on the general public and tht 
other on the trustees, if he were, out of regard fo : 
a supposed state of the public mind and the opinior a 
of the non-Christian citizens of the world, to with , 
draw from a society which is trying to make justice 
and love the controlling motive in all social cor : 
ditions and if the faculty were to surrender their in 
dependence of action and influence. . . the Berkeley 
Divinity School would not be long in losing the 
confidence of the Church.” Yet if the school is to 
be saved, it will need generous support from he 
friends of industrial democracy and freedom of 
teaching within the Episcopal Church. According” 
to Dr. Ladd it is ‘‘desperately in need of vrondll 
and the trustees and others have repeatedly said 
that no money will be forthcoming as long as its” 
present policy continues.” Its policy will continue, 
Dr. Ladd will let it die rather than permit it to live” 
as the teacher of a version of ‘‘God’s Word”’ whose 
application is determined by a “public state of 
mind.” But should it die, what conclusion will the 
enemies of Christianity draw? If, as the trustees 
declare, the principle of the Gospel ‘“‘fully and 
freely applied” holds a solution of industrial and 
social problems and if a Christian clergyman is_ 
placed under the ban for trying to apply fully andl 
freely Christian ethics to these problems, it is | 
surely hard to avoid one disagreeable inference. — 
The Church which permits such a thing to happen 
is controlled by people who do not want Christian — 
principles fully and freely applied to social and i in- 4 
dustrial problems. 


‘Che New 
REPUBLIC 


A Journal of Opinion. 


PUBLISHED WEEKLY AND COPYRIGHT, 1920, .N THE UNITED ]} 
STATES OF AMERICA BY THE REPUBLIC PUBLISHING COMPANY, 
INC., 421 WEST TWENTY-FIRST STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y. 
HERBERT CROLY, PRESIDENT; ROBERT HALLOWELL, TREASURER 


EDITORS 
HERBERT CROLY CHARLES MERZ 
FRANCIS HACKETT WALTER LIPPMANN 
ALVIN JOHNSON PHILIP LITTELL 


SIGNE TOKSVIG, Assistant Editor 


YEARLY SUBSCRIPTION FIFTY-TWO ISSUES, FIVE DOLLARS 
IN ADVANCE, SINGLE COPIES FIFTEEN CENTS, CANADIAN SUB. 
SCRIPTION FIVE DOLLARS AND FIFTY CENTS PER, YEAR IN 
ADVANCE, FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS FOR COUNTRIES IN THE 
POSTAL UNION, SIX DOLLARS PER YEAR IN ADVANCE; REMITe |] 
ecu ara TO BE MADE BY INTERNATIONAL POSTAL MONEY ORDER, 

‘ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS: MATTER, NOVEMBER 6, 1914, AT 
THE POST OFFICE AT NEW YORK, N. Y., UNDER THE ACT OF 
MARCH 3, 1879. 


hy 14, 1920 | 


A HE Republicans by the character of the 
a | platform and nominee they selected at 
a Chicago threw open for the Democrats a 
“door which everyone had believed closed. Where- 
“upon the Democrats assembled in San Francisco, 
and after due deliberation, slammed the door in 
‘their own'faces and locked it shut. That is to 
“say, the party, professing a keen realization of its 
“sudden opportunity, proceeded with an act of pro- 
7 found wisdom to destroy its own opportunity, for 
no reason which anyone could discover save the in- 
‘adequacy of its own collective intelligence. 
_ The delegates began in terms of Jefferson, went 
“on to terms of Wilson and ended in terms of Boss 
Tweed or Charlie Murphy. The dominant mo- 
‘tive was saying to win,” and the convention in- 
: terpreted ‘ ‘anything” as meaning “nothing.” On 
every point where a bold stand might have lost 
“some votes, the convention pussyfooted. ‘That such 
'a policy would cost even more votes in the long 
“run, no one seemed to believe. If there is one in- 
“stance in the whole platform where truth was not 
‘sacrificed to political expediency, I am unaware of 
‘it and in my judgment the platform committee is 
“equally unaware of it or it would have been stricken 
ut 
' True, the platform is a liberal document—more 
Diberal than the Republican instrument, But it 
Should have been apparent to everyone who aver- 
ages better than high grade moron that a mere 
| ‘plurality of liberalism in the Democratic platform 
this year can never wrest victory from the Republi- 
‘cans. A platform which endorses the League and 
“the Treaty as though nothing had happened since 
June, 1919, which ignores Russia altogether, which 
“defends free speech and a free press with such faint 
praise as to constitute an endorsement of all Mr. 
Palmer has done, which pussyfoots on Ireland and 
‘pussyfoots on labor, which has only praise for Bur- 
1 eson, which does not dare mention prohibition, and 
which leaves the great problem of Russia untouch- 


‘thusiasm among liberals which could alone have 
made a Democratic victory possible this year, Un- 
less one is able to believe, as I am not, that the new 
third party which is being formed in Chicago will 
be able to win this year, one is forced to the belief 
tl hat the forces which are seeking a restoration of 
Q nuinely Democratic conditions in America are 
balked, so far as political action is concerned until 
1924. 

_ The simple and obvious explanation of the con- 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


Democratic councils. 
phraseology, which is produced by men who realize 


, ‘ed—such a document cannot cause the flaming en- - 


196 


j - San Francisco 


vention is to say that it was the victim of the ad- 


‘ministration’s steam roller. I believe this is as false 
as such simple explanations usually are. 


: The no- 
tion that serried ranks of Wilson office holders 
came to San Francisco and ordered the party to 
commit suicide, is too naive to stand inspection. The 
administration had no candidate for President, it 
had no domestic policies to offer, its only demand 
in the field of international policy was for that un- 
qualified endorsement of Wilson which was so eas- 
ily secured. No, the convention was dominated by 


the administration because it chose to be so domi- 


nated. The group of politicians who were in con- 
trol deliberately decided that the people of this 
country are not intelligent enough to realize the 


deficiencies of the administration, and since the ini- _ 


mical attitude of the Republicans made support of 
the League practically imperative, under the theory 
of hostilities on which the two-party system is found- 
ed, they decided that they might as well swallow 
hook, line and sinker. But the politicians who dom- 
inated at San Francisco belong to an era in the 
Democratic party which far antedates Woodrow 
Wilson. Some of them, it is true, have come into 


‘prominence since he took command, but their ideas 


are the old ideas. The Democratic party of today 


has largely forgotten the new social vision of which 


it caught such inspiring glimpses at Baltimore and 
St. Louis. Just as the progressive impulse which 
Roosevelt brought into the Republican party in the 
first four years of the century has now died out, 
leaving control in the hands of men who learn 
nothing and forget nothing, so the Wilsonism of 
the pre-war period seems to have vanished from the 
It remains in the party 


the advertising value of continuity. of impression, 
but no one could sit in the convention hall for seven 
weary days without coming to a belief that the par- — 
ty’s liberalism is either liberalism in terms of yes- 
terday, or mere lip service. This was not merely 
true in the skilfully packed committees which did 
the real work up to the time when the ballotting 
for candidates began, it was true of the rank and 
file themselves. Incorrigibly optimistic about the 
outlook for success this year, incurably timid about 
any innovation which might break with tradition or 
alarm the most easily frightened conservative Dem- 
ocrat, the delegates voted down everything which 
smelled peculiar and did so with a sanctified and 
triumphant enthusiasm. If there was a rubber 
stamp upon the convention, it was not Wilson’s. © 


a: ala 


The liberalism which the President once possessed 
was never entirely understood by his followers, and 
they now comfort themselves with the assumption 
that, “the war having changed everything,” it is no 
longer necessary to pay allegiance to his lofty no- 
tions, save insofar as such allegiance serves an ob- 
vious party purpose, 

The‘ strictly pragmatic view of things taken by 


the convention accounts for the fact that only one. 


man who appeared on the platform made any im- 
pression of sincerity. That man, mirabile dictu, 
was W. J. Bryan. Bryan’s oratory was suckled 
in a style as outworn as the others, but he was at 
least willing to throw away personal advantage, 
party advantage, to champion a cause which had 
no merit, even in his own eyes, save that of being 
right. When a country gets into a frame of mind 
where it smiles indulgently at such a man, it is in 
a bad way, and the convention smiled indulgently 
at Mr. Bryan, though it gave him the usual fervid 
demonstration—begun in irony and ended in hys- 
teria, as these things often are. The tactics of the 
convention were simple, every possible evil thing 
was declared to be the fault of the Republican Con- 


- gress. Every other evil thing was declared, with ad- 


jectives and adverbs, to be non-existent. If it was an 
evil for which the administration is obviously and 
directly responsible, it was declared to be (a) non- 


existent and (b) a great achievement, pricelessly 


valuable to the nation. It was in this frame of 
mind that the convention managed to endorse Mr. 
Burleson, (though it had to go back to the parcels 
post to find something creditable in the Depart- 


ment), to make a purely perfunctory declaration . 


for free speech, to ignore domestic currency infla- 
tion as a cause of high living costs. 
platform needed only to endorse Santa Claus and 
to deny the rumor that babies are not brought by 
storks, to be complete. 
flourish over the fact that women had been made 


equal partners in this convention, but if that cir- 


-cumstance had any practical effect for good it was 
not discernible. 
the women delegates were of somewhat higher type 
and better intelligence than their confreres—not, 
indeed, a notably difficult achievement, but the 
women were too new at the business to halt the 
steam roller, even had they desired, and they gave 
no evidence of so desiring. ‘They divided their 
votes among the candidates about as the men did, 
they voted down the really useful and interesting 
ideas in the minority report of the platform com- 
mittee, in their own caucuses they split into liberal 
and conservative camps as did the men. 

The National League of Women Voters pre- 
sented to the convention a.mild and harmless pro- 


THE NEW REPUBLIC: 


mechanical fashion an outworn political game, per- 
haps dimly realizing that the new day demands new 


After that the . 


The party made a great - 


One received an impression that 


July 14, 1 920 


gram of welfare legislation, most of which w $ 
adopted, but there is no evidence that the wom 2 


one received from looking at the massed lump ¢ . 
delegates, It was conducted by essentially genial ~ 
and kindly men rendered stupid by environment” 
rather than congenital deficiency. They played in 


rules, but unable to bring themselves to act in con. 
formity with that conviction, believing—and who ~ 
knows whether they are not right ?—that the Amer- J 
ican people may be gulled yet once more by the 
old cries. It is a gloomy spectacle, no wonder that — 
the outstanding figure at the convention was Irvin 
Cobb, a professional humorist. The public needs : 
cheering at such a time. Possibly a decisive de- 
feat at the polls next November may awaken the : 
Democrats to the enormity of their error at San 
Francisco, but I doubt it. The party needs a new 
birth as completely as the Republican party does, 
and seems no more likely to get one. 


| Bruce BLIVEN. 
San Francisco, July sth. | 


Walls Against Eden 


Now Adam, dazzled, ill at ease, 
Inspects the copper-colored skies; 
Ringed with the roar of strange machineries, 
He thinks of Paradise. 


Yes, this is better. Here, at least, 
Is speed and vigor, not the old 
Languor of Eden and the lukewarm beast— 
Here life is hot and cold! 


Released for action, Adam is 
God in these swift complexities ; 

He laughs and leaps from cliff to precipice, 
Lurches through toppling seas. 


New grain is always his to thresh, 
Through him all energy is hurled; 

He rides triumphant on the tides of flesh, 
Pride of a gaping world. 


Yet Adam, hero of all he sees, 4 
Remains untamed, unreconciled = 
And, in the midst of swaggering victories, = 


Turns like a wayward child. 


7 


Ped 
4 


* “3 Sw a hae me aim 
Se eee as ee Oh Gt eee ed 


-Hungers for all he spurned, and shrinks 
From clamor and the applauding cries; 

Lost in a storm of dreams, he sinks, 
Remembering Paradise. 


Louis UNTERMEYER. 


‘a py 
» 


es 14, 1920 


THE NEW 


On Being a Stockholder 


Know Att MEN By oo PRESENTS, that... . the 
' undersigned, Stockholder in the........ Company, do 
hereby appoint James Smith, Henry Taylor, and Robert 
- Robinson, true and ert attorneys, to vote at the 
' meeting of the stockholders of said Company, , to be held 
: on the .... day of 


HY do we view these frequently sala 
: proxies with distaste? Partly, no doubt, 
Decause signing them means another detail in a 
world composed a ae jamboree 6 of “this eternal 
toning and unbuttoning.”” And the truly vir- 
‘tious dare not resort to the solution of the waste- 
basket, for the tiresome forms often come with re- 
turn stamps which worry the conscience. 

- But the worry goes deeper than a matter of 
stamps. Forms with no reality behind them are 
"the bane of honest living; what reality does this 
stream of proxies connote? ... The average stock- 
‘holder, having signed them, knows that in due time 
J he will receive a paper slip, and that on the strength 
‘of such slips, he can send out similar slips in rec- 
‘ognition of the fact that he has been supplied with 
food, fuel, and other conveniences. 
but why I should receive them, I have never discov- 
"ered. However, I welcome them with gratitude, 
easily satisfied with consolatory reflections about 
“abstinence.”” I put out of my mind the haunting 
‘remark of Matthew Arnold, that if we search our- 
selves about property rights we shall find that we 
I have no “rights,” only duties. Yet every now and 
then, questions bother me. Let me cling to my 
conventional “rights” with the rest of the world,— 
but how about the “duties”? ... I hear the grim 


without a duty has never yet been experienced. . 

f Jeing a stockholder is an agreeable, but he a 
Passive occupation. In these days of efficiency, we 
a ire much discouraged from passivity. How should 

one set about being an efficient stockholder? 

_ The most immediate answer would seem to be 
given by these irritating proxies. For they mean 
that we have something to do besides receiving 
checks; they recognize our responsibility for the 


\pparently, if I may trust pleas sometimes enclosed 
for return, if nobody signed, the enterprise would 
top: the railroads wouldn’t run, the wheels of in- 
u ustry would pause, . . . it might be worse than a 
ike! ... Nominally and legally shareholders own 
business and control it. But how nominal the 
leory is! 

‘That i is really why I hate to sign proxies. 
guse I am endorsing action about which I often 
now nothing at all. And I wonder if this is moral. 
‘Certainly, however, I have no especial desire to 


I love my slips; 


voice of Carlyle, remarking that the situation 


conduct of the business which yields the profits. - 


Be- 


REPUBLIC 198 
- know anything. I should be quite incapable of 
running, say a jute-factory or an electric-power 
company. It is most kind of the directors (con- 
veniently self-perpetuating), to take all that trouble 
off my hands and to send me those nice checks. 


There is ground for reasonable confidence that they 


make them as large as they can. I am sure they 
have my “‘interests” at heart; wae are always tell- 
ing me so. : 

Why then should proxies worry us? For the 


_ singular pronoun might as well be dropped at this 


point. Many people are getting worried today, 
especially people in the churches. | 

Intermittently, but more and more frequently 
the churches are instructing us that we must not 
rest till the intricate net-work of our lives is re- 
deemed to righteousness, Many decent folk agree 
with this idea and an obscure distress stirs in them 
when they realize how little they know concerning 
the sources of their income. 

Edward Carpenter pointed out the cer oaey 
years ago in England’s Ideal. 

The interest of his money comes to him he knows not 
whence; it is wrung from the labor of some one—he 
knows not whom. His capital is in the hands of rail- 
road companies, and his dividends are gained in due — 
season—but how? He dares not inquire. What have 
companies, what have directors and secretaries, to do 
with the question whether justice is done the workman? 
And when did a shareholder ever rise up and contend 
that dividends ought to be less and wages more? 

Yet so long as we draw our dividends automat- 
ically, we assume the full responsibilities of know- 
ledge. We become partisans: we endorse certain 
definite policies. | 

Those policies are, of course, likely to be the 
policies of those in possession. ‘They will be on 


the side of our own advantage; and we therefore - 


find ourselves in a position intolerable to any cour- | 
teous or chivalric soul. For if there is one thing 
which we crave now-a-days it is to be sure that we 
are disinterested in our attitude toward fiercely 
debated issues. We can not endure the suspicion 


that we are dominated by a class-psychology. It 


is an insult if any one suspect us of being so domi- 
nated. To confess the suspicion justified would 
give the case away to the Adversary,—to the eco- 
nomic determinist. We might as well turn Marx- 
ian and be done with it. 

Perplexity about the morals of dividend-draw- 
ing is one phase of the challenge flung to us by the 
social struggle. Little groups of stockholders 
gather here and there to discuss it; they shrink 
from feeling that the waters of wealth which flow 
their way may be streaked with dirt or blood. 
The proletariat may view with scorn these scruples 
of an apologetic bourgeoisie; nevertheless, they ex- 
ist, they increase. 


199 


‘Those troubled in this way are not as a rule the 
radicals, (who are to be found even among the 
bourgeoisie). Your radical has a comparatively 
easy time of it in his conscience. Convinced that 
the capitalistic system is vicious, he is troubled by 
no vexing attempts to discriminate. If of heroic 
_ mould, he may refuse to profit by rent or interest 
and betake him a la Tolstoi to manual labor. More 
often, however, he shrugs his shoulders, and saws 
away at the branch of the tree he sits on, cheerily 


whistling the Internationale, but holding his seat — 


securely though indefinitely. The liberals are the 
people concerned over the ethics of dividend-draw- 
ing. They have no abstract quarrel with Interest, 
but they want to be sure that what comes their way 
has no taint of exploitation or corruption. 

But when they begin to think, they too often find 
themselves peering into an impasse, It is the small 
investors, always referred to as the bulwark of 
The System, who are especially in trouble, for they 
have no means of securing information. ‘The first 
impulse may be to sell everything questionable. But 
such action might mean clearing out one’s whole 
_ property, not to speak of the fact that shifting re- 
sponsibility only alleviates compunction. . .. An 
old-fashioned socialist suggests exclusive invest- 
ment in government bonds: wherewith he is remind- 
ed of the multiplying situations where the govern- 
ment uses main forte to suppress possibly justifiable 
strikes. . . . Industrials are usually questionable; 
and how is the ignorant idealist to feel security 
about the handling of railroads? . . . These sus- 
picions of indirect complicity with wrong which tor- 
ment and debase the spirit, are not easily overcome. 

Still to bring them out into the open is a first 
step; and: already constructive suggestions are in 
the air. 

At a meeting held lately in Boston to consider 
The Christian Approach to Investments, an enter- 
taining suggestion in re proxies came from the au- 
dience. 
speaker, (a clever man, that rector), she prefaces 
her signature by a statement instructing her repre- 
sentative to have primary regard, not to the pro- 
tection of her dividends, but to the welfare of the 
workers. ‘The simple idea “took,” and people are 
already carrying it out, If it proved sufficiently 
contagious, it might in time gain substantial value. 
It both consoles and educates the conscience; and 
little movements with moral originality to them 
sometimes have surprisingly far-reaching effects. 
The attempt made by Mr. Cabot of Boston 'to as- 
certain the feeling of Steel shareholders has never 
_ been forgotten. 

However, no important practical result would be 
_ likely to follow from a lone person here and there, 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


By the counsel of her rector, said the | 


July 14, 192 


indulging i in such erratic procedure. More signif 
icant lines of influence are planned. In both Eng- 
land and America, Stockholders’ Associations of a 
new type are forming. Here is the prospectus 0 of 
the English Association: a 
We, the undersigned, being shareholders or be ‘ 
ficiaries through shares in companies, wish to state pub 
licly that we are convinced that the claims of the wo k- 
ers, to wages making it possible for them to live a full 
and free life, come before the claims of shareholders to 
dividends. 7 
We will, therefore, support such a reorganization of 

the present industrial system, as shall bring about . 
highest good of the workers and the best interests o ‘i 
the community, and are prepared to accept whatey 
personal loss shall arise through such reorearitealll . 
The American formula is similar: : 
We, the undersigned, in view of our responsibility as 
stockholders, feel compelled to state our conviction: a 
1) That the first charge on the industry should be 

‘the adequate and honorable compensation of those en 
gaged in it. 
2) That the ultimate serail in industry should pass 
from the owners of capital to those who work se hana 
or brain. k 
Interesting statements. But is not their animus” 
needlessly radical? Some provision should be made | 
for the people who want to moralize existing in- 
dustrial relations, but have no desire to destroy 
them. Such people would gladly subscribe to the 
first article in both statements, but they would re- 
pudiate the second. : 
One last possibility to be suggested shih ell 
their needs: a White List of Investments. Infor- 
mation is honestly wanted by prospective investors 
on other matters than the size and security of divi- | 
dends. Banks might furnish it if they liked. Their 
bond departments issue lists of ‘‘sound” invests | 
ments. Why could they not add items on ethical { 
status and human quality? ... At present, men in- 
the bond department are sinclitnil stumped when 
questions in this line are put to them; but they might | 
get used to it, as department stores got used to in-— 
quiries about the Consumers’ League Label. : 
The vision of banks giving this kind of informa-_ 
tion, however, lacks actuality. Special Commissions _ 
should do the work, The social service commis." 
sions of the churches would be an appropriate > 
agency. ‘[hey would not themselves be competent 
to carry on the necessary investigations, but they | 
could command the services of experts. Hea 
would be an admirable undertaking for the Inter. 
church movement,—more fundamental than most 
of its proposed activities. 
The list proposed would be difficult to draw up, 

it would be fallible, it would need constant revision, 
But why would it not be just as practicable as many | 
other forms of predigested information? It should 


: 
“e 


ly 14, 1920 — 
q 


« 23 in their morals. It should mention welfare 
work; it should tell the attitude toward such mat- 
tl ters as collective bargaining, the open shop, the 
mi imum wage, and it should of course exclude all 
. suspected of cyan the law or of em- 
] Ploying ‘ ‘agents provocateurs.’”’ It should indicate 
‘companies (they are shy of talking) which are try- 
ing advance experiments in industrial democracy. 
It such a list, every investor could find what he 
wants. Your mildly pink person would hesitate 
‘about unlisted securities for fear lest some obvious 


red Bolshevist,—who occasionally draws dividends 
—would scarcely be interested at all; but your 
s liberal should consult the list at every turn. 
_...It is not hard to see why proxies have lost 
their point. The reason is the modern habit of 
é delegating everything that can be delegated to 
‘somebody else. We are past masters in that art, 
we Americans; we delegate religion to the churches, 
education to the schools, charity to boards and in- 
stitutions, —and we make no exception of our busi- 
ness interests. But inthelast analysis, nothing which 
‘involves a moral element can be delegated. ‘The 
field of morals is the field of democracy. As to 
"what is efficient in business and industry, the aver- 
age stockholder must rely on specialists; but as to 
what i is just, what is honest, what is kind, he has 
c pacity and responsibility for decision. The temp- 
tation is sharp to cultivate that ignorance which is 
li iss; but it is our plain duty to get information, to 
mow what we want, and as part owners of the 
peperty to express our convictions, If we fail to 
do so, we sin. And incidentally,—since there are 
aany people besides stockholders in the world—if 
We continue to sign proxies automatically, with no 
ittention to what they may connote in human life, 
re shall have only ourselves to thank for possible 
sequences. 

Vipa D. SCUDDER. 


More Acid Test 


HE hypocrisy of our behavior toward Russia 

continues and apparently gives general 
tisfaction. Mr. Bainbridge Colby’s official in- 
ference with the A. F. of L. to dissuade that 
, from suggesting a change of policy contained 
monumental words: 


inciple of harmonious and trustful relations, whether 
f nations or of individuals, and is based upon the nega- 
ion of honor and good faith and every usage and con- 
ention underlying the structure of international law. 


s far as I know there i is not the slighest foun- 


“THE NEW 


include facts useful to persons of diverse prefer- 


‘atrocity like child-labor deface them. Your true-- 


4 _ The present Russian government repudiates every 


¥ ~ Fh WO ee a Panto dee “2 2.) etry! ee wey Pht He hint me ee OO i dd Pk ee ae 
f ; v sas i, . ‘, a AIS ; Va ie heey 
‘ j me , 5 : 


REPUBLIC 200 


dation for this rhetoric about good faith, and it 
comes ill from a government that has double- 
crossed the Moscow government at every turn. 
Perhaps Mr. Colby knows an instance. I can 
think of none, unless Brest-Litovsk is counted, and 
that is too childish a charge to go into now. The 
Bolsheviks do lie about one thing, and I think only 
one, as a regular practice. ‘They exaggerate con- 
sistently the labor disturbances in other countries. 
Meantime, how about us? Are we not doing our 
bit for the negation of honor and good faith? Let 
us take only a few examples: 

1. Ambassador Francis and other officials 
make up to the Bolshevik government, give it every 
reason to believe we wish to make an arrangement 
with it, and then take part in blackening it. 

; 
ous Sisson documents. 

3. We waste a lot of ink cokanb Fasiabead of tie 
lack of democracy in the Communist rule. Axven- 
tiev’s government was a strikingly democratic one, 
and immediately after it was upset by force we 
practically recognized the military dictator who 
took its place. We would have recognized any 
successful conservative general, from Korniloy on, 
had he been successful and gone through a few 
meaningless motions. 


4. We back the Nansen proposal. Tchicherin 
replies. ‘That reply is now made available in the 
valuable collection of documents put out by the 
League of Free Nations Association. It was sup- 
pressed by our government which instead published 
an alleged digest of what was in it. I defy any 
honest person to read the original and our official 
statement about it without a blush of shame. 

5. We backed the Prinkipo proposal. When 
we did that, was the Bolshevik government full of 
all these things Mr. Colby’s vocabulary now tells 
us about? If so, why did we back the proposal? 
Moreover when the Bolsheviks accepted and the 
other factions refused who was it that spread the 
story that the Bolsheviks had refused? | 


6. We sent the Bullitt commission. 


tell the truth when we encouraged the impression 
that Lenin had given a disingenuous answer? 
Those illustrations will suffice, although some 
dishonest piece of propaganda is put out nearly 
every week. Why not be candid about it? The 
situation is perfectly simple. The President will 
not act without the Supreme Council, otherwise 
France, and the bureacracy in the State Depart- 
ment honestly believes that all stories told against 


the Moscow government add to their usefulness: 


and respectability. Is anything more respectable 
than to tell stories about a government that does 


We spread broadcast the forged and ridicul- 


Were the f 
Bolsheviks too bad to deal with then? Did we 


201 


not allow private property? I happen to believe 
in private property also, but not in that method of 
making the world safe for it. 

As this is written, before the San RP ranciace 
nomination, I expect to support the Democratic 


ticket, but there is one thing in America that in- 


terests me much more than either party, and that 
is a return to our normal percentage of truth. I 
suggest as good topics for editorials in the Times 
and the Tribune the following texts: 

1. The Manchester Guardian says that the 
gold in the possession of the Moscow government 
is tainted if used to buy supplies needed by the Rus- 
sian people but pure if used to pay bonds held by 
French investors for money that helped to strength- 
en a Tsarist government. 

2. Mr. Henry P. Davison’s description of the 
suffering in various parts of Eastern Europe is 
well known. Demonstrate that in those countries 
the suffering is the result of war, whereas similar 
conditions in Russia are the result of unsound po- 
litical theories not lived up to. 

3. General Smuts says that the big Powers are 


The Tragedy of Mark Twain 


OT many years ago tens of thousands of 
Americans were working through the 
volumes of Jean Christophe, hoping, per- 
haps naively, to come to an understanding of the 
process by which the forces of natural genius are 
focussed to the creation of a great artist. But for 
Americans there was a more relevant inquiry con- 
ceivable. Assuming that natural genius is dis- 
tributed among the peoples, with a fair degree of 
impartiality, why does the American people fail 
to produce artists of the first rank? It was in- 
cumbent upon some American Rolland to give us 
our own, though a negative, Jean Christophe, to 
exhibit the conditions under which natural genius is 
thwarted and dissipated. That, essentially, is what 
Van Wyck Brooks has done in his Ordeal of Mark 


Twain (E. P. Dutton & Co.), although I am not 


certain he was trying to do exactly that. Consider, 
however, the logical forces inviting a writer deeply 
interested in the problem of art in America to just 
- such an enterprise. Mark Twain was unquestion- 
ably endowed with genius by nature. All through 
his work are scattered unmistakable proofs of ti- 
tanic power, and the oral tradition reveals a per- 
sonality far greater than his work. Yet Mark 
Twain: never attained to artistic ripeness. There 
is hardly a single specimen of his workmanship in 


THE NEW. REPUBLIC. 


which there is.no intrusion of the cheap and grotes: : 


‘pathy so often distinguishing his pages were the 


Hoe | wi 


- 


determined that the League of Nations shall no 
function and he gives the Polish attack on Russi: 
as an example. Demonstrate that Smuts is cite 
(a) a Bolshevik or (b) a fool. 4g 

4. Krassin has told the Jewish Forward 1 
there are in the possession of the Bolshevik govern 
ment 9,000,000,000 pounds of platinum, show | 
this statement is unimportant and: probably false, 

5. The Matin has recently published documen a 
proving that when the Entente was full of t: Ik 
about allowing the Russians to choose their own 
form of government Clemenceau was instructin 7 
d’Esperey that French official policy was to use 
the encirclement of Russia to destroy the Bolshevik 
government. Show the consistency here. t 

6. A special dispatch to the New York Evening 
Post says that our Treasury Department holds 
$58,000,000 of Polish bonds and points out that 
if we do not send Poland more supplies she may 
be beaten in the war against Russia. Write one 
column of sarcasm showing the justice of our 
policy; also its wisdom; but above all its re 
spectability. Norman Hapcoop. 


que. Is it not a fair working theory that the 
exuberance of invention and exquisiteness of s le 


true Mark Twain, while the imbecilities and 
grotesqueries were imposed upon him by his 
American environment? It is a hypothesis that im- 
presses Van Wyck Brooks with the force of self 
evidence. If it were established as a scientifi c 
verity, we should have at least a partial explanation 
of the failure of American artists to attain to great» - 
ness. We enslave them to our vulgar purposes. 
But if our artists are slaves, they must be the 
first to realize it; and did the godlike Clemens z0 
about chafing under his fetters? He did, argues 
Van Wyck Brooks. Not only was Mark Twain 
consciously in revolt against a fate that denied him 
his birthright of pure artistic creativeness and im 
posed on him the role of humorist—or more cor 
rectly, if Van Wyck Brooks could only see it, 0 
funny man—but his unconscious self dwelt in seeth- 
ing rage and utterly corroded at last, revenged 
itself by infusing into Mark Twain’s thought a pes 
simism that denied the value of all gifts to man ex 
cept death. That pessimism is Van Wyck Brooks's 
clue to the problem of Mark Twain’s failure. It 
is a malady of the soul, susceptible to the analysis 


—e. - 
Re oe 


1 14, 1920 gow Oe a NEW 


Bihe ‘newer psychology.’’ Some powerful force 
n Mark Twain must have been repressed, to turn 
Bard and lacerate-his soul. What was it? 

“Tt is as old as Milton that there are talents 
which are ‘death to hide,’ and I suggest that Mark 
Twain’s talent was just so hidden. That bitterness 
if his was the effect of a certain miscarriage in his 
reative life, a balked personality, an arrested de- 
vi et of which he was himself almost wholly 
unaware, but which for him destroyed the meaning 
of life. The spirit of the artist in him, like the gente 
at last released from the bottle, overspread in a 
gl poMy Vapor the mind it had néver been quite 
ible to possess.” 

_ The conjecture is bold. It is easy to understand 
a relatively simple impulses and yearnings, deeply 
implanted in the life of a man and ineradicable 
while life endures, may, when repressed, turn back 
‘a themselves and in their distorted growth 
estroy the integrity of a personality. But the 
“spirit of the artist’—what is that?. Is it a 
sychological simple to be manipulated mechanically 
by the psycho-pathologists? We may reserve judg- 
ment on the point. Perhaps the “suppressed wish” 
serves only as a metaphor which helps to marshall 
| the critic’s facts under an ordered plan. Even as 
such the device is justified. Van Wyck Brooks 
= a more telling argument than he could have 
made if he had merely assembled the abundant evi- 
d ence that Mark Twain was oppressed through 
nu much of his life by the feeling that he was wasting 
s time, working too little, and too often in viola- 
fion of his own canons of workmanship. 

There can be no disputing the fact that Mark 
Twain's environment was largely responsible for 
is deviation from what he felt to be the line of 
ittistic duty. The necessity of money-making was 
is bane. He was driven to it, partly by a sense 
ff the duty of making good first in his mother’s 
yes, later in the eyes of his wife and of her family 
nc associates, but perhaps above all by his own ac- 
ptance of making good financially as a pretty fair 


ar public, and that public wanted not art. but 
rseplay. A little art could be slipped in 
treptitiously, but only what the traffic would bear, 
id that was not much. Therefore Mark Twain 
as continually under the compulsion to do things 
which he was ashamed, in his heart, and pathetic- 
y grateful to men like Howells who accepted him 
t more than the face value of his work. He was 
d 1 to yield to their judgment, and in the opinion 
4 Van Wyck Brooks, sinned against his own genius 
dc Ig SO. That may be true. The evidence of- 
id is hardly sufficient to prove the point. But 


¥>. ») 


a ndard of personal worth. But making good 
nancially meant meeting the demands of the Amer- 


REPUBLIC 202 
there is no question that Mark Twain felt himself 
frightfully naked and vulnerable in the world, for — 
all his brave show of king-like independence. That 
is very American, Why is it that we Americans 
are so prone to combine a megalomaniac tongue 
with a shrinking soul, anxious to live up to every” 
standard in sight? Explain that and you will have — 
explained many of our surrenders of personal in- 
tegrity. Unfortunately Van Wyck Brooks took © 
Mark Twain’s humorously megalomaniac utter- 
ances for serious expressions of a megalomaniac 
soul, and, as it seems to me, utterly missed the most 
promising lead in his mountain of ore. But there 
were riches enough for his purpose, nevertheless. 

Mark Twain yielded himself to his environment, 
to the prejudice of his best work. So much may. 
be conceded. If he had been more self-dependent 
and more persistent in working in his own way, 
what role would he have assumed? Certainly not 
that of humorist, thinks Van Wyck Brooks. If we 


had to follow Van Wyck Brooks in confusing Mark 


Twain’s horse play with hishumor, we should agree. 
But there seems to be no reason for believing that 
Mark Twain did not know the difference between 
the delicate, tender humor with which he clothes 
his Eve in the Diary and the coarse stuff he pours 
over his Adam. The first is an instrument of ana- 
lysis by which Mark Twain seeks to attain to truth, 
concrete, living. The second has its end and aim 
in the laughter of the mob and the clink of dollars. 
Van Wyck Brooks would have robbed him of both, 
and turned him into a satirist, whose function was 
to be the exposure of the rottenness of American 
institutions. Was not Mark Twain always talking 
about an autobiography, to be published a century 
after his death,.in which he would tell the whole 
truth as he saw it, in burning words that would sear 
the page and blind the reader’s eyes? What could 
that truth be but exposure of our institutions? 
There are two questions here: one, whether 
American institutions were in fact so hopelessly 
corrupt as Van Wyck Brooks assumes; the other, 
whether Mark Twain was by temperament fitted to 
perceive institutional corruption, and perceiving it, 
to undertake the work of exposure. ‘As to the first, 
it is worth noting that Karl Marx, whom Van Wyck 
Brooks would not count among the ultra-conserva- 
tives, had no hope that any institutional system 
would break down before the assaults of its suc- 
cessor until it had unfolded all its potentialities of 
development. Corruption follows ripeness, and 
who would maintain that the American institutional 
system, from 1860 to 1900, was ripe? Van Wyck 
Brooks points out that the greatest European writ- 
ers were in revolt against the prevailing system, 
but the point is irrelevant. America was then, and 


* ge 


203 


still is, far less mature, economically and institution- 
ally, and Mark Twain was not a borrower of ideas, 
but one who generated them out of the conditions 
of his own American life. It was not an ideal life, 
he recognized. ‘There was plenty of individual ar- 
rogance, corruption, cruelty, cowardice. But he 
accepted America and her institutions as a tremend- 
ous improvement on the rest of the world, just as 
_ he accepted the nineteenth century as a great im- 
provement. on all the centuries that had gone be- 
fore, 


lytize for the American idea. He is continually 
slipping into the assumption that we do things bet- 
ter than the rest of mankind. He would have liked 
to Americanize the whole world, not only of today 
but of the centuries gone by. Did he not in imagi- 
nation Americanize King Arthur’s court and the 
Garden of Eden? : 

But was Mark -Twain sincere in his panegyrics 
of his country and his time, or werethose panegyrics 
concessions to the taste of a reading public that 
would have been impatient of a spirit of criticism? 
Did Mark Twain sell his approval of America, for 
popularity and cash? Van Wyck Brooks tries to 
prove this. But it is a treacherous business for a 

critic devoid of a sense of humor to hold an in- 
corrigible humorist too strictly to account. One 
instance of how Van Wyck Brooks has let himself 
be tricked will suffice. Mark Twain, backed by his 
father-in-law, had bought a part interest in the 
Buffalo Express, and had made himself associate 
editor. Thereupon he ran an announcement of 
which Van Wyck Brooks quotes the following 
excerpt: 
_ “Being a stranger it would be immodest for me 
to suddenly and violently assume the associate 
editorship of the Buffalo Express without a single 
word of comfort or encouragement to the unoffend- 
ing patrons of this paper, who are about to be ex- 
posed to constant attacks of my wisdom and learn- 
ing. But the word shall be as brief as possible. 
I only want to assure parties having a friendly 
interest in the prosperity of the journal that { am 
not going to hurt the paper deliberately and in- 

_tentionally at any time. I am not going to intro- 
duce any startling reforms, nor in any way attempt 
to make trouble. Such is my platform. I do not 
see any use in it, but custom is law and must be 
obeyed.” 

To most of the readers of the Express that an- 
nouncement no doubt seemed funny; to some it 
seemed silly. Mark Twain had reckoned with both 
of those classes, but certainly not with Van Wyck 
Brooks. 


innocently, more painlessly surrendered than in 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


Twain, reciting between sighs and laughter: “Tf 
Indeed, one of the most remarkable things | 
about Mark Twain is his naive tendency to prose- 


‘ the damned race.”’ 


“Never, surely, was a creative will more 


"hal Hd 


these words; marriage had been, for Mark Tw: 
artistic conscience, like the final whiff of chlorofo 
sealing a slumber that many a previous whiff h 
already induced. With that promise to be ‘ goo 
to refrain from hurting parties having a ‘friend 
interest in the prosperity’ of his paper, the artist iM 
Mark Twain had fallen into a ines trance: al 
body could manipulate him now.”” Any well train 
medium ought to be able to hear the shade of Mat 


had a cast iron dog that could read this criticis 
and preserve his austerity, I mane drive him o 
the door step.” ee 
Mark Twain was not in revolt against America 
institutions; therefore he could not have made ¢ 
himself a satirist according to Van Wyck Brooks <) 
taste. Mark Twain was essentially a pioneer, wit 
his character formed under-pioneer discipline 6 
indiscipline. And on the frontier, institutions d 
not present a front inviting the shafts of satire 
Life is a matter of direct fatalistic relations of ma 
with nature, of relations between men based upo 
personal consent. And out of such an environmen 
the most impressive lessons concern the nature rf 
the human material.. In any pioneer community 
how prompt is the classification of men as “al 
right” or ‘no good.” Even among those who ar 
“all right,” about every one promptly exhibits 
some flaw in his material. It is one of the chie 
functions of pioneer humor to forestall the discoy 
ery of flaws by confession, to impose the disclosur 
of them upon men who refuse to lay all their dog 
eared cards on the table. The frontier insisted of 
the disagreeable truth, but was willing to ease tht 
strain by humor. And there is so much disagree 
able truth to be exposed, under the circumstances 
that the tone of pioneer life tends to become pes 
simistic. Mark Twain was not exhibiting an} 
originality in his formula, ‘‘There is no hope foi 
It was current on the Wester r 
prairies thirty-five years ago; you still hear it 06 
casionally. 4 
To “buck up” the individual man, by showill 
him the truth about himself; was not that w at 
Mark Twain really wanted to do, instead of offer 
ing pleasant entertainment for man and beast? The 
truth that would sear the page, what was it but the 
truth about himself, as a specimen of the contempt 
ible species, man? 3 
The malady of Mark Twain was no doubt 
part a sense of inferior workmanship foisted upot 
a public that knew no better. But it was more thar 
that. It drew from the general mood of his gener. 
ation, a generation that pursued remorselessly the 
end of material success, to find it meaningless whet 
old age tamed the spirit and threw a veil of frost 


0 
1 eye ‘ 

ae, 

pape ‘ 
ow 7% 


ly ra, 1920 


THE NEW 


er the illusions, a generation that exhibited, as no 
ther has done, the defective character of the 
human material bent to purposes for which the ages 
had not adapted it, Mark Twain, without know- 
ing it, was a tragic figure in an army of tragic fig- 


nate ones.of the earth, and thereby proved to them- 
selves, that life upon the earth was not worth 
while. ALVIN JOHNSON. 


. Lectures 


2 | VERY seeker after culture should fea, on 


u e for per year if he got up just half an hour 
earlier every day. The prospect will healthily ap- 
pal him. And yet there is something very delight- 

a in the thought of taking culture a spoonful at 
‘Think of ultimately reaching that brimful 
ec Sesion which requires not another dip; of at- 
taining the condition in which one never needed to 
isten to another public lecture on any subject. 
We in America are particularly susceptible to 
the lure of the lecture. Academic circles, women’s 
| clubs, are by no means the only media for the suc- 
essful cultivation of the germ. Business men are 
more susceptible than almost any others. One huge 
automobile organization last year required its 
€ Kecutives all over the country to attend a series 

f lectures on the general subject (I think) of the 

chology of carburetors. The rule of the busi- 

ss man is as a rule, however, to disguise his 

e re as an after-dinner speech. He goes to 

“banquets,” and sitting among the remnants of the 

east hearkens for ‘hours to the gentleman who 

iscusses the duties of the day and the hopes of 
he future, I amtempted to digress upon banquets. 

Know men who before the war made a practice of 

ttending them—sometimes two and three in a 

week and from no Bacchic longings, but with a 

ense of something accomplished, something done, 

lat earns a night’s repose. I have myself attended 
hem—associations of commerce, coal-traders as- 


tkansas to be eligible) Mayflower Descendants, 
hat not. I have spoken’ at them, and hereby az- 
ounce my candidacy to speak again. But why are 
anquets? The food is always poor, the cost great, 
e result melancholy. Still, this is a digression. 


llows, they have their addresses printed, in pam- 
let form, and circulated among those not pres- 
t. It is plucky, but it seems unfair, somehow. 
y mail is lonely without the reprint of the re- 
tks of the head of the Paper-Board Manu- 


ures who, like him, imagined themselves the fortu-: Orangeville 


the number of public lectures he might have _ 


Ociations, Arkansas Societies, (you must have left: but an entertainer. 


anquet lecturers generally take the final step;brave. 


REPUBLIC 204 


facturers Association, delivered at Utica, New 


York, at the meeting of the Concrete Dealers. I 
read it with attention, but it does not seem to me 
to have quite the flair of the prospectuses of the 
Oklahoma Marble Mining Company and _ the 
Calamity Real-Estate Association 
(profit-sharing) which I also find in my box. 
Sometimes I suspect that the gentlemen whose 
names are signed to these addresses, and who de- 
livered them, must have written them themselves; 
the English is so very queer. 

Such banquet lecturers, however, are not those 
whom I now have:in mind; nor the other sort of © 
banquet lecturers, who make a profession of enter- 
taining over the coffee-cups. I have heard them 
too. Fred Stone seems to me better, and the 
Reverend Mr. Sunday cheaper; but if people like 
that sort of thing, why, that is the sort of thing 
they like. I am referring now to real lecturers, who 


stand on a platform; that is their distinctive feature. 


Of these there are several classes. There are 
first those who depend upon their ability to do 
something else. A lecture by Battling Nelson, or 
John Drew, or Vice-President Marshall, would al- 
ways be widely attended. Years ago the Battler 
honestly earned the best and biggest pair of cauli- 
flower ears in America; John Drew can act; and 
Mr. Marshall holds the record in vice-presidencies, 
having got two. I have never heard any of these 
three lecture, but I would gladly listen to any of 
them, and others are like me. We pay them the 
compliment of knowing who they are. What they 
say, of course, is unimportant. After the lecture 
we go out and tell our friends. ‘Well, you missed 
it.’ ‘What did he talk about?” ‘Oh, I don’t 
know; but he looks just like his pictures.” And 
our friends are satisfactorily mortified at having 
overlooked a lecture. This sort of lecturer is, I. 
think, on the whole most worthy of his hire. To 
see an elephant is something; but to observe him 
kick a football is really worth while. What dif- 
ference does it make if a hundred in the audience 
could kick it straighter? ‘They are not elephants. 

Another sort of lecturer is not a lecturer at all, 
His object is to pass the time. 
He deals in anecdotes, reminiscences, half-truths, 
turns of phrase, tricks of delivery. He is, of 
course, as an artist, at the opposite pole from the 
first sort, who may be called (with all deference) 
the freak, Sometimes the artist, by long practice 
before his public, or by other means, becomes the 
freak—that is (do not misunderstand me) becomes © 
so well-known that people wish to see him for what 
he is, as well as to hear him for what he says. Such 
a lecturer was Josh Billings. | 

But the most common variety of lecturer is he 


205 1rne NEW 
(or she) who offers what it would be invidious 
not to call information upon some particular sub- 
ject—literature, or sociology, or popular science, 
or any one of a hundred others. 
very much in demand at present; conservation of 
national resources is a good lay; the war offers an 
almost endless field. These lecturers frequently 
know something of their subjects; sometimes they 
are really authorities. ‘It is, speaking broadly, all 
one to the audience. The question is not what 
do they know, but how agreeably can they present 
it? And well aware of this, the lecturers as a rule 
conceal nearly all of what they know, if they hap- 
pen to know a good deal, and present the obvious, 
in, if possible, a pleasantly ornamented fashion. 
Pictures are a great help; moving pictures may be 
said to guarantee success. But without the crutch 
of the camera, many still achieve a sort of limping 
success. “They calculate how much their audience 
is likely to know; select an idea just fresh enough 
to be partly within, partly without, the penumbra 
of its collective intelligence; and by gradually 
shifting its orbit a very little, give the impression 
of having actually turned on fresh light. That any 
standard volume upon their subject, - purchasable 
for the price of a ticket or by the labor of an hour, 
would give tenfold more information than the lec- 
ture offers, they know and will freely admit; but 
‘what of it? If the audience will not read, and 
will listen, surely that is not their fault. F. A. 
M. E.—‘“‘fifty and my -expenses”—was the old 
slogan, Prices have gone up now, with the high 
cost of living; Emerson could get five hundred a 
night, easily. He would be worth it; if not all 
his successors who get it are worth it, that is due 
to the great truth which P. T. Barnum enunciates. 
In the days of Emerson, lecturers were often the 
only means by which thought could be communicat- 
ed. Books were hard to get; there was no such 
sea of special information as that which now any 
one who chooses may embark upon. But do any 
lecturers nowadays ever offer anything which is 
not more easily and thoroughly learned through 
books? I should say no. To hear a thing once is 
to remember almost nothing of it. Any teacher 
knows that only by. almost endless repetition, and 
repetition backed by required reading, can he en- 
force his point. Plow a field once, and you can 
sow; but minds are tougher soil. Books tend, at 
least, to stimulate thought; lectures tend to deaden 
it; and any lecturer, over a pipe, will tell you the 
same. But not over a tea-cup. It is the ladies, 
God bless them, who are our final target, and he 
would be a short-sighted poultry-fancier who would 
kill the goose that laid the golden egg. 
JAMES WEBER Linn. 


Psychology is — 


party or the other, or both, and none of us got’ anys 


a 
ZZ 
. 


REPUBLIC July 14, i 


The Bandwagon 
At San Francisco 4 


Mr. Parmer PRoPHESIES. 


Immediately after the recess was taken Attorney Ge 
eral Palmer remarked: ” 

“At 1 o'clock this morning I said that McAdoo wi 
out of the race. I now say that Cox will not be non 
inated. Either I or a dark horse will be chosen.”—WNeé 
York Times. i] 


REPUBLICS ARE TRADITIONALLY UNGRATEFUL. 


SAN Francisco, July 5.—James W. Gerard, forme 
Ambassador to Germany, a candidate for the Demo ati 
Presidential nomination, said to a friend here today: 

“It strikes me as a strange thing that the men rh 
came out of the war have had no recognition from eith 
of the big American parties.” | 

“What do you mean?” the friend asked. ; 

“Well, for example,” said Mr. Gerard, “take Mr, 
Hoover, General Pershing and myself. All have been can 
didates for the nomination for the Presidency before one 


where.” —Special to the New York World. 


Wuy Do You? 


“If you can’t get alcohol enough to make you dr , 
why do you want alcohol at all?” cried Bryan. Ne y 
York Times. ; 


A Rost sy ANy OTHER NAME. 


San Francisco, July 1.—Having carefully prepared 
a speech seconding the nomination of A. Mitchell Palmer, 
Mrs. Guilford Dudley, of Tennessee, according to the 
Palmer headquarters, found that she was eliminated by 
the fact that only three seconding speeches are permitted, 
So she asked if the Palmer people would object if she 
made the speech for Ambassador John W. Davis. F 

No objection being made, she delivered the speech, s b- 
stituting the name of Davis where she had originally 
written Palmer.—Special to the New York World. 


ae 


You’> Never Guess WuHo. a 


Mr. J. H. Bigelow places a candidate before the con- 
vention: “Your candidate must be more than the mere 
mouthpiece of your policies. He must be the embodiment : 
of your freedom and the exemplar of your liberties. . .. 
Behind him I see a solid phalanx of true Americanism 
that knows no divided allegiance. I see the humble citi 
zens who worship their Government. I see the wo ¥ 
sons of those noble sires that sleep in a hundred battle 
fields hallowed by their blood. I see the grim determi et 
tion that pervades them as they resolve that this nation n 
shall not perish. I see them following a shining helmet 
emblazoned with the light of liberty and adorned by the 
oriflamme of right. A new Navarre is upon the field. His 
lance is that of law; his shield is that of Justice; and 
democracy again triumphs, led and inspired by Pennsyl- 
vania’s noblest product, whom I now name for the Presi- 
dency of these United States—A. Mitchell Palmer.” 5 


i 
Ab F * 
Ls, 


a 


- 14, 1920 


SOE BN EW 


BGordon Craig Advancing 


i. The Theatre—A dvancing, by Edward Gordon Craig. 
Boston: Little, Brown and Company. 

PYHEY were short-sighted spear bearers in the new 
movement in the theatre who thought that with im- 
punity they could plunge their weapons indiscriminately 
into the body of the old theatre and win the praise of 
their master. They ‘forgot, as statesmen have forgotten 
latter months, that an outsider can not take sides 
ir a family quarrel, be it domestic or national or aesthetic, 
without uniting the family to repel the invader. You must 
marry into the family before your tongue is licensed. 

_ Up and down the little theatres and the lyceums for 
‘several years the opponents of the elder stage craft have 
conducted their guerilla warfare, with no. one to single 
3 the expert from the inept, the legitimate members of 
the family from the pretenders. The majority of these 
f franc-tireurs have used the name of Edward Gordon Craig 
‘ their superior officer without arousing deserved repu- 
liation, but the master has spoken at last with a decisive- 
ness doubled by delay. 

- In his new volume of collected ¢ essays and dialogues and 
f tasies, The Theatre—Advancing, a long-promised suc- 
( cessor to On the Art of the Theatre, Gordon Craig re- 
urns to his attack on the present theatre and to his quest 
for a new, but he has taken time by the way to test his 
: ofessed followers and find who is fitted to go to the 
front line with him. On Learning Magic is the title of 
the test, and with scorn he asks the Pupil of the dialogue: 
“Do you really believe you are so gifted a person that you 
can afford to skip the experience of saying, ‘My lord, the 
carriage waits’? And further: 

_ “T have planned out a new stage, certainly; but not be- 
cause I despised or hated the old stage—because I love it, 
a and lived near it many years. And though I may wish to 
reate a new stage, I know the old one; and to know is to 
love, even if one does not agree with it... You say you 
want to come to my school. I tell you you had better 
keep away unless you realize that you have firstly no right. 


these 


tsi ing the new art until you have paid the very humblest 
tr bute to the old institution, by studying all those things 
Which at present you dare to despise . . . Here with me 
mu learn first to love the old theatre. I Auasid on to you 
What my old master taught me, and I tell you where I think 
he may have erred, but I do not want your understanding 
0 0 become thick and muddy by drunkenly jeering at his 
strors. ‘Lhe ‘errors’ were far better than all your ‘virtues’.”” 
Craig has travelled far and clarified his thought and ex- 
ression on other roads where he is seeking the theatre 
of the future. He himself has advanced in pursuit of the 
ieatre advancing. He still carries with him strange im- 
dimenta which retard his gait. He still contradicts him- 
lf with unabashed abandon. He still wanders too far 
; too soon, it may be, down engaging by-paths such as 
ks or marionettes. But as artist, as philosopher and as 
a atroversialist of the theatre he is more fit and formidable 
F an ever. 

Iti is a bitter and ironic comment on our theatre and 
civilization that the gifted son of Ellen ‘Terry has 
en compelled as artist of the theatre to hold in abeyance 
$ creative powers and as philosopher to devote his ener- 
es largely to the propagation of a clearer conception of 
e theatre as art. To those of us who have known him 
life and in exhibition, Craig as artist is the real Craig, 


ct. 
S — 


0 despise the old stage, and secondly no chance of prac- 


up, or the donkey-carts will be passing us!’ ” 


REPUSLIC 206 
the most natural, the most expressive, the most vivid side 
of the man. His new book reveals him as artist only indi- 
rectly or by flashes of comprehension expressed in simple 
and beautiful language such as only an artist can command 
in confessing his art. Such rare moments are those in the 


House of the Vettii and in the Tragic Theatre at Pom- 


peii or the meeting with Salvini, avowals of a master- 
novice in the presence of a greater master. 

The Theatre—Advancing is more eloquent of the de- 
velopment of its author as philosopher and controversialist. 
He himself sees more clearly and he propounds more ex- 
plicitly the problem of the theatre and the nature of the 
theatre as art. Gradually he is rising above the petty 
personal vindictiveness which marred some of his earlier 
Imaginary Conversations. The present volume reveals 
this change and the range of it, for the fragments dated 
about 1908 are often spiteful, while those composed in 
recent years, even though controversial, are tolerant and 
marked by greater poise. ) 

For the first time, Craig ventures to predict the nature 
of his theatre of the future. Heretofore, it has been a 
dim and distant thing, alluring but vague, the negation of 
the thea’re of the present, partly a recreation of a lost the- 
atre, partly the discovery of a new. Now, however, this 
theatre of the future emerges more distinctly and in dual 
guise. “There shall be a Durable Theatre and a Perishable 
Theatre, both the work of artists and both far remote from 
the existing theatre. The Durable Theatre shall be re- 
ligious, perhaps, in content. ‘The architecture of the build- 
ing which houses it shall tend toward a form as inevitable 
and as natural as that of the cathedral or the ship, with 
equal variety of detail within that form. Reality shall not 
be represented but symbolized. Why may there not be a 
precious symbol of a tree or a house or a bridge as there 
is of the cross in the cathedral? And lastly, the actors 
shall be . . .? Ueber-marionettes, yes; only Craig is not 
so sure that this is the only goal, for he has heard of a 
race of actors in India whose austere self-discipline has 
purged them of the personal and fallible aspects of the 
actor as the western world knows him. | 

Side by side with this Durable Theatre, Craig now 
proposes a Perishable Theatre, born of the clowns in the 
circus—a theatre with spontaneous, improvized plays on 
light subjects which no one would mind losing. The plays 
themselves as well as their investiture might be fragile and 
elusive or comically crude, but never heavy with effort, 
always the evanescent foam of wit and fancy. . 

On the road toward these two theatres, Craig points 
the way for a clarification of functions in our present 
theatre. “If I have mocked at it I tell you I love it, and 
my mockery amounts to no more than a jerk at the reins | 
which my old horse Minnie understands to mean, ‘Hurry 
Our present 
theatre he sees compounded of these contrary elements: 1. 
On the poet’s part, an unnatural mode of speech—verse or 
prose; 2. On the actor’s part, a natural, even colloquial 
mode of utterance; 3. Scenes imitating nature in paint and 
canvas; 4. Actors of flesh and blood; 5. Movements half 


natural, half artificial; 6. Light always failing in an at- 


tempt to simulate nature’s light; 7. The faces painted and 
disguised; 8. The facial expression always attempting to 
come through the paint and disguise. 

These contradictory elements he rearranges in two cog- 
nate series, approximating the two theatres of his goal. 
His first grouping, a kind of working basis for the Dur- 
able Theatre, results thus: 1. The poet’s work to be as 


207 


it is—an unnatural mode of speech, or verse; 2. The ac- 
tor’s work to be an unnatural mode of delivery; 3. The 
scene to be a non-natural invention, timeless and of no 
locality; 4. Actors to be disguised beyond recognition, 


like the marionette; 5. Movements conventionalized ac- 


cording to some system; 6. Light frankly non-natural, 
disposed so as to illumine scene and actors; 7. Masks; 
8. Expression to be dependent on the masks and the con- 
ventional movements, both of which are dependent on the 
skill of the actor. 

By another grouping, a different harmony is reached: 
1. The poet’s work to be written in a colloquial mode of 
speech, natural—as improvisation is; 2. The actor’s de- 
livery to be colloquial; 3. The scene to be a facsimile or 
photographic reproduction of nature, even to the use of 
real trees, real earth, bricks, etc.; 4. The actors in no 
way disguised, but selected according to their likeness to 
the part which is to be acted; 5. Movements as natural 
as the speech; 6. The light of day or night; 7. The faces 
of the actors paintless; 8. The expression as natural as 
the movements and speech. 

Here, then, is a theatre logical and consistent, not so 
far from our present power to conceive and construct. It 
has nothing to do with the ideally conceived Durable 
Theatre; it is not yet even the ideal of the Perishable 
Theatre. 
for working toward both from the material at hand in the 
present theatre. 

The actual path toward the accomplishment of Craig’s 
dreams is still discouragingly vague. “What is the next step 
toward realization?” he asks, and then proceeds: “I am 
ready to tell two kinds of people the answer: princes or mil- 
lionaires; for the artists already know, and except for these 
three who else does it concern until it is accomplished ?” 

On the contrary, by good or ill fortune, the solution 
of the problem concerns someone far different. In the 
nature of our time the princes of today are too busy re- 
signing or plotting to retain or regain their thrones to 

bother about art. And the millionaires of the earth, like- 
wise, haunted by communism and the capital levy, are 
engaged with something more personal and concrete than 
the Theatre of the Future. To the public, to the public 
as mass-conscious of its desires and its rights, to the public 
as proletariat, it may be, Craig must turn for the impulse 
and the impetus toward his new theatre. Let him not be 
discouraged that the traditional friends of his art have 
abandoned him. Instead, let him face with the same calm, 
_ determined vision which has brought him thus far on his 
way, the new obligations and the new opportunities. The 
public for whom he ultimately. intends his theatre must 
build it themselves. ‘To comprehend this fact and to act 
upon it is the next step for the Theatre and for Gordon 
Craig—Advancing. Ouiver M. Sayier. 


La Belle France 


A History of France from the earliest times to the 
Treaty of Versailles, by William Stearns Davis, Ph. D. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co. 


HORTLY after the United States declared war 
against Germany, the department of history in the 
University of Minnesota, of which I was then a member, 
met to discuss the question, “What can we do?” We were 
only professors, but the world was still young, and we 
wanted to do something to beat the Hun and make the 


THE ‘NEW REPUBLIC 


naturally would desire to know something of the g re 


But it has the value of a practical suggestion 


cause they helped to defeat Germany rather than in nd 
for themselves. 


aa 


July 14, 1 


world safe for democracy. Professor William Stear 
Davis was present, and I recall his saying, apropos of t 
things that we could do, that someone ought to write 
book showing “what France has done for liberty”; ai 
as he said it I fancied that he looked pointedly at me. 
must have made some cynical remark or other, to the effe 
that France had imposed more liberty on others than g 
had ever fairly won for herself. This was, of Course, 1 
proper spirit for the work mentioned, and I never thoug 
of the incident again until one day the New Republi 
sent me Davis’s completed History of France. | h 
I said, must be the record of what France has done f 
liberty. Consulting the preface, I found that the book w 
“originally intended for men of the American army wi 


French nation on whose soil they expected to do battle fe 
liberty”; and that after the armistice had “vitiated th 
purpose .. .. the volume was continued . . . . to assi 
in making intelligent Americans in general acquainted wit 
the history of a country with which we have establish 
an ever deepening friendship.” 4 

The author professes no first hand knowledge of € | 
subject, but frankly and honorably admits. having mad 
extensive use of Rambaud’s Histoire de la civilisation fran 
caise and Malet’s Histoire de France, which, in respec 
to the latter, “in some cases almost amounts to a free trans 
lation.” In judging the book, therefore, from the poin 
of view of exact scholarship, the humane critic will r¢ 
member that Professor Davis has, as it were, thrown him 
self into the breach because no one else had the courage 
he has done a work belonging properly to some one else. 


The book is far from being a panegyric on the Frend 
people. What impresses me, indeed, is that a better cas 
should not have been made out for the ‘ ‘great French na 
tion.” Apart from the last chapters, which relate th 
events of 1914 and after, the manner is in large par 
perfunctory, as of one who, with the best will in the 
world, finds it difficult to take the subject very seriously 
Perhaps one reason for this is that the neat political an 
moral principles by which Professor Davis thinks it 
essary to judge men and events are so restricted and i 
elastic that few men and few events can ever hope to vit 
more than -a qualified approval. No defender of “aw 
tocracy,” he nevertheless has a fine contempt for ‘ ‘radicals , 
a believer in liberty and progress, he has a lively sense ( 
the virtue of “law and order’’; at once a liberal conse 
vative and a conservative liberal, he feels that a nation i 
itself open to just reproach whenever it grows restive un- 
der the control of respectable people of sound morals, m od 
erate views, and comfortable incomes. One must admit 
that France is a great nation, and that she has played 4 
great part in European Licey but one cannot help th : 
ing how much greater she might have been, and how mit 
safer her influence, had she never — encumbered 4 
nobles or a proletariat. 

I suspect that Professor Davis ae the F cen 


Apart from the Great War, I ano 
think he would ever have occupied himself with the } 

tory of a people who have so rarely demeaned chemselil 
altogether as one could wish. For the truth is that L 
Belle France, the jade, has more often than not been highh 
unconventional in her conduct. She has shown no grea 
inclination to dwell contentedly in an eight-to-twelve-roc : 
house—with bath. When she could not have a palace 
she was likely to prefer the gutter. She has been er 


ly 14 1920 THE NEW 
ate y capable i the highest exaltation and the deepest 
gradation ; and never was this so much the case as when 
e did most for liberty. Never was she guilty of such 
plorable excesses, of such shocking pranks, of conduct 
panbecoming a lady, as during the years from 1789 to 
795. This period in her career constitutes in fact a breach 
com so marked that nothing less than the Great 
and the Peace of Versailles was required to enable 
e best people to overlook it. 

‘Still, how one could wish that the French had man- 
ved their great Revolution, unquestionably the most im- 
or lant event of modern times, with greater moderation! 
lo w much more luminously it would, in that case, have 
linted the moral of the Russian Revolution! And our 
ret is all the greater since they began well enough. The 
St two years witnessed the abolition of the most flagrant 
bus of the “rotten old regime”; and the deputies of the 
ational Assembly made a most commendable attempt, 
pnsidering their inexperience and the visionary theories 
ith which their heads were filled, to establish a moder- 
tely liberal constitutional regime. Even the Declaration 
f Rights was “far from being a radical document. It ex- 
essed the moderate good sense of the bourgeoisie. [How 
i it that the good sense of the bourgeoisie is so often 
yderate’?] Article XVII expressly said, ‘Property is 
1 inviolable and sacred right’,”’, What could be better? 
Jitra-radicals could hardly accept this doctrine today”; 
‘that “few genuine Americans will quarrel with” the 
air principles of the Declaration, ‘‘although couched in 
m instantly remniscent of Rousseau and Montesquieu.” 

0 harm in using the phrases of Rousseau, so given to 
ench emphase, if we carefully discard the substance. 
@s, the first years of the Revolution leave little to be 
sired. But the lower classes were “already almost un- 
mnageable”’ ; and if the “court and noblesse failed to give 
& Revolution an honest support, the bourgeois” [ bour- 


id intelligence of the nation which was anxious for 
2 and enduring reforms and was equally anxious to 
ad off anarchy,” might not find itself able “to control 
situation and every chance would be given to the ex- 
an ists, ” 

This is of course what happened. ‘This is indeed what 
mes of having a proletariat. ‘The people got control. 
B acohin Club, originally a “legitimate debating so- 
‘g by 1791.“‘had become the center of all the radical- 
0 the capital.” [What! these timid, respectable bour- 
is is jacobins, who supported the Constitution of 1791 
il August 19, 1792, and even then would not speak 
‘frightful word Republic?] Well, at all events, the 
obin Club soon came to have a great influence on the 
washed masses,” and so became “the center of the 
paganda of the extreme Rousseau doctrines, with the 
Muine propagandist’s [read Lenin, but not National Se- 
ty League | corollary, that since the doctrines are true, 
means were lawful in giving them effect.” From this 


D t the way is clear; for in relating the French Revolu- 


jit is understood that the mention of the Jacobin Club 
he cue for the appearance of Marat, Danton, and 
¢ ee and then all is lost, even honor. ‘There is 
z to do but to go through with it—anarchy, atheism, 
2c as best one can. 
fessor Davis goes through with it, heroically. He 
tt ough with it, and he even finds something to be 
n defense of the Convention and the Committee of 
ang “This awful body can plead at least one 


isie, n’est-ce-pas?] the bourgeoisie, that is to say “the . 


REPUBLIC — 208 
great merit—it saved France.” It saved France, from 
what? Well, chiefly from Germany, but also apparently ~ 
from “the order-loving English . . . horrified at the steady 
trend of the tidings from across the channel.” It must 
also have saved France from its own diabolism, since it 
created the army, and in the army “the spirit of a great 
ideal, the ideal of a world emancipated from slavery and 
dedicated to liberty, fraternity, and human happiness, was 
animating the youth of France to fight and suffer on the 
frontier.’ But above and beyond all this, what is par- 
ticularly to be kept in mind is that the jacobins, bad as 
they. were, were not anything like as bad as the Bolshe- 
viks. “Comparisons of Revolutionary France with Revo- 
lutionary Russia will leave modern students very lenient 
in their judgments on Frenchmen of 1789-95.” Louis 
XVI “was executed with far more attention to the out- 
ward forms of justice than the unfortunate Nicholas II.” 
The: Jacobins “seem, however, men of much greater phys- 
ical courage than the doctrinaires who cringed before Ger- 
many in 1918.” ‘The French peasants “were to prove far 
more. practical and intelligent than the Russian soviets, 
Bolshevists, and mujiks.” ‘These sly hints will enable even 
the most obtuse reader to know what he ought to think; 
and no doubt much more could be said on the same theme, 


if one had a mind to it. 


Professor Davis’s history of France will, I think, be 
widely read.. It will be popular, it will be found interest- 
ing. And it is interesting, in more ways than one. With 
histories, that is after all the main thing; for Voltaire was 
not far from wrong when he said that “history is only 
a pack of tricks which we play on the dead.” 

( C. B. 


The New Social Order 


The New Social Order, by Harry F. Ward. N ew York:, 
The Macmillan Co. 


HE way of the professor of Christian ethics, like 

that of the transgressor, is hard. If he insists that 
Christ’s rule of gentleness, generosity and mercy should be 
strictly applied in worldly affairs, he is immediately ac- 
cused by practical persons of being “all right as a theorist, 
but lacking in common sense.” If he, then, turns on his 
critics and asks them to reform their religion so that it will 
square with their conduct, he is promptly attacked as a 
pagan, perhaps worse. This was the experience of John 
Ruskin and it rested heavily on his soul until his dying 
day. 

Undaunted by such difficulties, Dr. Harry F. Ward, 
professor of Christian Ethics in Union Theological Semi- 
nary, now boldly essays the ethics of the coming order. 
The Great War has ushered in a new day. Old institutions 
have been smashed and primitive passions unloosed. The 
knowledge, temper, and purpose of the common people of 


‘the world have been given a new direction. No ruling class 


can ever again sit unchallenged and unafraid in the seats 
of the mighty. A capitalist and imperialist oligarchy may, — 
for a while, dominate in the councils of the nations, but it 
trembles with uncertainty and its ways are uneasy. ‘These 
things, our author holds, are so real that even Gradgrind 
and Chadband will not regard them.as the vain imaginings 
of a cloistered Christian. 

In attempting to divine the future Dr. Ward lays down 
five principles for guidance. The first of these is equality, 
not that of the boastful bourgeois measuring himself against 


gs 


209 


the shaded marquis, rather the equality of worthy 
citizens, marred by no gross disparities of slum and mansion, 
but generous and avowed, resting upon a foundation no 


less secure than that of i aancahte and useful labor in the 


common weal. This equality will prevail not merely at the 
polls but in the courts of law, the places of industry, and 
the councils of the state. The second principle is that of 
universal service founded on the fellowship of the faith 
and the mutual aid of nature. The third is efficiency, not 
the cold-blooded calculation of the counting-house applied 
to the labor of a single shop, but social engineering, de- 
tached from the gain of individuals and corporations and 
brought into the service of national production. The fourth 
is the supremacy of personality—the recognition of the 
worth of the individual, his moral right to material and 
spiritual freedom—emancipated from any dead level of 
community mediocrity, the withering hand of dull con- 
formity. The fifth is world solidarity, mastering the de- 
cisive forces of race and class, so far as this can be done, 
by removing the divided interest in ownership that now 
creates and maintains them. 

In the realization of these principles, he believes, science 
and religion will make common cause. Science bends fine 
capacities to special tasks, religion draws them all into the 
service of the general good. Both transcend the boundaries 
of the common, the local, and the temporal. The true man 
of science could no more think of limiting his vision to the 
laboratory of a glue factory than a true Christian missionary 
could rest content serving in the private chapel of a world’s 
greatest pork magnate. In biology and cosmography the two 
may be divided but in the realm of the spirit, where all 
great hopes are born and all magnificent enterprises are 


‘conceived, there may be a harmony of which the profes-- 


sional reconcilers have never dreamed. 

Having laid down the principles of the new order, Dr. 
Ward brings under review the programs of the age—the 
plans of the British Labor party, the Russian Soviet Re- 


public, the League of Nations, the Socialists, the Farmers, 


organized labor in the United States and the modern 
churches. ‘These written documents, brought together from 


many countries and representing parties widely divergent. 


in professed aims and underlying motives, seem, at first 
glance, to be a mosaic, forced together by the strong hand 
of a master workman, but in truth they reveal, on careful 
examination, a drift and tendency which no student of 
ethics can well ignore. Lenin and the bishops of the Me- 
thodist Episcopal Church! American Catholics and Russian 
- Jews! Nazareth and London! Gethsemane and the wheat 
fields of North Dakota! Carlyle did suspect that the fire 
gleaming on the forge and the light of the distant star— 
the beating heart and the beating tide—were all of one 
scheme. Maitland tells us that English law is a part of all 

law, of a seamless web. — 
‘To come down, Dr. Ward has rendered a real service 
in bringing together in compact form so many expressions 
of the new spirit. He knows that they are signs rather 
than realities, but it is a poor skipper who cares not which 
way the veering flaw blows. Christians and pagans will do 
well to ponder them. Many a layman will be surprised to 
find what his bishop thinks of the modern social process. 
Many a bishop will be astounded to discover what obscure 
laymen, boasting of no hands laid on, of no apocalyptic 
_ visions, have beheld in their dreams. It is good for brethren 
to dwell together in unity, even for a little while, in the 
- pages of a book. 
ays Cuarves A. BEarp. 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


so hits off, accidentally, a quite accurate description of ¢ 


a telescope Jean peered hopefully at Herrick, only , 


dens in the soft haze that attends the sunset: Gregor 


July 14, q i 


The Swing of the Pendulum, by Adriana Spadoni. N 
York: Boni and Liveright. E 


HERE is to be eaten, particularly in New Engla 

a disheartening kind of meal: a flock of small dist 

the contents of which are distinguishable one from anot 
by name rather than taste—the brood of one all-cre: t 
pot, wherein are successively stewed onion, beef, turnip 4 
veal. Such a pot withholds from each food a part of 
individuality and hands it on to dilute the personality 
the next, to confuse mild veal with pungent onion, and 
sets up a single standard of gray nourishment, a comm 
denominator of mere calories. Just. as mercilessly d 
Miss Spadoni’s imagination operate, sending forth into 
real, three-dimensioned world a troop of pale chare cte 
cursed with congenital indistinctness, doomed from bif 
to wander unrecognizably in the fog of a common origi 
Consider briefly the cast, of vaguely human, blurr 
figures, of low visibility, like forms crouching at dusk 6 
a bed covered with mosquito netting. For example,’ o 
leading lady, Jean Norris; “a big, fair woman, not @ 
viously pretty.” When she meets our first hero, Frankl 
Herrick, she has “a strange impression of receiving a vet 
distinct picture of something naturally indistinct.” 


Swing of the Pendulum as a whole. For Miss Spadon 
reminds one of a Swiss guide persuasively adjusting” 
myopic telescope to the tourist’s eye, which, aimed presum 
ably at the rare lacework of distant peaks, sees only a din 
blue circle, bulging into opalescent rings. Through sud 


learn that “there was something large and curved ¢ 
whitish about this tall man that made her think oft 
gulls,” that “. . . there was something burning below tf a 
flesh that whiten and sharpened him.” ‘This tendene 
to the albino about Herrick extends even to his vision, 0 
he calls Jean “you wonderful big white woman” ami 
thinks of her as “fa white prairie fire.’ But in “7 
such adoration Jean leaves him. ] 

Jean, now well over thirty, edges toward the sunset ¢ 
her life as a heroine. Next male. The albino tinge red 


Allen is a “tall man, about forty, with thick dry brown ait 
full of reddish lights, and red-brown eyes.” But he fe des 
for he refuses to give Jean the child she desires by him- 
and does so quite properly, since he is married. Wanted 
a hero, a real flesh-and-blood hero, compounded of strengt 
and silence, if necessary, but at all odds alive, throbbing 
crudely visible, not like a composite photograph of the | 
American hero-team. For this role Philip Fletcher wi 
obviously not qualify, and Jean quite properly rejects h i 
for though “his eyes were clear, blue and kind, a trif 
too far apart, . . . his mouth was weak.” He too fade 
into the limbo, the jungle, where by now we are sure ! 
Spadoni has numberless pale male ghosts in leash. Ar 
Jerome Stuart emerges, making his most definite appearanc 
as “a quiet man with stooping student shoulders and thie 
gray hair.” Jean and he stand a moment in embrace @ 
the last page of the book, then vanish over the brink® n 
probable bliss. R. 


ee | 


Contributors 


Bruce BuIveN is editor of the New York Evening Globe. 
VipA SCUDDER is professor of English at Wellesley Colleg 
James WEBER LINN is professor of ——- at the Univers a 

of Chicago. 4 


