Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


-.xSi^TYQ^ 


i 


^^fiitAR^^' 


\ 


Al^ 


SL.-  ^f;iC, 


A  fflSTORY  OF 
AMERICAN  LrrERATURE 


BT 

WILLIAM  B.  ^klRNS.  FhJ). 

Aisociate  Professor  of  American  Literature  in  the 
Universitj  of  Wisconsin 


NEW  YORK 

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

AMERICAN  BRANCH :  35  West  32nd  Street 
LONDON,  TORONTO,  MELBOURNE,  AND  BOMBAY 

1921 


P5 


Copyright,  1912 
BT  Oxford  Univebsitt  PBiflB 

AMBRICAN  BBANCH 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  I 

PAQE 

The  Colonial  Time   (1607-1705). 1-102 

I.  The  Southern  Colonies 1 

n.  The    New    England    Colonies.     First    Period, 

1620-1676 21 

m.  The  New  England  Colonies.     Second  Period, 

1676-1765 6Q 

TV.  The  Middle  Colonies 90 

CHAPTER  n 

The  Revolutionary  Period  (1765-1800) 108-157 

I.  Controversial  Writings 103 

n.  Greneral  Literature 122 

CHAPTER  m 

The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  (1800-188S) 158-219 

I.  General  Conditions;  the  Knickerbocker  Writers  158 

n.  Writers  of  New  England 197 

m.  Writers    of     Philadelphia;     the    South;      the 

West 209 

IV.  Orators;  Scholars 215 

••• 
m 


iv  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  IV 

PAOE 

The  Central  Period  (1838-1883) 220-460 

I.  Greneral  Conditions 220 

II.  The  New  England  Transcendentalists 222 

III.  The  New  England  Abolitionists 254 

IV.  Miscellaneous  New  England  Writers 284 

V.  New  York  Writers 356 

VI.  Pennsylvania  Writers 895 

Vn.  Southern  Writers 404 

Vm.  Western  Writers 486 

CHAPTER  V 
Recent  Years  (1888-1912) 461-483 


PEEFACE 

This  book  attempts  to  trace  within  reasonable  compass  the 
course  of  literary  development  in  America^  and  to  present 
the  most  significant  facts  regarding  American  authors  and 
their  works.  It  places  greatest  emphasis  on  general  move- 
ments because  American  literature  is  first  of  all  important 
as  an  expression  of  national  life.  There  are  few  American 
writings  that  require  careful  analysis  and  merit  intensive 
study  as  masterpieces.  But  in  a  nation  where  education  has 
from  the  first  been  so  generally  diffused^  literary  attempts  of 
slight  artistic  merit  may  refiect  not  only  the  obvious  changes 
in  national  life  and  ideals^  but  subtler  tendencies  and  aspira- 
tions. For  this  reason  attention  is  given  not  only  to  the 
few  greater  writers,  but  to  many  others  whose  works,  though 
less  important  in  themselves,  are  sometimes  even  more  sig- 
nificant. The  plan  of  the  book  and  the  decision  what  to 
include  and  what  to  exclude  have  been  influenced  by  the 
author's  experiences  with  college  classes;  but  an  attempt  has 
been  made  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  general  reader  as  well 
as  those  of  the  systematic  student. 

In  tracing  tendencies  and  movements  it  has  been  necessary 
to  adopt  a  geographical  classification  of  authors;  and  this 
has  sometimes  been  carried  beyond  the  point  where  it  is 
significant.  It  is  a  matter  of  the  greatest  importance  whether 
an  author  represents  the  spirit  of  Puritan  New  England  or 
the  spirit  of  Cavalier  Virginia;  it  is  of  little  importance 
whether  he  chances  to  write  in  New  Hampshire  or  in  Ver- 
mont. For  convenience,  however,  smaller  as  well  as  larger 
groupings  have  been  made  on  the  basis  of  residence.  In 
adopting  this  plan  the  author  wishes  to  disclaim  any  intention 
of  over-emphasizing  sectioned  difFerences. 


y 


VI  Pbbpace 

As  a  general  rule  the  works  of  living  authors  have  not  been 
discussed  in  detail.  Exception  has  been  made  in  the  case  of 
two  or  three  men  whose  reputations  were  achieved  many 
years  ago,  and  whose  literary  work  is  evidently  done.  It 
would  have  been  easier,  and  perhaps  more  satisfactory,  to 
close  this  history  with  authors  who  flourished  in  the  middle 
of  the  nineteenth  century;  but  it  seemed  desirable  to  add 
some  comment  on  literary  conditions  in  recent  years.  Liv- 
ing writers  are  mentioned  as  illustrations  of  schools  and 
tendencies,  but  no  attempt  is  made  to  estimate  their  rank, 
or  to  name  all  who  are  worthy.  Even  after  this  explanation 
is  given  it  would  doubtless  be  hard  to  tell  why  some  are 
included  and  others  are  omitted.  The  author  expects  no 
general  assent  to  the  judgments  in  the  last  chapter;  but  it 
is  his  consolation  that  the  lapse  of  a  few  years  makes  all 
estimates  of  contemporary  waitings  seem  strange.  He  trusts 
that  he  may  live  to  feel  for  himself  that  many  things  in  this 
section  of  the  book  are  thoroughly  amusing. 

W.  B.  C. 

University  of  Wisconsin, 
April,  1912. 


A  HISTORY  OF  AMERICAN  LITERATURE 


ypx 


CHAPTEB  I 

Thb  Colonial  Time  (1607-1765) 

I.  The  Southebn  Colonies 

The  literature  of  America  was  an  ofF-shoot  from  that  of 
England.    If  an  exact  date  for  the  divergence  must  be  given, 

it  may  be  set  at  1607,  the  year  of  the  found- 
The  B^^nning    i^g  q{  the  first  permanent  British  colony  in 

Litermtore  *^®  ^®^  world.     At  this  time   Shakespeare 

was  still  writing,  and,  as  will  be  seen,  may 
have  received  a  suggestion  for  one  play  from  an  American 
book.  The  very  year  of  the  Jamestown  settlement  saw  the 
writing  or  publication  of  works  by  Beaumont  and  Fletcher, 
Chapman,  Dekker,  Marston,  and  others  of  the  group  who, 
though  they  wrote  largely  in  the  reign  of  James,  are  known 
as  the  later  Elizabethans.  These  men  did  not,  however,  exert 
any  strong  direct  influence  on  their  contemporaries  who 
emigrated  to  the  New  World.  Most  of  them,  it  will  be 
noted,  are  remembered  for  their  writings  in  two  depart- 
ments of  pure  literature — the  drama  and  the  lyric.  The 
early  settlers  of  Virginia  wrote  mostly  in  prose,  and  they 
wrote,  not  as  men  of  letters,  but  as  practical  explorers, 
colonists,  business  men.  They  told  the  story  of  their  adven- 
tures, and  described  the  country  to  which  they  had  come; 
and  if  they  tried  to  make  their  narratives  and  descriptions 
attractive  it  was  with  a  commercial  rather  than  with  an 
esthetic  purpose. 

But  though  the  connection  between  Elizabethan  literature 
and  these  early  writers  was  indirect,  it  was  none  the  less 
important  The  whole  colonization  of  Virginia  was  in  itself 
an  expression  of  the  spirit  and  temper  of  the  Elizabethaa 

1 


2  American  Litesatusb 

time.    The  love  of  adventure,  the  credulity  with  which  men 

believed  in  the  existence  of  wealth  in  every  unexplored  land, 

the  intense  wonder  with  which  they  viewed  the 

Influence  of  the  flora,  the  fauna,  and  the  inhabitants  of  their 
Elizabethan  i  i  «   .1 

Spirit  ^^^  home,  are  shown  on  every  page  of  the 

history  of  Jamestown.  One  does  not  need  to 
read  far  in  the  narratives  of  almost  any  of  these  early  Vir- 
ginian writers  before  he  realizes  that  here  is  the  same  uttitude 
of  mind,  the  same  philosophy  of  life,  so  often  expressed  on 
the  Elizabethan  stage. 

The  earliest  American  writings  were  in  prose,  and  English 
prose  liad  not  at  this  time  attained  its  full  development.    The 

day  of  Euphuism  had  gone  by,  and  the 
Sf  M*h^p^'         fashion  was  setting  toward  a  saner  and  more 

vigorous  style  of  writing;  but  few  works  had 
yet  appeared  which  were  associated  with  the  evolution  of 
modern  prose  style.  The  first  book  written  in  America  was 
published  three  years  before  the  King  James  version  of  the 
Bible,  four  years  before  any  of  Bacon's  Essays  took  their 
final  form,  and  a  generation  before  the  religious  and  polit- 
ical writings  of  Jeremy  Taylor  and  Milton.  English  prose 
of  this  time  had  a  fire  and  a  melody  of  its  own ;  but  even  in 
the  hands  of  men  of  letters  it  was  likely  to  be  unformed, 
sometimes  ungrammatical,  and  always  lacking  in  the  terse- 
ness and  finish  of  a  later  day.  When  attempted  by  untrained 
literary  workers  it  might  lose  none  of  its  force,  but  it  was 
likely  to  become  involved,  sometimes  even  ehaotic,  in  struc- 
ture. 

All  these  crude  but  vigorous  qualities  are  found  in  the 
style  of  the  first  American  writer — Captain  John   Smith 

(1580P-1631).    It  is  more  than  a  coincidence 

To^o&nitfa         ^^**  ^^®  name  which  stands  first  in  a  history 

of  American  literature  is  that  of  a  man  who 
is  known  to  every  schoolboy  fox  different  achievements  froja 


J 


Th£  Colonial  TtM»  3 

those  of  his  pen.  In  the  Elizabethan  age  m^a  of  letters  were 
men  of  action.  Conversely,  many  men  known  chiefly  for 
their  activities  in  politics,  exploration,  or  war  left  writ- 
ings of  value.  Indeed,  the  peculiarities  of  Elizabethan  prose 
style  may  be  traced  largely  to  the  fact  that  prose  was  written 
by  men  like  Sidney,  Baleigh,  and  others  who  possessed 
similar  energy  but  slighter  literary  talent  It  is  impossible 
to  judge  what  John  Smith  wrote  without  remembering 
what  he  did. 

The  achievements  of  this  man,  if  his  own  testimony  is 
to  be  trusted,  are  among  the  most  remarkable  of  modem 

times.  According  to  his  account  he  was  bom 
A^S^iSte'''  ^*  Willoughby  on  the  flat  coast  of  Lincoln- 

shire.  While  he  was  a  mere  boy  his  father 
died,  and  he  was  rather  shabbily  treated  by  his  guardians, 
who  finally  apprenticed  him  to  a  merchant.  The  life  to 
which  his  apprenticeship  bound  him  was  distasteful,  and  at' 
the  age  of  fifteen  he  ran  away  and  became  a  soldier  of 
fortune.  He  fought  in  France  and  the  low  countries; 
journeyed  to  Scotland  with  letters  to  the  king,  but  had 
little  success  as  a  courtier;  went  back  to  Willoughby  and 
lived  for  some  months  a  hermit  in  the  woods;  returned  to 
the  continent,  where  he  went  through  experiences  too 
numerous  to  mention;  was  cast  overboard  from  a  vessel  in 
the  Mediterranean,  and  picked  up  by  a  pirate ;  took  part  in 
an  engagement  and  received  his  share  of  the  booty;  and 
finally  reached  the  East,  the  scene  of  his  most  marvellous 
adventures.  Here  he  saw  much  of  the  war  against  the 
Turks,  and  in  every  movement,  he  tells  us,  he  played  a 
leading  part.  He  was  useful  to  his  commander,  both  in 
suggesting  plots  and  stratagems,  and  in  actual  conflict.  One 
of  his  most  dramatic  accounts  is  that  of  his  combat  'Ho 
delight  the  ladies''  with  three  Turks  in  succession,  each  of 
whom  he  slew  and  decapitated.    Finally  he  was  taken  captive 


4  AliEBICAN  LlTERATtrSB 

and  sent  as  slave  to  a  Turkish  lady  of  rank.  The  relations 
of  the  two  soon  became  highly  romantic — Smith  always 
made  a  good  impression  on  the  other  sex.  Unfortunately 
the  lady  had  a  cruel  brother  who  treated  him  with  indignity. 
Finally  the  Captain  killed  his  tormentor,  appropriated  his 
clothes  and  his  horse,  and  escaped,  riding  alone  many  days 
through  the  desert.  These  adventures,  but  the  most  impor- 
tant of  which  have  been  mentioned,  were  accomplished  before 
the  hero  returned  to  England  in  1605,  aged  about  twenty- 
five  years. 

For  the  next  year  and  a  half  Smith  seems  to  have  done 
nothing  noteworthy.  Then  he  comes  into  view  again  as 
one  of  the  most  conspicuous  of  the  men  who  founded  the 
colony  at  Jamestown.  Here  he  appears,  from  his  own  writ- 
ings and  those  of  his  contemporaries,  as  a  bluff,  quarrel- 
some, energetic  man,  afraid  of  no  one,  sometimes  under 
arrest,  once  in  danger  of  execution,  but  generally  coming 
out  victor,  and  showing  himself  perhaps  the  most  sagacious, 
practical  manager  in  the  whole  settlement.  He  directed  the 
palisading  of  the  fort,  explored  the  rivers  and  the  surround- 
ing coimtry,  traded  and  treated  with  the  Indians,  and  at 
the  same  time  took  his  part  in  all  the  intestine  broils  that 

characterized  the  first  months  of  the  colony. 
S^i  8  First       j^  ^g^g  ]^Qj.Q^  iqq^  |-]^at  he  found  time,  with 

all  his  other  labors,  to  write  what  so  far 
as  we  know  was  his  first  book,  and  what  was  certainly 
the  first  English  book  written  in  a  permanent  American 
settlement — A  True  Relation  of  such  occurrences  and  acci- 
dents of  noate  as  hath  hapned  in  Virginia  since  the  first 
planting  of  that  Collony,  which  is  now  resident  in  the  South 
part  thereof,  till  the  last  retume  from  thence. 

This  work,  perhaps  written  with  no  thought  of  its  publi- 
cation, contains  a  history  of  the  first  months  of  the  settle- 
ment, with  a  description  of  the  country  and  its  inhabitants. 


The  Colonial  Tihb  8 

It  is  not  a  long  work,  occupying  but  forty  pages  of  rather 
coarse  type  in  Mr.  Arber^s  reprint;  though  it  is  possible 
that  the  proprietors  of  the  colony  suppressed  some  of  Smithes 
frank  statements.  Very  likely  its  composition  was  begun 
in  1607,  soon  after  the  expedition  landed.  The  manuscript 
was  taken  to  England  in  the  early  summer  of  1608,  and 
printed  later  in  the  same  year. 

During  the  rest  of  his  stay  in  Virginia  Smith  wrote  but 
one  other  work  of  importance — A  Map  of  Virginia,  with  a 

Description  of  the  Countrey  the  Commod- 
W^SiM   ^'^      Hies,    People,     Oovemment    and    Religion, 

This  contains  little  narrative,  but  is  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  country,  its  physical  features,  climate,  plants, 
animals,  and  inhabitants.  It  was  sent  to  England,  probably 
late  in  the  year  1608,  but  was  not  published  until  1612,  and 
then,  somewhat  strangely,  at  the  University  Press,  Oxford. 
At  the  same  time  with  the  Map  of  Virginia  Smith  sent  a 
letter  to  the  London  proprietors  of  the  colony,  answering 
sharply  their  demands  for  immediate  financial  returns. 

John  Smith  returned  to  England  in  1609,  and  remained 
there  till  1614,  when  he  again  sailed  to  America  and  made  a 
map  of  the  coast  from  Cape  Cod  to  the  Penobscot.  In  1615 
he  started  for  New  England  with  a  colony,  but  the  expedi- 
tion met  disaster  at  the  hands  of  French  pirates.  After 
his  escape  from  his  captors  and  his  return  to  England  he 
devoted  himself  to  writing,  producing  a  considerable  number 
of  works.  Among  those  which  have  reference  to  America 
are:  A  Description  of  New  England,  1616;  New  Englands 
Trials,  1620,  1622;  The  General  Historic  of  Virginia,  1624; 
Advertisements  for  the  Unexperienced  Planters  of  New 
England,  or  Anywhere,  1631.  His  autobiography.  The  True 
Tra/vels,  Adventures,  and  Observations  of  Captaine  John 
Smith,  was  written  about  a  year  before  his  death,  which 
occurred  in  1631. 


S  American  Literat0bs 

The  only  authority  for  the  early  adventures  of  Captain 
Smith  is  this  autobiography.    His  statements  regarding  his 

exploits  are  therefore  hard  to  prove  or  dis- 
^  prove;  but  it  is  safe  to  say  that,  though  they 
evidently  have  some  basis  in  fact,  many  of  the  details  over- 
tax credulity.  When  we  come  to  his  experiences  in  Virginia 
there  are  other  accounts  that  may  be  compared  with  his 
own.  These  all  show  that,  whether  he  was  a  braggart  or 
not,  he  was  probably  the  one  man  among  the  helpless 
adventurers  at  Jamestown  who  was  really  equal  to  the  occa- 
sion. But  even  in  the  American  narrative  it  is  obvious  that 
he  delights  in  the  use  of  the  pronoun  *1,"  the  monotony 
of  which  he  varies  by  frequent  references  to  "Captain 
Smith*';  and  there  is  strong  reason  for  believing  that  some 
of  the  experiences  that  he  relates  have  little  or  no  basis  in 
fact.  The  one  which  has  aroused  most  discussion  is  the  story 
of  his  rescue  by  Pocahontas.  In  the  True  Relation,  written 
soon  after  he  was  captured  and  taken  to  Powhatan,  he  speaks 
of  that  monarch  as  most  friendly,  and  in  another  connection 
refers  to  Pocahontas  as  a  mere  child.  The  first  reference  to 
the  rescue  was  made  in  a  letter  which  Smith  wrote  to  Queen 
Anne  in  1616,  when  he  was  living  in  obscurity,  while  the 
**Indian  Princess,"  now  married  to  John  Bolfe,  was  attract- 
ing much  attention  in  London.  It  is  possible  that  the 
account  of  Powhatan's  hostility  was  omitted  from  the  True 
Relation  in  order  not  to  frighten  immigrants;  but  it  is 
much  more  likely  that  the  story  was  coined  to  connect  the 
hero's  name  with  that  of  a  social  celebrity. 

Except  for  the  fact  that  John  Smith  was  the  first  Amer- 
ican writer,  his  place  in  the  world  of  letters  is  unimportant. 

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  few 
te^8  Literary  ^^  j^g  English  contemporaries  who  confined 

themselves  to  prose  won  high  literary  rank. 
Even  as  prose,  his  writings  are  by  no  means  devoid  of  merit. 


Thb  Colonial  Tihb  7 

In  his  later  work^  written  when  he  had  more  leisure^  and 
looked  on  life  in  a  calmer  way^  there  are  sentences  that 
possess  the  tme  Elizabethan  melody : 

Who  can  desire  more  content,  that  hath  smaU  meanes ;  or  but  only 
his  merit  to  advance  his  fortune,  then  to  tread,  and  plant  that 
ground  hee  hath  purchased  by  the  hazard  of  his  life?  If  he  have  but 
the  taste  of  virtue  and  magnanimitie,  what  to  such  a  minde  can  bee 
more  pleasant,  then  planting  and  building  a  foundation  for  his  Pos- 
teritie,  gotte  from  the  rude  earth,  by  Qod's  blessing  and  his  owne 
Industrie,  without  prejudice  to  any?  If  hee  have  any  graine  of  faith 
or  scale  in  Beligion,  what  can  hee  doe  lesse  hurtfuU  to  any :  or  more 
agreeable  to  God  then  to  seeke  to  convert  those  poore  Salvages  to 
know  Christ,  and  humanitie,  whose  labors  with  discretion  wiU  tripple 
requite  thy  charge  and  imines?  What  so  truely  sutes  with  honour 
and  honestie,  as  the  discovering  things  unknowne?  erecting  Townes, 
peopling  Countries,  informing  the  ignorant,  reforming  things  unjust, 
teaching  virtue;  and  gaine  to  our  Native  mother-countrie  a  kingdom 
to  attend  her :  finde  imployment  for  those  that  are  idle,  because  they 
know  not  what  to  doe:  so  farre  from  wronging  any,  as  to  cause 
Posteritie  to  remember  thee ;  and  remembering  thee,  ever  honour  that 
remembrance  with  praise? 

In  the  works  produced  in  America  such  passages  as  this  are 
hardly  to  be  found.  The  circumstances  that  repressed  lit- 
erary activity  in  the  colonies,  and  that  in  some  measure 
have  crippled  American  literature  almost  to  the  present, 
began  to  make  themselves  felt  at  once.  The  True  Relation 
and  the  Map  of  Virginia  must  have  been  written  hastily, 
at  odd  moments,  in  the  midst  of  fatiguing  physical  toil  and 
mental  anxiety.  Both  are,  for  the  most  part,  plain  blunt 
narratives  and  descriptions  of  what  the  author  had  himself 
seen.  There  was  not  time  even  for  such  obvious  general- 
izations as  are  found  in  the  paragraph  quoted  above.  In 
the  Trtie  Relation,  especially,  narrative  clauses  often  crowd 
each  other,  as  in  the  following: 

The  two  and  twenty  day  of  Aprill,  Captain  Newport  and  myselfe 
with  divers  others,  to  the  number  of  twenty  two  persons,  set  forward 
to  discover  the  River,  some  fiftie  or  sixtie  miles,  finding  it  in  some 
plaoes  broader^  and  in  some  narrower,  the  Conntrie  (for  the  moste 


8  American  Litesatttrb 

part)  on  each  side  plaine  high  ground,  with  many  fresh  Springes,  the 
people  in  all  places  kindly  intreating  us,  daunsing  and  feasting  us 
with  strawberries,  Mulberries,  Bread,  Fish,  and  other  their  Countrie 
provisions  whereof  we  had  plenty:  for  which  Captaine  Newport 
kindely  requited  their  least  favours  with  Bels,  Plnnes,  Needles, 
beades,  or  Glasses,  which  so  contented  them  that  his  liberallitie  made 
them  follow  us  from  place  to  place,  and  ever  kindely  to  respect  us. 

Prose  like  this  violates  most  rhetorical  conventionalities^  but 
it  is  perfectly  clear.  Smith  is  an  example  of  the  unlearned 
pioneer  and  adventurer  who  writes  because  he  has  something 
to  say^  and  whose  straightforwardness  saves  him  from 
ambiguity. 

William    Strachey   was    a   colonist  of   a   different   sort. 
Though  little  is  known  of  his  life  he  was  evidently  a  man 

of  some  prominence  and  experience  in  polit- 
g^^**  ical  affairs,  who  in  1610  came  to  Virginia 

with  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  was  secretary  of  the 
colony  for  about  three  years,  and  afterward  returned  to 
England.  On  the  journey  over  Sir  Thomas  Gates's  fleet 
was  scattered  in  a  storm,  and  his  own  ship,  on  which 
Strachey  was  a  passenger,  was  wrecked  on  the  Bermudas. 
From  these  islands  the  survivors  escaped  in  rude  vessels 
of  their  own  construction,  and  reached  Jamestown  nearly 
a  year  after  they  first  set  out.  Strache/s  chief  work  written 
in  America  is  an  account  of  the  hardships  of  this  voyage, 
entitled  A  true  Beportory  of  the  Wracke,  and  Redemption 
of  Sir  Thomas  Oates  Knight;  upon  and  from  the  Ilands  of 
the  Bermudas:  his  Comming  to  Virginia,  and  the  Estate  of 
that  Colonie  then,  and  after,  under  the  Government  of  the 
Lord  La  Warre.  This  pamphlet  was  written  in  1610,  and 
printed  in  London  before  the  close  of  the  same  year.  It 
has  for  us  an  intrinsic  interest  as  one  of  the  strongest  speci- 
mens of  prose  to  be  found  among  Southern  colonial  writings ; 
and  perhaps  even  greater  interest  from  the  fact  that  some 
Shakespearean  scholars  believe  it  to  have  furnished  sug- 


The  Colonial  Time  9 

gestions  for  *^The  Tempest."  The  claim  can  hardly  be 
proved  or  disproved;  but  even  a  casual  reader  will  notice 
correspondences  between  parts  of  the  narrative  and  scenes  of 
the  play.* 

Strachey  was  a  man  of  some  education  and  culture,  though 
probably  not  a  trained  writer.  His  Wrache  and  Redemp- 
tion shows  a  conscious  striving  after  effect  such  as  might 
be  expected  of  a  man  of  literary  inexperience  who  was  trying 
to  narrate  a  terrible  occurrence.  His  Historie  of  Travaile 
into  Virginia  Brittania,  partly  written  and  partly  compiled 
after  his  return  to  England,  is  plodding  and  uninspired. 

A  later  official  of  the  colony  was  George  Sandys  (1577- 
1644),  who   held  the  position  of  treasurer  from   1621   to 

1624  or  1625.  At  the  time  of  his  appoint- 
^^  ^  ment  he  was  engaged  on  a  translation  of 
Ovid's  Metamorphoses  J  and  had  already  completed  five  books. 
After  his  arrival  in  Virginia  he  translated  the  remaining  ten 
books,  and  the  whole  was  published  in  1626,  after  his  return 
to  England.  It  is  one  of  the  more  notable  of  that  group  of 
translations  of  which  Chapman's  Homer  is  perhaps  the  best 
known  example,  and  for  many  years  was  given  high  rank 
by  critics  and  scholars.  In  the  dedication  of  the  completed 
Tolume,  addressed  to  King  Charles,  the  author  says: 

It  needeth  more  than  a  single  denization,  being  a  double  stranger; 
sprung  from  the  stock  of  the  ancient  Romanes,  but  bred  in  the  new 
world,  of  the  rudeness  whereof  it  cannot  but  participate,  especiaUy 
having  wars  and  tumults  to  bring  it  to  light  instead  of  the  Muses. 

Very  likely  the  work  did  suffer  from  the  circumstances  in 
which  it  was  written ;  but  it  would  puzzle  a  student  to  find 
any  particxdar  in  which  the  translation  is  indebted  to 
America,  or  to  distinguish  in  manner  between  the  ten  books 
done  here  and  the  five  completed  in  England.     The  connec- 

*  A  fair  and  eonam  statement  of  the  evidence  on  this  question  la  given  in  the 
Variorum  edition  of  the  play,  edited  by  Dr.  Hoiaoe  Howard  Fuznees. 


10  Amerioak  Literature 

tion  of  Sandys  with  Virginia  should  be  remembered  chiefly 
as  a  reminder  that  official  appointment  sometimes  brought  to 
the  New  World  men  of  high  scholarship  and  real  literary  gift. 
Smith,  Strachey,  and  Sandys  typify  three  important 
classes  of  early  writers — ^the  unlettered  adventurer  who  wrote 

with  little  thought  of  form,  the  gentleman  in 
nree  Tjrpes  of    p^j^jy^  jjfg  ^j^^j  attempted  a  literary  record 

of  his  experiences,  and  the  scholar  whose 
work  continued  the  same  here  as  in  England.  The  first  two 
of  these  classes  contained  many  representatives.  In  an  age 
when  ever3rthing  connected  with  America  excited  so  much 
interest  and  wonder,  every  emigrant  who  could  guide  a  pen 
was  likely  to  attempt,  for  private  friends  at  least,  some 
account  of  what  he  saw.  So  great  was  the  demand  for  news 
from  America  that  many  of  these  private  letters,  as  well  as 
writings  intended  for  publication,  found  their  way  into  print. 
Some  of  these  are  only  less  notable — ^indeed  some  may  be 
even  more  readable — than  those  of  Smith  and  Strachey;  but 
most  of  them  do  not  merit  consideration  in  a  literary  history. 
Mention  should  be  made,  however,  of  Alexander  Whitaker 
(1685-1613?),  ^The  Apostle_oO;irginia/^    Whitaker  was  a 

clergyman,  a  Cambridge  graduate,  who  in 
^ly  Minor        ^611    resigned   his  living   in   the   north    of 

England  to  come  as  a  missionary  to  the 
Indians,  and  who  labored  faithfully  at  various  places  in  the 
colony  until  his  death  some  five  or  six  years  later.  His  Good 
News  from  Virginia,  which  appeared  in  London  in  1613, 
contains  some  description  of  the  country,  but  treats  espe- 
cially of  the  natives  and  their  moral  and  spiritual  condition. 
Its  object  was  to  convince  the  English  people  that  the  Indian 
was  not  merely  a  curious  animal,  but  a  rational  human 
being,  for  whom  as  a  fellow-man  they  were  responsible. 
John  Pory  (1570P-1635?),  another  Cambridge  man,  was  a 
more  amusing  if  a  less  edifpng  writer.    He  came  to  America 


The  Colonial  Time  11 

under  different  circumstances^  being  presumably  sent  by  his 
family  because  his  drunkenness  made  him  inconvenient  at 
home.  In  his  earlier  years,  about  1600,  he  was  engaged  in 
historical  studies  and  in  preparing  translations  of  works  of 
travel  under  the  direction  of  Eichard  Hakluyt.  In  America 
his  indolence  and  his  bad  habits  kept  him  from  writing 
much,  but  he  left  an  account  of  three  excursions  among  the 
Indians,  reprinted  by  Smith  in  his  General  Historie,  and 
a  gossipy  letter  to  Sir  Dudley  Carleton.  As  an  observer 
he  seems  to  have  had  a  way  of  looking  on  the  odd  and  amus- 
ing side  of  things,  and  though  he  could  not  be  classed  as  a 
humorist  there  is  a  touch  of  f  acetiousness  about  all  his  work. 
The  writings  produced  during  the  first  twenty  years  of 
the  Jamestown  colony,  though  meagre,  were  more  than  could 
be  expected  from  men  in  such  circumstances;  and  a  con- 
temporary would  have  seemed  justified  in  predicting  that, 
with  more  leisure  and  fewer  hardships,  a  distinctive  Ameri- 
can literature  would  arise  in  that  part  of  the  continent  to 
which  they  belonged.    'Such  a  prediction,  if  made,  was  never 

fulfilled.     After  the  first  half-generation  of 

ment  of  literature  in  the  South.  The  few 
works  that  did  appear  for  the  next  one  hundred  and  forty 
years  were  sporadic  and  unrelated.  The  reasons  for  this 
literary  poverty  were  of  two  classes — ^those  depending  on  the 
character  of  the  colonists  and  those  depending  on  their 
environment. 

The  early  immigrants  to  the  Southern  colonies  differed 
widely  in  morals  and  in  social  position,  but  they  agreed  in 

one  respect:  with  few  exceptions  they  came 
Characteristics  to  the  New  World  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
Colonists  bettering  themselves  in  a  material  way.    They 

were  not,  like  the  pioneers  in  Massachusetts, 
devotees  to  a  principle,  but  adventurers,  some  in  a  good  and 


12  Amebioan  Literatusb 

some  in  a  bad  sense  of  that  term.  Most  of  them  came  with 
the  idea  of  returning  to  England  as  soon  as  they  had 
acquired  a  competence;  and  those  who  stayed  considered 
themselves,  at  least  for  a  generation  or  two,  not  primarily 
Virginians  or  South  Carolinians,  but  Englishmen  sojourn- 
ing in  the  wilderness.  Such  men  did  not  feel  called  upon  to 
produce  much  in  the  way  of  literature.  The  drama,  the 
lyric,  and  lighter  forms  of  writing  that  are  associated  with 
a  life  of  polite  leisure  could  not  be  expected  during  the 
period  of  hardship.  The  adventures  of  the  early  colonists, 
romantic  as  they  seem  to  us,  were  such  stern  realities  for  all 
concerned  that  no  one  had  time  to  be  a  laureate.  Perhaps, 
too,  the  romantic  element,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Pocohontas 
story,  has  been  mostly  added  by  the  imagination  of  later 
narrators.  Love  and  war,  it  is  sometimes  said,  are  the  great 
stimuli  to  literature.  War  there  was,  of  a  sort,  but  the 
Indian  coniSicts  were  not  of  a  nature  to  call  forth  an  Iliad ; 
and  love  was  not  likely  to  inspire  a  poet  while  the  planters' 
wives  were  imported  girls  secured  from  the  ship-masters  on 
payment  of  their  passage-money. 

There  was  not  even  an  incentive  to  the  more  matter-of-fact 
kinds  of  writing.  The  Pilgrim  felt,  from  the  first  day  of 
his  outward  voyage,  that  he  was  founding  a  Commonwealth, 
and  that  upon  him  devolved  the  duty  of  writing  its  history 
for  posterity.  The  Virginian  felt  no  such  duty  to  his  new 
and  probably  temporary  home.  In  politics  the  Virginian 
was  usually  a  Eoyalist,  and  in  religion  an  Episcopalian.  In 
both  he  occupied  traditional,  conservative  ground,  which  to 
his  mind  needed  no  defense  or  apology  unless  attacked. 
There  was  no  temptation,  therefore,  to  publish  controversial 
pamphlets  and  sermons.  All  that  the  early  settler  could 
be  expected  to  do  was  to  write  narratives  of  his  adventures, 
and  descriptions  of  the  country,  and  this  is  what  he  did. 

By  the  time  that  the  colonies  became  established,  and  men 


The  Colonial  Timb  13 

were  proud  to  consider  themselves  Virginians,  the  causes  of 
the  second  class,  those  arising  from  the  circumstances  of  life, 

repressed  literary  activity.    Chief  among  these 

orSouthem^Life  ^^^  *^®  ^^^^  ^*  education.     The  plantation 

system,  which  was  made  possible  in  Vir- 
ginia by  the  great  number  of  navigable  rivers,  tended  to 
the  isolation  of  each  family.  Neighbors  lived  so  far  apart  > 
that  common  schools  would  have  been  impossible,  even 
if  the  government  had  wished  to  establish  them.  Small 
children  coxdd  be  educated  only  by  private  tutors,  and  these 
were  expensive  and  hard  to  secure.  Under  these  conditions 
the  Southerners  came  to  consider  education  unnecessary,  and 
acquiesced  in  the  plans  of  the  royal  governors,  who  discour- 
aged it  as  a  menace  to  their  power.  As  a  result,  the  state 
of  learning,  even  in  families  of  wealth  and  real  refinement, 
was  almost  incredibly  low.  William  and  Mary,  long  the 
only  public  educational  institution  in  the  South,  was  digni- 
fied by  the  name  of  a  college,  but  really  devoted  itself  mostly 
to  instruction  in  elementary  branches.  A  few  sons  of 
wealthy  families  were  sent  to  English  universities,  where, 
if  tradition  is  true,  they  learned  chiefly  the  dissipations  and 
accomplishments  of  an  English  gentleman.  Many  members 
of  even  well-to-do  families  coxdd  hardly  read  or  write. 

The  repressive  policy  of  the  government  extended  not  only 
to  schools  but  to  the  printing  press.  There  was  virtually  no 
printing  in  Virginia  for  over  a  hundred  years,  and  but  one 
printing  house  until  ten  years  before  the  Revolution.  South- 
em  writings,  if  published  at  all,  were  sent  to  London. 

One  other  tendency  must  be  noticed,  which  in  its  opera- 
tion both  repressed  the  production  of  writings  in  the  South 
and  restricted  the  circulation  of  those  that  were  produced. 
Following  a  notion  current  to  some  extent  in  England  dur- 
ing the  eighteenth  century,  the  Southern  gentleman  felt  that 
literature  was  not  exactly  a  reputable  profession.     It  was 


14  AlCEBIGAN  lilTBEATtmfi 

proper  for  him  to  write,  to  circulate  manuscript  copies  of  his 
writings  among  his  friends,  and  to  have  them  neatly  en- 
grossed on  parchment  and  so  transmitted  to 
Southern  Atti-  ^ig  children ;  but  it  was  not  quite  dignified 
Litmtur^         to  have  them  printed,  certainly  not  to  print 

them  for  gain.  At  the  same  time  the 
lack  of  facilities  for  printing  in  the  colonies  discouraged 
less  punctilious  authors,  who  might  be  financially  unable 
to  publish  abroad.  It  may  be  conjectured  that  many  works 
were  written  which,  remaining  in  manuscript,  have  been 
lost  in  the  ravages  of  three  wars,  or  by  the  destructive  acci- 
dents of  two  hundred  years.  True,  this  private  and  amateur 
authorship  has  not,  in  recent  times,  led  to  the  best  literary 
results.  It  is  not  probable  that  any  great  American  epics 
or  tragedies  were  lost  to  the  world  through  the  modesty  of 
their  authors;  but  it  is  very  likely  that  works  remained 
impublished  that  were  quite  as  important  as  some  that  are 
mentioned  in  this  history. 

The  dependence  on  England  for  education  and  for  pub- 
lishing   facilities,    together    with    the   general    attitude    of 

Southerners  toward  the  mother  country, 
SouUiem  Writ-  accounts  for  the  most  notable  characteristic 
English  Models    ^^  Southern  colonial  literature — ^namely,  its 

connection  with  English  rather  than  with 
American  models.  There  was  no  ^^schooF'  of  Virginian 
writers.  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  any  Virginian  book  influ- 
enced any  other  Virginian  book.  At  any  given  time,  how- 
ever, the  writings  of  Virginia  gentlemen  were  certain  to 
show  the  influence  of  contemporary  or  recent  literary 
fashions  in  England. 

This  characteristic  is  seen  in  the  Burwell  Papers.  This 
name  has  been  given  to  an  anonjrmous  manuscript  which 
was  found  in  the  possession  of  the  Burwell  family  in  Virginia, 
and  which  deals  with  the  civil  disturbance  of  1676,  known  as 


The  Colonial  Timb  15 

Bacon's  rebellion.  From  internal  evidence  it  appears  to  have 
been  written  by  an  adherent^  though  not  a  strong  partisan, 

of  the  royal  governor,  at  a  period  not  far 
P^MM  subsequent  to  the  events  of  which  it  treats. 

The  most  noticeable  peculiarity  of  the  style 
is  the  excessive  use  of  conceits,  puns,  artificial  balances, 
and  all  the  other  mannerisms  found  in  the  Bestoration  prose 
at  its  worst.  The  following  passage,  stating  the  assumption 
of  leadership  by  Ingram  after  Bacon's  death,  illustrates  the 
intolerable  prolixity  of  the  author: 

The  Lion  had  no  sooner  made  his  ezitt,  hut  the  Ape  (hy  induhi- 
tahle  right)  steps  upon  the  stage.  Bacon  was  no  sooner  remoTed  by 
the  hand  of  good  providence,  but  another  steps  in,  by  the  wheele 
of  fickle  fortune.  The  Gountrey  had,  for  som  time,  bin  guided  by 
a  company  of  knaves,  now  it  was  to  try  how  it  would  behave  it  selfe 
under  a  foole.  Bacon  had  not  long  bin  dead,  (though  it  was  a  long 
time  before  som  would  beleive  that  he  was  dead)  but  one  Ingram 
(or  Isgrum,  which  you  wiU)  takes  up  Bacons  Commission  (or  ells 
by  the  patteme  of  that  cuts  him  out  a  new  one)  and  as  though 
he  had  bin  his  natureall  heire,  or  that  Bacons  Commission  had  bin 
granted  not  onely  to  him  selfe,  but  to  his  Executors,  Administraters, 
and  Assignes,  he  (in  the  MiUitary  Court)  takes  out  a  Probit  of 
Bacons  will,  and  prodames  him  selfe  his  Successer. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  manuscript  are  two  poems  on  the 
death  of  Bacon,  in  rhymed  pentameter  verse,  which  likewise 
show  the  author's  devotion  to  contemporary  English  models. 
Among  the  literary  curiosities  dating  from  a  slightly  later 
time  is  a  little  booklet  now  much  sought  by  collectors,  pub- 
lished in  London  in  1708,  and  bearing  the 
S^tOT*'^**^     title  The  Sot-Weed  Factor,  or  a  Voyage  into 

Maryland.  A  Satyr.  By  Eben,  Coole,  Oent 
Sot-Weed  will  be  recognized  as  an  uncomplimentary  name 
for  tobacco.  A  factor  was  a  merchant  or,  more  accurately, 
an  agent  who  handled  wares  for  a  principal  at  home.  It  is 
not  known  who  Ebenezer  Cook  was,  or  whether  this  was  his 
r^l  uwiej  but  ixi  the  poem  he  represents  himself  as  such  a 


16  Ambbioan  Litesatubb 

factor,  who  had  come  to  Maryland  to  barter  for  the  chief 
product  of  the  plantations.  On  first  landing  he  notices  the 
hospitality  of  the  planters,  even  then  proverbial;  but  the 
entertainment  furnished  is  not  much  to  his  liking.  After 
leaving  the  host  who  first  entertains  him  the  factor  sets  off 
on  his  business,  and  in  the  narrative  of  his  adventures  satir- 
izes the  law  courts,  the  inns,  and  all  classes  of  the  inhabi- 
tants, especially  the  Quakers.  One  of  these  he  describes  in 
lines  perhaps  the  most  frequently  quoted  of  any  in  the  poem : 

While  riding  near  a  Sandy  Bay, 

I  met  a  Quaker,  Tea  and  Nay; 

A  Pious  Conscientious  Rogue, 

As  e'er  woar  Bonnet  or  a  Brogue, 

Who  neither  Swore  nor  kept  his  Word, 

But  cheated  in  the  Fear  of  God ; 

And  when  his  Debts  he  would  not  pay, 

By  Light  within  he  ran  away. 

By  trusting  this  Friend  the  factor  is  defrauded  of  all  his 
goods.  His  efforts  to  recover  them  give  occasion  for  further 
comments  on  the  provincial  courts  and  lawyers;  and  the 
victim,  now  penniless,  returns  home,  leaving  a  curse  on  the 
whole  country.  In  the  absence  of  any  knowledge  regarding 
the  author  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  was  the  occasion  of 
the  poem,  or  how  far  the  satire  was  inspired  by  malice.  It 
gives  the  impression  of  being  a  shrewd  caricature  of  some 
of  the  prevailing  evils  of  the  time.  In  form  it  shows  evi- 
dent influence  of  Hudibras,  which  by  1700  was  the  model 
for  burlesque  satire;  but  it  lacks  the  forced  rhymes  and  the 
clever  turns  of  phrase  which  characterize  Butler^s  master- 
piece. 

At  a  later  date  there  appeared  in  Maryland  other  poems 
which  have  been  ascribed  to  Ebenezer  Cook.  The  most  not- 
able of  these  was  a  political  satire,  which  was  published  at 
Annapolis  in  1730,  and  which  bore  the  title  Sotweed  Redi- 
vivvs:  or  th$  Planter^  LooJcing-Olas^,    In  Burlesque  Verse, 


The  Colonial  Time  17 

Calculated  for  the  Meridian  of  Maryland.  By  E.  0.  Oent. 
It  is  probable,  however,  that  this  is  the  work  of  some  other 
satirist,  who  sought  to  attract  attention  by  adopting  the 
metrical  form  of  a  popular  poem  and  the  initials  of  its 
author.  Indeed,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  Ebenezer 
Cook  was  really  a  resident  of  Maryland,  though  the  vivid- 
ness of  his  descriptions  shows  that  he  must  have  visited  the 
colony. 

The  most  important  Southern  writer  of  the  early  eigh- 
teenth  century  was  William  Byrd    (1674-1744).     Of  the 

authors  who  have  thus  far  been  mentioned 
Byrd  was  the  first  who  was  a  native  of  Amer- 
ica. He  was  the  son  of  a  prominent  and  wealthy  Virginian 
family.  He  was  sent  to  England  and  the  Continent  for  his 
education,  studied  law  at  the  Middle  Temple,  was  called  to 
the  bar,  and  was  honored  with  membership  in  the  Boyal 
Society.  After  his  return  to  America  he  lived  on  the  family 
estate  at  Westover.  Here,  besides  managing  his  extensive 
private  interests  he  served  the  public  in  various  capacities. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  commission  which  in  1728  estab- 
lished the  boundary  line  between  Virginia  and  North  Caro- 
lina, and  an  account  of  his  experiences  during  this  survey  is 
the  most  valuable  of  his  writings.  These  writings  were  not 
intended  for  publication,  but  were  handed  down  to  the 
author^s  descendants  in  a  manuscript  volume  carefully 
engrossed  and  bound  under  his  direction.  This  collection, 
sometimes  known  as  the  Westover  Manuscripts,  contains, 
besides  "The  History  of  the  Dividing  Line,''  "A  Journey  to 
the  Land  of  Eden,"  "A  Progress  to  the  Mines,''  and  "An 
Essay  on  Bulk  Tobacco."  The  last-named  essay  may  not  be 
Byrd's  own  work.    The  papers  were  not  printed  until  1841. 

Colonel  Byrd  seems  to  have  been  regarded,  both  in  his 
own  and  in  succeeding  generations,  as  an  example  of  the 
highest  type  of  Southern  gentleman.     He  wfts  9>  mftft  of 


18  Aherioan  Liteeatube 

cxdtnre  and  social  charm.  He  collected  a  private  library,  said 
to  have  been  the  largest  in  Virginia,  and  his  writings  show 
that  he  had  an  appreciation  of  literature,  and  a  fondness  for 
gaining — and  sometimes  for  displaying- — odd  bits  of  curious 
information.  On  his  travels  through  the  colonies  he  was 
a  close  observer,  and  he  showed  the  catholic  interest  of  an 
eighteenth  century  gentleman  in  matters  of  economic,  his- 
torical, and  scientific  importance.  ^^The  History  of  the 
Dividing  Line^^  gives  much  valuable  information  regarding 
the  country,  and  the  plants,  animals,  and  natural  curiosities, 
but  it  is  most  interesting  for  the  shrewd  comments  on  men 
and  their  ways,  and  for  the  revelation  that  it  gives  of  the 
author^s  own  character. 

Byrd^s  style  is  that  of  a  man  who  had  read  and  enjoyed 
the  work  of  Addison  and  his  contemporaries.  While  the 
New  England  writers  were  still  adhering  to  the  crabbed  and 
pedantic  manner  of  an  earlier  century,  Byrd  succeeded  in 
writing  prose  that,  though  not  remarkable  for  grace,  had 
something  of  urbane  charm.  He  occasionally  indulged  in 
the  coarse  jests  that  an  eighteenth  century  Englishman 
seemed  to  think  necessary,  but  in  many  other  passages  he 
showed  a  fine  and  genuine  humor.  All  in  all,  his  writings, 
though  they  have  sometimes  been  absurdly  over-praised,  are 
among  the  most  pleasantly  readable  of  the  colonial  time. 

Besides  the  representative  writings  already  mentioned, 
the  later  seventeenth  and   early  eighteenth  centuries   saw 

the  production  of  a  considerable  number  of 
Mmor  Virginia     qQ^q^  works  written  by  Virginians  and  chiefly 

about  Virginia.  Perhaps  the  most  readable 
of  the  early  narratives  is  A  Voyage  to  Virginia,  by  Colonel 
Norwood.^  Little  is  known  of  the  author  except  that  he  was 
one  of  the  disheartened  royalists  who  fled  to  America  in 
1649  after  the  execution  of  the  king.  On  the  way  his  party 
^nclnred  almost  incredible  privations  on  se«^  fm4  land,  being 


The  Colonial  Time  Id 

forced  at  last  to  eat  the  bodies  of  their  comrades  who  died 
of  starvation.  The  story  is  a  valuable  one  for  its  illustration 
of  the  hardships  through  which  early  colonists  passed.  It 
is  also  interesting  for  the  picture  which  the  author  uncon- 
sciously gives  of  himself.  A  partisan  of  Cromwell  would 
enjoy  this  revelation  of  one  royalist,  with  his  thoughts,  even 
among  the  most  appalling  dangers,  all  fixed  on  the  good  things 
of  this  world — ^with  his  appreciation  of  the  physical  charms 
of  women,  his  love  of  good  things  to  eat,  and  his  shameless 
seMshness  in  gratifying  his  own  appetite  when  his  compan- 
ions  were  dying  of  starvation  about  him.  In  1724  the  Rever^ 
end  Hugh  Jones  (1669-1760),  a  professor  in  William  and 
Mary  college,  published  The  Present  State  of  Virginia.  Pro- 
fessor Joneses  literary  method  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact 
that  he  entitled  one  chapter  ^'Of  the  Habits,  Customs,  Parts, 
Employments,  Trade  of  the  Virginians;  and  of  the  Weather, 
Coin,  Sickness,  Liquors,  Servants,  Poor,  Pitch,  Tar,  Oar, 
&c.^^  He  succeeded,  however,  in  giving  much  valuable 
information,  intermixed  with  many  naive  comments.  By  the 
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  some  thoughtful  Vir- 
ginians began  to  turn  attention  to  the  history  of  their  colony. 
Bobert  Beverley  (1675P-1716?)  received  his  inspiration  to 
historical  study  while  completing  his  education  in  England, 
and  brought  out  a  history  of  Virginia  in  1705.  An  enlarged 
version  appeared  in  1722.  Like  most  histories  of  this  time, 
the  book  contains  a  variety  of  geographical  and  miscellaneous 
information.  Probably  the  most  interesting  section  of  the 
history  is  Part  II,  which  treats  of  "The  natural  Produc- 
tions and  Conveniences  of  the  Country,  suited  to  Trade  and 
Improvement.^^  Beverley  was  a  keen  observer,  with  almost 
a  poet's  fondness  for  nature,  combined  with  some  of  the 
explorer's  love  of  the  venturesome  and  the  marvellous.  In 
1747  William  Stith  (1689-1755)  pubUshed  at  WiUiams- 
burg  The  History  of  the  First  Discovery  and  Settlement  of 


20  AmEBICAK  LlTEEATUItfi 

Virginia,  covering  the  first  sixteen  years  of  the  Jamestown 
settlement  For  facts,  he  depends  largely  on  John  Smithes 
Oeneral  Historie.  His  style  is  less  attractive  than  that  of 
Beverley.  Mention  must  also  be  made  of  James  Blair  (1656- 
1743),  the  foimder  and  first  president  of  William  and  Mary 
college.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh 
and  came  to  Virginia  in  1685.  His  published  writings,  the 
chief  of  which  is  a  series  of  one  hundred  and  seventeen  ser- 
mons on  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  are  unimportant,  but  he 
was  probably  the  greatest  intellectual  force  in  early  Virginia. 
Published  writings  in  the  Southern  colonies  other  than 
Virginia  and  Maryland  were  few.     They  consisted  mostly 

of  descriptions  of  the  country,  written  to 
^h*"c  1    •        attract    emigrants,    pamphlets    inspired    by 

local  or  intercolonial  disputes,  and  occasional 
sermons.  Professor  Moses  Coit  Tyler,  after  an  exhaustive 
study,  chose  as  representative  of  this  extra- Virginian  liter- 

Iature  John  Lawson  of  North  Carolina,  Alexander  Garden  of 
South  Carolina,  and  Patrick  Tailfer  of  Georgia.  Lawson 
(P-1712)  came  to  America  in  1700  and  was  surveyor- 
general  of  North  Carolina.  His  writings  are  descriptions  of 
his  travels  and  explorations,  given  with  more  spirit  than 
characterizes  most  such  narratives.  Alexander  Garden 
(1685P-1756),  who  must  not  be  confounded  with  two  other 
South  Carolinians  of  the  same  name,  was  an  Episcopalian 
clergyman  in  Charleston  about  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century.  His  literary  work  consisted  of  published  sermons 
and  letters  directed  against  George  Whitefield,  the  evangelist. 
Patrick  Tailfer  seems  to  have  been  the  most  prominent  of 
a  group  of  men  who  had  quarrelled  with  the  government  of 
Georgia,  and  having  left  the  colony,  probably  under  com- 
pulsion, devoted  themselves  t6  publishing  attacks  upon  Ogle- 
thorpe. They  managed  their  case  with  considerable  shrewd- 
ness and  occasionally  handled  satire  with  effect. 


The  Colonial  Time  21 

n.  The  New  England  Colonies.     Fikst  Pekiod, 

1620-1676 

In  the  earliest  writings  of  the  New  England  colonies  are 
to  be  found  the  real  beginnings  of  American  letters.     In  a 

search  for  the  origin  of  what  is  best,  and  espe- 
TTie  Real  Begin-  cially  of  what  is  weakest  in  our  national 
icanLiterature"    literature,   the   student  of  tendencies   is   led 

back  at  last  to  the  crude  writings  of  Ply- 
mouth and  Massachusetts  Bay.  Strong  as  have  been  the 
influences  of  English  and  at  times  of  Continental  writers, 
it  is  easy  to  trace  a  continuous  development  from  these 
pioneers  in  authorship  to  the  New  England  of  to-day. 

That  this  is  true  will  be  no  surprise  to  the  reader  who 
recalls  the  outlines  of  New  England  history.    The  men  who 

founded   the   two   colonies    now   within   the 

Cbarac^stics     limits    of   Massachusetts    came    to    the   New 

of  Rew  £iiguuid 

Colonists  World  not  primarily  for  gain,  but  in  support 

of  a  principle.  We  shall  err  if  in  accepting 
this  fact  we  allow  our  fancy  to  idealize  these  pioneers 
too  much.  Among  even  the  earliest  there  were  undoubt- 
edly men  who  had  an  eye  to  the  advantages  that  might 
be  gained  by  exploiting  the  wilderness;  and  human  nature 
is  such  that  even  the  most  rapt  and  devout  divine  may 
be  a  very  practical  hand  at  a  bargain,  and  a  very  shrewd 
politician.  But  with  all  their  inconsistencies  the  Pilgrims 
and  the  Puritans  were  men  who  had  very  serious  and  on 
the  whole  very  high  ideals  of  life  and  of  the  part  that  God 
destined  them  to  play  in  it.  Especially  was  this  true  of  the 
leaders  of  thought,  the  men  who  were  most  likely  to  write. 
Judging  simply  from  the  character  of  these  men,  we  expect, 
what  we  find,  a  considerable  body  of  serious  and  well-con- 
sidered writings. 
It  was  natural  that  men  like  the  founders  of  New  England 


22  Ambbigak  Literatubs 

should  do   all  that  was   possible   to  encourage   education. 
From  the  first  grammar  schools  were  required  by  law  in  every 

community;  Harvard  college  was  founded  in 
NewEnfflimd       1^36,  and  the  whole  influence  of  church  and 

state  was  exerted  to  secure  the  diflEusion  of 
learning.  The  result  was,  first,  a  body  of  readers  almost 
co-extensive  with  the  population;  and,  second,  a  number  of 
specially  trained  young  men  from  whom  the  ranks  of 
authorship  were  recruited. 

Side  by  side  with  the  influence  of  educational  institutions 
worked  that  of  the  printing  press.  A  press  was  set  up  in 
Cambridge  as  early  as  1639.  Others  followed  soon  after. 
And,  though  they  were  hampered  by  a  strict  church  censor- 
ship, they  put  forth  great  quantities  of  such  literature  as 
was  allowed. 

Both  political  and  economic  conditions  made  New  Eng- 
land largely  dependent  on  herself  for  such  writings  as  she 

wanted.     To  the  Puritan,  the  great  body  of 
^^TT^"      the  glorious  literary  work  of  the  Elizabethan 

age  was  forbidden  by  the  discipline  of  his 
church.  His  own  party,  prolific  as  it  was  in  controver- 
sialists, produced  few  literary  men  of  preeminent  distinc- 
tion. The  sermons  and  pamphlets  written  in  New  Eng- 
land were  not  notably  inferior  to  those  of  Old  England, 
and  often  were  better  adapted  to  local  needs.  Moreover,  the 
influx  of  immigrants  from  the  mother  country  was  mostly 
confined  to  one  decade,  from  1630  to  1640.  With  the  tri- 
umph of  the  Puritan  party  in  England  the  necessity  of  emi- 
gration ceased.  After  the  later  date  it  has  been  estimated 
that  the  immigrants  to  New  England  were  fewer  in  number 
than  the  persons  who  returned  to  the  mother  country.  The 
result  was  that  the  colonies  became  isolated.  Their  wants 
were  few,  and  from  the  first  they  had  encouraged  arts  and 
manufactures.     They  imported  little.     In  every  way  the 


The  Colonial  Time  23 

citizen  of  Massachusetts^  was  far  more  remote  from  England 
than  the  Virginian,  who  annually  loaded  a  ship  with  tobacco 
at  his  own  wharf,  and  received  from  the  same  ship  at  its 
return  even  the  simplest  articles  of  household  use. 

In  no  department  of  life  was  this  isolation  more  complete /j 
or  fraught  with  more  serious  results  than  in  that  of  letters.'' 
To  the  time  of  the  Eevolution  the  influence  of  English  on 
New  England  literature  was  slight,  indirect,  and  exerted  by 
authors  of  inferior  merit.  It  is  not  known  that  a  copy  of 
Shakespeare  was  brought  to  New  England  until  1709,  and 
none  was  offered  for  sale  until  1722.  Even  Milton  seems  to 
have  been  ignored  by  the  Puritans  in  America.  There  is  no 
record  of  a  copy  of  his  works  in  New  England  before  1700, 
and  no  edition  was  printed  in  that  section  of  the  country 
until  1796.  Standing  thus  aloof  from  all  that  was  best  in 
the  literature  that  could  do  them  the  greatest  good  or  harm, 
Americans  carried  on  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  the  tradi- 
tions that  they  brought  with  them.  Students  of  language 
know  that  New  England  pronunciations,  odd  forms,  and 
many  so-called  "Americanisms"  are  really  survivals  of 
English  usage  at  the  time  of  James  the  First.  It  is  little 
more  difficult  to  trace  some  of  the  peculiarities  of  our  liter- 
ature back  to  the  Puritan  pamphleteers.  The  broader  genial 
influence  of  the  Elizabethans  died  out  in  Virginia;  the 
narrow  but  intense  spirit  of  the  controversialists  lived  in 
New  England,  and  after  all  the  cosmopolitanism  of  the  last 
hundred  years  may  be  seen  in  American  literature  to-day. 

At  first  glance  it  may  seem  strange  that  two  colonies,  both 
founded  by  Englishmen  within  the  same  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury, should  differ  so  widely  in  literary  ideals 

li^^Muencc^"  *®  ^^^  Virginia  and  Massachusetts.     The  ex- 
planation  of   this   difference   can   be   found 
both  in  the  changed  conditions  in  England  and  in  the  differ- 
ences between  the  men  who  emigrated  to  the  North  and  to  the 


24  American  LiTERATtrRE 

South.  The  years  just  following  1607  were  one  of  those 
transition  periods  in  English  literature  when  the  writers  of 
one  generation  pass  away  and  the  nation  seems  waiting  for 
their  successors.  In  the  thirteen  years  between  the  found- 
ing of  Jamestown  and  the  founding  of  Plymouth  there  died 
Shakespeare,  Beaumont,  Ealeigh,  Sackville,  Daniel,  and 
Hakluy t ;  in  the  next  decade,  before  the  founding  of  Massa- 
chusetts Bay,  these  were  followed  by  Bacon,  Giles  and  John 
Fletcher,  Lodge,  Middleton,  and  Purchas.  Of  the  few  writers 
who  remained,  like  Jonson,  Drayton,  and  Donne,  most  had 
done  their  best  work.  In  the  same  period  were  born  Milton, 
Samuel  Butler,  Jeremy  Taylor,  Baxter,  Bunyan,  Evel]^!, 
Marvell,  Suckling,  Lovelace,  Cowley,  and  Vaughan — ^the 
majority  of  the  men  who  are  remembered  in  the  literary 
history  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Between  the  later  writ- 
ings of  the  first  group  and  the  earlier  writings  of  the  second 
there  was  a  gap,  a  period  when  English  literature  was  least 
fitted  to  exert  helpful  influence  on  colonial  writings. 

Nor  were  the  Puritans  likely  to  be  much  afl!ected  by  even 
the  best  work  that  continued  the  Elizabethan  tradition.  In 
their  revolt  against  corruption  they  protested  against  the 
forms  of  literature  in  which  this  corruption  was  sometimes 
expressed.  Their  thoughts  were  on  matters  of  religion;  and 
partly  because  of  their  influence  it  was  mainly  theological 
writings  that  filled  the  literary  interregnum  of  the  early 
seventeenth  century.  In  the  reign  of  James  I,  more  than 
in  any  other  period  of  English  history,  religion  was  fashion- 
able. The  king  himself,  his  courtiers,  and  writers  of  all 
lesser  degrees  of  rank  discussed  sacred  subjects,  and  when 
they  treated  secular  subjects,  made  use  of  a  cant,  a  phrase- 
ology and  imagery  borrowed  from  the  Bible  and  from  sacred 
things.  The  numerous  dissertations  that  show  these  char- 
acteristics are  now  devoid  of  interest  except  to  the  special 
student;  none  of  them  has  held  a  place  in  literature.    But 


The  Colonial  Time  26 

they  were  the  models  for  the  first  writings  produced  in  New 
England. 

The  first  literary  impulse  of  any  people  emigrating  to  a 
new  land  is  to  write  the  story  of  their  experiences,  and  the 

description  of  the  country  that  they  find.    In 

ImD^se  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^®  Virginians  this  impulse  ex- 

pressed itself  in  brief  and  hastily  written 
accoimts  sent  back  to  England  for  immediate  publication. 
In  New  England  its  most  important  manifestation  took  a 
different  form.  To  the  mind  of  the  Puritan  the  fact  that  he 
was  a  servant  of  God,  founding  a  nation  for  God,  in  the 
wilderness,  gave  an  importance  to  his  every  act.  He  realized, 
therefore,  that  a  record  of  these  acts  would  be  valuable  to 
posterity;  and  accordingly  he  wrote,  not  for  the  London 
public  of  the  hour,  but  for  the  reader  of  that  future  when 
his  deeds  would  be  appreciated.  In  thus  turning  his  atten- 
tion to  history  he  carried  out  one  of  the  few  tendencies  of 
the  later  Elizabethan  time  with  which  he  could  sympathize. 
The  first  quarter  of  the  seventeenth  century  was  especially 
prolific  in  historical  writings,  of  which  Ealeigh's  History 
of  the  World,  Daniers  Wars  of  the  Roses,  and  Bacon^s  His- 
tory of  Henry  VII,  are  among  those  best  remembered.  Aa 
the  authors  of  these  works  were  many  of  them  high  in  the 
affairs  of  the  nation,  so  the  first  historians  of  Pl3rmouth 
and  Massachusetts  Bay  were  governors  of  their  respective 
colonies. 

William  Bradford   (1588-1657)3  the  second  governor  of 
Plymouth,  though  but  thirty-two  years  old  when  he  landed 

from  the  Mayflower,  had  been  with  the  Pil- 
B  *^"d  grims  throughout  their  experiences  in  Holland, 

and  had  taken  an  active  part  in  the  delibera- 
tions that  resulted  in  their  coming  to  America.  His 
first  writing  in  the  new  world  was  done  in  collaboration  with 
Edward  Winslow,  with  whom  he  kept  a  journal  of  the  first 


26  American  Literature 

thirteen  months  of  the  colony.  This  was  sent  to  England 
immediately  npon  its  completion,  and  was  published  in 
London  in  1622.  As  it  was  issued  without  the  authors^ 
names  and  bore  a  prefatory  note  signed  "G.  Mourf'  it  came 
to  be  known  as  Mourfs  Relaiion,  and  is  still  sometimes 
referred  to  by  that  title.  Bradford's  most  important  work, 
however,  was  the  Historv  of  Plymouth  Plantation,  begun  in 
1630,  and  continued  for  nearly  twenty  years.  The  first  book 
of  the  history  treats  of  the  rise  of  the  dissenters,  the  perse- 
cutions that  induced  them  to  flee  to  Holland,  their  expe- 
riences there,  their  reasons  for  desiring  to  come  to  America, 
and  finally  of  the  voyage  of  the  Mayfiower.  The  remainder 
of  the  work  covers  the  period  from  1620  to  1646  inclusive, 
and  is  in  the  form  of  annals. 

That  the  History  of  Plymouth  was  written  for  posterity 
is  shown  by  the  author's  disposition  of  the  manuscript. 
Throughout  his  life,  so  far  as  is  known,  he  made  no  move 
toward  giving  it  to  the  public.  At  his  death  it  passed  to  a 
nephew,  and  so  descended  through  various  hands  until  the 
Eevolution,  when  it  disappeared,  and  its  loss  was  long 
mourned  by  historians.  In  1855  it  was  discovered  in  the 
library  of  the  Bishop  of  London,  and  has  since  been  restored 
to  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts. 

Throughout  his  history  the  author  introduces  copies  of 
letters  and  of  official  documents,  and  evidently  strives  to 
leave  an  impartial  record.  The  narrative  is  usually  plain 
and  straight-forward,  but  both  matter  and  manner  are  tinged 
with  the  fanaticism  of  the  day.  To  the  writer's  mind  every 
event  that  favors  the  Pilgrims  or  confounds 'their  enemies 
is  the  result  of  a  direct  intervention  of  Providence. 

And  I  may  not  omite  hear  a  spetiall  worke  of  Gods  providence. 
Ther  was  a  proud  &  very  profane  yonge  man,  one  of  the  sea-men» 
of  a  lustie,  able  body,  which  made  him  the  more  hauty;  he  would 
allway  be  contemning  the  poore  people  in  their  siknes,  &  cursing 
them  dayly  with  greevous  execrations,  and  did  not  let  to  tell  them, 


The  Colonial  Time  27 

that  he  hoi>ed  to  help  to  cast  halfe  of  them  over  board  before  they 
came  to  their  jurneys  end,  and  to  make  mery  with  what  they  had; 
and  if  he  were  by  any  gently  reproved,  he  would  curse  and  swear 
most  bitterly.  But  it  plased  God  before  they  came  halfe  seas  over, 
to  smite  this  yong  man  with  a  greeveous  disease,  of  which  he  dyed 
in  a  desperate  maner,  and  so  was  him  selfe  the  first  that  was  throwne 
overbord.    Thus  his  curses  light  on  his  owne  head. 

Of  the  destruction  of  the  Pequots  he  writes : 

Those  that  scaped  the  fire  were  slaine  with  the  sword ;  some  hewed 
to  peeces,  others  rune  throw  with  their  rapiers,  so  as  they  were 
quickly  dispachte,  and  very  few  escaped.  It  was  conceived  they  thus 
destroyed  about  400.  at  this  time.  It  was  a  fearfull  sight  to  see 
them  thus  frying  in  the  fyer,  and  the  streams  of  blood  quenching  the 
same,  and  horrible  was  the  stinck  &  sente  ther  of;  but  the  victory 
seemed  a  sweete  sacrifice,  and  they  gave  the  prays  thereof  to  God, 
who  had  wrought  so  wonderfuly  for  them,  thus  to  inclose  their 
enimise  in  their  hands,  and  give  them  so  speedy  a  victory  over  so 
proud  &  insulting  an  enimie. 

This  is  in  the  manner  of  an  Hebrew  historian.  It  was, 
indeed,  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Booh  of  Revelation, 
rather  than  the  milder  gospels  and  epistles,  which  chiefly 
influenced  the  literary  expression  of  early  New  England. 
In  1646,  looking  with  astonishment  at  the  success  of  the 
Puritan  party  in  England,  Bradford  breaks  into  this  strain 
of  triumph : 

Full  litle  did  I  thinke  that  the  downfall  of  the  Bishops,  with 
their  courts,  cannons,  &  ceremonies,  &c.  had  been  so  neare,  when  I 
first  begane  these  scribled  writings  (which  was  aboute  the  year  1630, 
and  so  peeced  up  at  times  of  leasure  afterward),  or  that  I  should 
have  lived  to  have  scene  or  heard  of  the  same;  but  it  is  the  Lords 
doing,  and  ought  to  be  marvelous  in  our  eyes!  Every  plante  which 
mine  heavenly  father  hath  not  planted  (saith  our  Saviour)  shaU  be 
rooted  up.  Mat:  15.  13.  I  have  snared  the,  and  thou  art  taken,  O 
Babell  (Bishops),  and  thou  wast  not  aware;  thou  art  found,  and 
also  caught,  because  thou  hast  striven  against  the  Lord.  Jer. 
50.  24.    .    .    . 

But  who  hath  done  it?  Who,  even  he  that  siteth  on  the  white 
horse,  who  is  caled  faithfuU,  &  true,  and  judgeth  and  fighteth  right- 
eously, Rev :  19.  11.  whose  garments  are  dipte  in  blood,  and  his  name 


28  Ahebioak  Ltteratuhb 

was  caled  the  word  of  God,  ▼.  13.  for  he  shall  rule  them  with  a 
rode  of  iron ;  for  it  is  he  that  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the  feircenes 
and  wrath  of  God  almighty.  And  he  hath  upon  his  garments,  and 
upon  his  thigh,  a  name  writen.  The  King  of  Kings,  and  Lord  of 
Lords.  ▼.  15,  16.     Hallelu-iah. 

The  first  governor  and  the  first  historian  of  the  colony  at 

Massachusetts  Bay  was  John  Winthrop  (1588-1649).     Like 

,  ,     •«,.   ,  many  of  the  early  Puritans,  he  was  a  person 

John  Winthrop       .     ^  -  x,j.  -      ^     ^      1  i.         i. 

of  some  weight  m  England,  a  member  of  a 

good  family,  a  lawyer,  and  a  man  of  considerable  wealth. 
Such  a  person,  even  when  moved  by  the  deepest  religious 
impulses,  naturally  looks  at  life  more  broadly  than  a  man 
like  Bradford,  whose  experiences  since  childhood  had  been 
closely  bound  up  with  the  persecutions  of  a  despised  sect. 
This  difference  in  point  of  view  may  be  traced  in  his  history. 
There  is  less  of  the  rhapsodical  use  of  scriptural  phrase- 
ology, more  of  the  calm  and  matter-of-fact  treatment  of 
events.  That  Winthrop  was  capable  of  true  eloquence  when 
occasion  demanded  is  shown  by  his  speech  delivered  on  the 
occasion  of  his  arraignment  for  some  alleged  usurpation  of 
power  in  his  oflBce  as  governor.  In  this  he  speaks  with  the 
system  and  logic  of  a  trained  lawyer,  and  with  the  high 
devotion  to  an  ideal  that  always  characterized  him  as  a  man. 
The  style  of  his  History  of  New  England  is  partly  deter- 
mined by  the  fact  that  the  narrative  is  in  the  form  of  a  diary. 
The  first  entry  begins  "Easter  Monday,  March  29,  1630. 
Biding  at  the  Cowes,  near  the  Isle  of  Wight,  in  the  Arbella, 
a  ship  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  tons,'^  and  the  last  is  in  the 
year  1649.  As  is  usual  in  a  journal  of  this  kind  kept  by  a 
busy  man,  the  scale  is  far  from  uniform,  but  most  events  of 
importance  are  at  least  mentioned,  and  many  are  discussed 
at  some  length.  There  is  always  a  fascination  in  the  read- 
ing of  a  journal,  arising  from  the  incongruity  of  events  that 
are  by  chance  brought  together.  The  following  are  suc- 
cessive entries : 


The  Colonial  Time  29 

Thomas  Morton  adjudged  to  be  imprisoned,  till  he  were  sent  into 
England,  and  his  house  burnt  down,  for  his  many  injuries  offered 
to  the  Indians,  and  other  misdemeanours.  Gapt  Brook,  master  of 
the  Gift,  refused  to  carry  him. 

Finch,  of  Watertown,  had  his  wigwam  burnt  and  all  his  goods. 

Billington  executed  at  Plimouth  for  murdering  one. 

Here  and  there  are  records  of  casualties,  or  discussions  of 
church  policy,  that,  though  trivial  to  us,  doubtless  furnished 
the  subjects  of  conversation  for  many  days  in  the  young 
colony : 

Mr.  Maverick,  one  of  the  ministers  of  Dorchester,  in  drying  a  little 
powder,  (which  took  fire  by  the  heat  of  the  fire  pan)  fired  a  small 
barrel  of  two  or  three  pounds,  yet  did  no  other  harm  but  singed 
his  clothes.  It  was  in  the  new  meeting-house,  which  was  thatched, 
and  the  thatch  only  blacked  a  little. 

After  much  deliberation  and  serious  advice,  the  Lord  directed  the 
teacher,  Mr.  Cotton,  to  make  it  dear  by  the  scripture,  that  the 
minister's  maintenance,  as  well  as  all  other  charges  of  the  church, 
should  be  defrayed  out  of  a  stock,  or  treasury,  which  was  to  be 
raised  out  of  the  weekly  contribution;  which  accordingly  was  agreed 
npon. 

Interspersed  with  such  passages  as  these  are,  of  course, 
references  to  graver  matters.  The  question  of  the  red  cross 
in  the  banner  of  England,  and  the  treason  implied  in  its 
removal  by  Endicott  (made  familiar  to  most  readers  by 
Hawthorne^s  story),  is  the  subject  of  many  entries.  Here, 
too,  as  in  Bradford's  history,  are  special  providences : 

A  remarkable  providence  appeared  in  a  case,  which  was  tried  at 
the  last  court  of  assistants.  Divers  neighbors  of  Lynn,  by  agreement, 
kept  their  cattle  by  turns.  It  fell  out  to  the  turn  of  one  GiUow 
to  keep  them,  and,  as  he  was  driving  them  forth,  another  of  these 
neighbors  went  along  with  him,  and  kept  him  so  earnestly  in  talk, 
that  his  cattle  strayed  and  gate  in  the  com.  Then  this  other  neighbor 
left  him,  and  would  not  help  him  recover  his  cattle,  but  went  and  told 
another  how  he  had  kept  Gillow  in  talk,  that  he  might  lose  his  cattle, 
etc.  The  cattle,  getting  into  the  Indian  com,  eat  so  much  ere  they 
could  be  gotten  out,  that  two  of  them  feU  sick  of  it,  and  one  of  them 
died  presently;  and  these  two  cows  were  that  neighbor's,  who  had 
kept  Qillow  in  talk,  etc. 


30  AMEfilCAK  LlTEAATtTRS 

It  is  noticeable,  and  perhaps  significant,  that  while  these 
observed  cases  of  divine  interference  are  most  frequently 
mentioned  in  the  first  part  of  Bradford's  history,  they  are 
more  common  in  the  later  part  of  Winthrop's.  With  this 
tendency  to  observe  remarkable  providences  came  also  a  cred- 
ulity regarding  supernatural  sights  and  sounds  that  could 
be  ascribed  only  to  an  evil  power.  Can  it  be  said  that  as  the 
Pilgrim,  after  his  hardships  in  England  and  Holland,  gained 
the  beginnings  of  material  prosperity,  he  noticed  fewer  dis- 
pensations of  Providence;  while  the  Puritan,  coming  from 
a  more  comfortable  and  conventional  position  in  life,  felt 
himself  increasingly  awed  by  the  mystery  of  a  new  land? 

Thomas  Morton  (  ?-1646)^  differed  greatly  from  Bradford 
and  Winthrop,  both  as  a  man  and  as  an  author.  The  exact 
^  facts    regarding   his    life    are    somewhat    in 

doubt,  for  his  own  story  and  that  of  the 
Puritans  do  not  agree,  and  probably  neither  is  entirely  trust- 
worthy. It  is  known,  however,  that  he  was  a  Cavalier  and 
a  member  of  the  Church  of  England,  who  in  the  early  years 
of  the  Pl3mGiouth  settlement  held  a  plantation  and  trading 
post  at  Mount  Wollaston^  or.  Merry  Mount.  Here,  with  a 
few  companions  of  the  same  sort,  he  traded  with  the  Indians, 
and  enjoyed  life  according  to  his  disposition.  His  presence 
was  npt  pleasing  to  the  Pilgrims,  who  found  that  he  inter- 
fered with  their  trade  in  beaver,  and  who  were  especially 
troubled  because  his  way  of  life  was  not  theirs.  As  good 
Governor  Bradford  complains: 

They  allso  set  up  a  May-pole,  drinkiiig  and  dancing  aboute  it 
many  days  togeather,  inviting  the  Indean  women,  for  their  consorts, 
dancing  and  frisking  togither,  (like  so  many  fairies,  or  furies  rather,) 
and  worse  practises.  As  if  they  had  anew  revived  &  celebrated  the 
feasts  of  the  Roman  Goddes  Flora,  or  the  beasly  practieses  of  the 
madd  Bacchanalians.  Morton  likewise  (to  shew  his  poetrie)  com- 
posed sundry  rimes  &  verses,  some  tending  to  lasciviousnes,  and 
others  to  the  detraction  &  scandall  of  some  persons,  which  he  affixed 
to  this  idle  or  idoll  May-poUe.    They  chainged  allso  the  name  of 


The  Colonial  Time  81 

their  place,  and  in  stead  of  calling  it  Moonte  Wollaston,  they  call  it 
Merie-monnte,  as  if  this  joylity  would  have  lasted  ever. 

Xothing  was  to  be  merry  in  the  jurisdietion  of  Qovemor 
Bradford^  and  it  was  probably  his  mirth  fully  as  much  as 
other  offenses  that  called  do^i^hi  condemnation  on  Morton.  It 
was  charged  that  he  sold  arms  to  the  Indians^  a  serious 
offense,  though  by  no  means  imcommon.  The  'lascivious'' 
verses  aflSxed  to  the  May-Pole  are  extant,  and  though  they 
are  poor  poetry  and  rather  foolish,  they  contain  nothing  that 
need  offend  the  veriest  prude.  Offenses  with  the  Indian 
women,  hinted  rather  than  charged,  are  not  to  be  eicused 
according  to  the  rules  of  strict  morality,  though  they  were 
treated  as  a  matter  of  course  by  the  settlers  in  many  parts 
of  the  country.  To  the  Pilgrims,  however,  Morton's  sins  had 
no  palliation ;  and  they  seized  him  and  twice  transported  him 
to  England,  whence  he  returned  to  be  still  more  harshly 
treated.  He  was  never  brought  to  trial,  and  indeed  it  is 
doubtful  if  he  was  guilty  of  any  serious  offense  punishable 
under  English  law.  While  in  England  he  allied  himself 
with  those  persons  who  were  working  to  secure  a  revocation 

of  the  charter  of  Massachusetts,  and  his  book, 
rTTnim^^^       ^®    ^^^    ^n^ZtsA    Canaan,    was    evidently 

intended  to  aid  this  party.  This  was  prob- 
ably written  about  1634  or  1635,  and  was  publishej.^t  Am- 
sterdam in  1637.  It  extols  the  country  in  extravagant  terms, 
praises  the  Indians,  and  condemns  the  Puritans,  and 
endeavours  to  show  that  the  latter,  by  their  intolerant  exclu- 
sion of  all  other  settlers,  prevent  the  development  of  a  rich 
and  prosperous  English  colony. 

Morton  was  a  careless,  hap-hazard  writer,  and  to  his  own 
inaccuracies  were  probably  added  those  of  the  foreign 
printer.  His  descriptions  tend  toward  extravagance  in  a 
way  that  suggests  his  connection  with  the  Elizabethan  writer? 

foid  the  Ci^v^Uers^  rath^i:  thw  with  th^  ?uritan§ ; 


32  AmEBIOAN  LiTEEATnSE 

And  when  I  had  more  seriously  considered  of  the  bewty  of  the 
place,  with  all  her  faire  indowments,  I  did  not  thinke  that  in  all 
the  knowne  world  it  could  be  paralel'd,  for  so  many  goodly  groves 
of  trees,  dainty  fine  round  rising  hillucks,  delicate  faire  large  plaines, 
sweete  cristall  fountaines,  and  cleare  running  streames  that  twine 
in  fine  meanders  through  the  meads»  making  so  sweete  a  murmering 
noise  to  heare  as  would  even  lull  the  sences  with  delight  a  sleepe, 
so  pleasantly  doe  they  glide  upon  the  pebble  stones,  jetting  most 
jocundly  where  they  doe  meete  and  hand  in  hand  runne  downe  to 
Neptunes  Court,  to  pay  the  yearely  tribute  which  they  owe  to  him 
as  soveraigne  Lord  of  all  the  springs. 

The  most  interesting  part  of  the  New  English  Canaan  is 
the  third  section,  which  treats  of  the  settlers  "together  with 
their  Tenents  and  practise  of  their  Church/'  A  vein  of  f  ace- 
tiousness  runs  through  this  which  makes  it  amusing,  even 
when  it  is  manifestly  unfair.  Here  is  to  be  found  the  story, 
afterward  used  by  Butler  in  "Hudibras,''  of  the  proposition 
to  hang  an  old  and  bedridden  man  in  place  of  a  young  hunter 
who  had  committed  a  theft,  because  the  real  culprit  could 
not  be  spared.  The  author  is  fond  of  contemptuous  nick- 
names, and  never  fails  to  refer  to  Miles  Standish  as  "Cap- 
tain Shrimp.^'  He  is  master  of  a  clever  though  superficial 
wit,  which  he  employs  time  after  time  at  the  expense  of  his 
persecutors,  as  when  he  says : 

And  lastly  they  differ  from  us  in  the  manner  of  praying;  for  they 
winke^  when  they  pray,  because  they  think  themselves  so  perfect  in 
the  highe  way  to  heaven,  that  they  can  find  it  blindfold :  so  doe  not  I. 

From  all  that  can  be  learned  and  conjectured  Morton  was 
an  irresponsible,  roistering  sort  of  fellow,  who  took  every- 
thing, even  his  troubles  with  the  colonists,  as 

Morton's 

Character  ^  huge  joke.     No  doubt  Plymouth  was  well 

off  without  him,  but  it  is  hard  not  to  give 
him  some  sympathy,  and  impossible  not  to  be  amused 
by  his  book.  His  presence  in  New  England  suggests 
the  interesting  if  profitless  inquiry  what  American  history 

^  Winke — clow  tbe  ayes.  Morton  of  coozBe  read  his  prayerbook  when  he  prayed* 


Thb  Colonial  Tihb  33 

would  have  been  if  the  Englishman  of  his  type,  rather 
than  the  Puritan,  had  dominated  the  Northern  colonies. 
This  thought  and  the  pieturesqueness  of  Merry  Mount  seen 
against  the  sombre  Puritan  background  have  attracted  the 
attention  of  more  than  one  romancer.  Hawthorne^s  story 
"The  May-Pole  of  Merry  Mount^*  is  well  known;  John 
Lothrop  Motley^s  Merry  Mount  is  a  more  serious  though 
less  successful  attempt  to  use  the  same  material.  Altogether, 
the  student  of  colonial  literature  is  likely  to  spend  more 
time  on  the  New  English  Canaan  than  its  merits  warrant, 
and  to  conclude  as  Governor  Bradford  concluded  his  account 
of  Morton  and  Merry  Mount:  "But  I  have  been  too  long 
about  so  unworthy  a  person  and  bad  a  cause.'' 

In  a  community  where  every  one  could  read  and  write 
it  was  to  be  expected  that  many  persons  of  all  conditions 
would  leave  behind  them  formal  histories  or  the  materials 
for  history.  It  is  hard  to  choose  the  most  important,  but  one 
or  two  may  be  mentioned  as  typical  of  various  classes. 

Captain  John  Mason  (1600P-1672),  the  hero  of  the  con- 
flict between  the  whites  and  the  Indians  in  1637,  was  re- 
quested by  the  General  Court  of  Connecti- 
■^  cut  to  write  an  account  of  his  campaign,  and 

did  so  in  a  work  afterward  published  as  A  Brief  History  of 
the  Pequot  War.  Captain  Mason  was  an  Englishman  trained 
to  war  in  the  Low  Countries,  and  a  good  specimen  of  the 
devout  and  unrelenting  fighter.  His  narrative  has  some- 
thing of  a  soldier's  bluntness,  and  shows  delight  in  the  out- 
come of  the  conflict  both  as  a  soldier's  work  well  performed 
and  as  an  evidence  of  the  Providence  of  God. 

In  1654  there  was  issued  in  London  a  work  entitled  A  His- 
tory of  New  England  from  the  English  planting  in  the  Yeere 

1628  untill  the  Yeere  1652 y  but  since  known 

^  by  the  running  title  of  The  Wonder-Working 

Providence  of  Sions  Saviour  in  New  England.     This  pic- 


34  American  Litebatubb 

taresqne  history  was  the  work  of  Edward  Johnson  (1599^ 
1672).  a  native  of  Kent  and  an  early  emigrant  to  Woburn, 
Massachusetts ;  and  it  is  one  of  the  best  examples  of  the  kind 
of  writing  produced  by  a  devout  but  wholly  uncultured 
Puritan  layman.  Johnson^s  object  was  to  correct  false 
reports  about  the  country,  and  to  show  that  the  development 
of  New  England  had  been  under  the  direct  and  immediate 
guidance  of  Providence.  He  gives  a  painstaking  statement 
of  many  occurrences,  but  his  work  is  chiefly  valuable  not  as 
history  but  as  an  exemplification  of  the  ideals  and  modes  of 
thought  that  were  widely  dififused  in  the  land.  Perhaps  the 
most  noticeable  characteristic  of  his  style  is  a  tendency  to  hit 
upon  striking  phrases,  odd  metaphors  and  hyperboles,  often 
suggesting  if  not  borrowed  from  the  language  of  Scripture 
and  current  religious  discourse.  Expressions  like  the  follow- 
ing abound : 

With  these  words  they  lift  up  their  voyces  and  wept,  adding  many 
drops  of  salt  liquor  to  the  ebbing  Ocean. 

The  daylight  being  clouded  with  a  gross  vapor,  as  if  nights 
Ourtaines  remained  half  shut. 

So  they  came  over  this  boysterous  billow-boyling  Ocean,  a  few 
poor  scattered  stones  newly  raked  out  of  the  heaps  of  rubbish. 

These  turns  of  phrase  and  figure  seem  most  of  them  to 
come  spontaneously,  but  sometimes  there  are  evidences  of  a 
mighty  effort  to  find  a  comparison.  Dorchester  is  thus  de- 
scribed : 

The  forme  of  this  Town  is  almost  like  a  serpent  turning  her  head 
to  the  Northward :  over  against  Tompsons  Island,  and  the  Castle,  her 
body  and  wings  being  chiefly  built  on,  are  filled  somewhat  thick  of 
Flouses,  onely  that  one  of  her  wings  is  dipt,  her  Tayle  being  of 
such  a  large  extent  that  she  can  hardly  draw  it  after  her. 

Among  the  less  important  historians  was^Nathaniel  Morton 

(161S'1685}j  the  nephew  of  Governor  Bradford,  to  whom 

the  manuscript  history  of  Plymouth  descended.     His  New 

£nglmd'$  MmomU^  m  aQQOwt  of  th^  earlj'  year^  of  ft§ 


The  Colonial  Time  35 

colony^  published  in  1669^  was  bng  regarded  as  one  of 
the  most  valuable  authorities  for  American  history.     Since 

the  discovery  of  Bradford's  manuscript  in 
^De*^*^^^*^  1855  it  has  been  found  that  the  most  im- 
Writers  portant  parts  of  Morton's  work  are  copied 

literally,  page  after  page,  from  his  uncle's  ac- 
count. As  Morton  had  access  to  other  manuscripts  now  lost, 
which  he*  probably  used  in  the  same  way,  it  is  hard  to  say  what 
part  of  the  Memoriall  is  really  his  own.  It  is  not  easy  to 
draw  the  line  between  historians  and  authors  who  only 
furnish  the  materials  for  history.  Closely  connected  with 
the  true  historians  were  a  number  of  men  who  made  almost 
equally  valuable  contributions  to  our  knowledge  of  early  New 
England,  but  who  wrote  for  an  immediate  end.  The  Rever- 
end Francis  Higgeson  (1587-1630),  or,  as  the  name  was  later 
spelled,  Higginson,  came  from  England  to  the  church  at 
Salem  in  1629.  Like  many  other  passengers  on  sea-going 
vessels  at  that  time,  he  kept  a  journal  of  his  voyage,  which 
he  sent  back  to  England,  where  it  was  immediately  published. 
He  was  a  bom  observer,  and  later  in  the  same  year  he  wrote 
and  sent  to  London  for  publication  New  Englands  Planior 
Hon,  or  a  Short  and  Trite  Description  of  the  Commodities 
and  Discommodities  of  that  Countrey.  This  is  a  brief,  well 
planned,  and  on  the  whole  well  written  description  of  the 
country,  a  little  pedantic  in  style,  as  became  the  writing  of 
a  Cambridge-educated  divine.  Another  early  description  of 
America  is  New  Englands  Prospect,  by  WilliflHj  ffififld*  The 
author  probably  came  to  America  in  1629,  and  returned  in 
1633.  Whether  he  ever  came  back  is  uncertain,  and  it  may 
be  that  his  book  was  written  in  England.  It  is  more  com- 
plete and  systematic  than  most  works  of  its  kind,  treating 
of  the  country,  its  climate,  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  inhabitants, 
and  also  '^Of  the  evills  and  such  things  as  are  hurtfull  in  the 
Plantation."    A  peculiarity  of  the  author's  style  is  his  ex- 


36  AllERIOAN  LiTEBATirSB 

cessive  use  of  adjectives^  sometimes  as  many  as  twelve  or 
fifteen  to  one  substantive.  Perhaps  the  best  descriptions  of 
the  aborigines  in  New  England  were  written  by  Daniel 
Gookin  {1612-1687},  who  long  held  the  office  of  superintend- 
ent of  the  Indians  in  the  colony  of  Massachusetts.  His  main 
concern  for  the  Indians  was  the  salvation  of  their  souls,  and 
he  wrote  with  the  purpose  of  showing  their  capabilities  and 
the  need  of  missionary  work  among  them.  His  Historical 
Collections  of  the  Indians  in  New  England  was  dedicated  to 
Charles  II  in  1674,  but  for  some  reason  remained  unpublished. 
He  also  completed  a  history  of  New  England  on  a  large  scale, 
but  the  manuscript  is  supposed  to  have  been  destroyed  by 
fire.  John  Josselyn,  who  twice  visited  America,  and  who 
spent,  in  all,  some  ten  years  in  the  colonies,  is  the  author  of 
two  picturesque  works:  New  England's  Rarities  Discovered, 
in  Birds,  Beasts,  Fishes,  Serpents,  and  Plants  of  thai 
Country,  &c.,  published  in  1672,  and  An  Account  of  two 
Voyages  to  New  England,  &c.,  1674.  Josselyn  was  a  man 
of  family  and  education,  and  not  much  in  sympathy  with  the 
Puritan  strictness  of  New  England.  He  was  chiefly  inter- 
ested in  natural  science,  if  the  word  science  can  be  used  in 
connection  with  his  method;  for  he  records  in  the  most 
credulous  fashion  not  only  what  he  observes  or  thinks  he 
observes,  but  everything  that  he  is  told.  His  writings  have 
the  attractiveness  that  belongs  to  a  combination  of  a 
child's  book  of  wonders  and  a  summary  of  quaint  and  for- 
gotten theories. 

By  far  the  most  significant  writings  produced  in  early  New 
England  were  those  which  dealt  with  religion  and  theology. 

Few  of  these  deserve  the  strict  title  of  liter- 
Wri^ro  ature;  still  fewer  are  fairly  readable  to-day. 

Their  value  comes  from  their  intimate  con- 
nection with  the  life  of  the  people — ^from  the  fact  that  on 
the  one  hand  they  were  the  chief  influence  in  moulding  liter- 


Thb  Colonial  Time  37 

ary  taste,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  they  show  the  liter- 
ary demands  made  by  the  public. 

These  writings  were  the  work  of  the  Puritan  clergy,  and 
in  order  to  understand  them  it  is  necessary  to  know  some- 
thing of  their  authors.  The  most  notable 
Umd  Mnirt^"     characteristic  of  the  ministers  of  the  New 

England  churches  was  the  high  degree  of 
culture — or  more  accurately  of  learning — ^that  they  repre- 
sented. As  a  rule  they  were  Cambridge  men  who  had  made 
their  University  studies,  like  everything  else  in  their  lives, 
a  matter  of  conscientious  duty.  The  field  that  they  covered 
was  not  large,  but  they  knew  with  the  utmost  thoroughness 
Greek,  Latin,  Hebrew,  and  the  intricate  mazes  of  church 
doctrine.  Nor  were  these  subjects  for  the  private  study 
alone.  Rarely  was  a  sermon  printed  without  a  motto  in  one 
of  the  learned  tongues.  The  accuracy  of  translations  of  the 
Scriptures  was  often  discussed  in  the  pulpit.  Quotations 
from  Greek,  Latin,  and  Hebrew  were  common  in  sermons, 
and  even  in  prayers ;  and  almost  every  pulpit  discourse,  even 
those  intended  for  unlearned  hearers,  dealt  with  questions 
of  doctrine  that  would  to-day  be  considered  too  abstruse  for 
the  most  intellectual  congregation.  This  does  not  mean  that 
our  ancestors  were  prodigies;  but  such  powers  of  mind  as 
they  had  they  were  trained  from  childhood  to  exercise  upon 
questions  of  theology.  Besides,  the  sermon  was  not  a  matter 
for  the  hour  only.  It  was  the  theme  of  conversation  and  of 
private  meditation  throughout  the  week;  and  that  defects  of 
memory  might  not  interfere  with  a  full  mastery  of  its  intri- 
cacies, auditors  were  accustomed  to  bring  to  the  meetinghouse 
pencil  and  paper  and  take  notes. 

The  published  writings  of  the  early  ministers  were  largely 
sermons,  either  singly  or  in  series  that  formed  virtual 
systems  of  church  doctrine,  or  manuals  of  church  practice. 
They  also  issued  tracts  and  pamphlets  on  various  subjects. 


38  Amebican  Lttebatubb 

For  the  minister  was  not  only  a  spiritual  teacher^  but  a 
leader  and  an  almost  infallible  guide  in  public  affairs^  the 
iAterpreter  of  God's  will  to  a  people  with  whom  the  wishes 
of  Providence  were  supposed  to  control  every  act  of  life. 
They  were  consulted  at  every  step  by  legislators,  governors, 
and  judges.  These  men  are  most  of  them  remembered  as 
powerful  influences  in  the  colony,  not  as  authors  of  any  par- 
ticular works  of  importance.  It  may  be  well,  therefore,  to 
sketch  briefly  the  lives  of  some  of  the  most  prominent  of  them 
and  afterward  to  notice  some  of  the  more  general  character- 
istics of  their  writings. 

The  foremost  minister  of  the  first  half-century  in  Massa- 
chusetts was  John  Cotton   (15Ji^5-1fi52).     He  was  bom  in 

Derby,  England,  and  took  his  degree  at  Em- 
^^  ^  "  manuel  College,  Cambridge.  After  making  a 
brilliant  record  at  the  University  he  associated  himself  with 
the  Puritan  party,  and  became  pastor  of  a  church  at  Boston, 
England.  It  was  in  honor  of  this  church  and  its  illustrious 
pastor  that  the  chief  town  of  Massachusetts  was  given  its 
name.  When,  in  1633,  he  was  driven  from  England  by  the 
persecutions  of  Archbishop  Laud,  the  leader  of  the  anti- 
Puritan  party,  he  came  to  the  new  Boston,  where  he  was 
made  teacher  and  later  pastor  of  the  famous  First  Church. 
His  published  works  include,  besides  his  controversy  with 
Boger  Williams,  which  will  be  mentioned  later,  such  titles  as : 
A  Brief  Exposition  upon  Ecclesiastes;  The  Grounds  and  Ends 
of  the  Baptism  of  the  Children  of  the  Faithful;  A  Treatise 
concerning  Predestination;  A  Modest  and  Clear  Answer  to 
Mr.  Ball's  Discourse  of  Set  Forms  of  Prayer;  and  the  classic 
New  England  catechism,  usually  known  2i%  Spiritual  Milk 
for  Boston  Babes.  It  is  not  of  course  by  any  of  these  tracts 
and  sermons  that  his  power  is  to  be  estimated.  It  was 
through  his  personal  force  and  his  pulpit  oratory  that  he 
became  and  long  remained  the  real  leader  of  the  common- 


The  Colonial  Time  39 

wealth,  determining  the  policy  of  the  government  us  well  as 

that  of  the  church. 

This  sketch  of  the  life  of  John  Cotton  might  almost  serve 

as  the  biography  of  most  of  his  prominent  colleagues.    Among 

these  was  Thomas  Hooker  (1686-1647).    He 
omas    00  er   ^^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^^  Cotton,  was 

also  a  graduate  of  Emmanuel  College;  and  was  also  driven 
from  England  by  Laud,  from  whence  he  went  first  to  Hol- 
land, but  afterward  to  America,  crossing  the  ocean  in  the 
same  ship  with  Cotton.  For  three  years  he  preached  at 
Cambridge,  and  then,  with  his  congregation,  foimded  the 
town  of  Hartford,  Connecticut.  The  eighteen  titles  of  his  I 
published  works  include :  The  SouVs  Preparation  for  Christ; 
or  a  Treatise  of  Contrition;  The  8ouVs  Vocation;  or  Effec- 
tnal  Calling  to  Christ;  The  Sainfs  Dignity  and  Duty. 

When  Hooker  left  Cambridge  in  1636  his  successor  in  the 
pulpit  was  Thomas  Shepard  (1605-1649),  another  graduate 

of  Emmanuel,  and  another  victim  of  Laud, 
^en^  Among  his  publications  are:  New  England's 

Lamentations  for  Old  England's  Errours; 
Certain  Select  Cases  Resolved;  The  Clear  Srmshine  of  the 
Oospel  breaking  forth  upon  the  Indians  in  New  England. 
His  writings  are  somewhat  more  readable  to-day  than  those 
of  either  Cotton  or  Hooker. 

Cotton,  Hooker,  and  Shepard  seem  at  this  distance  to 
stand  out  above  their  many  devout  and  learned  contempo- 
raries, though  it  would  be  rash  to  say  with  certainty  who  were 
really  the  ablest  among  the  many  early  New  England  divines. 
As  has  been  said,  in  the  history  of  literature  they  coimt  more 
as  a  class  than  as  individuals.  Great  as  were  their  differ- 
ences in  temperament,  the  overwhelming  fact  of  their  creed 
seems  to  have  reduced  their  methods  of  expression  to  a  con- 
siderable sameness. 

The  most  noticeable  characteristic  of  the  writings  of  these 


40  AiiEBiOAN  Lttebatubb 

men  is  logical  exactness.    A  sermon  of  those  days  was  not  a 
superficial  discussion  of  a  subject,  but  a  thorough  investiga- 
tion of  every  point  involved.    Two  hours  was 
SMmons**         a  usual  length  for  such  a  discourse,  and  any 

important  topic  was  treated  in  a  series  of  dis- 
courses. The  parishioner  with  his  notebook  was  trained  to 
close  thinking;  and  the  sermon  was  arranged  in  numbered 
headings  and  subheadings  that  suggest  a  modem  college 
textbook  on  an  abstruse  subject. 

This  closeness  of  analysis  is  best  seen  in  sermons  on  doc- 
trinal points;  and  to  appreciate  the  logical  structure  it  is 
necessary  to  study  a  discourse  as  a  whole.  Every  American, 
certainly  every  American  of  New  England  ancestry,  should 
as  a  filial  duty  read  at  least  one  of  these  learned  theological 
discussions,  to  which  his  forefathers  listened  week  after  week. 
More  interesting  and  more  readily  quoted,  though  really  less 
significant,  are  the  hortatory  or  damnatory  sermons  occa- 
sionally  preached  to  warn  the  hearers  of  the  wrath  to  come. 
The  horrors  of  future  punishment  offered  one  of  the  few 
subjects  on  which  the  Puritan  allowed  his  imagination  free 
play;  and  it  sometimes  seems  as  if  he  took  an  exultant  pleas- 
ure in  the  vivid  picturing  of  eternal  torment.  Thomas 
Shepard  thus  describes  the  dialogue  between  the  Judge  and 
a  lost  soul  at  the  last  day : 

In  regard  of  the  fearful  sentence  that  then  shall  be  passed  upon 
thee;  Depart  thou  cursed  creature  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for 
the  devil  and  his  Angels,  Thou  shalt  then  cry  out.  Oh  mercy,  Lord ! 
Oh  a  little  mercy !  No,  wiU  the  Lord  Jesus  say,  I '  did  indeed  once 
offer  it  you,  but  you  refused,  therefore  Depart,  Then  thou  shalt 
plead  again,  Lord  if  I  must  depart,  yet  blesse  me  before  I  go :  No,  no. 
Depart  thou  cursed.  Oh  but.  Lord,  if  I  must  depart  cursed,  let  me 
go  into  some  good  place :  No,  depart  thou  cursed  into  hell  fire.  Oh 
Lord,  thafs  a  torment  I  cannot  bear;  but  if  it  must  be  so.  Lord, 
let  me  come  out  again  quickly;  No,  depart  thou  cursed  into  ever- 
lasting fire.  Oh  Lord,  if  this  be  thy  pleasure,  that  here  I  must  abide, 
let  me  have  good  company  with  me.    No  depart  thou  cursed  into  ever- 


The  Colonial  Tihb  41 

lasting  fire  prepared  for  the  DevU  and  his  Angels,     This  shall  be 
thy  sentence.    .    .    . 

The  torment  which  wisdome  shall  devise,  the  Almighty  power  of 
God  shall  inflict  upon  thee,  so  as  there  was  never  such  power  seen 
in  making  the  world,  as  in  holding  a  poor  creature  under  this  wrath, 
that  holds  up  the  soul  in  being  with  one  hand,  and  beats  it  with  the 
other,  ever  burning  like  fire  against  a  creature,  and  yet  that  creature 
never  burnt  up,  Rom,  9.  22.  Think  not  this  cruelty,  it's  justice. 
.  .  .  Thou  canst  not  endure  the  torments  of  a  littie  Kitchin  fire  on 
the  tip  of  thy  finger,  not  one  half  hour  together;  how  wilt  thou 
bear  the  fury  of  this  infinite,  endlesse,  consuming  fire  in  body  and 
soul  throughout  all  eternity?   .    .    . 

Thus  (I  say)  thou  shalt  lie  blaspheming,  with  Gods  wrath  like  a 
pile  of  fire  on  thy  soul  burning,  and  floods,  nay  seas,  nay  more, 
seas  of  tears  (for  thou  shalt  forever  lie  weeping)  shall  never  quench 
it.  And  here  which  way  soever  thou  lookest  thou  shalt  see  matter 
of  everlasting  grief.  Look  up  to  Heaven,  and  there  thou  shalt  see 
(Oh)  that  God  is  for  ever  gone.  Look  about  thee,  thou  shalt  see 
Devils  quaking,  cursing  God;  and  thousands,  nay  millions  of  sinfull, 
damned  creatures  crying  and  roaring  out  with  dolefull  shriekings:  ^/^ 
Oh  the  day  that  ever  I  was  bom ! 

Besides  sermons  and  tracts  the  chief  publications  of  the 
clergy  were  controversial  writings.     Most  typical  are  those 

regarding  some  technicality  of  theology; 
wrffinlT"^       others  were  concerned  with  matters  of  church 

discipline^  such  as  methods  of  baptism^  or 
the  right  of  women  to  sing  psalms  at  public  worship.  An 
interesting  example^  both  from  the  importance  of  the  ques- 
tion discussed  and  the  prominence  of  the  participants,  is  that 
between  John  Cotton  and  Roger  Williams  concerning  perse- 
cution for  religious  belief. 

This  controversy  had  its  origin  in  England  before  the 
emigration  of  the  Puritans  to  America.     An  unknown  pris- 
oner, confined  in  Newgate  because  of  his  reli- 

RoserWi^uns  ^^^^^  composed  some  arguments  against  per- 
secution and  sent  them  to  a  friend  outside  the 
prison,  employing  the  device  familiar  to  every  child  of  using 
milk  as  a  sympathetic  ink.  These  arguments  were  pub- 
lished; and  a  part  of  them  were  sent  to  John  Cotton  with  a 


42  Ahebican  Litebaturb 

request  for  his  opinion  upon  them.  In  reply  Cotton  wrote 
a  letter,  which  was  printed  just  at  the  time  that  Williams 
visited  England  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  charter  for 
Bhode  Island.  To  this  letter  Williams  wrote  a  hasty  reply, 
published  under  the  title  T2!:±JBUnidii  Tenei^^ 
tion  for  cau^s  of  Conscience,  ^isQU9$ed  t»  a  Conference.Jt&L 
tween  Truth  and  Peace.  When  this  reached  America  Cotton 
wrote  a  rejoinder  entitled  The  Bloody  Tenent  mashed,  and 
made  white  in  the  Blood  of  the  Lamh;.  and  this  in  turn  called 
forth  from  Williams  The  Bhqdy  Tenent  yet  More  BloQiu^  6i6 
Mr,  Cotton[s  endevourto  tposh  it  white  in, thA. Blood  ofJM 

The  modem  reader  of  this  discussion  is  struck  by  the  fact 
that  so  much  of  it  is  made  up  of  direct  appeals  to  Scripture, 
and  especially  to  the  symbolical  parts  of  Scripture.  The 
prisoner  in  Newgate  gives  as  his  first  argument  against  per- 
secution, not  the  inhumanity  and  injustice  of  such  treatment, 
but: 

Becaase  Christ  commandeth  that  the  Tares  and  Wheat  (which 
some  nnderstand  are  those  that  waike  in  the  Truth  and  those  that 
walke  in  Lies)  should  be  let  alone  in  the  World,  and  not  plucked  up 
untiU  the  Harvest,  which  is  the  end  of  the  World,  Math.  13.  36. 
88.    &c. 

This  is  followed  by  other  similar  scriptural  arguments ;  and 
it  is  largely  to  these  that  Cotton  devotes  himself  in  his  reply. 
Thus,  to  the  passage  quoted,  he  says: 

Tares  are  not  Bryars  and  Thomes,  but  partly  Hypocrites,  like 
tinto  the  godly,  but  indeed  camaU  (as  the  Tares  are  like  to  Wheat 
but  are  not  Wheat,)  or  partly  such  corrupt  doctrines  or  practices 
as  are  indeed  unsound,  but  yet  such  as  come  very  near  the  truth 
(as  Tares  do  to  the  Wheat)  and  so  neer  that  good  men  may  be 
taken  with  them,  and  so  the  persons  in  whom  they  grow  cannot  bee 
rooted  out,  but  good  Wheat  wiU  be  rooted  out  with  them. 

Arguments  of  other  kinds  are  of  course  used  by  both  Cotton 
and  Williams,  but  they  are  supported  by  frequent  scriptural 
citations.    The  tacit  understanding  seems  to  be  that  the  con- 


The  Colonial  Time  4S 

troversy  must  be  settled  by  appeal  not  to  the  spirit  but  to 
the  letter  of  the  Word  of  God. 

One  controversial  pamphlet  must  almost  be  placed  in  a 
class  by  itself.     This  is  The  Simyle  Cobler  of  Aaaawamfn^ 

by  Nathaniel  Ward  (157p?-1.652?)/  The 
author  was  another  of  the  graduates  of  .Em- 
manuel College,  Cambridge,  but  instead  of  passing  at  once 
from  the  University  to  the  ministry,  he  studied  and  prac- 
ticed law,  travelled  much,  and  saw  the  world.  Finally  he 
took  orders,  and  soon  afterward,  like  most  of  his  Puritan 
brethren,  suffered  the  displeasure  of  Laud.  He  came  to 
America  in  1634,  and  settled  as  pastor  of  the  church  at 
Aggawam,  afterwards  Ipswich.  Owing  to  ill  health  he 
resigned  his  pastorate  after  three  years,  but  he  continued  to 
reside  in  the  colony  until  1647,  when  he  returned  to  England. 
The  Simple  Cobler  was  begun  in  1645  and  was  published  in 
London  in  1647.  On  the  title-page  the  author  assumes  the 
character  of  a  poor  cobbler  "willing  to  help  mend  his  Native 
Country,  lamentably  tattered,  both  in  the  upper-leather  and 
sole,  with  all  the  honest  stitches  he  can  take.  And  as  willing 
never  to  bee  paid  for  his  work,  by  Old  English  wonted  pay.^^ 
He  makes  no  attempt,  however,  to  write  in  the  manner  of 
a  cobbler.  The  work  may  be  characterized  as  a  satire  on  i 
things  in  general,  and  a  manual  of  advice  to  English  Puri-  - 
tans,  especially  to  the  Parliament.  Nathaniel  Ward^s 
breadth  of  experience  had  not  given  him  breadth  of  mind, 
and  the  first  pages  of  his  book  are  devoted  to  an  intense 
tirade  against  religious  toleration: 

It  is  said,  That  Men  ought  to  have  Liberty  of  their  Conscience, 
and  that  it  is  persecution  to  debarre  them  of  it:  I  can  rather  stand 
amazed  then  reply  to  this:  it  is  an  astonishment  to  think  that  the 
braines  of  men  should  be  parboyl'd  in  such  impious  ignorance ;  Let 
aU  the  wits  under  the  Heavens  lay  their  heads  together  and  finde  an 
Assertion  worse  then  this  (one  excepted)  I  wiU  petition  to  be  chosen 
the  universaU  Ideot  of  the  world. 


44  Aherioan  Litebatube 

This  passage  represents  the  style  of  the  author  when  he  is 
most  conventional.  When  he  wishes  to  be  forcible,  he  uses 
outlandish  words  coined  by  himself,  quotations  from  the 
Latin,  and  figures  that  have  the  same  effectiveness  as  those 
of  modem  slang : 

It  is  a  most  toylsome  taske  to  run  the  wild-goose  chase  after  a 
well-breath'd  Opinionist:  they  delight  in  yitilitigation :  it  is  an  itch 
that  loTes  alife  to  be  scrub*d:  they  desire  not  satisfaction,  but 
satisdiction,  whereof  themselves  must  be  judges:  yet  in  new  erup- 
tions of  Error  with  new  objections,  silence  is  sinfuU. 

The  reverend  author  does  not  exhaust  his  vocabulary  in 
attacking  religious  toleration,  but  pays  his  respects  to  women 
of  fashion  in  a  still  more  forcible  manner.  The  following  is 
a  comparatively  mild  passage: 

It  is  a  more  common  then  convenient  saying,  that  nine  Taylors 
make  a  man:  it  were  weU  if  nineteene  could  make  a  woman  to  her 
minde:  if  Taylors  were  men  indeed,  weU  furnished  but  with  meer 
morall  principles,  they  would  disdain  to  be  led  about  like  Apes,  by 
such  mymick  Marmosets.  It  is  a  most  unworthy  thing,  for  men  that 
have  bones  in  them,  to  spend  their  lives  in  making  fidle-cases  for 
futulous  womens  phansies;  which  are  the  very  pettitoes  of  Infirmity, 
the  giblets  of  perquisquilian  toyes. 

The  latter  part  of  the  work  is  given  over  to  a  discussion  of 
contemporary  affairs  in  England.  Here  are  opinions  as  out- 
spoken as  those  on  toleration.  Of  the  Irish  after  the  mas- 
sacres of  1641  he  says : 

I  begge  upon  my  hands  and  knees,  that  the  Expedition  against 
them  may  be  undertaken  while  the  hearts  and  hands  of  our  Souldiery 
are  hot,  to  whom  I  will  be  bold  to  say  briefly:  Happy  is  he  that 
shaU  reward  them  as  they  have  served  us,  and  Cursed  be  he  that  shall 
do  that  work  of  the  Lord  negligently.  Cursed  be  he  that  holdeth  back 
his  Sword  from  blood :  yea.  Cursed  be  he  that  maketh  not  his  Sword 
Starke  drunk  with  Irish  blood,  that  doth  not  recompence  them  double 
for  their  hellish  treachery  to  the  EngUshf  that  maketh  them  not 
heaps  upon  heaps,  and  their  Country  a  dwelling  place  for  Dragons, 
an  Astonishment  to  Nations :  Let  not  that  eye  look  for  pity,  nor  that 
hand  to  be  spared,  that  pities  or  spares  them,  and  let  him  be 
accursed,  that  curseth  not  them  bitterly. 


The  Colonial  Time  45 

The  peculiarities  of  the  Simple  Cobler  are  explained  partly 
by  the  author^s  personality  and  partly  by  the  fact  that  he 
was  writing  for  English  readers.  It  is  an  example  of  that 
rough-and-ready  pamphleteering  which  was  less  necessary  in 
the  colonies,  but  which  to  many  lower-class  Englishmen  of 
Cromweirs  time  must  have  been  more  effective  than  the 
systematic  presentation  of  arguments  buttressed  with  appeals 
to  Scripture.  That  the  work  was  popular  with  the  classes 
for  whom  it  was  written  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  went 
through  four  London  editions  in  less  than  a  year.  More 
recently  it  has  been  regarded  chiefly  as  a  literary  curiosity. 
The  oddities  of  the  author^s  manner  have  drawn  attention 
from  his  matter — and  the  result  has  perhaps  been  fortunate 
for  his  reputation.  Bead  for  its  ideas  alone,  the  work  is  an 
exhibition  of  narrowness  and  bigotry  unusual  even  in  Puri- 
tan times. 

Contemporary  biographies  record  the  learning  and  the 
virtues  of  many  other  early  New  England  ministers,  most  of 

whom  published  at  least  a  few  sermons  and 
lunOTClencal      tracts  that  were  admired  in  their  day.     Few 

of  these  men,  however,  deserve  a  place  in  a 
literary  history.  Charles  Chauncy  (1592-1672),  a  graduate 
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  came  to  America  in  1638, 
and  settled  first  at  Plymouth  and  then  at  Scituate.  In  1654 
he  became  president  of  Harvard  college.  His  publications 
include  two  volumes  of  sermons,  and  a  controversial  work 
entitled  Antisynodalia  Americana.  Because  of  his  illustrious 
descendants  rather  than  of  his  own  work  mention  should  be 
made  of  Bichard  Mather  (1596-1669),  the  father  of  Increase, 
the  father  of  Cotton.  Unlike  most  of  his  Puritan  brethren 
he  was  educated  at  Oxford.  When  he  was  driven  from  Eng- 
land by  Laud  he  came  to  America  in  1635  and  was  for  many 
years  pastor  at  Dorchester.  His  publications,  besides  his 
part  in  the  Bay  Psalm  Book,  were  mostly  sermons. 


46  AliBElCAK  LrrBEATUBfi 

There  was  almost  no  poetry,  in  any  strict  sense  of  the  term, 
produced  by  the  early  New  England  colonists.     Verses,  or 

attempts  at  verses,  were  common,  and  were 
^  made  by  almost  every  one  who  wrote  at  alL 

Governor  Bradford  put  in  rhyme  many  economic  facts  re- 
garding New  England : 

Cattle  of  every  kind  do  fiU  the  land ; 

Many  are  now  kill'd,  and  their  hides  tann'd : 

By  which  men  are  supply'd  with  meat  and  shoes, 

Or  what  they  can,  though  much  by  wolves  they  lose. 

Other  writers  composed  jingles  of  the  sort  current  in  En- 
gland during  the  troubled  political  times — saws  intended 
to  stick  in  the  popular  mind,  and  to  express  a  general  truth 
so  as  to  suggest  its  application,  perhaps  in  a  treasonable  way, 
to  current  events.  Nathaniel  Ward  furnishes  several 
examples  of  these  couplets  in  the  Simple  Oohler. 

In  ending  wars  'tween  Subjects  and  their  Kings, 
Great  things  are  sav'd  by  losing  little  things. 

The  body  beares  the  head,  the  head  the  Grown, 
If  both  beare  not  alike,  then  one  will  down. 

Verses  were  also  used  for  no  other  apparent  purpose  than  to 

relieve  the  monotony  of  prose.      William  Wood,  in  his  New 

England's  Prospect,  often  puts  catalogues  of  plants,  trees, 

animals,  etc.,  in  verse: 

The  Turkey-Phesant,  Heathcocke,  Partridge  rare, 
The  carrion-tearing  Crow,  and  hurtful  Stare, 
The  long  liv*d  Raven,  th'  ominous  Screech-Owle 
Who  teUs,  as  old  wives  say,  disasters  foule. 

The  most  common  use  of  verses  was,  however,  as  memorial 
tributes.    At  the  death  of  any  minister  or  public  man  his 

friends  felt  called  upon  to  express  their  grief 
Memorial  ^^  rhymed  lines.     These  show  perhaps  better 

that  anything  else  the  esthetic  barrenness  of 
the  times.  They  abound  in  puns,  quibbles,  and  conceits. 
Some  of  them  show,  as  well  as  commemorate,  great  learning; 


Thb  Colonial  Time  47 

but  not  one  of  them  impresses  a  reader  to-day  as  the  heart- 
felt expression  of  a  true  emotion.  A  very  few  examples  of 
this  kind  of  literature  must  suffice.  On  the  death  of  Thomas 
Hooker,  Peter  Bulkley  wrote : 

Let  Hartford  sigh,  and  say,  IVe  lost  a  treasure; 

Let  all  New  England  mourn  at  God's  displeasure, 

In  taking  from  us  one  more  gracious, 

Than  is  the  gold  of  Ophir  precious, 

Sweet  was  the  savour  which  his  grace  did  give, 

It  seasoned  all  the  place  where  he  did  live. 

His  name  did  as  an  ointment  give  it  smeU, 

And  aU  bear  witness  that  it  savoured  well. 

The  death  of  John  Cotton  called  forth  many  effusions,  one 
of  the  best  of  which  was  by  John  Norton : 

And  after  Winthrop's  Hooker's,  Shepard's  hearse, 
Doth  Cotton's  death  call  for  a  mourning  verse? 
Thy  wiU  be  done.    Tet  lord,  who  dealest  thus. 
Make  this  great  death  expedient  for  us. 

•  •  .  .  • 

That  comets,  great  men's  deaths  do  oft  forego, 
This  present  comet  doth  too  sadly  show. 
This  prophet  dead,  yet  must  in's  doctrine  speak, 
This  comet  saith,  else  must  New  England  break. 
Whate'er  it  be,  the  heavens  avert  it  far, 
That  meteors  should  succeed  our  greatest  star. 
In  Boston's  orb,  Winthrop  and  t/otton  were; 
These  lights  extinct,  dark  is  our  hemisphere. 

Morton^s  Memorial^  the  great  storehouse  of  these  eulogies, 
preserves  this  gem: 

The  ninth  of  May,  about  nine  of  the  clock, 
A  precious  one  God  out  of  Plimouth  took ; 
Governor  Bradford  then  expired  his  breath. 
Was  call'd  away  by  force  of  cruel  death. 

The  following,  on  the  death  of  the  Eeverend  Mr.  Norton  and 
the  Beverend  Mr.  Stone,  is  more  ingenious : 

Last  spring  this  summer  may  be  autumn  styl'd, 
Sad  withering  fall  our  beauties  which  despoil'd; 
Two  choicest  plants,  our  Norton  and  our  Stone, 
Tour  Justi*  %hv^w  (iowp ;  r^mgv'd,  away  i^re  f  one, 


48  AllEBIOAN  LlTEEATUBE 

One  year  brought  Stone  and  Norton  to  their  mother. 
In  one  year  April,  July  did  them  smother. 

•  •  •  •  • 

A  stone  more  than  the  Ebenezer  fam'd; 
Stone  splendent  diamond,  right  orient  nam*d; 
A  cordial  stone,  that  often  cheered  hearts 
With  pleasant  wit,  with  Gospel  rich  imparts; 
Whetstone  that  edgified  th'  obtusest  mind; 
Loadstone,  that  drew  the  iron  heart  unkind. 
A  ponderous  stone,  that  would  the  bottom  sound 
Of  scripture  depths,  and  bring  out  Arcan's  found. 

The  same  limitations  that  are  seen  in  these  elegiac  verses 
are  even  more  noticeable  in  the  Bay  Psalm  Boole,     This 

rendition  of  the  Psalms  into  so-called  metre 
Book  *^  ^^^  made  by  a  committee  of  the  leading  min- 

isters of  New  England,  chief  among  whom 
were  Eichard  Mather,  Thomas  Welde,  and  John  Eliot.  J[^ 
was  published  at  Cambridge  in  1640,  and  was  the  first  book 
printed  in  America.  The  task  was  undertaken  because  of  the 
feeling  that  Sternhold  and  Hopkins^s  version  of  the  Psalms, 
which  was  in  use  among  the  Puritans  in  England,  was  not 
sufficiently  literal.  The  translators  endeavored  to  secure  a 
rendering  that  could  be  sung,  and  yet  that  should  adhere  as 
closely  as  possible  to  the  letter  of  the  original.  A  glance  at 
their  work  gives  another  reminder  that  it  was  the  Scripture 
as  Scripture,  and  not  the  spirit  underlying  it,  that  the  Puri- 
tan valued.  These  men  had  no  conception  of  poetry,  and 
no  skill  in  versification;  but  being  without  sense  of  humor 
they  put  forth  their  work  with  the  feeling  that  they  had  done 
a  service  acceptable  to  the  Lord.  Properly  to  appreciate  their 
readings,  one  must  make  comparison  with  the  sonorous  King 
James  version,  which  they  had  before  them.  The  first  lines 
of  Psalm  XIX  are  rendered  thus : 

The  heavens  doe  declare 

the  majesty  of  God: 
also  the  firmament  shews  forth 

his  handy-work  abroad. 


The  Colonial  Timb  49 

2  Day  speaks  to  day,  knowledge 

night  hath  to  night  dedar'd. 

3  There  neither  speach   nor  language  is, 

where  their  voyce  is  not  heard. 

4  Through  all  the  earth  their  line 

is  gone  forth  &  unto 
the  utmost  end  of  all  the  world, 
their  speaches  reach  also. 

The  first  American  writer  who  unquestionably  deserves 
the  title  of  poet  was  Anne  Bradstreet  (1612-1672).    She  was 

^    ,  bom  in  England  in  1612,  the  daughter  of 

Anne  Bradstreet   mi  -rv    ti  m  i  »  -mm- 

Thomas  Dudley,  afterward  governor  of  Mas- 
sachusetts— ^a  thrifty  old  Puritan  whose  virtues  were  com- 
memorated in  an  epitaph  by  Governor  Belcher: 

Here  lies  Thomas  Dudley,  that  trusty  old  stud, 
A  bargain's  a  bargain,  and  must  be  made  good. 

At  the  age  of  sixteen  she  was  married  to  Simon  Bradstreet, 
who  also  became  a  governor  of  Massachusetts.  In  1630,  with 
father  and  husband,  she  came  to  New  England.  Here  she 
removed  from  place  to  place,  settling  finally  at  Ipswich; 
attended  to  all  the  duties  of  a  pioneer  household ;  became  the 
mother  of  eight  children ;  suffered  much  from  ill-health ;  and, 
in  addition  to  all  this,  wrote  the  works  that  entitle  her  to 
be  placed  first  in  the  chronicle  of  American  poets. 

Her  favorite  authors  were  the  French  Puritan  Du  Bartas ; 
Quarles;  and  more  strangely,  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  whose  kins- 
woman she  may  have  been.  It  was  mainly  by  men  of  the 
stamp  of  Du  Bartas  and  Quarles,  however,  that  she  was  influ- 
enced. Her  longest  poems  are  didactic  treatises  on  "The 
Four  Elements,^^  "The  Four  Humours  in  Man^s  Constitu- 
tion,'' "The  Four  Ages  of  Man,''  "The  Four  Seasons  of  the 
Year,"  and  "The  Four  Monarchies."  These  and  some  shorter 
pieces  were  first  published  in  London  iiiJJ.5Q  under  the  title 
The  Tenth  Muse  lately  sprung  up  in  America — an  ambitious 
designation  for  which  she  was  in  no  way  responsible.    The 


so  Amebican  Literatube 

manuscripts  had  been  taken  without  her  knowledge  or  con- 
sent by  her  brother-in-law,  the  Eeverend  John  Woodbridge, 
when  he  sailed  for  England  in  1647,  and  he  procured  their 
publication.  Later  in  life  she  wrote  a  few  short  poems,  and 
a  series  of  *Ttf  editations^'  in  prose  which  are  really  superior 
to  her  poetical  work. 

Mrs.  Bradstreet^s  didactic  poems  are  what  might  be  ex- 
pected from  her  training.  The  following,  from  "The  Four 
Ages  of  Man,"  is  neither  better  nor  worse  than  the  average, 
and  is  interesting  as  one  of  two  or  three  passages  which  have 
caused  some  critics  to  believe  that  she  had  read  Shakespeare. 
Youth  speaks: 

If  any  care  I  take  'tia  to  be  fine, 

For  sure  my  suit,  more  than  my  virtues  shine. 

If  time  from  leud  Companions  I  can  spare 

Tis  spent  to  curie,  and  pounce  my  new-bought  hair. 

Some  new  Adonis  I  do  strive  to  be: 

Sardanapalus  now  survives  in  me. 

Cards,  Dice,  and  Oathes  concomitant  I  love, 

To  playes,  to  masques,  to  Taverns  still  I  move. 

And  in  a  word,  if  what  I  am  you'd  hear, 

Seek  out  a  Brittish,  bruitish  Cavaleer. 

The  prologue  to  the  poems  runs  rather  more  smoothly: 

To  sing  of  Wars,  of  Captains,  and  of  Kings, 
Of  Cities  founded.  Common-wealths  begun. 
For  my  mean  pen  are  too  superiour  things: 
Or  how  they  all,  or  each  their  dates  have  run 
Let  Poets  and  Historians  set  these  forth. 
My  obscure  Lines  shaU  not  so  dim  their  worth. 

Probably  the  best  of  her  later  poems  is  '^Contemplations,'^ 
which,  though  uneven,  shows  in  places  genuine  emotion,  and 
some  appreciation  of  Nature.  One  stanza  may  serve  as  an 
illustration : 

Then  on  a  stately  Oak  I  cast  mine  Eye, 
Whose  ruffling  top  the  Clouds  seemM  to  aspire; 
How  long  since  thou  wast  in  thine  Infancy? 
Thy  st^:e^gth,  and  gtature,  wor§  ihj  ye^r^  i^^mire, 


The  Colonial  Time  61 

Hath  hundred  winters  past  since  thou  wast  bom? 
Or  thousand  since  thou  brakest  thy  shell  of  horn? 
If  so,  all  these, as  nought  Eternity  doth  scorn. 

All  circumstances  considered,  it  is  surprising  that  this 
busy  New  England  matron  should  have  written  so  much  and 
so  well.  But,  after  all,  perhaps  she  best  deserves  memory 
because  among  her  lineaj  descendants  were  William  EUery 
Channing,  Bichard  Henry  Dana,  Wendell  Phillips,  and 
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes. 

To  his  contemporaries  the  Eeverend  Michael  Wigglesworth 
(.1631-1705)  seemed  a  greater  poet  than  Anne  Bradstreet; 

for  he  was  the  one  man  who  attempted  to  give 

Wlff  iMworth      P^^^^  expression  to  the  prevailing  creed  and 

all  that  it  implied.  His  biography  resembles 
that  of  many  other  New  England  ministers.  He  was  bom 
in  England  and  came  to  America  in  1638,  where  he  endured 
some  hardships  on  account  of  the  poverty  of  his  family,  but 
was  able  to  graduate  from  Harvard  in  1651.  He  served  in 
Harvard  college  for  a  time  as  tutor,  but  about  1655  was  set- 
tled at  Maiden,  Massiichusetts.  Here  he  remained  as  teacher 
and  pastor  until  his  death,  except  for  a  short  time  when 
he  went  on  a  voyage  to  the  Bermudas  for  his  health.  His 
early  intention  was  to  become  a  physician,  and  he  progressed 
so  far  in  his  medical  studies  that  he  was  able  to  minister  to 
the  bodies  as  well  as  the  souls  of  his  congregation.  His  f  amil- 
ilarity  with  medical  phraseology  is  shown  in  some  of  his 
poems.  His  own  health  was  poor,  and  often  he  was  unable 
to  enter  the  pulpit.  At  these  times  he  composed  some  of  his 
verses  as  the  only  service  he  could  offer  to  the  Lord. 

Among  Wigglesworth^s  lesser  poems  are  ^Tkleat  out  of  the 
Eater,  or  Meditations  concerning  the  Necessity,  End,  and 
Usefulness  of  Affliction  to  God^s  Children^' ;  and  ^^God's  Con- 
troversy with  New  England,  written  in  the  Time  of  the  Great 
Drought.'*    His  most  important  production  is,  however,  The 


52  AMEBICAN  LiTBRiLTUBB 

Day  of  Doom,  or  a  Poetical  Description  of  the  Oreat  and  Last 
Judgment,  published  in  1662.    This  contains  more  than  two 

hundred  eight-line  stanzas^  each  resembling 
YJJ^  a  double  ballad  stanza^  modified  by  the  use 

of  internal  rhymes  and  of  occasional  feminine 
endings.  The  peculiar  jigging  movement  of  this  verse  is 
strangely  out  of  harmony  with  the  gravity  of  the  theme. 
After  an  invocation  to  Christ  the  poet  begins  with  the 
description  of  the  night  before  the  judgment.  Then  fol- 
low the  appearance  St  Christy  the  awakening  of  the  liv- 
ing and  the  dead  with  the  natural  consternation  of  the 
wicked^  the  assembly  at  the  judgment  seat,  and  the  parting 
of  the  multitude  upon  the  right  and  the  left  hand.  Then 
the  righteous  are  awarded  a  place  beside  the  Judge,  and  the 
wicked  are  given  an  opportunity  to  speak  for  themselves.  The 
heathen  who  never  heard  the  Word,  the  infants  who  died  at 
birth,  and  others  who  can  offer  less  plausible  excuses,  en- 
deavour to  show  why  they  should  not  be  condemned,  and  each 
in  turn  is  answered  by  the  Judge.  This  part  of  the  poem 
gives  an  opportunity  for  an  exposition  of  Calvinistic  theology, 
and  especially  for  an  answer  to  some  of  the  objections  com- 
monly brought  against  it.  In  the  end,  judgment  is  pro- 
nounced, and  the  poem  closes  with  brief  descriptions  of  the 
torture  of  the  wicked  and  the  bliss  of  the  righteous. 

One  of  the  best  known  parts  of  the  poem  is  the  plea  of 
the  infants  who  are  denied  salvation  because  they  died  before 
they  could  receive  baptism.  Ife^  answer  to  their  argument  that 
they  should  not  suffer  eternal  torture  for  Adam^s  sin,  Christ 

says:  Would  you  have  griev'd  to  have  receiv'd 

through  Adam  so  much  good, 
As  had  been  your  for  evermore, 

if  he  at  first  had  stood? 
Would  you  have  said,  "We  ne'er  obey'd 

nor  did  thy  laws  regard; 
It  iU  befits  with  benefits, 

us,  Lord»  to  so  reward?" 


The  Colonial  Time  63 

Since  then  to  share  in  his  welfare, 

you  could  have  been  content, 
You  may  with  reason  share  in  his  treason, 

and  in  the  punishment 


and  concludes : 

You  sinners  are,  and  such  a  share 

as  sinners,  may  expect; 
Such  you  shall  have,  for  I  do  save 

none  but  mine  own  Elect. 
Yet  to  compare  your  sin  with  their 

who  liv'd  a  longer  time, 
I  do  confess  yours  is  much  less, 

though  every  sin's  a  crime. 

A  crime  it  is,  therefore  in  bliss 

You  may  not  hope  to  dwell; 
But  unto  you  I  shall  allow 

the  easiest  room  in  Hell. 

The  last  couplet  quoted,  perhaps  the  best  known  passage  in 
the  Day  of  Doom,  is  the  one  expression  of  the  author^s  better 
self  against  the  logic  of  liis  creed.  Every  other  assertion 
is  supported  by  marginal  citations  of  Scripture;  the  conces- 
sion to  the  infants  rests  only  on  the  poet^s  sense  of  justice. 
It  is  an  interesting  result  of  the  conflict  which  men  came 
more  and  more  to  feel  between  their  humane  impulses  and 
the  inevitable  logic  of  their  theology. 

The  most  remarkable  fact  regarding  the  Day  of  Doom 
was  its  popularity.  Professor  Tyler  estimates  that  within  a 
year  after  its  publication  a  copy  had  been  sold  for  every 
thirty-five  persons,  men,  women,  and  children,  in  New 
England.  When  the  average  size  of  families  at  this  time  is 
considered,  it  will  be  seen  that  a  large  proportion  of  the 
households  in  New  England  were  provided  with  the  volume. 
Its  popularity  continued  well  into,  and  indeed  through,  the 
eighteenth  century.  Children  were  required  to  learn  it  along 
with  their  catechism,  and  the  aged  repeated  it  as  a  comfort 
when  their  faith  was  assailed.    Thousands,  no  doubt^  read 


54  Ahbbioan  Ltteratubb 

no  other  poetry.  Not  only  wag  it  an  index  of  the  state  of 
poetic  taste  when  it  was  written^  but  it  helped  in  fixing 
poetic  standards  for  several  generations  afterward. 

An  early  versifier  whose  name  should  not  be  wholly  for- 
gotten was  William  Morrell.    He  was  an  Episcopalian  clergy- 
man who  was  sent  to  New  England  in  1623 

MQnorVene  ^j^j^^  ^  commission  from  the  ecclesiastical 
writer 

court,  but  who  found  it  wise  to  make  no  show 

of  authority.  His  stay  of  a  year  or  two  resulted  in  a  poem, 
Nova  Anglia,  which,  as  was  not  unusual  at  that  time,  he 
wrote  in  Latin  and  translated  into  English.  The  Latin  ver- 
sion is  said  by  those  who  are  judges  of  such  attempts  to  have 
some  academic  merits.  The  English  verses  move  rather  halt- 
ingly. There  are  a  few  good  lines  in  the  introduction,  but 
the  body  of  the  poem  is  only  a  crude  catalogue  of  plants, 
animals,  and  products  of  commercial  value. 

The  list  of  authors  already  given  includes  the  most  im- 
portant of  those  who  wrote  in  New  England  during  the  first 

half-century    of    colonial    life.      It    will   be 

General  Ch«-  noticed  that  all  of  them  were  bom  in  England, 
acterisucs  of  ^  «    i  ^ 

Early  Period  ^^^  most  of  them  were  educated  there.  Be- 
fore passing  to  the  first  generation  of  native 
authors  it  may  be  well  to  summarize  the  general  character- 
istics of  the  work  of  these  older  men.  In  this  way  we  shall 
get  more  clearly  in  mind  the  literary  forces  and  tendencies 
that  the  Puritan  brought  from  England,  and  so  shall  be 
better  able  to  trace  the  course  of  later  literary  development. 
It  is  perhaps  easier  to  state  what  is  wanting  than  what  is 
present  in  these  writings.    Both  the  forms  and  the  qualities 

of  composition  that  are  most  readily  associ- 

w*tiM**  **®^   ^^^^   ^^   '^orSi   literature   are   absent. 

There  was  no  drama,  no  fiction,  no  polite 
'  essays,  and  practically  no  poetry.  There  was  no  expression 
*  of  love  of  nature,  no  romantic  feeling,  almost  no  lighter  im- 


The  Colonial  Time  55 

agination.  The  drama  and  such  fiction  as  was  known  at  that 
time  were  condemned  as  frivolous  or  worse.  Poetry  might 
possibly  have  been  expected,  but  the  reasons  why  it  was  not 
written  are  not  far  to  seek.  All  the  higher  literary  activities 
of  the  Puritan  were  centered  on  the  thought  of  the  life  here- 
after, rather  than  on  this  life.  It  is  impossible  to  under- 
stand the  writings  or  the  actions  of  our  forefathers  without 
thoroughly  grasping  this  fact.  The  church  to-day  repeats 
the  same  statement  of  belief  in  the  life  everlasting;  but  the 
church  of  to-day  has  discovered  that  it  has  duties  close  at 
hand  and  leaves  the  future  pretty  largely  to  itself.  It  is 
among  less  intellectual  Christians  that  we  now  look  for  per- 
sons who  really  spend  much  time  in  thinking  of  their  state 
in  the  New  Jerusalem.  It  was  the  most  intellectual  among 
the  Puritans  who  thought  most  of  this  life  as  a  mere  prepara- 
tion for  the  life  beyond.  True,  the  successful  way  in  which 
they  managed  their  concerns  here  shows  that  they  must  have 
given  considerable  time  to  the  affairs  of  this  world ;  but  when 
they  wrote  it  was  on  higher  things.  In  those  days  the  news- 
paper had  not  given  to  reading  the  familiarity  that  breeds 
contempt,  and  the  printed  or  even  the  written  page  was  con- 
sidered worthy  of  preserving  only  edifying  thoughts. 

This  concentration  of  thought  along  one  line  crowded  all . 
lesser  matters  from  the  mind  of  the  Puritan.  He  felt  no  1 
love  for  nature  as  the  poets  feel  it.  There  was  little  place 
in  his  heart  for  the  love  of  woman.  Love  as  a  sensuous  or 
even  a  romantic  passion  was  not  to  be  mentioned.  There 
must  be  no  sonnets  to  Stella  or  songs  to  Lucasta.  More  to 
his  shame,  he  did  not  see,  or  at  any  rate  did  not  express,  the 
beauty  of  love  within  the  home.  Brutal  as  the  statement 
seems,  the  wives  of  the  early  settlers  were  worn  to  their 
deaths  by  the  labors  of  the  household  and  the  bearing  and 
rearing  of  many  children;  and  the  bereaved  husband  rarely 
found  it  convenient  or  economical  to  depend  long  on  a  hired 


56  Ahbbigak  LrrERATURB 

housekeeper.  Most  prominent  men  were  married  at  least 
twice.  Third  and  fourth  marriages  were  far  more  cemmon 
than  second  marriages  are  to-day.  Never  in  civilized  times 
has  the  theory  been  more  consistently  held  that 

God  made  the  woman  for  the  use  of  man, 
And  for  the  good  and  increase  of  the  world. 

It  was  long  after  this  that  good  Samuel  Sewall,  himself  the 
husband  of  three  women  and  the  unsuccessful  suitor  of  sev- 
eral more,  wrote  his  tract  in  support  of  the  theory  that  the 
weaker  sex  really  have  souls.  When  woman  is  neither  hon- 
ored as  a  helpmeet  nor  worshipped  as  a  mistress  she  is  likely 
to  inspire  little  poetry. 

The  one  subject  for  poetry  that  remained  to  the  Puritan 
was  the  relation  of  Grod  and  man — ^a  noble  theme,  but  one  on 
which  men  should  write  poems  of  Miltonic  grandeur,  or 
none.  New  England  brought  forth  a  Wigglesworth,  not  a 
Milton. 

The  important  writings  that  were  produced  in  this  early 
period  were  of  two  classes — historical  and  theological.     The 

significant  characteristics  of  these  were  two — 
J^Jj^^"  first,  common  to  them  all,  jn  intense  mar^ 

earnestness ;  second,  as  almost  the  only  mani- 
festation of  the  imagination,  the  use  of  a  powerful  and  gig- 
tesque  imagery—rseen  in  the  fondness  for  quotations  from 
Bevelation  and  the  Prophets,  and  in  the  quaintly  wrought 
phrases  of  Edward  Johnson  and  others.  The  persistence  of 
these  two  peculiarities  and  the  introduction  of  some  char- 
acteristics wanting  in  the  early  work  will  be  seen  in  the  lit- 
erature of  the  later  period. 

III.  The  New  England  Colonies.    Second  Period^ 

1676-1765 

The  first  period  of  New  England  literature,  in  which 
writers  were  mostly  bom  and  educated  in  England,  lasted 


The  Colonial  Time  57 

for  about  a  half-century.  The  year  1676  is  taken  to  mark  its 
ebse^  though  any  date  between  1670  and  1680  would  serve 

almost  as  well.  The  second  period  was  nearly 
N  ti^r^tm     a  century  in  duration,  and  extended  to  the 

time  when  the  colonists  ceased  to  be  truly 
colonial  in  spirit,  and  began  the  course  of  thinking  and  writ- 
ing that  finally  led  to  independence.  During  this  second 
period  the  great  majority  of  writers  were  born  and  educated 
in  America.  As  has  been  seen,  New  England  was  not  in  close 
literary  touch  with  the  mother  country.  Such  writings  as 
were  produced  represent  contemporary  American  conditions ; 
and  these  had  been  little  changed  by  outside  influences  since 
the  great  influx  of  immigrants  between  1630  and  1640.  It  is 
not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  literary  achievements  of 
the  time  were  not  great.  Though  the  amount  of  writing  was 
large,  as  was  to  be  expected  in  a  community  where  education 
was  so  generally  diffused  and  opportunities  for  printing  were 
so  numerous,  yet  the  productions  of  real  merit  are  relatively, 
fewer  than  in  the  first  half-century.  As  in  the  earlier  period,] 
historical,  theological,  and  political  writiMgs  were  of  the  great- 
est importance;  but  as  the  strictness  of  Puritanism  began  to' 
relax  there  were  slight  attempts  at  other  forms  of  composition. 
The  historical  writings  of  the  second  period  were,  like 
those  of  the  first,  many  of  them  suggested  by  current  events. 

From  1676  until  the  Kevolution  was  a  period 
Historical  ^f  almost  unbroken  warfare  with  the  Indians, 

Indian  Wars        either  alone  or  allied  with  the  French;  and 

the  record  of  these  terrible  but  somewhat 
monotonous  conflicts  has  been  preserved  in  many  contempo- 
rary narratives.  Few  of  these  works  were,  however,  history 
in  the  truest  sense.  Some  were  virtually  political,  others 
religious,  tracts;  and  some  were  the  personal  accounts  of 
participants.  None  of  them  was  of  great  literary  value,  but 
a  few  may  be  named  as  types. 


58  American  Litebatubb 

A  Narrative  of  the  Troubles  with  the  Indians  in  New 
England,  From  the  first  Planting  thereof  in  the  year  1607 

to  the  year  1677,  by  the  Eeverend  William 
H^l^d  Hubbard    (1621-1704),  was  written  with  a 

political  purpose.  The  author  was  bom  in 
England,  but  came  to  America  at  an  early  age,  and  was 
a  member  of  the  first  class  graduated  from  Harvard.  His 
history  was  published  in  1677,  and  was  clearly  called  forth 
by  the  outbreak  of  King  Philip^s  war  two  years  earlier.  His 
object  appears  to  have  been  not  only  to  gratify  seasonable 
curiosity,  but  to  defend  the  colonies  in  their  relations  to 
the  Indians.  As  he  tells  the  story,  there  is  always  but  one 
'  side  to  the  controversy;  »nd  he  frequently  pauses  to  notice 
charges  made  by  "some  persons^^  that  the  colonists  had  been 
unfair  or  brutal  in  their  dealings  with  the  natives.  The 
value  of  this  defense  was  appreciated  by  men  prominent 
in  the  government,  and  the  first  edition  was  printed  with 
a  formal  authorization  by  Simon  Bradstreet,  Daniel  Denni- 
Bon,  and  Joseph  Dudley. 

Increase  Mather  took  advantage  of  the  excitement  over  the 
\  Indian  outbreak  to  point  not  a  political  but  a  religious  moral. 

The  purpose  of  his  book,  which  also  appeared 

l^^^sHistorv  ^^  1677,  was  shown  by  the  title:  Relation  of 

the  Troubles  which  have  hapned  in  New 
England  by  Reason  of  the  Indians  there.  From  the  year  16H 
to  the  Year  1675.  Wherein  the  frequent  Conspiracies  of  the 
Indians  to  Cutt  off  the  English,  and  the  wonderfull  provi- 
dence of  Ood,  in  disappointing  their  devices  is  declared. 
Together  with  an  historical  discorse  concerning  the  prev- 
alency  of  prayer.  Showing  that  New  England's  late  deliv- 
ranee  from  the  rage  of  the  heathen  is  an  eminent  answer  of 
prayer.  The  author^s  chief  thesis  was  that  the  recent  troubles 
were  a  punishment  inflicted  by  Providence  on  a  generation 
that  was  becoming  lax  in  religious  faith. 


The  Colonial  Time  59 

A  little  later  Entertaining  Passages  Relating  to  Philip's 

War  was  written  by  Major  Benjamin  Church  (1639-1718),  a 

^  participant,   whose   book   was  published   in 

Benjamm  ^.^^g      rpj^^   author,   who   was    a   native   of 

Church 

Plymouth,  was  one  of  the  few  writers  of  the 

time  who  were  not  ministers  or  graduates  of  Harvard.  His 
account,  which  deals  largely  with  the  exploits  of  ^^Captain 
Church,^^  is  very  readable,  though  crude.  In  many  ways  it 
suggests  the  work  of  Captain  John  Smith  a  century 
earlier. 

Many  of  the  writings  called  forth  by  the  Indian  troubles 
were  not  formal  histories,  but  personal  accounts  of  experi- 
ences, especially  of  captivity  among  the  In- 

Narratives^       dians.     One   of  the  most  famous   of   these 

Captivity — Mary 

Rowlandflon         narratives  is  that  of  Mary  Bowlandson,  who 

in  the  winter  of  1676  was  carried  oflE  from 
Lancaster,  Massachusetts,  where  her  husband  was  pastor. 
Some  time  after  her  return  she  wrote  an  account  of  her 
adventures,  which  was  published  in  1682.  It  is  a  plain, 
pointed  narrative,  showing  keen  observation,  and  revealing 
the  personality  of  the  author  almost  as  plainly  as  the  manners 
of  the  savages. 

Probably  the  most  notable  personal  account  growing  out 
of  the  hostilities  between  1702  and  1713  is  The  Redeemed 

Captive  Returning  to  Zion,  or  A  faithful 
history  of  Remarkable  Occurrences  in  the 
Captivity  and  Deliverance  of  Mr.  John  Williams,  minister 
of  the  gospel  of  Deerfield,  who  in  the  desolation  which  hefel 
that  plantation  by  a  incursion  of  the  French  and  Indians, 
was  by  them  carried  away,  with  his  family  and  his  neighbor- 
hood, into  Canada.  The  occurrence  referred  to  on  this 
descriptive  titlepage  took  place  February  29,  1704.  The 
author  of  the  account  was  born  at  Eoxbury,  Massachusetts, 
was  graduated  at  Harvard,  and  except  during  the  year  of  his 


60  Ahebican  Ltteratubb 

captivity  and  a  short  time  thereafter  was  pastor  of  the 
church  at  Deerfield  from  1688  until  his  death  in  1729. 

The  capture  of  the  inhabitants  of  Deerfield  was  one  of  the 
most  serious  and  horrible  events  of  the  long  war.  At  first 
the  author  relates  in  detail  the  brutal  murders  of  women  and 
children  who^  on  the  march  to  Canada^  became  exhausted 
and  a  burden  to  their  captors ;  but  after  his  wife  had  suffered 
this  fate,  and  the  number  of  victims  increased,  he  writes 
more  briefly.  For  example:  "On  Saturday  (March  4)  the 
journey  was  long  and  tedious;  we  travelled  with  such  speed 
that  four  women  were  tired,  and  then  slain  by  them  who  led 
them  captive.'*  Through  all  these  hardships  the  author  sees  a 
special  providence  of  God  in  every  escape,  and  a  just  affliction 
of  God  in  every  case  of  murder  or  torture.  When  he  arrives 
at  Quebec,  his  chief  hostility  seems  to  be  directed,  not  against 
the  Indians  for  their  barbarity,  but  against  the  Jesuits,  who, 
though  according  to  his  account  they  were  humane,  attempted 
to  convert  the  captives  to  Eomanism. 

>   These  narratives  of  captivity  among  the  Indians  had  an 
especial  importance  in  an  age  when  all  fiction  was  forbidden. 

Though  they  were  usually  written  or  at  least 
Fktion        *^'      vouched  for  by  ministers,  and  always  avowed 

•  religious  edification  as  their  purpose,  they 
abounded  in  thrilling  adventures  and  hairbreadth  escapes, 
and  they  were  the  New  England  boy's  only  equivalent  for 
the  Wild  West  stories  that  have  charmed  recent  generations. 
In  some  of  those  of  later  date,  though  the  truth  of  the  story 
is  always  asserted  and  the  moral  purpose  is  always  avowed, 
the  facts  are  evidently  colored  for  effect.  In  spirit,  at  least,  a 
connection  may  be  traced  between  these  narratives  and  the 
nineteenth  century  romances  in  the  manner  of  Cooper. 

Besides  the  many  histories  and  journals  growing  out  of 
the  Indian  wars  there  were  also  produced  a  few  general  his- 
torical works.    The  most  famous  of  these.  Cotton  Mather's 


The  Colonial  Timb  61 

Magnolia,  or  the  Ecclesiastical  History  of  New  England,  will 
be  noticed  in  connection  with  other  writings  by  the  same 

author.  Probably  the  most  scholarly  piece  of 
O^iml  ffisto-  historical  work  done  in  New  England  during 
p^^        i        the  eighteenth  century  was  Thomas  Prince's 

Chronological  History  of  New  England  in 
the  form  of  Annals.  Thomas  Prince  (1687-1758)  was  born 
at  Sandwich^  Massachusetts^  and  was  graduated  from  Harvard 
in  1707.  After  two  years  spent  probably  in  the  study  of 
theology  he  went  to  England,  where  he  travelled,  preached, 
and  made  a  reputation  that  reached  back  to  his  colonial 
home.  In  1717  he  returned  to  Boston,  and  a  year  later 
became  pastor  of  the  Old  South  Church,  which  position  he 
held  until  his  death.  His  attention  was  early  turned  to  his- 
torical studies,  and  soon  after  he  became  pastor  he  began  to 
collect  the  famous  library  which  he  presented  to  his  church, 
and  which  still  bears  his  name.  The  duties  of  his  pastorate 
left  him  little  time  for  outside  studies,  however,  and  it  was 
not  until  1736  that  the  first  volume  of  his  history  was  pub- 
lished. This  did  not  meet  with  the  reception  that  it  deserved, 
and  it  was  not  until  1754  and  1755  that  three  pamphlet  parts 
of  Volume  II  appeared.  The  last  of  these  ends  abruptly  in 
the  middle  of  a  sentence  describing  the  events  of  August  5, 
1633.  It  is  probable  that  several  more  parts,  perhaps  all  of 
the  second  volume,  were  completed,  but  public  interest  in 
the  work  did  not  encourage  their  publication,  and  no  trace 
of  them  remains. 

As  was  usual  with  early  historians,  Prince  felt  it  necessary 
to  begin  with  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  more  than  half 

of  his  first  volume  is  occupied  in  bringing  the 

k^Mlt^**^'"   c^^^^^cle  ^^  16^^>  ^^en  New  England  his- 
tory really  begins.     The  preparation  of  this 

early    chronology    from    the    confused    mass    of    historical 

fables  that  were  then  believed  was  a  long  and  troublesome 


62  AmEMCAK   LltEftAfURfi 

task  for  a  man  with  Princess  love  of  accuracy,  and  he  wasted 
upon  it  much  time  that  he  might  profitably  have  expended 
upon  the  valuable  manuscripts  and  records  that  he  had  col- 
lected. The  real  value  of  that  part  of  the  history  that  treats 
I  of  New  England  comes  from  the  exactness  and  scholarly  care 
with  which  the  author  has  verified  every  statement  and  tried 
to  reconcile  every  apparent  contradiction.  In  his  preface  he 
gives  a  long  list  of  manuscript  authorities  to  which  he  had 
access,  many  of  which  are  now  lost.  These  he  cites  con- 
tinually, not  only  referring  to  his  authority,  but  wherever 
possible  giving  the  exact  words  of  the  original.  Like  most 
historical  works  in  strictly  chronological  form.  Princess  his- 
'  tory  is  dry  and  uninteresting  to  the  general  reader.  To  the 
student  of  history  it  is,  however,  of  great  value;  and  it  is 
significant  as  showing  how  far  the  historical  sense,  first  seen 
in  Bradford  and  Winthrop,  developed  during  the  colonial 
time.  When  Princess  opportunities  are  considered  he  may 
well  be  placed  in  the  list  with  those  later  New  Englanders 
who  have  won  marked  distinction  for  historical  scholarship. 
Thomas  Hutchinson  (1711-1780),  the  last  royal  governor 
of  Massachusetts,  is  best  remembered  for  the  part  he  took 

in  the  events  leading  to  the  Eevolution,  but 

„  ^"1^  his  relations  as  an  historian  are  rather  with 

Htttchiiuon 

the  colonial  than  with  the  revolutionary  epoch. 
He  was  bom  in  Boston  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard,  and 
entered  on  a  business  and  political  career  that  lasted  nearly 
half  a  century.  He  was  inclined  to  the  collection  of  histor- 
ical documents,  as  he  tells  us,  by  ''the  repeated  destruction 
of  ancient  records  and  papers  in  the  town  of  Boston.'*  His 
attention  was  turned  mainly  to  the  history  of  Massachusetts 
Bay,  though  in  an  appendix  to  his  second  volume  he  gives 
a  summary  of  events  in  Plymouth.  The  first  volume  of  his 
History  of  the  Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  which  ap- 
peared in  1764,  covered  the  period  from  the  first  settlement 


The  Colonial  Time  63 

of  the  colony  until  1691.  The  second  volume,  published  in 
1767,  brought  the  narrative  to  1760.  Before  this  volume  was 
given  to  the  press  the  trouble  between  Massachusetts  and  the 
mother  country  had  assumed  a  serious  form.  Hutchinson 
was  inclined,  both  by  temperament  and  by  oflScial  position, 
to  be  a  conservative,  and  he  soon  incurred  the  displeasure  of 
the  radical  patriots.  In  August,  1765,  his  house  was  raided 
by  a  mob,  and  many  of  his  manuscripts  were  lost  or 
destroyed.  That  of  the  second  volume  of  the  History  was 
rescued  from  the  streets  where  it  had  been  thrown. 

Hutchinson  edited  and  published  in  1769  A  Collection  of 
Original  Papers  relative  to  the  History  of  the  Colony  of 
Massachusetts  Bay,  In  1774  he  went  to  England,  where  he 
died  in  1780.  In  these  last  years  of  his  life  he  wrote  a  third 
volume  of  his  History,  which  remained  in  manuscript  until 
1828.  His  treatment  of  the  later  years  of  the  colonies, 
though  as  fair  as  could  be  expected,  is  colored  by  his  views  of 
the  great  controversies  still  imsettled  at  the  time  of  his  death. 
The  earlier  part,  written  before  the  seriousness  of  the  coming 
struggle  was  recognized,  is  scholarly  and  judicial  in  tone. 

A  few  lesser  historical  writers  are  of  some  interest  to  the 
student  of  literature.     William  Hubbard^  having  made  a 

beginning  as  an  historian  in  his  narrative 
^tokofl  ^'  ^^^  Indian  wars,  wrote  A  General  History 

of  New  England  from  the  Discovery  to  1680. 
This  extended  work,  which  remained  in  manuscript  until 
1815,  shows  a  considerable  amount  of  research,  but  follows 
for  the  earlier  years  a  few  other  authorities  very  closely. 
One  of  the  most  interesting  chapters  is  that  on  '^Memorable 
occurrences  and  sad  accidents  that  happened  in  Kew  England 
from  1666  to  1682*' — an  account  that  shows  the  feeling 
toward  the  marvellous  that  existed  a  few  years  before  the 
witchcraft  excitement.  About  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century  William  Doujiplass  (1691P-1762),  a  Scottish  physi- 


64  Ambrioan  Litbratubb 

ciaiiy  settled  in  Boston^  published  A  Summary,  Historical  and 
Political,  of  the  First  Planting,  Progressive  Improvements, 
and  Present  State  of  the  British  Settlements  in  North 
America.  This  discursive  work  in  two  volumes  was  quickly 
republished  in  London,  and  attracted  much  attention.  It 
begins  with  "Some  general  account  of  ancient  and  modem 
colonies/^  and  when  it  finally  reaches  America  treats  of  the 
entire  continent  from  Hudson^s  Bay  as  far  south  as  the 
English  had  planted  settlements.  In  order  to  make  his  work 
more  readable  the  author  introduces  digressions  on  all  kinds 
of  subjects  from  whaling  to  the  small-pox.  He  is  also  free 
in  the  expression  of  his  own  opinions,  particularly  on  matters 
in  any  way  connected  with  his  profession.  His  diagnosis  of 
the  witchcraft  mania  is  especially  interesting,  as  is  the  added 
remark :  "The  pourings  out  of  the  Spirit,  which  have  at  times 
been  epidemick  in  Northampton  upon  the  Connecticut  river 
belong  to  this  tribe  of  nervous  disorders.'*  The  book  con- 
tains lists  of  salaries,  details  of  public  defenses,  of  manu- 
factures, etc.,  and  other  general  information  for  which  later 
historians  should  be  thankful;  but  it  is  itself  lacking  in 
the  system  and  proportion  needful  in  a  true  history. 
Among  the  many  histories  of  Indian  troubles  was  that  of 
Samuel  Penhallow  (1665-1726),  which  covered  the  wars  of 
1703-13,  and  1722-25.  This  is  characterized  by  a  display  of 
extreme  vindictiveness  toward  the  Indians — a  spirit  the  more 
noticeable  because  the  author  in  his  earlier  years  began  a 
study  of  the  native  languages  with  the  intention  of  serving 
as  a  missionary.  Samuel  Niles  (1674-1762)  left  an  incom- 
plete  history  of  the  Indian  wars  from  1634  to  1760.  He  was  a 
clergyman,  and  frequently  pauses  in  his  narrative  to  draw  a 
lesson. 

The  journals  and  contemporary  records  of  the  second 
colonial  period,  though  hardly  as  picturesque  as  those  of  the 
first,  are  of  value  to  the  later  historian.    The  most  important 


The  Colonial  Time  65 

diarist  of  the  time  was  Samuel  Sewall  (1652-173Q).    Both 
the  paternal  and  the  maternal  grandfathers  of  Judge  Sewall 

were  early  immigrants  to  Massachusetts^  but 
Journals  and  owing  to  some  considerations  of  health  his 
uel  Sewall     "     parents  went  to  England^  where  he  was  bom 

in  1652.  When  he  was  about  nine  years  of 
age  the  family  returned  to  New  England.  Samuel  Sewall  was 
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1671,  and  became  a  resident 
fellow,  and  afterward  keeper  of  the  college  library.  He 
studied  divinity  and  began  to  preach,  but  abandoned  the 
ministry  for  business  and  politics.  For  three  years  he  was 
censor  of  the  printing-press  at  Boston.  In  1692  he  became 
member  of  the  council  and  judge  of  the  probate  court.  As 
such  he  played  a  prominent  part  in  the  trials  for  witchcraft 
at  Salem,  but  later  became  convinced  of  his  error,  and  made 
a  public  statement  of  repentance — an  act  that  cost  him  the 
friendship  of  the  Mathers  and  other  influential  associates 
who  refused  to  acknowledge  that  they  had  made  a  mistake. 
Besides  the  Diary  he  wrote  The  Selling  of  Joseph^  usually 
spoken  of  as  the  first  anti-slavery  tract  in  America  and  sev^ 
eral  other  pamphlets  on  religious  and  politifial  qnftfitioT^p. 

Judge  Sewairs  Diary,  the  best  authority  extant  on  the 

details  of  colonial  life  and  customs  during  the  last  of  the 

,  _^        seventeenth  and  the  first  of  the  eighteenth 

centuries,  was  begun  in  1673,  when  the  writer 
was  a  resident  fellow  at  Harvard,  and  continued  until  1729, 
one  year  before  his  death.  In  the  earlier  part  we  find  the 
news  of  the  day,  trivial  matters  of  personal  interest,  and 
details  of  the  government  of  Harvard: 

Mar.  23.    I  had  my  hair  cut  by  G.  Barret 

•  •  .  •  . 

June  15.  Thomas  Sargeant  was  examined  by  the  Corporation: 
finaUy,  the  advice  of  Mr.  Danforth,  Mr.  Stoughton,  Mr.  Thatcher, 
Mr.  Mather,  (then  present)  was  taken.    This  was  his  sentence. 

That  beinij^  convicted,  of  speaking  blasphemous  words  concerning 


66  Ahebigan  Lttbratube 

the  H.  G.  he  should  be  therefore  publickly  whipped  before  all  the 
Scholars.  2.  That  he  should  be  suspended  as  to  taking  his  degree 
of  Bachelour  (this  sentence  read  before  him  twice  at  the  Prts. 
before  the  committee,  and  in  the  hall  1  up  before  execution).  8.  Sit 
alone  by  himself  in  the  Hall  uncovered  at  meals,  during  the  pleasure 
of  the  President  and  Fellows,  and  be  in  all  things  obedient,  doing 
what  exercise  was  appointed  him  by  the  President,  or  else  be  finally 
expelled  the  Golledge.  The  first  was  presently  put  in  execution  in 
the  Library  (Mr.  Danforth,  Jr.  being  present)  before  the  Scholars. 
He  kneeled  down  and  the  instrument  Goodman  Hely  attended  the 
President's  word  as  to  the  performance  of  his  part  of  the  work« 
Prayer  was  had  before  and  after  by  the  President 

In  later  years  matters  of  personal  concern  occupy  a  large 
place^  and  we  read  with  interest^  though  with  a  half-feeling 
of  prying  into  another's  affairs^  the  record  of  the  courtships 
which  preceded  his  second  and  third  marriages^  and  espe- 
cially of  the  unsuccessful  wooing  of  Madam  Katherine  Win- 
throp.  Mixed  with  the  record  of  such  matters  are  accounts 
of  graver  affairs  of  church  and  state.  Wherever  the  reader 
opens  the  three  heavy  volumes  of  the  Massachusetts  Histor- 
ical Society  Collections  that  contain  this  diary  he  is  likely  to 
find  something  of  interest,  and  to  learn  something  worth 
knowing  regarding  the  manners  of  the  time  or  the  delightful 
personality  of  the  author. 

A  journal  written  in  a  much  more  self  conscious  tone  than 
that  of  Sewall  is  Mrs.  Sarah  Kemble  Knight's  brief  ac- 
count of  her  trip  from  Boston  to  New  Haven 
^^Kemble     ^^^  jfew  York  in  1704.     This  is  a  shrewd 

and  minute  description  of  the  experiences  of 
a  traveller  at  that  time,  and  lays  chief  stress  on  the  incon- 
veniences of  the  road.    It  was  not  published  until  1825. 

During  almost  the  entire  colonial  time  in  New  England  a 
great  part  of  the  writings  of  all  kinds  was  produced  by  the 

clergy.  Though  popular  education  was  gen- 
SySSSter!?       erally  diffused,  indeed  almost  universal,  nearly 

every  man  who  had  the  benefit  of  college 
training  entered  the  ministry.    This  was  owing  partly  to  tho 


Tffiffi  CotOOTAL  TiMfi  6? 

religious  tone  of  the  commonwealth,  partly  to  the  fact  that 
the  clergy  assumed  many  of  the  duties  that  naturally  belong 
to  other  professions.    They  took  part,  both  as  advocates  and 
as  arbiters,  in  the  settlement  of  disputes;  so  that  no  need 
was  found  for  the  services  of  lawyers.     There  is  no  record 
of  a  professional  barrister  in  Massachusetts  before   1688, 
and  long  after  that  lawyers  were  few,  and  their  calling  was  in  { 
rather  ill  repute.    Medicine  was  generally  on  an  unscientific 
basis,  and  many  of  the  more  reputable  practitioners  were 
clergymen  who  made  the  curing  of  bodies  incidental  to  the  j 
saving  of  souls.    Education,  beyond  the  elementary  instruc-  I 
tion  supplied  by  dame  schools,  was  also  in  the  hands  of  the  [ 
ministers.     Even  down  to   the  nineteenth  century  it  was 
customary  for  boys  to  prepare  for  college  under  the  instruc- 
tion of  some  scholarly  clergyman. 

It  was  natural  that  a  body  of  men  who  had  so  nearly  a 
monopoly  of  the  intellectual  callings  should  have  almost  a 
monopoly  of  authorship.  The  majority  of  the  historians 
were  clergymen.  The  same  will  be  found  true  of  the  writers 
of  verse.  Naturally,  however,  the  great  bulk  of  the  writings 
which  the  members  of  the  clerical  profession  published  had 
to  do  with  theology  or  the  then  closely  related  subjects  of 
philosophy  and  statecraft.  Works  of  this  kind  merit  con- 
sideration by  themselves. 

The  closing  years  of  the  seventeenth  and  the  first  half  of 
the  eighteenth jienturies  saw  a  change  in  the.  relation  of  the 

ministers  to  the  people  thgjt.ftmnUTltftd  aJmoal. 
The  Clerical        to  a  revolutxoEL    For  the  first  two  generations 
Threatened  ^  ^^^  England  the  power  of  the  clergy  was, 

as  has  been  seen,  practically  absolute.  The 
decline  of  this  clerical  power  was  brought  about  by  a  number 
of  causes,  economic,  theological,  and  political.  The  material 
prosperity  of  the  colonists  had  the  effect  of  turning  their 
minds  to  this  world,  rather  than  to  the  world  to  come;  there 


68  American  Literatubs 

was  some  truth  in  the  continued  complaints  of  the  clergy  that 
the  people  were  less  devout  than  their  forefathers.  The  theo- 
logical position  of  the  leading  New  England  churches  was 
attacked  from  various  sides.  Early  in  the  eighteenth  century 
there  began  to  be  felt  a  philosophical  liberalism  that  resulted^ 
long  after,  in  the  Unitarian  schism.  The  emotional  revivals 
of  Whitefield,  Edwards,  and  others  about  1740  tended  in 
another  way  to  disturb  the  sedateness  of  the  older  church. 
More  clearly  recognized  as  a  danger  was  the  movement  to 
introduce  the  established  church  of  England — a  movement 
that  found  favor  with  the  partizans  of  the  royal  governors. 

The  political  power  of  the  clergy  waned  as  the  relations 
of  the  colonists  to  the  mother  country  becamfe  more  promi- 
nent. With  the  withdrawal  of  the  charters  in  1684-6  the 
old  order  of  things  was  broken  up;  and  when  in  1691 
Increase  Mather  secured  a  new  charter  for  Massachusetts  it 
conferred  suffrage  not  for  church  membership,  but  on  the 
basis  of  a  property  qualification.  From  this  time  the  churches 
as  churches,  and  their  pastors  as  their  representatives,  had 
less  and  less  to  say  in  matters  of  government.  No  one 
recognized  this  change  more  than  the  ministers  themselves. 
Among  the  writings  of  the  time  none  are  of  more  interest 
than  those  which  represent  the  fight  in  favor  of  the  old  time 
prerogatives — ^a  fight  which  from  the  very  constitution  of 
the  colonies  was  hopeless. 

Of  all  the  influential  ministers  of  New  England  during 
the  last  century  of  the  colonial  time,  the  three  who  stand 
out  most  prominently  are  Increase  and  Cotton  Mather  and 
Jonathan  Edwards. 

The  Mathers  were  for  nearly  fifty  years  the  most  conspic- 
uous supporters  of  the  old  church  party.  Increase,  the  son 
mi.   «»  ^t.  of  Eichard  Mather,  who  has  been  mentioned 

as  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Bay  Psalm  Booh, 
was  bom  at  Dorchester,  Massachusetts,  in  1639,  and  died  in 


The  Colonial  Time  69 

Boston  in  1723.    His  son  Cotton  was  bom  in  1663.  and_-difld, 
in  1728.     So  much  of  the  work  of  father  and  son  was  con- 


temporary that  it  will  be  convenient  to  treat  of  the  two 
together. 

Increase  Mather  entered  Harvard  college  at  twelve  years 
of  age,  but  after  a  year  his  parents,  fearing  for  his  health, 

^,  ^  removed  him  and  placed  him  under  the  tutor- 
Increase  Mather  ^  » 
)C3^—  Il>i  ^^^P  ^^  ^^^  Eeverend  John  Norton  for  some- 
thing over  a  year.  He  took  his  degree  in  1656,  at  the  age  of 
seventeen,  presenting  as  his  graduating  disputation  an  attack 
on  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle.  About  a  year  later  he  went 
abroad,  took  the  Master's  degree  at  Trinity  college,  Dublin, 
spent  some  time  in  London,  and  preached  in  various  parts 
of  England  and  on  the  island  of  Guernsey.  In  1661,  driven 
out  by  the  act  of  conformity,  he  returned  to  America.  At 
first  he  preached  alternately  in  his  father^s  church  at  Dor- 
chester and  in  thej^orth  Church  at  Boston..  In  March,  1662, 
he  married  his  stepsister,  the  daiighter  of  J^ohn  Cotton,  thus 
uniting  two  of  the  most  distinguished  clerical  families  of 
New  England.  In  February,  1663,  his  son  Cotton  was  born. 
The  next  year  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  North  Church, 
Boston. 

To  write  his  biography  for  the  next  half-century  would 
be  to  recount  much  of  the  history  of  the  colony.    For  more 

than  thirty  years  he  was  the  leading  spirit 
ne  Leading  ^f  Massachusetts  in  matters  political,  reli- 
Massachttsetts      gi^us,  and  educational;  and  even  after  the 

decline  of  his  power,  he  and  his  son  were 
leaders  and  spokesmen  for  a  minority  too  strong  and  too 
active  to  be  ignored.  In  1679  he  was  moderator  of  the  ^Tte- 
forming  Synod^'  of  New  England  churches,  called  to  con- 
sider the  evil  ways  of  New  England,  which,  in  the  opinion 
of  the  members,  had  brought  upon  the  colonies  the  judg- 
ment of  God  in  the  shape  of  Indian  wars  and  threatened 


70  Akericak  Litbratubb 

political  calamities.  In  1681  he  was  tendered  the  presidency 
of  Harvard^  but  declined.  Two  years  later  he  opposed  sub- 
mission to  the  demand  of  Charles  II  that  the  charter  be  given 
]up.  In  1686  he  accepted  the  presidency  of  Harvard.  Early 
in  1688  he  was  sent  to  England  with  an  address  to  the  king. 
His  mission  was  to  secure  the  restoration  of  the  old  charter 
of  Massachusetts;  but  failing  in  this  before  the  Bevolution^ 
and  finding  it  impossible  under  William  and  Mary^  he  devoted 
himself  to  securing  a  new  charter  on  the  most  favorable  terms 
possible.  This  course  made  Mather  some  enemies^  especially 
as  the  officers  under  the  new  government  were  chosen  by  him. 
But  for  a  time  his  party  was  in  the  ascendancy^  and  he  was 
apparently  the  most  powerful  political  force^  as  well  as  the 
most  distinguished  clergyman  in  New  England. 

Meanwhile  Cotton  Mather  had  been  graduated  from  Har- 
vard at  the  age  of  fifteen,  had  begun  the  study  of  medicine, 

abandoned  this  for  the  ministry,  been  called 
Sr^lla^mi        *^   assist  his  father,   and  had  married  the 

daughter  of  Colonel  Phillips.  Prom  this 
time  on  he  and  his  father  worked  side  by  side.  Signs  of 
revolt  against  their  dominion  soon  appeared.  Later  gov- 
ernors paid  less  and  less  attention  to  their  counsels ;  advocates 
of  a  more  liberal  theology  established  a  rival  church  in 
Boston,  and  to  their  still  greater  annoyance  secured  control 
of  Harvard  college.  Increase  Mather,  who  had  been  presi- 
dent of  the  college  while  living  in  Boston  and  serving  as 
pastor  of  his  church,  was  legislated  out  of  office  by  the  adop- 
tion of  a  resolution  that  the  president  must  reside  at  Cam- 
bridge. Later  the  presidency  was  conferred  upon  Leverett, 
the  pastor  of  the  Brattle  street  church,  which  had  been 
organized  in  opposition  to  the  Mathers;  and  on  his  death 
the  corporation  chose  in  succession  three  other  ministers, 
passing  by  Cotton  Mather^  whose  chagrin  is  frankly  expressed 
in  his  diary. 


The  Colonial  Time  71 

The  champion  of  a  losing  cause  is  always  unpopular.    The 
unpopularity  of  the  Mathers  was  greatly  intensified  by  the 

part  which  they,  or  at  least  the  younger,  took 
^TtctoS?*        ^  *^®  persecutions  at  Salem  for  witchcraft. 

To  what  extent  they  were  morally  culpable 
for  their  part  in  this  affair  is  a  matter  of  dispute.  Like  most 
of  their  contemporaries  in  England  and  America  they  be- 
lieved in  the  possibility  of  witchcraft.  They  also  believed 
that  the  loss  of  religious  intensity  and  the  tendency  to 
disregard  the  leadership  of  the  ministers  were  signs  of  appall- 
ing degeneration,  and  deserved  divine  punishment.  The 
Lord  had  already  sent  Indian  wars  and  political  troubles 
without  effect ;  it  would  not  be  strange  if  as  a  more  terrible 
affliction  he  allowed  the  Devil  to  work  for  a  time  unmolested 
in  New  England.  Probably  both  men  were  sincere  in  the 
belief  that  this  was  the  true  analysis  of  the  state  of  affairs, 
but  they  may  have  been  the  more  ready  to  believe  because 
the  existence  of  this  mysterious  horror  could  be  used  as  a 
telling  argument  in  support  of  their  position.  Cotton 
Mather  was  especially  active  in  the  trials  at  Salem,  and  in 
the  revulsion  of  feeling  that  followed,  no  one  among  the 
persecutors  suffered  more  in  reputation  than  he.  Some  years 
later  he  incurred  the  popular  hatred  for  an  action  which  is 
now  approved  even  by  those  who  dislike  him  most — ^his  fear- 
less advocacy  of  inoculation  for  the  smallpox. 

In  character.  Increase  Mather  seems  to  have  been  the  saner 
and  more  practical  of  the  two.     Although  he  was  a  bom 

autocrat,  and  a  man  of  intense  likes  and  dis- 
SS*"i^A  lilacs*  l^e  was  something  of  a  diplomat,  who 
Compax^d  knew  how  to  meet  men,  and,  while  he  kept 

control  of  his  temper,  how  to  use  them  for  his 
purposes.    Probably  few  men  in  the  colony  could  have  done 
better  service  in  connection  with  the  charter  than  he  did. 
In  pure  intellectual  ability  Cotton  Mather  was  superior 


72  American  Litebatube 

to  his  father.  He  was  a  wider  reader^  a  more  volaminous 
writer^  possibly  a  more  astute  theologian.  But  certain  weak- 
nesses of  his  character^  intensified  by  his  trainings  made  him 
a  less  admirable^  probably  a  less  useful  man.  His  position 
as  the  son  of  the  leading  New  England  divine^  and  his  own 
precocity  insured  him  a  degree  of  admiration  not  conducive 
to  modesty;  and  unlike  his  father  he  never  enjoyed  the  cor- 
rective influence  of  travel  and  contact  with  the  great  world. 
He  well  knew  the  extent  of  his  intellectual  acquirements,  and 
in  spite  of  constant  expressions  of  humility  it  is  impossible 
not  to  feel  his  pride.  His  temper  was  vindictive,  and  not 
always  under  control.  He  lived  a  life  of  the  strictest  Puritan 
asceticism,  from  the  time  when  as  a  child  he  indulged  in 
secret  prayer  and  composed  forms  of  prayer  for  his  play- 
mates, to  his  old  age  when  some  of  his  fasts  were  of  three 
days^  duration.  His  life  cannot  be  understood  without  bear- 
ing in  mind  his  constant  fasts  and  vigils,  his  habit  of  intro- 
spection, and  of  seeing  moral  lessons  in  the  most  trivial  acts  of 
life.  Such  a  man  is  not  likely  to  have  the  broad  Christian 
sympathy  which  draws  others  to  him.  Certainly  Cotton 
Mather  did  not.  In  his  old  age  he  was  forced  to  endure  many 
disappointments.  His  aspirations  for  the  presidency  of 
Harvard  college  were  thwarted.  Many  members  of  his  church 
deserted  him.  The  very  boys  of  Boston  taunted  him  with 
ribald  songs.  Within  his  own  home  he  saw  the  death  of  two 
of  his  three  wives  and  thirteen  of  his  fifteen  children.  His 
third  wife  became  hopelessly  insane.  His  oldest  and  dearest 
son  became  a  wretched  profligate.  Yet  there  was  something 
about  his  personality  which  prevents  even  these  tragic  expe- 
riences from  arousing  the  sympathy  that  they  might. 

In  literary  style  father  and  son  differed  much  as  they  dif- 
fered in  temperament.  Increase,  while  not  free  from  ped- 
antry, usually  wrote  clearly  and  to  the  point  The  works  of 
Cotton  show  the  extremes  which  the  fantastic  method  reached 


The  Colonial  Time  73 

in  New  England.  His  writings  abound  in  pedantic  words, 
odd  conceits,  far-fetched  ullusions,  and  artificially  constructed 

sentences.     A  fair  idea  of  the  difEerence  in 

U^rr^Style       ^^^®  ^'  *^^  *^®  °^®^  ^^^  ^®  gained  by  com- 
paring the  letters  which  they  wrote  to  Governor 

Dudley  in  1708.  These  letters,  which  express  an  indigna- 
tion that  got  the  better  of  their  good  sense,  might  be 
expected  to  show  the  natural  style  of  the  authors.  The  open- 
ing of  each  will  serve  as  an  example.  The  first  is  from 
Increase: 

That  I  have  had  a  singular  respect  for  you,  the  Lord  knows;  but 
that  since  your  arrival  to  the  goyemment,  my  charitable  expecta- 
tions have  been  greatly  disappointed,  I  may  not  deny.  Without  any 
further  preface  or  compliments,  I  think  it  my  duty  freely  and  faith- 
fuUy  to  let  you  understand  what  my  sad  fears  concerning  you  are. 

1st.  I  am  afraid  you  cannot  dear  yourself  from  the  guilt  of 
bribery  and  unrighteousness:  For  you  to  declare  to  Mr.  Newton, 
that  he  should  not  do  what  his  office  as  judge  in  the  admiralty  obliged 
him  unto,  unless  he  would  give  you  an  hundred  pounds,  was  surely 
a  sin  of  tliat  nature.  And  for  you  not  to  consent  that  some,  whose 
titles  to  their  land  the  general  Assembly  had  confirmed,  should  enjoy 
their  right,  except  they  would  give  you  a  sum  of  money,  is  unright- 
eousness. 

Cotton  Mather  wrote  as  follows : 

There  have  appeared  such  things  in  your  conduct,  that  a  just  con- 
cern for  the  welfare  of  your  Excellency  seems  to  render  it  necessary, 
that  you  should  be  faithfully  advised  of  them.  It  was  not  without 
a  design  to  introduce  and  exercise  this  faithfulness,  that  I  have  in 
divers  letters  to  your  Excellency,  sought  out  acceptable  words f  and 
acknowledged  every  thing  in  the  world,  that  might  at  all  dispose  you 
to  give  me  the  hearing.  In  some  of  those  letters,  I  have  indeed,  with 
the  language  of  the  tribe  of  Naphiali,  insinuated  unto  you,  what 
those  points  were,  wherein  I  earnestly  desired  that  we  might  ob- 
serve and  confess  you  laudahle.  And  I  still  imagined  that  you  would 
at  the  same  time  understand  my  apprehension  of  there  being  points, 
-wherein  you  were  too  defective. 

The  amount  of  literary  work  put  forth  by  these  two  men 
is  enormous.  Increase  Mather  is  credited  with  almost  one 
htmdred  and  fifty  published  works.     The  list  of  Cotton 


74  AUBfilCAK  LiTBRATUBS 

Mather's  writings  appended  to  his  Life  by  his  son  Samuel 
indudes  three  hundred  and  eighty-three  titles^  and  this,  later 
scholars  tell  ns,  is  incomplete. 

Probably  the  most  notable  work  of  Increase  Mather,  from 
the  stand-point  of  to-day,  is  his  Essay  for  the  Recording  of. 

Illustrioiis  Providences,  This  book,  pub- 
J?^*"?  lished  in  1684,  is  a  collection  of  marvellous 

Writinn  stories  of  divine  intervention,  some  of  which 

were  contained  in  an  earlier  manuscript  sent 
from  England,  and  some  contributed  by  ISTew  England  clergy- 
men. Mather  was  rather  the  editor  than  the  author.  The 
stories  are  many  of  them  well  enough  told  to  be  readable  to- 
day, and  they  derive  some  interest  from  their  bearing  on  the 
witchcraft  delusions  of  a  decade  later.  The  greater  number 
of  Increase  Mather's  publications  are  of  course  sermons. 
Bepresentative  titles  are  ^^Important  Truths  about  Conver- 
sion," *'An  Arrow  against  Profane  and  Promiscuous  Dances," 
"The  Eevolution  Justified"  (1690),  "The  Voice  of  God  in 
Stormy  Winds." 

Of  Cotton  Mather's  four  hundred  works  the  largest  and 
best   known  is   the  Magnolia  Christi  Americana,   or   The 

Ecclesiastical  History  of  New  England,  pub- 
^^^?J;^^» 'lished  in  London  jn'  1702.  This  history 
ifagnyii^  covers  the  period  from  the  earliest  times  to 

the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  is 
divided  into  seven  books.  The  first  treats  of  the  settlement 
and  discovery  of  the  country;  the  second  gives  the  lives  of 
the  governors;  the  third  the  lives  of  sixty  famous  divines 
of  the  colonies ;  the  fourth  contains  the  history  of  Harvard 
college;  the  fifth  treats  of  the  "acts  and  monuments  of  the 
faith  and  order  in  the  churches  of  New  England";  the  sixth 
is  a  record  of  illustrious  providences;  and  the  seventh,  en- 
titled "The  Wars  of  the  Lord,"  tells  of  the  afflictions  and  dis- 
turbances of  the  churches.    This  massive  work,  which  Mather 


The  Colonial  Time  75 


himself  considered  his  most  important  production,  is  a  mine 
of  not  very  reliable  information  for  the  student  of  our  early 
history,  and  an  excellent  illustration  of  the  way  in  which 
that  history  was  viewed  by  an  ultra-orthodox  New  England 
clergyman.    Both  style  and  plan  show  the  author's  pedantry, 

\  and  his  fondness  for  an3rthing  but  the  natural  manner  of 

expression.    Notwithstanding  its  defects,  however,  the  Mag* 

'  nalia  exerts  a  sort  of  fascination  on  the  reader,  particularly 

in  the  more  direct  passages,  like  the  accounts  of  witchcraft 

J  and  the  Life  of  Sir  William  Phips. 

!  Another  work  of  Cotton  Mather's,  the  memory  of  which 

has  been  preserved  to  us  by  the  complimentary  notice  of 

Franklin  in  his  Autobiography,  is  Bonif actus, 

Len^W 'tines   ^^  Essay  upon  the  Oood  that  is  to  be  Devised 

and  Designed,  etc. — commonly  known  by  the 
abbreviated  title  of  Essavs  to  do  Oood.  This  shows  the  prac- 
tical, common-sense  side  of  the  author's  mind.  Still  another 
book,  the  interest  in  which  comes  more  from  subject-matter 
than  from  method  of  treatment,  is  The  Wonders  of  the  Invis- 
ible  World,  in  which  the  author  gives  his  opinions  upon 
witchcraft,  and  recounts  with  much  detail  some  of  the  cir- 
cumstances that  led  him  to  believe  in  the  presence  of  witches 
in  New  England.*  Among  representative  titles  of  less- 
known  and  less  important  works  are :  Balsamum  Vulnerarium 
e  Scriptura:  or  the  Cause  and  Cure  of  a  Wounded  Spirit; 
Brontologia  Sacra:  Sermons  occasioned  by  remarkable 
Thunder-Storms;  Pillars  of  Sait:  An  History  of  Criminals 
executed;  with  two  Lectures  on  Sin  punished  with  Sin; 

*  An  almoat  unique  work  of  some  intenet  to  the  studoit  of  histozy  ia  Man 
Wonders  of  the  InviaMe  Worlds  published  in  London  by  Robert  Calef .  a  hardheaded 
Boeton  merchant,  in  1700.  This  reply  to  Cotton  Mather's  Wonders  of  ihe  InvteiUe 
World  contains  a  jumble  of  arguments  against  witchcraft,  accounts  of  the  recent 
manifestations  at  Salem  as  seen  by  an  unbeliever,  and  attacks  on  the  Mathers, 
especially  Cotton.  It  probably  owes  part  of  its  fame  to  the  melodramatic  fact 
that  it  was  publicly  burned  in  Harvard  college  yard  by  order  of  President  la- 
crease  Mather. 


76  AKEBIOAN  LrrERATUEB 

Oolgotha:  A  lively  description  of  Death;  with  Memorials  of 
an  hopeful  Young  Man. 
y^    After  the  death  of  the  Mathers  the  supporters  of  strict 
Puritanism  in  America  found  their  cause  steadily  weakened 

both  by  active  opposition  and  by  popular 
AM^^Sfg  apathy.     They  were  no  longer  able  to  pun- 

ish trivial  heresies  and  offenses  against  church 
discipline  by  the  civil  law;  but  they  could  still  preach  the 
certainty  and  the  awfulness  of  a,  punishment  hereafter. 
From  this  time  there  was  an  apparent  increase  in  the  number 
of  sermons  that  pictured  the  tortures  of  the  damned.  One 
result  of  the  striving  after  a  livelier  religious  faith  was  a 
series  of  revivals  known  as  the  "Great  Awakening/'  begin- 
ning about  1740.  This  movement,  which  was  not  confined  to 
America,  sprang  from  widely  different  sources;  but  it  first 
manifested  itself  in  New  England  as  a  consequence  of  stren- 
uous exertions  on  the  part  of  those  who  still  believed  that 
without  a  return  to  the  old  spirit  the  colonies  were  hopelessly 
lost.  The  ultimate  result  of  this  revival  was  a  schism  in  the 
church ;  but  at  first  it  was  welcomed  by  most  of  the  orthodox 
as  a  special  manifestation  of  Providence. 

The  New  Englander  whose  name  is  most  prominently  asso- 
ciated with  this  revival  was  Jonathan  Edwards  ( 1703-1 758  L  a 

man  of  the  greatest  piety,  conscientiousness, 
E^rndT  *^^  delicacy  of  feeling.    A  glance  at  his  por- 

trait is  enough  to  show  that  he  was  made  of 
finer  stuff  than  most  of  his  contemporaries.  To  such  a  mind 
the  thought  of  eternal  tortures,  preached  as  his  conscience 
told  him  he  must  preach  it  to  an  apathetic  world,  could  only 
have  been  repulsive.  He  tells  us  that  he  was  repelled  by  it ; 
and  he  seems  to  have  become  reconciled  to  the  idea  only 
through  a  course  of  metaphysical  reasoning  by  which  he 
proved  to  himself  that  it  was  both  necessary  and  just.  It 
was  a  strange  result  of  the  age  that  the  man  who  had  per- 


The  Colonial  Timb  77 

haps  the  finest  poetic  sensibilities  of  any  writer  in  colonial 
New  England  produced  no  poetry,  but  on  the  one  hand  the 
greatest  American  treatise  on  metaphysical  theology,  and 
on  the  other  hand  pictures  of  eternal  torment  the  most 
graphic  and  detailed  of  the  many  that  were  painted  during 
the  reign  of  the  old  beliefs. 

Jonathan  Edwards  was  bom  in  East  Windsor,  Connecticut. 
He  came  of  a  family  which  had  been  in  New  England  since 
1640,  and  his  father  was  a  graduate  of  Harvard,  a  minister 
noted  for  more  than  usual  learning.  In  1720  he  was  grad- 
uated at  Yale  college,  which  had  come  to  be  looked  upon  as 
the  stronghold  of  orthodo3i:y,  in  opposition  to  Harvard,  which 
had  become  hopelessly  liberal.  After  receiving  his  first  de- 
gree he  remained  at  Yale  for  two  years  in  preparation  for 
the  ministry,  and  after  preaching  to  a  Presbyterian  congrega- 
tion in  New  York  for  eight  months,  he  returned  and  was 
tutor  for  two  or  three  years  more.  Early  in  1727  he  was 
settled  as  colleague  with  his  grandfather,  pastor  of  the  church 
at  Northampton. 

Jonathan  Edwards  is  said  to  have  been  unusually  preco- 
cious. As  a  boy  he  had  an  especial  liking  for  natural  science. 
It  was  in  his  early  years,  too,  that  he  showed  most  plainly 
the  poetic  capabilities  of  his  mind,  which  were  afterward 
kept  subordinate  to  his  work  as  preacher  and  theologian. 
When  fourteen  years  old  he  first  read  Locke  "On  the  Human 
Understanding,*^  and  some  writings  of  this  period  show  his 
grasp  on  metaphysics,  even  at  this  early  age.  Whether  he 
knew  Berkeley  in  the  early  part  of  his  life  is  a  matter  of 
doubt.  If  not,  he  anticipated  some  of  that  philosopher's 
conclusions. 

In  1735  occurred  the  first  of  the  revivals  in  Edwards's 
church  at  Northampton.  His  account  of  this,  published  in 
1736  and  usually  known  as  Narraiwes  of  Surprising  Conver- 
sions, probably  had  much  influence  on  similar  occurrences 


78  Ahbbioak  LmtRATcms 

elsewhere.  About  1740  came  the  first  visit  of  Whitefield,  the 
great  evangelist^  to  New  England^  and  the  ''Great  Awakening'^ 

already  referred  to.  The  history  of  this  move- 
B^^ffditnd  ment  cannot  be  given  here.  It  presents  a 
Revivals  ^^^  ^^  psychological  phenomena  second  only 

to  the  Salem  witchcraft  in  peculiar  inter- 
esty  and  the  questions  that  it  raised  regarding  the  rights 
of  itinerant  ministers  and  the  obedience  due  from  congrega- 
tion to  pastor  were  settled  in  a  way  that  changed  the  ecclesi- 
astical history  of  New  England.  Edwards  was  made  by 
temperament  and  by  circumstances  a  champion  of  the  move- 
ment,  yet  he  seems  always  to  have  been  conservative,  and  to 
have  discountenanced  both  the  excesses  of  the  meetings  and 
the  claims  of  itinerants  who  disparaged  the  regular  clergy. 

In  1750  Jonathan  Edwards  was  dismissed  from  his  pastor- 
ate at  Northampton.  It  is  impossible  now  to  explain  satis- 
factorily this  action,  which  was  then  almost 
mki^^Hn  ffifl  without  precedent  Six  years  before  he  had 
pmpfgfa  discovered  that  some  of  the  young  people  of 

his  congregation  were  reading  books  which 
tended  "to  promote  lascivious  and  obscene  discourse.'^  We 
could  understand  the  matter  better  if  we  knew  whether  the 
books  were  such  as  would  now  be  called  obscene,  or  whether, 
as  has  been  conjectured,  they  were  eighteenth  century  novels 
which  had  found  their  way  to  Northampton.  At  all  events 
the  congregation  failed  to  sustain  the  efforts  of  the  pastor  to 
discipline  the  offenders.  From  this  time  his  power  over  his 
church  declined.  The  immediate  cause  of  the  rupture  seems 
to  have  been  his  views  on  admission  to  the  Lord's  Supper, 
which  were  much  more  strict  than  those  of  his  grandfather. 
His  farewell  sermon  is  an  admirable  example  of  his  contro- 
versial style  and  of  the  plain  speaking  allowed  in  the  pulpit 
at  that  day. 

After  his  removal  from  Northampton  Edwards  settled  at 


The  Colonial  Time  79 

Stockbridge  as  missionary  to  the  Indians.  Here  he  wrote  his 
masterpiece,  usually  cited  as  the  Treatise  on  the  Freedom  of 
Jhe  Will,  in  which  he  attempted  to  reconcile  the  conflict 
between  the  thought  of  man  as  a  free  moral  agent  and  the 
thought  of  God  as  an  omnipotent  power.  In  1757  he  was 
called  to  the  presidency  of  Princeton  college,  a  position  which 
he  filled  but  a  few  weeks.    He  died  of  the  smallpox  in  1758. 

In  addition  to  the  two  works  already  referred  to,  Jonathan 
Edwards  published  a  large  number  of  sermons  and  a  few 

other  treatises.    His  sermons  are  mostly  long 
WrSn«8*  ^^^  elaborate,  showing  the  painstaking  work 

of  the  scholar.  The  great  majority  of  them 
treat  of  doctrinal  points  or  matters  of  church  policy.  These 
are  admirably  planned  and  written^  and  are  dry  only  because 
the  subjects  are  now  uninteresting.  The  discourses  that  are 
best  remembered  are  those  that  present  the  horrors  of  eternal 
punishment.  Edwards  is  said  to  have  had  none  of  the  tricks 
of  the  dramatic  orator;  but  by  the  simplicity  and  force  of 
his  literary  style,  and  his  digniiy  and  power  as  a  man,  he 
succeeded  better  than  any  other  minister  of  his  time  in  bring- 
ing his  hearers  to  a  realization  of  the  awful  doctrine  that  he 
preached.  An  account  is  preserved  of  the  appalling  effect 
produced  at  Enfield  by  his  sermon  on  "Sinners  in  the) 
Hands  of  an  Angry  God**;  and  this  sermon  is  perhaps  the! 
best  known  of  all  his  published  discourses.  Biit  many  others 
are  in  the  same  strain.  Among  the  titles  are :  **The  Eternity 
of  Hell  Torments/*  "The  Justice  of  God  in  the  Damnation 
of  Sinners,**  'TVicked  men  useful  in  their  Destruction  only,** 
"The  Torments  of  the  Wicked  in  Hell,  no  Occasion  of  Grief  | 
to  the  Saints  in  Heaven.** 

Mention  has  been  made  of  the  rapt  and  poetic  tone  of  some 
of  Edwards's  early  writings.  His  description  of  his  future 
wife  is  a  notable  illustration.  Less  intense,  but  more  t^ical, 
i£}  a  passage  like  the  following: 


80  Aherioan  Literatubb 

I  Tery  frequently  used  to  retire  into  a  solitary  place,  on  the  banks 
of  Hudson's  river,  at  some  distance  from  the  city,  for  contemplation 
on  divine  things  and  secret  converse  with  God ;  and  had  many  sweet 
hours  there.  Sometimes  Mr.  Smith  and  I  walked  there  together,  to 
converse  on  the  things  of  God;  and  our  conversation  used  to  turn 
much  on  the  advancement  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  world,  and  the 
glorious  things  that  God  would  accomplish  for  his  church  in  the  latter 
days.  I  had  then,  and  at  other  times,  the  greatest  delight  in  the 
holy  Scriptures,  of  any  book  whatsoever.  OftentimeB  in  reading  it, 
every  word  seemed  to  touch  my  heart  I  felt  a  harmony  between 
something  in  my  heart  and  those  sweet  and  powerful  words. 

The  same  intensity  of  imagination^  turned  in  another 
direction^  is  seen  in  a  passage  like  the  following  from  the 
sermon  on  "The  Future  Punishment  of  the  Wicked  Unavoid- 
able and  Intolerable^^ : 

We  can  conceive  but  little  of  the  matter ;  we  cannot  conceive  what 
that  sinking  of  the  soul  in  such  a  case  is.  But  to  help  your  concep- 
tion, imagine  yourself  to  be  cast  into  a  fiery  oven,  aU  of  a  glowing 
heat,  or  into  the  midst  of  a  glowing  brick-kiln,  or  of  a  great  furnace, 
where  your  pain  would  be  as  much  greater  than  that  occasioned  by 
accidentally  touching  a  coal  of  fire,  as  the  heat  is  greater.  Imagine  also 
that  your  body  were  to  lie  there  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  full  of  fire, 
as  fuU  within  and  without  as  a  bright  coal  of  fire,  all  the  while  fuU 
of  quick  sense ;  what  horror  would  you  feel  at  the  entrance  of  such 
a  furnace!  And  how  long  would  that  quarter  of  an  hour  seem  to 
you!  If  it  were  to  be  measured  by  a  glass,  how  long  would  the 
glass  seem  to  be  running!  And  after  you  had  endured  it  for  one 
minute,  how  overbearing  would  it  be  to  you  to  think  that  you  had 
it  to  endure  the  other  fourteen! 

But  what  would  be  the  effect  on  your  soul,  if  you  knew  you  must 
lie  there  enduring  that  torment  to  the  full  for  twenty-four  hours! 
And  how  much  greater  would  be  the  effect,  if  you  knew  you  must 
endure  it  for  a  whole  year ;  and  how  vastly  greater  stiU,  if  you  knew 
you  must  endure  it  for  a  thousand  years!  O  then,  how  would  your 
heart  sink,  if  you  thought,  if  you  knew,  that  you  must  bear  it  forever 
and  ever!  That  there  would  be  no  end!  That  after  millions  of 
millions  of  ages,  your  torment  would  be  no  nearer  to  an  end,  than  ever 
it  was ;  and  that  you  never,  never  should  be  delivered. 

But  your  torment  in  hell  will  be  immensely  greater  than  this  iUus- 
tration  represents. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  said  that  ererything  that  Jona- 
than Edwards  wrote  was  characterized  by  care  and  order  in 


The  Colonial  Time  81 

arrangement^  purity  and  simplicity  in  diction.    There  is  often 
a  charm  about  his  prose  that  attracts  the  reader^  even  when 

he  presents  a  dry  or  repellent  subject.  His 
great  work  on  The  Freedom  of  the  Will 
is  a  classic  of  metaphysics,  not  of  literature;  yet  most  of 
those  who  have  tried  to  overthrow  the  argument  have  paid 
tribute  to  the  logical  care  of  the  method  and  the  charm  of 
the  style. 

The  clergy  of  New  England  were  as  a  body  such  scholarly 
men,  the  part  they  played  in  affairs  was  so  great,  that  even 
those  who  lived  with  them  found  it  diflScult  to  measure  their 
relative  importance.  So  to-day  it  is  hard  to  decide  who 
should  be  ranked  next  after  Edwards  and  the  Mathers. 
The  few  who  will  be  mentioned  here  are  among  those  who 
were  most  noted  and  whose  fame  seems  to  rest  on  the  most 
enduring  basis.  TTrian  Oakes  (1631P-1681)  was  a  famous 
_  preacher  of  the  last  half  of  the  seventeenth 

andTheologiaiu   ce^^^^ry.    When  only  a  youth  he  published  a 

series  of  astronomical  calculations.  Later  in 
life  he  was  considered  a  remarkable  Latin  scholar  and  an 
effective  preacher  of  the  old  conservative  school.  His  pub- 
lished works  in  prose  are  a  few  sermons  that  would  hardly 
give  him  fame  to-day.  An  elegy  on  Thomas  Shepard  has 
been  mentioned  elsewhere.  John  Wise  (1 652-1 725j  was 
among  the  first  of  the  ministers  who  stood  for  the  new  demo- 
cratic order  of  things.  He  was  bom  at  Eoxbury,  where  his 
father  had  come  as  an  indentured  servant.  In  those  days 
social  position  was  everywhere  taken  into  account;  even  at 
Harvard  college  students  were  listed  in  the  catalogue  and 
took  their  seats  at  table  according  to  the  rank  of  their  fami- 
lies. The  indignities  to  which  Wise  submitted  on  account  of 
his  humble  birth  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  his  sub- 
sequent leaning  toward  democracy.  After  he  became  a  min- 
ister at  Ipswich  he  led  the  opposition  to  the  collection  of  taxes 


83  Ahbbioak  Ltteratubb 

imposed  by  the  royalist  govemiDent.  For  this  he  was 
arrested,  fined,  and  imprisoned.  The  most  important  work  of 
his  later  years  was  his  reply  to  "Certain  Proposals"  put 
forth  by  the  Boston  Association  of  ministers  in  1705.  These 
proposals,  for  which  the  Mathers  were  doubtless  responsible, 
advocated  changes  in  the  form  of  church  government  which 
would  greatly  increase  the  power  of  the  clergy.  This  contro- 
versy was  over  ecclesiastical  matters,  but  its  significance 
may  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  in  the  Eevolutionary  time, 
half  a  century  after  Wise's  death,  his  Vindication  of  the 
Oovemment  of  New  England  Churches  was  reprinted  twice 
in  a  single  year,  jand  circulated  as  one  of  the  best  available 
expositions  of  the  claims  of  democracy. 

Samuel  Willard  (1640-1707),  long  pastor  of  the  Old  South 
Church,  Boston,  and  for  some  time  acting  head  of  Harvard 
college,  was  a  iypical  theologian  of  the  old  school.  He  pub- 
lished in  1726  A  Compleat  Body  of  Divinity,  in  Two  Hun- 
dred and  Fifty  Lectures  on  the  Assembly's  Shorter  Cate- 
chism, and  many  other  sermons.  A  famous  minister  of  a 
somewhat  later  time  was  John  Barnard  (1681-1770),  a 
native  of  Boston,  a  graduate  of  Harvard  in  the  class  of  1700. 
Barnard  went  to  England  for  a  time,  where  he  was  offered 
an  oflScial  chaplaincy,  but  declined  because  he  would  not 
assent  to  the  thirty-nine  articles.  In  spite  of  this  his  asso- 
ciation with  churchmen  and  royalists  brought  him  into  some 
disrepute,  and  on  his  return  to  America  he  had  difficuliy  in 
finding  a  pulpit.  He  was  finally  accepted  by  the  church  at 
Marblehead;  but  he  was  always  somewhat  unorthodox,  and 
is  sometimes  said  to  have  been  the  first  New  England  min- 
ister to  deviate  from  Calvinism.  He  published  many  ser- 
mons, some  miscellaneous  work,  and  a  version  of  the  Psalms. 
Charles  Chauncy  (1705-1787),  pastor  of  the  First  Church  of 
Boston  for  sixty  years  from  1727  to  1787,  has  a  place  in  the 
political  W  vdl  fts  th^  theological  history  of  AiUQriqa,    A 


The  Colonial  Time  83 

grandson  of  President  Charles  Chauncy  of  Harvard,  he  in- 
herited some  of  the  love  of  controversy  that  often  distin- 
guished Harvard  divines.  Of  his  sixty  printed  sermons  a 
large  part  attack  somebody  or  something.  What  he  disliked 
he  hated  heartily.  His  aversion  to  poetry  was  such  that  he 
wanted  "Paradise  Losf'  translated  into  prose.  The  preach- 
ing of  "Whitefield  was  especially  distasteful  to  him,  and  he 
led  the  opposition  to  sensationalism  in  the  pulpit.  In  the 
contest  between  England  and  the  colonies  he  was  a  staunch 
patriot,  and  he  expressed  his  views  frankly  in  print. 

The  best  example  of  the  new  and  radical  type  of  minister 
who  was  possible  by  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  was 

Jonathan  Mayhew  11720-1 Y66).  He  was  a 
j^^  graduate  of  Harvard,  and  was  pastor  of  the 

West  Church  in  Boston  from  1747  until  his 
death.  His  present  fame  seems  to  rest  on  his  heterodoxy 
and  his  patriotism,  neither  of  them  perhaps  his  most 
worthy  characteristic.  Even  before  his  ordination  he 
had  expressed  his  disbelief  in  some  of  the  fxmdamental 
doctrines  of  Calvinism,  and  during  his  pastorate  he  was 
denied  the  full  fellowship  of  the  Congregational  min- 
isters of  Boston.  Among  other  heresies  he  refused  to  ac- 
cept the  dogma  of  the  Trinity,  and  it  has  been  said  that 
his  church  was  the  first  in  Boston  to  declare  itself  Unitarian. 
His  habit  of  independent  thinking  was  carried  into  political 
matters.  In  a  sermon  preached  on  the  anniversary  of  the 
execution  of  King  Charles  I,  and  on  other  occasions,  he 
expressed  the  view  of  government  and  political  rights  after- 
ward advocated  by  his  close  friends,  James  Otis  and  Samuel 
Adams.  These  sermons  on  political  subjects,  and  several 
others  directed  against  the  (Episcopalian)  Society  for  the 
Propagation  of  the  Gospel  have  an  element  of  sensationalism. 
The  preacher  is  not  only  frankly  outspoken,  but  he  shows 
a  fondness  for  striking,  even  startling  turns  of  phrase.    His 


84  AhEBICAN  LiTERATtTBfi 

Bermons  on  other  subjects  are  many  of  them  free  from  this 
peculiarity,  and  have  a  freshness,  a  modem  quality  of  style 
that  makes  them  almost  readable  to-day. 

In  the  departments  of  knowledge  already  considered — 
history  and  religion — ^the  second  period  in  New  England  pro- 
duced writings  that  were,  aU  things  consid- 
Little  Pure  Lit-     ^j.^^^  y^^y  creditable.     In  what  is  sometimes 

VMgUnA  called  pure  literature  little  was  done,   and 

that  little  was  of  small  merit.  In  England 
the  period  under  consideration  saw  the  development  of  the 
periodical  essay  and  of  the  novel.  In  America  neither  of 
these  forms  of  writing  was  attempted.  Novels  were  not 
only  not  written  but  it  was  forbidden  to  read  them;  and 
the  Puritan  boy  was  forced  to  content  himself  with  stories 
of  Indian  adventure  authenticated  by  the  Eeverend  John 
Williams  and  other  clerical  captives.  The  Addisonian  essay 
was  echoed,  if  at  all,  in  the  brief  comments  and  bits  of 
moralizing  to  be  found  in  the  ^almanacs.  Nathaniel  Ames 
(1708-17641^  of  Dedham,  Massachusetts,  was  for  many 
years  the  editor  of  one  of  the  more  famous  almanacs  pub- 
lished in  New  England.  His  wise  and  witty  sayings  were 
evidently  imitated,  if  not  stolen,  from  English  almanac- 
makers.  The  best  of  them  do  not  equal  the  work  of  Poor 
Bichard  in  Philadelphia. 

In  verse  the  later  colonial  period  was  almost  as  barren  as 
in  polite  prose.     The  attention  paid  in  England  to  poetic 

form  could  not  be  without  some  influence  in 
America ;  and  New  England  dabblers  in  verse 
gradually  came  to  realize  that  there  were  such  things  as 
rhythm  and  metre,  and  that  they  were  of  some  importance. 
But  there  was  no  imagination  corresponding  to  the  improve- 
ment in  form,  and  perhaps  no  one  in  the  period  was  so  well 
deserving  the  name  of  poet  as  was  Anne  Bradstreet  or 
Michael  Wigglesworth. 


The  Colonial  Time  85 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  century  verse  was 
largely  elegiac,  if  this  term  can  be  applied  to  the  effusions 

inspired  by  the   deaths  of   various  persons. 

g»  ^  These  memorial  poems  were  mostly  by  min- 
isters; and  the  best  of  them  were  by  men  who  did  little  in 
verse.  Among  them  are  the  "Elegy**  upon  the  death  of  the 
Eeverend  Thomas  Shepard,  by  TJrian  Oakes,  and  a  "Dirge/ 
for  the  Tenth  Muse**  (Anne  Bradstreet)  by  John  Norton,] 
pastor  at  Higham,  Massachusetts.  These  seem  to  be  the  only 
surviving  poetical  work  of  their  respective  authors.  Both 
show  fair  skill  in  versification,  though  with  halting  passages ; 
both  are  pitched  in  the  high  artificial  key  of  exaggerated 
lament  so  common  in  the  seventeenth  century,  though  they 
are  without  the  conceits  and  quirks  noticed  in  the  memorial 
verses  of  the  earlier  period.  The  fashion  of  these  conceits  was 
preserved,  however,  in  the  work  of  Nicholas  Noyes  (1647- 1 
1717),  long  pastor  at  Salem.  He  was  somewhat  prolific  of 
obituary  and  occasional  poetry,  and  his  love  of  puns  and  far- 
fetched turns  of  phrase  was  not  exceeded  by  any  of  his  prede- 
cessors. 

Later  in  the  period  American  versifiers,  like  their  English 
contemporaries,  yielded  implicitly  to  the  heroic  couplet,  and 

some   of  them   acquired  fair   facility  in   its 

H^^  CowLt     ^^®*     ^^^  Eeverend   John  Adams,  bom   in 

Nova  Scotia  in  1704,  graduated  at  Harvard 
in  1721,  and  died  at  Newport,  Ehode  Island,  in  1740,  wrote 
poems  in  the  conventional  manner,  which  gave  promise  of 
better  things.    A  few  lines  will  give  an  impression  of  all : 

Happy  the  man,  who,  in  a  calm  of  soul, 
Can  all  his  warring  passions'  waves  control ; — 
Who  stands  unmoved,  and  hears  the  rustling  wind 
Of  malice  strive  to  shake  his  steadfast  mind; 
From  whose  clear  breast  fuU  satisfaction  boils. 
While  in  his  cheeks  rejoice  the  cheerful  smiles. 
In  vain  would  Envy  with  her  harpy  daws 
His  peace  destroy,  or  prey  upon  his  joys. 


86  Aherigak  Litebatubb 

Some  of  the  serious  verse  of  Mather  Byles  (1707-1788), 
who  boasted  a  correspondence  with  Pope,  is  in  the  same  man- 
ner. Anonymous  examples  may  also  be  found  in  a  con- 
gratulatory volume  sent  by  Harvard  college  to  King  George 
III  in  1761. 

Besides  the  serious  attempts,  some  beginnings  of  humorous 
verse  appeared  early  in  the  eighteenth  century.    John  Sec- 
comb    (1708-1792),    a    divinity    student    at 
Humoroiss  Harvard,    wrote    some    jingly    verses    which 

Seccomb  purported  to  be  the  last  will  of  one  Matthew 

Abdy,  a  bed-maker  and  handy  man  about  the 
college.    The  opening  stanzas  run : 

To  my  dear  wife 

My  joy  and  life, 
I  freely  now  do  give  her 

My  whole  estate, 

With  all  my  plate, 
Being  just  about  to  leave  her, 

A  tub  of  soap, 

A  long  cart  rope, 
A  frying  pan  &  kettle. 

An  ashen  pail 

A  threshing  flail. 
An  iron  wedge  and  beetle. 

This  doggerel  was  sent  to  England  and  appeared  simultane- 
ously in  the  ^^ondon  Magazine'^  and  the  ^^Gentleman's 
Magazine"  for  May,  1732.  Later  it  was  reprinted  in  Amer- 
ica with  the  title  "Father  Abbe/s  Will.''  To  the  reader  of 
to-day  it  seems  cheap,  pointless,  and  vulgar.  Why  it  was 
given  recognition  by  the  two  leading  literary  magazines  of 
England  is  hard  to  say.  It  must  be  remembered,  however, 
that  standards  of  humor  were  different  in  the  eighteenth 
century.  Even  Goldsmith's  "Elegy  on  a  Mad  Dog"  does 
not  now  arouse  the  hilarity  that  it  once  did.  "Father  Abbejr's 
Will"  was  followed  by  another  poem  in  the  same  metre  pur- 


The  Colonial  Time  87 

porting  td  be  a  proposal  of  marriage  to  his  widow  from  the 
sweeper  of  Yale  college. 

A  humorist  of  greater  literary  merit  was  Mather  Byles,  a 
descendant  of  Eichard  Mather  and  John  Cotton,  a  Harvard 

graduate,  and  pastor  of  the  HoUis  street 
Mather  Byles  ^^^^^^  ^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^33  ^^  ^j^^  Revolu- 
tion, when  he  was  driven  from  his  pulpit  on  account  of  his 
loyalist  sympathies.  His  fiame  suffered  somewhat  from  the 
fact  that  he  took  the  unpopular  side  in  the  great  struggle; 
but  in  the  earlier  years  of  his  ministry  he  was  known  as  a 
sound  and  eloquent  pulpit  orator,  and  in  private  life  as  a 
genial,  witty  gentleman.  Many  of  his  puns  and  jokes  have 
come  down  to  us  in  tradition.  He  wrote  some  serious  verse, 
for  example,  "To  his  Excellency,  Governor  Belcher  on  the 
Death  of  his  Lady,  an  Epistle,*^  and  ''On  the  Death  of  the 
Queen,  a  Poem,^'  and  some  hjmins.  His  humorous  verses 
include  burlesque  ballads  and  parodies. 

Among   the  lesser   versifiers   of  the   eighteenth   century 
should  perhaps  be  remembered  Mather  Byles's  friend,  Joseph 

Green  (1706-1780).  The  intimacy  between 
Homorist  *^^  scholarly  Tory  clergyman  and  this  wealthy 

Whig  distiller  must  have  arisen  partly  from 
the  attraction  of  opposites,  but  they  were  fellow-graduates  of 
Harvard  and  fellow-writers  of  humorous  poetry.  Green's 
verse  was  more  satirical  than  that  of  his  friend,  and  his 
humor  was  somewhat  broader.  He  wrote  ja  parody  on 
Byles's  fine  ''Hymn  Written  during  a  Voyage,'*  and  this  was 
in  turn  parodied  by  Byles. 

Besides  the  verses  written  by  the  ministers  and  men  of 
culture  there  were  crude  attempts  of  the  people — songs  of 

the   French   and  Indian   wars,   and  ballads 
^^^        whose  only  merit  was  their  rudeness  and  di- 
rectness.   Of  these  one  is  remembered,  perhaps,  more  because 
its  Buthor,  Peter  Folger,  was  the  grandfather  of  Benjamin 


88  Amebigak  Litebatube 

Franklin  than  for  any  merit  of  its  own.  Folger  was  an 
Englishman  who  came  to  America  with  his  father  in  1635, 
and  settled  first  at  Martha^s  Vineyard  and  afterward  at 
Nantucket.  His  'poem^AjLoqking^  Glass  for  the  Times,  or 
The  former  Spirit  of  New-England  revived  in  this  genera- 
Hon,  was  a  plea  for  toleration,  or  rather  an  attack  on  those 
who  were  intolerant.  Its  occasion  was  the  wars  and  afiSic- 
tions  that  the  colonists  were  expefriencing  about  1675.  Like 
the  members  of  the  clerical  party,  he  believed  that  these  were 
a  punishment  from  God,  but  he  believed  that  they  were 
inflicted,  not  because  of  laxity  in  faith,  but  because  of  nar- 
rowness and  illiberality.    A  few  lines  will  serve  as  a  sample: 

I  would  not  have  yon  for  to  think, 

tho'  I  have  wrote  so  much, 
That  I  hereby  do  throw  a  Stone 

at  Magistrates  as  such. 
The  Rulers  of  the  Country  I 

do  own  them  in  the  Lord ; 
And  such  as  are  for  Government, 

with  them  I  do  accord. 
But  that  which  I  intend  hereby, 

is  that  they  would  keep  bound. 
And  meddle  not  with  God's  Worship, 

for  which  they  have  no  ground. 

This  ballad  was  written  in  1675,  and  Franklin  has  been 
quoted  as  authority  for  the  assertion  that  it  was  published  in 
that  year;  but  it  is  not  clear  that  he  intends  to  make  this 
statement,  and  there  is  no  other  evidence  of  a  printed  edi- 
tion until  1763.  If  the  author  discreetly  kept  his  poem  in 
manuscript,  he  hardly  deserves  all  the  praise  that  he  has 
received  for  courage  in  speaking  his  mind. 

Peter  Folger,  who  comes  just  at  the  point  of  division  be- 
tween the  first  and  the  second  periods,  is  of  interest  because 
he  reveals  a  side  of  New  England  life  but  little  seen  anywhere 
in  colonial  literature.  The  writings  that  have  been  enumer- 
ated in  the  foregoing  pages  were  produced  mostly  by  the  clergy. 


The  Colonial  Time  89 

They  represent  the  spiritual  aspirations^  the  theological  ques- 
tionings, the  wild  rhapsodical  imaginings  of  the  Puritans. 

But  there  existed  among  the  inhabitants  of 

of  H^^Snd  -^^^  England  a  tendency  to  be  practical,  to 

apply  hard  common  sense  to  the  everyday 
aflEairs  of  life  in  a  very  shrewd  matter-of-fact  way.  The 
colonists  amassed  wealth.  They  drove  hard  bargains 
with  the  Indians,  with  their  neighbors,  even  with  one  an- 
other. All  this  side  of  their  character  found  little  expres- 
sion in  literature.  Printing,  and  even  writing,  were  still 
serious  matters,  and  only  worthy  thoughts  were  preserved  on 
paper.  Men  who  possessed  both  the  devout  and  the  worldly 
practical  natures  took  pains  to  show  only  the  former  in  their 
writings ;  and  those  who  lived'  on  the  lower  plane — ^the  busi- 
ness men,  the  tradesmen,  the  artisans — hardly  wrote  at  all. 
The  student  finds  indications  of  this  hard  New  England 
common  sense  in  the  implied  objections  answered  by  writers 
on  theology  and  politics,  in  the  treatment  of  witchcraft  by 
men  like  Eobert  Calef,  in  tiie  more  personal  parts  of  SewalFs 
Diary,  in  anecdotes  of  the  Franklin  family  as  told  in  Benja- 
min's Autobiography,  and  in  comments  by  visitors, from  the 
old  world  and  from  other  colonies.  Notwithstanding  the 
fact  that  it  makes  so  slight  a  figure  in  colonial  writings,  it 
had  great  influence  on  New  England  literature  of  a  later 
date. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  said  that  the  writings  of  the 
later  colonial  time  in  New  England  were  characterized  byj 

intellectual  power,  but  by  esthetic  barrenness.f 
Limitetions  of      jjven   this   praise  needs   some   modification; 
Literature  '^^  ^^®  same  tendencies  that  prevented  grace- 

ful expression  led  also  to  a  narrowness,  a  lack 
of  that  sane  and  healthful  view  of  things  that  is  essential 
to  the  highest  intellectual  activity.  The  ablest  and  most 
learned  men  of  the  time  showed  pedantry  rather  than  scholar- 


90  American  Litesatube 

ship,  ingenuity  rather  than  analytic  insight.  Even  Jonathan 
Edwards^  the  greatest  of  them  all^  is  not  wholly  an  excep- 
tion to  this  statement  Their  lack  of  a  true  literary  sense 
was  in  part  due  directly  to  defects  in  the  Puritan  character, 
and  more  largely  to  the  fact  that  the  Puritans  denied  them- 
selves the  examples  of  the  greater  English  masters.  While 
the  Virginian  was  following  every  whim  of  literary  fashion, 
the  Massachusetts  writer  continued  almost  in  the  manner  of 
1620,  unmoved  by  even  the  strongest  literary  tendencies. 
Cotton  Mather  and  Jonathan  Edwards  were  early  and  late 
contemporaries  of  William  Byrd,  yet  his  work  seems  far 
more  modem  than  that  of  either.  The  result  of  all  this  was 
that  the  latest  of  the  Puritans  .gave  to  their  descendants  the 
example  of  mental  industry,  learning,  and  intense  moral 
earnestness,  but  they  left  them  with  no  sense  of  literary 
form,  and  indeed  with  no  adequate  appreciation  of  its  value. 
This  one-sided  heritage  must  be  kept  in  mind  in  studying 
the  later  development  of  literature  in  New  England. 

IV.  The  Middle  Colonies 

The  middle  colonies  were  founded  somewhat  later  than 
Massachusetts.  Most  of  them  made  less  careful  provision 
•^.*  ^  •  *_,  for  education;  but  they  had  an  advantaire 

m  contammg  many  settlers  of  broader  views 
and  more  catholic  taste.  Next  after  Boston  the  city  which 
achieved  greatest  literary  prominence  during  the  first  two- 
thirds  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  Philadelphia.  It  is 
worthy  of  note  that  the  most  distinguished  author  of  Phila- 
delphia was  a  man  who  received  his  early  training  in  Boston, 
but  who  represented  the  practical  side  of  the  New  England 
character,  and  who  fortunately  escaped  to  the  freer  atmos- 
phere of  the  Quaker  city. 

Benjamin  Franklin^s  long  life  of  eighty-four  years  (1706* 
1790)  spanned  the  period  of  the  Bevolution,  and  saw  the 


Thb  Colonial  Time  91 

establishment  of  the  national  government.  The  political 
services  for  which  he  is  best  remembered  were  performed  in 

the  later  period,  and  it  was  toward  the  close 
nvanvnti  of  his  life  that  he  wrote  the  Autobiography, 

from  a  literary  standpoint  his  most  im- 
portant work.  But  the  man  himself  was  a  product  of  the  colo- 
nial time,  and  as  the  man  and  his  writings  are  so  closely  con- 
nected it  seems  best  to  consider  him  among  colonial  writers. 

Franklin  was  bom  in  Boston  in  1706.  Peter  Folger,  his 
grandfather  on  the  maternal  side,  has  already  been  men- 
tioned. On  his  father's  side  he  was  descended  from  a  line 
of  thrifty  artisans,  many  members  of  the  family  having  been 
blacksmiths.  His  father  was  trained  as  a  dyer,  but  on 
removing  to  New  England  he  found  this  trade  in  little 
demand  and  became  f3k  maker  of  soap  and  candles.  Benja- 
min was  the  fifteenth  in  a  family  of  seventeen  children. 
He  was  first  intended  for  the  ministry,  but  the  family  in- 
come was  too  small  to  admit  of  giving  him  a  college  educa- 
tion, and  after  a  brief  schooling,  he  was  set  to  work  in  his 
father's  shop.  At  this  he  rebelled,  and  wanted  to  go  to 
sea.  At  length,  when  he  was  twelve  years  of  age,  his  father, 
noticing  his  fondness  for  reading,  apprenticed  him  to  his 
.brother  James,  who  was  a  printer.  Even  before  this  time 
he  had  read  through  his  father's  library,  which  ^'consisted 
chiefly  of  books  in  polemic  divinity,"  and  had  saved  his 
pennies  to  buy  Bunyan's  works,  which  he  sold  again  to 
procure  Burton's  Historical  Collections.  The  same  devotion 
to  reading  was  continued  throughout  his  apprenticeship.  He 
boarded  himself,  and  subsisted  on  a  vegetable  diet,  expend- 
ing for  books  what  he  could  save  from  his  allowance  for  food. 
An  odd  volume  of  the  Spectator  fell  into  his  hands,  and  on 
this  he  deliberately  modeled  his  prose  style. 

His  first  attempt  at  writing  was  not,  however,  in  prose 
but  in  verse.    Early  in  his  apprenticeship  he  composed  two 


92  AmEBIOAK  LmSRATUBE 

ballads,  one  on  the  drowning  of  a  light-house  keeper  and  his 
two  daughters,  the  other  on  the  capture  of  Blackbeard,  a 

pirate  who  had  long  infested  the  New  Eng- 

Sriw"tinff  ^  coast.     These  were  printed  by  James 

Franklin  and  peddled  about  the  streets  by  the 
author.  They  were  very  successful,  but  the  boy  was  dis- 
suaded by  his  father  from  further  attempts  at  verse-making. 
His  next  literary  venture  was  when  he  was  sixteen  years  of 
age.  By  this  time  his  brother  had  founded  the  ^^New  Eng- 
land Courant,^^  and  for  this  Benjamin  wrote  the  **JDogood 
Papers,**  on  the  Addisonian  model.  Fearing  that  his  brother 
would  ignore  anjrthing  coming  from  him,  he  at  first  dis- 
guised his  hand  and  slipped  the  manuscript  under  the  oflSce 
door.  After  several  numbers  had  been  printed  and  warmly 
praised  he  revealed  himself  as  the  author. 

Franklin  thus  entered  the  world  of  letters  at  a  time  when 
Samuel  Sewall  was  writing  his  diary  and  Increase  and  Cot- 
ton Mather  were  laboring  for  the  continu- 
S|f*^?^w  *^ce  of  the  old  ecclesiastical  order  in  New 

Characteristics  England.  As  has  been  said,  however,  he  rep- 
resented a  class  far  different  from  that  to 
which  these  worthies  belonged.  In  the  Franklin  family,  as 
we  catch  glimpses  of  it  in  the  Autobiography,  we  see  the 
characteristics,  good  and  bad,  which  have  since  been  asso- 
ciated with  the  word  "Yankee.'*  On  the  one  hand  were 
industry,  economy,  shrewdness,  and  a  determination  to  keep 
within  the  letter  of  the  law;  on  the  other  hand  was  a  dis- 
position to  believe  that  these  virtues  constituted  the  whole 
duty  of  man.  The  greatest  test  was  always  'T)oes  it  pay?** 
One  reason  that  led  the  elder  Franklin  to  give  up  the  idea 
of  educating  Benjamin  for  the  ministry  was  "the  little 
encouragement  that  line  of  life  afforded.**  Later  he  dis- 
suaded him  from  writing  ballads  by  telling  him  that  ^'verse- 
makers  were  generally  beggars.** 


The  Colonial  Timb  93 

Another  example  of  shrewdness,  carried  beyond  the  limit 
of  strict  ethics,  is  seen  in  James  Franklin^s  management  of 
the  "New  England  Courant/'  As  editor  he  seems  to  have 
discovered  that  sensationalism  may  be  financially  profitable 
to  a  newspaper;  and  his  constant  aim  was  apparently  to  see 
how  far  he  could  go  without  incurring  punishment  from 
the  strait-laced  rulers  of  Boston.  At  last  he  over-stepped  the 
line,  was  arrested,  imprisoned,  and  forbidden  to  issue  the 
paper  longer.  Instead  of  discontinuing  its  publication  he 
adopted  the  subterfuge  of  printing  it  in  Benjamin^s  name. 
Accordingly  the  articles  of  apprenticeship  were  publicly  can- 
celled, and  a  secret  agreement  was  drawn  in  their  stead. 
Benjamin  was  quick  to  see  that  these  secret  articles  were  not 
binding  on  him,  since  James  would  not  dare  to  make  them 
public.  He  therefore  snapped  his  fingers  in  his  brother^s 
face  and  ran  away  to  Philadelphia. 

The  details  of  his  trip,  and  his  first  adventures  in  the 
Quaker  city,  are  told  in  one  of  the  most  familiar  parts  of 

the  Autobiography,    He  secured  employment 

PhlladelDUa        ^^*^  Samuel  Keimer,  an  erratic  printer  who 

was  something  of  a  figure  in  the  early  life  of 
Philadelphia.  Soon  he  attracted  the  attention  of  Governor 
Keith,  who  oflEered  him  patronage  and  sent  him  to  England 
to  buy  lypes  and  a  press  for  a  printing  oflSce  of  his  own. 
Arrived  there,  he  found  that  he  had  been  duped,  and  that 
Keith  had  given  him  neither  the  introductions  nor  the  credit 
that  he  had  promised.  He  remained  in  London  for  eighteen 
months,  working  in  diflEerent  printing-oflSces,  reading  much, 
meeting  some  persons  of  note,  and  writing  a  free-thinking 
pamphlet,  ''A  Dissertation  on  Liberty  and  Necessity,  Pleas- 
ure and  Pain.'*  When  he  returned  to  Philadelphia  he  served' 
as  bookkeeper  and  general  assistant  to  a  merchant;  but  in 
a  few  months  his  employer  died  and  he  again  became  a 
printer,  first  in  the  employ  of  Keimer,  then  in  an  ofiGice  of 


94  Akebicak  Litseatitbb 

his  own.  By  his  industry  and  the  shrewd  tricks  that  he  knew 
so  well  how  to  plan  he  succeeded^  and  soon  became  a  promi- 
nent citizen.  He  was  instrumental  in  founding  the  public 
library;  he  organized  the  first  fire  company  in  Philadelphia, 
headed  the  movement  for  a  better  police  system,  and  was 
concerned  with  many  other  municipal  improvements. 

The  events  of  Franklin's  early  life  have  been  given  in 
some  detail  because  they  are  so  valuable  in  showing  the 

forces  that  went  to  the  forming  of  the  man, 
rauum  I  Later  ^^^  ^^^  ^  illustrating  the  class   of   New 

England  citizens  to  which  he  belonged.  His 
later  years  must,  in  spite  of  their  importance  to  the  student 
of  history,  be  passed  over  more  hurriedly.  By  1748  he  had 
prospered  so  well  that  he  sold  his  printingK)flBce  for  a  com- 
fortable sum,  and  proposed  to  devote  himself  to  the  study 
of  science,  for  which  he  had  developed  a  fondness.  His 
best-known  experiments  are  those  with  electricity,  but  he 
made  excursions  into  various  fields,  and  communicated  the 
results  of  his  researches  to  scientific  men  in  Europe  and 
America.  He  had  already  dabbled  in  politics,  and  in  1752 
he  was  elected  to  the  colonial  assembly,  and  was  later  made 
postmaster-general.  From  1757  to  1761  he  was  in  London  as 
agent  of  the  colonial  assembly.  In  1764  he  was  again  sent 
to  London  on  a  political  mission  and  remained  until  1775, 
taking  a  prominent  part  in  all  the  agitation  that  preceded 
the  Eevolution.  Shortly  after  his  return  to  America  he  was 
sent  to  France  to  negotiate  for  aid  in  the  struggle  for  inde- 
pendence. He  remained  in  Paris,  an  idol  of  the  French 
people,  until  1785,  serving  his  country  in  various  ways, 
finally  as  member  of  the  peace  commission.  After  his  return 
to  Philadelphia,  though  over  eighty  years  of  age,  he  was  still 
active  in  public  affairs.  His  last  work  of  importance  was 
as  member  of  the  Constitutional  Convention. 
Franklin's  published  works,  which  in  the  standard  editions 


The  Colonial  Timb  96 

fill  ten  heavy  volumes,  cover  a  multitude  of  subjects — ^the- 
ology, science,  politics,  morals,  even  literary  criticism.    His 

Franklin'  Writ-  ^*^®  *®  *  ^^^  ^^  letters  rests,  however,  on 
]iig»-.F^)or  three  works :  the  *Toor  Bichard'*  sayings,  the 

Richard*!  Autobiography,  and  the  "Bagatelles/*    It  was 

^^"^•'^  in  1732,  not  long  after  he  had  established 

himself  in  business  on  his  own  account,  that  he  began  the 
publication  of  "Poor  Bichard's  Almanac.'*  In  putting  forth 
this  work  he  adopted  the  name  of  Bichard  Saunders,  an 
English  almanac-maker  of  note,  but  he  gave  the  assumed 
author  the  character  of  a  poor  but  thrifty  American.  The 
hint  of  Poor  Bichard  probably  came  from  the  characters  in 
the  Spectator,  but  it  is  perhaps  because  he  is  so  much  like 
Franklin  himself  that  he  and  his  wife  Bridget  "are  quite  as 
real  as  any  characters  in  the  whole  domain  of  fiction.** 
These  almanacs  were  introduced  by  prefaces  that  tried  to 
be  both  witty  and  instructive.  They  contained  the  usual 
calendars  and  astronomical  data,  predictions  concerning  the 
weather,  suggestions  in  regard  to  crops,  and  scattered  here 
and  there  wise  saws  and  pointed  sayings.  It  is  these  last 
that  have  made  Poor  Bichard  famous. 

The  ethical  code  of  the  almanac-maker  did  not  require  that 
these  sayings  be  original,  and  many  that  bear  Franklin*s 
name  were  not  his  own.  It  is  now  impossible  to  say  which 
he  originated,  which  he  borrowed  entire,  and  which  he 
adapted  to  suit  the  occasion.  The  majority  probably  belong 
to  the  last-named  class.  But  he  deserves  the  credit  of  mak- 
ing them  all  pass  current.  After  Poor  Bichard  had  become 
widely  known  he  combined  the  best  of  his  sayings  in  an 
address  purporting  to  have  been  delivered  at  an  auction  by 
an  old  man  known  as  Father  Abraham.  It  was  in  this  dis- 
course, sometimes  called  "The  Way  to  Wealth^**  that  a  later/ 
generation  usually  read  Poor  Bichard*8  advice,  A  pann- 
graph  will  9?rv§  ^^  m  ilhstrrtiQ^ ; 


96  Ahebioan  Litebatube 

//  Hme  he  of  all  Things  the  most  precioust  wwUng  Time  must  he, 
as  Poor  Richard  says,  the  greatest  Prodigality;  since,  as  he  elsewhere 
tells  us,  Lost  Time  is  never  found  again;  and  what  we  call  Time 
enough,  always  proves  little  enough:  Let  us  then  up  and  be  doing, 
and  doing  to  the  Purpose ;  so  by  Diligence  shall  we  do  more  with  less 
Perplexity.  Sloth  makes  aU  Things  difRcult,  hut  Industry  all  easy, 
as  Poor  Richard  says ;  and  He  that  riseth  late  must  trot  all  Day,  and 
shall  scarce  overtake  his  Business  at  Night;  while  Laziness  travels 
so  slowly,  that  Poverty  soon  overtakes  him,  as  we  read  in  Poor 
Richard,  who  adds,  Drive  thy  Business,  let  not  that  drive  thee;  and 
Early  to  Bed  and  early  to  me,  makes  a  Man  healthy,  wealthyf  and 
wise. 

The  influence  of  the  Poor  Bichard  sayings  is  hardly  to 
be  overestimated.  They  were  published  in  the  most  popular 
almanac  of  the  colonial  time;  and  publication  in  an  almanac 
was  the  surest  way  to  secure  wide  circulation.  No  family  was 
so  poor  as  to  be  without  one  of  these  necessary  pamphlets; 
and  often  it  was  the  only  secular  reading  matter  that  the 
house  contained.  During  the  year  that  it  was  current  its 
contents  were  read  so  often  that  they  were  committed  to 
memory  by  young  and  old.  The  best  of  the  proverbs  were 
also  circulated  in  the  "Address  of  Father  Abraham/^  and 
in  various  other  forms.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  for  a  hundred 
years  no  phrases  except  those  of  Scripture  were  so  familiar 
to  Americans  everywhere  as  those  of  Poor  Eichard;  and 
many  of  them  gained  equal  currency  abroad.  Even  to-day, 
when  the  habit  of  quoting  wise  saws  has  almost  fallen  into 
disuse,  they  are  by  no  means  forgotten. 

The  Autobiography  wsis  begun  in  1771,  while  Franklin 
was  in  England,  but  was  soon  laid  aside.     At  the  urgent 

request  of  friends  it  was  taken  up  from  time 

Sx^wS«aphy     ^  *"^^  ^^*^^  ^'^^^^  ^^^^  *^^  ^^^*  installment 

was  written.    It  traces  the  author's  life  only 

to  1757,  but  it  covers  the  years  that  are  most  interesting  to 

the  student  of  Franklin  the  man.    The  qualities  which  have 

made  the  AtUohiography  one  of  the  f^w  American  classics 


Thb  Colonial  Timb  97 

are  its  Bimplicity  of  style  and  the  frankness  and  openness 
with  which  the  author  reveals  his  personality.  Few  books 
can  charm  readers  of  all  ages  and  all  temperaments ;  Frank- 
lin^s  Autobiography  comes  very  near  doing  this.  It  is  the 
first  book  written  in  America  which  an  American  to-day 
need  hesitate  to  say  he  has  not  read. 

The  "Bagatelles^^  were  short  sketches  written  while  Frank- 
lin was  in  France  to  please  a  circle  of  his  intimate  friends. 

^  ^  „  The  best  were  composed  for  Madame  Bril- 
Th.B.g.ten«      j^^^  ^  ^^^^^^  ^^J^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^ 

cially  enjoyed.  Among  them  are  the  "Story  of  the  Whistle," 
and  the  "Dialogue  between  Franklin  and  the  Gout,"  once 
in  every  school  reader,  but  now  less  familiar.  These  embody 
the  author's  philosophy  of  life,  but,  owing  perhaps  to  French 
influence,  they  have  not  quite  the  naturalness  and  genuine- 
ness of  the  Poor  Eichard  sayings  and  the  Autobiography, 

Franklin  as  statesman  and  Franklin  as  scientist  cannot 
be  considered  here;  yet  it  must  be  remembered  that  he 

was  more  important,  to  the  minds  of  con- 
of  Letters"*  ^"*  temporaries  at  least,  in  these  r61es  than  in 

that  of  literary  man.  Indeed,  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  word  he  can  hardly  be  called  a  man  of  letters. 
His  own  prose  style  is  excellent,  and  he  appreciated  work  of 
the  same  simple,  straightforward  sort;  but  he  does  not  seem 
really  to  have  possessed  much  taste  in  regard  to  other  forms 
of  literature.  He  enjoyed  dabbling  in  literary  criticism,  but 
his  judgments  are  likely  to  be  commonplace  or  amusingly 
erroneous.  He  does  not  seem  even  to  have  appreciated  the 
majestic  prose  of  the  Bible.  He  gravely  wrote  an  emenda- 
tion of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  with  reasons  for  each  change;  and 
later,  when  in  France,  he  produced  a  modernized  version  of 
the  first  part  of  Job.  Probably  this  last  bit  of  composition 
is  not  to  be  taken  seriously.  If  not,  it  at  least  shows  that  he 
was  willing  to  parody  the  work  of  the  Hebrew  poet.     Hia 


98  American  Literatube 

own  verse  oompositions^  with  the  exception  of  a  drinking 
song  of  doubtful  authenticity,  are  worthless. 

Franklin  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  a  great  moral  teacher. 
Such  praise  only  calls  attention  to  his  weakness.  An  exami- 
nation of  his.  writings  will  show  that  he 
?*^~***       taught  only  the  prudential  virtues — ^how  to 

be  healthy,  wealthy,  and  wise,  rather  than 
how  to  be  good,  except  as  a  matter  of  policy.  His  own  morals 
in  early  life  were  very  loose.  His  only  son  who  survived 
infancy  was  an  illegitimate  child;  and  he  was  engaged  in 
intrigues  with  women  in  London  and  in  Philadelphia  until 
the  time  of  his  marriage.  In  his  Autobiography  he  speaks  of 
these  affairs  with  regret,  but  his  reason  is  that  they  "were 
attended  with  some  expense  and  great  inconvenience,  be- 
sides a  continual  risk  to  my  health.^^  Even  in  his  later  years 
he  produced  writings  so  obscene  that  no  editor  has  ventured 
to  print  them.  His  moral  weaknesses,  and  the  fact  that  he 
adopted  worldly  prosperity  as  the  test  of  success  in  life,  have 
led  to  some  adverse  criticism  of  Franklin  as  a  man,  among 
which  is  a  remark  attributed  to  Jefferson  Davis  that  he  was 
"the  incarnation  of  the  peddling,  tuppenny  Yankee.*'  In 
response  to  this  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that,  many-sided  as 
his  character  was,  we  cannot  expect  to  find  it  universal.  He 
had  personal  faults  and  his  precepts  do  not  constitute  a 
complete  rule  of  conduct,  but  none  of  them  teach  immorality, 
and  most  of  them  have,  directly  or  indirectly,  a  moral  ten- 
dency. He  made  Poor  Bichard  say,  'It  is  hard  for  an  empty 
sack  to  stand  upright,'*  and  he  always  maintained  that  the 
most  practical  way  to  make  men  virtuous  was  to  remove 
temptation  by  making  them  thrifty,  prosperous,  and  con- 
tented. 

Franklin  should  be  remembered  for  his  connection  with 
both  the  New  England  and  the  Middle  colonies.  As  has 
lbee^  se^n^  he  represents  ope  side^  and  only  on?  side,  of  tb? 


Thb  Colonial  Time  99 

New  England  character.     He  was  wholly  without  religious 
mysticism  or  fine  idealism,  but  he  was  in  every  way  typical 

of  the  shrewd,  practical,  hard-headed  Yankee. 
J^"*  And  in  Pennsylvania  he  had  an  opportunity 

to  develop  his  bent  as  he  never  could  have 
done. under  the  eye  of  the  Puritan  ministers  and  magistrates. 
It  may  or  may  not  be  reasonable  and  fortunate  that  he  is 
often  cited  as  the  embodiment  of  the  true  American  spirit; 
but  he  was  a  power  in  his  own  and  succeeding  generations, 
and  he  still  remains  the  best  known  American  writer  of  the 
colonial  time. 

In  population  Pennsylvania  was  the  most  heterogeneous 
of  the  colonies,  the  settlers  comprising  Qermans,  Moravians,! 

Welsh,  Scotch-Irish,  iand  Swedes.     Some  of  I 
^eUectaalCon-  ^ggg  people  cared  little  for  learning,  and  in 

Pttms^lvanla       many   outlying   districts   nothing  was   done 

for  education.  In  Philadelphia  and  other 
conmiunities  where  the  Quakers  were  numerous  schools  were 
early  established,  and  were  second  in  number  and  quality 
only  to  those  of  New  England.  A  printing  press  was  set 
up,  and  as  the  colony  allowed  freedom  in  the  expression  of 
belief,  works  of  many  kinds  were  published  unmolested.  The  I 
first  magazine  in  America  was  issued  in  Philadelphia;  and 
the  first  public  library  really  deserving  the  name  was  started 
there.  There  was  no  college  until  1766,  but  when  the  Uni- 
versity of  Pennsylvania  was  founded  in  that  year  it  was  with 
a  much  broader  purpose  than  that  which  led  to  the  estab- 
lishment of  Harvard  for  the  education  of  ministers.  * 
In  the  Autobiography  Franklin  preserves  the  records  of 
several  lesser  writers  of  Philadelphia.    On  his  first  visit  to 

Samuel  Keimer    (P-1738),  the  printer  who 

jSflS&^iteni    ^^^^  ^^^  emplo3rment,  he  found  that  gentle- 
man at  the  case,  composing,  in  a  double  sense 
of  the  word,  an  elegy  on  Aquilla  Bose  (1696P-1723).    Bose 


100  Amebican  Literatubb 

had  been  an  assistant  in  Keimer's  shop^  and  had  written  a 
number  of  promising  verses,  afterward  collected  as  Poems 
on  Several  Occasions.  Keimer  himself  produced  a  consider- 
able amount  of  prose  and  verse  on  various  subjects.  James 
Ealph  (1695P-1762),  who  afterward  became  a  successful 
London  hack-writer,  was  a  Philadelphian,  and  accompanied 
Franklin  on  his  first  visit  to  England.  Other  young  men 
of  literary  tastes  are  mentioned  in  the  Autobiography  as 
members  of  Franklin's  famous  club,  ^^The  Junto/' 

A  more  important  Philadelphia  writer  was  Thomas  God- 
frey (1736-1763),    After  a  brief  attendance  at  school  he  was 

apprenticed  to  a  watchmaker.  He  served  as 
Go^brey  *  lieutenant  in  the  militia  during  the  cam- 

paign of  1758,  and  the  next  year  went  to 
North  Carolina,  where  he  spent  much  of  the  time  until  his 
death.  During  his  brief  lifetime  he  wrote  several  poems  in 
which  critics  have  found  much  promise,  and  the  ^Trince  of 
Parthia/'  so  far  as  is  known  the  first  tragedy  written  in 
America.  This,  as  the  name  implies,  is  an  oriental  tale,  and 
the  plot  depends  on  the  familiar  motives  of  political  ambi- 
tion and  jealousy  in  love.  It  offers  a  goodly  share  of  battles, 
intrigues,  and  crimes,  and  closes  with  the  suicide  of  the  hero 
and  the  heroine.  It  is  written  in  blank  verse,  which  the  author 
does  not  handle  so  successfully  as  some  of  the  lyric  measures 
of  his  shorter  poems.  It  would  be  foolish,  however,  to  criticise 
the  "Prince  of  Parthia'*  by  any  strict  standard.  It  is  the 
work  of  an  unschooled  boy  of  twenty-three  years,  who  knew 
nothing  of  the  stage,  and  had  seen  few  if  any  plays.  All 
things  considered,  it  was  not  a  discreditable  attempt  at  a 
form  of  writing  hitherto  untried  in  America.  It  was  played 
in  Philadelphia  April  24,  1767,  but  no  details  of  the  per- 
formance are  known. 

In  one  department  of  knowledge — ^natural  science — Phila- 
delphia easily  surpassed  all  other  colonial  cities.   It  is  true  that 


The  Colonial  Time  101 

many  New  England  divines — Cotton  Mather  for  example — 
made  observations  in  natural  history,  and  were  prolific  of 

theories  regarding  natural  phenomena.  But 
^iladelphla  \j^  Philadelphia  popular  interest  was  more 
Science  general,  and  there  was  more  of  the  modern 

spirit  of  investigation  and  experimentation. 
Franklin  is  the  best  known  of  the  Philadelphia  writers  on 
science.  Among  others  was  John  Bartram  (1699-171; 
who  founded  the  first  botanical  garden  in  America,  and  made 
extended  excursions  in  search  of  specimens.  Like  Franklin, 
Bartram  was  a  self-made  man.  Jaines  Godfrey  (1704-1749)^ 
the  father  of  Thomas  Godfrey  the  poet,  was  a  mathematician 
and  inventor  of  what  was  later  known  as  Hadley^s  quadrant. 
A  still  more  distinguished  mathematician  and  scientist  was 
David  Bittenhouse  (1732-1796),  who  made  several  valu- 
able inventions,  and  achieved  international  fame  by  his  obser- 
vations of  the  transit  of  Venus  in  1769. 

During  the  colonial  time  New  York  produced  relatively 
little  literature  of  importance.    When  the  English  took  pos- 

session  of  the  colony  in  1664  they  apparently 

caught  something  of  the  easy-going,  pleasure- 
loving  spirit  of  the  Dutch  settlers;  and  the  little  enterprise 
and  activity  that  they  showed  was  along  commercial  rather 
than  intellectual  lines.  There  was  no  such  body  of  learned 
men  as  the  New  England  clergy,  and  little  attention  was 
paid  to  the  popular  diffusion  of  knowledge.  Schools  were  few 
and  poor.  Kings  College,  founded  in  1754,  and  after  the 
Eevolution  known  as  Columbia  College,  was  for  a  time  so 
involved  in  factional  disputes  that  it  accomplished  little 
good. 

Like  the  other  colonies.  New  York  produced  some  ac- 
counts of  the  physical  attractions  of  the  country,  and  histories 
of  contemporary  events.  One  of  the  best  of  these  was  the 
History  of  the  Five  Indian  Nations  by  Cadwallader*  Colden 


102  American  Lttebatube 

(1688-1776).    Golden  was  the  son  of  a  Scotch  minister.    He 
came  to  Pennsylvania^  and  later  to  New  York,  where  he  prac- 
ticed  medicine,    and    held    various   political 
SSJ^"^  offices.    He  took  great  interest  in  the  troubles 

between  the  French  and  the  colonies,  and  his 
history  was  written  to  show  the  relation  of  the  Iroquois  to 
this  contest.  The  first  part  was  published  in  New  York  in 
1727,  and  a  continuation  in  London  in  1747.  It  contains 
a  large  number  of  well-told  anecdotes,  and  reports  of  speeches 
by  Indian  chieftains.  Besides  practicing  his  profession  and 
engaging  in  politics  Golden  dabbled  in  many  departments 
of  natural  science,  and  was  a  correspondent  of  Linnaeus,  and 
other  learned  men.  SOlMli?  J[i^^^.5S?*25.  (1*^23-1790),  a 
native  of  Albany,  a  graduate  of  Yale  in  the  class  of  1741,  and 
afterward  a  lawyer  and  politician  in  New  York,  occasionally 
tried  his  hand  at  verse.  In  1747  he  published  Philosophic 
Soliiude,  a  moralizing  and  satiric  poem  in  mediocre  heroic 
couplets.  He  jalso  wrote  some  minor  verse  and  some  contro- 
versial works  in  prose.  He  shows,  more  than  most  of  his 
contemporaries,  the  direct  influence  of  Pope. 


CHAPTER  II 

The  Bevolutionary  Period  (1765-1800) 

I.  Controversial  Writings 

In  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  literature  in 
America  showed  no  strong  characteristics  and  no  very  defi- 
nite tendencies.    The  religious  intensity  that 
Conditioni^*'^  inspired  so  much  of  the  earlier  writing  was 

ceasing  to  be  dominant^  even  in  New  Eng-i 
land^  and  nothing  was  taking  its  place.  People  in  America 
were  coming  more  fully  to  realize  that  there  was  an  English 
literature;  and  in  a  blind  and  half-hearted  way  they  were 
beginning  to  imitate  it,  particxdarly  in  those  forms  which  are 
always  associated  with  the  eighteenth  century.  In  all  parts 
of  the  country  were  men  who  rhymed  in  the  heroic  couplet 
and  imitated  the  prose  of  the  Spectator.  In  the  more  liberal 
colonies  others  attempted  the  drama,  and  made  some  slight 
efforts  suggested  by  English  fiction.  But  there  was  little 
life  to  any  of  this,  sind  it  could  have  had  but  little  vital 
interest  for  contemporary  readers.  It  is  not  strange,  there- 
fore, that  when  the  country  was  stirred  by  great  political 
excitement,  all  writing  should  be  concerned,  closely  or  re- 
motely, with  the  new  ideas. 

For  at  least  a  quarter  of  a  century  from  the  passage  of 
the  Stamp  Act  in  1765  the  most  important  writings  in  Amer- 
ica dealt  with  the  great  political  questions 

SitiSa  ^^^^  *^^^  ^^^^^®  *^®  P^P^^-  ^^*^^  *^®  Declara- 
tion of  Independence  there  was  heated  dis- 
cussion of  the  rights  of  the  colonies.  During  the  war  there 
was  enthusiastic  patriotism  and  bitter  hatred  of  England, 
met,  of  course,  by  the  opposite  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  loyal- 

103 


104  AlCBRIOAN  LlTBRATUBB 

ists  in  America.  After  peace  was  declared  there  were  differ- 
ences of  opinion  regarding  the  nature  of  the  new  govern- 
ment.  When  the  Constitution  was  finally  adopted^  and 
Washington  was  inaugurated  President,  there  was  an  in- 
creased feeling  of  nationality,  and  a  disposition  to  exalt  the 
United  States  and  the  principles  for  which  it  stood.  So 
closely  did  literary  expression  follow  changes  in  popular 
thought  that  each  of  these  periods  of  political  development 
might  be  considered  a  period  in  the  history  of  American 
literature.  For  convenience,  however,  it  is  better  to  consider 
as  a  whole  the  years  from  the  passage  of  the  Stamp  Act  to 
the  close  of  the  century.  This  is  the  more  desirable  because 
as  a  rule  the  authors  who  were  writing  before  the  opening 
of  the  war  continued  after  its  close.  The  Bevolution  was  a 
young  men^s  movement;  and  while  not  all  the  leaders  lived, 
as  did  John  Adams  and  Thomas  Jefferson,  a  full  fifty  years 
after  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  yet  many  of  them 
continued  active  throughout  the  remainder  of  the  eighteenth 
century. 

During  the  early  part  of  the  period  the  most  numerous 
and  in  every  way  the  most  important  writings  are  those  that 

argue  questions  of  colonial  rights — ^he.  ora^ 
Writinn  J??^3    pamphlets,    newspaper    articles,    and^ 

state  j)apers  which  present  various  phases  of 
the  many-sided  controversy.  At  first  thought  it  might  seem 
that  such  productions  hardly  require  notice  in  a  history  of 
literature.  Those  of  this  time  merit  consideration  in  detail, 
however,  not  simply  because  they  were  the  chief  products 
of  literary  activity  in  America  from  1765  to  1789,  but  be- 
cause they  influenced  in  a  great  degree  the  literary  taste 
and  the  later  prose  style  of  the  country. 

The  number  and  variety  of  these  political  writings  is 
appallingly  large.  In  the  colonies  where  education  was 
general,   almost  every  town  had  its  pamphleteers,  or  its 


The  Revolutionary  Pekiod  106 

writers  for  the  public  press.  It  is  noticeable,  however,  that 
most  of  the  productions  that  have  survived  in  remembrance 
are  the  work  of  authors  who  are  known  for  other  lachieve- 
ments  than  those  of  the  pen.  The  nblest  men  in  business  and 
the  professions  took  a  hand  in  the  controversy,  and  it  is 
with  their  work  that  the  student  is  chiefly  concerned. 

The  earlier  diflBculties  between  the  colonies  and  the  mother 
country  centered  in  N"ew  England;  and  it  was  New  Eng- 

T         Otis  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  became  prominent  in  the 

discussion.    Among  the  earliest  of  these  was 
James  Otis  (1725-1783).  a  native  of  Massachusetts,  a  gradu- 
ate of  Harvard,  and  al  the  time  discussion  over  colonial 
rights  began,  a  prominent  lawyer  of  Boston,  with  an  especial 
reputation  for  success  in  criminal  cases.     In  1760  he  pub-  i 
lished  The  Rudiments  of  Latin  Prosody,  for  some  time  used 
as  a  textbook  at  Harvard  college,  but  his  other  writings  show 
little  trace  of  the  scholarly  temperament.    His  first  important 
appearance  in  political  affairs  was  in  1761,  when  he  made, 
his  famous  argument  before  the  Superior  court  of  Massa-j 
chusetts   in   opposition   to   writs  of   assistance.      Tradition 
gives  this  speech  great  importance,  and  there  is  no  doubt 
that  it  made  a  strong  impression  on  those  who  heard  it. 
There  remain  to  us  only  some  brief  notes  of  the  argument, 
taken  by  John  Adams. 

Otis  published  several  pamphlets,  of  which  the  most  im- 
portant were.  A  Vindication  of  the  Conduct  of  the  House  of 

otto's  FwnpbletB  ^^V^^^'^^"'^^'"^  °f  *^^-  'Province  of  th.p.  Mn.tm. 

chusetts  Ban  and  The  Bights  of  the  British 
Colonies  Asserted  an4  Proved^  The  former  of  these  was 
concerned  with  a  controversy  between  the  assembly  and  the 
royal  governor,  who  had,  it  was  claimed,  exceeded  his  power 
in  increasing  the  colonial  defenses  without  legislative  consent. 
The  second,  issued  in  1764,  was  one  of  the  many  pamphlets 
discussing  the  relations  between  the  colonies  and  Great  Brit- 


106  Amebigan  Literatube 

ain^  and  dealt  at  some  length  with  the  nature  of  goyemment 
and  other  questions  of  abstract  political  right.  This  is  more 
moderate  than  most  of  the  author's  writings^  and  is,  accord- 
ing to  Professor  Tyler,  ^Hhe  one  work  of  Otis  on  which  rests 
his  reputation  as  a  serious  political  thinker'';  but  it  is  less 
typical  of  the  author,  and  probably  was  less  popular  in  its 
day  than  the  Vindication,  or  the  later  answers  to  the 
"Gentleman  sit  Halifax."  The  most  noticeable  character- 
istic of  these  pamphlets  is  a  rough  and  ready  style,  and  a 
tendency  to  jumble  together  fact,  argument,  nonsense,  and 
personalities,  sometimes  in  confusing  fashion.  In  this  con- 
nection it  is  interesting  to  note  that  even  in  the  early  years 
of  the  Eevolutionary  agitation  Otis  showed  some  eccentrici- 
ties, and  that  when,  in  1769,  he  was  the  victim  of  a  per- 
sonal assault  by  political  enemies  he  became  hopelessly  in- 
sane. 

Another  writer  on  the  colonial  side  who  began  his  work 
during  the  early  years  of  the  controversy  was  Samuel  Adams 

Sun  ftiAdAms    llZM2il§22}-     He  was  bom  in  Boston  and 

was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1740.  After 
his  graduation  he  took  up  the  study  of  law,  abandoned  this 
for  business,  and  became,  so  far  as  his  personal  affairs  were 
concerned,  a  ne'er-do-weel,  subsisting  on  the  small  returns  of 
a  tax-coUectorship  and  on  the  contributions  of  friends. 
Time  which  he  might  have  devoted  to  his  own  business  he 
gave  to  public  affairs. 

Though  Samuel  Adams  probably  wrote  more  than  any 
other  politician  of  the  time,  he  published  little  over  his  own 
name.  The  most  numerous  class  of  his  writings  consisted 
of  Jetters  to  the  newspapers,  and  for  these  he  is  known  to  have 
fused  at  least  twenty-five  different  signatures.  He  was  also 
prominent  in  town-meeting,  assembly,  and  congress,  and  the 
most  effective  parts  of  the  many  reports,  addresses,  and  me- 
morials issued  by  these  bodies  are  often  ascribed  to  him. 


f 


The  Bbvolutionabt  Period  10? 

Some  of  theBe  public  documents  are  able  productions,  char- 
acterized by  logical  method  and  a  direct,  dignified  style. 
The  letters  to  newspapers,  and  the  personal  letters  that  his 
biographer  reprints,  differ  in  tone  according  to  the  subject 
and*  occasion.  The  power  of  the  author  lay  in  the  fact  that 
he  could  appeal  to  almost  every  human  motive,  even  the  low 
and  the  transient,  and  yet  could  so  guard  himself  that  hej 
had  "nothing  to  retract.^*  He  was,  in  short,  a  consummate! 
politician,  who  used  his  pen  effectively  for  political  pur- 
poses. 

John  Adams  £1735;0L826),  the  more  famous  cousin  of 
Samuel,  was  also  a  graduate  of  Harvard,  and  a  resident  of 
_  _     . .  Boston.    He  took  part  in  the  agitation  over 

the  Stamp  Act,  and  from  this  tmie  almost  to 
his  death  he  was  a  fairly  prolific  writer  on  politics  and 
government,  and  incidentally  on  other  subjects.  His  first 
important  work  was  four  papers  published  in  the  Boston 
Oazette  in  1765,  and  afterward  collected  as  an  Essay  on 
the  Canon  and  Feudal  Law.  This  he  followed  by  other 
pamphlets  and  contributions  to  newspapers,  among  which 
was  a  series  of  articles  signed  ''N'ovangelus''  in  response  to 
Daniel  Leonard,  who  wrote  on  the  Tory  side  over  the  name 
'^assachusettensis."  In  1776  he  was  a  member  of  the  com- 
mittee to  draft  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  but  the 
work  was  done  by  Jefferson.  From  1778  to  1788  he  was 
most  of  the  time  on  foreign  missions,  and  had  little  chance 
to  take  part  in  controversies  at  home ;  but  he  published  some 
articles  on  America  in  newspapers  abroad,  and  in  1787 
brought  out  in  London  the  first  volume  of  A  Defence  of  the 
Constitutions  of  Oovemment  of  the  United  States  of  Amerr 
ica-  This  work  was  later  continued  in  two  volumes  more, 
and  a  sequel,  entitled  '^Discourses  of  Davilla,'*  was  begun  in 
the  "Gazette  of  the  United  States''  in  1789,  but  was  discon- 
tinued on  account  of  the  political  protests  that  it  aroused. 


108  Amebigan  Literatubb 

Adamfl's  personal  letters  during  this  period  are  also  of  great 
interest. 

Unlike  his  cousin,  John  Adams  had  little  of  the  art  which 
conceals  the  writer's  personality  and  adapts  modes  of  ex^ 

pression    to    special    occasions    and    special 
l?5iod         classes  of  readers.     In  style  nearly  all  his 

writings  are  representative  of  the  man  him- 
self. From  early  years  he  was  a  theorist  on  the  nature  of 
government.  In  his  controversial  writings  he  appeals  to 
general  principles  rather  than  to  temporary  prejudices. 
Thus,  his  contribution  to  the  discussion  of  the  Stamp  Act 
began  with  a  general  consideration  of  the  canon  and  the 
feudal  law.  The  Defense  of  the  ConstittUions  is  based  on 
a  detailed  study  of  all  representative  governments  from  the 
earliest  times.  It  might  seem  that  this  method  of  dealing 
with  living  political  questions  would  be  tedious  »nd  inef- 
fectual; but  John  Adams,  though  a  theorist,  was  by  nature 
a  partisan  and  an  advocate,  and,  especially  in  his  early  writ- 
ings,  usually  carried  his  readers  with  him.  He  had,  however, 
a  certain  fondness  for  what  may  be  called  the  legal  mode 
of  expression  which  sometimes  interfered  with  his  direct- 
ness. It  is  interesting  to  compare  in  respect  to  style  his 
draft  for  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts,  written  in  1779, 
and  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  His  well-known 
petulance  and  uncertainly  of  temper  are  seen  most  plainly 
in  his  personal  letters,  but  often  make  themselves  manifest 
in  his  later  writings  intended  for  publication.    * 

James  Otis,  Samuel  Adams,  and  John  Adams  represent 
respectively  three  classes  of  patriotic  controversialists — ^the 

enthusiastic  but  often  illogical  agitator,  the 

C^frov^aUrts  ^^^**y  manipulator  of  meetings   and  writer 

of  communications  to  the  press,  and  the 
trained  legal  thinker  who  supported  his  position  by  appeals 
to  history  and  to  the  fundamental  principles  of  jurispru- 


J 


The  Bbvolutionart  Period  109 

dence.  Other  pamphleteers  attracted  equal  or  greater  atten- 
tion for  the  moment;  but  these  three  now  seem  to  stand  out 
with  the  greatest  prominence. 

Of  the  loyalist  writers  of  Massachusetts  the  most  notable 
was  Daniel  Leonard  (1740-1829)^  already  mentioned  as  an 

adversary  of  John  Adams.  He  was  a  native 
jMnMl  Leonard,  ^£  ^^^  colony,  a  graduate  of  Harvard,  and 

engaged  in  the  practice  of  law  in  Boston  until 
he  was  forced  to  leave  on  account  of  his  loyalist  principles. 
In  1774-6  he  published  in  a  Boston  paper  the  series  of  letters 
signed  ^^Massachusettensis.^^  These  are  probably  the  strong- 
est statements  of  the  loyalist  ca^e  that  appeared  in  New  Eng- 
land, and  for  fairness  of  tone  and  excellence  of  literary  man- 
ner were  hardly  surpassed  by  any  pamphlets  of  the  Revolu- 
tion on  either  side.  Indeed,  their  excellence  is  so  great 
that  it  seems  to  have  relieved  Leonard  from  the  suspicion  of 
their  authorship.  John  Adams  himself  was  for  many  years  / 
convinced  that  they  were  the  work  of  his  friend  Jonathan 
Sewall. 

Few  political  pamphleteers  in  the  New  England  colonies 
other  than  Massachusetts  deserve  mention  for  the  literary 

quality  of  their  work.  In  Ehode  Island  Qov- 
H*"%n  Ut  A  ®"^^  Stephen  Hopkins  (1707-1786)  issued 
Pamphleteers       ^  ^'^^^  ^^^  Bights  of  Colonies  Examined, 

a  pamphlet  in  which  he  sets  forth  his  views 
with  the  force  and  directness  of  a  man  who  in  earlier  life 
had  been  farmer,  land  surveyor,  merchant,  and  ship-builder. 
In  response  there  appeared  the  earliest  loyalist  pamphlet  of 
importance — A  Letter  from  a  Oentlem^n  at  Halifax  to  his 
Friend  in  Rhode  Islands  in  which  the  loyalist  claims  are  pre- 
sented in  the  frank  and  informal  manner  which  might  be 
used  in  a  personal  letter.  The  author  was  Martin  Howard, 
of  Newport,  a  man  in  regard  to  whom  biographical  informa- 
tion is  scanty  and  strangely  unsatisfactory. 


110  AMEBIOAK  LxTBttATUBS 

In  the  controversies  which  followed  the  Eevolntion,  par- 
ticularly that  over  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution,  New 

England  took  a  prominent  part;  but  no  work 
If^^  •  produced  in  this  section  of  the  country  is 
Controvmialists  worthy  to  be  classed  with  The  Federalist,  or, 

indeed,  is  of  sufiScient  importance  to  need  men- 
tion in  a  literary  history.    In  the  closing  years  of  the  century 
the  most  noted  New  England  orator,  and  one  of  the  most  popu- 
lar of  the  New  England  essayists,  was  Fisher  Ames  Q^S^- 
1808) .  He  was  a  Harvard  graduate  of  1774,  a  prominent  mem- 
ber of  the  Massachusetts  bar,  and  held  various 
political  oflBces.  His  most  famous  speech  was  de- 
livered in  congress  in  1796  in  favor  of  Jay^s  treaty  with  Great 
Britain.    His  political  essays,  contributed  to  Boston  papers, 
were  in  the  English  eighteenth  century  manner,  and  bore 
such    signatures    as    "Camillus,''    *TL«aocoon,''    ^Talkland,^' 
"Phocion,''  etc.    He  was  a  master  of  a  forceful  and  efiEective 
X  formal  style,  and  his  admirers,  who  gave  him  the  nickname 
J  of  "tiie  American  Burke/'  were  wont  to  amuse  themselves 
by  pointing  out  his  resemblances  to  his  supposed  prototype. 
He  deserves  to  be  remembered  for  his  influence  on  the  next 
generation  of  American  orators. 

While  the  political  situation  in  the  middle  colonies  was  at 
first  not  so  acute  as  in  Boston,  yet  there  were  a  great  number 

of  controversial  writings  in  the  years  imme- 

SftmiMrSeaburr   ^^^^^^7  preceding  the  Eevolution.     In  New 

York  the  most  prominent  of  the  loyalist 
pamphleteers  was  Samuel  Seabury  (1729-1796),  before  the 
war  pastor  of  a  church  in  Westchester,  and  after  its  close  con- 
secrated the  first  bishop  of  the  American  Episcopal  church. 
In  1774  he  attacked  the  Continental  congress  in  three  pam- 
phlets signed  ^A  Farmer,^'  or  "A.  W.  Farmer/'  and  he  is 
also  supposed  to  have  been  the  author  of  some  less  important 
papers.     The  ^^Westchester  Farmer"  pamphlets  purport  to 


The  Ebvolutionary  Pbbiod  111 

be  written  by  a  plain  man  *to  others  of  his  class;  and  the 
author  succeeded  in  adapting  his  arguments  to  the  common 
people  without  undue  cheapness  or  lack  of  dignity. 

Among  the  many  writers  who  replied  to  the  '^Westchester 
Farmer*'  the  most  important  was  Alexander  Hamilton  (1757- 

1804).  then  a  boy  of  seventeen  in  attendance 
gj^^'™  at  King's,  now  Columbia,  college.    Hamilton 

was  a  native  of  the  West  Indies  who  had  been 
forced  by  family  misfortunes  to  enter  a  business  office  before 
he  was  thirteen  years  of  age,  and  had  shown  such  ability  that, 
through  the  kindness  of  friends,  he  was  sent  to  America  for 
an  education.  His  precocity  is  nowhere  better  shown  than 
in  the  grasp  of  the  entire  subject  of  controversy  manifested 
in  his  two  pamphlets  in  reply  to  Seabury.  At  times  his 
style  has  a  terseness  and  definiteness  that  he  may  have  ac- 
quired in  part  while  writing  business  letters  in  the  counting 
house  at  Jamaica.  His  few  attempts  at  humor  are  only 
moderately  successful,  and  the  part  of  the  pamphlet  ad- 
dressed especially  to  farmers,  while  logically  sound,  is  more 
artificially  wrought  than  the  rest. 

As  Hamilton  continued  to  write  controversial  documents, 
and  during  much  of  the  Eevolution  9,ided  Washington  in 

his  correspondence,  his  style  improved  until 

it  was  nearly  or  quite  at  its  best  in  the  Fed- 
erdlisL  This  remarkable  series  of  papers,  published  in  New 
York  during  1787-8  with  a  view  to  influencing  public  senti- 
ment in  favor  of  the  proposed  constitution,  is  the  most 
famous  and  probably  the  most  valuable  political  treatise  that 
America  has  produced.  Written  as  a  controversial  document, 
and  printed  in  a  newspaper  during  a  political  campaign,  it  has 
come  to  be  regarded  as  an  authority  on  the  nature  and  prin- 
ciples of  the  American  government,  and  is  quoted  by  writers 
on  constitutional  law  as  almost  equal  in  weight  to  the  con- 
stitution itself.    Its  reputation  r^sts  mainly  o&  its  content; 


112  American  Literatukb 

but  it  never  oould  have  been  so  authoritative  at  home,  or 
have  won  such  admiration  abroad,  if  the  great  ideas  which 
it  sets  forth  had  not  been  expressed  with  fitting  simplicity, 
dignity,  and  clearness.  So  free  is  the  work  from  tricks  and 
mannerisms  that  it  seems  impossible  to  determine  from  in- 
ternal evidence  the  authorship  of  several  disputed  numbers. 
Hamilton  originated  the  idea  and  certainly  wrote  more  than 
half  the  papers.  John  Jay  (1745-1829),  another  New 
York  publicist,  contributed  a  few,  and  James  Madison  some- 
what  more.  The  few  whose  authorship  is  disputed  lie  be- 
tween Hamilton  and  Madison. 

In  1793  Hamilton  wrote  a  series  of  essays  signed  ^Tacifi- 
cus^^  in  which  he  advocated  neutrality,  and  endeavoured  to 

oflEset  the  efiEects  of  the  Genet  agitation ;  later 
Later  "WMna     ^^  published  another  series  signed  ^^Camillufi^^ 

in  support  of  the  Jay  treaty.  The  great  mass 
of  his  published  writings  consist  of  letters  and  state  papers 
written  while  he  was  serving  the  government  in  various 
capacities.  Almost  any  of  these  documents  illustrates  Ham- 
ilton's excellence  as  a  political  writer,  but  none  of  them 
approaches  the  Federalist  in  importance. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  during  the  Eevolution  the 
most  distinguished  patriot  of  Pennsylvania  was  Benjamin 

Franklin,  whose  literary  activities  were  con- 
?"?^^te**^""  sidered  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Franklin 
FrankUn  ^^  abroad  from  1764  to  1775,  and  from  1776 

to  1785,  and  America  missed  the  witty  and 
telling  arguments  and  comments  on  events  which  he  would 
surely  have  written  if  he  had  been  at  home  during  the  most 
exciting  years  of  the  struggle.  While  in  England  he  con- 
tributed to  the  London  papers  various  articles  intended  to 
help  the  colonies,  and  the  report  of  his  examination  before 
the  House  of  Commons  in  1766  was  often  reprinted  and 
proved  a  valuable  campaign  document 


The  Ebvolutionaby  Period  113 

The  moBt  prominent  loyalist  of  Pennsylvania  was  Joseph 
Galloway  (1729-1803)^  a  personal  friend  and  at  one  time  a 

political  associate  of  Franklin.     In  the  first 
josepa  y  Continental  congress  he  proposed  a  plan  for 

home  role  which  is  said  to  have  been  satisfactory  to  the 
government^  but  which  was  rejected  by  a  vote  of  six  colonies 
to  five.  It  was  virtually  this  plan  which  he  expounded  in  the 
most  notable  of  his  many  pamphlets,  A  candid  Examination 
of  the  Mutual  Cl(\^^  of  (^tpM  Jjritain  q.nd  ihs  Coloniesj^ 
withaPlan^  Principles. 

The  tone  of  this  discussion  is  on  the  whole  moderate^  as  was 
befitting  one  who  was  pleading  for  mutual  concessions. 
The  author  does  not,  however,  succeed  in  concealing  his  con- 
tempt for  what  he  considers  quibbling  arguments  of  his 
opponents — ^for  example  the  claim  that  Americans  were  sub- 
jects of  the  crown  but  not  of  Parliament,  or  that  Parliament 
had  a  right  to  lay  duties  for  the  purpose  of  regulating  trade, 
but  not  of  raising  revenue. 

The  most  expert  manipulator  of  these  fine-drawn  distinc-  • 
tions  that  so  irritated  Galloway  was  John  Dickinson  flY32*  ^ 

1808  ">.  Like  Galloway,  he  was  a  native  of 
Maryland.  He  studied  law  in  Philadelphia 
and  London,  und  later  held  many  important  positions  in 
both  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland.  His  contributions  to  con- 
troversial literature  won  for  him  the  name  of  ^Tenman  of 
the  Bevolution,''  and  his  latest  editor  says,  '^Prom  no  other 
leader  of  that  movement  originated  a  series  of  arguments 
of  half  the  number,  importance,  or  popularity.''  The  num- 
ber of  his  writings  is  certainly  large,  and  there  is  abundant 
evidence  of  their  popularity  and  infiuence.  Nevertheless,  the 
reader  who  makes  their  acquaintance  for  the  first  time  is 
likely  to  be  disappointed.  There  is,  as  Galloway  charged, 
a  great  deal  of  hair-splitting;  and  the  style,  while  clear,  is 
not  in  any  way  attractive  or  remarkable.    The  controversial 


114  Amebioak  Literatube 

articles  seem  better  calculated  to  please  those  already  con- 
vinced than  to  make  new  converts. 

Dickinson's  writings  include  many  state  papers,  begin- 
ning with  the  declaration  of  rights  and  the  petition  to  the 
king  adopted  by  the  Stamp  Act  congress,  and  continuing 
through  most  of  the  war.  He  was  also  a  prolific  writer  of 
pamphlets  ]and  contributions  to  newspapers.  The  most 
famous  of  these  is  the  Letters  from  a  Pennsfflvania  Farmer ^^ 
which  were  published  in  1767-8  and  quickly  attracted  great 
attention  at  home  and  abroad.  Unlike  Seabury,  Dickinson 
made  no  attempt  to  keep  up  the  character  of  a  farmer;  but 
the  slyle  of  the  Letters  is  more  direct  and  forcible  than  that 
of  many  of  his  writings.  Dickinson's  services  did  not  end 
with  the  war,  but  when  the  ratification  of  the  constitution 
was  under  consideration  he  supported  it  in  a  series  of  letters 
signed  *Tabius,''  much  in  the  manner  of  his  earlier  work. 
His  once  famous  ^^Liberty  Song''  will  be  mentioned  in  an- 
other connection. 

Thomas  Paine  11737-1809)^  who  came  to  Pennsylvania  in 

1774,  soon  became  one  of  the  most  famous  citizens  of  the 

colony.    He  was  bom  in  England,  where  he 
Thomas  Fama      i    i  •  .  i 

had  a  not  very  prosperous  career  as  stay-maker, 

exciseman,  and  usher  at  a  school.  At  length  Franklin,  then 
in  England,  was  struck  by  the  excellence  of  a  statement  of 
grievances  which  he  had  drawn  up  for  his  brother  excise- 
men, and  offered  him  letters  to  friends  in  America.  Soon 
after  his  arrival  in  Philadelphia  he  secured  the  editorship 
of  the  Pennsylvania  Magazine.  His  few  months  of  editorial 
work  were  evidently  of  great  service  in  developing  his  Uterary 
style.  Early  in  1776  he  published  Common  Sen^e^  his  first 
political  pamphlet,  and  the  first  important  tract  advocating 
the  independence  of  the  colonies.  Prom  this  time  until  the 
close  of  the  war  he  was  in  the  service  of  the  country,  with  the 
army,  as  secretary  of  the  committee  of  congress  on  foreign 


The  Re  volution  aby  Period  115 

affairs^  and  as  envoy  to  France.  He  also  found  time  to  write 
on  political  topics.  His  most  important  work  of  this  period 
WBB_The  Crisis,  a  series  of  papers  which  appeared  at  inter- 
vals during  the  war,  and  had  for  its  object  to  revive  the 
spirits  of  the  colonists,  and  to  arouse  public  opinion  in  sup- 
port of  the  military  operations.    The  first  number  begins: 

These  are  the  times  that  try  men's  souls.  The  summer  soldier  and 
the  sunshine  patriot  will,  in  this  crisis,  shrink  from  the  seryice  of 
their  country;  but  he  that  stands  it  note,  deserves  the  love  and 
thanks  of  man  and  woman.  Tyranny,  like  hell,  is  not  easily  con- 
quered; yet  we  have  this  consolation  with  us,  that  the  harder  the 
conflict,  the  more  glorious  the  triumph.  What  we  obtain  too  cheap, 
we  esteem  too  lightly:  it  is  deamess  only  that  gives  everything  its 
value.  Heaven  knows  how  to  put  a  proper  price  upon  its  goods ;  and 
it  would  be  strange  indeed  if  so  celestial  an  article  as  Fbebdom  should 
not  be  highly  rat^. 

After  peace  was  declared,  Paine  went  abroad.  He  was 
outlawed  from  England  on  account  of  his  Rights  of  Mtm, 

an  answer  to  Burke^s  Reflections  on  the  French 
^^^^^        Revolution,  published  in  1791.    In  Prance  he 

became  a  member  of  the  National  convention, 
opposed  the  execution  of  the  king,  and  was  imprisoned  for 
a  year.  When  lie  regained  his  liberty  he  censured  Washing- 
ton for  not  attempting  to  secure  his  release,  and  in  this  way 
alienated  many  friends  in  America.  A  year  or  two  later  he 
published  The  Age  of  Reason^  a  work  which  long  made  his 
name  a  synonym  for  irreligion  and  atheism.  Afterward  he 
returned  to  America,  where  he  died  in  1809. 

This  reference  to  Paine's  foreign  career  is  necessary  be- 
cause his  later  impopularity  was  often  remembered  when 
his  earlier  fame  was  forgotten.  When  he  left  America  at 
the  close  of  the  war  few  men  were  more  generally  esteemed 
for  their  services  to  the  country;  and  it  is  conceded  by  most 
later  historians  that  no  contemporary  writings  exercised  such 
influence  as  did  Common  Sense  and  The  Crisis,    It  must  be 


116  Amebioak  Litbbatubb 

admitted  that  in  most  of  Faine's  work  there  is  here  and 
there  to  be  found  a  flippancy,  a  certain  vulgar  quality,  oflEen- 

sive  not  only  to  his  opponents  but  to  the  ju- 
£i^»       "^   dicial  minded;  }and  this  quality  is  especially 

noticeable  in  his  later  writings,  such  as  the  let- 
ter to  Washington  and  The  Age  of  Reason.  The  Revolutionary 
pamphlets  are  relatively  free  from  this  fault.  Common 
Sense,  especially  the  central  and  important  section  entitled 
'^Thoughts  on  the  Present  State  of  the  American  Affairs,"  is 
■characterized  by  plain,  eflfective  speaking,  not  often  lack- 
ing in  dignity.  The  Crisis,  though  it  rarely  rises  to  the 
height  of  the  opening  sentences  quoted  above,  is  probably  the 
'  best  written  of  Paine's  important  works.  It  is  true  that  the 
arguments  are  sometimes  specious,  and  that  an  appeal  is 
sometimes  made  to  prejudices,  but  this  is  only  saying  that 
the  essays  were  well  planned  to  accomplish  their  purpose. 

The  political  literature  of  the  South  during  the  Eevolu- 
tion  was  less  in  amount  than  that  of  the  North,  but  not 

inferior  in  quality.     Patrick  Henry   (1736- 

Stei^  HftQTv  ^'^^^^  began  his  career  early  in  the  contro- 
versy. He  was  of  good,  though  not  aristo- 
cratic, birth.  At  first  he  tried  farming  and  trade,  end 
succeeded  in  losing  most  of  the  money  that  he  had  received 
from  his  father  and  his  father-in-law.  He  then  studied  law  and 
soon  acquired  a  reputation  as  a  successful  advocate.  In 
1765  he  was  elected  to  the  Virginia  House  of  Burgesses,  and 
after  this  he  held  various  political  oflBces,  among  them  mem- 
ber of  the  first  Continental  congress  and  governor  of  Vir- 
ginia. He  opposed  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  but 
became  reconciled  to  it  after  the  first  ten  amendments  were 
adopted.  In  later  life  he  was  oflEered  the  positions  of  envoy 
to  France,  secretary  of  state,  and  chief  justice  of  the  United 
States,  all  of  which  he  declined. 

Patrick  Henry  is  known  mainly  as  an  orator;  and  his 


Thb  Ebvolutionaky  Pebiod  117 

fame  rests  largely  on  the  traditions  of  two  speeches.     The 

first  of  these  was  delivered  in  1765,  when,  a  young  and 

„       ,  ^    .        unknown  backwoods  lawyer,  he  succeeded  in 
Henry's  Oratory  » 

stampeding  the  House  of  Burgesses  in  favor 

of  outspoken  resolutions  denouncing  the  Stamp  Act.  Of 
this  address  the  only  important  part  that  has  come  down  to 
us  is  the  single  interrupted  sentence:  '^Caesar  had  his 
Brutus  $  Charles  the  First  had  hia  Cromwell;  and  George  the 
Third — ^may  profit  by  their  example.''  The  second  famous 
oration  was  pronounced  ten  years  later  before  the  convention 
called  when  the  governor  had  dismissed  the  Assembly,  and 
the  old  colonial  government  was  at  an  end.  A  report  of  this 
speech  is  given  in  Wirt's  ^Tjife  of  Patrick  Henry,"  which, 
though  it  cannot  be  traced  to  its  origin,  has  been  generally  ac- 
cepted by  tradition,  and  is  perhaps  better  known  than  any 
other  passage  of  American  oratory.  The  section  most  frequently 
quoted  is  that  beginning,  "Mr.  President,  it  is  natural  to 
indulge  in  the  illusions  of  hope,"  and  ending  with  the  words, 
"Give  me  Liberty,  or  give  me  Death."  Other  speeches,  the 
language  of  which  is  better  authenticated,  show  a  vigorous 
style  well  suited  to  oral  delivery.  They  are  not,  however, 
remarkable  productions  in  any  way.  Patrick  Henry,  like 
many  other  orators,  must  have  derived  his  power  mainly  I 
from  his  personality,  and  not  from  his  literary  style,  or  even 
from  the  logical  quality  of  his  argument. 

Thomas  Jefferson   (1743-1826),  the  greatest  of  the  Vir- 
ginia statesmen  except  Washington,  began  his  literary  career 

ft  little  later  than  Henry.     He  was  not  ad- 

entrance  into  politics  was  in  1769,  when  he 
became  a  member  of  the  House  of  Burgesses.    His  first  im- 
portant contribution  to  revolutionary  literature  was  made 
in  1774,  when  he  wrote  a  draft  of  instructions  to  the  Virginia' 
delegates  in  Congress,  a  work  afterward  published  as  A  Sum- 


118  Akebioan  Literatubb 

mflry  View  of  the  Bights  of  Bntish  America.  The  next  year 
he  filled  a  vacancy  in  the  Continentid  congress,  and  was  re- 
elected to  the  second  congress.  Though  his  writings  were 
few,  his  ability  was  recognized,  and  he  was  chosen  chairman 
of  the  committee  to  draft  the  ''Declaration  of  Independence/' 
After  the  ''Declaration''  was  adopted  he  withdrew  from  na- 
tional affairs,  and  devoted  himself  to  those  of  his  own  colony. 
He  revised  much  of  the  legislative  code  of  Virginia,  and 
while  governor  wrote  many  letters  and  state  papers  of  inter- 
est. Later,  in  answer  to  inquiries  from  the  French  govern- 
ment, he  prepared  his  Notes  on  Virginia.  This  is  an  ac- 
count of  the  physical  and  industrial  condition  of  the  state, 
with  some  comments  on  social  and  political  matters.  It 
was  first  printed  privately  in  France,  but  was  afterward 
widely  circulated.  From  1784  to  1789  Jefferson  was  in 
France.  His  later  writings,  including  many  letters  and  state 
r  papers,  and  the  Autqbiographii  are  of  the  greatest  value  to 
the  student  of  history,  but  show  no  characteristics  not  found 
in  the  earlier  work. 

The  best  known   production  of  Jefferson  is   of   course 
the  "Declaration  of  Independence,"  and  in  this  are  seen 

the  chief  characteristics  of  all  his  better 
S'LJSSto^  writings.     He  was  by  nature  a  theorist,  or, 

as  it  was  the  fashion  to  say  in  his  time,  a 
philosopher;  and  he  had  a  way  of  stating  general  principles 
with  the  dignity  and  sounding  force  that  is  fitting  to  the 
utterance  of  great  truth.  He  was  also  a  close  observer  and 
a  man  of  wide  interests,  given  to  the  collection  of  facts,  and 
on  occasion  to  their  arrangement  and  presentation  in  an 
effective  manner.  These  two  characteristics  are  shown  re- 
spectively in  the  opening  paragriaphs  of  the  "Declaration," 
and  in  the  specific  accusations  against  the  king  that  follow. 
The  charge  sometimes  brought  against  the  "Declaration," 
and  no  doubt  applicable  to  some  of  Jefferson's  writings,  is 


The  Eevolutionaby  Period  119 

that  the  connection  between  facts  and  generalizations  is 
neither  as  close  nor  as  logical  as  it  should  be.  The  ^^Declara- 
tion/' however,  expressed  the  ideas  not  of  Jeflferson  as  an 
individual,  but  of  the  American  people  as  he  and  the  other 
members  of  the  committee  understood  them.  It  is  unfair, 
therefore,  to  hold  him  too  closely  responsible  for  anything 
but  the  style;  and  this,  though  it  has  been  sneered  at  as 
"sophomoric,''  showed  by  the  immediate  efiEect  of  the  docu- 
ment, and  by  its  hold  on  the  people  for  over  a  centuiy,  that 
it  was  well  adapted  for  its  purpose. 

Daniel  Dulany  ^(1721-1797).  a  prominent  lawyer  of  Mary- 
land, published  at  the  time  of  the  Stamp  Act  agitation  a 

pamphlet  entitled  Considerations  on  the  Pro- 
!'•■■«'  priety  of  Imposing  Taxes  on  the  British  Col- 

Contr^nialitts  ^^^'    '^^^^  ^®  ^°®  ^^  ^^®  calmest,  clearest,  and 

most  effective  of  the  many  arguments  against 
taxation  without  representation.  Its  fame  in  later  years  was 
perhaps  the  less  because  the  author  advocated  only  peaceable 
means  of  resistance,  and  consistently  refused  to  join  in  the  war 
for  independence.  James  Madison  (1751-1836),  of  Virginia, 
a  classmate  of  Freneau  and  Brackenridge,  and  another  con- 
tributor to  the  Federalist,  did  his  most  important  writing  in 
connection  with  the  framing  and  adoption  of  the  constitution, 
though  his  career  as  a  statesman  extended  well  into  the  nine- 
teenth century.  His  literary  taste  was  surer  than  Jefferson's, 
but  his  writings  lack  some  of  the  elements  of  popularity. 

In  the  work  of  moulding  public  opinion  and  stimulating 
popular  enthusiasm  political  orations  and  pamphlets  were 

aided  by  writings  in  forms  more  commonly 

icidUtmture*    ^P^^^®^  ^^  ^^  'literary.'*    Prose  essays,  fiction, 

and  the  drama  were  all  used  to  express 
opinions  on  questions  of  vital  contemporary  interest.  Some 
of  the  prose  and  much  of  the  political  verse  of  the  time  may 
be  classed  as  satire,  using  this  term  in  the  broad  sense  which 


120  AlCERIOAN  LrrSEATUBB 

includes  downright  abuse  as  well  as  more  delicate  and  cutting 
attacks.  Ballads  commemorating  important  events  were 
sometimes  satirical^  sometimes  laudatory.  Songs  of  all  kinds 
were  common.  All  these  productions  followed  the  fashions 
recently  prevalent  in  England.  A  favorite  prose  form  was 
the  Addisonian  essay.  Verse  satire  was  written  in  the  heroic 
couplet  of  Pope,  or  in  the  tetrameter  of  Butler  and  Churchill. 
Ballads  were  of  a  few  conventional  types.  Songs  were  usually 
written  to  some  popular  tune,  and  were  often  little  more  than 
parodies  and  adaptations  of  older  originals.  Among  the 
most  popular  of  these  models  was  the  English  song  ^^Eearts 
of  Oak.''  The  tune  which  became  known  us  'TTankee  Doodle*' 
was  supplied  with  many  sets  of  words. 

The  best  of  these  writings  on  the  patriot  side  are  the  work 
of  men  who  are  known  for  other  things,  and  who  will  be 

discussed  later  in  this  chapter.  Many  songs 
||"^*°  »nd  ballads  were  anonymous,  but  with  the 

exception  of  the  different  versions  of  ^TTankee 
Doodle"  few  of  these  survived.  John  Dickinson  composed  a 
^Tjiberty  Song"  in  the  same  earnest  but  iminspired  manner 
in  which  he  wrote  his  pamphlets. 

Oome  join  hand  in  hand,  brave  Americans  aU, 
And  rouse  your  bold  hearts  at  fair  Liberty's  caU; 
No  tyrannous  acts,  shaU  suppress  your  just  claim, 
Nor  stain  with  dishonor  America's  name. 
In  freedom  we're  bom,  and  in  freedom  we'U  liye; 
Our  purses  are  ready, 
Steady,  Friends,  steady, 
Not  as  slaves,  but  as  freemen  our  money  we'U  give. 

Our  worthy  forefathers — ^let's  give  them  a  cheer — 
To  climates  unknown  did  courageously  steer; 
Thro'  oceans  to  deserts,  for  freedom  they  came. 
And,  dying,  bequeath'd  us  their  freedom  and  fame. 

Slightly  less  wooden  is  the  ^Tennsylvimia  Song,"  which  ap- 
peared anonymously  about  1775. 


The  Ebvolutionaey  Period  121 

We  are  the  troop  that  ne'er  will  stoop 

To  wretched  slavery, 
Nor  shall  our  seed,  by  our  base  deed, 

DespisM  vassals  be ; 
Freedom  we  will  bequeathe  to  them. 

Or  we  will  bravely  die ; 
Our  greatest  foe,  ere  long  shall  know. 
How  much  did  Sandwich  lie. 
And  all  the  world  shall  know, 

Americans  are  free ; 
Nor  slaves  nor  cowards  we  will  prove, 
Great  Britain  soon  shall  see. 

Of  the  anonymous  ballads  the  best  is  '^Nathan  Hale/'  or 
"Hale  in  the  Bush/'  which  has  a  genuine  poetic  quality. 
It  begins^ 

The  breezes  went  steadily  thro'  the  tall  pines, 
A  saying  "oh !  hu-ush !"  a  saying  "oh !  hu-ush !" 

As  stilly  stole  by  a  bold  legion  of  horse. 

For  Hale  in  the  bush,  for  Hale  in  the  bush, 

and  concludes: 

The  faith  of  a  martyr,  the  tragedy  shew'd, 

As  he  trod  the  last  stage,  as  he  trod  the  last  stage. 

And  Britons  will  shudder  at  gallant  Hale's  blood. 
As  his  words  do  presage,  as  his  words  do  presage. 

Thou  pale  king  of  terrors,  thou  life's  gloomy  foe. 
Go  frighten  the  slave,  go  frighten  the  slave ; 

TeU  tyrants,  to  you,  their  allegiance  they  owe. 
No  fears  for  the  brave,  no  fears  for  the  brave. 

The  Tory  writings  have  been  less  carefully  preserved,  and 
the  identity  of  the  authors  was  in  many  cases  never  revealed. 

The  two  best  known  loyalist  writers  of  verse 
^^d*^Mh^"  were  Jonathan  Odell  and  Joseph  Stansbury, 
Stansbury  whose  fame  is  due  to  the  fact  that  their  names 

are  associated  with  their  writings,  rather  than 
to  any  superiority  of  their  work.  Odell  (1737-1818)  was 
an  Episcopalian  clergyman,  a  native  of  New  Jersey,  of  old 
New  England  Puritan  stock.     He  is  known  chiefly  as  the 


122  Amsrioan  Litsratubb 

author  of  four  satirical  poems  published  in  1779,  of  which 
"The  American  Times''  is  the  most  representative.  These 
are  the  sort  of  bitter  satire  that  consists  largely  of  vitupera- 
tion of  measures  and  men : 

Virginian  caitiff!    Jefferson  by  name; 
Perhaps  from  Jeffries  sprung  of  rotten  fame. 
His  savage  letter  aU  belief  exceeds. 
And  Ck>ngre88  glories  in  his  bmtal  deeds. 

Joseph  Stansbuiy  (1760-1809),  a  Philadelphia  crockery 
merchant,  bom  in  London  and  educated  at  Saint  Faults 
school,  was  a  man  of  much  cleverness  and  good  nature.  Most 
of  his  poems  are  lyrics;  while  they  are  intense  in  their  de- 
votion to  the  king  they  lack  the  bitterness  of  OdelPs,  and 
\ sometimes  have  even  an  element  of  playfulness. 
^  II.  Genbkal  Literature 

Purely  political  writings,  numerous  though  they  were,  did 

not  constitute  all  of  the  literary  work  done  between  1765  and 

1800.     Just  before  the  outbreak  of  violent 

literary  At-  discussion  there  had  become  noticeable  in 
tempts  and  «       #  < -i  i  i  • 

Ambitions  various  parts  of  the  country  an  mcreased  m- 

terest  in  literature.  Men  of  literary  tastes, 
many  of  them  young  scribblers  in  or  just  out  of  college, 
tried  their  hands  at  the  lighter  forms  of  writing  then  current 
in  England,  and  occasionally  at  more  ambitious  productions. 
During  the  war  these  men  naturally  gave  their  attention  to 
questions  of  the  day,  and  confined  themselves  largely  to  po- 
litical satires  and  allegories,  martial  odes,  and  patriotic 
essays.  After  peace  was  restored  they  turned  again  to 
milder  and  more  serious  forms  of  literature.  With  the  sense 
of  political  independence  came  the  feeling  that  America 
should  achieve  literary  independence  as  well;  and  writers 
throughout  the  country  were  seized  with  a  desire  to  manufac- 
ture at  once  a  great  American  literature.  The  serious  attempts 


The  Ebvolutionart  Pbeiod  123 

of  these  men  form,  from  the  viewpoint  of  to-day,  one  of  the 
most  amusing  phenomena  in  the  history  of  the  nation.  The 
feeling  seemed  to  prevail  that  the  first  poet  to  complete  an 
heroic  poem  in  twelve  books  would  be  the  American  Homer, 
and  the  first  to  write  an  acceptable  tragedy  the  American 
Shakespeare.  The  result  was  a  flood  of  epics  and  dramas, 
accompanied  by  innumerable  lesser  works  of  all  descriptions. 
The  most  important  group  or  school  of  writers  was  a 
coterie  of  Connecticut  men,  mostly  graduates  of  Yale^  who 

came  to  be  known  as  the  ^'Hartford  Wits.'* 
liuB  Htrtfora       ipj^^  leading  members  of  the  group  were  John 

Trumbull,  Timothy  Dwight,  and  Joel  Bar- 
low. Associated  with  these  were  David  Humphreys,  Lemuel 
Hopkins,  Bichard  Alsop,  Theodore  Dwight,  and  others  of 
still  less  importance. 

The  causes  that  led  to  the  transfer  of  literary  supremacy, 
from  Massachusetts  and  Harvard  college  to  Coimecticut  andi 

Yale  were  partly  accidental,  and  partly  to  be) 
Literary  traced  in  religious,  political,  and   economic 

^S^^c^t         conditions.    Massachusetts  men  were  by  both 

temperament  and  position  more  active  in  re- 
ligion and  politics.  Harvard  college,  though  nominally 
orthodox,  was  being  infected  with  the  liberalism  that  later 
led  to  the  Unitarian  schism,  and  already  was  obliged  to  de- 
fend itself  against  many  persons  who  regarded  its  tendencies 
as  dangerous.  At  the  opening  of  the  war  Boston  was  ag- 
gressive in  resisting  England,  and  in  turn  suffered  more  than 
any  other  city.  It  was  natural  that  Boston  men  should  be 
more  bitter  in  political  controversy,  and  that  after  the  war 
they  should  devote  themselves  to  other  things  than  polite 
letters.  Connecticut,  on  the  other  hand,  was  less  disturbed 
by  popular  movements.  The  orthodoxy  of  Yale  was  un- 
questioned, even  though  many  of  the  undergraduates  were 
influenced  by  French  skepticism.    The  patriotism  of  the  state 


124  Ahesigak  Litebatubb 

was  undoubted;  yet  feeling  did  not  run  so  high  as  in  the  region 
of  actual  conflict.  The  Connecticut  valley,  already  prosper- 
ous before  the  war,  was  soon  after  its  close  one  of  the  richest 
sections  of  the  country.  With  this  worldly  prosperiiy  and 
this  feeling  of  certainly  regarding  religious  affairs  came 
leisure  for  polite  literature  and  a  disposition  to  uphold  vested 
rights,  and  to  look  with  suspicion  on  all  radicalism.  The 
Hartford  convention  of  a  later  date  was  the  outgrowth  of  ten- 
dencies already  in  operation. 

With  the  exception  of  Barlow  all  the  Hartford  Wits  were 
conservatives  in  religion  and  politics,  hating  Prance,  and 

opposing  with  especial  vigor  all  political 
^oMm^^     measures  that  tended  to  shake  public  credit, 

or  disturb  the  existing  order  of  things.  All 
of  them,  too,  were  disciples  of  the  eighteenth  century  school 
of  literature,  accepting  without  question  Addison  as  the  great- 
est English  master  in  prose,  and  Pope  in  verse. 

The  eldest  and  probably  the  most  talented  of  the  Hartford 
Wits  was  John  Trumbull  (1750-1831),  a  descendant  of  an 

old  New  England  family.  Bemarkable  stories 
are  told  of  TrumbulFs  precocity,  the  most 
notable  being  that  he  passed  the  entrance  examinations  for 
Yale  college  at  the  age  of  seven.  He  actually  entered  upon 
his  studies  in  that  institution  in  1763,  took  his  bachelor's 
degree  in  1767,  and  his  master's  degree  after  three  years 
more  of  residence  as  "Dean's  scholar."  After  studying  law 
for  a  year  he  was  recalled  to  Yale  for  two  years  as  tutor.  He 
then  went  to  Boston  and  read  law  in  the  oflSce  of  John  Adams 
until  near  the  outbreak  of  hostilities,  when  he  returned  to 
New  Haven  and  took  up  the  practice -of  his  profession.  Later 
he  removed  to  Hartford,  where  after  the  war  he  held  various 
political  offices. 

Trumbull's  literary  career  began  while  he  was  a  graduate 
student  at  Yale,     In  1769-70  he  wrote,  probably  with  the 


The  Bevolutionaey  Period  125 

assistance  of  Timothy  Dwight,  the  Medler,  a  series  of  essaYS 
obviously  modeled  on  the  Spectator.     These  deal  with  lit- 
erary,  social,   and  even  religious   questions, 

£a^  "^tines    ^^*  ^^  ^^*  touch  politics.     Later,  in  1770, 

he  published  another  series,  the  Correspondent. 
His  commencement  piece,  spoken  on  the  occasion  of  taking 
his  second  degree,  was  "An  Essay  on  the  TJse  and  Advantages 
of  the  Pine  Arts,"  written  partly  in  prose  and  partly  in  the 
heroic  couplet.  During  his  tutorship  at  Yale  he  continued 
to  write  verse,  producing  several  elegies  and  odes  with  obvious 
indebtedness  to  Qray  and  Milton.  His  most  important  pro- 
duction of  this  time  was,  however.  The  Progress  of  Dulness, 


a  lively  satire  on  modem  education  in  three  cantos  of  Hudi- 
brastic  verse.    This  poem  seems  to  be  the  literary  result  of  a ' 
movement  led  successfully  by  some  of  the  younger  men  at 
Yale  in  favor  of  greater  attention  to  English  composition, 
oratory,  and  belles  lettres  in  that  institution. 

Before  Trumbull  entered  the  law  office  of  John  Adams  at 
the  age  of  twenty-three  he  had,  as  has  been  seen,  made  sev- 
eral attempts  at  writing  in  both  prose  and  verse,  and  had 
shown  considerable  proficiency  in  managing  conventional 
literary  forms.  In  Boston,  as  might  be  expected,  he  was 
diverted  from  literary  criticism,  theories  of  education,  and 
social  foibles  to  the  all-absorbing  topic  of  politics.  In  1774 
he  wrote  an  "Elegy  on  the  Timfts/^  a  poem  of  sixty-three 
stanzas  on  the  Port  Bill  and  similar  subjects.     The  next. 

year,  after  he  returned  to  New  Haven,  he  pub- 
lished in  Philadelphia  the  first  part  of 
McFingal.  This  satire,  the  work  for  which  Trumbull  is 
chiefly  remembered,  is  a  burlesque  in  Hudibrastic  verse  on  1 
the  Tory  sympathizers.  McFingal,  the  butt  of  the  poem,  is  a 
voluble  loyalist  of  Scotch  extraction.  This  first  part  of  the 
poem,  afterward  divided  into  two  cantos,  tells  of  lan  exciting 
town,  meeting,  and  is  largely  polemical.    The  two  later  cantos. 


126  AmEBIOAN  LiTBKATtTBB 

added  in  1782  in  response  to  popular  demand^  are  a  trifle 
broader  in  their  hmnorons  account  of  the  tarring  and  feather- 
ing of  McFingal^  and  the  secret  meeting  of  his  adherents  in 
his  cellar.  The  real  work  of  the  satire  in  influencing  popu- 
lar feeling  was  done  by  the  first  part.  The  poem  is  usually 
said  to^be  modeled  on  Hudibras,  though  Professor  Tyler 
thinks  he  finds  more  influence  of  the  contemporary  English 
satirist  Churchill.  A  work  of  this  kind  is  little  read  after  the 
occasion  that  inspired  it  has  passed  into  history;  but  the 
popularity  of  McFingal  in  its  day  was  very  greats  and  it  was 
many  times  reprinted  in  the  nineteenth  century.  Undoubtedly 
it  was  the  most  successful  American  political  satire  before 
the  Biglow  Papers.  To-day  it  is  known  only  by  name  and 
by  a  few  pointed  couplets: 

But  optics  sharp  it  needs,  I  ween, 
To  see  what  is  not  to  be  seen. 

No  man  e*er  felt  the  halter  draw, 
With  good  opinion  of  the  law. 

Trumbull  took  little  part  in  the  deliberate  efforts  put  forth 
by  his  contemporaries  to  produce  a  new  national  literature. 
Although  he  lived  until  1831^  his  writing  was  almost  all  done 
before  the  close  of  the  war.  His  only  noteworthy  publications 
of  later  date  were  political  satires  produced  in  collabora- 
tion with  some  of  the  lesser  Hartford  Wits.  These  will  be 
discussed  in  another  place. 

Trumbull's  friend  and  collaborator,  Timothy  Dwight 
(1752-1817)  >  was  graduated  from   Yale  in   1769,  taught 

Dwiffht  ®^^^^  *^^  ^^  years,  and  in  1771  became 
tutor  at  Yale  at  the  same  time  as  Trumbull. 
In  1777  he  gave  up  his  tutorship  to  become  chaplain  in  the 
army.  Afterward  he  lived  at  Northampton,  where  his  grand- 
father, Jonathan  Edwards,  had  lived  before  him,  occupjring 
himself  as  farmer,  preacher,  and  member  of  the  legislAtore. 


The  Bbvolutionabt  Period  127 

Prom  1788  to  1795  he  was  pastor  of  the  church  at  Greenfield, 
Connecticut,  and  from  1795  to  Mg-deattjresident jof  Yale. 
It  should  be  noted  that  both  as  tutor  and  as  president  he  didv 
much  to  impioye  instruction  in  English  and  allied  branches. ' 

While  still  an  undergraduate  but  seventeen  years  of  age 
Dwight  was  probably  associated  with  Trumbull  in  the  produc- 
tion of  the  Medler,  and  afterward  of  the  Cor- 
of^clmaim  respondent.     Even  before  this  he  had  made 

some  metrical  translations  that  had  attracted 
attention,  and  a  little  later,  in  1771,  began  his  epic  poem, 
the  ConQuesi  of  Canaan.    He  tells  us  that  this  was  finished  in 
three  years,  but  was  not  published  until  1785.    It  contains, 
howerer,  several  references  to  events  of  the  Kevolutionary 
war  which  must  have  been  written  later,  and  there  is  reason 
for  suspicion  that  it  was  revised  in  other  particulars.    On  the  i 
whole  it  seems  more  representative  of  1785  than  of  1774.  ( 
It  is  a  poem  of  eleven  books  in  the  heroic  couplet,  and  treats 
of  the  subject  named  in  the  title,  with  considerable  deviation 
from  the  Scripture  narrative,  for  the  sake  of  proportion  in 
the  story.    Some  of  the  verse  is  effective  enough  after  a  me- 
chanical fashion,  but  the  poem  as  a  whole  is  academic,  plod-  \ 
ding,  and  mediocre.     The  Eevolutionary  battles  and  heroes  I 
that  the  author  wishes  to  honor  are  introduced  in  extended 
similes,  which  ostensibly  illuminate  something  in  the  narra- 
tive. 

The  preface  of  the  Conquest  of  Canaan  is  an  interesting 
illustration  of  the  attitude  of  American  writers  just  after 
the  close  of  the  war.  After  a  fulsome  dedication  to  Wash-  . 
ington  the  author  remarks  that  his  epic  "is  the  first  of  the 
kind  which  has  been  published  in  this  country,^'  makes  un- 
abashed reference  to  the  Iliad  and  Aeneid,  and  claims  the 
liberty  allowed  to  other  poets  of  coining  new  words.  In  con- 
clusion he  says :  "As  the  poem  is  uniformly  friendly  to  deli- 
oacy,  and  virtue,  he  hopes  his  cpuntryme»  will  so  far  regartj 


128  Amebican  Ltteratube 

him  with  candour^  as  not  to  impute  it  to  him  as  a  faulty  that 
he  has  endeavoured  to  please  them^  and  has  thrown  in  his  mite^ 
for  the  advancement  of  the  refined  arts^  on  this  side  of  the 
Atlantic/* 

Not  long  after  the  publication  of  the  Conquest  of  Canaan 
Dwight  began  the  composition  of  Qreenfield  HilL  a  work 

which,  however,  did  not  appear  in  print  until 
1794.     This  poem,  in  seven  Parts,  takes  its 
name  from  the  village  of  Greenfield  where  the  author  was 
pastor.    As  originally  planned  it  was  to  imitate  a  different 
English  poet  in  each  Part,  and  although  this  plan  was  aban- 
doned, the  imitation  is  still  evident  in  many  places.     The 
metres  employed  are  blank  verse,  the  heroic  couplet,  the 
Spenserian  stanza,  and  the  octo-syllabic  couplet.    The  titles 
of  the  diflEerent  sections  are  "The  Prospect,"  "The  Flourish- 
ing Village,*'  "The  Burning  of  Fairfield,"  "The  Destruction 
of  the  Pequods,"  "The  Clergyman's  Advice  to  the  Villagers," 
"The  Farmer's  Advice  to  the  Villagers,"  and  "The  Vision." 
The  author  javows  as  his  object  "To  contribute  to  the  innocent 
amusement  of  his  countrjrmen,  and  to  their  improvement  in 
manners,  and  in  economical,  political,  and  moral  sentiments ;" 
and  though  there  is  much  pleasant  description  of  simple  rural 
tlife,  especially  in  the  earlier  parts,  the  whole  poem  is  pain- 
IfuUy  didactic.    Some  passages  have  value,  however,  as  early 
examples  of  nature-appreciation  in  American  poetry. 
Dwight  was  the  author  of  several  other  works.    While  a 
^  chaplain  in  the  army  he  wrought  out  the  song  "Columbia," 
the  first  stanza  of  which  runs : 

Columbia,  Columbia,  to  glory  rise, 
The  queen  of  the  world,  and  child  of  the  skies ! 
Thy  genius  commands  thee;  with  raptures  behold, 
While  ages  on  ages  thy  splendours  unfold. 
Thy  reign  is  the  last,  and  the  noblest  of  time, 
Most  fruitful  thy  soil,  most  inviting  thy  dime. 
Let  the  crimes  of  the  east  ne'er  encrimson  thy  name^ 
Be  freedom,  and  science,  and  virtue,  thy  fame. 


The  Ebvolutionabt  Period  129 

Perhaps  his  most  poetic  bit  of  verse  is  the  well-known  para- 
phrase of  the  one  hundred  and  thirty-eighth  Psalm,  be- 
ginning: 

I  love  thy  kingdom,  Lord, 
The  house  of  thine  abode. 

Less  important  writings  of  a  later  time  were  a  verse  satire, 
^^The  Triumph  _pf_Infidelit)r/^  some  observations  on  **Lmi- 
guage/'  and  an  'TEssaxon  Light/^    The  year  after  Dwight^s 

death  one  hundred  and  twenty-three  of  his 
W^^  *     ^    sermons  were  collected  and  printed  under  the 

title  of  _Theqlg^y  explained  and  defended. 
In  1821  was  issued  his  chief  prose  work,  the  Travels,  These 
were  based  on  a  series  of  systematic  vacation  journeys  in  the 
course  of  which  President  Dwight  traversed  the  greater  part 
of  New  England  and  much  of  New  York.  They  are  in  the 
form  of  letters  addressed  to  an  imaginary  English  gentleman, 
but  were  intended  for  American  readers.  They  give  many 
interesting  and  valuable  facts  regarding  the  localities  visited 
by  the  author,  and  abound  in  all  sorts  of  miscellaneous  ob- 
servations. Their  chief  value  is  to  the  student  of  American 
social  history. 

In  many  ways  Timothy  Dwight,  though  he  had  rather  less 
of  genius  than  either  Trumbull  or  Barlow,  was  the  most 

representative  of  the  Hartford  Wits.  Unlike 
^^^*^rteji'"    Trumbull,  he  continued  writing  throughout 

his  life.  The  period  before  political  discus- 
sion became  all-absorbing  is  represented  by  his  contributions 
to  the  Medler  and  the  Correspondent;  the  years  of  the  war 
by  "Columbia;"  the  later  period  of  literary  striving  by  the 
Conquest  of  Canaan  and  Greenfield  Hill.  The  author's  limi- 
tations are  also  significant.  The  attempting  of  an  epic,  the 
deliberate  imitation  of  English  authors  in  a  poem  intended 
to  be  national,  like  Greenfield  Hill,  the  fondness  for  formal, 
eomiding  passages  of  rhetorical  verse,  and  the  plodding,  con- 


130  Amebioan  Lxtsbatubb 

scientioTiB,  but  uninspired^  quality  of  all  his  work  are  charac- 
teristic of  the  school  to  which  he  belonged. 

Joel  Barlow  (1754-1812^.  the  third  of  the  best-known  trio 
of  Hartford  Wits^  was  the  most  typical  Yankee  of  them 

all.  He  took  his  bachebr's  degree  at  Yale 
^  in  1778^  and  remained  at  the  college  for  a 

time  as  graduate  student.  He  seems  to  have  hoped  for  a 
tutorship^  but  was  disappointed^  and  turned  to  the  study  of 
law.  Hearing  that  the  troops  were  in  need  of  chaplains^  he 
took  a  six  weeks^  course  in  divinity^  was  licensed  to  preach, 
and  ministered  for  some  time  to  the  army  in  New  York. 
After  this  he  kept  a  printing  office,  edited  a  country  paper, 
and  revised  the  translation  of  Watta^s  Psalms,  Later  he  went 
to  England,  where  he  acted,  no  doubt  innocently,  as  the  agent 
of  a  swindling  land  company.  From  here  he  drifted  to 
France,  was  made  a  Citizen,  and  served  the  French  govern- 
ment in  various  ways.  In  1806  he  returned  to  America;  in 
1811  he  was  appointed  minister  to  France,  and  the  next  year 
he  lost  his  life  in  Poland  while  endeavouring  to  join  Napoleon 
during  the  retreat  from  Moscow. 

Barlow  differed  from  most  of  his  Connecticut  contem- 
poraries in  being  less  conservative  in  politics  and  religion. 

Consistency  was  not  one  of  his  chief  virtues, 
Tm^Saa"*^  and  it  is  impossible  to  say  from  what  he  wrote 

and  did  exactly  what  he  believed.  After  his 
experiences  in  France  his  orthodox  countrymen  thought  little 
good  of  him,  and  the  Congregational  church  of  Connecticut 
replaced  his  edition  of  the  Psalms  by  a  sounder,  if  less  poet- 
ical, version  by  Dr.  Dwight.  Beputable  historians  have  also 
accused  him  of  treasonable  designs  against  his  country.  On 
the  other  hand,  his  admirers  claim  that  he  has  been  libelled 
and  misunderstood.  At  all  events  he  was  inclined  to  be  a 
liberal,  and  his  liberal  t^ud^nqies  showed  th^ms^lv^Q  in  his 
citings. 


The  EfivotttTioiJAaT  Pesioo  131 

Barlow's  literary  aspirations  seem  to  have  been  in  the 
direction  of  verse  rather  than  of  prose.    On  the  occasion  of 

his  graduation  he  read  a  poem  on  '^The  Pros- 

Etfto^Vfirte       P^^*  ^'  Peace;"  and  soon  afterward  he  began 

a  narrative  and  philosophical  poem  which  oc- 
cupied his  spare  time  during  his  chaplainship^  and  was  pub- 
lished in  1787  as  the  Vision  of  Columbus.  After  leaving  the 
army  he  contributed  to  the  Anarchiadj  a  political  satire 
which  will  be  mentioned  later^  and  turned  out  a  number  of 
miscellaneous  trifles.  While  abroad  he  wrote  in  prose  on  po- 
litical subjects,  his  most  important  work  being  Advice  to  the 
Prfoggggrf  Orders,  published  in  1792  and  1795.  He  also 
wrote  a  verse  satire,  ^*The  Conspiracy  of  Kings.*'  It  was  in 
1793,  during  his  sojourn  in  Prance,  that  he  produced  his 
mock  heroic  poem  ^^Hasty  Pudding.''  In  parody  of  the 
many  poems  inscribed  in  sounding  phrases  to  the  Father  of 
his  Country  the  author  dedicated  this  effusion  to  Mrs.  Wash- 
ington. The  work  has  life,  and  movement,  and  real  wit. 
In  one  or  two  places  the  humor,  while  not  coarse,  is  not 
exactly  refined,  and  unfortunately  these  are  the  passages 
most  frequently  quoted. 

Barlow  seems  never  to  have  given  up  the  idea  of  writing 
the  great  American  poem,  and  in  1807  he  published  the 
*TC.   ^  «     tt  J    Oolumiiad.      This   is    really    the    Vision   of 

Columbus  enlarged  from  nine  to  ten  books, 
and  altered  in  many  respects,  mostly  for  the  worse.  As  in 
the  earlier  poem,  Columbus  in  prison  is  visited  by  Hesper, 
the  genius  of  the  western  world,  who  enables  him  to  behold 
in  detail  the  course  of  events  in  America  to  the  time  the 
poem  was  written,  ^nd  in  a  more  general  way  the  greatness 
of  the  country  thereafter.  The  verse  is  accompanied  by  pe- 
dantic and  dogmatical  prose  notes,  in  which  the  author 
assumes  to  instruct  the  reader  on  all  sorts  of  divergent  sub- 
jects.    Strangely  enough,  Barlow,  always  fond  of  rhetorical 


132  Amebicax  Litebatubb 

effect^  became  more  bombastic  as  he  grew  older.  Thns^  in  the 
Vision  of  ColumbuSy  he  wrote : 

The  Hero  tam'd.    And  tow'rd  the  crowded  coast 
Rose  on  the  wave  a  wide-extended  host, 
They  shade  the  main  and  spread  their  sails  abroad, 
From  the  wide  Laurence  to  the  Georgian  flood, 
Point  their  black  batteries  to  the  approaching  shore. 
And  bursting  flames  begin  the  hideous  roar. 

Twenty  years  later  in  the  Columbiad  these  six  lines  were 

expanded  into  twenty-eight,  part  of  which  run: 

Columbus  tum'd ;  when  rolling  to  the  shore 
Swells  o'er  the  seas  an  undulatmg  roar; 
Slow,  dark,  portentious,  as  the  meteors  sweep 
And  curtain  black  the  illimitable  deep, 
High  stalks,  from  surge  to  surge,  a  demon  Form 
That  howls  thro  heaven  and  breathes  a  billowing  storm* 
His  head  is  hung  with  clouds;  his  giant  hand 
Flings  a  blue  flame  far  flickering  to  the  land; 
His  blood-stain'd  limbs  drip  carnage  as  he  strides 
And  taint  with  gory  grume  the  staggering  tides; 
Like  two  red  suns  his  quivering  eyeballs  glare, 
His  mouth  disgorges  all  the  stores  of  war. 
Pikes,  muskets,  mortars,  guns  and  globes  of  fire 
And  lighted  bombs  that  fusing  trails  expire. 

This  is  Barlow  at  his  worst.  Many  passages  of  the  CoVamr 
biad  are  in  good  imitative  verse,  and  show  a  vigor  »nd  fire 
unknown  to  the  author's  contemporary,  Dwight.  But  the 
length  of  the  poem,  its  ambitious  title  and  plan,  its  bombast, 
and  the  author's  pedantic  notes  have  made  it  the  stock  ex- 
ample of  the  works  produced  in  an  jittempt  to  manufacture 
a  national  literature. 

The  other  Hartford  Wits  were  less  important,  and  show 
much  the  same  characteristics  as  Trumbull   and  Dwight. 

David  Humphreys  (1752-1818).  was  a  gradu- 
w^^l^d^   »te  of  Yale,  an  aid-de-camp  of  Washington 
Humphreys         ^^  *^^  ^^^>  ^^^  afterward  secretary  of  lega- 
tion at  Paris.     On  his  return  he  introduced 
I  merino  sheep  into  America,  an  act  for  which  he  perhaps  de- 


The  Eevolutionaby  Pebiod  133 

serves  more  credit  than  for  his  literary  achievements.  Dur- 
ing the  war  he  wrote  a  metrical  "Address  to  the  Armies  of  the 
United  States^^  which  was  widely  reprinted  and  translated 
into  French.  A  longer  Poem  on  the  Happiness  of  America 
also  gained  great  currency.  The  Widow  of  Malabar,  a  tragedy 
adapted  from  the  French,  was  acted  at  Philadelphia  in  1790. 
Besides  these  works  Humphreys  wrote  a  Life  of  General  Put- 
nam, and  minor  songs  and  poems. 

Lemuel  Hopkins  (1760-1801),  a  Hartford  physician, 
Theodorepwight  (1764r-1846_][,  a  cousin  of  Timothy  Dwight 
and  a  Hartford  and  New  York  lawyer,  and  Eichard  Alsop 
(17^1-1  ft"*-*^)  I  who  seems  to  have  had  no  occupation  but  scrib- 
bling, were  members  of  the  same  literary  set.  These  men 
were  given  to  coUaboration^-a  practice  more  common  among 
authors  of  the  eighteenth  century  than  now.  In  1786-7 
Trumbull,  Barlow,  Hopkins,  and  Humphreys  contributed  to 

,^    ^       ^.  ^     the  ^'New  Haven  Qazette**  American  Antiqui-  ^r 
The  Anarchiad       .       .  ,  ^ 

ttesy  better  known  as  the  Anarchiad.     This 

series  of  papers  illustrates  the  elaborate  and  ingenious  manner 
then  employed  by  the  satirist.  The  first  number  reports  the 
finding  in  some  prehistoric  ruins  to  the  westward  of  "The 
Anarchiad,  a  Poem  on  the  restoration  of  Chaos  and  sub- 
stantial Night,  in  twenty-four  books.^^  This  epic  is  con- 
jectured to  be  the  oldest  in  the  world,  and  Homer,  Virgil, 
Milton,  and  Pope  are  said  to  have  known  and  imitated  it. 
This  device  made  it  possible  to  give  parodies  of  these  authors 
as  extracts  from  the  imaginary  manuscript.  The  following 
is  typical : 

Lo,  the  poor  Briton,  who,  corrupted,  sold, 
Sees  God  in  courts,  or  hears  him  chink  in  gold. 

•  .  •  .  . 

A  heaven  like  London  his  fond  fancy  makes 
Of  Nectar'd  porter  and  ambrosial  steaks. 
Not  so,  Columbia,  shall  thy  sons  be  known. 
To  prize  the  public  weal  above  their  own. 


134  Amebican  Ltteraturb 

The  satire  is  directed  against  the  Democrats,  and  especially 
against  the  leaders  in  Shays's  rebellion  and  the  advocates  of 
paper  money.  The  title  has  reference  to  the  reign  of  anarchy 
which  all  Connecticut  Federalists  believed  would  follow  the 
triumph  of  the  liberal  party. 

Another  satire  of  slightly  later  date  was  jhe  EchOj  begun 
in  the  ^^American  Mercury'^  J^JLISL    Hopkins  seems  to  have 

been  the  leading  spirit  in  this,  and  among 
his  fellow-workers  were  Theodore  Dwight, 
Alsop,  and  probably  Trumbull.  It  was  started  with  the  idea 
of  ridiculing  false  literary  taste,  but  soon  became  largely 
political  and  attacked  Democratic  measures  and  the  prevalent 
enthusiasm  for  French  ideas.  It  consists  of  poems  in  the 
heroic  couplet  burlesquing  current  writings  of  all  sorts,  such 
as  bombastic  newspaper  reports,  political  speeches,  and  state 
papers.  The  same  authors  wrote  many  other  diatribes  in 
similar  vein,  particularly  New  Year's  verses  summarizing  the 
political  events  of  a  year.  For  some  reason  not  easily  ex- 
plained from  the  quality  of  the  work,  the  most  famous  of 
these  is  the  ^Tolitical  Greenhouse"  for  1798,  a  strong  satire 
in  Hudibrastic  verse.  The  greater  part  of  the  Echo  and  some 
of  the  miscellaneous  poems  were  collected  into  a  volume  in 
1807.  This  volume  shows  the  unfortunate,  but  marked,  de- 
terioration in  the  tone  of  political  satire  which  was  taking 
place  about  the  close  of  the  century.  The  attacks  on  oppo- 
nents are  personal  and  scurrilous.  There  is  little  wit,  and  that 
little  is  often  coarse.  Similar  characteristics  will  be  noticed 
in  the  work  of  Carey  and  other  contemporary  satirists  of  the 
middle  states. 

It  is  hard  for  a  reader  of  to-day  to  treat  the  Hartford  Wits 
as  seriously  as  they  deserve.  Their  desire  to  increase  the 
interest  in  literature  and  to  stimulate  literary  production 
in  the  new  country  was  a  laudable  one ;  but  their  attempt 
was  so  ambitious  and  so  deliberate  that  it  could  not  have  im- 


The  Bbvolutiokart  Period  135 

mediate  success.  Moreover,  the  fact  that  they  were  conserva- 
tives in  taste  as  well  as  in  principles  led  them  to  adopt  lit- 
erary forms  that  were  already  becoming  out- 
^^^^^J^  worn.  It  is  owing  rather  to  the  manner  than 
ip^its  i^  ^^  quality  of  their  work  that  to-day  there 

is  little  interest  in  any  of  their  writings.  In 
their  generation  their  essays  and  verses  were  really  enjoyed  by 
many  of  their  countrymen;  and  English  reviews  by  no  means 
friendly  to  America  gave  much  higher  praise  to  the  Columbiad 
and  the  Conquest  of  Canaan  than  the  most  patriotic  American 
would  think  of  giving  now.  It  is  not  likely,  if  ever  the 
pendulum  of  literary  taste  swings  back,  and  the  despised 
eighteenth  centuiy  literature  is  again  admired,  that  these 
imitative  American  attempts  will  regain  their  interest.  But 
a  careful  study  of  the  intellectual  history  of  America  shows 
that,  though  their  manner  was  not  followed,  they  had  more 
influence  on  the  development  of  a  national  literature  than 
is  often  supposed. 

While  the  Hartford  Wits  were  busily  at  work,  literary  pro- 
duction in  Boston  was  meagre  and  unimportant.  Massachu- 
setts had  suffered  much  from  the  war,  and  com- 
Mutsfudiusettf  mercial  prosperity  returned  slowly.  More- 
over, changes  in  religious  belief  and  social 
conditions  were  absorbing  the  energies  of  thinking  men.  For 
these  or  other  reasons  few  Massachusetts  authors  wrote  any-  \ 
thing  worthy  remembrance  in  the  years  immediately  after  j 
the  war;  and  of  these  few  the  majority  were  women. 

Mercy  Otis  Warren  (1728-1814),  sister  of  James  Otis  and 
wife  of  James  Warren,  another  political  leader,  was  prolific 

of  both  prose  and  verse.  Her  "Adulator" 
MwcyOtto  ^jY^3)    ^^^^^  ..r^^g  Qroup"   (1775)   are  dra- 

matic sketches  in  which  contemporary  char- 
acters figure  under  fictitious  names.  Mrs.  Warren  had  no 
touch  of  humor,  and  these  dramatic  satires,  if  they  may  be  bo 


136  AlCSRIGAN  LlTERATUBE 

characterized;  lire  very  heavy  and  very  severe.  Her  tragedies^ 
the  "Sack  of  Eome^*  and  the  'Tjadies  of  Castile/^  also  teach  po- 
litical lessons.  Besides  her  satiric  and  dramatic  works  she 
wrote  a  history  of  the  Eevolution  '^interspersed  with  biographi- 
cal;  political;  and  moral  observations/^  published  in  1805.  Her 
relationship  to  two  leading  families  and  her  acquaintance 
with  the  most  prominent  men  of  the  country  make  her  work 
of  much  interest  and  considerable  value.  She  had  an  ex- 
tensive correspondence  with  many  of  the  best  known  men  and 
women  of  her  time^  and  her  letters  are  models  of  dull;  formal 
propriety.  Over  the  signature  "Philomela**  she  addressed 
Mrs.  Winthrop  as  "Honoria**  and  Mrs.  Adams  as  *Tortia." 
Among  her  contemporaries  she  was  noted  for  her  ability  to 
draw  "characters,"  especially  of  persons  whom  she  disliked. 
These  sharp  and  unsympathetic  portrayals  often  made  her  im- 
popular,  and  her  characterization  of  John  Adams  in  her  his- 
tory led  to  a  wordy  controversy  with  that  irascible  statesman 
that  is  now  perhaps  better  known  than  any  of  her  other  works. 
Phillis  Wheatley,  » jiaye  .girl  born  in  Africa  about  the 
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  brought  to  America  in  her 

childhood,  and  educated  by  Mr.  Wheatley  of 
**  ^  Boston,  wrote  a  considerable  number  of  verses. 
They  are  good  conventional  work  in  the  forms  then  popular, 
devoid  of  originality,  but  really  remarkable  considering  the 
history  of  the  author.  That  they  have  been  remembered  is 
partly  due,  however,  to  the  fact  that  in  the  days  of  the  abo- 
litionists they  were  often  cited  to  prove  the  intellectual  capa- 
bility of  the  negro. 

Susanna  Haswell  Eowson  (1762-1824)  should  perhaps  be 
mentioned  here,  though  her  most  popular  book  was  written 

in  England,  and  several  of  her  writings  benr 

^'^^f^  ^^      later  date  than  1800.    She  was  the  daughter 
well  RowBon  ° 

of  a  British  naval  oflScer  who  served  in  Amer- 
ica and  married  a  Boston  woman.    At  the  outbreak  of  the 


The  Ebvolutionaby  Period  137 

war  Susaima^  a  child  of  fourteen  years,  went  to  England  with 
her  parents,  where  she  afterward  became  governess  in   a 
noble  family,  was  married,  and  began  her  career  as  an  au- 
thor.    Her  first  novel,  Victoria,  appeared  in  1786.     **The 
characters  are  taken  from  real  life,  and  the  design  of  the 
work  is  'to  improve  the  morals  of  the  female  sex  by  impressing 
them  with  a  just  sense  of  the  merits  of  filial  piety/''    The 
same  description  might  with  slight  change  be  applied  to 
most  of  Mrs.  Eowson's  works.     Charlotte  Temple,  the  only 
one  now  remembered,  was  published  in  London  in  1790.   Three 
years  later  Mrs.  Eowson  came  to  America,  where  she  first 
went  on  the  stage,  and  then  conducted  for  twenty-five  years  a 
fashionable  school  for  girls  in  and  near  Boston.     During 
her  theatrical  experience  she  wrote  an  opera,  a  farce,  and  I 
some  other  works,  and  later  published  poems,  essays,  and  I 
stories,  all  sentimentally  didactic.    The  novel  Sarah,  the  Ex^  \ 
emplary  Wife,  with  the  motto  "Do  not  marry  a  fool,"  is  said  \ 
to  be  based  on  her  own  matrimonial  experience. 

Another  Boston  writer  of  some  note  in  his  day  was  Bobert 
Treat  Paine,  Jr.  (1773-1811),  son  of  the  signer  of  the  Dec- 
laration.    He   was   christened   Thomas,  but 
R^rt  Treat       secured  a  legal  change  of  name  because  of  the 

odium  that  attached  in  New  England  to  the 
greater  Thomas  Paine.    After  taking  a  degree  at  Harvard  he 
entered  business,  but  gave  much  of  his  time  to  writing.    In 
1794  he  established  the  "Federal  Orrery,''  in  which  he  pub- . 
lished  the  "Jaoobiniad"  and  the  "Lyars,"  political  satires  that  | 
made  him  many  enemies.  When  at  last  Puritan  Massachusetts  I 
permitted  stage  plays  he  wrote  a  prize  prologue  for  the  open- 
ing of  the  first  theatre  in  Boston.    After  his  newspaper  ven- 
ture failed  he  became  more  closely  connected  with  theatrical 
matters,  and  married  an  actress.    For  a  time  he  studied  and 
attempted  to  practice  law,  but  his  naturally  indolent  dis- 
position and  increasing  habits  of  dissipation  prevented  sue- 


138  American  Literature 

cesS;  and  he  died  in  extreme  poverty.  This  wretched  close  of 
his  career  was  ascribed  by  the  more  Puritanical  residents  of 
Boston  to  his  connection  with  the  theatre^  and  his  life  was 
often  cited  to  point  a  moral.  His  poetical  works  include 
•  many  occasional  poems^  all  in  the  heroic  couplet^  among  them 
the  prologue  already  referred  to  and  "The  Euling  Passion/' 
delivered  before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  Society  of  Harvard. 
He  also  wrote  a  number  of  rather  bombastic  patriotic  songs^  of 
which  ^'Adams  and  Liberty*'  was  the  most  famous. 

Among  the  minor  Massachusetts  writers  was  J^_.JSann&h 
Adams  (1755-1832)^  author  of  a  Dictionary  of  Religions,  n 

History  of  the  Jews,  a  History  of  New  Eng- 

chuMtts  *V^ters  ^^'^^^  *^^  several  other  works.    All  these  were 

long  considered  excellent  reading  for  the 
young,  and  may  still  be  found  in  old  libraries.  Hannah  W. 
Foster  (1769-1840),  bom  in  Boston  and  after  her  marriage 
a  resident  of  Brighton,  Massachusetts,  also  wrote  moral  books 
for  young  ladies.  Her  most  popular  story,  The  Coquette,  or 
the  History  of  Eliza  Wharton,  was  published  in  the  last  years 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  reprinted  many  times  after- 
ward. Dr.  Benjamin  Church,  a  Boston  physician  of  consid- 
erable culture  and  abiliiy,  wrote  a  number  of  miscellaneous 
poems,  including  patriotic  songs,  and  a  long  verse  satire, 
"The  Times,'*  dealing  principally  with  the  Stamp  Act.  He 
was  accused,  however,  of  being  a  loyalist  in  disguise,  and  of 
writing  Tory  parodies  on  his  own  poems.  Early  in  1776, 
after  being  imprisoned  for  some  time,  he  was  forced  to  leave 
the  country,  and  the  ship  on  which  he  took  passage  was  lost 
at  sea. 
In  the  other  New  England  states  literary  production  was  as 
^  slight  as  in  Massachusetts.  Eoyall  Tyler  (1757-1826).  a 
^  native  of  Boston,  a  Harvard  graduate,  and  for  a  time  a  stu- 
dent in  the  law  oflBce  of  John  Adams,  removed  to  Vermont, 
where  he  finally  became  chief  justice.    He  is  remembered  for 


The  Ebvolutionaby  Period  139 

his  comedies^  The  Contrast,  ^nA.  May-Day  or  New  York  in 
am,  Uproar,    The  former,  said  to  be  the  first  play  in  which  the 

Yankee  dialect  was  introduced  for  purposes 
En^knd  States  ^*  comedy,  was  played  in  New  York  in  1786. 
—Royall  Tyler     Tyler  also  contributed  to  the  "Portfolio'^  and 

other  magazines,  and  wrote  The  Algerine 
Captive,  a  story  of  piracy  and  adventure  in  the  form  of  me- 
moirs interspersed  with  many  expressions  of  opinion  on  po- 
litical and  social  topics. 

To  Colonel  Eobert  Eogers  (1727-1800?),  a  native  of  New 
Hampshire,  and  a  soldier  of  wavering  allegiance  in  both  the 

French  and  Indian  and  the  Eevolutionary 
*  wars,  is  ascribed  the  tragedy  of  JPonfggcfe^  or 
^^A,^^^^£^^..Qt^dj^^Ticii»  The  play  represents  the  Indians 
as  simple  and  trustworthy  people,  victimized  by  white 
soldiers,  traders,  hunters,  and  even  missionaries  until  revolt 
was  a  virtue.  This  is  a  somewhat  unusual  view  for  a  soldier 
like  Eogers  who  had  seen  much  of  frontier  life ;  and  there  is 
a  possibility  that  he  may  not  have  written  the  play. 

Jonathan    M.    Sewall    (1748-18081.   a  native   of    Salem 
and  a  graduate  of  Harvard,  lived  most  of  his  life  in  New 

Hampshire.     His  poems,  published  in  1801, 

w*?^  jw-^*      l>iit  most  of  them  written  much  earlier,  in- 
Bngland  Writers  ' 

elude  metrical  versions  of  nearly  the  whole  of 
Ossian,  some  bombastic  patriotic  songs,  »nd  many  miscel- 
laneous lyrics.  Some  of  the  latter  have  smoothness  and  life, 
and  those  of  a  lighter  nature  are  often  cleverly  turned.  Dr. 
Joseph  Brown  Ladd^{  1764^1 786)  was  bom  and  educated  in 
Ehode  Island,  though  most  of  his  poems  were  not  published 
until  the  last  two  years  of  his  life,  when  his  residence  was 
in  Charleston,  South  Carolina.  He  was  a  precocious  boy, 
who  seems  to  have  accomplished  wonders  in  self-education. 
His  Poems_  of  Arouet,  published  in  the  year  of  his  death,  are 
formjal  poetical  epistles  to  his  lady-love  Amanda,  written 


140  American  Litesatube 

while  he  was  studying  medicine  in  Ehode  Island.    His  Lit- 
erary Remains,  brought  out  by  his  sister  in  1832,  include 
paraphrases  of  Ossian,  and  of  parts  of  the  Bible,  patriotic 
and  miscellaneous  poems,  and  critical  and  scientific  essays  in 
,  prose.    His  verse,  though  juvenile,  shows  some  individuality 
;  and  promise,  and  his  early  death  in  a  duel  at  the  age  of 
'  twenty-two  may  have  prevented  really  noteworthy  work. 

New  York,  which  in  the  next  century  was  to  become  the 
literary  center  of  the  country,  was  before  1800  a  provincial, 

commercial  town,  paying  little  attention  to 

^S^rJ^P  lit«-t--    The  theatre  was  pennitted  earlier 

than  in  Boston,  and  for  this  reason  there  were 
'(v   a  few  attempts  at  play-writing,  most  of  them  unworthy  of 
mention.    Wj^^^*^  Dunlap  (1766-1839),  artist  and  author, 
whose  biographical  and  critical  works  belong  to  the  nineteenth 
century,  was  for  some  years  manager  of  a  New  York  theatre, 
and  wrote  and  adapted  many  plays.     Among  the  most  im- 
portant of  his  original  productions  were  The  Father,  a  comedy 
played  in  1789,  Leicester,  a  tragedy  written  in  1790  and 
.  played  in  1794,  kilSl  jAndre,  an  hktorical  drama  played  in 
1798.     The  adaptations  were  from  various  sources,  but  be- 
ginning with  the  Stranger  m  179^  the  greater  number  were 
from  Kotzebue  and  other  authors  of  the  sentimental  school. 
Dunlap  was  a  manager  seeking  to  meet  the  popular  demand, 
and  his  plays  doubtless  seemed  better  to  the  audiences  who 
saw  them  than  they  do  to  the  reader  now.     He  has  an  im- 
portant place  in  the  history  of  the  American  stage^  and  his 
fame  has  been  appropriately  revived  by  the  ^'Dunlap  Society,^^ 
which  printed  a  number  of  works  on  the  national  drama. 
^hilip  Freneau  (1752-1832)  was  bom  in  New  York  city, 
"^  .Wt  he  should  be  associated  with  New  Jersey,  where  he  spent 
'  <  much  of  his  life.    He  was  graduated  from  Princetoain  1771. 
Even  as  an  undergraduate  he  did  much  writing,  and  collabo- 
rated with  bis  classmate,  H,  H,  Brackenbridge,  in  a  poem, 


\ 


The  Ebvolutionart  Period  141 

^TThe  Bising  Glory  of  America/^  spoken  by  the  latter  at  com- 
mencement.   He  wrote  his  first  political  satires  early  in  1775, 

and  later  in  the  same  year  sailed  to  the  West 

PhmD^^eau     ^^^i®^-     During  the  voyage  the  mate  died, 

and  Preneau,  thottgh  apparently  without  ex- 
perience as  a  sailor,  took  his  place.  At  this  time  he  seems  to 
have  acquired  his  love  of  the  sea.  He  returned  to  America 
in  1778,  and  thereafter  was  alternately  at  sea  and  engaged 
in  writing  and  editorial  work  ashore.  His  most  notable 
voyage  was  one  undertaken  in  1780,  which  ended  in  his  cap- 
ture by  the  British  and  his  confinement  in  »,  prison  ship  in 
New  York  harbor.  His  experience  during  this  imprison- 
ment was  the  basis  for  one  of  his  most  scathing  poems.  The 
most  important  of  his  editorial  experiences  was  in  connection 
with  the  ^T^ational  Gazette,^'  which  he  founded  in  Philadel- 
phia in  1791.  At  this  time  he  held  a  very  minor  clerkship  in 
the  department  of  state.  As  his  paper  was  strongly  anti- 
Federalist  and  pro-French,  the  charge  was  made  that  Jef- 
ferson, then  secretary  of  state,  was  subsidizing  the  editor  with 
government  money.  A  scandal  arose  which  seems  ridiculous 
now,  but  which  resulted  in  the  abandonment  of  the  **Gazette." 
Freneau  was  a  prolific  writer.  He  issued  volumes  of  verse 
in  1786,  1788,  1795,  1809,  and  1815,  and  these  contain  by 

no  means  all  his  poems.-    Most  of  these  vol- 
?*^"*  umes  are  rare,  and  for  many  years  the  only 

collection  of  his  works  readily  available  was 
Poems  relating  to  the  American  Revolution,  edited  by  Evart 
A.  Duyckinck  in  1865.  It  was  probably  for  this  reason  that 
Freneau  came  to  be  known  chiefly  for  his  political  poems — 
work  which  is  neither  his  best  nor  his  most  distinctive. 
Unfortunately  his  latest  editor.  Professor  F.  H.  Pattee,  has 
accepted  and  helped  to  perpetuate  the  designation  "Poet  of 
the  American  Revolution.^^ 
The  political  poems  of  Freneau  were  mostly  written  in  the 


142  Am1!RICAN  LlTERATtrsB 

year  1776,  before  the  trip  to  Jamaica,  and  in  the  few  years 
immediately  following  the  return  from  this  trip  in  1778, 

Political  Sail        thoiigli  ft  considerable  number  were  produced 

later,  especially  during  the  war  of  1812.  They 
arc  classed  as  satires,  though  most  of  them  are  downright 
attacks  on  measures  and  men,  with  no  touch  of  lightness  or 
humor.    The  following  lines  on  Comwallis  are  tjrpical : 

What  pen  can  write,  what  human  tongue  can  teU 
The  endless  murders  of  this  man  of  heU  I 
Nature  in  him  disgrac'd  the  form  diyine ; 
Nature  mistook,  she  meant  him  for  a — swine : 
That  eye  his  forehead  to  her  shame  adorns ; 
Blush !  nature,  blush — ^bestow  him  tail  and  horns !— 
•  •       ,  •  •  • 

GonvincM  we  are,  no  foreign  spot  on  earth 
But  Britain  only,  gave  this  reptile  birth, 
That  white-diff'd  isle,  the  Tengeful  dragon's  den, 
Has  sent  us  monsters  where  we  look*d  for  men. 

Strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  man  who  wrote  great  quanti- 
ties of  verse  like  this  was  possessed  of  a  vivid  and  powerful 

imagination,  a  lightness  and  delicacy  of  poetic 
^j^**  fancy,   and   even   a  considerable   faculty   of 

humor.  These  contradictions  in  the  character 
of  his  poetic  work  are  hard  to  explain.  His  latest  editor  en- 
deavours to  trace  a  change  in  temper,  with  disillusionment  and 
loss  of  the  romantic  spirit,  but  the  dates  of  his  poems  hardly 
support  this  theory.  Many  of  the  lightest  and  most  delicately 
imaginative  verses  were  contemporaneous  with,  or  follow,  the 
most  bitter  political  writings.  The  man  seems  really  to 
have  possessed  two  natures.  The  bitterness  of  the  satires  is 
clearly  genuine,  and  the  fineness  and  delicacy  of  the  lighter 
work  is  just  as  clearly  an  expression  of  real  feeling. 

Freneau's  earliest  attempts  include  a  considerable  amount 
of  light  and  humorous  verse,  with  some  satire,  but  no  more 
than  is  to  be  expected  of  the  average  collegian.    Even  as  an 


The  Eevolutionary  Period  143 

undergraduate  he  was  responding  t6  the  influence  of  Gray, 
and  of  Milton's  minor  poems.    He  also  showed  at  an  early  age 

the  peculiar  sense  of  the  personality  of  natu- 
Frene^s  ^.^j  objects  that  characterizes  some  of  his  best 

poems.  Perhaps  the  most  important  of  his 
early  works  is  ^/Pictures  of  Columbus/'  said  to  have  been  writ- 
ten in  1774.  This  consists  of  eighteen  sections,  each  portray- 
ing a  scene  in  the  life  of  the  hero.  Several  of  these  are  in  blank 
verse — a  form  which  Freneau  mastered  rather  late.  The 
passages  in  \jric  measures  are  more  striking.  In  the  inter- 
view between  Columbus  and  an  enchantress  is  shown  rather 
crudely  some  of  the  weird  imagination  which  distinguished 
several  of  his  earlier  poems : 

The  staring  owl  her  note  has  sung; 
With  gaping  snakes  my  cave  is  hung ; 
Of  maiden  hair  my  bed  is  made, 
Two  winding  sheets  above  it  laid. 

During  his  stay  in  Jamaica  Freneau  wrote  several  poems, 
the  most  strikingly  imaginative  of  which  is  the  ^^Houii 
Nijght/*  The  theme  is  the  death  of  Death.  Freneau^s  poem 
is  very  uneven,  and  taken  as  a  whole  it  is  in  no  way  to 
be  compared  to  the  work  of  Swinburne  and  Poe,  who 
have  treated  the  same  idea;  but  some  stanzas  have  real 
power: 

Bnde,  from  the  wide  extended  Ghesapeke 
I  heard  the  winds  the  dashing  waves  assail, 

And  saw  from  far,  by  picturing  fancy  form'd, 
The  black  ship  travelling  through  the  noisy  gale. 

Less  restrained,  but  not  without  a  certain  energy  and  vivid- 
ness are  passages  like  the  following: 

Nor  lookM  I  back,  till  to  a  far  off  wood, 
Trembling  with  fear,  my  weary  feet  had  sped — 

Dark  was  the  night,  but  at  the  inchanted  dome 
I  saw  the  |nfe^|ial  window^  Qaminip  re^^ 


144  Amsbioak  Lttebatukb 

And  from  within  the  howls  of  Death  I  heard, 
Gondng  the  dismal  night  that  gaye  him  birth, 

Damning  his  ancient  sire,  and  mother  sin. 
Who  at  the  gates  of  hell,  accursed,  brought  him  forth* 

•  •  •  •  • 

Dim  burnt  the  lamp,  and  now  the  phantom  Death 
Gave  his  last  groans  in  horror  and  despair— 

"All  hell  demands  me  hence," — ^he  said,  and  threw 
The  red  lamp  hissing  through  the  midnight  air. 

Even  more  significant  than  the  over-wronght  imagination 
of  "The  House  of  Nighf  *  is  the  author's  delicate  and  sympa- 
thetic  treatment   of   nature.     Some   of   the 

S;2ri']!«tare  1»^«'  ^''^  *»  "^he  Dying  Elm,"  and  "On 

the  Sleep  of  Plants/'  ascribe  to  natural  objects 
a  personality,  a  sort  of  kinship  with  man,  such  as  no  other 
American  poet  of  the  eighteenth  century  dreamed  of.  "The 
Wild  Honeysuckle/'  which  often  represents  Freneau  in  the 
anthologies,  is  excellent  in  form,  but  more  conventional  in 
idea.  Several  poems  to  insects  and  animals,  such  as  "To  a 
Caty^did,"  "To  a  Dog,"  "On  a  Honey  Bee  Drinking  fxQia.A 
Glass  of  Wine  and  Drowned  therein/'  show  a  genial,  half- 
humorous  tendency  which  is  strange  in  the  author  of  the 
political  satires.  The  Indians  and  the  fate  which  overtook 
them  are  also  touched  upon  in  more  than  one  poem.  "The 
Indian  Burying  Ground"  well  deserves  to  be  remembered 
independently  of  the  fact  that  Campbell  borrowed  without 
credit  the  last  line  of  the  stanza : 

By  midnight  moons,  o'er  moistening  dews ; 

In  habit  for  the  chase  arrayed, 
The  hunter  still  the  deer  pursues, 

The  hunter  and  the  deer,  a  shade ! 

The  reawakening  of  interest  in  Preneau's  non-political  verse 
not  many  years  ago  led  to  absurd  over-praise.  The  assertion 
was  sometimes  made  that  he  was  an  important  precursor  of 
the  romantic  movement,  anticipating  in  many  ways  Worda- 


Thb  Eevolutionaby  Period  145 

worth  and  Coleridge.  The  most  that  can  safely  be  said  is 
that  he  was  strongly  influenced  by  the  same  poets  who  in- 
fluenced the  earlier  romanticists  in  England, 
^^^^^^  and  that  in  comparison  with  his  contempo- 
raries he  showed  more  originality  and  inde- 
pendence of  thought,  more  imagination,  and  a  finer  feeling 
for  nature.  His  exact  relations  to  romanticism  are,  however, 
worthy  of  more  careful  study  than  they  have  received.  "The 
House  of  Night^'  was  written  after  Vatheh  and  the  poems  of 
**Ossian,'*  but  before  the  writings  of  Mrs.  Radcliffe,  "Monk^* 
Lewis,  Godwin,  and  Blake.  A  search  for  the  sources  of  the 
weird  imagery  in  this  poem,  and  a  comparison  between  Pre- 
neau's  attitude  toward  nature  and  that  of  his  English  con- 
temporaries might  yield  some  interesting  results,  though  it 
would  not  show  him  to  be  the  leader  in  the  new  movements 
With  all  his  defects,  Freneau  seems  sure  of  a  place  in  the  his- 
tory of  American  literature.  He  is  the  most  important 
American  poet  before  Bryant,  and  he  is  one  of  the  very  few 
writers  of  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  whose 
work  deserves  attention  for  its  intrinsic  merits  alone. 

To  New  Jersey  may  also  be  credited  John  Woolman  (1720^ 
1772}  >  *^®  Quaker,  an  intense  mystic^  who,  guided  by  the 

Inner  Light,  travelled  much  among  his  sect 
in  America  and  England,  and  left  a  Journal 
in  which  he  recorded  his  experiences.  The  gentleness  and 
simplicity  of  this  short  autobiography  endear  it  to  readers 
who  can  appreciate  devout  and  wholly  impractical  idealism. 
It  won  high  praise  from  Charles  Lamb,  and  it  was  edited  by 
Whittier,  who  was  drawn  to  the  author  both  as  a  brother 
Quaker  and  as  an  opponent  of  slavery. 

Among  the  signers  of  the  Declaration  from  New  Jersey 
was  Francis  Hopkinson  (1737-1791),  one  of  the  cleverest  of 
the  light  writers  of  the  Revolutionary  time.  He  was  born  in 
Philadelphia,  was  educated  at  the  college  of  Philadelphiai 


146  Amebican  Literatubb 

afterward  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  stadied  law. 
His  activities,  however,  were  never  confined  to  his  profession. 

He  was  prominent  in  many  civic  societies, 
HoDkinsoii  served  for  a  time  as  secretary  and  librarian 

of  the  Library  Company  of  Philadelphia, 
and  spent  a  season  abroad.  In  1768  he  married  Miss  Borden, 
of  Bordentown,  New  Jersey,  and  removed  to  that  place,  but 
again  took  up  his  residence  in  Pennsylvania  before  the  close 
of  the  war.  In  both  states  he  held  various  political  positions, 
and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  United  States  district  judge 
for  Pennsylvania. 

Hopkinson  was  a  versatile  writer  of  both  piose  and  poetry. 
His  prose  essays  in  his  collected  works  bear  such  varied  titles 
as  ^^An  Improved  Plan  of  Education,*'  "A  new  Game  of  Cards 
for  the  Improvement  of  Orthography,'*  ^^Speech  of  a  Post  in 
the  Assembly-Eoom,**  ^'Improved  Method  of  Quilling  a  Harp- 
sichord,'* '^Dialogues  of  the  Dead,"  "Address  to  the  Philo- 
sophical Society."  He  was  especially  happy  as  a  satirist,  jand 
his  political  burlesques,  "A  Pretty  Story"  on  the  troubles  with 
Great  Britain,  and  "The  New  Eoof,"  on  the  proposed  consti- 
tution, are  still  remembered.  Even  better  conceived  are  some 
of  his  satires  on  less  important  themes,  such  as  his  parody  on  a 
college  examination.  The  best  of  his  verses  are  a  few  grace- 
ful little  songs  which  he  wrote  and  set  to  music;  but  the 
best  known  is  the  ^^  jfltHifi^tf  ^^^  Kegs."  a  ballad  on  the  alarm 
caused  among  the  British  by  infernal  machines  floated  down 
the  river  into  Philadelphia.  Hopkinson  was  a  somewhat  rare 
example,  in  the  stirring  Eevolutionary  times,  of  the  accom- 
plished gentleman  who  combined  with  excellence  in  his  pro- 
fession an  easy  proficiency  in  the  arts  of  music,  drawing, 
versifying,  and  essay-making. 

Hugh  Henry  Brackenridge  Xl^iSilSlfijl  was  born  in  Scot- 
land, but  came  to  Pennsylvania  as  a  boy.    He  was  graduated 

f^t  ?rioc^top  iu  the  ma^  class  witl^  Firepe^u,  wd  served  for 


The  KEVOLUflONARY  PERIOI)  14^ 

a  time  as  tutor  in  the  college.    Later  he  taught  school^  edited 
the  *TJnited  States  Magazine/^  studied  divinity,  and  was  an 

ianny  chaplain.  After  the  close  of  the  war  he 
Bn^k^^ffe       s^died  law  and  removed  to  Pittsburg,  where 

he  had  some  connection  with  the  Whiskey 
Insurrection  of  1794.  Prom  1799  until  his  death  he  oc- 
cupied a  seat  on  the  supreme  bench  of  Pennsylvania.  Like 
Hopkinson,  he  scribbled  for  recreation,  though  the  tem- 
per of  the  men  was  widely  different.  The  Gazette  Publica- 
tions, a  volume  in  which  he  collected  many  of  his  shorter 
writings,  contains  a  sketch  of  Pittsburg,  burlesque  poems 
an  dueling  and  on  political  subjects,  a  '^Masque^^  on  the  warm 
springs  of  Virginia,  the  verse  of  which  is  strongly  imitative  of 
"Comus,'*  several  sermons,  a  drama  on  Bunker  Hill,  and 
many  miscellaneous  trifles  of  all  sorts.  His  most  ambitious 
work  is  Modern  Chivalry,  or  the  Adventures  of  Captain  Far- 

mgo  and  Teague  O'Regan.  This  is  a  rambling 
prose  burlesque  showing  the  influence  of  Don 
Quixote  in  the  plan,  and  of  Smollett,  Sterne,  and  Fielding  in 
the  manner.  The  Captain  starts  out  to  see  the  world,  ac- 
companied by  his  servant  Teague,  who  is  the  butt  of  the  story, 
and  whose  misadventures  furnish  opportunity  for  the  humor 
and  for  a  great  deal  of  half-hidden  satire  on  democracy. 
In  the  first  part,  published  in  Pittsburg  in  1796,  some  of  the 
situations  are  amusing,  and  the  humor,  though  coarse,  is  genu- 
ine. The  second  part,  published  in  1806,  has  a  stronger  po- 
litical bearing,  and  is  less  successful. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century  Philadelphia 
was  the  American  city  that  most  attracted  cultured  immi- 
grants and  visitors  from  abroad.     New  York 
Cultured  Immi-    ^^s  not  yet  an  important  port,  and  Boston 
radladelphia        ^^®  under  a  cloud  from  the  efifects  of  the 

war.  The  fact  that  Philadelphia  was  the 
home  of  Franklin,  the  American  who  was  best  known  in 


14d  Amebigan  Ltteratobs 

Europe,  perhaps  aided  in  attracting  attention  to  the  city. 
Mention  has  already  been  made  of  Thomas  Paine,  whose 
writings  were  ahnost  wholly  politieaL  At  a  little  later  time 
several  other  immigrants  were  concerned  with  other  forms  of 
literature. 

To  Pennsylvania,  if  to  America  at  all,  belongs  Jean  Hector 
St.  John  de  CrevecoBur,  a  native  of  Normandy,  who  was  edu- 
cated in  England  and  came  to  America  in 

Jean  Hector         1754.    During  the  war  he  seems  to  have  been 

St.  John  da  - 

Crevecorar  neutral,  and  after  a  visit  to  France  in  1782-3 

he  served  for  a  time  as  French  consul  at  New 
York.  During  much  of  his  stay  in  America  he  was  engaged 
in  farming,  and  the  work  by  which  he  is  known  is  entitled  Let- 
Ii^?.pl.^  4MfiricQ1l  Farmer.  These  letters,  published  in  Eng- 
lish in  1782,  and  afterward  translated  by  the  author  into 
French,  are  gossipy,  and  have  a  pleasing  though  somewhat 
artificial  style.  They  are  not,  like  so  many  published  letters 
from  America,  written  to  attract  or  deter  immigrants,  but 
show  the  results  of  an  accurate  and  kindly  observation  of  the 
natural  features  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  New  World.  In 
a  manner  that  contrasts  charmingly  with  the  f6rmal  essays 
of  his  contemporaries,  Crevecoeur  writes  on  such  topics  as 
^TVTiat  is  an  American  r^^  "Manners  and  Customs  of  Nan- 
tucket,*^ "On  Snakes ;  and  on  the  Humming  Bird.*' 

Peter  Markoe  (1753-17921),  who  was  bom  in  the  West 
Indies,  educated  at   Trinity  college,   Dublin,   read   law  in 

London,  and  came  to  Philadelphia  in  1783, 
should  be  remembered  among  the  literary  im- 
migrants to  Pennsylvania.  He  wrote  under  the  assumed 
name  "A  Native  of  Algiers'*  a.  tragedy^  ThB-Fninot  Chi&U  ^id 
a  comic  oj)era,,  TUq  £.QCQti^iliation^  besides  miscellaneous 
poems — all  ambitious  but  rather  commonplace  work. 

Some  of  the  other  writers  who  came  to  Pennsylvania  con- 
cerned themselves  with  politics.    William  Cobbett  (Peter  Por- 


The  BEVOLunoNABY  Period  149 

cttpine),  the  English  editor,  was  in  Philadelphia  from  1792 
to  1800  and  wrote  in  support  of  the  Federalists.     Cobbett 

should  hardly  be  classed  as  an  American 
Political  Writws  author,  but  he  must  be  mentioned,  if  not  for 
Cobbett  ^^  ^^^  writings,  then  for  what  was  written 

about  him.  It  was  his  habit  to  attack  vigor- 
ously and  directly  everjrthing  and  everybody  that  he  disliked, 
and  his  tirades  elicited  from  indignant  Americans  many  pro- 
tests which  are  often  in  a  manner  similar,  to  his.  He  must  be 
held  partly  responsible  for  the  imfortunate  loss  of  dignity 
and  respectability  that  is  seen  in  political  satire  &bout  the 
close  of  the  century. 

One  of  Cobbetfs  opponents  was  Mathew   Carey   (1760- 
1839),  a  vigorous  and  versatile  Irishman  who  in  1784  found 

it  necessary  to  leave  his  native  country  on 

account  of  political  troubles.  During  a 
former  exile  he  had  met  Franklin  in  Paris,  and  it  was  prob- 
ably owing  to  this  fact  that  he  came  to  Philadelphia.  Here 
as  publisher,  editor,  and  book-seller  he  was  a  prominent  char- 
acter for  over  fifty  years,  his  activities  ranging  all  the  way 
from  fighting  a  duel  with  a  rival  editor  to  organizing  the  first 
American  Sunday  School  society.  In  the  year  of  his  arrival 
in  America  he  established  the  "Pennsylvania  Herald,'*  and 
afterward  edited  the  "American  Museum.'*  In  1793  he  pub- 
lished a  History  of  the  Yellow  Fever,  and  in  1796  a  small 
volume  called  Miscellaneous  Trifles,  containing  short  stories, 
Addisonian  sketches,  papers  on  the  stage,  etc.  In  1799  ap- 
peared his  Plumh  Pudding  for  the  Humane,  Chaste,  Valiant, 
Enlightened  Peter  Pgrcupinej  an  attack  on  Cobbett,  whom 
he  hated  with  the  combined  hatred  of  a  Democrat  for  a 
Federalist  and  an  Irishman  for  an  Englishman.  He 
writes: 

Bat,  wretch  as  yon  are,  accursed  by  God,  and  hated  by  man,  the 
most  tremendous  scourge  that  bell  ever  vomited  forth  to  curse  % 


160  American  Litebatxtsb 

people,  by  sowing  discord  among  them,  I  desire  not  the  honour  or 
credit  of  being  abused  or  vilified  by  you.  •  .  • 

To  send  a  challenge  to  a  blasted,  posted,  loathsome  coward,  who» 
a  disgrace  to  the  name  of  soldier,  when  he  was  called  to  account  for 
his  villany,  hen-heartedly  took  refuge  under  the  strong  arm  of  the 
law,  and  swore  his  life  against  the  challenger,  would  sink  me  almost 
to  a  level  with  yourself.  But,  detested  miscreant,  if  ever  you  dare 
approach  the  throne  of  heaven,  pour  out  thanksgivings  that  I  am  so 
far  inferior  to  you  in  bodily  strength.  Were  I  able  to  grapple  with 
you  single-handed,  I  swear  by  all  my  hopes  of  happiness,  the  inmost 
recesses  of  your  dungeon-like  labyrinth  should  not  screen  you  from 
my  vengeance!  Heavens!  what  pride!  what  pleasure!  I  should 
feel  in  dragging  you  reeking  from  your  den,  and  cow-skinning  you 
till  Argus  himself  should  not  be  able  to  perceive  a  hair's  breadth 
upon  your  carcase  but  sore  upon  sore ;  so  that  were  you  and  Lazarus 
candidates  for  the  commiseration  of  the  public,  you  would  carry  off 
the  palm. 

A  few  weeks  after  the  Plumb  Pudding  he  issued  the  Porcu- 
piniad,  a  Hudibrastic  poem  in  four  cantos.  In  this  a  rela- 
tively small  number  of  verses  are  made  the  occasion  for 
voluminous  footnotes,  containing  criticisms  on  Cobbett,  and 
objectionable  passage  from  his  works.  Many  of  Care/s  writ- 
ings after  1800  were  on  politics  and  political  economy.  The 
Olive  Branch,  or  Faults  on  both  Sides,  Federal  and  Demo- 
cratic, written  during  the  war  of  1812,  went  through  several 
editions. 

It  would  seem  that  the  author  of  a  passage  like  the  one 
quoted  from  Carey  should  be  beneath  notice  in  a  history  of 

literature.  The  use  of  billingsgate  in  political 
Dirty  Political  controversy  was,  however,  a  manner  of  the 
Cliffton"  time.    Eeaders  of  all  classes  learned  to  expect 

it,  and  what  is  worse,  to  enjoy  it;  and  even 
writers  of  more  refinement  than  Carey  indulged  in  it  on  oc- 
casion. Thus  William  CliflEton  (1772-1799),  a  Philadelphian 
of  Quaker  descent  who  wrote  some  of  the  most  delicate  and 
charming  verses  of  the  period,  was  guilty  of  the  Orou^jja. 
dirty  and  witless  satire  on  the  liberal  party.  In  this  coarse 
attack  he  ridicules  not  only  the  public  life  of  prominent 


The  Eevoltjtiokary  Period  161 

Democrats,  but  their  personal  appearance  and  their  private 
misfortunes.  This  disposition  toward  scurrility  in  political 
writing,  which  was  seen  in  a  slighter  degree  in  the  later  work 
of  the  Hartford  Wits,  is  one  of  the  most  unfortunate  legacies 
which  the  eighteenth  century  left  to  the  nineteenth. 

The  last,  and  except  Franklin,  the  greatest  of  the  Penn- 
sylvania authors  who  wrote  in  the  period  before  1800  was 

Charles  Brockden  Brown  {1771-1810).     He 

KToS"^^'    '^^«  ^"^  ^  Philadelphia  and  passed  through 

a  somewhat  peculiar  boyhood,  during  which 
poor  health  interrupted  the  studies  for  which  he  had  a  taste, 
and  led  him  to  form  the  habit  of  taking  long  solitary  rambles 
in  the  environs  of  Philadelphia.  He  studied  law,  but  never 
practiced.  For  some  time  he  was  in  New  York,  where  he  met 
a  number  of  literary  men  and  did  much  of  his  literary  work. 
He  early  became  imbued  with  religious  skepticism,  and  gen- 
eral freedom  of  thought,  probably  from  the  writings  of  God- 
win. His  first  published  work  of  importance  was  Alctiin, 
a  discussion  of  the  rights  of  woman,  in  dialogue  form,  which 
he  brought  out  in  1797.  From  this  time  until  the  close  of  his 
short  life  he  wrote  unceasingly.  His  next  work,  a  novel  in  the 
form  of  letters,  was  never  published;  but  in  the  four  years 
from  1798  to  1801,  inclusive,  he  gave  to  the  world  no  less  than 
six  novels,  Wieland,  Ormond,  Arthur  Mervyn,  Edgar  HunU  /^ 
ley,  Clara  Howard,  and  Jane  Talbot,  besides  editing  the  'b'' 
"Monthly  Magazine  and  American  Eeview''  in  1799-1800, 
and  writing  fugitive  pieces  in  prose  and  verse.  Between  this 
time  and  his  death  he  edited  the  ^TJiterary  Magazine  and 
American  Eegister,^'  a  monthly,  and  the  '^merican  Eegister,^' 
a  semi-annual,  published  other  writings,  and  worked  on  a 
general  geography  and  a  history  of  Eome  during  the  age  of 
the  Antonines.  He  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  first  Ameri- 
can who  "devoted  himself  to  literature  as  a  prof ession,''  and 
the  amount  and  character  of  the  work  he  did  shows  what  the 


162  Ahebioak  Lttebatubb 

phrase  meant  in  his  time.  His  editorial  labors  and  literary 
hack-work  are  worth  notice  only  as  showing  what  a  man 
of  letters  mnst  then  do  to  live.  His  novels  have  a  greater 
interest 

In  the  art  of  novel-writings  us  in  political  and  religious 
thought^  Brown  was  chiefly  influOTced_  .bj:_QQdi5nnj.  His 
»  H  rfa  stories  all  have  something  of  the  mysterious, 
the  terrible,  or  the  psychologically  strange. 
In  Wieland  it  is  spontaneous  combustion  and  ventriloquism ; 
in  Arthur  Mervyn  the  horrors  of  yellow  fever;  in  Edgar 
Huntley,  somnambidism;  and  the  success  of  his  stories  lies 
largely  in  the  effective  though  crude  way  in  which  he  pictures 
the  effect  of  horror  or  mystery  on  the  human  mind.  The 
presence  of  this  uncanny  element  is,  however,  one  of  the  great- 
est weaknesses  of  Brown's  works  to-day.  The  taste  for  crude 
horrors  common  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century 
was  happily  only  temporary.  The  art  of  handling  skillfully 
the  weird  and  the  mysterious  was  later  developed,  especially 
by  Poe  and  Hawthorne,  to  a  point  unknown  in  Brown's  time. 
Moreover,  the  particular  devices  that  he  used  were  unfortu- 
nately chosen.  Spontaneous  combustion  and  ventriloquism, 
in  his  day  terms  of  vague  and  terrifying  suggestiveness,  are 
now  associated  respectively  with  matter-of-fact  science  and 
the,  cheapest  charlatanism.  It  seems  absurd  to  represent  the 
human  body  as  consimied  by  the  former,  or  a  rational  being 
led  to  commit  a  series  of  awful  crimes  by  means  of  the  latter. 
In  the  author's  time,  however,  these  devices  were  at  least  as 
available  for  literary  uses  as  are  hypnotism  and  various  occult 
phenomena  for  the  novelists  of  to-day. 

In  his  scenes  and  settings  Brown  was  true  to  his  experi- 
ences. The  action  of  all  his  published  novels  takes  place  in 
America,  and  his  descriptions  are  said  to  be  remarkably 
faithful.  The  wild  country  described  in  Edgar  Himtley  is 
like  some  of  the  regions  visited  by  Brown  in  his  youthful 


The  Bbvolutionabt  Pbbiod  163 

rambles.    The  horrors  of  the  yellow  fever  epidemic^  so  vividly 
portrayed  in  Ormond  and  Arthur  Mervyn,  were  seen  by  the 

author  in  New  York.    This  choice  of  Ameri- 

Bom'sNovels    ^^^    settings   is   but   another   expression   of 

patriotic  self -consciouisness ;  but  the  realistic 
handling  of  scenes  chosen  shows  closeness  of  observation  and 
an  admirable  gift  for  description. 

Inj)lot2  Bro'vm'snovels  are,  according  to  modem  standards, 
almost  formless.    The  sole  unity  is  often  that  which  belongs 

to  a  series  of  incidents  clustering  about  one 

^own4  Novels    P®™^^-     ^^'^  action,  once  begun,  continues 

through  a  bewildering  series  of  events,  each  of 
which  is  usually  told  in  a  long  letter  or  monologue  by  one  of 
the  participants.  The  interest  often  lies,  not  in  the  grand 
denouement,  but  in  the  outcome  of  the  separate  incidents. 
This  interest  is,  however,  rarely  lacking.  The  curiosity 
aroused  by  one  set  of  circumstances  is  never  gratified  until 
some  new  complication  has  been  introduced. 

The  six  novels,  beginning  with  Wieland  and  closing  with 
Jane  Talhot,  not  only  stand  in  time  at  the  turn  of  the 
century,  but  they  combine  in  an  interesting  way  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  periods  that  precede  and  follow.  As  pioneer 
work  they  will  always  be  interesting  to  the  student  of  Amer- 
ican fiction,  and  they  have  enough  intrinsic  merit  to  justify 
the  recent  revival  of  interest  in  the  author  and  his  works. 

Before  1800  America  had  made  a  beginning  in  scholarship. 
The  Bevolutionary  period  was  given  rather  to  the  making 

than  the  writing  of  history,  and  while  many 

ffishwiSs"      ^^^^^  ^^^6  written  which  are  valuable  sources 

for  the  later  student,  few  need  mention  here. 
The  writings  of  Thomas  Hutchinson  and  of  Mercy  Warren 
have  already  been  referred  to.  _Jeremy  Belknap  (1744-iy98)|> 
a  native  of  Boston,  sometime  pastor  of  the  Congregational 
church  at  Dover,  Massachusetts,  and  afterward  of  the  Fed- 


154  American  Liteeaturs 

eral  street  church,  Boston,  came  nearer  than  »ny  contem- 
porary to  maintaining  the  traditions  of  the  earlier  New  Eng- 
land historians.  He  published  an  extended  History  of  New, 
TTmrppsihriFP  and  in  1794-8  issued  two  volumes  of  Americatk^ 
Biographies.  The  first  volume  begins,  somewhat  remotely, 
with  Biron,  Modoc,  and  Zeno ;  the  second  includes  several  of 
the  early  fathers  of  New  England.    Belknap  should  also  be 

I  remembered  as  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Massachusetts  His- 
torical Society.  His  instincts  were  scholarly,  and  his  work, 
though  now  superseded,  was  carefully  done.  In  his  humorous 
prose  sketch  The  Foresters,  the  adventures  of  John  Codline, 
Walter  Carrier,  and  similar  characters  represent  in  allegorical 
form  the  early  history  of  Massachusetts,  Ehode  Island,  and 
the  other  colonies. 

Among  writings  which  furnish  material  to  the  later  his- 
torian should  be  named  the  Travels,  of  Captain  Jonathan  Car- 

ver    (1732-1780)^    published    in   London   in 
j^temis  for        -j^^i^g  ^^^  ^ater  reprinted  in  America.     The 

author,  a  native  of  New  York,  served  in  the 
French  and  Indian  wars,  and  at  their  close  started  to  learn 
something  of  the  new  territory  that  they  brought  to  Great 
,  Britain.  He  penetrated  as  far  as  Lake  Superior  and  the  head- 
;  waters  of  the  Mississippi,  and  there,  receiving  no  en- 
'  couragement  from  the  authorities,  was  forced  to  return.  He 
then  went  to  England,  where  he  met  with  slight  success  in  his 
endeavor  to  secure  recognition  of  his  labors,  and  where  he 
died.  About  one  third  of  his  book  tells  in  concise  manner  the 
story  of  his  journey.  The  rest  is  devoted  to  the  manners  and 
customs  of  the  Indians,  and  the  flora  and  fauna  of  the  regions 
that  he  visited.  Both  the  narrative  and  the  descriptions  are 
interesting  reading,  and  more  accurate  than  most  books  of 
travel  in  this  age.  The  war  produced  many  narratives  of 
personal  experiences,  especially  the  experiences  of  persons 
who  were  taken  prisoners  by  the  British.    As  a  type  of  these 


The  Bbvolutionary  Period  155 

may  be  chosen  the  account  written  by  the  picturesque  Vermont 
fighter  and  politician,  ^than  Allen  (1T37-178?1.  The  style 
of  this  book  is  rough  and  ready,  and  not  the  least  interesting 
parts  are  those  in  which  the  author  gives  unconscious  and  not 
always  flattering  portraits  of  himself.  More  dignified  and  in 
every  way  better  written  is  the  narrative  in  which  Henry 
Laurens  (iy24JL!i!9.2L  of  South  Carolina,  merchant,  states- 
man, and  afterward  commissioner  to  negotiate  peace,  tells  of 
his  capture  and  imprisonment  in  the  Tower  of  London. 

One  specimen  of  historical  writing  stands  in  a  class  by 
itself.     Samuel  Peters  (1735^18261,  an  Episcopalian  clergy- 
man who  was  expelled  from  Connecticut  as  a 
•  **^mst      '^^    loyalist,  amused  himself  during  his  enforced 

sojourn  in  England  by  writing  a  General  Hisz 
tory  of  Connecticut y  htj  a  Q^ntUmm  of  .tM  Province,  This 
work,  published  in  London  in  1781,  is  famous  as  the  authority 
for  the  'Tjlue  laws,^'  and  for  many  uncomplimentary  state- 
ments regarding  the  colony.  It  is  worthless  as  history  and 
shows  the  unfairness  of  the  author  on  every  page.  A  contro- 
versy, not  yet  settled,  arose  regarding  the  author  and  his 
book,  in  which  it  has  been  maintained  that  he  was  prejudiced 
by  the  harsh  treatment  that  he  received,  that  he  intended  a 
political  satire,  that  he  deliberately  lied,  and  that  he  was 
insane.  Meanwhile  the  book  continues  to  be  amusing,  except 
perhaps  to  ultra-patriotic  and  ultra-sensitive  citizens  of  Con- 
necticut. 

Natural  science  received  most  attention  in  Philadelphia, 
where  Franklin  did  some  of  his  most  important  work  after 

1765.  William  Bartram  (1739-1823)  and  B. 
oi«*sSiS£Js    -S.  Barton  11766-18.15).  both  professors  in  the 

University  of  Pennsylvania,  wrote  much  on 
natural  history,  the  former  publishing  a  detailed  account  of 
his  travels  in  the  South  to  examine  natural  products.  To 
Connecticut  belongs  Noah  Webster  (1758-1843),  who  pub-  v 


156  Ahebioan  Lttebatubb 

lished  his  spelling-book  in_  1783  and  his  Dissertations  on 
the  _,En£Ush_Language_  in  ^1789.^  His  Dictionary  belongs 
to  the  nineteenth  century.  Lindley  Murray  (1745-1826) 
was  a  native  of  Pennsylvania  and  for  some  time  a  resident  of 
New  York,  though  his  famous  grammar  was  not  written  until 
after  his  removal  to  England.  Two  great  theologians  and 
educators.  President  John  Witherppgcm..  (1722-1794)  of 
PrincetoQ^Aad  Pre^dent  Ezra  Stiles  (1727-1795)  of  Yale^ 
had  an  important  part  in  the  intellectual  development  of 
America,  and  their  writings  entitle  them  at  least  to  mention 
in  a  history  of  American  literature. 

As  the  preceding  survey  has  shown,  the  troubled  years  of 
the  later  eighteenth  century  brought  a  change  of  literary 

TV  Pr      stvi     ^^®*^l8>  *  sense  of  literary  freedom,  and  earnest 

literary  striving,  but  little  valuable  achieve- 
ment. The  idea  that  literature  should  be  only  the  servant  of 
religion  passed  away,  even  in  New  England.  In  its  place 
there  arose,  naturally  enough,  some  disposition  to  connect 
literature  and  politics.  It  was  at  this  time  that  Americans 
acquired  the  habit,  often  remarked  by  foreign  critics,  of  dis- 
cussing so  freely  questions  of  government  and  of  law.  In 
political  controversy  there  were  developed  two  prose  styles, 
characteristic  of  the  two  political  parties.  Federalist  and 
Democratic.  The  one  was  a  sedate,  gentlemanly  manner,  ow- 
ing something  to  Addison,  and  something  to  later  conserva- 
tive writers  in  England.  The  other  was  a  slightly  heightened 
rhetorical  style,  seen  at  its  best,  perhaps,  in  the  "Declaration 
of  Independence.'^  In  oratory  the  prevailing  fashion  at  the 
close  of  the  period  was  the  artificial,  "classical*'  manner  of 
Fisher  Ames.  Dignified  verse  satire  at  first  followed  the  man- 
ner of  Pope,  and  burlesque  the  manner  of  Butler.  Toward 
the  close  of  the  century,  as  has  been  seen,  satire  in  both  prose 
and  verse  grew  bitter  and  scurrilous. 
Political  literature  never  succeeded,  however,  in  assuming 


The  Eevolutionary  Period  157 

the  same  degree  of  importance  that  religious  literature  had 
held  in  early  New  England.    At  the  same  time  that  men  were 

most  concerned  over  political  freedom  they 
^p  ^'^^         ^^^^  learning  to  read  works  which  their  fathers 

had  in  many  cases  abhorred,  and,  even  in 
the  most  Puritanical  colonies,  were  themselves  attempting 
essays,  dramas,  lyrics,  and  fiction.  With  a  few  exceptions, 
like  the  novels  of  Brown,  these  attempts  were  important 
only  as  beginnings,  which  were  to  have  an  undue  in- 
fluence on  the  work  of  later  Americans.  The  feeling 
that  a  national  literattire  could  come  by  deliberate  process 
of  manufacture,  rather  than  by  a  slow  and  natural 
growth,  led  to  much  writing  that  had  no  real  vitality.  It 
was  hardly  fortunate,  either,  that  America  did  not  acknowl- 
edge the  eighteenth  century  English  masters  until  their  rule 
was  beginning  to  be  questioned  at  home.  Perhaps  the  most 
hopeful  sign  was  the  fact  that  Americans  were  eclectic  in 
their  tastes.  The  same  poet  often  appreciated  and  tried  to 
imitate  the  best  things  in  Pope  and  the  best  things  in  writers 
of  diametrically  opposite  tendency. 


CHAPTER  III 

The  Early  Nineteenth  Centuet  (1800-1833) 

I.  Generaii  Conditions  ;  the  Enigeebbogkeb  Wbitbes 

At  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  Americans  were 
independent  politically,  but  provincial  in  manners^  tastej^ani. 

habits  of  thinking.    Looking  back,  we  see  that 

Rdi^^ishiiM       *^^®  ^^^  inevitable.    A  nation  could  not  find 

distinctive  expression  in  art,  literature,  and 
social  manners  as  quickly  as  it  could  ratify  a  treaty.  Patriotic 
Americans  of  the  time,  however,  felt  that  the  existence  of  any 
national  deficiency  was  a  matter  of  shame.  Foreign  writers 
soon  discovered  this  sensitiveness  and  took  advantage  of  it. 
English  travellers  made  hasty  trips  through  the  United  States 
and  published  their  observations  in  accounts  which,  though 
unjust  to  the  better  life  of  the  country  and  in  part  false,  were 
often  painfully  true  in  their  pictures  of  unfortunate  national 
traits.  English  reviewers  of  American  books  were  likely  to 
mingle  even  with  their  praise  patronizing  allusions  to  the  bar- 
renness of  literature  in  the  new  country.  To  these  aspersions 
American  writers  replied  with  absurd  denials,  bombastic  pro- 
tests, satire,  and  other  weapons  ineffectual  as  against  the 
truth  that  the  charges  contained.  The  reader  of  this  great 
mass  of  international  writings  is  forced  to  the  conclusion 
that,  though  both  sides  were  unfair,  England  was  more  just 
\  to  America  than  America  to  England.  It  must  be  said,  how- 
ever, that  even  reasonably  friendly  Englishmen  rarely  neg- 
lected an  opportunity  to  taunt  Americans  with  unpleasant 
facts.  This  literary  antagonism  was  most  intense  during  the 
early  years  of  the  nineteenth  century.    Its  progress  and  its 

158 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  159 

gradual  disappearance  are  among  the  important  facts  of  the 
period  now  to  be  considered. 

The  wish  to  confound  foreign  critics  came  as  an  added 
incentive  to  the  desire  to  produce  a  national  literature.    In 

general,  literary  attempts  were  less  ludi- 
I^aL        ^'^      crously   ambitious    than  those   of   the   later 

eighteenth  century,  though  the  Columbiad, 
perhaps  the  worst  of  all,  was  published  in  1807.  Among  the 
unwise  demands  which  were  continually  made  on  American 
authors  were  those  for  '^sustained  effort,'^  rapid  composition, 
and  the  treatment  of  American  subjects.  The  cry  for  "sus- 
tained effort/^  later  ridiculed  by  Poe,  probably  came  from  the 
feeling  that  nothing  but  writings  on  a  great  scale  could  ade- 
quately represent  a  great  country.  A  short  essay  or  lyric,  no 
matter  how  exquisitely  wrought,  would  not  be  distinctively 
American.  The  idea  of  literary  inspiration  prevailed,  and  an 
author  was  praised  for  the  ability  to  compose  a  poem  at  one 
sitting.  Painstaking  labor  was  apparently  thought  unneces- 
sary for  a  true  American  genius.  The  demand  for  American 
subjects  was  an  unintentional  confession  of  the  provincial 
character  of  American  work.  Style  and  tone  were  almost 
wholly  imitative,  but  it  was  felt  that  the  subject,  at  least, 
might  be  national. 

Almost  as  marked  as  provincialism  in  1800  was  sectional- 
ism. The  southern,  the  middle,  and  the  New  England  groups 
_,     .      „  of  states  were  almost  as  far  removed  from  each 

other  as  m  the  colonial  time.  Indeed,  western 
expansion  and  the  development  of  diversified  trade  interests 
to  some  extent  increased  these  local  differences.  To  the 
student  of  literature  the  most  important  result  of  sectional 
rivalry  was  the  temporary  depression  of  New  England  and 
the  rise  of  New  York. 

The  causes  of  the  economic  and  political  eclipse  of  New 
Jlngland  are  too  complicated  f oi*  disQussioft  l^er^.    Be^nning 


160  American  Literatubb 

with  JefiEerson's  administration  the  northern  Atlantic  states 
were  probably  the  least  prosperous  section  of  the  oonntry. 

When  the  depression  came  the  more  energetic 

Hew  EneUuid       J^^^S  ^^n  did  not  remain  at  home  to  write 

Lamentations,  but  emigrated  to  the  West, 
carrying  with  them  their  sturdiness,  their  intellectual  vigor, 
and  their  love  of  education.  The  influence  of  these  New  Eng- 
land emigrants  can  be  traced  in  the  small  colleges  of  western 
New  York  and  Ohio,  land  to  some  extent  in  the  public  schools 
and  state  universities  of  the  next  group  of  states  to  the  west- 
ward. No  doubt  these  men  had  more  influence  on  the  intel- 
lectual life  of  the  nation  than  would  have  been  the  case  if  they 
had  stayed  at  home  and  written  books;  but  for  a  time  litera- 
ture was  deprived  of  their  activities.  With  so  much  of  the 
young  blood  gone.  New  England  remained  bound  by  conserva- 
tism, and  such  able  men  as  were  left  found  large  and  free 
.expression  diflBcult.  Moreover,  changes  in  religious  belief 
I  began  to  occupy  attention,  and  many  men  like  the  elder  Chan- 
ning,  who  might  have  achieved  fame  in  other  forms  of  litera- 
ture, turned  to  controversial  writing. 

On  the  other  hand.  New  York  was  rapidly  developing.    Its 
harbor,  its  position  with  reference  to  the  great  routes  to  the 

West,  and  other  minor  causes  soon  made  it  the 
5***  Y   -  chief  commercial  center  of  the  coimtry.    With 

wealth  came  leisure  and  a  desire  to  cultivate  art 
and  literature.  Along  with  other  business  interests  were  devel- 
oped those  connected  closely  and  remotely  with  letters.  Great 
publishing  houses  were  founded;  and  the  New  York  newspapers 
became,  as  they  have  since  remained,  the  most  prominent  in 
the  country.  All  these  influences  tended  to  encourage  writing 
on  the  part  of  native  New  Yorkers,  and  to  attract  men  of 
literary  tastes  and  aspirations  from  other  parts  of  the  country. 
Among  the  former  were  Irving  and  Drake ;  among  the  latter. 
Cooper,  Bryant,  Halleck,  and  WiUxs,    These  men  and  their 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  161 

literary  associates  came  to  be  known  as  the  Knickerbocker 
school  or,  more  accurately,  as  the  Knickerbocker  group.  Their! 

connection   was   primarily   geographical   andl 
TheKni^et''       temporary.    Still^  most  of  them  were  acquaint- ^ 

ances,  and  some  of  them  were  close  friends. 
Naturally  they  were  all  influenced  to  some  eirtent  by  the  con- 
ditions of  the  time  and  of  the  city  in  which  they  lived.  An 
attempt  to  connect  them  very  closely  will,  however,  lead  to 
misunderstanding. 

The  most  effective  work  of  these  men  was  done  within  the 
limits  assigned  to  this  period,  though  neither  the  opening  nor 

the  closing  date  has  any  especial  significance. 
^^BrSo?  ^^^  former,  1800,  is  chosen  mainly  for  con- 

venience, since  the  New  York  writers  hardly 
made  themselves  felt  before  the  publication  of  Salmagundi 
in  1807  and  the  Knickerbocker  History  in  1809.  The  year 
1833  is  arbitrarily  assumed  as  a  point  of  demarcation  between 
two  periods  widely  different.  Between  1830  and  1835,  and 
indefinitely  for  some  years  before  and  after,  a  spirit  of  change 
was  felt  throughout  the  western  civilized  world.  The  political 
revolutions  in  France,  Belgium,  and  Poland,  the  passage  of 
the  Eeform  bill,  the  abolition  of  slavery  and  the  rise  of  the 
tractarian  movement  in  England,  the  development  of  Tran- 
scendentalism and  the  welcoming  of  German  influence  in 
America,  were  widely  different  manifestations  of  the  same  or 
related  tendencies.  This  new  spirit  of  the  time  and  the  new 
social  and  political  conditions  that  grew  partly  out  of  the 
settlement  of  the  West  and  partly  out  of  the  increase  in  com- 
mercial prosperity  brought  forward  new  national  questions. 
By  1833  the  nation  was  aware  of  the  change;  and  though  most 
of  the  Knickerbocker  group  continued  to  write  after  that  time 
they  added  little  to  their  fame,  and  were  forced  to  relinquish 
the  lead  in  literary  activity  to  the  younger  men  who  were  el- 
ready  writing  in  New  England, 


1^ 


163  AhERIOAN  LrrBRATTTHE 

The  most  representative  of  the  Knickerbocker  writers  and 
the  one  whose  own  writings  supplied  the  designation  for  the 

group  was  Washington  Irving  (1783-1859).  He 

ir^ntT^^^^  ^*^  ^^"^  ^  ^®^  York  city,  the  son  of  a  well- 
to-do  hardware  merchant.  His  father  was  a 
stem  Scotch  Presbyterian;  his  mother  was  of  English  an- 
cestry, an  Episcopalian,  and  a  woman  of  gentle  and  lovable 
qualities.  As  the  youngest  of  a  family  in  which  there  were 
several  sons,  Washington  fell  mostly  under  the  charge  of  his 
mother.  Some  excuse  for  a  lack  of  vigorous  discipline  may  be 
found  in  his  delicate  health.  At  all  events,  he  seems  to  have 
done  much  as  he  pleased.  The  elder  sons  had  been  graduated 
from  Columbia  and  entered  their  f ather^s  business.  Washing- 
ton's desultory  schooling  ended  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  when  he 
lominally  began  the  study  of  law.  Before  this  time  he  had 
read  much,  had  made  a  boyish  attempt  at  writing  verses  and 
a  play,  and  had  acquired  a  fondness  for  the  theatre,  which  he 
formed  the  habit  of  visiting  without  his  father's  consent.  It 
was  also  without  the  knowledge  of  his  father  that  he  was 
confirmed  in  the  Episcopal  church.  His  law  studies  were 
pursued  with  little  energy  and  were  often  interrupted.  He 
made  trips  up  the  Hudson,  in  1803  he  visited  Montreal  and 
Quebec,  and  in  1804  he  was  sent  abroad  for  his  health.  Some 
time  afterward  he  became  engaged  to  Miss  Matilda  Hoflfman, 
:  daughter  of  his  law  preceptor.  The  death  of  this  young 
woman  in  1809  is  often  held  to  mark  one  of  the  turning-points 
in  his  life.    Irving  was  never  married. 

Irving's  writings  are  closely  associated  with  the  events 
of  his  life,  and  fall  naturally  into  five  groups;  his  early  at- 
tempts, before  he  adopted  literature  as  a  pro- 
Im^s Early      fession;  the  Sketch-Book  group;  the  Spanish 

group;  the  writings  on  Western  American 
themes ;  and  the  later  biographies  and  miscellaneous  sketches. 
His  first  published  work  w^  \h^  JjiMflkW.Qld^hJPa^s^ 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Centurt  163 

written  for  the  New  York  'Ttfoming  Chronicle''  in  1802-3. 
These  :are  plainly  imitative  of  Addison,  and  the  author  chose 
for  them  a  name  which  suggests  one  of  the  distinctive  quali- 
ties of  all  his  writings.  After  his  return  from  Europe  he  was 
associated  with  his  brother  William  and  his  friend  James  K. 
Paulding  in  the  production  of  Salmagundi,  another  Addi- 
^nian  series  published  in  1807.  These  papers  discussed  the 
theatre,  society,  and  sometimes  politics. 

Shortly  after  the  publication  of  Salmagundi  it  occurred  to 
Washington  Irving  and  another  brother,  Peter,  that  there 

would  be  sport  in  writing  a  burlesque  on  Dr. 
^ckerbocker's  Samuel  Mitchell's  Picture  of  New  York,  an 
New  York  historical  work  that  had  recently  appeared.  Ac- 

I  ?o^  cordingly  they  set  to  work,  with  energy  worthy 

a  more  serious  object,  to  collect  material  for  erudite  footnotes 
and  learned  references.  The  work  seems  to  have  been  fairly 
under  way  when  Peter  Irving  relinquished  his  part  in  the 
undertaking.  Washington  then  altered  the  plan,  which  had 
been  to  continue  the  history  of  New  York  to  date,  condensed 
the  part  already  written  into  four  introductory  chapters,  and 
developed  the  history  of  the  ^'Dutch  djmasty.^'  It  was  while 
he  was  engaged  on  this  work  that  Miss  Hoffman  died.  After 
the  first  intensity  of  his  grief  was  passed  he  returned  to  it 
as  a  diversion,  and  some  of  the  most  humorous  parts  are  said 
to  have  been  written  after  her  death.  The  public  had  been 
prepared  for  the  book  by  the  publication  in  Nfew  York  papers 
of  clever  advertisements  concerning  the  disappearance  of  the 
supposed  author,  Diedrich  Knickerbocker.  That  the  hoax 
might  be  less  readily  detected  Irving  took  the  manuscript  to 
Philadelphia,  where  it  was  printed  in  1809, 

The  publication  of  the  Knickerbocker's  History  of  New 
York  is  so  important  that  it  is  sometimes  taken  to  mark  an 
epoch  in  the  history  of  American  literature.  It  was  the  first 
American  book,  with  the  exception  of  Franklin's  Autobiogra- 


164  Amebic  AN  Literatubb 

phy,  to  establish  a  permanent  reputation  for  literary  merit. 
After  more  than  a  hundred  years  it  is  one  of  the  books  with 
which  every  well-read  American  is  supposed  to  be  familiar.  A 
little  of  its  fame  is  perhaps  due  to  the  reflected  glory  of  Irv- 
ing's  later  works;  and  a  little,  perhaps,  to  the  adoption  of 
"Knickerbocker^^  as  applicable  to  everything  from  New  York ; 
but  the  intrinsic  merits  of  the  book  entitle  it  to  the  place  that 
it  has  held. 

In  style  the  Knickerbocker's  History  diflfers  greatly  from  the 
Oldstyle  Papers  and  Salmagundi.     The  authors  by  whom 

Irving  was  influenced  are  uncertain.  Sir 
Ch^actoistics  'W'alter  Scott  and  others  made  comparisons 
boSvHistory  with  Swift  and  Sterne.    The  question  is  hardly 

worth  considering.  The  important  matter  is 
Ithat  Irving  had  evolved  a  style  so  far  original  that  it  was  not 
'a  plain  imitation  of  any  author.  Other  important  character- 
istics of  the  History  can  best  be  seen  by  comparing  it  with 
the  works  of  Irving's  immediate  predecessors,  the  Hartford 
Wits.  From  these  it  differed  in  the  lack  of  a  didactic  purpose, 
in  its  use  of  humor,  and  in  its  attitude  toward  moral  ques- 
tions. A  few  half-veiled  political  allusions  appealed  to  con- 
temporary readers,  but  the  work  was  written  not  to  teach  but 
to  amuse.  The  objects  of  the  author^s  ridicule  were  chosen, 
not  because  of  any  feeling  against  them,  but  because  they  were 
available  for  his  purpose.  Indeed,  Irving  and  his  readers  both 
feel  more  kindly  toward  them  because  they  lend  themselves 
to  the  fun-making.  A  few  of  the  more  serious-minded  de- 
scendants of  Dutch  families  at  first  resented  the  carica- 
tures of  their  ancestors,  but  even  these  soon  felt  the  geniality 
of  the  satire  and  were  proud  to  be  called  "Eiiickerbockers.'* 
Another  point  of  difference  between  Irving  and  his  predeces- 
sors is  his  attitude  on  moral  questions.  In  this  he  resembled 
old  England  of  the  eighteenth  century  far  more  than  New 
England.    The  Knickerbocker's  History  is  not  in  the  slightest 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  165 

degree  immoral;  but  it  treats  flippantly  vices  which  the  Puri- 
tan felt  he  could  speak  of  only  with  abhorrence.  The  author 
is  evidently  ^  healthy,  lively  young  fellow,  not  necessarily 
wicked  himself,  but  willing  to  joke  over  the  sins  of  others. 

For  ten  years^  after  the  publication  of  the  Knickerbocker's 
History  Irving  did  no  literary  work  except  to  serve  for  a 

short  time  as  editor  of  ^'Select  Eeviews,^*  after- 
A  Period  ward  the  "Analectic  Magazine.**    He  became  a 

Inactiyity  partner  in  the  firm  of  Irving  Brothers,  import- 

ing cutlers,  but  at  first  he  had  little  to  do  with 
the  business.  He  visited  Washington,  Baltimore,  and  Phila- 
delphia, made  many  friends,  and  enjoyed  the  social  side  of 
life.  The  war  of  1812  threw  the  affairs  of  the  cutlery  firm 
into  confusion,  and  at  its  close  in  1815  Washington  Irving 
was  sent  to  England  to  look  after  the  interests  there.  He 
seems  to  have  attended  to  business  faithfully,  if  not  with 
enthusiasm.  In  1818,  however,  the  firm  f ailed^  and  he  r%; 
solyed  to  support  himself  by  writing.  Accordingly,  he  went 
down  to  London  and  began  work  upon  the  Sketch  Book. 

The  Sketch  Book  was  intended  for  American  readers,  and 
was  published  in  New  York  in  parts  of  four  or  five  sketches 

each,  beginning  early  in  the  summer  of  1819. 
Thc^Sketch  rpj^^  London  ^'Literary  Gazette**  began  to  re- 

,    '  print  these  parts  as  soon  as  they  were  received, 

and  in  self-defense  Irving  resolved  to  bring  the  work  out  in 
London  himself.  After  unfortunate  experiences  with  other 
publishers  he  established,  through  the  friendly  mediation  of 
Walter  Scott,  a  connection  with  Murray,  the  most  important 
publisher  of  the  day,  that  continued  throughout  his  life. 

The  chief  characteristics  of  the  Sketch  Book  are  those  that 
are  found  in  all  the  best  of  Irving's  later  writings.  The  style  is 
neither  that  of  Salmagundi,  nor  of  Knickerbocker,  though 
there  are  elements  of  both.  Critics  have  suggested  indebted- 
ness to  Addison,  Steele,  Sterne,  Mackenzie,  Goldsmith,  and 


166  Amerigak  Literatubb 

others.  It  is  significant  that  all  these  authors  belong  to  the 
school  just  going  out  of  fashion.  Irving's  style,  though  indi- 
vidual, was  influenced  by  the  more  graceful  and  sentimental 
writers  of  the  eighteenth  century.  His  subjects  were  not 
altogether  such  as  the  more  formal  of  his  masters  would  have 
chosen.  He  had  a  love  for  the  old,  the  romantic,  the  pictur- 
esque. He  prefixed  his  sketches  with  mottoes  from  old  songs 
and  old  plays,  and  he  rummaged  in  the  British  Museum  for 
antiquarian  information  such  as  he  used  in  the  sketches  of 
Christmas  festivities  at  an  English  country-house.  He  had  a 
fondness,  too,  for  the  sentimental  and  the  pathetic,  as  is  seen  in 
such  pieces  as  "The  Wife,''  "Bural  Funerals,"  "The  Widow 
and  her  Son.*'  Speaking  generally,  his  subjects  tend  toward 
I  the  romantic,  and  his  style  is  that  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
The  Sketch  Booh  was  cordially  received  in  both  England 
and  America,  and  the  public  began  to  call  upon  the  author  for 

«      t.  .^    ^  .«  something  more.    The  articles  in  the  Sketch 
Bracebridge  Hall 

Book  that  received  most  praise  were  the  Christ- 
mas sketches  and  the  American  stories  "Rip  Van  Winkle" 
and  "The  Legend  of  Sleepy  Hollow;'*  and  in  Bracebridge 
Hall,  his  next  volume,  Irving  continues  these  two  forms  of 
writing.  The  antiquarian  learning  shown  in  the  descriptions 
of  old  English  customs  doubtless  represents  much  preliminary 
work  in  the  British  Museum.  Most  of  the  book  was  actually 
written  in  Paris,  where  the  author  spent  some  time  .in  com- 
pany with  Thomas  Moore  and  other  literary  friends.  In  the 
original  plan  Buckthorne,  an  author,  was  to  be  one  of  the 
chief  characters,  but  Irving  decided  to  reserve  him  for  the 
hero  of  the  novel  which  his  friends  were  urging  him  to  write. 
The  slight  thread  of  story  running  through  Bracebridge  Hall 
is  no  doubt  a  concession  to  this  demand  for  a  "sustained" 
work  of  fiction.  The  book  was  ready  for  the  printer  early  in 
1822,  and  was  brought  out  simultaneously  in  England  and 
America.    A  few  English  reviews  objiected  that  the  pictures  of 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  167 

country  life  were  untrue,  and  some  of  the  author's  country- 
men complained  that  it  was  un-American,  but  in  general  it 
was  well  received,  and  further  exertions  were  demanded  from 
the  author. 

With  these  demands  Irving  did  not  find  it  easy  to  comply. 
He  tried  to  make  use  of  Buckthome  in  a  novel  to  be  called 

The  History  of  an  Author;  he  conceived  a 
a  '^veBter^  series  of  tales  on  the  legendary  superstitions 
}<;./  of  Germany;  and  he  abandoned  these  in  favor 

of  two  volumes  more  of  Sketch  Booh.  Finally  he  decided  on 
the  form  which  the  Tales  of  a  Traveller  now  bears.  To  make 
this  somewhat  heterogeneous  work  he  cut  up  what  he  had  al- 
ready written  of  the  History  of  an  Author,  and  combined 
with  the  tales  so  formed  material  that  he  might  have  used  in 
the  German  legends  and  the  new  Sketch  Book,  Much  of  the 
German  material  he  had  gathered  in  a  trip  up  the  Bhine  and 
to  Vienna  and  Dresden.  He  began  the  manuscript  when  he 
reached  Paris  on  the  return  journey,  and  finished  it  in  Eng- 
land in  1824.  Even  after  it  had  gone  to  the  printer  it  was 
found  insufficient  to  fill  the  specified  two  volumes,  and  he  was 
obliged  to  write  more  sketches  and  to  expand  some  already 
written. 

Of  the  three  works  published  between  1819  and  1824  the 
Sketch  Book  takes  highest  rank.  It  is  fresher,  more  spon- 
taneous, and  more  varied  than  the  others.    A 

Comoaiad'  ^®^  ^^   *^®   sketches   are   almost  universally 

known.  The  popularity  of  "Bip  Van  Winkle'* 
may  have  been  increased  by  the  wonderful  dramatic  inter- 
pretation of  Joseph  JeflEerson ;  but  the  "Legend  of  Sleepy  Hol- 
low,'* in  the  broader  vein  of  Knickerbocker,  is  almost  equally 
a  favorite.  Even  the  English  sketches,  many  of  them  on 
unpromising  subjects  and  tinged  with  a  sentimentality  now 
wholly  out  of  fashion,  charm  by  their  clearness  and  beauty  of 
expression.    In  Bracebridge  Hall  the  style  is  even  smoother. 


168  AiiEBiCAN  Literature 

but  somewhat  less  vital  and  expressive.  There  is  less  narra- 
tive than  the  plan  of  the  work  seems  to  call  for,  and  the 
many  descriptions  of  persons  and  scenes,  strung  on  so  slight 
a  thread  of  story,  become  a  little  monotonous.  Only  the 
sketch  of  ''The  Stout  Gentleman'^  approaches  ''Eip  Van 
Winkle^'  and  "The  Legend  of  Sleepy  HoUow^^  in  popularity. 
The  Tales  of  a  Traveller  has  greater  variety  than  Bracebridge 
Ilally  but  is  inferior  in  almost  every  way,  Irving  was  not 
thoroughly  familiar  with  the  spirit  of  the  Continental  coun- 
tries in  which  many  of  his  scenes  were  laid.  His  acquaintance 
with  the  cruder  forms  of  German  romanticism  seems  to  have 
had  a  particularly  unfortunate  effect  upon  his  work.  He 
rarely  succeeded  in  a  story  of  action,  and  in  this  collection  he 
attempted  many  lively  tales.  Buckthorne  is  a  less  pleasing 
character  than  most  of  his  literary  creations.  Moreover,  his 
taste  seems  to  have  failed  him  as  it  rarely  did.  "The  Story 
of  the  Young  Bobber^^  fortunately  finds  no  parallel  in  his 
other  writings. 

Irving's  diflSculties  in  preparing  the  Tales  of  a  Traveller 
doubtless  showed  him  that  he  had  worked  out  the  vein  opened 

in  the  Sketch  Booh,  If  not  he  must  have  been 
of  a  ii^ject  ^     warned  by  the  reviews,  English  and  American. 

These,  while  mostly  friendly,  were  not  lavish 
in  their  praises,  and  many  of  them  made  unfavorable  com- 
parison with  the  earlier  volumes.  So  it  came  about  that 
Irving  found  himself,  at  the  age  of  forty-two,  a  literary  man 
with  an  established  reputation  looking  for  a  remunerative 
literary  job.  He  declined  liberal  offers  of  editorships  because 
he  disliked  to  be  tied  down  to  routine  work.  He  refused  to 
contribute  to  the  London  "Quarterly  Review^^  because  it  was 
unfavorable  to  America.  While  still  uncertain  what  to  do 
he  went  over  to  Bordeaux  "to  see  the  vintage.^^  Here  he 
lingered  until  he  received  from  Alexander  H.  Everett,  then 
United   States  minister  to   Spain,  the  suggestion  that  he 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Centuby  16D 

translate  Navarette^s  Voyages  of  Colurribvs,  soon  to  appear 
at  Madrid.  ^ 

On  reaching  the  Spanish  capital  he  found  ITavarette's 
work  too  scrappy  to  suit  his  purpose,  and  he  resolved  to  write 

an  independent  life  of  Columbus.  Accord- 
SS^S^        -gly  ^  ^-«-d  at  Madrid,  working  on 

manuscripts  in  the  government  archives  and 
on  other  original  sources.  Following  a  habit  of  his,  he  laid 
aside  the  Life  of  Columhusjo  write  the  first  draft  of  the  Gonr 
quest  of  Oranada,  and  the  former  was  not  finished  until  1827 
and  not  published  until  1828.  He  now  travelled  about  Spain, 
visited  the  Alhambra,  and  settled  down  for  about  a  year  at 
Seville.  Here  he  prepared  a  second  edition  of  the  Columbus, 
and  put  the  Conquest  of  Oranada  into  shape.  In  1829  he 
made  another  visit  to  the  Alhambra,  and  it  is  chiefly  the 
experiences  of  this  second  trip  that  are  narrated  in  the  work  of 
that  name.  T!he  Legends  of  the  Conquest  of  Spain^  are  said  to 
have  been  finished  at  this  time,  but  they  were  not  published 
until  later.  In  1829  Irving  was  appointed  secretary  of  lega- 
tion at  London.  Here  he  put  in  shape  the  Voyages  of  the 
Companions  o/  Columbus,  and  the  Alhambra. 

The  Spanish  subjects  to  which  Irving  was  led  by  the  chance 
suggestion  of  Everett  were  admirably  suited  to  his  taste: 

The  two  chief  characteristics  seen  in  the 
CharacteristiM  Sketch  Boole  were  love  of  the  picturesque  and 
Works  genuine  patriotism.     Spain  could  gratify  the 

first  of  these,  and  Columbus  had  a  connection 
with  America.  Irving^s  fitness  for  writing  biography  and 
history  was,  however,  not  remarkable.  He  was  careful,  con- 
scientious, sand  though  desultory  in  his  methods,  by  no  means 
afraid  of  hard  work.  He  investigated  thoroughly  many  au- 
thorities. But  he  had  neither  the  training  nor  the  tempera- 
ment of  an  ideal  biographer.  Even  in  the  languages  that  he 
must  use  he  wns  mostly  self-taught.    He  had  an  eye  for  the 


170  AmEBIOAN  LiTERATlTBB 

picturesque  rather  than  for  that  which  was  intrinsically  im* 
portant.  The  result  was  that  in  the  Life  of  Columhus  he  pro- 
duced a  work  readable^  accurate  in  statement  of  unquestioned 
fact^  land  as  judicial  as  he  knew  how  to  make  it^  but  not^  as 
the  great  biography  must  be,  the  final  word  on  the  subject. 
In  the  Conquest  of  Oranada  he  made  the  mistake  of  trying 
to  tell  history  in  the  guise  of  fiction.  The  work  purports  to 
be  extracts  from  the  chronicle  of  an  imaginary  monk.  Fray 
Antonio  Agapida.  Irving  intended  Fray  Antonio  to  personify 
the  churchman's  intense  hatred  of  the  Moors,  as  Carlyle  sig- 
nified a  certain  temper  of  mind  by  Dry-as-Dust.  The  device 
was  an  unfortunate  one.  The  monk  is  always  felt  to  be  a 
dummy,  and  his  presence  tends  to  discredit  the  whole  work. 
Irving  saw  this  as  soon  as  the  book  was  published.  In  a  re- 
view that,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  time,  he  was  asked 
to  write  for  the  "Quarterly*'  his  one  object  was  to  maintain 
that  the  narrative  is  veritable  history.  In  the  Alhambra  he 
was  lagain  free  to  mingle  his  observations  and  the  results  of 
his  imagination  without  the  historian's  strict  subserviency  to 
facts.  This  collection  of  descriptions  and  tales  is  called  with 
some  justice  a  Spanish  Sketch  Book;  but  it  is  somewhat 
thinner  and  less  virile  than  the  earlier  work.  It  seems,  too, 
a  little  more  artificial,  as  if  the  author  had  planned  some  of 
his  experiences  in  the  old  Moorish  palace  for  the  *'copy"  that 
might  be  made  of  them.  With  the  passing  of  the  popular 
fondness  for  sentiment  it  has  probably  suffered  more  than  the 
Sketch  Boole. 

The  Alhambra  was  published  just  as  Irving  returned  to 
America  in  1832.    He  had  been  absent  about  half  a  genera- 
tion, during  which  time  he  had  achieved  an 
W^"*"        international  reputation,  and  his  native  coun- 
Subjects  ^^  ^^^  experienced  great  changes.     He  had 

always  protested  his  loyalty  to  America,  but 
had  said  that  he  found  less  distraction  from  work  and  more 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Cbntuet  171 

inspiration  in  the  old  world.  Although  there  had  been  much 
newspaper  criticism  of  his  course  in  remaining  abroad^  his 
reception  on  his  return  was  enthusiastic^  and  there  was  a 
general  demand  that  he  write  on  American  themes.  It  may 
have  been  in  response  to  this  demand  that  he  took  an  ex- 
tensive trip  through  the  new  West,  going  with  a  government 
party  as  far  as  the  Arkansas  river,  and  returning  by  way  of 
New  Orleans  and  Washington.  The  literary  result  of  this 
journey  was  A  Tour  on  the  Prairies,  published  with  other  ma- 
terial as  the  Cravon  Miscellany  in  1835. 

Even  before  the  Miscellany  appeared  Irving  had  received 
from  John  Jacob  Astor  a  request  to  write  the  history  of  that 

merchant's  business  ventures  on  the  Pacific 
coast.  The  circumstances  attending  the  prepa- 
ration of  Astoria  were  once  the  subject  of  much  controversy, 
now  of  interest  only  as  showing  how  jeabusly  the  country 
watched  its  literary  men.  The  unquestioned  facts  are  that 
John  Jacob  Astor  oflEered  to  pay  Irving  for  writing  the  his- 
tory; that  at  the  suggestion  of  the  latter  his  nephew,  Pierre 
M.  Irving,  was  employed  on  the  work  at  a  liberal  salary  paid 
by  Astor;  and  that  the  book  appeared  as  Astoria,  by  Washing- 
ton Irving.  It  was  charged  that  Pierre  M.  Irving  did  most 
of  the  work,  and  that  Washington  Irving  sold  his  name  to 
Astor  for  a  large  sum.  Pierre  M.  Irving  maintains,  and  there 
is  no  good  reason  for  doubting  his  word,  that  his  own  labors 
were  mostly  clerical,  and  that  his  xmcle  received  no  remunera- 
tion except  from  the  sale  of  the  book  in  the  usual  way. 

The  third  of  Irving^s  writings  with  a  western  American 
theme  was  more  purely  a  commercial  venture.    While  engaged 

on  Astoria  he  met  Captain  Bonneville,  an 
cf^ihS"**^'  adventurer  who  had  spent  some  time  in  the 
Bonneville  West,  and  had  prepared  an  account  of  his  ex- 

periences. Irving  bought  his  manuscript  for 
$1,000,  touched  it  up  somewhat — ^veiy  slightly,  if  his  preface 


178  AkEBIGAN  LitERATUBB 

is  to  be  believed — and  issued  it  in  1837  b&  The  Adventures  of 
Cavtain  BonnevilUj^  The  specidation  was  a  good  one,  for 
Nephew  Pierre  proudly  tells  us  that  the  sale  of  the  work 
brought  $7,500. 

These  American  works  add  little  to  the  fame  of  Irving. 
The  subjects  were  not  such  as  he  was  best  fitted  to  treat,  and 
he  was  directed  to  them  more  by  patriotism  and  popular  de- 
mand than  by  any  real  interest.  The  Tour  on  the  Prairies 
and  the  best  parts  of  Astoria  ure  of  the  grade  of  good  maga- 
zine work,  to  be  read,  enjoyed,  and  forgotten. 

Irving  next  planned  to  continue  his  studies  of  Spanish 
achievement  in  a  history  of  the  conquest  of  Mexico ;  but  he 

procrastinated  until  he  found  that  Prescott 
Bioeraiihies         ^^^  working  upon  the  same  subject,  and  then 

generously  relinquished  the  field  to  the  younger 
man*  He  began  a  life  of  Washington,  but  it  was  interrupted 
by  his  appointment  as  Minister  to  Spain  in  1842,  and  by  other 
writings.  The  first  volume  appeared  in  1855,  and  the  last 
just  before  his  death  in  1859.  Meanwhile  he  had  published  a 
short  T^yg  of  Goldsmith^  and  Mahomet  and  his  Successors, 
both  in  1849.  Wolfert's  Boost,  a  collection  of  stories  part  of 
which  had  been  written  for  magazines,  appeared  in  1855. 
Some  sweepings  of  his  portfolio  were  issued  after  his  death 
2l^  Syanish  Papers. 

Many  of  the  short  sketches  in  the  later  volumes  were  good, 
though  none  equal  the  best  of  his  earlier  days.  Of  the  later 
biographies,  the  Ooldsmith  is  the  best  and  the  Mahomet  the 
poorest.  Irving  was  fitted  by  temperament  to  understand 
Goldsmith,  and  he  had  neither  the  temperament  nor  the  train- 
ing for  an  adequate  study  of  Mahomet.  The  Life  of  Wash- 
ington^wsis  a  respectable  treatment  of  a  diflScult  theme.  Irv- 
ing undertook  it  from  motives  of  patriotism,  but  it  was  not 
the  kind  of  subject  that  he  really  enjoyed.  He  complained 
of  the  ^Vant  of  feature''  even  in  the  Eevolutionaiy  war.    The 


The  Early  Nineteej^th  Century  173 

present  neglect  of  the  work  is  due,  however,  not  to  its  lack 
of  picturesqueness,  but  to  the  fact  that  it  represents  a  kind 
of  biography  now  out  of  fashion.  In  the  early  years  of  the 
century  the  veneration  of  Washington  was  carried  to  ridicu- 
lous extremes.  Even  conservative  magazines  printed  his  name 
only  in  capitals ;  and  the  introduction  of  the  Commander-in- 
Chief,  even  in  disguise,  in  Cooper^s  Spy  was  condemned  as 
sacrilege.  Irving  belonged  to  the  time  when  these  traditions 
prevailed;  and  his  ancestry,  his  training,  even  his  name,  pre- 
disposed him  to  take  an  exalted  view  of  his  hero.  It  should 
be  remembered  to  his  credit  that,  artificial  as  the  Washington 
he  pictured  seems  to  us,  the  portrait  is  more  lifelike  than  any 
drawn  by  his  predecessors. 

Irving  lived  until  a  change  in  literary  taste  had  taken  place. 
Just  after  his  death  there  was  a  reaction  against  his  works, 

and  a  generation  fed  on  Transcendentalism 
Gen«ral  ^  ^  and  reform  felt  that  they  were  thin  and 
of  Irvins  unprofitable.     Since  that  time  there  has  been 

no  enthusiastic  Irving  revival,  yet  he  has 
slowly  increased  and  seems  to  be  still  increasing  in  popular 
favor.  In  a  study  of  American  literature  he  is  important,  if 
for  no  other  reason,  because  of  his  historical  position.  He 
was  the  first  American  to  win  international  fame  solely  as  an 
author.  He  was  one  of  the  first  Americans  to  write  without 
a  didactic  purpose.  He  was  the  last  and  the  greatest  of  the 
American  Addisonians.  The  intrinsic  merit  of  his  writings, 
however,  warrants  his  fame.  This  merit  is  pf  gtyle  rather. 
than_ofjiQntgnt  though  the  two  are  inseparable.  And  in  style 
his  writings  are  surprisingly  uniform.  Unlike  Charles  Brock- 
den  Brown  and  many  other  men  who  have  depended  on 
authorship  for  support,  he  did  not  divide  his  time  between 
hackwork  and  more  purely  literary  efforts.  Virtually  every- 
thing that  he  wrote  appears  in  his  collected  works;  and  there 
are  few  pages  of  which  he  need  have  felt  ashamed  or  which 


174  American  LiTSRATURfi 

the  reader  with  leisure  will  not  find  fairly  interesting.  Still, 
his  fame  has  come  to  rest  mainly  on  the  Knickerbocker 
History,  the  three  works  of  the  Sketch  Book  group,  and  the 
more  imaginative  of  the  Spanish  writings;  and  in  these  may 
be  seen  his  chief  excellences.  The  adjective  most  frequently 
applied  by  contemporaries  to  both  the  man  and  his  writings 
was  "genial.'*  With  geniality  were  combined  a  certain  old- 
fashioned  quality  and  a  masculine  delicacy  of  taste.  It  is 
easy  to  enimierate  many  things  that  he  could  not  do,  yet  he 
'appeals  as  do  few  other  American  authors  to  the  reader  who 
is  in  the  proper  mood. 
^  The  second  of  the  greater  Knickerbockers  was  James  Fen- 
imore  Cooper   (1789-1851).     He  was  bom  at  Burlington, 

New  Jersey,  but  before  he  was  a  year  old 
JamM  hig  father  removed  to  Cooperstown,  New  York, 

Cooper  ^  settlement  founded  on  a  large  family  estate 

in  the  wilderness.  There  was  Quaker  blood 
m  his  f ather^s  family,  and  his  mother  was  of  Swedish  d^sjQent. 
His  boyhood  was  spent  among  the  heterogeneous  population  of 
a  backwoods  settlement.  Here  he  attended  the  village  school, 
dignified  by  the  name  of  ^'The  Academy,''  and  then  continued 
his  studies  imder  a  clergyman  near  Albany.  In  1802,  at  the 
age  of  thirteen,  he  entered  Yale  college.  According  to  his 
own  statement  he  studied  little,  and  in  his  junior  year  was 
dismissed  for  his  share  in  some  college  scrape.  It  was  then 
decided  that  he  should  enter  the  navy.  As  there  was  at  this 
itime  no  naval  academy  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  serve  an 
tapprenticeship  in  the  merchant  marine,  and  he  shipped  as  a 
common  sailor  on  a  vessel  bound  for  England  and  Mediter- 
ranean ports.  In  1808  he  was  commissioned  as  midshipman, 
and  was  detailed  with  a  party  sent  to  supervise  the  construc- 
tion of  a  brig  on  Lake  Ontario — an  experience  that  he  later 
made  use  of  in  writing  T%«  Pathfinder.  He  also  saw  some 
sea  duty.    In  1811  he  married  Mis$  DeLancey,  of  Westchester 


The  Eably  Nineteenth  Centubt  175 

couniy,  New  York;  and  a&  his  wife  objected  to  the  separa- 
tion involved  in  a  naval  career  he  resigned  from  the  service. 
For  some  years  he  lived  at  various  places  in  New  York  state^ 
with  no  other  occupation  than  managing  his  properly. 

It  was  in  1820,  when  Cooper  was  past  thirty  years  of  age, 
that  he  chanced  to  remark  that  he  could  write  a  better  story 

than  some  fashionable  novel  which  he  was  read- 
FIrstNovel  ^^'     -According  to  tradition,  his  wife  dared 

him  to  make  good  the  boast.  As  he  had  never 
written  anything,  or  taken  any  interest  in  literature,  it  is  un- 
likely that  she  expected  him  to  do  so.  But  he  set  to  work, 
and  before  the  close  of  the  year  had  completed  Precaution^  a 
novel  of  English  society  life,  with  much  pious  moralizing. 
It  seems  dull  now,  but  it  was  a  fair  representative  of  a  type 
then  in  fashion,  and  was  good  enough  to  be  reprinted  in  Eng- 
land, and  to  receive  favorable  notice  from  some  reviewers  who 
took  it  to  be  the  work  of  an  English  woman.  This  would  seem 
to  indicate  that  it  was  superficially  true  to  conventional  ideas, 
if  not  to  life,  in  its  portrayal  of  English  society.  The  author 
had  seen  England  only  as  a  sailor  with  a  few  days  of  shore 
leave  in  London,  and  it  is  a  mystery  where  he  obtained  his 
ideas  of  English  affairs.  Very  likely  he  had  absorbed  them 
from  novels  of  the  same  sort  that  he  attempted. 

The  success  of  Precaution  was  not  great,  but  it  was  enough 
to  encourage  another  attempt.    The  author^s  friends  of  course 

urged  him  to  try  an  American  subject.  Prob- 
?*  S?^  ably  the  example  of  the  author  of  Waverly  in- 

The  Pilot  clined  him  to  the  historical  novel.    He  took  as 

the  germ  of  his  next  story,  23^§22>  some  anec-  / 
dotes  that  he  had  heard  from  John  Jay  regarding  an  Ameri-  i 
can  secret  service  agent  in  the  Eevolutionary  war.    The  scene 
is  laid  in  Westchester  county,  with  which  he  had  become 
thoroughly  familiar  after  his  marriage.    He  worked  with  little 
wthnsiasm,  the  writing  dragged,  and  it  i?  mi  that,  in  order 


176  Akebican  Literature 

to  satisfy  his  printer  that  the  work  would  really  have  an  end, 
he  wrote  the  last  chapters  and  had  them  printed  and  paged 
before  he  completed  the  earlier  parts  of  the  second  volume. 
Late  m  1821,  hqweyer,  The  8^  appeared,  and  met  with  a  sale 
unprecedented  in  American  fiction.  This  seems  to  have  de- 
termined Cooper  on  more  systematic  authorship,  though  in 
the  preface  to  his  next  work.  The  Pioneers,  he  expressed  him- 
self as  still  undecided.  He  removed  to  N"ew  York  city,  where  he 
was  in  closer  touch  with  publishers,  and  where  he  founded  the 
Bread  and  Cheese  Lunch,  a  club  of  which  most  of  the  other 
Knickerbocker  writers  were  members,  jn  The  Pioneers  he 
portrayed  ihe  frontier  life  that  he  had  seen  in  boyhood.  Be- 
fore this  appeared  he  had  decided  upon  another  work  under 
circumstances  slightly  similar  to  those  which  led  to  Precau- 
tion. In  a  discussion  of  the  identity  of  the  ^*6reat  Unknown" 
he  had  maintained  that  The  Pirate  was  written  by  a  lands- 
man, and  that  a  sailor  would  have  achieved  greater  effects 
with  the  same  material.  One  of  his  hearers  was  incredulous, 
and  to  show  what  could  be  made  of  a  sea  tale  he  decided  to 
write  one  himself.  The  Pt?o^  joUowed  closely  upon  The  Pio- 
n£er^both_qf  them  appearing  in  1823.  . 

Within  less  than  four  years  after  Cooper  blundered,  so  to 
speak,  into  authorship,  he  had  produced  four  novels  of  four 

distinct  tjrpes — ^the  novel  of  fashionable  society, 

Variety  of  ^he  historical  novel  of   the  Revolution,   the 

Cooper  8  Early 

-^Qtk  novel  of  frontier  life,  and  the  sea  tale.    The 

first  of  these  was  relatively  a  failure;  but  in 
all  the  others  he  had  succeeded,  and  The  Spy,  The  Pioneers, 
and  The  Pilot  are  still  among  his  most  popular  works.  The 
^historical  novel  appealed  to  him  most  strongly — ^both  The 
Spy  and  The  Pilot  are  to  a  certain  extent  of  this  class — and 
he  decided  on  a  series  of  tales  based  on  Revolutionary  happen- 
ings in  various  states.  The  only  one  written  was^Lifizi^L^itL- 
J^r)7n,  fo^  M<iaflqphi;\f^tt^y    This  represents  much  careful  study. 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  177 

bnt  the  author  could  never  do  justice  to  New  England,  and  it 
fell  flat.  He  then  returned  to  the  frontier  tale  and  wrote 
what  many    consider    his    masterpiece — The    Last    of   the 

Mohicans. 

-  - 

In  1826  Cooper  went  abroad  and  remained  for  seven  jyearSj^ 

visiting  most  of  the  countries  that  a  traveller  ordinarily  sees, 

but  spending  more  time  in  France  than  else- 

writiiigs  where.    His  travels  did  not  interfere  with  his 

Produced 

Abroad  writing.    In  the  first  two  years  of  his  foreign 

residence  he  produced  The  Prairie  and  The 
Red  Rover,  which  continue  the  frontier  stories  and  the  sea 
tales  respectively.  The  Wept  of  Wish-torirWish  and  The 
Water-Witch,  published  in  the  next  two  years,  were  less  suc- 
cessful. Before  they  appeared  Cooper  was  being  drawn  into 
the  controversies  that  occupied  much  of  his  later  life.  He 
was  irritated  by  the  ignorance  and  misconceptions  of  Euro- 
peans, and  particularly  of  Englishmen,  regarding  America. 
At  the  same  time  he  felt  that  Americans  lacked  much  of  the 
refinement  of  the  old  world  and  were  too  self-satisfied.  With 
a  view  to  correcting  the  ideas  of  both  parties  he  had  written 
in  1828  Notions  of  the  Americans  Picked  up  iy  a  Travelling 
Bachelor,  a  series  of  imaginaryletfefs  by  an  imaginary  Eng- 
lish traveller  in  America.  He  had  a  knack  of  antagonizing  both 
sides  in  any  controversy  that  he  entered,  and  this  book  was 
not  especially  pleasing  to  either  Englishmen  or  Americans. 
The  course  of  European  events,  including  the  revolution  in 
France  and  the  revolt  in  Poland,  now  attracted  his  attention, 
and  his  next  three  novels.  The  Bravo.  The  Heidenmauer.  and 
The  Headsman,  have  European  settings.  This  does  not  imply 
a  diminution  of  the  author^s  Americanism,  for  all  the  stories 
exalt  the  idea  of  democracy. 

InJL833  he  returned  to  America  and  settled  at  Cooperstown. 
For  almost  all  the  remaining  eighteen  years  of  his  life  he  wasf 
engaged  in  quarrels.    The  history  of  these  troubles  occupies » 


178  AlHERIGAN  LlTESATUBIS 

mnph  space  in  a  complete  biography  of  Cooper,  but  it  is 
hardly  worth  the  reader's  time.    The  impopularity  caused  by 

what  he  had  written  while  abroad  was  in- 
Co^oTerBiM       creased  by  A  Letter  to  his  Counirumen^  a 

pamphlet  in  which  he  grew  indignant  at  some 
of  the  criticisms  on  his  novels,  expressed  contempt  for  the 
American  press,  and  touched  on  politics  in  a  way  to  anger 
both  parties.  The  MonJkvns^  a  poor  attempt  pit  a  satirical 
novel,  had  the  same  effect.  In  1836-38  he  published  ten 
volumes  of  travels  in  which  he  pointed  out  the  faults  of  Europe 
und  America  in  a  way  that  was  pleasing  to  neither.  Mean- 
while he  had  trouble  with  his  neighbors  over  the  right  of  the 
public  to  use  part  of  the  Cooper  estate  as  a  picnic  ground. 
The  quarrel  was  trivial,  but  it  was  taken  up  by  the  press  of  the 
country  to  Cooper's  disadvantage ;  and  it  led.  to  two  novels, 
Someward_Bgund  and  Home  as  Found,  which  state  Cooper's 
side  of  the  matter,  and  contain  much  criticism  of  America. 
By  this  time  he  had  come  to  be  looked  upon  as  an  unreasonable 
grumbler,  and  a  slanderer  of  his  country,  and  was  everywhere 
assailed.  In  1839  he  brought  out  his  History  of  the  Navy  of 
the  United  States^  a  work  which  he  had  long  had  in  mind. 
Two  rival  oflBcers  were  claiming  credit  for  the  battle  of  Lake 
Erie,  and  as  Cooper's  judgment  was  not  wholly  in  favor  of 
either,  the  partisans  of  both  added  their  clamors  to  those  of 
his  other  enemies.  Cooper  had  already  begun  suits  for  libel 
against  newspapers  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  and  these 
were  increased  in  number  and  continued  for  several  years. 
He  was  successful  in  almost  all,  and  it  seems  to  be  the  verdict 
of  a  later  generation  that  his  worst  offense  was  a  lack  of  tact, 
and  that  his  traducers  were  wholly  unjustified. 

It  is  strange  that  in  1840  and  1841,  in  the  midst  of  these 
disquieting  experiences.  Cooper  produced  two  of  his  calmest 
and  most  successful  stories.  The  Pathfinder  and  The  Deer^^ 

gtoyen    Most  of  bis  other  latQ  wv^ls  hftve  ft  cgntrovewftl 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  179 

or  at  least  a  strong  didactic  elemeiit.    Of  these,  Mercedes  of 
Castile,  which  appeared  between  The  Pathfinder  and  The 

Deerslayer,  is  a  story  of  the  voyages  of  Colum- 

N^  to*     ^^^     ^^^'      rfee   Two   Admirals^   WinQ-and-Wing, 

J^pd  MfiyArs.  and  Afloat  and  Ashore  deal 
with  the  sea.  Wyandotte  is  a  frontier  story.  Satanstoe.  The^ 
Chainbearer.  and  The  Redskvns  form  a  series  called  forth  by 
Cooper's  interest  in  the  anti-rent  war,  waged  by  tenants 
against  the  patroon  system  in  N"ew  York.  The  Crater,  Jack 
Tier,  The  Oak  Openings.  The  Sea-Lions,  and  The  Ways  of  the 
Hour,  which  appeared  between  1847  and  1850,  show  an  in- 
crease in  didacticism  and  a  decrease  in  creative  imagination. 
It  is  said  that  the  anthor  contemplated  a  tale  in  which  his 
favorite  hero,  Leatherstocking,  should  take  part  in  the  Bevo- 
lution,  but  if  the  design  existed  its  execution  was  prevented 
by  his  death. 

If  popularity  be  accepted  as  a  test  only  two  novels  written 
after  1828,  The  Pathfinder  and  The  Deerslayer,  deserve  to 

rank  with  those  of  earlier  date.  Of  the  other 
yj^^^^  later  works,  some  of  the  sea  stories  are  still 

read,  though  usually  by  persons  who  have 
enjoyed  The  PHot  and  The  Red  Bover,  and  who  hope  for 
something  more  of  the  same  kind.  The  writings  on  which 
the  author's  reputation  now  rests  are  The  Spy,  The  Pilot,  The 
Bed  Bover,  and  the  five  frontier  stories  in  which  the  character 
of  Leatherstocking  appears — The  Pioneers,  The  Last  of  the 
Mohicans,  The  Prairie,  The  Pathfinder,  and  The  Deerslayer* 


*  This  is  the  order  in  which  the  "Leathentookinc  Tales"  were  written.  Arranged 
aooozdinc  tQ  the  events  of  the  hero's  life  they  would  stand:  The  Deer^ayer,  The 
Lati  of  the  Mohieane,  The  Pathfinder,  The  Pioneere,  and  The  Prairie.  Cooper  becan 
by  pietuzing  an  old  hunter  suoh  as  the  proprietor  of  Ciooperstown  doubtless  found 
when  he  began  his  settlement.  In  later  volumes  he  represents  different  epochs 
in  the  life  of  such  a  character.  The  Deerdayer  pictures  the  young  hunter  just 
showing  his  aptneei  for  woodcraft;  The  Pathfindmr  shows  the  lover;  The  Laei  of 
the  Mohieane  the  woodsman  in  his  prime;  and  The  Prairie  the  old  man,  driven 
from  his  favorite  hunting  grounds  in  the  forest  by  the  advancing  settlementi. 


180  AlCBBICAN  LlTERATtJBB 

Special  praise  for  the  other  stories  is  not  hard  to  find.  Ban- 
croft pronounced  the  description  of  the  battle  of  Bunker 
Hill  in  Lionel  Lincoln  the  best  ever  written;  Bryant  admired 
the  spirit  and  lifelike  quality  of  Jack  Tier;  and  only  the  other 
day  a  much-travelled  English  woman  said  that  The  Bravo 
was  still  the  best  guidebook  to  Venice.  None  of  these  works, 
however,  appeals  as  a  whole  to  the  ordinary  reader,  and  the 
novel  of  adventure  that  does  not  so  appeal  is  a  failure. 
y-  In  judging  of  the  unsuccessful  novels  and  miscellaneous 
works  the  reader  is  hampered  by  an  imperfect  knowledge  of 

the  author's  personaliiy.  It  was  Cooper's  dy- 
52^^  ing  wish  that  no  authorized  biography  be  per- 

mitted,  and  his  family  have  never  opened  to 
the  public  any  of  the  special  sources  of  information  in  their 
possession.  Cooper  was  a  man  with  few  close  friends,  and  his 
manner,  both  in  writing  and  in  personal  intercourse,  was  such 
as  often  to  be  misunderstood.  It  is  unfortunate  that  posterity 
has  not  the  fullest  opportunity  to  do  him  justice.  Certain 
characteristics  are,  however,  fairly  apparent.  He  was  by  con- 
viction and  hereditary  instinct  an  aristocrat,  yet  he  was  by 
political  conviction  a  democrat.  In  religion  he  combined  a 
love  of  the  forms  of  Bpiscopalianism  with  almost  Puritan 
ideas  of  conduct;  so  that  it  has  been  said  that  he  hated  the 
Puritans  because  he  was  so  much  like  them.  His  manv 
troubles  seem  to  have  been  brought  about  by  a  lack  of  tact  and 
a  mistaken  idea  that  it  is  always  the  duty  of  a  friend  to  tell 
unpleasant  truths.  His  strictures  on  America  were  not  made, 
as  was  charged,  because  he  was  unpatriotic,  but  because  he 
really  wished  that  America  might  know  her  faults  and  mend 
them. 

These  personal  peculiarities  explain  much  that  was  weak 
and  unfortunate  and  ephemeral  in  Cooper's  work.  The  en- 
during qualities  of  his  better  stories  are  associated  with  his 
genuine  love  of  what  is  best  in  America,  and  his  wholesome^ 


( 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Centuby  181 

large-hearted  appreciation  of  nature  and  those  types  of  men 
that  are  nearest  nature.  The  scenes  of  all  his  best  stories  are 
laid  in  America  or  on  board  American  ships^  and  his  best 
characters  are  all  Americans.  His  pictures  of  the  forest, 
the  lake  ajid  the  sea  have  a  wonderful  freedom  and  life.  One 
of  the  best  indications  of  their  merits  is  the  fact  that  his  long 
descriptions  do  not  seem  intolerable  in  an  exciting  story. 
The  action  rarely  appears  to  drag  except  in  those  unfortu- 
nate novels  where  the  author  lectures  aud  preaches. 

An  unfriendly  critic  can  easily  formulate  a  long  series  of 
charges  against  Cooper.     He  fails  in  psychological  analysis 

of  the  more  complex  types  of  man.  He  can- 
Cooper's  jjQ^j  portray  a  gentleman,  or  a  New  Englander, 
'RTKfiihmim         ^^  *  woman.    He  has  little  command  of  humor. 

His  plots  are  not  carefully  constructed  and 
if  coolly  analyzed  often  seem  improbable  in  detail.  He  over- 
works a  few  devices,  such  as  the  ^T)roken  twig^^  which  Mark 
Twain  ridicules,  and  the  abstracted  manner  of  his  naval 
heroes.  His  language  is  often  inexact  and  he  sometimes 
makes  downright  grammatical  blunders. 

The  wise  admirer  of  Cooper  will  concede  the  truth  of  most 
of  these  charges,  but  will  maintain  that  they  are  not  sufScient 

to  justify  the  condemnation  of  his  works.  If 
Cooper's  j^^  cannot  portray  the  intricate  workings  of  a 

Venial  complex  mind,  he  has  chosen  as  his  heroes 

men  of  simple  life  and  elemental  passions. 
Harvey  Birch,  Leatherstocking,  and  Tom  CofBn,  however 
unsatisfactory  to  a  devotee  of  realism,  have  impressed  thou- 
sands of  readers  as  true  to  life.  Even  the  imbecility  of  his 
women,  of  which  much  has  been  said,  is  not  a  fatal  defect. 
The  fashion  of  his  time  was  that  heroes  should  be  of  the  male 
sex ;  and  the  weakness  of  those  dependent  upon  them  empha- 
sized their  manly  qualities  by  contrast.  That  he  could  por- 
tray at  least  one  type  of  strong-minded  woman  is  shown  by 


183  American  Ltteratusb 

Betty  Flanagan  in  The  Spy.  Moreover^  Cooper's  lackar 
daisieal  heroines  are  not  unlike  those  of  other  novelists  of  his 
time>  and  the  student  of  the  period  hesitates  to  say  that  they 
are  wholly  untme  to  life.  It  was  as  much  the  fashion  for 
women  to  he  helpless  and  clinging  then  as  it  is  for  them  to 
be  athletic  now;  and  in  literature  for  and  about  women^  and 
in  personal  letters  that  have  been  preserved,  is  evidence  of 
the  existence  of  a  race  of  beings  very  similar  to  the  "females'* 
of  The  Pilot  land  The  Last  of  the  Mohicans. 

Cooper's  lack  of  humor  is  a  defect,  but  it  is  not  noticed 
except  when  he  attempts  an  unsuccessful  comic  character  like 
the  music  master  in  The  Last  of  the  Mohicans,  or  the  tailor 
and  his  wife  in  The  Red  Rover.  The  plots,  whatever  their  de- 
fects, do  not  fail  to  hold  interest,  and  in  the  outcome  to  sat- 
isfy a  sense  of  poetic  justice.  Inconsistencies  may  be  striking 
when  they  are  pointed  out,  but  the  man  who  cares  for  a  story 
of  adventure  rarely  notices  them  as  he  reads.  The  defects 
of  siyle  are  explained,  though  of  course  not  excused,  by  the 
author's  lack  of  early  training  and  his  haste  in  composition. 
They  are  not  so  serious  as  is  often  supposed,  and  the  language 
often  has  ease  of  movement  and  genuine  power. 

Final  judgment  on  the  value  of  Cooper's  works  could  be 
passed  only  after  deciding  the  relative  merits  of  different 

schools  of  fiction.     Without  discussing  this 
vJauir  *  question,  one  may  fairly  say  that  the  narra- 

tion of  heroic  deeds  has  been  popular  from 
the  days  of  Homer  to  those  of  Stevenson,  and  is  likely  to  be 
popular  longer  still.  Critics  who  feel  that  the  tale  of  ad-' 
venture  gratifies  only  a  crude  taste  will  of  course  give  Cooper 
little  consideration.  Those  who  insist  on  a  certain  precon- 
ceived standard  of  literary  expression  may  find  some  things 
in  his  novels  which  they  will  not  enjoy.  Those,  however,  who 
require  of  such  fiction  only  that  it  be  absorbingly  interesting, 
and  that  it  contain  nothing  to  shock  the  moral  or  esthetic 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Centubt  183 

sense^  will  be  likely  to  rank  him  high.  In  the  past  there  have 
been  many  of  the  last-mentioned  class.  Some  of  the  men 
who  were  most  hostile  to  the  author  personally  were  enthusi- 
astic admirers  of  his  works.  His  better  novels  have  been 
translated  not  once  but  many  times  into  most  European  I 
languages^  and  it  is  said  into  those  of  the  East.  So  far  as  i 
can  be  judged  their  popularity  is  no  less  now  than  it  was 
fifty  years  ago,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  in  the 
meantime  all  literary  tendencies  have  pointed  in  a  different 
direction. 

Whatever  judgment  is  passed  on  his  literary  merits,  it  must 
be  remembered  that  Cooper  created  the  American  novel  of 

the  sea,  and  practically  created  the  American 
^^nato?^       frontier  story   and   the   American   historical 

novel.    In  his  choice  of  literary  form  he  wasi 
influenced  by  Scott;  but  once  started  he  was  in  no  sense  ani 
imitator.     His  American  predecessors  taught  him  nothing. 
That  it  was  not  easy  to  grow  the  flowers  even  after  he  had 
furnished  the  seed  is  shown  by  the  fate  of  dozens  of  frontier 
stories  written  as  soon  as  he  had  popularized  the  type.    With 
the  exception  of  those  by  Simms,  hardly  one  is  remembered  by 
name.     In  his  field  Cooper  was  the  pioneer  and  he  still  I 
stands  alone.  / 

William  Cullen  Bryant  (1794-1878),  the  third  of  the  more' 
important  Knickerbocker  writers,  was  one  of  the  many  New 

England  men  who  were  attracted  to  New 
jraitamC«llea    York.    He  was  bom  in  CTunmington,  Massa- 

chusetts,  where  his  father  was  a  physician  and 
a  man  of  some  importance  in  the  communiiy.  In  his  early 
years  his  maternal  grandfather,  an  old  Puritan  of  the  strict- 
est school,  had  a  considerable  hand  in  family  discipline;  and 
Bryant  mentions  the  impression  made  upon  him  by  "prayers 
which  were  poems  from  beginning  to  end,  mostly  made  up  of 
sentences  from  the  Old  Testament  writers.''    A  little  later 


184  AlCBBIOAN  LiTBaATlTBfi 

the  father^  while  in  Boston  as  a  member  of  the  legislature,  was 
I  attracted  by  IJnitarianism  and  the  son  afterward  followed 
this  lead;  but  the  impressions  made  by  this  early  training 
remained. 

After  receiving  his  elementary  education  Bryant  studied 
Latin  and  Greek  under  two  clergymen,  one  of  whom,  it  is 
interesting  to  note,  gave  him  instruction  and  board  for  a 
dollar  a  week.    At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  was  prepared  to  en- 
iToU  as  a  sophomore  in  Williams  college,  then  a  struggling 
I  institution  with  but  four  instructors.    His  father  was  unable 
to  give  him  a  college  education,  and  after  one  year  he  left 
'Williams  to  take  up  the  study  of  law.    In  time  he  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  bar  and  became  a  moderately  successful  country 
practitioner  at  Great  Barrington,  Massachusetts. 

From  an  early  age  Bryant  had  been  a  great  reader.    His 
father's  library  contained  the  eighteenth  century  English 

classics  in  prose  and  verse,  and  the  works  of 
RMdLf        ^     ^^®  earlier  American  poets.    Before  he  went  to 

college  he  had  read  a  large  and  surprisingly 
heterogeneous  list  of  books.  At  twelve  he  was  entiiusiastic 
over  Pope's  Homer,  and  he  always  retained  a  kindly  feeling 
for  Pope,  though  he  differed  from  him  widely  in  poetic  ideals. 
Later,  he  had  a  Scott  period^  which  resulted  in  some  attempts 
at  narrative  poems  on  Indian  subjects,  and  a  Byron  period 
of  which  he  was  afterward  ashamed.  Shortly  after  leaving 
college  he  was  interested  in  the  gloomy  sentimentalists  like 
Blair  and  Henry  Earke  White.  His  favorjte  poet,  however, 
from  the  time  that  he  first  saw  the  Lyrical  Ballads,  was 
Wordsworth.  His  versification,  especially  his  blank  verse, 
shows  most  influence  of  Wordsworth,  with  some  qualities 
derived  from  his  early  familiarity  with  Pope.  It  is  notice- 
able that  though  his  earliest  attempts  were  in  the  heroic  coup- 
let, he  soon  dropped  that  measure  altogether,  and  it  is  found 
in  no  poem  in  his  collected  works.    Still,  his  fondness  for  a 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Centuet  185 

marked  rhythmical  beat  is  seen  in  a  few  pecuUarities  of  his 
versification.  With  the  eighteenth  century  writers  of  blank 
verse  he  has  little  in  common. 

Bryant  himself  tells  us  that  in  his  very  early  childhood  he 
used  to  pray  that  he  might  write  verses  that  should  endure. 

When  thirteen  years  of  age  he  wrote  a  political 

Ymb  Writinff      8^^^®^  "The  Embargo/^  which  was  published, 

and  republished  with  affidavits  certifpng  to 
the  precocity  of  the  sauthor.  While  at  Williams  college  he 
began  a  narrative  poem  on  an  Indian  subject.  When  seven- 
teen or  eighteen  years  of  age,  and  while  under  the  influence 
of  Henry  Kirke  White  and  others  of  his  school,  he  wrote  the 
greater  part  of  "Thanatopsis^^  but  the  poem  was  not  published 
until  1817.  "To  n  Waterf owF^  was  written  at  the  age  of 
nineteen.  In  1821  he  was  invited  to  deliver  the  annual  poem 
before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  of  Harvard.  It  is  an  indi- 
cation of  the  state  of  poetry  at  the  time  that  this  honor  went 
to  a  country  boy  who  had  attended  college  but  one  year,  and 
whose  reputation  rested  on  a  few  poems  in  the  magazines. 
His  performance  on  this  occasion  was  "The  A^es.^^  In  the 
same  year  he  published  his  first  collection  of  poems,  a  volume 
of  only  forty-four  pages,  containing  '^Thanatopsis,^^  "To  a 
WaterfowV'  "The  Ages,''  "The  Yellow  Violet/'  and  a  few 
others.  During  the  next  few  years  he  wrote  a  large  number 
of  his  shorter  poems. 

All  this  time  Bryant  had  been  practicing  law  in  western] 
Massachusetts,  and  his  affiliations  had  been  with  Boston  rather ' 

than  with  New  York.  The  law  had  always 
New  T^k  ^^^  somewhat  distasteful  to  him,  and  jn  1825 

he  gave  up  his  practice  and  went  to  Kew  York 
as  editor  of  the  "New  York  Eeview  and  AthenaBuniMagar 

-■  -  r  ,        ..     .    ■  -Jl_       Mill-  II         -  -^— ■■~-   -    — ---•    »-»«"»*~— '»""'^~~-~"     '        '■"■   -<ii|       1,11     ,,|,         ■      II     '  "      U      *r 

zine."  This  periodical  soon  failed,  and  after  some  vicissitudes 
he  accepted  an  editorship  on,the  "Evening  Post."  In  1828 
he  became  editor  in  chief.    In  1834  he  went  to  Europe  for 


186  AmBBIOAK  LiTBRATUBfi 

two  years  and  on  his  return  assumed  both  the  business  and 
the  editorial  responsibility  of  the  "Post/*  Prom  this  time 
until  his  death  he  led  the  active  life  of  a  New  York  newspaper 
man,  relieving  the  monotony  of  his  work  by  frequent  trips 
abroad,  by  the  purchase  and  improvement  of  a  country  place 
on  Long  Island  and  of  the  Bryant  homestead  at  Cummington, 
and  by  literary  diversions. 

On  his  arrival  in  New  York  in  1826  he  established  personal 
relations  with  most  of  the  literary  men  of  the  city,  and  with 

several  of  the  young  enthusiasts  who  were  try- 
^yant  and  jjjg  ^  develop  the  fine  arts  in  America.    He 

Knickerbocken    ^^^me  too  late,  however,  to  be  much  influenced 

by  these  men,  or  to  exert  much  influence  on 
them.  In  1825  he  was  thirty-one  years  of  age,  the  head  of  a 
family,  jand  a  man  of  considerable  business  and  professional 
experience.  Many  of  his  poems,  including  the  two  usually 
named  as  his  best,  were  already. written.  The  other  Knicker- 
bockers had  also  done  much  of  their  best  work  and  were  not 
likely  to  be  changed  by  a  new-comer.  Such  influence  as 
Bryant  did  exert  was,  however,  of  a  kind  much  needed.  In 
'  a  time  when  rapidity  of  composition  was  prized  before  other 
excellences  he  stood  for  care  and  revision.  Though  never  a 
deep  student,  he  endeavoured  to  take  a  broad  view  of  literary 
matters,  and  his  criticisms  were  more  judicial  than  those  of 
most  of  his  contemporaries. 

For  half  a  century  the  great  bulk  of  Bryant*s  writings  was 
composed  of  editorial  articles.  These  hardly  rank  as  litera- 
ture, and  few  of  them  have  been  reprinted. 

55?*^!*^  lite  most  of  his  work  they  are  careful  and 

Editorial  . 

Articles  sedate,  though  not  lacking  in  strength.     In 

style  they  differ  widely  from  the  breezy  edi- 

1  toriftls  that  have  more  recently  characterized  the  "Post,**  yet 

they  appealed  to  the  same  high  class  of  readers.    As  an  editor 

.Bryant  was  especially  interested  in  the  improvement  of  news- 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  187 

paper  English,  and  his  ruleB  for  the  printers  of  the  "Post" 
are  still  traditions  in  many  composing  rooms. 

The  two  volumes  of  prose  in  Bryanf  s  collected  works  in- 
clude tales  and  sketches,  lectures,  magazine  articles  on  literar 

ture  and  art,  and  memorial  addresses.    Many 
^■^^  of  the  lighter  articles  first  appeared  in  the 

Ptose  "Talisman/*  a  literary  annual  issued  in  1827,/ 

1828,  and  1829  by  Bryant,  Verplanck,  and) 
Sands,  and  illustrated  by  Inman,  S.  F.  B.  Morse,  and  other! 
artist  friends  of  the  editors.  Bryant  could  not  tell  a  stoiy  and 
he  soon  gave  up  the  attempt.  Some  of  the  magazine  articles 
show  his  interest  in  literary  subjects  and  his  appreciation  of 
scholarly  methods.  An  early  paper  "On  Trisyllabic  feet  in 
Iambic  Measure,''  though  dealing  with  the  mere  rudiments  of 
versification,  shows  research  in  a  field  that  had  hardly  been 
touched  in  America.  Some  lectures  on  English  poetry  are  ab- 
surdly inclusive,  but  indicate  careful  work.  The  memorial 
addresses  daj»  from  the  later  years  of  his  life.  They  invari- 
ably contain  over-praise,  but  except  for  this  are  admirable. 

Excellent  as  was  Biyanfs  work  as  editor  and  critic,  it  is 
to  his  verse  alone  that  he  owes  his  position  among  American 

authors.     Yet  his  verse  writing  was  always 
z^S.  incidental  to  his  regular  duties.    All  his  poetay 

except  his  translation  of  Homer  is  coUocted 
in  one  small  volume.  Of  this  over  one-fourth  was  written 
before  he  came  to  New  York  in  1825,  and  the  rest  was  scat- 
tered over  the  fifty-three  remaining  years  of  his  life.  After 
he  went  to  New  York  he  studied  several  modem  languages, 
and  the  result  of  this  study  and  of  his  first  visit  to  Europe  | 
was  a  number  of  translations  of  short  poems.  The  influence 
of  Irving  on  American  taste  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  over  one-  * 
half  of  these  are  from  the  Spanish.  The  translation  of  Homer 
▼as  taken  up  as  a  diversion  after  the  death  of  his  wife  in  1866. 
The  "Iliad"  was  puUished  m  J1870,  tteJ^j^^Bse 


188  American  Literatuhb 

In  the  poems  certain  limitations  are  at  once  apparent  The 
author  could  not  tell  a  story^  though  he  succeeded  slightly 
better  in  verse  than  in  prose.  He  had,  if  one  may  judge  by 
his  writings,  no  sense  of  humor.  Few  things  in  literature  are 
more  painful  than  the  lines  "To  9*  Mosquito/'  and  "A  Medi- 
tation on  Bhode  Island  Coal.''  He  lacked  passion,  fire,  definite 
human  sympathy. 

Bryanfs  excellences  are  best  seen  in  poems  that  present 
two  favorite  ideas.    The  first  of  these  is  that  of 

"eternal  change 
WMch  is  the  life  of  Nature." 

He  loves  to  stand  apart,  watching  with  a  remote  sympathy 

the  continual  fiux  of  things.  This  is  seen  in 
Fa^te Ideas      "'^^®  Crowded  Street,"  and  on  a  larger  scale 

in  "The  Ages,"  "The  Past,"  and  the  "Hymn 
to  the  North  Star."  The  poems  on  death  consider  this  most 
momentous  change  that  comes  to  man  as  part  of  the  great 
movement  of  nature.  It  is  death  in  its  relation  to  the  body 
rather  than  to  the  soul  that  he  treats,  but  as  he  approaches  the 
subject  it  is  never  repulsive.  As  death  is  universal,  so  it  is 
to  be  viewed  calmly  and  bravely;  this  is  the  teaching  first 
stated  in  "Thanatopsis,"  and  many  times  repeated.  The  other 
favorite  idea  of  the  poems  is  love  of  nature^  Bryanfs  feel- 
ing toward  nature  was  that  of  a  healthy  man  who  enjoyed  it 
for  its  own  sake,  without  asking  why.  He  does  not  philoso- 
phize over  it  like  Wordsworth,  or  describe  it  microscopically 
like  Tennyson,  or  sentimentalize  over  it  like  Bums.  If  he 
uses  it  to  point  a  moral  it  is  by  the  obvious  device  of  a  com- 
parison, as  in  "The  West  Wind,"  "The  Hymn  to  the  North 
Star,"  "A  Summer  Bamble,"  and  "To  the  Fringed  Gentian." 
Of  all  aspects  of  nature  he  enjoyed  best  the  wild  forest  as  he 
knew  it  in  boyhood  in  western  Massachusetts.  The  Italian 
landscape  did  not  satisfy  him  because  man  had  changed 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  189 

nature  too  much.  He  says  little  of  the  mountains^  and  little 
of  the  sea,  though  for  the  last  thirty-five  years  of  his  life  he 
over-looked  it  from  his  country  home.  His  poems  to  particu- 
lar flowers  treat  common  favorites  without  previous  poetical 
associations,  such  as  the  yellow  violet,  the  painted  cup,  and 
the  fringed  ffentian.  His  melancholy  shows  itself  in  his 
poems  on  autumn,  land  the  peculiar  coldness  of  his  tempera- 
ment is  seen  in  his  fondness  for  winter.  One  of  his  best  love- 
songs  has  a  winter  setting,  and  "The  Little  People  of  the 
Snow,'^  the  best  of  his  narrative  poems,  is  a  unique  story  of 
the  fairies  of  the  cold  who  revel  among  the  frost-flowers. 
Naturally,  the  best  of  his  poems  are  those  that  connect  both 
of  his  favorite  ideas — the  love  of  nature  and  the  thought 
of  death  as  change.  These  ideas  are  sometimes  strangely 
combined,  as  in  "June,^^  where  the  beautiful  month  appeals 
to  the  author  as  a  pleasant  time  in  which  to  be  buried. 

The  poems  that  deal  with  subjects  other  than  those  just 
mentioned  are  likely  to  be  good,  but  not  remarkable.     The 

author's  taste  did  not  often  fail  him  except 
SnScr  ^^^^   ^^    attempted   humor,    and   he   rarely 

wrote  anything  that  was  flat.  Even  the  Homer 
is  a  work  of  some  merit.  When  he  began  the  translation 
nearly  sixty  years  had  elapsed  since  he  received  his  scanty 
college  training  in  Greek,  and  he  could  have  given  little 
time  to  the  language  afterward.  He  was  the  coldest  of 
poets.  He  is  said  to  have  held  with  Poe  that  a  long  poem 
is  an  impossibility;  and,  as  has  been  remarked,  he  did  not 
succeed  well  in  telling  a  story.  Such  a  man  could  not  make  a 
very  scholarly  or  a  very  popular  translation  of  the  most  glow- 
ing and  rapid  of  epic  poets.  His  version  has,  however,  dig-i 
nity,  and  often  ease,  and  is  probably  more  nearly  literal  than] 
any  other  verse  translation. 

Although  Bryant  often  shows  quiet  melancholy,  he  can 
hardly  be  accused  of  sentimentality.    Most  of  the  poems  thfit 


190  Ambbioak  Literatubb 

approach  nearest  to  sentimentalising  like  ^'Consumption''  and 
"The  Death  of  the  Flowers/'  have  a  personal  reference.  Di- 
Idacticism  seemed  natural  to  him,  yet  he  rarely  wrote  with  a 
I  didactic  purpose.  The  moral  is  almost  always  given  at  the 
end  of  a  poem,  in  a  few  lines  that  though  skillfully  added 
might  often  be  omitted  without  much  loss.  Indeed,  the  clos- 
ing lines  of  "Thanatopsis"  were  not  written  until  some  years 
after  the  rest  of  the  poem  had  been  published ;  and  the  same 
might  conceivably  be  true  of  ''The  West  Wind,"  the  ''Hymn 
to  the  North  Star,"  '"A  Forest  Hymn,"  and  many  others, 
among  them  even  "To  a  Waterfowl." 

Bryant  was  the  first  American  poet  to  attain  lasting  fame, 
as  Irving  was  the  first  essayist,  and  Cooper  the  first  novelist. 
»  p  v  ^iilike  these  men,  he  did  not  achieve  an  in- 
temational  reputation.  The  volume  of  poems 
issued  in  1832  was  reprinted  in  England  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  Irving,  but  it  attracted  little  attention,  and  its 
author  never  became  widely  known  abroad.  He  was,  how- 
ever, for  at  least  twenty-five  years,  the  leading  poet  of  America, 
and  for  a  much  longer  time  he  had  no  rival  in  his  own  sec- 
tion of  the  country.  This  fact  gave  him  a  prestige  which  may 
have  influence  on  his  reputation,  even  to-day.  But  though  he 
has  perhaps  been  overrated  he  fully  deserves  a  place  among 
the  greater  American  poets.  No  American  has  equalled  him 
in  the  expression  of  his  few  favorite  ideas;  and  these,  while 
they  are  not  of  the  sort  to  arouse  enthusiasm,  appeal  strongly 
to  most  persons  at  some  period  of  their  lives.  Though  his 
manner  is  cold,  his  diction  is  always  clear  and  his  verse 
flawless;  and  occasionally,  as  in  the  line  which  so  impressed 
Hartley  Coleridge  and  Matthew  Arnold, 

"The  desert  and  immitable  air/' 

there  is  a  touch  of  inspiration.  He  is  the  least  of  the  trio 
of  the  greater  Knickerbockers,  but  he  may  live  longest  of 
them  all. 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  191 

The  lesser  New  York  writers  are  all  far  inferior  to  the 
three  already  discussed^  yet  several  of  them  produced  single 

works  that  are  still  well  known;  and  they 
Y^kW^tn       showed  forth  fully  as  much  as  their  superiors 

the  characteristics  of  national  life.     Most  of 

them  were  so  versatile^  or  rather  attempted  so  many  things, 

that  no  classification  according  to  forms  of  composition  is 

practicable. 

Among  the  writers  who  link  this  period  to  the  preceding 

is  William  Dunlap^  whose  dramas  have  already  been  noticed. 

«..«.  ^  ,  After  18Q0  his  literary  activities  were  mostly 
WiUuun IHinlap    ,,  .         i..  x    •  j       i.-  i_         tt 

those  of  an  historian  and  a  biographer.    He 

wrote  the  lives  of  George  Frederick  Cooke,  the  actor,  and 
Charles  Brockden  Brown,  a  Historv  of  the  American 
Theatre  and  a  History  of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the 
Arts  of  Design  in  the  United  States.  All  these  are  full  of 
facts,  but  are  formless  and  without  merit  of  style.  Dun- 
lap  was,  however,  a  forceful  and  influential  man  among 
literary  men,  the  friend  of  most  of  the  newer  authors,  as  he 
had  been  the  friend  of  Charles  Brockden  Brown.  The  His- 
tory of  the  American  Theatre  is  dedicated  to  Cooper. 

James  Kirke  Paulding  (1778-1860),  already  mentioned  as 
a  collaborator  with  Irving  in  Salmagundi,  was  a  peculiar 

specimen  of  Americanism.    His  family  origi- 
jJ|2Snr  nally  had  some  property,  but  his  father  ex- 

pended it  by  an  act  of  patriotism  during 
the  Bevolution^  and  was  never  reimbursed.  The  son  was 
bom  in  Dutchess  Counly,  New  York,  and  grew  up  with 
little  schooling  and  without  going  five  miles  from  home  until 
he  was  eighteen  or  nineteen  years  of  age.  He  then  secured  a 
business  clerkship  in  New  York,  where  his  sister  had  married 
William  Irving.  The  Irvings  introduced  the  green  country 
boy  to  their  literary  friends,  who  at  first  took  him  up  as  the 
^  butt  of  their  jokes.    In  time  be  became  more  sophisticated 


192  American  Literatube 

and  was  able  to  do  his  full  share  in  Salmagundi,  This  seems 
to  have  been  his  first  attempt  at  authorship.  In  1812  he 
[brought  out  John  Bull  and  Brother  Jonathan,  a  political 
j  satire  modeled  on  Arbuthnot,  and  he  continued  writing  until 
1849.  The  Lay  of  the  Scottish  Fiddle  is  a  parody  on  Scott 
The  Backwoodsman  is  a  poem  descriptive  of  frontier  life. 


^Koningsm^rlee,  the  Long  Finne,  The  Dutchman's  Fire- 
\side,  and  Westward  Ho  are  novels.  Among  his  other  works 
are  a  play,  The  Lion  of  the  West,  a  second  series  of  Salmor 
I  gundi,  and  Merry  Tales  of  the  three  Wise  Men  of  Ootham — 
the  last  a  heterogeneous  satire  on  the  theory  of  human  per- 
fectibility, the  common  law,  and  phrenology.  The  author's 
temper  was  satiric,  and  even  his  novels  were  "complicated^' — 
to  use  his  own  phrase — ^by  irreverent  burlesques  of  other 
authors.  He  seems  always  to  have  retained  the  attitude  of 
the  countr3rman  in  the  city,  who  feels  that  he  must  ridicule 
everything  he  sees  in  order  not  to  be  ridiculed  himself.  When 
not  engaged  in  political  satire  Paulding  preferred  to  write 
of  American  frontier  and  country  life.  The  scene  of  The 
Dutchman's  Fireside  is  laid  near  Albany  before  the  Bevolu- 
tion,  that  of  Koningsmarhe  in  New  Jersey,  and  that  of 
Westward  Ho  in  Virginia  and  Kentucky.  The  author  has 
Cooper's  fondness  for  the  woods  and  the  wilderness,  but  little 
of  Cooper's  power  of  description.  In  some  of  his  lighter 
sketches  he  is  like  a  crude  and  clumsy  Irving,  and  might  be 
suspected  of  imitation  if  he  had  not  shown  the  same  quali- 
ties before  the  Sketch  Book  was  published. 

Among  the  lesser  poets  of  New  York  two  stand  out  with  ^ 
especial  prominence.    Of  these,  the  younger,  Joseph  Bodman 

Drake  (1795-18201,  did  not  live  to  fulfill  his 
Jos^   Rodman   gj^j.]y  promise.     He  is  said  to  have  been  a 

descendant  of  the  Pilgrims,  but  was  born  in 
New  Yorkt  Both  his  parents  died  when  he  was  young  and 
he  was  forced  to  support  himself.    He  first  engaged  in  bust- 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  193 

ness^  then  studied  medicine^  and  afterward  kept,  a  drug  store  i 
and  practiced  his  profession.  He  married  a  woman  of  some 
means  and  was  able  to  go  abroad  for  his  healthy  but  it  was  use- 
less, and  he  died  of  consumption  at  the  age  of  twenty-five. 
His  lesser  poems  show  the  influence  of  Moore  and  occa- 
sionally of  Wordsworth.  His  one  important  work  is  '^The 
Culprit  Fay,^^  a  narrative  and  descriptive  poem  in  which  he 
tried  to  acclimate  fairies  to  the  region  of  the  Hudson.  The 
story  is  that  of  a  fay  who  has  sinned  by  loving  a  mortal 
maiden  and  must  do  penance.  Some  of  the  situations  are 
ingenious  rather  than  imaginative,  but  there  is  music  in  the 
verse,  and  there  are  some  truly  poetic  descriptions.  It  was  the 
best  work  of  the  kind  that  had  so  far  been  done  in  America, 
with  the  possible  exception  of  one  or  two  poems  by  Freneau. 
Unfortunately  Drake  was  anxious  for  the  praise  that  was 
being  bestowed  so  freely  on  rapid  work,  and  he  prefixed  to 
"The  Culprit  Fa/'  an  ingenious  note  so  worded  as  to  give 
the  impression,  without  stating  the  fact,  that  the  poem  was 
written  in  three  days. 

Fitzgreene  Halleck  (1790-1867),  the  close  friend  and  lit- 
erary partner  of  Drake,  was  one  of  the  New  Bnglanders  who 

were  attracted  by  the  commercial  prosperity 
Fitzgreene  ^£  -^^^  York.     He  was  bom  in  Connecticut. 

where  he  taught  school  and  clerked  in  a  store 
until  he  was  twenty-one  years  of  age.  He  then  secured  a  po- 
sition in  a  New  York  counting-house,  and  held  this  and  a 
similar  clerkship  with  John  Jacob  Astor  during  his  active 
career.  Shortly  after  he  went  to  New  York  he  met  Drake. 
According  to  tradition  the  latter  was  captivated  by  Halleck's 
affected  remark  that  it  "would  be  heaven  to  lounge  upon  the 
rainbow  and  read  Tom  Campbell,'^  and  the  two  became  at  once 
fast  friends.  In  1819  they  united  to  write  the^^Croaker  Papers,'^ 
a  series  of  light  and  often  satirical  verses  on  topics  of  the 
time,  published  anonymously  in  the  '^Evening  Post.^'    SomQ 


194  Ahbbicak  Literatubb 

of  the  papers  are  clever^  but  the  great  stir  they  made  must 
have  been  due  to  the  noveliy  of  the  plan  and  to  the  fact  that 
the  secret  of  authorship  was  so  well  kept 

As  time  went  on  Halleck  assumed  the  air  of  a  blas4  bache- 
lor^ and  became  a  well-known  figure  in  literary  and  social 

circles.  His  verse  was  influenced  chiefly  by 
^^^f^  Campbell,  and  later  by  Byron.  Among  the  tricks 

that  he  acquired  from  the  latter  was  that  of 
mixing  in  the  same  poem  serious  imaginative  passages  and  bur- 
lesque. This  is  seen  in  "Fanny/*  "Alnwick  Castle/*  "Connecti- 
cut/* and  other  poems.  His  longest  poem,  "Fanny/*  published 
in  1819,  is  often  called  an  imitation  of  Don  Juan,  but  the  dates 
are  so  close  together  as  to  make  this  doubtful.  In  this,  and 
in  some  poems  of  the  Alnwick  Castle  volume  of  1827,  are 
fine  passages  which  earned  for  the  author  a  temporary  repu- 
tation as  one  of  the  few  greater  American  poets.  In  later 
3'ears  he  wrote  little.  Though  probably  second  only  to  Bryant 
of  the  Knickerbocker  poets,  he  is  now  remembered  for  little 
more  than  "Marco Jiozzaris/*  and  one  stanza  of  his  tribute 
to  Drake: 

Green  be  the  turf  above  thee, 

Friend  of  my  better  days ! 
None  knew  thee  but  to  love  thee. 

Nor  named  thee  but  to  praise. 

The  names  of  three  New  York  writers  are  preserved  each 
by  a  single  song.    John  Howajrd JEam£LXiy,92J8J2)^uthoy 

of  "Home,  ^weet  Home/*  was  bom  in  New 
Songwriters       York  city,  but  spent  part  of  his  boyhood  in 

Boston.  He  early  showed  an  interest  in  the 
theatre,  which  his  Puritan  relatives  tried  in  vain  to  suppress. 
He  edited  a  dramatic  paper  at  the  age  of  thirteen  and  at 
eighteen  went  on  the  stage.  During  much  of  his  life  he  was 
connected  with  the  theatre  in  Europe  and  America,  sometimes 
a$  actor^  but  jn.QT^  frequently  as  $^uthQr  wd  adapter  of  plays. 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  195 

For  some  time  he  resided  in  Paris  and  translated  successful 
French  plays  for  the  London  managers.  His  best  drama,\ 
Brutus,  or  the  Fall  of  Tarquin,  was  not  a  direct  adaptation,) 
though  he  owns  his  indebtedness  to  other  authors  who  had 
written  on  the  same  theme.  It  is  a  blank-verse  tragedy  with 
some  striking  situations,  and  was  long  in  the  repertoires  of 
the  greatest  tragedians  of  England  and  America.  "Homej 
Sweet  Home**  occurs  in  Clari,  or  the  Maid  of  Milan,  a  senti-j 
mental  production  which  is  remarkable  for  nothing  else. 
Payne  died  at  Tunis,  where  he  was  United  States  consul, 
and  after  many  years  his  body  was  brought  back  for  interment 
in  his  native  country.  Samuel  Woodworth  (1785-1842), 
bom  in  Massachmsetts  and  long  a  New  York  editor,  wrote 
plays,  a  novel,  and  many  short  poems,  most  of  them  senti- 
mental. The  only  one  that  survives  is  '^The_  Old^Oakgn 
Bucket,**  written  in  1817.  George  P.  Morris"  (1802-1864) 
was  born  in  Philadelphia,  but  lived  almost  his  entire  life  in 
New  York.  His  editorial  career,  extending  from  1823  to 
1864,  was  divided  between  the  "New  York  Mirror**  and  the 
"Home  Journal,**  both  light  literary  journals  which  reflect 
in  an  interesting  way  the  transient  taste  of  the  country. 
Morris  was  long  noted  as  the  most  successful  American  writer 
of  songs.  Of  these  only  ^^oodman^  Spare Jfliat^  is  now 
sung.  Others,  such  as  "Near  the  Lake  where  drooped  the 
Willow,**  '^e  were  Boys  together,**  and  "My  Mother's  Bible,** 
are  said  to  have  been  immensely  popular  in  their  day.  Payne, 
Woodworth,  and  Morris  all  show  the  influence  of  the  wave 
of  sentimentalism  that  was  sweeping  over  both  England  and 
America  about  1820-1830. 

Among  the  less  important  Knickerbocker  writers  were 
Gulian  C.  Verplanck  C17£fiJJ8IQ}  and  Bobert  C.  Sands 
(^rt§S^1832),  who  have  been  mentioned  as  collaborators  with 
Bryant  in  the  "Talisman.**  Verplanck  was  a  descendant  of  one 
of  the  wealthy  old  Dutch  families  of  New  York,  and  was  long 


196  Amerioak  Litesatitee 

prominent  in  social,  literary,  and  political  life.  His  contribu- 
tions to  the  "Talisman,"  which  are  typical  of  his  lighter 

work,  include  popular  historical  sketches,  a 
YorkWriten       romantic  tale  or  two,  and  a  humorous  skit, 

"Peregrinations  of  Petrus  Mudd."  In  his 
serious  work  he  is  much  heavier  than  Irving,  but  aims 
to  produce  the  same  effects.  His  humor,  which  he  employed 
in  several  political  satires,  approaches  burlesque.  Verplanck 
was  the  author  of  serious  essays  and  orations  on  literary  mat- 
ters and  edited  the  works  of  Shakespeare.  He  was  the  kind 
of  man  who  gives  weight  and  character  to  a  literary  set,  but 
his  own  writings  are  now  of  little  value.  Eobert  C.  Sands  had 
a  part  in  several  literary  undertakings  besides  the  "Talisman" 
during  his  short  life  of  thirty-three  years.  While  a  student 
at  Columbia  college  he  formed  a  sort  of  literary  partnership 
with  j^es  W.   Earib]tirn^^(179M8  a  young  divinity 

student  of  much  promise  who  died  at  a  still  earlier  age  than 
Sands.  Together  they  started  two  periodicals,  and  later 
began  a  metrical  translation  of  the  Psalms  and  Yamoyden, 
a  narrative  poem  with  an  Indian  hero.  The  latter  was  fin- 
ished by  Sands  after  his  friend^s  death.  Later  Sands  did 
editorial  work  on  several  periodicals  and  contributed,  with 
Miss  Sedgwick  and  others,  to  the  Tales  of  Glauber  Spa. 
His  prose,  much  of  which  dates  from  the  later  years  of  his 
life,  is  somewhat  Irvingesque.  His  verse  is  notable  for  the 
wide  range  of  influence  that  it  shows  in  both  spirit  and  form. 
An  early  poem,  "The  Bridal  of  Vaumond,"  is  in  the  measure 
of  "The  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,"  but  has  a  Byronic  motive. 
The  introduction  to  Yamoyden  is  in  the  Spenserian  stanza, 
and  the  body  of  the  poem,  which  is  in  octosyllabics,  contains 
echoes  of  Milton^s  minor  poems,  Scott,  Shelley,  Coleridge,  and 
Wordsworth.  Sands  was  also  familiar  with  the  poets  of 
Southern  Europe  and  made  several  translations  from  their 
works. 


\ 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  197 


II.  Writers  of  New  England 

During  the   supremacy  of   the  Knickerbocker   school  in 
American  literature  the  most  popular,  though  not  the  ablest 

group  of  New  England  writers,  were  the  suc- 
Writm  ^^  cessors  of  the  Hartford  Wits  in  Connecticut. 

These  continued  the  milder  traditions  of  their 
predecessors,  but  lacked  their  fire  and  enthusiasm.  They 
were  especially  susceptible  to  the  sentimental  influence  seen 
in  the  works  of  the  lesser  New  York  poets,  and  their  work  was 
almost  all  obviously  moral  and  didactic.  The  most  promi- 
nent of  the  group  were  Mrs.  Sigourney,  Percival,  and  Good- 
rich. 

Lydia  Huntley  Sigoumev  <^1791-1865)  was  probably  the 
most  representative  of  the  Connecticut  writers.     Before  her 

marriage  she  taught  "selecf*  classes  of  young 

gLJ!^^^  ^     ladies:  she  was  a  model  wife  and  mother;  and 
Sigourney  ^  ^ 

after  her  husband  lost  his  property  she  con- 
tributed by  her  pen  to  the  support  of  the  family.  Her  biog- 
rapher tells  with  pride  that  she  composed  or  aided  in  the  com- 
position of  forty-six  volumes,  ^T)esides  more  than  2,000 
articles  in  prose  and  verse,  contributed  to  nearly  300  periodi- 
cals.'^ Her  first  volume,  aptly  called  Moral  Pieces  in  Prose 
and  Verse,  published  over  her  maiden  name  in  1815,  was 
composed  largely  of  exercises  written  for  her  class  of  young 
ladies.  Other  representative  titles  of  her  books  are  Olive] 
Buds,  Letters  to  Mothers,  Whisper  to  a  Bride,  Her  first] 
collection  of  poems  appeared  in  1827,  and  others  followed* 
at  short  intervals.  Many  of  these  volumes  were  issued 
as  gift  books,  with  fine  paper,  delicate  binding,  and  the  char- 
acteristic steel  engravings  of  ninety  years  ago.  Mrs.  Sig- 
ourney was  early  styled  "The  American  Mrs._Hemaiij,^'  and 
the  characterization  was  fully  as  happy  as  most  such  nick- 
names.   She  dealt  especially  with  the  simpler  domestic  afEec- 


198  Ahebican  Literatube 

tions,  with  the  beauty  of  piety,  and  the  necessiiy  of  preparing 
for  death.  Her  average  mediocre  work  may  be  illustrated  by 
B  stanza  from  *^The  Bubble^' : 

Out  springs  the  bubble  dazKling  bright. 
With  ever-changing  hues  of  light, 
And  so  amid  the  flowery  grass. 
Our  gilded  years  of  childhood  pass. 

James  Gates  Percival  (iy9fi-]p5fl)  wm  known  to  his  con- 
temporaries as  one  of  the  greatest  American  poets,  but  is 

now  almost  forgotten.  There  is  space  here 
Pwcival****        neither  to  trace  the  details  of  his  shifting 

career  nor  to  discuss  his  complex  personality. 
He  was  bom  in  Connecticut,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale 
in  1815.  He  studied  now  law,  now  medicine,  taught 
school  in  various  places,  thought  of  taking  holy  orders,  gave 
popular  lectures  on  botany,  published  a  miscellany  at  Charles- 
ton, South  Carolina,  was  appointed  professor  of  chemistry 
at  West  Point,  resigned  because  of  fancied  slights  to  his  dig- 
nity, did  philological  work  on  Webster's  dictionary  and  was 
state  geologist  in  Connecticut  and  in  Wisconsin.  Meanwhile 
he  had  time  for  several  unfortunate  love  affairs,  an  attempt 
at  suicide,  and  the  production  of  a  large  amount  of  verse. 
,  Among  his  personal  traits  seem  to  have  been  an  acute  sensi- 
tiveness and  an  extreme  though  genuine  egotism.  These 
peculiarities  interfered  with  his  success  in  life,  and  made  it 
possible  for  an  essay  by  Lowell,  which  is  essentially  unfair,  to 
shatter  whatever  remained  of  his  literary  reputation. 

PercivaPs  versatility  shows  itself  in  his  poems.     These 
include  attempts  in  almost  all  conceivable  metres,  and  trans- 
lations from   most  known   tongues,   besides 
PoMM   *  verses  in  foreign  languages.    Notwithstanding 

Lowell's  patronizing  sneer,  Percival  had  great 
linguistic  attainments  and,  although  he  was  influenced  by 
some  of  the  bad  fashions  of  his  day,  considerable  taste.    He 


The  Eably  Nineteenth  Century  199 

held,  however,  the  belief  that  poetry  came  by  inspiration,  not 
by  labor,  fmd  he  never  revised.  As  a  resxQt,  many  fine  lines 
and  passages  that  show  genuine  poetic  feeling  and  in- 
sight are  buried  amid  masses  of  crude  Byronic  and  other  imi- 
tative verse.  Some  of  his  sonnets  and  one  or  two  lyrics,  such 
as  "The  Coral  Grove**  and  **To  Seneca  Lake,**  are  suflBciently 
free  from  blemishes  to  hold  a  deserved  place  in  the  an- 
thologies. A  little  search  among  his  works  will  reveal  many 
beauties,  and  some  touches  of  real  genius,  but  there  are  few 
poems  that  are  worthy  of  consideration  in  their  entirety.  He 
was  one  of  the  most  notable  victims  of  the  belief  in  inspira- 
tion and  hasty  composition. 

Samuel  Q.  Goodrich  (1793-1860)  was  by  birth  and  tempera- 
ment a  Connecticut  Yankee,  though  after  a  time  he  removed 

his  publishing  business  from  Hartford  to 
Q^"J^^'  Boston.    As  publisher,  and  as  editor  of  his 

literary  annual  "The  Token,**  he  aided  in  in- 
troducing to  the  public  several  literary  men,  notably  Haw- 1 
thome.  He  was  himself  the  author  of  the  original  Peter  | 
Parley  books,  though  later  works  issued  under  this  name  were 
written  by  others.  The  Peter  Parley  books  aimed  to  instruct 
the  young  in  history,  geography,  and  many  other  subjects  by 
introducing  edifying  facts  in  a  fictitious  narrative.  This 
sugar-coating  of  knowledge  was  clumsily  done,  but  the  plan 
just  suited  the  temper  of  the  time,  and  the  series  had  a  great 
sale,  both  in  America  and  in  England. 

To  the  list  of  Connecticut  poets  may  be  udded  the  name  of 
James  A.  Hillhouse  (1789-1841),  of  New  Haven,  a  Yale 

graduate  of  the  class  of  1808.  His  first  publi- 
Mlnor  cation,  a  Phi  Beta  Kappa  poem  entitled  "The 

Writen  Judgment,  a  Vision,**  is  commonplace,  and 

suffers  by  comparison  with  Wigglesworth*8 
'T)ay  of  Doom.'*  "Hadad,**  a  drama,  is  his  most  ambitious 
work.    The  theme  is  the  old  one,  based  on  a  story  in  the  Apoc- 


200  Amebican  Litebatube 

rypha,  of  a  maiden  with  a  demon  lover.  The  plot  is  crude, 
and  the  verse  is  often  turgid  with  crowded  and  mixed  imagery, 
but  there  are  occasional  passages  of  strangely  powerful  blank 
verse.  J.  Q.  C.  Brainard  (1796-1828)  was  another  Connecti- 
cut poet.  He  was  a  bom  journalist,  with  a  journalist's  facility 
of  expression,  and  the  defects  that  arose  from  hurried  compo- 
sition are  less  obvious  in  his  work  than  in  that  of  Eercival, 
though  his  genius  was  very  much  less  than  PercivaPs.  His 
[friend  Goodrich  tells  with  much  enjoyment  that  his  once 
!  famous  lines  on  Niagara  were  composed  in  a  few  minutes 
with  the  printers  calling  for  copy,  though  the  subject  was 
entirely  unpremeditated,  and  the  author  had  never  seen  the 
Falls.  His  friends  felt  that  he  gave  promise  of  great  attain- 
ment, but  he  died  of  consumption  at  the  age  of  thirty-two. 

Literary  traditions  in  Boston  during  the  early  years  of  the 
nineteenth  century  were  conserved  chiefly  by  a  group  of  young 

professional  men,  most  of  whom  were  mem- 
Boston  Writers:  bers  of  a  social  and  literary  association  known 
The^Anthology     ^^  the  Anthology  Cliih.     Prom  1803  to  1811 

they  published  the  "Monthly  Anthology,'*  and 
they  were  the  chirf  contributors  to  the  "North  American 
Beview**  when  it  was  founded  in  1815.  The  first  editor  of 
the  "North  American  Review**  was  William  Tudor,  imd  among 
his  associates  were  John  Quincy  Adams,  Jared  Sparks,  Joseph 
Story,  William  EUery  Channing,  Greorge  Ticlmor,  Edward 
Everett,  Alexander  H.  Everett,  Bichard  Henry  Dana,  Wash- 
ington Allston,  J.  S.  J.  Gardiner,  E.  T.  Channing,  and  others. 
The  names  of  many  of  these  men  are  remembered,  though 
in  some  cases  not  solely  because  of  the  excellence  of  their 
literary  work.    Only  two  or  three  need  be  considered  here. 

William  EUery  DliRTiTn'Tig  (lyftO-ift^i^j  takes  rank  rather 
as  a  divine  than  as  a  man  of  letters,  yet  he  had  more  of  the 
literary  gift  than  most  of  his  contemporaries.  Several  ad- 
mirable reviews  and  miscellaneous  essays  dating  from  the 


11 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Century  201 

time  of  the  Anthology  Club  show  what  he  might  have  achieved 
if  he  had  devoted  himself  to  pure  literature.    Even  at  this 

early  time,  however,  his  chief  interest  was  in 
^i^mEllery     theological  and  religious  questions.     A  little 

later  he  found  himself,  though  against  his 
will,  the  recognized  leader  of  the  liberal  forces  in  the  great 
controversy  between  the  Unitarians  and  the  orthodox  Congre-l 
gationalists;  and  still  later  he  was  involved  in  the  anti-1 
slavery  agitation.     His  religious  and  sociological  writings  I 
show  the  clearness  of  his  thought  and  the  lucidity  and  charm 
of  his  style,  but  the  fact  that  they  deal  with  unattractive 
subjects,  and  that  they  are  chiefly  claimed  and  circulated  by 
a  single  sect,  prevents  them  from  being  widely  read. 

The  ablest  writer  of  this  group,  with  the  possible  exception 
of  Channing,  was  Eichard  Henry  Dana  (1787-1879^.     He 

was  a  native  of  Cambridge,  and  entered  Har- 
^^ard  Henry     ^^^^  ^^^  ^j^^  ^j^gg  ^^  1808,  but  was  dismissed 

on  account  of  some  offence,  and  studied  law. 
His  connection  with  the  Anthology  Club  dates  from  1814, 
jand  he  was  for  a  time  associated  with  Edward  T.  Channing  in ! 
the  editorship  of  the  "North  American  Review.^^  When , 
Channing  resigned  Dana  failed  of  promotion  to  the  editor- 
ship because  he  was  too  unpopular.  Indeed,  certain  personal 
peculiarities  interfered  not  only  with  the  smoothness  of  his 
personal  relations  with  other  men,  but  to  some  extent  with  the 
excellence  of  his  writings.  He  was  given  to  discussing  him- 
self and  his  works  with  great  self-complacency,  and  he  had  too 
little  deference  for  well-established  literary  canons.  Besides 
reviews  and  miscellaneous  essays  he  wrote  poems  and  prose 
tales.  Some  of  these  he  published  in  "The  Idle  Man,**  a 
miscellany  which  he  issued  in  1821-2.  In  the  more  powerful 
stories,  such  as  "Paul  Felton*'  and  "Tom  Thornton,**  he  shows 
the  influence,  though  no  direct  imitation,  of  Charles  Brockden 
Brown.    Though  these  exhibit  some  lapses  in  taste,  they  are 


202  Akebigan  Literatubb 

better  in  their  way  than  anyftung  else  of  the  kind  between 
Brown  and  Poe. 

Verse-making  seems  to  have  been  a  late  diversion  for  Dana. 
His  first  poem,  "The  Dying  Baven/*  was  published  in  "The 
_      ,  _  New  York  Eeview^'  in  1825,  when  the  author 

was  thiriy-eight  years  of  age.  Once  started, 
he  wrote  freely,  and  in  1827  issued  a  volume  of  poems  which 
won  some  praise  from  "Blackwood^s.^^  Another  volume  ap- 
peared in  1833.  Dana^s  longest  poem,  "The  Buccaneer,"  in 
which  a  cruel  pirate  suffers  for  his  misdeeds  through  the 
agency  of  a  spectral  horse,  is  grotesque  in  conception,  but 
contains  many  good  passages,  as  well  as  many  examples  of 
pathos  suggestive  of  Crabbe.  The  author  had  a  genuine  ap- 
preciation of  nature,  and  his  best  verse  is  that  in  which  this 
is  shown.  "The  Little  Beach-Bird^^  is  probably  his  best 
known  poem. 

Washington  Allston  (1779-1843),  one  of  th^  greatest  of. 
early  American  painters,  was  a  native  of  South  Carolina,  but 

removed  to  Bhode  Island  in  early  boyhood.  He 
^?Jr™*^^*°         was  graduated  from  Harvard,  and  studied  art 

abroad  imtil  1809,  when  he  opened  a  studio 
in  Boston.  By  his  first  marriage  he  was  connected  with  the 
Ghannings  and  by  his  second  with  the  Danas,  and  was  thus 
thrown  into  close  association  with  the  Anthology  set.  In 
1813  he  published  in  London  The  Sylphs  of  the  Seasons  and 
other  Poems,  and  by  1822  he  had  written  Monaldi,  a  romance, 
which  was  not,  however,  printed  until  nearly  twenty  years 
later.  He  had  the  eye  and  the  ear  of  an  artist,  and  his  serious 
poems  show  delicate  beauties,  but  no  great  strength.  Occa- 
sionally, as  in  ^^Eosalie,'*  his  metrical  effects  suggest  those  of 
Poe^s  lighter  melodies.  In  "The  Paint  King^'  he  attempts  a 
burlesque  on  Scott.  Monaldi  is  a  melodramatic  story  of 
revenge  and  insanity,  with  a  conventional  Italian  setting. 
The  best  passages  in  the  book  are  one  or  two  short  descriptions 


The  Eably  Nineteenth  Century  203 

of  nature.  At  the  time  when  Allston  was  writings  America 
needed  the  artist  influence^  and  his  fine  personality  as  well  as 
his  talent  enabled  him  to  do  his  contemporaries  much  good; 
but  his  work  is  not  of  the  sort  to  live  for  its  own  merits. 

Two  members  of  the  Anthology  Club,  George  Ticknor 
(1791-1871)   and  Edward  Everett  (1794-1865),  should  be 

remembered  as  among  the  first  Americans  to 
^*?S^^^^^  study  at  Germanuniversities  and  to_  introduce 
Everett  ^^   ^.^^Y.^^   college   those    German  methods 

that  revolutionized  higher  education  in  \ 
America.  Ticknor  served  as  professor  of  foreign  languages 
at  Harvard,  again  studied  abroad,  and  in  1849  published  a 
scholarly  history  of  Spanish  literature.  Everett  during  his 
long  and  busy  career  was  at  different  times  pastor  of  the  Brat- 
tle street  church  in  Boston,  professor  of  Greek  at  Harvard, 
president  of  Harvard,  member  of  Congress  and  of  the  senate, 
minister  to  England,  secretary  of  state,  and  candidate  for  the 
vice-presidency.  He  was  prolific  of  both  magazine  articles  and 
orations,  his  collected  works  containing  about  one  hundred  and 
seventy-five  of  the  latter.  In  his  day  he  was  frequently  named 
as  the  greatest  American  orator.  His  addresses,  though  he  says 
he  has  "applied  the  pruning  knife  freely  to  the  style,'*  are 
even  in  their  amended  form  the  best  illustration  of  the  high- 
flown  manner  which  was  the  fashion  in  the  early  years  of  the 
nineteenth  century.  They  abound  in  classical  allusions,  and 
are  modelled,  as  the  author  apologetically  says,  on  Johnson, 
Gibbon,  and  Burke. 

John  Quincy  Adams  (1767-1848^,  who  has  been  mentioned 
asa  member  of  the  Anthology  Club  in  Boston,  is  known  rather 

as  a  statesman  than  as  a  literary  man,  though 
M^*"^  hiuAtta  '^^  before  he  was  elected  to  the  presidency 
Writers  ^^  ^^^  Fnited  States  he  filled  the  chair  of 

belles  lettres  at  Harvard.  Jna^^ph  Story  (1779- 
1846),  another  member  of  the  Anthology   Club,  was  a 


204  Ahbbican  Literatubb 

graduate  of  Harvard  with  the  class  of  1798.  He  wrote  verses 
in  his  earlier  years,  and  was  later  a  politician,  a  judge,  a  pro- 
fessor in  the  Harvard  law  school,  and  the  author  of  many 
able  treatises  on  law.  A  contemporary  of  these  men,  though 
not  exactly  of  their  set,  was  Charles  Sprague  (1791-1875). 
a  native  of  Boston  and  for  nearly  half  a  century  a  banker  in 
that  city.  He  wrote  prize  prologues  for  various  theatres,  and 
a  didactic  poem,  "Curiosity,**  which  he  delivered  before  the 
Phi  Beta  Kappa  Society  of  Harvard.  This  piece,  which  is 
often  spoken  of  as  his  best,  is  the  usual  metrical  essay  in  the 
heroic  couplet,  with  obvious  echoes  of  Pope.  As  a  whole  it 
is  smooth,  but  lacks  striking  or  quotable  passages.  Sprague 
was  an  orator  of  the  florid  type.  A  sounding  passage  on  "The 
American  Indian,**  from  his  Fourth  of  July  oration  delivered 
in  1825,  was  a  favorite  school  declamation  until  comparatively 
recent  years.  Another  old-fashioned  poet  was  John  Pierpont 
^1785-1866),  a  native  of  Connecticut  and  a  graduate  of  Yale, 
for  many  years  pastor  of  the  HoUis  Street  Church,  Boston. 
He  was  a  great  traveller  for  his  day,  visiting  the  Holy  Land. 
He  was  also  an  ardent  temperance  and  antislavery  reformer, 
jmd  some  of  his  enthusiasms  are  reflected  in  his  verse.  The 
Airs  of  Palestine  wsiS  published  in  1816  and  reissued  with  some 
additions  in  1840.  The  best  known  of  his  occasional  poeins 
is  ^TVarren*s  Address,**  written  for  the  banquet  at  the  layinjg 
of  the  cornerstone  of  the  Bunker  Hill  monument,  and  begin- 
ning "Stand!  the  ground*s  your  own,  my  braves.**  Luciu^ 
M.  Sargent  (1786-1867)  was  another  Boston  poet  and  re- 
former.  His  chief  interests  were  in  the  temperance  move- 
ment. Some  of  his  temperance  tales,  which  to  a  later  taste* 
seem  wofuUy  commonplace,  were  widely  read,  and  it  is  said 
that  one  of  them  passed  through  one  hundred  and  thirty 
editions.  Henry  Coggswell  Knight  ( 1 788-1835  j,  a  native 
of  Massachusetts  and  a  graduate  of  Brown  University  with 
the  class  of  1812,  published  in  1809  The  Cypriad,  a  coUec- 


The  Eably  Ninbteknth  Centubt  205 

tion  of  youthful  verses^  in  1815  The  Broken  Harpy  and  1821 
Poems.  His  work  is  a  strange  mixture^  occasionally  poetic, 
sometimes  witly,  but  often  flat  and  unintentionally  ludicrous. 
As  a  versifier  he  echoes  every  poet  that  he  reads,  and  his  work 
is  perhaps  most  notable  for  the  fact  that  at  an  early  date  he 
shows  so  strongly  the  influence  of  Wordsworth  and  Coleridge. 
His  Letters  from  the  South,  published  over  the  signature  of 
Arthur  Singleton,  are  studiously  whimsical. 

New  Englanders  were  especially  susceptible  to  the  pious  and 
didactic  sentimentality  which  was  prevalent  during  the  early 

nineteenth  century,  and  several  Boston  women 

Sentimentality      yj^^  ^j^jj  ^jj^  Connecticut  authors  in  show- 

— ^Women 

Writers  ^^S  ^^^^  quality.    Their  works  are  now  of  value 

only  as  an  expression  of  the  spirit  of  the  time. 
^§I§hLWent?^rth  Morton  (1759-1846),  who  as  early  as  1790 
had  published  Ouabi,  an  Indian  tale,  in  verse,  brought  out  in 
1823  a  miscellany  entitled  My  Mind  and  its  Thoughts.  Some 
of  the  prose  "thoughts*^  are  suflSciently  ^'Orphic'*  in  form  to 
suggest  the  later  transcendentalists.  The  verse  is  in  the 
form  of  "Odes*^  and  **Lines^^  to  Time,  Memory,  and  other 
abstractions.  Hannah  F.  Gould  (1789-1865),  the  daughter 
of  the  principal  of  the  Boston  Latin  school,  wrote  much 
for  periodicals,  and  published  several  volumes  of  verse.  Her 
poems  are  all  short,  and  bear  such  suggestive  titles  as  "The 
Empty  Bird's  Nest,'*  "The  Slave  Mother,''  "To  the  Moon- 
beams," "The  Pebble  and  the  Acorn."  The  early  work  of 
Lydia  Maria^ChM  (1802-18^  also  shows  much  senti- 
mentality and  is  obviously  didactic.  Hobomoh,  her  flrst 
novel,  was  published  in  1821.  The  Rebels  followed  the  next 
year.  Both  have  historical  American  settings.  More  repre- 
sentative are  some  early  writings  for  children.  In  1831  she 
became  interested  in  the  antislavery  movement  through  the 
influence  of  Garrison,  and  from  that  time  she  devoted  her- 
self to  this  and  kindred  reforms. 


206  AmSRIGAK  LtT££ATtJtl£ 

Marie  Qowen  Brooks  £1795-1845X,  whom  Southey  named 
"Maria  del  Occidente/^  and  characterized  as  "the  most  im- 
passioned and  imaginative  of  all  poetesses/^ 
g~J^^*"*       had  a  varied  career.     Her  father  died  when 

she  was  a  child^  leaving  her  almost  penniless. 
She  was  educated  hy  Mr.  Brooks^  a  wealthy  Boston  merchant, 
who  married  her,  but  soon  afterward  lost  his  property,  and 
then  died.  The  young  widow,  who  had  taken  to  writing 
verses  "for  consolation,^*  went  to  Cuba,  and  afterward  to 
England.  Her  first  volume,  Judith,  Esther  and  other  Poems, 
was  published  in  1820.  The  first  canto  of  Zophiel,  or  The 
Bride  of  Seven,  was  written  in  Cuba,  jind  the  rest  under 
Southey^s  direction  in  England.  Idomen,  which  appeared  in 
1843,  was  autobiographical.  Mrs.  Brooks^s  earliest  verses  were 
echoes  of  the  English  poets,  especially  those  of  the  seven- 
teenth century.  Zophiel,  an  Eastern  tale,  reminds  us  of  the 
brief  popularity  that  Byron,  Moore,  and  others  gave  to  oriental 
subjects.  It  tells  again  the  story  of  a  maiden  whose  suitors 
were  slain  one  after  another  by  her  demon  lover.  The  versi- 
fication is  harsh,  though  many  passages  show  the  impassioned 
quality  which  Southey  praised. 

Catherine  M.  Sedgwick  (1789-1867)^  a  prolific  writer  of 
fiction  and  miscellaneous  works,  was  a  somewhat  more  sane 

and  important  authoress.  She  was  bom  in 
sT^^^  Stockbridge    and,    like    other    residents    of 

western  Massachusetts,  had  some  associations 
with  the  KTew  York  literary  set.  In  1832  she  contributed  with 
Bryant  and  others  to  a  miscellany.  The  Tales  of  Glauber 
Spa.  For  fifty  years  she  conducted  a  school  for  young  ladies; 
and  her  novels.  Rope  Leslie,  The  Linwoods,  and  others,  have 
the  moral  and  educational  qualities  to  be  expected  in  the  work 
of  a  preceptress,  though  they  are  by  no  means  so  weak  as  the 
usual  "moral  tales.*'  Her  patriotism  was  especially  intense. 
The  Linwoods,  her  latest  and  probably  her  best  novel,  is  n  tale 


The  Earlt  KTinbtebnth  Century  207 

of  the  Bevolutionary  war.  In  this  she  ventured  to  introduce 
Washington  among  the  characters^  though  she  confesses  in  the 
preface  that  when  mentioning  his  name  ^'she  has  felt  a  senti- 
ment resembling  the  awe  of  the  pious  Israelite  when  he  ap- 
proached the  ark  of  the  Lord/'  The  plot  is  la  complicated 
one,  involving  all  the  fortunes  of  b.  th  love  and  war,  and 
ends  with  strict  poetical  justice  done  to  ill  parties. 

As  was  seen  in  the  last  chapter,  the  tendency  to  write  broad 
burlesque  and  vituperative  satire  culminated  about  the  be- 
ginning of  the  century,  jmd  the  Hartford  Wits 
Satire—Thomas   and  Mathew  Carey  did  some  of  their  most 
FMsenden  offensive  work  just  after  1800.    As  time  went 

on  the  less  dignified  and  more  objectionable 
writings  of  this  sort  came  to  be  recognized  at  their  true  value, 
and  though  they  continued  to  be  written  and  published  they 
need  not  be  noticed  here.  The  satires  of  Thomas  Green 
Fessenden  (1771-1837)  are  still  faintly  remembered.  Fes- 
senden  was  bom  in  KTew  Hampshire,  took  his  degree  at  Dart- 
mouthy  and  went  to  England  on  a  business  enterprise.  Here 
he  became  interested  in  Perkins's  metallic  tractors,  a  cure-all 
extensively  advertised,  and  in  1803  attacked  physicians  who 
opposed  their  nse  in  Terrible  Tractoration,  by  Christopher 
Caustic,  M.D.  This  is  in  four-line  stanzas  of  Hudibrastic  verse, 
and  is  accompanied  by  voluminous  footnotes,  in  some  of  which 
there  is  great  show  of  scientific  knowledge.  The  verse  itself 
seems  far  from  brilliant,  but  the  public,  which  always  enjoys 
an  attack  on  doctors  or  preachers,  welcomed  the  poem,  and 
it  was  generally  read  and  quoted  in  England  and  America. 
In  1806,  after  his  return  from  England,  Fessenden  published 
Democracy  Unveiled,  a  violent  attack  on  the  Democrats,  whom 
he  designates  as 

The  8cnm — the  gcandal  of  the  age, 
A  blot  on  human  nature's  page. 

He  is  especially  severe  on  Jefferson,  and  a  relatively  small 


208  Akebican  Literature 

number  of  Hudibrastic  verses  serve  as  an  excuse  for  footnotes 
in  which  are  repeated  the  worst  of  the  charges  against  Jef- 
ferson's public  and  private  character.  Later^  Fessenden  pub- 
lished Pills,  Poetical,  Political,  and  Philosophical.  A  satirist 
of  a  different  sort  was  Tabitha  Ten^fiy_Q762-1837),  a  native 
of  Exeter,  New  Hampshire,  who  published  Female  Quixotism 
in  1807.  In  this  work  Don  Quixote  and  Sancho  Panza  are 
burlesqued  in  the  heroine  and  her  maid,  whose  adventures  ure 
varied  and  some  of  them  rather  boisterous. 

One  of  the  most  picturesque  of  New  England  literary  char- 
acters was  John  Neal  (1793-18761,  who  was  bom  in  Port- 
land, Maine.    His  Wandering  Recollections  of 
Miune-John       ^  somewhat  lusy  Life,  written  when  he  was 

about  seventy-five  years  of  age,  recounts  in 
a  breezy  manner  the  varied  experiences  of  an  indefatigable 
Yankee.  At  different  times  he  was  in  business,  as  clerk  and 
proprietor  in  several  cities,  teacher  of  penmanship,  lawyer, 
editor,  and  man  of  letters.  His  first  story.  Keep  Cool,  in  ridi- 
cule of  duelling,  was  published  in  1817,  and  his  poem,  "The 
Battle  of  Niagara,^*  in  1818.  These  were  followed  in  the  next 
fifteen  years  by  seven  other  novels  and  some  miscellaneous 
work.  Meanwhile  he  had  gone  to  England,  and  with  the 
assurance  of  a  self-educated  down-easter  had  made  himself 
known  to  literary  men,  and  become  a  contributor  to  "Black- 
wood^s'^  and  a  prot6g6  of  Jeremy  Bentham.  After  five  years 
he  returned  to  America,  to  resume  the  practice  of  law  and 
continue  literary  work.  Neal  exemplifies  in  an  exaggerated 
degree  most  of  the  amusing  characteristics  that  have  been 
noticed  in  his  contemporaries.  He  showed  his  patriotic  wish 
for  literary  independence  by  rejoicing  that  he  did  not  write 
"what  the  English  themselves  call  English.'*  In  his  review 
of  American  Literature  in  'TBlackwoodV*  he  complacently 
wrote  of  his  own  poems :  "Abounding  throughout  in  absurdity, 
intemperance,  affectation,  extravagance — ^with  continual  but 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Cbntubt  209 

involuntary  imitation :  yet,  nevertheless,  containing  altogether 
more  sincere  poetry,  more  exalted,  original,  pure  poetry,  than 
all  the  works  of  all  the  other  authors  that  have  ever  appeared 
in  America/'  He  published  the  dates  at  which  he  began  and 
ended  each  of  his  novels,  and  called  attention  to  the  rapidity  . 
of  composition — "four  English  volumes  in  thirty-six  days/'  i 
Most  of  his  works  are  turgid  and  bombastic,  others  show 
traces  of  sentimentality.  Yet,  in  spite  of  his  ridiculous  ex- 
travagance of  thought  and  expression,  KTeal  is  far  more  than 
an  epitome  of  the  faults  of  American  authors.  There  is  much 
imagination  and  grace  in  some  of  his  poems,  and  even  the 
hastily  written  novels  often  hold  the  attention  by  their  origi- 
nality of  conception  and  vividness  of  portrayal.  All  in  all, 
!N'eal  and  his  works  are  among  the  most  interesting  literary 
curiosities  of  the  time.  ^ 

III.  Writers  op  Philadelphia;  the  South;  the  West 

At  the  opening  of  the  century  Philadelphia  was  the  chief 
city  of  the  country,  and  a  centre  for  much  of  what  was  called 

"polite  letters ;''  but  among  the  great  number 
Joseph  ^onie     ^*  creditable  writers  there  were  few  whose 

works  are  now  even  faintly  remembered.  For 
the  first  decade  of  the  century  the  most  prominent  literary 
figure  was  perhaps  Joseph  Denqjft  fiyfi«,i«i9.)  He  was  a 
native  of  Boston  and  a  graduate  of  Harvard,  and  before  he 
removed  to  Philadelphia  in  a  political  capacity  in  1799  had 
been  a  newspaper  editor  in  KTew  England.  Prom  1801  until 
his  death  he  conducted  the  "Portfolio**  under  the  name  of 
'^Oliver  Oldschool.**  This  journal  contained  letters  of  travel, 
literary  and  dramatic  criticism,  original  and  selected  poetry, 
and  miscellaneous  essays,  after  the  manner  of  the  better 
eighteenth  century  magazines.  In  dress,  deportment,  and 
literary  style  Dennie  affected  the  fashions  implied  by  his 
pen-nam^.    His  prose  was  fonuftl  and  a  trifle  oracular,  and 


210  American  Ltteratuee 

his  tastes  were  in  general  those  of  the  eighteenth  centary^ 
though  in  an  early  number  of  the  "Portf olio*'  he  quoted  from 
the  Lyrical  Ballads  and  gave  them  high  praise.  As  "The  Lay 
Preacher*'  he  began  in  his  New  Hampshire  newspaper  and 
continued  in  the  "Portfolio**  a  series  of  "sermons** — short 
essays  each  prefixed  with  a  text  of  Scripture, 

Charles  Jared  IngersoU  (1782-1862),  a  Pennsylvania  law- 
yer and  politician,  wrote  poems,  a  tragedy,  a  history  of  the 

War  of  1812,  and  his  Recollections;  but  was 
Ineeraoll  *^        best  known  for  Inchiquin  the  Jesuit's  Letters. 

These  were  published  in  1810  at  a  time  when 
America  was  greatly  irritated  by  the  unfavorable  accounts 
written  by  foreign  travellers  in  the  United  States,  and 
pretended  to  give  the  observations  and  criticisms  of  a  Jesuit 
in  this  country.  They  were  written  as  if  from  Washington 
and  vicinity,  and  contain  slight  censure  and  much  praise  of 
American  customs  and  institutions.  The  pretense  of  foreign 
authorship  ought  not  to  have  deceived  anyone,  and  the  great 
interest  that  the  letters  aroused  can  be  accounted  for  only  by 
the  excited  state  of  public  feeling. 

J()hn  ]^]a]7  Xiim  (1777"^^^^)  was  a  native  of  Pennsylvania, 
but  like  his  more  famous  brother-in-law,  Charles  Brockden 

Brown,  lived  for  some  time  in  New  York. 
^^^  When  but  eighteen  years  of  age  he  published 

Writers  ^  *^®  latter  city  a  volume  of  Miscellaneous 

WorTcs  that  show  promise,  and  two  years  later 
wrote  a  play,  Bourville  Castle,  which  was  acted  with  much 
success.  He  afterward  underwent  a  change  of  feeling  and 
became  a  clergyman,  and  was  settled  as  pastor  of  the  First 
Presbyterian  Church  of  Philadelphia.  Valerian,  a  narrative 
poem  with  some  strong  descriptive  passages,  was  published 
after  his  death.  Joseph  Hopkinson  (1770-1842^.  a  Phila- 
ji'^JE^y?  lawyei^  owes  his  place  in  literary  history  only  ta 
the  authorship  of  "Hail,  Columbia.** 


The  Uarly  K^ineteenth  Cbntury  Sll 

The  South  continued  to  furnish  orators  and  statesmen^  but 
produced  no  writers  who  gave  themselves  exclusively  to  litera- 
ture, and  it  was  only  occasionally  that  a  pro- 
M^tendr—         fessional  man  attempted  literary  composition 
Kennedy  ^  ^  diversion.     The  only  ciiy  that  could  be 

called  a  literary  center  was  Baltimore,  and\ 
Maryland  had  a  larger  share  of  authors  than  any  other! 
Southern  state.  Jnhyi  Ppndleton  TCennedv  ^795-1870)  was 
a  Maryland  lawyer  who  during  much  of  his  life  was  active 
in  politics.  His  first  literary  work  was  contributions  to  the 
*^Eed  Book/'  a  fortnightly  publication  which  he  and  a  friend 
issued  at  Baltimore  in  1818-19.  Swallow  Bam,  published  in 
1832,  is  a  series  of  sketches  of  life  in  lower  Virginia,  with  a 
slight  tale  interwoven.  Horseshoe  Robinson,  probably  the 
author's  most  popular  work,  is  a  tale  of  the  Eevolution.  Rob 
of  the  Bowl  is  also  an  historical  novel,  with  the  scene  laid 
in  the  times  of  the  proprietary  government  in  Maryland.  In 
all  these  works  the  description  of  life  and  manners  is  faithful 
and  picturesque,  and  the  strfry  is  interestingly  told. 

William  Wirt  (1772-1834)  was  also  a  native  of  Maryland,! 
but  spent  most  of  his  life  in  Virginia  and  at  Washington.    He\ 

was  a  lawyer,  and  held  many  political  posi- 
ws«Sm"wirt      tions,  but  found  time  for  much  literary  work. 

His  first  series  of  essays,  the  Letters  of  the  Brit- 
ish Spy,  adopts  the  old  fiction  of  a  packet  of  letters  found  in 
a  boardinghouse,  and  purports  to  be  written  from  Richmond 
by  an  Englishman  of  rank  to  a  member  of  parliament.  The 
character  of  the  supposed  author  is  not  well  maintained,  and 
the  letters  are  really  essays  dealing  with  the  nature  of  elo- 
quence, Buffon's  theories  of  geological  formation,  the  need 
of  greater  support  for  higher  education  in  Virginia,  and  other 
of  the  author's  favorite  topics.  After  their  publication  in  the 
Eichmond  "Argus"  in  1803  the  letters  were  collected  in  book 
form  and  went  through  at  least  twelve  editions.    The  sketch 


\ 


212  AMEBtOAK  LlTEBAtU&fi 

of  ^The  Blind  Preacher'*  in  Letter  VI  was  long  a  favorite 
selection.  The  author  shows  the  influence  of  Addison,  whom 
he  praises  extravagantly  in  one  letter,  but  his  manner  is 
heavier  and  more  ornate  than  that  of  his  model.  It  is  hard 
to  understand  the  admiration  once  felt  for  these  papers  as 
specimens  of  style,  but  they  were  long  considered  prose  clas- 
sics. Two  other  series  of  Wirt's  essays.  The  Rainbow  and  The 
Old  Bachelor,  also  went  through  several  editions,  and  some 
of  his  speeches,  especially  that  on  the  trial  of  Aaron  Burr, 
were  well  known.  Probably  his  most  popular  work  was 
Sketches  of  the  Life  and  Character  of  Patrick  Henry,  a  fasci- 
nating biography  of  the  old-fashioned  literary  type. 

Another  Maryland  writer  who  should  be  remembered  is 
Francis  Scott  Kev  (1780-1843),  the  author  of  ^^The  Star- 

Spangled  Banner.''    Nothing  else  in  the  post- 
JJ^®'  humous  collection  of  his  poems  is  of  value. 

^^SiKB  John   Shaw    ( 1778-1809 ) ,   a  naval   surgeon 

bom  in  Annapolis,  wrote  poems  which  were 
collected  and  published  after  his-  death.  A  few  of  his  more 
pleasing  songs  survive  in  the  anthologies.  Edward  Coate 
Pinknev  (1802-1828),  son  of  a  prominent  Maryland  poli- 
tician, in  his  short  life  was  an  oflScer  in  the  navy,  a  member 
of  the  bar,  a  volunteer  in  the  Mexican  fight  for  independence, 
a  professor  in  the  IJniversity  of  Maryland,  and  an  editor.  He 
was  a  hot-headed  youth  with  a  propensity  for  duellings  and 
his  literary  models  were  Byron  and  Moore.  "Eodolph,"  his 
',  longest  poem,  is  a  story  of  illicit  love,  bloodshed,  remorse, 
and  madness.  One  or  two  gallant  and  sentimental  songs 
are  all  that  survive  of  his  thin  volume  of  poems. 

To  the  southward  almost  the  only  author  whose  name  is 
preserved  was  Bichard  Henry  Wilde  (1789-1847).  a  native  of 
Ireland  who  came  to  Georgia  in  boyhood,  and  became  a 
lawyer  and  a  member  of  congress  from  that  state.  After 
suffering  some  political  disappointments  he  went  to  Florence 


The  Eablt  Nineteenth  Century  213 

and  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  Italian  literature.    His 
only  important  published  writings  are  a  work  on  Tasso  and 

a  long  poem^  Hesperia,  which  appeared  after 
Georgia—  j^ig  death.    His  fame  has  been  kept  alive  by 

WUde       ^"'^     *  *^^8  '^^  5an  unfinished  opera,  published 

under  various  titles,  but  best  known  by  the! 
first  line,  'Ttfy  life  is  like  the  summer  rose.'* 

By  the  opening  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  region  west  of. 
the  AlleKhanies  was  beginning  to  be  important  politically  and 
m..  «*,  .  economically^  and  to  have  a  life  of  its  own. 

There  were  twQ_  chief  literary  centres  in  the 
West,_ Lexington,  Kentucky,,  and  Cincinnati^  Ohio;  but  sev- 
eral other  enterprising  towns  settled  by  emigrants  from  the 
more  intellectual  states  of  the  East  supported  literary  periodi- 
cals. Lexington  was  the  seat  of  Transylvania  ^t^iversitj^ 
which  was  founded  as  an  academy  in  the  preceding  century, 
and  began  to  confer  the  bachelor's  degree  in  1802.  The 
''Medley,'*  the  first  literary  monthly  in  the  West,  was  estab- 
lished at  Lexington  in  1803.  The  commercial  importance  of 
Cincinnati  gave  that  city  an  advantage,  and  it  early  became 
a  centre  for  the  publication  of  both  books  and  periodicals. 
The  intrinsic  merit  of  the  western  writings  was  not  great, 
but  the  spirit  shown  in  various  literary  enterprises  was  re- 
markable. The  authors  had  the  taste  and  the  standards  of  the 
East,  but  their  isolation,  their  enthusiasm  for  the  new  country, 
and  the  feeling  of  independence  natural  in  frontier  life  con- 
spired to  give  western  literature  a  distinction  which  it  lost 
when  improved  means  of  communication  bound  East  and 
West  more  closely  together. 

Among  the  authors  and  editors  of  this  region  who  deserve 

mention  were  Timothy  Flint  and  James  Hall.    J]lintj[1780: 

.    «..         1840^  was  bom  and  died  in  Massachusetts, 
Timothy  Flint      ,  ^  .      ., 

but  spent  some  years  as  a  missionary  m  the 

West,  and  was  for  a  time  editor  of  a  magazine  in  Cincinnati. 


S14  American  Litesatubs 

Hi&  most  valuable  writings  were  historical  and  descriptive, 
but  he  also  wrote  two  highly  colored  romances,  and  some 
translations  from  the  French. 

James  Hall  (1793-1868)  was  bom  and  educated  in  Phila- 
delphia.   He  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  afterward  held 

a  commission  in  the  regular  army.  In  1818 
he  resigned  from  the  service  to  begin  the  prac- 
tice of  law  at  Pittsburg.  In  1820  he  removed  to  Illinois, 
where  for  twelve  years  he  was  editor,  lawyer,  and  judge. 
Among  other  literary  activities  he  edited  the  ''Western  Sou- 
venir,'*  an  annual,  in  1829,  and  founded  the  "Illinois 
Monthly  Magazine''  in  1830.  Later  he  removed  to  Cincinnati, 
where  he  continued  his  editorial  labors.  His  first  important 
work  was  a  series  of  letters  to  the  "Portfolio,"  afterward 
collected  as  Letters  from  the  West.  These  tell  of  his  first  trip 
down  the  Ohio.  Several  volumes,  of  which  The  West,  its  Soil, 
Surface,  and  Productions  is  typical,  give  statistical,  historical 
and  miscellaneous  information  in  unusually  readable  fashion. 
More  purely  literary  in  form  are  his  nimierous  tales,  sketches, 
and  poems.  The  longest  of  these  is  Harpe's  Head,  A  Legend 
of  Kentucky.  This  is  a  story  with  much  action,  and  with 
many  vivid  descriptions  of  scenery  and  manners,  first  in 
Virginia  and  then  in  Kentucky.  Among  collections  of  shorter 
tales  are  Legends  of  the  West,  Tales  of  the  Border,  The 
Wilderness  and  the  War-Path.  These  all  treat  almost  ex- 
clusively of  western  themes.  Hall's  poetry,  consisting  mostly 
of  brief  narrative  and  sentimental  pieces,  is  of  little  value. 
Many  of  his  sketches,  especially  those  which  are  quiet  and 
sentimental,  show  the  influence  of  Irving;  others  which  are 
more  purely  frontier  stories  and  stories  of  action  are  sugges- 
tive of  Cooper.  The  author  was,  however,  no  mere  imitator. 
He  had  an  easy  and  effective  narrative  style,  and  his  de- 
scriptions of  western  life  and  scenery  are  vivid  and  sym- 

patb^tt^f 


Thb  Early  Nineteenth  Cbntuby  216 

IV.  Orators;  Scholars 

Public  speaking  continued  to  be  held  in  high  esteem  in 
America,  and  there  were  many  men  in  all  sections  of  the 

couintry  whose  eloquence  was  famous  in  their 

SudMWebster  ^^^'  ^^®  ^'  these  have  already  been  men- 
tioned in  connection  with  other  kinds  of  literary 
activity.  The  life  of  Daniel  Webster  (1782-1852),  the  great- 
est  of  the  New  England  orators,  belongs  rather  to  political 
than  to  literary  history,  and  is  too  well  known  to  need  more 
than  brief  statement  here.  He  was  the  son  of  a  New  Hamp- 
shire farmer.  In  childhood  his  chief  characteristics  were  ill 
health  and  great  shyness.  Signs  of  intellectual  brilliancy 
induced  his  father  to  send  him  to  Dartmouth  college.  He 
studied  law  and  practiced  in  various  towns  of  Massachusetts, 
finally  in  Boston.  For  the  last  twenty-five  years  of  his  life  he 
was  a  member  of  the  United  States  senate,  except  during  two 
periods  when  he  was  secretary  of  state.  The  best  remembered 
of  his  occasional  addresses  are  the  jqration  deliyiered  at  the 
laying  of  the  cornerstone  of  the  Bimker  Hill  moixument  and 
the  eulogy  on  Adams  and  Jefferson.  Of  the  congressional 
speeches  the  reply  to  Hayne,  1830,  and  the  "Seventh  of  March 
Speech,^*  iSSOT  are  best  known.  All  of  these  owe  some- 
thing  of  their  fame  to  the  importance  of  the  occasion,  and 
there  are  many  other  speeches  in  Webster's  collected  works 
which,  in  parts  at  least,  »re  hardly  inferior.  Some  of  his 
j)leas  at  the  bar,  notably  that  at  the  trial  of  the  murdexfiJS  of 
Joseph  WEile  m  Salem,  have  a  high  rank  in  the  oratory  of 
the  legal  profession.  Though  weak  and  shy  as  a  boy,  Webster 
developed  into  a  man  of  powerful  physique,  with  a  dignity  and 
a  presence  that  verged  on  pomposity.  The  orations  show 
the  quality  of  the  man.  They  are  solid,  formal,  dignified,, 
and  have  a  touch  of  the  artificial  diction  of  the  older  classic  | 
English  and  American  school.    Webster  was  a  man  of  great 


216  American  Litebatube 

intellectual  power^  and  he  could  express  his  ideas  with  abso- 
lute clearness ;  but  the  distinctive  characteristic  of  his  orations 
is  the  combination  of  weight  with  the  heightened  manner. 
It  is  proof  of  real  worth  that  though  his  style  of  public  speak- 
'ing  has  been  abandoned  in  favor  of  the  simpler  manner  repre- 
sented by  Lincoln,  yet  his  speeches  are  still  read  with  un- 
diminished admiration. 

With  the  development  of  national  consciousness  and  greater 
opportunities  for  leisurely  work  it  was  natural  that  there 
should  be  attempts  in  the  direction  of  American  scholarship. 
About  1820  a  proposal  was  made  to  establish  an  American 
Academy,  with  headquarters  at  New  York,  but  sectional  jeal- 
ousies and  the  absurdly  ambitious  nature  of  the  scheme 
brought  about  an  early  failure.  A  number  of  more  modest 
learned  societies  came  iuto  existence  during  the  first  third  of 
the  century.  Individual  scholars,  working  independently  or 
in  connection  with  the  leading  colleges,  did  much  creditable 
work. 

The  most  frequent  attempts  at  scholarly  writing  were  in 
the  field  of  history  and  biography.    As  the  men  who  had  taken 

part  in  the  Bevolution  and  the  organization 
Biog;raphy  ^f  ^j^^  government  passed  away,  there  was  a 

Waems  '  natural  tendency  to  write  their  biographies. 

Every  American  with  the  instincts  of  an  his- 
torian prepared  his  life  of  Washington,  and  from  this  often 
proceeded  to  the  consideration  of  other  men.  Among  the  ear- 
liest was  l^gfiffl  ]ji.  Wee^s  (lyfiO^-ift^.K^^  an  eccentric  Vir- 
ginia preacher  and  book  agent,  who  took  advantage  of  the 
interest  occasioned  by  Washington's  death,  and  the  next  year, 
1800,  brought  out  a  biography.    This  was  exceedingly  popular, 

Iand  is  now  notorious  as  the  source  of  the  hatchet  story  and 
other  anecdotes  which  were  apparently  manufactured  by  jan  au- 
thor who  knew  what  the  public  wanted.  Weems  later  wrote  lives 
of  Franklin,  Marion,  and  Penn,  less  ffimo^is  than  his  Wash- 


1 


The  Early  Nineteenth  Centubt  217 

ington,  but  equally  unreliable.  A  very  different  biography  is 
that  by  another  Virginian^  John  Marshall  (1755-1835).  By 
««.«*«.»      his  service  as  a  soldier  in  the  Eevolution  and 

his  experience  in  various  civil  capacities, 
culminating  in  his  appointment  as  Chief  Justice  of  the  United 
States,  he  had  acquired  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  public 
affairs  with  which  Washington  was  concerned.  The  prepara- 
tion of  the  Life  was  uindertaken  at  the  request  of  Washing- 
ton's family,  and  the  five  volumes  appeared  ftt  intervals  be- 
tween 1804  and  1807.  It  was  too  early  for  a  judicial  and 
definitive  biography,  but  Marshall's  work  shows  fairness, 
care,  and  the  power  iand  weight  that  characterize  all  his  writ- 
ings.   It  is  still  a  classic. 

Jared  Sparks  (1789-1866)  was  a  more  systematic  historical 
scholar.     His  early  connection  with  the  "North  American 

Eeview''  has  already  been  spoken  of;  later  he 
was  professor  of  history  and  president  at 
Harvard  college.  He  is  remembered  chiefly,  however,  as 
biographer,  and  as  editor  of  the  writings  of  Washingto 
Franklin,  and  other  American  statesmen.  His  practice  of 
omitting  passages  from  the  letters  that  he  edited,  and  of  mak- 
ing grammatical  and  other  emendations,  is  discountenanced 
by  later  scholars,  but  was  justified  on  the  theory  that  nothing 
should  be  made  public  which  would  lessen  reverence  for  the 
founders  of  the  nation.  His  work  was  carefully  done  and, 
except  for  these  emendations,  his  editions  are  authentic.  He 
was  a  worthy  predecessor  of  the  great  historians  that  Har- 
vard produced  in  the  next  generation. 

Among  minor  historians  who  deserve  brief  mention  is 
Isaiah  Thomas  (1749-1831),  a  New  England  editor  and  pub- 
lisher, who  wrote  a  History  of  Printing  in\ 
^torians  America,    which   is    still    a   standard    work. 

Samuel  L.  Knapp  (1783-1838),  ^n  editor  and 
late  in  life  a  New  York  lawyer,  published  many  miscellaneoTis 


asl 


218  Ahebicak  Litebatube 

writings,  and  edited  a  Library  of  American  History.  To  the 
student  of  to-day  his  most  interesting  work  is  a  series  of  lec- 
tures on  American  Literature,  published  in  1829.  These  are 
rambling  and  over-patriotic,  but  give  interesting  contempo- 
rary estimates  of  American  authors  and  of  literature  in  gen- 
eral. David  Bamsey  (1749-1815),  a  native  of  Philadelphia, 
but  for  most  of  his  life  ja  resident  of  Charleston,  South 
Carolina,  was  a  surgeon  in  the  Eevolutionaiy  war,  and  after- 
ward the  author  of  History  of  the  American  Revolution, 
Life  of  Oeorge  Washington,  and  History  of  the  United  States. 
While  not  a  great  judicial  historian  his  writings  carry  con- 
siderable authority. 

Western  writers  gave  the  material  for  history  rather  than 
the  finished  work.    Besides  Timothy  Flint  and  James  Hall, 

who  have  already  been  mentioned,  Henry  Bowe 
Sh^lcSt*        Schoolcraft   (1793-18^)    deserves  to  be  re- 

membered.  He  was  bom  in  Few  York  and 
was  first  attracted  to  the  West  by  his  interest  in  geology  and 
mineralogy.  Afterward  he  became  an  Indian  agent  and  was 
connected  with  various  government  commissions.  He  published 
accounts  of  his  travels  and  many  historical  and  ethnological 
works  relating  to  the  Indians.  He  was  especially  interested 
in  Indian  folk  lore,  and  prepared  two  collections  of  tales, 
Algic  Researches,  1839,  and  The  Myth  of  Hiawatha  and  other 
oral  Legends,  1856.  He  also  wrote  a  number  of  rather  con- 
ventional poems  on  Indian  subjects.  The  interest  of  his  prose 
works  lies  chiefly  in  the  subject  matter,  but  his  style  is  simple 
and  usually  adequate. 

In  natural  science  America  continued  to  furnish  a  con- 
siderable number  of  able  workers,  some  of  whom  wrote  with 
Th  Sc*  tl  ta  *ibility«  I^  Philadelphia,  where  scientific  tra- 
ditions were  strong,  Benjamm^Bugh^XH^^ 
1813),  a  prominent  physician  and  man  of  affairs,  published 
about  the  opening  of  the  century  several  works  on  medical 


The  Eakly  Ninbtbenth  Cbntuby  219 

and  miscellaneous  subjects.  To  Philadelphia  came  the  Scotch 
pnftt,  AlpTftTidfir  ^jyilann  (17^6-1813).  who  turned  his  atten- 
tion from  verse-making  to  the  preparation  of  his  famous 
ornithology.  In  New  England  perhaps  the  leading  scientist 
was  Benjamin  Silliman  (1779-1864)^  long  professor  at  Yale 
college,  and  founder  of  the  "American  Journal  of  Science." 
He  combined  the  true  scientific  spirit  with  a  faculty  for  popu- 
lar exposition,  and  probably  did  more  than  any  other  man 
to  extend  the  interest  in  American  science  during  the  first 
half  of  the  century. 

America  has  iiome  claim  to  Benjamin  Thompson,  Count 
Humford  (1753-1814),  Tory,  soldier  of  fortune,  and  physicist 

He  was  a  native  of  Massachusetts,  though  his 
r^^Jj.  famous  experiments  on  the  nature  of  heat  were 

conducted  in  Prance.  Naihaxud-^JMOaditfili 
(1773-1838),  in  early  life  a  sailor  of  Salem,  published  valu- 
able works  on  applied  mathematics  and  translated  Laplace. 

Lexicography  and  the  philological  sciences  were  also  well 
represented  in  New  England.    Noah  Webster,  whose  earlier 

work  was  mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapter, 
L^ioographm  P^^ished  a  grammar  in  1807,  and  con- 
tinued his  linguistic  studies  at  Amherst, 
where  he  aided  in  founding  the  college,  at  New  Haven,  and 
in  England.  The  first  edition  of  his  famous  Dictionary  was 
published  in  1828.  Joseph  E.  Worcester  (1784-1865).  a 
rival  lexicographer,  was  bom  in  New  Hampshire,  but  lived 
most  of  his  life  in  Massachusetts.  He  edited  Johnson's 
Dictionary  and  prepared  an  abridgment  of  Webster's  before 
he  issued  his  own  in  1830. 


•\ 


CHAPTEB  IV 

The  Central  Period  (1833-1883) 

I.  General  Conditions 

It  has  already  been  remarked  that  in  the  fourth  decade  of 
the  nineteenth  century  great  changes  took  place  in  the  po- 
•jnninff     ^^*^^*^*  Tcligious,  and  social  thought  of  the 
of  the  Period—    country,  and  showed  themselves  in  all  forms 
National  of  literary  expression.    The  perfection  of  the 

^     ^^^  steam  boat  and  the  beginnings  of  the  railroad 

established  the  possibility  of  easy  communication  between 
different  sections  of  a  great  country,  and  definitely  answered 
the  question  whether  the  United  States  could  continue  as  one 
nation.  At  the  same  time  sectional  differences  increased 
rather  than  diminished.  The  West  grew  influential  in  poli- 
tics, jind  through  its  influence  the  free,  energetic,  but  unculti- 
vated type  of  man  became  more  conspicuous  in  public  affairs. 
The  development  of  cotton  raising  and  other  industrial 
changes  made  the  South  more  dependent  than  ever  before  on 
slave  labor.  On  the  other  hand  the  disapproval  of  slavery, 
which  had  long  existed  and  had  been  steadily  growing  in  the 
North,  was  intensified  by  the  spirit  of  democratic  reform 
which  was  felt  about  this  time  in  both  Europe  and  America. 
As  a  result  North  and  South  found  themselves  sharply  at 
variance  over  a  matter  which  had  serious  moral  aspects,  and 
which  appealed  to  the  sentiments  of  both  parties.  In  New 
England  the  increased  interest  in  political  and  sociological 
questions  was  accompanied  by  great  changes  in  philosophy  and 
religious  belief.  About  this  time,  too,  appeared  the  first  pub- 
lished writings  of  a  number  of  men  who  were  bom  in  the  first 

220 


The  Central  Period  221 

decade  of  the  century,*  and  who  afterward  became  the  most 
distinguished  in  American  letters. 

The  men,  the  problems,  andthe^  methods  of  th^ 
came  into  prominence  between   1830   and   1840   continued 

strong  in  the  intdlectual  life.fti.ihe„.Mtipn 
^e^ad^^        nntil  at  least  half  a  ^eneratign  .af tpr  Jthfi-CiYiL 

"Vyar.  The  change  at  the  close  of  the  period 
was  even  more  gradual  than  that  at  the  beginning;  but  be- 
tween 1880  and  1890  there  was  a  noticeable  weakening  of  the 
older  sectional  feeling,  and  a  tendency  toward  a  readjustment 
of  political  lines.  Younger  men  came  into  prominence  in 
literature,  and  the  intellectual  prestige  of  New  England  was 
weakened.  No  one  date  in  the  decade  is  more  significant  than 
another  of  this  change.  The  year  1883  has  been  chosen  to 
end  the  period  because  it  rounds  out  a  half  century. 

One  characteristic  of  the  period  under  discussion  was  the 
passage  of  literary  supremacy  from  New  York  to  New  Eng- 
land, or  more  specifically  to  Boston  and  its  en- 
^^Mc^tttte      vir^^s.    Irving  and  Cooper  continued  to  write, 

but  after  1833  they  did  nothing  to  increase- 
the  reputations  that  they  had  already  won,  and  they  inspired 
no  successors  of  their  own  rank.     The  Connecticut  writers,, 
with  their  mild  conservatism  and  their  devotion  to  the  moral 
and  the  commonplace,  failed  equally  to  express  the  spirit  of 
the  time.    It  was  the  beginning  of  an  era  of  vigorous  mental 
activity  and  moral  questioning,  and  it  was  fitting  that  the 
descendants  of  the  most  virile  of  the  Puritans  should  take  the 
lead.    The  literary  ascendency  of  Massachusetts  was  not  geo-  / 
graphical  but  racial.    The  leaders  whose  names  will  be  men-  i 
tioned  later  could  almost  without  exception  trace  their  an- 
cestry back  to  the  emigrants  of  the  early  seventeenth  century. 
Two  great  movements  stirred  New  England  during  this 

*  Garriflon,  Willis,  fflmms,  Emerson,  Longfellow,  Hawthorne.  Whittier.  Holmes, 
and  Poe,  as  well  as  many  of  their  lesser  contemporaries,  were  bom  in  the  years 
1803-0  inclusive. 


Z2i  Ahs&ioak  LrrsRATUBB 

period— transcendentalism  and  abolitionism^  Both  were 
ethical,  but  one  looked  toward  religion  and  Jbeliefj^  the,  other 

toward  politics  and  action.  Both  were  so 
^va^mte  strongly  reflected  in  literature  that  it  will  be 

convenient  to  group  together  the  authors  who 
were  especially  concerned  with  each. 

II.  Thb  New  England  Tbansoendbntalists 

The  term  "transcendentalism*  was  originally  a  nickname 
applied  to  the  enthusiastic  devotees  of  the  idealistic  phi- 
losophy; and  transcendentalism  has  never  been 
'^Tuucmdmi-      better  defined  than  by  Emerson  when  he  said 
Idealism  **        .  *at  it  was  idealism  as  it  appeared  in  New 

I  England  about  1840.  A  more  exact  definition 
is  impossible,  for  New  England  transcendentalism  was  not  a 
system  capable  of  formulation,  and  the  transcendentalists 
agreed  only  in  spirit,  not  in  belief.  Idealism  in  New  England 
was  not  new.  Though  not  definitely  recognized  and  called  by 
name,  it  was  always  strong  in  Puritanism.  The  revolution  by 
which,  in  the  preceding  period.  Harvard  college  and  most  of 
the  older  New  England  churches  had  become  Unitarian  was 
largely  an  intellectual  movement.  Its  great  achievement  was 
the  establishment  of  the  right  of  free  thought.  Transcenden- 
talism in  one  of  its  aspects  was  the  assertion,  under  the  new 
conditions  of  freedom,  of  the  idealism  that  survived  from  the 
old  faith.     The  form  of  this  assertion  was  modified  by  the 

;  formulated  idealistic  philosophy  of  Kant  and  other  Germans. 
At  first,  however,  the  German  language  was  almost  unknown, 

.  and  German  thinkers  were  studied  through  the  interpretations 

i  of  Coleridge,  Carlyle,  and  the  French  writers. 

As  transcendentalism  was  not  a  system,  perhaps  no  two  of 
the  so-called  transcendentalists  believed  exactly  the  same. 
They  agreed,  however,  in  denying  the  postulate  of  Locke 
that  the  mind  of  a  child  is  like  a  sheet  of  blank  paper  on 


The  Central  Period  283 

which  knowledge  is  written  only  by  experience.    They  main- 
tained^ on  the  contrary^  that  every  man  has  certain  ideas, 

like,  for  example,  those  of  right  and  wrong, 
talist  Beliefs*       which  are  innate,  which  transcend  experience, 

and  which  may  be  incapable  of  intellectual! 
proof.  This  belief  implies  a  close  relation  between  every  indi- 
vidual and  the  source  of  all  wisdom,  and  carries  as  a  corollary 
that  in  the  domain  of  these  innate  ideas  it  is  necessary  only 
to  look  earnestly  within  one^s  self  to  learn  the  truth.  It  was 
the  absurd  and  unphilosophical  application  of  this  theory 
that  did  most  to  bring  transcendentalism  into  disrepute. 
Into  the  transcendental  camp  rushed  fanatics  who  looked 
within  themselves  and  fotmd  the  revelation  that  it  was  sin- 
ful to  eat  potatoes,  or  to  wear  clothing  of  a  certain  cut,  or 
perhaps  to  wear  any  clothing  at  all.  These  absurdities  are 
even  yet  associated  with  the  word  transcendentalism;  but 
the  transcendentalists  were  as  a  whole  sensible  people,  who 
did  valuable  service  in  helping  to  preserve  the  idealism  that 
has  always  been  a  marked  American  characteristic. 

With  the  development  of  idealism  went  other  tendencies 
not  philosophical  which  had  their  influence  on  transcenden- 
talism.   The  descendants  of  the  Puritans  were 

The  "Renaifr-       ^^^  |^g|.  ^reakinff  loose  from  traditions  of  all 
sance*'  of  Hew  ,  j  i.     .      •       j. v  •  j     i!  •        x- 

England  sorts,  and  begmnmg  the  period  of  mvestigar 

tion  and  activity  that  Professor  Wendell  aptly 
calls  the  "renaissance**  of  New  England.  The  college  cur- 
riculum was  broadened  by  increasing  the  attention  given  to 
"helles  lettres" — ^the  customary  academic  designation  for 
courses  in  literature — and  by  the  introduction  of  modem 
languages.  Once  the  exploration  of  unfamiliar  fields  was 
begun,  enthusiasts  rushed  everywhere — into  the  medieval  poets 
and  the  oriental  mystics.  So  sudden  was  this  movement  and 
so  vast  were  the  regions  just  discovered  that  at  first  there  was 
no  scholarly  thoroughness,  and  no  true  appreciation  of  values. 


224  Ahebican  Literatube 

To  know  a  poef  b  name  and  a  few  translated  quotations  from 
his  works  was  justification  for  mentioning  him  in  terms  of 
familiarity.  At  the  same  time  with  these  excursions  into 
literature  there  was  a  sudden  introduction  of  the  other  larts, 
attended  often  with  the  same  strange  judgments  as  to  values. 

The  nearest  approach  to  an  organization  of  the  transcen- 
dentalists  was  an  informal  association  sometimes  spoken  of 

as  the  Symposium,  and  by  outsiders  as  the 
Sm    8i  Transcendental  Club.    Among  the  chief  mem- 

bers were  Ealph  Waldo  Emerson,  Henry  David 
Thoreau,  Amos  Bronson  Aloott,  Margaret  Puller,  George  Eip- 
ley,  P.  H.  Hedge,  James  Preeman  Clarke,  C.  A.  Bartol,  Eliza- 
beth Palmer  Peabody,  Theodore  Parker,  W.  H.  Channing, 
J.  S.  Dwight,  and  Jones  Very.  Brownson,  Bancroft,  Cranch, 
and  others  were  occasional  attendants.  Meetings  were  first 
held  in  1836.  and  continued  for  some  time  at  irregular 
intervals. 

Among  the  tangible  results  of  the  transcendental  move- 
ment were  the  ^'Diar'  and  the  Brook  Parm  Community. 

The  "Dial"  was  a  quarterly  published  from 
The  "Dial" 

1840  to  1844  by  the  more  enthusiastic  devotees 

of  the  new  philosophy.  It  was  edited  at  first  by  Margaret 
Puller  and  afterward  by  Emerson.  Those  who  have  access 
to  its  now  rare  files  will  find  it  the  best  illustration  of  the 
aspirations  of  the  transcendentalists  and  of  some  of  their 
chief  follies. 

The  Brook  Parm  Settlement  was  a  mildly  communistic 
experiment  at  Wesj  BoxburyijiearJBpstpnj  between  1841  aa4 

JL847'._  Its  chief  promoter  was  George  Eipleyj. 
The  Brook  and  among  his  coadjutors  were  Hawthorne 

C^uaunity         ^^^  Charles  A.  Dana.    George  William  Curtis 

was  a  resident,  though  not  a  stockholder. 
Emerson,  Margaret  Puller,  Horace  Greeley,  and  others  were 
interested  in  the  plan  and  gave  it  qualified  endorsement^ 


The  Central  Period  225 

though  they  regarded  it  as  impracticable  and  declined  to 
become  members.  The  ideas  that  underlay  the  experiment 
were  the  dignity  of  labor,  the  desirability  of  living  close  to 
nature,  and  the  advantage  of  mutual  helpfulness.  The  plan,f 
especially  at  first,  was  not  in  any  way  radical,  and  aimed  at 
no  revolution  in  the  social  structure.  A  company  was  organ- 
ized and  investors  took  stock  as  in  any  other  business  concern. 
Eesidents  were  to  do  a  certain  share  of  labor  or  pay  for  their 
board.  Plans  were  made  to  conduct  a  school  and  in  other 
ways  to  supplement  the  income  from  the  farm.  Families  were 
to  preserve  their  identity  and  every  member  was  to  retain 
full  control  of  himself  and  his  property.  After  a  time  the 
community  became  influenced  by  the  more  radical  ideas  of 
Fourier  and  lost  something  of  its  early  simplicity.  This  may 
have  hastened  the  inevitable  dissolution  of  the  association, 
as  did  a  serious  loss  by  fire  in  the  spring  of  1846.  Though 
the  fame  of  the  community  is  due  as  much  to  its  picturesque- 
ness  as  to  its  importance,  it  is  a  significant  illustration  of  the 
way  in  which  idealistic  Yankees  set  about  reforming  the 
world. 

The  greatest  and  the  most  representative  of  the  transcenden- 
talists,  and  the  oldest  of  the  greater  New  England  men  of  let- 
ters, was  Balph  Waldo  Emerson  (1803-1M2). 
Ralph  Waldo       g^e  was  bom  in  Boston,  the  descendant  of  louff 

lines  of  clergymen.  His  father  was  pastor  of 
the  First  Church  of  Boston,  which  had  become  Unitarian. 
The  elder  Emerson  died  in  1811,  leaving  his  wife  and  five 
small  children  dependent  upon  themselves  and  the  aid  of 
friends.  Expenditures  for  food  and  clothing  were  minimized 
to  provide  means  for  education.  Pen  pictures  of  Waldo  as 
a  '^spiritual  looking  boy^'  who  never  smiled  and  never  in- 
dulged in  hoys  play  are  somewhat  painful,  and  it  would  be 
pleasant  to  believe  them  the  imaginings  of  later  admirers. 
He  attended  the  Boston  Latin  school,  and  afterward  entered 


226  AicsRiOAN  Ltteratdkb 

Harvard  college^  where  he  ran  errands  for  the  president^ 
waited  on  table  at  commons^  and  received  aid  from  scholar- 
ship funds.     He  was  poor  in  mathematics^ 
^^^1"  satisfactory  but  not  brilliant  in  other  studies. 

Bhetoric  and  elocution  interested  him^  and  he 
is  said  alwajrs  to  have  retained  a  fancy  that  he  would  like  to 
be  professor  of  these  branches.  His  reading  was  extensive^ 
but  desultory.  It  seems  to  have  been  understood  that  he 
should  enter  the  miaistry,  and  there  is  no  record  of  the  usual 
agonies  over  the  choice  of  a  profession.  After  his  graduation 
in  1821  he  taught  school  for  four  years  to  save  money.  Then 
he  entered  Harvard  Divinity  School^  but  was  soon  forced  to 
leave  on  account  of  poor  health.  The  next  year  he  was 
licensed  to  preachy  without  examination.  His  health  con- 
tinued precarious^  and  for  some  time  prevented  him  from 
becoming  a  candidate  for  a  regular  pulpit.  At  last^  in  1829, 
\he  became  pastor  of  the  Old  North  Church,  Boston — ^formerly 
the  church  of  the  Mathers.  The  same  year  he  was  married  to 
Miss  Ellen  Tucker,  of  Concord,  New  Hampshire. 

Emerson  was  now  approaching  the  age  of  thirty  and  gave 
no  indication  of  any  unusual  or  peculiar  ability.    As  a  pul- 
pit orator  he  had  the  fascination  of  a  iSne 
S?^^  "         personality,  and  his  younger  hearers  said  that 

he  "made  religion  real;'*  but  his  biographer 
jSnds  nothing  remarkable  in  his  sermons.  He  continued  in 
'  his  pastorate  until  1832,  when  he  resigned  on  account  of  a 
disinclination  to  administer  the  Lord's  Supper.  He  was  no 
,  violent  iconoclast  or  anti-ritualist,  but  he  found  that  the  sac- 
rament did  not  mean  to  him  what  it  was  supposed  to  mean, 
and  rather  than  go  through  the  form  without  the  spirit  he 
proposed  either  that  he  should  be  excused  from  administering 
it,  or  that  he  should  resign.  The  church  was  unwilling  to 
adopt  the  former  alternative,  and  a  separation  followed,  evi- 
dently without  ill  feeling  on  either  side.    The  church  con- 


The  Central  Period  327 

tinned  his  salaiy  for  a  time  and  be  frequently  occupied  his 
old  pulpii 

Mrs.  Emerson  had  died  earlier  in  the  same  year^  and  in 
December  he  sailed  for  Malta^  hoping  to  find  better  healtU. 

He  travelled  through  much  of  Italy,  visited 

^fto  Europe    ^^™'  ^^  returned  by  way  of  England.    He 

was  not  a  sight-seer;  he  has  little  to  say  of 
scenery,  or  customs,  or  works  of  art.  He  foimd,  as  he  said, 
always  "the  same  faces  under  new  caps  and  jackets.**  His 
chief  interest  was  in  men,  and  he  took  pleasure  in  meeting 
Landor  in  Italy,  and  Coleridge,  Carlyle,  and  Wordsworth  in 
Great  Britain.  Jiisjisit  toCarlyle  at  Craigenputtock  was  the 
beginning  of  a  friendship  that  lasted  till  death. 

After  his  return  to  America  in  1833  Emerson  preached 
nearly  every  Simday  in  Unitarian  pulpits,  and  delivered  many 

lectures.     The  ^^yceums'*   which   about  this 

L^xan  "         *™®  ^®^®  organized  in  every  city  and  village 

and  in  most  country  districts  gave  the  pro- 
fession of  lecturer  an  unusual  importance,  and  most  men 
who  were  prominently  before  the  public  appeared  more  or  less 
frequently  upon  the  platform.  With  Emerson  lecturing  was 
an  important  avocation  for  forty  years.  He  began  with  silb- 
jects  from  natural  history  and  his  travels,  but  his  teaching 
was  always  ethical,  and  he  soon  gave  his  lectures  such  titles 
as  his  essays  now  bear.  The  extent  of  his  tours  gradually 
widened  until  it  included  Illinois  and  Wisconsin,  and  the 
border  states  of  the  South.  In  1834  he  settled  at  Concord, 
which  was  henceforth  to  be  his  home;  and  the  next  year  he 
married  Miss  Lydia  Jackson.  A  small  income  came  to  him 
from  the  estate  of  his  first  wife,  and  in  later  years  his  books 
brought  him  something;  but  at  first  he  found  it  hard  to  live 
within  his  income.  As  the  works  of  Carlyle  appeared,  he 
attended  to  theii  republication  in  America,  and  often  embar- 
rassed himself  by  advancing  considerable  sums  for  this  pur- 


228  Akebican  Literatubs 

pose.  He  also  found  it  necessary  to  keep  open  bouse  for  the 
many  pilgrims  who  came  to  Concord  to  ask  advice,  or  more 
frequently  to  enlist  him  in  some  wild  reform.  But  though  he 
found  it  necessary  to  practice  strict  economy  and  to  lecture 
each  year  to  make  up  a  deficit,  he  never  really  suffered  from 
poverty.    With  the  exception  of  a  lecturing  trip  to  England 

in  1847-8  his  life  passed  uneventfully  until 
L^^^T^ffs         ^^®  burning  of  his  house  in  1872.    Even  before 

this  his  friends  had  noticed  the  beginnings  of 
mental  weakness,  the  tendency  to  which  was  probably  in  the 
blood.  The  shock  and  exposure  at  the  time  of  the  fire  hastened 
the  process  of  decay,  and  for  the  remaining  ten  years  of  his 
life  he  was  never  quite  himself.  His  memory  was  pre- 
carious, and  his  mind  lacked  its  old  incisiveness  except  at 
moments.  Immediately  after  the  fire  friends  provided  for 
a  trip  to  the  Nile,  which  he  had  always  wished  to  see,  and  on 
his  return  he  found  his  house  rebuilt  and  his  library  in  its 
old  place.  He  occasionally  repeated  some  of  his  lectures,  and 
nominally  superintended  the  publication  of  some  new  works, 
made  up  from  old  manuscripts. 

Emerson's   distinctive   genius   developed   late.     His   first 
publication  was  a  thin  volume  entitled  Nature,  issued  in 

1836.     The  next  year  he  attracted  attention -^ 

^Sw^iitinffl    ^y  ^^^  ^^^  •'^®**  Kappa  address  at  Harvard 

on  *The  American  Scholar:"  and  in  1838  his 
famous  address  to  the  graduating  class  at  Harvard  Divinity 
School  antagonized  the  conservative  Unitarians,  and  gave  him 
the  reputation  in  some  circles  of  being  a  dangerous  man. 
The  first  series  ot  Essays.  1841^  and  the  second  series^.  1844^ 
were  adaptations  of  his  lectures;  indeed  the  same  may  be  said 
of  most  of  his  later  prose  volumes — Miscellanies,  1849,,.£gjg.- 
resentative  Men,  1850,  The  Conduct  of  Life,  1860,  Society 
and  Solitude,  1870.  English  TruHs,  published  in  1856,  was 
the  result  of  his  second  trip  abroad.     The  volimie  entitled 


The  Cbntbal  Period  229 

Letters  and  Social  Aims  was  compiled  from  his  manuscripts 
under  his  partial  direction  in  1876.  Another  collection, 
Natural  History  of  the  Intellect^  was  issued  after  his  death. 
His  correspondence  with  Carlyle  and  with  other  friends  has 
since  been  published,  and  his  Journals  are  now  being  given  to 
the  public. 

While  in  college  Emerson  had  written  verse,  and  there  is 
evidence  that  he  always  cared  much  for  the  power  of  poetic 

expression.    He  frequently  refers  to  his  poetic 
Emenons  temperament,  and  even  speaks  of  himself  as 

by  nature  a  poet.  Some  of  his  poems  were 
published  in  the  "Dial,''  but  he  issued  no  collection  until 
1847.  Another  volume  appeared  in  1865,  May-Day  in  1867,. 
and  a  revised  collection  in  1876.  In  1874  he  published  Par-i 
nassus,  an  anthology  made  up  of  the  English  poems  that  he| 
especially  enjoyed.  Most  of  the  selections  were  made  long  be- 
fore ;  but  the  fact  that  some  were  admitted  after  his  powers 
began  to  decline  makes  the  book  of  little  value,  even  as  an 
indication  of  the  editor's  taste. 

Emerson's  mind  was  so  individual  that  it  is  hard  to  charac- 
terize it  in  ordinary  terms.    His  great  intellectuality  is  con-. 

ceded  by  everyone ;  yet  he  was  not  a  great  | 
Emerson's  scholar  or   a   systematic   thinker.     He   read' 

Characteristics     °^^^^  ^^  some  periods  of  his  life,  but  he  cared : 

for  a  striking  sentence  rather  than  for  the  \ 
organized  thought  of  a  book,  and  he  always  held  that  reading 
was  only  the  recreation  of  a  scholar.     He  was  not  deeply . 
versed  in  any  language,  or  science,  or  philosophy.     His  free ; 
handling  of  the  names  of  German  philosophers  and  of  Ori- 
ental poets  might  seem  to  imply  familiarity,  but,  as  was  usual 
in  his  time,  his  references  were  often  based  on  slight  and 
second-hand  information.    As  an  observer,  both  of  men  and 
of  nature,  he  was  usually  quick  and  accurate,  though  he 
sometimes  seems  shrewd  rather  than  deep.    His  lack  of  system 


230  Ahebioan  Ltteratube 

is  seen  in  the  disorganized  stracture  of  his  lectures  and  essays^ 
and  in  his  failure  to  formulate  any  system,  or  even  to  classify 
materials.  His  justification  he  found  in  his  philosophy,  which 
i  taught  him  to  look  within  himself  at  each  moment,  without 
Ireference  to  the  past,  and  to  avoid  forms  and  systems  as  re- 
pressing. But  his  beliefs  and  his  habits  of  thought  coincided. 
He  proceeded  by  insight,  by  inspiration,  in  the  cant  phrase 
of  his  admirers,  by  "possession/^  rather  than  by  ratiocinative 
processes. 

With  this  idealism  were  combined  intensely  practical  quali- 
ties.   In  this  respect  he  resembled  the  older  Puritans,  who 

with  all  their  religious  intensity  built  up  for- 
Emeraon's  tunes  and  managed  shrewdly  the  affairs  of 

OualitiM  state.     Emerson  was  not  an  especially  good 

financier,  but  he  had  fair  business  instincts 
and  a  practical  common-sense  way  of  looking  at  everyday 
affairs.  He  made  a  good  neighbor,  who  ''always  kept  his 
fences  up/'  He  attended  town-meetings  and  mingled  in  a 
perfectly  natural  way  with  the  farmers  and  villagers  about 
him.  He  foretold,  a!s  clearly  as  any  banker  or  merchant  could 
have  done,  the  causes  that  would  interfere  with  the  success  of 
the  Brook  Farm  community.  Surrounded  as  he  was  by 
cranks  and  enthusiasts,  he  tried  no  wilder  experiments  than 
,  practicing  vegetarianism  for  a  few  weeks,  and  inviting  the 
house-maids  to  sit  at  the  family  table.  It  was  this  happy 
balance  between  the  transcendental  and  the  practical  that 
gave  him  his  leadership.  His  words  inspired  the  most  ideal- 
istic of  his  followers.  His  actions  gave  no  offense  and  little 
chance  for  ridicule  to  the  most  hard-headed  critic.  Moreover 
he  had  the  judgment  to  see  what  he  could  and  could  npt  do, 
and  where  his  own  work  lay,  and  he  refused  to  be  closely 
allied  with  extreme  reforms  of  any  kind.  Even  where  he 
sympathized  with  a  crusade  like  that  against  slavery,  he  felt 
that  the  active  work  could  best  be  done  by  others.    He  never 


The  Central  Period  23l 

temporized;  or  concealed  his  thoughts.  His  speech  on  John 
Brown  and  other  anti-slavery  utterances  are  strong;  but  he 
did  not  give  himself  entirely  to  the  movement,  and  to  re- 
formers with  one  idea  seemed  lukewarm. 

Personally  Emerson  seems  to  have  exercised  a  fascination/ 
on  all  who  knew  him.    People  went  to  his  lectures  because^ 

of  the  man,  if  not  for  his  ideas.     Even  the ' 
^JjJ^JJ'  wild  reformers  who  failed  to  win  him  to  their ! 

own  notions  usually  left  him  with  no  less  of 
love  and  admiration  because  of  their  disappointment.  The 
few  glimpses  that  we  have  of  his  home  life  show  almost  ideal 
relations  with  his  children ;  and  the  "curious,  sociable,  cheer- 
ful public  funeraV  as  Henry  James  calls  it,  was  only  one 
indication  of  the  way  he  was  regarded  by  his  Concord  neigh- 
bors. Still,  there  was  an  aloofness  about  him  that  kept  all 
men  at  a  little  distance.  He  had  no  intimates  outside  of  his 
own  family.  While  in  college  he  sometimes  joined  convivial 
circles,  and  later  he  was  a  welcome  member  of  the  famous 
Saturday  Club,  which  included  all  the  prominent  literary  men 
of  Boston.  But  though  always  gracious  and  winning,  he 
never  allowed  his  reserve  to  be  broken  down. 

Emerson's  literary  tastes  are  not  easily  learned  or  under- 
stood.   His  biographer  says  that  he  saw  nothing  in  Shelley, 

Aristophanes,    Don    Quixote,    Miss    Austen, 

^^nunTTastes    ^^^^^^^ — *   ^^^    ^    heterogeneous    as    those 

which  he  loved  to  put  together  for  himself. 
There  is  hardly  more  similarity  between  the  authors  that  he 
admired — ^Byron,  Moore,  George  Herbert,  Beaumont  and 
Fletcher.  One  is  led  to  suppose  that  his  enthusiasm  for  Ooethe 
was  caught  mostly  from  Carlyle;  and  that  his  interest  in 
Hafiz  and  other  Orientals  was,  unconsciously  of  course,  a 
little  faddish.  His  writings  show  quotations  from  a  great 
range  of  authors,  but  they  are  mostly  striking  phrases, 
chosen  for  themselves  and  not  for  their  connection  with  a  sys- 


S32  Ahebioan  Literatubb 

tern  of  ideas.  It  was  probably  the  authors  who  could  furnish 
such  phrases  that  he  enjoyed  most.  He  set  great  store  by 
form  of  expression,  and  was  forever  striving  for  it.  Not  even 
personal  friendship  could  reconcile  him  to  Carlyle's  prose 
style.  He  had,  as  Lowell  points  out,  an  acute  sense  for  the 
inevitable  word.  He  composed  by  sentences,  and  when  a 
sentence  shaped  itself  for  him  he  put  it  in  his  notebook  for 
use  as  occasion  arose.  His  lectures  and  essays  were  made  up 
of  these  prearranged  sentences  with  more  or  less  of  connective 
.material  supplied.  He  never  spoke  impromptu,  and  he  was 
'not  great  as  a  letter  writer.  On  the  whole,  he  seems  to  have 
had  no  philosophy  of  literature,  but  to  have  liked  the  work 
which  had  form,  and  which  appealed  to  him  in  his  mood.  It 
seems  hopeless  to  attempt  to  trace  a  connection  between  his 
reading  and  his  prose  style. 

The  first  published  work.  Nature,  differs  but  little  in  style 
from  those  that  follow.    It  has  slightly  more  of  plan,  though 

logical  sequence  is  not  always  found  where  it 
*  is  promised.    It  contains  illustrations  of  the 

author's  favorite  habit  of  enumerating  a  list  of  heterogeneous 
persons,  or  things,  as  ^^anguage,  sleep,  madness,  dreams, 
beasts,  sex.''  And  it  abounds  in  the  short,  quotable  sentences 
which  are  so  forceful  in  the  essays :  ^'Nature  never  wears  a 
mean  appearance;"  ''Give  me  health  and  a  day,  and  I  will 
make  the  pomp  of  emperors  ridiculous;"  "Man  is  the  dwarf 
of  himself ;"  "All  that  Adam  had,  all  that  Caesar  could,  you 
have  and  do."  The  leading  idea  of  Nature  is  that  which 
has  already  been  given  as  the  central  thought  of  transcen- 
dentalism. Every  soul  is  of  the  divine  essence,  and  may  have 
communication  with  all  that  is  divine  in  the  universe;  and 

since  all  things  and  all  actions  are  manif  esta- 
yhmn  *  tions  of  the  divine,  it  may  read  a  spiritual  les- 

son in  every  work  of  nature  or  of  art.    This 
thought,  with  its  resulting  lesson  of  individual  dignity  and  its 


The  Cbntbal  Period  233 

imnimerable  corollaries  and  applications^  is  the  author's  one 
message  to  the  worlds  and  is  found  on  almost  every  page  that 
he  wrote.    Thus,  the  essay  on  "History**  begins : 

There  is  one  mind  common  to  aU  individual  men.  Every  man  is 
an  inlet  to  the  same  and  to  aU  of  the  same.  He  that  is  once  admitted 
to  the  right  of  reason  is  made  a  freeman  of  the  whole  estate.  What 
Plato  has  thought,  he  may  think ;  what  a  saint  has  felt,  he  may  feel ; 
what  at  any  time  has  befallen  any  man,  he  can  understand.  Who 
hath  access  to  this  universal  mind,  is  a  party  to  aU  that  is  or  can 
be  done,  for  this  is  the  only  and  sovereign  ag^nt 

Passages  were  frequently  transferred  from  one  lecture  to 
another,  and  new  lectures  were  made  up  by  piecing  together 
passages  from  old  ones.  It  is  often  impossible  on  reading  a 
paragraph  to  guess  in  what  particular  essay  or  lecture  it  may 
be  found. 

It  is  not  true,  however,  that  the  author  mainly  repeats  him- 
self.   His  lesson  is  one  which  has  so  many  applications,  and 
on  which  so  much  depends,  that  each  statement  under  new 
conditions  seems  a  new  thought.    It  is  probably  impossible  i 
now  for  anyone  to  receive  from  the  Essays  the  same  tonic  1 
effect  that  they  gave  to  the  author's  contemporaries.     For 
two  generations  they  have  been  common  property,  and  not 
only  their  ideas  but  their  imagery  are  everywhere  echoed  in 
the  pulpit,  the  lecture  room,  and  the  review  article.    Every 
young  man  and  woman  is  familiar  through  indirect  sources 
with  much  of  the  best  that  Emerson  has  to  offer.    Yet  it  is 
probable  that  to-day  few  readers,  certainly  few  young  readers 
of  idealistic  tendencies,  make  their  first  acquaintance  with 
the  Essays  without  receiving  a  distinct  stimulus.    There  is 
little  that  seems  really  new.  Indeed,  some  of  the  most  effective  | 
ideas  are  those  that  the  reader  at  once  recognizes  as  his  own; - 
but  there  is  a  suggestiveness  which  starts  train  after  train  ; 
of  thought. 

It  is  sometimes  charged  that  Emerson  is  too  hopeful,  that 
he  disregards  the  evil  and  the  disappointment  in  the  world. 


234  AlCSHICAK  LrCERATUSB 

and  leads  his  readers  to  expect  too  much  of  life.  This  is 
undoubtedly  trae^  and  each  reader  must  decide  for  himself 

whether  it  is  a  defect.  In  Emerson's  own 
1^°""!^*  eyes  it  was  not    A  man  with  the  acuteness 

of  observation  shown  in  his  countless  descrip- 
tions of  nature  and  in  his  homely  illustrations  from  life  could 
hardly  fail  to  see  the  evil  as  well  as  the  good.  That  he  pre- 
ferred to  ignore  it  rather  than  to  make  it  conspicuous  by  wag- 
ing open  fight  only  shows  his  faith  in  his  ideals.  A  more 
serious  charge  against  the  essays  is  the  inconsistency  of  oc- 
casional passages^  and  the  use  of  phrases  which  taken  by  them- 
selves seem  over-audacious.  This  arises  from 
^^udadous  ^jjg  jj^^.^  ^f  looking  at  a  truth  from  different 

angles  in  order  to  gain  a  complete  view^  and 
caused  the  author  no  concern  whatever.  Yet  the  reader  who^ 
ignorant  of  Emerson^  meets  for  the  first  time  the  phrase  ''I 
am  part  or  parcel  of  God/'  or  a  passage  like  the  following 
from  the  essay  on  '^Self-Beliance,''  is  likely  to  be  shocked  or 
bewildered : 

Do  not  ten  me,  as  a  good  man  did  to-day»  of  my  obligation  to  put 
aU  poor  men  in  good  situations.  Are  they  my  poor?  I  teU  thee, 
thoQ  foolish  philanthropist,  that  I  grudge  the  doUar,  the  dime,  the 
cent  I  give  to  such  men  as  do  not  belong  to  me  and  to  whom  I  do 
not  belong.  There  is  a  class  of  persons  to  whom  by  aU  spiritual 
affinity  I  am  bought  and  sold;  for  them  I  wiU  go  to  prison,  if  need 
be ;  but  your  misceUaneous  popular  charities ;  the  education  at  college 
of  fools;  the  building  of  meeting-houses  to  the  vain  end  to  which 
many  now  stand ;  alms  to  sots ;  and  the  thousand-fold  Relief  Societies ; 
' — though  I  confess  with  shame  I  sometimes  succumb  and  give  the 
dollar,  it  is  a  wicked  dollar  which  by-and-by  I  shaU  have  the  manhood 
to  withhold. 

To  the  habitual  reader  of  Emerson^  however,  statements  like 
these  appear  in  their  true  relation^  and  seem  both  plain  and 
natural. 

The  peculiar  structure  of  the  prose  is  such  that  what  is 
true  of  one  volume  is  true  of  all.    Probably  the  two  series 


The  Central  Period  235 

of  Essays  are  now  the  most  widely  read,  though  at  first  they 
attracted  little  attention.     Representative  Men  was  in  plan 

suggested  by  Heroes  and  Hero-Worship. 
Chmcterisdcs  Some  of  the  early  addresses  collected  in  the 
Pjpjjg^  volume   of  Mtscellames   are   more   coherent 

and  more  logical  in  structure  than  most  of 
the  other  works.  English  Traits  is  not  an  ordinary  traveller's 
book,  but  as  the  title  implies  is  a  discussion  of  the  characteris- 
tics of  a  people,  with  such  chapter  headings  as  "Race,^* 
"Ability,'^  "Manners,^'  ^Truth,'^  and  ^'Character.''  Emerson 
liked  the  English,  though  he  saw  their  weaknesses,  and  the 
book  shows  shrewd  and  kindly  insight.  The  posthumous  vol- 
ume Natural  History  of  the  Intellect  bears  a  title  which 
Emerson  had  long  had  in  mind  as  that  of  a  work  on  philoso- 
phy, and  which  he  gave  to  a  series  of  lectures  delivered  at 
Harvard  college;  but  most  of  the  material  of  these  lectures 
appears  in  his  other  writings,  and  but  two  or  three  of  them 
are  given  in  this  final  volume. 

The  poems  show  as  much  individuality  as  the  prose,  and 
have  probably  been  the  cause  of  more  discussion.    The  ideas 

that  they  present  are  the  same  as  those  of  the 
P^m"* '  essays,  though  with  more  stress  on  the  beauty 

of  nature.  In  form  they  tend  to  the  irregular 
and  occasionally  to  the  eccentric.  The  usual  verdict  of  the 
author's  early  contemporaries  was  that  of  the  **Fable  for 
Critics:'' 

Whose  prose  is  grand  verse,  while  his  verse,  the  Lord  knows, 
Is  some  of  it  pr — No,  'tis  not  even  prose! 

and  they  were  accused  of  utter  lack  of  rhythm,  melody,  and 
metre.  It  is  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  growing  accom- 
modation of  the  ear  to  flexibility  in  verse  that  these  criticisms 
seem  absurd  now.  Still  there  are  occasional  harsh  lines,  and 
false  rhymes,  many  of  which  are  not,  however,  displeasing 
to  those  who  enjoy  a  subtle  assonance.    Metrical  students  also 


236  Amerioan  Lttebatube 

say  with  truth  that  he  commanded  few  measures^  and  had  a 
fondness  for  the  somewhat  jigging  octosyllabics.  Another 
peculiarity  which  ofEends  some  readers  is  the  use  in  imagiaa- 
tive  passages  of  words  with  unpoetic  associations.  Emerson 
went  as  far  as  any  of  the  poets  who  believed  in  the  democracy 
of  words.  His  usage  has  sometimes  an  effectiveness  of  its 
own^  as  in  the  quatrain : 

He  planted  where  the  deluge  ploughed, 
His  hired  hands  were  wind  and  cloud; 
His  eyes  detect  the  Gods  concealed 
In  the  hummock  of  the  field. 

More  questionable  are  the  lines  on  the  pine-tree  in  '^ood- 
notes :'' 

My  garden  is  the  doyen  rock. 
And  my  manure  the  snow. 

And  to  the  unsympathetic  reader  the  poetic  approaches  the 
ridiculous  in  the  passage  from  '^The  Sphinx  :*' 

Erect  as  a  sunbeam 

Upspringeth  the  palm ; 
The  elephant  browses, 

Undaunted  and  calm. 

Despite  all  this  technical  criticism  the  poems  have  a 
wonderful  charm  for  many  readers.  Among  the  rough  verses 
are  passages  of  haunting  cadence  and  melody^  and  often  whole 
poems  where  an  admirer^  at  leasts  would  want  no  line  changed. 
True,  the  longer  poems  are  formless,  and  ^Ttay-Day^^  when 
republished  was  changed  as  "if  half  its  paragraphs  were  to 
be  taken  and  shuffled  like  a  pack  of  cards.'^  The  "Threnody,'* 
written  on  the  death  of  the  author's  son,  shows  too  intense 
personal  sorrow  to  compete  with  smoother  and  more  academic 
elegies.  The  long  poems  must  be  read,  like  the  essays,  in 
bits.  A  few  of  the  shorter  poems,  like  "The  Sphinx*'  and  "The 
Problem,"  were  long  held  up  to  ridicule  as  unintelligible, 
though  it  does  not  seem  that  they  should  offer  much  difficulty 


The  Central  Period  237 

to  one  who  knew  Emerson's  philosophy.  It  is  in  some  of  the 
briefer  poems,  like  the  ^^Concord  Hymn^'^  ^^Bhodora/'  and 
^^Days/'  and  even  more  epigrammatic  passages  and  fragments, 
that  his  power  is  seen.  The  bulk  of  these  is  very  small,  but 
their  value  lies  in  the  concentration  of  thought  and  perfection 
of  form. 

It  is  the  usual  fate  of  a  prose  essajrist  whose  ideas  arck 
more  valuable  than  his  form  to  be  neglected  after  his  message! 

is  understood  and  diffused ;  and  it  seems  prob- 
Fate  of  ^  g^jjjg  |.jjg^  ^}jig  fate  will  slowly  overtake  Emerson. 

PfQgg  So  far  as  the  sentence  and  the  apt  word  are  con- 

cerned his  manner  is  worthy  of  his  thought ;  and 
many  of  his  phrases  are  now  embedded  in  our  speech.  The  lack 
of  unity  and  logical  sequence,  however,  is  so  serious  a  blemish 
on  the  prose  writings  as  a  whole  that  it  would  be  rash  to  pre- 
dict their  permanency.  As  yet,  however,  the  Essays,  judged 
by  the  test  of  cheap  reprints  and  large  sales,  are  almost  un- 
diminished in  popularity. 

It  seems  possible,  though  it  is  too  soon  to  make  the  predic- 
tion, that  the  writings  of  Emerson  that  stand  best  chance  of 

permanency  are  the  better  poems.  These  won 
Sb?^m^^  ^     their  first  appreciation  from  persons  who  knew 

the  essays,  while  other  readers  maintained  that 
they  were  obscure.  With  the  wider  dissemination  of  ideal- 
istic views,  most  persons  have  the  clew  to  their  interpretation, 
and  few  of  the  verses  trouble  any  careful  reader  to-day.  The 
essays,  built  as  they  were  from  lyceum  lectures,  have  something 
of  the  provincial  about  them.  They  seem  calculated  for  the 
meridian  of  Boston  and  the  year  184 — .  The  poems  have,  as 
all  true  poetry  has,  more  of  a  universal  quality.  British 
readers,  for  whom  the  essays  were  not  especially  designed,' 
have  always  ranked  the  poems  relatively  high.  It  is  notice- 
able, too,  that  much  of  the  late  verse  of  minor  American  poets 
shows  a  legitimate  but  unmistakable  influence  of  Emerson. 


238  Akbbican  LrrsRAtuBB 

Whatever  the  ultimate  fate  of  Emerson's  writings,  he  will 
always  occupy  a  prominent  place  in  the  history  of  American 

thought.  At  the  most  critical  time  in  the 
^!!inPfltfv         intellectual  development  of  the  country  his 

influence  was  greater  than  that  of  any  other 
man.  He  suited  his  generation  and  his  surroundings.  Even 
to  the  present  time  he  takes  almost  unquestioned  rank  as  the 
most  powerful  and  stimulating  ethical  teacher  that  the  nation 
has  produced. 

The  second  of  the  transcendentalists  in  literary  importance 
was  Henry  David  Thoreau  (1817-1862).     He  was  horn  at 

Concord,  Massachusetts,  where  his  father  had 
^to^David       failed  in  trade  and  become  a  maker  of  lead 

pencils.    Though  his  family  was  not  well-to-do, 

he  managed,  partly  through  the  aid  of  scholarships  and  his 

own  labors,  to  complete  a  course  at  Harvard.    He  seems  to 

have  been  a  fair  student,  though  he  was  not  always  tractable, 

and  made  a  not  wholly  favorable  impression  on  the  faculty. 

After  his  graduation  he  supported  himself  by  surveying  and 

such  odd  jobs  as  whitewashing,  and  by  the  slight  returns  from 

lecturing  and  writing.    His  failure  to  adopt  a  profession  came 

not  from  laziness,  but  from  the  fact  that  he  had  no  dependents 

and  few  physical  wants,  and  that  he  wished  to  be  independent. 

;  His  acquaintance  with  Emerson  began  about  the  time  of  his 

;  graduation  from  Harvard  in  1837,  and  from  1841  to  1843 

5  he  was  a  member  of  Emerson's  household.    In  1845  he  built 

\  a  hut  on  the  shore  of  Walden  Pond,  near  Concord,  and  lived 

I  there  alone  for  two  or  three  years.    At  various  times  he  took 

trips  through  New  England  by  boat  and  on  foot,  and  these 

furnished  material  for  much  of  his  writing.    During  his  lif e- 

^time  he  published  two  volumes,  A  Weeh  on  the  Cgncprdqnd 

Merrimac  Bivers,  and  Wdlden,  or  Life  in  the  Woods.    He  de-  / 

,  livered  occasional  lectures,  and  contributed  a  number  of  short 

\  essays  to  the  '^DiaP'  and  other  magazines.    Since  his  death 


i> 


The  Central  Period  239 

these  essays^  and  other  writings  left  unpublished^  have  been 
issued  in  several  volumes. 

None  of  the  biographies  of  Thoreau  is  satisfactory,  and  it 
is  hard  to  arrive  at  a  sure  estimate  of  his  personality.    He 

had  a  strain  of  eccentricity,  probably  derived 
"S^^         from  his  mother's  family,  but  his  peculiarities 

seem  to  have  been  misunderstood  and  their 
importance  overrated.  His  experiment  in  the  simple  life 
at  Walden  has  caused  him  to  be  styled  a  hermit  and  a  recluse, 
though  he  went  to  the  village  daily,  and  always  welcomed  in- 
tercourse with  friends.  One-sided  and  paradoxical  statements 
which. he  loved  to  make  for  their  startling  effect  earned  for 
him  the  reputation  of  being  stoical  and  misanthropic,  and  of 
"not  believing  in  civilization.*'  His  refusal  to  pay  taxes  to 
a  government  that  he  thought  unjust  was  a  procedure  advo- 
cated by  many  other  abolitionists.  Though  he  had  many  pe- 
culiarities, he  was  a  man  of  strong  human  emotions,  which  nt 
times  he  liked  to  conceal.  He  had  a  great  fondness  for  nature, 
of  which  he  was  an  almost  abnormally  keen  observer.  He 
took  especial  delight  in  seeing  what  others  left  unnoticed  in 
things  about  him.  He  says,  'T  omit  the  xinusual  .  .  . 
and  describe  the  common.  This  has  the  greatest  charm,  and 
is  the  true  theme  of  poetry.**  It  was  with  the  eye  of  a  poet 
that  he  usually  looked  at  nature,  though  he  turned  his  powers 
to  account  in  making  some  natural  history  collections  for 
Agassiz.  His  love  of  nature  did  not,  however,  interfere  with 
his  interest  in  books.  He  was  a  wide  reader,  of  catholic  taste, 
and  an  indefatigable  student  when  he  once  began  a  subject. 
He  knew  the  Greek  poets  thoroughly  and  made  careful  trans- 
lations from  some  of  them.  Like  many  other  transcendental- 
ists  he  dabbled  in  the  Oriental  writers.  He  was  widely  read 
in  English  literature,  not  only  in  the  classics,  but  in  out-of- 
the-way  writers,  like  the  minor  Elizabethan  dramatists  and 
the  lesser  poets  of  the  seventeenth  century.    His  biographer 


240  AlCEBIOAN  LlTERATUBE 

computes  that  there  are  quotations  from  a  hundred  authors 
in  one  of  his  books  alone;  and  most  of  these  fit  the  context 
naturally,  not  as  if  introduced  to  show  recently  acquired  eru- 
dition. His  criticisms,  as  of  Chaucer  in  the  Week  on  the 
Concord  and  Merrimac  Rivers,  show  shrewd  appreciation  of 
literary  merit.  His  reading  extended  even  to  town  histories 
and  similar  sources  of  information,  from  which  he  gathered 
interesting  bits  of  fact.  He  was  strongly  influenced  by  the 
transcendental  ideas,  and  as  he  lacked  Emerson^s  sanity  and 
balance  he  sometimes  went  astray.  He  was,  however,  prob- 
ably aware  of  the  full  absurdity  of  his  most  startling 
expressions. 

The  character  of  Thoreau's  writings  is  indicated  by  the 
titles  of  the  two  books  published  during  his  lifetime,  and  by 

those  given  to  some  of  the  posthumous  collec- 
SaM***  *  tions — Excursions,  The  Maine  Woods^  Oapg 

Cod.  A  Yankee  in. Canada,  etc.  These  are 
mostly  descriptions  of  nature,  combined  with  discussions  of  the 
author's  philosophy  of  life.  The  nature  descriptions  are 
characterized  by  clearness,  picturesqueness,  quiet  humor,  and 
a  rare  individual  quality.  At  times,  however,  they  are  marred 
by  a  forced  pun  or  other  consciously  startling  expression. 
This  tendency  to  be  startling  is  still  more  prominent  in  the 
frequent  bits  of  moralizing.  It  is  the  quotation  of  isolated 
sayings  from  these  passages  that  has  given  Thoreau  the  repu- 
tation of  being  more  erratic  than  he  is.  In  Walden,  the  best 
of  his  works,  the  reader  is  likely  to  be  struck  first  by  the 
oddity  of  a  passage  like  the  following : 

None  is  so  poor  that  he  need  sit  on  a  pumpkin.  That  is  shiftless- 
ness.  There  is  plenty  of  such  chairs  as  I  like  best  in  the  viUage 
garrets  to  be  had  for  taking  them  away.  Furniture!  Thank  God, 
I  can  sit  and  I  can  stand  without  the  aid  of  a  furniture  warehouse. 
What  man  but  a  philosopher  would  not  be  ashamed  to  see  his  furni- 
ture packed  in  a  cart  and  going  up  country  exposed  to  the  light  of 
heaven  and  the  eyes  of  men,  a  beggarly  account  of  empty  boxes.    That 


The  Central  Period  241 

is  Spanlding's  furniture.  I  could  never  tell  from  inspecting  such 
a  load  whether  it  belonged  to  a  so-called  rich  man  or  a  poor  one. 
Indeed,  the  more  you  have  of  such  things  the  poorer  you  are. 

It  is  only  after  a  re-reading,  perhaps  after  reading  aloud,  that 
one  feels  the  full  charm  of  a  chapter  like  that  on  ^^Sounds : 


5> 


Sometimes,  on  Sundays,  I  heard  the  bells,  the  Lincoln,  Acton, 
Bedford,  or  Concord  bell,  when  the  wind  was  favorable,  a  faint, 
sweet,  and  as  it  were,  natural  melody,  worth  importing  into  the 
wilderness.  At  a  sufficient  distance  over  the  woods  this  sound  acquires 
a  certain  vibratory  hum,  as  if  the  pine  needles  in  the  horizon  were 
the  strings  of  a  harp  which  it  swept.  All  sound  heard  at  the  greatest 
possible  distance  produces  one  and  the  same  effect,  a  vibration  of  the 
universal  lyre,  just  as  the  intervening  atmosphere  makes  a  distant 
lidge  of  earth  interesting  to  our  eyes  by  the  azure  tint  it  imparts  to 
it.  There  came  to  me  in  this  case  a  melody  which  the  air  had  strained, 
and  which  had  conversed  with  every  leaf  and  needle  of  the  wood,  that 
portion  of  the  sound  which  the  elements  had  taken  up  and  modulated 
and  echoed  from  vale  to  vale. 

Thoreau's  verse  was  mostly  written  while  he  was  young, 
though  a  few  hits  are  scattered  through  his  later  prose.    It 

has  been  enthusiastically  praised  by  admirers 
^^^'^  *  of  the  author's  philosophy,  and  contains  some 

fine  couplets  and  quatrains;  but  it  is  rarely 
well  sustained,  and  the  writer's  taste  is  not  sure.  Sometimes 
he  strikes  out  a  stanza  like  the  following,  in  which  he  ante- 
dates a  well-known  poem  of  Matthew  Arnold : 

The  smothered  streams  of  love,  which  flow 
More  bright  than  Phlegethon,  more  low, 
Island  us  ever,  like  the  sea. 
In  an  Atlantic  mystery. 

But  in  close  juxtaposition  to  this  are  lines  like  those  on  the 
boatbuilders  heard  across  the  river: 

The  waves  slowly  beat 
Just  to  keep  the  noon  sweet, 
And  no  sound  is  floated  o'er, 
Save  the  smHet  on  shore, 
Which  echoing  on  high. 
Seems  a-calking  the  sky. 


242  AmEBIOAN  LrCERATUBB 

In  his  lifetime  Thoreau  was  looked  upon  as  an  imitator  of 
Emerson;  of  late  years  he  has  seemed  remarkable  for  his 
Th        »  TtmsA  individuality.     His  phibsophy  was  no  doubt 

greatly  influenced  by  Emerson^  but  his  literary 

style  seems  to  have  suffered  more  from  occasional  Garlylisms 

than  from  any  unfortunate  indebtedness  to  his  friend  and 

(neighbor.     He  is  one  of  the  few  American  writers  whose 

!  fame  has  steadily  increased.     His  contemporaries  refused  to 

-take  him  seriously^  or  to  buy  his  books.    Later  generations 

have  been  glad  to  collect  and  publish  all  his  available  writings^ 

and  have  come  to  esteem  him  for  his  delicate  and  sympathetic 

portrayals  of  nature  and  for  his  pointed^  if  impractical^ 

comments  on  life.    Though  his  eccentricities  prevent  him  from 

ranking  with  the  greatest  American  essayists^  he  has  a  unique 

charm  for  many  readers,  and  his  place  in  American  literature 

seems  secure. 

Amos  Bronson  Alcott  (1799-1888),  the  best  known  of  the 
more  erratic  idealists,  was  the  son  of  a  Connecticut  farmer. 

His  family  name  was  Alcox,  and  he  made  the 
J^oABronsoa     change  to  Alcott  on  reaching  manhood.    He 

received  a  slight  education  in  the  country 
schools  and  from  the  parish  minister,  but  by  the  time  he  was 
fifteen  years  of  age  he  was  working  in  a  clock  factory.  After 
an  unsuccessful  experience  as  peddler  in  New  York,  Massa- 
chusetts, and  the  South  he  turned  to  school  teaching.  His 
first  venture  was  at  Cheshire,  where  he  introduced  so  many 
innovations  in  methods  of  instruction  and  discipline  that  he 
was  forced  to  leave.  Afterward  he  taught  in  various  schools, 
!  the  most  important  of  which  was  in  Boston.  Here  a  number 
'.  of  prominent  families  placed  their  children  under  his  instruc- 
tion, and  his  attempts  at  educational  reform  attracted  consid- 
erable attention.  He  interpreted  literally  the  ideas  expressed 
in  Wordsworth's  '^Ode  on  Intimations  of  Immortality,'*  and 
spent  much  time  in  discussing  the  eternal  verities  with  the 


The  Central  Period  243 

infants  committed  to  his  charge.  Some  of  these  discussions 
were  published  as  Conversations  with  Children  on  the  Gospels  I 
in  1836.  His  patrons  were  startled  to  learn  from  this  book 
that  he  had  been  conversing  with  his  pupils  on  the  physical 
phenomena  of  birth^  and  many  of  them  withdrew  their  chil- 
dren. The  end  of  the  school  came  a  little  later  when  he 
alienated  his  remaining  supporters  by  admitting  a  colored 
pupil. 

By  this  time  Alcott  was  a  transcendentalist  of  the  mystic 
sort^  interested  in  temperance^  women's  rights^  dress  reform^ 

dietetics^  the  water  cure,  and  all  the  other  fads 

•cnodra^^m      ^^®^  which  New  England  was  then  agitated. 

He  aided  in  founding  the  Symposium,  which 
included  most  of  the  leading  devotees  of  the  new  philosophy. 
He  also  began  to  hold  ''conversations'*  at  which,  for  a  sub- 
stantial fee,  he  discussed  the  nature  of  things.  In  1837  he 
had  completed  a  rhapsodical  work  entitled  Psyche,  or  the  \ 
Breath  of  Childhood,  but  it  was  never  published.  A  few 
years  later  he  removed  to  Concord  and  endeavored  to  make 
a  living  by  day  labor  among  his  neighbors.  The  demands 
made  upon  his  time  by  reform  conventions  and  the  visits 
of  other  enthusiasts  were,  however,  so  great  that  his  family 
had  but  precarious  support.  His  theories  had  already 
gained  some  following  among  the  more  erratic  liberals  abroad, 
and  in  1842  Emerson  and  other  friends  subscribed  money  to 
send  him  to  England.  Here  he  found  some  congenial  spirits, 
but  failed  to  make  a  favorable  impression  on  Carlyle.  When 
he  returned  he  brought  with  him  two  Englishmen,  Lane  and  / 
Wright,  who  were  looking  for  a  spot  ''whereon  the  new  Eden 
may  be  planted.'*  They  secured  a  farm  which  they  rechris- 
tened  "Pruitlands,^'  and  on  which  they  endeavored  to  found  a 
community  which  should  be  less  sordid  than  that  at  Brook 
Farm.  No  animal  products  were  to  be  eaten,  and  the  soil  was 
not  to  be  insulted  by  the  admixture  of  manures  of  animal 


244  Ahsbioan  Lttbratubb 

origin.  The  rights  of  worms  and  insects  were  to  be  respected. 
No  vegetables  were  to  be  eaten  which,  like  the  potato,  grew 
downward  instead  of  aspiring.  After  the  failure  of  this 
experiment  the  Alcott  family  endured  various  vicissitudes 
until  1857,  when  they  again  settled  at  Concord.  After  the 
eldest  daughter,  Louisa,  became  able  to  support  the  family 
with  her  pen  her  father  gave  all  his  time  to  writing  and  philo- 
sophical speculation.  In  1879  he  was  instrumental  in  found- 
ing the  Concord  School  of  Philosophy,  of  which  he  continued 
as  dean  until  his  death.  In  the  winter  of  1880-81  he  made 
an  extended  trip  in  the  West  giving  conversations.  At  this 
time  he  was  returning  to  something  approaching  orthodoxy 
in  religious  belief.  In  1882  he  suffered  a  paralytic  stroke, 
after  which  he  wrote  nothing. 

Besides  the  writings  already  mentioned  Alcott  published  in 
the  "DiaP  his  ^^Orphic  Sayings,^^  a  series  of  sententious  ob- 
servations which  were  often  unintelligible,  and 
Wr^in  which  did  as  much  as  any  one  thing  to  expose 

transcendentalists  to  ridicule.  Between  1868 
and  his  death  he  issued  several  volumes — Tablets,  Concord 
Days,  and  Tahle  Talk  in  prose,  and  Sonnets  and  Canzonets 
and  New  Connecticut  in  verse.  Some  of  his  prose  essays,  like 
those  on  lighter  topics  in  Concord  Days,  have  a  pleasant 
literary  flavor.  Wherever  he  deals  with  philosophical  questions 
he  shows  an  abnormal  mysticism  in  thought,  and  a  tendency 
to  be  "orphic*^  in  form.  New  Connecticut  is  autobiography 
in  jingling  quatrains.  Sonnets  and  Canzonets,  a  series  part 
of  which  tells  the  story  of  his  love  and  marriage  after  the 
manner  of  an  Elizabethan  sonnet  cycle,  is  in  smooth  conven- 
tional form,  but  there  is  evidence  that  his  lines  were  retouched 
by  his  friends.  In  all  his  writings  he  shows  the  sense  of  his 
own  importance  which  inspired  his  question  to  Emerson: 
"You  write  on  the  genius  of  Plato,  of  Pythagoras,  of  Jesus; 
why  do  you  not  write  of  me?'* 


The  Central  Period  245 

Alcotf s  friends,  among  whom  were  most  of  the  greater 
transcendentalists,  found  something  in  the  man  which  they 

liked,  and  much  in  his  thought  which  they 
considered  sugjgestive.  Some  of  his  peda- 
gogical notions  foreshadow  theories  since  generally  accepted. 
It  is  probable  that  he  does  not  appear  at  his  best  in  his  writ- 
ings, and  that  he  does  not  now  have  full  justice  done  him. 
But  it  seems  to  be  his  fate  to  be  remembered  as  an  awful 
example  of  the  extremes  to  which  transcendentalists  could  go. 

Margaret  Fuller  (1810-1850)^  the  most  famous  woman  of 

the  transcendental  movement,  was  bom  in  Cambridgeport, 

m*         .«.«      Massachusetts.     Her  father,  a  somewhat  er- 
aLugsitt  Fuller 

ratic    lawyer   and   politician,   took   personal 

charge  of  her  education,  and  put  her  through  a  process  of 
intellectual  forcing  which  she  resented  in  later  years.  She 
began  the  study  of  Latin  at  six  years  of  age,  and  by  the  time 
that  she  was  bl  young  woman  was  well  versed  in  Latin,  Ger- 
man, French,  and  Italian,  and  knew  some  Greek.  After  her 
father's  death  she  voluntarily  assumed  much  of  the  responsi- 
bility for  the  care,  support,  and  education  of  her  younger 
brothers  and  sisters.  She  taught  in  Alcotfs  famous  school  { 
in  Boston,  and  in  Providence,  Ehode  Island,  and  she  con-l 
ducted  with  great  success  conversations  for  classes  of  women 
in  Boston.  From  1840  to  1842  she  edited  the  'TDial.''  In 
1844  she  became  a  member  of  the  editorial  staff  of  the  *TTew 
York  Tribune,^'  and  lived  for  a  time  in  the  family  of  Horace 
Greeley.  While  in  New  York  she  visited  many  of  the  chari- 
table and  penal  institutions,  and  was  greatly  interested  in 
sociological  questions,  particularly  those  relating  to  women. 
Her  contributions  to  the  "Tribune'^  were  artistic,  dramatic, 
and  literary  criticisms,  and  miscellaneous  articles.  In  1846 
she  went  abroad  and  visited  England,  France,  and  Italy.  In 
England  she  met  most  of  the  leading  men  of  letters,  and  in 
Paris  formed  the  acquaintance  of  George  Sand.    She  was  in 


246  AlCEBIOAK  LrnSRATUBS 

Italy  during  the  troubles  of  1848-9^  and  was  the  friend  and 
confidante  of  Mazzini.  whom  she  had  met  in  London.  Late  in 
1847  she  was  secretly  married  to  the  Count  Qssoli,  a  young 
Italian  gentleman  who  had  forsaken  his  family  principles  and 
become  a  liberal.  The  next  summer  she  spent  in  the  moun- 
tains of  Abruzzi,  where  her  son  was  bom.  As  her  marriage 
was  still  a  secret^  she  left  the  child  with  a  nurse  and  returned 
to  Some.  Ihiring  the  siege  of  1849  she  attended  the  wounded 
in  one  of  the  hospitals.  After  the  victory  of  the  French  she 
went  with  her  husband  and  child  to  Florence,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1860  the  family  sailed  from  Leghorn  for  New  York. 
The  vessel  was  a  small  merchant  brig,  carrying  but  two  other 
passengers.  After  an  unfortunate  voyage,  during  which  the 
captain  died  and  the  child  was  ill  with  the  small-pox,  the  ves- 
sel was  wrecked  off  Fire  Island,  New  York,  and  the  entire 
family  was  drowned. 

An  attempt  to  understand  Margaret  Fuller's  personality 
leads  to  great  perplexity.    To  the  unsympathetic  world  which 

saw  her  at  a  distance  she  was  a  type  of  the 

PorgQuijity  whom  intellectual  ambition  and  an  extraordi- 

nary egotism  had  crowded  out  all  other  quali- 
ties. This  estimate  might  be  supported  by  many  citations 
from  her  journals,  letters,  and  writings  intended  for  publica- 
tion. On  the  other  hand,  her  friends  saw  in  her  many  admir- 
able womanly  qualities.  A  series  of  love-letters  written  in 
1846-6  to.  James  Nathan,  a  Jewish  commission  merchant  of 
New  York,  while  they  tempt  severe  comment  on  the  recipient 
who  made  them  public,  tell  the  story  of  an  intense  romance, 
hardly  to  be  expected  of  an  abnormally  intellectual  blue-stock- 
ing of  thirty-five.  In  the  end,  however,  she  says  in  her 
journal  :/T!  shall  write  a  sketch  of  it  and  turn  the  whole  to 
account  in  a  literary  way,  since  the  affections  and  ideal  hopes 
are  so  unproductive.'^    Her  secret  marriage  on  short  acquaint- 


The  Cbnteal  Pbbiod  247 

ance  to  a  man  who  was  much  her  junior^  and  who  according  to 
her  own  frank  statement  was  not  her  intellectual  equals  was 
surprising,  though  it  proved  to  be  ideally  happy.  Her  refusal 
in  the  final  crisis  of  her  life  to  be  saved  by  the  only  available 
means  because  it  involved  separation  of  the  family  during  the 
process  of  rescue  is  interpreted  by  some  as  an  illustration  of 
self-will,  and  by  others  as  an  instance  of  wifely  and  maternal 
devotion.  While  no  theory  of  her  personality  will  explain  all 
the  facts  that  are  recorded  of  her,  the  most  plausible  seems 
to  be  that  she  was  a  woman  of  great  mental  alertness  and  ^^ 
strongly  passionate  nature,  influenced  by  all  the  forces  of 
transcendental  New  England.  An  unattractive  personal  ap-  I 
pearance,  a  lack  of  tact,  and  a  blunt  and  irritating  manner  in-  i 
herited  from  her  father  repelled  most  persons  at  first  sights  \ 
while  she  fascinated  those  who  came  within  the  range  of  her 
attraction.  Her  long  friendship  with  Emerson  is  the  most 
important  of  her  intimacies.  The  world  failed  to  satisfy 
either  her  intellectual  or  her  emotional  longings.  Prom  one 
disappointment  came  her  mysticism,  her  occasional  indulgence 
in  the  satiric  mood,  and  her  expressions  of  ridiculous  or  re- 
pelling egotism;  from  the  other  came  the  abandon  shown  in 
her  letters  to  James  Nathan,  and  perhaps  in  her  marriage. 
Ill  health  and  constant  introspection  led  to  many  of  her  in- 
consistencies and  sudden  changes  of  mood. 

It  is  as  an  illustration  of  the  effect  of  transcendentalism  on 
such  a  woman  that  the  career  of  Margaret  Fuller  is  chiefly 

important.  Both  she  and  her  friends  agreed 
y^J^^  that  she  talked  much  better  than  she  wrote. 

Writings  H®^  ^^^*  volume.  Summer  on  the  Lakes,  pub-  \ 

lished  in  1843,  was  based  on  a  Western  excur- 
sion, supplemented  by  much  hard  labor  in  the  library  of  Har- 
vard college.  Even  since  the  editor  of  her  collected  works 
has  omitted  some  of  the  longer  digressions  it  is  a  disjointed 
and  ill-proportioned  work.    Indeed,  she  seems  always  to  have 


248  AlCEBIOAN  LiTERATUlCB 

lacked  a  sense  of  literary  form.  Her  pamphlet^  Woman  in  the 
I  Nineteenth  Century,  expanded  from  an  article  in  the  ^^Dial/' 
was  published  in  1844.  It  was  long  regarded  as  one  of 
the  ablest  presentations  of  the  claims  of  woman,  but  is  now 
interesting  chiefly  as  an  indication  of  the  way  in  which  the 
important  questions  regarding  woman's  place  in  society  have 
changed.  Just  before  she  went  abroad  in  1846  she  gathered 
together  two  volumes  of  her  fugitive  writings  under  the  title 
of  Papers  on  Literature  and  Art.  The  manuscript  of  a  work 
on  the  Italian  Republic,  the  fruit  of  her  best  labors  abroad, 
was  lost  at  the  time  of  her  death.  In  1855-6  her  brother 
edited  four  volumes  of  her  collected  works,  which  include, 
besides  the  writings  already  mentioned,  other  papers  from 
periodicals,  and  from  manuscripts,  a  few  original  poems,  and 
an  early  metrical  translation  of  Goethe's  ''Tasso.'*  Her  verse 
is  unsuccessful.  Her  prose  is  on  a  variety  of  subjects.  She 
enjoyed  nature,  and  wrote  of  it,  though  Emerson  is  right  in 
saying  that  her  "raptures''  are  somewhat  ^'sickly  and  super- 
ficial." She  had  much  to  say  of  art,  to  which  she  was  perhaps 
drawn  by  her  study  of  Goethe,  but  her  judgments  are  erratic. 
The  same  is  true  in  a  lesser  degree  of  her  literary  criticism. 
Many  of  her  writings  are  significant  as  indications  of  the 
transcendental  view  of  things,  but  few  of  them  deserve  preser- 
vation for  either  content  or  manner.  Much  more  interesting 
is  the  memoir  in  which  Emerson,  Channing,  and  James  Free- 
man Clarke  join  their  reminiscences  ]and  interpretations  of 
her  life  and  work. 

Theodore  Parker  (1810-18601  was  the  most  active  practi- 
cal  reformer  among  the  transcendentalists.    His  father  was 

unable  to  send  him  to  college,  but  he  took  the 
J^2?"  entrance  examinations  at  Harvard  and  studied 

by  himself  for  four  years,  coming  up  from  his 
home  in  Lexington,  Massachusetts,  to  pass  the  examinations 
with  each  class.    As  he  had  not  been  in  residence  and  had 


The  Central  Period  249 

paid  no  tuition,  he  did  not  receive  his  bachelor's  degree.  After 
completing  a  course  at  the  Harvard  Divinity  school  J^aJbfifiaEae. 
minister  of  the  Unitarian  church  at  West  Eoxbury,  Massa- 
chusetts.  His  radicalism  was  soon  apparent  and  older  min- 
isters of  his  denomination  shunned  him.  In  1845  he  began 
to  jreach  in  Boston,  where  he  continued  until  just  before  his  \ 
death.  Though  denied  fellowship  by  other  Unitarian  churches 
he  attracted  a  large  congregation,  and  became  known  as  a 
great  pulpit  orator  and  lyceum  lecturer.  He  was  active  in  all 
reforms,  but  especially  in  the  anti-slavery  movement.  He 
aided  fugitive  slaves,  incited  mobs  to  rescue  negroes  from  the 
hands  of  the  authorities,  secured  arms  to  send  to  Kansas,  and 
was  privy  to  part,  at  least,  of  John  Brown's  plans  for  his 
Virginia  campaign.  His  writings  were  numerous.  He  con- 
tributed several  papers  to  the  "Dial,''  and,  beginning  in  1849, 
conducted  for  three  years  the  *T^assachusetts  Quarterly  Be- 
view."  His  complete  works,  published  in  Boston  and  London 
after  his  death,  include  sermons,  lectures,  and  suggestive 
articles  on  many  themes. 

Parker  was  a  persistent  and  energetic  student,  and  he  had 
remarkable  powers  of  acquisition.     He  knew  something  of 

twenty  different  languages,  and  he  had  made 

SuUnments        ®^^^  investigations  in  most  departments  of 

knowledge,  particularly  those  relating  to  phi- 
losophy. He  had  the  power  which  belongs  to  a  self-educated 
man  with  a  vast  store  of  facts  which  he  can  command  and  use 
at  will.  The  calm  patience  of  the  scholar  or  the  higher  tastes 
of  the  man  of  culture  he  did  not  have.  He  wrote  that  he 
would  rather  have  been  a  Franklin  than  a  Michael  Angelo. 
His  sense  of  literature  as  well  as  of  other  arts  was  uncertain. 
His  own  works,  though  they  are  always  forcible  and  show  the 
rare  power  of  introducing  numerous  facts  and  allusions  with- 
out the  appearance  of  pedantry,  are  often  slightly  bombastic, 
and  lack  reserve  and  sustained  dignity  of  tone. 


250  Aherioan  Litbratubb 

UnitarianiBm  changed  rapidly  in  Parker's  lifetime^  and 
when  he  died  those  who  had  earlier  denied  him  fellowship  were 
,  ^^  ready  to  build  his  tomb  as  that  of  a  prophet. 
His  biography  has  several  times  been  written, 
his  works  are  still  published,  and  the  centenary  of  his  birth 
was  widely  observed.  He  was  an  attractive  and  forceful  man, 
able  and  sincere,  and  he  contributed  something  to  the  develop- 
ment of  religious  thought.  In  American  letters  he  was  a 
striking  and  picturesque  rather  than  an  important  figure. 

George  Eipley  (1802-1880)  was  bom  in  Greenfield,  Massa- 
chusetts, was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1823,  and  after  com- 
Gttor    Pi  1         pleting   his    divinity   course    became    pastor 

of  a  newly  organized  Unitarian  church  in  Bos- 
ton. He  was  a  thorough  student,  and  soon  came  to  be  re- 
garded as  one  of  the  scholars  of  the  transcendental  movement. 
His  devotion  to  the  new  ideas  was  not  wholly  approved  by  his 
church,  and  he  resigned  his  pastorate  to  become  the  leader  in 
the  Brook  Farm  Association.  In  all  his  work  he  was  greatly 
assisted  by  his  wife,  who  was  a  woman  of  remarkable  person- 
ality. Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Eipley  devoted  themselves  with 
equal  earnestness  to  the  speculative  and  the  practical  questions 
involved  in  the  new  scheme.  Both  did  their  share  of  manual 
labor  and  taught  in  the  school.  Eipley's  devotion  to  the 
community  continued  to  the  last,  and  when  failure  came  he 
assumed  the  debts  that  remained,  and  sold  his  extensive 
private  library  to  meet  them.  For  a  time  he  conducted  at 
New  York  the  ^'Harbinger/'  which  had  been  founded  by  the 
Brook  Farm  community  as  an  organ  of  Fourierism.  When 
this  failed  Horace  Greeley,  who  had  been  interested  in  Brook 
\Farm,  made  him  literary  editor  of  the  "New  York  Tribune,'* 
la  position  that  he  held  to  his  death.  He  also  did  much  mis- 
cellaneous writing  and  with  C.  A.  Dana  edited  the  New 
American  Cyclopedia, 

Eipley  is  important  for  his  connection  with  Brook  Farxa 


The  Central  Period  251 

and  kindred  movements,  and  for  his  later  work  as  literary 
critic  on  the  ''New  York  Tribune/'  When  he  accepted  his 
Rini  v»  Rflnk      Position  on  the  "Tribune'^  no  daily  newspaper 

in  the  country  gave  a  scholarly  and  dignified 
discussion  of  literary  matters.  Though  he  was  not  a  great 
critic,  his  taste  was  sound,  his  reading  wide,  and  his  scholar- 
ship thorough,  and  he  made  his  department  a  model  for  other 
journals.  He  is,  however,  to  be  remembered  for  his  influence, 
not  for  his  achievements.  A  projected  collection  of  his  essays 
and  reviews  was  never  published  and  only  the  curious  student 
is  likely  to  read  his  writings  to-day. 

Among  the  minor  poets  of  transcendentalism  were  jDhristo- 
pher  P.  Cranch,  Jones  Very,  and  William  Ellery  Channing. 

Cranch  (1813-1892)  was  bom  in  Virginia, 
f^^ii^**^  was  graduated  from  Harvard,  and  during  the 
Channing  early  years  of  the  transcendental  movement 

was  a  clergyman.  Later  he  withdrew  from  the 
ministry,  studied  art  in  Italy  and  France,  lived  for  a  time  in 
New  York,  and  returned  to  Cambridge,  where  he  died  in 
1892.  His  poems  of  the  transcendental  period  were  mostly 
short  lyrics,  of  which  the  best  is  the  "Stanzas'*  published  in 
the  'rOial,*'  beginning: 

Thought  is  deeper  than  all  speech. 
Feeling  deeper  than  all  thought. 

Later  he  published  a  translation  of  Virgil,  some  tales  for 
children,  and  other  writings.  Jones  Very  (1813-1880)  was 
bom  in  Salem  and  after  graduation  from  Harvard  was  tutor 
in  that  institution.  He  became  afflicted,  however,  with  a  re- 
ligious monomania  that  interfered  with  his  career.  Though 
licensed  to  preach  he  never  had  a  congregation,  and  after 
the  transcendental  excitement  was  over  lived  quietly  until  his 
death  in  1880.  The  seven  hundred  poems  in  his  collected 
works  are  all  short,  many  of  them  being  sonnets,  and  thQ  TOflr 


252  Amebigan  Lttebatubb 

jority  of  them  express  his  idealistic  beliefs.  They  are  smooth, 
and  delicate  in  manner,  and  some  of  them  still  hold  their 
places  in  the  anthologies;  but  the  author  is  more  likely  to  be 
remembered  as  another  erratic  member  of  Emerson^s  circle 
than  as  a  poet.  William  EUery  Charminpf  (1818-1901^^  fre- 
quently known  as  Ellery  Channing  to  distinguish  him  from 
his  more  eminent  uncle  of  the  same  name,  was  a  native  of 
Boston.  He  attended  Harvard  college  for  a  time,  went  west 
for  two  or  three  years,  and  engaged  in  editorial  work  in  New 
York  and  elsewhere.  His  wife  was  a  sister  of  Margaret  Fuller, 
Rnd  he  was  intimate  with  Thoreau,  whose  biography  he  wrote. 
His  friends  felt  that  he  had  the  temperament  and  the  insight 
of  a  true  poet;  and  some  of  his  verses  strike  a  purer  note  than 
those  of  Cranch  or  Very,  though  they  are  usually  not  well 
sustained. 

Among  the  early  transcendentalists  who  afterward  became 
practical  men  of  aflEairs  werejjt^^eorge  William  Curtis  (ISIt 

1892)  and  Charles  A.  Dana  (13W-l?9IJl. 
Both  were  contributors  to  the  'TDial^*  and  resi- 
dents at  Brook  Farm,  and  after  the  failure  of  that  experiment 
both  removed  to  New  York  and  engaged  in  editorial  work. 
The  former  will  be  considered  among  the  New  York  writers. 
Dana's  later  work,  which  included  many  years  of  editorial 
writing  for  the  New  York  "Tribune^*  and  the  "Sun,**  and  the 
editing  with  Bipley  of  the  "Sew  American  Cyclopmdia,  is  less 
important.  His  early  verses  and  some  prose  work  in  the 
"Dial**  and  the  "Harbinger**  show  an  idealism  and  aspiration 
not  to  be  suspected  from  his  later  career. 

Orestes  A.  Brownson(  1803-1876),  who  during  his  life- 
time dallied  with  most  of  the  faiths,  religious  and  political, 
known  in  America,  was  a  transcendentalist  during  the  central 
years  of  the  movement.  When  a  young  man  he  joined  the 
Presbyterian  church,  but  a  few  years  later  he  was  a  Uni- 
versalist  minister  and  editor  of  a  Universalist  journal.    He 


The  Central  Period  253 

next  transferred  his  allegiance  to  the  Unitarians.  After 
serving  some  time  in  the  ministry  of  that  denomination  he 

became  a  transcendentalist^  and  from  1836 
JJ^  to  1843  was  pastor  of  the  Society  for  Christian 

Writen  Union  and  Progress  in  Boston,     Prom  1841 

until  his  death  he  was  a  communicant  of  the 
Boman  Catholic  Church,  though  his  orthodoxy  was  often 
questioned  by  the  American  Catholic  clergy.  He  was  active 
in  politics,  much  of  the  time  as  a  member  of  the  Democratic 
party,  but  often  independent.  In  1838  he  founded  the 
''Boston  Quarterly  Review;*'  and  after  he  became  a  Catholic 
he  edited  "Brownson*s  Quarterly  Review.*'  Besides  his  maga- 
zine and  review  articles  he  published  Charles  Elwood,  or  The 
Infidel  Converted,  a  novel,  in  1840,  The  Spirit-Rapper^  an 
Autobiography,  in  1864,  and  several  other  works  on  religion, 
philosophy,  and  questions  of  the  day.  Of  these  Charles  El- 
wood is  the  only  one  of  importance  in  which  he  takes  the 
transcendental  point  of  view.  He  was  an  occasional  attendant 
at  the  meetings  of  the  Symposium,  and  the  contributors  to 
the  ''Boston  Quarterly  Review*'  were  in  some  cases  the  same  as 
those  of  the  "Dial.**  Brownson  was  a  bom  controversialist, 
and  no  matter  what  his  position  might  be  at  the  time,  he  sup- 
ported it  with  cleverness  and  some  ability.  His  frequent 
changes  of  party  and  church  did  much  to  discredit  him,  and 
his  ideas  were  often  not  taken  seriously.  His  style  was  well 
adapted  to  temporary  controversy,  but  it  was  too  flippant  and 
uncertain  in  manner  to  ensure  a  lasting  reputation  for  the 
author.  James  Freeman  Clarke  (1810-_188gl  was  another 
transcendentalist.  Unitarian  clergyman,  and  versatile  author 
whose  fame  as  a  man  of  letters  is  by  no  means  commensurate 
with  his  influence  while  living.  He  founded  the  Church  of 
the  Disciples  in  Boston,  and  became  known  as  a  transcen- 
dentalist, an  abolitionist,  and  an  advocate  of  woman's  suffrage 
and  other  reforms.    In  later  years  he  was  often  spoken  of  as 


254  Akksioan  Litbratukb 

the  leader  of  the  TTnitarian  church  in  America.  His  nximer- 
ous  published  works  include  many  sermons,  popular  essays 
on  theological  subjects,  some  translations,  and  several  histori- 
cal and  biographical  works.  His  book  on  Ten  Oreat  Religions 
attracted  considerable  attention.  A  later  work.  The  Legend 
of  Thomas  Didymus,  the  Jewish  Sceptic,  was  an  attempt  to 
vivify  and  reconcile  the  gospel  stories  by  means  of  an  imagi- 
nary narrative  credited  to  Thomas.  The  book  is  unsatisfac- 
tory; and  indeed  the  author  is  rarely  successful  in  anything 
but  sermons  and  popular  religious  tracts. 

III.  The  New  England  Abolitionists 

The  belief  in  the  unrighteousness  of  human  slavery,  which 
finally  resulted  in  the  Emancipation  Proclamation,  did  not 

originate  in  New  England.  It  had  been  de- 
li^mAnt  veloping  for  generations  throughout  the  civi- 

lized  world,  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  nine- 
teenth  centuiy  was  generally  diffused.  More  enlightened 
thinkers  in  the  South,  as  well  as  those  in  the  North,  con- 
demned the  institution  until  changing  economic  conditions 
and  resentment  at  what  they  considered  unwarranted  inter- 
ference with  local  affairs  forced  them  to  support  theories 
which  at  bottom  they  did  not  really  believe.  Both  circum- 
stances and  temperament  united,  however,  to  make  the  de- 
scendants of  the  New  England  Puritans  the  leaders  in  the 
movement  for  wider  human  freedom.  At  first  the  North 
realized  the  practical  difficulties  of  emancipation,  as  the  South 
realized  its  theoretical  desirability.  But  about  the  beginning 
of  the  period  now  under  consideration  a  few  persons  began 
to  emphasize  the  moral  at  the  expense  of  the  practical  aspects 
of  the  question,  and  to  call  for  immediate  abolition.  At  first 
these  radicals  were  condemned  in  the  North  as  bitterly  as  in 
the  South.  Business  advantage  and  a  more  laudable  hesi- 
tancy to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  other  states  led  most  citi- 


The  Central  Period  255 

zens  to  resent  any  inflammatory  utterances  against  slavery; 
and  the  lower  and  more  selfish  classes  of  the  community  carried 
their  resentment  against  the  reformers  to  the  point  of  perse- 
cation.  The  early  transcendentalists  had  to  withstand  ridi- 
cule and  supercilious  imbelief;  the  early  abolitionists  were 
forced  to  endure  social  ostracism,  and  even  physical  violence. 
The  revolution  which  changed  the  feeling  toward  the  abo- 
litionists from  abhorrence  to  honor  came  partly  fjrom  an 
awakening  of  the  public  conscience,  and  partly  from  the 
political  and  economic  developments  that  drove  North  and 
South  into  extreme  opposing  positions.  This  change  was 
accomplished  first  in  New  England  and  was  hastened  by  a 
great  number  and  variety  of  writings  by  New  England  men. 
All  the  transcendentalists  who  have  been  mentioned,  with 
the  partial  exception  of  Brownson,  were  in  sympathy  with  the 

anti-slavery  agitation.  Some  of  them,  notably 
Ab  liti    iats        Emerson,  felt  that  they  had  other  messages  to 

bear,  and  declined  to  take  a  very  active  part 
in  abolition  meetings  and  organizations;  others  were  equally 
notable  as  anti-slavery  workers  and  as  transcendentalists. 
Parker  and  Clarke  not  only  preached  abolitionism,  but  per- 
sonally aided  in  the  rescue  and  secretion  of  runaway  slaves. 
Dana,  especially  after  he  took  up  newspaper  work  in  New 
York,  was  a  strong  supporter  of  the  anti-slavery  crusade. 
There  was  also  a  number  of  men,  less  speculative  and  mystical 
than  the  transcendentalists,  whose  chief  energies  were  devoted 
to  the  abolition  movement,  and  who  fairly  constitute  a  group 
of  anti-slavery  writers. 

One  of  the  earliest  and  most  influential  of  these  writers, 
though  by  no  means  the  most  meritorious,  was  William  Lloyd 

Garrison  f  1805-1879  ">.  He  was  a  native  of 
wimm  Lloyd     Massachusetts,  and  after  he  had  served  an 

apprenticeship  on  a  local  paper  edited  several 
minor  journals,  among  them  the  ^^Genius  of  Universal  Eman- 


256  Amebigak  Litebatube 

cipation'*  at  Baltimore.    In  1831  he  founded  the  'Tjiberator*' 

■■■  ^^1.  IIW I        II    III    I  I      I 

at  Boston^  and  he  continued  to  edit  it  and  to  speak  and  write 
for  abolition  until  his  end  was  accomplished. 

Garrison  conducted  his  campaign,  not  by  means  of  elaborate 
argument,  but  by  the  blunt  and  continued  iteration  of  a  few 

statements  that  he  believed  self-evident.  His 
The  Appeal  of  reasoning  was  simple.  Starting  with  the  pos- 
Writinra  tulate  that  all  men  are  created  free  and  equal', 

he  argued  that  no  man  has  a  right  to  enslave 
another.  Therefore,  every  slave  is  entitled  to  immediate 
emancipation  regardless  of  consequences ;  the  man  who  with- 
holds due  hire  from  the  slave  is  a  thief;  and  a  Union  based 
on  a  Constitution  that  recognizes  an  iniquity  like  slavery  is 
accursed.  The  repetition  of  these  ideas,  expressed  in  the 
plainest  language,  on  almost  every  page  of  Garrison's  writings 
is  inartistic,  and  to  the  man  who  thinks  of  expediency  seems 
fanatical ;  but  the  very  fact  that  it  irritates  makes  it  forcible. 
This  force  is  increased  by  a  certain  earnestness  and  dignity 
that  pervades  even  the  most  bitter  passages.  There  is  harsh 
language  in  abundance,  but  it  is  never  blackguardism,  and 
rarely  personal  vituperation.  It  is  because  his  utterances, 
extreme  and  impractical  as  they  were,  contained  a  grain  of 
imcomf ortable  truth,  that  Garrison  was  hated,  reviled,  and 
mobbed,  and  in  the  end  brought  men  to  his  side.  His  personal 
courage,  his  unceasing  application,  and  his  power  of  striking 
expression  made  him  one  of  the  most  important  forces  in 
bringing  about  emancipation.  In  the  literary  history  of  the 
country  he  holds  only  the  minor  place  accorded  to  a  forceful 
pamphleteer. 
john^Greenleaf  Whittier  (1807-1892),  the  chief  poet  of  the 

anti-slavery  movement,  was  bom  in  Haverhill, 
JohnGreenleax     Massachusetts.    Unlike  the  other  more  promi- 
nent literary  men  of  New  England  he  was  a 
representative  of  the  uncultured  rural  class.    His  ancestors 


The  Central  Pbbiod  257 

were  Quaker  farmers  who  had  quietly  tilled  the  same  home- 
stead since  1647,  and  had  occupied  the  house  in  which  he  was 
born  since  1688.  Whittier^s  own  childhood  was  spent  in  the 
hard  labor  that  devolved  on  a  New  England  farmer's  boy, 
varied  by  attendance  at  brief  winter  terms  of  country  school. 
When  about  fourteen  years  of  age  he  made  the  acquaintance 
of  Burns's  poems  and  was  inspired  to  write  verses  of  his  own. 
'A  familiar  story  relates  that  one  of  these  rhymed  effusions 
was  sent  to  a  local  paper,  and  that  the  editor,  William  Lloyd 
Garrison,  rode  to  the  Whittier  home  to  see  the  young  con- 
tributor, and  to  urge  him  to  continue  his  education.  The 
elder  Whittier  had  a  conservative  Quaker  farmer's  distrust  of 
superfluous  learning,  but  his  prejudices  were  so  far  overcome 
that  the  son  spent  two  winters  at  Haverhill  academy,  earning 
his  own  expenses  by  shoe-making  and  teaching.  Here  he 
gained  the  rudiments  of  French  and  somewhat  greater  famili- 
arity with  English  literature. 

Through  the  influence  of  Garrison,  Whittier  secured  in  1828 
the  editorship  of  the  ^^American  Manufacturer,''  published  at 

Boston.  Later  he  edited  for  brief  periods  of 
^"JjH?^  .^  time  weekly  papers  at  Haverhill  and  at  Hart- 
ford, Connecticut.  Poor  health,  which 
throughout  life  interfered  with  his  activities,  and  the  cir- 
cumstances of  his  family  induced  him  to  return  to  the  farm 
in  1832.  In  1836  the  old  homestead  was  sold,  and  he  re- 
moved to  the  village  of  Amesburj,  which  was  his  permanent  | 
residence  until  his  death.  Meanwhile  he  had  become,  through 
Garrison's  influence,  an  abolitionist,  had  published  in  1833 
a  pamphlet  on  slavery  entitled  Justice  and  Expediency,  and 
was  taking  an  jactive  part  in  the  anti-slavery  propaganda. 

This  devotion  to  an  unpopular  cause  had  a  radical  effect 
on  both  his  worldly  and  his  literary  career.  It  blasted  his 
political  future,  which  is  said  to  have  been  promising,  and 
it  changed  the  character  of  his  writings.    Before  this  he  had 


268  Amsbican  Litebatubb 

aSected  the  manner  of  Byron  and  Scott,  and  had  published 

I  many  poems  in  newspapers  and  magazines.    In  1831  he  had 

collected  a  series  of  sketches  first  contributed  to  the  '^New 

England    Magazine/'    and    issued    them    as 

EariyWritincs     ^^9^^^  ^f  ^^^  England,  and  the  next  year 

he  published  a  long  narrative  poem,  '^MoU 
Pitcher/'  These  early  writings,  almost  all  of  which  were 
suppressed  in  later  life,  sare  intrinsically  imimportant,  but 
they  indicate  how  different  might  have  been  his  literary 
career  if  he  had  not  deliberately  given  himself  for  thirty 
years  to  the  anti-slavery  cause. 

Poor  health  and  limited  financial  circumstances  restricted 
Whittier's  activities,  but  he  gave  to  the  abolition  movement 

all  the  energy  that  he  possessed.  He  eon- 
A^^t&i^      ducted  for  »  short  time  an  abolitionist  paper  in 

Philadelphia,  where  his  ofiice  was  destroyed 
by  a  mob,  and  he  was  threatened  with  personal  violence ;  and 
from  time  to  time  he  did  editorial  work  on  other  papers. 
When  new  occasions  arose  he  put  in  verse  the  feelings  of  his 
pariy.  Nor  was  he  useful  merely  as  a  writer.  He  believed  in 
I  accomplishing  results  by  any  honorable  means,  and  he  became 
associated  with  the  "New  Movement,'*  opposed  in  method  to 
Garrison  and  others  who  refused  to  exercise  political  privi- 
leges under  a  government  that  tolerated  slavery.  The 
qualities  which  had  made  his  own  political  prospects  bright 
while  he  was  a  conservative  still  served  him,  and  he  took  an 
active  and  often  effective  part  in  the  work  of  conventions, 
committees,  and  other  organizations.  His  Quaker  faith  pre- 
vented him  from  approving  the  war  as  such,  but  he  seems  to 
have  felt  that  it  was  necessary,  and  he  rejoiced  in  the  result. 

Whittier  never  married.  Certain  poems  which  he  charac* 
terized  as  "subjective  and  reminiscent"  imply  that  he  had 
loved,  but  such  was  his  reserve  that  his  biographers  have  not 
succeeded  in  learning  much  regarding  his  affections,  or  even 


Thb  Central  Period  259 

in  identifjring  their  object  or  objects  with  certainty.  One 
reason  for  his  celibacy  was  probably  his  financial  circum- 
stances^ and  his  feeling  of  obligation  to  his  mother  and  sister. 

His  health  prevented  him  from  engaging  in 
SSotflife       regular  remunerative  work,  and  it  was  not 

until  after  the  war  that  his  copyrights  yielded 
enough  to  relieve  him  from  anxiety  over  business  affairs.  He 
was  a  man  with  few  intimates,  and  these  were  mostly  in  the 
humbler  walks  of  life.  With  the  members  of  the  Boston  lit- 
erary set  he  was  on  terms  of  pleasant  acquaintanceship,  but 
nothing  more.  His  relations  with  James  T.  Fields  and 
Bayard  Taylor,  whom  he  associates  with  himself  in  his  poem, 
'The  Tent  on  the  Beach,*'  were  somewhat  closer.  Probably 
some  of  his  neighbors  in  the  little  village  of  Amesbury  knew 
him  best.  His  closest  friends  outside  his  own  social  class 
were  women. 

The  frequency  of  Whittier^s  publications  suggests  the  ra- 
pidity and  fluency  with  which  he  wrote.    Besides  the  early 

works  already  mentioned  he  published  "Mogg 

^^ficWriter     ^^g^^®/'  *  ^^E  narrative  poem,  in  1836,  and 

collections  of  poems  in  1837, 1838, 1840, 1843,  j 
1846,  1849,  1850,  1853,  1856,  1860,  1864,  and  1865,  besides 
several  volumes  of  prose,  and  many  articles  in  periodicals. 
When  the  "Atlantic  Monthly*'  was  founded  he  became  one  of 
the  contributors.  His  volumes  published  before  1865  contain 
some  of  his  best  miscellaneous  work,  but  throughout  almost  all 
of  them  the  anti-slavery  element  is  prominent,  and  in  many 
it  predominates. 

Although  he  was  interested  in  woman's  suffrage  and  other 
reforms  his  heart  was  bound  up  only  in  the  abolition  move- 
ment, and  when  this  was  accomplished  he  became  less  of  a| 
propagandist  and  more  of  a  man  of  letters.  At  the  close  of ' 
the  war  he  wius,  however,  nearly  sixty  years  old,  and  his  lit- 
erary manner  was  well  formed.    He  continued  to  write  pro- 


260  Amebican  Literatubs 

fusely  nntil  his  death,  publiflhing  "Snow-Bound^*  in  1866, 
"The  Tent  on  the  Beach'*  in  1867,  and  other  volumes  of 
verse  in  1869,  1870,  1871,  1872,  1876,  1876,  1878,  1881, 
1883, 1886,  and  1892,  besides  a  revised  edition  of  his  complete 
writings  in  1888-9,  and  some  miscellaneous  work.  If  an  in- 
creased proportion  of  his  better  poems  is  found  in  the  late  vol- 
umes it  is  because  he  gave  more  time  to  themes  of  permanent 
importance,  rather  than  because'  of  any  great  development. 
The  habit  of  writing  rapidly  and  with  little  revision  had  be- 
come fixed,  and  he  was  too  old  to  break  it.  He  attempted  no 
new  forms  and  acquired  but  little  greater  skill  in  the  old  ones. 

Whittier^s  favorite  themes,  aside  from  those  connected  with 
slavery,  were  events  in  the  early  history  of  New  England, 

especially  the  persecution  of  the  Quakers  and 
Whittier's  the  witches;  Indian  legends;  the  simple  life 

Poems  ^  ®^  rural  New  England;  and  religious  doubt 

and  belief.  The  anti-slavery  poems  were  mostly 
inspired  by  particular  events — "editorials  in  verse,**  they  have 
been  aptly  called.  Their  lack  of  interest  now  is  due  in  part 
to  the  qualities  that  once  made  them  effective — ^their  intensity 
and  their  pertinency  to  questions  of  immediate  timely  inter- 
est. It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  they  were  the  best 
of  the  iimumerable  verses  on  similar  themes.  Even  to-day 
it  is  impossible  to  read  "The  Hunters  of  Men^**  with  its 
sarcasm  and  scorn,  or  "Massachusetts  to  Virrinia,**  with  its 
impassioned  indignation,  and  not  feel  something  of  the  stirring 
of  the  old  conflict.  Nominally  in  this  group  of  poems,  though 
different  in  character  and  quality,  are  "Ichabod,**  in  which 
he  expressed  his  grief  at  what  he  felt  to  be  the  apostasy  of 
Webster,  and  "Laus  Deo.**  his  noble  hymn  of  thanksgiving 
over  the  fall  of  slavery. 

It  is  in  his  narrative  poems  that  Whittier  shows  the  great- 
est development.  His  early  ambition  was  to  write  long  nar- 
rative poems  on  American  themes.    This  was,  however,  be- 


The  Central  Period  261 

yond  his  powers.    Both  "Mogg  Megone'*  and  **Moll  Pitcher*' 
were  failures;  and  the  author  turned  to  the  form  of  verse  in 

which  he  excelled^  the  short  and  simple  ballad. 
Whittier's  The   majority   of   his   ballads,   like   '^Mabd 

5J^^*  Martin/^  ^^Skipper  Ireson^s  Bide/'  '^Barbara 

Fiifitchie,''  and  most  of  the  tales  in  ^^The  Tent 
^  the  Beach/'  have  an  historical  or  legendary  origin,  but 
some  of  the  most  effective,  such  as  ^^Telling  the  Bees"  and 
^^Maud  MuUer,''  are  creations  of  fancy  expressing  some  ele- 
mental emotional  experience.  All  those  mentioned  are 
simple  stories  simply  told;  ^^The  Sisters"  shows  that  if  need 
be  he  could  produce  a  dramatic  effect. 

Whittier's  powers  of  description  are  seen  to  advantage  in 
the  nan^tive  poems.    His  handling  of  descriptive  background 

in  poems  like  "Telling  the  Bees"  is  unsur- 
Whittier's  passed,  if  not  unequalled,  in  American  verse. 

S^ptil         His  purely  objectm  poems  of  nature   are 

hardly  as  good;  but  some  of  those  in  which 
there  is  a  strong  subjective  element  must  be  ranked,  with  his 
ballads,  as  his  finest  work.  Such  are  "Sunset  on  the  Bear- 
Camp,"  "The  Biver  Path,"  "A  Sea  Dream,"  "The  Barefoot 
Boy/'  and,  greatest  of  all,  "Snow-Bound."  In  these,  as  in  the 
ballads,  the  chief  characteristic  is  absolute  naturalness  and 
fidelity  to  nature  and  to  human  life,  without  reference  to 
artificial  conventionalities.  Everywhere  in  Whittier  as  in 
Burns  the  reader  is  struck  by  conversational  turns  of  phrase, 
homely  figures  of  speech,  which  would  be  fatal  if  used  with 
the  slightest  affectation,  but  which  constitute  one  of  the 
chief  charms  of  the  verse. 

God's  colors  aU  are  fast, 

from  "Sunset  on  the  Bear-Camp"  may  serve  as  an  illustration. 

The  religious  verses  are  not  great  poetry,  but  they  express 

the  genuine  spiritual  emotions  of  a  simple  and  devout  man. 


26S  Akebigan  Litebaturb 

Quakerism^  long  a  despised  faith^  foiind  itself  in  many  re- 
spects in  harmony  with  the  new  transcendental  spirit  of 

New  England^  and  the  poet's  expressions  of 
Whitttor's  quiet  trust  in   the   Divine   had   an   especial 

y^^^'**  charm  for  those  who  had  reached  a  belief  in  the 

Inner  Light  by  the  troubled  way  of  German 
philosophy.  Whittier^s  true  attitude  is  indicated  by  the 
familiar  stanza  from  "The  Eternal  Goodness  :'* 

I  know  not  where  His  islands  lift 

Their  f  ronded  palms  in  air ; 
I  only  know  I  cannot  drift 

Beyond  His  love  and  care. 

In  other  poems  he  showed  just  enough  questioning  to  prove 
that  he  was  intellectually  alert  in  the  midst  of  the  nineteenth 
century;  but  serious  religious  doubt  he  probably  never  felt. 
His  fondness  for  subjects  connected  with  the  Holy  Land  is 
a  curious  illustration  of  his  old-fashioned  attitude  toward 

(religious  matters.  It  is  noticeable  that  though  he  was  a 
Quaker  the  hymnbooks  of  most  denominations  contain  more 
of  his  h3rmns  than  of  those  by  any  other  American  poet. 

The  three  volumes  of  prose  in  Whittier's  -collected  writings 
contain  some  meritorious  work,  but  little  that  would  have 

been  reprinted  if  it  had  not  been  for  the 
^weWritincs     ^^^^^^^  reputation  as  a  poet.    Most  important 

Ifrom  a  literary  standpoint  is  "Margaret 
Smith's  Journal/*  a  painstaking  piece  of  work  which  aims  to 
recreate,  by  means  of  a  slight  fictitious  narrative,  something 
of  colonial  New  England.  It  introduces  the  author's  favorite 
topics  of  slavery,  the  Quakers,  and  the  Indians,  and  its  thread 
of  tragic  romance  implies  a  provincial  distrust  of  those  who 
came  from  the  gayer  social  life  of  England.  Some  of  the 
lighter  sketches,  such  as  "Yankee  Gypsies,''  and  "The  Fish  I 
didn't  Catch,"  are  pleasant  reading.  The  author's  first  anti- 
slavery  utterance,  "Justice  and  Expediency,"  is  in  a  height- 


The  Central  Period  263 

ened  oratorical  manner^  and  presents  both  the  moral  and 
the  practical  arguments  against  slavery  with  great  intensify. 
The  Portraits,  Sketches,  Historical  Papers,  Criticisms, 
etc.,  are  mostly  unimportant  articles  collected  from  maga- 
zines. 

In  both  his  limitations  and  his  excellences  Whittier  was 
representative  of  rural  New  England.    In  many  ways  his  life 

was  narrow.    He  never  travelled.    His  educa- 

^Stoti  *  ^^^  ^^  ^  ^y  ^^  slight  and  he  never  owed 

much  to  books.  Most  of  the  greater  works  of 
English  literature  influenced  him  little  and  those  of  other 
literatures  not  at  all.  His  Quaker  training  restricted  him  in 
many  ways.  He  had  no  knowledge  or  appreciation  of  music ; 
he  never  entered  a  theatre;  he  seems  to  have  cared  little  for 
painting  and  sculpture;  and  it  is  doubtful  if  he  ever  fully 
appreciated  the  value  of  form  in  poetry.  His  own  metres  are 
simple  and  few  in  number,  and  he  rarely  attempted  anything 
so  slightly  artificial  as  the  sonnet.  He  had  a  characteristic 
love  of  the  didactic,  and  showed  his  limitations  in  the  remark 
that  the  'Tsalm  of  Life'*  was  "worth  more  than  all  the  dreams 
of  Shelley  and  Keats  and  Wordsworth.'*  Indeed,  the  fact! 
that  his  moral  was  stronger  than  his  artistic  sense  jaccountsj 
directly  and  indirectly  for  his  chief  deficiencies,  his  common-l 
places,  his  careless  rhymes,  and  all  the  crudities  due  to  hastej 
and  lack  of  revision. 

Whittier's  good  qualities  were  equally  lypical  of  his  class  and 
his  environment.    He  had  the  seeing  eye  and  the  feeling  for 

the  picturesque  that  are  natural  to  a  race  of 
Excellences  intelligent  men  who  know  life  from  observation 

rather  than  from  books.  He  had  all  the  New 
England  shrewdness,  idealism,  belief  in  democracy,  and  devo- 
tion to  truth.  Prom  these  characteristics  came  his  accuracy 
and  vividness  in  description,  his  knack  of  story-telling,  his 
mastery  of  the  forms  of  language  and  of  vierse  that  make 


264  Amebicak  Lttsratubb 

a  strongs  simple  appeal^  and  the  high  moral  quality  that  is 
everywhere  present  in  his  poems. 

It  is  because  'New  England  ideals  have^  in  the  course  of 
national  development,  become  common  to  so  many  sections 

of  the  coimtry  that  Whittier  has  good  claim 
Am«^anPo^^*  to  be  called  the  most  representative  American 

poet.  Though  the  life  detailed  in  "Snow- 
Bound'^  and  ''Maud  Muller''  is  long  a  thing  of  the  past^  a 
large  part  of  the  American  people  still  hold  the  Quaker 
farmer's  ideas  of  the  independence  and  dignity  of  labor^  and 
still  teel,  though  reason  may  tell  them  differently^  that  a  xmion 
between  the  Judge  and  the  barefoot  maiden  would  have  been 
neither  impractical  nor  imwise.  Conditions  change^  and 
Americans  are  no  doubt  coming  to  read  ''Maud  Muller"  as 
Englishmen  read  of  King  Cophetua  and  the  beggar  maid. 
For  the  many  who  have  taken  it,  or  still  take  it,  as  a  literal 
commentary  on  life,  Whittier  has  spoken  better  than  any  other 
poet 

The  author's  personality  also  aided  in  giving  him  the  char- 
acter of  a  national  representative.  Strong  as  was  his  indig- 
nation over  slavery,  and  bitter  as  were  his  denunciations,  he 
never  seemed  to  be  actuated  by  selfish  motives,  or  to  harbor 
personal  ill-feeling.  His  desire  to  do  absolute  justice  is  illus- 
trated by  his  care  that  "Ichabod"  should  be  followed  in  his 
poems  by  "The  Lost  Occasion,"  in  which  he  expresses  a  more 
charitable  opinion  of  Webster;  and  by  the  note  in  which  he 
showed  his  anxiety  lest  "Skipper  Ireson's  Bide"  might  per- 
petuate a  tradition  that  did  injustice  to  a  man  long  dead. 
Probably  no  other  abolitionist  uttered  such  strong  words  and 
aroused  so  little  personal  hostility.  His  gentleness,  his  obvi- 
ous genuineness,  his  dignified  simplicity,  his  adherence  to  the 
forms  of  Quakerism,  even  his  bachelor  loneliness,  separated 
him  from  other  men,  and  made  him  appear  as  the  world  feels 
a  poet  should;  and  as  the  man  shows  in  all  his  works,  these 


The  Centbal  Period  265 

same  characterifitics  still  seem  to  make  him  typical  of  the  best 
in  old  New  England,  if  not  in  the  nation  at  large. 

The  greatest  orator  of  the  anti-slavery  cause,  Wendell  Phil- 
lips (1811-1884)^  was  the  descendant  of  an  old  and  aristo- 

cratic  New  England  family.  He  was  gradu- 
~  ated  from  Harvard  college  and  Harvard  law 
school,  and  opened  an  office  in  Boston.  When  he  identified 
himself  with  the  abolitionists  he  fully  realized  that  he  was 
sacrificing  social  position  and  professional  success.  He  first 
attracted  attention  in  1837  when  at  a  meeting  in  Faneuil 
Hall  he  made  a  sudden  and  dramatic  reply  to  a  speech  by  the 
attorney-general  of  the  commonwealth,  who  had  defended 
the  mobbing  of  Lovejoy,  an  abolitionist  editor  in  Illinois. 
From  this  time  until  emancipation  was  secured  he  was 
constantly  active,  speaking  wherever  he  could  be  heard.  Be- 
sides his  anti-slavery  addresses  he  delivered  lyceum  lectures 
on  other  topics.  Even  before  the  close  of  the  war  he  was 
interested  in  woman's  suffrage  and  teetotalism,  and  after  the 
slave  was  freed  he  supported  various  extreme  theories  of 
reform. 

As  an  abolitionist  Wendell  Phillips  excites  admiration  for 
the  moral  and  physical  courage  that  he  displayed,  and  deserves 
credit  for  accomplishing  much  in  behalf  of  his  cause.  As 
an  orator  he  had,  according  to  tradition,  wonderful  influence 
over  an  audience.  As  a  man  of  letters  he  was  of  less  im- 
portance. It  is,  indeed,  hard  to  see  on  reading  his  speeches 
what  constituted  their  power.  They  usually  begin  tactfully; 
some  of  them,  like  that  on  Toussaint  rOuverture,  contain 
highly  wrought  passages  much  in  vogue  for  school  and  college 
declamations;  and  a  few,  like  the  plea  for  the  removal  of 
Judge  Loring,  show  skilful  and  logical  reasoning.  Most  of 
them,  however,  appeal  to  the  prejudices  of  the  hearers,  and 
are  only  clever  and  rather  specious  in  argument,  though  ap- 
parently the  work  of  a  man  who  was  not  deliberately  insincere. 


266  Akbbioan  Literature 

His  most  famous  lyceum  lecture  not  on  a  controversial  topic^ 
"The  Lost  Arts/*  contains  some  history  and  science,  partly 
false,  so  stated  as  to  produce  an  eminently  heightened  effect. 
Indeed,  many  of  his  addresses  give  the  reader  an  impression 
of  unintentional  distortion  to  make  an  effective  case. 
y^  James  Bussell  Lowell  (1819-1891)  belongs  partly  to  the 
anti-slavery  writers  and  partly  to  the  group  of  ITew  Eng- 

landers  who  were  in  the  largest  sense  men  of 
g^^'^^      letters.    His  interests  were  wide,  and  he  wrote 

on  many  themes;  but  he  gave,  though  not 
quite  so  completely  as  Whittier,  some  of  his  best  years  to  the 
support  of  abolitionism.  He  was  bom  in  Cambridge  in  1819, 
almost  a  half-generation  after  the  other  New  England  writers 
of  first  rank.  His  family  was  one  of  considerable  distinction. 
One  member  founded  the  town  of  Lowell,  Massachusetts, 
another  established  the  Lowell  Institute  in  Boston.  His 
father  was  pastor  of  the  West  Church,  Boston.  James  Bussell 
Lowell  was  the  youngest  of  six  children.  He  inherited  from 
his  mother  an  imaginative  disposition,  and  he  grew  fond  of 
reading  imaginative  books — among  the  earliest  being  Scott^s 
tales  and  the  Faerie  Queen.  He  was  fortunate  in  having 
among  his  playmates  boys  like  the  Danas,  William  Wetmore 
Story,  and  Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson.  In  1834  he  en- 
tered Harvard  college,  where  he  read  much  in  his  own  fashion, 
formed  friends  among  the  literary  set,  and  edited  the  col- 
lege magazine,  but  neglected  such  of  his  studies  as  were  un- 
attractive to  him.  The  faculty  showed  him  the  leniency  with 
which  faculties  are  likely  to  treat  a  bright  and  wholesome 
boy  who  insists  on  doing  things  in  his  own  way,  but  at  last 
his  record  grew  too  bad.  It  was  apparently  the  sum  of  many 
I  minor  delinquencies  rather  than  any  one  serious  act  that  led 
!to  his  ^^rustication^^  in  his  senior  year.  This  old-fashioned 
punishment  consisted  in  placing  the  culprit  in  the  family  of 
some  scholarly  country  clergyman,  who  furnished  board,  lodg- 


The  Centkal  Pbeiod  267 

ing,  instruction,  and  exhortation.    In  this  case  the  place  of  j 
banishment  was  Concord. 

After  receiving  a  degree  Lowell  hesitated  in  the  choice  of  a 
profession.     He  considered  the  ministry,  law,  business,  even 

medicine.  The  final  decision  was  law,  and  he 
Maria  White —  ^^g  graduated  from  the  Harvard  Law  school 
Emnurement        ^^  1840.     In  college  he  had  been  a  careless, 

sentimental  youth,  with  a  tendency  to  be 
mildly  satirical,  perhaps  to  affect  the  blas6.  While  at  Concord 
he  had  refused  to  take  Emerson  seriously,  and  in  his  class-day 
poem  had  satirized  him  and  the  abolitionists.  He  would 
inevitably  have  changed  as  he  became  older,  but  the  change 
was  hastened  by  his  acquaintance  with  Maria  White.  This 
young  woman  was  of  the  more  spiritual  New  England  type, 
a  writer  of  verses,  and  a  reformer  who  dared  at  that  early 
date  to  appear  on  the  public  platform,  yet  who  kept  the  most 
perfect  modesty  and  girlish  womanliness.  Lowell  had  met  her 
while  he  was  agitated  over  the  choice  of  a  profession,  and 
about  the  time  of  his  graduation  from  the  law  school  they 
became  engaged.  It  is  significant  of  the  young  people  them- 
selves and  of  the  idyllic  society  in  which  they  lived  that  their  j 
love-letters  were  passed  about  among  their  many  friends  that  * 
others  might  enjoy  their  happiness. 

Miss  White  stimulated  Lowell  to  greater  literary  productive- 
ness and  interested  him  in  the  anti-slavery  reform.    His  first 

volume  of  verse,  which  appeared  a  year  after 

UttftfyWork     *^®^^  betrothal  with  the  significant  title  of 

A  Year's  Life^  consisted  mostly  of  love  poems. 
But  few  of  these  have  been  preserved  in  the  author^s  collected 
works.  At  this  time  he  was  nominally  practicing  law,  but 
really  occupying  himself  with  contributing  to  the  magazines 
and  lecturing  a  little.  Besides  poems  he  published  a  series 
of  papers  on  the  "Old  English  Dramatists'*  in  the  'Boston  ^ 
Miscellany,"  and  a  prose  tale,  "My  first  Clienf    In  1843  he 


268  Akericak  LmsRATusB 

joined  with  his  friend  Bobert  Carter  in  founding  a  magazine 
of  his  own,  "The  Pioneer/'  This  lasted  but  three  months, 
and  left  the  proprietors  in  debt,  but  it  is  valuable  as  illustrat- 
ing the  remarkable  selective  ability  which  Lowell  always 
showed  as  an  editor.  The  three  numbers  contain  contributions 
jby  Poe,  Story,  Hawthorne,  Neal,  Jones  Very,  and  others  then 
inconspicuous  who  have  since  won  fame. 

In  1844  Lowell  was  married,  and  lived  for  the  winter  in 
Philadelphia  and  afterward  at  the  family  home,  Elmwood, 
in  Cambridge.  He  had  little  money,  and  like  Hawthorne  in 
the  early  days  of  his  married  life  found  it  difficult  to  make 
ends  meet.  In  the  year  of  his  marriage  he  published  another 
collection  of  poems,  containing  among  others  *Trometheus^ 
^and  the  'TLegend  of  Brittany.'*  The  next  year  he  issued  his 
/first  volume  of  prose.  Conversations  on  some  of  the  Old  Poets. 
In  1846  he  became  a  regular  contributor  to  the  "Anti- 
Slavery  Standard,''  and  in  this  year  he  wrote  the  first  of  the 
"Biglow  Papers."  These  were  pubUshed  in  newspapers,  and  in 
1848  collected  into  a  volume.  The  year  1848^  the  most  ii|t 
jortant  in  Lowell's  literary  life,  also  saw  the  publication  of 
the  "Fable  for  Critics,". "The  Vision  of  Sir  Lauufal/'  and 
another  volume  of  poems.  In  the  hope  of  reviving  Mrs. 
Lowell's  failing  health  the  family  went  abroad  in  1851, 
but  the  benefit  was  slight,  and  she  died  in  1853.  Four  chil- 
dren had  been  bom  to  them,  of  whom  but  one  survived  the 
mother.  The  record  of  these  joys  and  sorrows  may  be  traced 
in  some  of  the  father's  finest  poems. 

In  1855  James  Bussell  Lowell  was  chosen  to  deliver  the 
Lowell  Institute  lectures  at  Boston,  and  the  indirect  residt 

of  his  success  was  his  appointment  to  succeed 
Lowell  Longfellow   as    Smith   professor   of   modern 

£^-*        languages  and  Uterature*  at  Harvard.    Before 

entering  upon  his  duties  he  went  abroad  to 
study,  spending  most  of  his  time  in  Germany.    In  1857  he 


Thb  Cbnthal  Pebiod  269 

was  married  to  Miss  Frances  Dunlap.    The  same  year  he 
became  editor  of  the  "Atlantic  Monthly/' 

The  "Atlantic  Monthly^'  was  planned  as  a  medium  of  .ej^ 
pression  for  the  literary  men  of  New  En^and  who  were  in  sym- 

pathy  withjhe jiewmovemente  and 

]^ttJy^**^      J^^-t^fi^-^<^  iendendea.    Among  its  early 

contributors  were  Longfellow,  Whittier,  Emer- 
son, Holmes,  J.  T.  Trowbridge,  T.  W.  Higginson,  Mrs.  Stowe, 
and  a  little  later  Hawthorne  and  many  others.  Before  this 
time  the  only  important  New  England  magazine  had  been  the 
"North  American  Eeview,''  and  this,  through  fear  of  injur- 
ing its  subscription  list,  had  become  a  trimmer  on  all  political 
and  social  questions.  Under  LowelFs  editorship  the  "At- 
lantic** at  once  achieved  a  preeminence  never  before  or  since 
attained  by  an  American  magazine,  and  for  many  years  after- 
ward represented  what  was  best  in  American  literature. 

Lowell  retained  the  editorship  of  the  "Atlantic"  until 
1861,  when  he  surrendered  it  to  James  T.  Fields,  of  the  firm 

of  Ticknor  and  Fields,  which  had  purchased 
Lowell's  the  magazine.    In  1863  he  became  one  of  the 

to  ICasaziMs       editors  of  the  'Tf  orth  American  Review,*'  and 

succeeded  in  making  it  a  live  periodical  with 
real  opinions.  His  prose  contributions  to  the  "Atlantic**  and 
the  "North  American**  were  both  literary  and  political,  the 
political  being  in  the  early  years  the  more  important.  Most  of 
his  greater  critical  essays  were  written  after  the  war  was 
finished,  and  reconstruction  was  well  imder  way.  Since  the 
"North  American**  did  not  publish  verse  his  poems  were 
printed  in  the  "Atlantic.**  In  1862,  after  repeated  solicita- 
tion, he  began  in  the  "Atlantic**  a  second  series  of  "Bifflow 
Papers/*  and  continued  them  at  intervals  until  1866. 

In  1864  Lowell  collected  a  volume  of  prose  miscellanies 
which  was  issued  as  jpireside  Travels — a  fanciful  title  which, 
like  those  of  later  collections,  was  chosen  by  the  publisher, 


270  Ahbbioak  Ltteratubs 

not  by  the  author.    In  1865^  at  the  serrices  held  in  honor  of 
the  sons  of  Harvard  who  died  in  the  Civil  War,  he  read  his 

^^Commemoration  Ode/^  considered  by  many 
^^!Si,^^      critics  his  poetical  masterpiece.    In  1868  ap- 

peared  a  collection  entitled  Under  the  WiU 
lows,  and  in  1870  a  long  poem.  The  Cathedral.  Two  volumes 
of  critical  essays,  the  first  series  of  Among  my  Books  and 
My  Study  Windows,  were  published  in  1870  and  1871  re- 
spectively. 

In  1872  Lowell  resigned  the  editorship  of  the  "North 
American  Eeview,"  secured  a  respite  from  his  professorial 

duties,  and  went  to  Europe  for  two  years.  On 
Lowell's  hig  return  to  America  he  wrote  for  the  "Na- 

ActivitiM  tion''   some  satirical   verse  on  the  political 

morals  of  the  country  in  which  he  came  as 
near  as  his  geniality  allowed  to  showing  ill-nature.  This  re- 
sulted in  unpleasant  criticism,  and  was  the  first  occasion  of 
the  absurd  charge,  often  repeated,  that  Lowell  was  losing  his 
Americanism.  In  1876  he  took  an  active  interest  in  the  cam- 
paign, and  was  delegate  to  the  national  convention  and  presi- 
j  dential  elector.  After  the  election  of  President  Hayes  he  was 
appointed  minister  to  Spain,  where  he  served  for  three  years. 
In  1880  he  was  promoted  to  the  Court  of  Saint  James,  and 
represented  the  United  States  there  until  he  was  recalled  by 
President  Cleveland  in  1885.  In  Spain  he  made  an  eflScient 
minister,  but  was  out  of  the  main  current  of  events.  In  Eng- 
land he  succeeded  as  no  American  before  him  had  done  in 
being  ambassador  not  only  to  the  court  but  to  the  literary  and 
social  circles  of  the  country.  He  developed  great  powers  as 
an  occasional  speaker,  and  was  everywhere  in  demand. 

The  second  Mrs.  Lowell  died  in  the  year  of  his  recall  from 

England,  and  after  his  return  to  America  he  made  his  home 

1  with  his  married  daughter,  first  at  Southborough,  Massachu- 

1  setts,  then  in  the  family  residence  at  Elmwood.     For  the 


The  Central  Period  271 

BimimerB  he  tisually  went  to  England.    In  1887  he  again  de- 
livered the  Lowell  Institute  lectures,  qhoosing  as  a  subject 

his  favorite  theme,  the  Old  English  Drama- 
Lowell  s  Last       ^g|^^     These  lectures  were  printed  in  1892. 

Other  late  volumes  were  Democracy  and 
other  Addresses,  1886,  Heartsease  and  Rue,  1888,  Political 
Essays,  1888.  For  many  years  he  had  been  troubled  with 
gout,  and  after  suffering  hopelessly  from  a  complication  of 
troubles  he  died  in  1891.  He  had  almost  prepared  for  the 
press  another  collection  of  essays,  and  this  was  issued  soon 
after  his  death.  In  1893  appeared  two  volumes  of  his  let- 
ters edited  by  Charles  Eliot  Norton. 

These  volumes  of  letters  give  a  delightful  view  of  Lowell's 
life  and  personality,  and  afford  the  best  means  of  knowing 

an  author  whose  works  can  be  appreciated 
~^^^JjJ^  only  by  those  who  have  formed  the  acquaint- 

ance of  the  man  himself.  In  boyhood  he  was 
bright  and  interesting,  and  already  showed  some  of  the  traits 
of  the  man.  In  college  he  was  one  of  those  brilliant  but  ir- 
repressible youths  who  are  admired  not  for  what  they  do,  but 
for  what  they  are  and  what  they  seem  capable  of  doing.  At 
this  early  age  he  had  developed  the  habits,  which  he  always 
retained,  of  an  omnivorous  reader  and  a  bibliophile.  In  these 
years  and  those  just  following  he  had  great  aspirations  and 
great  though  not  unpleasing  confidence  in  himself.  As  his 
acquaintance  with  Maria  White  brought  out  what  lay  deeper 
in  his  nature  he  came  to  sympathize  strongly  with  the  anti- 
slavery  movement,  and  sacrificed  something  by  allying  him- 
self with  the  unpopular  cause.  At  this  time  he  was  a  mystic, 
seeing  visions,  and  even  feeling  that  he  received  direct  revela- 
tions from  Gk)d.  Life  dealt  somewhat  harshly  with  hijn,  and 
it  is  in  connection  with  his  troubles  and  sorrows  that  his  sweet- 
ness of  character  is  best  shown.  It  is  pathetic  to  note  the 
Qban^  from  his  entimsii^stic  confidence  in  his  future  as  ^. 


272  Amebioan  Litebatuee 

poet  to  Ms  questioning  dissatisfaction  with  all  his  later  work. 
There  were  no  suddon  transitions  in  his  life^  but  he  passed 
gradually  from  the  buoyant  hopefulness  of  "The  Vision  of  Sir 
Launfal"  and  the  rollicking  humor  of  the  "Fable  for  Critics'' 
to  a  calmer  though  no  less  genial  view  of  life.  His  diplomatic 
and  social  successes  came  in  his  later  years,  the  proper  though 
unexpected  reward  of  what  had  gone  before.  Through  all 
he  appears  the  same — ^whimsical,  kindly,  a  man  of  the  world  in 
the  better  sense,  but  as  stem  as  his  Puritan  ancestors  in  his 
devotion  to  moral  truth. 
-^  Lowell's  earliest  writing  was  in  verse.  He  made  rhymes 
in  his  boyhood,  jand  in  college  his  capabilities  were  recognized 

when  he  was  chosen  to  write  the  class  poem, 
y  ^     8  Barly     jj^  ^^  ^  student  of  the  English  poets,  and  his 

early  work  was  often  little  more  than  a  mosaic 
of  phrases  suggested  by  his  reading.  In  the  poems  from  his 
first  volume  the  chief  influence  seems  to  be  that  of  Tennyson. 
"The  Sirens"  suggests  "The  Lotos-Eaters:'' 

The  sea  is  lonely,  the  sea  is  dreary, 
The  sea  is  restless  and  uneasy; 
Thou  seekest  quiet,  thou  art  weary, 
Wandering  thou  knowest  not  whitiier; — 
Our  little  isle  is  green  and  breeasy, 
Come  and  rest  thee !    O  come  hither, 
Come  to  this  peaceful  home  of  ours, 

"Where  evermore 
The  low  west  wind  creeps  panting  up  the  shore 
To  be  at  rest  among  the  flowers ; 
FuU  of  rest  the  green  moss  lifts, 

As  the  dark  waves  of  the  sea 
Draw  in  and  out  of  rocky  rifts, 
Calling  solemnly  to  thee. 

There  is  even  a  closer  imitation  of  Coleridge  in. 

From  the  dose-shut  windows  gleams  no  spark. 
The  night  is  chilly,  the  night  is  dark ; 

and  there  are  obvious  echoes  of  Shelley,  Keats,  Southey,  and 
others.    This  imitation  grows  less  noticeable  as  time  passes. 


The  Central  Period  873 

but  some  of  the  later  poems  suggest  Browning  and  Matthew 
Arnold.  In  the  early  published  poems  there  is  no  touch  of 
humor,  though  the  letters  of  this  time  show  that  Lowell  often 
scribbled  verses  that  were  full  of  fun.  There  is  much  on  love 
jmd  woman,  something  on  the  grave  problems  of  life  and  the 
mission  of  the  poet,  relatively  little  on  nature.  In  the  poems 
written  between  the  appearance  of  A  Year's  Life  and  the 
author^s  flowering  year  of  1848  there  is  more  variety,  often 
more  power.  Here  come  'Trometheus*'  with  its  radical 
democracy,  "To  a  Pine-Tree,''  "To  the  Dandelion,'*  and 
"Beaver  Brook*'  with  their  nature  descriptions,  the  ringings 
verses  of  "The  Present  Crisis,**  and  the  restrained  expressions 
of  personal  grief  in  "The  Changeling**  and  "She  Ciune  and 
Went.** 

The  earliest  work  to  attract  much  public  attention  was  the 
first  series  of  the  "Biglow  Papers,**  begun  in  the_"Bogtoa 

Courier**    in  ^846^,   and    continued    in    the. 
The  Biglow  "Anti-Slavery    Standard**"  until  "'l848."      In 

Fintsinies  *^®^^    original    form    these    were    poems    in 

the   Yankee   dialect   satirizing  the  Mexican 
War  and  the  policy  that  favored  it.     The  elaborate  set- 
ting in  which  these  poems  are  now  found  was  added  when 
they  were  collected  in  1848.    Some  of  the  best  things  in  the 
'Tapers**  are  in  this  later  part — ^the  "Notices  of  an  Inde- 
pendent Press,**  the  rambling  introduction  by  the  Eeverend 
Homer  Wilbur,  and  the  notes  interspersed  throughout.    The 
additions,  however,  tend  to  obscure  the  fact  that  the  original 
design  was  wholly  political.    As  the  'Tapers**  now  stand  they 
satirize  log-rolling  literary  criticism,  later  tendencies  in  verse, 
the  pedantry  and  mild  weaknesses  of  the  New  England  clergy, 
the  popular  enthusiasm  for  Carlyle,  and  many  other  things,  j 
The  greatest  fault  is  that  there  is  too  much  of  this  added  \ 
material.    Lowell  never  knew  when  to  stop  fooling,  once  he ; 
had  begun,    No  other  writer  ever  prepared  a  whole  glossary 


274  Akerigan  Litesatubb 

as  a  joke.  It  is  a  less  serious  fault  that  the  characters  are 
none  of  them  consistent.  Birdofredom  Sawin  is  so  much  of 
a  clown  that  we  hardly  expect  him  to  be  true  to  real  life. 
Hosea  Bigbw  himself  is  always  the  same  in  his  political  be- 
liefs^ but  not  in  form  of  expression.  His  faults  of  spelling  are 
much  more  exaggerated  in^some  poems  than  in  others,  and  oc- 
casional  passages  employ  a  learned  diction  quite  impossible 
for  a  rustic  like  Hosea.  Parson  WilKur  shows  the  greatest 
inconsistencies  of  all.  At  times  he  is  a  ludicrous  caricature 
of  a  narrow  pedantic  clergyman,  at  times  a  pathetic  old  con- 
servative, at  times  he  is  identical  with  Lowell  himself.  The 
use  of  dialect  is  explained  partly  by  the  author's  interest  in 
the  peculiarities  of  local  New  England  speech,  partly  by  the 
fact  that  it  gives  greater  freedom  of  expression.  Audacities 
like  those  in  the  last  lines  of  the  following  stanza  would  be 
intolerable  in  plain  English : 

Bz  fer  war,  I  caU  it  murder, — 

There  you  hey  it  plain  an'  flat; 
I  don't  want  to  go  no  furder 

Than  my  Testyment  fer  that; 
God  hez  sed  so  plump  an'  fairly, 

If  8  ez  long  ez  it  is  broad, 
An'  you've  gut  to  git  up  airly 

Ef  you  want  to  take  in  Qod. 

Dialect  was  also  favorable  to  the  introduction  of  humor,  al- 
ways a  necessity  in  effective  political  satire. 

The  second  series  of  the  "Biglow  Papers''  differs  from  the 
first  chiefly  in  being  less  spontaneous.    The  Lowell  of  1862 

was  more  of  a  philologist  and  less  of  an  en- 
Snd  sS^  thusiastic  reformer  than  the  Lowell  of  1846. 

The  long  introduction  to  the  second  series  is 

signed  by  J.  E.  L.  in  his  proper  person,  and  is  wholly  serious. 

"The  Courtin'/'  LowelPs  only  important  dialect  poem  outside 

the  '^iglow  Papers''  proper,  is  repeated  from  the  Introduction 

;  to  the  first  series,  carefully  enlarged  to  nearly  t^e  its  original 


Tttfi  Central  PfiRiofi  S'i'5 

bulk.  The  poems  of  the  series  as  they  appeared  in  the  "At- 
lantie^^  show  a  tendency  to  wander  from  strictly  political 
themes^  as  if  to  experiment  with  the  possibilities  of  dialect 
verse.  Indeed^  certain  pastoral  and  descriptive  passages  were 
adapted  from  an  abandoned  narrative  poem,  "The  Nooning/' 
The  extravagances  attributed  to  Birdofredom  Sawin  seem,  to 
a  later  day  reader,  less  pleasing  than  those  of  the  earlier  series. 
Some  effective  lines  of  Yankee  colloquialisms  are,  however, 
unexcelled.    "Jonathan  to  John"  is  full  of  them: 

Who  made  the  law  thet  hurts,  John, 

Heads  I  ioin, — ditto  tails  f 
**J,  B,**  was  on  his  shirts,  John, 

Onless  my  memory  fails. 

•  •  •  •  • 

We  own  the  ocean,  tu,  John: 

You  mus'n'  take  it  hard, 
Ef  we  can't  think  with  you,  John, 

It's  jest  your  own  back-yard. 
Ole  Uncle  S.  sez  he,  "I  guess, 

Ef  thefs  his  daim,"  sez  he, 
"The  fencin'-stufTll  cost  enough 

To  bust  up  friend  J.  B., 

Ez  wal  ez  you  an'  me !" 

The  'Table  for  Critics*^  illustrates _twa.ofthe.authpy8  chief 
characteristics — ^his  ability  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  an 

author  from  his  early  work,  and  his  inabiUly 

Sitiw  — ^  ?^P  i^^^?  Y^!?^  *^?  readeiLtilg  h^i  enough. 

The  piarts  of  the  work  best  known  are  the 
critical  estimates  of  contemporary  writers.  A  few  of  these 
show  personal  bias — ^Lowell  over-praises  his  fellow-abolition- 
ist Mrs.  Child,  he  shows  his  personal  dislike  of  Margaret 
Puller,  and  he  is  rather  patronizing  in  his  attitude  toward  the 
Knickerbocker  writers.  Most  of  his  judgments  are,  however, 
those  of  posterity,  though  often,  as  in  case  of  Hawthorne,  he 
was  characterizing  writers  who  had  not  done  their  best  work. 
It  is  doubtful  if  many  persons  read  the  whole  poem,  with  ita 


216  American  LiTERATirfiS 

rhymed  tifle-page  and  preface,  and  its  rambling  fable  of 
Apollo,  into  which  are  brought  inntmierable  puns,  and  discus- 
sions of  all  sorts  of  things,  even  capital  punishment.  On  every 
page  are  clever  lines,  but  the  whole  is  too  long  and  too  hard 
to  follow. 

There  is  a  striking  difference  between  the  'Vision  of  Sir 
Launf  al,**  which  also  appeared  in  1848,  and  either  the  "Big- 
low  Papers''  or  the  "Fable  for  Critics.''    The 
?V~^         'Vision"  was  undoubtedly  suggested  by  Ten- 
nyson's treatment  of  the  Grail  legend.     Its 
I  great  popularity  is  due  to  its  obvious  moralizing  and  to  the 
j  presence  of  some  fine  nature-descriptions.     It  is,  however, 
lacking  in  originality  of  both  idea  and  expression,  and  it 
shows  great  unevenness  of  execution.     In  the  famous  pas- 
sage on  June  there  are  prosaic  lines  like. 

The  flush  of  life  may  weU  be  seen ; 

and  close  to  the  perfect  characterization. 

Like  a  locust  shriUs  the  imprisoned  sap, 

is  the  ridiculous  metaphor: 

But  the  wind  without  was  eager  and  sharp, 
Of  Sir  Launfal's  gray  hair  it  makes  a  harp. 

The  poem  is  said  to  have  been  written  hurriedly,  and  it  was 
evidently  the  product  of  one  of  those  periods  of  spiritual 
exaltation  that  sometimes  came  to  Lowell. 

"The  Unhappy  Lot  of  Mr.  Knott,"  which  appeared  in  1850, 
is  worth  notice  only  as  the  worst  example  of  the  extremes  to 

which  the  author  could  go  in^punning.     In 

P  ^ma  *     **'     ^®  ^**®^  poems  he  excelled  in  his  appreciations 

of  nature,  and  in  short  finished  poems  of  senti- 
ment. The  poems  "Under  the  Willows"  and  ^Tictures  from 
Appledore"  are  representative  of  one  class,  "For  an  Auto- 
graph," "Auf  Wiedersehen,"  and  'Ttf onna  Lisa"  of  the  other. 
The  ^'Harvard  Commemoration  Ode"  is  his  most  ambitious 


The  Central  Period  277 

production  and  has  called  forth  various  judgments.     It  is 
probably  safe  to  say  that  it  ranks  well  among  the  occasionaL 
poems  written  in  the  English  language  during  the  last  half  of*, 
the  nineteenth  century,  but  it  is  not  one  of  the  world's  great  i 
odes.    It  has  many  sonorous  passages  and  many  quotable  lines  ^ 
which,  after  all,  do  not  seem  to  get  themselves  quoted.    The 
best  known  section,  that  on  Lincoln,  was  not  part  of  the  origi- 
nal poem. 

"The  Cathedral,**  reminiscent  of  a  day  spent  at  Chartres 
years  before,  is  the  only  long  poem  in  which  Lowell  treats  the 
great  changes  in  religious  thought  during  the  century  in  which 
he  lived.  It  has  some  effective  lines,  but  is  strangely  inconsistent 
in  tone,  and  as  a  whole  leaves  an  unsatisfactory  impression. 
The  last  volume  of  verse.  Heartsease  and  Rue,  contains  many 
sonnets  to  persons,  and  other  minor  poems,  and  some  earlier 
pieces  not  included  in  former  volumes.  The  long  poem  on 
the  death  of  Agassiz,  written  in  1874,  treats  in  a  reminiscent 
way  of  the  Cambridge  men  that  Lowell  knew,  and  has  a  per- 
sonal interest.  "FitzAdam's  Story,**  which  had  originally 
been  published  in  the  *^ Atlantic  Monthly**  for  1867,  is  all  that 
was  written  of  a  proposed  series  of  verse  tales.  It  is  partly  in 
dialect  of  a  less  pronounced  order  than  that  of  the  "Biglow 
Papers.** 

Lowell*s  prose  writings  consist  of  political  and  literary 
essays  and  a  few  miscellaneous  papers.    All  the  political  essays 

which  he  cared  to  have  preserved  are  contained 
p  ™^  E  ^^  *  ^^^  volume  which  he  compiled  late  in  life. 

With  but  one  or  two  exceptions  the  papers  in 
this  collection  were  written  during  the  period  of  Civil  War 
and  reconstruction,  and  first  appeared  in  the  "Atlantic**  or  the 
"North  American.**  There  is  no  representative  of  the  earlier 
contributions  to  the  "Anti-Slavery  Standard,**  and  other 
reform  publications,  and  but  a  small  part  of  what  he  wrote  at 
a  later  time.    Even  the  few  essays  that  were  chosen  for  preser^ 


278  Akebigan  Literatubb 

vation  were  edited  and  reyised,  some  of  them  with  a  resulting 
confusion  of  tenses;  so  that  they  occasionally  seem  like 
prophecy  written  after  the  fact.  This  selection  and  revision 
was  no  doubt  wise.  During  the  early  part  of  his  life  Lowell 
considered  that  his  mission  was  poetry,  and  prose  was  but  an 

<  unimportant  avocation.     In  later  years  his  most  carefully 
,  written  articles  had^  in  order  to  be  immediately  effective,  some 

of  the  qualities  that  make  against  permanency.  The  few 
selected  essays  give  an  adequate  idea  of  his  method  and  of  his 
principles. 

Chief  among  these  principles  is  a  JaitlLia.dejnocracy^  based 
on  faith  in  mankind.    His  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  the 

American  idea  did  not,  however,  blind  him  to 
Lowtll's  American  faults.    In  his  later  essays,  such  as 

2J|^  that  on  ''The  Place  of  the  Independent  in  Poli- 

tics,** he  shows  his  appreciation  of  American 
shortcomings  with  almost  unpleasant  frankness.  His  ideal- 
ism led  him  to  argue  from  general  truths  rather  than  from 
expediency,  even  where  practical  questions  were  most  immi- 
'  nent.  His  whimsicality  led  him  to  indulge  in  puns  and  di- 
^  gressions,  even  in  the  discussion  of  the  most  serious  subjects. 
He  played  on  the  name  of  a  Southern  statesman  to  entitle  one 
of  his  most  earnest  essays  written  during  the  War  ''The  Pick- 
ens and  Stealings  Eebellion.**    His  candor  and  fairness  showed 

<  itself  now  and  then  in  some  surprisingly  frank  statement ;  and 
his  moral  enthusiasm  is  often  expressed  in  passages  of  strong, 
ahnost  impassioned,  prose. 

Lowells  first  volume  of  literary  criticism  wsAjJonvermtions^ 
on  some  of  the  Old  Poets,  published  in  1845.    He  chose  this 

old-fashioned  form  in  which  to  present  his 
MtiMl^Essa        opinions  because  it  gave  him  the  chance  for  a 

rambling  treatment  without  apparent  lack  of 
unity.  His  later  literary  essays,  though  in  more  conventional 
form,  are  still  conversations,  or  rather  monologues,  on  thQ 


The  Central  Period  279 

greater  writers.  He  rarely  discnsBed  his  contemporaries^  and 
— strangely  in  view  of  Ms  sure  editorial  judgments — ^when 
he  did  he  was  not  at  his  best.  His  essays  on  Percival  and 
Thoreau  are  unsound  and  unfair.  When  he  professed  to  re- 
view a  recent  book  he  wrote  an  essay,  after  the  English 
fashion,  on  some  subject  which  the  book  suggested.  He  was  a 
wide  reader  and  he  early  acquired  the  habit  of  making  marginal 
and  fiyleaf  annotations.  When  he  undertook  an  essay  on  Dante, 
or  Chaucer,  or  Shakespeare,  his  own  copies  of  these  masters 
contained  an  abundance  of  suggestions.  The  disadvantage 
was  that  these  marginal  annotations,  made  at  different  times 
and  in  different  moods,  led  to  a  rambling  method  of  treat- 
ment, and  sometimes  to  abrupt  changes  of  tone.  There  is, 
however,  usually  an  underlying  plan  to  the  essay,  and  a 
certain  consistency  is  secured  by  the  reappearance  of  a  few 
favorite  ideas.  Among  these  are  his  faith  in  democracy,  a 
punctiliousness  regarding  certain  matters  in  the  form  of 
prose,  an  aversion  to  the  exaltation  of  the  Saxon  element  in 
the  language,  an  insistence  on  the  legitimacy  of  the  Ameri- 
can idiom,  a  tendency  to  depreciate  what  America  has  done  in 
literature,  and  a  habit,  more  common  now  since  the  vogue  of 
Matthew  Arnold,  of  adopting  the  comparative  method  in 
discussing  English  literature.  One  of  his  peculiarities  in 
method  is  that  of  referring  to  obscure  and  unheard  of  au- 
thorities in  a  manner  that  sometimes  seems  pedantic,  and 
that  is  often -unilluminating  and  wearisome.  This  is  shown 
in  an  essay  like  '^New  England  Two  Centuries  Ago,^  which 
is  nominally  a  review  of  two  historical  works.  Another  pe- 
culiarity is  the  unexpected  introduction  of  quips,  puns,  and 
odd  turns  of  phrase.  Thus,  in  the  essay  on  Shakespeare,  he 
remarks  in  the  midst  of  an  otherwise  serious  and  straight- 
forward passage:  ''Shakespeare  himself  has  left  us  a  preg- 
nant satire  on  dogmatical  and  categorical  aesthetics  (which 
commonly  in  discussion  soon  lose  their  ceremonious  tails 


280  Akebioak  Ltteratubb 

and  are  reduced  to  the  intemeeine  dog  and  cat  of  their  bald 
first  syllables)/'  These  whimsical  expressions  are  less  notice- 
able in  the  later  prose.  With  the  peculiarities  of  the  essays 
that  have  been  mentioned  goes  naturally  their  chief  virtue — 
that  they  are  the  frank,  genuine  expression  of  opinion  and 
feeling  by  a  scholar  who  is  at  the  same  time  a  whole-souled 
lovable  man.  It  is  a  mistake  to  read  the  essays  without 
thinking  as  much  of  the  author  as  of  the  subject. 

The  only  volume  of  jniscellaneous  essays  is  the  Fireside 
Travels,  made  up  in  1864  of  papers  that  had  been  published 

in  magazines.  The  first  and  the  best  of  the 
Lowell's  collection  is  "Cambridge  Thirty  Years  Ago/* 

S^«»«"      in  wHch  the  author  recalls  boyirfi  xnemories 

of  his  native  village.  "The  Moosehead  Jour- 
nal'* is  a  rather  dull  account  of  a  journey  into  the  Northern 
woods.  The  greater  part  of  the  volume  is  made  up  of  remi- 
niscences of  Italian  travels  with  his  friend  W.  W.  Story.  These 
are  somewhat  thin  and  are  full  of  traveller's  Italian  phrases 
and  of  references  to  happenings  of  little  interest  to  anyone 
except  the  participants.  Better  than  anything  in  this  col- 
lection are  "MyOarden  Acquaintogce''  and  "On  a  Certain 
Condescension. in. Foifiigiifirp/'.. in  the  wolxjiie  My  Study  Win^ 
dows.  The  first  of  these  is  an  especially  charming  out-of- 
door  essay,  showing  as  well  as  any  of  the  poems  the  author's 
close  observation  of  nature.  The  second,  on  gc  more  patriotic 
theme,  contains  some  of  his  finest  humor. 

During  the  later  years  of  his  life  Lowell  suffered  from  over- 
praise,  due   partly  to  his   diplomatic   and   social   successes 

abroad,  partly  to  the  fact  that  he  was  the  most 
Lowell's  available  man  for  Harvard  and  literary  Bos- 

?*^^  ton  to  set  up  as  an  idol.    At  this  time  it  be- 

came customary  to  designate  him  as  "the  great- 
est American  man  of  letters."  When  he  died  he  left  so  de- 
lightful a  memory  that  it  is  still  hard  to  determine  just  how 


The  Central  Period  281 

much  this  phrase  means.  Even  in  the  future  the  critic  who 
forms  the  acquaintance  of  his  charming  personality  through 
the  Letters  will  be  tempted  to  rank  his  writings  higher  than 
they  deserve.  It  seems,  however,  that  his  poetry,  the  work 
by  which  he  set  the  greatest  store,  has  not  the  qualities  that 
will  give  permanency.  Notwithstanding  its  high  ideals  it 
is  too  commonplace  in  thought  and  far  too  imitative  in  form. 
Lowell  never  succeeded,  except  in  his  dialect  verse,  in  develop- 
ing an  individual  manner.  Some  of  the  nature  poems  will 
long  delight  those  who  enjoy  descriptive  verse,  the  'Vision 
of  Sir  Launf  aP'  will  appeal  to  those  who  love  a  poetic  allegory, 
and  the  '^Commemoration  Ode''  will  hold  its  place  among 
American  patriotic  poems — ^but  the  verse  as  a  whole  hardly 
makes  the  same  popular  appeal  as  that  of  Longfellow  and 
Whittier,  while  it  just  lacks  the  perfection  that  would  endear 
it  to  the  scholar. 

The  prose  has  been  dismissed  by  one  of  the  greatest  Ameri- 
can critics  with  the  remark  that  it  "is  of  a  transitory  nature, 
and  steadily  grows  less  interesting.'*  This  is  no  doubt  true 
of  the  political  writings;  if  it  is  true  of  the  critical  essajrs 
it  is  because  they  contain  so  much  of  the  author  that  they 
are  valuable  only  to  those  who  know  his  personality.  It 
seems  likely  that  they  will  long  continue  to  be  suggestive, 
though  they  will  no  doubt  lose  much  of  their  popularity  as 
the  traditions  of  Lowell  the  man  fade  away. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  whimsical  lapses  of  taste  mar  the 

perfect  form  of  all  but  the  latest  writings  in 
f  T*Bte     *^**'    l^oth  verse  and  prose.    In  the  poems  there  are 

not  only  prosaic  lines  such  as  have  been  cited 
from  the  'Vision  of  Sir  Launf al,"  but  such  eccentricities  as : 

I  waited  with  a  maddened  grin 
To  hear  that  voice  aU  icy  thin 
Slide  forth  and  teU  my  deadly  sin 
To  heU  and  heaven,  Rosaline  I 


282  Ameeican  Literatubb 

in  the  midst  of  a  serious  impassioned  lyric.  In  the  prose 
there  are  puns^  flippant  digressions^  allusions  to  unheard  of 
men  and  things^  and  pedantic  exhibitions  of  vocabulary,  as 
in  the  following  from  Fireside  Travels: 

By  and  by,  perhaps,  enough  observations  will  have  been  recorded 
to  assure  us  that  these  recurrences  are  firmamental,  and  histrionomers 
wiU  have  measured  accurately  the  sidereal  years  of  races.  When  that 
is  once  done,  events  wiU  move  with  the  quiet  of  an  orrery  and 
nations  will  consent  to  their  j^eridynamis  and  apodynamis  with 
planetary  composure. 

Such  peculiarities  as  these  may  be  pardoned,  or  even  enjoyed 
by  the  author^s  friends,  but  they  repel  the  disinterested  reader 
who  loves  artistic  work  for  its  own  sake. 

I  The  writings  of  Lowell  that  have  most  chance  of  life  are 
probably  the  'TBiglow  Papers.**    These  are  without  question 

the  greatest  American  political   satire,   and 

La8^/w?k     *^®y    ^^^^    better    than    anything    else    the 

author's  originality.  It  may  safely  be  pre- 
dicted that  they  will  live  in  American  political  history 
as  other  political  satires  have  lived;  and  they  are  fairly 
well  known  abroad,  where  it  is  customary  to  refer  to 
Lowell  as  an  American  humorist.  But  after  a  generation 
such  writings  are  little  read  except  by  the  special  student — 
it  is  their  fame,  and  not  themselves,  that  survives.  In  this  case 
the  dialect,  now  obsolete  in  the  community  where  the  author 
heard  it  spoken,  may  aid  in  hastening  oblivion. 

In  conclusion,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  promise  of 
enduring  literary  fame  is  not  the  only  praise  that  can  be 
bestowed  upon  a  man  of  letters.  The  greater  part  of  LowelPs 
life  and  energy  was  given  to  affairs  of  his  own  time,  and  his 
:  influence  on  his  contemporaries,  if  not  his  published  works, 
gives  him  a  place  in  the  literary  history  of  his  country.  As 
political  reformer,  as  editor,  as  teacher,  above  all  as  an  ex- 
ample of  the  type  of  scholarly  gentleman  that  the  new  world 
was  able  to  produce,  he  perhaps  did  more  than  any  of  his 


The  Central  Period  283 

contemporaries  to  dignify  American  literature  at  home  and 
to  win  for  it  respect  abroad. 

Thomas  Wentworth  Higfflnson  (1823-1911),  the  last  sur- 
vivor  of   the   distinguished   group   to   which   he   belonged, 

was  a  man  of  interesting  personality  and  no 
Thomas  small  ability.    He  was  a  graduate  of  Harvard, 

2|ggj^g^jjj  and  preached  for  a  time,  but  gave  up  his  pul- 

pit because  of  his  transcendental  and  anti- 
slavery  views.  He  took  part  in  attempts  to  rescue  fugitive 
slaves,  aided  in  the  strife  to  keep  Kansas  free,  and  had  sym- 
pathetic knowledge  of  John  Brown^s  Virginia  campaign. 
In  1862  he  entered  the  war,  and  was  later  colonel  of  the 
first  black  regiment  organized.  After  two  years  he  was  forced 
to  leave  the  service  on  account  of  wounds,  and  for  the  rest  of 
his  life  devoted  himself  mainly  to  literature  and  to  the 
woman's  suffrage  movement.  He  published  a  great  variety 
of  works — ^poems,  biographies,  histories,  and  essays.  As  a 
controversialist  he  was  saved  from  tediousness  by  a  touch  of 
humor,  and  his  literary  and  miscellaneous  essays  are  often 
charming  in  manner.  Perhaps  his  most  valuable  work  is 
found  in  his  autobiography,  which  bears  the  apt  title  of 
Cheef^yl^^^  and  in  some  of  the  many  late  essays  in 

which  he  gives  reminiscences  of  the  greater  men  he  had 
known,  and  of  the  great  happenings  in  which  he  had  borne 
a  part. 

A  great  host  of  New  England  men  and  women  wrote  and 
spoke  in  favor  of  abolition,  but  few  won  a  place  in  literary 

history.  Mra.  Julia  Warc^  Howp  H  819-1910)^ 
'^^f .    .  was  the  daughter  of  a  New  York  banker,  but 

Writers  Iv^^A  in  Boston  after  her  marriage  in  1843. 

Her  early  interests  were  in  literary  and  philo- 
sophical studies,  but  the  greater  part  of  her  long  life  was 
given  to  reforms.  With  her  husband  she  edited  an  anti- 
slavery  paper  in  Boston^  and  after  the  war  she  became  active 


284  Amerioak  Lttebatubb 

in  the  woman's  suffrage  propaganda.  She  wrote  poems,  two 
plays,  descriptions  of  travel,  and  other  miscellaneous  prose, 
and  published  a  somewhat  disappointing  volume  of  Bemi- 
niscences.  Her  only  work  which  is  likely  to  live  is  the  intense 
but  not  very  intelligible  ^^Battle  HvmT]  ft^  t^^  ^^ri?h1ir^^ — 
one  of  many  attempts  by  patriotic  poets  to  fit  dignified 
words  to  the  stirring  tune  of  "John  Brown's  Body/*  ,Lucy 
Larcom  (_1826-18g3L)  belongs  by  association  with  the  anti- 
slavery  group,  though  few  of  the  poems  preserved  in  her  col- 
lected works  touch  on  slavery.  Her  girlhood  was  spent  as  an 
operative  in  the  Lowell  cotton  mills.  For  a  time  she  lived 
in  Illinois,  but  returned  to  Massachusetts  in  1862,  where  she 
taught  school  and  edited  "Our  Young  Folks.'*  She  early 
made  the  acquaintance  of  Whittier,  who  often  revised  her 
writings.  Her  poems  are  short  and  mostly  lyric,  and  many 
of  the  best  seem  like  thinner  echoes  of  Whittier*s.  She  had 
a  fondness  for  sentimental  themes,  such  as  the  sailor's  wife 
still  asking  for  the  long  lost  vessel;  and  she  wrote  many 
poems  for  children.  Her  work  is  fairly  well  sustained  on  the 
level  she  adopts,  and  if  she  never  approaches  the  heights  of 
her  model,  Whittier,  her  occasional  lapses  are  less  noticeable. 

IV.  Miscellaneous  New  England  Writers 

The  New  England  writers  still  to  be  considered  cannot  be 
classed  either  as  transcendentalists  or  as  anti-slavery  re- 
formers, yet  most  of  them  had  some  relations  with  one  or 
both  of  these  groups.  Longfellow  wrote  poems  on  slavery, 
Hawthorne  resided  at  Brook  Farm,  and  Holmes  was  the  life- 
long friend  of  many  of  the  transcendentalists  and  wrote  the 
biography  of  their  chief.  With  none  of  these  men,  however, 
was  political  reform  or  idealistic  philosophy  the  chief  con- 
sideration. They  represent  rather  the  more  distinctly 
scholarly  and  esthetic  impulses  of  the  ^^renaissance  of  New 
England." 


The  Central  Period  285 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longldlow  (1807-1882)  traced  back 
his  ancestry  to  John  and  Priscilla  Alden  and  other  passengers 

in  the  Mayflower.  His  father,  a  Harvard 
Henry  graduate,  was  a  successful  lawyer  in  Portland, 

^^^^         where  Henry  was  bom.    As  a  boy  he  showed 

characteristics  that  seem  to  foreshadow  cer- 
tain limitations  of  his  poems.  He  attended  public  school  but 
one  week  because  the  boys  were  too  rough ;  his  favorite  play- 
mates were  girls;  he  shot  off  a  gun  but  once;  and  he  was  wont 
to  stuff  his  ears  with  cotton  on  the  Fourth  of  July,  that  he 
might  escape  the  noise.  On  the  other  hand  he  was  a  bright 
and  intelligent  boy,  of  excellent  manners  and  disposition. 
He  studied  in  private  schools  and  at  Bowdoin  college,  where 
he  was  graduated  with  the  class  of  1825.  Among  his  fellow 
students  at  Bowdoin  were  Franklin  Pierce,  Hawthorne,  and 
Abbott,  the  historian. 

The  Longfellow  home  was  one  of  culture,  with  a  fair  li- 
brary, and  Henry  early  formed  the  habit  of  reading.  His 
"bo/s  one  book'^  was  Irving^s  Sketch-Booh.    Of  the  poets  we 

know    that    he    read    Tom    Moore,    Cowper, 

Longfellow's        Qssian,  and  on  Sundays  Hannah  More.     He 
Early  Trainmg  '  .         .4.  .  * ,  • 

early  began  to  write  verse,  and  one  of  his  pro- 
ductions was  published  in  a  local  paper  when  he  was  but 
thirteen.  While  in  college  many  of  his  verses  appeared  in  the 
'TJnited  States  Literary  Gazette,**  and  they  made  up  a  con- 
siderable part  of  a  volume  of  Miscellaneous  Poems  selected 
from  that  journal  in  1826.  Xike  hundreds  of  other  Ameri- 
cans he  felt  that  the  time  had  come  for  the  production  of  a 
native  literature.  He  chose  this  theme  for  his  commence- 
ment piece,  and  he  wished  to  devote  himself  to  letters  as  a 
profession.  His  father,  however,  advised  him  to  study  law, 
and  he  would  probably  have  done  so  if  he  had  not  by  chance 
made  a  favorable  impression  on  one  of  the  trustees  of  Bow- 
doin college,  and  so  received  the  offer  of  a  professorship  of 


!^86  Amkbigak  Litshatubs 

modem  languages.  The  proffer  of  snch  a  poeition  to  a 
fresh  graduate  seems  strange  now,  but  it  must  be  remembered 
that  Ticknor  at  Harvard  was  almost  the  only  professor  of 
modem  languages  in  an  American  college,  and  that  the  salary 
of  a  professor  at  Bowdoin  was  only  $800  or  $1,000.  To  fit 
himself  for  the  position  Longfellow  went  abroad  for  three 
years,  spending  most  time  in  France,  Spain,  and  Italy,  and  a 
few  months  in  Germany.  After  his  return  he  taught  French, 
Italian,  and  Spanish;  and  as  textbooks  were  few  and  unsatis- 
factory he  translated  a  French  grammar,  and  edited  read- 
ing books  in  French  and  Spanish.    In  1831  he  was  married 

I  to  Mary  S.  Potter^  daughter  of  a  neighbor  at  Portland.  He 
began  to  contribute  articles  on  literary  subjects  to  the  "North 
American  Eeview,'*  and  he  published  in  the  "New  England 
Magazine"  "The  Schoolmaster,''  a  series  of  articles  with  an 
Addisonian  introduction  and  notes  of  foreign  scenes  after  the 
manner  of  the  Sketch-Boole,  Some  of  this  material  was  used 
again  m  Outre-Mefj  which  began  to  appear  in  numbers  in 

>  1833,  and  was  published  complete  in  two  volumes  in  1835. 
In  1833  he  had  also  published  in  a  thin  volume  a  translation 
of  "Coplas  de  Manrique.'' 

When  in  1834  Ticknor  decided  to  resign  the  Smith  pro- 
fessorship at  Harvard,  Longfellow  was  chosen  as  his  successor. 

Early  in  the  next  year  he  went  abroad,  this 
^^^*"^**  time  to  perfect  himself  in  the  languages  of 

northern  Europe.  He  sailed  to  England  and  spent  the  sum- 
mer in  Sweden  and  Denmark.  In  Holland  his  wife  died 
after  a  brief  illness.  He  went  to  Heidelberg  for  the  winter, 
and  after  a  summer  in  Switzerland  returned  to  take  up  his 
duties  at  Harvard.     In  1839  he  published  Hjiperiqn^a  Bp^ 

^mmcej  and  Voices  of  the  Nightj^  a  collection  of  poems.  Hy- 
perion is  an  idealized  traveller's  journal,  the  events  of  which 
correspond  with  those  of  the  author's  second  visit  to  Europe, 
from  the  death  of  his  wife  to  the  end  of  his  stay  in  Switzer- 


The  Central  Period  287 

land.  The  sub-title,  "A  Eomanee^^  is  deserved,  if  at  all,  be- 
cause of  the  introduction  of  a  heroine,  Mary  Ashburton, 
whom  the  hero,  Paul  Flemming,  meets  in  Switzerland,  and 
whom  he  leaves  after  an  ardent  but  imsuccessful  wooing. 
This  was  a  recognizable  portrait  of  Miss  Prances  E.  Appleton,  | 
whom  Longfellow  had  met  at  the  place  described,  and  of 
whom  he  saw  much  in  Switzerland.  The  more  emotional 
scenes  were  presumably  imaginary,  but  all  the  other  details 
were  real.  This  representation  of  a  courtship  on  the  part  of 
a  widower  of  but  a  few  months,  and  the  portrayal  of  real 
characters,  seemed  to  many  persons  in  bad  taste,  and  the  lady 
and  her  family  are  said  to  have  been  for  a  time  displeased. 
Other  gossip  of  this  date  pictures  Longfellow  as  a  little  of  a 
dandy,  with  what  seemed  to  sedate  Cambridge  an  over-fas- 
tidiousness and  a  love  of  gorgeousness  in  waistcoats.  But 
he  was  successful  with  his  classes,  and  he  drew  to  himself  a 
close  circle  of  friends.  Four  of  these.  Professor  Felton, 
Charles  Sumner,  George  S.  Hillard,  and  Henry  B.  Cleve- 
land, made  up  with  Longfellow  a  set  known  as  the  "Five  of 
ClubsJ'  or  as  they  were  nicknamed  the  '^Jtfutual  Admiration 
.Sox?iety.^*  The  larger  group  of  his  friends  came  to  include 
Lowell,  Emerson,  Holmes,  and  indeed  nearly  all  the  Boston 
and  Cambridge  literary  men. 

While  Hyperion  met  with  some  unfriendly  criticism.  Voices 
of  the  Night  was  warmly  received,  and  Longfellow  again 

turned  to  poetry.  His  next  work  was  in  the 
Longfellow's  ballad  form,  and  in  1841  he  j^VLhli&heiBallads 
Poetry  ^^P'^.  other  Poems,     The  next  year  he  went 

abroad  for  his  health.  While  confined  to  his 
berth  during  the  stormy  passage  home  he  wrote  his  Poems  on 
Slavery.  These  were  published  in  a  volume  on  his  return,  and 
were  included  in  the  popular  edition  of  his  works,  but  were 
omitted  from  a  Philadelphia  edition  intended  for  Southern 
circulation.    This  omission  incensed  the  abolitionists,  as  the 


288  Ahebioan  Literaturb 

poems  themselves  had  incensed  others,  and  for  a  time  the 
author  found  himself  between  two  fires. 

In  1843  Miss  Appleton  yielded  to  the  protracted  wooing  of 
the  poet.    Her  father  purchased  as  a  gift  the  historic  Craigiy 

Houscj^  in  which  Longfellow  had  taken  rooms 

Boi^^T^e      ^^^^  ^®  ^*  ^®^*  ^  Cambridge,  and  which 

has  since  been  associated  with  his  name.  This 
was  the  beginning  of  a  period  of  great  happiness  and  earnest 
productive  work.  The  poet^s  domestic  life  was  ideal,  the 
circle  of  his  friends  was  large  and  delightful,  and  Mrs. 
Longfellow's  property  together  with  his  salary  and  the  re- 
turns from  his  literary  work  enabled  him  to  live  in  comfort. 
His  works  followed  in  rapid  succession— 3r^?.Bf^jfr^  of^  Bruges 
.Cktid^other  Poems  in  1846,  TSv^^gf^jfLP.  ir\  JMZ^  M^^V:2:3h/ 
a  prose  romance,  in  1849,  The  Sea^ide^md  thj^  in 

1850,  ^Ae  Oplden  Legend  ijxXS&hBiawathii  in  J.85§,  Miles 
^§to>ndish  ia  J.S5S*  Many  of  the  shorter  poems  were  first  pub- 
lished in  the  magazines,  particularly  in  the  ^'Atlantic 
Monthly  after  this  was  established  in  1857.  In  1854  he 
resigned  his  professorship  that  he  might  give  himself  entirely 
to  literary  work,  and  from  this  time  the  amount  of  his  writ- 
ings increased. 

In  1861  the  course  of  his  life  was  broken  by  the  tragic 
death  of  his  wife.  While  she  was  sitting  in  the  library  with 
her  family  her  dress  caught  fire  and  she  was  fatally  burned. 
In  his  distress  Longfellow  tried  to  find  distraction  in  com- 
pleting the  translation  of  Dante^  which  he  had  begun 
years  before.  He  also  published  TaZe^  o/  a  Wayside  Inn, 
1863,  and  Fleur-de-Luce,  a  collection  of  shorter  poems,  1866. 
The  N^w  England  Tragedies,  1868,  and  The  Divine  Tragedy, 
1871,  were  united  with  The  Oolden  Legend,  published  earlier, 
to  make  up  the  trilogy  Ghristus^  a  Myster^j^  issued  in  this 
form  in  1872.  Other  late  volumes  were  Three  Boohs  of  Song, 
containing  the  second  day  of  Tah&.ofg  Waffsid^Jtmr  1873, 


The  Cbnteal  Period  289 

The  Masque  of  Pandora,  187 ByKeramoSf  18Y8^  Ultima  Thule, 
1880,  In  the  Harbor,  1882.  In  1868-9  Longfellow  was  agam 
abroad,  and  during  his  visit  to  England  received  the  degrees  i 
of  LL.D.  from  Cambridge  and  D.C.L  from  Oxford.  During  I 
his  later  years  he  lived  at  Craigie  House,  surrounded  by  his 
children  and  friends,  receiving  modestly  but  complacently 
the  tributes  of  admiration  from  many  readers.  The  long 
dramatic  poem  "Michael  Angelo,**  which  he  had  had  by  him 
for  many  years,  but  never  fully  completed,  was  published  the 
year  after  his  death. 

Longfellow's  character  was  one  of  great  mildness,  sweet- 
ness, and  purity  rather  than  of  strength.    He  made  himself 

widely  beloved;  and  he  took  his  chief  enjoy- 
^ractw  *        ment  in  the  home  circle,  the  library,  and  the 

quieter  pleasures  of  life.     He  was  strangely 
indifiEerent  to  the  forces  that  were  acting  about  him.    He  was 
a  friend  of  Emerson  and  other  transcendentalists,  yet  one 
might  read  all  his  writings  and  never  suspect  that  a  great  I 
ethical  and  philosophical  upheaval  was  going  on  about  him. 
He  lived  through  the  anti-slavery  struggle,  and  always  pro-» 
fessed  in  a  quiet  way  his  opposition  to  slavery;  yet  his  few 
poems  on  the  subject  were  written  as  a  diversion  on  a  rough 
ocean  voyage  as  early  as  1842.    In  the  more  stirring  years 
that  followed  his  interest  seems  to  have  come  largely  second- 
hand through  his  friendship  for  Charles  Sumner.    Still  more  j 
strange  was  his  apparent  indifference  to  art.    At  the  time  of' 
his  early  journeys  abroad  all  New  England  was  experiencing 
an  artistic  awakening,  but  in  poems,  essays,  and  published 
letters  he  scarcely  makes  mention  of  a  picture  or  a  statue, 
and  he  refers  to  a  building,  if  at  all,  only  for  its  connection 
with  some  legend.     In  Florence  he  notices  only  some  wax- 
works representing  scenes  of  the  plague,  and  these  he  ranks 
as  "equally  admirable'*  with  Dante's  poem.    Even  in  "Michael 
Angelo/'  written  late  in  life,  he  touches  on  art  but  Kghtlyj^ 


290  Amesioan  Litekatube 

and  then  only  to  echo  commonplace  criticism.     His  nearest 
approach  to  an  adequate  treatment  of  an  artistic  theme  is 
perhaps  found  in  the  bookish  dilettantism  of  ^^Keramos/' 
I     In  minute  scholarship  Longfellow  was  inferior  to  Ticknor, 
»hi8  predecessor,  and  Lowell,  his  successor,  in  the  Smith  pro- 
fessorship.     The    weakness   of    his    classics, 
i^?^^|r*        especially,  gave  critics  a  chance  to  make  an 

absurd  ado  over  such  matters  as  the  use  of  the 
adjective  for  the  adverbial  form  in  "Excelsior,**  and  the  mis- 
quotation in  the  opening  lines  of  "Jugurtha/*  His  favorite 
reading  was  in  the  poets  of  the  middle  ages  and  Southern 
Europe,  and  he  took  especial  pleasure  in  those  legends  which 
teach  a  truth  of  universal  application.  He  left  no  essays  of 
value  to  the  careful  student,  but  he  did  much  to  acquaint 
America  with  the  songs,  sayings,  and  traditions  of  Conti- 
nental Europe. 

Up  to  the  time  of  his  graduation  from  college  Longfellow 
had  sought  expression  in  verse  rather  than  prose.  The  early 
Loofffen  w»  poems  show  smoothness  of  versification  and 
Prose— -Outre-  simplicity  of  expression,  and  contain  hints, 
Mer  and  though  no  obvious  imitations,  of  Wordsworth, 

Hyperion  Moore,  Bryant,  and  others.     On  his  selection 

for  the  Bowdoin  professorship  he  relinquished  the  idea  of 
writing  poetry,  and  for  ten  or  twelve  years  his  chief  literary 
activity  was  in  prose.    Outre-Mer,  written  under  the  influence 
'  of  Southern  Europe,  and  after  the  model  of  Irving^s  Sketch- 
Booh,  is  a  thin  copy  of  a  popular  original.    The  style,  at  least 
in  the  opening  parts,  has  a  slight  affectation  of  quaintness,  the 
descriptions  tend  to  run  to  adjectives,  and  the  humor  is  but 
partly  successful.    The  book  illustrates  the  author's  fondness 
for  old  legends,  his  tendency  to  observe  persons  rather  than 
things,  and  his  quiet  moralizing.     Hyperion,  written  after 
I  his  second  trip  abroad,  shows  the  influence  of  German  senti- 
I  mentalisQi^    It  is  a  l^  healthy  book  than  Outre-Merj^  and 


Thb  Centbal  Pebiod  291 

it  represents  a  passing  mood  of  the  author's  mind  rather 
than  his  real  self.  The  style  is  too  affected^  and  there  is  too 
much  of  a  disposition  to  discuss  the  great  problems  of  life 
on  the  part  of  a  young  man  whose  experience  was  on  the 
whole  very  limited.  At  no  other  period,  probably,  would 
Longfellow  have  written  in  just  this  way  of  "Dante,  Cer- 
vantes, Byron,  and  others;  men  of  iron — ^men  who  have  dared 
to  breast  the  strong  breath  of  public  opinion,''  and  more  of 
the  same  sort. 

The  only  later  prose  work  aside  from  unimportant  maga- 
zine articles  was  Kavanagh,  written  ten  years  after  Hyperion, 

This  romance  was  suggested  by  the  author's 
^  observations  of  life  at  Pittsfield,  Massachu- 

setts, where  he  spent  a  summer.  In  the  village  school- 
master, whose  duties  keep  him  from  the  great  literary  work 
that  he  wishes  to  undertake,  Longfellow  evidently  saw  him- 
self. The  hero,  Kavanagh,  is  a  wonderful  young  clergyman, 
who  quotes  Maria  del  Occidente,  and  is  adored  by  the  two 
most  charming  young  women  of  his  congregation.  In  the 
end  he  marries  one  of  these  heroines,  and  the  other  dies  of  a 
broken  heart.  The  book  contains  much  admirable  material 
in  the  shape  of  incidents  of  village  life,  but  they  are 
introduced  as  if  from  a  notebook,  without  the  vivifying 
touch  that  would  make  them  eflEective.  The  story  is 
not  well  knit  together  and  leaves  but  an  unsatisfactory 
impression. 

All  of  Longfellow's  prose  work  received  considerable  praise, 
and  Hyperion  was  especially  popular  with  sentimental  people, 
some  of  whom  it  is  said  took  it  for  their  guide  book  for  the 
Bhine,  and  in  Switzerland  traced  out  the  exact  course  fol- 
lowed by  the  hero.  Kavanagh  has  been  commended  by  such 
diverse  critics  as  Hawthorne  and  Howells.  Yet  it  is  doubt- 
ful if  the  names  of  these  works  would  be  remembered  to-day 
if  it  were  not  for  the  author's  fame  as  a  poet. 


292  American  Literatubb 

This  poetic  fame  may  be  said  to  have  begun  with  the  pub- 
lication of  Voices  of  the  Night  in  1839.    Up  to  this  time 

Longfellow^s  claims  as  a  poet  rested  on  some 
oicMo  creditable   juvenile  pieces   in  the   magazines 

and  the  verse  translation  of  "Coplas  de  Man- 
rique/*  It  was  in  1838-9,  while  in  the  mood  that  resulted  in 
Hyperiouy  that  he  wrote  some  moralizing  pieces  that  he  called 
"Psalms/' — a  term  which  he  retained  in  the  title  of  but  one 
of  them,  the  "Psalm  of  Life/*  These  are  in  a  variety  of 
simple  lyric  measures,  and  show,  in  both  thought  and  form, 
some  influence  of  the  German.  Each  presents  simple  reflec- 
tions on  some  of  the  great  problems  of  life,  and  closes,  as  was 
the  author's  wont,  with  a  definite  exhortation  or  moral  les- 
son. It  was  these  "psahns''  that  really  gave  popularity  to 
the  Voices  of  the  Night,  and  that  have  been  retained  under 
the  title  of  this  volume  in  later  editions.     They  are  typical 

Iof  a  large  group  of  the  author's  poems — ^the  simple  rhymed 
expression  of  simple,  genuine  aspiration  and  feeling.  This 
form  of  poetry,  whatever  critical  judgment  may  be  passed 
upon  it,  is  one  which  makes  a  wide  appeal.  Of  the  eight 
poems  which,  with  the  "Prelude,"  are  grouped  as  "Voices  of 
the  Night"  in  late  editions,  all  may  be  said  to  be  familiar, 
and  at  least  one-half  are  among  the  best  known  poems  in  the 
language. 

In  his  next  volume  Longfellow  turned  to  the  ballad.  In 
adopting  this  form  he  was  probably  influenced  by  the  German 

and  Norse  ballads,  some  of  which  he  trans- 
bSS^^"^'*        lated.     For  almost  the  first  time  he  followed 

the  advice  which  he  had  earlier  given  to  Ameri- 

I  can  authors,  and  chose  distinctively  American  subjects.    Yet 

'  "The  Skeleton  in  Armor"  and  "The  Wreck  of  the  Hesperus" 

are  in  form  imitations  of  the  antique.    The  test  of  a  ballad 

should  perhaps  be  its  popularity;  and  judged  by  this  test 

"The  Wreck  of  the  Hesperus"  must  be  pronounced  successful. 


The  Central  Period  293 

Yet  it  is  untme  to  life  and  contains  an  obtrusive  moral  that 
the  true  folk-ballad  would  have  avoided. 

The  poems  on  slavery,  written  the  next  year,  were  another 
attempt  to  treat  an  American  theme.    They  are  simple  and 

pretty,  but  the  inevitable  comparison  with 
Stadwr*^        Whittier's   utterances    on   the    same    subject 

brings  out  their  bookishness  and  lack  of  force. 
"The  Spanish  Student,*'  the  first  of  several  dramatic 
compositions,  had  really  preceded  the  two  last-mentioned 
volumes  in  date  of  writing,  but  was  not  published  in  book 
form  until  1843.  The  story  was  an  old  one,  told  by  Cer- 
vantes, and  used  by  various  Spanish  dramatists  and  by 
Middleton.  It  fits  well  with  the  romantic  mood  in  which  the 
author  found  himself  about  the  time  of  its  composition,  and 
gives  the  opportunity  for  some  good  verse,  including  Long- 
fellow's best  song  for  music,  "Stars  of  the  Summer  Night.'' 
The  action,  however,  does  not  carry  the  reader  along  with  it. 
The  characters  are  bookish,  not  real.  Even  the  speeches  of 
the  servant,  Chispa,  with  their  apt  application  of  Spanish 
proverbs,  seem  artificial,  and  give  the  impression  of  excellent 
material  unskilfully  used. 

In  the  volumes  of  1845  and  1846  Longfellow  continued  the 
forms  of  composition  which  he   had  tried  before,  but  in 

"Evangeline"  he  attempted  a  long  narrative 
y^ng^    t  poem.    The  well-known  story  that  Hawthorne 

declined  to  use  the  plot,  while  Longfellow  eagerly  welcomed 
it,  shows,  if  true,  how  well  each  knew  his  own  capabilities. 
The  mildly  sentimental  story,  with  its  slight  action  and  its 
pathos,  was  admirably  suited  to  the  poef  s  genius,  and  many 
of  his  critics  consider  the  poem  his  masterpiece.  In  view  of 
the  fact  that  the  descriptions  have  a  great  charm  for  many 
readers  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  they  were  based  on  such 
works  as  the  author  found  in  his  library,  and  on  a  travelling 
diorama  of  the  Mississippi,  the  coming  of  which  he  records 


294  Akbbioan  Lttebatusb 

in  his  diftry  as  a  ''special  benediction/'  He  had  never 
seen  and  he  made  no  attempt  to  see  the  places  which  he  por- 
trays. The  poem  precipitated  a  discussion  on  the  possibilities 
I  of  English  hexameters^  and  is  still  one  of  the  best  known 
illustrations  of  what  may  be  accomplished  in  this  metre. 

The  poet  again  turned  to  the  middle  age  in  the  "Golden 
Legend/'  which  will  be  mentioned  later  as  part  of  the  trilogy 

of  "Christus.'*  In  "Hiawatha"  he  took  up 
another  American  theme.  Many  authors  had 
made  use  of  Indian  subjects^  and  each  had  been  blamed  either 
for  over-idealizing  his  characters^  or  for  making  them  so 
realistic  as  to  be  repulsive.  Longfellow  decided  to  write,  not 
of  individual  Indians,  but  of  the  myths  and  traditions  of  the 
race.  His  material  was  mostly  taken  from  Schoolcraft,  who 
had  just  published  the  result  of  his  researches  among  the 
Indians  of  the  Northwest.  The  legends  are  of  course  selected 
and  modified  for  poetic  purposes.  The  metre,  the  unrhymed 
trochaic  tetrameter,  is  that  of  the  Finnish  epic,  the  ^'Kale- 
vala,"  and  was  chosen  as  being  in  keeping  with  the  nature 
of  the  subject  and  the  character  of  the  Indians  themselves. 
The  metre  is  perhaps  the  most  marked  characteristic  of  the 
poem.  Its  movement  took  the  ear,  though  it  was  often  criti- 
cised as  jigging  and  monotonous.  The  lack  of  rhyme  made 
easy  a  host  of  parodies  that  complicated  the  discussion. 
The  popular  judgment  was  strongly  in  favor  of  both  the 
•  content  and  the  form  of  the  poem,  and  it  is  still  known  to 
f  every  one.  Of  late,  however,  it  seems  to  make  its  strongest 
appeal  to  children. 

The  choice  of  these  unusual  metres  for  "Evangeline"  and 
'^Hiawatha"  indicates  how  carefully  Longfellow  studied  metri- 
cal effects,  and  how  readily  he  adopted  meas- 

l^M^^^ects   ^^^  from  foreign  sources.     His  ear  was  not 

so  sensitive  as  that  of  some  poets,  and  he 
sometimes  carried  the  use  of  a  device  too  far,  as  often  in 


The  Central  Period  295 


'^Hiawatha/'  and  in  the  sibilant  line  often  quoted  from 
''Evangeline/* 

When  she  had  passed  it  seemed  like  the  ceasing  of  exquisite  mnsic. 

On  the  other  hand  his  taste  never  failed  him  altogether;  and 
often  his  verses  have  a  haunting  quality  that  defies  analysis^ 
as  in  "My  Lost  Youth  :** 

I  can  see  the  shadowy  lines  of  trees, 

And  catch,  in  sudden  gleams, 
The  sheen  of  the  far-surrounding  seas, 
And  islands  that  were  the  Hesperides 
Of  all  my  boyish  dreams. 
And  the  burden  of  that  old  song, 
It  murmurs  and  whispers  stiU : 
''Atboy's  will  is  the  wind's  will, 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long  thoughts.*' 

"The  Courtship  of  Miles  StandisV  suggests  'TBvangeline*' 
in  both  form  and  method^  though  it  is  less  sentimental  and 

probably  stronger.     Priscilla^s  answer,  about 
Ouw  liaiTatiye   ^y^j^  ^jj^  gtory  centers,  was  a  tradition  in  the 

poet's  family.    The  "Tales  of  a  Wayside  Inn" 
are  a  series  of  stories  put  in  the  mouths  of  various  persons 
supposed  to  gather  at  the  old  inn  at  Sudbury,  a  favorite 
resort  of  college  parties  from  Cambridge.     The  characters, 
whose  identity  is  but  thinly  veiled,  were  friends  of  the  author, . 
the  best-known  being  Ole  Bull,  the  violinist,  and  Thomas  i 
William  Parsons,  the  poet.    The  fact  that  the  speakers  repre- 1 
sent  many  nationalities  made  it  easy  to  introduce  a  great 
variety  of  stories  which  the  author  had  met  in  his  reading. 
But  one  of  the  tales  is  said  to  be  of  his  own  invention. 

Christus,  made  up  of  the  "Divine  Tragedy,*'  "The  Golden 
Legend,'*  and  "The  New  England  Tragedies,"  was  a  work 

by  which  the  author  set  great  store,  but  which 
never  became  popular.     It   is   a  trilogy  in 
which  Part  I  represents  the  ancient  world.  Part  II  the  mid- 
dle age,  and  Part  III  the  present.    "The  Divine  Tragedy" 


296  AlCBBICAN  LrrBSATUBB 

is  little  more  than  a  paraphrase  into  verse  of  the  gospel  ac* 
count  of  Christ^s  life,  the  three  acts  or  ^'passovers'*  each  repre- 
senting a  year  of  his  ministry.  It  seems  strange  that  Long- 
fellow, with  his  fondness  for  simple  expression,  should  not 
have  seen  how  far  inferior  his  version  was  to  the  prose  of  the 
Scripture  narrative.  "The  Golden  Legend,^'  the  earliest  and 
the  most  popular  of  the  divisions  of  the  poem,  retells  a  story 
of  superstition  and  maidenly  devotion.  The  main  events  and 
the  illustrative  material  are  not  well  interwoven,  and  the 
reader  feels  as  he  often  does  in  Longfellow's  complex  nar- 
ratives, that  material  has  been  introduced  from  a  notebook. 
The  "New  England  Tragedies''  are  two,  "John  Endicotf' 
and  "Giles  Corey."  Both  deal  with  Puritan  intolerance  and 
superstition,  shown  in  the  former  in  the  persecution  of  the 
Quakers,  and  in  the  latter  in  the  delusion  of  the  Salem 
witchcraft.  The  pictures  are  worked  up  with  considerable 
antiquarian  detail,  but  the  plots  are  not  well  organized.  This 
is  especially  true  of  "John  Endicott,"  where  both  the  hero 
and  the  heroine  are  lost  sight  of  at  the  end,  and  the  chief 
interest  in  the  plot  is  not  resolved.  In  the  trilogy  as  a  whole 
the  difference  between  the  parts  is  so  great  that  there  is  no 
sense  of  unity,  imd  the  representation  of  the  present  by 
Puritan  intolerance  hardly  seems  adequate. 

The  later  poems  of  Longfellow  are  similar  in  kind  and 
quality  to  those  which  had  gone  before.    They  include  more 

'^Tales  of  a  Wayside  Inn/'  the  dramatic  poems 
UtepSS        "'^^^  Masque  of  Pandora"  and  "Judas  Mac- 

cabflBus,"  and  short  poems,  many  of  them  of 
a  personal  nature.  Among  the  best  known  of  these  is  "The 
Hanging  of  the  Crane,"  suggested  by  the  home-making  of 
the  poet's  friend,  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich.  ^Tilichael  Angelo" 
is  in  dramatic  form.  It  represents  scenes  in  the  life  of  the 
great  artist  and  teaches  the  virtue  of  labor  and  single-minded 
devotion  to  art 


The  Central  Period  297 

Short  translations,  chiefly  Ijrrics  and  ballads,  from  most  of 
the  European  languages,  were  produced  throughout  the  poet^s 

life.     Those  which  were  suited  to  his  genius 
^^^^        were  both  faithfully  and  sympathetically  ren- 
dered.    His  most  ambitious  translation,  that 
of  Dante,  is  praised  for  its  '^elegant  literalness,^^  but  the  I 
strength  and  power  of  the  original  were  not  his  to  give. 

All  of  Longfellow^s  works  are  readable,  but  in  searching 
for  those  on  which  his  fame  rests  it  is  as  well  to  discard  the 

prose,  the  dramas  and  dramatic  poems,  the 
SSS^St      translation  of  Dante,  and  most  of  the  "Tales 

of  a  Wayside  Inn.**  There  remain  '^Hia- 
watha,'* "Evangeline,**  and  "Miles  Standish,**  a  few  ballads 
and  other  verse  narratives,  and  a  large  number  of  poems  of 
human  aspiration  and  feeling.  All  these  live  with  undimin- 
ished vigor,  but  it  is  those  of  the  last  group  that  are  best 
known  and  that  constitute  the  poet*s  best  claim  to  remem- 
brance. If  judgment  is  based  on  the  nimiber  of  poems  that 
are  household  quotations  there  is  no  question  that  in  America 
and  probably  in  England  Longfellow  exceeds  every  modem 
poet  in  popularity.  His  admirers  also  point  out  that  the 
works  of  no  other  English-speaking  poet  of  his  century  have 
been  so  widely  translated.  It  is  much  to  be  the  favorite  poet 
of  so  many  people.  But  the  extravagant  praise  which  has 
followed  this  popularity  has  sometimes  seemed  to  lay  on  the 
critic  the  necessity  of  calling  attention  to  the  author's  limi- 
tations. These  are  mostly  due  to  the  character  of  the  man, 
and  many  of  them  have  been  indicated  in  the  preceding  dis- 
cussion. He  lacked  strength,  originality,  the  seeing  eye.) 
He  wrote  from  books  rather  than  from  first  hand  observa-i 
tion,  and  he  failed  to  appreciate  the  great  movements  that 
were  stirring  the  nation,  and  all  deeply  thinking  men.  On 
the  other  lumd,  the  purity  of  his  life,  his  patriotism,  and  the 
tenderness  with  which  he  sympathized  with  the  more  com- 


298  AiffBSiOAN  LmauLTURB 

mon  trials  of  men  and  women  are  as  fully  reflected  in  his 
verse  as  are  his  defects.  He  never  wrote  an  impure  line,  or 
J  one  that  would  lessen  the  reverence  of  man  for  truth.  And 
J  to  the  young,  and  to  thousands  of  readers  whose  lives  have 
fallen  in  quiet  places,  his  "Psalms**  bring  exactly  the  solace 
and  inspiration  that  they  need.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  some 
of  these  poems  sin  against  perfect  art.  The  'Tsahn  of  Life** 
would  be  a  richer  possession  if  its  lesson  had  been  presented 
effectively  in  less  sing-song  verse,  and  without  the  absurd 
mixture  of  metaphor  so  often  pointed  out: 

And  departiiig  leave  behind  as, 
PooiprinU  on  the  $and9  of  time; 

Footprints,  that  perhaps  another. 

Sailing  o*er  Ufe^s  Bolemn  moin^ 
A  forlorn  and  shipwrecked  brother. 

Seeing,  shaU  take  heart  again. 

Still,  most  of  the  faults  in  the  poems  are  not  glaring. 

Pew  true-minded  persons  fail  to  find  in  Longfellow's  poems 
something  that  appeals  strongly  to  them  in  childhood  and 
early  youth ;  and  fortunate  are  they  to  whom  the  same  simple 
consolation  and  exhortation  remains  adequate  throughout 
life.  The  man  who  feels  the  full  stress  of  modern  thought 
may  be  tempted  to  exclaim : 

And  common  is  the  commonplace 
And  vacant  chaff  well  meant  for  grain, 

but  he  is  an  intellectual  snob  if  he  fails  to  honor  the  poetry 
that  he  found  an  inspiration  in  his  simpler  days. 
^     Nathaniel  Hathome  (1804-1864),  or,  as  he  wrote  it  later, 
HfisthaXQgy  was  bom  in  Salem.    His  earliest  American  an- 
cestor, who  came  to  Salem  in  1637,  was  a 

Hawthonie         '^"^  ^'  weight  in  the  community,  and  his  son 

was  one  of  the  witch  judges.     The  family 
declined  in  Boeial  importance,  however,  and  for  two  genera- 


The  Central  Period  299 

tions  before  the  birth  of  Nathaniel  the  Hathomes  had  been 
sea  captains.  The  story  of  loss  of  title  to  an  estate  in  Maine^ 
and  certain  traditions  regarding  family  temper  and  peculiari- 
ties, are  pretty  faithfully  repeated  in  The  Hovse  of  the  Seven 
Gables,  Nathaniel's  father  died  in  1808,  and  his  mother, 
though  apparently  not  a  morbid  woman,  withdrew  entirely 
from  the  world,  living  in  her  own  room,  and  never  sitting  at 
table  even  with  her  children.  This  peculiar  home  life  doubt- 
less had  its  effect  on  her  son.  In  1818  she  removed  for  a  time 
to  Maine,  where  she  had  relatives,  and  here  Nathaniel 
rambled  in  the  woods  imd,  as  he  says,  acquired  his  habit  of 
solitude.  Although  the  family  were  left  with  little  means 
an  uncle  undertook  the  charge  of  his  education,  and  he  suf- 
fered no  great  hardships.  He  went  back  to  Salem  to  pre-f 
pare  for  college  and  in  1821  entered  Bowdoin. 

There  seems  to  have  been  nothing  unusual  about  Haw- 
thorne's boyhood  and  college  days.    He  had  few  intimates, 

but  he  was  not  a  recluse,  and  he  had  his  share 
Yo^^"™**        in  boyish  escapades  and  college  scrapes.    His 

feat  of  printing  a  weekly  "Spectator''  with 
his  pen  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  some  juvenile  rhymes  are 
hardly  significant  of  anything  more  than  an  interest  in 
books.  His  pride  at  the  same  age  in  learning  to  chew  tobacco, 
and  later  in  some  college  dissipations  shows  nothing  but  boy- 
ishness. His  scholarship  was  fair.  Among  his  fellow  stu- 
dents at  Bowdoin  were  Longfellow,  Franklin  Pierce,  and 
Horatio  Bridge,  the  last  two  throughout  life  his  closest 
friends.  It  was  during  his  last  year  at  college  that  he  adopted 
the  "w"  in  his  name. 

After  his  graduation  Hawthorne  went  back  to  Salem,  where 
he  lived  twelve  or  fourteen  years  in  a  secluded  way,  entering 
no  profession,  and  seeing  little  of  the  world.  It  is  possible 
that  he  had  begun  Fanshawe  while  at  college.  If  not,  his 
earliest  literary  attempt  was  "Seven  Tales  of  my  Native 


300  Amerigak  Lttebatubb 

Land/*  a  oollectioii  of  short  stories  which  he  burned  after 
trying  in  vain  to  find  a  publisher.  In  1828  he  published  at 
^  his  own  expense  Fanshawe^  a  rather  melo- 
Early  Writings  dramatic  romance  of  college  life.  This  at- 
tracted little  attention,  and  he  soon  regretted 
its  publication  and  made  every  effort  to  suppress  it.  After 
his  death  his  family  characteristically  included  it  in  his  col- 
lected works.  He  next  wrote  "Provincial  Tales/*  for  which  as 
a  collection  he  could  find  no  publisher,  but  some  of  which 

IGrOodrich  took  for  use  in  his  annual,  the  "Token.**  Among 
these  were  "The  Gentle  Boy,**  and  some  of  the  other  better 
known  "Twice-Told  Tales.**  From  this  time  he  continued  to 
write  tales  and  short  sketches,  publishing  in  the  "Token** 
and  in  magazines.  In  1836,  after  he  had  been  eleven  years 
out  of  college  without  any  regular  remunerative  employment, 

I  he  undertook  the  editorship  of  the  "American  Magazine  of 
Useful  and  Entertaining  Knowledge**  at  a  salary  of  $500. 
This  was  mere  hackwork,  and  he  did  not  regret  that  the 
venture  soon  failed.  The  next  year  he  compiled  for  Goodrich 
j  a  Peter  Parley  book,  Universal  History  on  the  Basis  of 
'  Geography.  All  this  time  he  had  published  nothing  over  his 
own  signature,  and  his  name  was  first  made  known  to  the 
public  through  an  enthusiastic  notice  by  his  friend  Park 
Benjamin,  published  in  a  New  York  magazine  in  1835. 
About  this  time  Horatio  Bridge,  without  Hawthorne's 
knowledge,  gave  a  financial  guarantee  that  insured  the  pub- 
lication in  1837  of  a  volume  of  short  sketches.  The  fact 
that  these  had  been  published  before,  most  of  them  in  the 
"Token/*  led  to  the  adoption  of  the  title  Twice  Told  Tales. 

(The  appearance  of  this,  his  first  work  under  his  own  name, 
tended  to  bring  the  author  out  of  his  seclusion.  A  stronger 
infiuence  in  the  same  direction  was  exerted  by  the  Peabodys, 
an  old  Salem  family,  who  began  a  systematic  attempt  to 
form  the  acquaintance  of  their  recluse  neighbor.    The  ulti- 


The  Centeal  Period  801 

mate  result  was  the  engagement  of  Nathaniel  Hawthorne  to 
the  younger  daughter,  Sophie  Peabody. 

The  responsibility  of  an  engagement  impressed  on  Haw- 
thorne the  need  of  doing  something  for  a  living,  and  through 

the  influence  of  friends  he  secured  an  appoint- 
Boston^"^*  "*      ment  as  weigher  and  ganger  in  the  Boston 

custom  house.  His  duties  were  to  watch  the 
unloading  of  vessels  and  to  keep  tally  of  the  cargo.  At  first 
he  enjoyed  the  novelty  of  the  occupation,  but  he  soon  sickened 
of  it,  as  he  always  did  of  any  systematic  work.  The  Peabody 
family  had  removed  to  Boston,  where  they  engaged  in  pub- 
lishing and  bookselling.  It  was  probably  at  the  solicitation 
of  the  older  sister,  Elizabeth  Peabody,  that  he  wrote  three 
volumes  of  child^s  stories,  Orandfathei^^J^hair.  Famous  Old 
People,  and  Liberty  Tree.  These  represent  his  only  important 
literary  work  during  his  residence  in  Boston.  In  1841,  with 
the  change  of  administration,  he  lost  his  position,  and  at  once 
joined  the  Brook  Farm  community. 

The  Brook  Farm  scheme  seems  impractical  in  retrospect, 
yet  it  was  carefully  planned  by  men  of  business  sense,  and 

was  really  more  promising  than  many  of  the 
ar^^Fmn**      "promoted*^  enterprises  in  which  literary  and 

professional  men  are  every  year  induced  to 
invest  their  money.  Hawthorne  was  not  enthusiastic  over 
transcendentalism,  though  Miss  Peabody  and  her  family  were, 
and  he  seems  to  have  joined  the  community  because  he 
thought  it  the  best  way  to  provide  for  a  home.  The  original 
plan  looked  to  the  building  on  the  farm  of  cottages  for  mar- 
ried couples  and  he  hoped  soon  to  occupy  one  of  these.  He 
invested  his  entire  savings,  $1,000,  in  stock,  and  took  up  his 
residence  as  a  working  member  of  the  community.  At  first 
he  had  some  slight  enthusiasms,  but  they  soon  passed  away, 
and  he  recorded  in  his  journal  the  conclusion  that  ^Tliabor 
is  the  curse  of  the  world,  and  nobody  can  meddle  with  it 


302  American  Litbraturb 

without  becoming  proportionably  brutified/'  By  the  middle 
of  the  first  summer  he  was  sick  of  the  whole  affair^  but  after 
an  absence  of  some  weeks  he  returned  as  a  boarder.  He  com- 
plained that  the  conditions  were  not  favorable  to  literary 
work^  and  he  produced  only  one  short  story^  and  another 
,  child's  hook,  Biographical  Stories  for  Children^ 

In  the  spring  of  1842  Hawthorne  left  Brook  Farm  for 
good^  and  though  his  sayings  were  tied  up  in  the  company, 

and  he  had  no  regular  occupation,  he  was 

the  Old  Mmise  at  Gpncord.  Glimpses  of  his  life 
here  show  an  idyllic  sort  of  existence,  with  the  most  romantic 
devotion  on  the  part  of  the  married  lovers,  and  delightful 
excursions  by  wood  and  stream  with  Thoreau  and  Ellery 
Channing.  The  care  of  providing  for  a  family  weighed  on 
him,  and  he  was  troubled  by  lack  of  means — ^just  how  seri- 
ously is  uncertain.  Through  the  influence  of  friends  he  at 
last  secured  the  position  of  suryggor  of  .cii8tom8_jit  Salem. 
During  his  four  years'  residence  in  Concord  he  had  written 
a  considerable  number  of  tales,  and  these  he  collected  in 
1846  as  Mosses  from  an  Old  Manse.    In  the  same  year  he 

assumed  his  duties  in  the  Salem  custom  house, 
Cu^mHouM     *^^  continued  until  he  was  removed  after  the 

change  of  administration  in  1849.  His  salaiy 
was  only  $1,200,  but  his  official  duties  occupied  only  three  or 
four  hours  daily.  As  usual,  he  found  them  uncongenial 
after  the  noveliy  was  gone.  Notwithstanding  what  seems 
abundant  time  he  wrote  very  little. 

Hawthorne  was  a  non-resident  when  he  was  given  one  of 
the  most  important  offices  in  the  little  ciiy  of  Salem.  His 
appointment  came  through  influences  not  local,  and  though 
he  was  faithful  and  business-like  he  stood  aloof  from  his 
fellow  townsmen,  and  especially  from  those  with  commercial 
interests.    It  was  natural  that  when  a  change  of  administra- 


The  Centkal  Pbkiod  303 

tion  came  no  one  should  protest  strongly  if  he  fell  a  yietim 
to  the  spoils  system.  He  had  f elt^  however^  that  his  appoint- 
ment was  a  sort  of  literary  pension^  and  was  not  only  indig- 
nant but  apparently  surprised  that  anyone  should  think  of 
displacing  him.  His  indignation  was  directed  against  the 
entire  commnnity  of  Salem^  but  especially  against  some  of 
his  associates^  whom  he  lampooned  in  the  introduction  to 
The  Scarlet  Letter,  and  a  Mr.  XJpham,  whom  he  tried  to  hold 
up  to  scorn  in  The  House  of  the  Seven  Oables. 

In  his  first  despondency  after  leaving  the  custom  house 
he  wrote  his  friend  Hillard  asking  for  the  suggestion  of 

"some   stated  literary  employment,  in  con- 
Hawthome  nection  with  a  newspaper,  or  as   corrector 

Scarlet  Letter       ^^  *^®  press  to  some  printing  establishment.*' 

So  far  as  is  known  this  was  the  only  time 
except  during  his  brief  editorship  of  the  "Magazine  of  Use- 
ful and  Entertaining  Knowledge*'  that  he  ever  signified  a 
willingness  to  accept  any  systematic  literary  employment, 
or  indeed  any  employment  not  political.  This  request  was 
not  pushed,  and  he  began  work  on  The  Scarlet  Letter,  while 
the  family  lived  on  a  small  sum  that  Mrs.  Hawthorne  had 
saved  from  her  household  allowance,  and  on  a  contribution 
from  Hillard  and  other  friends.  The  time  was  unfavorable 
for  literary  production,  for  besides  worrjring  over  financial 
affairs  he  was  distracted  by  his  mother's  illness  and  death, 
and  by  illness  in  his  own  family.  According  to  the  well- 
known  story  The  Scarlet  Letter  was  planned  as  the  leading] 
tale  in  a  collection  of  short  stories,  and  was  expanded  at  the 
suggestion  of  James  T.  Fields,  the  publisher.  It  appeared  in  \ 
April,  1850,  and  had  remarkable  success.  Its  author  was  at^ 
last  famous. 

Although  Hawthorne  had  expressed  his  contempt  for 
Salem  and  its  people  he  continued  to  reside  there  until  after 
the  publication  of  The  Scarlet  Letter.    The  ill-natured  per- 


304  American  Literature 

sonal  comments  on  his  associates  in  the  custom  house^  which 
were   introduced   in   the   sketch  prefixed  to    this  romance^ 

aroused  an  indignation  that  must  have  made 
Hawtbome's  life  in.the  city  unpleasant;  and  it  was  with  lit- 
RMJdencCT  *^®  regret  on  either  side  that  he  left  his  native 

town  and  took  up  his  residence  in  the  Berk- 
[  shire  hills.  Here,  with  the  Sedgwicks  and  Herman  Melville 
'  for  neighbors,  he  lived  for  a  year  and  a  half.  During  the 
fall  and  early  winter  of  1850  he  wrote  his  second  romance, 
The  House  of  the  Seven  Qgible^  Part  of  the  next  year  he 
gave  to  The  Wonder  Book,  which,  like  the  Tanglewood  Tales, 
published  two  years  later,  was  a  retelling  of  classic  myths 
for  children.  Later  in  1851  he  compiled  ^T^f  Snow  Image^ 
and  Other  Twice  Told  Tales,  a  series  of  sketches  that  had 
appeared  in  periodicals,  but  had  not  been  republished.  In  the 
same  year  the  family  removed  to  West  Newton,  and  after- 
ward to  Concord,  where  Hawthorne  had  bought  Alcott's 
^  house,  the  Wayside.  West  Newton  was  near  the  site  of 
Brook  Farm,  though  this  may  have  had  nothing  to  do  with 
the  fact  that  he  made  the  famous  community  the  background 
for  his  next  long  tale.  The  BKthedale  Romance,  published  in 
1852.  Shortly  after  his  removal  to  the  Wayside  he  was  asked 
to  write  a  campaign  life  of  his  old  friend,  Franklin  Pierce, 
now  a  candidate  for  the  presidency.  This  work  had  no 
literary  importance,  and  is  of  interest  mainly  because  of  the 
views  which  it  expresses  on  slavery  and  kindred  matters. 
After  his  election  Pierce  reciprocated  the  favor  by  appointing 
Hawthorne  United  States  consul  at  Liverpool. 

For  four  years  Hawthorne  was  an  eflScient  consul,  but  as 
before  he  fretted  under  his  official  duties.  He  travelled 
somewhat  about  England,  but  he  never  really  came  to  enjoy 
the  country,  or  to  have  more  than  a  half  affection  for  its 
people.  He  did  not  meet  the  greater  literary  men,  and  he 
never  entered,  except  in  a  formal  way,  into  any  of  the 


The  Central  Period  305 

life   about   him.     Only   the   salary   reconciled   him   to   his 
position.      This,   though   reduced   by   congress   during   his 

term,  enabled  him  to  repay  the  gift  which 
Hawthorne  friends  had  made  through  Hillard,   and  to 

Livmool  ^*y    *^^^®    *''    ®^°^    *^^*   relieved    him    from 

fear  of  later  want. 
After  rerigning  the  consulate  in  1857  he  spent  a  year  and 

a  half  in  Italy,  living  for  a  time  in  Bome  and 
^wthome  in      ^^  Florence.     In  the  latter  he  occupied  the 

old  villa  just  outside  the  city  which  furnished 
the  suggestion  of  Monte  Beni  in  Th^  Marble  Faun.  In  the 
spring  of  1859  he  returned  to  England  and  took  up  his  resi- 
dence on  the  Yorkshire  coast.  He  had  begun  another 
romance  at  Florence,  and  he  finished  it  at  Bedcar.  The 
next  year  it  was  published  in  England  as  JTAe  Transfprmor 
Uon,  and  in  America  as JT^g  Marble  Faun,  In  1860  Haw- 
thorne returned  to  Concord. 

The  reader  of   Hawthome^s   notebooks  kept  during  his 
foreign  residence  is  impressed  with  the  fact  that  he  went 

abroad  too  late  in  life  to  derive  the  greatest 
Effect  of  enjoyment  from  his  travels.    Until  he  reached 

iStvels*^"**  *        middle  age  he  had  scarcely  been  outside  New 

England,  and  he  found  it  hard  to  adapt  him- 
self to  new  methods  of  life,  not  to  mention  new  habits  of 
thought.  The  petty  annoyances  of  travel  irritated  him,  and 
while  he  was  never  an  habitual  grumbler,  he  sometimes  found 
it  hard  to  be  a  sympathetic  visitor.  Italy  pleased  him,  on 
the  whole,  more  than  England,  yet  the  remark  on  sour  bread, 
forced  so  absurdly  into  TJie  Marble  Faun,  is  only  one  of 
many  indications  that  show  how  he  dwelt  on  impleasant 
trifles.  Among  the  most  interesting  passages  in  the  foreign 
notebooks  are  those  that  trace  the  development  of  his  taste  in 
art.  While  in  England  he  began  to  visit  galleries,  and  to 
analyze  his  appreciation  and  lack  of  appreciation,  and  he 


306  Amebioan  Litebatube 

continued  the  proceBS  under  more  favorable  conditions  in 
Italy.  His  usual  attitude  is  that  of  the  man  who  feels  that 
he  ought  to  enjoy  art,  but  who  is  really  bored  by  it.  Occar 
sionally  he  grew  enthusiastic.  His  appreciations  were,  how- 
ever, erratic,  and  he  never  became  quite  at  ease  regarding 
such  conventionalities  as  the  nude  in  sculpture. 

When  Hawthorne  returned  to  Concord  in  1860  his  career 
as  an  author  was  almost  finished.     His  health  was  failing 

and  he  was  troubled  by  the  state  of  political 
Start  Y*****        affairs.    He  had  never  taken  an  active  interest 

in  politics,  but  he  had  been  nominally  a 
democrat,  and  he  retained  his  old  political  faith,  such  as  it 
was,  with  little  change.  He  never  came  to  sympathize  with 
the  anti-slavery  agitation,  and  he  wrote,  "I  rejoice  that  the 
old  Union  is  smashed.^'  Though  he  spoke  of  himself  as  a 
war  democrat  and  a  Northern  man  he  could  not  but  realize 
that  he  was  out  of  sympathy  with  his  natural  associates.  He 
published  nothing  concerning  contemporary  events  except 
an  article  "Chiefly  about  War  Matters,''  in  the  "Atlantic'*  for 
1862.  The  next  year  he  contributed  to  the  same  periodical 
0,W.J^li  B-pm6j  a  series  of  papers  compiled  from  the  note- 
books that  he  had  kept  in  England.  He  was  trying  to  pro- 
duce another  story,  and  he  completed  an  instalment  or  two 
;  of  The  DolUver  Bornance  for  the  "Atiantic,"  but  his  power 
of  sustained  work  was  gone,  and  he  died  in  May,  1864. 

Available  information  regarding  Hawthorne  the  man  is 
less  than  might  be  desired.    The  chief  facts  of  his  life,  as 

already  given,  are  unquestioned,  but  it  is  hard 
^^^J^^^   to  feel  that  one  really  knows  his  character. 

He  was  ordinarily  retiring  and  revealed  him- 
self but  little  outside  his  family  circle.  He  expressed  the 
wish  that  no  authorized  biography  be  published,  and  the 
family  refused  to  allow  Lowell,  or  other  competent  biogra- 
phers, access  to  the  materials  in  their  possession*     Tl^eir 


The  Central  Period  307 

scruples  did  not  prevent  the  son  from  writing  Nathaniel 
Hawthorne  and  his  Wife,  a  Biography,  or  the  daughter  and 
her  husband  from  publishing  various  works  on  the  father. 
All  these  books  are  gossipy,  but  exceedingly  unsatisfactory. 
The  reader  is  left  with  the  uncomfortable  feeling  that  he  may 
be  doing  injustice  to  :a  man  because  of  insufficient  data. 

Though  in  some  ways  representative  of  Jfew  England, 
Hawthorne  seems  to  have  lacked  the  energy  and  the  sense  of 

independence  so  common  in  his  neighbors. 
Hawthome'i  His  family  was  not  well-to-do,  and  he  owed 
D^din  i  ^^^  education  to  the  bounty  of  a  relative,  yet 

he  was  content  to  settle  down  at  home  after 
leaving  college,  and  made  no  serious  attempt  to  earn  his  own 
living.  Indeed,  though  he  faithfully  performed  tasks  that  he 
undertook,  he  seems  to  have  had  an  aversion  to  systematic 
labor  of  all  sorts.  Having  devoted  himself  to  literature,  he 
apparently  felt  that  the  nation  owed  him  a  living.  His  atti- 
tude toward  Goodrich,  who  really  did  much  for  him,  was 
ungrateful  and  somewhat  patronizing.  He  was  indignant 
at  his  fellow-townsmen  because  they  did  not  appreciate  him, 
and  at  the  government  because  it  did  not  continue  him  in 
office.  After  he  was  removed  from  the  Salem  custom  house 
he  accepted  a  gift  of  money  made  up  by  subscription  among 
his  friends.  It  is  true  that  he  paid  this  back  at  a  later  time, 
and  even  if  he  had  not  done  so  there  was  nothing  at  all  discred- 
itable in  his  receiving  such  a  token  of  esteem ;  but  not  every 
able-bodied  and  able-minded  Yankee  would  have  taken  it 
without  making  stronger  eflEorts  in  his  own  behalf. 

These  apparent  weaknesses,  if  they  are  such,  are  over- 
shadowed by  characteristics  of  which  we  are  convinced  by 
indications  rather  than  by  direct  evidence.     The  devotion- 
which  his  friends  Pierce  and  Bridge  felt  for  him  could  have ' 
been  inspired  only  by  a  man  who  had  something  noble  in 
his  nature.     The  faithfulness  with  which  he  always  per- 


308  American  LrrBBATUES 

formed  unpleasant  duties  is  greatly  to  his  credit.    So  is  his 
manliness  in  refusing  to  withdraw  the  dedicatory  address  to 

his  friend  Pierce  when  the  publishers  protested 
Hawthorne's  that  association  with  the  name  of  that  dia- 
^^^^  credited   statesman  would  ruin  the   sale   of 

Our  Old  Home.  In  his  family  life  he  ap- 
pears^ even  after  allowance  is  made  for  some  over-drawn 
idyllic  pictures,  as  a  man  of  wonderful  sympathy  and  sweet- 
ness. It  is  the  fact  that  some  of  these  traits  are  not  readily 
reconciled  with  others  mentioned  before  that  makes  the  man 
in  his  relation  to  his  writings  hard  to  comprehend. 

After   Hawthorne's    death   his    family   published   several 
volumes  of  selections  from  his  notebooks,  and  some  unfin- 
ished romances.    The  notebooks  were  a  oom- 
N  n^cS**        bination  of  commonplace  book  and  journal, 

in  which  he  jotted  down  hints  for  stories,  and 
thoughts  and  facts  that  might  be  useful,  together  with  detailed 
accounts  of  excursions  and  interesting  experiences.  They 
were  intended  for  his  eye  alone  and  the  propriety  of  pub- 
lishing them  might  be  questioned.  Still,  if  available  as  he 
wrote  them,  they  would  be  of  value  to  the  close  student  of 
his  literary  art.  Unfortunately  they  are  so  edited  as  to  be 
almost  worthless.  In  Passages  from  the  American  Note-Boohs 
omissions  are  not  indicated,  and  quotations  from  letters  are 
introduced  without  being  clearly  designated  as  such.  In  the 
\  English  Note-Books  passages  used  in  the  preparation  of  Our 
j  Old  Home,  and  in  the  Italian  Note-Books  some  of  those 
used  in  The  Marble  Faun  are  omitted,  so  that  there  is  little 
opportunity  to  study  the  author's  method  of  re-working  ma- 
terial. 

A  similar  criticism  may  be  passed  on  the  editing  of  the 
unfinished  romances.  There  are  four  of  these,  representing 
as  many  attempts  to  develop  ideas  long  in  the  author's  mind. 
One  of  these,  published  as  "The  Ancestral  Foot-Step,''  is  a 


The  Central  Pebiod  309 

series  of  stadias  written  in  1858.     The  story  is  connected 

with  the  tradition  of  a  bloody  footprint  at  the  entrance  of 

Smithell's  Hall^  England^  and  involves  the 

Hawthorne's        relation  between  the  fortunes  of  an  English 
Unfinished  i  i  i    •      ji  •  « 

Romances  house  and  a  secret  in  the  possession  of  an 

American  emigrant.  "Doctor  GrimshaVs 
Secret''  is  another  and  probably  a  later  attempt  to  use  the 
same  material,  with  the  addition  of  a  reference  to  the  elixir  of 
life.  "Septimius  Pelton''  makes  use  of  the  same  theme.  All 
these  had  been  abandoned  by  the  author,  and  he  had  de- 
termined that  the  final  form  should  be  that  of  the  "DoUiver 
Eomance.''  In  this  the  idea  of  a  bloody  footprint  and  the 
international  element  do  not  occur.  These  fragmentary  and 
rejected  manuscripts,  if  printed  exactly  as  Hawthorne  wrote 
them,  would  be  of  interest  in  showing  how  he  built  up  a 
romance.  But  they  have,  according  to  the  editor's  notes,  been 
changed  in  minor  but  unindicated  respects,  evidently  with 
the  idea  of  improving  the  continuity  and  making  them  more 
readable.  On  the  whole,  the  posthumous  volumes  as  issued 
are  chiefly  a  vexation  to  the  student  of  Hawthorne,  and  serve 
little  useful  purpose  except  to  swell  the  copjrright  receipts  of 
his  heirs. 

The  unfinished  romances  do,  however,  illustrate  the  per- 
sistency with  which  he  clung  to  an  idea  which  impressed  him 
as  having  literary  possibilities.  Long  before  he  knew  the  legend 
of  Smithell's  Hall  he  had  entered  in  the  notebooks  a  reference 
to  a  man  whose  foot  left  everywhere  a  bloody  print.  The 
thought  of  earthly  immortality  had  long  fascinated  him,  as  is 
shown  by  references  in  the  notebooks,  and  by  the  use  of  a  simi- 
lar idea  in  **Doctor  Heidegger's  Experiment."  The  plan  of 
writing  an  Anglo-American  romance  occurred  to  him  when 
he  first  thought  of  going  abroad,  and  he  relinquished  it  only 
after  repeated  trials.  These  unfinished  narratives  also  show 
how  the  habit  of  using  vague  symbolism  grew  with  years. 


310  Amebioak  Literatubb 

They  contain  some  passages  quite  as  powerful  in  their  sug- 
gestiveness  as  anything  that  he  ever  wrote. 

Hawthome^s  important  literary  work  divided  itself  into 
two  groups^  the  short  stories  and  sketches  and  the  romances. 

The  most  valuable  of  the  former  are  included 
HawfliQme'i  in  three  volumes,  the  Twice-Told  Tales,  the 
Sketchei  Mosses  from  an  Old  Manse,  and  The  Snow 

Image  and  other  Twice-Told  Tales.  Some 
of  them  are  stories  with  action  and  plot,  some  are  mere 
sketches  owing  their  interest  to  the  charm  with  which  the 
author  invests  the  commonplace.  The  stories  show  consider- 
able variety,  but  the  best  of  them  are  studies  of  human  beings 
placed  in  some  peculiar  situation  with  reference  to  their  fel- 
low men,  or  to  moral  problems.  Thus,  *^The  Minister's  Black 
VeiP  shows  a  man  who  separates  himself  from  others  by 
wearing  a  symbol  of  the  isolation  of  every  human  soul; 
"Dr.  Heidegger's  Experiment"  is  a  study  of  the  actions  of 
three  old  persons  who  are  able,  temporarily,  to  regain  youth. 
"Eappaccini's  Daughter''  develops  the  conception  of  a  woman 
so  nurtured  that  her  touch,  or  even  her  breath,  is  poison  to 
others  of  her  race.  Though  the  situations  which  interested 
him  involved  moral  problems,  he  rarely,  as  in  "A  Eill  from 
the  Town-Pimip,"  wrote  with  the  apparent  purpose  of  teach- 
ing a  lesson.  In  "The  Gentle  Boy,"  and  a  few  other  early 
stories,  he  approached  very  near  the  sentimentality  which 
has  been  seen  in  some  of  his  contemporaries.  He  was  fond 
of  old  New  England  backgrounds,  as  in  "The  Gentle  Boy," 
"The  Gray  Champion,"  "Endicott  and  the  Eed  Cross,"  and 
the  four  ^TLiegends  of  the  Province  House."  One  of  the  most 
individual  characteristics  of  his  method  is  his  supjpestive- 
ness.  This  is  reasonably  definite  in  "The  Great  Carbuncle," 
"The  Minister's  Black  Veil,"  "The  Snow  Image."  In  other 
land  on  the  whole  better  tales  it  is  indefinite — a  faint  smbol- 
ism,  too  evanescent  to  be  analyzed,  or  illustrated  by  quota- 


The  Central  Pebiod  811 

tions  apart  from  the  context,  but  plainly  felt.  The  falling 
rose  leaves  in  "The  Maypole  of  Merry  Monnf'  have  a  sug- 
gestiveness  more  forcible  than  that  of  obvious  allegory. 

The  other  volumes  of  short  stories  were  intended  for  chil- 
dren, and  though  excellent  of  their  kind  are  not  to  be  ranked 

among  the  author^s  important  work.  The 
Hawthorne's  most  noticeable  are  the  adaptations  of  old 
Children  myths,  in  the  Wonderhooh  and  the  Tangle^ 

wood  Tales.  It  has  been  questioned  whether 
such  a  modification  of  a  classic  story  is  fair  or  desirable. 
However  this  may  be,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  the  success- 
ful-manner in  which  Hawthorne  has  eliminated  all  suggestion 
of  immorality  and  all  elements  beyond  the  comprehension 
of  children  and  still  left  in  every  case  the  essence  of  the 
story.  In  some  of  the  m3rths  he  found  an  underlying  moral 
not  unlike  those  of  his  original  New  England  tales. 

After  his  unsuccessful  attempt  at  a  romance  in  FansJiawe, 
Hawthorne  confined  himself  for  more  than  twenty  years  to 
the  short  tale  or  sketch.  It  was  in  the  creation  of  these 
smaller  units  that  he  learned  what  he  could  and  could  not 
do,  and  perfected  his  prose  style.  That  The  Scarlet  Letter 
took  on  the  proportions  of  a  romance  is  said  to  have  been 
due  to  Fields's  advice.  Once  he  learned  his  power  in  the 
creation  of  longer  stories  he  did  not  care  to  write"  short  ones. 
Either  the  discovery  of  his  abilities  or  the  sudden  achievement 
of  success  stimulated  him,  and  the  years  from  1850  to  1852, 
in  which  he  published  The  Scarlet  Letter,  The  House  of  the 
Seven  Odbles,  and  the  Blithedale  Romance,  besides  miscel- 
laneous work,  were  the  most  productive  of  his  life. 

The  central  idea  of  The  Scarlet  Letter  had  long  been  in 
Hawthorne's  mind,  and  is  introduced  incidentally  in  "Bndi- 
cott  and  the  Eed  Cross."  It  is  probable,  though  there  is  no 
direct  evidence,  that  the  story  had  been  taking  shape  long 
before  the  loss  of  his  office  led  him  to  put  it  on  paper.    The 


318  AiomiCAN  LrrERATUBE 

romance  is  prefaced  by  an  introduction  entitled  "The  Cus- 
tom House/'  and  Hawthorne  is  quoted  as  saying  that  the 

vogue  of  the  book  was  due  to  this  preliminary 
The  Scarlet  sketch.     This  remark  and  the  sketch  itself 

W  gkttg^      ilia 

Introdoctioii        ^^^^  *  peculiar  aberration  on  the  part  of  the 

author.  When  he  wrote  he  was  disaffected  at 
the  loss  of  his  position^  and  this  fact  prejudiced  his  views 
of  his  co-workers  who  were  so  fortunate  as  to  remain  un- 
disturbed. The  most  regrettable  remarks  concern  "a  certain 
permanent  Inspector.'^  Hawthorne  writes  of  his  "moderate 
proportion  of  intellect,  and  the  very  trifling  admixture  of 
moral  and  spiritual  ingredients ;  these  latter  qualities,  indeed, 
being  in  barely  enough  measure  to  keep  the  old  gentleman 
from  walking  on  all-fours/'  and  continues  "My  conclusion 
was  that  he  had  no  soul,  no  heart,  no  mind ;  ...  It  might 
be  diflScult — and  it  was  so— to  conceive  how  he  should  exist 
hereafter,  so  earthly  and  sensuous  did  he  seem.*'  Naturally 
such  comments  shocked  the  little  city  where  the  man  so 
characterized  had  been  generally  known,  and  where  his  de- 
scendants still  lived — especially  since  he  had  died  before  the 
sketch  was  published.  In  the  preface  to  the  second  edition 
Hawthorne  made  matters  worse,  if  possible,  by  saying:  "It 
appears  to  him,  that  the  only  remarkable  features  of  the 
sketch  are  its  frank  and  genuine  good-humor,  and  the  general 
accuracy  with  which  he  has  conveyed  his  sincere  impressions 
of  the  characters  therein  described.  As  to  enmity  or  ill-feel- 
ing of  any  kind,  personal  or  political,  he  utterly  disclaims 
such  motives.*'  If  one  accepts  this  statement  it  convicts 
Hawthorne  of  an  utter  lack  of  taste  and  sense  of  propriety. 
The  affair  was  evidently  one  of  those  in  which  men  of  genius 
sometimes  get  entangled;  but  it  is  unfortunate  that  The 
Scarlet  Letter  should  have  been  given  to  the  world  with 
such  an  introduction. 
The  Scarlet  Letter  is  usually  conceded  to  be  the  best  of 


The  Central  Period  813 

the  four  romances.    Both  the  theme  and  the  setting  of  the 
story  were  suited  to  the  author.    The  problem  to  which  he 

was  most  strongly  attracted  was  that  of  the 
J^Sctrijrt  effect  of  sin.     The  background  that  he  used 

Plot,  Chazacten  ^^^*  effectively  was  that  of  early  Puritan  New 

England.  In  The  Scarlet  Letter  he  repre- 
sented against  this  background  the  effect  of  one  great  sin  on 
the  four  persons  most  intimately  concerned,  and  on  the  com- 
munity. The  story  cannot  be  analyzed  in  the  ordinary  fashion. 
There  is  little  plot  or  action  in  the  usual  sense  of  these  words. 
None  of  the  characters  does  anything,  or  except  for  the 
abortive  attempt  to  fly  from  New  England  plans  to  do  any- 
thing. Yet  there  is  a  plot  of  absorbing  interest,  in  which 
the  events  are  psychological,  not  physical.  The  most  success- 
ful character  in  the  book  is  Hester.  She  is  the  central  figure 
of  the  story,  and  she  is  a  type  that  Hawthorne  could  best 
portray.  He  pictures  two  sorts  of  women — ^the  pale,  ethereal 
kind  like  Priscilla  and  Hilda,  and  the  full-blooded,  queenly 
creatures  represented  by  Hester,  Zenobia,  and  Miriam.  It 
is  significant  that  he  makes  the  former  his  heroines — rather 
perfunctorily,  as  it  sometimes  seems;  but  that  though  the 
Hesters  and  Zenobias  and  Miriams  all  sin  he  really  enjoys 
them  more  and  paints  them  more  successfully.  Dimmesdale, 
Hester's  partner  in  sin,  is  a  trifie  shadowy,  as  is  shown  by 
the  fact  that  he  moves  some  readers  to  pity,  others  only  to 
contempt.  Chillingworth,  who  supplies  the  place  of  the  vil- 
lain in  a  novel  of  action,  is  somewhat  melodramatic  in  his 
psychology.  Little  Pearl  gives  the  one  touch  of  color  in  a 
sombre  picture,  and  is  artistically  a  success,  though  it  has 
been  questioned  how  far  she  is  true  to  child  nature.  The 
other  characters,  whether  viewed  individually  or  as  part  of 
the  cruel  Puritan  populace,  are  properly  costumed  and  har- 
monize with  the  general  plan. 

The  romance  illustrates  in  an  especial  degree  the  peculiar 


314  Akbbigan  LrnsKATUBB 

narrative  methods  that  the  author  had  been  evolving.    Sym- 
bolism is  everywhere^    The  scarlet  letter  itself  is  introduced 

Tha  ScflrlAt  ^™®  *^^'  time,  and  always  with  a  new  sugges- 

Letter—  tiveness.    The  vision  of  the  flaming  symbol  in 

Narrativa  the  heavens  may  be  an  artistic  mistake,  but 

the  allusion  to  the  same  device  on  the  min- 
ister's breast,  with  the  hint  at  explanations  not  definitely 
given,  is  masterly.  More  intangible  still  are  such  touches  as 
that  of  the  rose  before  the  prison  door  in  the  first  chapter. 
Another  peculiarity  of  the  narrative  is  the  telling,  as  if  it 
were  perfectly  natural,  of  each,  character*^  .^cret  thou^its. 
What  no  other  person  could  ever  know,  what  the  characters 
would  hardly  admit  to  themselves,  the  writer  narrates  as 
frankly  as  the  most  obvious  actions,  and  the  reader  never 
thinks  of  questioning.  Whether  or  not  he  was  a  transcen- 
dentalist  in  avowed  belief,  Hawthorne  proceeds  in  his  ro- 
mances on  the  transcendental  theory  that  every  mind  can 
comprehend  the  workings  of  every  other  mind.  A  man  of 
the  slightest  external  experience,  he  was  able  to  enter  into 
the  feelings  of  the  guilty  man  or  woman,  and  so  to  portray 
them  that  the  reader  knows  they  would  be  his  own  emotions 
imder  like  circumstances.  The  power  of  analyzing  dark  and 
sin-haunted  minds  is  a  great  element  in  his  genius.  With 
brighter  and  happier  moods  he  does  not  succeed  quite  so  well. 
The  House  of  the  Seven  Odbles  has  the  same  New  England 
setting,  and  it  deals  with  something  of  the  same  problems 

as  The  Scarlet  Letter.  It  is,  however,  thinner. 
The  House  of  gjii  leaves  a  less  unified  impression.  The  ac- 
Q^l^l^  tion  is  in  the  present,  but  interest  centers 

more  in  the  background — in  the  old  house 
itself,  in  the  story  of  its  origin,  of  the  wizard  Maule's  curse 
on  the  Pjmcheon  family,  and  of  the  lost  title  deeds.  Next  in 
interest  for  many  readers  are  the  bits  of  seriously  playful 
description,  as  of  the  urchin  who  patronizes  the  cent-shop,  of 


The  Central  Pbbiod  315 

the  chickens  in  the  garden,  of  old  Hepzibah  herself.  Last 
in  interest  is  the  story,  with  its  slight  thread  of  action,  end- 
ing in  the  removal  of  the  curse  by  the  inter-marriage  of  the 
Maule  and  Pyncheon  families.  Perhaps  this  slight  interest 
of  the  story  is  due  in  part  to  the  fact  that  Hawthorne  was  at 
the  same  time  indulging  his  personal  animosities  and  reveal- 
ing family  traditions.  The  story  of  the  curse  and  of  the  lost 
title  deeds  are  from  the  history  of  the  Hathornes.  The  por- 
trait or  caricature  of  Judge  Pyncheon  is  supposed  to  be 
recognizable  as  the  politician  who  was  chiefly  instrumental 
in  removing  the  author  from  the  custom  house.  This  latter 
fact  is  responsible  for  some  faults  of  the  story.  The  Judge 
is  a  melodramatic  villain,  and  the  scenes  in  which  he  appears, 
and  especially  his  death,  are  more  melodramatic  than  is  usual 
with  Hawthorne.  The  portrait  of  Hepzibah  is  well  drawn, 
and  that  of  Phoebe  is  a  pleasant  sketch,  not  very  fully  filled 
in.  Clifford,  the  victim  of  a  great  wrong,  is  somewhat 
shadowy,  and  to  some  readers  is  unpleasant,  rather  than  an 
object  of  pity  as  the  author  intended.  The  young  daguerro- 
typist  with  his  up-to-date  notions  is  not  the  sort  of  character 
that  Hawthorne  could  portray  well,  but  he  plays  his  slight 
part  acceptably.  Uncle  Venner,  the  gardener,  is  a  clever 
conception,  though  inferior  to  Silas  Poster,  the  farmer  in 
Blithedale.  These  deficiencies  in  the  characters  are  not 
obvious  at  first  reading,  but  they  help  to  account  for  the 
thinness  and  sense  of  unreality  felt  in  the  story.  The  moral 
problems  are  those  of  heredity  rather  than  those  of  personal 
sin,  and  their  relations  to  actual  life  are  not  definitely  pointed 
out.  Suggestiveness  is  everywhere  present— obvious  as  in 
the  degenerate  brood  of  chickens,  more  subtle  in  Clifford 
blowing  bubbles,  or  the  cat  stealing  across  the  garden  after 
Judge  Pjmcheon's  death. 

The  Blithedale  Romance  differs  from  the  other  longer 
stories  in  motive,  scene,  and  narrative  method.     like  the 


316  American  Leteratube 

others^  it  shows  the  effect  of  sin,  but  the  sin  of  the  hero  is  the 
somewhat  strange  one  of  selfish  philanthropy — ^the  enthusi- 
asm of  a  reformer  which  blinds  him  to  ail 
SnwttM*^*     other  claims.     The  fault  of  the  heroine  is  a 

wayward  impetuosity,  derived  from  heredi- 
tary tendencies.  The  motive  is  more  nearly  that  of  a  modem 
"problem  noveV^  than  are  the  subtle  studies  of  conscience  in 
The  Scarlet  Letter  and  The  Marble  Faun.  The  book  seems 
to  be  the  author's  comment  on  the  movements  for  reform 
which  were  all  about  him  in  the  early  fifties.  The  scene  is 
a  community  which  is  plainly  that  at  Brook  Farm,  and  Haw- 
thorne has  drawn  on  his  experiences  for  many  of  the  inci- 
dents and  some  of  the  characters.  Silas  Foster  is  pictured 
from  life,  and  Priscilla  was  clearly  suggested  by  the  little 
seamstress  from  Boston  who  is  referred  to  in  the  notebooks. 
Miles  Coverdale  has  a  few  of  the  characteristics  of  Hawthorne 
himself.  On  the  first  appearance  of  the  book  Zenobia  was 
said  to  represent  Margaret  Fuller.  However  many  points 
of  resemblance  may  have  been  plain  to  contemporaries,  the 
reader  of  to-day  finds  little  similarity  between  the  beautiful, 
passionate  creature  of  the  romance  and  the  Margaret  Fuller 
of  the  biographies.  It  is  more  likely  that  both  Zenobia  and 
HoUingsworth,  in  whom  the  author  works  out  the  results  of 
their  respective  sins,  are  wholly  imaginary  portraits.  IJnlike 
the  other  romances  the  story  is  not  told  by  a  narrator  who 
knows  the  secret  workings  of  each  heart,  but  by  an  eye-witness 
who  can  recount  only  what  he  observes,  and  draw  his  infer- 
ences. In  spite  of  the  modem  setting  and  the  ordinary  story- 
teller's method,  s3rmbolism  is  frequent.  The  flower  in 
Zenobia's  hair  is  a  striking  example. 

Critics  have  so  frequently  spoken  of  Blifhedale  as  an  in- 
ferior production  that  the  reader  who  questions  this  judgment 
probably  does  well  to  keep  silence;  yet  he  may  be  pardoned 
for  maintaining  that  the  inferiority  is  not  so  great  as  is 


The  Central  Period  317 

sometimes  charged.  The  problem  of  the  book  is  worthy  of 
the  novelist,  though  the  reader  may  not  agree  with  his  solu- 
tion. The  characters,  with  the  exception  of 
Rank  of  the  Coverdale,  are  as  life-like  a  group  as  Haw- 
Romance^  thome  ever  created.    Coverdale  is  but  lightly 

sketched  for  the  same  reasons  that  led  Poe  to 
employ  shadowy  narrators  for  many  of  his  tales.  The  scene, 
though  somewhat  abnormal,  is  made  to  seem  real.  The  story 
moves  on  to  an  ending  that  is  artistically  inevitable.  The 
general  impression  left  by  the  book  is  one  of  strength,  though 
it  is  not  wholly  pleasing.  Of  all  Hawthorne's  works  it  is  theM 
most  pessimistic,  and  the  pessimism  is  all  the  stronger  fori! 
being  hinted  rather  than  definitely  expressed. 

The  Marble  Faun  followed  the  other  romances  after  a  con- 
siderable interval,  and  was  in  part  the  result  of  the  author's 

Italian  experiences.  His  Anglo-American 
Faun"  romance  would  not  take  shape,  and  he  turned 

to  an  Italian-American  plot.  The  theme  re- 
sembles that  of  The  Scarlet  Letter,  but  is  broader,  being  no 
less  than  the  place  of  sin  in  the  development  of  the  soul. 
The  scene  is  Italy,  but  the  characters  are  Americans,  or  of 
no  particular  nationality.  Kenyon  is  a  N'ew  England  gentle- 
man who  commands  entire  respect,  but  does  not  win  the  heart. 
Hilda,  who  has  been  said  to  be  modelled  after  the  author's 
daughter,  is  one  of  Hawthorne's  pale,  ethereal  creatures. 
Miriam  is  of  the  other  type  that  he  loved  to  portray — ^the 
full-blooded,  voluptuous  woman,  with  a  suggestion  of  the 
South  in  her  nature.  Donatello,  though  nominally  an  Italian, 
is  the  incarnation  of  primeval  innocence  and  joyousness, 
rather  than  a  definite  human  being. 

The  Marble  Faun  has  more  action  than  the  other  romances, 
but  the  movement  is  hindered  by  digressions  and  descriptions. 
The  fact  that  it  has  been  commended  as  a  guide  book  to 
Some  hints  at  its  defects  as  a  work  of  fiction.    It  is,  moreover. 


318  AhEBICAN  tilTBRATUBfi 

a  guide  book  written  by  a  provincial  visitor^  who  retains  his 
fresh  enthusiasms^  but  who  has  not  gained  an  idea  of  relative 

values.  Excellent  as  many  of  the  descriptions 
Wb^UFtLm^     ^^  ^  themselves,  they  detract  greatly  from 

the  effectiveness  of  the  romance.  The  sug- 
gestive method,  which  fitted  so  well  with  the  Italian  back- 
ground, was  employed  not  only  in  details  but  in  the  resolu- 
tion of  the  plot  itself.  Beaders  complained  that  the  ending 
as  originally  written  was  unintelligible,  and  the  author  added 
a  chapter  which  made  no  improvement. 

Hawthorne  shows  his  New  England  relationships  more 
clearly  than  any  other  American  author,  yet  he  was  not  a 

t3rpical  New  Englander.     He  cared  little  for 

^BwE^md  ^^^^°^*^  religion,  and  it  is  impossible  to  de- 
termine exactly  what  his  faith  was.  Although 
he  was  so  closely  associated  with  the  transcendental  leaders  he 
took  no  real  part  in  the  transcendental  movement;  and  he 
had  no  interest  in  the  many  reforms  in  which  New  Eng- 
landers  were  engaged.  His  recurrence  to  the  thought  of  sin 
in  the  world  seems  at  first  sight  a  Puritan  characteristic, 
but  he  was  concerned  not  with  forgiveness  and  salvation  in 
the  theologian's  sense,  but  with  the  effects  of  sin  on  the  soul. 
.In  his  fondness  for  studying  the  troubled  conscience  he 
•showed  a  temperament  which,  despite  the  protests  of  those 
•who  knew  him  best,  must  be  pronounced  somewhat  morbid 
and  pessimistic.  The  best  evidences  of  this  are  not  his 
gloomy  subjects,  but  little  indications  here  and  there  in  his 
writings.  The  comments  on  the  death  of  Zenobia  in  Blithe' 
dale  could  have  been  written  only  by  a  man  who  felt  the  full 
weakness  of  human  nature.  The  plucking  from  above 
Wordsworth's  head  of  "weeds''  that  might  ^Tiave  drawn  their 
nutriment  from  his  mortal  remains"  would  hardly  have  sug- 
gested itself  to  a  buoyant  mind.  The  questionings  that  came 
to  him  regarding  the  virtue  of  women  that  he  met  must  have 


The  Central  Period  319 


i 


been  inspired^  in  a  man  so  far  from  libertinism^  by  a  pro- 
found distrust  of  human  nature.  Many  such  indications^  in 
sketches^  romances^  and  journals^  indicate  his  lack  of  the  hope- 
ful spirit.  In  every  way  he  was  a  product  of  New  England 
but  not  a  representative. 

His  style  and  narrative  method  were  his  own.    He  was  not 
a  wide  reader  and  his  reading  had  little  apparent  influence 

on  his  writings.  After  Fanshawe,  in  which 
Hawthorne's  he  followed  the  fashion  of  leading  his  chapters 
Ifothod  ^^^^  mottoes,  it  is  rare  to  find  a  quotation  or 

a  literary  allusion.  The  influence  of  his  con- 
temporaries was  no  greater.  He  was  on  intimate  terms  with 
few  men  of  letters  at  home  or  abroad,  and  his  communiiy  of 
interest  with  these  few  was  not  literary.  The  chief  quality 
of  his  prose  style  is  a  charm  that  cannot  be  analyzed.  In 
Fanshawe  this  is  hinted  at,  and  a  few  passages  seem  like  sym- 
pathetic parodies  of  his  later  work.  His  individual  manner 
was,  however,  developed  during  his  long  seclusion  at  Salem. 
It  is  seen  at  its  best  in  descriptions  and  personal  comments, 
as  in  some  of  the  sketches  without  plot,  where  it  is  everything. 
It  is  most  unreal  in  conversation.  His  characters  expres^ 
appropriate  thoughts,  but  in  such  language  as  human  beings' 
never  used.  Yet  even  here  the  tone  of  the  diction  so  har- 
monizes with  the  idea  that  there  is  little  sense  of  unfitness; 
the  characters,  though  stiflE  and  unnatural  in  words  and  ac- 
tions, always  seem  essentially  real.  The  peculiarities  of  his 
narrative  method  have  been  mentioned  in  connection  with 
separate  works.  Perhaps  the  most  striking  of  these  are  his 
assumption  of  almost  omniscient  insight  into  the  hearts  of 
his  characters  and  his  masterly  handling  of  suggestiveness 
and  symbolism.  His  sense  of  humor  was  but  slightly  and 
unequally  developed,  and  there  is  sometimes  a  monotony  of 
tone  in  his  work;  but  he  rarely  spoils  a  tale  by  attempting 
humor  unsuccessfully. 


320  Ambbican  Litbratube 

After  all  has  been  said^  the  best  qualities  of  Hawthorne's 

work  are  too  subtle  to  be  catalogued.    Notwithstanding  his 

provincialisms^  his  morbidness^  and  his  occa- 

Hawfhomes  gional  exhibitions  of  bad  taste,  his  work  as  a 
Rank 

whole    leaves    the    impression    of    sustained 

artistic  effect.  In  America  he  has  taken  almost  unquestioned 
rank  as  our  greatest  romancer;  and  although  his  subjects 
appeal  less  to  European  readers,  and  his  defects  are  such  as 
would  impress  European  critics,  his  value  is  recognized 
abroad. 

More  distinctively  than  Longfellow  or  Hawthorne,  Oliver 
Wendell  Holmes  (1809-1894)  was  a  product  and  representa- 
tive of  New  England  culture.     By  birth  he 
HotoeT*^^"     was  a  typical  New  Englander  of  the  better 

class.  On  his  mother's  side  he  was  a  lineal 
descendant  of  Anne  Bradstreet,  and  was  connected  in  more 
or  less  remote  degrees  of  cousinship  with  some  of  the  best 
known  families  in  New  England.  Holmes's  father,  a  Yale 
graduate,  was  one  of  the  relatively  few  New  England  clergy- 
men who  clung  sternly  to  the  Calvinistic  faith.  He  was  also 
a  man  of  letters,  the  possessor  of  a  good  library,  the  author 
of  some  verse,  and  of  the  Annats  of  America  in  prose.  The 
mother  was  probably  less  rigid  in  her  orthodoxy  and  had 
something  of  the  vivaciiy  so  noticeable  in  her  son.  Oliver 
Wendell  was  bom  at  Cambridge  in  1809,  the  birth  year,  as 
he  was  fond  of  remarking,  of  Lincoln,  Gladstone,  Tennyson, 
Darwin,  and  other  notables,  among  whom  he  might  have 
included  Poe.  His  early  schooling  was  received  at  Cambridge, 
and  he  was  sent  for  a  year  to  that  stronghold  of  orthodoxy, 
Phillips  Academy  at  Andover.  Among  his  early  school 
fellows  were  several  Cambridge  boys  and  girls  who  were  later 
to  become  famous,  among  them  the  younger  Richard  Henry 
Dana  and  Margaret  Puller.  Holmes  was,  according  to  his 
own  picture  of  himself,  an  active,  inquisitive,  ingenious  boy, 


The  Central  Period  321 

who  thought  much  and  read  much,  though  he  rarely  read  a 
book  through.  In  1825  he  entered  Harvard  and  was  gradu- 
ated with  the  now  famous  class  of  1829.     After  the  usual 

—  ~ 

hesitation  over  the  choice  of  a  profession  he  took  up  law  for 
a  year,  but  abandoned  it  for  medicine.  For  two  years  he 
studied  in  Boston,  and  for  two  years  in  Paris,  getting 
glimpses  in  vacation  of  England,  Scotland,  Holland,  the  Ehine, 
Switzerland,  and  Italy.  His  letters  from  Paris  show  that 
though  he  enjoyed  good  living  and  a  good  time,  he  was  en- 
thusiastically devoted  to  his  profession.  On  his  return  to 
America  he  opened  an  office  in  Boston,  and  built  up  a  fair, 
though  never  a  very  large  or  remunerative,  practice.  He 
was,  however,  a  successful  and  convincing  writer  of  essays 
on  medical  topics.  For  two  or  three  years  he  was  professor 
of  anatomy  in  Dartmouth  college,  a  position  that  involved  the 
delivery  of  a  course  of  lectures  for  three  months  each  year. 
In  1847  he  was  called  to  a  professorship  of  anatomy  in  the  c 

Harvard  medical  school. 

Meanwhile,  Holmes  had  been  building  up  a  local  reputa- 
tion as  a  poet,  an  essayist,  and  a  wit.    While  an  undergradu- 
ate he  had  written  poems,  humorous  and  senti- 
WriS^^"^^     mental,   for   the   Harvard    "Collegian.^^     It 

was  while  he  was  studying  law  that  he  be- 
came indignant  at  the  proposal  to  destroy  the  frigate  "Consti- 
tution,^^ and  made  his  protest  in  "Old  Ironsides/^    He  also 
contributed  to  various  periodicals  articles  in  prose  and  verse. 
Two  of  these,  which  appeared  in  the  "New  England  Maga-! 
zine^^  under  the  title  of  "The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast-' 
Table,^'  were  the  precursors  of  the  more  famous  series  written' 
later.    In  1836  he  published  a  collection  of  poems. 

After  his  appointment  to  the  Harvard  professorship 
Holmes^s  life  was  outwardly  an  uneventful  one.  For  thirty- 
five  years  he  delivered  regularly  his  four  lectures  a  week 
throughout  the  college  year.    During  the  better  days  of  the 


322  American  Litsbatubb 

lycetun  moyement  he  lectured  on  several  subjects,  among 
them  the  English  poets  of  the  nineteenth  century.    A  liability 

to  asthma  tended  to  keep  him  at  home,  and 
So Ws  Uter  jj3  traveUed  little,  and  rarely  left  New  Eng- 
land, even  for  a  short  stay.  He  resigned  from 
the  professorship  of  anatomy  in  1882  because  he  desired  a  rest 
and  more  time  for  literary  work.  The  summer  of  1886  he 
spent  with  his  daughter  in  England  and  Paris.  A  pleasant 
incident  of  the  trip  was  the  receipt  of  honorary  degrees  from 
Oxford,  Cambridge,  and  Edinburgh.  Though  threatened  with 
blindness  he  retained  some  use  of  his  eyes  and  almost  the 
full  command  of  his  other  faculties  until  his  death. 

Holmes's  literary  reputation  was   achieved  late   in  life. 
In  1857,  when  the  "Atlantic  Monthly**  was  founded,  he  was 

a  middle-aged  Boston  gentleman,  a  Harvard 

Holmes  t  professor,  the  author  of  a  number  of  occa- 

Literary  Career     "       ,      '  ,      ,  x-        x  i        j 

sional  poems   and  of  some  sentimental  and 

humorous  trifles  in  verse,  a  writer  of  fairly  valuable  and  very 
readable  medical  essays,  but  by  no  means  a  notable  man  of 
letters.  Yet  it  is  a  familiar  story  that  Lowell  insisted  on 
his  becoming  a  contributor  to  the  new  magazine.  As  usual, 
LowelFs  instinct  as  an  editor  was  true;  and^^e  Autocrat^ol 
the  Breakfastj^Tablej  which  ran  as  a  serial  throughout  the 
first  twelve  numbers,  did  more  than  anything  else  to  insure 
the  success  of  the  "Atlantic.**  This  series  was  immedi- 
ately followed  by  another, ^^  Professor  at  the  BreakfasU 
Table.     Then  came  The  Professor^s  Story,  issued  in  book 

form  as  Elsie   Venrkcr^   and   in   1867    another  novel.   The 
— — —  -  •  - 

Guardian  Anqd,  The  Poet  at  the  BreaTcfast-Tdble,  pub- 
lished  in  1872,  completed  the  Breakfast-Table  series.  Then 
followed  a  decade  of  literary  inactivity,  in  which  ^ajnenioir 
of  .Motley,  was  the  only  work  of  importance.  After  the  resig- 
nation from  the  Harvard  professorship  came  another  series 
of  interesting  works--the  life  of,BmeraQn.in.l884^ 


The  Central  Period  323 

Antipathii  in.  1884-5^  Our  Hundred JDqys  in  Europe  in  1887, 
Over  the  TeorCups  in  1888-90.  For  the  edition  of  his  works 
issued  in  1883  he  compiled  a  volume  of  Medical  Essays^  and 
another  of  miscellaneous  papers  collected  under  the  title 
Pages  from  an  Old  Volume  of  Life.  Several  volumes  of 
verse  appeared  at  different  times. 

Personally  as  well  as  in  ancestry  Dr.  Holmes  was  repre- 
sentative of  much  that  was  best  in  New  England.    He  had 

the  Yankee  characteristics  of  mental  alert- 
Hohnes's  ne&B,  of  ingenuity,  of  interest  in  many  things. 

Characteriitics     ^^  ^  ^^^  ^®  ^^®  always  working  with  tools  and 

contriving  new  devices.  As  a  man  he  experi- 
mented with  the  microscope  before  it  was  recognized  as  a  neces- 
sary instrument  in  the  study  of  anatomy.  He  was  an  enthusi- 
astic amateur  photographer  in  the  days  of  the  old  and  diflScult 
wet  process.  He  invented  the  ordinary  hand  stereoscope.  Even 
in  his  latest  years  he  was  greatly  interested  in  the  mechanical 
ingenuity  shown  in  such  contrivances  as  the  safety  razor  and 
the  illuminating  devices  that  aided  his  weakened  vision.  The 
diversity  of  his  general  interests  may  be  seen  by  turning 
through  a  few  pages  of  one  of  his  discursive  volumes.  This 
breadth  was  necessarily  incompatible  with  the  greatest  depth. 
Even  in  his  specially  Dr.  Holmes,  though  said  always  to 
have  been  abreast  of  the  times,  was  not  an  investigator. 
That  he  chose  his  position,  or  at  least  occupied  it  knowingly, 
is  shown  in  The  Poet  at  the  Breakfast-Table  and  other  works 
in  which  he  paid  his  respects  to  the  narrow  specialist.  His 
habit  of  reading  ''in  books  rather  than  through  them''  has 
been  mentioned;  and  it  was  probably  lack  of  sjrstem  rather 
than  lack  of  quantity  in  his  reading  that  led  him  to  say, 
''No  graduate  of  Harvard — or  at  least  very  few — ^had  ever 
read  less  nt  my  age  than  myself.'' 

It  was  also   owing  to  his  New  England  training  that 
Holmes  took  great  interest  in  theology.    He  early  suffered  a 


324  Ahebicak  Literatube 

reaction  from  the  strict  views  of  his  father.    His  professional 
studies  gave  him  data  not  known  to  his  neighbors^  and  led 

him  to  approach  many  problems  from  the 
Holmes's  gifle  of  what  would  now  be  called  physiological 

Theology  psychology.     Of  the  popular  New  England 

writers  on  religious  subjects  he  was  almost 
the  only  one  who  gave  full  weight  to  the  revelations  of 
modem  science.  His  favorite  speculations  were  on  sin  and 
moral  responsibility  as  determined  by  heredity  and  environ- 
ment; but  he  had  much  to  say  on  the  belief  in  ^  future  state, 
and  the  nature  of  the  relations  between  God  and  man.  These 
were  his  pet  topics,  to  which  he  returned  time  after  time  in 
almost  everything  that  he  wrote.  Much  of  what  he  said  is 
generally  unquestioned  to-day,  and  the  rest  is  nothing  new; 
but  at  first  he  seemed,  to  the  followers  of  his  father's  faith, 
a  blasphemer. 

In  all  matters  but  religion  Dr.  Holmes  was  a  conservative 
and  something  of  an  aristocrat.    He  disliked  the  extremists 

in  reform  movements,  though  he  professed 
Co     ^*tiam       to  be  in  sjnoipathy  with  the  general  aims  of 

many  of  them.  His  lack  of  interest  in  abo- 
lition was  so  noticeable  that  he  was  accused  of  being  a  pro- 
slavery  man,  though  when  the  war  began  no  one  spoke  more 
clearly  than  he  in  favor  of  the  TTnion.  His  aristocratic  ten- 
dencies show  themselves  in  his  frequent  disquisitions  on  the 
subject  of  family  and  heredity,  in  which  he  called  in  his  pro- 
fessional knowledge  to  reenforce  his  sympathies.  There  was 
nothing  of  snobbishness  in  all  this,  but  rather  the  feeling 
which  prefers  the  orderly,  the  well  established,  and  the  pleas- 
ant to  the  strenuous  and  the  radical.  On  the  other  hand  his 
broad  sympathy  is  shown  in  many  ways.  It  was  his  feelings 
as  much  as  conscious  determination  that  led  him  always  to 
address  the  duller  half  of  his  class  in  his  lectures.  When- 
ever he  could  he  refused  the  ungracious  task  of  writing  lit- 


The  Central  Period  325 

erary  criticisms.  Early  in  his  career  he  gained  the  name 
of  being  the  best  talker  and  diner  out  in  Boston;  and  his 
geniality  made  it  impossible  to  be  offended  at  his  sharp 
sayings.  As  he  grew  old  the  differences  between  his  belief 
and  that  of  the  orthodox  church  became  less  marked,  and  this 
tended  to  remove  the  one  hindrance  to  his  being  universally 
beloved. 

Dr.  Holmes^s  best  prose  is  seen  in  the  Breakfast-Table 
series.    The  Autocrat,  the  first  and  the  best — ^to  use  his  own 

phrase,  the  first  pressing  of  the  grapes — is 
^e  Autocrat  of  made  up  of  the  best  things  that  the  author 
iji^Ijj^  could  say,  and  doubtless  had  said  at  the  break- 

fast and  dinner  tables  of  Boston.  The  form, 
that  of  conversation  running  to  monologue  at  a  table  where  the 
boarders  represented  a  diversity  of  interests,  gave  a  chance 
to  introduce  any  subject,  and  to  treat  it  in  almost  any  man- 
ner. The  first  instalment,  for  example,  touches  on  mutual 
aximiration  societies,  the  philosophy  of  conversation,  puns, 
poetic  composition,  and  a  dozen  other  topics.  The  author's 
favorite  theological  ideas  come  in  frequently.  Poems  are 
read  by  the  Autocrat  and  others  at  the  table.  Puns,  of  the 
truly  clever  sort,  are  frequent,  as  in  much  of  the  author's 
prose  and  verse.  Epigrams,  among  the  best  in  American 
literature,  ]are  scattered  here  and  there.  Through  the  whole 
runs  a  slender  thread  of  a  love  story.  The  characters  at  the 
table  are  lightly  but  admirably  sketched,  and  the  book  has 
just  enough  unity  not  to  be  a  hodgepodge,  and  not  enough 
to  prevent  its  being  opened  and  read  at  any  page.  It  has, 
been  compared  to  Lamb's  essays,  to  Christopher  !N'orth's; 
Noctes  AmbrosiancB,  and  to  various  other  informal  books, 
but  while  it  has  resemblances  to  some  of  them  it  has  a  flavor 
and  an  individuality  of  its  own. 

The  Professor  at  the  Breakfast-Tdble,  which  followed  im- 
mediately after  The  Autocrat,  is  on  the  whole  the  least  satia- 


326  Ahebioan  LrnsRATUHB 

/factory  of  the  series.    The  book  is  more  serious,  which  means 
that  it  deals  more  with  theological  controversy.    It  is  less  in 

the  form  of  conversation  or  broken  monologue. 
imdllhAPoet       ^^^   characters,   and   especially   the   cripple. 

Little  Boston,  on  whom  the  author  lavished 
much  care,  are  less  attractive  than  those  of  The  Autocrat 
Though  there  are  many  excellent  quotable  passages  the 
general  impression  left  by  the  volume  is  far  inferior  to 
that  of  its  predecessor.  The  Poet  at  the  Breakfast-Table, 
which  concludes  the  series,  was  written  after  a  considerable 
interval,  during  which  the  author  no  doubt  acquired  a  new 
j  fund  of  witty  sayings.  Though  inferior  to  The  Autocrat  it 
;  is  better  than  The  Professor.  In  the  character  of  the  Master 
the  author  created  as  it  were  a  second  self,  who  could  make 
remarks  which  he  hesitated  to  give  in  the  first  person,  now 
that  the  speaker  was  so  definitely  identified  in  the  public 
mind  as  0.  W.  H. 

Dr.  Holmes  again  adopted  a  form  similar  to  that  of  the 
Breakfast-Table  series  in  his  last  important  work.  Over  the 

TeorCups.    This  was  begun  in  the  ^^Atlantic*' 

tII^c™  ^^  ^^^^'  ^^*  ^*®  interrupted  by  the  death  of 

his  wife  and  his  daughter,  and  resumed  in 
;  1890.  The  greater  part  of  it  was,  therefore,  written  after 
the  author  was  over  eighty  years  of  age.  It  is  inferior  to 
the^  Breakfast-Table  series,  but  there  is  nothing  to  suggest 
the  work  of  a  superannuated  man.  It  is  a  trifle  more  frank 
than  the  earlier  papers  in  its  personal  references,  and  is 
written,  as  the  author  says,  rather  for  his  old  friends  than 
for  new  acquaintances.  It  contains  some  allusions  to  his 
favorite  ideas  on  religious  and  other  subjects,  but  its  frequent 
discussion  of  new  things  and  new  problems  shows  how  alertly 
the  author  kept  pace  with  the  times. 

The  first  two  novels  deal  with  the  same  problem — ^that  of 
inherited  tendencies^— and  were  intended  to  teach  something 


The  Central  Pebiod  827 

regarding  moral  responsibility.    ^Ttfedjcated  fictipn'f  a  friend 
of  the  author  once  called  them^  and  he  often  quoted  the 

phrase  with  a  protest,  though  with  evident 
Elsie  Venner—  enjoyment  of  its  aptness.  Elsie  Venner,  the 
Anyai  heroine  of  the  first,  suflEers  from  the  effects  of 

a  rattlesnake  bite  received  by  her  mother  before 
her  birth,  so  that  her  nature  has  a  strange  element  not  human. 
The  Guardian  Angel  shows  in  a  more  ordinary  fashion  the 
culmination  and  power  of  strong  family  tendencies.  The 
setting  in  both  stories  is  in  New  England,  and  there  are 
shrewd  and  happy  portrayals  of  village  life,  which  make  ^use 
of  material  similar  to  that  which  Longfellow  handled  unsuc- 
cessfully in  Kavanagh.  The  characters  are  sketchily  yet 
efiEectively  drawn,  with  a  touch  of  humor,  and  a  great  deal  of 
human  sympathy.  Miles  Gridley,  in  The  Ouardian  Angel,  is 
a  delightful  creation,  and  some  admirable  epigrams  are  intro- 
duced as  quotations  from  his  forgotten  book.  The  plot, 
aside  from  the  action  necessitated  by  the  leading  idea,  is  of 
the  quiet,  obvious,  old-fashioned  sort.  This,  indeed,  is  the 
kind  of  story  which  Holmes  always  used,  in  his  novels  and  in 
the  Breakfast-Table  series — ^the  simple  love  story,  with  stock 
hero,  heroine,  and  villain,  the  action  varied  occasionally  by 
a  touch  of  the  melodramatic,  as  in  one  episode  of  Elsie  Ven- 
ner. The  lack  of  a  more  closely  knit  structure  and  the  pres- 
ence of  so  obvious  a  didactic  motive  are  the.  chief  defects  in 
the  novels.  Though  not  great  works  of  fiction  they  are 
wonderfully  readable,  and  once  read  are  likely  to  be  remem- 
bered. Of  the  two,  EUie  Venner  is  the  more  striking,  but  it 
contains  no  character  so  good  as  Miles  Gridley. 

A  Mortal  Antipathy  suffers  from  an  extreme  lack  of  plausi-\ 
biliiy.  The  story  is,  briefly,  that  of  a  young  man  who  has  an . 
uncontrollable  aversion  to  all  young  women,  the  result  of  an 
injury  at  the  hands  of  a  pretty  girl  in  his  infancy.  The 
resolution  of  the  plot  comes  when  the  hero,  helplessly  weak 


328  Amebigan  Literatubb 

with  typhoid  fever,  is  rescued  from  a  burning  house  by  an- 
other pretty  girl,  a  college  athlete  in  bloomers.     It  seems 

strange  that  Holmes  should  have  attempted 
AntiM^y  ^  P^^*  which  his  keen  perception  must  have 

told  him  was  not  only  improbable  but  some- 
what ludicrous.  He  went  conscientiously  about  the  task  of 
making  it  seem  plausible,  but  he  did  not  succeed.  The  story 
is  most  interesting  for  its  sketches  of  two  types  of  college 
girl,  and  for  its  reflection  of  the  author^s  views  on  the  "new 
woman.'*  It  is  much  more  discursive  than  a  novel  is  usually 
peicmitted  to  be,  and  may  be  said  to  stand  midway  between 
a  romance  and  a  work  like  those  in  the  Breakfast-Table  series. 
The  preparation  of  a  memoir  of  Motley  was  a  difficult  task, 
especially  while  unfortunate  events  in  the  political  life  of  the 

historian  were  fresh  in  the  public  mind,  and 
Hoimeis^         Dr.   Holmes   did  little  more  than   write   a 

tribute  to  a  friend.  The  life  of  Emerson  is 
interesting  as  showing  how  the  Sage  of  Concord  was  viewed 
by  a  friend  and  neighbor  not  in  sympathy  with  his  phi- 
losophy. Transcendentalism  appealed  to  Holmes  inasmuch 
as  it  stood  for  greater  freedom  of  thought,  but  the  oddities 
and  extremes  of  the  movement  and  its  lack  of  repose  shocked 
him.  In  his  biography  he  succeeded  in  portraying  one  im- 
portant side  of  Emerson's  character,  but  another  side  he 
could  hardly  understand. 

The  Medical  Essays,  though  included  in  the  collected  works, 
and  readable  enough,  are  relatively  unimportant.    They  ex- 
press views  on  physiological  and  psychological 
Holmes's  matters  which  are  repeated  in  more  popular 

Ptose      ^^^      ioim  in  the  other  essays.     Several  of  them 

attack  one  of  the  Doctor's  chief  aversions, 
homeopathy.  The  Pages  from  an  Old  Volume  of  Life  in- 
cludes a  varieiy  of  papers,  among  them  "My  Hunt  after  the 
Captain,"  an  account  of  a  journey  in  search  of  hia  son,  who 


The  Centkal  Period  889 

had  been  wounded  at  Antietam,  and  "Cinders  from  the  Ashes/' 
a  short  paper  containing  some  interesting  recollections  of  his 
early  life.  The  least  important  of  his  volumes  is  Our  Hun- 
dred Days  in  Europe,  in  which  he  writes  of  his  summer  in 
England.  With  its  testimonials  to  asthma  cures  and  patent 
razors^  its  minute  chronicle  of  goings^  comings^  and  social 
attentions,  this  seems  unworthy  of  *^The  Autocrat.'^  If  it  had 
not  been  followed  four  years  later  by  the  bright  and  thought- 
ful Over  the  Tea-Cups  it  might  have  led  to  the  belief  that 
the  author  was  lapsing  into  the  painful  garrulity  of  old  age. 
As  a  poet  Holmes  showed  his  conservative  tendency.  He 
was  fond  of  the  heroic  couplet  and  continued  to  write  it 

throughout  life.  He  disliked  the  '^rattlety- 
ounes  as  a        bang  sort  of  verse/^  as,  in  a  goodnatured  letter 

to  Lowell,  he  characterized  the  metre  of  "Sir 
Launfal.*'  He  wrote  "metrical  essays,*'  and  his  lyrics  were 
often  of  the  mildly  sentimental  sort,  with  the  quiet  good 
taste  of  an  old-fashioned  gentleman.  _A8  an  occasional  poet 
il§  has  hftPTi  nTiftqiift1]pfl  in  Anfi^ppR.  His  poems  for  the  class 
of  '29  and  for  many  societies  and  anniversaries  fill  a  consider- 
able space  in  his  works;  and  all  have  the  merit  of  special 
fitness  for  the  occasion,  while  a  few  possess  an  enduring 
quality.  Those  best  known  are  of  the  lyric  order,  such  as 
"Bill  and  Joe/'  and  "The  Boys,"  both  among  the  class  poems. 
The  longer  didactic  pieces,  with  their  happy  mixture  of 
humor  and  sense,  are  of  a  kind  that  has  gone  out  of  fashion; 
but  "Poetry;  a  Metrical  Essay"  and  "A  Rhymed  Lesson" 
contain  many  quotable  couplets.  Many  of  the  early  poems 
and  a  few  of  the  later  ones  are  wholly  humorous.  Holmes  is 
at  his  best,  however,  in  the  blending  of  humor  and  pathos, 
as  in  "The  Last  Leaf/'  or  of  humor  and  material  for  solid 
thought,  as  in  "The^Deacgn^s  Masterpiece" — ^better  known  as 
"The  One-Hoss  Shay."  A  poem  of  this  latter  sort,  in  which 
the  humor  predominates,  was  "The  Broomstick  Tram,"  writ- 


330  AhSBIOAK  laTBBATUBB 

ten  when  the  author  was  over  eighty^  and  as  fresh  and  in- 
genious as  his  boyhood  verses.  Of  the  purely  serious  poems 
<^T|iP  n]^ft|pKoTi^   Van^jl^^tt^^^  firat  given  in  The  Autocrat, 

is  the  best  known^  und  was  the  author's  favorite.  Its  great 
vogue  is  probably  due  to  the  obvious  moral  lesson  in  the  last 
stanza^  but  for  a  poem  of  its  kind  it  is  almost  flawless.  The 
long  ^'Wind-Clouds  and  Star-Drifts/'  published  section  by 
section  in  The  Poet  at  the  Breakfasi-Table,  is  smooth,  imd 
phrases  well  the  author's  beliefs.  Many  of  the  short  poems 
are  of  the  sort  sometimes  called  society  verse — ^the  brief  treat- 
ment in  perfect  taste  of  subjects  neither  too  serious  nor  too 
trivial.  Holmes  had  an  old-fashioned  fondness  for  pathos, 
^  which  is  often  shown  in  his  prose,  and  in  such  poems  as 
"The  Voiceless*'  and  'TJnder  the  Violets;"  but  he  usually 
saved  himself  from  sentimentality  by  the  introduction  of 
humor. 

In  discussing  Dr.  Holmes's  rank  as  a  man  of  letters  it  is 
perhaps  well  to  begin  with  sweeping  concessions.    He  was  not 

a  great  scholar,  a  great  moral  teacher,  a  great 

^    ***  poet,  or  a  great  essayist.    He  did  not  repre- 

sent the  aggressive  spirit  of  the  time.  He  was  to  a  consider- 
able extent  provincial.  On  the  other  hand  he  was  a  kindly, 
genial,  observing  man,  with  a  gift  of  happy  expression  in 
prose  and  verse.  He  is  aljways  suggestive,  if  not  deep.  He 
made  a  personal  impression  on  his  hearers  and  readers.  For 
this  reason  he  occupies  an  important  and  in  some  respects  a 
unique  place  in  American  literature.  Many  a  critic  who 
would  unhesitatingly  concede  all  the  limitations  that  have 
been  mentioned  picks  up  Holmes's  poems  and  The  Autocrat 
more  frequently  and  with  more  pleasure  than  the  works  of 
any  other  American  poet  or  essayist.  In  the  great  variety 
which  these  works  offer  there  is  something  for  every  mood 
except  that  of  the  deepest  thought,  and  perhaps  suggestions 
even  lor  that.    And  whatever  is  there  is  given  with  the  in- 


The  Cbntraii  Pbbiod  331 

describable  quality  which  we  call  perfect  taste^  and  which 
marks  the  author  as  a  gentleman.  v 

The  six  greater  New  England  writers,  Emerson,  Whittier, 
Lowell,  Longfellow,  Hawthorne,  and  Holmes,  were  all  of 

old  New  England  ancestry  and,  with  the  ex- 
'^^^^^  ception  of  Longfellow,  were  all  bom  in  eastern 

Authors  Massachusetts.     All  but  Whittier  spent  their 

active  lives  within  twenty  miles  of  Boston  and 
Harvard  college,  and  Whittier  was  but  little  farther  away. 
All  of  them  were  on  terms  of  pleasant  acquaintanceship,  and 
they  met  frequently  in  Boston,  especially  after  the  founding 
of  the  ^^Atlantic  Monthly/^  Besides  these  men  and  their 
contemporaries  who  have  already  been  mentioned  there  were 
many  other  Massachusetts  writers  who  were  of  importance  in 
their  day,  and  a  considerable  number  of  whom  deserve  to  be 
remembered.  Among  those  who  were  associated  with  what 
may  be  called  the  main  literary  set  were  James  T.  Fields, 
E.  H.  Dana,  Jr.,  Edward  Everett  Hale,  J.  T.  Trowbridge, 
Charles  Eliot  Norton,  Samuel  Longfellow,  E.  T.  S.  Lowell, 
William  Ware,  Harriet  Prescott  SpoflEord,  and  Elizabeth 
Stuart  Phelps  Ward. 

James  T.  Fields  (1817-1881^  was  bom  in  New  Hampshire, 
but  went  to  Boston  when  a  young  man,  and  for  over  thirty 

years  was  a  member  of  the  leading  publishing 
james    .  g^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^     Unlike  most  of  the  New 

England  literary  men  he  did  not  have  a  college  education; 
but  he  was  a  wide  reader,  and  he  had  the  instincts  of  a  biblio- 
phile and.  a  collector.  As  publisher,  and  as  editor  of  the 
'"Atlantic  Monthly^'  from  1862  to  1870,  he  became  the  help- 
ful friend  of  many  American  men  of  letters.  During  fre- 
quent visits  to  England  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  leading 
English  writers.  His  most  valuable  work  is  Yesterdays  with 
Authors,  first  published  in  1872.  In  this  he  writes  of 
Thackeray,  Hawthorne,  Dickens,  Wordsworth,  Miss  Mitford, 


332  Akerioan  Litssatubb 

and  Barry  Cornwall,  all  of  whom  he  had  known.  The  papers 
are  gossipy  and  appreciative  rather  than  critical,  but  have 
real  value.  Underbrush  is  a  collection  of  miscellaneous  essays 
and  sketches,  some  of  them  containing  partly  successful  at- 
tempts at  humor,  and  some,  like  a  paper  on  ^^Diamonds  and 
Pearls,^^  the  gleanings  of  a  reader  in  out-of-the-way  places. 
His  poems  contain  some  old  favorites  of  the  school  readers, 
with  humorous  turns  and  moral  lessons,  but  are  of  slight 
importance.  As  publisher,  editor,  lecturer,  and  center  of  a 
literary  circle  Fields  rendered  services  to  American  litera- 
ture altogether  incommensurable  with  the  value  of  his  own 
writings. 

Bichard  Henrv  Dana,  Jr.  (1815-1882)^  abolitionist,  writer 
on  international  law,  and  occasional  contributor  to  the  '^North 

American  Eeview,^'  owes  his  permanent 
j^^rd  Henry     literary  reputation  to  one  book.  Two  Years 

Before  the  Mast  This  tells  the  story  of  the 
author's  experiences  on  a  cruise  which  he  made  to  California 
for  the  purpose  of  regaining  his  health.  It  was  published 
in  1840,  and  remains  the  best  portrayal  of  sea  life  in  the  old 
Asyn  of  American  sailing  vessels.  The  style  is  graphic,  and 
the  facts,  though  evidently  uncolored,  are  so  told  that  they 
have  the  charm  of  a  romance. 

_Edward  Everett  Hale  Q822-19Q9)  came  of  a  family  that 
had  been  distinguished  since  the  early  days  of  Massachusetts 

Bay.  After  his  graduation  from  Harvard  at 
Edward  Bvwett   ^j^^  ^^^  q£  ggygnteen  he  entered  the  ministry 

in  1842,  and  became  pastor  of  a  XJnitarian 
church  in  Boston  in  1856.  For  almost  seventy  years  he  was 
)  active  in  many  ways — as  preacher,  lecturer,  philanthropist, 
,  social  reformer,  editor,  historian,  biographer,  essayist,  and 
story  writer.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  magazines, 
and  the  number  and  variety  of  his  published  volumes  seems 
incredible  until  one  remembers  how  long  and  persistently 


The  Central  Period  333 

he  wrote.  Though  prolific,  he  was  not  a  hasty  or  at  least 
not  a  slovenly  writer.  His  style  was  always  easy  and  indi- 
vidual, and  though  he  may  seem  a  trifle  garrulous  in  some 
of  his  later  work  he  never  loses  his  charm.  As  an  historian 
he  was  accurate  and  reasonably  thorough,  but  he  had  not  the 
time  and  perhaps  not  the  temper  for  deep  investigation. 
His  Franklin  in  France  and  other  historical  writings  will 
probably  be  superseded ;  and  his  essays  and  novels  can  hardly 
last.  His  pleasant  and  gossipy  recollections  of  !N"ew  England 
men  and  afifairs  will  long  be  a  delight  to  students  of  these  sub- 
jects, though  for  concise  criticism  and  statement  of  fact  they 
will  go  to  other  authorities.  Perhaps  his  work  which  is  most 
likely  to  live  is  his  short  stories.  ^^My  Double,  and  How  he 
Undid  Me,^^  published  in  the  "Atlantic^*  in  1859,  showed 
clever  and  ingenious  humor.  ^^The  Man  without  a  Country^^^ 
written  during  the  Civil  War,  is  a  masterly  story,  and  deserves 
to  be  remembered  not  only  for  its  lesson  of  patriotism  but 
for  its  literary  art.  The  feeling  is  intense,  yet  never  seems 
over-done;  and  the  verisimilitude  is  so  great  that  the  tale  has 
been  taken  for  history. 

John  Townsend  Trowbridge  (18^7- ),  another  late  sur- 

vivor  of  the  early  "Atlantic^^  group,  is  a  native  of  "New  York, 

but  removed  to  Boston  about  1848.  He  is 
^owMdn  ™^®*  successful  in  stories  for  boys,  and  Cudjo's 

Cave  and  the  "Jack  Hazard*'  stories  are  now 
being  enjoyed  by  the  sons  and  grandsons  of  those  who  first 
delighted  in  them.  His  work  for  adults  is  on  the  whole  less 
valuable,  though  the  "Vagabonds'*  and  one  or  two  other 
poems  are  commonly  known,  and  some  of  his  novels  were 
popular  in  their  day.  My  Own  Stgrji,  a  late  book  of  reminis- 
cences, is  both  readable  and  valuable  to  the  student  of  literary 
history. 

Charles  Eliot  Norton  (1827-1908)  is  better  known  as  a 
translator  and  editor  than  as  a  creative  i^uthor,  but  filled 


334  AUCSBIOAK  LCTEttATUBfi 

an  important  place  in  the  Ifew  England  literary  Bet.  He  was 
bom  at  Cambridge^  graduated  at  Harvard^  and  for  many 

years  occupied  a  chair  in  that  college.  He 
S^S^   -riy  -de  a  journey  to  India,  and  spent 

much  time  in  Europe.  Besides  editing  the 
correspondence  of  Carlyle  and  Emerson  and  the  letters  of 
Lowell  he  translated  Dante^  and  published  several  works  on 
artistic  and  literary  topics.  Edwin  Percy  Whipple  (1819- 
1886)  was  another  man  of  literary  interests^  whose  writings 
are  now  but  little  read.  He  held  a  business  clerkship  in 
Boston  when  in  1843  he  attracted  attention  by  an  article 
on  Macaulay^  modelled  somewhat  on  the  style  of  that  author. 
He  soon  won  a  reputation  as  an  essayist  and  lyceum  lecturer, 
and  was  one  of  the  most  respected  critics  of  his  day.  Among 
his  volumes  are  Essays  and  Reviews,  1848-9,  Literature  and 
Life,  1849,  The  Literature  of  the  Age  of  Elizabeth,  1876. 
It  is  now  difficult  to  understuid  the  basis  of  Whipple's  con- 
temporary reputation.  He  was  a  conscientious  critic,  with 
fairly  definite  though  narrow  canons  of  judgment,  and  he 
tried  to  write  in  an  entertaining  way;  but  his  essays  show 
neither  keen  insight  nor  effective  phrasing.  Doubtless  his 
fame  was  helped  by  the  fact  that  he  was  a  self-educated  man^ 
by  his  success  as  a  popular  lecturer,  and  perhaps  by  his  style, 
which  was  modelled  on  that  of  the  favorite  essayist  of  the  day, 
Macaulay. 

Samuel  Lojagfellow  (1819-1892),  younger  brother  of  the 
more  distinguished  poet,  was  a  graduate  of  Harvard  and  B 

Unitarian  clergyman.     He  made  important 
^  contributions  to  hymnology,  both  as  author 

and  editor,  and  he  also  wrote  the  life  of  his  brother.  SflTpufil, 
P._Smith  (1808-1895),  a  member  of  the  famous  Harvard 
class  of  1829,  and  later  a  Baptist  clergjrman  and  an  editor, 
wrote  several  hymns,  and  other  poems,  but  is  remembered 
only  as  the  author  of  *Ttf y  Countryj  His  qfthee.'' 


The  Central  Pebiod  335 

Bobert  Traill  Spence  Lowell  (1816-1891),  elder  brother 
of  James  Bussell  Lowell,  was  a  graduate  of  Harirard  college 

and  Harvard  medical  school,  but  later  be- 
ollicti^**"      came  an   Episcopal  clergyman.     He   served 

parishes  in  the  Bermudas,  Newfoundland, 
New  York,  and  New  England,  and  was  for  a  time  professor 
of  Latin  in  Union  College.  He  wrote  poems  which,  while 
they  never  reach  the  heights,  are  musical  and  admirably 
sustained.  More  important  are  his  stories.  The  New  Priest  \ 
in  Conception  Bay,  Anthony  Brade,  and  A  Story  or  tivo\ 
from  a  Dutch  Town.  The  New  Priest  in  Conception  Bay,  his  * 
most  important  work,  has  for  its  setting  the  fishing  village 
in  Newfoundland  where  he  was  stationed.  It  is  a  strong 
story,  with  vivid  character  painting,  but  suflEers  from  the 
fact  that  it  is  written  with  a  sectarian  purpose.  William 
Ware_(17??'-i852J,  another  Harvard  graduate  and  Unitarian 
clergyman,  published  three  historical  or  semi-historical  novels 
— Zenobia,  or  the  Fall  of  Palmyra  (first  published  as  Letters \ 
from  Palmyra),  Aurelian  (first  published  as  Probvs),  and' 
Julian,  or  Scenes  in  Judea.  In  each  of  these  the  story  is 
told  in  letters  purporting  to  be  written  by  one  of  the  principal 
characters.  The  author  makes  a  conscientious  attempt  to 
re-create  ancient  scenes,  and  his  results  are  in  some  ways 
praiseworthy;  but  the  length  of  his  stories,  the  artificiality 
of  his  form,  and  the  lack  of  a  light  touch  interfere  with  his 
success.  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  Ward  ('1844-1911),  who 
published  over  her  maiden  name,  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps, 
was  a  precocious  Andover  girl  who  was  a  contributor 
to  "The  Youth's  Companion*'  at  the  age  of  thirteen,  and  to 
^fHarper's  Monthly''  before  she  was  twenty.  Her  many 
stories,  sketches,  and  essays  have  most  of  them  a  moral  aim. 
The  fiates  Ajar,  her  most  popular  work,  is  an  imaginative 
presentation  of  the  possibilities  of  the  future  life,  and  was 
inspired  by  the  death  of  her  brother,     Ijomsg^Qhaa^^ 


336  AlCBRIOAK  LmSRATUEB 

Monlton  (18g^^yp8)  was  a  native  of  Connecticut^  but  after 
her  marriage  lived  in  Boston.  She  wrote  much  for  periodi- 
cals^ and  published  some  twenty  volumes  of  fiction^  essays^ 
and  poems. 

*  Somewhat  younger  than  the  authors  who  have  been  men- 
tioned was  Louisa  M^  Alcptt  (1832-1888)^  daughter  of  Amos 

Bronson  Alcott.  The  hardships  which  that 
J^|?^**?J*T  erratic   transcendentalist   brought   upon   his 

family  gave  her  valuable  training  and  fur- 
nished material  for  some  of  her  later  literary  work.  She 
early  wrote  verses,  plays,  and  stories,  some  of  which  were 
published,  but  her  first  work  of  importance  was  Hospital 
Sketches,  issued  in  1863.  This  told  of  the  author's  experi- 
ences during  a  few  weeks  as  army  nurse  in  Washington.  In 
1869  it  was  reprinted  with  the  addition  of  a  group  of  "Camp 
and  Fireside  Stories.'^  It  is  said  that  some  of  Miss  Alcotf  s 
earliest  tales  had  been  of  the  ultra-sensational  kind,  and  a 
few  of  those  in  this  group  show  a  trace  of  melodrama.  Others 
abound  in  graphic  and  detailed  description,  and  show  an  ir- 
repressible sense  of  humor.  She  really  found  herself  in  the  first 
of  her  long  series  of  juvenile  eboneB^JAttle  Women,  published 
in  1868.  Many  of  these  tales  are  cleverly  realistic  pictures 
of  New  England  life  as  she  had  known  it.  It  is  usually  said 
that  she  wrote  for  girls,  as  Trowbridge  wrote  for  boys;  but 
young  people  of  both  sexes  enjoy  her  bright  and  wholesome 
books. 

Other  writers  whose  literary  work  was  not  fairly  begun 
until  after  the  close  of  the  Civil  War  were  John  Fiske, 

Charles  Dudley  Warner,  and  Horace  B.  Scud- 
John  Fiflke  ^^^^    John  Fiske  (1842-1901)  holds  a  unique 

place  as  a  scholarly  expositor  and  popularizer  of  philosophy 
and  history.  He  was  bom  in  Hartford,  was  graduated  at 
Harvard,  and  lived  most  of  his  later  life  at  Cambridge.  He 
had  a  brief  connection  with  Harvard  college  after  his  gradu- 


The  Central  Peeiod  337 

ation,  but  his  advancement  was  prevented  by  rumors  of  his 
atheism.  Later  he  engaged  in  lecturing^  and  was  nonresident 
professor  of  history  in  Washington  University,  St.  Louis. 
Throughout  life  his  interests  were  broad,  but  he  was 
first  attracted  chiefly  by  the  theory  of  evolution,  and  after- 
ward by  American  history.  Before  1885  he  published  a 
number  of  books  on  philosophical  topics,  which  had  great 
influence  in  interpreting  the  views  of  Darwin  and  Spencer 
to  Americans.  Between  1888  and  his  death  he  wrote  a  num- 
ber of  historical  works.  The  chief  characteristic  of  all  his 
writings  is  their  great  clearness.  He  had  a  remarkable 
faculty  of  stating  difficult  matters  for  the  common  man 
without  serious  loss  of  scholarly  accuracy. 

Charles  Dudley  Warner  (1829-1900)  was  born  in  western 
Massachusetts,  and  was  graduated  from  Hamilton  college  in 

1851,  and  from  the  TJniversiiy  of  Pennsyl- 
lAte  lamor         yania  law  school  in  1856.     After  practicing  his 

profession  in  Chicago  for  four  years  he  turned 
to  journalism,  and  later  was  one  of  the  editors  of  Harper's 
Magazine.  His  first  book  to  gain  attention  was  My  Summer 
in  a  Oarden^  a  collection  of  light  newspaper  sketches  pub- 
lished in  1870.  From  this  time  until  his  death  he  wrote 
voluminously.  Several  of  his  books  are  accounts  of  travel, 
some  are  fiction,  and  some  are  miscellaneous  essays.  ^j^^iSJi 
Boy,  one  of  his  most  pleasing  books,  is  full  of  autobiographi- 
cal reminiscences.  The  Gilded  Age  he  wrote  in  collaboration 
with  Mark  Twain.  He  was  general  editor  of  the  American, 
Men  of  Letters  series,  to  which  he  contributed  the  volume  on ! 
Irving.  He  was  a  journalist  of  the  best  tjrpe,  a  man  of  wide  ' 
interests,  of  literary  taste,  and  though  genial,  of  sternly  up- 
right principles.  His  work  is  simple,  homely,  and  humorous — 
charming  reading  for  a  summer's  day,  but  without  very  dis- 
tinctive qualities.  Horace  E.  Scudder  (1838-1902),  a  native 
of  Boston  and  ^  graduate  of  Williams  college,  was  for  manj 


1 


338  AlCXBIOAN  lilTBRATURB 

years  literary  adviser  of  tiie  leading  publishing  house  of  New 
England  and  edited  some  of  the  more  important  series  issued 
by  that  firm.  From  1890  to  1898  he  was  editor  of  the  '^At- 
lantic Monthly/*  His  earlier  writings  were  largely  for 
children^  and  he  always  took  an  interest  in  child  life  and  in 

(juvenile  literature.  His  most  important  work  was  the  Life 
of  James  Russell  Lowell,  and  he  wrote  other  biographies 
and  essays. 

Several  Massachusetts  authors  were^  because  of  tempera- 
ment or  circumstances  of  residence,  less  closely  associated 

with  the  group  that  centered  about  Boston, 
^'    '    ^  Harvard  college,  and  the  "Atlantic  Monthly.'* 

_Jo8wh^  Gilbert  HoUand^Xl^l?^^^^^  was  a  Yankee  who  tried 
keeping  writing  school,  taking  daguerreotypes,  teaching,  and 
practicing  medicine,  and  finally  found  his  calling  in  editing  a 
newspaper  and  giving  general  good  advice.  At  the  age  of 
thirty  he  became  associate  editor  of  the  '/Springfield  Sepub* 
lican/*  and  did  much  to  develop  the  reputation  of  that  paper. 
After  1870  he  lived  in  New  York  and  edited  "Scribner*s 
Monthly.**  His  first  work  to  attract  attention  was  Timothy 
TitcomVs  Letters  to  Young  People,  Married  and  Single, 
published  in  the  "Springfield  Bepublican**  and  collected  in 
book  form  in  1858.  This  was  followed  the  same  year  by 
Bitter-Sweet,  a  dramatic  poem,  and  later  by  Kathrina,  a  long 
narrative  poem.  Lessons  in  Life,  Plain  Talks  on  Familiar 
Subjects,  Gold  Foil  Hammered  from  Popular  Proverbs,  a 
Life  of  Lincoln,  Arthur  Bonnicastle,  a  novel,  and  many 
more.  Dr.  Holland's  great  popularity  as  a  lyceum  lecturer 
and  the  immense  sales  of  his  books  indicate  that  he  had  a 
message  for  many  of  his  contemporaries;  and  his  works  are 
still  in  print.  His  ideals  were  true,  and  he  stated  them 
strongly,  apparently  unconscious  that  they  were  commonplace. 
His  prejudices,  his  religious  narrowness,  a  sort  of  cheap 
reverberating  quality  of  his  style,  and  hiu  usq  of  up-to-date  if 


The  Cbntbal  Pebiod  839 

not  slangy  expressions  no  doubt  helped  to  impress  Ms  moral 
on  readers  of  »  certain  class.  His  poems  teach  the  same 
lessons  as  his  prose^  but  they  move  from  beginning  to  end 
without  a  touch  of  inspiration.  He  is  an  example  of  the 
author  who  has  a  contemporary  reputation  and  an  influence 
wholly  disproportioned  to  the  artistic  value  of  his  work. 

Thomas  William  Parsons  (1819-1892)  was  a  native  of  Bos- 
ton.    During  several  years  of  his  early  miuihood  he  lived 

in  Italy,  where  he  became  interested  in  Dante, 
^^^  William  ^^^    published    a   verse    translation    of    the 

first  ten  cantos  of  the  Inferno  in  1843,  He 
adopted  the  supposedly  unpoetic  profession  of  dentistry, 
which  he  practiced  in  Boston,  and  afterward  in  London.  He 
completed  the  translation  of  the  Inferno  in  1867,  and  issued 
a  number  of  small  volumes  of  original  verse,  some  of  them 
privately  printed.  A  selection  from  these  was  published  as 
Poems  the  year  after  his  death.  The  translation  of  Dante 
has  been  highly  praised  by  competent  scholars,  and  impresses 
the  reader  who  does  not  know  the  original  as  the  loving, 
painstaking  work  of  a  man  with  the  poet's  instinct.  Par- 
sons was  a  poefs  poet,  and  he  wrought  little,  but  with  great 
care  and  exquisite  taste.  His  best  known  poem,  ''On  ji 
Bust  of  Dante,*'  is  one  of  the  few  flawless  lyrics  written  by 
an  American.  Though  never  widely  popular,  he  was  one  of 
the  truest  artists  among  minor  American  writers  of  verse. 

Another  self-exiled  American  who  wrote  poetry  as  an  lavo- 
cation  was  William  Wetmore  Storv  (1819-1895).  the  lawyer 

and  artist.  He  was  a  native  of  Salem  and  a 
W»to™   St        graduate  of  Harvard.     After  being  admitted 

to  the  bar  he  published  several  legal  treatises 
of  recognized  authority.  In  1848  he  went  to  Italy,  where  he 
resided  for  the  rest  of  his  life,  and  attained  international 
fame  as  a  sculptor.  He  possessed  an  attractive  personality, 
his  interests  were  wide,  and  his  writings  touch  many  sub- 


340  AlCBRICAH  LiTBBATUSX 

jecU.  His  poems  were  produced  at  Tsrions  times  throagboat 
his  life.  After  he  went  abroad  he  published  a  play  or  two 
and  some  prose  works^  among  them  Boba  di  Eoma,  or  Walks 
and  Talks  about  Borne,  and  Conversations  in  a  Studio.  His 
Ter8e  was  obviously  influenced  by  Browning.  He  made  fre- 
quent use  of  the  dramatic  monologue,  and  succeeded  well  with 
the  broken  blank  Terse  that  fits  this  kind  of  composition. 
^^A  Boman  Lawyer  in  Jerusalem/'  a  defense  of  Judas,  is  the 
longest  and  the  most  ingenious  of  his  exercises  in  psychological 
analysis.  His  most  familiar  poem,  ^Cleopatra/'  shows  some- 
thing of  the  same  treatment  in  briefer  compass  and  lighter 
measure.  Some  of  his  lyrics  are  well  sustained  and  indeed 
all  his  work  is  usually  pleasing  and  in  good  taste. 

Among  the  minor  poets  whose  names  are  occssionally  re- 
called was  Georjge  Lunt  (1803-1885),  a  Newburyport  lawyer 

and  editor.  He  published  several  volumes  of 
Monmmoi         verse,  but  all  is  now  forgotten  except  a  lyric 

or  two.  Prances  Sargent  Osgpod_(1811-1850) 
was  the  daughter  of  a  Boston  merchant,  but  after  her  mar- 
riage lived  in  London  and  New  York.  Mrs.  Osgood  is  per- 
haps now  best  remembered  because  of  Foe's  extravagant  praise 
of  her  work,  yet  her  contemporary  fame  was  considerable. 
Her  poems  are  most  of  them  sentimental  lyrics,  often  intense, 
and  often  with  an  element  of  over-fanciful  imagination.  The 
quality  which  attracted  Foe  was  doubtless  her  smoothness 
and  facility  in  versification.  Epes  Sargent  (1813-1880),  a 
descendant  of  a  prominent  New  England  family,  was  a  pains- 
taking editor  and  compiler,  and  the  author  of  many  original 
works  of  various  kinds.  Several  of  his  plays  were  put  on  the 
stage  and  his  tales  for  young  people  once  had  considerable 
vogue.  .JolmJBtpyle  O^Keilly  (1844-1890}  was  a  native  of 
Ireland  who  escaped  from  Australia,  where  he  had  been  trans- 
ported for  treason.  He  became  editor  of  the  'Boston  Filot,** 
and  was  noted  as  a  public  speaker  and  a  poet.    His  verses 


The  Central  Period  341 

show  a  Celtic  flu^cy^  and  are  characterized  hj  smoothness,  and 

many  aphoristic  lines  and  couplets. 

The  instinct  for  historical  writing  had  been  strong  in 

Massachusetts  since  the  days  of  Bradford  and  Winthrop,  and 

four  Massachusetts  men,  Prescott,  Bancroft, 

^*  Motley,  and  Parkman,  produced  histories  that 

Massachusetts  ^       •  .      .  i  •  j.      x_  ah 

Historians  *^®  ^^^^  important  as  literature.     All  were 

of  old  New  England  stock,  bom  within  a  few 
miles  of  Boston,  and  graduated  at  Harvard  college.  Two  of 
them,  Prescott  and  Motley,  devoted  themselves  to  European 
history,  though  they  chose  subjects  that  had  some  connection 
with  America;  and  two,  Bancroft  and  Parkman,  chose  Ameri- 
can themes. 

William  Hickling  Prescott  (1796-1859)  was  a  native  of 
Salem,  and  in  1811  entered  college  as  a  sophomore.     The 

WiUiam  ^®^*  y®^^  ^®  ^^^  struck  by  a  piece  of  bread 

Hickling  thrown  by  a  fellow  student  at  commons,  and 

Prescott  received  injuries  that  resulted  in  the  blind- 

ness of  one  eye  and  great  weakness  of  the  other.  He  had  been 
a  fair  student,  and  the  f acully  showed  him  some  considera^ 
tion,  so  that  he  was  able  to  receive  his  degree.  He  spent 
some  time  in  travel  and  contributed  a  few  papers  to  the 
''North  American  Eeview^^  and  other  magazines.  His  finan- 
cial circumstances  were  such  that  he  might  have  lived  without 
definite  employment,  but  he  rejected  this  possibility  and  re- 
solved to  become  a  writer.  To  make  up  for  the  deficiencies  of 
his  college  training  he  outlined  a  course  of  study,  most  of 
which  he  carried  out.  After  much  consideration  he  decided 
on  a  subject  from  Spanish  history,  and  in  1837  published  his 
Ferdinand  and  Isabella.  He  then  turned  naturally  to  The 
Conquest  of  Mexico^  the  theme  of  which  Irving  generously 
relinquished  to  him,  and  afterward  to  The  Conquest  ol  Peru^ 
Before  his  death  he  had  completed  three  of  four  projected 
volumes  on  Philip  the  Second. 


343  Aherigak  Litsratube 

PTesootfs  methods  of  study  and  composition  were  de- 
tennined  by  his  infirmify.     He  could  not  himself  ransack 

libraries  and  manuscript  collections,  or  even 

Uta^T  Method  ^®^*  ^*^  profit  the  places  where  these  au- 
thorities were  found.  He  never  went  to 
Spain,  Mexico,  or  Peru.  Fortunately  he  had  both  influence 
and  money,  and  was  able  to  engage  the  best  copyists  and  to 
secure  for  them  admission  to  the  most  valuable  collections. 
The  results  of  their  labors  were  brought  to  his  darkened 
study  and  used  with  the  aid  of  readers.  After  he  had 
planned  a  work  he  got  in  mind  the  facts  relating  to  a  single 
topic,  and  thought  out  the  details  and  even  the  phraseology 
before  a  line  was  written.  In  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  every 
sentence  is  elaborated  as  if  it  were  intended  as  a  textbook 
example  of  its  type.  Later  he  gained  greater  ease,  but  he 
always  gave  the  impression  of  studious  care.  His  methods 
of  work  also  affected  the  value  of  his  history  as  history,  though 
he  recognized  the  diflSculties  under  which  he  labored  and 
tried  to  overcome  them.  It  is  a  common  charge  that  he 
painted  his  historical  pictures  with  too  gorgeous  coloring. 

John  Lothrop  Motley^  (181471877}  was  born  at  Dorchester, 
a  half  generation  younger  than  Prescott.     After  a  brilliant 

though  not  very  diligent  career  at  Harvard, 
MmJ^^^      he  studied  at  Berlin  and  Goettingen.     His 

first  two  volumes  were  novels.  The  earlier, 
Morion's  Hope,  is  partly  autobiographical,  and  in  some  places 
has  a  little  of  the  fiavor  of  Wilhelm  Meister.  Merry  Mount 
is  historical  fiction.  At  an  early  date  he  had  written  a  re- 
view article  or  two  on  historical  subjects,  and  he  began  sys-* 
tematic  study  of  the  history  of  the  Dutch  Eepublic.  On  learn- 
ing that  Prescott  intended  a  work  on  Philip  the  Second  he 
was  tempted  to  give  up,  but  Prescott  encouraged  him,  as 
he  had  himself  been  encouraged  by  Irving  under  similar 
circumstances.    Prom  1851  to  1856  he  worked  among  the 


The  Central  Period  343 

manuscript  collections  of  Europe  and  finished  JTAg  Bise  of 
the  Dutch  Republic  in  1856.  In  1860  he  published  two 
volumes  oi  The  United  Netherlands  and  completed  the  work 
in  1868.  Meanwhile  he  had  been  for  a  time  minister  to 
Austria  and  in  1869  was  made  minister  to  England.  In  both 
positions  he  had  serious  trouble,  which  led  to  bitter  and 
confusing  newspaper  controversy.  After  his  summary  recall 
from  England  he  wrote  ajife  of  John_of  Barneveldt,  and 
planned  a  work  on  the  Thirty  Years'  War  which  his  failing 
health  did  not  allow  him  to  prepare.  Motley  was  a  careful 
and  thorough  student,  and  any  defects  of  his  work  come 
rather  from  his  personality  than  from  his  methods.  He 
seems  to  have  had  the  temper  of  an  advocate  rather  than  that 
of  a  judge,  and  perhaps  that  of  a  dramatist  more  than  either. 
When  he  considered  historical  questions  analogous  to  those 
in  the  United  States  he  was  somewhat  of  a  partizan,  and  he 
was  likely  to  sympathize  with  the  most  picturesque  character. 
His  history  always  has  a  hero. 

George  Bancroft  (1800-1891).  the  elder  of  the  two  his- 
torians who  chose  American  themes,  was  bom  in  Worcester. 

He  was  one  of  the  first  of  the  Harvard  men  to 

Gtotgfi  Bancroft    i   j  r%  j  •     j   j.-l      ^ 

•  study  m  Germany  and  received  the  degree 

of  Ph.D.  from  Goettingen  in  1820.    In  1822-3  he  was  tutor  in 

Greek  at  Harvard,  and  in  the  latter  year  published  a  volume 

of  poems.     He  had,  however,  already  determined  to  devote 

himself  to  history,  and  in  1834  he  published  the  first  volume 

of  his  History  of  the  Umt&d  States^    This  history  was  his 

chief  literary  task  throughout  life,  though  his  work  upon  it 

was  much  interrupted  by  his  participation  in  politics.  He  was 

successively  collector  of  the  port  of  Boston,  secretary  of  the 

navy,  and  minister  to  England  and  to  Germany.     After 

1849  he  lived  in  New  York.    Twelve  volumes  of  his  history 

appeared  at  intervals  until  1882,  the  last  bringing  the  narra< 

tive  to  the  adoption  of  the  constitution.    The  final  revised 


344  Ahbbicak  Litbratubb 

edition  was  published  in  1884-5.     His  other  writings  are 
mostly  magazine  articles  fmd  occasional  addresses. 

Bancroft  differed  from  most  of  his  New  England  con- 
temporaries in  being  a  democrat,  and  his  political  beliefs 

influenced  both  his  views  of  history  and  his 

LU^m^^Method  ^*y^®'    -^^  ^^  much  of  a  moralist,  as  is  shown 

by  some  of  his  earliest  essays.  He  inter- 
preted history  in  the  light  of  his  views  on  life  and  govern-* 
ment,  and  thus  to  a  certain  extent  laid  himself  open  to  the 
charge  of  partizanship.  His  siyle,  especially  in  the  earlier 
volumes,  had  something  of  the  heightened  quality  that  was 
affected  by  the  democrats  rather  than  the  federalists.  He 
was,  however,  a  thorough  and  conscientious  investigator, 
trained  even  more  than  most  of  his  contemporaries  in  the 
methods  of  German  scholarship.  If  his  history  is  not  abso- 
lutely impartial  it  is  not  because  of  any  deliberate  misrepre- 
sentation or  coloring. 

Francis  _Parbnan  (1823-1893)  was  bom  in  Boston,  and 
after  his  graduation  from  Harvard  studied  law,  but  never 

practiced.  In  1846  he  went  on  an  extended 
?J^*  trip  through  the  wilderness  west  of  the  Mis- 

sissippi, and  improved  every  opportunity  to 
become  familiar  with  the  life  of  the  hunter,  the  guide,  and  the 
Indian.  His  account  of  this  trip,  first  published  in  the 
^'Elnickerbocker  Magazine,^'  and  afterward  issued  as  The  Calx- 
Jprnia  and  Oregon  TraUj,,  is  an  unusually  interesting  narra- 
tive of  personal  adventure.  Two  years  later  he  published  his 
first  historical  work,^fce  Conspiracy ^qf  Poniiaq.^  His  health 
was  never  good,  and  was  permanently  impaired  by  exposure 
and  over  exertion  during  his  first  visit  to  the  West.  Much  of 
the  time  he  was  wholly  unable  to  use  his  eyes,  and  another 
affliction  deprived  him  for  a  time  of  the  use  of  his 
limbs.  While  in  a  depressed  state  of  mind  after  the  comple- 
tion of  The  Conspiracy  of  Powtiac  he  wrote  a  novels  Vassai 


The  Centbal  Period  34S 

Morion,  published  in  1856,  but  omitted  from  his  collected 
works.  This  is  slightly  melodramatic  in  plot,  and  is  evi- 
dently in  a  degree  autobiographical.  At  a  later  time  he  turned 
to  horticulture  3S  an  out-door  avocation.  He  published  a 
book  on  roses  in  1866,  and  in  1871-2  was  professor  of  horti- 
culture at  Harvard.  In  spite  of  all  diflBculties  he  persevered 
in  his  historical  work,  and  produced  a  series  of  volumes  cover- 
ing the  entire  conflict  between  France  and  England  for  su- 
premacy in  the  New  World.  Those  that  followed  The  Conspir- 
acy of  Pontiac  were  Pioneers  of  France  in  the.  New  World. 
1865 ;  The  Jesuits  in  North  America  in  the  Seventeenth  Cen- 
tury, 1867 ;  La  SaJle:  or  The  Discovery  of  the  Oreat  West. 
1869 ;  The  Old  Regime  in  Canada,  18114: ;  Count  Frontenac  and 
New  France  under  Louis  XIV,  1877 ;  ^Montcalm  and  Wolfe, 
1884;  and  A  Half-Century  of  Cgnfliat.  1892.  In  the  prepara- 
tion of  these  works  Parkman  made  five  trips  to  Prance  to  ex- 
amine authorities,  and  visited  nearly  every  part  of  America  in 
which  the  scenes  of  his  histories  ]are  laid.  He  combined  in  a 
remarkable  degree  the  accurate  method  and  impartial  sense  of 
a  modern  historian  with  a  keen  observation  of  nature  &nd 
man,  and  an  eye  for  the  picturesque.  His  works  are  of  un-  ^ 
questioned  value  as  authorities,  and  his  style  has  a  finish  and 
charm  hardly  to  be  found  in  the  work  of  any  other  American 
historian  of  equal  scholarly  rank.  He  wrote  narrative  rather 
than  philosophical  history,  yet  his  analyses  of  causes  and  of 
great  movements  are  sufScient  and  sound. 

Several  of  the  Massachusetts  publicists  and  orators  have 
been  discussed  in  other  connections,  and  a  few  more  deserve 

mention.  Eufus  Choate  (1799-1859),  a  law- 
raoiicists  ana      y^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^.^^^  United  States  senator 

from  Massachusetts,  was  a  man  of  brilliant 
and  magnetic  personality.  He  was  a  devoted  student  of  the 
classics,  and  he  deliberately  applied  the  results  of  his  studies 
to  the  development  of  his  own  siyle,  not  always  with  fortu- 


346  Ahbbican  Literatube 

nate  effects.  In  some  orations  he  uses  long  and  involyed 
sentences  in  which  the  reader  becomes  entangled^  though  his 
delivery  is  said  to  have  concealed  the  defect.  He  belongs  on 
the  whole  to  the  same  group  of  orators  as  Webster;  but  he  had 
more  brilliancy  and  less  weight  and  dignity,  and  his  power 
probably  depended  more  on  his  personal  manner.  Though 
his  speeches  are  still  traditionally  classic  they  are  little  read, 
and  have  little  influence  on  modem  public  speaking.  Charles 
Francis  Adams  (1807-1886),  son  of  John  Quincy  Adams, 
had  a  long  public  career,  the  most  important  incident  of  which 
was  the  ministry  to  England  under  President  Lincoln.  In 
his  younger  days  he  contributed  articles  on  literary  and  mis- 
cellaneous subjects  to  the  "North  American  Eeview;"  he 
edited  with  great  care  the  works  of  his  father  and  his  grand- 
father, and  wrote  their  memoirs ;  he  published  some  political 
pamphlets;  and  he  delivered  many  orations  and  addresses. 
The  frank  determination  and  the  literary  tastes  and  interests 
which  had  characterized  the  earlier  members  of  the  family 
are  seen  to  a  considerable  extent  in  all  these  works,  fiharlefl 
^umner  (1811;-1874)  was  the  son  of  an  old  New  England 
family,  a  graduate  of  Harvard,  a  student  of  literature,  and  in 
his  day  the  "scholar  in  polities'*  from  Massachusetts.  A 
Fourth  of  July  oration,  "C)n  the  True  Grandeur  of  Nati^iag;^^ 
in  which  he  opposed  war,  attracted  much  attention.  After  1860 
almost  all  his  speeches  were  on  political  questions;  but  he 
continued  to  keep  his  interest  in  literature,  and  was  a  life- 
long intimate  of  Longfellow  and  others  of  the  Cambridge 
literary  set.  The  discussion  of  his  long  service  in  the  senate, 
with  the  sensational  assault  by  Brooks,  and  the  later  aliena- 
tion from  his  party,  belongs  to  political  history.  The  fifteen 
volumes  of  his  works  offer  little  attraction  to  the  ordinary 
reader.  They  are  made  up  largely  of  speeches  in  the  senate. 
His  formal  addresses  before  that  body  were  usually  four 
hours  in  length  imd  were  in  a  siyle  that  has  been  called 


The  Central  Period  347 

'|wchitectural/'  This  epithet  is  apt  in  the  sense  that  they 
were  built  up  with  great  labor,  not  that  they  were  admirable 
in  proportion.  His  style  was  formal,  and  his  use  of  many  quo- 
tations and  allusions  was  in  a  manner  already  almost  obsolete. 

The  literary  work  in  the  other  New  England  states  was 
far  inferior  to  that  in  Massachusetts.     Connecticut  still  held 

the  second  place  with  a  few  minor  poets  and 
Connecticut —  several  prose  writers  of  more  importance.  Of 
Mitchell  ^^®   latter   perhaps  JDonald    Grant_  MitcheU 

(1822-1908)  shows  most  markedly  the  char- 
acteristics that  have  been  seen  in  earlier  Connecticut  writers, 
though  he  also  has  some  resemblance  in  both  temper  and 
literary  manner  to  Irving.  He  was  bom  in  Norwich  and 
was  graduated  from  Yale  in  1841.  His  first  writings  were 
sketches  of  European  travel  and  light  satirical  essays.  In 
1850  he  published,  over  the  pen-name  ^^k  Marvel/^  Reveries 
of  a  Bachelor^  and  the  next  year  Dream  Life.  These  books 
can  be  described  neither  as  romances  nor  as  personal  essays, 
but  have  some  of  the  characteristics  of  both.  They 
partly  tell  and  partly  imply  a  story,  but  the  narrative  ele- 
ment is  not  predominant.  Reveries  of  a  Bachelory  especially, 
is  a  charming  embodiment  of  the  old-fashioned  genial  and 
delicate  sentimentalism  at  its  best.  After  serving  for  a 
time  as  United  States  consul  at  Venice,  Mitchell  settled  in 
1855  at  Edgewood,  a  farm  near  New  Haven,  where  he  lived 
until  his  death.  He  writes  of  this  in  My  Farm  of  Edgewood,  \ 
Wet  Days  at  Edgewood,  and  other  volumes  that  combine  ap-  \ 
preciation  of  nature,  practical  observations  on  farming,  and 
gleanings  from  the  georgic  writings  of  English  and  classic 
poets.  His  English  Lands,  Letters,  and  Kings,  and  American 
Lands  and  Letters  are  literary  criticism  with  a  strong  personal 
element. 

Mitchell  is  said  to  have  been  annoyed  that  the  public  pre- 
ferred Reveries  of  a  Bachelor  to  his  later  writings;  and 


348  Ahebican  LrrESATURB 

many  of  his  wannest  admirers  give  first  rank  to  such  volumes 
as  Wet  Days  at  Edgewood.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  the 
public  is  right,  and  that  though  the  earlier  volumes  belong 
to  a  kind  of  literature  now  out  of  fashion  they  have  more 
real  vitality  than  the  author's  slightly  self-conscious  writings 
as  gentleman  farmer  or  as  amateur  critic.  All  Mitchell's 
work,  however,  is  delicate  in  manner  and  pervaded  by  n>n 
air  of  leisurely  culture  that  is  too  rare  in  American  books. 

Harriet  Beecher  Stowe  (1811-1896),  though  at  difEerent 
times  resident  in  many  places,  fairly  belongs  to  Connecticut. 

She  was  bom  in  Litchfield,  ttie  daughter^gf 
I^rriet  BMcii«r    ^^i^^   Eeverend   Lymjui  Beecher,   one  of   the 

strongest  of  the  New  England  clergymen  who 
clung  to  Trinitarian  Congregationalism,  and  j^e  sister  of  a 
^till  more  distinguished  clergymanj_Henry  Ward  Beecher.^ 
Her  mother  died  four  years  after  her  birth,  and  her  father, 
though  he  married  twice  afterward,  took  chief  charge  of  her 
education.  Numerous  anecdotes  are  told  of  the  homely, 
simple,  humorous  life  of  the  family.  The  children  were 
allowed  a  wider  course  of  reading  than  some  Calvinists  would 
have  approved,  and  Mrs.  Stowe  remembered  especially  her 
experiences  with  the  Arabian  Nights,  Scott,  and  Byron. 

Dr.  Beecher  was  called  to  a  conservative  pulpit  in  Boston, 
and  in  1832  to  the  presidency  of  a  theological  seminary  in 
Cincinnati.  Here  Harriet  became  intimate  with  Mrs.  Calvin 
E.  Stowe,  wife  of  a  professor  in  the  seminary;  ftnd  after  her 
friend's  death  in  1834  her  eflEorts  to  console  the  husband  led 
to  an  engagement  and  her  marriage  in  1836.  Professor 
Stowe  afterward  accepted  calls  in  the  East,  first  at  Bowdoin 
college,  Brunswick,  Maine,  and  then  at  Andover  theological 
seminary;  and  in  1864  the  family  settled  permanently  at 
Hartford.  After  the  war  they  also  had  a  winter  home  in 
Florida. 

Before  her  marriage  Mrs,  Stowe  had  published  a  geography 


The  Central  Period  349 

and  done  some  other  slight  work  with  her  pen;  and  although 
her  health  was  poor,  and  limited  means  imposed  on  her  a 

large  share  of  household  duties,  she  continued 
Cabin   ^*"^*        ^  write  occasionally.     It  was  just  after  her 

removal  to  Brunswick,  that  she  began  the  com- 
position of  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.  During  her  residence  in  Cin- 
cinnati she  had  seen  much  of  slavery  across  the  border,  and 
she  had  visited  friends  in  the  slave  states.  She  always  be- 
lieved slavery  an  evil,  but  she  was  not  at  first  an  abolitionist, 
and  even  after  her  convictions  became  more  intense  she  was 
never  guilty  of  the  vindictive  sentiments  shown  by  many 
northerners  who  knew  nothing  of  the  South  at  first  hand. 
In  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  she  tried  to  show  the  bright  as  well 
as  the  dark  side  of  slavery;  and  she  pictured  the  most  brutal 
slave-master  and  the  woman  with  the  most  unreasonable  race 
prejudice  as  northerners.  Indeed,  she  was  surprised  that 
opposition  to  the  book  came  from  the  South  rather  than  from 
the  radical  abolitionists,  whom  she  thought  she  was  too  mild 
to  please. 

The  inspiration  to  write  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  came  from  a 
desire  to  arouse  interest  in  the  evils  of  slavery,  supplemented 
by  a  purpose  to  increase  the  meagre  family  income.  The, 
work  grew  to  completion  slowly,  during  the  few  spare  mo- 
ments of  a  busy  housewife.  It  first  appeared  serially  during 
1851-2  in  the  "National  Era,'^  an  abolitionist  paper  of  small 
circulation  published  in  Washington.  As  soon  as  it  was 
completed  it  was  issued  in  book  form  at  Boston,  and  achieved 
remarkable  success.  Statistics  are  somewhat  confiicting,  but 
it  is  usually  said  that  half  a  million  copies  were  sold  in 
five  years.  In  England  the  book  had  an  almost  equally  re- 
markable run,  and  it  was  translated  into  most  continental 
languages. 

As  a  reply  to  critics  who  doubted  the  truth  of  her  portrayals 
the  author  published  in  1853  A  Key  to  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin. 


350  Americak  Litbratubs 

The  same  year  she  went  abroad^  and  the  inevitable  volume  of 
experiences  appeared  in  1864  as  Sunny  Memories  of  Foreign 

Lands.  In  1856  she  issued  a  second  novel  of 
lS^^hSm     slavery,  ^e(f,  a  Tale  of  the  Great  Dismal^ 

Swamp,  based  on  some  events  in  the  Nat 
Turner  slave  insurrection  of  1831.  In  later  editions  of  her 
works  this  story  appeared  with  the  title  Nina  Gordon.  At 
the  time  of  its  publication  Mrs.  Stowe  went  to  England  to 
protect  her  copjrrights,  and  made  a  tour  of  the  continent. 
After  her  return  to  America  she  continued  to  write  profusely 
until  she  was  seventy  years  of  age.  After  that  time  her 
powers  declined  and  she  published  nothing  of  importance. 
The  Biverside  edition  of  her  works  comprises  sixteen  volumes. 
Among  her  later  writings  that  deserve  mention  are  two 
stories  with  New  England  heLckgtoymA^^he  Minister's  Woo- 
ing and  Old-Town  Folks.  The  former  has  a  theological 
motive,  less  interesting  now  than  when  the  book  was  written. 
The  charm  of  both  is  due  to  the  shrewd,  sympathetic,  and 
human  portrayal  of  New  England  life — a  life  that  the  author 
knew  far  better  than  that  which  she  depicts  in  Uncle  Tom's 
Cabin.  Some  of  her  voliunes  are  for  young  people  and  others 
are  sketches  with  a  moral  and  didactic  purpose.  In  1869 
she  contributed  to  the  ** Atlantic  Monthly*'  a  vindication  of 
Lady  Byron,  which  she  followed  by  a  book  on  the  same  sub- 
ject. It  is  based  on  revelations  which  she  received,  or  be- 
lieved herself  to  have  received,  from  Lady  Byron  herself. 
Her  sincerity  cannot  be  doubted,  but  her  story  was  so  revolt- 
ing that  the  world  was  not  prepared  to  believe  it  without  bet- 
ter authentication  than  she  could  offer,  and  the  episode  must 
be  considered  the  most  unfortunate  in  her  literary  career. 

Though  many  critics  find  the  nearest  approach  to  artistic 
excellence  in  the  New  England  tales,  Mrs.  Stowe  seems  des- 
tined to  be  known  as  the  author  of  one  book.  Uncle  Tom's 
Cabin.    The  faults  of  this  story  are  obvious.    It  is  sensational^ 


The  Central  Pebiod  351 

and  the  plot  structure  is  especially  open  to  criticism.    It  is, 
however,   a  S3nmpathetic  presentation  of  life  by  an  alert, 

kindly,  and  intensely  human  woman.  After 
Fame  ^^^  '        ^^'  analysis  of  such  a  book  is  likely  to  be  less 

satisfactory  than  a  statement  of  its  success. 
At  first  its  great  sale  in  America  was  ascribed  to  its  timeli- 
ness; but  it  had  almost  equal  vogue  in  countries  where 
the  domestic  institutions  of  America  caused  little  concern, 
and  after  more  than  half  a  century  it  still  maintains  its  popu- 
larity, and  dramatized  versions  are  still  played  not  only  in 
America  but  in  England  and  on  the  Continent.  Whatever 
the  formal  critic  may  say,  such  wide  and  long  continued 
popularity  shows  the  presence  of  some  elements  of  literary 
greatness,  if  not  of  artistic  skill. 

The  jiuthor  who  has  suddenly  become  a  celebrity  writes 
ever  after  at  a  disadvantage.  After  1862  Mrs.  Stowe  worked 
with  the  public  eye  continually  upon  her.  Personally  she 
continued  unspoiled  by  praise;  but  the  quality  of  her  work 
mfty  have  been  injured  by  a  knowledge  of  what  was  expected 
of  her.  At  all  events  it  is  the  critics  rather  than  the  common 
readers  who  have  pointed  out  the  excellences  in  her  work  of 
later  date,  while  her  first  story  has  appealed  to  millions. 

Two  lesser  Connecticut  authors  were  connected  with  events 
of  the  Civil  War.    H.  H.  Brownell  (1820-1872)  >  a  Hartford 

lawyer,  attracted  the  attention  of  Admiral 
Minor  Parragut  by  some  of  his  poems  on  naval  sub- 

Writers  jects,  and  received  an  jippomtment  as  acting 

ensign  that  enabled  him  to  see  actual  service. 
'^^The  Bay  Pighf  ^  describes  the  battle  of  Mobile,  at  which  he 
was  present,  and  ^^The  River  Pight^'  the  engagement  at  "New 
Orleans.  Both  seem  imitative^^  greater  poems  on  similar 
themes,  such  as  Tennyson's  ''The  Eevenge,'*  and  Cowper's 
"On  the  Loss  of  the  Royal  George;'*  but  both  are  tediously 
bng  and  not  well  sustained.    As  thQ  events  of  which  they 


352  American  Literature 

treat  pass  farther  back  into  history  the  praise  that  they  once 
received  seems  strangely  overdone.  Brownell^s  miscellaneous 
poems  are  equally  unsuccessful.  Theodore  Winthrop  (1828- 
1861^  was  descended  from  the  early  governor  of  Massachu- 
setts Bay^  and  on  his  mother's  side  from  Jonathan  Edwards. 
In  the  six  years  after  his  graduation  from  Yale  in  1848  he 
visited  various  parts  of  Europe,  Panama,  California,  and 
Oregon,  and  returned  overland  to  the  East.  At  the  outbreak 
of  the  war  he  enlisted,  rose  to  the  rank  of  major,  and  was 
killed  in  battle  in  1861.  Before  his  death  he  had  published 
little  except  some  short  papers  in  the  "Atlantic  Monthly.*' 
His  three  novels,  Cecil  Dreeme,  John  Brent,  and  Edwin 
Brothertoft,  two  volumes  of  short  sketches,  and  a  collection 
of  poems  appeared  posthumously  and  gained  considerable 
vogue.  The  experiences  of  the  author's  short  life  gave  him  an 
abundance  of  material,  and  his  stories  and  sketches  of  travel 
show  great  varieiy.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  public  in- 
terest was  stimulated  somewhat  by  a  knowledge  of  his  per- 
sonality, and  the  picturesque  facts  of  his  career;  and  few 
persons  now  read  his  works.  Jgoae  Terrv  Cooke  (1827-1892^^ 
published  light  and  melodious  verses,  and  short  magazine 
stories.  A  touch  of  sentiment  suggests  the  work  of  the  earlier 
Connecticut  school,  though  she  is  saved  from  offensive  senti- 
mentality by  a  good  sense  of  humor  and  by  the  change  in  the 
spirit  of  the  times. 

In  Ehode  Island  Albert  Q.  Greene  (1802-1868)^  a  Provi- 
dence lawyer  of  literary  tastes,  wrote  a  number  of  poems,  in- 
cluding two  favorites  of  the  old  school  readers, 

5^^  ^^  "Old  Grimes"  and  'The  Baron's  Last  Ban- 
Island  Writers 

quef  He  also  deserves  to  be  remembered 
as  the  founder  of.  the  Harris  Collection  of  American  Poetry. 
Sarah  Helen  Whitman  Y 1803-1878)  was  also  a  resident  of 
Providence.  Her  maiden  name  was  Power.  In  1828  she 
was  married  to  Mr,  Whitman  j  in  1833  she  was  widowed,    la 


The  Central -Period  353 

1848  she  was  provisionally  engaged  to  Poe,  but  the  arrange- 
ment was  broken  off,  partly  through  the  agency  of  friends. 
Mrs.  Whitman  is  best  remembered  on  account  of  her  rela- 
tions to  Poe,  and  her  essay  "Edgar  A.  Poe  and  his  Critics ;'' 
but  her  poems  are  better  than  the  average  minor  verse  of  the 
time.  They  have  a  tendency  to  be  sentimental,  and  are  not 
highly  original,  but  they  are  remarkably  melodious,  and 
show  considerable  familiarity  with  modern  European  litera- 
ture. Some  of  those  which  grew  out  of  her  relations  with 
Poe  are  among  her  best  and  have  an  added  biographic  value. 
In  Vermont  Daniel  P.  Thompson  (1795-1868),  a  f armer^s 
boy  who  was  educated  at  Middlebury  college  and  became  a 

prominent  lawyer,  judge,  politician,  and  edi- 

^nor  Vermont  ^  wrote  a  number  of  historical  and  other 
wnten  ^  »     -,  m-, 

novels.      Only    one   of    these    survives — Th& 

Oreen  Mountain  Boys,  an  historical  romance  dealing  with 
Vermont  in  the  Eevolution.  The  patriotic  nature  of  the 
subject  no  doubt  had  much  to  do  with  the  popularity  of  this 
tale;  but  the  story  is  stirring  jind  well  told,  and  the  book  is 
still  a  good  one  for  boys,  and  not  beneath  the  notice  of  their 
elders.  John  Q.  Saxe  (1816-1887)  was  also  a  native  of  Ver- 
mont, a  graduate  of  Middlebury,  a  lawyer,  an  editor,  and  a 
politician.  During  his  later  years  he  resided  in  N"ew  York 
City  and  Albany.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  brilliant  but 
erratic  man,  with  periods  of  nervous  excitement  which  in 
later  years  became  downright  insanity.  He  began  his  literary 
career  as  n  newspaper  humorist;  and  his  best  work  is  as  the 
author  of  humorous  poems,  many  of  which  satirize  social 
foibles.  "The  Proud  Miss  McBride,''  one  of  the  most  popular 
of  these,  is  aimed  at  the  airs  of  the  newly  rich.  It  is  clever, 
but  like  many  of  his  poems  is  too  long.  Some  of  his  other 
verses  abound  in  puns,  and  have  a  slight  burlesque  element, 
suggesting  Hood.  His  few  serious  poems  are  not  of  great 
value.    Though  not  one  of  the  greater  American  humorists. 


354  American  Litebatubb 

Saxe  is  well  above  the  level  of  the  ordinary  newspaper  rhym- 
ster^  and  his  fan  is  genuine  and  clean. 

Celia  Leifi^hton  Thaxter  ^1836-1894)  was  a  native  of  Ports- 
mouthy  New  Hampshire,  imd  passed  most  of  her  life  on  the 

Isle  of  Shoals,  where  her  father  was  lighthouse 
Minor  Hew  keeper.    Her  prose  sketches.  Among  the  Isles 

Writer^  0/  Shoals,  first  published  in  the  ^'Atlantic,'' 

and  many  of  her  poems  show  the  influence  of 
her  life-long  environment.  Her  prose  is  over-crowded  with 
adjectives,  but  vivid,  and  full  of  suggestive  description  and 
anecdote.  Her  poems,  many  of  them  on  subjects  connected 
with  the  sea,  have  no  great  distinction,  but  rank  well  among 
the  minor  verse  of  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

In  Maine  Jacob  Abbott  Q803-1879^.  a  Congregational 
clergyman,  39nd  for  a  time  professor  of  mathematics  and  nat- 
ural philosophy  in  Amherst  colleg^e,  emulated 
Wdtws^  'Teter  Parley**  as  a  writer  of  moral  jand  in- 
structive books  for  the  young.  His  biographer 
credits  him  with  more  than  two  hundred  works.  The  most 
important  are  the  twenty-eight  volumes  of  the  BoUo  series^ 
which  tell  of  the  life,  adventures,  and  travels  of  Bollo  Holiday 
and  his  family.  Characters  and  events  are  both  natural, 
but  the  story  in  each  volume  is  slight,  and  the  real  aim  is  to 
give  information.  Jacob  Abbott* s  brother.  John  S.  C.  Abbott 
(1805-1877),  also  a  clergyman,  wrote  a  number  of  popular 
histories,  some  of  them  still  read.  He  Wjas  a  compiler  rather 
than  an  original  student.  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Akers  Allen  (1832- 
)  was  bom  and  passed  the  first  thirty  years  of  her  life 
in  Maine;  later  she  lived  in  Washington,  in  Baltimore,  and 
in  New  York.  Her  poems,  some  of  them  published  oyer  the 
signature  of  Florence  Percy,  are  mostly  lyrics.  The  only  one 
now  generally  remembered  is  the  sentimental  *^ock  me  to 
Sleep,  Mother,**  which  by  no  means  represents  her  best  work. 

A  Maine  writer  of  greater  distinction  was  Sylvester  Judd 


The  Central  Period  855 

11813-1853),  long  pastor  of  a  Unitarian  church  at  Augusta. 
He  was  horn  in  Massachusetts  and  was  graduated  from  Yale 

college   and   from   Harvard   divinity   school. 
^  •'  His  most  important  work  bears  the  rather 

appalling  title  of  Margaret,  a  Tale  of  the  Real  and  Ideal, 
Blight  and  Bloom;  Including  Sketches  of  a  Place  not  before 
Described,  called  Mons  OhristL  It  was  first  published  in 
1845  and  revised  in  1851.  The  scene  is  laid  in  Kew  Eng- 
land in  the  years  just  following  the  Bevolution.  The  heroine, 
Margaret,  is  a  waif  who  grows  up  among  the  lowest  classes 
of  New  England  society,  in  the  midst  of  vice  and  without 
religious  instruction,  but  remains  pure,  and  has  religious 
dreams  and  visions.  After  many  experiences  she  marries  a 
wonderful  Mr.  Evelyn,  who  converts  her  to  Unitarianism, 
and  together  they  purchase  the  country  about  her  former 
home  and  establish  an  ideal  state  of  society.  The  first  part 
of  the  book  was  written  after  careful  antiquarian  research, 
and  impresses  the  reader  as  true  to  life,  even  without  the 
tributes  to  its  fidelity  from  older  New  England  critics.  The 
later  part  shows  the  strangely  confused  ideals  of  a  transcen- 
dental Unitarian.  The  book  was  devoutly  written  to  interpret 
the  author^s  views  more  freely  than  he  could  express  them  in 
sermons.  As  a  unified  work  of  art  it  is  nothing;  but  some 
scenes  are  strong,  the  interpretation  of  New  England  life 
and  nature  is  excellent,  and  the  "ideal"  parts  are  an  interest- 
ing if  sometimes  an  amusing  revelation  of  certain  aspects  of 
New  England  thought.  Judd  also  published  Philo,  an  Evan- 
geliad,  in  verse,  and  a  second  tale,  Richard  Edney,  which 
deals  with  contemporary  New  England  life.  His  biographer 
gives  copious  extracts  from  a  blank  verse  tragedy  which  was 
never  published.  These  works  have  the  defects  of  Margaret, 
with  less  of  its  power. 

New  England  produced  several  writers  who  became  famous 
for  a  coarse  grained  and  more  hilarious  humor  than  that  of 


356  American  Literatxtbe 

Lowell  and  Holmes.  Chief  among  these  was  j^j^rlea  "Pattat 
Browne  (1834-18671,  who  wrote  over  the  name  of  Artemns 

Ward.  He  was  bom  in  Maine^  and  after  re- 
H^^otST*         ceiving  an  elementary  education  worked  first 

as  printer  and  then  as  reporter  on  various 
papers  in  New  England,  ITew  York  and  Ohio.  He  first  at- 
tracted attention  by  humorous  articles  hi  a  Cleveland  news- 
paper about  1858.  In  1861  he  began  to  lecture,  and  was 
successful  both  in  the  East  and  in  California,  where  he 
made  an  extended  trip  in  1862-4.  In  1866  he  went  to 
England  on  a  lecturing  tour  which  opened  auspiciously, 
but  was  soon  ended  by  his  death  from  consumption  at  the 
age  of  thirty-two.  As  a  lecturer  Artemus  Ward  is  said  to 
have  possessed  an  imperturbable  gravity  of  manner  which 
added  much  to  the  effect  of  his  drolleries.  The  humor  in  his 
writings  comes  from  his  extreme  whimsicality  and  unexpected 
turns  of  thought  and  phrase.  Many  of  his  newspaper  essays 
read  better  than  the  lectures.  A  few  are  slightly  coarse,  but 
the  majority  are  wholly  clean  and  wholesome.  Among  less 
important  humorists  was  Seba  Smith  (1792-1868),  also  a 
native  of  Maine  and  a  journalist.  As  Major  Jack  Downing  he 
wrote  humorous  letters,  largely  on  political  topics.  Benjamin 
P.  Shillaber  (1814-1890),  a  Boston  editor,  won  fame  as  the 
creator  of  Mrs.  Partington,  a  sort  of  Yankee  Mrs.  Malaprop. 
Besides  the  Mrs.  Partington  sayings,  which  depend  for  their 
humor  on  the  misuse  of  words,  he  wrote  many  other  sketches, 
several  of  them  for  juvenile  readers. 

V.  New  York  Writers 

While  Boston  was  in  one  sense  the  literary  capital  of  the 

i  country  from  1833  to  1883,  New  York  was  the  center  of  those 

*  commercial   industries   most   closely   allied   with   literature. 

New  England  developed  one  magazine  of  great  literary  sig- 

nificimce,  and  one  publishing  house  that  controlled  the  copy- 


The  Central  Period  357 

rights  of  many  of  the  best  works  of  American  authors;  but 
"New  York  was  the  center  of  the  book  trade  and  of  general 

publishing  interests,  it  had  the  best  daily  pa- 
5  ly^^  pers,  and  it  came  to  lead  in  the  publication 

of  magazines.  The  ^^Knickerbocker  Magazine'^ 
and  ^Tutnam^s  Monthly  Magaaine^^  were  both  solid  and 
respectable  periodicals,  though  they  never  equalled  the  **At- 
lantic  f^  jand  with  the  increased  use  of  high  grade  illustrations 
in  magazines  ^^Harper^s  Monthly  Magazine/^  ^^Scribner^s 
Monthly/^  (afterward  the  "Century  Magazine'*),  and  later 
the  new  ^^Scribner^s  Magazine'*  and  others  came  to  occupy  a 
high  place.  The  presence  of  these  publishing  interests  could 
not  fail  to  make  New  York  the  home  of  many  writers,  and 
the  literary  headquarters,  so  to  speak,  of  many  others.  A 
large  number  of  men  were  attracted  from  different  sections 
of  the  country  to  editorial  positions  on  Kew  York  newspapers 

and  magazines.  The  list  includes  writers  like 
Mit  *^  Dana  jand  Eipley,  who  have  been  discussed 

among  New  England  writers,  and  Poe,  who 
more  properly  belongs  to  the  South;  and  others,  like  Sted- 
man.  Gilder,  Aldrich,  and  Howells,  who  will  be  remembered 
chiefly  as  poets  or  novelists.  A  considerable  number  of  men, 
however,  who  should  be  credited  to  New  York  deserve  a  place 
in  literary  history  on  account  of  work  that  was  closely  associ- 
ated with  editorial  labors. 

^Nathaniel  Parker  Willis  (1806-1867)  was  one  of  the  most 
prominent  of  early  New  York  editors  and  was  a  great  figure 

in  the  literary  life  of  his  time.    He  was  born 

in  Portland,  Maine,  of  the  strictest  New  Eng- 
land ancestry,  and  was  educated  at  Andover  and  Yale.  Even 
before  he  left  college  he  had  gained  a  wide  reputation  by  his 
poems,  especially  some  of  his  paraphrases  of  Scripture  narra- 
tives. After  his  graduation  he  wrote  poems,  edited  annuals 
for  Goodrich,  and  founded  in  Boston  the  *^ American  Monthly 


358  AinEBiOAN  Litbratusii 

Magazine.**  This  failed^  and  in  1831  Willis,  who  was  find- 
ing  the  strict  tradition  to  which  he  was  bom  irksome,  removed 
to  New  York  and  became  associated  with  George  P.  Morris 
in  the  editorship  of  the  *lNjw  York.  Mirror.^'  With  this 
paper  and  its  snccessors,  the  ^^^ew  MirroT^^  and  the  *^Home 
Jonmal/*  he  maintained  an  uninterrupted  connection  until 
his  death.  From  1831  to  1836  he  was  abroad.  He  travelled 
widely  in  Europe,  made  his  way  into  the  best  sociely, 
and  turned  what  he  saw  to  account  in  gossipy  letters  for  pub- 
lication. He  married  an  English  lady  and  brought  her  home 
to  a  country  place  near  Owego  which  he  named  Glenmary. 
Nine  years  later  his  wife  died,  and  some  time  afterward  he 
married  again  and  settled  in  a  less  pretentious  residence, 
Idlewild,  on  the  Hudson.  Both  Glenmary  and  Idlewild 
figure  in  his  writings. 

Willis  avowed  a  frank  preference  for  editorial  work  and 
journalistic  correspondence  that  would  please  his  contem- 
poraries, rather  than  for  the  preparation  of 
*™8»  elaborate  productions  in  the  hope  of  post- 
humous fame.  With  the  exception  of  one  novel,  Paul  Fane, 
almost  all  his  prose  was  in  the  form  of  short  letters,  sketches, 
and  tales,  and  was  first  published  in  some  periodical.  Several 
of  his  volumes,  like  PencilUngs  by  the  Way,  and  Loiterings 
of  Travel,  are  made  up  of  travellers'  letters.  Others,  like 
Letters  from  Under  a  Bridge,  Out  Doors  at  Idlewild,  and 
The  Convalescent,  are  gossipy  correspondence  from  hift 
country  homes.  Life  Here  and  There,  Hurrygraphs,  Fu% 
Jottings,  The  Rag-Bag,  and  others  are  more  miscellaneous^ 
and  are  made  up  of  magazine  ephemera.  Two  dramas^ 
^^Bianca  Visconti^^  and  ^^Tortessa;  or  The  Usurer  Matched,*" 
and  "Lady  Jane,'^  a  poem  influenced  by  Don  Juan,  are,  with 
the  novel  already  mentioned,  his  most  ambitious  productions. 
The  bulk  of  his  poetical  work  was  done  in  early  life. 

As  editor  and  elder  man  of  letters  Willis  was  the  helpful 


The  Cbntbal  Period  869 

friend  of  many  young  American  writers;  but  the  great  popu- 
larity of  his  works,  and  a  certain  jaunty  air  which  he  affected, 

made  him  enemies.  In  some  respects  he  was 
^~**  open  to  criticism.     He  was  a  man  of  the 

world  who  without  family  or  money  made 
his  way  into  some  of  the  best  society  of  Europe ;  and  he  was 
accused  of  turning  into  newspaper  copy  family  and  society 
secrets  which  a  more  delicately  minded  man  would  have  re- 
frained from  mentioning.  It  should  be  said,  however,  that 
this  charge  was  brought  by  rival  Americans,  rather  than  by 
the  European  friends  who  were  supposed  to  have  suffered. 
He  fought  a  duel  with  an  English  author,  and  he  was  named 
as  co-respondent  in  the  most  famous  divorce  case  that  agi- 
tated New  York  society  about  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth 
century.  In  this,  as  in  many  of  the  matters  charged  against 
him,  his  guilt  was  not  proved.  He  should  probably  be  remem- 
bered as  a  kindly  but  rather  weak  man,  whose  shortcomings 
were  due  to  a  deficient  sense  of  the  highest  fitness  of  things, 
rather  than  to  any  deliberate  violation  of  the  ethical  and 
social  code. 

As  a  poet  Willis  enjoyed  great  vogue  and  still  finds  a  few 
readers.    His  paraphrases  of  Scripture  seem  flat  and  artificial, 

xtT»»  .  i>  ^^^  ^^^^  *^®  simplicity  and  directness  of  the 

Willis's  Poems     t>»ui  n  •  j.  j      ▼ 

Bible  prose  are  so  generally  appreciated.    In 

a  time  when  the  sacredness  of  the  book  precluded  the  thought 

of  reading  it  as  literature  there  was  need  of  anything  that 

would  visualize  Bible  scenes  and  make  Bible  charactei^s  seem 

real  men  and  women.     To  many  devout  readers  '^Hagar  in 

the  Wilderness*^  and  '^Jephthah's  Daughter*'  were  the  highest 

type  of  poetry.    Many  of  the  miscellaneous  verses  show  the 

sentimentality  of  the  author's  time;  some,  like  ^Tarrhasius,'* 

though  powerful,  are  artificial.     His  satire,  'Tjady  Jane,'' 

has  deservedly  shared  the  fate  of  other  imitations  of  Don 

Juan.    Perhaps  the  best  of  the  poems  are  sentimental  or 


360  Ambbioan  Litsraturs 

humorous  trifles  which  would  at  a  little  later  time  have  been 
called  society  verse. 

As  a  prose  writer  Willis  had  a  taking  journalistic  style. 
He  knew  what  would  interest  the  public;  and  he  was  a  master 

of  the  art  of  making  his  writing  personal 
*  ^**  without  seeming  to  be  egotistical.  He  kept 
himself  prominent  in  his  letters  from  abroad;  many  of  his 
sketches  and  tales  are  autobiographic.  His  letters  from  Glen- 
mary  and  Idlewild  often  dealt  with  the  most  trivial  and  com- 
monplace matters^  and  drew  their  interest  from  the  fact  that 
the  author^  a  distinguished  man  of  letters^  seemed  to  be 
chatting  with  the  individual  reader  concerning  his  garden, 
his  poultry,  or  his  personal  ailments.  The  chief  defects  of 
form  are  those  that  come  from  haste  and  a  lack  of  feeling  for 
the  chastity  of  language.  The  titles  of  his  books  indicate  a 
tendency  to  be  striking;  and  the  same  tendency  is  shown 
in  the  coinage  of  barbarous  words  and  the  forming  of  strange 
compounds. 

Both  as  a  man  and  as  an  author  Willis  was  genial,  and 
truly  devoted  to  America  and  American  literature;  but  both 

his  personal  and  his  literary  ideals  were  lack- 
mg  m  vinlity  and  firmness.  He  did  much  for 
American  authors  and  American  letters,  and  later  critics 
have  been  somewhat  slow  to  appreciate  his  services.  The 
oblivion  which  is  overtaking  his  works  is  deserved,  but  not 
the  slighting  obloquy  which  is  sometimes  cast  upon  the  author. 

Almost  the  opposite  of  Willis  in  most  particulars  was 
Horace  Greeley  fl811-18y2V.Jhfi-faunder  of  the  ^TSTew  York 
—  --^,  Tribune.!'  He  was  bom  in  Amherst,  New 
^  Hampshire,  where  his  parents  were  Scotch- 
Irish  farmers  of  the  lowest  class.  After  receiving  slight  edu- 
cation and  serving  an  apprenticeship  in  country  newspaper 
ofSces  he  became  a  tramp  printer  and  made  his  way  to  New 
York.  Here,  after  a  variety  of  experiences  as  printer,  publisher. 


The  Central  Period  861 

and  editor  of  campaign  papers,  he  founded  the  "Tribune/' 
which  he  controlled  editorially  until  shortly  before  his  death. 
In  1872  he  seceded  from  the  Bepublican  party  and  became  a 
candidate  for  president  on  the  Liberal  Eepublican  and  Demo- 
cratic tickets.  The  strain  of  the  campaign,  followed  by  the 
disappointment  of  an  overwhelming  defeat,  broke  down  his 
healthy  and  he  died  a  few  days  after  the  election. 

As  a  writer,  Greeley  was  master  of  a  rough  and  ready 
outspoken  siyle  that  impressed  his  readers  with  his  honesiy 
and  fearlessness;  In  both  writings  and  actions  he  had  a  way 
of  occasionally  doing  the  unexpected  thing.  He  was  to  some 
degree  in  sympathy  with  the  New  England  transcendental 
movement,  and  he  employed  on  the  "Tribune^^  Margaret 
Puller,  Gteorge  Eipley,  George  William  Curtis,  C.  A.  Dana,j 
and  other  transcendentalists.  He  defended  in  the  "Tribune'* 
some  of  the  doctrines  of  Fourier,  and  he  gave  much  space 
to  reports  and  discussions  of  table-tipping  and  other  spiritual- 
istic phenomena,  though  he  did  not  profess  belief.  It  was 
through  the  "Tribune**  that  the  spirit  of  "the  newness**  which 
inspired  New  England  found  its  way  to  many  readers  in 
other  parts  of  the  country.  The  paper  also  led  public  thought 
on  political  and  economic  questions.  Greeley  wrote  a  history 
of  the  civil  war,  which  was  naturally  somewhat  partizan; 
What  I  know  of  Farming,  an  amusing  book  telling  of  his 
unsuccessful  agricultural  experiences;  and  an  interesting 
autobiography,  BecoUections  of  a  Busy  Life,  He  is  remem- 
bered, however,  not  because  of  these  works,  but  because  of 
his  influence  through  the  "Tribune** — an  influence  not  easily 
realized  now,  when  the  race  of  great  personal  editors  is  ex- 
tinct, and  not  one  reader  in  ten  can  name  the  man  who  con- 
trols the  policy  of  his  favorite  newspaper. 

With  New  York  editors  may  also  be  included  theJReyerend 
Bufus  Wihnot  Griswold  (1815-185Y).  He  was  a  native  of 
Vermont^  and  in  early  life  had  a  varied  career  as  printer, 


362  Amebigak  Lttebatubb 

editor^  and  Baptist  clergTinaii.    From  1841  to  1843  he  edited 
"Graham's  Magazine'*  in  Philadelphia^  and  then  removed  to 

New  York,  where  he  was  connected  with  various 

Rttfus  Wiimot      jninor  periodicals.     His  own  inconsiderable 
Oriswold  ...  j  ^ 

writings  in  prose  and  verse  are  now  for- 
gotten, but  he  is  remembered  as  the  compiler  and  editor  of 
several  collections  of  American  literature.  His  Poets  and 
J^oetrji  of  America,  Prose  Writers  of  Americqj  and  Fem^ 
Poets  of  America  each  went  through  several  editions.  Tn 
these  works  he  bestowed  praise  on  American  authors  with  a 
lavishness  that  now  seems  ridiculous;  nevertheless  he  antago- 
nized many  persons  who  did  not  receive  what  they  felt  to 
be  their  due  share  of  compliments.  A  much  better  man  would 
have  made  the  same  enemies;  and  much  was  charged  against 
him  that  was  untrue.  Still,  after  all  possible  allowances  are 
'  made,  he  seems  to  have  been  conceited,  and  not  always  impar- 
tial, and,  what  is  worse,  to  have  lacked  a  high  sense  of  honor. 
His  edition  of  Poe  will  be  considered  in  another  place.  His 
collections  and  criticisms  did  considerable  service  in  calling 
attention  to  the  body  of  readable  American  writings;  but  it 
is  a  distinct  misfortime  that  this  labor  could  not  have  been 
performed  by  an  abler  and  a  juster  man. 

Of  less  importance  than  the  men  already  mentioned  was 
£ffltK  P'^^i^^^"  (iftnQ-i«fi4.)j  son  of  a  Connecticut  man  who 

had  removed  to  British  Guiana.  He  was  con- 
^mor  New  York  ^Qg^^g^  editorially  with  a  number  of  papers 

and  magazines,  among  them  the  ^'American 
Monthly  Magazine,^'  and  "Brother  Jonathan,'^  and  he  wrote 
many  verses  and  miscellaneous  essays.  J^gaiis  ft^ylnrf^  CUrk 
Ll^iPriaza),  for  many  years  editor  of  the  '^Knickerbocker 
Magazine,'*  was  a  native  of  western  New  York.  He  was 
known  in  his  day  as  a  writer  of  clever  and  genial  quips  and 
sketches,  which  usually  appeared  in  the  editorial  departments 
of  his  magazine  and  a  few  of  which  were  collected  in  book 


The  Cbntral  Period  363 

form.  T.8.  Fay  (1807-1898),  a  native  of  New  York  city, 
was  for  a  time  associated  with  Morris  and  Willis  on  the 
^'New  York  Mirror/*  and  published  a  novel,  Norman  Leslie, 
and  several  volumes  of  miscellaneous  essays. 

,  George  William  Curtis  (1824-1892)  represented  the  New 
York  of  a  slightly  later  date  than  the  men  who  have  already 

been  mentioned.  He  was  bom  in  Providence, 
G^^  wiiiiam   gjjQ^g  Island,  but  his  family  removed  to  New 

York  in  1839.  He  served  for  a  year  as  clerk 
in  a  mercantile  house,  and  gained  the  familiarity  with  New 
York  business  life  that  he  showed  later  in  J^rue  and  I. 
Trumps,  and  other  writings.  In  1842  he  and  his  brother 
became  pupils  in  the  school  at  Brook  Farm,  and  later  he 
spent  some  time  with  the  families  of  two  farmers  near  Con- 
cord. In  these  days  he  was  a  young  man  of  fascinating  per- 
sonality, devoted  to  music,  and  so  strongly  affected  by  tran- 
scendentalism that  he  adopted  various  fads  in  dress  and  diet. 
At  Concord  he  was  a  member  of  the  little  transcendental 
circle  that  gathered  about  Emerson,  though  he  was  not  blind 
to  the  humorous  aspects  of  the  movement.  From  1846  to 
1850  he  was  abroad,  journeying  in  a  leisurely  manner 
through  Europe  and  spending  some  time  in  Egypt  and  Syria. 
The  chief  literary  results  of  this  trip  were  Nile  Notes  Qf,(i. 
Howadji,  SLniJThe  Howadji  in  Sjifia^  published  in  1851  and 
1852  respectively.  These  differ  from  ordinary  books  of 
travel  in  that  they  attempt  to  give  the  spirit  of  the  scene 
rather  than  minute  descriptive  details;  and  they  surprised 
some  of  the  author's  friends  by  showing  a  frank  yielding  to  the 
sensuous  charm  of  the  East.  Though  the  descriptions  are  too 
full  of  adjectives  and  too  intense,  the  volumes  still  have 
power  to  delight  the  sympathetic  reader  and  almost  to  carry 
him  into  a  land  of  enchantment. 

On  his  return  to  America  Curtis  began  his  long  career 
as  an  editor.     He  was  at  first  connected  with  the  ^New 


364  AmebiOan  Literatubb 

York  Tribune/'  but  soon  became  editor  of  "Putnam's''  and 
began  to  conduct  the  Easy  Chair  department  in  "Harper's 
Monthly."  In  1857  he  also  became  chief  editorial  writer  for 
"Harper's  Weekly."  He  achieved  much  fame  as  an  orator 
and  went  on  the  lyceum  platform.  Though  he  persistently 
declined  public  olBBce  he  was  always  active  in  politics,  and  in 
his  later  years  was  perhaps  the  most  prominent  leader  in  the 
movement  for  civil  service  reform. 

After  the  publication  of  his  first  two  volumes  Curtis's 
chief  literary  work  was  done  for  the  periodicals  which  he 

edited  and  for  the  lecture  platform.  Lotus- 
w^^^  Eating  is  a  series  of  letters  from  American 

watering  places,  full  of  comparisons  with  the 
European  scenes  that  were  still  fresh  in  his  mind,  and  of 
satire  on  American  social  crudeness.  The  Potiphar  Papers^ 
Pfue  and  L  and  his  one  novel.  Trumps^  are  the  work  of  a 
man  who  has  read  Thackeray  and  who  takes  something  of  the 
same  view  of  the  world,  but  is  much  more  downright  in 
thought  and  expression.  All  satirize  the  selfishness  and 
sordidness  of  New  York  life.  Prue  and  I,  the  most  delicate 
of  the  three,  still  has  its  admirers,  but  in  all  the  satire  is  too 
serious  to  be  really  pleasing.  By  far  the  most  charming 
volumes  that  bear  the  author's  name  are  those  which  contain 
essays  selected  from  the  "Easy  Chair."  Next  in  interest  are 
fL  collection  of  Orations  and  Addresses  and  another  of  Literary 
and  Social  Essays,  issued  after  his  death. 

George  William  Curtis's  great  power  was  due  to  his  geni- 
fility,  to  the  absolute  purity  and  disinterestedness  of  his  na- 
ture, and  to  his  genuine  devotion  to  democratic 
Clwr"rt   'sti        ideals.     He  offered  the  too  rare  spectacle  of 

an  American  in  politics  without  desire  of  per- 
sonal reward.  In  the  midst  of  New  York  life  he  always  kept 
some  of  the  characteristics  of  transcendental  New  England — 
a  touch  of  sentiment,  high  idealism,  and  an  intense  devotion 


The  Central  Period  365 

to  duty.  His  essays  in  the  "Easy  Chair*'  often  announced  views 
on  moral  questions  with  which  many  of  his  readers  must  have 
disagreed^  but  no  one  who  had  felt  the  charm  of  the  author 
could  take  offense.  On  the  whole,  he  was  at  his  best  in 
descriptive  and  reminiscent  sketches  where  his  kindliness  and 
human  sympathy  predominate,  and  in  his  simple  comments 
on  life  where  his  reiteration  of  old  but  needed  truths  never 
seems  trite. 

Another  influential  journalist  of  the  latter  half  of  the 
period  was  Edwin  Lawrence  Godkin  (1831-1902).  a  native 

of  Ireland,  who  came  to  America  in  1856. 
E^tors    ^'         After  engaging  in  miscellaneous  journalistic 

work  and  studying  law  he  founded  in  1865 
the  New  York  "Nation/^  with  which  he  was  connected  until 
his  death.  He  was  master  of  a  vigorous  style  of  editorial 
writing  which  was  effective,  but  likely  to  be  irritating  to  those 
who  disagreed  with  him.  Though  he  published  some  works 
in  book  form,  the  achievement  for  which  he  deserves  to  be 
remembered  is  the  establishment  of  the  "Nation'*  in  the  high 
position  which  it  has  long  held  among  American  weeklies. 
Parke  Godwin  (1816-1904'),  a  native  of  New  Jersey  and  a 
graduate  of  Princeton,  was  long  associated  with  his  father-in- 
law,  William  CuUen  Bryant,  on  the  "Evening  Post.*'  He 
also  edited  other  periodicals,  among  them  the  "Harbinger," 
the  organ  of  Fourierism  in  New .  York,  and  'Tutnam's 
Monthly.'*  The  first  essay  in  his  volume  Out  of  the  Past 
is  a  review  of  Bryanf  s  poems,  written  in  1839,  and  his  last 
volume  was  A  New  Study  of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets,  1900. 
During  all  the  intervening  years  he  took  an  active  interest 
in  matters  pertaining  to  art  and  literature,  and  was  a  figure 
of  some  literary  importance,  though  few  of  his  works  have 
a  lasting  literary  quality.  Mary  Mapes  Dodge  (1838-1905), 
a  native  of  New  York,  was  for  over  thirty  years  editor  of 
"St.  Nicholas,"  and  achieved  a  national  reputation  as  the 


366  AmE&IOAK  LiTBRATtTBB 

author  of  stories  and  verses  for  children.  Her  most  poptdar 
story  is  '^ans  Brinker,  or  the  Silver  Skateg^''  the  scene  of 
which  is  laid  in  Holland.  She  had  a  sense  of  humor,  and 
the  art  of  writing  stories  that  children  enjoy,  rather  than 
those  which  adults  think  they  ought  to  enjoy.  Richard  Grant 
White  (1821-1885)  passed  his  entire  life  in  New  York  city, 
and  was  connected  with  several  newspapers.  He  published 
two  editions  of  Shakespeare's  works,  much  Shakespearian 
criticism,  and  some  popular  treatises  on  modem  linguistics. 
He  was  also  the  author  of  an  anonymous  political  satire. 
The  New  Oospel  of  Peace  according  to  Saint  Benjamin,  a 
novel,  and  other  works.  White  maintained  some  peculiar 
views  regarding  the  English  language,  and  his  manner  in  his 
writings  was  of  a  nature  to  attract  attention,  but  not  to 
strengthen  his  authority.  He  was  a  pronounced  Anglo- 
maniac,  and  he  always  gave  the  impression  of  feeling  con- 
tempt for  anyone  who  questioned  his  dogmatic  critical  dicta. 
He  was  really  a  student  of  industry  and  considerable  insight, 
and  though  not  a  great  scholar,  made  some  valuable  contri- 
butions to  the  mass  of  Shakespearian  criticism. 
^.J>  Aside  from  the  editors  already  mentioned  and  the  poets 
who  were  also  remembered  for  their  prose,  New  York  pro- 

duced  few  important  essayists.    The  influence 
EoittTJiito  ®'   Henry  Ward   Beecher    (1813-1887)    was 

Henry  Ward        largely  due  to  his  published  writings,  though 
Beecher  jjg  might  from  his  twenty  years'  connection 

with  the  New  York  "Independent"  be  classed  among  the  edi- 
tors, and  to  his  contemporaries  he  was  first  of  all  an  orator. 
1  He  was  bom  in  Connecticut,  a  son  of  the  Eeverend  Lyman 
Beecher  and  a  brother  of  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe.  After 
graduating  from  Amherst  college  and  entering  the  ministry 
ha  preached  for  a  time  in  Indiana.  In  1847  he  was  called 
to  Plymouth  Church,  Brooklyn,  and  held  the  pastorate  until 
bis  death.     Here  he  soon  became  recognized  as  the  most 


The  Central  Period  367 

influential  pnlpit  orator  in  America,  and  his  sermons,  pub- 
lished week  by  week  from  stenographic  reports,  reached 
thousands  of  persons  who  never  heard  him  preach.  He  be- 
lieved in  carrying  into  the  pulpit  the  discussion  of  ethical] 
and  sociological  matters  and  in  going  out  upon  the  platform 
to  discuss  political  and  social  questions.  He  was  a  leader  in 
the  anti-slavery  movement,,  and  during  the  war  he  visited 
England  and  did  much  to  turn  public  sentiment,  which  had 
been  largely  with  the  South.  His  addresses  in  some  of  the 
manufacturing  towns  are  probably  unexcelled  in  modem 
times  as  examples  of  the  art  of  managing  a  hostile  audience. 
He  was  a  man  of  great  energy  and  wide  interests.  With  him 
religion  was  a  matter  of  action  rather  than  of  belief;  and 
his  theological  views,  always  liberal,  became  so  modified  that 
Plymouth  Church  finally  withdrew  from  the  fellowship  of 
Congregational  churches.  In  1874  his  name  was  involved 
in  a  scandal  which  was  discussed  throughout  the  country. 
Public  opinion,  like  the  jury  before  which  the  case  was  tried, 
disagreed,  but  the  prevailing  view  was  in  favor  of  his  inno- 
cence. His  church  was  loyal  to  him,  but  his  influence  in  the 
country  at  large  suffered  somewhat.  He  did  some  editorial 
work  while  he  was  preaching  in  the  West,  and  later  on  the 
New  York  "Independent.''  His  published  works  were  numer- 
ous, and  include  a  novel,  Norwood;  or  Village  Life  in  Nep)\ 
England,  and  essays  on  many  subjects;  the  best,  however,! 
are  the  reports  of  his  spoken  discourses. 

Directness,  practicality,  humor,  and  insight  are  the  char- 
acteristics of  Beecher's  best  works.    He  was  never  afraid  to 

express  his  thoughts  and  he  had  the  knack  of 
^^  ^^  hitting  upon  telling  phrases.     It  was  inevi- 

table that  work  done  as  his  was  should  be  uneven,  and  after 
he  became  famous  it  was  hard  for  him  to  avoid  publishing 
the  poor  as  well  as  the  good.  His  geniality  sometimes  led 
him,  also,  to  attempt  wprk  for  which  he  was  not  fitted.    It 


368  Ahbbicak  Literatubb 

was  at  the  aolicitation  of  his  friend,  Bobert  Bonner^  of  the 
New  York  'Tliedger,"  that  he  wrote  Norwood;  neither  his 
previoiLS  experiences  nor  his  habits  of  mind  were  likely  to 
make  him  successful  in  novel-writing.  The  bulk  of  his 
mediocre  work  has  tended  to  obscure  his  real  merit,  but  he 
holds  an  unquestioned  place  among  the  few  great  American 
orators,  and  he  should  also  be  remembered  as  an  essayist  of 
much  power. 

Henry  T.  Tuckerman  (1813-1871),  a  native  of  Boston 
who  after  1845  lived  in  New  York,  was  an  essayist  of  con- 
siderable contemporary  reputation.    In  early 
mmOTAew  x«r«  manhood  he  spent  some  time  in  Italy,  and 

produced  the  inevitable  books  of  travel.  Later 
he  wrote  verses  and  many  essays  on  literature  and  art.  The 
most  readable  of  the  latter  are  rambling  and  slow-moving — 
at  times  slightly  suggestive  of  Irving — ^the  evident  work  of  a 
man  who  has  gained  much  from  books  and  travel.  His  more 
formal  works,  like  Thoughts  on  the  Poets,  are  more  solid,  but 
lack  charm. 

Among  the  New  York  writers  of  prose  fiction  the  name  of 
Mr.  William  Dean  Howells  would  stand  first  if  it  were  not 

for  the  fortunate  fact  that  he  is  still  actively 
New  York  writing,   and  hence   does  not  come  within 

RctiOTi  *^®  ^0^   of  this   history.     In   the   earlier 

years  of  the  period  New  York  failed  to 
maintain  the  reputation  of  the  preceding  generation. 
Not  until  the  later  magazine  writers  were  there  produced 
short  stories  that  could  compare  with  those  of  Irving.  And 
although  some  of  the  authors  named  below  wrote  stories  of 
adventure  no  one  deserves  to  be  classed  with  Cooper  or  above 
Paulding  in  this  field. 

Herman  Melville  (1819-1891)  wrote  tales  of  adventure, 
both  authentic  and  fictitious.  He  was  the  descendant  of  an 
old  New  England  family,  but  his  parents  removed  to  New 


The  Cbntrax  Period  369 

York  before  his  birth.    He  early  developed  a  taste  for  adven- 
ture, which  was  perhaps  strengthened  by  reading  Dana's 

Two  Years  before  the  Mast.    Before  he  was 
M^^  twenty  he  had  made  a  voyage  to  Liverpool; 

and  in  1841  he  joined  a  whaling  crew  bound 
for  the  Pacific  by  way  of  Cape  Horn.  Before  he  returned  to 
America  in  1845  he  deserted  the  ship,  lived  for  some  time 
with  a  cannibal  tribe  on  one  of  the  South  Sea  Islands,  es- 
caped in  an  Australian  whaler,  was  concerned  in  an  incipient 
mutiny,  had  various  shore  experiences  on  Tahiti,  and  came 
home  in  an  American  man-of-war.  His  first  book  was  Typee, 
published  in  1846,  in  which  he  tells  of  his  experiences 
among  the  cannibal  tribe.  Omoo  continues  his  story,  and 
tells  of  life  on  the  Australian  whaler  and  on  Tahiti.  These 
two  works  are  not  fiction,  but  sections  of  autobiography,  told 
from  recollection.  Both  are  simple,  straight-forward  narra- 
tives, and  though  wholly  without  plot-interest  are  fascinating. 
Bedbum  is  a  novel  based  on  his  early  voyage  to  Liverpool. 
White^acket  continues  the  Typee  and  Omoo  series,  and  tells 
of  his  return  voyage  on  a  man-of-war.  Moby  Dick,  or  the 
White  Whale,  is  a  story  of  a  crazed  sea  captain  who  pursued 
around  the  world  the  invincible  white  whale  that  had  maimed 
him  for  life.  Many  incidents  are  told  with  a  detail  that  sug- 
gests that  they  were  actual  experiences  of  the  author's  own 
whaling  voyage.  The  conception  of  the  story  is  a  powerful 
one,  but  it  is  not  adequately  sustained.  By  this  time  (1850) 
the  author  had  become  deeply  interested  in  abstruse  phi-i 
losophy,  and  especially,  it  is  said,  in  Sir  Thomas  Browne. 
As  a  result  his  style  suffered  a  complete  and  disastrous  change 
from  the  directness  of  Typee  and  Omoo,  The  beginnings  of 
this  change  are  seen  in  Moby  Dick;  and  it  is  more  marked  in 
the  author's  later  prose  works,  which  are  hardly  readable. 
Battle  Pieces  and  Aspects  of  the  War  is  a  collection  of  poems, 
mostly  crude  and  formless,  but  written  with  much  enthusiasm. 


370  Ambbigan  Litebatubb 

Melville's  early  work  is  so  good  as  to  cause  serious  regret  at 
the  deterioration  of  his  style. 

The  Reverend  Edward  Payson  Boe  (1838-1888).  a  novel- 
ist of  a  different  sort^  must  be  mentioned  because  his  works 

afford  an  index  of  popular  taste.    His  literary 
career  began  in  1872  with  the  publication  of 
Barriers  Burned  Away,  a  stoiy  of  the  great  Chicago  fire. 
The  success  of  this  was  so  great  that  the  author  resigned  his 
pastorate  at  Highland  Falls^  near  the  Hudson,  and  devoted 
himself  to  writing.    From  this  time  until  his  death  he  pub- 
lished an  average  of  more  than  a  volume  a  year,  all  fiction 
except  two  or  three  books  on  horticulture.    Among  his  novels 
were  The  Opening  of  a  Chestnut  Burr,  Near  to  Nature's 
Heart,  and  Nature's  Serial  Story.    All  these  were  very  popu- 
lar, and  at  the  time  of  his  death  his  publishers  estimated 
that  nearly  1,400,000  copies  of  his  books  had  been  sold. 
Eoe  took  his  writing  seriously,  visiting  factories,  jails,  and 
courtrooms  for  literary  material,  and  he  always  wrote  with  a 
I  moral  purpose.    His  great  success  is  due  in  part  to  the  fact 
ithat  he  made  use  of  mildly  sensational  plots  to  inculcate 
'moral  lessons.    His  stories  are  always  wholesome  and  they  are 
^sometimes  told  with  power.     In  both  structure  and  style 
they  are,  however,  crude  and  slovenly.     Their  unequalled 
popularity  shows  high  moral  standards  rather  than  cultivated 
literary  taste  on  the  part  of  middle  class  American  readers. 
Fitz  James  O^Brien  (1828F-1862}  wrote  poems,  essays,  and 
dramas,  but  is  best  remembered  for  a  few  of  his  short  stories. 

He  was  bom  in  Limerick,  Ireland,  and  edu- 
O'Brim  **  cated  at  the  University  of  Dublin,  and  is 

reputed  to  have  run  through  with  a  fortune 
of  £8,000  before  he  came  to  New  York  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
four.  Here  he  became  a  member  of  the  "Bohemian''  set,  and 
in  the  ten  years  before  his  death  did  a  great  amount  of  writ- 
ing for  pewspapers  mi  magazines.    At  the  opening  of  th^ 


The  Central  Period  371 

Civil  War  he  enlisted  in  the  Union  army,  and  his  death  was 
the  result  of  wounds.  Some  of  the  best  of  his  work  has  been 
collected  and  edited  by  his  friend,  William  Winter.  O'Brien 
was  a  genius  of  remarkable  power  and  originality.  His  ir- 
regular life  and  his  habits  of  hasty  writing  interfered  with 
the  production  of  finished  work,  and  render  hazardous  any 
conjecture  as  to  what  he  might  have  accomplished  if  he  had 
not  been  killed  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-four.  It  was  a 
hopeful  sign,  however,  that  his  three  best  short  stories,  '^Th§ 
Diamond  Lens/'  ^^The  Wondersmith/'  and  ^^What  Was  It?  a 
Mystery/'  were  written  in  his  later  years.  These  three  tales 
are  by  no  means  perfect  in  structure,  but  they  show  a  mar- 
vellous originality  of  imagination.  The  unique  conception 
of  a  being  invisible,  but  palpable  to  the  other  senses,  which 
he  develops  in  ^TVTiat  Was  It?  a  Mystery,*'  has  since  been 
borrowed  by  de  Maupassant  and  other  artists  who  deal  with 
the  supernatural. 

Among  the  lesser  writers  of  adventure  in  the  early  part  of 
the  period  was   Mrs.   Caroline   M,   Kirkland    (1801-1864). 

After  her  marriage  she  lived  for  a  time  in 
Minor  New  York  Michigan,  and  her  experiences  on  what  was 
Fictiofi  *^®^  *^®  frontier  furnished  the  inspiration 

for  her  earliest  and  best  writings,  A  New 
Home:  Who'll  Follow?  Forest  Life,  and  Western  Clearings, 
These  tales  and  sketches,  published  under  the  assumed  name 
of  Mrs.  Mary  Clavers,  give  shrewd,  humorous,  observant 
pictures  of  pioneer  life,  and  lack  the  exaggeration  common 
in  western  sketches.  Several  miscellaneous  works  published 
after  Mrs.  Kirkland's  return  to  New  York  are  unimportant. 
The  literary  achievements  of  Cornelius  Mathews  (1817- 
1889)  were  so  varied  that  he  is  hard  to  classify,  but  he 
may  well  be  placed  among  the  writers  of  fiction.  He  was 
a  New  York  lawyer,  but  gave  most  of  his  time  to  litera- 
ture.    His   stories   The    Career  of   Puffer  Hopkins,   and 


372  Americak  Litbratubb 

Big  Abel  and  the  Little  Manhattan,  satirize  conditions  in 
New  York  city.  Mathews  took  great  interest  in  the  Indians. 
He  published  Behemoth,  a  Legend  of  the  Mound-Builders, 
Wdkendah,  an  Indian  poem^  and  a  collection  of  Indian 
legends  adapted  from  Schoolcraft.  Among  his  other  writ- 
ings are  dramas  and  poems.  He  had  versatility^  imagination^ 
and  some  humor,  but  WM  lacking  in  finish.  Hjalmar  Hjorth 
Bovesen  (1848-1895)  was  bom  in  Norway  and  educated  at 
Leipaic  and  at  the  University  of  his  native  country.  He  came 
to  America  in  1869^  and  after  editing  a  Norwegian  weekly 
in  Chicago  and  teaching  the  classics  in  a  western  coUege 
he  became  professor  of  Oerman  at  Cornell,  and  afterward  at 
Columbia.  Boyesen's  masters  in  fiction  were  Tolstoi  and 
Turgenieff  among  Europeans,  and  Mr.  Howells  among 
Americans,  and  the  latter  frankly  admits  that  his  pupil  ^'out- 
realisted^'  him.  Boyesen's  work  has  individuality  and  is 
pleasingly  suggestive  of  his  foreign  birth  and  training.  He 
is  at  his  best  in  stories  that  deal  with  Norwegian  life.  Some 
of  his  tales  for  boys  are  especially  good. 

In  humorists  New  York  was  less  prolific  than  were  other 
sections  of  the  country.    Robert  H.  Newell  (1836-1901)  wrote 

between  1861  and  1868  a  series  of  political 
H^^  satires  which  he  signed  "Orpheus  C.  Kerr.'' 

Nothing  in  the  papers  is  better  than  the  pun 
in  this  signature.  Mrs.  Frances  M.  Whitcher  (1811-1852j^. 
who  passed  her  life  in  central  New  York  state,  was  the  author 
of  The  Widow  Bedott  Papers,  and  some  other  humorous 
sketches  in  piose.  The  Widow  Bedott  is  funny  chiefiy  because 
of  her  garrulity,  and  her  proclivity  for  endless  digressions  in 
her  narratives. 

Of  the  many  New  York  writers  who  essayed  verse,  only  one. 
Whitman,  is  commonly  named  among  the  greater  American 
poets.  With  Whitman  were  grouped,  in  the  late  fifties  and 
early  sixties,  a  small  circle  nicknamed  ^e^Bohemii^s,  whose 


The  Central  Period  373 

rendezvous  was  Pfaff^s  restaurant  on — or  more  accurately 
under — Broadway,  near  Bleeeker  street.     Many  fables  are 

told  of  this  coterie,  which  seems  to  have 
Literary  Groups    jjg^jj  made  up  of  erratic  and  often  impecunious 

and  "Schools"  t;  up  u    c     av^^      ti  u  lc       m^^cuu      uud 

in  Hew  York       newspaper     men     and     unattached     writers. 

With  the  exceptions  of  Whitman,  Fitz  James 
O^Brien,  and  William  Winter  most  of  them  are  now  wholly 
forgotten.  The  names  of  several  other  New  York  writers 
who  may  have  been  rare  visitors  at  PfaflPs  are  sometimes 
erroneously  added  to  the  list.  The  Bohemians  are  an  inter- 
esting literary  tradition  in  New  York,  but  they  are  more  pic- 
turesque than  significant,  and  even  their  picturesqueness  has 
very  likely  increased  with  time.  The  only  group  of  poets 
which  could  in  any  sense  be  called  a  New  York  "school*^  was 
composed  of  Bayard  Taylor,  Edmund  Clarence  Stedman, 
Eichard  Henry  Stoddard,  and  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich.  Of 
this  group  Taylor  should  more  properly  be  considered  with 
the  Pennsylvania  writers. 

Bichard  Henry  Stoddard  (1825-1903)  was  bom  in  Hing- 
ham,  Massachusetts.     His  father,  a  sailor,  was  lost  at  sea 

when  he  was  but  a  few  years  old.  His  mother 
R^MTdHenry     ^^^    ^efi    in    poor    financial    circumstances, 

which  were  not  improved  after  her  second 
marriage.  In  1835  the  family  went  to  New  York.  Here 
young  Stoddard  gained  a  little  schooling,  but  at  the  age  of 
fifteen  he  was  set  to  work.  He  tried  all  sorts  of  occupations 
— errand-boy,  shop-boy,  copyist  in  a  lawyer's  oflBce,  black- 
smith, molder  in  an  iron  foundry,  and  assistant  to  a  carriage 
painter.  Meanwhile  he  was  reading  such  poetry  as  he  could 
lay  his  hands  on,  and  writing  verses  for  his  own  amusement. 
In  1849  he  issued  his  first  volume  of  poems,  which  he  after- 
ward suppressed.  In  1852  he  was  married  to  Miss  Elizabeth 
Barstow,  who  also  attained  some  reputation  as  a  writer  of 
verse.     By  this  time  he  had  formed  an  acquaintance  with 


374  AmEBIOAN  LiTERATinCB 

many  men  of  letters,  and  through  the  influence  of  some  of 
them,  especially  Hawthorne  and  Whipple,  he  secured  a  clerk- 
ship in  the  New  York  custom  house.  This  position  he  held 
from  1863  to  1870.  The  next  three  years  he  was  a  clerk  in 
the  dock  commissioner's  oflSce,  and  for  a  short  time  he  was 
city  librarian.    During  his  last  ten  years  in  the  custom  house 

I  he  was  literary  editor  of  the  New  York  "World,'*  and  from 
1880  until  his  death  he  filled  the  same  position  on  the  "Mail 
and  Express.''  He  edited  and  compiled  several  books,  revised 
Qriswold's  Poets  of  America,  and  published  several  volumes 
of  his  own  poems,  and  a  collection  of  essays  entitled  Under 
the  Evening  Lamp,  His  Recollections,  which  he  was  pre- 
paring for  the  press  at  the  time  of  his  death,  appeared  post- 
humously. 

It  is  pleasant  to  notice  that  Stoddard's  friends  and  many 
of  his  acquaintances  speak  in  the  warmest  terms  of  his  per- 
sonality.   His  prose  writings  give  the  impres- 

Stoddard'8  Prose    .         ;  ^,  x-        xi^xi. 

sion  of  a  man  who  was  too  conscious  that  he 

had  risen  by  his  own  exertions,  and  who  was  a  little  inclined 
to  patronize  others.  He  speaks  slightingly  of  his  mother, 
who  seems  really  to  have  done  for  him  all  that  her  means 
and  her  strength  allowed.  His  criticisms  are  likely  to  be 
generalities,  or  to  be  warped  by  apparent  prejudice.  In  his 
early  years  Poe  declined,  in  a  way  that  oflEended  him,  to  pub- 
lish one  of  his  poems,  and  he  was  always  fond  of  repeating 
the  most  unfavorable  stories  regarding  Poe,  and  of  character- 
izing his  poems  with  such  penetrating  remarks  as  "The 
I  parent  of  Annabel  Lee  was  Mother  Qoose."  All  in  all,  his 
critical  work  is  of  little  value,  as  regards  either  content  or 
style. 
It  is  Stoddard's  poetry  that  constitutes  his  best  claim  to 

i  remembrance.  He  was  of  those  who  care  for  beauty  of  form 
and  concept  rather  than  for  didacticism;  and  he  had  a  fine 
sense  of  melody.    His  friends  and  special  admirers  sire  in  the 


The  Central  Pbbiod  376 

habit  of  praising  his  bla^k  verse  and  his  odes,  but  it  seems 
probable  that  his  lyrics  will  be  more  likely  to  last.    Some  of 

the  briefest  of  these,  like  ^^irds/^  ^^The 
Poetry    '  Flifi^ht  of  Youth^^^  have  a  finish  and  a  finality 

that  should  insure  them  a  permanent  place  in 
any  collection  of  American  verse.  The  longer  poems,  even 
those  in  lyric  measures,  are  likely  to  be  tmeven,  and  in  places 
too  obviously  imitative. 

Edmund  Clarence  Stedman  (1833-1908)  was  bom  at  Hart- 
ford,  Connecticut,  the  descendant  of  an  old  New  England 

family.  His  father  died  when  he  was  but  two 
Edmund  years  old,  and  his  mother,  who  was  herself  a 

Stedman  writer   of   poetry,    relinquished    him   to   his 

father's  relatives  and  married  again.  Hfe 
entered  Tale,  where  he  attracted  some  attention  by  his  verses, 
but  was  rusticated,  and  then  dismissed  for  general  wildness 
and  dissipation.  Many  years  later  he  made  application  for 
his  degree  and  it  was  granted.  After  his  dismissal  from  Yale 
he  went  South,  edited  country  papers  in  New  England,  en- 
gaged in  the  clock  business,  and  was  married  without  his 
guardian's  consent  at  the  age  of  twenty.  In  1855  he  became 
a  real  estate  and  general  broker  in  New  York.  Here  he  lived 
in  a  'TJnitary  Home,''  one  of  the  cooperative  experiments] 
organized  by  readers  of  Fourier,  and  a  number  of  his  asso- « 
dates  were  writers  and  newspaper  men.  His  poem,  "The 
Diamond  Wedding,"  a  satire  on  a  much  heralded  society 
event,  was  published  in  the  "Tribune"  in  1859,  and  attracted 
attention  which  was  intensified  when  the  father  of  the 
bride  demanded  "satisfaction"  from  the  young  author.  A 
little  later  he  contributed  to  the  "Tribune"  "How  Old  JqIibl 
Brown  Took  Harper's, J^rriu"  and  "The  Ballad  of  Lager 
Bier" — one  a  patriotic  and  the  other  a  humorous  lyric.  The 
popularity  of  these  three  effusions  led  to  an  engagement  on 
the  "Tribune,"  which  he  soon  left  for  the  *^orld."    He  was 


376  American  Lttesatube 

war  correspondent  after  the  attack  on  Port  Sxunter,  and  for 
a  time  held  a  govemment  clerkship  at  Washington.  In  1863 
he  came  back  to  New  York,  and  entered  Wall  Street,  becoming 
a  member  of  the  Stock  Exchange  a  few  years  later.  From 
this  time  nntil  1900  his  life  was  a  series  of  financial  ups  and 
downs,  with  much  anxiety  and  never  more  than  moderate 
success.  In  1900  he  sold  his  seat  on  the  Stock  Exchange  and 
retired  on  a  rather  meager  competency  to  devote  himself 
wholly  to  literary  work. 

Stedman  always  maintained  that  his  chief  interests  were 
literary,  and  that  he  endured  business  only  for  the  purpose 

of  winning  an  opportunity  for  writing.  N"ot- 
LJt^v  Labon   'withstanding  the  exactions  of  his  feverish  life 

in  the  Stock  Exchange  and  almost  constant 
ill  health,  he  managed  to  do  a  considerable  amount  of  work  as 
editor,  as  critic,  and  as  poet.  He  compiled  A  Victorian  An-: 
thology  s,nd _An  American  Anthology^  and,  at  an  earlier  date, 
collaborated  with  Ellen  M.  Hutchinson  in  A  Library  of 
American  Literature.  He  also  edited  with  George  E.  Wood- 
berry  the  works  of  Poe.  His  important  criticism  is  contained 
in  three  volumes,  yictqrian  Poets,  Poets  of  America^  and 
The  Nature  and  Elements  of  Poetry — ^the  last  a  series  of 
lectures  originally  delivered  at  Johns  Hopkins  Universiiy. 
He  also  gave  much  study  to  the  Sicilian  idyllists,  but  never 
brought  his  work  into  shape  for  publication.  His  poems  were 
written  at  various  times  throughout  his  life* 

Stedman's  letters  show  him  to  have  been  painstaking  in 
matters  of  scholarly  detail,  and  most  of  his  editing  is  well 

done;  though  students  of  the  Poe  for  which 

E^t^^dCritic  ^®  ^^®  ^  P*^  responsible  are  sometimes  an- 
noyed by  errors  in  collation,  and  strange  de- 
cisions in  choice  of  texts.  His  critical  writings  deal  mostly 
with  poetry.  At  an  early  age  he  arrived  at  the  conclusion 
th^it  ^'Beauly  is  governed  by  laws  as  severe  and  disoovera- 


The  Central  Period  81(11 

ble  as  are  mathematics/'  and  ''The  great  poet — ^the  great 
artist — ^is  a  umversalist,  an  eclectic/'  These  views  he 
never  seriously  modified,  and  he  developed  them  in  his 
last  and  most  serious  critical  volume.  The  Nature  and  Ele- 
ments of  Poetry.  All  his  critical  essays  are  careful  work, 
based  on  "reading  up"  both  in  the  poets  themselves  and  in 
the  writings  of  other  critics — a  type  of  production  which  every 
college  instructor  knows  well,  and  which  he  should  surely 
honor  when  it  is  well  done.  They  are,  however,  lacking  in  the 
flashes  of  insight  that  characterize  the  work  of  the  great! 
critics,  and  they  have  little  of  the  personal  quality  of  LowelFs  I 
essays.  The  author  sometimes  shows  erratic  appreciations, 
Bs  when  he  ranks  Lord's  turgid  lines  "On  the  Defeat  of  a 
Great  Man"  with  Whittier's  "Ichabod."  Often  the  breadth 
of  his  reading  in  preparation  for  a  paper  leads  him  to  give 
oddly  incongruous  lists,  as:  "Bascom  and  Buskin  foUow 
Mill";  '^Browning,  Banville,  Whitman,  Emerson."  Notwith- 
standing these  peculiarities  his  critical  writings  are  solid,  and 
not  to  be  ignored  by  any  student  of  the  subjects  which  hei 
treats.  His  Poets  of  America  has  no  real  rival  in  its  field. 
Stedman's  earliest  verses  in  the  "Tribune"  were  only  tak- 
ing work  of  good  newspaper  grade,  though  the  careful  reader 

detects  in  them  hints  of  such  later  and  more 
JJJ°^  "         finished  poems  as  "Pan  jn  Wall  Street,"    In 

his  more  serious  attempts  of  this  time  Ten- 
nyson was  the  chief  influence,  but  he  succeeded  fairly  well  in 
being  faithful  to  his  belief  that  the  true  artist  is  an  eclectic. 
His  longer  poems,  like  'jTh^KameLesp  Prince/'  have  their  ex- 
cellences but  they  were  never  widely  popular,  and  will  be  less 
and  less  read.  In  his  later  years  he  was  a  successful  writer  of 
occasional  poems — ^perhaps  the  most  successful  after  Holmes. 
He  was  at  his  best,  however,  in  a  variety  of  shorter  poems 
scattered  throughout  his  works — in  one  or  two  short  patri- 
otic pieces  like  ^^anted — ^A  Man,"  in  New  England  idyls 


378  Ambbicak  LrrsKiiTnBB 

like  ^hej^orstep^'  and  ^mitiy  SleighingJ'  in  a  trifle  like 
'^Tcrajoars  Amour,^  and  in  his  almost  unique  impassioned 
song  beginning;  '^^on  art  mine,  thou  bast  given  th^  wor^" 
All  fbose  named  were,  as  it  bappens,  written  before  he  had 
passed  middle  age.  But  as  the  stress  and  disappointment 
of  life  grew  upon  him,  be  still  wrote  hopefully  and  with  no 
less  of  excellence  in  form,  yet  with  a  calm  recognition  of  the 
deeper  meaning  of  things. 

It  is  a  question  whether  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  (1836- 
1907)  should  not  have  been  discussed  among  the  New  Eng- 
land writers.    He  was  a  native  of  New  Eng- 
ThomMBaflty    Jand,  he  spent  a  great  part  of  his  literary 

life  in  Boston,  and  he  felt  most  at  home  there. 
Still,  he  began  to  write  in  New  York,  and  so  far  as  essential 
characteristics  are  concerned  his  poetiy  had  more  in  common 
with  that  of  Stoddard  and  Taylor  than  with  that  of  his 
Boston  and  Cambridge  literary  friends.  Though  the  least 
''Bohemian"  of  the  group  in  temperament  he  was  at  one 
time  associated  in  a  literaiy  way  with  some  of  the  frequenters 
of  Pf afiPs  restaurant. 

Aldrich  was  bom  in  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire,  but 
spent  part  of  his  boyhood  in  New  York  and  three  years  in 
New  Orleans.  His  life  after  his  return  to  Portsmouth  is 
pictured  with  reasonable  fidelity  in  The  Story  of  a  Bad  Boy. 
For  financial  reasons  he  did  not  go  to  Harvard  as  he  had 
planned,  but  at  the  age  of  sixteen  entered  his  uncle's  business 
office  in  New  York.  Here  he  began  to  publish  verses  and 
at  the  age  of  nineteen  brought  out  a  volume  of  poems.  The 
same  year,  1866,  he  wrote  ''Baby  Bell/'  his  first  work  to  at- 
tract general  attention.  About  this  time  he  gave  up  busi- 
ness, and  later  held  various  editorial  positions  on  New  York 
papers.  Before  he  was  twenty-three  he  had  published  two 
volumes  of  verse  and  one  of  prose,  and  had  made  friends 
with  Willis,  Taylor,  Stoddard,  and  other  New  York  literary 


The  Cknthal  Period  379 

men.  For  a  time  he  wag  oonnecied  with  the  ''Saturday 
Press/'  a  lively  satirical  journal  founded  by  Clapp,  the 
''King  of  Bohemia/*  with  the  assistance  of  two  other  Bo- 
hemians^ O'Brien  and  Winter.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  war 
he  asked  for  a  military  appointment^  but  missed  it  through 
an  accident.  For  a  few  weeks  he  was  war  correspondent  for 
the  New  York  "Tribune.''  By  1865  he  had  made  himself 
well  known  as  a  writer  of  prose  fiction  and  of  verse,  and  was 
called  to  Boston  to  edit  "Every  Saturday/'  a  literary  paper 
published  by  Fields  and  Osgood.  From  this  time  until  his 
death  Boston  was  his  literary  home,  and  his  actual  residence 
was  in  the  cily  or  not  far  away.  From  1881  to  1890  he  edited 
the  "Atlantic."  After  the  latter  date  he  travelled  much,  spend- 
ing several  summers  in  Europe  and  twice  going  around  the 
world. 

Aldrich  was  a  fairly  prolific  writer,  but  he  was  an  unspar- 
ing critic  of  himself  and  he  chose  carefully  the  work  which 
he  wished  to  be  preserved.  He  retained  not  a  single  poem 
from  his  first  collection  of  fifty,  and  rejected  many  of  later 
date.  His  prose  works  were  subjected  to  the  same  careful 
sifting.  The  residue  is  contained  in  seven  volumes  of  prose 
and  two  of  verse. 

Aldrich's  novels.  Prudence  Palfrey,  The  Stillwater 
Tragedy,  and  others,  are  well  told,  but  they  lack  the  vitality 

of  his  best  work.  His  one  long  narrative 
which  is  sure  to  live  is  The  Story  of  a  Bad 
Boy.  The  slight  change  of  Portsmouth  to  Rivermouth  and 
the  name  of  the  hero,  Tom  Bailey,  suggest  how  largely  the 
story  is  autobiographical.  It  is  the  work  of  a  man  who  re- 
tained full  sympathy  with  his  own  boyhood  and  with  other 
boys  after  he  had  lived  long  enough  to  learn  what  life  really 
means.  His  insight  into  boyish  ways  suggests  Mark  Twain 
in  Tom  Sawyer  and  HucJcleberry  Finn,  but  his  attitude  is 
more  sympathetic  and  his  tone  is  quieter.    Every  reader  who 


380  AmBRIOAN  LmSRATUBB 

was  fortunate  enough  to  know  the  book  in  his  boyhood  will 
still  recall  passages,  humorouis  and  pathetic,  which  have 
fixed  themselves  in  his  memory.  Among  these  is  sure  to  be 
the  few  lines  of  restrained  narrative  which  tell  of  the  drifting 
away  of  Binny  Wallace.  A  comparison  of  this  impressively 
simple  account  with  the  treatment  of  tragic  and  pathetic 
events  in  other  boys'  stories  will  reveal  much  of  the  author's 
nature  and  the  secret  of  his  power.  Next  to  The  Story  of 
A  Bad  Boy,  Aldrich's  best  prose  is  in  his  short  stories.  He 
was  a  careful  student  of  prose  style  and  of  the  art  of  nar- 
ration, and  he  has  left  some  of  the  most  carefully  planned 
and  delicately  wrought  stories  of  the  later  nineteenth  century. 
*^Marjory  Daw^''  usually  conceded  to  be  his  masterpiece  in 
short  fiction,  is  one  of  the  two  best  hoax  stories  by  Ameri- 
can authors.  That  it  is,  however,  more  than  a  hoax  is  shown 
by  the  fact  that  it  may  be  re-read  with  little  loss  of  interest. 
Several  other  stories  have  a  similar  unexpected  ending,  but  he 
confined  himself  to  no  one  type  of  plot.  His  sketches  of 
travel  and  the  miscellanies  in  the  Ponhapog  Papers  show, 
like  everything  else  that  he  did,  the  charm  of  his  manner, 
but  are  relatively  unimportant. 

After  compiling  for  the  complete  edition  of  his  works  all 
his  poems  which  he  wished  preserved,  Aldrich  made,  in  the 

year  before  his  death,  a  still  briefer  collection 
of  Songs  and  Sonnets  which  he  evidently 
felt  embodied  the  best  of  his  verse.  This  judgment  was 
undoubtedly  correct.  Much  might  be  said  in  praise  of  his 
longer  poems  like  ^^yndham  Towers'*  and  "Judith  and  Holo- 
femes,"  but  his  most  distinctive  and  most  remarkable  work 
is  in  the  shorter  poems  which  he  called  "Interludes."  The 
lightest  of  these  are  mere  society  verse,  but  many  of  them, 
while  equally  exquisite  in  form,  touch  grave  themes  with  an 
insight  and  a  finalily  of  expression  that  place  them  with  the 
truest  poetry.    There  are  many  of  these  poems^  and  no  one 


The  Centeal  Period  381 

will  serve  as  an  adequate  example,  for  each  has  its  individual 
quality. 

In  all  his  writings,  both  prose  and  verse,  Aldrich  was  an 
artist,  forever  striving  for  perfection  of  form.    He  not  only 

rejected  his  unsuccessful  work,  but  he  revised 
Ml  A^^  *^**  which  he  retained  with  a  frequent  and 

minute  care  that  suggests  the  similar  labors 
of  Tennyson.  He  had  a  fine  feeling  for  the  purity  of  the 
English  tongue,  and  he  was  shocked  and  pained  by  the 
vagaries  of  some  of  his  later  contemporaries.  Yet,  as  he  pro- 
tests in  one  of  his  poems,  art  for  art's  sake  did  not  mean  to 
him  technique  for  technique's  sake.  Though  he  was  not  a 
propagandist  or  a  preacher  he  had  the  New  England  con- 
science, and  the  New  England  sense  of  the  deeper  things  of 
life;  and  his  work,  though  never  obviously  didactic,  always 
rests  on  a  sound  and  worthy  philosophy  of  things. 

Aldrich's  reputation  as  a  wit  and  as  a  kindly  gentleman 
still  makes  it  difficult  to  judge  his  permanent  rank.     The 

Story  of  a  Bad  Boy  and  some  of  his  best  short 

stories  ought  to  last.  Of  his  poems,  "Baby 
Beiy  one  of  his  less  distinctive  pieces,  is  still  popular  after 
over  half  a  century.  It  is  no  doubt  a  misfortune  that  his 
'best  work  is  in  sonnets  or  still  slighter  poems  which  lack  the 
bulk  necessary  to  make  an  impression.  Such  pieces  are  likely 
to  become  mere  fugitives,  and  to  be  denied  credit  for  the 
excellence  which  they  really  possess.  Still,  it  seems  to  many 
of  Aldrich's  admirers  that,  whether  his  popular  reputation  ,• 
endures  or  not,  he  missed  by  only  the  slightest  of  margins  a 
place  with  the  greater  American  men  of  letters. 

Taylor,  Stoddard,  Stedman,  and  Aldrich  constitute  the 
second  most  important  group  of  American  authors  in  the  last 
half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  In  both  external  circum- 
stances and  literary  ideals  they  offer  many  points  of  contrast 
to  the  New  England  poets.    They  were  not  bom  in  New  York, 


382  Akebioak  LrrSRATtJHfi 

but  came^  one  from  Pennsylyania^  and  the  others  ftom  iTetr 
England.    Two  of  them,  Taylor  and  Aldrich,  lived  in  New 

York  but  a  limited  time.  They  were  not 
Y*V«SiMMdM  ^  fortunate  as  to  cluster  about  a  great  college 
^  p,^^  like    Harvard,    or    about    a    great    literary 

magazine  like  the  "Atlantic/*  During  their 
formative  years  such  literary  connections  as  they  had  were 
largely  with  newspapers  and  ephemeral  literary  magazines. 
Unfortunately  for  their  fame  they  lacked  a  set  of  admiring 
friends  like  those  survivors  of  the  golden  days  in  New  Eng- 
land who  have  written  so  many  interesting  volumes  of  recol- 
lections and  literary  reminiscences.  They  met  each  other  as 
friends,  but  privately  and  informally,  and  no  Boswell  has  left 
a  very  definite  record  of  what  they  said  and  did.  We  know, 
however,  that  they  agreed — ^and  this  is  their  chief  significance 
as  a  ''school" — in  viewing  poetry  not  primarily  as  an  instru- 
ment for  moral  edification,  but  as  an  art.  It  would  be  mis- 
leading to  push  the  comparison  far,  but  in  some  ways  they  were 
related  to  literature  in  America  as  the  Pre-Raphaelite  group 
were  related  to  literature  in  England.  The  models  for  their 
juvenile  work  were  the  English  poets  who  had  form  and  music 
— ^Keats,  Shelley,  Tennyson.  Among  the  slight  affectations 
common  to  all,  or  at  least  to  all  but  Stedman,  was  a  fondness 
for  Oriental  themes.  Stoddard  has  his  ''Oriental  Songs,'* 
and  Aldrich  his  collection.  Cloth  of  Gold.  The  ideal  of 
poetry  which  these  men  held  was  different  from  that  of  the 
New  Englanders  and,  in  the  view  of  many  persons,  higher. 
Their  achievement  was  by  no  means  to  be  despised.  Still, 
they  never  attained  a  popular  recognition  at  all  approaching 
that  of  Emerson,  Longfellow,  Lowell,  Whittier,  and  Holmes. 
In  explanation  of  this  it  has  been  said  that  the  older  poets  so 
occupied  the  public  mind  that  no  attention  was  paid  to  new 
ones.  The  true  reason  seems  to  be  that  they  lacked,  except 
here  and  there,  as  in  Aldrich's  "Baby  Bell,"  the  touch  of 


The  Central  Pbbiod  383 

common  nature  which  endeared  even  the  mediocre  verse  of 
Longfellow  and  Whittier  to  the  mass  of  uncritical  readers. 
On  the  other  hand  they  often  failed — ^whether  for  lack  of 
genius  or  because  of  diversity  of  interests — of  that  absolute 
perfection  of  form  which  makes  a  poem  an  undying  work  of 
art.  More  recent  writers  have  inclined  to  their  view  of  poetry 
rather  than  to  that  of  the  New  England  school,  and  it  may 
be  that  their  influence  was  more  valuable  than  their  achieve- 
ment. This  can  hardly  be  known  with  certainty  until  the 
tendencies  of  later  verse  are  more  clearly  evident  than  they 
are  to-day. 

New  York  attracted  many  writers  of  verse  who,  after  their 
arrival  in  the  city,  had  little  direct  connection  with  any  literary 

set.    From  Ohio  came,  in  1852,  the  Gary  sis- 

a  *beCarv        *®^®*  ^^  young  women  who  from  pure  love 

of  writing  had  begun  to  compose  verses  under 
most  discouraging  conditions  in  their  western  home,  and  who 
had  published  a  joint  volume  of  poems  in  Philadelphia  in  1850. 
The  elder,Alice  (1820-1871),wrote  a  number  of  prose  tales,  in 
the  best  of  which  she  sketched  western  life  as  she  had  known  it. 
Both  she  and  her  sister  Phoebe  (1824-1871)  are  now,  however, 
remembered  for  their  poems.  Alice  was  the  more  voluminous 
writer,  and  critics  have  usually  credited  her  with  the  greater 
poetic  gift;  but  none  of  her  verses  has  equalled  in  popularity 
Phoebe^s  hymn  beginning  ^y)ne  sweetly  solemn  thought^-^ 
or  her  humorously  philosophical  juvenile  poem. 

Suppose,  my  little  lady, 

Your  doll  should  break  her  head. 

The  verses  of  both  incline  toward  sentimental  moralizing. 
Those  of  Alice  are  likely  to  be  more  deeply  pathetic,  and  to 
take  a  more  intense  view  of  things;  those  of  Phoebe  are  more 
hopeful,  have  more  humor,  and  are  sometimes,  it  seems,  a 
little  more  genuine.    Fhoehe  occasionally  takes  e^  shrewd  an4. 


384  Amebigan  Literatube 

kindly  view  of  life  that  suggests  Whittier.     Some  of  Alice's 

early  poems  show  the  influence  of  Longfellow's  moralizing 

lyrics. 

Much   younger  than   the   poets   already  mentioned  was 

Emma  Lazarus  ( 1849-1  RftT).     She  was  bom  in  New  York 

city,  of  an  orthodox  Jewish  family  of  Portu- 
Fmtw  Lazarus  i  j      r>ii  11 

guese  descent.     She  was  precocious,  and  her 

first  volume  of  poems  was  published  when  she  was  but 
eighteen.  Her  early  work  was  influenced  by  her  devotion 
to  art  and  music,  by  Heine,  and  by  Emerson,  whom  she  knew 
personally.  In  1871  she  published  Admetus  and  Other 
Poems,  and  in  1876,  The  Spagnoletto,  a  tragedy  with  the 
scene  in  Italy  in  the  seventeenth  century.  The  outbreak  of 
anti-Semitic  feeling  in  Europe  about  1879  aroused  her  sym- 
pathy for  her  race,  and  from  that  time  until  her  death  she 
gave  her  best  energies  to  the  cause  of  her  people.  A  collec- 
tion of  miscellaneous  poems  issued  in  1882  bore  the  title 
Son£s  qf^_a  Semite.  The  Dance  to  Death  is  a  blank  verse 
drama  based  on  the  persecution  of  the  Jews  in  Thuringia. 
Among  her  other  works  were  translations  from  Heine,  and 
from  some  of  the  Hebrew  poets;  AUde,  a  romance  based  on 
Goethe's  Autobiography;  some  "prose  poems** ;  and  magazine 
articles  on  questions  relating  to  the  Jews.  In  much  of  her 
work  are  seen  a  flne  artistic  quality  and  a  trace  of  the  rich 
sensuousness  of  her  race.  Some  of  her  earlier  narrative 
poems,  like  "Admetus**  and  "Tannhauser,**  tell  old  legends  in 
good  blank  verse,  with  much  originality,  and  remarkably 
visualized  description.  Epochs,  a  cycle  of  poems  with  simple 
Ijrrical  movements,  touches  on  some  of  the  serious  problems 
of  life  with  great  genuineness.  Her  later  poems  on  Jewish 
themes  are  more  stirring,  but  show  no  loss  of  artistic  power. 
Her  "prose  poems,**  which  suggest  Whitman,  are  less  success- 
ful, as  are  the  dramas.  Of  the  latter,  The  Dance  to  Deaih 
has  most  merit 


The  Central  Period  385 

Among  lesser  poets  who  came  to  New  York  was  William 
B.  Wallace  (1819-1881),  a  native  of  Kentucky.     His  early 

occasional  poems  like  ^^The  Battle  of  Tippe- 
Y^^Poete  canoe^^  have  music  and  life,  but  are  close  imi- 

tations of  Byron  and  at  times  of  Halleck  and 
Holmes.  Throughout  life  he  was  successful  in  growing 
showy  flowers  from  seed  furnished  by  other  poets.  His  patri- 
otic lyric  ^^The  Sword  of  Bunker  Hill/^  though  conventional, 
is  less  imitative  than  most  of  his  work.     Thomas  Dunn 


»^^t^mt^^mtmm 


English  (1819-1902)  was  bom  in  Pennsylvania  and  lived  at 
different  times  in  Virginia  and  New  Jersey,  but  did  most 
of  his  literary  work  in  New  York.  He  edited  a  literary  maga- 
zine, wrote  novels  and  plays,  and  engaged  in  an  exciting 
quarrel  with  Poe.  His  poems  are  varied  in  character,  but  he 
is  remembered  only  for  his  sentimental  songs.  Of  these, 
^^en  Bolf  ^  attained  great  popularity  when  it  was  published 
in  the  "New  York  Mirror'^  in  1843,  and  was  recalled  to 
favor  when  it  was  inwoven  in  the  plot  of  Du  Manner's  TrUby 
half  a  century  later.  William  A.  Butler  (1825-1902)  came 
from  Albany  to  New  York  for  the  practice  of  law.  His 
miscellaneous  writings  include  letters  of  travel,  humorous 
sketches,  papers  on  art,  novels,  biography,  and  several  occar 
sional  poems.  His  genius  was  satiric,  and  his  greatest  suc- 
cess was  achieved  in  Nothing  to  Wear,  a  take-oflE  on  the 
wardrobe  of  a  society  woman.  The  popularity  of  the  poem 
is  due  rather  to  its  content  than  to  the  poefs  art.  Charles 
Q.  Halpine  ^1829-1868)  was  an  Irishman,  a  graduate  of 
Trinity  college,  Dublin,  who  entered  the  journalistic  field  in 
New  York  about  1852.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  he  en- 
listed, and  it  was  while  he  was  at  the  front  that  he  began  to 
write  for  the  New  York  "Herald'^  a  series  of  articles  over 
the  signature  of  Private  Miles  O'Reilly.  The  prose  that  these 
contain  is  of  little  account,  but  some  of  the  poems  attained 
considerable  popularity.     Thes^  and  Halpine's  other  ver^ea 


386  American  Lttebatuse 

ran  smoothly^  and  had  a  local  and  temporary  application 
that  gave  them  vogue,  but  they  are  now  unimportant.  To 
New  York  state,  though  not  to  the  city,  belongs  ^Alftgd^B: 
Street  (1811-1881),  for  over  thirty  years  state  librarian  at 
Albany.  He  was  bom  in  Poughkeepsie,  and  spent  his  early 
years  in  the  picturesque  region  near  the  Hudson.  Almost 
all  his  verse  treats  of  nature,  which  he  portrayed  with  great 
accuracy,  but  with  little  imagination.  His  poems  were 
highly  praised  in  their  day,  but  are  of  the  sort  that  satisfies 
a  critical  theory  rather  than  appeals  to  the  heart,  and  are 
now  almost  forgotten. 
^  The  most  famous  and  the  most  diflScult  to  criticise  of  the 
New  York  poets  during  the  mid-century  was  Walt  Whit* 

TTiflTi  (1819-1892).  He  was  bom  on  Long 
Island.  His  father  and  mother  were  of  Eng- 
lish and  Dutch  ancestry,  respectively.  His  father  was  a 
carpenter,  but  most  of  the  Whitmans  had  been  farmers. 
Walt,  or  as  he  was  named  Walter,  attended  the  Brooklyn 
common  schools,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  learned  to  set 
type  in  a  printing  office.  He  taught  country  school  for  a 
winter  or  two,  but  most  of  the  time  until  he  was  thirty 
years  of  age  he  was  employed  about  Brooklyn  and  New  York 
newspaper  offices  as  compositor,  contributor,  editor,  and 
what-not.  In  1848  he  made  a  leisurely  journey  to  New 
Orleans,  where  he  had  been  offered  an  editorship  on  the  *'Cres- 
cent."  Soon  afterward  he  returned  at  a  still  more  leisurely 
pace  by  a  roundabout  route  through  the  West  and  North. 
He  next  published  a  paper  and  kept  a  bookstore,  and  a  little 
later  took  up  the  business  of  building  and  selling  small  dwell- 
ing houses  in  Brooklyn.  It  was  some  time  in  the  early  fifties 
that  he  conceived  the  idea  of  writing  Leaves  of  Orass.  and  he 
brought  out  his  first  volume  bearing  this  title  in  1855.  Late 
in  1862  he  went  South  in  search  of  his  brother,  who  had 
been,  woimded  at  Fraderiqtoburg,  and  during  the  rest  of  thei 


The  CfiNT^AL  PjfeRiofi  S87 

war  lie  ministered  to  the  sick  and  wounded  soldiers  in  the 
hospitals  at  Washington — serving  not  as  regular  nurse,  but 
as  visitor,  friend,  and  ahnoner  to  those  who  needed  his  atten- 
tions. He  secured  a  clerkship  in  the  Department  of  the 
Interior,  but  was  removed  in  1865  as  the  author  of  an  im- 
moral book.  Friends  soon  procured  him  another  clerkship 
in  the  oflSce  of  the  attorney-general,  and  he  held  this  until 
1873,  when  he  was  incapacitated  for  service  by  a  stroke  of 
paralysis.  From  this  time  until  his  death  in  1892  he  lived 
the  life  of  an  invalid  or  semi-invalid  at  Camden,  New  Jersey. 
Whitman^s  writings  before  he  was  thirty-five  years  of  age 
were  those  of  a  miscellaneous  contributor  to  the  newspapers 

and  magazines.    The  few  examples  which  he 
WM^^  included   in   his   collected   works   consist  of 

rather  halting  conventional  verses,  and  little 
moral  tales  and  sketches,  which  usually  leave  a  sense  of  in- 
completeness, and  imply  a  deficiency  in  the  author^s  sense  of 
literary  form.  The  peculiar  manner  which  he  afterward 
used  almost  exclusively  in  his  poems  was  first  employed  in 
his  volume  published  in  1855.  As  a  designation  for  all  his 
poetical  works  after  this  date  he  adopted  the  name  Leaves  of 
Grass.  From  1855  to  1891  inclusive  he  issued  ten  successively 
enlarged  volumes  under  this  title,  each  containing  his  com- 
plete poems  to  the  date  of  publication.  The  ^rst  issue,  1855, 
was  printed  partly  by  Whitman  himself,  and  appeared  in 
Brooklyn  without  the  name  of  a  publisher.  The  edition  of 
1881  was  suppressed  in  Massachusetts  on  the  ground  that 
it  was  obscene.  Many  other  bibliographical  facts  concerning 
the  various  forms  of  the  book  are  of  interest  to  the  special 
student.  Before  his  death  the  author  also  collected  into  one  \ 
volume  such  of  his  prose  work  as  he  wished  preserved.  His  ' 
most  important  essay,  ^^Democratic  yi8taaJ^flppeared  in  1870. 
The  prose  volume  also  includes  ^^PppmTnpn  Pfiy^/^  a  scrappy 
series  of  autobiographic  memoranda^  and  many  short  mis- 


888  Ahebigan  LrnsRAttJU 

cellaneons  pieces.  The  Letters  to  Peter  Doyle,  The  Wound- 
Dresser,  made  up  chiefly  of  letters  to  his  mother^  the  Diary 
in  Canada,  and  other  posthumous  publications  are  of  some 
biographic  value. 

The  main  facts  of  Whitman's  life  as  already  given  are  well 
known;  but  there  is  a  scarcity  of  the  more  detailed  informa- 
tion that  would  enable  one  to  form  a  sure 
Character*  estimate    of    the    man    and    his    character. 

Though  far  from  reticent  so  far  as  his  ordi- 
nary actions  were  concerned,  he  was  secretive  regarding  otiier 
affairs.  His  relations  to  women  have  been  a  subject  of  much 
discussion  and  conjecture,  which  is  justifiable  in  so  far  as 
further  knowledge  of  his  life  might  aid  in  the  interpretation 
of  some  of  his  poems.  In  his  Bohemian  days  in  New  York 
he  indulged  in  all  the  dissipations  of  a  great  city.  Late  in 
life  he  admitted  that  he  was  the  father  of  children  still  liv- 
ing, but  nothing  is  known  of  their  mother  or  mothers,  or 
of  the  circumstances  that  attended  his  breaches  of  conven- 
tional social  usage.  His  later  life  was,  so  far  as  direct  evi- 
dence shows,  exemplary.  The  charge  of  disgustingly  intense 
egotism  has  been  brought  against  him,  and  has  been  strenu- 
ously denied.  So  far  as  this  rests  on  the  use  of  the  first 
person  in  his  poems  it  may  be  considered  as  disproved;  but 
there  are  other  facts  not  easily  explainable  on  any  other 
theory.  He  took  pleasure  in  commendation  by  any  news- 
paper, no  matter  how  insignificant,  and  he  was  in  the  habit  of 
writing  notices  of  himself  and  distributing  them  to  editors 
and  reporters.  His  personal  letters,  in  which  the  pronoun 
"I^'  can  surely  have  no  unusual  meaning,  tell  seriously  and 
with  monotonous  frequency  the  most  absurdly  trivial  details 
of  his  life.  The  persistent  use  of  the  nickname  ^^alf  in- 
stead of  his  baptismal  name  Walter,  and  the  habitual  wearing 
of  a  distinctive  dress,  seem  to  show  an  affectation  that  is 
found  only  with  egotism.    On  the  other  hand  many  of  his 


The  Central  Pebiod  889 

letters  and  other  prose  writings  indicate  a  man  of  great 
genuineness^  simplicity^  and  unselfishness.  The  impressions 
that  he  made  on  others  were  various.  His  friends  and  some 
casual  acquaintances  speak  of  the  charm  of  his  personality. 
Others  agree  more  nearly  with  Thomas  Wentworth  Higgin- 
son,  who  says  that  he  seemed,  in  Lanier's  phrase,  a  "dandy 
roustabout,"  and  gave  the  impression  "not  so  much  of  manli- 
ness as  of  Boweriness.'* 

From  the  mass  of  conflicting  evidence  it  seems  probable 
that  Whitman  was  in  youth  a  man  of  perfect  bodily  health, 
though  not  a  man  of  athletic  temperament,  or  one  who  took 
much  pleasure  in  his  own  bodily  exertions.  He  was  mentally 
alert  and  wonderfully  sensitive  to  the  impressions  made  by 
the  varied  activities  of  human  life.  Nature  appealed  to  him 
most  strongly  in  her  larger  and  freer  aspects,  such  as  the  sea; 
and  man  in  his  aspect  of  energetic,  practical,  creative 
laborer.  He  took  great  pleasure  in  the  society  of  omnibus 
drivers,  ferry  boat  pilots,  horse  car  conductors,  and  other  men 
of  rude  manners,  but  of  real  capability.  His  trip  to  the 
West  and  South  added  to  his  knowledge  of  the  common  people 
of  America.  This  affection  for  men,  not  in  mass,  but  as 
individual  living  human  beings,  was  his  most  marked  char- 
acteristic. He  wrote,  "There  is  something  in  staying  close  ] 
to  men  and  women  and  looking  on  them,  and  in  the  contact  > 
and  odor  of  them,  that  pleases  the  soul  well.*'  It  is  significant 
that  notwithstanding  his  advocacy  of  the  American  ideal  he 
never  thought  of  enlisting  in  the  Civil  War  and  fighting  for 
a  principle.  Once  his  sympathies  were  aroused,  however, 
by  the  sight  of  the  sufferings  in  the  army  hospitals  he  volun- 
tarily gave  to  individuals  services  more  valuable  and  more 
trying  than  those  of  most  soldiers  in  the  field.  To  this  hos- 
pital experience  he  recurred  more  frequently  and  with  greater 
satisfaction  than  to  anything  else  in  his  career.  It  is  to  The 
Woimd-Dresser  and  the  hospital  passages  of  "Specimen  Days'* 


890  AhEBIOAN  LmSBATUBB 

that  those  who  doubt  after  reading  the  poems  should  turn 
before  forming  an  adverse  estimate  of  the  man.  Personally 
he  was  much  given  to  posing^  but  his  moments  of  genuine- 
ness made  a  powerful  impression  on  those  who  were  so  fortu- 
nate as  to  behold  them. 

The  impulse  that  led  to  the  writing  of  Leaves  of  Orass 
is  believed  by  the  poet's  worshippers  to  have  been  an  inspira- 
tion akin  to  that  of  the  older  prophets.    To 
wvwng  unsympathetic  critics  it  has  seemed  an  at- 

tempt on  the  part  of  a  man  who  had  failed 
in  ordinary  literary  forms  to  attract  attention  by  oddity. 
Neither  of  these  judgments  is  probably  wholly  true.  The 
doctrine  of  the  importance  of  the  individual  human  soul^  as 
announced  by  Emerson  and  other  transcendentalists^  may 
have  suggested  to  an  experimenter  in  literaiy  fields  the  ideas 
of  a  new  and  different  literature  of  which  this  doctrine 
should  be  the  center.  Once  started^  he  became  a  lifelong 
apostle  of  what  he  called  democracy.  After  a  study  of  both 
his  prose  and  his  poetry  it  is  hard  not  to  believe  that,  though 
he  was  egotistical  and  self-conscious^  he  was  in  the  main 
sincere.  He  evolved  his  poems  with  pains  at  firsts  and  fre- 
quently revised  and  elaborated  them  afterward.  As  he  con- 
sidered Leaves  of  Orass  a  unified  work  rather  than  a  collec- 
tion he  took  equal  pains  in  regard  to  grouping  and  arrange- 
ment. 

The  most  striking  characteristic  of  Whitman's  poetry  is 
its  lack  of  ordinary  verse  form.    Except  in  a  few  cases  it 

is  without  rhyme  or  sustained  metre.  For 
these  it  substitutes  a  rude  and  irregular 
rhythm^  akin  to  that  which  is  founds  it  is  said^  in  the  chants 
of  primitive  peoples.  Many  lines,  often  first  lines,  are 
examples  of  the  highest  rhythmical  effects;  but  two  lines 
with  the  same  rhythm  are  rarely  found  together.  An  attempt 
to  read  such  work  as  verse  is  sure  to  result  disastrously.    To 


Thb  Central  Period  391 

appreciate  it,  one  should  read  it  as  he  reads  the  finer  parts 
of  the  King  James  version  of  the  Bible,  simply  as  rhythmical 
prose.  Treated  in  this  way  much  of  it  will  be  found  to  have 
a  subtle  melody  which  is  more  and  more  impressive  as  the 
ear  becomes  accustomed  to  it.  The  author  says  that  many  of 
the  poems  were  directly  inspired  by  music ;  and  some  of  them 
suggest  in  a  vague  way  the  movement  of  great  orchestral 
pieces. 

The  power  of  Whitman^s  poems  comes,  not  so  much  from 
long  passages  taken  as  wholes,  as  from  short  suggestive 
phrases.  It  is  probable  that  in  other  poetry  this  is  true  more 
often  than  is  generally  realized.  The  success  of  rhymes 
in  which  good  phrases  are  deliberately  woven  together  to 
make  nonsense,  and  the  frequency  with  which  readers  are 
moved  by  sounding  verse  that  they  do  not  fully  understand, 
illustrate  how  much  is  due  to  the  suggestiveness  of  telling 
words  and  groups  of  words.  The  art  of  making  these  effec- 
tive phrases  Whitman  had  in  a  remarkable  degree ;  and  he  also 
relied  much  on  the  picturing  power  of  simple  terms.  This 
he  carried  to  an  extreme  in  his  long  catalogues  of  objects  or 
attributes,  often  thrown  together  promiscuously: 

The  athletic  American  matron  speaking  in  public  to  crowds  of  lis- 

tenerSy 
Males,  females,  immigrants,  combinations,  the  copiousness,  the  indi- 

Tidnality  of  the  States,  each  for  itself — the  money-makers. 
Factories,    machinery,    the    mechanical    forces,    the    windlass,   lever, 

puUey,  aU  certainties. 
The  certainty  of  space,  increase,  freedom,  futurity. 
In  space  the  sporades,  the  scattered  islands,  the  stars — on  the  firm 

earth  the  lands,  my  lands. 

If  this  sort  of  thing  is  ever  poetry  it  is  because  the  reader 
finds  in  the  long  list  some  items  that  appeal  to  his  imagi- 
nation. 

Whitman's  chief  idea,  as  has  been  said,  is  that  of  democ- 
racy.   By  this  word^  as  he  shows  in  his  chief  prose  work 


892  AlOEBIGAK  LmSRATUBX 

'democratic  Vistas/'  he  means  a  conception  of  man  and 
of  the  universe  to  which  all  earlier  civilizations  have  been 

tending,  and  in  accordance  with  which  shall 
p^J^JJJ*  come  the  fullest  development  of  the  future. 

He  accepts  something  resembling  the  transcen- 
dental doctrine  of  the  individual.  In  his  many  poems  written 
in  the  first  person  he  uses  ^^I''  and  ^^me^'  to  designate  not 
abne  himself,  but  every  man  and  woman.  Moreover,  he 
believes  that  as  all  objects,  actions,  and  attributes  are  part 
of  the  divine  scheme,  nothing  is  to  be  despised  or  thought 
unworthy  of  celebration  in  poetry.  The  severest  censure 
which  he  received  was  directed  against  those  poems  in  which 
he  extended  this  theory  to  the  phenomena  of  sex.  Sex  is, 
according  to  the  poet,  as  pure  and  as  natural  as  anything  else 
in  human  experience,  and  should  be  treated  as  freely.  Much 
may  be  said  in  favor  of  this  theory  as  a  theory,  but  the  results 
of  its  application  are  displeasing  to  most  persons.  The 
majority  of  Americans  are  also  too  puritanical  to  accept  a 
hew  poetry  of  the  sex  relation  from  a  man  whose  own  life 
had  not  conformed  to  conventional  standards  of  morality. 
It  may  indeed  be  questioned  whether  if  Whitman  had  married 
and  become  the  father  of  a  family  he  would  have  written 
some  of  the  passages  which  have  given  offence.  In  view  of 
the  fact  that  so  many  prejudices  and  preconceived  notions 
enter  into  our  estimate  of  poems  on  this  subject,  it  is  safer 
to  judge  first  of  the  author  when  he  violates  not  moral  but 
purely  esthetic  sensibilities.  His  whole  philosophy  stands 
or  falls  with  such  passages  as 

The  malform'd  limbs  are  tied  to  the  surgeon's  table, 
What  is  remored  drops  horribly  in  a  pall ; 

or, 

Divine  am  I  inside  and  out,  and  I  make  holy  whatever  I  touch  or  am 

touched  from. 
The  scent  of  these  arm-pits,  aroma  finer  than  prayer* 


The  Central  Period  393 

All  men  honor  the  surgeon^  and  any  sqneamiBhness  on  his 
part  would  be  a  misfortune  to  humanity.  In  the  eyes  of 
science  there  is  no  essential  difference  between  the  biologic 
processes  that  produce  beautiful  or  repulsive  forms,  or  be- 
tween the  chemical  processes  that  yield  pleasant  or  unpleasant 
odors.  The  question  is  whether  art  is  as  inclusive  as  science. 
This  every  reader  must  answer  for  himself;  and  his  answer  ^ 
will  decide  the  question  whether^  for  him,  Walt  Whitman  is 
the  prophet  of  a  new  poetry. 

Such  a  prophet  the  author  undoubtedly  believed  himself 
to  be.  He  proclaimed  that  the  poetry  of  the  future  was  not 
His  Conception  only  to  be  new  in  substance  and  form,  but 
of  his  Art  that  it  was  to  supersede  all  that  had  gone 

before.  It  was  to  sing  of  the  artisan  equally  with  the  noble, 
of  the  body  equally  with  the  soul,  of  death  equally  with  life. 
In  form  it  was  to  be  unrestricted  by  laws  of  metre,  it  was  to 
use  the  slang  of  the  street  as  well  as  bookish  diction,  and,  in 
America,  it  should  contain  French  and  Spanish  expressions  in 
proportion  as  French  and  Spanish  elements  enter  into  national 
life.  It  was  to  celebrate  "adhesiveness,*^  an  extraordinary,  in- 
tense friendship  between  man  and  man,  which  is  perhaps  the 
most  perplexing  of  the  author's  conceptions.  All  these  charac- 
teristics, which  he  enumerated  in  "Democratic  Vistas"  and 
other  prose  essays,  are  seen  in  his  own  poems.  From  the  first 
conception  of  Leaves  of  Grass  he  apparently  held  his  views  al- 
most unchanged.  His  later  poems  have  a  little  less  of  the 
physical  and  more  of  the  spiritual  element,  and  are  slightly 
less  eccentric  in  form;  but  the  difference  indicates  only  an 
advance  in  years  and  experience,  not  a  change  of  philosophy. 

The  reader  who  rejects  Whitman  as  a  philosopher  and  a 
prophet  should  not  simmiarily  dismiss  his  poetry  as  unworthy 

H.  _  of  attention.    To  such  a  critic  a  careful  study 

of  his  work  will  show  many  deficiencies  and 
many  beauties.    Among  the  deficiencies  are  the  lack  of  any 


894  AionoiK  Ltcbsatusb 

lomantic  element  of  hmiior^  and  of  sure  tarte.  Bomantic  Iot^ 
or  even  the  more  tender  emotions  centering  aronnd  childhood, 
is  rarely  mentioned.  The  relations  of  the  sexes  and  other  rela- 
tions within  the  family  are  thought  of  much  as  a  sociologist 
might  think  of  them.  The  lack  of  humor  and  of  sure 
taste  go  together.  The  author  was  unable  to  see  the  ridicu- 
lous side  of  his  own  work.  His  long  catalogues  of  things, 
his  affected  use  of  strange  words,  and  his  incongruous  group- 
ings of  ideas  were  by  no  means  necessary  results  of  his  poetic 
theories.  His  prose,  though  readable  and  valuable  for  the 
light  it  throws  on  the  author  and  his  views,  has  even  more 
artistic  defects  than  the  poems.  Sentences  are  scrappy  and 
disconnected,  often  ungrammatical.  On  the  other  hand,  al- 
most anyone  may  gain  inspiration,  as  did  John  Addington 
Symonds,  from  the  broad  free  view  and  the  contagious 
optimism  of  the  poet.  To  those  who  care  for  the  picturing  force 
of  words  his  many  exquisite  lines  and  phrases  are  sure  to 
appeal;  and  many  readers  will  find  in  the  subtle  melody  of 
his  finer  compositions,  as,  for  example,  ''When  Lilacs  Last  in 
the  Door-Yard  Bloom'd,''  a  charm  rarely  equalled  in  more 
formal  verse. 

Whitman  has  been  the  tmf ortunate  center  of  a  fierce  dis- 
cussion in  which  both  friends  and  enemies  have  gone  to 

extremes.  A  letter  from  Emerson  commend- 
ing the  first  edition  of  Leaves  of  Orass,  which 
with  questionable  taste  Whitman  made  public,  was  misun- 
derstood, though  it  helped  to  gain  the  popular  ear.  The 
Good  Gray  Poet,  an  excited,  illogical  pamphlet  in  which 
W.  D.  O'Connor  expressed  his  indignation  at  Whitman's 
dismissal  from  the  Interior  Department,  was  the  first  and 
perhaps  the  worst  of  a  series  of  absurd  defences  and  pane- 
gyrics. On  the  whole  these  writings  of  foolish  friends  did 
the  poet  more  harm  than  the  attacks  of  his  enemies.  The 
most  bitter  attacks  were  based  on  misunderstandings  of  the 


Thb  Obntbal  Period  395 

poems.  CriticB  who  grasped  the  anihor^s  theories  but  believed 
them  wrong  have  mostly  written  with  calmness  and  dignity. 
In  Europe,  especially  on  the  Continent,  it  has  been  the  fashion 
to  look  on  Whitman  as  the  one  distinctively  American  poet, 
in  whom  the  American  idea  f  oimd  its  appropriate  expression. 
This  is  due  in  part  to  n  misconception  of  American  civiliza- 
tion, in  part  to  the  fact  that  the  poef  s  ideas  harmonize  with 
those  of  the  most  audacious  old-world  reformers.  For  many 
years  the  majority  of  American  critics  spoke  of  Whitman 
only  to  ridicule  his  form  and  condemn  his  morals,  and  the 
great  mass  of  Americans,  whom  he  claimed  to  represent, 
foxmd  his  work  unreadable.  He  is  still  almost  unknown  to 
the  common  people  for  whom  he  wished  to  speak.  Cultured 
readers,  however,  have  come  to  take  his  poems  more  seriously. 
Much  of  the  admiration  professed  for  Ids  work  is  intelligent,  | 
but  the  element  of  fad  may  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  many 
persons  are  equally  devotees  of  Whitman  and  of  Poe — two 
men  whose  theories  of  poetry  are  the  most  diverse  and  irrec^ 
oncilable  to  be  found  in  literature.  While  his  extreme 
manner  has  found  few  imitators,  his  influence  has  been  strong 
on  recent  poets  both  in  England  and  America. 

VI.  Pennsylvania  Wbitebs 

Philadelphia  continued  as  in  the  earlier  years  of  the  cen- 
tury to  be  a  literary  center  of  importance  without  numbering 

among  its  permanent  residents  many  writers 
^^^^^        of  high  rank.    It  was  noteworthy,  especially 

before  1860,  for  the  publication  of  annuals 
and  popular  magazines.  Among  the  latter  "Godej's  Lady^i. 
Boqi^f*  and  ^^Graham's  Magazine?  long  held  national  repu- 
tations. Some  of  the  more  important  editors  of  these,  like 
Qriswold  and  Poe,  did  most  of  their  literary  work  elsewhere. 
Others  of  lesser  consequence,  like  Mrs.  Sarah  J.  Hale,  Eliza 


396  Ahericak  LrnouruBS 

Leslie,  imd  a  liiUe  later  Willis  Oaylord  Clark  and  B.  T. 
Conrad,  fairly  belong  to  Philadelphia. 

Mrs,  Sarah  J.  Hale  a788-18y9)>  bom  Bncll,  waa  a  native 
of  New  Hampshire.    At  the  age  of  thirty-four  she  was  left 

a  widow  with  five  small  children,  and,  as  she 
Phn^  ...  was  fond  of  reminding  her  readers,  turned  to 
Editon  literary  work  for  support.     For  some  time 

she  conducted  the  '^Ladies'  Magazine''  in 
Boston,  and  in  1837  became  editor  of  ^'Gode/s  Lady's  Book." 
She  also  edited  annuals,  among  them  the  ''Opal/'  and  was 
the  author  of  a  novel,  a  tragedy,  several  volumes  of  poems,  and 
other  miscellaneous  work.  Her  prose  and  verse  are  both 
highly  moral  and  commonplace,  even  for  writings  of  their 
class,  jiliza  LesHe  (1787-1858),  a  contributor  to  "Godey's'' 
and  editor  of  an  annual,  the  ''Gift,"  published  besides  a 
classic  cook-book  some  mildly  humorous  tales  and  sketches. 
Willis  Gaylord  Clark  (1810-1841),  a  twin  brother  of  Lewis 
Gaylord  Clark,  was  editorially  connected  with  several  Phila- 
delphia journals.  His  poems,  in  smooth  academic  form, 
incline  to  melancholy — ^a  fact  that  may  be  associated  with 
the  early  death  by  consumption  of  both  his  wife  and  himself. 
His  prose,  on  the  other  hand,  consists  mostly  of  brief  humor- 
ous sketches.  JBpbert  Tajlor  Conrad  (1810-1858}^  a  Phila- 
delphia lawyer,  in  early  life  editor  of  two  newspapers,  and 
later  of  "Graham's  Magazine,"  was  the  author  of  a  few 
poems  and  of  three  plays,  of  which  ''Aylmere,  or  the  Bond- 
man of  Kent,"  was  successfully  acted  by  Forrest. 

A  more  important  editor  and  miscellaneous  literary  worker 
was  Charles  Grodfrey  LelandJ[l 824-1903).    He  was  bom  in 

Phifadelphia,  and  after  taking  his  degree  at 

Gote**  Leknd    ^™^^^^^  *^^   studjdng  abroad   contributed 

to  many  of  the  leading  magazines  of  the 
country.  For  a  time  he  edited  a  Philadelphia  newspaper. 
He  had  wide  interests  and  a  fondness  for  curious  researdies. 


The  Central  Period  S9f 

One  of  his  early  writings  was  on  "The  Poetry  and  Mystery  of 
Dreams;'^  and  later  he  published  the  results  of  interesting 
studies  on  the  gipsy  language  and  customs,  on  the  legends  of 
the  Algonquins,  on  the  early  discovery  of  America  by  the 
Chinese,  etc.  Besides  these  he  wrote  sketches  of  travel  and 
edited  a  series  of  art  manuals.  He  was  a  careful  observer, 
and  what  he  has  to  say  is  valuable ;  but  his  prose  works  are 
sometimes  slightly  but  unfortunately  flippant  and  discursive. 
His  most  popular  literary  work  was  the  JBans  Breitmann^ 
Ballads^  which  began  to  appear  in  1857.  These  are  bur- 
lesques in  German-American  dialect  on  the  peculiar  ideal- 
istic German  who  was  turned  loose  on  America  by  the  troubles 
of  1848,  and  below  the  broad  fun  on  the  surface  they  show 
the  author's  interest  in  the  study  of  odd  types  of  character. 
Leland  was  associated  with  a  group  of  Philadelphia  writers 
which  included  Eobert  Montgomery  Bird,  George  H.  Boker, 

Bayard  Taylor,  and,  a  little  apart  from  the 
A  Group  of  others,  Thomas  Buchanan  Bead.    These  men 

Writers  agreed  m  caring  much  for  the  artistic  side  of 

literature.  The  more  typical  members  of  the 
group.  Bird,  Boker,  and  Taylor,  all  attempted  dramatic  com- 
position. 

Robert  Montgomery  Bird  (1805-1854)  was  educated  as  a 
physician,  but  early  turned  to  literature.     He  began  with 

plays,  of  which  the  most  famous,  **The  Gladi- 
Robert  ator,''  was  a  favorite  with  Forrest,  the  actor. 

Bird  -^^  ^^^^  wrote  Calavar  and  The  Infidel,  two 

romances  of  which  the  scene  is  laid  in  Mexico, 
and  followed  these  by  other  fiction.  All  his  work  is  of  a 
highly  romantic  order.  His  stories  are  weak  in  plot,  but  hold 
interest  by  a  succession  of  incidents. 

A  far  abler  man  was  George  H.  Boker  (1823-1890).  He 
was  a  native  of  Pennsylvania  and  a  graduate  of  Princeton,  a 
man  bom  to  wealth  and  social  position,  who  followed  litera- 


8d8  AMK&toAK  LrrmATuiUfi 

ture  because  he  loved  it.  Daring  the  war  he  was  the  leader 
of  the  Union  League  Club  of  Philadelphia^  and  later  was 

minister  to  Turkey  and  to  Russia.  After 
*^    '  some  early  poems  he  wiote  four  tragedies, 

"Calaynos/*  "Anne  Boleyn/'  "Leonor  de  Guzman/'  and 
"Prancesea  da  Rimini.^*  His  Plays  and  Poems,  collected  in 
1856^  include  two  lighter  dramatic  compositions.  Later  pub- 
lications were  Poems  of  the  War,  Street  Lyrics,  Koenigsm^rk 
and  Other  Poem^s,  The  Booh  of  the  Dead,  and  a  volume  of 
Sonnets. 

Boker's  tragedies  have  intense  and  over-romantic  plots, 
and  make  use  of  all  the  old-fashioned  devices  of  the  dramatist. 
"Calaynos"  and  "Leonor  de  Guzman*'  have  Spanish  settings. 
The  best  is  "Francesca  da  Rimini/'  which  still  holds  the 
stage.  The  story  as  told  by  Dante  is  amplified,  and  so  man- 
aged that  the  hearer  is  led  to  sympathize  with  all  three  bvers. 
The  prominent  use  of  the  court  fool  in  developing  the  action 
and  the  frequent  asides  are  conventionalities  which  were  more 
tolerable  sixty  years  ago  than  they  are  to-day.  In  spite  of 
artificiality,  however^  the  story  has  tmity  and  consistency,  and 
never  drags.  The  blank  verse  is  well  handled,  though  it  does 
not  rise  to  great  heights.  Boker's  lyrical  poems  sometimes  sug- 
gest Shelley  and  occasionally  Tennyson,  but  can  never  be 
called  imitative.  His  sonnets,  which  Leigh  Hunt  thought 
the  best  on  the  legitimate  model  produced  in  America,  show 
rather  too  much  influence  of  the  Elizabethan  sonneteers. 
His  work,  throughout,  is  that  of  a  man  of  taste  and  enthusi- 
asm for  literature  who  has  a  considerable,  but  not  the  high- 
est, literary  gift. 

Bayard  Taylor  (1825-1878)^  or  as  he  was  known  until  early 
manhood  James  Bayard  Taylor,  was  distinctively  a  product  of 

Pennsylvania,  though  many  of  his  literary 

^  ^  associations  were  with  New  York,  and  he  has 
already  been  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  New  York 


The  Central  Pebiod  899 

group.  He  was  bom  in  Kennett  Square,  Cheater  County^ 
PennsylYania.  His  ancestry  inclnded  both  Quaker  and 
Lutheran  elements.  After  a  precocious  boyhood,  in  which 
he  showed  his  fondness  for  books,  he  spent  a  short  time  in  an 
academy,  and  at  seventeen  was  apprenticed  to  a  country 
printer.  Even  before  this  he  had  contributed  poems  to  the 
Philadelphia  papers,  and  in  1844  he  published  on  the  advice 
of  Griswold  his  first  volume  of  poems.  He  had  always  wished 
to  travel,  and  now^  on  the  strength  of  the  slight  literary  repu- 
tation derived  from  his  book,  he  secured  contracts  from  sev- 
eral papers  to  write  letters  from  abroad.  His  first  visit  to 
Europe,  which  occupied  two  years  and  covered  parts  of  Eng- 
land, Scotland,  Belgium,  Switzerland,  Italy,  and  Prance,  was 
made  at  an  expense  of  about  $500.  His  newspaper  letters 
were  collected  in  1846  into  his  first  book  of  travel.  Views 
Afoot 

From  this  point  Taylor^s  varied  and  industrious  career 
cannot  be  traced  in  detail.    For  a  time  he  published  a  country 

Later  Career        P*P®^>    *^^    ^^^^   ^®^*    *o    ^^^    York   on 

the  staff  of  the  ''Tribune.'*     In  1850  came 

the  culmination  of  the  tragic  romance  of  his  life.  He  had 
long  been  betrothed  to  Mary  Agnew,  a  Quaker  girl.  For 
some  time  it  had  been  evident  that  she  was  afficted  with 
consumption,  and  the  lovers  were  married  in  full  antici- 
pation of  her  death,  which  occurred  two  months  later.  The 
success  of  Views  Afoot  and  the  author's  love  of  new  scenes 
united  in  urging  him  to  travel.  He  went  to  California  in 
the  days  of  the  gold  excitement;  and  before  his  death  he  had 
visited,  besides  many  sections  of  the  United  States,  Egypt, 
the  Holy  Land,  India,  Iceland,  and  most  corners  of  the  more 
frequented  countries.  From  all  these  places  he  wrote  letters, 
which  were  afterward  collected  into  volumes.  It  was  in 
Germany  that  he  felt  most  at  home;  and  here,  in  1857,  he 
married  Maria  Hansen^  who  survived  to  write  his  life  and 


400  AhBHICAK  LmSRATUBB 

edit  his  works.  After  his  second  marriage  he  bought  a  tract 
of  land  and  built  a  mansion  near  his  boyhood  home.  The 
desire  of  founding  an  estate^  which  has  been  disastrous  to  so 
many  men  of  letters,  was  strong  upon  him.  He  went  beyond 
his  means  and  although  he  slaved  at  lecturing  and  literary 
hackwork,  he  was  still  embarrassed  financially.  Just  as  all 
things  began  to  look  brighter  he  died,  in  1878,  soon  after  he 
had  taken  his  place  as  United  States  minister  to  Germany. 

It  was  partly  the  pressure  of  external  circumstances  and 
partly  the  inherent  activity  of  his  mind  that  led  Taylor  to 

undertake  so  many  kinds  of  writing.    Besides 
*^  the  merest  hackwork,  such  as  newspaper  cor- 

respondence, editing,  and  compiling  school  histories,  he  at- 
tempted various  forms  of  poems,  the  drama,  books  of  travel, 
short  stories,  novels,  literary  essays,  literary  burlesques,  and 
translations ;  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  planning  a  life 
of  Goethe.  He  is  said  to  have  valued  his  own  prose  lightly, 
but  to  have  cared  much  for  the  name  of  poet;  and  it  is  in 
his  poetry  that  his  development  may  best  be  traced.  Of  his 
first  two  or  three  volumes  of  poems,  little  need  be  said  except 
that  they  possess  some  of  the  qualities  of  the  later  work. 
Poems  of  the  Orient,  1854,  shows  how  strong  a  hold  the  Bast 
took  on  his  passionate  nature.  Few  other  poets  have  put 
into  their  work  so  much  of  the  sensuous  spirit  of  the  Ori- 
ental lands  and  still  kept  themselves  so  free  from  sensuality. 
These  poems  show  the  influence  of  Shelley,  and  are  over- 
intense,  over-rhetorical,  yet  the  best  of  them  must  be  ranked 
high  among  American  lyrics.  The  Poet's  Journal,  1862,  is 
a  sort  of  serious  medley,  with  a  little  of  a  story  told,  and  more 
implied  by  interwoven  lyrics.  It  is  really  the  account  of  the 
nuthor's  first  and  second  loves,  and  culminates  with  the  birth 
of  his  child.  From  this  time  on  the  echoes  in  his  poems  are 
of  Tennyson  rather  than  of  Shelley,  and  there  are  hints  of 
Swinburne,  and,  in  subject  and  treatment,  of  IioweU.    From 


The  Central  Period  401 

this  time^  too^  he  felt  moved  to  attempt  higher  things  in 
poetry.  The  Picture_of  Saint  John^  186g,  Lars,  a  Pastoral 
[gi^Norwa^  the  ^'Gettysburg  Ode/^  and  above  all  his  dramatic 
works  and  the  translation  of  Faust  are  more  ambitious  than 
anything  that  he  had  undertaken  before. 

Taylor's  moral  ideals  were  as  pure  as  those  of  the  New 
England  poets,  and  at  bottom  he  had  some  of  their  tendency 

to  didacticism.  Like  his  associates  in  New 
of  VwS^  York,  however,  he  believed  that  the  highest 

quality  of  poetry  is  beauty.  His  artistic  in- 
stincts were  strong  in  all  directions,  and  at  times  he  devoted 
himself  with  some  earnestness  to  painting.  In  his  early 
years  he  inclined  to  the  prevailing  sentimentalism,  and  later 
there  was  an  element  of  artistic  mysticism  in  his  work. 
His  taste  ripened  late,  as  none  knew  better  than  himself. 
In  the  end,  his  critical  judgment  was  stronger  than  his 
creative  power.  As  a  result,  his  later  work — indeed  nearly 
all  after  the  Poems  of  the  Orient — seems  too  carefully 
wrought  out  to  move  the  reader.  The  odes  and  many  lyrics 
in  "Prince  Deukalion^'  and  other  works  have  few  flaws  in 
structure,  but  they  lack  the  charm  of  the  Shelleyan  and 
rhetorical  'TSedouin  Song.''  Taylor  was  a  true  poet,  who  fell 
just  a  little  short  of  fulfilling  his  great  promise. 

Of  the  original  dramatic  works  "The  Prophet*'  is  the  only 
one  that  is  strictly  a  drama.     The  subject,  Mormonism,  is 

ill  adapted  to  a  play,  the  structure  is  poor. 
Dramatic  Works  and  the  blank  verse  is  by  no  means  the  au- 
thor's best.  "The  Masque  of  the  Gods"  »nd 
'Trince  Deukalion"  are  dramatic  poems  in  which  spirits  and 
the  Gods  of  old  speak.  They  teach,  in  a  veiled  allegorical 
way,  the  author's  later  religious  beliefs.  The  best  parts  of 
both  are  the  lyrics  that  are  frequently  interspersed.  "Prince 
Deukalion"  shows  the  influence  of  the  author^s  study  of 
J(kvst    The  trandation  of  Goetbe'e  maeiteipiecQ  is  probaJbly 


408  Akbbioan  Lttbhatubb 

Taylor^B  lughest  achievement  He  devoted  to  it  some  of  ibd 
best  years  of  his  life ;  and  though  he  had  not  high  scholarship^ 
he  had  the  scholarly  enthusiasm  that  stops  at  no  labor.  Crii-' 
ics  of  his  Fanst  have  generally  given  high  praise  to  the  subtle 
interpretation  of  the  original. 

The  novels^  Hannah  Thurston,  John  Godfrey's  Fortunsi, 
The  Story  of  Kennett,  and  Joseph  and  his  Friend,  appeared 

between  1863  and  1870.  The  scenes  of  all  are 
laid  in  America  and  the  first  three  are  in 
part  autobiographical.  Hannah  Thurston  is  another  of  the 
many  unsuccessful  attempts  to  write  a  story  of  American 
village  life.  It  deals  with  the  reforms  and  -isms  of  the 
mid-century^  and  shows  how  Taylor  felt  toward  some  of  his 
strict  neighbors.  The  plot  is  poorly  organized  and  the  story 
often  drags.  John  Godfrey's  Fortunes  was  evidently  sug- 
gested by  some  of  the  author's  literary  experiences.  The 
scenes^  said  to  some  extent  the  incidents^  in  Kennett  are 
avowedly  drawn  from  life  in  his  own  neighborhood.  As 
novels,  none  of  these  works  ranks  very  high;  but  they  show 
some  of  the  author^s  views,  and  especially  his  thorough  Ameri- 
canism and  belief  in  democracy.  The  short  stories,  potboilers 
written  for  magazines,  are  in  structure  little  better  than  the 
novels. 

Taylor^s  critical  essays,  as  represented  in  the  volume  col- 
lected by  his  wife,  are  mostly  disappointing.    They  rarely 

show  insight;  when  they  are  best  they  are 
^]^~^  commonplace,  and  when  they  differ  from  re- 

ceived opinion  they  are  often  absurd.  Ths 
Echo  Club  is  a  series  of  burlesques  suggested  by  early  literary 
recreations  of  Taylor,  Stoddard,  O'Brien,  and  others. 
»  Taylor^s  best  prose  work  is  probably  that  which  he  valued 
\  least,  his  books  of  travel.  He  had  an  observing  eye,  a  ready 
sympathy,  and  good  powers  of  description.  He  rarely  moral- 
issed^  or  sentimentalized^  or  lectured  on  history  or  sdenoQs. 


The  Central  Period  403 

He  knew  better  than  to  write  long  descriptions  of  nature  with- 
out introducing  in  some  way  a  human  interest.     He  told 

his  own  experiences,  keeping  himself  in  the 
1™2  center,  and  still  his  narratives  never  seem 

egotistical.     It  is  doubtful  if  truer,  saner,! 
better  written  books  of  travel  have  been  produced  in  America.} 
Even  to-day,  when  such  works  are  wholly  out  of  fashion, 
the  reader  who  picks  up  one  of  these  old  volumes  is  loth  to  lay 
it  down. 

Taylor  felt  when  he  accepted  the  ministry  to  Germany  that 
he  was  just  getting  ready  for  his  best  work.  It  may  be 
P^^^  doubted  whether  if  he  had  lived  his  literary 

hopes  would  have  been  gratified.  He  was  too 
much  the  victim  of  circumstances,  he  had  too  many  ambitions, 
he  attempted  too  many  kinds  of  work,  to  do  his  best;  and  it 
is  uncertain  just  how  great  that  best  might  have  been.  He 
became,  with  the  possible  exception  of  Whitman,  the  most 
eminent  literary  man  of  the  middle  states  in  his  time;  and 
the  sweetness  of  his  personality,  his  conscientious  industry, 
and  the  disappointment  of  his  aspijrations  constituted  a 
tradition  which,  after  his  death,  tended  to  perpetuate  his 
memory.  How  much  of  his  work,  aside  from  the  translation 
of  Faust,  will  be  remembered  in  fifty  years  is  a  question 
hard  to  answer. 

JThomas  Buchanan  Rea^  (JiS^^-'^^y^^  was  bom  in  Chester 
County,  Pennsylvania,  of  parents  in  poor  financial  circum- 
stances.   He  was  apprenticed  to  a  tailor,  but 
Thomfla  ran  away  to  Philadelphia  and  afterward  to 

£2—  the  West.   Before  he  WEB  twenty  years  of  age  he 

had  been  grocer's  clerk,  cigar-maker,  sculptor, 
sign-painter,  actor,  and  artist.  Much  of  his  later  life  was  spent 
abroad,  where  he  painted  the  portraits  of  many  distinguished 
people,  and  less  successful  fanciful  pictures.  His  many  poems 
were  published  at  intervals  from  1847  to  his  deftth.    Among 


404  Ambbicak  Lttbratubb 

them  are  The  New  Pastoral  in  thirty-six  books,  which  treats  of 
pioneer  life  in  America,  The  House  by  the  Sea,  The  Wagoner 
of  the  Alleghanies,  a  tale  of  Bevolutionary  times,  and  The 
Oood  Samaritans.  Besides  these  longer  works  he  wrote  many 
lyrics  and  shorter  poems.  He  had  the  artistic  instinct,  in 
verse  as  in  painting,  but  he  wrote  too  freely,  and  with  too 
little  self-criticism.  He  had  a  fondness  for  strongly  accentu- 
ated rhythms,  for  lines  rhyming  in  triplets,  and  for  me- 
chanical arrangements  of  his  poems.  He  is  at  his  best  in 
his  lyrics,  of  which  the  most  popular  example  is  "Sheridan^s 
Bide.^^ 

VII.  SouTHBRN  Writers 

In  the  South  conditions  were  still  unfavorable  to  the  pro- 
duction of  literature.     There  were  fewer  cities  than  in  the 

North,  and  hence  fewer  literary  centers;  and 
thfTsottS  facilities  for  publishing  were  not  so  readily 

at  hand.  Both  custom  and  temperament  in- 
clined the  more  cultured  Southerners  to  the  appreciation  rather 
than  the  creation  of  literature;  and  if  they  wrote  at  all  it 
was  likely  to  be  for  recreation,  and  in  the  spirit  of  a  dilettante. 
It  is  noticeable  that  though  the  patricians  were  often  the 
most  generous  contributors  to  Southern  literary  magazines, 
a  good  proportion  of  the  writers  who  are  best  remembered, 
such  as  Poe,  Simms,  and  Timrod,  represented  less  exclusive 
social  circles.  Before  the  war  politics  offered  the  most  attrac- 
tive field  for  men  of  intellectual  tastes  who  might  have  at- 
tained some  excellence  in  letters.  Indeed,  most  historians  of 
Southern  literature  have  enlarged  their  lists  of  authors  by 
including  men  who  are  chiefly  distinguished  in  political  his- 
tory. Southern  statesmen  maintained,  as  they  always  have, 
a  high  average  of  excellence  as  orators  and  as  writers  on 
public  affairs,  but  few  of  them  merit  much  consideration  as 
men  of  letters.    The  war  left  the  South  unfitted,  for  a  few 


The  Central  Period  405 

years,  to  do  much  in  literature.  Although  a  considerable 
number  of  Southern  writers  have  since  arisen,  most  of  them 
belong  to  the  period  after  1883. 

Baltimore  was  always  a  center  of  culture,  particularly  of 
Soman  Catholic  culture ;  and  in  the  latest  years  of  the  period 

Johns  Hopkins  Uniyersity  attracted  men  de- 
^^^^  voted  to  the  newer  scholarship.     Baltimore 

periodicals  were  among  the  best  in  the  South. 
Among  the  writers  who  were  temporarily  drawn  there  were 
Poe  and  Father  Byan.  Pew,  however,  of  the  permanent 
residents  of  the  city  deserve  mention.  George  H.  Calvert 
(1803-1889),  a  descendant  of  the  founder  of  Maryland, 
lived  near  Baltimore  until  1843,  when  he  removed  to  Bhode 
Island.  He  studied  at  Harvard,  at  Gk>ettingen,  and  later 
edited  a  Baltimore  paper,  and  published  translations  from 
the  German,  and  many  original  works,  both  prose  and  verse. 
His  prose  essays  show  an  attempt  to  be  aphoristic,  and  at 
times  suggest  the  influence  of  Emerson,  but  are  on  the 
whole  a  rather  artificial  expression  of  commonplace  thought 
His  two  plays,  in  blank  verse,  seem  to  have  been  modelled  on 
the  more  intense  work  of  the  Elizabethans.  His  poems  are 
characterized  by  artificial  diction.  His  work  is  that  of  a 
gentleman  of  culture  and  wide  interests,  who  is  not  quite 
sure  in  taste,  3nd  who  allows  himself  to  be  over-ambitious. 

The  literary  career  of  Sidney  Lanier  (1842-1881^  is  asso- 
ciated with  the  newer  intellectual  movement  in  Baltimore, 

though  the  greater  part  of  his  life  was  spent 
Sidney  Lamer      farther    South.      He    was    born    in    Macon, 

Georgia,  of  good  family,  though  not  of  the  oldest  Southern 
aristocracy.  His  father  was  a  successful  lawyer.  Even  as  a 
boy  he  was  noteworthy  as  a  musician.  He  entered  Ogle- 
thorpe college,  a  small  sectarian  institution  at  Midway, 
Georgia,  and  on  his  graduation  in  1860  was  made  tutor. 
His  ambition  was  to  study  in  Germany  and  become  a  college 


400  Ahssioak  Lttbhatusb 

teacher,  but  tbis  was  frustrated  by  the  war.  He  enlisted  in 
the  Confederate  army  in  1861,  and  served  in  the  line,  as 
scout,  and  in  the  signal  service.  He  was  finally  captured 
on  board  a  blockade  runner  and  confined  in  Point  Lookout 
prison.  After  the  war  he  was  clerk  in  a  hotel,  principal  of 
an  academy,  and  from  1868  to  1872  an  assistant  in  his 
f  ather^s  law  o£Sce.  His  only  important  publication  up  to  this 
time  was  Tiger  Lilies,  a  novel  begun  while  he  was  in  the 
army,  and  finished  in  1867.  He  had  always  retained  his 
interest  in  literature  and  music,  however,  and  had  worked 
when  time  permitted  on  a  volume  of  prose  essays  and  on  a 
long  poem,  "The  Jacquerie,"  neither  of  which  was  ever  com- 
pleted. In  the  winter  of  1872-3  he  resolved  to  devote  himself 
to  the  life  of  an  artist  and  a  scholar. 

Even  before  this  he  was  afflicted  with  consumption,  but  he 
did  not  lose  hope.  He  went  to  Baltimore,  where  he  played  first 

flute  in  the  Peabody  Orchestra,  and  revelled  in 
^^^^"  the  opportunities  for  study  aiforded  by  the  Pea- 

body  library  and  the  newly-organized  Johns 
Hopkins  University.  From  this  time  tmtil  his  death  in  1881 
his  life  was  a  brave  struggle  against  disease  and  financial 
embarrassment,  and  in  the  last  years  a  race  with  death  to 
see  how  much  he  could  accomplish  before  the  end.  At  first 
he  was  obliged  to  leave  his  wife  and  children  at  the  South, 
but  after  a  time  the  returns  from  his  music  and  from  his  lit- 
erary work  enabled  the  family  to  live  quietly  at  Baltimore. 
"Com,"  his  first  poem  to  attract  much  notice,  was  published 
in  1875.  This  aided  him  in  forming  several  literary  friends, 
and  through  one  of  these.  Bayard  Taylor,  came  the  invita- 
tion to  write  the  cantata  for  the  opening  of  the  Centennial 
Exposition.  This  made  him  better  known,  though  the  pro- 
duction itself  adds  little  to  his  poetic  fame.  His  first  volume 
of  verse  appeared  in  1877.  A  book  on  Florida,  1876;  THa 
Boifs  Froissart,  1878;  The  Boif'a  King  Arthur,  1880;  The 


The  Central  Period  407 

Bo}/*8  Mdbinogion^  1881;  and  the  posthumously  published 
Boy's  Percy  were  hackwork,  though  the  editing  of  the  old 
romances  was  by  no  means  distasteful  to  him.  He  organized 
classes  of  ladies  for  the  study  of  literature,  and  in  1879  was  i 
appointed  lecturer  in  English  literature  in  Johns  Hopkins.! 
He  projected  several  scholarly  works,  of  which  he  published 
only  one.  The  Science  of  EnQlish  Verse,  1880.  Since  his 
death  have  appeared  several  volumes  of  his  writings,  includ- 
ing a  complete  edition  of  his  poems,  his  letters,  some  collec- 
tions of  his  essays,  and  his  lectures  on  The  English  Novel 
and  on  Shakespeare  and  his  Forerunners. 

All  who  knew  Lanier  testify  to  his  personal  charm.    He 
was  a  man  of  wide  interests  and  broad  views  and  sympathies. 

While  he  never  lost  for  a  moment  his  devotion 
i^^         to  the  South,  after  the  war  he  accepted  the 

inevitable,  and  looked  to  the  future  rather 
than  the  past.  He  was  bom  in  one  of  the  more  democratic 
of  the  Southern  states,  and  he  responded  to  influences  that 
were  not  strong  in  the  South — ^notably  modem  scientific 
thought  and  German  transcendentalism.  He  was  able,  there- 
fore, to  stand  in  close  relations  with  men  in  both  sections  of 
the  country.  The  pathos  of  his  life,  his  personal  sweetness, 
his  relations  to  the  new  and  the  old  South,  and  to  one  of 
the  younger  American  tmiversities  all  make  his  story  one  of 
interest,  but  tend  to  render  difiScult  a  just  estimate  of  his 
importance.  By  his  admirers  he  has  been  praised  as  a  scholar, 
a  prose  essayist,  and  a  poet. 

Lanier  had  some  of  the  characteristics  of  a  scholar — inr 
terest  in  many  subjects,  a  consciousness  of  his  own  deficien- 
cies, and  an  ambition  to  learn.  While  in  the 
Scholanhio  army,  and  while  at  work  under  the  most  dis- 
couraging circumstances  in  i;he  South,  he 
managed  to  learn  many  things,  and  particularly  to  become 
well  read  in  older  English  literature.    When  he  decided  on  a 


408  AlOSRIOAK  LmSRATUBB 

literary  career  he  felt  the  need  of  a  broader  and  more 
thorough  trainings  and  set  himself  to  acquire  it  His  biograr 
pher  prints  an  interesting  letter  in  which,  in  1877,  he  ap- 
plied for  a  fellowship  at  Johns  Hopkins  TJniversity  in  order 
that  he  might  study  the  physics  of  musical  tone,  mineralogy, 
botany,  comparative  imatomy,  French,  and  (German — a  course 
which  he  goes  on  to  say  '^akes  straight  towards  the  final 
result  of  all  my  present  thought.''  There  is  a  strange  mix- 
ture of  the  ludicrous  and  the  pathetic  in  the  idea  of  an  in- 
valid of  thirty-five  proposing  to  master  these  diverse  branches 
of  knowledge  in  order  that  he  might  become  a  poei  With  all 
his  enthusiasm,  however,  he  lacked  the  patience  imd  the  sound 
judgment  of  a  true  scholar.  He  was  too  ready  to  speak  and 
write  before  he  had  investigated  his  subject  deeply  land  made 
certain  of  his  conclusions.  It  would  be  unfair  to  judge  him 
severely  on  accoimt  of  his  India  papers,  imaginative  maga- 
zine articles  into  which  he  worked  much  half-assimilated  guide- 
book information,  or  by  his  lectures  on  the  novel  and  Shake- 
j  speare;  but  the  same  unripeness  is  evident  in  The  Science  of 
1  English  Verse,  which  he  deliberately  published  as  a  contribu- 
I  tion  to  scholarship.  His  lack  of  sure  judgment  is  shown  in 
'  his  tendency  to  give  the  highest  praise  to  minor  writers  who 
took  his  fancy. 

The  exuberance  and  lack  of  sureness  which  characterized 
his  scholarship  also  account  for  the  chief  defects  of  his  prose. 

His  early  novel.  Tiger  Lilies,  is  strained,  rhe- 
•'^  ^^  torical,  and  overfanciful  in  imagery.  These 
faults  he  outgrew  to  some  extent,  but  few  pages  of  even  his 
latest  prose  are  wholly  free  from  them.  This  is  the  more  sur- 
prising since  he  himself  points  them  out  in  an  early  bit 
of  self-criticism.  A  few  of  his  letters  are  charming  revela- 
tions of  a  charming  personality,  but  most  of  them — even  those 
to  his  wife — ^are  highly  artificial,  full  of  bookish  words,  and 
archaic  forms,  and  unnatural,  involved  sentences. 


The  Central  Period  409 

Lanier's  chief  literary  ambition  was  in  the  direction  of 
poetry.    He  wrote :  "I  know  .  .  .  that  I  am  in  soul,  and  shall 

be  in  life  and  utterance,  a  great  poet/^  His 
J;*^*''*  achievement  can  in  fairness  be  judged  only 

of  Po^ry  ^  connection  with  his  theories  of  music  and 

poetry.  To  his  mind  the  relations  between 
these  two  forms  of  art  are  far  closer  than  has  usually  been 
supposed.  He  believed  that  a  poem  should  have  a  solid  basis 
of  idea,  but  he  emphasized  the  fact  that  it  should  appeal  to 
the  ear  through  subtle  eflEects  of  appropriate  tone-color  and 
rhythm.  It  is  the  form  rather  than  the  idea  that  is  strik- 
ing in  his  verse.  Indeed,  his  thought,  except  in  poems  like 
the  *^ymns  of  the  Marshes,^^  in  which  he  shows  the  response 
of  his  imaginative  temperament  to  the  influence  of  nature, 
is  likely  to  be  commonplace.  The  ideas  that  maize  rather  than 
cotton  will  save  the  agricultural  industries  of  the  South, 
which  underlies  "Corn,^^  and  that  the  nation  is  too  much 
absorbed  in  sordid  trade,  which  underlies  "The  Symphony,^' 
seem  when  stated  baldly  to  be  hardly  worth  the  poef  s  while. 
Worse  than  the  triteness  of  his  ideas  is  his  torturing  and 
twisting  them  in  strange  long-drawn-out  figures  and  odd 
conceits.  As  a  poet  even  more  than  as  a  prose  writer  he 
found  it  impossible  to  think  and  speak  simply,  clearly,  and 
naturally.  What  Edmund  Gosse  calls  his  "strain  and  rage*' 
was  probably  due  not  alone  to  a  striving  after  poetic  eflEect  in 
accordance  with  his  theories,  but  to  the  immaturity  of  his 
taste  and  thought.  For,  although  he  was  in  his  fortieth 
year  when  he  died,  he  seemed  as  immature  at  the  end  as  some 
boys  of  twenty. 

Among  Lanier's  most  striking  poems  are  "The  Symphony/' 
"Thft  M^TRhfifl  of  Qlyri^f"  and  "Sunrise/'    In  the  first  the 

author  attempts  to  suggest  by  both  the  music 
8    oems    ^^^  ^^^  .^^^  ^£  diflEerent  parts  of  the  poem 

the  effect  of  different  orchestral  instruments.     In  the  other 


410  AhBRICAN  LrrBRATUEB 

two  poems  the  verse  is  even  more  musical  and  more  arti- 
ficial. His  use  of  alliteration  and  tone-color,  and  some  of 
his  rhythms,  suggest  Swinburne — ^the  modem  English  poet 
whom  he  most  disliked.  Better  than  the  longer  poems, 
though  less  distinctive,  are  a  few  lyrics  in  which  he  deliberately 
and  avowedly  worked  out  a  conceit.  Among  these  is  the 
much  praised  ^^Ballad  of  Trees  and  the  Master/*  which,  with 
its  pun  on  the  word  "tree,**  is  after  all  somewhat  forced. 
Still  better  is  the  "Evening  Song/'  in  which  are  blended  with 
remarkable  effect  the  Elizabethan  and  the  nineteenth  century 
conceptions  of  love. 

Lanier  wrote  at  a  time  when  North  and  South  were  becom- 
ing reconciled,  and  when  Northern  critics,  in  their  desire  to 

be  fair,  gave  eager  recognition  to  a  promising 
Southern  man  of  letters.    He  attracted  little 
attention  abroad,  but  at  home  he  had,  and  still  has,  a  consider- 
able body  of  enthusiastic  readers.     Even  these  are  wont  to 
admit  that  he  must  be  judged  not  so  much  by  what  he  did 
as  by  what  he  would  have  done.    He  stands  as  the  most  dis- 
tinguished literary  man  of  the  New  South;  but  it  is  by  no 
means  certain  that  when  the  careers  of  the  many  successful 
Southern  writers  now  living  are  completed  he  will  deserve 
this  distinction. 
^    If  Virginia  had  a  literary  center  it  was  Bichmond,  which 
in  the  old  days  was  a  city  of  much  culture.    Here  was  pub- 
lished  the   ".Southern  Literary   Messengej,*' 
J^^^sC^ke    °^°^^   frequently   remembered   in   connection 

with  Poe,  but  the  leading  magazine  of  the 
South  both  before  and  after  his  .editorship.  Other  and 
shorter  lived  periodicals  had  considerable  merit.  Among  the 
representative  Virginia  writers  was  Philip  Pendleton  Cooke 
j[1816;J.850]tj  a  graduate  of  Princeton.  He  studied  law,  but 
devoted  himself  largely  to  writing  and  sportsmanship.  He 
published  in  the  periodicals  a  few  prose  tales  and  part  of  a 


The  Central  Period  411 

romance.  His  only  volume  was  Froissart  Ballads  and  other 
Poems,  1847.  The  preface  announces  the  plan  of  turning 
stories  from  Froissart  into  verse,  but  only  three  such  narra- 
tives are  given.  The  rest  of  the  volume  is  taken  up  with  verse 
tales  of  his  own  invention,  and  miscellaneous  poems,  includ- 
ing his  best  remembered  lyric,  ^^Florence  Vane/^  The  author 
may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  Virginia  gentleman  of  family 
and  wealth  who  dabbled  in  literature  for  his  own  pleasure. 
His  younger  brother.  John  Esten  Cooke  (1830-1886).  came  to 
take  letters  more  seriously.  After  studying  law  he  turned 
his  attention  to  romance  writing,  and  in  1854  published  three 
works.  Leather  Stocking  and  Silk,  The  Virginia  Comedians, 
and  The  Youth  of  Jefferson,  The  scenes  of  all  these  are 
laid  in  Virginia  in  pre-Eevolutionary  times.  Leather  Stock- 
ing and  Silk  is  a  tale  of  pioneer  days  in  the  Shenandoah 
Valley.  The  Youth  of  Jefferson  is  a  story  of  college  life  at 
Williamsburg,  based  on  tradition  and  on  some  slight  hints 
in  the  early  letters  of  JefiEerson.  It  is  an  intensely  romantic 
story  of  love  and  gallantry,  in  which  the  heroine  dons  male 
attire  and  becomes  the  confidante  of  her  poor  and  bashful 
lover.  The  Virginia  Comedians,  often  ranked  as  the  au- 
thor's best  work,  is  another  romantic  tale  of  pre-Eevolution- 
ary times,  full  of  intense  devotion  on  the  part  of  handsome 
cavaliers  and  of  languishing  on  the  part  of  the  ladies.  The 
plot  is  poorly  organized,  especially  in  the  latter  part;  and 
an  attempt  to  gain  historic  interest  by  introducing  Patrick 
Henry  is  unsuccessful.  Phlegmatic  readers  of  the  present 
day  may  doubt  whether  this  artificial  romantic  society  ever 
existed,  but  it  is  the  society  which  tradition  loves  to  paint 
as  that  of  the  old  regime  in  the  South,  and  which  Cooke  was 
especially  fond  of  reproducing  in  his  novels.  He  wrote  several 
other  stories  in  the  same  strain,  though  after  the  war,  in 
which  he  served  with  distinction,  he  turned  more  to  scenes 
from  1860  to  1865,    Besides  fiction  he  wrote  a  life  of  Stone- 


^2  Amsbioan  Litbratubs 

wall  Jackson  and  other  biographical  and  Bemi-historical 
works.  He  was  one  of  the  most  prolific  writers  of  the  Old 
South  and  many  of  his  works  are  still  in  prini  All  are  char- 
acterized by  devotion  to  Virginia  and  by  the  air  of  the  old- 
time  romancer.  Haste  in  composition  and  the  inability  to 
construct  good  plots  account  for  the  fact  that  his  stories  do 
not  stand  higher  in  their  class. 

Virginia  was  also  the  native  state  of  Abram  J.  Byan  (1839- 
1886 j,  whose  wanderings  in  the  service  of  his  church  after- 
ward took  him  through  nearly  every  Southern 
lUmoffVirgmia     g^^     g^  entered  the  Boman  Catholic  priest- 
hood and  became  a  chaplain  in  the  Confed- 
erate army.     His  poems  stand  to  Boman  Catholicism  and 
devotion  to  the  South  as  the  more  sentimental  poems  of  the 
New  England  writers  do  to  puritanism  and  loyalty  to  tiie 
Union,  respectively.     They  have  a  swing  that  catches  the 
popular  ear  and  they  are  full  of  sincere  emotion.     Many 
are  on  distinctly  religious  subjects,  many  on  the  lost  cause. 
I  The  greatest  favorites  are  "The  Conquered  Banner/*  and 
/  "The  Sword  of  Lee/*  but  several  of  the  religious  poems  are 

really  better.      Mrs    Marprnrpf.  ^jTiyj^iTi   Prftflton    (1820-1^97^ 

was  a  native  of  Philadelphia,  but  lived  most  of  her  life  at 
Lexington,  Virginia,  and  became  closely  identified  with  the 
South.  Her  earliest  publication  was  a  novel,  Silverwood, 
but  she  was  more  successful  in  her  poetry,  of  which  she  pro- 
duced several  volumes,  Her  work  shows  some  influence  of 
Mrs.  Browning,  and  is  praised  by  her  admirers  for  grace, 
delicacy  of  finish,  purity  of  sentiment,  and  an  intense  religious 
element.  Her  poems  are  usually  free  from  blemishes  due  to 
bad  taste,  and  they  show  wide  interests  and  some  feeling;  but 
they  lack  positive  qualities  which  would  entitle  them  to  high 
rank.  Her  journals  and  letters  give  an  interesting  view  of 
experiences  during  the  war. 
It  is  difficult  to  identify  Edgar  Allan  Foe   (1809-1849) 


The  Central  Period  413 

with  any  section  of  the  country.  By  family  relationship  he 
was  a  Southerner,  but  he  was  bom  in  Boston,  received  much 

of  his  schooling  in  England,  and  did  his  most 
'^^^  ^  eflfective  literary  work  in  Philadelphia   and 

New  York.  He  was  not  so  much  a  cosmopolitan  as  a  man 
independent  of  place  and  environment.  If  any  section  can 
lay  claim  to  him  it  is  the  South,  and  if  any  state  of  the  South, 
Virginia. 

It  is  impossible  to  discuss  Poe's  position  as  a  writer  without 
some  reference  to  the  unfortunate  controversies  that  arose 

regarding  his  life  and  character.  When  he 
Rr«dffp^     died  in  1849  he  named  as  his  literary  executor 

the  Eeverend  Euf us  "W.  Griswold,  whose 
labors  as  editor  and  compiler  have  already  been  mentioned. 
The  relations  between  Poe  and  Griswold  had  been  strained, 
and  Poe  had  at  one  time  expressed  a  bitter  contempt  for 
Griswold  and  all  his  works;  but  he  apparently  believed  that 
there  had  been  a  complete  reconciliation.  A  few  days  after 
Poe^s  death  Griswold  published  in  the  New  York  "Tribune*' 
an  article  the  tone  of  which  may  be  inferred  from  the  state- 
ments that  Poe  "had  few  or  no  friends,^'  and  that  "There 
seemed  to  him  no  moral  susceptibility;  and  what  was  more 
remarkable  in  a  proud  nature,  little  or  nothing  of  the  true 
point  of  honor.''  Griswold  claimed,  and  it  is  charitable  to 
believe,  that  when  he  wrote  this  article  he  was  ignorant  of 
the  trust  which  Poe  had  imposed  upon  him.  When,  a  little 
later,  he  undertook  the  preparation  of  a  memoir  to  accompany 
Poe's  works,  he  felt  that  he  must  adhere  to  his  former  state- 
ments, and  he  painted  the  author's  character  blacker,  if 
possible,  than  before.  When  there  was  conflict  between  two 
authorities  as  to  a  fact,  or  two  interpretations  of  an  action, 
he  uniformly  chose  the  more  unfavorable ;  and  it  is  as  certain 
as  circumstantial  evidence  can  make  it  that  he  falsified  docu- 
ments to  support  his  case.    This  picture  of  depravity  appealed 


414  Amsbicak  Lttbratubb 

to  people  who  since  the  days  of  Byron  had  heen  fond  of 
associating  genius  with  the  diabolical^  and  in  spite  of  protests 
by  N.  P.  Willis  and  others  who  knew  Poe  it  was  long  accepted 
as  true.  At  length  the  reaction  set  in^  and  apologists  went 
to  ridiculous  extremes  in  an  attempt  to  prove  Poe's  character 
spotless.  Even  to-day  the  reader  is  sometimes  troubled  to 
decide  just  what  he  should  believe. 

It  was  not  altogether  Griswold^s  fault  that  hardly  half  the 
statements  in  his  memoir  are  correct.    Poe  himself,  whether 

through  mere  perversity,  or  for  some  other 
Poe's  Life  &  t^  j> 

reason,  gave  currency  to  many  wild  tales  re- 
garding his  life.  The  main  facts  are  now,  however,  well 
established.  He  was  bom  in  Boston,  where  his  parents  were 
playing  a  temporary  theatrical  engagement.  His  father, 
who  belonged  to  a  respectable  Southern  family,  had  been 
disowned  by  his  relatives  when  he  went  on  the  stage,  and  a 
year  later  had  married  an  actress.  Both  parents  died  when 
Edgar  was  very  young,  and  he  was  adopted  by  Mr.  Allan,  a 
merchant  of  Bichmond,  Virginia,  who  afterward  acquired 
considerable  wealth.  From  1815  to  1820  the  Allans  were 
abroad,  and  Edgar  was  in  a  boys'  school  in  the  suburbs  of 
London.  He  spent  one  year  at  the  University  of  Virginia, 
where  he  made  an  excellent  record  for  scholarship,  but  fell 
into  the  prevailing  student  dissipations.  A  quarrel  with 
Mr.  Allan  over  his  gambling  debts  prevented  his  return  to 
the  University,  and  later  led  to  his  leaving  home  and  to  his 
disinheritance.  He  is  said  to  have  enlisted  in  the  army,  and 
to  have  served  so  faithfully  that  friends  secured  a  discharge 
and  an  appointment  to  "West  Point.  Here  he  neglected  his 
military  duties  and  was  dismissed  in  1831.  Meanwhile  he  had 
published  Tamerlane  and  Other  Poems,  ixi  a  Bostonianj^J]^ 
1827;  Al  Aaraaf,  Tamerlane  and  Minor  Poems^  in  18^-2.;  and 
another  volume  of  Poems  in  1831.  After  many  vicissitudes  he 
attracted  the  attention  of  some  literary  men  of  Baltimore, 


The  Central  Pebiod  415 

who  secured  him  a  position  as  editor  of  the  "Southern  Lit-« 
erary  Messenger*^  at  Eichmond.     In  1836  he  married  his  \ 
cousin,  Virginia  Clemm,  a  girl  of  thirteen.    In  1837  he  left  | 
Sichmond  and  went  first  to  New  York  and  then  to  Phila-  ^ 
delphia,  where  he  was  editor  successively  of  "Burton's  Gentle- 
man's Magazine''  and  of  "Graham's  Magazine."     In  1844 
he  went  to  New  York,  and  hecame  connected  with  the  *^ve- 
ning  Mirror,"  and  afterward  was  editor  and  part  proprietor 
of  the  ^^roadway  Journal."    After  this  failed  he  wrote  for 
various  periodicals.    In  1847  his  wife  died.    In  1849  he  went 
South  to  further  a  project,  which  had  been  the  dream  of  his 
life,  for  foimding  an  independent  literary  magazine.    While 
in  Eichmond  he  met  Mrs.  Shelton,  an  old  sweetheart,  now 
a  widow,  and  it  is  supposed  that  they  became  engaged.    He 
started  back  to  arrange  his  affairs  in  N"ew  York,  but  died  in 
Baltimore.    Most  of  his  poems  and  prose  tales  were  published 
in  the  magazines  of  which  he  was  the  editor.    His  longest! 
tale,  "The  Narrative  of  Arthur  Gordon  Pym,"  the  first  part 
of  which  appeared  in  the  "Southern  Literary  Messenger," 
was  issued  in  book  form  in  1838.    Collections  of  tales  were 
published  in  1839  and  1845,  and  a  volume  of  poems  in  1845. 

It  is  harder  to  speak  of  Poe's  character  than  of  his  life, 
not  so  much  because  the  facts  are  unknown  as  because  it  is 

diflBcult  to  interpret  them.  Poe  was  addicted, 
probably  from  an  early  age,  to  the  occasional 
use  of  intoxicants.  His  nervous  temperament  seems  to  have 
been  such  that  a  slight  indulgence  was  productive  of  the 
worst  results.  He  was  not,  at  least  during  the  greater  part 
of  his  life,  an  habitual  drunkard;  but  his  weakness  often 
prevented  hun  from  securing  and  holding  regular  employ- 
ment. There  is  evidence  that  after  the  death  of  his  wife  he 
took  to  the  use  of  drugs ;  and  it  is  probable,  though  not  certain, 
that  his  death  in  Baltimore  was  the  result  of  a  debauch. 

In  his  xdc^tiQiis.  with  otbor  mm  Fq^  w^  uot  a  ^sint,  but 


416  Ahebicak  Lttebatube 

he  does  not  seem  to  have  shown  any  serious  moral  obliquity. 
The  worst  stories  told  by  Griswold  have  not  been  substanti- 
ated by  later  biographers,  and  his  letters  show  nothing  worse 
than  some  duplicity  in  criticising  friends  behind  their  backs. 
He  exerted  a  strong  influence  over  women,  and  in  his  later 
years  had  several  intense  "platonic  friendships/*  at  least  one  of 
which  perhaps  went  a  trifle  beyond  social  conventionalities; 
yet  there  is  no  suspicion  of  moral  wrongdoing.  Indeed,  both 
his  writings  and  his  life  show  a  remarkable  freedom  from  im- 
pure passion.  His  business  relations  have  been  the  subject  of 
detailed  discussion,  and  even  his  failure  to  return  a  borrowed 
volume  of  no  great  value  has  been  given  a  publicity  that  does 
not  always  attend  delinquencies  of  this  sort.  In  this  case 
the  discovery  of  a  letter  has  proved  him  guiltless,  not  only 
of  dishonesty,  but  of  undue  carelessness.  There  is  no  ques- 
tion, however,  that  he  sometimes  borrowed  small  sums  of 
money  that  he  was  unable  to  repay;  but  there  is  nothing  in 
these  transactions  to  show  deliberate  dishonesty.  Poe  was, 
indeed,  never  mercenary,  unless  in  his  engagement  to  Mrs. 
Shelton,  and  accounts  of  this  affair  are  confused  and  un- 
certain. On  the  other  hand  the  unselfishness  of  his  devotion 
to  his  wife  and  her  mother  is  shown  by  the  testimony  of  all 
who  knew  the  family,  and  by  numerous  letters  written  by 
Mrs.  Clemm  both  before  and  after  his  death. 

Poe^s  moral  weaknesses  were  imdoubtedly  the  chief  cause 
of  his  failure  in  life,  yet  this  does  not  mean  that  they  were 

greater  than  those  of  many  other  men.  Cir- 
lUAfortttnM  cumstances,  which  must  be  coimted  for  some- 
thing, were  against  him.  His  boyhood  was 
passed  in  the  expectation  of  a  comfortable  position  in  life, 
and  the  fact  that  it  was  his  own  vices  which  led  Mr.  Allan  to 
cast  him  off  did  not  fit  him  the  better  to  make  his  own  way. 
In  literature  he  was  in  advance  of  his  time.  Editorial  labors 
which^  even  though  interrupted  by  his  fits  of  intemperance^ 


The  Central  Period.  417 

would  now  be  worth  great  salaries,  brought  him  but  a  few 
dollars  a  week.  It  is  probable  that  his  poems  and  prose  tales 
now  yield  annually  to  many  publishers  who  acknowledge  no 
obligations  of  copyright  sums  larger  than  that  which  the 
author  received  from  them  during  his  entire  life.  Add  to 
the  lack  of  appreciation  the  fact  that  he  had  not  the  trick  of 
making  friends,  and  that  he  was  too  independent  to  worship 
the  literary  divinities  of  the  day,  and  we  have  an  explanation 
if  not  a  palliation  of  much  that  was  unfortunate  in  his  life. 
Though  a  man  of  the  finest  nervous  organization,  he  endured 
all  his  life  the  hardships  of  poverty.  Worst  of  all,  he  was 
forced  to  see  his  invalid  wife  suffer,  and  perhaps  die  the 
sooner  for  want  of  the  common  comforts  of  existence.  Had 
Poe  been  a  model  of  thrift  and  propriety  he  could  no  doubt 
have  eked  out  a  comfortable  existence  on  the  money  that  he 
might  have  earned.  But  if  his  talents  had  brought  him  half 
the  return  with  which  they  would  have  been  rewarded  a  few 
years  later,  we  should  hear  less  about  his  moral  faults. 

So  much  has  been  said  of  Poe^s  life  and  character  only  be- 
cause these  subjects  cannot  be  ignored  in  a  consideration  of 

his  works.    Though  he  revealed  himself  much 

We  W   kB  ^^^^  *^*^  ^^  ^^^^  supposed,  the  man  and  his 

works  have  always  been  inseparable  in  the 
popular  mind.  Critics,  too,  have  been  guilty  of  arguing  in 
a  circle,  assuming  that  the  writings  were  autobiographical 
because  they  dealt  with  sin  and  remorse,  and  then  substan- 
tiating the  popular  conception  of  the  author^s  character  by 
reference  to  his  writings. 

Poe  was  a  poet,  a  writer  of  prose  tales,  and  a  critic.    His 
criticism,  once  dismissed  lightly  and  held  to  be  little  more 

than  the  expression  of  bitter  prejudices,  is 
C  ^chm  ^^^  more  widely  read,  and  serves  as  the  best 

introduction  to  his  other  work.  As  a  critic 
he  belonged  to  the  school  of  Coleridge,  though  his  ideas  were 


418  Aherioak  Ltteratubb 

mostly  individual/  He__Btood  for  literature^as^aajirt,  and  for 
the  idea  pioperly  expressed  by  the  much  abused  phrase^  **ATt 
for  arf s  sake."  The  object  of  a  work  of  pure  literature 
should  be^  he  felt^  to  make  a  definite  pleasurable  impression  on 
the  mind>  and  this  impression  should  be  made  for  itself^  and 
not  for  any  ulterior  purpose  of  giving  information  or  incul- 
cating a  moral.  His  most  important  ideas  on  the  function 
of  criticism  in  general  are  set  forth  in  the  letter  prefixed  to 
the  Poems  of  1831.  His  views  of  the  poem  are  summarized 
in  his  popular  lecture  on  ^TThe  Poetic  Princiide,"  and  applied 
in  his  many  reviews  of  poems  by  other  authors.  His  theory 
of  the  prose  story  is  best  expressed  in  his  review  of  Haw- 
thorne's Twice-Told  Tales. 

It  is  sometimes  said^  uncharitably^  that  Foe  so  shaped  his 
critical  dicta  as  to  give  the  highest  place  to  the  only  kinds  of 
literature  that  he  could  himself  produce.  This  seems  to  be 
disproved  by  the  fact  that  in  *^A1  Aaraaf /'  published  when  he 
was  but  twenty,  and  itself  written  in  a  form  which  his  criti- 
cisms disapprove,  he  sets  forth  in  a  mystical  way  the  idea 
of  beauty  which  underlies  his  later  theory  of  poetry.  As  he 
developed  this  theory  he  defined  poetry  as  '^the  rhythmical 
creation  of  beauty/'  and  insisted  that  it  should  be  treated 
as  an  art,  not  as  the  result  of  insane  inspiration.  The  latter 
idea  underlies  ^^The  Philosophy  of  ,][jppipoRitiQn/^  an  essay 
in  which  he  professes  to  give,  with  absurd  detail,  his  method 
in  composing  *^The  Haven."  It  is  a  corollary  to  his  theory 
of  the  function  of  poetry  that  the  lyric  is  a  higher  form  than 
the  epic;  and,  indeed,  he  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  a  long 
poem  could  not  exist.  His  conception  of  the  short  prose  tale 
is  stated  less  definitely.  He  preferred  it  to  the  novel,  because 
it  allowed  greater  unity  and  definiteness  of  impression.  He 
considered  that  though  a  lower  form  than  the  poem,  it  had 
possibilities  which  the  poem  had  not,  since  it  admitted  im- 
pressions like  terror  and  mystery,  while  poetry  i^hould  be 


The  Gentkal  Pebiod  419 

limited  to  the  presentation  of  beauty.  In  regard  to  other 
forms  of  literature,  he  laid  down  few  general  principles.  A 
dramatic  poem  which  was  not  an  acting  drama  he  was  inclined 
to  consider  **a  flat  contradiction  in  terms.^' 

In  all  his  chief  critical  ideas  Foe  was  in  opposition  to  his^ 
most  popular  contemporaries.    New  England  was  dominant 

in  American  literature,  and  New  England  was 
Poe  uidHis^       represented  by  the  intellectual  didacticism  of 

Peter  Parley,  and  the  moral  didacticism  of 
Longfellow.  The  idea  of  inspiration  and  the  ^'divine  afflatus*' 
prevailed;  and  the  public  admired  the  poet  who  could  write 
his  poems  at  a  sitting,  rather  than  the  one  who  perfected  his 
work  by  years  of  polishing.  Considering  the  individuality  of 
his  ideas,  his  reviews  were  usually  fair  in  essentials.  There 
are  exceptions,  such  as  his  bitter  attack  on  Griswold,  and  he 
had  some  prejudices  that  influenced  much  of  his  critical 
work.  Toward  female  writers  he  was  likely  to  be  unduly 
charitable — ^he  gave  unstinted  praise  even  to  such  senti- 
mentalists as  L.  E.  L.  He  had  little  friendly  feeling  for 
the  New  Englanders,  partly  because  he  differed  so  widely 
from  their  ideals,  partly  because  it  irked  him  to  see  them  so 
popular  while  he  was  neglected,  partly  because  he  objected 
to  their  mutual  admiration  societies  and  log-rolling  criticism. 
It  was  probably  dislike  of  New  England  as  much  as  love  of 
the  South  that  led  him  to  pose  occasionally  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  Southern  ideas  and  institutions.  Still,  he  always 
ranked  Longfellow  at  the  head  of  American  poets,  except 
when  he  wavered  in  favor  of  Lowell;  and  there  is  hardly  a 
case  in  which  he  did  not  give  a  New  England  author  as  much 
praise  as  is  conceded  by  posterity. 

Poe's  contemporary  reputation  as  a  bitter  and  unfair  critic 
was  due  to  the  unpopularity  of  his  critical  standards,  to  his 
independence  and  lack  of  tact,  and  to  the  fact  that  he  allowed 
himself  to  ride  several  hobbies.     Chief  among  these  were 


430  Ambbioak  Lxteraturb 

grammar^  Tersification,  and  originality.  He  rarely  reviewed 
a  prose  work  without  quoting  a  list  of  expressions  that  were 
CriftieAiB  hhiM    granunatically   incorrect.     Usnally,   it  must 

be  admitted^  his  points  were  well  taken. 
The  same  cannot  be  said  of  his  criticisms  on  versification. 
When  he  trusted  his  ear  he  was  usually  rights  but  he  often 
preferred  to  base  his  criticisms  on  pedantic  theories  of 
technique.  His  favorite  hobby  was  originality.  He  admitted 
no  degrees  of  legitimate  indebtedness^  but  characterized 
every  case  of  similarity  as  plagiarism.  Longfellow  was 
the  object  of  his  most  persistent  and  most  unreasonable 
attacks  on  this  charge.  All  these  hobbies  touched  points 
on  which  writers  are  extremely  sensitive;  and  an  author's 
personal  feeling  toward  the  reviewer  was  influenced  not  by 
the  pages  of  discriminating  praise^  but  by  the  paragraph 
that  exposed  his  grammatical  blunders  and  bad  rhymes,  or 
passed  harsh  judgment  on  his  borrowings. 

Most  of  Poe's  own  writings  conform  strictly  to  his  theories. 
The  only  exceptions  in  his  verse  are  three  long  poems,  pub- 
lished in  early  youth.   "Tamerlane/*  which 
nafrlSnni         appeared   when   he   was   but   eighteen,    and 

which  according  to  his  own  statement  was 
written  much  earlier,  shows  plainly,  though  not  obtrusively, 
the  influence  of  Byron.  Only  an  occasional  favorite  word 
like  '^bodiless*'  suggests  the  later  verse.  ^^Al  Aaraaf/*  pub- 
lished two  years  later,  was  evidently  written  under  the  in- 
fluence of  Shelley.  It  is  mystic  and  highly  imaginative,  and 
contains  one  lyric  passage  of  rare  and  subtle  beauty.  It  was 
originally  prefaced  by  the  sonnet,  "ToScience/'  which 
shows  the  author^s  youthful  mastery  of  a  form  which  he 
afterward  rejected.  The  dramatic  fragment,  "Politian/* 
is  the  least  valuable  of  the  three,  and  shows  Poe  out  of  his 
element.  In  these  early  years  he  was  beginning  to  work  out 
the  wonderful  music  of  his  verse.     His  masters  were  Cole- 


The  Central  Pebiod  421 

ridge^  who  may  have  suggested  the  use  of  the  repetend,  and 
Shelley^  from  whom  he  gained  the  trick  of  nsing  a  special 
vocabulary  of  onomatopoetic  words.  Later  in  life  he  took 
an  occasional  hint  from  Mrs.  Browning,  and  perhaps  from 
others.  But  what  he  borrowed  he  used  in  his  own  way,  and 
he  deserves  the  credit  of  originating  a  new  effect  in  the  music 
of  English  verse.  The  attainment  of  perfection  was  a  mat- 
ter of  years.  Many  of  the  poems  as  we  now  have  them  were 
of  exceedingly  slow  growth.  Their  successive  stages  of  de- 
velopment may  be  seen  in  the  versions  published,  often  with 
change  of  title,  in  the  periodicals  of  which  the  author  was 
editor.  His  judgment  on  a  freshly  written  poem  was  by  no 
means  sure.  ^TThe  City  in  the  Sea/^  ^TTlalume/^  and  others 
contained,  as  first  published,  stanzas  that  are  almost  ridicu- 
lously weak.  But  he  rarely  reprinted  without  making 
changes,  and  nearly  every  change  is  an  improvement.  Among 
poems  that  date  from  the  earlier  time  with  relatively  few 
emendations  are  "Israfer  and  ^^To  Helen/'  ^^The  Sleeper." 
which  Poe  considered  his  best  poem,  was  changed  almost  out 
of  semblance  to  its  original  form.  The  poems  of  his  later 
years,  such  as  ^The  Baven/'  ^UMlimfi,^'  and  "AnnabeLIigfi^" 
were  of  course  subject  to  less  revision.  They  exemplify, 
however,  the  artistic  mastery  of  verse  which  he  at  last  at- 
tained. '^The  Eaven'*  probably  owes  as  much  of  its  popularity 
to  mere  effects  of  sound  as  to  the  thought  and  imagery. 
'TTlalume''  shows  the  author's  highest  attainment  in  the  pro- 
duction of  unusual  effects  by  the  use  of  the  repetend  and  ono- 
matopoetic words. 

The  subjects  of  the  poems  also  accord  with  the  author-s 
theories  of  the  nature  of  poetry.    Hisjdeals  limited  him jto 

the  lyric,  and  in  writing  lyrics  he  aimed  at 
Th  k^^baiT     *^®  presentation  of  the  highest  beauty.     In 

this,  he  tells  us,  there  is  always  a  touch  of 
sadness;  and  the  saddest  of  all  thoughts  are  occasioned  by 


428  Akxsioan  LrnsRATun 

the  death  of  a  beautifiil  woman.  This  theme  is  foand  in 
'*The  Eaven/'  "Annabel  Lee/'  ^^aliune/'  "To  Helen/'  '^To 
One  in  Paradise/'  "The  Sleeper/'  and  many  more.  In  "Isra- 
fel/'  "The  Haunted  Palace/'  "The  City  in  the  Sea/'  and 
others  the  element  of  sadness  is  present,  bnt  with  different 
associations.  Undoubtedly  the  range  of  ideas  in  the  poem 
was  limited  by  the  author's  conception  of  his  art.  War, 
happy  love,  and  other  usual  themes  of  the  lyric  are  wanting. 
The  thought,  too,  is  always  subdued  to  a  single  emotional 
effect.  It  is  not  true,  however,  as  is  sometimes  charged,  that 
thought  is  absent,  or  trivial.  Every  poem  except  "The 
Bells,"  which  is  little  more  than  a  rhythmical  exercise,  has  a 
definite  and  sufficient  content,  and  can,  if  anyone  desires, 
be  paraphrased  in  prose.  Even  ^HTlalume,"  which  some 
critics  have  pronounced  meaningless,  should  offer  no  diffi- 
culties of  interpretation  to  any  person  who  understands  the 
vocabulary  and  takes  up  the  poem  with  no  preconceived  idea 
of  its  autobiographical  significance. 

Poe's  first  published  tale  was  "The  .MS.  fminfl  jt^  a  Bottlp/* 
which  won  a  prize  offered  by  the  "Baltimore  Saturday  Visi- 
tor" in  1833.     The  others  were  published  at 
P^  Prose         Intervals,  most  of   them   in   the  periodicals 

with  which  he  was  connected.  Many  of  those 
that  are  included  in  his  collected  works  are  trash — ^the  per- 
functory output  of  a  journalist  who  had  to  fill  space.  Poe 
himself  is  not  responsible  for  the  preservation  of  these  pieces, 
and  their  mediocrity  should  not  affect  our  judgment  of  his 

I  better  work.  His  tales  which  are  really  excellent  exceed  in 
number  those  of  any  other  American  except  Hawthorne. 
All  these  better  stories,  with  the  exception  of  the  long  "Narra- 
tive of  Arthur  Gordon  Pym,"  conform  to  the  author's  critical 
theory.  This  restricted  him  to  a  single  definite,  effectjaook. 
jpression  in  each.  tale.  The  variety  of  effects,  though  much 
greater  than  in  the  poems,  was  limited.    He  handled  humor 


The  Central  Period  423 

with  only  moderate  success^  and  no  humorous  tale  deserves 
a  place  among  his  productions  of  first  rank.  He_succeeded 
best  in  the  representation  of  mystery^  horror^  and  terror. 
This  fact  suggests  comparisons  with  the  English  novelists  of 
terror,  with  the  German  romanticists,  and  with  Hawthorne. 
In  no  case  is  the  resemblance  very  clear.  He  differed  from 
Monk  Lewis  and  Mrs.  Badcliffe  in  making  prominent  not  so 
much  the  terrible  as  the  effect  of  terror  on  the  human 
mind.  The  resemblance  to  Hoffmann  and  the  German  roman- 
ticists is  plainer,  but  the  evidence  of  indebtedness  is  not  clear. 
It  seems  reasonably  certain  that  Foe  did  not  read  German, 
and  the  explanation  that  he  knew  Hoffmann  through  French 
and  English  translations  is  not  convincing.  Like  Hawthorne, 
he  delighted  in  psychological  analysis,  particularly  the  analy- 
sis of  a  morbid  or  terror-stricken  mind.  But  he  pictured  the 
mind  troubled  by  mental  disease  or  physical  suffering  rather 
than  by  moral  questionings. 

The  narrative  method  in  the  prose  tales  is  that  of  a  writer 
who  wishes  to  make  an  emotional  impression  rather  than  to 

recoimt  an  action  for  its  own  sake.  He  sue- 
J^'"  ceeds  admirably  in  creating  and  sustaining 

what  it  is  now  fashionable  to  call  "atmos- 
phere.'* To  aid  in  doing  this  he  often  employs  the  device  of 
a  colorless,  almost  an  impersonal,  narrator,  whose  comments 
serve  the  purpose  of  a  chorus,  but  who  takes  little  important 
part  in  the  action.  This  is  the  case  in  "The  Fall  of  the  House 
of_^Ush§r,*'  "The  Descent  into  the  Maelstroni/*  *T^.he  Murders 
in  the  Hue  Morgue/'  and  many  more.  Even  when  the  nar- 
rator has  a  significant  part  in  the  story,  as  in  "The^  Pit  and 
the_Pendulum''  and  ^Tjigeia/'  his  personal  traits  are  left 
vague  and  ill  defined,  and  the  reader  thinks  of  him  as  passive 
rather  than  active.  In  the  tales  which  have  a  more  definite 
and  everyday  setting  great  care  is  taken  to  secure  verisunili- 
tude  by  the  use  of  realistic  details  in  both  the  narrative  and 


424  AmEBIOAN  LiTEBATtTBB 

the  descriptiTe  passages.  This  is  shown  to  best  advantage  in 
the  first  part  of  'The  Narrative  of  Arthur  Gordon  Pj^*'  "The 
Gold-Bug/'  the  detective  tales>  and  some  of  the  newspaper 
hoaxes.  The  descriptions  are^  indeed^  sometimes  too  long 
and  detailed  to  suit  modem  taste;  and  the  same  may  be  said 
of  the  expository  passages  in  which^  in  a  few  tales^  the  author 
airs  his  philosophy.  Usually^  however,  the  tales  are  excel- 
lent in  unity  and  proportion. 

A  careful  student  of  the  stories  soon  notices  the  frequent 

repetition  of  a  few  ideas.    The  thought  of  a  partial  sentience 

_^^_  of  the  body  after  death,  or  at  least  of  an  in- 

filj^f  dissoluble  relation  between  the  soul  and  the 

body,  is  common,  as  in  the  "Colloquy  of  Monoa 
jandJCTna**  and  in  "MoreUji,*'  With  this  may  be  connected  the 
thought  of  premature  burial,  found  in  "The  Fall  of  the 
House  of  Usher,**  and  referred  to  in  other  tales.  Eeference 
to  the  walling  up  of  a  dead  body  is  found  in  "The  Cask  of 
Amontillaip**  and  "The.  Black  Caty*  and  in  a  slightly  differ- 
ent form  in  "The  Tell-Tale  Heart.**  These  and  a  few  other 
ideas  recur  constantly. 

This  repetition  of  ideas  makes  any  satisfactory  dassificar 
tion  of  the  tales  difficult.    There  is  great  variety  of  subject 

and  treatment,  but  tales  that  differ  most 
PoSiiSm         widely  in  other  respects  are  often  associated 

through  the  recurrence  of  some  favorite  idea. 
A  few  overlapping  groups  readily  suggest  themselves.  The 
tales  in  which  horror  is  painfully  obtrusive,  like  "The  Black 
Cat,**  "Berenice.**  and  "The  Facts  in  the  Case  of  M.  Valdc- 
jnar,**  deserve  little  attention.  They  are  powerful,  and  they 
develop  some  of  Poe*s  favorite  conceptions,  but  they  indicate 
a  partial  lapse  of  taste,  and  it  is  the  author's  misfortune  that 
they  are  so  widely  known.  In  "The  Fall  of  the  House  of 
Usher,**  "The  Pit  and  the  Pendulum,**  "The  Tell-Tale 
Heart,**  "The  Imp  of  the  Perverse/*  and  "The  Cask  of  Amon- 


The  Central  Period  425 

tillado'*  the  portrayal  of  horror  is  subsidiary  to  the  study  of 
its  effects  on  the  mind,  and  the  story  is  more  artistic.  ^^The 
Mjgguejafjhe  Red  DeatV^  is  still  more  unreal,  and  connects 
itself  with  the  rhapsodies  [^Shadow^^  and  ^^Silence/^  which  are 
prose  trenching  on  the  domain  of  poetry.  In  "Ligeia*'  and 
to  a  slighter  extent  in  "Morella''  and  ^^Eleonora^^  the  author 
carries  us  out  of  all  place  and  time,  and  deals  with  the  very 
mysteries  of  existence. 

It  seems  hard  to  believe  that  the  same  mind  that  conceived 
'TEiigeia"  planned  also  "The  Gold-Bug,''  "The  Murders  in 

the  Rue  Morgue,''  "The  Mystery  of  Marie 

Poe;8  Stories  of    Eog|t."  and  "The  Purloined  Letted"     The 

Ratiocination      *■    '^•""^  • ■ ' 

first  of  these  is  a  story  of  the  finding  of  buried 

treasure  by  means  of  a  memorandum  in  cjrpher,  and  connects 
itself  on  the  one  hand  with  tales  of  adventure  like  the  "Nar- 
rative of  Arthur  Gordon  Pym,"  and  on  the  other  hand  with 
the  last  three  named.  These  three  have  the  distinction  of 
being  the  first  detective  stories,  and  in  spite  of  countless 
imitations  for  more  than  sixty  years  they  are  still  unexcelled. 
They  represent  a  comparatively  late  period  in  Poe's  literary 
work.  While  he  was  in  Philadelphia  he  published  a  paper 
on  methods  of  secret  writing,  and  for  a  time  amused  him- 
self by  reading  all  cjrphers  sent  him.  It  was  about  the  same 
time  that  he  began  to  write  his  tales  of  ratiocina- 
tion. The  scenes  of  these  three  stories  are  laid  in  Paris,  and 
all  have  the  same  hero,  M.  Dupin.  The  thesis  of  "The  Mur- 
ders in  the  Rue  Morgue"  is  that  the  more  mysterious  the 
aspect  of  a  crime,  the  more  readily  should  the  facts  be  discov- 
ered by  an  acute  reasoner.  "The  Purloined  Letter"  presents 
the  converse  of  this  proposition,  that  the  simplest  things  are 
the  most  puzzling  to  ordinary  minds.  In  "The  Mystery  of 
Marie  RogSt"  the  author  dealt  with  a  crime  that  had  been  a 
short  time  before  the  sensation  of  New  York.  He  gave  a 
French  form  to  the  name  of  the  victim,  Mary  Rogers,  ex- 


J 

^ 


X 


426  Ambrioan  LrrE&ATUBB 

changed  Parifi  for  New  York;  and  the  Seine  for  the  Hudson^ 
and  endeavored  to  have  M.  Diipin  settle^  from  information 
famished  by  the  newspapers^  the  responsibility  for  a  crime 
which  had  ba£9ed  the  police.  His  reasoning  is  plausible,  and 
it  is  said  that  later  revelations  showed  the  truth  of  his  theory; 
but  the  necessity  of  adhering  to  fact,  and  of  sifting  much 
irrelevant  testimony  to  show  its  worthlessness  spoils  the  pro- 
portion of  the  story. 

This  union  of  the  intellectual,  the  ratiocinative  faculty 
with  the  highly  imaginative  is  the  most  distinctive  character- 
istic of  Poe's  genius.    It  was  his  own  theory 

TVo-fflSl  ^^^  *  mathematician  could  not  reason  well 

unless  he  were  something  of  a  poet.  Certainly 
his  imaginative  faculty  helped  in  the  production  of  his  in- 
tellectual tales;  and  his  intellectuality  doubtless  aided  as 
much  in  the  creation  of  his  poetry  and  his  imaginative  stories. 
The  two  together  gave  him  an  insight  that  accomplished  what 
he  could  have  done  with  neither  alone.  This  was  strikingly 
illustrated  by  his  prediction,  from  the  first  few  chapters,  of 
the  outcome  of  '^Bamaby  Budge.''  It  is  shown,  also,  in  his 
article  on  the  automatic  chess  player,  and  in  many  of  his 
critical  works.  In  some  of  his  essays  he  called  to  his  aid  both 
intellect  and  imagination  in  forming  conjectures  of  the 
things  that  lie  beyond  human  knowledge.  The  prose  rhap- 
sodies, the  mystical  tales  like  '^igeia,''  and  the  late  'Uprose 
poem*'  ^^Eureka''  all  show  how  persistently  he  thought 
on  the  great  mysteries  of  existence.  It  was  probably  this 
habit  of  questioning  the  unknowable  that  led  him  to  the 
production  of  those  tales  that  are  too  uncanny  and  weird. 
*  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  these  are  only  theatrical  at- 
tempts at  effect,  or  that  they  have  no  relation  to  life.  Poe 
was  forever  thinking  about  life,  and  about  its  deepest  prob- 
^lems.  like  any  journalist,  he  sometimes  wrote  under  com- 
pulsion, and  to  meet  the  popular  demand.     He  lacked 


The  Central  P^biod  427 

thoiDUgh  scholarly  training,  though  he  was  widely  read,  and 
he  sometimes  attempted  to  conceal  his  limitations  by  tricks 
like  those  which  he  exposed  in  ^^ow  to  Write  a  Blackwood 
Article/^  But  when  he  was  at  his  best  he  was  not  a  charla- 
tan, but  a  conscious  artist,  using  the  tricks  of  his  art  only  to 
secure  the  greater  j&delity  to  truth. 

Foe's  genius  was  recognized  to  some  extent  before  his  death, 
but  full  appreciation  of  his  worth  has  been  a  matter  of  slow 
^       -.    .  growth.    It  is  the  misfortune  of  such  a  writer 

that  his  more  obvious  and  less  subtle  work 
attracts  most  attention.    "The  Eaven^'  is  still  the  most  popu- 
lar of  his  poems,  and  "The  Black  Caf'  is  at  least  as  well 
known  as  any  of  his  tales.    It  was  also  his  misfortune  to  be 
worshipped  by  a  cult,  against  the  extravagant  claims  of  which 
saner  readers  felt  bound  to  protest.    He  has,  however,  won 
the  praise  of  the  most  conservative  critics,  and  many  later 
writers  have  done  him  the  honor  of  imitation.     Swinburne, 
Bossetti,  and  even  Tennyson  were  influenced  by  his  verse; 
Stevenson's  "Treasure  Island''  shows  obvious  similarity  to 
"The  Gold-Bug" ;  Jules  Verne  took  the  hint  for  some  of  his 
extravagant  sketches  from  the  newspaper  hoaxes;  de  Mau- 
passant and  a  host  of  short  story  writers  in  France,  England, 
and  America  have  acknowledged  him  as  master ;  and  the  in- 
numerable writers  of  detective  stories  have  modeled  their 
work  on  "The  Murders  in  the  Eue  Morgue"  and  *'The  Fur- 
loined  Letter."    The  fact  that  his  works  have  given  sugges- 
tion's to  such  widely  different  writers  is  a  suflScient  answer) 
to  the  remark  sometimes  made  that  Foe's  range  is  narrow.'. 
It  is  a  just  criticism  that  his  range,  though  broad,  did  not '; 
include  the  more  common  forms  and  themes — ^the  narrative  i 
poem,  the  love  lyric,  the  love  tale,  and  the  presentation  of  ' 
commonplace  truth  in  prose  and  verse.    These  are  the  stuff 
of  which  most  literature  is  made,  and  the  writer  who  lacks 
them  has  a  restricted  audience,  and  a  somewhat  iRTQaj^t^C  tiQld 


428  American  Literature 

on  all  readen  who  have  strong  human  sympathies ;  yet  there 
is  much  else  in  literature.  With  all  his  limitations  Poe  has 
attained  a  foreign  reputation  that  is  probably  more  secure 
than  that  of  any  other  American  author^  and  for  the  last 
fifty  years  has  been  steadily  gaining  in  recognition  at  home. 
South  of  Virginia  the  only  important  literary  center  was 
GharlestoiL     Here  were  established  from  time  to  time  a 

number  of  short-lived  magazines^  and  here 
w!MH****miiii  ^^^^  found  several  writers  of  national  repu- 
tiUntnm  tatlou.     Thc  most  important  of  these  was 

William  Qilmore  Simms  (1806-1870).  He  was 
a  native  of  Charleston.  When  he  was  a  mere  child  his  mother 
died,  and  his  father  failed  in  business  and  went  West,  leaving 
him  in  the  charge  of  his  grandmother.  After  a  brief  and 
unsatisfactory  schooling  he  became  a  drug  clerk  as  a  prelimi-> 
nary  to  the  study  of  medicine.  By  the  time  he  was  eighteen, 
however,  he  abandoned  this  occupation  for  the  study  of  law. 
After  a  visit  to  his  father  in  Mississippi,  where  he  saw  some- 
thing of  frontier  life,  he  practiced  his  profession  in  Charles- 
ton for  a  year,  and  then  turned  to  literature.  Between  1827 
and  1832  he  was  editor  of  a  magazine  and  of  a  newspaper 
which  successively  failed,  wrote  tales  and  miscellaneous 
articles  for  the  magazines,  and  published  five  volumes  of 
verse.  The  last  of  these  was  his  most  ambitious  poetical 
fittempt,  Atalantis.  He  went  to  New  York  to  see  it  through 
the  press,  and  began  life-long  friendships  with  Bryant  and 
several  other  norttiem  men  of  letters.  In  1833  he  brought 
out  his  first  romance,  Martin  Fdber,  and  a  collection  of 
short  tales.  The  former  is  said  to  have  been  a  harrowing 
story  of  crime,  based  partly  on  fact.  The  author  afterward 
excluded  it  from  his  collected  works.  Ouy  RiverSy  a  story  of 
wild  life  on  the  frontier,  was  issued  in  1834,  and  jTfte  Yen^ 
assee^the  first  of  his  historical  tales,  in  1835. 

From  this  time  on  Simms's  literary  activities  .were  too 


The  Central  Period  429 

ntLmerous  to  mention  in  detail.    He  worked  indef  atigably  and 
with  wonderful  rapidity.     Before  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil 

War  he  had  been  associated  editorially  with 
^°?J™15^         half  a  dozen  periodicals,  and  had  published  a 

dozen  or  more  volumes  of  verse,  two  dozen 
volumes  of  fiction,  two  dramas,  and  many  miscellaneous  works, 
besides  a  good  share  of  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  magazine  / 
articles  which  his  biographer  was  able  to  identify.  Meanwhile  / 
his  first  wife  had  died,  and  he  had  married  a  lady  of  some  for- 
tune, and  lived  on  her  father's  plantation  near  Charleston. 
He  made  frequent  visits  to  New  York,  where  most  of  his 
books  were  published,  and  during  part  of  the  year  he  lived 
in  Charleston.  Here,  in  the  fifties,  he  became  the  center  of  i 
a  group  of  literary  men,  most  of  them  younger  than  him- 
self, which  included  the  poets  Timrod  and  Hayne.  Although 
after  his  second  marriage  he  was  in  somewhat  easier  circum- 
stances financially,  his  life  was  not  wholly  pleasant.  Charles- 
ton society,  the  most. exclusive  in  the  South,  gave  little  recog- 
nition to  the  former  drug  clerk.  His  health  began  to  fail;  he 
suffered  affliction  in  the  illness  and  death  of  several  of  his 
children;  his  home  was  partly  destroyed  by  fire;  and  he 
worried  greatly  over  the  political  troubles  that  were  agitat- 
ing  his  state.  Long  before  the  outbreak  of  the  war  he  had 
become  a  strong  secessionist,  and  a  believer  in  the  beneficence 
of  slavery.  He  advocated  extreme  measures,  and  when  the 
culmination  came  took  great  interest  in  the  attack  on  Sum- 
ter, and  made  suggestions  for  fortifications,  some  of  which 
were  adopted.  Throughout  the  war  he  continued  to  write, 
but  as  his  connection  with  Northern  publishing  houses  was 
broken  off  he  printed  only  in  Southern  periodicals.  The 
close  of  the  struggle  left  him  in  poverty  and  broken  in  health. 
His  wife  had  died  during  the  war.  His  library  and  the  rest 
of  the  buildings  on  his  estate  had  been  burned.  He  could 
support  himself  only  by  incessant  writing.    The  kind  of  fie- 


430  AHERtOAK  LiTEBAtUltfi 

tion  which  he  produced  was  going  out  of  fashion  and  he  was 
forced  to  contribute  stories  to  cheap  Northern  periodicals^  or 
to  send  his  work  to  ambitious  Southern  magazines  which  were 
unable  to  pay.  Soon  after  the  war  he  renewed  his  friend- 
ship with  many  of  the  Northerners  whom  he  had  known,  and 
some  of  them  were  able  to  make  life  easier  for  him  without 
wounding  his  pride. 

As  has  been  seen,  Simms  tried  most  forms  of  writing  in 
prose  and  verse.    He  began  with  verse,  and  it  is  said  that  he 

Simm.'.  Pd«n.    ^^''^y^  esteemed  his  poems  more  highly  than 

his  prose.  His  readers  disagreed  with  him, 
however,  and  this  fact,  though  it  disappointed  him,  led  him 
to  give  more  of  his  time  to  fiction.  Most  of  his  poetry  was 
written  before  1850.  His  earliest  verses  show  considerable 
influence  of  Byron  and  Wordsworth.  His  longest  poem, 
Atalantis;  a  Story  of  the  Sea,  was  evidently  written  after 
reading  Comus.  The  persons  of  the  poem  include  the  King 
of  the  Sea-Demons,  a  Princess  of  the  Nereids,  a  Zephyr- 
Spirit,  and  several  flesh  and  blood  Spaniards.  The  poem 
opens  with  the  princess  enchanted  upon  a  magical  island 
raised  by  the  King  of  the  Sea-Demons,  but,  like  Milton's 
heroine,  resolute  in  mind.  The  plot  is  resolved  when  one  of 
the  Spaniards,  sole  survivor  of  a  shipwreck,  becomes  her 
lover  and  rescues  her  magic  wand.  Interspersed  throughout 
the  blank  verse  dialogue  are  some  of  the  author's  most  melodi- 
ous or  most  nearly  melodious  lyrics.  The  other  poems  show 
considerable  variety,  but  none  of  them  is  of  great  importance. 
Simms's  best  work  is  his  fiction.  Even  this  varies  greatly 
in  kind  and  quality.     Some  of  the  least  known  romances 

are  psychological  studies  influenced  by  God- 
?J2V  win.    Pelayo  and  Count  Julian  are  based  on 

romantic  incidents  in  Spanish  history,  and 
The  Damsel  of  Darien  on  the  adventures  of  Balboa.  The 
short  stories  were  also  in  a  variety  of  manners  and  on  a  va- 


Thb  Central  Period  431 

riety  of  subjects.  JThe^  twounportant  groups  of  his  romances 
are  those  that  deal  with  frontier  life,  and  those  that  are 
based  on  events  in  the  colonial  and  revolutionary  history  of 
the  South.  In  these  he  was  trying  to  do  for  his  section  of 
the  country  what  Cooper  had  done  for  the  North.  The  border 
romances  are  tales  of  outlawry  and  crime,  exciting,  but  with 
little  artistic  merit.  The  chief  are  Ouy  Rivers,  Richard 
Hardis,  Border  Beagles,  Beauchamp,  and  CharlemonL  The 
scenes  of  the  first  four  are  laid  in  Georgia,  Alabama,  Mis- 
sissippi, and  Kentucky  respectively.  More  important,  on 
the  whole,  are  the  colonial  and  revolutionary  tales.  These 
include  The  Yemassee,  The  Partisan,  Mellichampe,  The 
Kinsman  (renamed  The  Scout),  Katherine  Walton,  The 
Sword  and  the  Distaff  (renamed  Woodcraft),  The  Forayers, 
Eutaw,  and  others,  some  of  them  published  only  in  magar 
zines.  The  first  of  the  series.  The  Yemassee,  is  usually  con- 
ceded to  be  the  best.  The  scene  is  in  South  Carolina  during 
the  colonial  time,  arid  the  story  is  one  of  Indian  warfare, 
with  the  usual  love  incidents.  The  characters,  especially  the 
Indians,  are  well  portrayed,  the  descriptions  of  natural 
scenery  are  true  and  83rmpathetic,  and  the  fights  are  exciting. 
Though  the  reader  is  many  times  reminded  of  The  Spy  and 
The  Last  of  the  Mohicans  the  book  is  far  more  than  an 
imitation. 

Simms's  two  dramas,  '^Norman  Maurice*'  and  "Michael 
Bonham,**  and  his  "dramatic  essay,*'  "Benedict  Arnold,'*  are 

far  more  crude  than  either  his  poems  or  his 
Miscellaneoiif  romances;  at  least  their  form  makes  their 
Work  crudities  more  noticeable.     The  blank  verse 

tragedy,  "Norman  Maurice,"  in  which  the 
hero,  a  lawyer  and  politician,  triumphs  over  all  sorts  of  dia- 
bolical enemies  and  becomes  United  States  Senator  from 
Missouri,  reads  in  parts  like  a  burlesque  on  a  melodrama,  and 
it  is  hard  to  realize  that  it  is  serious  work,  written  when  the 


432  Ahebican  Litebatube 

atithor  was  in  his  prime.  His  miscellaneous  works  ineltide  popa- 
lar  biographies  of  Marion,  Captain  John  Smith,  the  Chevalier 
Bayard,  and  Nathanael  Greene,  and  treatises  on  the  history 
^and  geography  of  South  Carolina.  He  also  edited  several 
apocryphal  Shakespeare  plays,  and  in  1867  a  volnme  of 
Yfar  Poetry  of  the  South. 

Temperament,  lack  of  critical  training,  financial  necessi- 
ties, and  indeed  all  circumstances  conspired  to  make  Simms 

a  hasty  and  careless  writer.    He  had  all  the 
^J""^  literary    faults   of   his    Northern   prototype. 

Cooper,  and  much  less  of  genius.     Still,  he 
deserves  a  place  among  American  writers  of  romance,  not 
j  merely  as  the  leading  representative  of  his  class  in  the  South, 
i  but  as  the  author  of  several  works  that  show  more  than  a 
fair  mastery  of  the  difficult  art  of  planning  an  exciting  nar- 
rative. 

Among  the  younger  men  of  letters  who  gathered  about 
Simms  were  Henry  Timrod  and  Paul  Hamilton  Hayne. 

Both  were  natives  of  Charleston  of  nearly  the 
^"'^  same  age,  and  though  they  differed  widely  in 

social  position  they  were  friends  from  boyhood.  JQasrod 
1829-1867)  was  of  German  ancestry,  the  son  of  a  book- 
binder who  sometimes  made  verses,  and  who  achieved  a  lit- 
tle military  distinction  in  the  Seminole  War.  The  death 
of  the  father  left  the  family  poor,  and  Henry  was  unable 
to  complete  his  course  at  the  University  of  Georgia.  He 
studied  law,  but  never  practiced,  and  for  some  time  served 
as  tutor  in  a  private  family.  At  the  opening  of  the  Civil  War 
he  enlisted,  but  was  obliged  to  leave  the  service  on  account 
of  ill  health.  He  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  act  as 
war  correspondent,  and  edited  a  paper  at  Columbia,  South 
Carolina.  When  this  city  was  burned  he  lost  all  his  property. 
Prom  this  time  until  his  death  in  1867  his  life  was  one  of 
privation  and  suffering.    He  was  already  afflicted  with  con- 


The  Cbntkal  Pbbiod  438 

sumption^  and  he  seems  to  have  been  of  an  impractical  tom 
of  mind^  and  unable  to  make  the  best  of  circumstances. 

Timrod's  first  volume  of  verse  was  published  in  Boston  in 
1860^  and  was  praised  as  a  work  of  promise.    In  1873  his 

friend  Hayne  collected  his  works  and  pub- 
lished them  with  a  memoir.  The  poems  by 
which  he  is  best  remembered  were  written  during  and  after 
the  war.  Several  of  them  are  of  the  emotional  sort  which 
consists  in  praise  of  his  state  and  objurgation  of  her  enemies. 
They  have  fire  and  lyric  swing;  but  a  comparison  of  his 
*^Carolina'*  and  Whittier^s  "Massachusetts  to  Virginia/' 
poems  with  about  the  same  proportion  of  intellectual  and 
emotional  elements^  will  show  the  lack  of  weight  behind  the 
Southern  fierceness.  "The  Cotton  Boll/'  one  of  his  best 
poems^  has  fine  melodious  passages^  but  seems  less  success- 
ful if  it  is  read  as  a  whole.  Some  of  his  personal  poems 
and  poems  of  nature  show  an  ear  for  verse  harmonies  and 
a  lyric  gift  The  bulk  of  his  excellent  work  is,  however, 
small. 

Paul  Hamilton  Hayne  (1830-1886)  came  of  an  old  South 
Carolina  family.     He  was  educated  at  the  College  of  South 

Carolina  in  his  native  city,  and  then  studied 
l^til  Hamilton     j^^^ .  ^^^  ^xe  soon  abandoned  his  profession  for 

letters.  He  was  connected  editorially  with! 
Charleston  periodicals.  Like  Timrod,  he  served  in  the  war] 
until  his  health  failed;  and  like  him,  he  lost  his  library  and 
his  home  by  fire.  He  was  left  almost  penniless,  and  removed  to 
a  few  acres  of  land  in  the  pine  barrens  near  Augusta,  Georgia. 
Here  he  remained  until  his  death,  supporting  himself  mainly 
by  writing.  He  published  volumes  of  poems  in  1865,  1867, 
1859,  1872,  and  1876,  and  a  collected  edition  in  1882.  In 
prose  he  wrote  the  lives  of  his  uncle,  Bobert  Young  Hayne, 
and  of  Hugh  S.  Lagar6,  and  many  magazine  articles.  At 
the  time  of  his  death  he  left  a  romanqe  unfiixished.    As  a 


434  Ambbioan  Ltteratubb 

poet  Hayne  was  influenced  by  the  more  musical  English  mas- 
ters— ^by  Chaucer  and  Tennyson^  and  to  some  extent  by  Foe. 
The  bulk  of  his  yerse  is  considerable,  and  much  of  it  gives 
the  impression  of  having  been  written  too  easily.  When  he 
took  pains  and  was  at  his  best  he  attained  to  charming  musi- 
cal effects.  Almost  all  his  poems  are  short.  During  the  war 
he  wrote  patriotic  lyrics  that  were  intense,  but  not  so  bitter 
•as  those  of  his  friend  Timrod.  In  later  years  he  became 
reconciled,  in  a  manly  and  honorable  way,  to  the  new  order, 
and  while  he  never  lost  his  devotion  to  the  South,  he  wrote 
many  poems  that  tended  to  a  better  understanding  between 
the  sections  of  the  country.  His  writings,  like  his  life,  show 
the  sweetness  of  his  temper,  his  bravery  in  adversity,  and  his 
loyalty  to  his  principles  and  his  friends.  In  feeling  for  the 
subtle  tones  of  verse  he  was  inferior  to  Timrod,  and  he  has 
received  less  praise ;  but  it  is  doubtful  if  he  was  not  as  true  a 
poet,  and  a  better  representative  of  what  was  best  in  the 
South. 

It  is  only  by  the  fact  of  residence  and  choice  of  subjects 
that  Albion  W.  Tourgee  (1838-1905)  is  classed  with  South- 
em  writers.    He  was  bom  in  Ohio,  attended 
Sri«f^^*"    Eochester    University,    and    served    in    the 

Union  »rmy  during  the  Civil  War.  In 
1865  he  settled  in  North  Carolina,  where  he  held  various 
offices,  and  as  judge  of  the  superior  court  was  concerned  in 
breaking  up  the  secret  political  organization  known  as  the 
Ku-Klux-Klan.  After  1881  he  lived  in  Pennsylvania  and 
New  York,  and  held  appointments  in  the  United  States  con- 
sular service.  His  first  novel,  Toinette,  a  study  of  social  con- 
ditions at  the  South,  made  little  stir;  but  Figs  and  Thistles, 
A.  FooVs  Errand^  and  Bricks  Without  Straw,  all  published 
in  1879-80,  and  all  dealing  with  Southern  social  and  political 
conditions,  were  widely  read.  Later  works  touching  on  the 
same  theme^  among  th^m  Hot  PlomhgreSf  and  An  Appeal  to 


The  Central  Period  435 

CoBsar,  were  less  successful.  His  best  work,  A  FooVs  Errand, 
is  based  in  part  on  his  own  experiences,  and  contains  inci- 
dents said  to  have  been  revealed  in  the  investigation  of  the 
Ku-Klux-Klan.  It  is  the  obviously  partisan  work  of  a  man 
who  wished  to  be  fair,  but  who  could  not  overcome  his  preju- 
dices. Some  of  the  situations  are  strong  and  are  told  with 
considerable  power.  Unlike  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,  with  which, 
in  the  days  of  its  popularity,  it  was  sometimes  compared,  it 
lacked  the  art  and  the  insight  necessary  to  give  it  perma- 
nence. Dr.  Frank  0.  Ticknor  f  1822-1874y.  a  physician  and 
farmer  of  Columbus,  Georgia,  is  remembered  as  the  author 
of  a  number  of  smooth  lyrics,  with  a  faint  touch  of  archaic 
simplicity,  and  some  restraint.  His  best  known  poem,  ^^itfle 
GiflBn  of  Tennessee/*  is  said  to  be  based  on  fact.  Most  of 
his  best  pieces  were  written  during  the  war,  but  they  deal 
with  home,  friends,  nature,  and  love  of  children,  rather  than 
with  military  achievements.  They  were  not  published  in 
book  form  until  1879. 

With    the    Southwestern    states    were    associated    several 
writers  of  Northern  birth  who  became  Southerners  both  by 

residence  and  by  sjrmpathies.  William  Wil- 
SSiSS  ^'  ^berforce  Lord  (1819-1907).  a  native  of  New 

York,  was  many  years  rector  of  an  Episco- 
palian church  at  Vicksburg,  Mississippi,  and  during  the  war 
was  chaplain  in  the  Confederate  urmy.  He  published  a 
volume  of  Poems,  Christ  in  Hades,  and  Andre,  a  tragedy. 
His  work  is  imitative,  especially  of  Wordsworth.  Albert 
Pike  (1809-1891)  was  bom  in  Boston,  attended  Harvard 
college,  and  taught  for  a  time  in  New  England.  In  1831 
he  went  to  the  far  Southwest,  and  after  various  adventures 
returned  to  Arkansas,  where  he  became  an  editor  and  a  law- 
yer. He  served  in  the  Mexican  War  and  in  the  Confederate 
army.  After  the  close  of  the  Civil  War  he  removed  to 
Memphis  and  then  to  Washington.    His  twelve  '^ymns  to 


436  Ambrigan  Literatubb 

the  Gods/'  eight  of  which  were  published  in  Blackwoods' 
Magazine^'  in  1839^  were  written  while  he  was  still  a  school 
teacher  in  New  England.  They  are  rhetorical  apostrophes 
to  the  heathen  deities,  and  show  the  influence  of  Coleridge 
and  Keats,  but  are  well  sustained,  and  give  promise  of  better 
things.  The  author's  removal  from  literary  associations  and 
his  interest  in  other  activities  probably  account  for  his 
failure  to  fulfill  this  promise.  His  Prose  Sketches  and 
Poems,  written  in  the  Southwest,  in  the  preface  of  which  he 
says,  'It  is  some  time  since  I  have  seen  the  works  of  any  poet,'' 
are  naturally  more  interesting  for  subject  matter  than  for  ar- 
tistic excellence.  He  is  best  remembered  as  the  author  of 
^T)ixie"  and  a  few  other  short  poems,  among  them  an  '^Ode 
to  the  Mocking-Bird,"  modelled  to  some  extent  on  Keats's 
"Ode  to  the  Nightingale."  Mary  Ashlev  Townsend  (1832- 
22m)  >  bom  in  New  York,  and  after  her  marriage  a  resi- 
dent of  New  Orleans,  wrote  under  the  pen  name  of  Xariffa^ 
Her  humorous  sketches  in  prose  are  forgotten,  but  her  mildly 
sentimental  poems  hold  for  her  a  place  in  the  anthologies. 

VIII.  Western  Weitbbs 

In  the  early  years  of  the  period  under  discussion,  before 
railroads  had  bound  together  the  East  and  the  West,  the 

-Ohio  valley  continued  to  maintain  a  fairly 

W«rt«n  Writers  ^®^^*®   gro^P   or   school   of   writers.     Like 

Flint,  Hall,  and  other  pioneers  who  were 
noticed  in  the  preceding  chapter,  these  men  were  most  of 
them  bom  in  the  East,  but  entered  enthusiastically  into  the 
spirit  of  the  West.  They  wrote  on  Western  subjects,  edited 
and  contributed  to  Western  periodicals,  and  often  had  their 
books  printed  by  Western  publishers. 

George  D.  Prentice  .(180^il^.TPJ  ^^  ^  precocious  Con- 
necticut boy  who  was  graduated  from  Brown  and  became  an 
editor  at  Hartford.    In  1830  he  left  his  paper  in  charge  of 


The  Central  PIbbiod  437 

a  promising  young  contributor,  John   Greenleaf   Whittier, 
and  went  to  Kentucky  to  gather  material  for  a  life  of  his 

political  idol,  Henry  Clay.  He  was  induced 
^^tice^'  ^  remain,  and  continued  until  his  death  as 

editor  of  the  ^^Louisville  Journal/^  afterward 
the  ^^Courier-Joumal/^  He  was  a  clever  newspaper  writer  in 
a  day  when  personalities  and  smart  repartee  were  more  the 
fashion  than  now.  A  collection  of  his  best  paragraphs  was 
published  in  1869  under  the  title  Prenticeana.  These  are 
mostly  quick,  humorous  thrusts  at  opponents  and  their  ideas, 
and  are  not  always  characterized  by  delicacy.  Of  more  im- 
portance were  the  author's  poems,  published  at  intervals  dur- 
ing his  life,  and  collected  into  a  volume  after  his  death.  He 
was  strongly  influenced  by  Bryant,  and  some  of  his  most 
popular  pieces,  such  as  "The  Closing  Year,'^  are  almost 
imitations  in  both  idea  and  versification.  He  also  wrote 
poems  of  lighter  sentiment  with  the  trite  diction  and  imagery 
so  common  in  his  day.  Some  of  these  are  faintly  suggestive 
of  Moore. 

JTilliam  D.   Gallagher   (1808-1894)  was  bom  in  Phila- 
delphia, but  removed  to  Ohio  at  the  age  of  ten.    He  edited 

several  newspapers  and  short-lived  magazines 
SrhSifr  *  ^^  Cincinnati  and  other  Ohio  cities,  and  after- 

ward in  Louisville.  His  interest  in  Western 
literature  was  always  strong*  Besides  encouraging  the 
writers  of  his  section  in  the  journals  that  he  edited,  he  com- 
piled in  1841  Selections  from  the  Poetical  Literature  of  the 
West.  He  wrote  many  poems,  of  which  the  most  ambitious 
was  ^'Miami  Woods.*'  This  contains  sympathetic  nature  de- 
scriptions, and  moralizings,  mostly  commonplace,  on  subjects 
suggested  by  the  forest.  The  rather  halting  blank  verse  is  at 
times  reminiscent  of.  Bryant,  and  perhaps  of  Byron  and 
Cowper,  and  is  interspersed  with  stanzas  in  unrhymed  metres. 
Gallagher's  miscellaneous  poems  are  on  various  themes;  some 


438  Ambrican  LmsRATURS 

preach  the  democratic  idea  of  the  dignity  of  labor,  and  others, 
on  the  whole  his  best,  picture  various  aspects  of  nature  as 
seen  in  the  West 

Among  the  literary  prot^s  of  Prentice  was  Amelia  B. 
Welby  (1819-lg52)^  bom  Coppuck,  a  native  of  Maryland  who 

removed  to  Kentucky  in  childhood.  She 
wrote  over  the  signature  of  ''Amelia"  pas- 
sionate sentimental  verses  which  went  through  many  editions, 
and  won  for  her  a  share  of  the  praise  which  Poe  was  fond  of 
distributing  among  poetesses.  A  writer  of  a  very  different 
sort,  and  one  not  so  closely  connected  with  the  Kentucky- 
Cincinnati  school,  was  Bobert  Dale  Owen  (1801-j[877)^.  He 
was  the  son  of  the  noted  Scotch  reformer  Robert  Owen,  and 
came  to  the  United  States  in  1825  to  aid  in  the  establishment 
of  a  communistic  colony  at  New  Harmony,  Indiana.  After 
this  failed  he  served  in  congress  from  Indiana,  and  held  other 
political  offices.  Though  somewhat  erratic  in  his  ideas  he  was 
a  forceful  writer  on  social  and  educational  questions,  and  in 
his  later  years  published  several  works  on  spiritualism.  He 
also  attempted  a  drama  on  the  subject  of  Pocahontas,  and  in 
1874  published  Threading  my  Way,  an  interesting  though 
rambling  autobiography  covering  his  life  until  he  settled  in 
America.  Among  native  Western  writers  was  Henrv  M. 
jtoackenridge  {1786-1871),  son  of  H.  H.  Brackenridge,  the 
versatile  author  of  Modem  Chivalry.  He  was  bom  in  Pitts- 
burg and  spent  a  considerable  portion  of  his  life  in  that  city. 
As  early  as  1812  he  published  an  account  of  Louisiana,  and 
followed  this  by  other  miscellaneous  historical  and  descrip- 
tive writing.  H4s  more  important  works  are  Recollections 
\  of  Persons  and  Places  vn  the  West,  1834,  and  a  History  of 
'  the  Western  Insurrection,  written  to  vindicate  his  father. 
His  prose  is  pleasant  and  readable,  without  his  father's  erratic 
humor. 
To  the  West  of  this  time  sI^q  belongs  Abraham  Lincoln: 


The  Central  Period  439 

(1809-1865),  whose  qualities  as  a  statesman  have  tended  to 
distract  attention  from  his  ability  as  a  writer  and  a  speaker. 

In  simplicity,  candor,  and  pleasing  directness 
I^c!^°  of   expression   his   prose   has   probably   been 

equalled  by  that  of  no  other  American  publicist 
except  Franklin;  and  he  far  excels  Franklin  when  he  mixes 
an  emotional  element  with  the  intellectual.  Even  when  he 
is  slightly  rhetorical,  as  in  the  "Second  Inaugural  Address/* 
and  to  a  lesser  exent  in  the  ^^Qettysburg  Address/^  he  seems 
perfectly  genuine.  In  acquiring  this  prose  style  Lincoln 
probably  owed  fully  as  much  to  the  frankness  and  vigor  of 
pioneer  life  in  Kentucky  and  Illinois  as  to  the  frequently 
mentioned  study  of  Shakespeare  and  the  Bible. 

In  the  later  years  of  the  period  the  writers  of  the  middle 
West  were   less   closely   associated.     After   railroads   were 

opened  they  were  more  likely  to  publish  their 
Writani    "         books  and  to  form  their  literary  friendships 

in  the  East.  As  the  region  to  which  they 
belonged  became  less  isolated  their  writings  lost  many  of 
the  distinctively  Western  characteristics.  Moncure  D.  Con- 
way  (1832-1907)  was  active  in  the  anti-slavery  agitation  in 
Ohio,  and  wrote  on  a  variety  of  subjects  while  pastor  of  a 
Unitarian  church  in  Cincinnati.  He  was  bom  of  a  slaveholding 
family  in  Virginia,  studied  law,  entered  the  Methodist  minis- 
try, became  a  Unitarian,  attended  Harvard  divinity  school,  and 
preached  as  a  Unitarian  in  Washington,  Cincinnati,  and 
London,  England.  He  wrote  on  many  things  and  was  the 
friend  of  many  distinguished  men  of  letters  in  England  and 
America.  He  cannot  be  associated  definitely  with  any  section 
of  the  country,  but  his  career  as  an  author  virtually  began 
in  Cincinnati.  J.  J.  Piatt  (1835-  )  has  continued,  in 
poetry,  some  of  the  traditions  of  the  Ohio  valley  school.  In 
Michigan  Will  Carleton  (1845-  )  has  written  simple  bal- 
lads  of  domestic  life.    These  men  are  still  living. 


440  Ahbhigak  Lttbratusb 

Edward  Effgleflton  (1837-1902)  was  bom  in  Indiana  of 
Virginia  ancestry.    He  attended  school  bnt  two  years  and 

was  mainly  self-edncated.  He  served  as  a 
5^^^^  Methodist  preacher  and  agent  of   a   Bible 

society  in  Indiana  and  Minnesota,  and  after- 
ward edited  jnvenile  papers  in  Illinois.  In  1870  he  removed 
to  New  York.  His  first  novels  The  Hoosier  Schoolmaster^ 
was  published  in  1871.  This  was  followed  by  several  others^ 
the  most  important  being  TAg  Circuit  Rider^  Roxy.  The 
Hoosier  Schoolboy,  The  Oraysons,  and  The  Faith  Doctor; 
and  by  some  collections  of  short  stories.  In  his  later  years 
Eggleston  gave  much  attention  to  the  history  of  the  United 
States  and  wrote  several  popular  historical  works.  He  had 
a  high  ideal  of  the  duties  and  the  importance  of  the  novelist, 
and  in  his  stories  of  Western  life  he  endeavored  to  paint  ac- 
curately the  scenes  and  the  types  of  character  which  he  knew 
in  his  boyhood.  This  painful  sense  of  duty  was  fatal  to  artistic 
excellence.  His  attempt  to  show  both  the  good  and  the  bad 
sides  of  pioneer  life  and  pioneer  character  interfered  with  the 
romantic  effect  of  his  stories,  and  yet  did  not  assure  realism. 
Nevertheless,  the  intrinsic  interest  of  the  life  described  and 
the  author's  moral  earnestness  secured  great  popularity  for 
The  Hoosier  Schoolmaster,  The  Circuit  Rider,  and  their 
successors;  and  they  are  still  valuable  for  the  glimpses  they 
give  of  pioneer  times. 

Another  Indiana  novelist,  Lewis>  or  Lew  Wallace  (1827- 

190j^^  was  a  lawyer,  who  also  served  with  distinction  in  both 

nr  *^®  Mexican  and  the  Civil  Wars.    His  career 

as  a  writer  began  late  in  life.  The  Fair  Ood, 
1873,  a  story  of  the  conquest  of  Mexico,  is  full  of  vivid  de- 
scriptions, highly  colored  after  Frescott,  and  shows  consider- 
able archseological  research.  Both  this  and  Wallace's  most 
successful  novel,  Ben-Hur^  a  Tale  of  the  Christy  1880j>  are 
Bomewhat  crude  and  melodramatic,  but  show  a  remarkable 


The  Centeal  Period  441 

power  of  realizing  and  picturing  the  details  of  unfamiliar 
scenes.  His  later  works  were  The  Boyhood  of  Christ,  The 
Prince  of  India,  a  novel.  The  Wooing  of  Malkatoon,  a  long 
poem  in  prosaic  blank  verse,  and  Commodus,  a  blank  verse 
drama.  These  have  all  the  faults  of  BenrUur  and  fewer 
excellences. 

John  Hay  (1838-19051  was  bom  in  Indiana,  was  gradu- 
ated from  Brown  University,  and  studied  and  practiced  law 

in  Illinois  until  1861.  He  was  private  sec- 
^^         ^  retary  to  President  Lincoln,  and  held  diplo- 

matic positions  abroad  until  1870.  For  a  time  he  was  edi- 
torial writer  on  the  "New  York  Tribune.'*  After  1876  his 
residence  was  in  Ohio,  but  he  was  much  of  the  time  in  the 
public  service.  Under  President  McKinley  he  was  ambassa- 
dor to  England,  and  later  secretary  of  state.  The  Pike 
County  Ballads  were  published  while  he  was  engaged  on  the 
"Tribune,**  as  wsB_Castilian  Days,  the  result  of  studies  of 
Spanish  life  made  while  he  was  attached  to  the  legation  at 
Madrid.  The  Breadwinners,  an  anonymous  novel  of  which 
he  is  generally  conceded  to  be  the  author,  appeared  in  1883. 
In  1890  were  published  another  volume  of  poems  and  the 
monumental  work  of  Nicolay  and  Hay  on  Lincoln's  adminis- 
tration. The  Pike  County  Ballads  present  the  rough  lan- 
guage and  crude  but  intense  ideas  usually  associated  with 
the  West.  Some  of  the  *^allads**  were  wholly  humorous, 
but  the  most  popular,  |^Jim  Bludspe**  and  ^Tiittle  Breeches/* 
combine  humor  and  pathos.  Hay  was  not  a  great  writer, 
but  both  his  verse  and  his  prose  show  that  in  addition  to  his 
capabilities  for  statesmanship  and  diplomacy  he  had  the 
instincts  of  a  man  of  letters. 

Another  Western  verse  writer,  whose  work,  if  not  his  name, 
is  most  widely  known  of  all,  was  Stephen  C.  Foster  (1826- 
1864).  He  was  bom  in  Pittsburg  and  spent  most  of  his  life 
in  thftt  cil^  and  in  Cincinnati.    He  was  always  devoted  to 


4412  AlCBBIOAK  LlTB&A!rt7BS 

mufiic^  and  finally  relinquished  bntinees  to  become  an  author 
and  composer  of  songs.    He  wrote  '^Old  Black  Joe^^  ^^Qld 

Folks  at  Home/  '^NeUieJwas  a  .Ladj,"  "Old. 
|S£r*  Kentucky  Home/^  and  many  more  songs  in 

negro  dialect,  and  also  sentimental  pieces, 
among  them  "Conae  wherejmy  Love  Lies  Dreaming/^  Though 
none  of  these  belongs  to  the  higher  order  of  poetical  or  musi- 
cal composition,  they  are  free  from  the  cheapness  and  vul- 
garity of  many  of  their  class,  and  the  popularity  of  some 
of  them,  notably  '^Old  Folks  at  Home/'  has  been  almost 
universal. 

A  geographical  classification  of  authors  makes  no  place  for 
a  wanderer  like  Richard  Realf  (1834-1878).  but  he  was 
_  lu»ociated   with  the   West,  and  his  longest 

residence  in  one  place,  five  years,  was  at 
Pittsburg.  He  was  bom  in  England,  where  his  precocity 
secured  the  patronage  of  Lady  Byron  and  others.  At  eighteen 
he  published  a  volume  of  poems  entitled  Guesses  at  the 
Beautiful.  An  intrigue  with  a  woman  older  and  of  higher 
social  rank  than  himself  ruined  his  prospects  and  led  him  to 
come  to  America  in  1854.  He  worked  in  the  Five  Points 
mission  in  New  York,  then  went  to  Kansas,  where  he  became 
associated  with  John  Brown.  Subsequently  he  visited  Eng- 
^  land,  lived  for  a  time  in  the  South,  did  newspaper  work  in 
Ohio,  served  in  the  Union  army  during  the  war,  afterward  in 
the  regular  army,  and  was  editor  of  a  Pittsburg  paper.  In 
the  end  he  committed  suicide  in  California.  At  various 
times  he  was  a  proselyte  to  the  Boman  Catholic  church  and 
student  in  a  Jesuit  college,  lecturer  for  the  Shakers,  and  appli- 
cant for  admission  to  the  Oneida  community.  He  seems  to 
have  married  three  women,  all  of  whom  were  living,  undi- 
vorced,  at  the  time  of  his  death.  There  was  probably  a 
touch  of  insanity  in  his  nature  which  accounted  for  his 
vagrant  and  non-moral  career.     In  one  of  three  soimeta 


The  Central  Period  443 

written  on  the  night  of  his  death  he  spoke  of  himself  as  ^'a 
great  soul  killed  by  cniel  wrong/'  but  he  rarely  mentioned 
or  even  commented  indirectly  upon  his  own  life.  On  the 
other  hand  many  of  his  poems  on  love  and  friendship  are 
strong  and  apparently  genuine.  His  work  shows  a  combina- 
tion of  idealism  and  sensuousness  that  suggests  the  Fre- 
Baphaelites.  His  poems  were  published  in  the  "Atlantic/* 
"Scribner's/'  and  other  periodicals^  and  have  been  collected 
since  his  death.  A  few  of  them,  such  as  ^indirection'*  and 
"An  Old  Man's  Idyl/'  entitle  him  to  9;  definite  place  among 
minor  American  poets. 

Among  orators  of  the  middle  West  may  be  mentioned 
gobert  G.  IngersoU   (1833-18.99J.     He  was  bom  in  New 

York,  but  spent  almost  his  entire  life  in 
fa^!^i?*  Illinois.     His  best   speeches  were  pleas  in 

important  cases  in  which  he  was  counsel,  and 
occasional  orations,  notably  his  nomination  of  Blaine  in  the 
presidential  convention  of  1876.  He  attracted  most  atten- 
tion, however,  by  his  lectures  attacking  the  conventional 
aspects  of  Christianity.  All  his  speeches  show  a  tendency 
to  be  flamboyant  and  over-rhetorical,  and  in  those  on  reli- 
gious questions  he  makes  use  of  ridicule  and  irritating  satire. 
He  had  an  effective  command  of  language,  but  his  works  will 
always  be  more  highly  admired  by  the  sophomore  than  by 
the  maturer  mind. 

The  West  has  produced  more  than  its  fair  proportion  of 
popular  humorists.    Most  of  these  have  little  literary  merit, 

though  they  cannot  quite  be  ignored.  There 
ItoioiSte  **™    ^  *  distinctly  Western  quality  in  the  work  of 

Henry  W.  Shaw  (1818-l^jS&)  which  can  be 
traced  to  an  experience  of  twenty  years  as  steamboat  hand, 
auctioneer,  and  Ohio  farmer,  though  he  did  not  become 
famous  as  "Josh  Billings"  until  after  his  return  to  the  East. 
He  owed  his  popularity  to  short  sayings^  which  usually  ex- 


444  Ahbhigan  Litbraturb 

pressed  commonplace  moral  truths  in  an  odd  way,  and  were 
made  more  striking  by  the  cheap  device  of  bad  spelling. 
When  he  attempted  a  connected  discourse  he  was  insufferably 
flat  David  Boss  Locke  (1833-1888),  a  native  of  New  York 
but  long  an  Ohio  newspaper  man,  wrote  the  ^Tetroleum_ 
Y.  Nasby'^  letter^,  which  were  among  the  most  popular  po- 
litical satires  during  the  wax  and  reconstruction  periods. 
I  Most  of  these  were  published  in  the  'Toledo  Blade^'  and 
'  afterward  collected  in  several  volumes.  They  purport  to  be 
written  from  Kentucky  by  an  illiterate  and  morally  irre- 
sponsible Democrat.  During  the  exciting  years  in  which 
they  appeared  they  were  widely  read,  and  they  are  said  to 
have  been  greatly  enjoyed  by  President  Lincoln.  To  the 
reader  of  to-day  they  seem  to  be  characterized  by  flatness, 
vulgarity,  and  an  exaggeration  too  great  to  be  funny.  A 
novel  entitled  A  Paper  City,  and  a  book  of  travels,  Nasby 
in  Exile,  are  worthless.  Edgar  W.  .Ny^_  (185jObIfi2fiX,  who 
grew  to  manhood  in  Wisconsin,  and  for  a  time  edited  a  paper 
in  Wyoming,  wrote  sketches  over  the  name  *'Bill  "NjeJ^  al- 
ready made  famous  by  Bret  Harte.  He  probably  had  more 
genius,  and  certainly  more  refinement,  than  either  Shaw  or 
Locke,  but  he  had  less  didactic  purpose,  and  his  fame  is 
likely  to  be  even  shorter  lived  than  theirs. 

An  incomparably  greater  humorist  was^Samuel  L.  Clemens 
j[1835-1910}^  who  seems  destined  to  be  remembered  by  his 

pen  name,  Mark  Twain.  He  was  bom  at 
Florida,  Missouri,  where  his  father,  a  Vir- 
ginian of  good  family,  had  gone  after  an  unsuccessful  career 
as  lawyer  and  business  man  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee.  Most 
of  his  boyhood  was  spent  in  the  sleepy  slave-holding  river 
town  of  Hannibal,  Missouri.  His  environment  and  many  of 
his  adventures  are  pictured  in  Tom  Sawyer  and  Huckleberry 
Finn,  When  he  was  twelve  years  of  age  his  father  died 
and  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  local  printer.    Later  be  went 


The  Central  Period  448 

East  for  it  year,  worked  at  his  trade  in  New  York  and  Phila- 
delphia, and  visited  Washington.  At  the  age  of  twenty-one 
he  started  to  ^^eam  the  river/^  and  in  less  than  two  years 
was  a  licensed  steamboat  pilot  on  the  lower  Mississippi. 
The  incidents  in  the  first  part  of  Life  on  the  Missis- 
sippi are  largely  autobiographical,  though  in  the  book 
he  represents  himself  as  somewhat  younger  than  was 
actually  the  case.  Up  to  this  time  he  had  written  nothing  of 
importance.  Tradition  tells  of  a  sensational  issue  of  his 
brother's  newspaper  which  he  produced  when  left  in  charge, 
and  of  some  unidentified  contributions  to  the  ^^Saturday 
Evening  Posf  While  on  the  river  he  contributed  to  a  New 
Orleans  paper  a  burlesque  on  the  reminiscent  and  oracular 
utterances  which  Captain  Sellers,  an  old  pilot,  was  in  the 
habit  of  publishing  over  the  signature  "Mark  Twain.*'  Cap- 
tain Sellers  is  said  to  have  been  so  offended  that  he  never 
wrote  again.  At  a  later  date  Clemens  had  occasion  to  make 
use  of  both  his  real  and  his  pen  name. 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  war  the  young  pilot  found  his  occu- 
pation gone,  and  after  a  brief  and  unimportant  experience 

in  the  Confederate  army  he  went  West  with 
Later  C^ew'      ^®  brother,  who  had  been  appointed  secretary 

to  the  territorial  governor  of  Nevada.  He  saw 
various  aspects  of  life  in  the  West,  tried  mining,  took  up  a 
timber  claim  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Tahoe,  and  did  editorial 
work  on  a  paper  at  Virginia  City,  Nevada,  and  later  on  thej 
"San  Francisco  Morning  Call.''  In  San  Francisco  he  came 
in  contact  with  Bret  Harte  and  others  of  the  interesting 
group  who  were  trjring  to  develop  literature  on  the  Pacific 
slope.  For  a  few  months  he  was  in  the  Sandwich  islands  as 
a  newspaper  correspondent,  and  he  lectured  a  little.  He  had 
already  established  a  local  reputation  as  a  humorist,  but  he 
attracted  slight  attention  until  1867,  when  The  Celebrated 
^y:P£^A.EL93...'^^J^^iOMTQ!0  y^^  published  in  a  New  York 


446  AmBBIOAN  LmSRATUBS 

paper.  Two  years  later  he  was  sent  by  a  newspaper  on  a 
cruise  to  Southern  Europe  and  the  Holy  Land — ^the  first, 
apparently,  of  the  Mediterranean  tours  by  chartered  steamer 
which  are  now  so  common.  His  newspaper  correspond- 
ence written  on  this  trip  was  worked  over  into  The  In- 
nocents  Abroad,  which  appeared  in  book  form  in  1869. 
This  was  printed  for  the  subscription  trade,  rather  showily, 
with  crude  if  sometimes  vigorous  woodcuts.  It  achieved  a 
large  sale,  though  chiefly  among  readers  who  bought  literar 
ture  on  the  solicitations  of  agents.    On  his  return  from  his 

\  first  trip  abroad  he  became  editor  of  a  paper  in  Buffalo,  New 
York,  and  in  1871  removed  to  Hartford,  Connecticut    After 

j  this  time  he  lived  in  Connecticut  and  New  York,  with  several 
visits  abroad.  Shortly  before  his  death  Oxford  conferred 
on  him  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  Like  Scott  he  was  heavily  in- 
volved in  the  failure  of  a  firm  that  published  his  own  and 
other  books,  but  he  lived  to  pay  all  debts  and  to  spend  his 
last  years  in  comfortable  circumstances. 

Mark  Twain  passed  the  greater  part  of  his  literary  life 
in  the  East,  but  he  was  distinctly  a  product  of  the  West. 

The  improgressive  existence  in  the  Missouri 
JJ^V^''''2S^      community  where  he  spent  his  boyhood,  and 

the  free,  varied  life  on  the  Mississippi  in- 
fluenced him  profoundly  in  different  ways,  and  his  later 
experiences  on  the  Pacific  slope  gave  just  the  element  that 
was  needed  to  produce  a  man  who  was  typical  of  the  most 
picturesque  parts  of  the  West.    It  is  not  quite  certain  when 

I  he  changed  his  views  on  slavery  and  kindred  matters.    He  was 

»  of  Virginia  ancestry,  his  own  family  held  slaves,  and  at  the 
outbreak  of  the  war  he  evidently  inclined  toward  the  South. 
Through  all  his  later  writings  he  was  unsparing  in  his  con- 
demnation of  slavery,  both  because  it  was  a  moral  wrong  and 
because  it  repressed  the  economic  and  industrial  advance- 
lent  in  which  he  so  thoroughly  believed.    Mr.  Howells  says. 


\ 

i 


The  Central  Pebiod  447 

''The  part  of  him  that  was  Western  in  his  Southwestern 
origin  Clemens  kept  to  the  end^  but  he  was  the  most  de- 
southemiz^  Southerner  I  ever  knew/^ 

Like  many  humorists  Mark  Twain  showed  eccentric  and 
contradictory  personal  traits.     Some  of  these  were  no  doubt 

inborn  and  others  were  acquired  during  the 
S2X"'     varied  experience  of  Ms  early  years.     The 

slow  drawl  which  many  persons  thought  was 
affected  for  use  on  the  lecture  platform  is  said  to  have  been 
characteristic  of  his  mother's  speech  as  well.  His  unrepressed 
indulgence  in  profanity  and  his  habit  of  using  broad  lan- 
guage in  conversation  and  personal  letters  may  have  been 
acquired  on  the  river.  He  had  a  fondness  for  striking  cos- 
tumes^ such  as  the  sealskin  coat  which  caused  discomfort  to 
his  friends  as  they  walked  with  him  on  Broadway,  and  the 
white  serge  suit  which  he  wore  conspicuously  in  his  later 
years;  and  he  was  fond  of  doing  things  to  surprise  and  shock 
the  conservative  public.  He  was  enthusiastic  over  the  prac- 
tical achievements  of  modem  scientists  and  inventors,  though, 
if  we  are  to  believe  his  own  statement,  he  lacked  the  mechani- 
cal sense  necessary  to  comprehend  even  the  simplest  device.  A 
more  important  characteristic  was  his  liability  to  form  intense 
dislikes  for  persons  and  institutions.  In  both  his  humorous 
and  his  serious  works  he  occasionally  pauses  to  deliver  a! 
fling  of  concentrated  bitterness  at  something  which  has' 
aroused  his  hatred.  In  Innocents  Abroad  he  denounces  Abe- 
lard.  In  Tom  Sawyer  he  condemns  the  sentimentality  which 
shows  sympathy  for  criminals.  Among  his  pet  literary  aver- 
sions was  Sir  Walter  Scott,  and  with  a  total  disregard  of 
chronology  he  seriously  held  Scotfs  romances  responsible  for 
the  false  ideals  of  chivalry  and  the  backward  condition  of  the 
South. 

Mark  Twain  was  the  author  of  many  works,  not  all  of 
which  need  be  mentioned,  here.    After  The  Innocents  Ahrofld, 


448  Ambbicak  Litsraturs 

he  wrote  Roughing  It  (1872),  which  tells  of  his  early  ex- 
periences in  Nevada  and  California.    His  sketches  of  travel 

were  continued^  at  a  later  date,  by  A  Tramp 
^^*^^ •      Abroad  and  Following  the  Equator.    In  1873 

he  wrote,  in  collaboration  with  Charles  Dud- 
ley Warner,  The  Oilded  Age^  The  chief  character  of  this 
story  is  Cobnel  Sellers,  the  delightfully  enthusiastic  and 
impecunious  promoter  of  great  business  ventures.  Colonel 
Sellers  is  said  to  have  been  drawn  from  the  life  after  a 
cousin  of  Clemens's  mother,  and  the  fact  that  the  caricature 
was  Bjrmpathetic  doubtless  adds  to  his  charm.  A  drama- 
tized version  of  the  book,  centering  around  the  character 
of  Sellers,  held  the  stage  for  some  years.  In  1876  a^ 
peered  ^fee  Adventures  of  Tom  Sawyer  and  in  1884  the 
companion  volume.  Huckleberry  Finn^  The_  Prince  and  the 
Pauperj  which  was  also  dramatized,  was  published  in  1882, 
BnA  Life  on  the  Mississippi  in  1883.  Among  other  note- 
worthy works  were  A  Connecticut  Yankee  in  KingArthur^ 
Courtf  1889,  in  which  the  author  keeps  up  his  quarrel  with 
feudal  ideals,  Pudd'nhead  Wilson,  1894^  another  tale  of  a 
Mississippi  Eiver  town.  Joan  of  Arc,  an  historical  novel,  and 
^Christian  Science^,  an  attack  on  the  new  faith. 

Mark  Twain  made  his  first  reputation  as  a  humorist.    There 
is  much  that  is  not  funny  in  The  Innocents  Abroad,  but  the 

great  majority  of  readers  who  bought  the  inar- 
H^or         '      ^^^^'^  volume  from  a  persuasive  agent  thought 

of  it  only  as  a  funny  book  and  the  author  as 
another  American  ''funny  man.'*  In  essence  the  humor  is 
of  the  same  sort  that  had  been  shown  by  other  newspaper 
writers.  There  is  much  exaggeration,  some  of  it  less  effective 
than  statement  of  fact  would  have  been.  The  tourist  who 
had  a  napoleon  changed  for  copper  in  Tangier  'Tiad  bought 
eleven  quarts  of  coin,  and  the  head  of  the  firm  had  gone  on 
the  street  to  negotiate  for  the  balance  pf  th^  change."    Tber^ 


The  Central  Period  449 

is  a  striving  after  incongruity — an  incongruity  often  secured 
by  treating  in  a  light  way  things  of  dignity  and  importance. 
Gibraltar  from  the  sea  is  "suggestive  of  a  'goV  of  mud  on 
the  end  of  a  shingle/^  The  much  quoted  meditation  at  the 
tomb  of  Adam  is  not  irreverent  in  the  sense  that  it  shocks 
anyone's  religious  faith;  but  it  shows  a  disposition  to  force 
mirth  on  any  subject.  Even  in  these  early  volumes,  however, 
Mark  Twain  was  usually  far  better  than  his  journalistic 
contemporaries,  and  in  his  best  work  he  was  incomparably 
above  them.  He  took  the  so-called  "American  humor*' — . 
the  humor  of  excessive  statement  and  juxtaposition  of  irrele- 
vant ideas — and  showed  that  in  the  hands  of  a  literary  artist 
it  was  a  form  worthy  of  respect.  But  in  essentials  his  rela- 
tionships are  always  with  Artemus  Ward  rather  than  with 
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes. 

The  humor  in  Mark  Twain's  later  stories  is  better  than 
that  in  his  earlier  works  chiefly  because  it  presents  a  more 
genuine  view  of  life.  When  at  his  best  he  shows  a  sure  in- 
sight into  human  nature.  Compare,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
meditation  at  the  tomb  of  Adam  or  the  well-known  experience 
with  the  mummy  and  the  Genoa  guide  from  The  Innocents 
Abroad,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  chapter  in  which  Tom 
Sawyer  whitewashes  the  fence,  or  the  coarser  episode  of 
"The  Eoyal  Nonesuch"  from  Huckleberry  Finn.  The  two 
selections  last  named  are  not  more  refined  or  more  clever 
than  the  others,  but  they  rest  on  a  basis  of  fundamental 
truth  that  gives  them  far  greater  value. 

In   his    stories,    Tom    Sawyer,    Huckleberry   Finn,    and 
Pudd'nhead  Wilson,  and  in  the  first  part  of  Life  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi, Mark  Twain  pictured  the  world  as 
Hark  Twain's      he  saw  it  in  boyhood  and  youth.     The  plots 

River  Tides         ^'  ^^^  *^^®^  ^^®  somewhat  forced.    As  a  critic 

he  was  merciless  in  his  conmients  on  romantic 
writers,  »ad  h?  attacked  Cooper  for  the  improbability  of  hi^ 


450  AmBBICAK  LnXSATUSB 

inddents.  Yet  nothing  in  Cooper  is  bo  nnlikely  as  the  Btarj 
of  PuddPnhead  WiUon,  with  two  Italian  noblemen  ronning 
for  office  in  a  little  Western  town,  and  the  disooveiy  after 
many  years  that  slaye  and  master  had  been  exchanged  in 
their  cradles.  It  would  be  ungracious  to  apply  the  author's 
criticisms  to  his  own  work.  In  spite  of  over-ingenuity  and 
the  use  of  trite  romantic  situations,  Pudd'nhead  WHsan  is 
interesting  and  in  parts  powerful  Most  readers,  however, 
prefer  the  earlier  tales,  Tom  Sawyer  and  Huckleberry  Finn. 
The  first,  which  as  has  been  said  is  largely  autobiographical, 
has  more  force,  but  less  unity.  It  is  preeminently  a  study 
of  boy  nature,  though  there  is  much  on  other  human  nature 
as  well.  Huckleberry  Finn  is  regarded  by  many  critics  as 
the  author's  masterpiece.  It  is  as  truly  humorous  as  Tom 
Sawyer,  but  the  underljring  view  of  life  is  more  serious, 
and  it  suggests  more  important  questions.  Especially  interest- 
ing is  the  implied  commentary  on  slavery.  It  has  more  to  do 
with  the  Mississippi,  and  no  one  else  has  presented  so  strongly 
and  sympathetically  the  elusive  fascination  of  the  mighty 
stream. 

It  was  perhaps  the  fact  that  the  river  affected  him  so  pro- 
foundly that  led  Mark  Twain  to  rank  Life  on  the  Mississippi 

as  his  best  work.    Yet  it  may  be  that  he  was 

iinlwJSr  ^^*  ^^^  *^^°^  right    The  book  contains  a  few 

of  his  finest  descriptions — ^passages  which,  like 
others  of  almost  equal  excellence  in  Huckleberry  Finn,  show 
his  response  to  the  subtler  appeals  of  nature,  and  which,  if  he 
had  written  no  humor,  might  have  given  him  a  reputation 
as  a  prose  poet.  No  other  of  his  works  shows  better  the  power 
and  fiexibility  of  his  style,  and  no  other  has  so  much  diversity 
and  is  at  the  same  time  so  well  sustained.  There  is  no  bois- 
terousness,  and  there  is  less  fun  of  any  sort  than  in  most  of 
his  writings,  but  there  is  much  humor  in  the  true  sense  of 
that,  WQcd^.     TheiSjQ  Qpnmienl^^  9PP^7  only  to,  i^^  (^pten 


Th^   CfiNTfeAt  PBRlOfi  451 

which  tell  of  the  author's  experiences  befoj^e  th^  war.  The 
last  part  of  the  volume  is  like  disjointed  and  rather  unin- 
teresting newspaper  correspondence  and  the  effect  of  anti- 
climax which  it  produces  is  a  disappointing  reminder  of  some 
of  Mark  Twain's  artistic  deficiencies. 

Of  the  tales  with  imaginative  and  historical  settings  A 
Connecticut  Yankee  in  King  Arthur^s  Court  is  perhaps  the 

most  notable.     Those  who   rank   this  work 

iSlMb'^^^jL     ^^^^S  *l^®  author's  best,  point  to  the  abundant 

himior  and  to  the  lessons  which  the  story 
teaches — the  selfishness  of  feudalism  and  the  service  of 
modern  science  and  invention  in  securing  rights  to  the  indi- 
vidual. Those  who  are  less  enthusiastic  complain  that  a 
humor  based  so  purely  on  burlesque  and  incongruity  is  more 
forced  than  that  of  Huclcleberry  Finn  and  Life  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi,  and  feel  that  the  lessons  need  no  such  grotesquely 
elaborate  enforcement.  The  more  conservative  are  likely  to 
regret,  also,  that  the  good  in  chivalry  should  not  have  a  more 
respectful  recognition.  It  is  characteristic  of  Mark  Twain  that 
while  he  had  only  ridicule  for  the  knights  who  were  accustomed 
to  "go  grailing"  and  gather  at  the  Table  Round,  he  regarded 
Joan  of  Arc  with  the  most  intense  admiration  and  reverence. 
His  historical  novel,  Joan  of  Arc,  purporting  to  be  the  me- 
moirs of  the  Maid  as  written  by  her  private  secretary,  is  a 
serious  piece  of  work.  It  shows  careful  historical  reading 
and  much  pains,  but  it  is  not  wholly  successful  or  convincing. 
If  Mark  Twain  was  taken  too  lightly  at  first,  he  was  taken 
seriously,  perhaps  too  seriously,  in  his  later  years.    Readers 

who  discovered  that  he  was  something  more 
|^J^J^~*^  than  a  newspaper  joker  began  to  hail  him  as 

a  philosopher,  and  he  himself  undertook  to 
express  opinions  on  a  variety  of  subjects  ranging  from  for- 
eign missions  to  politics.  He  attacked  Christian  Science  in 
a  volume  which  is  probably  more  deeply  regretted  ^y  his 


452  AmBEIOAK  lilTERATUBfi 

friends  who  share  his  disapprobation  of  the  new  sect  than 
by  the  victims  of  his  ridicule  and  scorn. 

It  would  be  unduly  rash  to  predict  at  this  time  the  future 
place  of  Mark  Twain  in  American  literature.     It  already 

becomes  evident  that  in  his  later  years  and 
^^{[  Twain  s      gijiQ^  his  death  he  has  been  overrated.    Little 

of  his  ambitiously  serious  work  appears  to 
have  the  elements  of  permanency^  and  it  is  probable  that 
with  change  of  taste  his  purely  funny  writings  will  seem  less 
and  less  interesting.  He  has  left^  however,  a  considerable 
amount  of  truly  genuine  work  in  which  the  humor  is  more 
than  cleverness  and  the  seriousness  is  without  affectation; 
and  it  will  be  strange  if  American  readers  willingly  let  this 
die. 

Between  the  Mississippi  and  the  Pacific  slope  there  was 
little  literary  production  worthy  of  notice.     Colorado  may 

perhaps  lay  claim  to  Mrs.  Helen  Hunt  Jack- 
5S)?^*        _gon  (1831-1885).     She  was  the  daughter  of 

Professor  Fiske  of  Amherst,  and  was  first 
married  to  Captain  Edward  B.  Hunt  of  the  United  States 
army.  After  the  death  of  her  husband  and  children  she  be- 
gan to  write,  and  was  soon  one  of  the  regular  contributors 
to  the  "Atlantic/^  The  state  of  her  health  induced  her  to 
remove  to  Colorado,  and  here  she  was  later  married  to  Wil- 
liam S.  Jackson,  of  Colorado  Springs.  About  1879  or  1880 
she  became  strongly  interested  in  the  wrongs  of  the  Indians, 
and  from  that  time  many  of  her  writings  dealt  with  various 
aspects  of  the  Indian  question.  She  was  a  woman  of  intense 
and  thoroughly  genuine  personality,  violent  in  her  likes  and 
dislikes,  and  often,  though  never  intentionally,  unjust.  One 
of  her  marked  characteristics  was  a  love  of  wandering,  which 
led  her  to  Europe  and  many  times  through  favorite  parts  of 
America.  Her  poems,  most  of  them  originally  published  in 
periodicals,  were  collected  in  volumes  at  various  times.    Her 


The  Central  Period  453 

prose  included  sketches  of  travel,  literary  criticism,  fiction, 
stories  for  children,  land  miscellaneous  essays.  For  the 
greater  number  of  her  writings  she  used  the  signature  '*H. 
H.,^^  and  later  Helen  Jackson.  The  question  of  her  author- 
ship of  a  series  of  clever  magazine  stories  signed  **Saxe 
Holme''  once  aroused  much  discussion,  and  was  never  abso- 
lutely settled. 

Mrs.  Jackson's  poems  reflect  the  strong  emotions  character- 
istic of  her  nature.    They  tell  old  legends  of  the  church,  they 

treat  of  death  and  religious  consolation,  of 
He^jftcjoon  i  jj^ppy  and  of  unrequited  love,  and  of  the  de- 
lights of  nature.  Most  of  them  are  short  and 
in  lyric  measures.  They  are  likely  to  be  over-rich  in  imagery 
and  to  lack  calmness  and  repose.  Much  of  her  prose  shows 
the  same  intensity  as  her  verse.  Her  early  accounts  of 
European  travel  jumble  together  valuable  matter  and  trivially 
uninteresting  personal  detail,  but  some  of  her  later  sketches, 
such  as  "Glimpses  of  California  and  the  Missions,''  are  charm- 
ing in  both  matter  and  style.  A  Century  of  Dishonor,  an  ar- 
raignment of  the  United  States  government  for  its  treatment 
of  the  Indians,  was  written  after  conscientious  researches  in 
the  Astor  library,  but  is  a  one-sided  and  almost  hysterical 
presentation  of  the  subject.  As  a  tract  it  had  an  immediate 
effect,  but  it  can  hardly  add  much  to  the  author's  permanent 
literary  reputation.  Her  best  prose  work,  Ramona,  a  story  of 
early  life  in  Southern  California,  also  introduces  the  wrongs 
of  the  Indians,  somewhat  to  the  detriment  of  the  novel  as  a 
work  of  art.  It  abounds  in  accurate  and  graphic  descriptions, 
sometimes  more  detailed  than  is  necessary  to  give  local  color. 
The  plot  is  simple  and  not  wholly  artistic.  The  study  of 
three  women  in  the  first  part  of  the  book  is  excellent.  The 
author  succeeded  in  portraying  the  Indian  and  the  Spaniard 
better  than  less  passionate  and  more  complex  Anglo-Saxon 
types.    The  power  of  the  novel  is  due  in  part  to  its  intensity 


454  Ambkicak  Lttkratukb 

and  moral  eamestneBS,  in  part  to  the  fact  that  it  shows  an- 
other of  the  local  and  diatinctiye  methods  of  life  in  America 
that  have  been  so  thoroughly  expbited  by  recent  story  tellers. 
The  Pacific  slope,  like  the  Ohio  valley,  developed  a  literary 
center  of  its  own  which  maintained  some  importance  nntil 
«^  «.   .^  ^       ^'ter  tlic  completion  of  trans-continental  rail- 

roads.  Newspapers,  literary  periodicals,  pub- 
lishing houses,  and  libraries  were  all  founded  in  San  Fran- 
cisco soon  after  the  American  occupation  of  California.  Be- 
tween 1850  and  1856  at  least  three  literary  magazines  were 
started  in  the  city.  More  important  was  the  *^Overland 
Mqnt^jv**  founded  in  1868.  This  was  ambitiously  modelled 
after  the  ''Atlantic,*'  and  though  of  course  very  provincial, 
had  some  merit.  Many  of  the  articles  dealt  with  Western  sub- 
jects, but  there  was  also  a  brave  attempt  to  be  cosmopolitan. 
The  contributors  to  this  as  to  earlier  magazines  were  mostly 
men  of  Eastern  birth,  some  of  them  only  temporarily  resi- 
dent in  California. 

The  most  distinctive  of  the  California  writers  was  Francis 
_Brgtj^arte  (1839-1908),  who  after  he  achieved  literary  suc- 
cess wrote  over  the  shortened  signature  of 
Bret  Harte.     He  was  bom  in  Albany,  New 
York,  and  received  a  common  school  education.    His  father 
died  while  he  was  still  young,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  he 
went  with  his  mother  to  California.    He  taught  school  and 
worked    as   miner,   tax-collector,    express    messenger,    drug 
clerk,  and  compositor — all  before  he  was  twenty  years  of  age. 
He  contributed  to  the  ''Californian,'*  a  literary  weekly  that 
J  preceded  the  ''Overland,*'  and  as  early  as  1863  published  a 
'  Spanish- American  tale  in  the  "Atlantic.**    When  the  "Over- 
{land  Monthly**  was  founded  he  became  its  editor,  and  in 
the  second  issue  brought  out  "Tbe  Tjiip.)^  nf  B/><^ri]]g  QfmW* 
his  first  great  success.    This  was  quickly  followed  by  "The 
Outcasts  of  Poker  Flat**  and  several  other  of  his  best  tales. 


The  Central  Period  455 

and  by  some  of  his  most  popular  poems,  among  them  ^IPlain 
Language  from  Truthful  .If^m^"  hftttfir  kn^wTi  suk  *^T>^^ 
Heathea..  Chinee/*  These  were  more  highly  valued  in  the 
East  than  in  California,  and  in  1871  the  author  resigned  his 
editorship  and  the  professorship  of  English  literature  in  the 
University  of  California  to  which  he  had  just  been  elected,  and 
removed  to  New  York.  He  contributed  to  the  "Atlantic*'  and 
lectured  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  In  1878  he  was  ap- 
pointed consul  at  Crefeld,  Germany,  and  two  years  later  was 
transferred  to  Glasgow.  After  his  removal  from  the  latter 
position  in  1885  he  continued  to  reside  in  England  until 
his  death.  His  works  include  Condensed  Novels,  1867;  The 
Luck  of  Roaring  Camp  and  other  Sketches,  1871;  Tales  of 
the  Argonauts  and  other  Sketches,  1875 ;  and  many  other  col- 
lections of  short  tales;  Odbriel  Conroy,  a  novel,  1876;  Two 
Men  of  Sandy  Bar,  a  drama,  1876;  and  several  collections 
of  poems,  the  first  published  in  1871. 

Bret  Harte  had  some  conspicuous  personal  peculiarities 
which  were  freely  commented  upon  during  his  life  time,  and 

not  even  the  work  of  his  latest  biographer  has 
PmomStv*        made  it  possible  to  form  a  sure  estimate  of  his 

character.  He  is  said  to  have  been  unreliable 
in  keeping  dinner  engagements,  paying  debts,  and  attend- 
ing to  consular  duties.  During  his  later  years  there  was 
some  estrangement  between  him  and  his  family.  On  the 
other  hand  published  letters  to  his  wife  and  children  are 
charming  and  apparently  genuine.  He  was  welcome  in 
literary  and  the  better  social  circles  of  England,  and  formed 
warm  friendships  with  Englishmen.  He  enjoyed  children 
and  won  their  confidence.  It  seems  probable  that  he  suffered 
from  a  lack  of  business  aptitude,  and  of  firmness  of  charac- 
ter, so  that  without  any  serious  moral  delinquencies  he  alien- 
ated some  friends  and  gave  his  enemies  opportunity  for 
malicious  attacks. 


456  Ahbbioak  Lttbratubx 

Life  in  Galifomia  in  the  early  fifties  was  nnique.  The 
discoveiy  of  gold  had  attracted  great  crowds  of  adventurers, 

representative  of  all  parts  of  America  and 

S««WHUti  Tjfe   ^^^"^P®*  *^^  ^'  *^  grades  of  society  and  all 

degrees  of  education.  Their  one  common 
characteristic  was  intense  energy;  imd  in  the  free  atmos- 
phere of  a  new  coimtry  they  were  boisterous  and  unrestrained, 
even  to  the  point  of  lawlessness.  In  -contrast  to  the  rawness 
of  this  society  were  the  remains  of  the  old,  drowsy,  Spanish 
civilization.  Still  other  elements  of  picturesqueness  were 
added  by  the  Indians  and  the  Chinese.  Bret  Harte  seems 
to  have  been  greatly  impressed  by  this  heterogeneous  life  as 
he  saw  it  during  the  varied  experiences  of  his  early  years. 

His  first  sketch  in  the  "Atlantic,**  published 
Bret  Harte'f        i^  1863,  tells  an  old  Spanish  tradition  in  a 

California  Life     ^'^  *^^   Irvingesque  manner.     Five  years 

later,  in  "The  Luck  of  Bearing  Camp,**  and 
the  stories  that  immediately  followed  it,  he  turned  to  the 
portrayal  of  rude  life  in  the  mining  camp.  These  early  short 
sketches  are  his  best  work.  They  copy  some  of  the  less  ad- 
mirable traits  of  Dickens;  they  are  over-sentimental  and 
'  somewhat  sensational;  the  conclusions,  even  in  the  best 
stories  like  "The  Outcasts  of  Poker  Flat/*  are  inartistically 
melodramatic.  Nevertheless,  they  jire  characterized  by  indi- 
viduality, humor,  wide  sympathy,  and  truth  to  the  ultimate 
facts  of  human  nature.  If  they  serve  any  didactic  purpose 
it  is  to  show  that  there  are  some  elements  of  gentleness  and 
goodness  in  the  roughest  men  and  the  lowest  social  outcasts. 
The  heroes  land  the  heroines  are  often  vicious  characters,  but 
the  author  always  distinguishes  sharply  between  their  heroic 
qualities  and  their  vices. 

After  he  went  abroad  Bret  Harte  continued  to  write  stories 
of  the  early  life  in  California.  His  admirers  point  out  now 
one  and  now  another  of  these  later  sketches  as  evidence  that 


The  Cbntral  Period  46? 

his  powers  had  not  diminished^  but  none  of  these  is  convinc- 
ing to  the  average  reader.    He  had  been  too  long  away  from 

the  scenes  that  he  described;  he  had  lost  too 
Uiter  iS!m*        much  of  his  early  idealism  and  enthusiasm  and 

he  had  come  too  much  under  the  influence 
of  the  conventional  in  literature.  He  often  took  the  stock  plots 
of  the  ordinary  story  writer  and  developed  them  with  a  Cali- 
fornia setting  that  was  also  becoming  formal.  He  yielded 
to  the  latter-day  temptation  to  character  analysis^  and  in 
this  he  was  unsuccessful.  Some  of  the  characters  of  his 
earlier  stories,  such  as  Oakhurst  and  Yuba  Bill,  really  live, 
and  Colonel  Starbottle  is  at  least  an  interesting  caricature; 
but  even  these  persons,  when  he  elaborated  them  in  later 
works,  become  incomprehensible  beings.  He  had  most  difficulty 
in  portraying  women,  and  this  he  rashly  undertook  in  many 
of  the  later  tales.  His  few  sketches  of  a  more  refined  civi- 
lization are  even  less  successful  than  the  later  Western  stories, 
and  this  fact  offers  the  justification  for  his  persistent  ad- 
herence to  the  earlier  form  of  work. 

The  prose  other  than  the  short  stories  is  of  less  importance. 
The  two  series  of  Condensed  Novels,  one  among  the  earliest 

and  the  other  among  the  latest  of  his  writ- 
Bret  Harte's  ings,  are  at  times  clever  in  their  parodies 
^^^  of  contemporary  fiction,  but  the  cleverness 

is  on  the  whole  specious.  The  longer  stories, 
especially  the  novel  Odbriel  Convoy,  are  failures.  The  author 
could  no  more  organize  a  complex  plot  than  he  could  analyze 
a  complex  character.  The  same  deficiencies  led  to  the  failure 
of  his  prose  dram:a,  ''Two  Men  of  Sandy  Bar.'*  In  this 
some  of  the  scenes  are  so  far  over-done  that  they  seem  like 
burlesque;  and  the  story  is  confused,  improbable,  and  fails 
to  satisfy  a  sense  of  poetic  justice. 

Though  not  a  great  poet  Harte  was  a  verse  writer  of  con- 
siderable merit.    He  handled  a  variety  of  lyric  measures  with 


488 

focoetB.     He  managed  the  '^diamatic  monologiie^  wiili  a 
great  deal  of  natnralneflB;  and  he  was  able  to  write  dialect 

▼erse  that  was  hnmorona  without  being  cheap. 
Mil  Hartra        j^  j^  perhaps  hia  hnmoroiu  poems  like  **The 

Heathen  Chinee^  and  'The  Society  upon 
the  Stanislans^  fliat  are  best  known;  bat  some  of  the  senti- 
mental and  mildly  pathetic  pieces  like  '^er  Letter^  and 
^Dickens  in  Camp^  are  almost  as  popular.  **3im^  his  best 
'  dramatic  monologue,  blends  humor  and  pathos.  His  patri- 
otic and  some  of  his  juvenile  poems  are  smooth  and  effective. 
Little  of  his  work  is  distinctly  imitatiye,  but  there  are  sug- 
gestions of  divers  poets,  among  them  Longfellow,  Emerson, 
and  Browning. 

Bret  Harte  is  said  to  have  been  fastidious  in  matters  of 
diction  and  to  have  spared  no  pains  to  secure  the  proper 

word  and  phrase.  He  lacked  somewhat,  how- 
^^Hartrs        ^^^^^  ^  sense  for  style;  and  his  style  did  not 

improve  with  years.  Yet  in  spite  of  all 
artistic  defects  some  of  his  work  is  too  strong  and  too  genuine 
to  be  lost.  In  his  lifetime  he  probably  did  not  receive  due 
recognition  at  home.  At  first  California  resented  his  sketches 
and  feared  that  the  East  would  accept  them  as  a  complete 
picture  of  Western  civilization.  Later  the  East,  which  had 
welcomed  him,  grew  sensitive  lest  the  vogue  of  his  books 
abroad  might  give  Englishmen  a  wrong  idea  of  America. 
It  now  seems  that  he  is  assured  of  a  permanent  place  among 
American  story  writers,  though  the  amount  of  work  for  which 
he  will  ultimately  be  remembered  may  be  smalL 

The  most  gifted  California  writer  of  a  slightly  later  date 
was  Edward  Rowland  Sill  (1841-1887) .     He  was  bom  in 

Connecticut    and    was    graduated    at    Yale. 

Rowlimd  8IU       ^^^  ^®^^  *^  ^^^^  ^^  ^*^  engaged  in  busi- 
ness on  the  Pacific  coast.    He  then  returned 

East^  studied  a  few  months  in  Harvard  divinity  school,  did 


The  Central  Pebiob  459 

editorial  work  on  a  New  York  paper^  and  taught  in  an  Ohio 
academy.  From  1871  to  1874  he  was  instructor  in  the  Oak- 
land>  California^  high  school^  and  from  1874  to  1882  was 
professor  of  English  literature  in  the  University  of  Cali- 
fornia. The  last  four  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  Ohio, 
where  he  was  engaged  in  literary  work.  His  writings  were 
contributed  to  the  magazines^  especially  to  the  ^^Atlantic 
Monthly/'  and  most  of  them  were  published  anonymously. 
The  only  volumes  issued  in  his  lifetime  were  a  small  collec- 
tion of  poems  published  in  186  7,  and  another  privately 
printed  for  his  friends  when  he  left  Califomia  in  1883. 
Since  his  death  there  have  been  published  three  small  volumes 
of  his  poems,  and  a  volume  of  prose,  all,  or  almost  all, 
gathered  from  the  magazines. 

Sill  was  iL  New  England  idealist  who  never  succeeded  in 
putting  his  mind  at  rest  regarding  the  problems  and  doubts 
which  the  nineteenth  century  brought  to  thinking  men.  His 
poems  present,  not  doubt  overcome  by  faith,  as  in  Tennyson, 
nor  doubt  accepted  with  a  resignation  that  becomes  half 
pleasurable,  as  in  Arnold,  but  the  real  doubt  of  a  sensitive 
and  conscientious  man  who  continues  to  question  the  uni- 
verse. They  are  individual  poems,  and  reveal  a  personality 
of  great  sweetness,  naturalness,  and  human  sympathy.  His 
best  known  short  poem,  *^A  FooFs  Prayer/^  has  an  epigram- 
matic quality.  'T^^Venus^MUo/*  his  best  poem  of  mod- 
erate length,  blends  with  the  spirit  of  the  later  nineteenth 
century  something  of  the  spirit  of  Keats.  "JTheJEermitagej^ 
his  longest  poem,  has  some  fine  passages  and  much  micro- 
scopic description  of  nature,  but  taken  as  a  whole  is  not 
strong.  His  prose,  which  is  mostly  in  the  form  of  brief 
essays,  has  the  same  charm  as  his  poetry,  and  sometimes  a 
lightness  that  most  of  the  poetry  lacks.  His  limitations  in 
both  prose  and  verse  are  obvious,  but  he  will  continue  to  at- 
tract a  small  circle  of  persons  whose  intellectual  experiences 


460  Ambrioan  Litbbatubb 

fit  them  to  understand  hifi  own^  and  who  read  him  closely 
enough  to  come  in  sympathy  with  his  fine  personality. 

Of  living  writers  in  California  who  attained  a  reputation 
before    1883^  jDincinnatus    Hiner    Miller^    who    writes    as 

"Joaguin  Miller/^  is  the  most  distinctive.    He 
Uvtag  has    written    prose    fiction,    but    is    known 

Writtfi  especially  for  his  vigorous  verse.     Miss  Ina 

p.  Goolbrith  has  written  poems,  the  best  of 
fhem  lyrical. 


CHAPTER  V 

Bbobnt  Yeabs  (1883-1912) 

A  WORK  which  does  not  consider  living  authors  in  detail 
can  give  little  more  than  a  general  discussion  of  the  literary 
achievements  of  the  last  thirty  years.  Besides  the  survivors 
from  the  earlier  time,  whose  work  has  been  discussed  in  the 
preceding  chapter,  there  have  arisen  many  American  writers 
of  merit,  but  few  of  obvious  distinction.  Periods  of  medi- 
ocrity are  likely  to  intervene  between  major  creative  periods, 
and  it  may  be  that  the  next  generation  will  see  great  and 
original  achievement;  but  the  signs  of  the  new  time  are  not 
yet  suJBBciently  plain  to  justify  prophecy. 

An  important  phenomenon  of  the  last  twenty-five  years  has 
been  the  loss  of  literary  prestige  by  New  England,  without 

the  corresponding  development  of  any  other 
j^^^**]^f^    literary  center.     Boston  is  still  the  seat  of 

important  educational  and  publishing  inter- 
ests, and  the  home  of  much  culture.  New  York,  as  the  chief 
commercial  center,  leads  in  the  magazine  and  book  publish- 
ing industries,  and  offers  the  greatest  attractions  to  those 
who  are  interested  in  the  drama  and  other  arts.  But  though 
the  majority  of  American  writers  visit  New  York,  contribute 
to  New  York  magazines,  and  publish  with  New  York  houses, 
no  great  proportion  of  them  live  in  the  ciiy,  and  there  is  no 
very  distinctive  New  York  school  of  writers.  Other  cities, 
notably  Philadelphia  and  Chicago,  have  literary  interests  of 
importance.  The  tendency  seems  to  be,  however,  to  concen- 
trate publishing  in  the  East,  especially  in  New  York,  but  to 
leave  authors  scattered  throughout  the  country.    This  is  b 

461 


4612  Amxbioak  LrrxEArou 

natural  result  of  modem  means  of  communication,  and  the 
modem  diasemination  of  books.  Diversity  of  residence  and 
ease  of  communication  make  possible  the  expression  of  minor 
sectional  traits,  and  at  the  same  time  an  increase  in  the  homo- 
geneity of  national  literature. 

Another  interesting  fact  is  the  development  of  periodicals 
I  in  such  a  way  as  to  change  the  relation  between  author  and 

reader.    In  an  earlier  day  maga2dnes  were  sup- 
2j"|2!J?         ported  directly  by  their  readers,  and  could  pay 

their  contributors  only  in  proportion  to  the 
amount  received  from  subscriptions.  In  commercial  phrase, 
the  magazine  stood  in  the  position  of  middleman  between 
the  producer  and  the  consumer  of  literature.  With  the  devel- 
opment of  modem  business  methods  magazines  are  supported 
by  advertising,  and  in  some  cases  subscriptions  form  a  rela- 
tively small  source  of  income.  The  manager  may  care  for  a 
large  circidation  more  on  account  of  the  greater  advantages 
in  advertising  contracts  than  on  account  of  the  money  received 
from  the  sale  of  copies.  He  is  in  danger  of  regarding  tHe 
literary  contents  as  in  itself  an  advertising  feature,  and  of 
choosing  contributors  for  their  advertising  value.  It  is  true 
that  all  magazine  editors  are  on  the  alert  for  the  desirable 
work  of  any  new  author;  but  it  is  also  tme  that  many  of 
them  are  willing  to  pay  a  popular  writer  his  own  price  for 
.  anything,  good  or  bad,  that  bears  his  name.  As  a  result 
'.authors  of  established  reputation  are  sorely  tempted  to  allow 
I  the  publication  of  hasty  and  ill  considered  works.  More 
serious  is  the  fact  that  even  the  better  magazines  are  forced 
by  competition  to  supply  novelties,  and  to  accept  material 
'that  is  striking  and  speciously  attractive,  rather  than  that 
which  is  sound.  Since  a  much  larger  proportion  of  writings 
than  ever  before  are  first  published  in  magazines,  these  facts 
are  of  serious  importance. 
Modem  processes  of  illustration  also  influence  writings  in- 


Bbcent  Years  463 

tended  for  magazines^  and  to  a  lesser  extent  those  published 
in  books.  They  have  already  revolutionized  the  literature  of 
travel;  so  that  the  up-to-date  traveller's  narrative  is  no 
longer  a  series  of  graphic  descriptions  and  interesting  inci- 
dentS;  but  a  thin  letter-press  commentary  on  the  work  of 
his  camera^  or  maybe  of  his  brush  and  pencil.  It  is  hard  to 
believe^  too,  that  some  of  the  stories  published  by  magazines 
are  not  accepted  because  they  lend  themselves  to  illustration 
rather  than  for  their  literary  qualities. 

These  changed  conditions  are  by  no  means  unmixed  evils; 
nor  are  their  concomitants,  the  middleman  between  author 
and  publisher,  and  the  syndicate  of  periodicals.  They  do, 
however,  aflfect  the  circumstances  of  publication  so  seriously 
that  they  must  affect  the  method  and  quality  of  literary  pro- 
duction. Whether  the  sum  of  their  influences  is  for  good 
or  for  bad  it  is  now  too  soon  to  say. 

It  is  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  time  that  recent 
tendencies  in  novel  writing  are  in  the  direction  of  realism 

and  character  analysis.    There  have  been  oc- 

T^wd^ealism  ^^^^^^^^  violent  reactions  in  the  direction  of 

ultra-romanticism,  and  about  the  close  of  the 
century  the  country  suffered  from  an  epidemic  of  hastily 
written  historical  novels.  The  two  most  distinguished  living 
American  novelists,  William  Dean  Howells  jnd  jEeQjy.  JwiGS» 
stand,  however,  for  the  study  and  portrayal  of  things  as  they 
are. 

In  the  recent  development  of  the  short  story  as  a  distinct 
literary  form  America  has  done  its  full  share,  and  more; 

and  perhaps  American  writers  of  short  stories 

ThA  Short  Story  i  j.*    i  j*  j.*        •  i_  ^  x-l        a        • 

^  are  relatively  more  distmguished  than  Ameri- 
can authors  in  any  other  field  of  literature.  The  increasing 
number  of  magazines  offers  opportunities  for  the  publication 
of  short  stories,  and  short  stories  in  turn  help  to  make  the 
magazines  possible  Bud  popular^i    Many  young  persons  with 


464  Ambrioak  LrnsRATURB 

literary  interests  have  foimd  time  to  attempt  the  briefer 
form  when  circamstances  would  have  prevented  them  from 
writing  an  old-fashioned  two  volmne  novel;  and  though  this 
has  led  to  the  production  of  an  immense  amount  of  experi- 
mental and  mediocre  work^  it  has  devebped  a  few  writers 
who  might  not  otherwise  have  discovered  their  capabilities. 

1  During  the  last  few  years  the  short  story  has  come  to  be  re- 
garded as  a  worthy  form  of  fiction  with  laws  of  its  own,  and 
its  technique  is  now  being  studied  by  many  critics.  A  notable 
characteristic  of  recent  short  story  writing  in  America  is  the 
use  of  '^ocal  color/'  Almost  every  distinctive  community  and 
mode  of  life  in  the  country  has  been  exploited  by  story 
tellers.  Among  the  many  writers  who  have  made  special 
fields  their  own  are^arah  Orne  Jewett  and  Mary  E.  Wilkins_ 

JPrefimanJQr-lLBW.iE»glf|n4,ilPQrge  W.  Cable  for  the  Iiouisi- 
anajCreolfig,  Mary  M.  Murfree  (Charles  Egbert  jDraddoct] 
for  the  .Temiessee  i^pmitain^  P.  Hopkinson  Smith  for  some^ 
aspectsof  the  South,  Thomas  Nelson  Page  and  JoerC£an3Ier 

jHarris  for  the  Southern  negro,  James  Lane  Allen  for  Ken- 
tucky,  Hamlin  Garland  and  Owen  Wister  for  certain  features 
of  life  in  the  middle  West  and  the  Southwest,  respectively. 
Not  only  different  sections  of  the  country,  but  occupations 
which  have  distinctive  peculiarities  ipre  drawn  upon  for  set- 
tings for  short  stories. 

The  valuable  achievement  of  the  last  quarter-century  in 
poetry  has  been  small.     The  best  work  has  been  done  by 

writers   who   made   their   reputation   before 

^  1883.    The  fashion  has  set  toward  short  and 

epigrammatic  lyrics,  and  few  poems  on  an  ambitious  scale 

have  been  attempted.     The  Americans  who  have  had  most 

linfiuence  on  their  latest  successors  are  Emerson  and  Whit- 

-man.  There  are  many  experiments  in  the  manner  of  Euro- 
pean poets  and  of  other  times,  but  there  is  litUe  that  seeiQS 
a  high  and  genuine  expression  of  tcnday. 


Recent  Years  465 

An  increasing  number  of  younger  men  have  been  tempted 
to  the  writing  of  plays,  and  some  of  them  have  produced 

work  admirably  suited  to  effective  presenta- 
tion by  the  complex  art  of  the  modem  stage. 
There  have,  however,  been  no  dramas  of  the  first  literary  rank, 
and  few  of  the  second.  The  perpetual  demand  for  sensa- 
tional plays  has  been  filled  by  melodramas  which  stage-craft 
is  able  to  make  more  lurid  than  ever  before :  but  the  tendency 
in  the  drama,  as  in  prose  fiction,  is  towaidLjgalism,  It  may 
be  partly  as  a  result  of  that  tendency  that  the  successful  act- 
ing plays  written  within  the  last  few  years  have  been  almost 
all  in  prose. 

Within  recent  years  there  have  been  many  writers  of  good 
prose  essays,  but  none  of  preeminent  distinction.    The  sharp 

differentiation  of  the  short  story  from  the 
essay  has  modified  the  latter,  and  no  recent 
writings  are  of  the  same  order  as  some  of  the  most  charming 
work  of  Addison,  Lamb,  and  Irving.  Essays  on  various 
aspects  of  nature-study  have  become  popular,  and  discussions 
of  literary  and  artistic  matters  are  more  widely  read  than  ever 
before.  In  the  better  newspapers  lighter  discussions  of  social 
questions  and  of  evils  of  the  day  have  been  more  refined  »nd 
more  truly  humorous  than  formerly.  Though  these  can 
hardly  be  classed  as  literature  their  improvement  indicates 
better  popular  taste. 

With  the  development  of  modem  ideals  of  scholarship  the 
writings  of  scholars  take  less  and  less  rank  9S  literature. 

Thoroughness  of  investigation  and  imparti- 
^  ality  of  statement  are  the  chief  merits  of  the 
monograph  or  treatise;  and  many  investigators  seem  to  fear 
that  literary  graces  are  to  be  shunned  lest  they  seduce  the 
writer  from  accuracy  in  the  presentation  of  facts.  For  this 
reason  few  of  the  many  able  scientists  and  historians  of 
recent  years  need  be  mentioned  in  this  Tolnme. 


466  Ahbrioan  Ltteratubb 

On  acoount  of  the  increased  homogeneity  of  the  country 
and  the  great  frequency  of  migrations^  classification  of  au- 
thors according  to  location  is  less  easy  and  far 
WHim^        less  significant  in  this  period  than  in  those  that 

have  preceded.  In  New  England,  where  the  lit- 
erary life  has  fortunately  been  conducive  to  longevity^  Edward 
Everett  Hale,  Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson,  Julia  Ward 
Howe,  J.  T.  Trowbridge,  and  Donald  G.  Mitchell,,  all  contribu-' 
tors  to  the  "Atlantic'*  in  its  early  days,  continued  to  write  un- 
til well  into  the  twentieth  century ;  and  so  did  Harriet  Prescott 
_Sppfford,  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  Var,cLjind  Thomas  Bailey 
^Idrich,  slightly  yoimger  members  of  the  "Atlantic**  group. 
Among  surviving  writers  who  entered  the  field  later  are 
JjjliaJ3jJBJEtexi;»J>f  Vermont,  who  has  written  popular  verse, 
Arthur  Sherbuxne  .Hardy,  of  New  Hampshire,  who  has  pub- 
lished several  novels  and  miscellaneous  essays,  and  Mary  E. 
jVi11ri]]fl  JpVpPTnflTij  of  Massachusetts,  who  has  written  short 
stories.  Winston  Churchill,  one  of  the  most  popular  of  later 
novelists,  lives  in  New  Hampshire.  Margaret  W.  Deland^poet 
and  novelist,  has  been  a  resident  of  Boston  since  1880,  though 
she  was  a  native  of  Pennsylvania.  The  relative  importance 
of  women  in  the  literary  life  of  New  England  is  an  interest- 
ing fact. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  writers  of  verse  who  no  longer 
survives  is  Emily  Dicldnppii. (1830-1886}^  who  was  bom  and 

spent  her  life  in  Amherst,  Massachusetts. 
^  ^  **  Though  a  woman  of  grace  and  social  accom- 
plishment she  voluntarily  lived  almost  as  a  recluse.  Only 
three  or  four  of  her  poems  were  published  during  her  life- 
time, and  not  even  her  closest  friends  realized  her  power,  or 
knew  of  the  amount  of  excellent  work  that  she  was  storing 
away  in  her  portfolio.  The  three  little  volumes  of  verse  pub- 
lished after  her  death  abound  in  short  startling  bits  of  self- 
TQvelation  and  incisive  comments  on  life*    Though  uneveOi 


Becent  Years  467 

as  secret  poetical  work  is  almost  sure  to  be^  they  show  nn- 
questionable  genius.  The  author  had  humor^  insight^  and 
an  unusual  power  of  terse  and  well  rounded  expression.  Her 
Letters  are  interesting^  but  are  disappointing  in  that  they 
give  so  little  clue  to  her  personality. 
JgwTfth  Qmft  .Tpwptt  (;i849-19Q9^  began  to  write  before 
1883^  though  most  of  her  work  was  done  later.    She  was  a 

descendant  of  old  and  cultured  New  England 
Mrah  Ome  families,   and  was  bom   at   South  Berwick, 

Maine,  where  her  father  was  a  doctor  with  a 
large  country  practice.  As  a  member  of  a  physician's  family 
Miss  Jewett  had  an  exceptional  opportunity  to  know  inti- 
mately the  lives  of  persons  of  all  social  grades.  During  her 
early  womanhood  the  summer  boarder  was  beginning  to 
frequent  the  vicinity  of  South  Berwick,  and  it  was  with  a 
kindly  hope  of  interpreting  her  humbler  neighbors  to  these 
visitors  that  she  began  to  write.  Her  first  sketches  were 
printed  in  the  "Atlantic  Monthly.'*  ^P^ephqven^  her  first  novel, 
appeared  in  1877,  but  is  said  to  have  been  written  earlier. 
After  the  publication  of  Deephaven  she  continued  to  write 
abundantly,  producing  a  novel  or  a  volume  of  short  stories 
almost  every  year.  Most  of  her  work  portrays  New  England 
life,  and  she  is  at  her  best  in  the  representation  of  placid 
existence  in  a  manner  that  frequently  invites  comparisons 
with  Cranford.  The^  (Inunir^j  nf  Ha  Pninip^  JPjri^  IB  prob- 
ably her  best  novel. 

Constance  . J^emmore  ,W,Q.Qlapn,  .(I83&J188.4),   a  niece  of 
James  Penimore  Cooper,  illustrates  the  migratory  tendency 

that  makes  geographical  grouping  of  authors 
Constance  difficult.     She  was  bom  in  New  Hampshire, 

WoolBoa  ^*®   educated  in   Cleveland  jind  New  York 

city,  for  several  years  spent  her  winters  in 
Florida,  and  after  1879  lived  mostly  in  Italy.  She  fairly 
belongs,  however,  to  New  Hampshire.     She  began  to  write 


468  Ambbioak  Lttbratubx 

fiction  about  1870  and  continued  nntil  her  death.  Most  of 
her  work^  which  consisted  of  both  short  stories  and  novels,  waB 
first  published  in  '^Harper's  Magazine/^  and  much  of  it  was 
afterward  reprinted  in  book  form.  She  is  distinguished  from 
the  mass  of  magazine  short  story  writers  by  her  close  obser- 
vation and  careful  workmanship,  but  she  hardly  had  genius. 
New  York  has  attracted  a  large  number  of  writers,  many 
of  whom  are  or  have  been  connected  with  literary  periodicals. 

Possibly  this  association  with  journalism  may 
Wrftm^  have  encouraged  the  tendency  to  mild  Bo- 

hemianism  which  many  of  them  have  shown 

'or  affected.  No  single  characteristic,  not  even  Bohemianism, 
is,  however,  common  to  them  all.  There  is  really  no  later 
New  York  school. 

^eniy  Cujler  Bunner  (1855-1856)  was  a  native  of  Oswego, 
New  York,  but  passed  all  his  life  after  early  manhood  in  the 

ciiy.  Prom  1877  until  his  death  he  was 
i^J^^      editor    of.  'Tuct!f    and    expended    much 

of  his  energy  in  the  difficult  task  of  seri- 
ously influencing  public  opinion  through  the  editorial 
articles  of  a  comic  paper.  He  also  wrote  stories  iand 
verses  which  prove  his  good  humor  and  cleverness  and  which 
show  a  deft  literary  touch.  Among  his  prose  volumes  are 
Short  Sixes,  1890;  Zadoc  Pine  and  other  Stories,  1891; 
Love  in  Old  Cloathes  and  other  Stories,  1896;  the  longer 
Story  of  a  New  Torh  House,  1887,  and  Made  in  France,  a 
volume  of  translations,  1893.  There  is  humor  in  all  of  these, 
though  they  are  by  no  means  "funny  stories.**  The  best  of 
them  are  charmingly  told.  Two  volumes  of  verse.  Airs  from 
Arcady  and  Rowen,  appeared  during  the  author's  lifetime, 
and  after  his  death  a  collection  of  his  poems.    He  is  best  in 

,  parody  of  the  finer  sort  and  in  society  verse.     Some  of  his 

:  more  delicate  lyrics  show  the  Influence  of  Herrick  and  per- 

.  haps  of  Austin  Dobson. 


Begent  Years  469 

Laurence  Hutton  (1843-1904)  was  a  native  of  New  York 
city^  and  though  he  travelled  much  abroad  and  during  his 

latest  years  lived  at  Princeton,  New  Jersey, 
g"S!?^  was  always  associated  with  the  literary  life  of 

the  metropolis.  For  a  number  of  years  he 
conducted  the  department  of  'TLiterary  Notes''  in  "Harper^s 
Magazine,''  he  contributed  to  other  periodicals,  and  he  is 
said  to  have  written  or  edited  nearly  fifty  volumes.  His  chief 
interests  were  in  literature  and  the  stage.  Many  of  his 
books  deal  with  actors  and  the  theatre,  others  are  literary 
reminiscence  and  minor  criticism.  His  Literary  Landmarks 
Jp/«-£ifl»^^  *  carefully  prepared  guide  to  places  of  literary 
interest,  was  followed  by  similar  volumes  on  Edinburgh,  Paris, 
and  other  cities.  He  had  an  attractive  personality,  and  his 
writings  were  pleasant  reading  to  his  contemporaries;  but 
his  more  ambitious  works  hardly  show  the  scholarship  that 
will  make  them  last,  and  his  lighter  prose  is  too  informal  to 
survive  the  traditions  of  the  man  himself. 

JFrancis   "Rifibarfl    ^InfiVtmi    ( 1834-^ gOg)  ^   who   wrote   as 
Prank  E.   Stockton,  was  bom  in  Philadelphia  and  began 

journalistic  work  in  that  city,  but  during  most 
Sto!^<m  ^^  ^®   literary   career   was   connected   with 

"Scribner's  Monthly"  and  '^St.  Nicholas'* 
in  New  York.  His  reputation  was  achieved  rather  late  in  life. 
He  published  a  volume  of  stories  in  1870,  but  it  was  not  imtil 
some  years  later  that  the  ^'Eudder  Grange"  group,  and 
especially  ^^The  Lady  or  the  Tiger/'  brought  him  general  rec- 
ognition. He  wrote  voluminously,  and  during  the  last  thirty 
years  of  his  life  published  more  than  forty  volumes.  He 
was  a  quiet  humorist  of  the  ingenious  and  quizzical  order,  and 
was  most  successful  in  portraying  with  apparent  seriousness 
xmusual  or  impossible  situations.  "The  Lady  or  the  Tiger," 
his  best  known  story,  is  a  new  type  of  hoAX.  He  is  likely 
to  be  remembered  chiefly  for  this  and  for  a  few  more  of  hie 


470  Akbbioak  Litbratubb 

best  short  stories.  His  novels.  The  Late  Mrs.  Null,  The 
Hundredth  Man,  and  others,  several  collections  of  juvenile 
tales,  and  such  compilations  as  Stories  of  New  Jersey  and 
Buccaneers  and  Pirates  of  our  Coasts  are  respectable  work, 
but  have  little  enduring  quality. 

Among  essayists  and  miscellaneous  writers  still  living  in 
New  York,  or  closely  connected  with  the  city,  are .  Lyman 

^bbott,  whose  chief  interest  is  in  religious  and 
P^CJy         sociological  questions;. Henry  van  Dvke.  now 

of  Princeton  University,  preacher,  poet,  and 
wMftyiflf.;  Jn^jl  "PiifTTOughs.  who  writes  on  the  study  of  nature; 
andJ[amilton  W.  Mabi^  Jfrander  Matthews,  and  George  E. 
Wopdberry,  who  discuss  questions  of  literature.  Professors 
Matthews  and  Woodbeny  are  also  known  as  writers  of  verse, 
and  Professor  Matthews  has  written  clever  short  stories. 
Theodore  Booseyelt  has  written  on  a  variety  of  topics,  espe- 
cially history  and  manly  sports.  William  Winter  has  writ- 
ten important  dramatic  criticisms.  Edith  Whartoiij  one  of 
the  latest  writers  of  prose  fiction,  was  bom  in  New  York  and 
her  literary  associations  are  chiefly  with  this  city.  Among 
New  York  writers  should  also  be  mentioned  Francis  Hop- 
^kinson  Smith,  author  of  many  delightful  stories,  though  by 
birth  and  temperament  he  belongs  with  the  South.  Henry 
^James^^  the  most  distinguished  American  novelist  resident 
abroad,  has  his  chief  American  associations  with  New  York. 
Mr.  James  has  created  the  "international  novel/*  in  which 
he  represents  a  cosmopolitan  group  of  characters,  each  some- 
what at  loss  to  understand  the  other's  points  of  view. 

This  is  perhaps  the  best  place  to  notice  Francis  Marion 
Crawford.  (1854-1909),  whose  literary  relationships,  at  least 

in  a  business  way,  were  also  with  New  York. 
CrawteST  Though  he  spent  most  of  his  life  abroad  he 

was  of  the  purest  American  ancestry.    He  was 
descended  from  General  Francis  Marion  of  Bevolutionaiy 


Bbobnt  Ybabs  471 

fame,  and  his  father  was  a  noted  American  sculptor.  His 
mother  was  a  sister  of  JiQia  Ward  Howe.  He  was  bom  in 
Italy  and  remained  there  until  his  twelfth  year.  He  received 
part  of  his  preparatory  schooling  at  Concord,  Massachusetts ; 
attended  in  turn  the  Universities  of  Cambridge,  Heidelberg, 
and  Bome;  visited  India,  whither  he  was  drawn  by  his  inter- 
est in  Sanscrit;  and  returned  for  a  time  to  America,  where  he 
studied  at  Harvard  and  began  his  literary  career.  He  soon 
went  abroad  again  and  lived  most  of  the  time  in  Italy.  Dur- 
ing the  later  years  of  his  life  he  owned  a  villa  overlooking  the 
sea  at  Sorrento. 

Crawford  gained  some  acquaintance  with  journalism  in 
India^  but  his  first  serious  writing  was  done  while  he  was  at 

Harvard.  Mr.  Isaacs^  which  appeared  in  1882 

Crawford's  ^  ■*       '       ^  >  *^'  x  m^ 

^ra^m  *^^  attracted  great  attention,  was  a  story  of 

the  East  Indian  life  which  still  had  a  strong 
hold  on  his  imagination.  From  this  time  he  wrote  incessantly 
until  his  death.  Hardly  a  year  went  by  without  its  volume 
from  his  pen,  and  some  years  yielded  two  or  more.  This 
rapidity  could  hardly  be  conducive  to  the  most  finished  work- 
manship, though  it  must  be  owned  that  his  stories  rarely 
show  obvious  marks  of  haste.  He  attempted  a  few  stories 
with  American  settings,  but  after  Mr,  Isaacs  the  scenes  of  his 
best  tales  were  laid  in  Europe.  A  g^g^^f^-^^^^^fl  Ko- 
J^op^e^  one  of  the  most  finished  of  his  shorter  novels,  is  a 
story  of  Bussian  exiles  in  Mimich.  The  action  of  many  of 
his  most  popular  stories  takes  place,  naturally,  in  Italy. 
Among  these  Italian  tales  ^Te^^Ronmn^Singsrj  8ar^^^ 
.^35^'./?.^-^aJP^d  Pow  pmno,  the  last  three  forming  a  trilogy 
which  traces  the  fortunes  of  a  group  of  Boman  characters 
during  the  troubled  times  after  the  fall  of  the  papal  power. 
All  his  books  are  readable;  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  choose 
a  restricted  list  of  the  best  to  which  his  admirers  would  agree. 
Besides  fiction  he  wrote  some  popular  historical   works. 


472  Akebioan  LmaATUBB 

BuUn  of  the  South,  Ave  Roma  Immortalis,  and  Salve 
Venetia;  and  an  interesting  essay,  "The  Novel— What  Is  It  V* 

In  the  essay  jnst  named  Crawford  defined  the  novel  as 
a  '^pocket  theatre/'  and   took  his  stand   firmly  with  the 

romanticists  as  opposed  to  the  realists.  His 
SkcSoo* ^^^  plots  are,  indeed,  romantic;  and  his  characters 

are  unusual  in  either  personality  or  situation; 
but  every  character  acts  from  comprehensible  motives,  and 
the  backgrounds  of  his  stories  are  pictured  with  the  greatest 
accuracy  of  detail.  He  was  a  keen  observer,  and  he  had  the 
interest  in  arts  and  crafts  and  the  manual  dexterity  in  mas- 
tering them  that  was  once  considered  an  American  trait.  He 
could  picture  a  cobbler's  shop  or  a  cigarette  maker's  workroom 
as  accurately  as  the  scenes  of  higher  life.  He  also  succeeded 
as  few  men  do  in  being  really  cosmopolitan,  so  that  even 
the  citizens  of  the  various  coimtries  where  he  placed  his 
plots  bear  witness  that  he  had  actually  entered  into  their 
life,  and  for  the  time  being  looked  from  their  point  of  view. 
He  was,  too,  a  bom  story  teller,  who  never  let  the  peculiarities 
of  his  characters  or  the  vividness  of  his  backgrounds  obscure 
the  interest  in  the  story  itself.  As  a  result  his  characters, 
even  the  most  romantic  of  them,  seem  to  live,  and  the  action 
of  his  novels  leaves  an  impression  of  realiiy  which  is  more 
lasting  than  that  of  most  romantic  stories. 

Marion  Crawford  was  not  a  great  novelist,  but  he  ranked 
very  high  among  writers  of  clean,  genuine,  interesting  tales. 
With  perhaps  one  exception  he  is  the  most  cosmopolitan  of 
American  writers.  His  style,  notwithstanding  his  hasty 
composition,  is  always  clear  and  dignified. 

Considerably  younger  than  most  of  the  men  already  named 
wereJPjchard  Hqyey,  Stephen  Crane,  »nd  Paul  Leicester 

RidurdH         ^-^*  .KichardV^Qv^^lM^ 

Kich«      ovey    ^  Illinois,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth,  and 

after  studying  for  the  ministry  changed  his  plans  and  became 


Bboent  Yeabs  473 

joumalist,  nctor,  and  finally  professor  of  English  literature 
in  Barnard  college.  His  poems  are  varied  in  form  and  kind; 
they  show  such  diverse  influences  as  Whitman,  Emerson, 
Kipling,  and  the  later  French  poets,  and  they  attempt  many 
Greek  and  other  imusual  metres.  His  most  ambitious  work 
was  Launcelot  and  Ouenevere,  a  Poem  in  Dramas,  of  which 
he  published  four  parts,  "The  Quest  of  Merlin,  a  Masque;'* 
"The  Marriage  of  Guenevere,  a  Tragedy;'*  "The  Birth  of 
Galahad,  a  Bomantic  Drama;'*  and  "Taliesin,  a  Masque.** 
The  last  of  these  is  a  mystical  allegory  of  the  poet  in  his 
relation  to  life,  and  has  some  lyrics  that  are  almost  fine, 
though  they  never  quite  sing  themselves.  In  the  earlier  parts, 
especially,  there  is  often  a  conscious  striving  and  a  lack  of 
perfect  touch  and  taste.  In  moral  tone  the  poem  represents 
the  reaction  against  the  exaltation  of  the  domestic  virtues 
in  the  Idyls  of  the  King,  and  Launcelot  is  made  the  chief 
hero.  The  admirers  of  the  poet  ranked  Launcelot  and 
Ouenevere  high,  and  it  is  certainly  a  work  of  promise.  If 
Hovey  had  lived  he  might  have  done  better  things  on  the 
grand  scale.  As  it  is,  his  best  work  is  probably  some  of 
his  less  ambitious  lyrics,  many  of  which  appeared  in  ^ngs 
from  Vagabondia,  which  he  published  jointly  with  his  friend 
Bliss  Carman.  As  the  title  of  this  volume  implies,  his 
lighter  verses  have  freedom  and  something  of  Bohemianism, 
but  it  is  the  Bohemianism  of  the  open  air  rather  than  that 
of  the  city  beer  cellar.  At  the  time  of  the  Spanish- American 
war  Hovey  wrote  several  patriotic  pieces,  of  which  ^TJnmani- 
f  est  Destinv**  is  the  best. 


Stephen  Crane    (1871-1900)    attended  Lafayette  college 
and  Syracuse  universiiy,  and  served  as  war  correspondent 

during  the  Graeco-Turkish  and  the  Spanish- 

^  American  wars.    For  the  last  two  years  of  his 

life  he  made  his  home  in  England.     His  stories,  especially 

"Tbe   Bed  Badge,  of   Courage/*  attracted  great  attention. 


474  AnsnoAH  Litbratukb 

especially  in  England,  where  they  won  high  praiae  from  con- 
seryative  critics.  Since  his  death  his  reputation  has  faded 
and  it  is  doubtfid  if  it  will  be  reviyed.  He  had  the  reporter's 
knack  of  seeing  the  striking  fact  and  stating  it  in  tiie  pic- 
turesque way,  and  he  had  something  of  the  literary  artisf  s 
technique  and  sense  of  form;  but  his  work  lacked  repose  and 
perfect  taste.  His  poems,  some  of  which  appeared  in  a 
volume,  TFar  is  Kind,  show  the  influence  of  Whitman. 

j^aul  Leister  Ford  ^18  native  of  Brooklyn, 

besides  important  work  as  editor,  biographer,  and  bibliogra- 
pher, wrote  several  novels.    Among  these  were 
P^  Uicestar      y^^  Hpnprahle  Peter  Stirling^  The_  Oreat  K. 

..QndA.  Train  Robbery,  and  Janice  Meredith. 
The  last,  a  story  of  the  Bevolution,  is  a  conscientious  his- 
torical novel,  and  appeared  in  1899,  just  as  this  class  of  fic- 
tion was  temporarily  in  vogue.  The  Honorable  Peter  Stirling 
was  obviously  based  on  facts  in  the  life  of  Grover  Cleveland. 
In  spite  of  glaring  faults  in  both  style  and  construction  it  is 
a  graphic,  realistic  story  and  will  remain  as  a  valuable  study 
of  some  aspects  of  American  life. 

During  recent  years  as  in  the  past  Philadelphia  has  main- 
tained publishing  interests  of  importance,  and  has  been  a 

center  of  quiet,  conservative  culture.  Among 
*|™"Wpiiia        living  authors  associated  with  the  city  are  Dr. 

^Silas^Widl.  Mitchell^  author  of  several  novels 
and  poems,  as  well  as  technical  and  semi-technical  works; 
Owen  Wisjer,  whose  best  work  in  fiction  deals  with  the  West 
and  the  Southwest  ;^gnes  Bepplier,  the  author  of  many  sug- 
gestive essays,  and  Sorace"^  Howard  Purness,  the  Shake- 
spearean scholar. 

Since  the  trials  and  uncertainties  of  the  reconstruction 
period  Southerners  have  turned  to  literature  as  never  before. 
The  greater  number  of  Southern  authors  have  written  fiction, 
especially  stories  which  portray  aspects  of  provincial  life 


Becbnt  Ybabs  475 

with  which  they  are  familiar;  but  the  South  has  produced, 
during  the  last  twenty-five  years,  at  least  its  fair  share  of 

workers    in    all    departments    of    literature. 
The  South  j,^^  ^^  "Atlantic  Monthly^*  was  for  a  time  in 

editorial  charge  of  a  man  of  Southern  birth.  Most  of  these 
writers  are  still  living  and  can  only  be  mentioned  here;  but 
when  the  future  history  of  American  literature  is  written  this 
infusion  of  the  Southern  element  is  sure  to  give  the  material 
for  an  interesting  and  instructive  chapter. 

In  Maryland  J^jd^d  Malcolm  Johnston.  (1822-1898>.  a 
native  of  Georgia  and  long  the  head  of  a  boys'  school  near 

Baltimore,  was  the  author  of  some  excellent 
Maryland  short  stories.     He  was  nearly  sixty  years  of 

Writeri^        *?®  before  he  wrote  much,  but  he  gained  his 

greatest  success  in  portraying  the  "cracker** 
life  of  Georgia  which  he  had  known  in  his  youth.  Several 
of  the  best  of  the  Georgia  stories  were  grouped  together  as 
The  Dukeshorough  Tales.  John^B.  Tabb  (1845-19Q9),  a 
native  of  Virginia  and  long  instructor  in  English  literature 
in  a  Boman  Catholic  college  near  Baltimore,  was  the  author  of 
many  quatrains,  sonnets,  and  other  brief  lyrics.  Father 
TabVs  range  was  narrow,  but  his  exquisite  bits  of  verse  show  1 
a  genuineness  of  feeling  and  a  perfection  of  form  that  has* 
rarely  been  equalled  by  minor  American  poets.  JIaurice 
Francis  Egan^  of  Washington,  author  of  many  tales  and 
essays,  still  survives.  Jhomas  NelsQB JPage,  of  Virginia,  still 
writes  delightful  stories,  in  the  best  of  which  the  oldtime 
darkey  is  a  prominent  character. 

In  Georgia  Joel  Chandler  Harris  (1848-1908)  wrote  tales 
based  on  the  folldore  of  the  negroes.  As  a  boy  he  learned  the 
printer's  trade  in  the  oflBce  of  a  literary  periodical  published 
by  a  wealthy  Georgia  planter  on  his  estate^  and  here  when 
his  work  was  over  he  listened  to  the  superstitious  stories  of 
the  slaves.    Later,  when  he  was  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the 


476  Akbbioan  Lxtkratusb 

'^Atlanta  Constitation/'  he  created  the  character  of  TTncle 
BemuB^  an  old-fashioned  negro  into  whose  mouth  he  put  his 

tales.  These  early  Uncle  Bemns  sketches  were 
Georgia  Writers  unique,  and  they  are  among  the  most  inter- 
— Jod  Chandlar   ^^^    ^^    valuable    contributions    of    the 

South  to  national  literature.  Like  many 
newspaper  writers  who  attain  great  popularity  Harris 
worked  too  fast,  and  is  said  to  have  published  twenty-six 
volumes  of  different  sorts  between  1880  and  1897,  besides 
performing  his  editorial  duties  during  that  time.  Much 
of  this  work  is  relatively  unimportant;  and  even  the  later 
Uncle  Bemus  stories  are  inferior  to  their  predecessors,  partly, 
perhaps,  because  the  author  tried  to  make  them  more  ac- 
curately representative  of  real  negro  folklore.  As  illustrative 
of  a  different  phase  of  Southern  development  mention  should 
perhaps  be  made  of  Henry  W.  Grady  (1850-1889),  a  native 
of  Georgia,  a  graduate  of  the  University  of  Georgia,  and  for 

I  some  time  editor  of  the  ^'Atlanta  Constitution.**  Though 
none  of  his  work  is  likely  to  live  as  literature  he  is  one  of  the 
best  illustrations  of  the  development  of  new  and  promising 
intellectual  tendencies  in  the  section  which  he  represented. 

The  Western  and  Southwestern  states  of  the  Old  South 
have  also  had  their  share  of  writers.    Among  those  still  living 

is  Mary  N".  Murfrea^  of  Tennessee,  who  writes 
WritS****"       ovw  the  name  of  [Charles  Egbert  Craddock. 

Her  work  consists  largely  of  the  portrayal,  in 
short  stories,  of  life  in  the  less  progressive  regions  of  her 
state.  Another  writer  of  short  stories,  Frances  Hodgson  Bur- 
jjgtt,  is  a  native  of  England,  but  for  some  time  resided  in 
Tennessee,  and  may  fairly  be  assigned  to  that  state.  In 
Louisiana  George  W.  Cable  has  effectively  portrayed  Creole 
life  in  novels  and  short  tales. 

It  is  doubtful  whether  Lafcadio  Hearn  (1850-1904)  can 
fairly  be  claimed  as  an  American  writer;  yet  he  lived  for 


Bbcbnt  TsABd  477 

dome  time  in  New  Orleans,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  was 
here  that  he  developed  his  individual  style;  and  he  always 

published  in  America.     He  was  bom  in  the 
earn    j^j^jj^j^  igiai^flg^  the  son  of  an  Irishman  serving 

as  surgeon  in  the  British  army,  and  a  Oreek  mother.  He  was 
educated  in  preparation  for  the  priesthood,  part  of  the  time 
in  a  boys'  school  in  Paris.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he  came 
to  America  and  was  reporter  on  a  Cincinnati  paper.  After- 
ward he  went  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  did  newspaper  work 
and  wrote  tales  and  sketches.  Between  1887  and  1890  he 
spent  considerable  time  in  the  West  Indies,  and  did  some 
journalistic  work  in  New  York.  In  1890  he  went  to  Japan 
under  contract  with  a  magazine  to  furnish  correspondence, 
but  remained  to  become  a  teacher  in  the  University  of  Tokio, 
to  many  a  Japanese  wife  and  become  a  naturalized  citizen 
of  the  empire,  to  accept,  nominally  at  least,  Buddhism,  and 
to  direct  that  his  body  be  cremated  according  to  Buddhist 
rites. 

Heam's  best  work  before  he  went  to  Japan  consisted  of 
sketches  of  life  and  scenes  along  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  in 

the  West  Indies.    In  his  later  years  he  pub- 
5^2!!L  lished  many  books  on  Japan  and  Japanese 

life  and  thought.  The  Japanese  themselves 
gave  him  credit  for  gaining  a  better  insight  into  the  national ! 
character  than  any  other  English  speaking  writer.  His  prose  J 
style  was  the  result  of  careful,  conscientious  effort.  In  his 
earlier  sketches  it  was  characterized  by  richness  and  over- 
luxuriousness,  and  by  wonderful  picturing  power.  In  his 
books  on  Japan  this  exuberance  was  somewhat  restrained, 
and  though  his  style  was  always  strongly  adjectival,  many 
passages  in  his  later  work  have  great  excellence  of  form. 

In  wealth,  in  the  dissemination  of  that  intelligence  that 
is  almost  but  not  quite  culture,  and  in  the  development  of 
higher  education  the  middle  West  has  made  great  advance  in 


478  AxsuoAH  LmtATusB 

the  last  twenty-five  years.    The  literary  importaxice  of  the 
aectioiL  has  iiot»  however,  increased  proportionally.    This  is 

due  to  several  causes.  Much  of  the  upper 
Mississippi  valley  is  now  in  that  prosperous 
but  unpoetic  state  of  development  which  must  intervene  be- 
tween the  picturesqueness  of  pioneer  days  and  the  picturesque- 
ness  of  an  old  civilization*  The  commercial  rather  than  the 
artistic  ideal  dominates  the  West,  even  in  education.  The 
state  universities,  the  most  important  institutions  of  higher 
learning,  are  forced  by  public  sentiment  to  lay  most  stress  on 
'^ractical^  branches  of  knowledge.  Many  cities  have  good 
libraries,  and  some  of  them  creditable  monuments,  art  gal- 
leries, and  musical  organizations;  but  these  are  often  sup- 
[ported  by  men  of  wealth  who  realize  the  value  of  a  culture 
that  they  do  not  themselves  understand,  and  are  enjoyed  by 
{women,  or  by  men  who  have  developed  the  esthetic  at  the 
expense  of  other  faculties.  The  most  important  reason,  how- 
ever, why  the  West  cuts  so  small  a  figure  in  the  literary  world 
is  that  the  majority  of  Western  writers  of  merit  associate 
themselves  sooner  or  later  with  the  East. 

Ohio  may  fairly  lay  claim  to, Edith  Thomas,  one  of  the 
better  living  writers  of  verse.    A  reminder  of  the  eagerness 

with  which  parts  of  Ohio  took  up  the  cause  of 
the  black  man  is  found  in  the  fact  that  jPaul 
L.  Dunbar  (1872-1906^  a  colored  writer  who  achieved  con- 
siderable success  in  both  prose  and  poetry,  was  bom  and  edu- 
cated in  that  state. 

Indiana  has  developed  a  school  of  writers  several  of  whom 
have  become  widely  popular,  though  they  have  never  been 

taken  very  seriously  by  critics.    Wallace  and 

Indiana  Writers   tt       i.         i.  x*       j   •     xi.  j* 

Hay  have  been  mentioned  m  the  preceding 

chapter.     The  most  notable  living  representative  is  James 

JWTiitcomb^Eilfiyj  an  especially  popular  writer  of  humorous 

and  sentimental  poems,   largely  in  dialect.     G^eorge  Ade, 


Rbobnt  Ybabs  479 

author  of  dramas,  stories^  essays^  and  much  miscellaneous 
himiorous  work,  is  a  native  of  Indiana,  though  his  training  as 
a  writer  was  gained  in  Chicago.  Maurice  Thompson  (1844- 
1901)  was  bom  and  passed  the  greater  part  of  his  life  in 
Indiana,  but  his  early  manhood  was  spent  in  the  South,  and 
he  served  through  the  war  in  the  Confederate  army.  Later 
he  was  railway  engineer,  lawyer,  poUtician,  state  geologist 
of  Indiana,  and  for  many  years  non-resident  editor  of  the 
"New  York  Independent.*'  His  published  writings  include 
fiction,  poetry,  books  of  archery  and  other  sports,  popular 
studies  in  natural  science,  literary  essays,  and  history.  Con- 
sidering the  quantity  and  the  variety  it  is  good,  but  the  fa- 
cility with  which  the  author  wrote  and  a  certain  lack  of  train- 
ing and  restraint  interfered  with  his  success. 

Chicago,  the  metropolis  and  the  leading  commercial  city 
of  the  West,  is  naturally  a  bookselling  and  publishing  center 

of   some   importance.      Chicago   newspapers, 
^^^  though  they  bear  a  reputation  for  sensational- 

ism, are  energetically  and  ably  edited.  Two  or  three  pub- 
lishers issue  respectable  lists  of  books ;  and  for  some  years  the 
^3ili|t*  has  been  recognized  as  one  of  the  best  critical  journals 
in  the  country.  Hamlin  Garland,  whose  most  realistic  stories 
are  of  life  in  Wisconsin,  Minnesota,  and  Dakota,  has  many 
associations  with  the  Chicago  writers.  Jarriet  Mann  Miller^ 
who  writes  sketches  on  nature  and  miscellaneous  essays  over 
the  signature  ojLQlive..  Thome  Miller,  was  for  some  time  a 
resident  of  the  city.  .  Peter  Dunne,  the  creator  of  "Mr. 
Dooley,'*  began  his  humorous  sketches  while  employed  on  a 
Chicago  paper.  These  writers  form  no  school,  and  not  even  a 
group  except  in  a  purely  geographical  sense. 

Euyene  Field  (1850-1895).  the  most  important  writer  yet 
distinctly  associated  with  Chicago,  was  bom  in  Saint  Louis 
of  New  England  parentage.  His  mother  died  when  he  was 
very  young,  and  he  grew  to  manhood  under  the  charge  of 


480  AlCBBIOAN  LmSRATUBB 

relatives  in  Vennont  After  Bpending  a  few  months  each  at 
Williams  college,  Knox  college^  and  the  University  of  Mifi- 

sonri  he  became  engaged  to  the  fourteen-year- 
'****°*  old  sister  of  a  friend,  and  partly  to  pass  the  J 

time  until  she  was  of  marriageable  age  went  abroad.     He  | 

returned  after  he  had  exhausted  all  that  was  available  of  j 

his  patrimony,  married,  and  became  a  newspaper  man  in  i 

Saint  Joseph,  Saint  Louis,  Kansas  City,  and  Denver,  suc- 
cessively. In  1883  he  went  to  Chicago  to  take  charge  of  a 
special  column  in  the  "Daily.  KfiFJi,''  jifterward  the  ^Tteoord/^ 
This  column,  which  he  entitled  ^harps  and  Fl^j^^^  he  con- 
tinued with  slight  interruption  until  his  death. 

According  to  his  friends  and  associates  Field  was  an  un- 
usually lovable,   convivial,   impecimious,   and   irresponsible 

newspaper  man,  a  great  practical  joker,  always 
^T^^V^  perpetrating  hoaxes  on  his  friends  and  on 

public  characters  of  whatever  dignity  or 
position.  He  was  fond  of  writing  reports  of  imaginary 
speeches,  and  reviews  of  imaginary  books,  and  anecdotes  of 
imaginary  children,  which  he  assigned  to  persons  more  or 
less  in  the  public  eye ;  and  these  were  often  propoimded  with 
such  seriousness  as  to  deceive  all  but  the  most  sophisticated 
readers.  Until  he  went  to  Chicago,  he  had  read  little  and 
cared  little  for  literature.  There  he  became  interested  in  the 
old  romances  and  ballads,  and  later  in  Horace.  It  was  still 
later  that  he  became  addicted  to  the  book  collecting  of  which 
he  says  so  much  in  his  writings. 

Almost  everything  preserved  in   Field's  collected  works 
appeared  first  in  the  ^'Sharps  and  Flats''  column.    His  first 

books.  The  Tribune  Primer,  published  in  Den- 

"*•  ver  in  1882,  and  Culture's  Oarland,  Boston, 

1887,  are  both  slight  and  humorous,  and  of  interest  chiefiy 

to  collectors.  J[n^l889  he  issued^A  /".tffZg  Jiogh  i^f  Pf^fipihl^ 

Tales  and  A  Little  Booh  of  Western  Verse^    Subsequent  pzoee 


Beoekt  Ybars  481 

voluines  include  more  isles,. The  House,  a  series  of  sketches 
based  on  the  author's  experiences  in  securing  and  fitting  up 
his  own  residence,  and  Love  Affairs  of  a  Bibliomaniac. 
The  two  last  named  had  appeared  in  detached  parts  in  the 
^'Sharps  and  Flats^'  column^  and  neither  was  finished  at  the 
time  of  the  author's  death.  Of  the  other  volumes  of  verse  the 
most  notable  sre  Sonss^of  Childhood,  eoii  Echoes  from  the^ 
Sabine  Farm,  a  series  of  half-translations  and  half-parodies 
of  Horace^  written  by  Eugene  Field  and  his  brother  Boswell 
Martin  Field. 

The  chief  characteristics  of  all  Field's  works  are  geniality, 
humor,   sentimentality,   and   a  tendency  to   imitation   and 

parody,  in  the  broader  sense  of  these  terms. 

of^M'8  wlnrks  ^^®^  ^®  became  interested  in  the  romances 

and  ballads  he  made  free  use,  in  both  prose 
and  verse,  of  a  rudely  manufactured  Old  English  dialect; 
and  in  many  of  his  stories  he  imitates  the  tone  and  manner 
of  the  old  tales.  At  later  periods  the  influence  of  Christopher 
North,  of  Father  Prout,  and  of  Beranger  is  seen  in  his  work. 
He  also  had  a  tendency,  explained  perhaps  by  the  necessity 
of  furnishing  a  stint  of  copy  each  day,  to  imitate  or  repeat 
himself.  Once  started  on  songs  for  children  he  wrote  not 
only  English,  but  Scotch,  Irish,  Dutch,  and  Japanese  lulla- 
bies. The  theme  of  the  death  of  a  child,  which  he  handled 
with  popular  success  in  'Tjittle  Boy  Blue/'  recurs  again  and 
again.  His  prose  tales,  though  in  some  way  they  always 
impress  the  reader  as  the  expression  of  a  charming  person- 
ality, are  mostly  too  artificial  and  too  much  overcharged  with 
sentiment  to  take  the  highest  rank.  His  discursive  essays, 
like  The  Love  Affairs  of  a  Bibliomaniac,  though  immeasur- 
ably above  ordinary  newspaper  work,  show  the  lack  of  that 
deep  scholarship  and  broad  culture  that  lie  back  of  the  great- 
est informal  literary  discussions.  Much  of  his  verse  is 
ephemeral  by  nature  of  the  subject ;  much  of  it  is  only  cleverly 


482  Akbbioak  Lttbratubb 

and  rather  cheaply  hiunoious.  Of  this  sort  is  "The  Little 
Peach/^  which  for  a  few  years  was  sung  or  recited  by  half 
the  comedians  in  the  country.  His  more  sentimental  poems 
are  efEective^  but  often  show  a  touch  of  artificiality.  Even 
'little  Boy  Blue/'  probably  the  most  popular  of  all,  suggests 
the  use  of  pathos  as  literary  capital.  His  best  work  was  in 
his  poems  for  children,  which  include  such  fanciful  lullabies 
as  ^^ynken,  Blynken^  and  Nod/'  and  "The  Hush-a-bye 
Lady/'  and  such  semi-humorous  appreciations  of  childish 
feeling  as  "Seein'  Things  at  Night." 

Eugene  Field's  importance  in  American  literary  history 
comes  not  from  the  value  of  what  he  wrote,  but  from  his 

relation  to  the  West  and  to  his  occupation  as 
^Jj^^j^yj^         journalist     Though  he  owed  much  to  New 

England,  he  was  a  thorough  Westerner.  He 
declined  time  after  time  remunerative  offers  from  Eastern 
newspapers  because  the  East  oppressed  him.  His  view  of 
life,  of  books,  of  culture  was  that  of  the  section  in  which  he 
lived.  Moreover,  he  furnishes  the  best  illustration  that  the 
country  has  yet  produced  of  the  possible  relations  between 
the  daily  newspaper  and  the  man  of  letters.  Not  only 
jokes,  hoaxes,  poems,  and  tales,  but  book-lore  and  transla- 
tions of  Horace  were  first  offered  to  the  patrons  of  a  Chi- 
cago daily,  at  least  nine  tenths  of  whom  probably  read 
"Sharps  and  Plats"  with  persistent  interest.  The  fact  that 
he  planned  his  writings  for  the  masses  explains  many  of  the 
weaknesses  of  Field's  work,  but  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that 
it  does  not  account  for  many  of  its  excellences.  He  wrote 
for  popular  readers,  but  his  individuality  was  so  strong  that 
he  refused  to  follow  the  obvious  popular  demand,  and  he 
gave  to  the  man  on  the  street  glimpses  of  subjects  that  are 
usually  associated  with  higher  literary  culture.  Opinions 
will  differ  as  to  whether  or  not  this  was  a  desirable  achieve- 
ment; but  more  than  any  other  recent  American  Eugene 


Bboent  Ysabs  483 

Field  raises  questions  as  to  the  future  democracy  of  litera- 
ture. 

William  Vaughn  Mondy  (1ftfi9-19in)  was  a  native  of  In- 
diana and  a  graduate  of  Harvard  with  the  class  of  1893.    In 

1895  he  was  called  to  the  faculty  of  the  Uni- 
Moody  *"*^  versity  of  Chicago,  and  was  nominally  con- 
nected with  that  institution  until  his  death, 
though  for  the  last  three  years  of  his  life  he  did  little  or  no 
regular  teaching.  The  Masque  of  Judgmant^  published  in 
1900,  and  especially  Poems,  1901,  were  hailed  by  many  critics 
as  works  of  unusual  promise.  A  few  pieces,  notably  the  ^^Ode 
in  Time  of  Hesitation/^  have  a  sure  and  sustained  manner 
that  has  rarely  been  attained  in  the  last  three  decades.  In 
the  remaining  years  of  his  life  the  poet  did  not  quite  fulfill 
the  hopes  of  his  friends.  He  published  The  Fire-Bringer 
in  1904,  and  then  turned  his  attention  to  the  writing  of  plays. 
His  prose  drama,  ^^The  Great  Divide/^  attained  great  success 
on  the  stage,  and  his  second  play,  ^The  Faith  Healer/^  had 
some  merit.  Just  before  his  death  it  seemed  that  he  might 
accomplish  still  greater  things  both  as  a  poet  and  as  a 
dramatist. 

Farther  West  than  Chicago  literary  production  in  recent 
years  has  been  less  important.    To  Iowa  belongs  Alice  French^ 

who  writes,  as  Octave  Thanetu.  stories  of 
SSS  wS*     Western  life.     On  the  Pacific  slope  H.^H, 

Bancrofjt  is  engaged  in  businesslike  fashion 
in  preparing  the  history  of  the  West.  Here,  too,  John  Vance 
Cheney  wrote  his  best  known  poems. 


INDEX 


Abolitioiiism,  222. 

AboUtionists,  254-284. 

Abbott,  Jacob,  354. 

Abbott,  John  S.  C,  364. 

Abbott,  Ljrman,  470. 

Academy,  American,  216. 

Adams  and  Liberty,  138. 

Adams,  Charles  I>Vanci8,  346. 

Adams,  Hannah,  138. 

Adams,  John,  104,  107-8,  100,  125, 

136,  138. 
Adams,  Rev.  John,  85. 
Adams,  John  Quincy,  200,  203. 
Adams,  Samuel,  83,  106-7,  108. 
Addison,  92,  120,  124,  156,  163,  173, 

465;  see  also  **  Spectator" 
Address  of  Father  Abraham,  95-6. 
Ade,  George,  478-9. 
Admettu,  384. 

Admetua  and  Other  Poems,  384. 
Adventures    of    Captain    BonnenUe, 

171-2. 
Adventures  of  Tom  Sawyer,  448. 
Advertisement   for   the    Unexperienced 
Planters  of  New  England  or  Any- 
where,  5. 
Advice  to  the  Privileged  Orders,  131. 
AdvlaJtor,  135. 
Afloat  and  Ashore,  179. 
Age  of  Reason,  115,  116. 
Ages,  185,  188. 
Airs  from  Aready,  468. 
Airs  of  Palestine,  204. 
Al  Aaraaf,  418,  420. 
Al    Aaraaf,    Tamerlane    and    Minor 

Poems,  414. 
Alcott,   Amos  Bronson,   224,   242-5: 
life,       242-3,       transcendentalism, 
243-4,    writings,    244,    rank,    245; 
336. 
Alcott,  Louisa  M.,  244,  336. 
Aldrich,  T.  B.,  296.  357.  373.  378-81: 
life,    378-9,    prose,    37&-80,    rank, 
381 ;  382,  466. 
Algerine  Captive,  139. 
Algic  Researches,  218. 
Alhambra,  169,  170. 
Alide,  384. 

Allen,  Elisabeth  Akers,  364. 
Allen,  Ethan,  155. 
Allen,  James  Land,  464. 


Allston,  Washington,  200,  202-3. 

Alnwick  Castle,  194. 

Alsop,  Richard,  123,  133,  134. 

"AmeUa,"  438. 

American  Anthology,  376. 

American  Antiquities,  133-4. 

American  Lands  and  Letters,  347. 

American  Note-Books  (Hawthorne's), 
308. 

Americari  Scholar,  228. 

Americanisms,  23. 

Ames,  Fisher,  110,  156. 

Ames,  Nathaniel,  84. 

Among  My  Books,  270. 

Among  the  Isles  of  Shoals,  364. 

Anarchiad,  133-4,  137. 

Ancestral  Footstep,  308. 

AndrS  (Dunlap),  140. 

Andri  (Lord),  435. 

Annabel  Lee,  374,  421,  422. 

Anne  Boleyn,  398. 

Anthology  Club,  200,  201,  203. 

Anthony  Brade,  335. 

Anti-Slavery,  first  tract  favoring,  65. 

Anti-Slavery  Movement;  see  "Aboli- 
tionism." 

Antisynodalia  Americana,  45. 

"Apostle  of  Virgmia,"  10. 

Appeal  to  CcBsar,  434. 

"Artemus  Ward,"  356.  449. 

Arthur  Bonnicastle,  338. 

Arthur  Mervyn,  151.  152,  163. 

"Arthur  Singleton,'^  205. 

Astoria,  171.  172. 

Atalantis,  428,  430. 

Atlantic  Monthly,  259,  269,  276,  322, 
331,  338,  379,  475. 

Auf  Wiedersehen,  276. 

Aurdian,  335. 

Autobiography  (Franklin's),  75,  89, 
91,  92,  93.  95,  96-7,  98,  99,  100. 

Autobiography  (Jefferson's),  118. 

Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast-Table,  321, 
322,  325,  326.  330. 

Ave  Roma  Immortalis,  472. 

Aylmere,  or  the  Bondman  of  Kent,  396. 

Baby  BeU,  378,  381,  382. 
Backwoodsman,  192. 
Bacon's  Rebellion,  14,  16. 
BagatcUes,  95,  97. 


485 


486 


Indsx 


BaUad  of  Laoer  Bi»,  376. 

BaUad  of  Trtea  and  the  if  otter,  4ia 

BalladB  and  Other  Poema,  287. 

Ballads  of  the  Revolution,  120-1. 

Bancroft,   George,   224,   S41,   343-4. 

Bancroft,  H.  H..  483. 

Barbara  Frietehu,  261. 

Barefoot  Boy,  261. 

Bariow,  Joel,  123,  124,  120,    180-2, 

133. 
Barnard,  John,  82. 
Baron' e  Lost  Banquet,  862. 
Barrien  Burned  Atoay,  370. 
Barstow,  Elisabeth,  373. 
Bartol,  C.  A.,  224. 
Barton,  B.  S.,  156. 
Bartram,  John,  101. 
Bartram,  William,  166. 
Battle  Hymn  of  the  Republie,  284. 
Battle  of  Niagara,  208. 
BaUU  of  the  Kege,  146. 
BattU  of  Tippecanoe,  386. 
Battle  Pieeea  and  Aepeete  of  Qye  War^ 

369. 
Bay  Fight,  361. 

Bay  Paalm  Book,  46,  4&-0,  68. 
Beauchamp,  431. 
Beaoer  Brook,  273. 
Bedouin  Song,  401. 
Beecher,  Henry  Ward,  848,  366-8. 
Behemoth,   a  Legend   of  the   Mound 

Buildere,  372. 
Being  a  Boy,  337. 

Belfry  of  Brugee  and  Other  Poeme^  288. 
BeOcnap,  Jeremy,  163^. 
Bea8,422. 
Ben  BoU,  386. 
Benedict  Arnold,  431. 
Ben-Hur,  440-1. 
Benjamin,  Park.  300,  362. 
Berenice,  424. 
Beverley,  Rob^t,  19. 
Bianca  Viaconti,  368. 
Bible,  literary  influence  of,  24,  27. 
Big  Abel  and  the  Little  Manhattan,  372. 
Biglow  Papers,  126,  263,  273-6,  277, 

282. 
BiU  and  Joe,  329. 
"BiU  Nye,"  444. 

Bird,  Robert  Montgomery,  397. 
"Birdofreedum  Sa^nn,"  274,  276. 
Birds,  375. 

Birth  of  Galahad,  473. 
Bitter-Sioeet,  338. 
Black  Cat,  424,  427. 
Blair,  James,  20. 
Blameless  Prines,  377. 
Blithedale  Romance,  304,  311,  316-7, 

318. 


Bloody    Tenmi    Waehed   onA    Mods 

WhiU,  42. 

Bloody  Tenent  7et  More  Bloody,  42. 

Bloody  Tenerd  of  Persecution,  42. 

"Bohemians,'*  370,  372^,  378,  370. 

Boker,  George  H.,  397-8. 

Bonif<iciue,  76. 

Bonneville,  Captain,  171. 

Book  of  the  Dead,  308. 

Border  Beagles,  431. 

Bowrnlle  CaeOe.  210. 

Bowditch,  Nathaniel,  210. 

Boyesen,  Hjalmar  Hjorth,  372. 

Boyhood  of  Christ,  441. 

Boys,  The,  329. 

Bracebridge  HaU,  166-7,  168. 

Brackenridge,  H.  H.,  119,  140,  146-7, 
438. 

Brackenrid|»,  H.  M.,  438. 

Bradford,  William,  25-8,  29,  30,  31, 
33,  34,  35,  46,  62,  341. 

Bradstreet,  Axme,  49-61,  84,  86,  320. 

Bradstreet,  Simon,  49. 

Brainard,  J.  G.  C,  200. 

Braso,  177,  180. 

Breadwinners,  441. 

Breakfaet^Table  Series,  826,  327. 

Bricks  without  Straw,  434. 

Broken  Harp,  205. 

Brook  Farm  Community,  224,  230, 
243.  250,  252,  284,  301,  302,  304, 
363. 

Brooks,  Marie  Gowen,  206. 

Broomstick  Train,  329. 

Brown,  Charles  Brockden,  161-3, 167, 
173,  191,  201,  202,  210. 

Brown,  Charles  Farrar,  356. 

Brownell,  H.  H.,  351. 

BrccMmson,  Orestes  A.,  224,  252-3, 
255. 

Brutus,  or  the  FaU  of  Targuin,  195. 

Bryant,  William  Cullen,  145,  160, 
183-90:  early  years,  183-5,  early 
verse,  185,  removal  to  New  York, 
186-6,  editorial  artidee,  186-7, 
other  prose,  187,  poems,  187-8, 
favorite  ideas,  188-9,  translation 
of  Homer,  189,  literary  importance, 
190;  196,  206,  290,  365,  437. 

Buccaneer,  202. 

Buccaneers  and  Pirates  of  our  Cotuts, 
470. 

Bulkley,  Peter,  47. 

Bunner,  Henrv  Cuyler,  468. 

Burroughs,  John,  470. 

Butler,  Samuel,  120,  156;  see  fliidi- 
bras. 

Butler.  William  A.,  386. 

BurweU  Papers,  14,.16. 


Index 


487 


Burnett,  Frances  Hodgson,  476. 
Byles,  Mather,  86,  87. 
Byrd,  William,  17-8,  00. 

Cable,  George  W.,  476. 
Calavar,  397. 
Calayno8,  398. 
Calef,  75  n.,  89. 

California  and  Oregon  Trail,  344. 
California  writers,  454-60,  483. 
Cambridge  Thirty  Yean  Ago,  280. 
"Camilius,"  112. 

Candid  Examination  of  the  Claima  of 
Great  Britain  and  the  Colonies,  113. 
Career  of  Puffer  HopkinSt  371. 
Carey,  Mathew,  134,  149-50,  207. 
Carleton,  WiU,  439. 
Carman,  Bliss,  473. 
Carolina,  433. 
Carter,  Robert,  268. 
Carver,  Jonathan,  154. 
Cary,  Alice,  383. 
Cary,  Phoebe,  383. 
Caek  of  AmontiUado,  424. 
Caetilian  Daye,  441. 
Cathedral,  270,  277. 
CecU  Dreeme,  352. 
Celebrated  Jumping:  Frog  of  Caknerae, 

445. 
Century  of  Dishonor,  453. 
Chainbearer,  179. 
Chambered  Nautilus,  330. 
Changeling,  273. 

Channing,  Edward  T.,  200,  201. 
Channing,  William  EUery,  51,  200-1. 
Channing,  WiUiam  Ellery  (2nd),  251. 

252,  302. 
Channing,  William  H.,  224. 
Charlemont,  431. 
Charlotte  Temple,  137. 
"Charles     Egbert     Craddock";     see 

Murfree,  M.  N. 
Charles  Elwood,  or  the  Infidel  Con- 
verted, 253. 
Chauncy,  Charles,  45. 
Chauncv,  Charles  (2nd),  82-3. 
Cheerful  Yesterdays,  283. 
Cheney,  John  Vance,  483. 
Chicago  as  publishing  center,  461. 
Child,  Lydia  Maria,  205,  275. 
Choate,  Rufus,  345. 
Christ  in  Hades,  435. 
Christian  Science,  448. 
"Christopher  Caustic,  M.  D.,"  207-8. 
Christus,  a  Mystery,  288,  294,  295-6. 
Chronological  aistory  of  New  England, 

61. 
Church,  Benjamin,  59,  138. 
Churchill,  Charles,  120,  126. 


Churchill,  Winston,  466. 

Cigarette-Maker*  s  Romance,  471. 

Cinders  from  the  Ashes,  329. 

CireuU  Rider,  440. 

City  in  the  Sea,  421,  422. 

Clara  Howard,  151. 

Clari,  or  the  Maid  of  Milan,  195. 

Clark,  Lewis  Gaylord,  362,  396. 

Clark,  Willis  Gaylord.  396. 

Clarke,  James  Freeman,  224,  248, 
253-4,  255. 

Clapp,  Henry,  379. 

Clear  Sunshine  of  the  Oospel  Breaking 
forth  upon  the  Indians  in  New 
England,  39. 

Clemens,  Samuel  L. ;  see  Twain,  Mark. 

Cliffton,  William,  150-1. 

ClosirHf  Year,  437. 

Cloth  of  Gold,  382. 

Cobbett,  William,  148-9. 

Colden,  Cadwallader,  101. 

Colloquy  of  Monos  and  Una,  424 

Colonial  Literature,  1-102. 

Colorado  writers,  452-4. 

ColurrUna,  128,  129. 

Columbia  College,  101. 

Columbiad,  131-2,  135,  159. 

Come  Where  My  Love  Lies  Dreaming, 
442. 

Commemoration  Ode,  270. 

Commodus,  441. 

Common  Sense,  114,  115,  116. 

Concord  Days,  244. 

Concord  Hymn,  237. 

Concord  School  of  Philosophy,  244. 

Condensed  Novels,  455,  457. 

Conduct  of  Life,  228. 

Connecticut,  literary  supremacy  of, 
123. 

Connecticut  writers,  123-35,  165, 
197-200,  221,  347-n62. 

Connecticut  Yankee  at  King  Arthur^s 
Court,  448,  451. 

Conquered  Banner,  412. 

Conquest  of  Canaan,  127-8,  129,  136. 

Conquest  of  Chranada,  169,  170. 

Conquest  of  Mexico,  341. 

Conquest  of  Peru,  341. 

Conrad,  Robert  Taylor,  396. 

Considerations  on  the  Propriety  of  Im- 
posing Taxes  on  the  British  Col- 
onies, 119. 

Conspiracy  of  Kings,  131. 

Conspiracy  of  Pontiac,  344.  345. 

Contemplations,  50. 

Contrast,  The,  139. 

Controversial  Writings  in  Revolu- 
tionary time,  103-122. 

Convalescent,  358. 


488 


Indec 


Convenationa  in  a  Studio,  840. 

CamtenaUont  on  9omo  oi  ik$  Old 
PcMto,  268,  278. 

CtrnvertotftOfM  wiKh  ChUdron  on  tho 
Qo9peU,  243. 

Conway,  Moncure  D.,  439. 

Coolbnth,  Ina  D.,  460. 

Cook,  Ebeneser,  16-7. 

Cooke,  John  Esten,  411. 

Cooke,  Philip  Pendleton,  410-1. 

Cooke,  Rose  Tenv,  362. 

Cooper,  Jamee  Fenimore,  160,  173, 
174-83:  eariy  life,  174,  early  wiit- 
ingi,  176-7,  wiitingB  abroad,  177, 
controversies,  177-8,  later  writings, 
178-0,  personality,  180-1,  literary 
importance,  181-3;  100,  191,  192, 
214,  221,  368,  431,  432,  450,  467. 

CoiAaa  de  Manrique,  286,  292. 

Cogueite,  138. 

Coral  Orove,  199. 

Com^  406,  409. 

Correspondent,  125,  127,  129. 

Cotton  Bda,  433. 

Cotton,  John,  38,  39,  41-3,  47,  09, 
87. 

Count  Frontenae  and  New  France  under 
Louie  XIV,  345. 

Count  Julian,  430. 

Country  of  the  Pointed  Fire,  467. 

Country  Sleighino,  378. 

CouHin\  The,  274. 

Courtehip  of  MUee  Standieh,  295, 
297. 

Craigie  House,  288,  289. 

Cranch,  Christopher  P.,  224,  251,  252. 

Crane,  Stephen,  472,  473-4. 

Crater,  179. 

Crawford,  Francis  Marion,  470-2. 

Crayon  Miecellany,  171, 

Crevecoeur,  Jean  Hector  St.  John,  de, 
148. 

Crieie,  The,  115,  116. 

Croaker  Papere,  193. 

Crowded  Street,  188. 

Cudjo*e  Cave,  333. 

Culprit  Fay,  193. 

Culture's  Garland,  480. 

Curioaity,  2^. 

Curtis,  George  WiUiam,  224,  252,  361, 
363-5. 

Cypruu2,  204. 

Damsel  of  Darien,  430. 

Dana,  Charles  A.,  224,  250,  252,  255, 

357,  361. 
Dana,  Richard  H.,  51,  200,  201,  320. 
Dana,  R.  H.,  Jr.,  331,  332,  369. 
Dance  to  Death,  S»L, 


Dante,  Longfellow's  tnuislatioii,  207; 
Parsons's  translation,  339. 

Day  of  Doom,  52-4,  199. 

Dtis,2Z7. 

Deacon's  Masterpiece,  329. 

DeaUi  of  the  FUneere,  190. 

Dedaration  of  Independence^  107, 
118-9,  145,  156. 

Deephaeen,  467. 

Deerslayer,  178,  179. 

D^enee  of  the  Constitutions  of  Govern^ 
meid  o/  the  United  States  of  Amer- 
ica, 107. 

Deland,  Margaret  W.,  466. 

Demoeraey  and  other  Addresses,  271. 

Democracy  Unveiled,  207. 

Democratic  Vistas,  387,  392,  393. 

Dennie,  Joseph,  209. 

Descent  into  the  Maelstrom,  423. 

Description  of  New  England,  5. 

Dial,  224,  229,  238,  244, 245,  248,  249, 
251,  252,  253. 

Diamond  Lens,  371. 

Diamond  Wedding,  375. 

Diary,  Sewall's.  65-6,  89. 

Diary  in  Canada,  388. 

Dickens  in  Camp,  458. 

Dickinson,  EmUy,  466-7. 

Dickinson,  John,  113-4,  120. 

Dictionary,  Webster's,  156,  219;  Wor- 
cester's, 219. 

"Diedrich  Knickerbocker,"  163. 

Discourses  of  DaviUa,  107. 

Divine  Tragedy,  288,  295. 

Dixis,  436. 

Doctor  Grimshaw's  Secret,  309. 

Doctor  Heidegger*s   Experiment,   309, 
310. 

Dodge,  Mary  Mapes,  365. 

Do  Good  Papers,  92. 

DoUvver  Romance,  306,  309. 

Don  Orsino,  471. 

Doorstep,  378. 

Dorr,  Julia  C.  R.,  466. 

Douglass,  William,  63-4. 

Drake,  Joseph  Rodman,  160,  192-3, 
194. 

Drama,  54,  55;  recent  tendencies  in, 
465. 

Dream  Life,  347. 

Dred,  a  Tale  of  the  Dismal  Swamp,  350. 

Dudley,  Thomas,  49. 

Dukethorough  Tales,  475. 

Dulany,  Daniel,  119. 

Dunbar,  Paul  L.,  478. 

Dunlap,  William,  140,  191. 

Dimne,  Peter,  479. 

Dutchman's  Fireside,  192. 

Dwight»  J.  S.,  224. 


Index 


489 


Dwight,  Theodore,  123,  133,  134. 
Dwight,  Timothy.  123,  126,  126-30, 

132. 
Dtfino  Baven,  202. 

Eastbum,  James  W.,  lOd. 

"Easy  Chair"  Essays,  364,  365. 

Echo,  134. 

Echo  Clvb,  402. 

Echoes  from  the  Sobine  Farm,  481. 

Edoar  A.  Poo  and  Hie  CrUice,  353. 

Edifor  HunOey,  161,  162. 

Education  in  New  England,  21-2,  67; 
in  New  York,  101;  in  Pennsylvania, 
09;  in  Southern  colonies,  13. 

Edwards,  Jonathan,  68,  76-81:  tem- 
perament, 76,  early  years,  77, 
ministry,  77-8,  at  Northampton, 
78,  writings,  79-81;  90,  126,  362. 

Bdwvn  Brcihertofi,  352. 

Egan,  Maurice  Francis,  475. 

Elegiac  verse  in  New  England  col- 
onies, 46-8. 

Elegy  on  Oie  Timee,  125. 

Eleonora,  425. 

Eliot,  John,  48. 

Elizabethan  influence  on  American 
literature,  1,  2,  3,  4,  82. 

Eleie  Venner,  322,  327. 

Embargo,  185. 

Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  224,  225-238: 
early  life,  225-6,  as  pastor,  226-7, 
in  Europe,  227,  as  lecturer,  227, 
later  years,  228,  prose  writings, 
228,  verse,  229,  personal  and  intel- 
lectual qualities,  229-31,  literary 
tastes,  231-2,  message,  232-3,  op- 
timism, 234;  literary  qualities, 
234-7,  rank,  238;  242,  243,  247,  248, 
269,  287,  289,  322,  328,  331,  334, 
363,  382,  384,  458,  464,  473. 

Endicott,  John,  29. 

EndicoU  and  the  Red  Croee,  310,  311. 

English,  Thomas  Dunn,  385. 

English  criticisms  of  American  lit- 
erature, 168. 

English  influence  in  Southern  col- 
onies, 1,  2,  3,  14;  in  New  England 
colonies,  22-25. 

English  hands.  Letters,  and  Kings, 
347. 

English  Noto-Books,  308. 

English  TraUs,  228,  235. 

Entertaining  Passages  RelaHng  to 
PhUip's  War,  59. 

Epochs,  3M. 

Essays  imd  Reviewe,  334. 

Essay  for  the  Recording  of  JUustriaus 
Profridenees,  7^ 


Essay  on  the  Canon  and  Feudal  Law, 

107. 
Essays  to  Do  Oood,  75. 
Eternal  Goodness,  262. 
Efi^eston,  Edwsxd,  440. 
Eureka,  426. 
EtUaw,  431. 

Evangeline,  288,  293,  294,  295,  297. 
Evening  Song,  410. 
Everett,  Alexander  H.,  200. 
Everett,  Edward,  200,  203. 
Excelsior,  290. 
Excursions,  240. 

"Fabius,"  114. 

Fable  for  Critics,  268,  272.  275-6. 

Facts  in  the  Case  of  M.  Valdemar,  424. 

Fair  God,  440. 

Faith  Doctor,  440. 

Faith  Healer,  483. 

FaU  of  the  House  of  Usher,  423,  424.' 

Famous  Old  People,  301. 

Fanny,  194. 

Fanshawe,  299,  300,  311,  319. 

Father,  140. 

Father  Abbey's  WHl,  86. 

"Father  Abraham,'^  95-6. 

Faust,  Taylor's  translation,  401,  402, 
403. 

Fay,  T.  S.,  363. 

Federalist,  110,  111-2,  119. 

Female  Poets  of  America,  362. 

Ferdinand  and  IsabeOa,  341,  342. 

Fessenden,  Thomas  Green,  207. 

Fiction,  early  substitutes  for,  60. 

Field,  Eugene,  479-83:  life,  479,  char- 
acter, 480,  writings,  480-1,  cnarao- 
teristics  and  importance,  481-3. 

Field,  Roswell  Martin,  481. 

Fields,  J.amee  T.,  269,  269,  303,  311, 
331—2 

Figs  and  ThisOes,  434. 

Fire-Bringer,  483. 

Fireside  Travels,  269,  280,  282. 

Fish  I  Didn't  Catch,  262. 

Fiske,  John,  336-7. 

Fits-Adam's  Story,  277. 

Fleur-de-Luee,  288. 

Flight  of  Youth,  376. 

Flint,  Timothy,  213,  214,  218,  436. 

•'Florence  Percy,"  364. 

Florence  Vane,  411. 

Folger,  Peter,  87-8.  91. 

Fottoufing  the  Equator,  448. 

FooVs  Errand,  434,  436. 

FooTs  Prayer,  469. 

For  an  Autograph,  276. 

Forayers,  431. 

Ford,  Paul  Leicester,  472,  474. 


490 


Indsz 


FofMf  ffynifi,  IM 

Porut  lAf€,  871. 

ForMtorc,  164. 

Foster,  Hannah  W.,  188. 

Foster,  Stephen  C,  441. 

Four  Age$  of  Man,  40,  68. 

Four  EUmenU,  40. 

Four  Hunumrs^  40. 

Four  Monarehies,  40. 

Four  iSeotont  o^  the  F«n%  40. 

FrsneMoa  da  KimifU,  808. 

Franklin,  Benjamin,  76,  88,  00-0: 
early  years,  00-1,  eany  wiitin|pii, 
02,  characteristics,  02,  in  Phila- 
delphia, 03,  later  years,  04,  writ- 
ings. 04-7,  as  teaoher,  08;  101,  112, 
148,  140,  166. 

Franklin,  James,  01,  02,  03. 

Franklin  in  France,  333. 

Freedom  ctf  the  WiU,  Edwards'  trea- 
tise on,  70,  81. 

Freeman,  Mary  £.  Wilkins,  484,  468. 

lYeneau,  Philip,  110,  140-146:  early 
life,  141,  poems,  141-4,  significance 
of,  146;  146,  103. 

IVench,  Alice,  483. 

Froiaaart  BaUade  and  Other  Poeme,  411. 

Fruitlands,  243. 

Fuller,  Margaret,  224,  246-8:  life, 
246-6,  personality,  246-7,  writinei, 
247-8;  262,  276,  316,  320,  361. 

Fun  JoUinaa,  368. 

Fumess,  Horace  Howard,  474. 

Gabriel  Conrau.  466.  467. 
Gallagher,  WiUiam  D.,  437-8. 
Galloway,  Joseph,  113. 
Garden,  Aleicander,  20. 
Gardiner,  J.  8.  J.,  200. 
Garland,  Hamlin,  464,  470. 
Garrison,  William  Lloyd,  266-6,  267, 

268. 
Oalea  Ajar.  336. 
GatetU  PubUcaHana,  147. 
Oeneral  Hiatory  of  ConnediciU,  166. 
Oeneral  Hiatorie  of  Virginia,  6,  11, 

20. 
OenOe  Boy,  300,  310. 
"Gentleman  at  Halifax,"  106,  100. 
Georgia  Writen,  20,  212-3,  476-6. 
German  influence  at  Harvard  College, 

203. 
QeUyaburg  Addreaa,  430. 
OeUyaburg  Ode,  401. 
OUded  Age,  337,  448. 
Gflder,  Richard  Watson,  867. 
Cfilea  Corey,  206. 
Oladiaior,  307. 
Glenmary,  868,  860. 


•iofit,  463. 
Godfrey,  Thomas,  100. 
Godfrey,  James,  101. 
Qodkin,  Edwin  Lawrenoe, 
GecTs  CotUroeerey  with  New  Bngiand^ 

61. 
Godwin,  Parke,  866. 
Ooid-Bvg,  424,  426,  427. 
Odd  FoU   Hammered  from  Pojiiilar 

ProMrbf ,  338. 
OMm  Legend,  288,  204,  206.  208. 
Good  Gray  Poet,  804. 
Good  Newe  from  Virginia,  10. 
Good  Samaritana,  404. 
Goodrich,  Samuel  Q.,  107.  108.  IW. 

800,  307,  367. 
QooUkDaniel,  86. 
Gould,  Hannah  F.,  206. 
Grady,  Henry  W.,  478. 
OrmSfaiher'a  Chatr.  801. 
Oray  Champion,  3lQ. 
Gni^tcmt,  440. 
Great  Awakening,  70,  78. 
Oreai  Carbuncle,  310. 
Oreat  Divide.  483. 

"threat  K.  and  A.  Train  Robbery,  474. 
vireeley,  Horace,  224,  246,  260,  860-1. 
Green,  Joeeph,  87. 
Oreen  Mountain  Boya,  363. 
Greene,  Albert  G.,  362. 
OreenfiM  HiU,  128.  120. 
Grisw<dd,  Rufus  Wihnot,  861-2,  874, 

806,  413,  416,  410. 
Group  (Mercy  Warren),  136. 
Group  (William  Cli£Fton).  160-1. 
Guardian  Angel,  322,  827. 
Gustaes  ai  the  Beaulifid,  442. 
Guy  Rieere,  428,  431. 

"H.  H.,"  462-4. 

Hadad,  100. 

Hagar  in  the  WHdemeeaiVH^. 

HaU  ColunMa,  210. 

Hale,  Edward  Everett,  881,  882-8, 

460. 
Hah  in  the  Buah,  121. 
Hale,  Sarah  J.,  306,  306. 
HaJil-CetUury  of  Conflict,  846. 
HiOi,  James,  213,  214,  218,  436. 
Halleck,  FitsGreene,  160,  103-4,  886. 
Halpine,  Charles  G.,  386. 
Hamilton,  Alexander,  111-2. 
Banging  of  the  Crane,  206. 
Hannah  Thuraton,  402. 
Sana  Brinker,  or  the  Siher  Shatea, 

366. 
Bane  BreHmann  BaUada,  807. 
Hardy,  Arthur  Sherburne,  406. 


Indbx 


491 


HarpeU  Head,  a  Legend  of  Kentucky, 
214. 

Hams,  Joel  Chandler,  464,  475-6. 

Harris  Collection  of  American  Po- 
etry, 352. 

Harte,  Biet,  444.  445,  454-8:  life, 
454-5,  personality,  455,  treatment 
of  Calltornia  scenes,  456,  writings, 
456-8,  rank,  458. 

Hartford  Wits,  123-35:  list  of,  128, 
conservative  tendencies  of,  124, 
Trumbull,  124-6,  Timothy  Dwight, 
126-30,  Barlow,  130-2,  Humph- 
reys, 132,  Hopkins,  133,  Theodore 
Dwiisht,  133,  Alsop,  133,  joint 
writings,  133-4,  significance  of 
group,  134-5;  151,  197,  207. 

Harvard  College,  22,  77,  81,  86, 128. 

Harvard  Commemoration  Ode,  276-7, 
281. 

Basty  Fudding,  131. 

Hathome;  see  Hawthorne. 

Haunted  Paiaee,  422. 

Hawthorne,  Nathaniel,  20,  33,  152, 
199,  224,  268,  269,  275,  284,  286. 
291,  293,  298-320:  early  life,  298-9, 
early  writing^  299-301,  at  Boston 
and  Brook  Farm,  301-2,  at  Old 
Manse  and  Salem,  302-3,  later 
residences  and  travels,  303-6,  per- 
sonal characteristics,  306-8,  post- 
humous publications,  308-9,  short 
tales,  310-11,  romances,  311-18, 
literary  characteristics,  31&-20: 
831,  374,  418,  422,  423. 

Hay,  John,  441,  478. 

Hayne,  Paul  H.,  429,  432,  433-4. 

Headsman,  177. 

Heam,  Lafcadio,  476-7. 

Hearts  of  Oak,  120. 

Heartsease  and  Rue,  271,  277. 

Heathen  Chinee,  455,  458. 

Hedge,  F.  H.,  224. 

Heidenmauer,  177. 

Heniy,  Patrick,  116-7. 

Her  Letter,  458. 

Hermitage,  459. 

Hesperia,  213. 

Hiawatha,  288,  294,  295,  297. 

Higgeson,  Francis,  35. 

Higginson,  Thomas  Wentworth,  266, 
269,  283,  389,  466. 

HOlhouse,  Jamee  A.,  199. 

Historical  Collections  of  the  Indians  in 
New  England,  36. 

Historical  writings  in  New  England, 
25,  57-66,  341-5. 

Historic  of  TrawiiU  into  Virginia 
Brittania,  9. 


History  cf  Qys  Nomv  of  Iks  United 
States,  178. 

History  of  New  England,  28-30. 

History  of  PlymouDi  Plantation,  26-8^ 
29. 

History  of  Printing  in  America,  217. 

History  of  the  Divtdvng  Line,  17,  18. 

HiMory  of  the  Western  InsvrrectUm^ 
438. 

Hotiomoh,  205. 

Holland,  Josiah  Gilbert,  338. 

Hohnee,  Oliver  Wendell,  51,  269,  284, 
287,  320-31:  early  life,  320-1, 
early  writings,  321,  later  life,  322. 
litenry  career,  322-3,  personal  and 
inteUeotual  characteristics,  323-5, 
prose  writings,  325-9,  poems,  329- 
30,  Uterary  rank,  83(>-l;  356,  877, 
382,  385.  449. 

Home  as  round,  178. 

Home,  Sweet  Home,  194,  195. 

Homer,  Bryant's  trmislatioD,  187* 
189. 

"Homer  Wilbur,"  273. 

Homeward  Bound,  178. 

Honorable  Peter  Sterling,  474. 

Hooker,  Thomas,  39.  47. 

Hoosier  Schoolboy,  440. 

Hoosier  Schoolmaster,  440. 

Hope  Leslie,  206. 

Hopkins,  Lemuel,  123,  183,  184. 

Hopkins,  Stephen,  109. 

Hopldnson,  Francis,  145-6. 

Hopldnson,  Joseph,  210. 

Horseehoe  Robinson,  211. 

"Hosea  Bidow,"  274. 

HospUal  SkUches,  336. 

Hot  Plowshares,  434. 

House,  481. 

House  by  the  Sea,  404. 

House  of  Night,  143,  144.  146. 

House  if  the  Seven  Qables,  299,  803, 
304,  311,  314-5. 

Hovey,  Richard,  472-3. 

How  Old  John  Brown  Took  Harper's 
FerryjZ75. 

How  to  WriU  a  Blackwood  Article,  427. 

Howadji  in  Syria,  363. 

Howard,  Martin,  109. 

Howe.  Julia  Ward,  283,  466,  471. 

Howells,  William  Dean,  291,  357,  368, 
372,  446^463. 

Hubbard,  William.  58,  63. 

Huckleberry  Finn,  379,  444,  448,  449, 
450,  451. 

Hudibras,  16,  32,  126,  134,  207. 

Himiorists,  later  New  Englandt_356; 
Uter  New  York,  872;  U^  West- 
em,  443-52. 


492 


hUDWX 


HumphreyB,  I>av|d,  128,  183. 
Hundredth  Man,  470. 
Hunten  of  Men,  260. 
Hurrtforaphe,  368. 
HuehrOrbye  Lady,  482. 
HutchiiiBon,  Thomas,  02-8,  168. 
Button,  Laurence,  400. 
Hyperion,  a  Romance,  286,  287,  200, 

291,  202. 
Hymn  to  the  North  Star,  188,  190. 
Hymn  Written  durino  a  Voyage,  87. 
Hymna  of  the  Marehea,  409. 
Hymns  to  the  Oode,  436. 

Ichdbod,  260,  264,  377. 

Idle  Man,  201. 

Idlewild,  368,  360. 

Idomen,  206. 

"Ik  Marvel,"  347. 

Iliad,  Bryant's  translation,  187. 

niinqis  writers,  479. 

Illustrations,  dffects  of  on  recent  writ- 
ings, 462-3. 

Imp  of  the  Perverse,  424. 

In  the  Harbor,  289. 

Inchiquin,  the  Jesuit's  Letters,  210. 

Indian  Burying  Oround,  144. 

Indiana  writers,  478-9. 

Indirection,  443. 

Infidel,  397. 

IngersoU,  Charles  Jared,  210. 

Ingersoll,  Robert  G.,  443. 

Innocents  Abroad,  446,  447,  448,  449. 

Iowa  writers,  483. 

Irving,  Pierre  M.,  171,  172. 

Irving,  Peter,  163. 

Irving,  Washington,  160,  162-74: 
youth,  162,  early  writings,  162-3, 
Knickerbocker's  History,  163-6, 
Sketch  Book,  166,  Bracebridge 
Hall,  166,  Tales  of  a  Traveller^  167, 
Spanish  writings,  169-70,  writings 
on  American  subjects,  170-1,  later 
biographies,  172-3,  general  char- 
acteristics, 173-4;  190,  191,  192, 
196,  214,  221,  286,  342,  347,  368, 
466. 

Irving,  William,  163,  191. 

Israfel,  421.  422. 

Italian  Note-Books,  308. 


■« 


Jack  Hazard"  stories,  333. 
Jack  Tier,  180. 
Jackson,  Helen  Hunt,  462-4. 
Jacobiniad,  137. 
Jacquerie,  406. 

James,  Henry,  231,  463,  470. 
Jamestown  colony,  writings  in,  1-11. 
Jane  Talbot,  161,  163. 


Janice  MeredUK  474. 

Jay,  John,  112. 

Jefferson,  Thomas,  104,  107,  117-0. 

Jefferson.  Joseph,  167. 

Jephthah^s  Daughter,  369. 

Jesuits  in  North  America,  846. 

Jewett,  Sarah  Ome,  464, 467. 

Jim,  468. 

Jim  Bhidsoe,  441. 

Joan  of  Arc,  461.  448. 

"Joaquin  MiUer,'*  460. 

John  Brent,  362. 

John  BuU  and  Brother  Jonathan,  192. 

John  Endicott,  296. 

John  Godfrey's  Fortunes^  402. 

Johns  HopHns  University,  405. 

Johnson,  Edward,  33-4,  66. 

Johnston,  Richard  Maloc^,  476. 

Jonathan  Oldstyle  Papers,  162-3,  164. 

Jonathan  to  John,  275. 

Jones,  Hugh,  19. 

Joseph  and  his  Friend,  402. 

"Josh  Billings,"  443. 

Josselyn,  John,  36. 

Journey  to  the  Land  of  Eden,  17. 

Judas  MaccabcBus,  296. 

Judd,  Sylvester,  364-6. 

Judgment  (The),  A  Vision,  190. 

Judith  and  Holofemes,  380. 

Judith,  Esther,  and  other  Poems,  200. 

Jugurtha,  290. 

Julian,  or  Scenes  m  Judea,  335. 

June,  189. 

Justice  and  Expediency,  262,  267. 

Kathrina,  338. 

Kavanagh,  288,  291,  327. 

Katherine  Walton,  431. 

Keep  Cool,  208. 

Eeimer,  Samuel,  93,  99-100. 

Kennedy,  John  F.,  211. 

Kentucky  writers,  213,  214,  436-8. 

Keramos,  289,  290. 

Key,  Francis  Scott,  212. 

K^  to  Unde  Tom's  Cabin,  349. 

Kinsman,  431. 

Kirkland,  Caroline  M.,  371. 

Knapp,  Samuel  L.,  217. 

"Knickerbocker"     writers,     160-196, 

197,  276. 
Knickerbocker's  History  of  New  York, 

161,  163-6,  167,  174. 
Knight,  Henry  Coggswell,  204. 
Knight,  Sarah  Kemble,  66. 
Koenigsmark  and  Other  Poems,  398. 
Koningsmarke,  the  Long  Finne,  192. 

Ladd,  Joseph  Brown,  139. 
Ladies  cf  Castile,  136. 


Index 


493 


Lady  Jane,  358,  359. 

Lady  or  the  Tiger,  469. 

Lanier,    Sidney,    389,    405-10:    life, 

405-7,    personality,    407,    soholar- 

ship,    407-8,    prose,    408,    poems, 

409-10,  rank,  410. 
Larcom,  Lucy,  284. 
Lara,  a  Pastoral  of  Norway,  401. 
La  SaUe  or  the  Dtaeovery  of  the  Qreat 

West,  345. 
Last  Leaf,  329. 
Last  of  the  Mohicans,  177,  179,  182, 

431. 
LaU  Mrs,  NuU,  470. 
Launcdot  and  Gtienevere,  473. 
Laurens,  Henry,  155. 
Laua  Deo,  260. 
Lawson,  John,  20. 
Lawyers  in  early  New  England,  67. 
Lay  of  the  ScoUish  FiddU,  192. 
"Lay  Preacher,  The,"  2ia 
Lazarus,  Emma,  384. 
Leather  Stocking  and  SUk,  411. 
"Leatherstocking"  tales,  179. 
Leaves  of  Orass,  386,  387,  390,  393, 

394. 
Legend  of  Thomas  Didymus,  the  Jew- 
ish Sceptic,  254. 
Legend  of  Brittany,  268. 
Legend   of  Sleepy  Hollow,   166,   167, 

168. 
Legends  of  New  England,  258. 
Legends  of  the  Conquest  of  Spain,  169. 
Legends  of  the  Province  House,  310. 
Legends  of  the  West,  214. 
Leicester,  140. 

Leland,  Charles  Godfrey,  396-7. 
Leonard,  Daniel,  107,  109. 
Leonor  de  Guzman,  398. 
Leslie,  Elisa,  396. 
Lessons  in  Life,  338. 
Letter  from  a  Oentleman   at  Halifax, 

109. 
Letters  and  Social  Aims,  229. 
Letters  from  a  Pennsyloania  Farmer, 

114. 
Letters  from  Palmyra;  see  Zenobia* 
Letters  from  the  South,  205. 
Letters  from  the  West,  214. 
Letters  from  Under  a  Bridge,  358. 
Letters  of  an  American  Farmer,  148. 
Letters  of  the  British  Spy,  211. 
Letters  to  Peter  Doyle,  388. 
Liberator,  255. 
Liberty  Song,  114,  120. 
Liberty  Tree,  301. 

Library  of  American  Literature,  376. 
Life  Here  and  There,  358. 
Ufe  of  Columbus,  169,  170. 


Life  of  OMsmith,  172. 

L^e  of  Washington,  172. 

L%fe  on  the  Mississippi,  445,  448,  449« 
450.  451. 

Ligeia,  423,  425,  426. 

Lincoln,  Abraham,  216,  438-9. 

Linn,  John  Blair,  210. 

Linwoods,  206. 

Liond  Lincoln,  176,  180. 

LUeraiure  and  Life,  334. 

Literature  of  the  Age  of  Elixabeth, 
334. 

Literary  and  Social  Essays,  364. 

Literary  Landmarks  of  London,  469. 

LittU  Beach-Bird,  202. 

Little  Book  of  Profitable  Tales,  480. 

Little  Book  of  Western  Verse,  480. 

Little  Boy  Blue,  481,  482. 

Little  Breeches,  441. 

Little  Giffin  of  Tennessee,  436. 

LitOe  Peach,  482. 

LitOe  People  of  the  Snow,  189. 

Little  Women,  336. 

Livingston,  William,  102. 

Locke,  David  Ross,  444. 

Loiterings  of  Travel,  358. 

Longfellow,  Henry  Wadsworth,  268, 
269,  284,  285-98:  life  and  writings, 
285-9,  character,  289-90,  prose, 
290-1,  poems,  292-7,  rank  as  poet, 
297-8;  299,  327,  331,  346,  382,  383, 
384,  419,  420,  458. 

Longfellow,  Samuel,  331,  334. 

Looking  Class  for  the  Times,  88. 

Lord,  W.  W.,  377,  435. 

Lost  Occasion,  264. 

Lotus-Eating,  364. 

Love  Affairs  of  a  Bibliomaniac,  481. 

Love  in  Old  Cloathes  and  other  Stories, 
468. 

LoweU,  James  Russell,  198,  232,  266- 
83:  early  life,  266-7.  early  literary 
work,  267-8,  academic  and  editorial 
labors,  268-9,  later  writings,  269- 
70,  political  career,  270-1,  per- 
sonality, 271-2,  early  verse,  272-3, 
Biglow  Papers,  273-5,  poems, 
275-7,  prose,  277-80,  literary  char- 
acteristics, 280-3;  287,  290,  322, 
329,  331,  334,  335,  338,  356,  377, 
382  419. 

Lowell,  Robert  Traill  Spence,  331, 
335. 

Luck  of  Roaring  Camp,  454,  456. 

Luck  of  Roaring  Camp  arui  othef 
Sketches,  455. 

Lunt,  George,  340. 

Lyars,  137. 

Lyceums,  227« 


Indbx 


MdM  Martin,  261. 

Mabie.  Hamilton  W.,  470. 

MeFinaal,  126-6. 

Made  tn  France,  468. 

Maduon.  Jamee,  112,  119. 

Magaaines,  recent  tendendea  in, 
462. 

Magnalia  Chrieti  Am^noanOt  61, 
74-6. 

Mahomei  and  hie  Sueceeeore,  172. 

Maine  writera,  364-6. 

Maine  Woode,  240. 

"Major  Jack  Downing."  366. 

Man  vfiUunU  a  Country,  333. 

MS.  Found  in  a  BoUle,  422. 

Map  cf  Virginia,  B,  7. 

MarUe  Faun,  306,  308,  316,  317. 

Marco  Bouarie,  194. 

MoToaret,  a  Tale  qfthe  Real  and  Ideal, 
366. 

Margaret  Smith*e  Journal,  262. 

"Maria  del  Ocddente,"  206,  291. 

Marjory  Daw,  380. 

"Mark  Twain";  see  Twain,  Mark. 

Markoe,  Peter,  148. 

Marriage  of  Oueneoere,  473. 

Marahfol,  John,  217. 

Marehee  of  Olynn,  409. 

Martin  Faber,  428. 

Maryland  writers,  16-7,  119,  211, 
212,  404-10,  476. 

Masque  of  the  Qode,  401. 

Masque  of  Judgment,  483. 

Masque  of  Pandora,  280,  296. 

Masque  of  the  Red  Death,  426. 

Mason,  Captain  John,  33. 

Massachusetts,  literary  supremacy  of, 
123,  221. 

Massachusetts  Bay  Colony,  21,  28. 

Massachusetts  to  Virginia,  260,  433. 

Massachusetts  writers,  21-90,  106-9, 
136-8,  200-7,  222-347. 

"Massachusettensis,"  107,  109. 

Mather,  Cotton,  60,  68,  69-76:  birth, 
69,  education,  70,  connection  with 
witchcraft,  71,  character,  72,  lit- 
erary style,  73,  writings,  74;  90, 
92,  101. 

Mather,  Increase,  68,  68-76:  birth, 
68,  education,  69,  political  mission, 
69-70,  revolt  against,  70,  connec- 
tion with  witchcraft,  71,  charac- 
ter, 72,  literary  style,  73,  writings, 
74-6  •  92. 

Mather,  Richard,  46,  48,  68,  87. 

Mathews,  Cornelius,  371. 

Matthews,  Brander,  470. 

Maud  MuUer,  261,  264. 

May-Day,  229,  236. 


May-Day,  at  New  York  in  an  Uproar^ 
139. 

M«yhew,  Jonathan,  83. 

May-Pole  of  Merry  Mount,  33,  311. 

Meat  out  cf  the  Eater,  61. 

Medical  Essays,  323,  328. 

Medicine  in  early  New  England,  67. 

Meditatums,  60. 

Medler,  126,  127.  129. 

MeUichampe,  431. 

Melville,  Herman,  304,  368-370. 

Memorial  Verse  in  New  England  colo- 
nies, 4&-^ 

Mercedes  of  Castile,  179. 

Merry  Mount,  30,  33. 

Merry  Mount,  33,  342. 

Merry  Tales  of  the  Three  Wise  Mam 
of  Gotham,  192. 

Miami  Woods,  437. 

Michael  Angelo,  289,  296. 

Michad  Bonham,  431. 

Middle  Colonies,  90-102. 

Miles  Standish,  288. 

Miller,  Cindnnatus  Hiner,  460. 

Miller,  Harriet  Mann,  479. 

Milton,  2,  23,  24,  143. 

Ministers,  Early  New  En^^d,  37-8, 
66-84. 

Minister*8  Black  VeU,  310. 

Minister's  Wooing,  360. 

Miscellanies,  236. 

"Mr.  Dooley,"  479. 

Mr,  Isaacs,  471. 

"Mrs.  Mary  Clavers,"  871. 

"Mrs.  Partington,"  366. 

MitcheU,  Donald  G.,  347,  466. 

Mitchell,  Samuel,  163. 

MitcheU,  SUas  Weir,  474. 

Jlfoby  Dick,  or  the  White  Whale,  360. 

Modem  Chivalry,  147,  438. 

Moqg  Megone,  269,  261. 

MM  Pitcher,  268,  261. 

Monaldi,  202. 

Manikins,  178. 

Monna  Lisa,  276. 

"M.  Dupin,^'  426,  426. 

Montcalm  and  Wolfe,  346. 

Moody,  William  Vau|^,  483. 

More  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  Worlds 
76,  note. 

Morrell,  William,  64. 

Morella,  424,  426. 

Morris,  George  P.,  196,  368,  363. 

Mortal  Antipathy,  322,  327. 

Morton,  Nathaniel,  34-6,  47. 

Morton,  Sarah  Wentworth,  206. 

Morton,  Thomas,  30-3:  his  settle- 
ment at  Merry  Mount,  30,  his 
book,  31,  his  character,  32-3. 


Indsx 


495 


MofrtMC%  Hope,  342. 

Mo88e8  from  an  Old  Manser  302,  310. 

Motley,  John  Lothrop,  33,  322,  328. 

Moulton,  Louise  Chandler,  336. 

Mount  Wollaston,  30. 

Mourt'a  RekUion,  26. 

Murders  in  the  Rue  Morgue,  423,  425, 

427. 
Murfree,  Marv  N.,  464,  476. 
Murray,  Lindley,  156. 
My  Country,  His  of  Thee,  334. 
My  Double  and  How  he  Undid  Me,  333. 
My  Farm  of  Edgewood,  347. 
My  First  Client,  267. 
My  Garden  Acquaintance,  280. 
My  Hunt  After  the  Captain,  328. 
My  Life  ia  like  the  Summer  Rose, 

213. 
My  Lost  Youth,  295. 
My  Mind  and  its  Thoughts,  205. 
My  Own  Story,  333. 
My  Study  Windows,  270,  280. 
My  Summer  in  a  Garden,  337. 
Mystery  of  Marie  Rogit,  425. 
Mtdh   of   Hiaioatha   and    other   Oral 

Legends,  218. 

Narrative  of  Arthur  Gordon  Pym,  415, 
422,  424,  425. 

Narratives  of  Surprising  Conversions, 
77. 

NaOfy  in  ExOe,  444. 

NaJture,  228,  232. 

Nathan,  James,  246,  247. 

Naihan  Hale,  121. 

"Native  of  Algiers,"  148. 

Natural  History  of  the  Intellect,  229, 
235. 

Nature  and  Elements  of  Poetry,  376, 
377. 

NaJture* s  Serial  Story,  370. 

Navarette,  169. 

Neal,  John,  208-9,  268. 

Near  to  NaJture* s  Heart,  370. 

Ned  Meyers,  179. 

Nellie  was  a  Lady,  442. 

New  American  Cyclopedia,  250,  252. 

New  Connecticut,  244. 

New  England  characteristics  seen  in 
Franklin,  98-9. 

New  England  characteristics  in  co- 
lonial time.  21-2,  54r-6. 

New  England,  literary  supremacy  and 
decUne,  159-60,  221,  461. 

New  England  Two  Centuries  Ago,  279. 

New  England  Tragedies,  288,  295,  296. 

New  England  writers,  21-90,  105-10, 
123-40,  153-n5,  197-209,  222-366, 
466-8;  Poe'Q  attitude  t<>ward,  419. 


New  England^s  Lamentations  for  Old 

England  Errours,  39. 
New  England*s  Memorial,  34-5,  47. 
New  England*s  Plantation,  35. 
New  England's  Prospect,  35,  46. 
New  England's  Rarities  Discovered,  36. 
New  England's  Trials,  5. 
New  English  Canaan,  31-2,  33. 
New   Gospel    of   Peace    according    to 

Saint  Benjamin,  366. 
New  Hampshire  writers,  139,  354. 
New  Home  (A):  Who'U  FoOowt  371. 
New  Jersey  writers,  140-5. 
New  Pastoral,  404. 
New  Priest  in  Conception  Bay,  335. 
New  Roof,  146. 
New  Study  of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets, 

365. 
New  York,  as  publishing  center,  461; 

loses  literaiy  supremacy,  221. 
New  York  writers,  101-2,  110-2,  140. 

160-96,  356-95,  468-74. 
Newell,  Robert  H.,  372. 
News  from  Virginia,  10. 
NiU  Notes  of  a  Howadji,  363. 
Niles,  Samuel,  64. 
Nirui  Gordon;  see  Dred, 
Norman  Leslie,  363. 
Norman  Maurice,  431. 
North  American  Review,  200,  201,  217, 

269-70. 
North  Carolina  writers,  20. 
Norton,    Charles    Eliot,    271,    331, 

333-4. 
Norton,  John,  47,  69,  85. 
Norwood,  Colonel,  18-9. 
Norwood;    or    ViUage    Life   in    New 

England,  367,  368. 
Nothing  to  Wear,  385. 
Notions  of  the  Americans  picked  up  by 

a  Travelling  Bachelor,  177. 
Notes  on  Virginia,  118. 
Nova  Anglia,  54. 
"Novangelus,"  107. 
Noyes,  Nicholas,  85. 
Nye,  Edgar  W.,  444. 

Oak  Openings,  179. 
Oakes,  Urian,  81,  85. 
O'Brien,  Fits  James,  370-1,  373,  379, 
402 

O'Connor,  W.  D.,  394. 
"Octave  Thanet,"  483. 
Ode  in  Time  of  Hesitation,  483. 
Ode  to  the  Mocking-Bird,  436. 
Odell,  Jonathan,  121-2. 
Odyssey,  Bryant's  translation,  187. 
Ohio  writers,  213,  214,  439,  478. 
Old  Bachelor.  212. 


406 


Index 


OU  Black  Joe,  442. 

Old  English  DramaHitB,  267. 

Old  FoUbs  at  Home,  442. 

Old  GrimeB,  362. 

Old  Ironsides,  321. 

Old  Kentucky  Home,  442. 

Old  Man*s  Idyl,  443. 

Old  Manse,  302. 

Old  Oaken  Bucket,  195. 

OU  RSffime  in  Canada,  346. 

Old^Totm  Folks,  360. 

Olive  Branch,  160. 

'*OUve   Thome   MiUer";  see   Mfller, 

Harriet  Mann. 
"OUver  Oldachool,"  209. 
Omoo,  369. 

On  a  Bust  of  Dante,  339. 
On  a  Certain  Condescension  in  For- 
eigners, 280. 
On  the  DeSeai  of  a  Great  Man,  377. 
On   the    True  Grandeur   of  Nations, 

346. 
One-Hoss  Shay;  see  Deacon's  Master' 

piece. 
Opening  of  a  Chestnut  Burr,  370. 
O^Reilly,  John  Boyle,  340. 
OrienUU  Songs,  382. 
Ormand,  161,  163. 
"Orpheus  C.  Kerr."  372. 
Orpnic  Sayings,  244. 
Osgood,  f^ands  Sargent,  340. 
OsBoIi,    Countess;    see   Fuller,    Mar- 

fcaret. 
Otis,  James,  83,  105-6,  108,  135. 
OtioM,  206. 
Our  Hundred  Days  in  Europe,  323, 

329. 
Our  Old  Home,  306,  308. 
Out  Doors  at  IdUwHd,  358. 
Out  of  the  Past,  365. 
Outcasts  of  Poker  Flat,  454,  456. 
Outre-Mer,  286,  290. 
Over  the  TeorCups,  323,  326,  329. 
Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  tranislated  by 

Sandys,  9. 
Owen,  Robert  Dale,  438. 

"Pacificus,"  112. 

Page,  Thomas  Nelson,  464,  475. 

Pages   from   an  Old  Volume  of  Li^s, 

323,  328. 
Paine,  Robert  Treat,  137-8. 
Paine,  Thomas,  114-6. 
Pan  in  Wall  Street,  377. 
Paper  City,  444. 

Papers  on  LOeraturs  and  Art,  248. 
Parrhasius,  359. 

Parker,  Theodore,  224,  248-50,  266. 
Parkxoan,  Francis,  341,  344-5. 


ft 


«i 


«( 


Pamasstu,  229. 

Parsons,  Thomas  W.,  296,  339. 

Partisan,  431. 

Past,  188. 

Pathfinder,  174,  178,  179. 

Patrick  Henry,  Wirt's  life  of,  212. 

Patriot  Chit^,  148. 

Pattee,  F.  H.,  141. 

Paulding,  James  Kirke,  163,  368. 

Paul  Fane,  358. 

Paul  FeUon,  201. 

Payne,  John  Howard,  194-6. 

Peabody,  Elisabeth  Palmer,  224. 

Pdayo,  430. 

PencUings  by  the  Way,  368. 

Penhallow,  Samuel,  64. 

"Pennnrlvania  Farmer,"  114. 

Pennsylvania  Song,  120. 

Pennsylvania  writers,  90-101,  112-6, 
146-53.  155,  209-10,  396-404. 

Pequots,  27,  33. 

Perdval,   James   Gates,    197,   198-0, 
200,  279. 

Peter  Pariey,"  199,  300,  364,  419. 
Peter  Porcupine,"  148-9. 
Petroleum  V.  Nasby,"  444. 

Peters,  Samuel,  155. 

Phelps,  Elisabeth  Stuart;  see  Ward, 
Ehzabeth  Stuart  Phelps. 

Philadelphia  writers,   90-101,   112-6, 
145-63,  155,  209-10,  395-8,  474. 

Philadelphia  as  a  publishing  center, 
461. 

Philip  the  Second,  341. 

Philhps,  WendeU,  61,  265-6. 

Philo,  an  Evangeliad,  356. 

Philosophic  Solitude,  102. 

Philosojphy  of  Composition,  418* 

Piatt,  J.  J.,  439. 

Pickens  and  Stealings  Rebdlion,  278. 

Picture  of  Saint  John,  401. 

Picture  of  New  York,  163. 

Pictures  from  Appledore,  276. 

Pictures  of  Columbus,  143. 

Pierpont,  John,  204. 

Pike,  Albert,  435. 

Pike  County  Ballads,  441. 

Pilgrims,   21,    25,    26,    30,   31;   con- 
trasted with  Southern  writers,  12. 

PiUs,  Poetical,   Political,  and  Philo- 
sophical, 208. 

Pilot,  176,  179,  182. 

Pinkney,  Edward  Coate,  212. 

Pioneers,  176,  179,  268. 

Pioneers  of  France  in  the  New  World, 
345. 

Pit  and  the  Pendulum,  423,  424. 

PUice  of  the  Independent  in  Politics. 
278, 


Indbx 


497 


Plain  LanguiOoe  from  TnUhful  James, 

455. 
Plain  Talks  on  Familiar  Subjects,  338. 
Plays  and  Poems,  398. 
Plumb  Pudding  for  Peter  Porcupine, 

149-60. 
Plymouth  Colony,  21,  25,  30. 
Poe,  Edgar  Allan,  143,  152,  159,  268, 

317,  340,  353,  357,  362,  374,  376, 

385,  395.  404,  410,  412-28:  life  and 

character,     414-7,     literary     criti- 

dsm,  417-20,  poems,  420-22,  prose 

tales,    422-6,     genius    and    rank, 

426-8;  438. 
Poem  on  the  Happiness  of  America, 

133. 
Poems  of  Arouet,  139. 
Poems  of  the  Orient,  400,  401. 
Poems  of  the  War,  398. 
Poems  on  Several  Occasions,  100. 
Poems  on  Slavery,  287. 
Poet  at  the  Breakfast-Table,  322,  323, 

326,  330. 
'Toet  of  the  American  Revolution," 

141. 
Poets  and  Poetry  of  America,  362. 
Poets  Journal,  400. 
Poets  of  America,  374,  376,  377. 
Poetic  Principle,  418. 
Poetry,  a  Metrical  Essay,  329. 
Poetry  and  Mystery  of  Dreams,  397. 
Poetry  in  New  England,  46,  54,  55-6, 

84-8. 
PolUian,  420. 
Political  Essays,  271. 
Political  Greenhouse,  134. 
Political  writings,  103-22,  156-7. 
Ponkapog  Papers,  380. 
Ponteach,  139. 

"Poor  Richard,"  84.  95-6,  98. 
Pope,   86.   120,    124.   133,   166,   167, 

184. 
Porcupiniad,  150. 
Pory,  John,  10. 
Potiphar  Papers,  364. 
PraiHe,  177.  179. 
Precaution,  175,  176. 
Prentice,  George  D.,  436-7. 
Prenticeana,  437. 

Prescott,  WiUiam  ffickling,  341-2. 
Present  Crisis,  273. 
Present  State  of  Virginia,  19. 
Preston,  Margaret  Junlon.  412. 
Pretty  Story,  146. 
Prince,  Thomas,  61-2. 
Prince  and  the  Pauper,  448. 
Prince  Deukalion,  401. 
Prince  of  India,  441. 
Prince  of  Parthia,  100^ 


Printing  in  New  England  oolonies,  22; 

in  Virginia,  13. 
"Private  Miles  O'ReiUy,"  386. 
Problem,  236. 
Probus;  see  Aurelian. 
Professor  at  the  Breakifast-Table,  322, 

325,  326. 
Professor's  Story;  see  Elsie  Venner, 
Progress  of  Dutness,  126. 
Progress  to  the  Mines,  17. 
Prometheus,  268,  273. 
Prose  Sketches  and  Poems,  436. 
Prose  Writers  of  America,  362. 
Prospect  of  Peace,  131. 
Prophet,  401. 

Proud  Miss  McBride,  363. 
Prudence  Palfrey,  379. 
Prue  and  I,  363,  364. 
Psalm  of  Life,  263,  292,  298. 
Pudd'nhead  Wilson,  448,  449,  460. 
Puritans,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  28,  30, 

31,  33,  37,  40,  55,  56,  57,  221,  222, 

223,  254;  contrasted  with  Southern 

colonists,  11,  12. 
Purloined  Letter,  425,  427. 

Quest  of  Merlin,  473. 

Rag-Bag,  358. 

Rainbow,  212. 

Rappaccini's  Daughter,  310. 

Ralph,  James,  100. 

Ramona,  453. 

Ramsey,  David,  218. 

Raven,  418,  421,  422,  427. 

Realism,    recent    tendencies   toward, 

463. 
Realf,  Richard,  442. 
Read,  Thomas  Buchanan,  397,  403. 
Recollections,  374. 
Recollections  of  a  Busy  Life,  361. 
Recollections  of  Persons  and  Places  in 

the  West,  438. 
Reconciliation,  148. 
Red  Badge  of  Courage,  473. 
Red  Rover,  177,  179,  182. 
Redbum,  369. 
Redeemed  Captive  Returning  to  Zion, 

69-60. 
Redskins,  179. 
Religious  writings  in  New  England, 

36-45. 
"Renaissance"  of  New  England,  223. 
Repplier,  Agnes,  474. 
RepresentcUive  Men,  228,  235. 
Reveries  of  a  Bacheior,  347. 
Revolutionary  Period,  103-167. 
Rhode     Island    writers,    109,     139, 

362-^. 


498 


Iin>] 


Bhodofu,  237. 

Bhymtd  L$$mmf  820. 

Bichafd  lEdamr,  3ft6. 

Ritkard  Hardu,  431. 

BMU  1^  Manjll5, 

Why,  Jmdm  Whitoomb.  478. 

RiU  fnm  Qs/i  Town  Fump,  310. 

Ripl^,  Georn,  224,  250-1,  367,  361. 

Rip  fon  WinBe,  160.  167,  168. 

R%B€  1^  the  Duiek  RepMie,  343. 

RtBing  Glory  of  Ameriea,  141. 

Bitteohoiise,  DftTid,  101. 

Rwer  Fighi,  361. 

iiiMr  Paih,  261. 

Robcifihe  Bawl,  211. 

I^oba  d»  Aoma,  340. 

iSoeik  me  to  Siiep,  Motktr,  364. 

Roe,  Edward  Payaon,  370. 

Rogeia,  Robert,  130. 

"RoUo^*  booki,  364. 

Raman  Lawyer  in  JenuaUm,  340. 

Roman  SitMer,  471. 

Rose,  AquiJla,  90. 

Roosevelt,  Theodore,  47a 

Roughino  It,  448. 

Rowen,  468. 

Rowlandaon,  Mary,  60. 

Rowaon,  Suaanna  Haawell,  186. 

i:o2»,  440. 

Rudder  Oranoe,  460. 

RuUt%  oitU  Sauih,  472. 

Ruling  Paanan,  138. 

Rush,  Benjamin,  218-0. 

Ryan,  Abram  J.,  412. 

Sack  of  Rome,  136. 

Salmagundi,  161,  163.  164,  166,  101, 

102 
Salve  Venetia,  472. 
Sanda,  R.  C,  187,  106, 106. 
Sandyi,  George,  0-10. 
Sant'  Ilario,  471. 
Sartieineeea,  471. 
Sargent,  Epes,  340. 
Sargent,  Luoiua  M.,  204. 
Satanetoe,  179. 
"Saxe  Holme,"  463. 
Saxe.  John  G.,  863. 
Scarlet  Letter,  303,  304,  811-4,  316, 

317. 
Scholarship,  153,  216-^. 
Schoolcraft,  Henry  Rowe,  218,  204, 

372. 
Science  of  Engliah  Veree,  407.  408. 
Scientists,  218-9. 
ScotU:  see  Kineman, 
Scudder,  Horace  E.,  336,  337. 
Sea  Dream,  261. 
eeabury,  SiMQUel,  UO,  111,  414, 


SathLiame,  170. 

iSsostds  and  the 

Seeoomb,  John,  86. 

Seetaonaliam  in  American  fitaratoTC^ 

160. 
Sedgwiek,   Catherine   M.,   106,   206^ 

804. 
Seein*  Thinge  at  NifM,  482. 
SeieeHone/rom  the  PoeUoal  lAberaiun 

ttT  the  Weti,  431. 
Setting  of  Joeeph,  66. 
SepHndue  Felton,  300. 
Smions  in  eaily  New  Eng^Land,  37, 

38-^. 
SewaU,  Jonathan,  100,  130. 
SewaU,  SamueU  56,  6&-6.  89.  02. 
Shadow,  425, 
Shakespeare,  1,  8,  23,  24,  196,  279, 

366;  possibly  indebted  to  Strachey, 

8,9. 
Sharpe  and  FlaU,  480,  481,  482. 
Shaw.  Henry  W.,  443,  444. 
Shaw,  John,  212. 
She  Came  and  Went,  273. 
Shepaid,  Thomas,  39,  40-1,  81,  85. 
Sheridan'e  Ride,  404. 
Shillaber,  Benjamin  P.,  356. 
Short  Sixee,  468. 
Short  story,  recent  development  of, 

463. 
Sigouraey,  Lydia  Huntley,  197-8. 
Suenee,  425. 

Sill,  Edward  Roidand,  458-60. 
Rilhman,  Benjamin,  219. 
SHeerwood,  412. 
Simms,    404,    428-32:    life,    428^0, 

poems,  430,    prose  fiction,  430-1, 

miscellaneous  work,   431-2,    rank, 

432. 
Simple  CdUer    of  Aggawamm,  43-5, 

Siimere  in  the  Hande  of  an  Angry 
Qod,  79. 

Sirene,  272. 

iSulers,  261. 

Skeleton  in  Armor,  292. 

SketOi  Book,  165-6,  167,  168,  160, 
170,  174,  192,  285,  286. 

Skipper  Ireeon*e  Ride,  261,  264. 

Sleeper,  421.  422. 

Smith,  F.  Hopkinson,  464,  470. 

Smith,  John,  2-8:  life  and  adven- 
tures, 3-4j  writings,  4-5,  his  ve- 
racity, 6,  hterary  qualities,  6-8;  10, 
11,20. 

Smith,  Samuel  F.,  334. 

Smith,  Sebaj  356. 

South  Carolma  writers,  428-84, 

Snow  Image,  310, 


Indbx 


499 


Snow  Image  and  other  Twiee-Told 
Tales,  304,  310. 

Snow-Bound,  259,  261. 

Society  and  Solitude,  228. 

Society  upon  the  Stanislaus,  468. 

Songs  and  Sonnets,  380. 

Songs  from  Vagabondia,  473. 

Songs  of  a  Semite,  384. 

Songs  of  Childhood,  481. 

Songs  of  the  Revolution,  120-1. 

Sonnets  and  Canzonets,  244. 

Sot-Weed  Factor,  1&-6. 

Sotweed  Redivivus,  16-7. 

South  Carolina  writers,  20,  428-34. 

Southern  characteristics  affecting  lit- 
erature, 11-4. 

Southern  writers,  116-9,  211-3,  404- 
36.  474-7. 

Spagnoletto,  384. 

Spanish  Papers,  172. 

Spanish  Student,  293. 

Sparks,  Jared,  200,  217. 

Specimen  Days,  387,  389. 

Spectator,  91,  95,  125. 

Sphinx,  236. 

Spirit-Rapper  (The),  an  Autobiog- 
raphy, 253. 

Spiritual  Milk  for  Boston  Babes,  38. 

Spofford,  Harriet  Prescott,  331,  466. 

Sprague,  Charles,  204. 

Spy,  173,  175,  176,  179,  182,  431. 

Stansbury,  Joseph,  121-2. 

Stars  of  the  Summer  Night,  293. 

Star-Spangled  Banner,  212. 

Stedman,  Edmund  Clarence,  357, 
373,  375-8:  life  and  literary  labors, 
375-6,  as  editor  and  critic,  376-7, 
as  poet,  377-8;  381,  382. 

Stiles,  Ezra,  156. 

StilluKUer  Tragedy,  379. 

Stith,  WiUiam,  1^20. 

Stockton.  Frank  R.,  469. 

Stoddard,  Richard  Henry,  37^-5,  378, 
381,  382,  402. 

Stone,  Reverend  Mr.,  47. 

Stories  of  New  Jersey,  470. 

Story,  Joseph.  200,  203. 

Story.  William  Wetmore,  266,  268, 
280.  339-40. 

Story  of  a  Bad  Boy,  378,  379,  380,  381. 

Story  of  a  New  York  House,  468. 

Story  of  Kennett,  402. 

Story  of  the  Whistle,  97. 

Story  or  two  from  a  Dutch  Town,  335. 

Stout  Gentleman,  IQS, 

Stowe,  Harriet  Beeoher,  269,  348-51, 
366. 

Strachey,  William.  8-0,  10. 

Street,  Alfred  B.,  386. 


Street  Lyrics,  398. 

Summary,  Historical  and  PolUu/il,  of 
the  First  Planting,  Progressive  Im^ 
provements  and  Present  State  of  the 
British  Settlements  in  North  Amer- 
ica, Q^. 

Summary  View  of  the  Rights  of  British 
America,  118. 

Summer  on  the  Lakes,  247. 

Sumner,  Charles,  287,  346. 

Sunny  Memories  of  Foreign  Lands,^ 
3W.  ^ 

Sunrise,  409. 

Sunset  on  the  Beareamp,  261. 

Swallow  Bam,  211. 

Sword  and  the  Distaff,  431. 

Sword  of  Bunker  Hut,  385. 

Sword  of  Lee,  412. 

SiM^  of  the  Seasons,  202. 

Symphony,  409. 

Symposium,  224,  243. 

Tabb,  John  B.,  476. 

TahU  Talk,  244. 

TalbHets,  244. 

Tailfer,  Patrick,  20. 

Tales  of  a  Traveller,  167,  168. 

Tales  of  a  Wayside  Inn,  288,  296,  296, 

297. 
Tales  of  Glauber  Spa,  196,  206. 
Tales    of   the    Argonauts    and    other 

Sketches,  455. 
Toles  of  the  Border,  214. 
Taliesin,  473. 
Talisman,  187.  195,  196. 
Tamerlane,  420. 

Tamerlane  and  other  Poems,  414. 
Tanglewood  Tales,  304,  311. 
Tannhaiuer,  384. 
Taylor.  Bayard.  259.  373.  378,  381, 

382.   397.   398-403:   life,   398-400, 

poetry,     400-1,     dramatic    works, 

401-2,    novels.    402,    other   prose, 

402-3,  rank.  403. 
Telling  the  Bees,  261. 
Tell-TaU  HeaH,  424. 
Ten  Great  Religions,  254. 
Tent  on  the  Beach,  259,  260,  261. 
Tenth  Muse,  49. 
Terrible  Tractoration,  207. 
Thanatopsis,  185.  188.  190. 
Thaxter.  Celia  L.,  354. 
Theology  Explained  and  Defended,  129. 
Thomas.  Isaiah,  217. 
Thomas,  Edith,  478. 
Thompson,   Benjamin,   Coimt  Rum- 

ford,  219. 
Thompson,  Daniel  P.,  353. 
Thompson,  Maurice,  479. 


600 


Indsx 


Thoreau,  Henry  David,  22i,  238-42: 
life,  238,  penonalily,  239-^40,  prose* 
240-1,  vene,  241,  rank,  242;  262, 
279,302. 

"Thou  art  mine,  thiou  hatt  gi»en  thy 
uwrdr  378. 

ThoughU  on  thepoeiB,  368. 

Threading  my  Way,  438. 

Threnody,  236. 

Ticknor,  Frank  O.,  435. 

Ticknor,  George,  200,  203,  286,  200. 

Tiger  lAlies,  406,  408. 

Timothy  TiUsomb'a  Letters,  338. 

TlxnnxC  Henry,  404,  429,  432-3,  434. 

To  a  Moequito,  188. 

To  a  Pine-Tree,  273. 

To  a  Waterfowl,  185,  190. 

To  Helen,  421,  422. 

To  One  in  Paradise,  A2X 

To  Science,  420. 

To  Seneca  Lake,  199. 

To  the  Dandelion,  273. 

To  the  Fringed  OenHan,  188. 

Toinette,  434. 

Token,  199,  300. 

Torteeaa;  or  the  Ueurer  Matched,  358. 

Tom  Sawyer,  379,  444,  447,  448,  449, 
450. 

Tom  Thornton,  201. 

Tour  on  the  Prairies,  171,  172. 

Tourgee,  Albert  W.,  434. 

Toujours  Amour,  378. 

TowDsend,  Mary  A^ey,  436. 

Tramp  Abroad,  448. 

Transcendental  Club,  224. 

TranscendentaliBm,  161,  173. 

Tranaoendentalista,  222-254,  361. 

Transformation:  see  Marble  Faun, 

Treatise  on  the  Freedom  of  the  Will,  79. 

Tribune,  New  York,  245,  250,  251,  252. 

Tribune  Primer,  480. 

Trowbridge,  J.  T.,  269,  331,  333,  336, 
466. 

True  Relation  of  Virginia,  4,  6,  7. 

True  Reporlory  of  the  Wracke  and  Re- 
dem'ption  of  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  8,  9. 

True  Travels,  Adventures,  and  Obser- 
vations of  Captain  John  Smith,  5. 

Trumps,  363,  364. 

Trumbull,  John,  123,  124-6,  129,  132, 
133,  134. 

Tuckerman,  Henry  T.,  368. 

Tudor,  William,  200. 

Twain,  Mark,  181,  337,  379,  444-52: 
life,  444-6,  influenced  by  West, 
446,  personality,  447,  writings,  447- 
52,  humor,  448,  rank,  452. 

Twirs-Told  Tales,  300,  310,  418. 

Tvfo  Admirals,  179. 


Two  Men  of  Sandy  Bar,  455,  467. 
Two  Years  Before  the  Moat,  332, 
Tyler,  Royall,  138-9. 
Typee,  369. 


Ukdume,  421,  422. 

UUima  Thule,  289. 

"Unde  Remus*'  tales,  476. 

Unde  Tom's  Cabin,  349,  360.  435. 

Under  the  Evening  Lamp,  374. 

Under  the  Violets,  330. 

Under  the  Willows,  270,  276. 

Underbrush,  332. 

Unhappy  Lot  of  Mr.  Knott,  276. 

United  Netherlands,  343. 

Universal    History   on   the   Batie   oi 

Oeography,  300. 
University  of  Pemuqrlvaiiia,  99. 

Vagabonds,  333. 

ViUerian,  210. 

Van  Dyke,  Henry,  470. 

Vassal  Morton,  344. 

Venus  of  Milo,  459. 

Vermont  writers,  138,  353. 

Verplanck,  Gulian  C,  187,  19&-6. 

Verse    in    New    England    oolonieo, 

46-54    84  8. 
Very,  Jones,  224,  251,  252,  268. 
Victorian  Anthology,  376. 
Victorian  Poets,  376. 
Views  Afoot,  399. 
Vindication  of  the  Conduct  of  the  Houee 

of  Representatives,  105. 
Vindication  of  the  Oovemmeni  of  New 

England  Churches,  82. 
Virginia  Comedians,  411. 
Virginia  writers.    1-20,    116-9,    211. 

410-28;   contrasted  with  those  of 

Massachusetts,  23. 
Vision  of  Columbus,  131,  132. 
Vision  of  Sir  Launfal,  268,  272,  276, 

281,  329. 
Voiceless,  330. 

Voices  of  the  Night,  286,  287,  292. 
Voyage  to  Virginia,  18. 
Voyages  of  Columbus,  169. 
Voyages  of  tlie  Companions  of  Column 

bus,  169. 

Wagoner  of  the  AUeghanies,  404. 

Wakendah,  372. 

Walden,  or  Life  in  the  Woods,  238, 

240-1. 
Wallace,  Lew,  440-1,  478. 
WaUaoe,  William  R.,  385. 
Wandering  Recollections  of  a  Some* 

what  Busy  Life,  208. 
Wanted—A  Man,  377. 


Index 


501 


War  U  Kind,  474. 

War  Poetry  of  the  South,  432. 

Ward,  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps,  331, 
335,  466. 

Ward,  Nathaniel,  43-5,  46. 

Ware,  William.  336,  337. 

Warner,  Charles  Dudley,  336,  337, 
448. 

Warren,  Mercy  Otis,  135-6,  153. 

Warren*8  Address,  204. 

Waler-Witch,  177. 

Way  to  Wealih,  95-6. 

Ways  of  the  Hour,  179. 

Wayside,  304. 

Webster,  Daniel,  215-6,  346. 

Webster,  Noah,  155,  219;  his  dic- 
tionary, 198. 

Week  on  the  Concord  and  Merrimac 
Rivers,  238,  240. 

Weems,  Mason  L.,  216-7. 

Welby,  Amelia  B.,  438. 

Welde,  Thomas,  48. 

Wept  of  WishntannWish,  177. 

West  Wind,  190. 

"Westchester  Farmer,"  110,  111. 

Western  Clearings,  371. 

Western  Souvenir,  214. 

Western  writers,  213-4,  477-83,  436- 
60. 

Westooev  Manuscripts,  17. 

Westward  Ho,  192. 

Wet  Days  at  Edgewood,  347,  348. 

Wharton,  Edith,  470. 

What  I  know  of  Farming,  361. 

What  Was  Jtf  a  Mystery,  371. 

Wheatley,  PhilUs,  136. 

When  Lilacs  Last  in  the  Door-Yard 
Bloomed,  394. 

Whitaker,  Alexander,  10. 

Whitoher,  Frances  M.,  372. 

White,  Maria,  267,  271. 

White,  Biohard  Grant,  366. 

Whitefield,  George,  20,  68,  78. 

White^acket,  369. 

Whitman,  Sarah  Helen,  352-3. 

Whitman,  Walt,  372,  373,  384,  386- 
95:  life  and  writings,  386^-8,  chaj> 
acter,  388-9,  motive  in  writing,  390, 
verse  form,  390-1,  views  on  life  and 
literature,  392-4,  rank,  394;  403, 
464,  473,  474. 

Whittier,  James  Greenleaf,  145,  256- 
65:  earljr  life,  256-7,  early  writings, 
258,  antislavery  labors,  257-8,  per- 
sonal life,  258-9,  poems,  259-62, 
prose,  262-3,  literary  characteris- 
tics, 263-5;  269,  284,  377,  382,  383, 
384,  433,  437. 

Whipple,  Edwin  Percy,  334,  374. 


Widow  BedoU  Papers,  372. 
Widmo  of  Malabar,  133. 
WieUmd,  151,  152,  153. 
Wigglesworth,  Michael,  51~4,  56,  84, 

199. 
Wild  Honeysuckle,  144. 
Wilde,  Richard  Hennr,  212-3. 
WHdemess  and  the  War-Path,  214. 
Wilkins,  Mary  E. ;  see  Freeman,  Mary 

E.  Wilkins. 
Wiilard,  Samuel,  82. 
William  and  Mary  (College,   13,   19, 

20. 
Williams,  Roger,  38,  41-3. 
Williams.  John,  59-60,  84. 
Willis.   Nathaniel  Parker,   150,  357- 

60,  363,  378,  414. 
Wilson,  Alexander,  219. 
WindnClouds  and  Star-Drifts,  330. 
Wing-andnWing,  179. 
WinsloWjEdward,  25-6. 
Wmter,  William,  371,  373,  379,  470. 
Winthrop,    John,    28,    30,    62,    341, 

352. 
Winthrop,  Theodore,  352. 
Wirt,  William,  117,  211. 
Wise,  John,  81. 
Wister,  Owen,  464,  474. 
Witchcraft,  71. 
Witherspoon,  John,  156. 
WolfeH's  Roost,  172. 
Woman    in   colonial   New  England, 

55-6. 
Woman   in   the   Nineteenth   Century, 

248. 
Wonder  Book,  304,  311. 
Wondersmith,  371. 
Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  75. 
Wonder-Working  Providence  of  Sion*s 

Saoiour  in  New  England,  33-4. 
Wood,  William,  35,  46. 
Woodberry,  George  E.,  376,  470. 
Woodcraft;  see  Sword  and  Distaff. 
Woodman,  Spare  that  Tree,  195. 
Woodnotes,  236. 
Woodworth.  Samuel,  195. 
Wooing  of  Malkatoon,  441. 
Woolman,  John,  145. 
Woolson,  Constance  Fenimore,  467. 
Worcester,  Joseph  E.,  219. 
Wound-Dresser,  388,  389. 
Wracke  and  Redemption  of  Sir  Thomas 

Gates,  8,  9. 
Wreck  of  the  Hesperus,  292. 
Wyandotte,  179. 
Wyridham  Towers,  380. 
Wynken,  Blynken,  and  Nod,  482. 

"Xariffa,"  436. 


ZopUat  or  TKb  Bridt  0/ B«*«n.  200. 


J  "■"■  T 


^  /      , 

~S^3. 3'^..  Lii^^  .   c.  //,  //.  /-.   /^,x .  cy ,  Tf . 


/7.    '    .' 


,".  .'t  / .  K  >• .  i^^'  ^'  vX..  XT. 


,       7 


.  0 


I       '  '  ^ 

,      H^  '  •  •  II  '  ' 

/   I' 


?l 


'     /  >  !■    '       i.   V  (.1-    r     c'V*      '  •  »  '  .  '*/  •      ^ 


