Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA 



THEWmERICAN novel in GERMANY 
^ 1871-1913 



BY 

CLEMENT VOLLMER 

/// 



A THESIS 

PRESENTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL IN 

PARTIAI FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 

THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 



INTERNATIONAL PRINTING CO. 

PHILADELPHL\ 
1918 



Copyright 1918 

BY 

CLEMENT VOLLMER 



V7 



PREFACE. 

The data presented in this volume was collected during the 
author's sojourn in Bcrhn, from April to Scpteml:)er, 1914. The 
results as formulated here claim to Ije merely an objective 
description of facts, arranged in the form of a chronological 
study. The aim has not been to draw broad and final conclusions 
from these facts, but rather to pave the way for later detailed 
investigations of the relative importance which individual Amer- 
ican novelists attained in Germany within the period bounded by 
the Franco-Prussian War and the Great World War of 1914. It 
was in fact the outbreak of the present war in August, 1914, with 
its attendant confusion and governmental limitations placed upon 
otherwise accessible bibliographical data, which prevented a more 
searching investigation and the drawing of rhore definite conclu- 
sions than those which this work ventures to assert. 

The Bibliography (Chapter III) claims to be a complete list 
of American novels of the post-Civil War novelists published 
in Germany in toth English and German. The omission of 
numerous writers of unliterary sensational fiction requires no 
apology. The novels are grouped according to an alphabetical 
tabulation of authors and under each author follow the strict 
chronological order of publication, in so far as the exact date of 
publication was ascertainable. 

The investigation was undertaken at the suggestion of the 
much lamented Professor Marion Dexter Learned, of the Uni- 
versity of Pennsylvania, to whose memory the author owes a 
deep debt of gratitude for his constant inspiration and guidance 
For helpful suggestions and the extension of special privileges 
which facilitated the gathering of material, many thanks are due 
to Dr. Drechsler, Chief of the Amerika Institut in Berlin, to the 
officials of the Research Division of the Konigliche Bibliothek 
of Berlin, and to many publishers and l)ooklovers of Germany 
who made otherwise inaccessible facts availal)le. 

Clement Vollmer. 
Philadelphia, May 15, 1918. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

Chapter I. 

Page 
Introduction: 

The Period, 1871-1913 9 

Reasons for this Starting Point 9 

General Survey of Germany's Attitude Toward the 

American Novel 9 

American and British Literature 11 

The True Situation 14 

Chapter IL 
Chronological Survey: 

(a) Certain Limitations 16 

(b) The History 18 

In Groups of Years (1871-1890) 18 

In Individual Years (1891-1913) 26 

(c) Chronological Table 39 

(d) Determining Factors in this History 40 

Few Novels Al)out Germany 40 

Works on American Literature 41 

The Periodicals 45 

The Publishers 46 

American Poetry 47 

American Men of Letters in Germany 48 

Political Relation Unimportant 51 

Chapter III. 
Bibliography: 

Containing a Complete List of American Novels Pub- 
lished in Germany, 1 871 -19 13, Arranged by 

Authors 52 



THE AMERICAN NOVEL IN GERMANY, 1871-1913. 



CHAPTER I. 



Introduction. 

The period between the years 1871 and 191 3 is too recent 
to enable us to form an absohiu!y accurate opinion and a final 
judgment concerning the value of its literature. The novels 
which were written in these years in America may ether win for 
themselves a prominent place in the hall of literary fame or they 
may be forgotten by the generations and centuries which are to 
follow. W. J. Long * says : "There was once a wise man named 
Archimedes, who said that he could move the world if he had a 
lever long enough and a place to stand on. So the historian might 
with confidence speak of his own age if he could remove himself 
to the distant future and view the present event in its historic 
perspective, that is, in its relation to other events, past and to 
come." However, uncertain though our judgment may be of the 
immediate present and past, we are at least able to determine 
the extension of interest which our literature has attained, even 
if only for the time being, in foreign lands, and it is the immedi- 
ate purpose of this investigation to indicate the degree which 
that interest has attained in Germany and German Austria. 

The year 1871 has been roughly chosen as a starting point 
for various reasons. In the first place, it was this year which 
gave birth to the new German Empire and marked the begin- 
ning of an era in which Germany has played so prominent a 
role in '*\Vcltpolitik," as well as in the arts, the sciences and 
commercial affairs. 

For the United States there was also a literary rejuvenation 
at about this time. In his General Survey of American Litera- 



* American Literature, New York, 1913, p. 147. 



lo The .Inirricitn Xuicl :';• Gcrnuniy, j ^*;'i'iofj 

turc since the Civi! War, II. S. Pano-ast declares iliat - "it has 
not been rcinarkaf;lc for the <U.p{h or cI- «|i:er.ce of its weightier 
prose, or for the brilliancy and iii>i.i;];t c»f li».r:ry cr:tir:-ni, but 
in its fiction it has made a distinct and n' -table ci •ntribution lo 
h'teraturc," It has lx:en the aistoni to trace tliis new movement 
in American Literature as datincj from the end of tlic Civil War, 
but the chief school of fiction, the reali:5tic scii»;ol, led by Ilowells 
and James, did not really be'jin until after 1S70. The prose 
novel assumes a "tyrannous central po-iiion/*^ because of its 
direct appeal to all classes of people. Especially is this notice- 
able after 1876, since which date **nearly two hundred good 
writers and perhaps a thousand good volumes have appeared" 
on the American fiction market. Twenty years later, in 1896, wc 
read:'* "Tlie magnitude of the flood of novels and tales that 
now surges through newspaper and magazine, and in bound 
form sweeps other literary products from the bookstands, 
almost exceeds belief." Stedman says:* **Tlie elder poets fully 
met the need for idyllic verse, relating to home, patriotism, re- 
ligion, and the work-day life of an orderly people. They did 
not scrutinize and vividly present the coils of individual feeling. 
Our people have outgrown their juvcnescence, tested their man- 
hood and now demand a lustier regimen. They crave the sensa- 
tions of mature and cosmopolitan experience, and are bent upon 
what wc arc told is the proper study of mankind. The rise of 
our novelists was the answer to this craving. They depict life 
as it is, though rarely, as yet, in its intenscr phases." When 
Kdward Fawcett complained, shortly after the Civil War, that 
"just now it is surely the twilight of our American novelists," he 
was stating the truth, for this new revival of the realistic novel 
had not yet noticeably developed. By the end of Grant's second 
term, 1877, the** "complete restoration of the Union, the spread 
of new states from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and the significant 



•/■/« Introduction to American Literature, New York, 1898, p. 309. 
•jvirhard Burton: Literary Leaders of America, New York, 1904, p. 3U. 

• Paltcc: A Ili^tory of American Literature, Boston, 1896, p. 422. 

• Poets of America, Hoslon, 1886. 

• \V. J. Loiik: American Literature, New York, 1913, p. 270. 



The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipi^ ii 

Centennial Exposition of 1876" liacl taken place. These marked 
the opening of the new era of this republic and with it the begin- 
ning of the great development of the American novel. 

As if to make the new epoch in the American novel an en- 
tirely and not only a partly new one, we find that almost all the 
great novelists of the earlier days died before the rejuvenation 
of our fiction set in. Among these are Simms (1S70), J. P. 
Kennedy (1870), Scalsfield (1864), Hawthorne (1864), Miss 
Sedgwick (1867), Cooper (1851), James Kirke Paulding 
(i860), Washington Irving (icJq), Poe (1849). I^^ England, 
the death of Dickens (d. 1870) and Bulwer-Lytton (d. 1873), 
also marked the end of the old and the beginning of the new 
epoch.^ 

Let us make a rapid preliminary survey of the extent and 
growth of Germany's interest in and knowledge of American 
literature. In an early work, Ludwig Wachler*s Lehrbuch der 
Litcraturgeschichte,^ we find references to American literature 
only on one page.® In speaking of Walter Scott's supreme posi- 
tion as English novelist, he says: "er hat in Washington Irving 
einen wi'irdigen Nclx:nbuhler gefunden; manche neuere Erschei- 
nungen (v. Allan Cunningham, d. etvvas diirftig-brcite N. Am. 
James Fenimore Cooper u. a.) sind vielversprechend." It was 
some time after this tliat Cooper became really known to the 
German reading public, but once aroused, their interest in his 
works shows no signs of weakening, even at the present day.^^ 
Brander Matthews correctly said of Cooper : **The first American 
author to carry our flag outside the limits of our language." Miss 
Maclean has pointed out *^ the immense popularity in Germany of 
Uncle Tom's Cabin, after its publication in America in 1852. It 



'C/. also Alphonso Smith: Die Amcrikanischc lAtcratnr (Vol. II of the 
Bibliothck der amerikanischcn Kullurgeschichte, Berlin, 1912), pp. 22, 29. 33, 
34, 217 aud 307, for an excellent description of the new awakening in Ameri- 
can Litcratnre after 1870. Cf. also F. L. Pattee: American Literature Since 
1870, New York, 191 5. 

• 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1830. 

•P. 381. 

'• As recently as 1909, Karl Fcdern published his translation of Cooper in 
Gennany. 

"Americana Germanica, Vol. X, "Uncle Tom's Cabin" in Germany, 



12 The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipij 

has gone through no less than seventy-five separate editions in 
Germany since that time. Johannes Scherr's AUgemeine Ge- 
schichtc dcr Litcratur gives us another means of judging the atti- 
tude of German Hterary critics and hit^torians toward our litera- 
ture. In the first edition of this work (1851), Cooper is given a 
half-page description, but is chiefly branded as an imitator of 
Scott.*- He then blandly adds: "Brown, Ncal, Paulding, Hoff- 
man, Bird, Simms, Anna Sedgwick u. andere waren tatig im 
Roman." Washington Irving is honored with fourteen lines 
and described as an imitator of Dickens. In the third edition 
of 1869, although "neu verarbeitet und stark vermehrt," the only 
addition among American authors is a short footnote on Poc 
(d. 1849). I" the fourth and fifth editions *^ of this same work 
the additions consist of one line concerning Hawthorne and the 
following list: "B. Taylor, R. H. Stoddart, J. R. Lowell, G. H. 
Baker, Th. B. Aldrich, J. A. Dorgan, J. J. Pratt and Walt Whit- 
man, in welchen letztgenannten die cine Halfte seiner Landsleute 
einen grossen Dichter, die andere einen grossen Narren sieht.*' 
Although written in 1875, there is no mention of Bret Harte 
or Mark Twain. In the sixth edition of 1880, we find the state- 
ments of the previous editions unchanged, Hawthorne is brushed 
aside with "der phantastisch-humoristische Novellist N. Haw- 
thorne lehnt sich an Poe,'* and this important addition:*^ "In 
den Erziihlungen und . Schildcrcien von Th. B. Aldrich und M. 
Twain tritt die humoristische AuiTassungs- und Betrachtungs- 
weise von Welt und Menschen elxinfalls in den Vordergrund, 
wogegen der Novell ist W. D. Howclls mehr die pathetische Seite 
der Erscheinungcn des Lebens hervorkehrt.'' Whitman receives 
an unfavorable footnote as his portion. 

From this cursory treatment it would appear as if Ameri- 
can literature had not aroused sufficient interest in Germany to 



" This inciicatcs a cioiidcd lack of appreciation of our literature which 
amonj( some Gcnnari critics has persisted to this day. At the time of Cooper's 
death (1851) he had already been translated and pn!)lislied countless times in 
Germany, hut the notion among certain luiropeans that whatever is American 
caimot be of permanent value was strikingly illustrated in his case. 

" 1872, 1875. 

"P. 119. 



The American A^ovel in Germany, iS/i-ipT^ 13 

call forth histories of its literature written in German and bv 
Germans. However, as early as 18C8, Brunncmann published 
his Geschichie der Nordamcrikanischen Literatur. In 1883, 
Eduard Engel issued his Geschichtc der amerikanischcn Litera- 
tur, He pul)lished this as an appendix to his Geschichtc der eng- 
lischen Liicratiir in the later editions. The second edition ap- 
peared in separate binding in 1897, but in it he doubts *'ob eine 
Litteratur, die iilx^rhaupt erst seit wenigcn Jahrzehnten anfiingt 
unabhangig von der englischen sich zu entwickeln, sclion fiir eine 
geschichtliche Darstellung geniigMides Material liefert, muss be- 
zweifelt werden." Two works had appeared before Engers: 
Ernst Otto Hopp's Unier dem Sterneubanncr {Streifziige in das 
Leben und die Literatur der Amerikaner)^ (Bromberg, 1877), 
und Rudolf Doehn's Aus dem amerikanischcn Dichtcnvald 
(Leipzig, 1881). In 1891 there appeared the most pretentious 
work of all, Karl Knortz' Geschichtc der nordamcrikanischen 
Literatur (2 vols., Berlin, Lustenoder). This was followed in 
1898 by E. P. Evans' Bcitrdge zur amerikanischcn Literatur- und 
Ktdtnrgcschichte, Finally, in 191 2, Kcllner's Geschichtc der 
nordamcrikanischen Literatur (2 vols.)^ was published in the 
Goschen series. ^^ 

During all this time the Germans were in fact taking a genu- 
ine interest in our literature. One critic writes in 1876: "Die 
Amerikaner haben auf einem ganz eigenen Boden, in ganz eig- 
ner Luft, mid in einem ganz eignen Geiste geschichtlicher Ent- 
wickelung ein ganz eigncs l.elien und somit audi eine ganz eigne 
Literatur. Obgleich sic noch immer wcsentlich mit Leben und 
Literatur luiglands und Dcutschlands zusanimen hiingen und eng- 
lisch wie deutsche Geisteswerke immer frisch Ix^i sich einbiirgern, 
halxn sie doch langst auch auf eigne Weise denken und dichten 
gelernt.**^^ In the same year another reviewer calls his readers' 
attention to Duyckinck's Cyclopedia of American Literature 
from the earliest time to the year jSj^: "Sie ist an und fiir sich 
cine ganze, fiir die gewahltesten Familicnkreise passende Biblio- 



"These works and others are discussed in more detail in Chap. 11(d) of 
this study. 

^Magacin fiir die Literatur dcs Auslandcs, April 15, 1876, p. 228. 



14 The American Novel in Germany, iS/T-ipTj 

tlick anicrikanischcr Bellctristik.'**'^ Moreover, even after the 
new era of the American novel had begun between 1870 and 
1S75, interest did not wane in many of the old favorites. Cooper 
remained the most popular American author for many years: 
Harriet Beecher Stowe's latest works were read with avidity, 
and the critics speak highly of her *'ausgesprochen niichterne 
Prosa."^^ But lest his readers forget, we llnd the reviewer of 
Richardson's Primer of American Liierahire,^^ reminding them 
that **Namen wie die von Washington Irving, Ivongfellow, Bret 
Harte, Ba3^ard Taylor, erinnern uns, dass es audi jenseils des 
Oceans eine Literatur giebt, die es verdient, dnss wir Deutsche 
uns eingehend und voll Interesse mit ihrer Entwickelung und Ge- 
schichte beschaftigen."^^ 

In spite of this and the literary histories mentioned above, 
American literature has not yet been fully recognized in Ger- 
many as distinct from the English. It is gratifying to note that 
Wiilker's Gcschichte dcr englischen Literatur, usually considered 
the best German work on this subject, does not mention our litera- 
ture. Korting's Grundriss dcr englischen Literatur,'^^ however, 
still considers our literature more or less British and gives short 

nitz Catalogues for further information. The Tauchnitz edition 
is still generally called the Collection of British Author s,'^'^ 
although sixty-eight of its four hundred and ninety authors are 
American ^^ (works by Cooper and Irving being among the first 
volumes published 1841 -1847), ^^^ among them are the very best 
sellers. Germans themselves realize this failure to properly recog- 
nize American literature, as e. g. when Dr. H. Schmidt "* speaks 
of "die mangelhafte Beriicksichtigung, die die englische Literatur 
Amerikas noch immer selbst in den neuesten Werken iiber eng- 



11 

IS 



ilf. /. d. L. d. A., Sept. 30, 1876, p. 577- 
M. /. d. L, d. A., Sept. 9, 1876, p. 530. 

" Boston, 1879. 

**M. /. d. L. d. A., June 21, 1879, p. 394- 

^ 2nd ed. 

" Cf. any volume of Kayscr's Bi'ichcr-Lexikon. 

**\Jp to June, 1914. 

**DiV Neucrcn Sprachcn, Vol. 3, p. 611 {1896). 



The American No7rl in Germany, iS/i-rpi^ 15 

Hsche Litcratiir findet."-*^ E. P. Evans, born in America, but a 
German citizen since 1870, has heroically defended our literature 
and accuses the British of attempts to prove that Irving and 
Cooper were British-born, "alxT die reichhaltige und eigenartige 
Enlwickelung der amerikanischen Literatur und das unverkenn- 
bare Nationalg(»prage, welches sie fiihrt, liisst derlei Verwechse- 
lungen, selbst niit dcm bi^scsten W'illen, kaum mehr vorkommen. 
— Xur Herr Baron v. Tauchnitz scheint imnicr noch bei dem 
alten Glauben zu bleiben, dass es keine amcrikanische Literatur 
gebe, sonst ware es ja unerfindlich, wie er die bekannte Schrift- 
steller Hawthorne, Henry James, Aldrich, Howell s, Harte, Long- 
fellow und noch viele andere unter 'British authors' subsumieren 
und als solche verlegen kann."^^ H. H. Ewers has recently writ- 
ten a Filhrer (lurch die vwderne Literatur,-^ in which three hun- 
dred authors from all countries are presented as "die geistige 
Elite der Kultur unscrer Zeit in literarischer Beziehung." The 
only Americans who are considered as deserving mention arc 
Poe, Mark Twain, and Walt Whitman, the author deploring the 
lact that "der Amerikaner Walt Whitman, Leute wie Schlaf und 
andere eine Zeitlang in seinen Bann zog.*' Similar treatment is 
accorded American literary men in Carl Schmidt's Der moderne 
Ronionr^ in which Upton Sinclair is the only American dis- 
cussed in a long list of German, French, Russian, English and 
Italian novelists. On the other hand, Keiter und Kellen's Der 
Roman -^ finds space for seventeen American novelists, includ- 
ing all the important ones since 1870 with a few exceptions. 

In spite of this apparent ignoring of American men of letters 
and the seeming lack of appreciation by literary historians in 
Germany of our rij^ht to a place in the literary sun, conditions are 
not such as w'e might judge them off-hand to be. We certainly 



^ Even in this statcmont. much as llic writer wouUl like to see American 
Literature receive a more prominent recognition in Germany, he can only 
think of achiovinpr this prreater prominence hy incorporating a more extensive 
account of dur literal ure in the Histories of English Litcialure. 

^ I>citrii(jr, etc.. p. io<), Cotta, 1898. 

" lUrlin. i(X)6. 

*' Osnabriick, Kx>S. 

•• Essen- Ruhr, 1908. 



i6 The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipij 

cannot agree with Miss Colbron,^^ that "until a few years ago 
American literature in its modern form, began and ended with 
Bret Hartc and Mark Twain as far as they («. e,, the Germans) 
were concerned." Nor can we adopt the standpoint of Charles 
A. L. Reed, who has discovered that there arc many people in 
Germany who speak English, lie says:^' "The American, how- 
ever, who felicitates himself that, even in the cities (of Germany) 
mentioned, the interest in the English language engenders inter- 
est in the literature of America is doomed to disappointment: 
for whatever interest is thus aroused centers in the literature of 
England; to which country rather than to America, all literature 
in the English language is most frequently attributed." 

That not only Bret Ilarte and Mark Twain, but a large 
number of other American novelists are eagerly read and their 
latest works diligently sought after, and that these are recog- 
nized by most of their readers as American and not British, will 
be developed in the course of this study. 



CHAPTER II. 



Chronological Survey. 



(a) Certain Limitations. 

In making a chronological study of the American novel in 
Germany after 1870, certain limitations nnist be borne in mind. 
It would be useless to make the treatment absolutely exhaustive, 
for the reason that there are almost countless American authors 
who appear only in our nickel- and dime-novel form, but are 
nevertheless translated and made commercially valuable by enter- 
prising German publishers. This ephemeral "Revolver-fiction," 
as the Germans call it, redounds neither to our credit nor does it 
add to the culture of Germany, nor does it enhance our literary 



at 



The Bookman, March, 1914, p. 45 ff. 
Review of Reviews, Vol. 29, p. 459 (1904). 



The American Novel in Germany, i8/J-Jpis 17 

reputation among certain undiscriniinating German critics who 
look upon these works as typical American literature. Such 
names therefore as Old Sleuth, Frank Pinkcrton, Lawrence 
Lynch, Bertha M. Clay and an endless list of their confreres, 
though translated and eagerly bought and devoured by the Gas- 
senpobcl, cannot form part of our investigation. Where such 
authors, however, such as Anne Katherine Greene, have had an 
astounding success and have appeared in more expensive edi- 
tions, tliey will come within the scope of this study. 

Further, let it be borne in mind that this treatment aims to 
give the extent to which American novelists have been translated 
and published in Germany, only however in so far as they really 
represent the new American novel, which began to develop 
around 1870. Many of the older authors continued to be pub- 
lished in Germany after this date, notably Cooper, Sealsfield, 
Walt Whitman, Artenms Ward, Hawthorne, Poe,^^ etc. These 
men had either died before the new American novel came into 
being, or, with a large number of minor novelists, continued to 
represent the old school of novelists which had done its chief 
work before the rise of Ilarte, Twain, James and Ilowells. They 
are therefore not considered as coming within the limitations of 
this work. 

There are certain other authors who carried the American 
spirit and ideal, or, more properly, their own often distorted in- 
terpretation of that spirit, into Germany. Because they were not 
novelists, they cannot be treated here, in spite of tlie fact that 
their works have been so widely spread throughout Germany 
that they have done much to influence the opinion which Ger- 
many has of. us. Among these, the most prominent have been 



" Translations : 

Emerson — Karl Fcdcrn, ITalle, 1897. 
Poc — Lachmann, Hcrlin, 1801. 

H. & A. MoUer-Hrutk, Miiidcn, 1901. 
lVhttma)tr—l\nor{z u. Kollcston, Ziirich, i88g. 

K. Fcdern, Mindcn, 1(104. 

Schoclermann, Lcipzif*, 1004. 
Fratiklin — Fricdrich Kapp, Berlin, 1882. 
Hawtlionic — Kucnsiler, Leipzig::. 
Park man— K'dvi^, Stuitgart, 1875. 



i8 The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipi^ 

Andrew Jackson Davis, Ralph Waldo Trine, whose In Tune with 
the Infinite was recently the most widely read American book in 
Germany, Orison Swett Marden and Sheldon Loavitt. Other 
more familiar names, such as Theodore Roosevelt, Helen Keller, 
Andrew Carnegie and William James found a great response to 
their literary efforts among the higher classes in Germany. 

For convenience sake, it has been thought wise to group 
the publications between 1871 and 1890 in four distinct sub- 
divisions (1871-1876, 1877-1882, 1883-1886, 1887-1890). After 
1890 certain important events make it advisable to discuss each 
year separately up to and including 191 3. 

(&) lite History. 

In 1 87 1, 1872 and 1873 Germany was still in the process of 
readjusting herself after her war with France and the establish- 
ment of the German Empire. There seems to have been little or 
no demand for foreign authors so that in the year which saw the 
conclusion of peace, only one work of the newer American school 
came into being. It was Charles Dudley Warner's (1829-1900) 
My Summer tn a Lrarden. 1 liis was published at l^eipzig by 
Lowe, and created a very good impression. What pleased par- 
ticularly was the description of Paris in its imperial gala array 
of 1868, prior to the terrible events which followed — war and 
revolution. A critic remarks : *'Es tat unserem deutschen Herzen 
wohl, solche Worte zu Icsen wie : 'One gets to love Germany and 
the German as he does no other country and people in 
Europe. . . ."^^ 

The only novel which can be definitely fixed in 1872 is Louisa 
M. Alcott's Ein M'ddchen aus der guten alien Schulc}^ The 
work appeared in better binding than Warner's book of 1871 and 
cost Mk. 7.50. Evidently the edition did not sell as rapidly as 
expected at this price, for in 1874, when the next edition ap- 
peared the price had been reduced to Mk. 6. But, as wc shall see, 
Miss Alcott became very popular in Germany five years later. 



S4 



M. f. d. L, d. A., Nov. 9, 1872, p. 586. 
Stuttgart, Nitzschke, 1872. 



The American No%*cl in Germany, iSji-i^i^ 19 

In the years 1 871- 1876, Baron Tauchnitz, who had been 
publishing British and American novels since 1841, began to offer 
to Germany the first volumes of the new American novel. It is 
not surprising that Bret Harte and Afark Twain, who were 
destined to become the most popular of all American writers and 
strong rivals of Cooper in the esteem of the German people, lead 
the procession. Of Bret Harte's works. Idyls of the Foot-hills, 
Prose and Poetry and Gabriel Conroy, the latter being the author's 
only attempt at a full-length novel, appeared. Of Twain's works 
only the Adventures of Tom Sawyer was published. But other 
Tauchnitz editions of this period marked the opening of a great 
future popularity, e. g., Miss Alcott's Little Women, F. L. Bene- 
dict's St. Simon's Niece and N. Sheppard's Shut up in Paris be- 
long to this period, but neither one of these authors ever appeared 
again in German publi.shing houses. 

The first translation of Bret Harte came out in 1873, being 
Kalif ornische Novcllen}^ In the following year the firm of 
Grunow in Leipzig read the public mind with sufficient accuracy 
and began to issue its series of Amerikanischc Humoristen. 
Between 1874-1876, eleven volumes were issued in this series, 
two by Aldrich, six by Mark Twain (Charles Dudley Warner 
being co-author of Das vcrgoldete Zeitalter), two by Artemus 
Ward and one by Max Adeler. Adeler received praise from a 
critic because he amuses his readers "ohne Verlctzung der die 
englische Sprache in ihrer Construction und Orthographic re- 
gelndcn Gesetze,"^® a thing which Artemus Ward and other 
humorists were constantly guilty of. In 1874 the first novel of 
Elizabeth Prentiss to appear in Germany, Frit:: und Marie und 
Ich, was published by Nusser at Itzehoe. The edition was very 
cheap (75 Pf.), but the next year, 1875, Die Pcrlc der Familie 
appeared in Basel and gave her a more general reputation than 
the first work. Harte's Argonauten Gcschichten appeared this 
year with Grunow. 

In 1876, Miss Prentiss seems to have become known, for 



"Leipzig, Quandt und Handel, 1873. 
••3/. /. d, L. d. A., Sept. 8, 1877, p. 548. 



20 The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipij 

Schneider in Basel published another of her books, Die Familie 
Percy. In tliis year Grunow followed up his Amerikanische 
Humorist en series of 1874- 1876, with a new series of Amerika- 
nische Novellisten. Here Henry James, Jr., greets the Ger- 
man public for the first time with his Ein leidenschaftlicher 
Erdenpilger and Roderick Hudson. These two novels and Har- 
te's Gabriel Conroy complete the series. Bui it did not complete 
the translation and publication of Gabriel Conroy. Reclam issued 
a translation, as did also Hallbergcr in Stuttgart, Janke in Ber- 
lin, and Hartleben in \'ienna. Not to be outdone by his fellow- 
publishers, Auerbach in Stuttgart started a Transatlaniische Ro- 
manbibliothck, in which Gabriel Conroy also appeared. Thus we 
are presented with the strange phenomenon of a novel, which both 
American and European literary criticism had assailed unfavor- 
ably, appearing seven tunes in one year in a foreign land, once 
in Tauchnitz and six times in German translation. The Ger- 
man public was beginning to awaken to the charms of Bret 
Harte's Far West with its gold mines and its motley adventurous 
throng and were demanding his latest works as fast as they ap- 
peared in America. Auerbach's Traiisatlantische Biblioihek 
also introduced a new American novelist to German readers in 
the publication of Howell's Voreilige Schliisse. This year had 
been a banner year for Bret Harte, ten volumes of his work ap- 
pearing in various parts of Germany. 

The year 1877 was chiefly remarkable for the interest in 
Louise M. Alcott. Grunow put editions of Kleinc Frauen und 
Kleine Manner on the marjvet, while Valett and Com- 
pany (Bremen) issued a cheap edition of Kleine Frauen. 
This was only one of many cases in which Tauchnitz pub- 
lished some popular American novel in English, only 
to have it followed by numerous German translations in the 
next year or following years. It cannot be denied that this 
Leipzig firm did a great and important work in demonstrating to 
publishers and translators that the new American novel would 
find as enthusiastic an audience in Germany, l>oth in its original 
form and in translation as Cooper, Scalsfield, Poc and other ear- 
lier masters had found. Grunow continued his activity this year 



The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipij 21 

with two new volumes in the Amcrikanische Humoristcn series, 
one each by Mark Twain and T. B. Aldrich as well as adding 
James' Der Amerikajier to his Amcrikanische Novellisten, 

Between 1877-1882, Tauchnilz' publication of American 
novels took a decided step forwards. Two volumes by Aldrich, 
one by Miss Alcott, the anonymous novel Democracy, one vol- 
ume by Habberton, Helens Babies, eight volumes by Hartc, two 
by Blanche Willis Howard, three by Howells, nine by James, one 
by Miss Prentiss and six by J^Iark Twain, — thirty-four in all, 
were published by this firm. 

The Transatlantische Romanbibliothek, now in the hands of 
Abenheim, Berlin, added James' Die Amerikaner, Eggleston's 
Schnlmeisicr von Flat-Creek ("ein liebliches Idyll" a reviewer 
calls it) and Adder's Miinchhausen in America in 1877. Aben- 
heim also published two volumes of Bret Ilarte in inexpensive edi- 
tions. Miss Prentiss' Stepping Heavenivard, which Tauchnitz had 
already published, appeared this same year in German transla- 
tion ^^ and reached its third edition. 

Bret Harte was again the centre of interest in 1878, Aben- 
heim publishing five volumes at one mark per volume. Howell's 
Dean: Biihnenspicl ohne Coiilissen also appeared with Abenheim. 
Reclam added H. James' Buy en Pickering and Janke (Berlin) his 
Der Amerikaner. 

Althougli Reclam issued two volumes of Mark Twain and 
Abenheim four more volumes of Bret Harte in 1879, the most 
significant pul)lication was Habberton's Tante Jettchen (Aben- 
heim), for this was the first appearance of Habberton, who was 
destined to become a household name among the Germans, in Ger- 
man translation. 

Two newcomers make their appearance in 1880, Boyesen 
and Julian Hawthorne. Boyesen's Gunnar ^^ made a very good 
impression and was widely read. Its romantic, poetic legends and 
superstitions gave the story **etwas naiv-mystisches, das an das 
Volksmarchcn erinnert."^^ 



" Basel, Schneider, 1877- 

" Brcslau, Soliottlander, 18S0. 

• V ossischc Zcitung, Sontt. Bcil, June 20, 1880. 



22 The American A^o7'cl in Germany, iSyi-ipij 

Barthol and Company in Berlin began their Englische Ro- 
manbibliothck in 1881, and the first two volumes published were 
George W. Cable's Grandissimcs, JMiss Prentiss' HimmeUm 
reached its fourth edition and a new English Library *^ published 
a volume of Mark Twain's Sketches. 

This English Library was not without its rivals, for in 1882 
Barthol's Englishe Romanbibliothek, which had been inaugurated 
the year before, published two volumes of Francis Hodgson 
Burnett and one of Albion W. Tourgee. Nevertheless Rudolphi 
& Klemm kept pace by publishing Margoric Daw by Aldrich and 
Harte's Talcs of the Argonauts. In Hamburg there arose 
another rival to these two firms who were giving Germany the 
best that the authors of Great Britain and America had to offer. 
This was Asher's Continental Library, published by Gradener and 
Richter. In this year (1882) they put forth two volumes by Miss 
Burnett, A Fair Barbarian and That Lass o' Lowrie's, Edgar 
Fawcett's A Gentleman of Leisnre, Habbcrton's Sojne Folks 
and Other Folks, and, in a more expensive binding and under 
the general title of Asher's Collection of English Authors, British 
and American, another edition of Some Folks. Reclam continued 
its competition with the more expensive publications with 
Aldrich's Prudence Palfrey und andere ErjsdIUungen, Habberton's 
Allerhand Leute, and nine volumes by Bret Ilarte. Between 
1 877-1 882 began the publication of Anne Katherine Greene's 
works in Behrcnd's Eisenbahn Unterhaltungcn with Schein und 
Schtdd, which created a taste for this authoress that kept the pub- 
lishers of criminal and detective novels very busy for many years 
to come. 

Tauchnitz' publication of the anonymous Democracy bore 
its fruit, for in 1883 no less than four editions of the German 
translation appeared. A new firm entered the race to gain some 
of the profit which Bret Harte's works were pouring into pub- 
lishers' treasuries, namely Breitkopf and Hartel (Leipzig), who 
published in 1883 a neat volume of Harte's Neueste Novellen. 

In 1884 and 1885, Demokratisch reached its fifth edition. 



Rudolphi & Klemm, Zurich, i88t. 



The American Novel in Germany, i8yi-iQi^ 23 

Miss Prentiss had not been forgotten, for IVa^ Lizzie Erzdhltc 
und Gentleman Jim were issued in one volume by Bohme (Leip- 
z\^). Elizabeth Stuart Phelps' Im Jenseits reached a second edi- 
tion in 18S5, and Burnett's Die schone Barbarin was added to 
IJarthors Englische Romanhiblioihek, 

Tauchnitz and the other publishers of various series and 
Bibliotheken were again unusually prolific between 1882-1886. 
In these years, Tauchnitz issued one volume by Miss Alcott, one 
by Miss Burnett, seven by F. Marion Crawford, who entered the 
German book market at this time, two by J. C. Fletcher (Geo. 
Fleming), two by Habberton, one by L. B. Halstead (B. Elbon), 
four by Bret Harte, one by Blanche W. Howard, nine by Howells, 
one by Helen Hunt Jackson, five by Henry James, Jr., and three 
by Mark Twain. Reclam between 1883-1886 issued Aldrich's 
Die Tragbdie von Stillwater and was the first German publisher 
to present in translation the famous story by Habberton, Helene's 
Kindcrchen. Two developments in this period meant much for 
the future of the American novel in Germany. Engelhorn in 
Stuttgart began in 1884 to publish his Allgemeine Rovianbiblio- 
tliek. Eine Auswahl der bestern modernen Romane aller Volker. 
The editions were inexpensively bound in 50 Pf. and 75 Pf. 
volumes, and thus all classes had access to them. A volume of 
Boyescn's short stories was the first American contribution and 
was followed in 1885-1886 by two volumes of Harte. The 
other important publication of 1886 was the beginning of the 
Stcrncnbanner'SerieJ^^ 2i series devoted to American humorists. 
Stockton's Rudcrheim and Twain's Unterwegs und Daheim were 
its firbt numbers. The cost per volume, Mk. 2.50, guaranteed a 
strongly though plainly bound volume that would stand the wear 
and tear of time. Asher's Continental Library added Mrs. Bur- 
nett's Louisiana, while Harte's In the Carquinez Woods and 
Julian Hawthorne's Dust were the new volumes in Asher's col- 
lection in 1886. Rose Terry Cooke, unknown to the large mass 
of the German people, was introduced to a small religious circle 
through her Ein Laicn-Prediger, published as a religious tractate 



btuttgart, Lutz, 1886. 



24 The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipij 

for 20 Pf. Twenty-six years later (1912) it was republished by 
Ott in Gotlia, but one would have great difiiculty in finding a 
German today who had ever heard of its author. 

The period between 1882-1886 had witnessed a great accel- 
eration in the history of the American novel in Germany. Many 
publishers had taken an interest in American literature, who pre- 
viously had probably scorned the literary efforts of the *7cnseits." 
There was a general awakening of interest among all classes, 
since everyone could afford to buy the cheap Reclam and Engel- 
horn editions, while Asher's and Tauchnitz's volumes supplied 
those whose education had given them a reading knowledge of 
English. The Germans realized that the way to learn a language 
was to read copiously in that language, and to read something 
that interests as well as instructs. This trend of thought led 
naturally to the reading of the best that English and American 
literature offer, and was thus responsible largely for the keen in- 
terest in our novel. American humor became better known 
through the Stcrnbanner-Scrie and increased this interest. 

Short stories by Aldrich, Stockton, Bischop, Deming, Mat- 
thews and O'Brien were added to the Sternenbanncr-Serie in 
1087, while Boyesen and Burnett appeared in hngeinorn. IJer 
kleine Lord, by Burnett, was the first German translation of Little 
Lord Fauntleroy, which became as popular as Helen's Babies 
and Tom Sawyer, A new translation of Twain's Prince and 
Pauper was published by the Verlag der "dcutschen Heimat" in 
Konstanz as Fiirst und Bettlcr. Miss Prentiss' Himmelan ap- 
peared in a new edition and, though never known in Germany as 
a novelist, S. Weir Mitchell became known to German medical 
students through Behandlung gewisser Fornien von Neurasthenic 
und Hysteric, But most significant of all was the publication of a 
two-volume edition of Wallace's Ben Hiir, the first appearance of 
this famous novel in Germany. The Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt 
issued four editions of Ben Hur in this year, while O. Hendel 
(Halle) in his Bibliothck der Gesanitliteratttr des In- und Aus- 
landes printed both the usual 25 Pf. edition and a Prachtband 
edition. 

In 1888, Tauchnitz published Ben Hur and the Stcrnban- 



The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipij 25 

ncr Scric added Twain's Lebcn auf dem Mississippi. In the next 
year **die Perle der Sanimlung," as one critic expresses it, was 
added to the StcrnbanncrSerie, namely, Blanche W. Howard's 
Guenn. This reviewer finds in it "eine ausscrst seltene Gestal- 
tungskraft iind dazu cine echte Poesie der Stimmung.''^^ It is in- 
teresting to note that Paul Hcyse wrote a warm letter of praise 
for this novel and its author. Ben Hnr reached its fifth edition 
in 1889. The socialistic organ Vonv'drts brought another name 
before the German people which soon became universally known, 
by the publication in its Berlinc' Arbcitcr Bibliothek of a fifteen 
Pf. edition of Bin sozialistischcr Roman (Looking Backward), 
by Edward Bellamy. 

Tauchnitz presented a number of new authors between 
1887-1890. Besides a volume of Miss Alcott, Bellamy's Looking 
Backxvard, Mrs. Burnett's Little Lord Fauntlcroy and Sara 
Crewe, seven novels by Crawford, eight volumes by Bret Harte, 
two by Blanche W. Howard and two by Mark Twain, wc also 
find Margaret Deland's John Ward Preacher and A. C. Gunter's 
Mr, Barnes of New York. The former pleased because of the 
comparison between the quaint old-fashioned life of Ashurst and 
the busy religious atmosphere of Lockhaven."*^ Reclam published 
Bellamy's Ri'ickblick and Dr, Heydcnhoff's Wunderkur, Mrs. 
Burnett's Der kleinc Lord Fauntlcroy and several others between 
1 887- 1 890. The Stcrnbanner added volumes by Cable, Twain 
and Anne Katherine Green in 1890. Altogether Bellamy's works 
were published by five firms in 1890, and the edition of Riick- 
blick, which O. Wigand (Leipzig) put forth went through six 
editions in this one year. A Zchnpfcnnig Bibliotliek in Berlin 
published volumes of Boyesen, Octave Thanet (Alice French) 
and a short story by Mark Twain. Engelhom's Romanbibliothek 
presented Gunter's Mr, Potter aus Texas, while the firm of Lii- 
stenoder (Berlin) published volumes by Miss Alcott, Habbcrton, 
Harte and Stockton. Amelie Rives made her first appearance in 
Der Lcbcndc odcr der Tote, while Reclam issued the only work 
of E. P. Roe, Wie sich Jcmand in seine Fran verlicbt, that ever 



*" M. /. d, L. d. A., March 30, 1889, p. 213. 
"^Herrig^s Archiv, Vol. 84 (1890), p. 189. 



26 The Atncrican Novel in Germany, jSyi-ipTj 

appeared in Germany. Frank Ilopkinson Smith, who had not 
yet been introduced into Germany as a novchst, is represented in 
1890 through his book of travel Plcinair'Siudien aus Spanien, 
Holland und Italien. 

From 1891 on we do not meet with the same difficulty in 
determining the exact year in which the Rcclam and Tauchnitz 
volumes are issued, for the year is in most cases appended to each 
volume even when long lists occur in the catalogues. For three 
years (1891-1893) there is a steady stream of publication of 
American novelists, but in 1894 a decided falling off occurs, as 
will be seen from the figures l^elow. 

Bellamy was again the central figure in 1891. His Rilckblick 
was published in Meyer's Volksbilchcr, which sold at the ridicu- 
lously small price of 10 Pf. Reclam reprinted his Dr. Heyden- 
hofs Wunderktir, which they had issued the year before, and 
added Miss Ludington's Schzvester. O. Hendel (Halle) offered 
Maud Elliot in his Gesamtliteratur, etc., series and Fischer (Ber- 
lin) issued a second cheaper edition of Frdulcin Ludington's 
Schtvester. Tauchnitz published volumes by Burnett, Crawford, 
Richard Hardin?: Davis, Julien Gordon, Bret Harte and Richard 
Henry Savage. Davis and especially Savage, the former 
through his Gallegher, the latter through My Official Wife, be- 
came well known and cherished by German readers in the follow- 
ing years. A new movement to place before the people the best 
English and American works in the original and at exactly the 
same rate at which the Tauchnitz volumes sold, Mk. 1.60, was 
begun in this year in the formation of another English Library, 
by Heinemann and Balestier (Leipzig). Nine volumes by Amer- 
ican authors appeared in this first year, the most interesting fact 
being that the authors chosen were scarcely known up to this 
time. Mrs. Burton Harrison with Anglomaniacs and Mary E. 
Wilkins with A Far-away Melody and A Humble Romance had 
never appeared in Germany before, w^hile Margaret Deland, 
Amelie Rives and Charles Dudley Warner were practically un- 
known, whereas Howells and James, the real leaders of the new 
realistic novel in America, were known to the German public 
which did not read English, only through the translation of one 



The American Novel in Germany, i8/T-jpi^ 27 

volume each. However since this English Library presented the 
novels in the original, it may be assumed that Tauchnitz editions 
of Howells and James had already revealed the great novellistic 
ability of these leaders to the cultured German public. Bret 
Harte continued his unrivalled popularity with editions by Hen- 
del and in Meyer's Volksbiicher. Ben Hur reached its sixth edi- 
tion, while Heichers and Skopnik (Berlin) published two addi- 
tional works by Wallace: Die hchrc Gottheit und Jesu Kind- 
schaft. Hclcncn's I^inderchcn appeared in Engelhorn's Roman- 
bibliothek, as did also two volumes by Julien Gordon. Lutz 
(Stuttgart) began to issue his Sammlung atisgewiihlter Krimi- 
nal und Detektiv Romane, with volumes by Anne Katherine 
Green and Julian Hawthorne. 

There arc five new names in 1892, Wolcott Balestier, Am- 
brose Bierce, Lloyd Osboume, Kate Douglas VViggin and Con- 
stance F. Woolson. Heinemann and Balestier's English Library 
is responsible for introducing three of these, Balestier, Osboume 
and Woolson. Two volumes of Balestier appeared, The Average 
Woman and Naulahka, written in conjunction with Rudyard 
Kipling. Bierce's In the Midst of Life, a new Tauchnitz volume, 
brought forth much unfavorable criticism: *Tch erinnere mich 
nicht, jemals ein Werk der sogenannten schoncn Literatur mit 
demselben Ekel gelesen zu haben, wie In the Midst of Life, von 
dem ich niclit Ixigreife, wie es in die Tauchnitz collection Auf- 
nahme finden konntc."** No work of Bierce's was ever pub- 
lished in Germany again, a conclusive proof that he created an 
unsavory impression. The translation of K. D. Wiggin's Christ- 
mas Carol appeared as Die Gcschichte von VogeVs IVeihnachts- 
Rbschen}^ Miss Wiggins was also to have a bright future 
among her German admirers, as the following years will show. 
Reimer (Berlin) issued German translations of four novels of 
Marion Crawford, at exactly the same price as the Tauchnitz 
volumes, Mk. 1.60, in order to compete on even terms. Edward 
Eggleston, two of whose works had already appeared in Ger- 



Hcrrip's Archiv, Vol. 88 (1892), p. 444. 
Leipzig, P. Hobbitig, 1892. 



28 The Avtcrlcan No7'cl in Germany, iH^i-ipij 

many, made his last apjKarancc in The Faith Doctor (Tauch- 
nitz). This work received great praise as a social satire/*^ En- 
gclhorn, Lutz and O. Ilcndcl continued their publications of 
American authors, while lleincinann and Balestier adckxl new 
works by James and Lloyd Oslx)urne Iwsidcs introducing the 
three new authors mentioned alx)vc. 

There were no new authors in i8o^ This year proved 
another great year for Crawford, six of whose novels were is- 
sued, and Bret Ilartc, nine of whose works made their appear- 
ance. Lutz, whose Detective Series had flourished the year be- 
fore, only issued one work of this type, A. K. Green's Endlich 
gefundcn. Tauchnitz put ten new American novels on the 
market, the most significant being two by Miss Wiggin, whose 
poj>uIarity had suddenly flared into being the year before. The 
Deutsche Verlagsanstalt of Stuttgart became unusually active 
with volumes by Bellamy, Bret Harte (three) and Stockton 
(two). Margaret Deland's most famous novel appeared as 
Johannes IVard, die Geschichte cincs Geistlichen, but she is not 
heard of again in Germany for the next seventeen years. 

The next year (1894) witnessed a decrease of almost fifty 
per cent, in die pui>iicaLioa 01 Aiiieiican uuvclo. l\ui a single 
work of Howells or James, only one of Mark Twain and two of 
Crawford, to mention the prominent novelists, appeared. Miss 
Burnett's Theo, cine Liebesgeschichte, appeared in two transla- 
tions, one in Berlin, the other in Frankfurt a/O. Reclam and 
Engelhorn each published only one American novel, while Tauch- 
nitz' contribution of six novels was not up to his usual standard 
of ten or more. Miss Prentiss' Himmelan continued popular 
and reached its sixth edition. 

The year 1895 proved to be more disastrous than 
1894. Miss Burnett occupies the centre of interest. No less 
than seven novels by this authoress came from the press, one 
of them, Klein Kiilchen, reaching lis fifth edition in one year. 
Mrs. Craigie (J. O. Hobbes) makes her first appearance with 
The Gods, Some Mortals and Lord IVickenham (Tauchnitz). 



** Mitteilungen aus dcm gesamtcn Gebietc dcr englischen Sprachi und 
Litcratur, Beibhtt sn "Anglia," Vol. 3 (July. 1892), p. 93. 



The American Novel in Germany, iSyi-igi^ 29 

Though not frequently translated or even published in the orig- 
inal, this authoress created much discussion and critical com- 
ment in German literary circles. Thomas Wentworth Iliggin- 
son's work on women appeared as Die Fraucnfrage imd der gc- 
sunde Mcnschcnvcr stand, but the author, like S. Weir Mitchell 
and Frank Hopkinson Smith, never became known to Germans 
as a novelist. Howclls, who had not been heard from since 
1 89 1, was restored to the public by Engelhorn in Pflichtgefilhl. 

The American novel was alniost restored to its normal basis 
in 1896, even though it must be admitted that it required Lutz' 
Kriminal und Detektiv Romane to swell the low total output 
which the last two years had shown. Nine novels by A. K. 
Green api>eared in this collection. Miss Burnett with four 
novels, Bret Harte with three, Savage with four, and Mark 
Twain with four, kept these prominent authors in the fore- 
ground. Interest in Crawford had received a severe check and 
we do not hear of him again until 1900. Harold Frederic was 
the newcomer with two volumes in the Tauchnitz edition, but his 
Illiunination or Damnation of Tlieron Ware di.^pleased a certain 
critic, because, to use his own words, "Was die Verfasserin selbst 
denkt, bleibt geflisscntlich unausgesprochen."*" But Frederic 
was not disliked by the critics, and tlie whole German nation has 
felt grateful to him for his interesting study of Emperor Wil- 
liam II, which appeared in 1890. 

This leads us to another low mark in the history of Amer- 
ica's novel in Germany, for in 1S97 the total number of publica- 
tions falls l3elow the low total of 1894. But it is somewhat en- 
couraging to find at least one new novelist. Stephen Crane made 
his only appearance in Germany with Maggie, das Strassenkind. 
Harte and Savage lead with three novels each, while Mark 
Twain's Millionenpjundnote is published by two firms. It is 
quite astounding to note that Tauchnitz published only two novels, 
Ilarte's Ancestors of Peter Athcrly and Savage's A Modern 
Corsair. Heinemann and Balestier continue their reputation for 



** Hcrriifs Archiv, Vol. too (1808). p. .175. It is cHiTicult to determine 
why the reviewer thinks that Harold J-Vederic is a woman, unle.ss it be that 
his i>ortr:iy al of feminine cliaracter is so minute in its details that only a 
woman could have inlcrpreled it as he does. 



30 The American Novel in Germany, iSyi-ipl^ 

publishing the lesser known American authors by issuing Lloyd 
Osbourne's Ebb-tide, A Trio and a Quartette, written in con- 
junction with Robert Louis Stevenson. Engelhorn added only 
one American novel to their collection : Savage's Die Hexe von 
Harlem. 

For the next five years (1898-1903), Mark Twain is the 
great bright light that forces all competing authors into total or 
semi-darkness. 1898 was a great improvement over 1897, an 
advance of at least fifty per cent, in productivity. In 1898 Lutz 
published a series of Twain's Ausgewahlte humoristische Schrif- 
ten, consisting of six volumes, also a more expensive binding of 
Meine Reise um die Welt, and Der Querkopf Wilson in his Kri- 
vtinal und Detektiv series. Lutz also published tliree volumes of 
Stockton, which he also called his Ausgewahlte humoristische 
Schriften, Little Lord Fanutleroy of Miss Burnett received the 
honor of being taken into Herbig's (Berlin) series of Modem 
English Authors, a series which included only the very best, as 
such names as Cooper, Longfellow, Hawthorne, Dickens, Tenny- 
son, E. B. Browning, Robert Browning, George Eliot, Scott, 

year, with two volumes in Tauchnitz and a volume of translated 
short stories, published by Perthes (Gotha). Helen Hunt Jack- 
son's Ramona, which had already appeared in Tauchnitz and in 
1886 was published in German, now reached the second edition 
of the German version. Kiirschner's Biicherschatz, which had 
begun only the year before to include American authors in its 
20 Pf. and 40 Pf. editions, offered a volume of Savage and one 
of Bret Harte. Most of Lutz' Kriminal und Detektiv Romane 
reached their second edition, especially those of A. K. Green. 

Although 1898 had produced no new American novelist, the 
year 1899, even though it witnessed fewer volumes published, 
nevertheless brought some new names before the pfMinle. The 
most important newcomer was Gertrude Atherton, whose works 
were not frequently translated, but who nevertheless became 
well known to the educated public and the literary critic through 
the many Tauchnitz volumes which bear her name. Lutz con- 
tinued to make good use of A. K. Green and Julian Hawthorne 



The American Nm^el in Germany, iSji-iQi^ 31 

in his detective series, while R. Jacobsthal in Berlin tried to com- 
pete with him in a series of Amerikanischc Detckiiv Romane, 
containing such immortal names as Old Sleuth, Frank Pinker- 
ton, etc., by adding a touch of real literary flavor in the publica- 
tion of volumes by Twain and Poe. Another new name which 
called forth much comment in the periodicals, although not a 
single work of hers was translated into the German, was Elizabeth 
Robins (C. E. Raimond) whose The Open Question appeared 
this year. Zwissler (Wolfenbiittel) admitted the first American 
novelist to his flausbibliothek, K^zabelh Stuart Phelps' Ein ci- 
genartiges Leben im Dienste des Herrn, Hollis Godfrey ap- 
peared for the first time in Germany with his Rejuvenation of 
Miss Semaphore (Tauchnitz). 

The year 1900 was another banner year for Mark Twain. 
No less than ten of his works were published in that year. Aid- 
rich returned after a thirteen years' absence from the German 
book market in O. Hendel's (Halle) inexpensive edition of 
Marjoric Dazv und andcre Erz'dhlungen in his Bibliothek der Ge- 
samtliieraiur, etc, George W. Cable was also heard from after 
ten j-ears' silence in a volume of the Biicherci Brims (Minden), 
namely, Aus der alien Kreolen-Zcit. Hollis Godfrey was taken 
into Fehsenf eld's Romansammlung (Freiburg i/B), with Fr'du- 
lein Eulalia's griissliches Abentencr, Three volumes of Craw- 
ford appeared in this collection, indicating a demand for trans- 
lations of the better authors in inexpensive fonn, the Fehsenfeld 
volumes selling for 50 Pf. and 75 Pf. Miss Prentiss* Himmelan 
reached its seventh edition, and Blanche W. Howard made her 
last appearance in Germany with Toni, die Kammcrjungfer, pub- 
lished in the Klcine Bibliothek of Breer und Thiemann. Bret 
Harte had by no means been forgotten, for From Sand-hill to 
Pine appeared in Tauchnitz and a new edition of Im Waldc von 
Carquincz.^^ Richard H. Davis' Gallcgher appeared in Erzlih- 
lungen aus deni Untcrhaltungsblatt fiir Stenographen. American 
novels had on more than one occasion Ixren used for reading and 
writing exercises by various shorthand systems, but this is the 



Rhcinische Union, Stuttgart, 1900. 



32 The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipi^ 

first appearance of an American novel as pure cntertaiimient de- 
signed especially for stenographers. 

Mark Twain in 1901 fell one short of his 1900 record, with 
nine volumes published in Germany by seven different firms. A 
new edition of Bcpi Htir appeared in Berlin (A. Weichert), Miss 
Alcott's Little Women appeared twice and three volumes of Mrs. 
Burnett, including of course Little Lord Uaiintleroy, helped to 
increase her already great popularity. Cable's /^mj alten Kreolen- 
Taijen, issued the year before by Bruns in Minden, seems to have 
pleased, for a new edition appeared in 1901, better bound and 
more expensive than the year before. It is interesting to recall 
the doubt expressed by a certain critic, upon the appearance of 
Old Creole Days in America back in 18S8: **\Vie lange er aus 
dieser Quelle (i. e., the life of the old French settlers of New 
Orleans) schopfcn kann ohne sie zu erschopfen, und ob er auf 
eineni anderen Felde ebenso erfolgreich sein wird, ist f raglich/'^*' 
and then to note how true this prophecy seemed to the Germans 
when Bylow Hill appeared : *'Bylow Hill, seine erste im Norden 
spielende Erziihlung hat enttauscht. Wenn auch dcr Dichter in 

Neuengland verpflanzt hat, so scheint er doch dort nicht in sei- 
nem Element zu sein."*'^ A very important newcomer of this 
year is Frank Norris, whose Octopus appeared in Tauchnitz. 
Norris' name became very well known in the next few years. 

The wave of publications, which had been at its height in 
1891 and 1892, and again between 1896-1901, with low points 
in 1894, 189s and 1897, experienced another decided drop in 
1902. This proved to be the last low mark, even though the in- 
crease in publications up to the banner year of 1912 was not as 
rapid as the increased outpuv of novels in America seemed to 
warrant. Four editions of Ben Hur appeared in 1902, the Volks- 
ausgabe of the Deutsche Vcrlagsanstalt reaching its eighty-third 
edition and the more expensive edition by the same firm its eighty- 
second. In Reutlingen, Enslin and Laiblin issued a Volksaus- 



M. /. d. L. J. A., May 22, 1888, p. 341. 
Da4 literarische Echo, Sept., 1902, p. 1712. 



The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipiS 33 

gabe and a better edition. Bret Harte seemed to lose no popu- 
larity, as five volumes from him testify. But Miss Atherton, 
James, Howells, Miss Wiggin and Miss Wilkins are not heard 
from. Mrs. Burnett is second to Harte with four volumes, two 
of them being Little Lord Faunileroy, Grunow's edition of Miss 
Alcott's Kleinc Frauen reached a third edition. Crawford and 
Savage each received an addition to their lists. 

The number of novels in 1903 was almost double that of 
the previous year. There are four new names to add to the list : 
Irving, Bacheller, Thomas Dixon, Jr., Henry Harland and 
George Horace Lorimer. Bachellei *s Eben H olden did not excite 
much interest, for only one other work of his has up to this time 
been published in Germany. The possibility of Dixon's Leopard's 
Spots retarding or at least injuring the proper development and 
education of the negro by picturing him "als cin raubsiichtiges, 
blutdi'irstiges Gesindel" wherever he appears, caused much un- 
favorable criticism. ^^ Henry Harland, the publication of whose 
works in the next four years was restricted to Tauchnitz and En- 
gelhorn, became known to Germany through The Cardiftal's Snuff- 
box. We find it variously described as "Eine Tochterpensionat- 
geschichte" and ''eine reizende idyllische Liebesgeschichte." Lori- 
mer's Brief e eines Dollarkimigs an seinen Sohn was eagerly read 
and ran up to six editions in this and the following year. Mark 
Twain, however, was still par excellence the American author, 
and in 1903 another set of his Humortstische Schriften appears 
with Lutz, including five novels. Besides these, four other vol- 
umes, in two cases later editions of works in Lutz' Kriminal und 
Detektiif Romane, appeared. In Velhagen und Klasing's English 
Authors, Miss Alcott's Good Wives was published. 

Little Lord Faunileroy and Ben Hur had become so well 
known that they proved the most popular works of 1904. Three 
English and one German version {Der kleine Lord) appeared, 
and three editions of the latter were issued. K. Thienemann 
(Stuttgart) issued a splendid new leather edition, with gold edg- 



"C/. Literarisches Centralhlatt, July 4. 1903, P- 202, and Das Uterarischi 
Echo, June, 1902, p. 1283. 



34 The Avicrican Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipi^ 

ing, for Mk. lo, as well as cheaper editions, down to Mk. 4. 
Miss Atherton was gaining in favor, as three new Tauchnitz vol- 
umes demonstrate. The new names for the year are Jane G. 
Austin and Henry F. Urban. Miss Austin's volume of short 
stories appeared with Velhagen und Klasing and marked her 
only invasion of Gennany. Urban, an .'Vmerican who wrote in 
German, and therefore is scarcely known in America, became 
very popular because of his supposedly true pictures of Ameri- 
can life. The Concordia Verlagshaus (Berlin) published almost 
all of his works in Germany. Paul Leicester Ford was added to 
Lutz' Kriminal Series with Das Abenieucr im Expressing, which 
reached a fifth edition in 191 1. His better works, such as the 
historical novel Janice Meredith never became known to the Ger- 
mans. "Als Geschichtsforscher und Bibliograph," says a critic 
who had read Janice Meredith, **hat der Vcrfasser Vorziigliches 
geleistet . . . als ein belehrendes Geschichtsbuch ist es zu em- 
pfehlen.'"^- A new work of A. K. Green's, The Filigree Ball, 
which with one exception was her only novel seriously consid- 
ered by any literary critic, did not provoke very favorable com- 
ment. The volume is spoken of as "unsinniges Geschwatz," and 
the authoress "Hat ihrer rnantasie die /.iigcl schiessen lassen."** 
Mrs. Burnett with five volumes in 1905, Bret Harte with 
five, and Mark Twain with four, give the best proof to the state- 
ment that the old favorites did not soon lose the affection of the 
people after they had once made themselves popular. But a reai 
rival to the old guard had developed formidable proportions by 
1905 in the publication of four works by Miss Atherton. There 
were no new authors this year. Howells returned after an ab- 
sence from the book-market of four years, with Miss Bellard's 
Inspiration (Tauchnitz). Loriiner's Neue Brief e, «. s. w,, were 
published by Fleischel and reached four editions. Habberton's 
Helen's Babies was included for the first time in Velhagen und 
Klasing's school texts, in the section for English Authors. Miss 
VViggin's Rebecca of Snnnybrook Farm became so popular that 



^ Literarischrs Ccntralblati, May 5, 1900, p. 791. 
** Liierarisches CefUraWlalt, April 22, 1905, p. 173. 



The American Novel in Germany, i8/i-i(^i^ 35 

Engclhorn issued a translation, Rebekka von Sonncnhachhof in 
a four-mark edition instead of his usual 50 Pf. and 75 Pf. vol- 
umes. 

Three important features characterize the development in 
1906. Ben Ilur had gained such wide-spread popularity that 
seven editions appeared, two of these being in Graz, Styria. 
Another feature is the only appearance of Westcott's David 
1 1 arum, which had appeared in America seven years before 
(1899). In Germany it was looked upon as "typisch amerika- 
nisch," but for that very reason it pleased readers and critics alike 
who were always anxious to learn more concerning the genuine 
unadulterated small-town American citizen.^'' A more important 
novelty of the year was the publication of Upton Sinclair's Der 
Snmpf {The Jungle) m a bound edition and a Volksausgabe, be- 
sides an inexpensive edition of the same author's Der Industrie- 
baron. Sinclair's Sumpf aroused almost as much interest as it 
did in America and was commented freely upon not only by 
literary critics, but also by German commercial and governmental 
interests. Mrs. Edith Wharton, only two of whose works ap- 
peared in Germany, but who nevertheless received constant atten- 
tion by the critics, made her debut in The House of Mirth, There 
is another whom Germany had not known before this year, but 
who leaped into fame at one bound — Lafcadio Ilearn. His 
Kohoro and Lotos, four thousand copies of the latter being sold 
the first year, appeared in German translation with the Literari- 
sche Anstalt, Frankfurt a/M. Irving Racheller made his second 
and last appearance in Silas Strong, a novel which the Germans 
felt was written for American readers alone: "Andere diirften 
in dcm mageren Tnhalte und der absonderlichen Schreibweise we- 
nig Gefallcn finden.""^ 

Thomas Dixon. Jr.'s Schwarz und Weiss appeared in 1907, 
although it bad been announced to appear in 1904. The criticism 
of the American original, The Leopard's Spots, in 1903 had been 
so severe that the Hesperus Verlag in Berlin hesitated to issue 



**Das Utcrarische Echo, Dec. i, 1899. 

•* IMcrarxschcs Ccntralblatt, Dec. 7, 1907, P. 4^. 



36 The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-ipi^ 

the translation until the tumult had somewhat subsided. Two more 
versions of Mrs. Burnett's Der klcine Lord appeared, as well as 
her Die hiibsche Schwesier von Jose in Kiirschner's Biicherschatz. 
Hearn had become so well known that Tauchnitz published three 
of his works, Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan, Kokoro, and Kwai- 
dan, while Iciimo appeared in translation at Frankfurt a/M. The 
two important newcomers are Jack London and Tom Lawson. 
The former's Wenn die Nattir ritft was the only novel of Lon- 
don's to appear in this year, but one of his political studies ap- 
peared as Mnnimpalsozialismus in England. Lawson's Freitag der 
Dreizehnte was not taken seriously by German critics, a fate 
which had already befallen the original in America. While it 
was being translated into many languages and reached countless 
masses of people in all Europe as well as in Germany, we find 
that the prevailing opinion sums it all up with "Mangel an kiinst- 
lerischem Formensinn in Aufbau der Handlung wie in der diirf- 
tigen Sprache."^® Another reviewer is a little harsher when he 
speaks of London's work as "ohne literarischen Wert," and later, 
"es wirkt wie eine iiberlegene Parodie auf sich selbst."^'' The 
long-expected translation of Norris' Octopus, which was pub- 

1*m»XaL-vA iAJL 4.AAV. X «Ai^%^AAAA4W^ %J^X k\^%J AAA A, ^V^ ▲ | 4AAA44iA» C^LyL>W.C4A V#l^ iil X ^<J J f 

and almost immediately reached a second edition. Ben Hur was 
again issued by three different publishers, while Mark Twain 
had another unusually good year with six volumes. Miss Wig- 
gin had become especially known to the younger people through 
Freytag's "Schulausgaben" of her works, and her Rebekka von 
Sonnenbachhof now became accessible to all in the 50 Pf . Engel- 
horn edition. 

Mark Twain had seen the rise and fall of many minor 
authors, but continued to remain as popular as ever. In 190S 
new editions of four of his works came out. Hearn's Kyushu, 
with three thousand copies sold the first year, kept this author 
before the people. Owen Wister was translated and introduced 
to Germany for the first time in Novellen aus dem Abenteuerle- 



^Das Literarischc Echo, Sept. 15, 1907, p. 1800. 
" Literarisches CentraWlatt, June 22, 1907, p. 218. 



The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-Jpij 37 

ben des IVilden IVestens. Such works as McGrath's Der Mann 
auf dem Bock continued to be translated and published in Engel- 
horn, Kiirschncr, Meyer's Volksbiicher, etc., but cannot claim our 
attention here. 

Lutz' criminal and detective stories had reached so many edi- 
tions that he published a more expensive series called Detektiv 
Gryce Serie, in 1909 and 1910. The series consists of six vol- 
umes by A. K. Green, all of which had already appeared in 
cheaper form. They were advertised as being far above the 
average criminal novel and not to be confused with "anstossige 
Lektiire" of the Nick Carter type. We find that the Vossische 
Zeitung remarks, concerning one of these six novels, H inter ver- 
schlossenen Ti'iren: "VVohltuend riihrt es, dass dcr Verfasser 
diese Wirkung nicht durch die Spekulation auf den Instinkt fiir 
das Sensationelle, sondern vielmehr durch die gcschickt erson- 
nene Handlung, und dcren mit psychologischem Verstandnis 
durchgefiihrte Entwicklung erreicht.*' Again we read in the 
Literarischcs Ccntralblatt, referring to Schcin und Schidd and 
Hand und Ring: "Was soil man ubcr diese Erzeugnisse sagen? 
Sie sind jedenfalls nicht von der schlechten Art, wenn sie uns 
auch den Eindruck machcn wie alle Vertreter dicscr Gattung, 
nach einem und dcmsdbcn Rezcpt verfertigt zu sein."^® This 
indicates that there was not an absolute aversion to this higher 
grade detective-literature, especially since the critic adds: "Es 
soil literarisch sehr anspruchsvoUc Rlcnschen geben, die die Ver- 
suchung, einen Dctektivroman zu Ende zu Icsen, nicht widerste- 
hen" — Ileam's Kwaidan now appeared in German translation 
and soon reached its third thousand. A new Ben Hur was pub- 
lished by Schreitcr (Berlin) in the Sammlung Kulturhistorischcr 
Romunc, which included such novels as Quo Vadis, Monte 
Crista, David Coppcrficld, Der ezvige Jude, Gldckncr von Noire 
Dame, etc. Clara Louise Bumham made her only appearance in 
Germany in Juwel — Ein Kapitcl aus ihrcm Lebcn. Sinclair's Die 
Borsenspiclcr went through two editions, and Mark Twain 
added five more publications to his list. 



Literarischcs CcntraWlait, March 26, 1910, p. 136. 



38 The American A^orcl in Germany, iS/i-rgiji 

The year 1910 finds Hearn leading the list with eight new 
publication or later editions of old works. F. II. Burnett and 
Bret Harte have four volumes this year, while Twain has six. 
Urban's new book, Die drei Dollarjdgcr aus Berlin, met with the 
same hearty welcome that all his previous works had experienced. 
Many Germans read all of Urban's works, who had never heard 
of Howells, James or Miss Atherton. The American dramatist, 
with whom the American drama, according to certain critics, 
takes its beginning in 1870, Bronson Howard, is represented in 
this year of 1910 with his only work which found publication in 
Germany, Mceresgold. As a dramatist Germany never knew 
him. Howells had not been entirely forgotten, for his Tuscan 
Cities, originally published in Heinemann and Balestier's English 
Library in 1891, now reappeared after nineteen years in a new 
edition. Even Henry James, Jr., had not appeared on the new 
book lists since 1892, but Tauchnitz rescued him and restored him 
to the public in The Finer Grain. 

The year 191 1 records no diminution of interest in Ben Hur. 
Five editions were published in this year. Many of Twain's 

lishcd. It can be seen that, popular though Bret Harte was, he 
could not outstrip Mark Twain in the estimation of the German 
people. Three editions of Little Lord Fauntleroy appeared, two 
being English school texts, the other being published by the 
Lehrerhausverein fiir Oberosterreich in Linz. After nineteen 
years, Heinemann and Balestier issued a new edition of Bale- 
stier and Kipling's Natdaltka. The Literarische Anstalt of Stutt- 
gart published Das Japanbuch, Eine AuswalU aus Hearn's IVer- 
ken, which reached its twelfth thousand. In Twietmeyer's 
Sammlung engUscher Original atisgaben fiir Schul- nnd Privat- 
Studium, I.orimer's Letters from a Self-made Merchant to His 
Son, which had already appeared both in Tauchnitz and in trans- 
lation, was revived for school use. 

The banner year of all was 191 2, even though it presents the 
paradox of having the most American novels published within its 
limits, without a single work of the most popular American au- 
thor, Mark Twain, being among th^m. Henry James, Jr., had 



The American Novel in Germany, iSyi-ipi^ 39 

received a new lease on life, as two new volumes testify. Jack 
London increased his reputation with three Tauchnitz volumes 
and another volume, Wolfsblutj in German translation. Hartc 
and Heam had only one volume each, while F. Marion Crawford 
appeared with two. Little Lord Fauntleroy continues its phenom- 
enal popularity with four new editions, three German and one 
English. An English and a German edition of Helen's Babies 
were published, Stockton's Atisgewdlilte Schriften, originally 
published in 1898 by Lutz, appeared in a new edition. Norris' Pit 
is published as Die Getreideborse. Two of Miss VVilkins' novels 
were published in Heinemann and Balestier's English Library. 
Miss Allcott's Atis der Knabenzvelt and Aus der Mddchenwelt 
each reached its third edition. 

The last year which we shall consider (191 3) indicated a 
decided decrease from the year before. Although Twain is well 
represented and Jack London holds his prominent place with 
three new Tauchnitz volumes, Harte, Howells and James have 
absolutely disappeared, while Crawford, Wallace and Burnett 
each have only one volume published. It seems almost fitting 
that it should be so, namely, that the names of Harte, Howells 
and James, the leaders and teachers of the later American realis- 
tic novelists, should close through their departure, not necessarily 
forever, this great period which they had opened. 

The remaining pages of Chapter H are devoted to a chrono- 
logical table, which summarizes statistically the histor}' of our 
novel in Germany, 1871-1913, and to a general statement of the 
determining factors in that history. This study has brought us 
to the brink of the Great World War of 1914, whose influence 
upon German American cultural relations cannot be foreseen, 
nor even imagined. 

(c) Chronological Table. 

(Containing the number of American volumes of the later 
school of novelists [1871-1913] published in Germany, both in 
the original and in translation, and not including certain works 
without literary merit, which appeared only in the cheapest 



40 



The American Novel in Germany, iSyr-Tpij 



Volksbibliotheken. A few works are also inckulcxi whicli were 
written in collaboration with foreign authors.) 



i»7i-i»70 


: 32 


1877-1882 


: 88 


I 883- I 886 


: 59 


1887-1890 


: 72 


1891 


: 41 


1892 


: 43 


1893 


: '34 


1894 


: 17 


1895 


: 15 


1896 


: 29 


1897 


: 16 


1898 


: 30 


1899 


: 25 




1913 



1900 


31 


1901 


: 34 


1902 : 


19 


1903 ; 


: 33 


1904 


: 28 


1905 ; 


; 41 


1906 


: 39 


1907 ; 


; 45 


1908 


: 29 


1909 ; 


; 30 


1910 


: 42 


1911 


; 46 


1912 


; 52 



: 27 

Summary: — 87 novelists; 997 novels or volumes of 

novelettes. 



(d) uetermining t actors. 

In attempting to fix some definite causes for the rising and 
falling of the American novel in Germany, one is confronted by 
a confusing array of facts and circumstances, some of which may 
have had a general or even a particular influence, but most of 
which bear too remote a relation to the problem on hand to give 
us much enlightenment. It is the purpose in the following section 
to point out some of these circumstances and to attempt an as- 
signment of them to their proper place in the history of the Amer- 
ican novel in Germany, wherever that is possible. 

With eighty-seven American novelists and nine hundred and 
ninety-seven American novels or volumes of short stories (or 
novelettes) published in Germany between 1871-1913, with a 
host of minor writers of fiction, whom we do not mention in the 
same breath with American literature, we cannot say that our 
novel has been neglected in Germany. But that it might have 
had even greater success under other conditions may be gleaned 
from tlie following interesting circumstance. The American 



The American Nm/cl in Germany, iS/r-ipij 41 

novelist has rarely taken as his Ixickgrouiid the life and customs 
of Germany and the Germans. This may be because the French- 
man, the Italian, the Spaniard, and even the Englishman exhibit 
more of the romantic and sentimental in their external life than 
the German. The best qualities of the German are usually bound 
up in his innermost personality and come to the surface only when 
put to the test. lie is introspective and individualistic in his pri- 
vate life and does not lend himself to the pliable treatment that 
the average American novelist demands. In consequence, the 
German and his country have been brushed aside when foreign 
themes and backgrounds were searched for. A. B. Maurice'^ 
has pointed out that, of the leading American novels dealing with 
foreign countries, twenty-six had their background in the British 
Isles, twenty-one in France, twenty-four in Italy, four in Ger- 
many and one in Austria. In the Tauchnitz collection, which in- 
cluded four hundred and thirty-seven of the most prominent 
works of sixty-eight American authors, up to June, 19 14, only six 
deal directly with German or Austrian conditions.^^ Evidently 
Germany and Austria have not appealed to the American novel- 
ist's imagination. It is reasonable to assume that, had the same 
attention been given to Germany as to Britain, France and Italy, 
at least those novels dealing with Germany would have been 
translated and read, and would doubtless have led to a keener 
interest in American letters. Here, then, we find a very good 
reason for the apparent lack of interest among Germans in our 
novel-literature taken as a whole, such as, c. g., is ficcorded the 
French, Russian and British novel-literature. This, however, 
did not affect the diametrically opposite warmth of interest in 
our most uniquely American products, such as those of Harte, 
Twain, Habberton, Bellamy, etc. 

The various histories of America literature and important 
literary contributions, which discussed American literature, did 



'Bookman, Vol. 27 (1008), p. 246. 

Gertrude Alhcrton: Toiccr of Ivory (Munich). 

F. Marion Crawford: Grcifcnstein (Sclnvarzwald). 

A Cigarcitc-Makc/s Romance, 

Blanche \V. Howards: The Open Door. 

The Witch of Prague (Prague). 

Mark Twain: A Tramp Abroad, 



42 The American Ncn'el in Germany, iS/i-iprj 

contribute their share in stimulating interest. We noted above 
that Scherr's Allgcmeinc Geschichte der Literaiur, even in its 
later editions of 1875 and 1880, had given but little separate 
recognition to our literature and had mingled our authors in- 
discriminately with the British authors. Rut it is nevertheless 
gratifying to find that a genuine Geschichte der nordanierikani- 
schen Literatnr, by Brunnemann, appeared as early as 1868. 
Although this immediately precedes the opening of our period, 
the work probably aroused little attention. Very enthusiastic 
in its spirit, it leaves no real hope in the minds of students that 
a great future is in store for the literature of our reconstructed 
Republic. But in 1876 appeared Thomas Wentworth Higgin- 
son's Geschichte der Vercinigten Staaten von Nord-Amcrika in 
popularer Darstellung (Auerbach, Stuttgart). It was illustrated 
with numerous wood-cuts and contained three maps. It was 
meant for the public at large and unquestionably added to the in- 
terest and understanding of America among the German middle 
classes. The increase of eighty-eight published volumes in the 
five years between 1877-18S2 over the thirty-two between 1871- 

\9K'^f\ t<; vprv <:t<mifirnnt nnd mnv he frnct^d nnrflv to TTi florin son's 

work. Ernst Otto IIopp's Unter dem Sterncnbanner. Streif- 
siige in das Leben und die Literatnr der Amerikaner,^^ was an 
important contribution to the spread of knowledge concerning 
America and her literature. Rudolf Doehn's Ans dem Ameri- 
kanischen Dichterwald (Leipzig, 1881), was an attempt to form- 
ulate a chronological history of American literature, but it be- 
came known to but a limited circle of people, and prolxibly ex- 
erted no influence on those who had heretofore not concerned 
themselves with American men of letters. As early as 1883, 
Eduard Engel added an appendix on American literature to his 
Geschichte der Englischcn Literatnr, and later this was published 
separately as Geschichte der Literatnr Nordamerikas. Wiilker, 
the greatest of all among the historians of English literature in 
Germany, refused to add an account of American literature, 
"weil diese Literatnr sclbstandig, nicht als Anhangsel behan- 
delt werden miisse.*' Engel's work, though short and concise, 
but written in his warm, sympathetic tone of admiration, prob- 



Bromberg, Fischer, 187;'. 



The American Novel in Germany, 1871-igi^ 43 

ably helped to make the fifty-eight volumes published in three 
years (1883-1886) so encouraginjr an increase over the thirty- 
two volumes in five 3ears of the preceding decade (1871-1876). 
Karl Knortz, who had already done much in stirring up interest 
in Germany for our literature through his translation of our 
poets, contributed a masterful work in his Geschichte dcr Nord- 
amerikanischcn Lifcratur.^^ This was an attempt to fill a long- 
felt need, for Engel's work, though splendid in quality, was too 
sketchy to give sufficient information on any particular subject. 
But Knortz' two-volume historv was a "work which for com- 
prehensiveness, accuracy and appreciativcness compares favor- 
ably with any of our own text-lxx)ks on American literature.*'^^ 
Its striking fault is that it tries to be too comprehensive and in- 
cludes many minor authors who contributed little or nothing to 
our literature. In reviewing Knortz' work, Ernst Otto Hopp, 
author of Unter dcm Sternenhanncr, remarks: "Es steht zu 
furchten, dass auch dicse Knortz'sche Literaturgcschichte ameri- 
kanischer Namcn kein grosses Terrain erobern und die Papier- 
kosten dcs Verlcgcrs kaum decken wird."®* Unfortunately it 
cannot be stated that this most thorough of all histories of Amer- 
ican literature in Germany had any direct influence on the reading 
and spread of contemporary American novelists. After two 
years in which the novel seems to hold its own, the terrific slump 
of 1894-1897 occurs. At the opening of this period, in 1894, a 
series of lectures was delivered by Frank Sintenis in the Univer- 
sity of Dorpat, including lectures on Bret Harte, Bellamy and 
Mark Twain. These were published under the title of Literari- 
sche Ansichtcn in Vortriigcn, but can scarcely have reached far 
beyond the small circle of those who heard the lectures. Fol- 
lowing close upon Sintenis' work, we find Edward Payson 
Evans' Bcitrlige zur Amerikanischcn Liieratur- und Kulturge- 
schichie (Stuttgart, 1898). This is a work of undoubted merit. 
Its author was born in America, but since 1870 had been living 
in Germany and was for all practical purposes, a German. This 
volimie, which had previously appeared as a series of articles in 



•■ Liistcnodcr, Herlin, 189T. 

"H. II. Pcckham in South Atlantic Monthly, Oct., 1914, p. 382 ff. 

^Englischc Stxidicn, Bd. XVII (1892), p. 237. 



44 The American Novel in Germany, iS/l-ic^ij 

prominent periodicals, seems to place a new life and meaning 
into our literature for the German, and it cannot reasonably be 
doubted that the increased demand for American literature, which 
resulted in the increased publication between 1S9S-1901 can be 
partly attributed directly to Evans' incisive and interesting ar- 
ticles. 

In 1899, Karl Federn, an Austrian who had made a name 
for himself as an authority on Nietzsche and who was an ardent 
admirer of Emerson, published a group of Essays ziir amerikani- 
sclien Literatur, including papers on Whitman, Emerson and 
Thoreau. 

The very next year (1900) appeared Anton E. Schonbach's 
Gesammelte Aufsat::e cur netteren Literatur (Graz, 1900), in 
which various phases of Gennan, Austrian and American litera- 
ture were discussed. Besides separate essays on Cooper, Long- 
fellow and Hawthorne, we find an excellent resume of the new 
American novel in the essay Der amcrikanisclie Roman der Ge- 
genzvart. Schonbach's character-studies and fair-minded and 
scholarly valuation of our fiction are worthy of the highest 
praise. His abilitv to intprp«;t rpnr1or<? in thp QnKj^rf- i^m^nr *4ic- 

cussion must have opened many eyes to the wealth of literary 
effort across the Atlantic. About this time there was a great 
flood of works in Germany on America and they contributed to 
the growing knowledge and interest in every phase of Ameri- 
can life. I'wald Fli'igers Die nordamcrikanlsche Literatur 
(Leipzig and Vienna) appeared in 1907, the year which was 
superseded only by 191 1 and 191 2 in the number of American 
novels published in Germany. The publication of Professor 
Alphonso Smith's lectures at the University of Berlin in the 
winter semester of 1910-1911 under the title of Die amerikani- 
scJie Literatur,^^ made a tremendous impression in German lit- 
erary and university circles, and it is not a matter of chance that 
1912 forms the high-water mark in the tide of production of 
American novels. Kellner's Goschen edition of Die amerikani' 



•• Berlin, 1912. 



The American Novel in Germany, iSyi-ipij 45 

sche Literatur (1912) probably did its share in making our litera- 
ture popular. The following year (1913) however cut the total 
of fifty-one practically in half with only twenty-six publications. 

Certain other works must be given their share of the credit 
for awakening a German interest in American fiction. Our his- 
torians, Motley and Parkman, had both been translated, Mot- 
ley's works appearing at Dresden in 1857, while Parkman's ap- 
peared at Stuttgart in 1875, the translation being by Kapp. 
Schlaf, besides translating Whitman, wrote an excellent work on 
the man and his literary work, and even attempted to imitate him 
in German, witliout however acquiring much success. One of 
the best articles ever written on Lowell, we are reminded by H. 
H. Peckham,^® was written by A. E. Schonbach.**^ 

This leads us to the part played by the periodicals in Ger- 
many. A constant stream of articles on theolderand newerwriters 
of our literature has appeared in the best German journals. Miss 
Colbron ®® is therefore far from right when she states that "the 
same literary journals which come out strong in praise of our 
classics, which give full mead of praise to Emerson, Hawthorne, 
Poe . . . these same journals turn with cold scorn from our 
newer writers." If it would serve any purpose, a long list of 
articles could be found dealing with our very latest literature 
and dealing \vith it fairly, discriminatingly and thoroughly. One 
of the leaders in this respect is the Magazin fiir Literatur, so- 
called since 1891. From 1832- 1880 it was known as Magazin filr 
die Literatur des Anslandes (M. f. d. L. d. A.) and from 1881- 
1890 as Magazin fiir die Literatur des In- und Anslandes, Its 
long articles and reviews came to the attention of many people 
and doubtless led many to examine into our literature. Ever 
since January 4, 1873, this periodical has had a column entitled 
"Amerikanischcr Biichermarkt,'* in which American works in 
both German and English arc announced. Englische Studien, 
which first appeared in 1877, makes scarcely any mention of 



^ South Alhnilc Monthly, Oct., 1914. 

•* Gcsammclte Aufslitse sur Neueren Literatur, Graz, 1900. 

" Bookman, March, 1914, p. 47. 



46 The American Novel in Germany, jS/i-ipi^ 

American literature up to and including 1899, with the excep- 
tion of terming EngeVs history an "Anhiingscr' and severely 
criticizing Knortz' splendid two-volume history. However, 
since 1900, Englischc Stud ten has devoted a colunm regularly to 
"Amerikanische Literatur," where the newest works are ably 
discused. Das literarische Echo, since 1898, has had an excellent 
review of the latest literary happenings in America in many 
numbers. It would be useless to even mention the countless peri- 
odicals and newspapers wdiich have presented regular critical 
columns, carefully edited essays, encomiums, eulogies, apprecia- 
tions and necrologues on American authors. Besides these, many 
periodicals and daily newspapers published American poetry and 
prose works in the form of substantial translations. As an ex- 
ample of this, the Deutsche Rundschau, between December, 1878, 
and June, 1888, printed five complete novels of Bret Harte in 
long serial form. In fact, so ardent and zealous were German 
periodicals to acquire and print the very latest that America had 
to offer, that one of these stories, Aus Calif ornien's friihen Ta- 
gen,^^ appeared in a German periodical, even before it appeared 
in English, by virtue of a special arrangement made by the own- 

" chener Allgemeine Zeitung (especially the Beilage), the Berliner 
Tageblatt and the Frankfurter Zeitung, all have done valiant 
service in keeping our literature before the eyes of the people of 
Germany. It is a fact worthy of note that the reviews and 
criticisms of American works show a marked increase, as the 

• years went by, in the appreciation of our American viewpoint, and 
can be said to be at present far more valuable, as well as more 
searching, than was the case thirty or more years ago. 

A word in passing might be said concerning the part played 
by publishers in introducing the American novel into Germany. 
Some firms printed the English originals only, others the Ger- 
man translations only, and still others both. The Tauchnitz firm 
has published the w^orks of sixty-seven American authors in neat, 
convenient pocket editions. All over Germany various "Eng- 



*• Deutsche Rundschau, Oct.-Nov., 1880, p. 268 ff. 



The American Novel in Germany, iSyj-igi^ 47 

lish Libraries" have sprung up, those of Heinemann and Bale- 
stier (Leipzig), Rudolphi and Klemm (Zurich), Asher's Conti- 
nental Library (Gradener & Richter), Kiihtmann (Dresden), 
Modern English Authors (Berlin, Herbig), being the most im- 
portant. Then there have been special series of Schulausgaben 
by Velhagcn & Klasing, Lindauer (Miinchen), Regensburg 
(Miinster), A. Twietmeyer (Leipzig), Buchholz and Diebel 
(Troppau), and others. Reclam has published the works of 
many American authors in German translation, making them ac- 
cessible to all people because of the cheap binding. Other series 
which include American authors in their lists of inexpensive edi- 
tions are: Englische Romanhibliothek (Barthol & Company, Ber- 
lin), Bibliothek der Gesamtlitcratur des In- and Auslandes (Hal- 
le, O. Hendel), Berlepsch Romanbibliothek (Regensburg, Hab- 
bel), Biicherei fi'ir die Jugend (Wien, Pichler), Weichert's Wo- 
chenbibliothek (Berlin), Zehnpfennig Bibliothek (Berlin), 
Meyer's Volksbilcher (a 10 Pf.), Bibliothek der fremden Zungen 
(Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, Stuttgart), Fehsenfeld*s Roman- 
sammlung (Freiburg i/B), Kiirschner's Biicherschatz, Lutz' Kri- 
miftal and Detektiv Romane (Stuttgart), Amerikanische Detek- 
tiv Romane (Berlin, Jacobsthal), Zwissler's Hausbibliothek 
(Wolfenbiittel), Der neue Roman (Berlin, Ilartmann), Singer- 
Biicher (Strassburg, J. Singer), Weber's moderne Bibliothek 
(Heilbronn), Univin Library (Leipzig), Jugend und Volksbii- 
cherei (Regensburg), Hesse's Volksbiicherei, etc. There are 
altogether between ninety and one hundred firms, some of them 
in Austria and Switzerland, which have, between 1871-1913, 
published one or more American novels either in the original or 
in translation. To the work of these firms, mercenary, though 
it may have been, and spurred on as they were chiefly by a vigor- 
ous competition, we must nevertheless assign that share of credit 
which is due each agency that has helped to make America l)ctter 
know abroad. 

There is another factor which helped to lead Germans into a 
deeper study of our fiction, namely, the appreciation and respect 
which Germany already had for our poetry. Between 1864 and 
1909 twenty-six anthologies were published in Germany, de- 



48 The American Novel in Germany, iS/i-rpr^ 

voted either entirely or in part to American poetry. In 1864 
appeared Karl Vollheim's Perlen der neuen cnylischcn und ameri- 
kanischen Lyrik/^ and in 1865 Friedrich Spielhagen's Amcrika-- 
iiisclie Gedichte (Leipzig). Then came Adolf Strodtmann's Anie- 
rikanische Anthologie (Hildburghausen, 1870). These three 
collections were important, since they appear at the very threshold 
of the period which we are treating. A. I. Roehm "^ finds that 
American poets have been translated far oftener than British 
poets in Germany, but that the quality of the translation is cor- 
respondingly weakened. 

Longfellow andPoe are the only American poets whose works 
have been completely translated by the Germans, but Bryant, Whit- 
man and Taylor are represented with good collections. Byron 
was translated only half as many times as Longfellow, but while 
A. Bottger's Byron translation went through six editions, only 
two of the fifteen German translations of Evangeline reached a 
second edition. Tennyson's Enoch Ardcn was translated only 
half as often as Evangeline, but Waldmiiller's translation of 
Enoch Arden went through thirty-five editions. Bochm remarks : 
**Trotz anscheinlich giinstigen iiusserlichen Verhiiltnissen, finden 

"1 <*1 'I'tli^l i"^ 1*1. • • 

11 clidO dUi Ci^lil UliiV«i llVUiilOdi°'ViS^C«.LOV^llC4AA v^v«iv*^w V.«4«W «*aA ^^\j%j 

sen Ganzen sehr minderwartige Ubersetzungsliteratur." But the 
nine complete or selected translations of Longfellow, and espe- 
cially the fifteen translations of Eijangeline and nine translations 
of Hiawatha demonstrate clearly how great a demand there was 
for his works. Knortz' excellent biography of Longfellow also 
became well-known. Although Knortz thought Longfellow too 
highly sentimental and eflfeminate and not sufficiently substantial, 
that his popularity was due to his mildness and gentleness, his 
great sincerity and sympathy rather than because he took any de- 
cided stand on any important issue, yet he says of him: "Lie- 
benswiirdig und anziehend ist seine Muse, vollendet sein Form- 
talent, ausgezeichnet sein Gefiihl in dcr Wahl passcnder Rhyth- 



*• Leipzig, Wenger. 1864. 

" Chicago Universitj', Ph.D., Diss., 1910. 



The American Novel in Cerviany, i8/i-ipfj 49 

men und Metren."^^ A. Baumgartner said: "Eine Englische 
Literatur ohne Longfellow ist so uiivollstandig als eine franzosi- 
sche ohne Rousseau, odcr eine deutsche ohne Rosegger."** Ed- 
mund Gosse declared Longfellow to be as true a poet as ever 
breathed. There is thus tunplc proof that our greatest poet was 
known and appreciated by many Germans, and this is quite as 
true of Walt Whitman/^ 

Knortz wrote a biography of Whitman, and Johannes Schlaf 
not only wrote a work ''^* on this poet, but translated and even 
imitated his poetry in German. Tlie fact that Whitman was not 
included in Knortz and Dickmann's collection called Modern 
American Lyrics,''^ called forth a storm of protest in Germany. 
"Aber was soil man zu einer Mustcrsammlung amerikanischer 
Lyriker sagen, in welcher Walt Whitman ganz und gar durch 
seine Abwesenheit glanzt. . . ."'^^ But Ferdinand Freiligrath 
found Whitman a great enough poet to translate, and Eduard 
Bertz called him the greatest master of "Stimmung" of all ages.''® 

An article in the Athcfiaeum for March 11, 1876, speaks of 
the unjust treatment accorded Whitman by magazines, publish- 
ers, critics, etc., in America and adds : "Der alte Mann lebt noch, 
imd soil man wenigstens den Versuch nicht unterlassen, ihm nach 
diesem harten Tagewerke einen weniger triiben, nicht von Noth 



"Longfellow, Literarhistorische Studie, Hamburg, 1879, Gruning. Cf. 
also M. f, d. L. d. A., Jan. 25, 1879, P- 59- 

^Magasxn fiir Literatur, Feb. 19, 1898, p. 1898. 

**C/. O. K Lessing: Hliitman and his German Critics, in Journal of 
English and Germanic i'hiloloyy, Vol. IX (1910), p. 85 ff. 

'•Johannes Schlaf: Walt Whitman, Vol. 18 of Die Dichtung (1904). Of 
this work Lessing says {Jour, of Eng. and Gcr. Phil,, X, p. 9O : "This liule 
book is an unparalleled example of high-handed arrogance, cowardly imposi- 
tion and utter ignorance." Lessing further declares Schlaf to have been com- 
pletely incompetent as a critic of Whitman, not having read more than fifteen 
per cent, of his work and having but a very imperfect knowledge of the 
English language. 

" Leipzig, 1880. 

"A/. /. d. L, d. A„ Sept. 4, 1880, p. 505. 

'■Bertz considerably modified his opinion of Whitman after he had made 
a more thorongliRoinR slndy of the underlying personality of the man. {Cf. 
E. Bertz: Walt li hitniau, cin Charaktcrbild, Vol. \ J I of Jahrbuch fiir sexuelle 
Zwischenstufcn, IQ05.) Hertz was then so vigorously attacked by Schlaf that 
he was forced to defend hitnself Ly exposing the latter in IVhitman-Mysterien 
(1907) and Der Vankee Ueiland, 



50 The Avicrican Nozrl in Germany, iS/i-rpi^ 

und Mangel heimgesuchten Lebensabend zu bereiten, und nicht 
erst seinen Tod zu erwartcn, um ihm eine spate Ancrkennung in 
Marmor oder Bronze zu zollcn." And the Magasin fiir die Lite- 
ratur des Auslandes adds:"^^ "Wenn Deutschland,— <las trotz 
aller Behauptungen auswartiger Pressen, in geistiger Beziehung 
am freiesten dasteht, freier als das der selbstgeschmicdeten Fes- 
scln begrJinzter geistiger Anschauung sich erst allmahlich be- 
wusst wcrdende England, freier als der diese Fesseln mit Stolz 
zur Schau tragende Freistaat der Neuen Welt — fiir den jeder 
Fessel trotzenden amerikanischen Sanger auch nicht viel tun 
kann, so wollen wir ihm wenigstens die Beachtung nicht vorent- 
halten, welche die eigne Heimat ihm versagt." What a warm- 
hearted tribute from a foreign shore to a poor, ridiculed, friend- 
less old bard, to whom his own country had turned its back and 
had coldened its heart. 

Is it then too much to say that this keen interest in Ger- 
many for our poets, these twenty-six anthologies, these many 
translations of cherished poems,®^ and these splendid tributes to 
their memory must have created an interest in the literary efforts 
of the Republic across the seas and must have thus helped create 
the demand for our better hctioni' It is imdouDtediy true tiiat 
the appreciation of the delicate art of Longfellow, Poe, Whit- 
man,®^ Whittier, Bryant, Lowell and Taylor gave our country a 
reputation for imaginative genius and creative power that led 
Germans to inquire into the work of a Bret Harte, a Mark Twain, 
a Howells, a James, and a score of others who formed the formid- 
able company of new novelists. 

Perhaps another reason for Germany's approval of and 
participation in our later American novel may be found in the 
close touch which certain of our literary men have had with 
Germany. Bayard Taylor, for example, was always a friend 
and admirer of the Germans and their literature. He spent part 



^ April 29, 1876, p. 259. 

••Roehm found fifteen translations of Evangeline, nine of Hiawatha, nine 



of Poe's Raven, eight of Bryant's Thanatopsis, five of Whittier's Maud MuUer, 
In spite of much unfavorable criticism such as that mentioned above. 



n 



The American Novel in Germany, iSji-iQi^ Si 

of two years, during which he traveled afoot through Europe, in 
Germany (1844-1846) and during the very last year of his life 
he was the accredited minister of our Government at Berlin 
(June to September, 1878). He had only been in Berlin a few 
months when he died. But he had gained impressions that ap- 
peared the following year hi Studies in German Literature, ^'^ 
and in turn Germany had gained an impression of love and re- 
spect for him that has never died. Many tributes to his memory 
appeared in the German periodicals^, and most of them voiced the 
closer touch that had been created between Germany and Amer- 
ica through the personality of this man. To quote from one of 
them : "Was Wundcr also, dass das deutsche Volk dem grossen 
Bayard Taylor als Gesandten der Vereinigten Staaten Republik 
ein so einstimmiges WohlwoUen entgegentrug, wie wohl noch 
nie dem Gesandten einer fremden Macht. Eine tiefe Sympa- 
thie verband ja beide — Bayard Taylor und das deutsche Volk. 
. . . Kommende Geschlechter werden ihn nennen, die nie in 
sein freundlich-inniges Antlitz geschaut, nie seine treue Hand 
gefasst, nie ein Wort aus seinem Munde gehort. Denn ob auch 
der Hauch seines Mundes verweht, sein Wort, sein Dichterwort 
bleibt. ... In der neuen Welt gclx>ren, und in der alten ge- 
reift, hat er sein Volk gelchrt die Geschichte des deutschen 
Volkes, auf dass die Briider einander kennen; dessen bleibt 
Deutschland eingedenk."^*^^ That there was a decided increase in 
the publication of American novels after 1878 is undoubted, and 
it may easily have been partly brought about through the popu- 
larity of Bayard Taylor. It might also be added that Mark 
Twain and others came into close and cordial personal relations 
with Germany, and did a great deal in demonstrating the real 
essence and fibre of the American spirit, leading more or less 
directly to a greater appreciation of our literature. 

There is nothing in the political relations of Germany and 
America which influenced the reading of our novel abroad. Even 
the Spanish-American War failed to mark a definite epoch in the 



•" New York, 1879. 

"M. /. d. L. d. I. u. A., Feb. 22, 1879, p. "7. 



5^ Bibliography 

development. In fact, eleven years after the war (1909) the 
number of publications had fallen below the mark set by the 
Peace Jubilee Year of 1898. The professorial exchange system, 
begun about 1906, may have stimulated interest, since 1907 marks 
the highest point in the whole history of our novel in Germany 
with the exception of two years, 191 1 and 1912. 

It must always be borne in mind that, whereas certain factors 
may have had a broad general influence in increasing or decreas- 
ing the number of American novels published, it nevertheless re- 
mains for the popularity of the individual author, whatever the 
reason for that popularity may be, to determine the degree of 
interest with which he is received in a foreign land. The Bibli- 
ography which forms Chapter III of this work, will show clearly 
who these most popular authors were. 



CHAPTER III. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

[This bibliography coiuaiub a coiiipI^^Lc Hot of American 
novels, within the limitations described in Chapter II (a), pub- 
lished in Germany and in certain Austrian and Swiss centres 
between the years 1871 and 191 3, inclusive. The translations 
are indicated either (a) by the German title, (b) by the name of 
the translator, which is added in parentheses wherever obtainable, 

or (c) by ( ) wherever a German title was not used 

and the name of the translator was not available.] 

Max Adeler (Charles H. Clark). 
Fern vom WeltgeiUmmel. (RToritz Busch.) Leipzig, Grunow. 

1876. 
Ellhogen-Raum. (Heichen-Abcnheim.) Berlin, Abenheim. 1877. 

Louise M. Alcott. 

Ein Mddclien aits dcr guten alien S chide. (Mary C. Rothwell.) 
2 vol. Stuttgart, Nitzschke. 1872-1873. 

same. New edition. Stuttgart, Nitzschke. 1874. 



Bibliography 53 

Little Women, 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1876. 
Kleine Fraucn. Kleine Manner. 3 vol. (P. Schanz.) Leip- 
zig, Grunow. 1877. 
Kleine Fraucn. Bremen, Valett. 1877. 
Little Men. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1879. 
Frau Podger^s Theetopf u. a. Erzn. (A. Passow.) Berlin, 

Abenheim. 1882, 
An Old-fashioned Girl. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 
Kleine Fraucn. (P. Schanz.) 2nd ed. Leipzig, Grunow. 1886. 
Jo's Boys and How They Turned Out. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1886. 
In blauer und in grauer Uniform. (A. Passow.) Berlin, Lus- 

tenoder. 1890. 
Little Women. School ed. Leipzig, G. Freytag. 1896, 
Good Wives. School ed. Leipzig, G. Freytag. 1898. 
Little Men. School ed. Leipzig, G. Freytag. 1900. 
Little Women. School ed. 2nd ed. Leipzig, G. Freytag. 1901. 
Little Women. Berlin, F. A. Herbig. 1901. 
Kleine Frauen. (P. Schanz.) 3rd ed. Leipzig, Grunow. 1902. 
Good Wives. School ed. Bielefeld and Leipzig, Velhagen und 

Klasing. 1903. 
Little Women. School ed. Bielefeld and Leipzig, Velhagen u. 

Klasing. 1904. 
Little Women. School ed. 3rd ed. Leipzig, G. Freytag, and 

Vienna, F. Tempsky. 1905. 
Little Women. School ed. Leipzig, Velhagen u. Klasing. 1910. 
Good Wives. School ed. Leipzig, Velhagen u. Klasing. 1910. 
Aus der Kiujbenwelt. (J. E. Wessely.) Berlin, Globxis Verl. 

1912. 
Aus der M'ddclvcnwelt. (J. E. Wessely.) Berlin, Globus Verl. 

1912. 

Good Wives. School ed. Leipzig, Velhagen u. Klasing. 191 3. 
Little Women. School ed. Leipzig, Velhagen u. Klasing. 19 13. 

Thomas Bailey Aldrich. 

Prudence Palfrey u. andere Leute. (M. Busch.) Leipzig, Gru- 
now. 1874. 

Die Geschichte eincs bosen Buben. (M. Busch.) Leipzig, Gru- 
now. 1875. 



54 Bibliography 

Die Konigin von Saba. (M. Busch.) Leipzig, Grunow. 1877. 

Marjorie Daw and Other Tales. Leipzig, Taiichnitz. 1878. 

The Stillwater Tragedy. Leipzig, Taiichnitz. 1880. 

Marjorie Daw and Other Tales. Zurich, Rudolphi u. Klemm. 
1882. 

Prudence Palfrey «. andere Erzn. Leipzig, Reclam, Jr. 1877- 
1882. 

Die Tragodie von Stilhvater. Leipzig, Reclam, Jr. 1883-1886. 

Marjorie Daw u. andere Ersn. (]\L Goulvcn.) Halle, O. Hen- 
del. 1900. 

Mary Antin. 
The Promised Land. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 19 13. 

Gertrude Atiieuton. 

American Wives and English Husbands. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 

1899. 
The Californians. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1899. 
Senator North. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1900. 
Patience Sparhazvk and Her Times. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1900. 

The Aristocrats. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1901. 

The Conqueror. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 

The Splendid Idle Forties. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 

A Daughter of the Vine. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1904. 

His Fortunate Grace. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1904. 

The Valiant Runaways. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1904. 

The Bell in the Fog, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1905. 

The Travelling Thirds. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1905. 

Senator North. (M. Behrend-Arnau.) Leipzig, R. Sattler. 

1905. 
Eine Tochter des IVestens. (ivi. Bahnson.) Bonn, C. Georgi. 

1905. 

Rezanov. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1906. 

Ancestors. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1908. 

The Gorgeous Isle. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1909. 

Tozver of Ivory. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1910. 

Julia France ami Her Times. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 191 2, 



Bibliography 55 

Jane G. Austin. 

Three Stories of Colonial Days. Leipzig, Velhagcn u. Klasing. 
1904. 

Mary Austin. 

Liebe and Weisheit, Berlin, R. Hartmann. 191 3. 

Aus dem Herzen gedrangt. Berlin, R. Hartmann. 1913. 

Irving Bacheller. 

Eben Holden. Leipzig, T. F. Unwin. 1903. 
Silas Strong. Leipzig, T. F. Unwin. 1906. 

WOLCOTT BalESTIER. 

The Naulahka} Leipzig, Heinemann u. Balestier. 1892. 

The Average Woman, Leipzig, Heinemann u. Balestier. 1892. 

Naulahka} (E. Becher.) 2 vol. Stuttgart, Engel horn. 1900. 

The Naulahka.^ New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann u. Balestier. 
1911. 

The Average Woman. New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann u. Bale- 
stier. 19 1 2. 

Edward Bellamy. 

Ein Riickbltck 2000-1887. Berlin, Vorwarts Verl. 1889. 

Im Jahre 2000. (R. George.) Halle, O. Hendel. 1887-1890. 

Dr. Heidenhoff's Wunderkur. (A. Zacher.) Leipzig, Reclani. 
1887-1890. 

Dr. Heidenhoff's Kur. (E. Wulkow.) Berlin, Rosenbaum u. 
Hart. 1890. 

Fraulein Ludingfon's Schwcster. (C. Steinitz.) Berlin, S. 
Fischer. 1890. 

Ein Riickblick. (A. Flcischmann.) ist-5th ed. Leipzig, O. 
Wiegand. 1890. 

Ein Riickblick. (G. v. Gizycki.) Leipzig, Reclam. 1890. 

Alles Verstaatlicht. (G. Malkowsky. ) Berlin, Eckstein. 1890. 

Ein Riickblick. (A. Fleischmann. ) 6th ed. Leipzig, O. Wie- 
gand. 1890. 



Written in conjunction with Rudyard Kipling. 



56 Bibliography 

Looking Backward 2000-1887. Leipzig, Taitchnitz. 1890. 

Ein Riickblick. (J. Hoops.) Leipzig, Meyer. 1S91. 

Maud Elliot u, Ein Echo von Aniictam, (G. Joel.) Halle, O. 

Hendel. 1891. 
Miss Ludingtons Schwcstcr, (J. Mollenlioff.) Leipzig, Re- 

clam. 1 89 1. 
Dr, Heidenhoff's Kur. Reprint. Leipzig, Reclani. 1891. 
Fraulein Ludington's Schwcster, (C. Steinitz.) Berlin, S. 

Fischer. 1891. 
Die Liebe eincs Positizdstin, Stuttgart, Deutsche Verl.-Anstalt. 

1893. 
Mit geschlossenen Augcn, (O. Dittrich.) Leipzig, Meyer. 

1894. 
Ein Riickblick 2000-1887, Reprint. Berlin, Vorwarts Verl. 

1894. 
Dr. Heidenhoff's Kur. (E. Wulkow.) New ed. Berlin, Rosen- 

baum imd Hart. 1895. • 
Gleichheit (Equality). (M. Jacobi.) 2 ed. Stuttgart, Deut- 
sche Verl.-Anstalt. 1898. 

Frakk T.ff. "RRVFOTrr 
St. Simon's Niece. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1876. 

Ambrose Bierce. 
In the Midst of Life. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 

Elizabeth Bisland (Wetmore). 

A Widower Indeed. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 

Eine Blitzfahrt rund um die Welt. Berlin, S. Cronbach. 1892. 

HjALMAR HjORTII BOYESEN. 

Gunnar. (P. Jiingling.) Breslau, Schottlander. 1880. 

Glitzer-Brita, llincr der seincn Namcn vcrlor. (F. Spielhagen.) 

Ein Rittcr von Dannebrog, Stuttgart, Engclhorn. 1885. 

Eine Tochtcr der Philister. 2 vol. (A. Scheibe.) Stuttgart, 
Engelhorn. 1886- 1887. 

Gunnar. Unter dem Glctscher, (K. Steinitz.) Leipzig:, Re- 
dam. 1 887- 1 890. 



Bibliography 57 

Fiedclhmts tind seine Familie, Berlin, Zehn-Pfennig Verl. 1890. 
Selbstbesiimmung. (M. Mann.) Stuttgart, Engclhorn. 1897. 
Fiedellians und Kriippelhafis. Berlin, U. Meyer. 1905. 

Cyrus Townsend Brady. 

Der kleine Ingenietir. Graz (Styria). Volksbiicherei. 1907. 
Der Kaffee-Corner, (A, Brehmer.) Berlin, H. Hillger. 1907. 
Der Cowboy. (A. Voigt.) Berlin, H. Hillger. 1913. 

The Breadwinners. 
The Breadwinners, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 

Frances H. Burnett. 

That Lass o'Lowrie's. Hamburg, Gradener u. Richter. 1877- 
1882. 

A Fair Barbarian, Hamburg, Gradener u. Richter. 1879-1882. 

Louisiana. ( ) Berlin, Kogge u. Fritze. 1881. 

Dolly. (H. Henschel.) Berlin, Barthol & Co. 1881-1882. 

Das Grubenmadchen. 2 vol. Berlin, Barthol & Co. 1882. 

Die schbne Barbarin. (A. Ranke.) Berh'n, Barthol & Co. 1883. 

Through Ofie Adviinistration. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 

Louisian<^. Hamburg, J. F. Richter. 1886. 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1887. 

Der kleine Lord. Volksausg. Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1887. 

Sara Crewe. Editha's Burglar. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1888. 

Der kleine Lord. Salon- Ausg. Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1889. 

Der kleine Lord. (L. Koch.) Leipzig, Reclam. 1887-1890. 

The Pretty Sister of Jose. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 

Die kleine Miss (That Lass o'Lowrie's). (C. Danneberg.) 5 
cd. Frankfurt a/Q, H. Andres & Co. 1893. 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. School ed. Leipzig, Rcnger. 1894. 

Theo, cine Liebesgeschichte. (C. Dannenberg.) Frankfurt, 
a/0, H. Andres & Co. 1894. 

Dolly. (E. Fliessbach.) Frankfurt a/0, H. Andres & Co. 1895. 

Die schbne Fischerstochtcr. Robert Lindsay's Gliick. Sir Pat- 
rick's Roman (W. Eichner.) Leipzig, Lindner. 1895. 

Kleine Kdtchcn. (W. Eichner.) S ed. Leipzig, Lindner. 1895. 

Schon Lisbeth. (W. Eichner.) Leipzig, Lindner. 1895. 



58 Bibliography 

Uiiscr Naclibar von driiben. (W. Eichncr.) Leipzig, Lindner. 

1895. 
Ein Stillleben, etc, (W. Eichncr.) Leipzig, Lindner. 1895. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy, Students' ed. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1896. 
Der kleine Lord Fauntlcroy. (A. Weil.) Leipzig, Biblio. Inst. 

1896. 
A Lady of Quality. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1896. 
Die hiibschc Polly Pembcrton. (W. Eichner.) Gross-Lichter- 

fclde, RI. & W. Heichen. 1896. 
Der kleine Lord Fauntlcroy. (L. Koch.) Zurich, C. Schmidt. 

1897. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. 2nd ed. Berlin, F. A. Herbig. 1898. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy, School ed. Leipzig, Renger. 1898. 
His Grace of Osmonde. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1898. 
Sara Crezve. School ed. Berlin-Carlshorst, IL Friedrich. 1901. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. School ed. Gotha, F. A. Perthes. 1901. 
Die hiibschc Polly Pembcrton. (W. Heichen.) Berlin, A. Wei- 
chert. 1 901. 
Sara Crezve. Students' ed. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1902. 
Eine vornehme Dame. (F. Mangold.) Stuttgart, Engelhom. 

* 1902. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. 3rd ed. Berlin, F. A. Herbig. 1902. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. 6th ed. School ed. Leipzig, Renger. 

1902. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. School ed. Gotha, F. A. Perthes. 

1903. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. Sch(X)l ed. Leipzig, G. Freytag. 1904. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. School ed. Munich, J. Lindauer. 1904. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. 7th ed. School ed. Leipzig, Renger. 

1904. 
Der kleine Lord. (E. Bechcr.) Stuttgart, G. Weise. 1904. 
Sara Crezve. School ed. 2nd ed. Paderborn, Schoningh. 1905. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. School ed. Bielefeld, Velhagen u. Kla- 

sing. 1905. 
Little Lord Fauntlcroy. School ed. Berlin, Friedberg u. Mode. 

1905. 



Bibliography 59 

. Little Lord Fauntlcroy, Schooled, (abridged). Bielefeld. Vti- 
hagen u. Klasing. 1905. 

Der klcine Lord. (H. W. Mertens.) Miinster, Regensburg. 
1905. 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. 8th ed. School ed. Leipzig, Renger. 
1906. 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. School ed. 2nd ed. Gotha, F. A. 
Perthes. 1906. 

Der kleine Lord. (E. Becher.) Stuttgart, G. Weise. 1907. 

Der kleine Lord. (E. Becher.) Koln, H. u. F. Schaffstein. 1907. 

Die hiibsche Sclnvcstcr von Jose. (P. Wollmaiin. ) Berlin, H. 
Hillger. 1907. 

Sara Cretve. School ed. Bielefeld, Velhagen u. Klasing. 1908. 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. 9th ed. School ed. Leipzig, Renger. 
1908. 

The Shuttle. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1908. 

Sara Crewe. School cd. Reprint. Bielefeld, Velhagen u. Kla- 
sing. 1909. 

Sara Crcive. School ed. Paderbom, F. Schoningh. 1910. 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. 4th ed. Berlin, F. A. Herbig. 19 10. 

Kathleen. Heilbronn, O. Weber. 1910. 

Der klcine Lord. (R. Rcichhardt.) 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Locwe. 
1910. 

Der kleine Lord. (R. Reichhardt.) 4th ed. Volksausg. Stutt- 
gart, Loewc. 1 9 10. 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. School ed. Reprint. Bielefeld, Vel- 
hagen u. Klasing. 191 1. 

Der kleine Lord. (M. de Schol.-Joel. ) Linz, Lehrerhausverein 
f iir Oberosterreich. 1 9 1 1 . 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. School ed. nth ed. Leipzig, Renger. 

1911. 

Der klcine Lord. (M. de Scholley-Joelson. ) Reichenberg, So- 
lors Nachf. 1912. 

The Secret Garden. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1912. 

Little Lord Fauntleroy. School ed. Reprint. Bielefeld, Vel- 
hagen u. Klasing. 191 2. 

Der kleine Lord. (E. Becher.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1912. 



6o Billi.jrizpky 

Oct klcinc Lord. (C BcrrJiardt.) Leipzig, Volks- u. Jugend- 
schri f ten- Vcrlag. 1 9 1 2. 

Sara Crcu,\\ Sci;«-ol ed. Reprint. Leipzig, \'e!hagen iL Kla- 
sing. 1 91 2. 

Der kleine Lord. (R. Reichhardt.) 5th ed. Volksausg. Stutt- 
gart, Locwe. 191 3. 

Clara Lolise Burnham. 

Juwcl — Ein Kapitcl aiis ihrcm Leber.. (A. Martens.) Ham- 
burg, Volsch. 1909. 

George Washixgtox Cable. 

Die Grandissimes. (E. PfSnrlcr.) Berlin, Barthol & Co. 1881. 
Slid tntd Kord.' (D. Bimbaum.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1890. 
Aus der altcn Kreolen-Zeit. (H. H. Ewers.) Minden, J. C C 

Bruns. 1900. 
Aus alien Kreolentagcn. (H. H. Ewers.) Minden, J. C. C. 

Bruns. 1901. 

Winston Churchill. 
Mr. Crew's Career. Leip/Ig, TaucIuiiLz. li/oS. 

Lucy Randall Comfort. 

Die Erbin von Rcdcliff. Rei^cnsburg, O. Habbel. 1899. 

Das Geheimnis von Glenliampton. Regensburg, O. Habbel. 1902. 

William Wallace Cook. 
Montana. (A. Vischer.) Stuttgart, Engclhom. 1910. 

Rose Terry Cooke. 

Ein Laien-Prcdiger. Berlin, Ev. Buch- u. Tractat-Gesell. 1886. 
Ein Laien-Prcdijcr. (P. VoUrath.) Gotha, P. Ott 1912. 

Pearl M. T. Craigie (J. O. Hobbes). 
The Gods, Some Mortals and Lord IVickenham. Leipzig, 
Tauchnitz. 1895. 



•Contains story by P. Deming. 



Bibliography 6i 

The Serious Wooing. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1901. 

Love, and the Sotd Hunters. Leipzig, Unwin. 1903. 

The Vineyard. Leipzig, Unwin. 1904. 

The Flute of Pan. Leipzig, Unwin. 1905. 

The Dream and the Business. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1906. 

Stephen Crane. 

Maggie, das Strassenkind. (D. Lande.) Leipzig, G. H. Wie- 

gand. 1897. 
Maggie, das Strassenkind. (D. Lande.) Leipzig, E. Fiedler. 

1897. 

F. Marion Crawford. 

Mr. Isaacs. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 

Doctor Claudius. Leipzig, Tauchnitz, 1883. 

To Leeward. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 

A Roman Singer. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 

An American Politician, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1885. 

Zoroaster. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1885. 

A Tale of a Lonely Parish. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1886. 

Marzio's Crucifix. Leipzig, Tauclinitz. 1887. 

Saracinesca. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1887. 

With the Immortals. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1888. 

Patd Patoff. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1888. 

Greifcnstein. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1889. 

Sant' Ilario. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1889. 

A Cigarette-Maker's Romance. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1890. 

Khaled. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 

A Witch of Prague. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 

Marzio's Crucifix. (T. Hopfner.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1891. 

The Three Fates. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 

Don Orsino. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 

Doktor Claudius. (T. Hopfner.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1892. 

Saracinesca. (T. Hopfner.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1892. 

Mr. Isaacs. (T. Hopfner.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1892. 

Zoroaster. (T. Hopfner.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1892. 

The Children of the King. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 

Marion Darche. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 



62 Bibliography 

Fietro Gliislcri 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 
Sant' Ilario. (T. Hopfner.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1893. 
Greifcnstcin, (T. Hoptner.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1893. 
Der Ziyarettenmacher. (T. Eminger-Longard. ) Stuttgart, 

Lutz. 1893. 
Katharine Lauderdale, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1894. 
Don Orsino. (T. liopfner.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1894. 
The Ralstoiis. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1895. 
Casa Braccio. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1896. 
Adam J oinist one's Son. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1S96. 
Taqttisara, 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1896. 
Corleone. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1897. 
/'/ Rose of Yesterday. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1897. 
Corleone, (G. Hildebrandt.) Freiburg i/B, Fehsenfeld. I9(X». 
Pietro Ghisleri. (G. Hildebrandt.) Freiburg i/B, Fehsenfeld 

1900. 
Marion Darche. (G. Hildebrandt.) Freiburg i/B, Fehsenfeld. 

1900. 
Via Criicis. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1900. 
In the Palace of the Kinrj, Leipzie, Tauchnitz. looi. 
Marietta, a Maid of Venice, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1902. 
Cecilia. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 
The Heart of Rome. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 
Whosoever sJiall offend . . . Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1904. 
Soprano. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1905. 
Arethnsa. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 
A Lady of Rome. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 
The Diva's Ruby. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1908. 
The Primadonna. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1908. 
The White Sister. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1909. 
Stradclla. Leipzig, Tauchnit::. 1909. 
The Undesirable Governess. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1910. 
Arcthxisa, die Sklavin von Byzans. (A. Helms.) Leipzig, V. 

Hirt. 191 1. 
Uncanny Tales. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 191 1. 
The Primadonna. 2 vol. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Engelhoni. 

1911. 



Bibliography 63 

SaracxMsca^ (M. de Lavalle de Vigors.) Freiburg i/B, Her- 
der. 191 2. 
Im Herzen Roms. (W. v. Aretin.) Berlin, H. Hillger. 1913. 

Richard Harding Davis. 

Gallegher, etc, Leipzig, Tauclmitz. 1891. 

Van Bibber, etc, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 

Geschichte ohne Ende. Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 1894. 

S. Gallegher.* Eine Zeitungsgeschichte. Leipzig, J. H. Ro- 

bolsky. 1900. 
Soldaten des Gliicks. (F. Mangold.) Stuttgart, Engelhom. 

1900. 
Ransom's Folly. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 
A Christmas Posy.^ School ed. Leipzig, G. Freytag. 1906. 
Sammlg. ausgw. Krim. u. Detek. Roniane.^ vol. 18. Stuttgart, 

Lutz. 6 ed. 1 898- 1 9 II . 
Im Nebel. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, R. Lutz. 1910. 
The Man Who Cotdd Not Lose. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1912. 
Im Nebel. (M. Jacobi.) 2nd ed. Stuttgart, R. Lutz. 19 12. 
Im Nebel. (M. Jacobi.) 3rd ed. Stuttgart, R. Lutz. 191 3. 
The Red-Cross Girl. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1913. 

Margaret Deland. 

John Ward, Preacher. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1889. 

Sidney. 2 vol. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 1891. 

Johannes Ward. (M. L.) Berlin, G. Reimer. 1893. 

Alt-Chester Geschichte. (L. Ohler.) Stuttgart, D. Gundert 
1910. 

Pfarrer Lavendar's Frcunde. (L. Ohler.) Stuttgart, D. Gun- 
dert. 19 1 2. 

Philip Deming. 
Sild and Nord.'^ (D. Bimbaum.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1890. 



■A translation into Portuguese. 

*From Untcrhaltnngsblatt fiir Stcnographcn. 

•Containing stories by R. H. Davis, B. Ilarte, M. Maartens, etc. 

• ContaininiT stories by A. K. Green, G. Allen, R. H. Davis, Conan Doyle. 

* Contains story by Geo. W. Cable. 



64 Bibliography 

Democracy. 
Democracy. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1882. 
Demokratisch. (T. M. Hagen.) 4 ed. Frankfurt a/M, Koe- 

nitzer. 1883. 
Demokratisch. (T, M. Hagen.) 5th ed. Frankfurt a/M, Koc- 

nitzer. 1885. 

Thomas Dixon, Jr. 

The Leopard*s Spots. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 

Weiss und Schivarz,^ (Leopard's Spots.) Leipzig, F. Roth- 

barth. 1904. 
Weiss und Schwarz. Berlin, Hesperus Verlag. 1907. 

Lily Dougall. 

Beggars All. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 

Der Zeitgeist, (Beggars AIL) (M. Baumann.) Gottingen, Van- 
denhoeck & Ruprecht. 1896. 

Edward Eggleston. 
Der Schulmeister von Flat-Creek. (W. Lange.) Berlin, Aben- 

Der Weltuntergang. (P. Heichen.) Leipzig, Reclam. 1887- 

1890. 
The Faithful Doctor. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 

Edgar Fawcett. 
A Gentleman of Leisure. Hamburg, Gradencr & Richter. 1882. 

Julia Constance Fletcher (George Fleming). 

Kismet. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 
Andromeda. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1885. 

Paul Lkickster Ford. 

Das Abenteucr im Expresssug. Stuttgart, Lutz. 3 ed. 1904- 
1906.  



* Not published 1904 as announced. Mss. sold to Hesperus Verl. 



Bibliography 65 

Das Ahentetier im Expresssug. (H. Darnoc.) 4th ed. Stutt- 
gart, Lutz. 1909. 

Das Abenteuer im Expresssug, (H. Darnoc.) sth ed. Stutt- 
gart, Lutz. 191 1. 

Harold Frederic. 

Illuminatio7i or the Damnation of Theron IV are. Leipzig, Tauch- 

nitz. 1896. 
March Hares. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1896. 

JuLiEN Gordon (Julia Grinnell Cruger). 

Daphne. (A Diplomat's Diary.) (F. Spielhagen.) Stuttgart, 
Engelhorn. 1891. 

Frdulein Reseda. Ein Mann der Erfolge. (E. Beclcer.) Stutt- 
gart, Engelhorn. 1891. 

A Diplomat* s Diary. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 

Ein puritanischer Heide. (E. Becker.) 2 vol. Stuttgart, En- 
gelhorn. 1892. 

Anna Katiierine Green (Rohlfs). 
Schein and Schnld. (M. Lortzing.) Berlin, Behrend. 1877- 

1882. 
Hand und Ring. Weimar, Wcissbach. 1889-1890. 
Hand und Ring. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1890. 
Hinter verschlosscncn Tiircn. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1891. 
Hatul und Ring, Reprint. Weimar, Weissbach. 1891. 
Um Millionen. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1892. 
Hand und Ring. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1892. 
Das verlassene Gasthaus. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1892. 
Hand und Ring. Leipzig, A. Bergmann. 1892. 
Endlich ge fund en. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1893. 
Hand und Ring. 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1896. 
Der Tag der Vergcltung. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1896. 
Ausgcwdhltc Kriminal-Romane. 7 vol. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1896. 

1. Hinter verschlosscncn Tiiren. 

2. Hand und Ring. 

3. Schein und Schuld. 



66 Bibliography 

4. Das vcrlassene Gasihaus. 

5. Um Milli Often. 

6. Dcr Tag der Vcrgcltung. 

7. Endlich gefundcn. 

Das vcrlassene Gasihaus. 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1897. 

Um Millioncn. 2nd cd. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1898. 

Endlich gcfiuiden. 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1898. 

Schcin und Schuld. 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1898. 

Zwischen sicben und zivolf Uhr. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1898. 

Das vcrlassene Gasthaiis. 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1899. 

Um Millionen. 3rd ed. Stuttgart^ Lutz. 1899. 

Ilinter verschlossenen Tiiren. 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1899. 

Zwischen sicben und zwblf Uhr. 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1899. 

Hand und Ring. 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1900. 

Seine Schuld. (P. Wollmann.) Erfurt, F. Barthoma. 1900. 

Endlich ge fund en. 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 

Schein und Schuld. 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 

Der Tag der Vergeltiing. 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 

Endlich gefunden. 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1903. 

Das vcrlassene Gasthaus. 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1903. 

f~f infer 'j^er^^'^l^l^^se^^^^^ 'Viir/>ii Ath i»H SttV.*"'^?.rt T_i!tz. I'^c. 

Zwischen sieben und zivblf Uhr. 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1903. 

Ilinter verschlossenen Tiiren. sth ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1904. 

The Filigree Ball. Leipzig, Unwin. 1904. 

Im Labyrinth der Siinde. (M. Walter.) Dresden, Moewig u. 

HofFner. 1904. 
Das vcrlassene Gasthaus. 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1905. 
Hand und Ring. 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1905. 
U7n Millionen. 4th cd. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1905. 
Der Tag dcr Vergeltung. 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1905. 
Engel und Teufel. (B. A. Baer.) Bonn, Rheinische Union. 

1905. 
Einer meiner Sohne. ist and 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1906. 
Dcr Eiligram'Schmuck. (P. Seliger.) ist-3rd ed. Stuttgart, 

Lutz. 1906. 
Schcin und Scludd. 4th cd. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1906. 
Zwischen sicben und zwolf Uhr. 4tli cd. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1906. 



Bibliography 67 

Das Filigran-Hcrs. (B. A. Baer.) Leipzig, E. Maerter. 1906. 
Im Labyrinth der Siinde. ( M. Walter. ) 3rd ed. Dresden, Moe- 

wig u. Hoffner. 1906. 
Der FiliyranSchmuck. (P. Seliger.) 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 

1907. 
Das verlassenc Gasthatis. sth ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 
Eftdlich gcfundcn, sth ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 
Hand and Ring, 5tli ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 
Um Millioncn, 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 
Einer meiner Sdhnc, 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 
Zwischcn siebcn und zzvdlj Uhr. 6th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 
Hand und Ring. 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907 
Schein ufid Schidd, 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1908. 
Hinier verschlosscncn Tiiren. 6tli ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1908. 
Detektiv Gryce-Scric. 6 vol. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1909. 

1. Schein und Schuld. (M. Lortzing.) 9 ed. 

2. Hand und Ring. (M. Jacobi.) Bed. 

3. Um Millionen. (M. Jacobi.) 7 ed. 

4. Hinter verschlossenen Tiiren. (M. Jacobi.) 7 ed. 
$. Endlich gef linden. (M. Jacobi.) 7 ed. 1 909-1 910. 
6. Einer meiner Sohne. (G. Runimler.) 7 ed. 1910. 

Um Millio7ien. 6th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1 9 1 1 . 
Zwischen sieben und zivolf. 6th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 1. 
Hand und Ring. (Gryce ed. ) 9th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 1. 
Hinter verschlosscncn Tiiren. 7th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 1. 
Hinter verschlosscncn Tiiren. (Gryce ed.) Sth ed. Stuttgart, 

Lutz. 1912. 
Endlich gef linden. (Gryce ed.) Sthed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 2. 
Das Nachbarhans. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 2. 
Endlich gefunden. 6th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 2. 
Hand und Ring. 6th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1912. 
Detektive Gryce-Serie. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1912. 

vol. 7: Das Nachbarhans. (G. Rummler.) 3 ed. 
Im Labyrinth der Siindc. (M. Walter.) Berlin, C. Henschel. 



68 Bibliography 

Die Amethyst'Pkiole. Der gcstohlene Rubin. (A. Gleiner & M. 
Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1913. 

Das Nachbarhaus. (G. Rummler.) (Gryceed.) 4tli ed. Stutt- 
gart, Lutz. 1 91 3. 

Das Nachbarhaus. (G. Rummler.) (Gryceed.) 7th ed. Stutt- 
gart, Lutz. 19 1 3. 

Die Amethyst'Phiole, Der gestohle^ie Rubin. (A. Gleiner & M. 
Jacobi.) 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1913. 

Archibald Clavering Gunter. 

Mr. B antes of New York. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1888. 

Mr. Barnes von New York. (F. Mangold.) 2 vol. Stuttgart, 

Engelhom. 1889. 
Mr. Potter aus Texas. (N. Riimelin.) 2 vol. Stuttgart, Engel- 

horn. 1890. 
Miss Niemand. (F. Mangold.) 2 vol. Stuttgart, Engelhom. 

1892. 
Als Herr Woodhouse erwachte. {Adventures of Dr. Burton, 

vol. I.) (E. V. Kraatz.) 3 ed. Dresden, Moewig u. Hoff- . 

ner. 1909. 
Die Stecknadel im Heuhaufen. (Adventures of Dr. Burton, vol. 

2.) (E. V. Kraatz.) 3 ed. Dresden, Moewig u. Hoffner: 

1909. 
Nachte des Grauens. {Adventures of Dr. Burton, vol. 3.) (E. 

V. Kraatz.) 3 ed. Dresden, Moewig u. Hoffner. 1910. 

John Habberton. 

Helen's Babies and Other People's Children. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 

1877. 
Tante Jettchen. (A, Niirenberg.) Berlin, Abenheim. 1879. 
Allerhand Leute. (A. Niirenberg.) Leipzig, Reclam. 1877- 

1882. 
Some Folks. Hamburg, Gradener u. Richter. 1879- 1882. 
Other Folks. Hamburg, Gradener u. Richter. 1879-1882. 
The Bowsham Puszle. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1882. 
One Tramp; Mrs. Maybimis Twins. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 



Bibliography 69 

H dene's Kinder chen. (M. Greif.) Leipzig, Rcclam. 1883-1886. 
Andrer Leute Kinder oder Bob u. Teddi in der Fremde. (M. 

Greif.) Leipzig, Rcclam. 1883-1886. 
Frau Marburg's Zwillinge. (M. Greif.) Leipzig, Reclam. 

1887-1890. 
Onkel Gustav. (Helen's Babies.) (P. Heichen.) Berlin, Liis- 

tenoder. 1890. 
Helene's Kinder chen, Andrer Leute Kinder. (M. Greif.) Leip- 
zig, Reclam. 1890. 
Helenen's Kinder chen. (R. Georg.) Halle, O. Hendel. 1891. 
Andrer Leute Kinder. (F. Dobbert.) Halle, O. Hendel. 1891. 
Die Bartoner Temper enzbewegung. (F. Dobbert.) Halle, O. 

Hendel. 1892. 
Grossgcwordcne Kinder. (Helen's Babies.) Frankfurt a/O, H. 

Andres. 1893. 
Grossgcwordcne Kinder. (Helen's Babies.) Berlin, J. Gnaden- 

feld. 1893. 
Helenen's Kinderchen. (O. Nessille.) Leipzig, Bibliogr. Inst. 

1897. 
Helenen's Kinderchen. (M. Greif.) Leipzig, Reclam. 1899. 
Andrer Leute Kinder. (C Rusak.) Leipzig, W. Fiedler. 1899. 
Andrer Leute Kinder. (O. Nessille.) Leipzig, Bibliogr. Inst. 

1901. 
Der Tiger und das Insekt. (C. Dinter.) Leipzig, O. Spamer. 

1903. 
Helen's Babies. Bielefeld, Velhagen und Klasing. 1905. 

Helenen's Kinderchen. (R. George.) Halle, O. Hendel. 1908. 

Helen's Babies. School ed. Bielefeld, Velhagen u. IClasing. 

1912. 
Helenen's Kinderchen u. Andrer Leute Kinder. (E. Otten.) 

Leipzig, van den Broccke. 19 12. 
Helenen's Kinderchen u. Andrer Leute Kinder. (P. Dehmel.) 

Strassburg, J. Singer. 191 3. 

L. B. Halstead (Barbara Eclbon.) 
PethesdQ. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 



yo Bibliography 

Henry Harland. 

The CardviaVs Snuff-Box. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 

The Lady Paramount. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 

My Friend Pros per 0, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1904. 

Des KardinaVs Schnupftabakdose. (N. Ri'miclin.) Stuttgart, 
Etigelhorn. 1905. 

Eine erlauchte Frau, {Lady Paramount,) (N. Riuxielin.) Stutt- 
gart, Engelhorn. 1906. 

Mein Freund Prospero. (N. Riimelin.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 
1907. 

The Royal End. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1909. 

Mrs. Burton Harrison. 

The Anglomaniacs. Leipzig, Hcincman u. Balestier. 1891. 
The Anglomaniacs. New ed. Leipzig, Heineniann u. Balestier. 
1911, 

Francis Bret Harte. 

Prose and Poetry. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1872. 

Die Argonauten Gcschichten, etc. 3 vol. Leipzig, Grunow. 

1873-1875. 
Californische Novcllen. (W. Hertzberg.) Leipzig, Quandt u. 

Handel. 1873. 
Idyls of the Foot-hills. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1874. 
Gabriel Conroy. (M. Eichner-Culliniore.) Vienna, Hartleben, 

1875.1876. 
Gabriel Conroy. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1876. 

Gabriel Conroy. ( ) Berlin, Janke. 1876. 

Gabriel Conroy. (U. Brachvogel.) 3 vol. Stuttgart, Hallber- 

ger. 1876. 
Gabriel Conroy. (Moritz Busch.) 2 vol. Leipzig, Grunow. 

1876. 
Gabriel Conroy. (C. Th. Eben.) 2 vol. Stuttgart, Aucrbach. 

1876. 
Gabriel Conroy. (O. Randolf.) Leipzig, Rcclam. 1871-1876. 
Californische Er::dhhingen. (W. Lange.) Leipzig, Reclam. 

1871-1876. 
Thankful Blossom, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1877. 



Bibliography yi 

Two Men of Sandy Bar. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1877. 

The Story of a Mine. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1877. 

Thankful Blossom. Eine Liebcsgeschichte. Berlin, Abenheim. 

1877. 
Californische Erzahhmgen. (W. Lange.) Leipzig, Reclam. 

1877-1882. 
Die Geschichte eincr Mine. (A. Passow.) Leipzig, Reclam. 

1877-1882. 
Die heiden Manner von Sandy Bar. (W. LaHge.) Leipzig, 

Reclam. 1877-1882. 
Thankful Blossom. (O. Randolf.) Leipzig, Reclam. 1877- 

1882. 
Fiinf neue Erz'dhlungen. ( Heichen- Abenheim. ) Berlin, Aben- 
heim. 1877. 
Die Geschichte ciner Mine. Berlin, Janke. 1877- 1880. 
Drift from Two Shores. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1878. 
Ein Gespenst der Sierras, etc. (A. Passow.) BerUn, Abenheim. 

1878. 
Das Heidenkind, etc. Berlin, Abenheim. 1878. 
Die Mine in der Teufelsschlucht. (Heichen- Abenheim.) 2 ed. 

Berlin, Abenheim. 1878. 
Aus meinein Secrduberleben. Berlin, Abenheim. 1878. 

Baby Sylvester, etc. ( ) Berlin, Abenheim. 1878. 

An Heiress of Red Dog, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1879. 

The Ttvins of Table Mountain, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1879. 

Roger Catron's Freund, etc. Berlin, Abenheim. 1879. 

Die Erbin von Red Dog, etc. Berlin, Abenheim. 1879. 

Das Geheimnis von Dead-Wood, etc. Berlin, Abenheim. 1879. 

Jeff Brigg's Love Story, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1880. 

Tales of the Argonauts. Zurich, Rudolphi & Klemm. 1881- 

1882. 
Flip, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1882. 

In the Carqiiincz Woods, Hamburg, J. F. Richter. 1 883-1 886. 
Neueste Novcllcn. (B. Wirth.) Leipzig, Breitkopf u. Hartel. 

1883. 
On the Frontier. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 
By Shore and Sedge. Leipzig, Taudmitz. 1885. 



72 Bibliography 

Maruja. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1885. 

Maruja. (A. Scheibe.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1885-1886. 

Von der Greiize, (A. Scheibe.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1885- 

1886. 
Tales of the Argonauts. Students' ed. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1886. 
Snowbomid at Eagle's and Devil's Ford. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 

1887. 
Ein Milliondr von Rough-und-Ready. Berlin, Verl. der Illustr. 

Ztg. 1887. 
The Crtisade of the Excelsior. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1888, 
A Millio}taire of Rough and Ready, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 

1888. 
Cressy. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 18S9. 
Captain Jim's Frcxind, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1889. 
A Waif of the Plains. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1890. 
Ausgewdhlte Ersdhlungen. (A. Niirenberg.) Berlin, Liisten- 

oder. 1890. 
The Heritage of Dedlotv Marsh, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1890. 
A Ward of the Golden Gate. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1890. 
Der Pflegling der Goldnen P forte. (P. Hcichen.) Halle, O. 

Hendel. 1891. 
A First Fapiily of Tasajara. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 
A Sappho of Green Springs, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 
Die Erbschaft von Dedlow Marsh. (O. Dittrich.) Leipzig, 

Bibliogr. Inst. 1891. 
Kapitan Jim's Freund. (O. Dittrich.) Leipzig, Bibliogr. Inst. 

1891. ( ! I '•'^ji 

Argoftatiten Geschichten. (J. Hoops.) I-III. Halle, O. Hen- 
del. 1892. 
Colonel Starbottle's Client, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 
Sally Dows, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 
Susy. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 

Cressy. ( ) Stuttgart, D, Verl.-Anstalt. 1893. 

Ein fahrender Ritter der Foot-Hills. (O. Dittrich.) Leipzig, 

Bibliogr. Inst. 1893. 
Ein fahrender Ritter der Foot-Hills, Das Erbteil in den Dedlow- 

Marschen, Kapitan Jim's Freund. ( ) Stuttgart, 

D, Verl.-Anstalt 1893. 



Bibliography 73 

Das Gli'ick von Deznl's Fort. Mannheim, J. Benshcimer. 189 v 

Ein Millionar von Rough und Ready. Mannheim, J. Bensheimer. 
1893. 

In dcr Prairie verlasscn, {Waif of the Plains.) (E. Becher.) 
Stuttgart, J. Engelhorn. 1893. 

The Bell-ringer of Angels, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1894. 

A Protegee of Jack Hamlin's, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1894. 

Clarence. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1895. 

In a Hollow of the Hills. The Devotion of Enriquez. Leipzig, 
Tauchnitz. 1896. 

Argonauten Geschichtcn. (J. Hoops.) IV- V. Halle, O. Hen- 
del. 1896. 

Ein Geheimnis des Tclegraphenhiigels. (O. Dittrich.) Leip- 
zig, Bibliogr. Inst. 1897. 

Die Hohle am Hiigcl. Jack Despard. Enrique^ Santillo. Ber- 
lin, H. Hillger. 1897. 

Eingeschneit. Berlin, H. Hillger. 1898. 

Stories in Light and Shadozv. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1898. 

Mr. Jack Hamlin's Mediation. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1899. 

From Sand-hill to Pine. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1900. 

Im Walde von Carquines. New ed. . Stuttgart, Union Verl. 
1900. 

Drci Teilliaber. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 

Two Stories (bound with Mark Twain's "der kleine Detektii/'). 
Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 

Under the Redwoods. Leipzig, Tauclmitz. 1901. 

Cressy. ( ) New ed. Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anstalt 

1902. 

Jack Hamlin als Vermittlcr, etc. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 
1902. 

Der Gmbenmillionar. (A. Roehl.) Berlin, Hillger. 1902. 

On the Old Trail. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1902. 

Ein Schiff von Anno '49. Heilbronn, O. Weber. 1902. 

Eine vornchme Familie. (H. Limbach.) Berlin, Hillger. 1903. 

Trent's Trust, etc. Leipzig, Tauclmitz. 1903. 

Die Postmeisterin von Laurel Run. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, 
Lutz. 1904. 



74 Bibluujraphy 

Dcr Sheriff von Siskyou\ Stuttgart, Littz. 1905. 

Diu Geheimnis dcr Sierra, Stuttgart, Lutz. 1905. 

Pionicrc des Western. (H. Sarvvcy.) Stuttgart, Engclhom. 

1905. 
In dcr Prairie vcrlassen. (E. Bechler.) Stuttgart, G. Weise. 

1905. 
A Christmas Posy.^ School ed. Leipzig, G. Freytag. 1906. 

Auf der alten Fdhrte, (E. Bcchcr.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1906. 

Two Stories (also Twain's *'dcr klcine Detcktiv"). 4th and 5th 

ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907- 1908. 
Das anvertraute Gut. Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1908. 
Dcr Pflegling dcr goldnen P forte. (P. Hcichcn.) Halle, O. 

Hendel. 1908. 
Kalifornischc Erzdhlungen. (W. Ilertzberg.) Berlin, Verl. f. 

d. deutsche Haus. 1909. 
Kalifornischc Erzdhlungen. Leipzig, Turn- Verl. 1909. 
Unfrcizvilligc Reklame. Dcr Mann am Scmaphor. Onkcl Jim 

and Onkcl Billy. Leipzig, Hesse u. Becker. 191 o. 
Dick Spindler's JVcihnachtsfcicr. Barker's Gliick. Ein Urteils- 

Liberty Jones und ihre Entdcckiing. Jimmy's grosser Bruder. 

Dcr Sheriff von Siskyow. Leipzig, Hesse u. Becker. 1910. 
Die Postmeisterin von Laurel Run, etc. Leipzig, Hesse u. Becker. 

1910. 
Drci Tcilhabcr. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1911. 
Baby Sylvester.^^ Troppau, Buchholz u. Dicbel. 191^. 

Julian Hawthorne. 

Mrs. Gainsborough's Diamantcn.'^^ Miinstcr, Aschendorff. 1880 
Dust. 2 vol. Hamburg, J. F. Richter. 1883-1886. 
Dcr grosse Bankdicbsiahl. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1891. 
Dcr vcrh'dngnisvoUe Brief. Sttittgart, Lutz. 1892. 
Ein tragisches Geheimnis. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1892. 



•Containing stories by Rich. H. Dr\vis, M. Maartens. B. Harte, etc 
'•Contains stories by W. Irving and M, Twain. 
"Contains three short stories by Gcrh. Keller. [Roller ? J 



Bibliography 75 

Sich selbst vcrbannt. (K. Knortz.) Mannheim, Bensheinicr. 

X893. 
Archibald Malmaison. (M. Miiller.) Leipzig, Reclatn. 1894. 

Eiucs andern Schuld, {Another^ s Crime.) Berlin, R. Jacobs- 
thai. 1899. 

Dcr t'crhanguisvollc Brief, 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1899. 

Der grosse Bankdicbstahl 3rd and 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 
1899-1901. 

Dcr verhangnisvollc Brief, 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1903. 

Der grosse Bankdicbstahl, 5th ec. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1905. 

Ein tragischcs Gehcimnis, 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1905. 

Der vcrhangniszfolle Brief, 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1906. 

Same. 6th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 

Der grosse Bankdicbstahl, 6tli ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 

Ein tragisches Gehcimnis, 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1908. 

Archibald Malmaison, Leipzig, Reclam. 191 1. 

Der grosse Bankdicbstahl. 7th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 2. 

Lafcadio Hearn. 

Kokoro, (B. Franzos.) Frankfurt a/M, Litcrar. Anst. 1906. 

Lotos, (B. Franzos.) Frankfurt a/M, Literar. Anst. 1906. 

Izumo, (B. Franzos.) Frankfurt a/M, Literar. Anst. 1907. 

Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 

Kokoro. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 

Kzvaidan, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 

Kyushu. (B. Franzos.) 3rd ed. Frankfurt a/M, Liter. Anst. 
1908. 

Kwaidan, (B. Franzos.) 3rd ed. Frankfurt a/M, Liter. Anst. 
1909. 

Gleanings in Buddha-Fields, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1910. 

Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan, (2nd series.) Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1910. 

Out of the East. T^ipzig, Tauchnitz. 1910. 

The Romance of the Milky JVay, etc, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1910. 

Buddha, (B. Franzos.) Frankfurt a/M, Literar. Anst. 1910. 

Izumo. (B. Franzos.) Sth and 6th ed. Frankfurt a/M, Liter. 
Anst. 1910. 



76 Bibliography 

Kokoro. (B. Franzos.) 13th and 14th ed. Frankfurt a/M, 

Lit. Anst. 191 o. 
Kyushu. (B. Franzos.) 4th and 5th ed. Frankfurt a/M, Liter. 

Anst. 1 910. 
Das Japanbuch. (B. Franzos.) 5th ed. Frankfurt a/M, Liter. 

Anst. 191 1. 

Same. 6th to 12th ed. Frankfurt a/M, Liter. Anst. 

1911. 

Japan, Ein Deutungsversuch. 2 ed. Frankfurt a/M, Liter. 

Anst. 1 91 2. 

George Fitzalan Bronson-Howard. 

Meeresgold. (Scars in the Southern Seas.) (P. Klaiber.) 
Stuttgart, Engelhom. 19 10. 

Blanche Willis Howard (Teuffel). 

One Summer. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1877. 
Aunt Serena. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1882. 
Gucnn. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 
Tony, the Maid, etc, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1888. 

Guenn. (H. Stern & M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1889. 
A Fellow and His Wifc}^ Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 
Toni, die Kammerjungfer. (A. Salzbrunn.) Hamm, Breer u. 
Thiemann. 1900. 

William Dean Howells. 

Voreilige SchlUsse, (M. Wesselhoeft.) Stuttgart, Auerbach. 

1876. 
The Lady of the Aroostook. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1879. 
A Foregone Conclusion. Leipz*<^, Tauchnitz. 1879. 
A Modern Instance. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1882. 
The Undiscovered Country. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 
Venetian Life. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 
Italian Journeys. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 
A Chance Acquaintance. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 



*■ Written in collaboration with Wm. Sharp, 



Bibliography yy 

Their Wedding Journey. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 

A Fearful Responsibility. Tonelli's Marriage. Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1883. 

A Woman's Reason. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 

Dr. Breen's Practice. Leipzig, Tauchnitz.' 1884. 

The Rise of Silas Lapham. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1886. 

The Shadow of a Dream. Leipzig, Hcinemann & Balcstier. 1891. 

Tuscan Cities. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 1891. 

Pflichigcfiihl. {A Fearful Responsibility.) Stuttgart, Engel- 
horn. 1895. 

A Pair of Patient Lovers. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1901. 

Miss Bellard's Inspiration. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1905. . 

Tuscan Cities. New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 1910. 

Tuscan Cities. New ed. Leipzig, F. A. Brockhaus. 191 1. 

Baroness Bettina von Hutten (nee Riddle). 

The Halo. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 
Kingsmead. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1909. 
The Lordship of Love. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1910. 
The Green Patch. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 191 1. 
Sharrow. Leipzig, Tauclinitz. 1912. 

HELEN/ Hunt Jackson. 

Ramona. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1885. 

Ramona. (E. H. Denio.) Leipzig, Bohme. 1886. 

Ramona. (E. H. Denio.) 2nd ed. Leipzig, E. Ungleich. 1898. 

Henry James, Jr. 

Ein leidcnschaftlicher Erdenpilgcr, etc. (Mor. Busch.) Leip- 
zig, Grunow. 1876. 

Roderick Hudson. (Mor. Busch.) Leipzig, Grunow. 1876. 

Der Amerikaner.\ 2 vol. (Mor. Busch.) Leipzig, Grunow. 

1877. 
Der Amerikaner. (Heichen-Abenheim.) Berlin, Abenheim. 

1877. 

The American. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauclinitz. 1878. 

The Europeans. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1878. 

Der Amerikaner. Berlin, Janke. 1878. 



yS Bibliography 

Engcn Pickering, (W. Laiige.) Leipzig, Reclani. 1878. 

Roderick Hudson, 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1879. 

Daisy Miller. An International Episode. Four Meetings. Leip- 
zig, Tauchnitz. i'879. 

Confidence. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1880. 

The Madonna of the Future, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1880. 

Eugene Pickering, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1880. 

Washington Square, etc. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1881. 

The Portrait of a Lady. 3 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1882. 

Foreign Parts. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 

[French Poets and Novcllists.l Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 

The Siege of London. The Point of View. A Passionate Pil- 
grim. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 

Portraits of Places. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1884. 

A Little Tour in France. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1885. 

Unheimliche Geschichtt.^^ Berlin, Verl. d. Humorist. 1890. 

A London Life. Leipzig, Heineniann & Balestier. 1891. 

The Lesson of the Master, etc. Leipzig, Hcinemann & Balestier. 
1892. 

The Finer Grain. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. iQio. 

A London Life. New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 
1911. 

The Lesson of the Master, etc. New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann & 
Balestier. 1912. 

The Outcry. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 19 12. 

Thomas Lawson. 

Freitag der Dreizehnte. (M. Enckhausen & E. v. Kraatz.) Han- 
nover, A. Sponholtz. 1907. 

Jennette Lee. 
Onkel William. Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1910. 

Jack London. 

We7in die Natur Ruft. {Call of the Wild.) (L. Lons.) Han- 
nover, Sponholtz. 1907. 



*"A series of grewsome stories by Weisflog, Tieck, James, Dickens and 
K. T. A. Hoffmann. 



Bibliography 79 

Burning Daylight. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 191 1. 

Wolfsblut. (M. Lane.) Freiburg i/B, Fehsenfeld. 191 2. 

The Call of the Wild. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1912. 

When God Laughs, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1912. 

The Sea-wolf. Leipzig, Tauclinitz. 191 2. 

South Sea Tales. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1913. 

Martin Eden. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 191 3. 

The Son of the Sun. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 19 13. 

The Son of the Wolf. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1914. 

George Horace Lorimer. 

Letters fro7n a Self-made Merchant to His Son. Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1903. 

Brief e eines Dollar-Kbnigs an seinen Sohn. (O. v. Oppen.) 
6 ed. Berlin, E. Fleischel. 1903- 1904. 

Same. 7th to nth ed. Berlin, E. Fleischel. 1904- 

1905. 

Old Gorgon Graham. More Letters from, etc. Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1905. 

Neiic Brief e eines Dollar-Konigs an seinen Sohn. (A. Brieger.) 
Berlin, E. Fleischel. 1905. 

Letters from a Self-made Merchant, etc. School ed. Leipzig, 
A. Twietmeyer. 191 1. 

Harold MacGrath. 

Der Mann auf dem Bock. (G. Bauer.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 
1908. 

Justin H. McCarthy. 

Wenn ich der Konig war'. (N. Rumelin.) Stuttgart, Engel- 
horn. 1907. 

Cleveland Moffett. 

Durch die Wand. (E. v. Kraatz.) 3 ed. Dresden, Moewig & 
HofFner. 191 1. 

Frank Norris. 

The Octopus. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1901. 
The Pit. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1903. 



8o Bibliography 

Der Octopus. (E. v. Tempsky.) Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 

1907. 

Same. 2nd ed. Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 1907. 

Die Getreidcborse. (The Pit.) (E. v. Tempsky.) Stuttgart, 

D. Verl.-Anst. 1912. 

James Oppenheim. 

Aus fernen Tagen. {Wild Oats?) Frankfurt a/M, Jiidische 
Volksbiicherei. 1912. 

Lloyd Osbourne. 

The Wrecker. ^^ 2 vol. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balcsticr. 1892. 

The Ebb'Tide.^^ A Trio and a Quartette.^* Leipzig, Heinemann 
& Balestier. 1897. 

Schiffbruch.^* {The Wrecker.) (B. Katscher.) Leipzig, Re- 
clam. 1899. 

Baby Bullet, the Motor of Destiny. Leipzig, Tauclinitz. 1905. 

Wild Justice. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1906. 

The Motormaniacs. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 

Liliput, der Schicksalsmotor. {Baby Bullet.) (G. Bauer.) 
Stuttgart, lingelhorn. 1908. 

The Ebb-Tide. ^^ New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier 
1911. 

The Wrecker}^ New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 19 12 

The Kingdoms of the World. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1912. 

Elizabeth Stuart Phelps (Ward). 

Im Jenseits. {Beyond the Gates.) Leipzig, F. Richter. 1885, 
Lazare,komni heraus.^^ {Come Forth!) (Mr. K.) Leipzig,? 

Hobbing. 1891. 
Same. New ed. Leipzig, Stuttgart, Hobbing & 

Biichle. 1893. 
Jenseits des Weltmeeres. (A. v. S.) Gotha, F. A. Perthes. 

1897. 



"Written in collaboration with R. L. Stevenson. 
"Written in collaboration with Herbert Dickinson Ward. 



Bibliography 8i 

Ein eigcnartigcs Lcbcn im Dienstc des Herrn. (\V. Euchler.) 
Wolfenbiittel, J. Zwissler. 1899. 

Elizabeth Prentiss. 

Frits und Maria tind ich. (M. Morgcnstern. ) Itzehoe, Nusser. 

1874. 
Die Pcrle der Familic. (M. Morgcnstern.) Basel, Schneider. 

1875. 
Die Familie Percy. (M. Morgcnstern.) Basel, Schneider. 

1876. 

Himmelan. 3 ed. (M. Morgenstein.) Basel, Schneider. 1877. 

Stepping Heavenward, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1879. 

Himmelan, (M. Morgcnstern.) 4th ed. Basel, Schneider. 1881. 

Was Lizzie erzahlte. Gentleman Jim, (M. Morgcnstern.) Leip- 
zig, Bohme. 1884. 

Himmelan, (M. Morgcnstern.) Sth ed. Basel, Geering. 1887. 

Little Susy's Little S err ants. School ed. Leipzig, Renger. 1892. 

Himmelan. (M. Morgenslern.) 6th ed. Basel, A. Geering. 
1894. 

Die Ferle der Familie, (M. Morgcnstern.) 2nd ed. Basel, 
Geering. 1896. 

Himmelan. (M. Morgcnstern.) 7th ed. Basel, Geering. 1900. 

Amelie Rives. 

Der Lebende oder der Tote? (IL Koch.) 2 ed. Frankfurt 

a/M, Koenitzer. 1890-1891. 
According to St, John. Leipzig, Heincniann & Balestier. 1891. 
Same. New cd. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 

1911. 

Elizabeth Robins (Parkes). [C. E. Raimond.] 

The Open Question. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1899. 
The Magnetic North. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1904. 
A Dark J^antcrn. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauclinitz. 1905. 
The Convert. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1908. 
The Florentine Frame, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1909. 



82 Bibliography 

Where Are You Going to . . .? Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1913. 
Way Statiofts. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 191 3. 

Mary Roberts Rineiiart. 

Die Wendeltreppe, 3 ed. Dresden, Moewig & Hoffner. 191 1. 
Schlafzvagenplats Nr. 10. 3 ed. Dresden, Moewig & Hoffner. 

1912. 
Elf Zweiundzwanzig. Dresden, Moewig & Hoffner. 191 2. 

Edward Payson Roe. 

Wie sich Jemand in seine Frau verliebt, (K. Knortz.) Leipzig, 
Reclam. 1887- 1890. 

Richard Henry Savage. 

My Official Wife. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1891. 

The Little Lady of Lagunitas. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 

Prince SchamyVs Wooing, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 

Meine offizielle Frau, (N. Riimelin.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 
1892. 

Delilah of Harlem, Leipzig. Tauchnitz. i8q.'^. 

The Masked Venus, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 

The Anarchist, 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1894. 

Prince SchamyVs Brautwerbung, (N. Riimelin.) Stuttgart, 
Engelhorn. 1894. 

In the Old Chateau. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1895. 

A Daughter of Judas. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1895. 

Miss Deveraux of the Mariquita, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1896. 

Checked Through, etc, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1896. 

Meine offizielle Frau. ( N. Riimelin. ) Salonausg. Stuttgart, En- 
gelhorn. 1896. 

Wanderbilder. (F. Mangold.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1896. 

Die Hexe von Harlem, (F. Mangold.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 
1897. 

A Modern Corsair. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1897. 

Meine offizielle Gattin,^^ Tetschen a/E, F. Jaeger. 1897. 



i« 



Published in sliortliand by F. Jaeger. 



Bibliography 83 

In the Sivim, 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1898. 

Die Prinzessin von Alaska, (G. Hildebraiidt-Eggert) Berlin, 

Hillger. 1898. 
The White Lady of Khaminavatka. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1899. 
Die gcfangenc Prinzessin, Vienna, Hartlebcn. 1899-1900. 
In the House of His Friends, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1901. 
The Mystery of a Shipyard. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1902. 
A Monte Crista in Khaki, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. . 1904. 
Von Havana nach Peking, (E. Ritter v. Lcpkowski.) Vienna, 

K. Mitschke. 1905. 
Die maskierte Venus, (H. Limbach.) Berlin, D. Dreyer. 1905. 

Nathan Sheppard. 
Shut Up in Paris, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1874. 

Upton Sinclair. 

Der Sumpf, (The Jungle,) (E. E. Ritter.) 2 ed. Hannover, 

Sponholtz. 1906. 
Der Industriebaron. 6 ed. Hannover, Sponholtz. 1906. 
Der Sumpf. Volksausg. Hannover, Sponholtz. 1906. 
In zehn Jahren, (The Industrial Republic) (M. Enckhausen 

and E. v. Kraatz.) Hannover, Sponholtz. 1907. 
1st ''der Sumpf wahr?^'^ Hannover, Sponholtz. 1907. 
Metropolis. (E. v. Kraatz.) Hannover, Sponholtz. 1908. 
Die Borsenspieler, (R. Miiller.) 2 ed. Hannover, Sponholtz. 

1909. 
Samuel der Suchende, Hannover, Sponholtz. 1911. 

Frank R. Stockton. 

Ruderheim. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1886. 
Kuriose Geschichtcn. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1887. 
Novclleien und Skizzen.^^ (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1887. 
Vielliebchcn, etc, (P. Hcichen.) Berlin, Liistenoder. 1890. 



"Contains an open letter of Sinclair's. President Roosevelt's Message 
to Congress on the stock-yard question, and Chapter I of The Jungle, 

" Contains short stories by Aldrich, Bishop, Deming, Mattliews, O'Brien, 
Stockton, etc. 



84 Bibliography 

The House of Martha. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 
Im Eichhornhof. (M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lutz. 1893. 
Der See ten f el. Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 1893. 
Ausgcwahlte humoristische Schriften. 3 vol. Stuttgart, Lutz. 
1898. 

1. Rtiderheim. (M. Jacobi.) 

2. hn Eichhornhof. (M. Jacobi.) New ed. 

3. Kuriosc Geschichten. (M. Jacobi.) 

Zum Nordpol tind Erdkern. (M. Walter.) 2 ed. Stuttgart, D. 

Verl.-Anst. 1899. 
Abenteuer des Kapitdn Horn. (L. S.) Leipzig, O. Spamer. 

1903. 
Same. 2nd ed. Leipzig, O. Spamer. 1908. 

Axisgewdhlte humoristische Schriften. Reprint of 1898 ed. 3 

vol. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1912. 

Octave Thanet (Alice French). 

Amerikanische Kriminalerzdhlungen.^^ Berlin, Verl. der Zehn- 
pfennig Bibliothek. 1890. 

Das gastliche Haus, (G. Bauer.) Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 191 2. 

Albion W. Tourgee. 

Eines Narren Narrenstreich. ( E. Penner. ) 3 vol. Berlin, Bar- 
thol & Co. 1882. 

Mark Twain (Samuel L. Clemens). 

Jim Smiley' s beriihmter Springfrosch, etc. ( M. Busch. ) Leip- 
zig, Grunow. 1 874-1 876. 

Die Arglosen auf Reisen. (M. Busch.) Leipzig, Grunow, 1874- 
1876. 

Die neue Pilgerfahrt. (M. Busch.) Leipzig, Grunow. 1874- 
1876. 

Das vergoldete Zeitalter.^^ (M. Busch.) 2 vol. Leipzig, Gru- 
now. 1 874- 1 876. 



*• Contains stories by Karl Knortz. 

••Written in collaboration with Charles Dudley Warner. 



Bibliography 85 

The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1876. 
Skizzenbuch. (M. Busch.) Leipzig, Grunow. 1877. 
The Innocents Abroad, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1879. 
Ausgewahlte Skizzen, 2 vol. (W. Lange.) Leipzig, Reclam. 

1879. 
Roughing It, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1880. 
A Tramp Abroad. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1880. 
Ausgwahlte Skizzen. 3rd vol. (W. Lange.) Leipzig, Reclam. 

1880. 
The Innocents at Home. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1881. 
The Prince and the Pauper. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1881. 
The Stolen White Elephant. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1882. 
Ausgewahlte Skizzen. 4th vol. (H. Oswin.) Leipzig, Reclam. 

1883. 
Life on the Mississippi. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 
Sketches. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1883. 

The Adventures of Huckelberry Finn. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1885. 
Unterwegs und Daheim. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1886. 
FUrst und Bettlcr. (J. Flach.) Konstanz, Verl. d. deutschen 

"Heimat." 1887. 
Lcben auf dcm Mississippi. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1888. 
[Selections from American Humor by M. T.] Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1888. 
Abenteuer und Fahrtcn des Huck Finn. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1890. 
Der Prinz und dcr Betteljunge. (H. Lobedan.) Giessen, Ricker. 

1890. 
Heitere Liebesgeschichten.^^ Berlin, Verl. d. Zehnpfennig 

Biblio. 1890. 
A Yankee at the Court of King Arthur. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1890. 
The American Claimant. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1892. 
Der amerikanische Pratcndent. Stuttgart, D. Verl-Anst 1892. 
Ausgezvahlte Skizzen. 5th vol. (D. Haek.) Leipzig, Reclam. 
1892. 



** Contains Stories by M. T., Ludmilla Koelle, O. v. Oberkamp and Hein. 
Backer, 



86 Bibliography 

The £1,000,000 Bank-note, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 

Skiszen, (II. Lowe.) Leipzig, Bibliogr. Inst. 1893. 

Tom Sawyer Abroad, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1894. 

Piidd'nhead Wilson, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1895. 

The Prince and the Pauper. School ccI. Berlin, Gaertner. 1896. 

Personal Recollectiofis of Joan of Arc, 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1896. 

Die Millionenpfundnote. (W. !Marnet.) Neustadt a. d. H., 
Marnet. 1897. 

Die Million-Pfufidbanknote. Berlin, H. Hillger. 1897. 

Torn Sawyer, Detective, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1897. 

More Tramps Abroad. 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1897. 

Aiisgewahlte Skizzen. 6th vol. (D. Haek.) Leipzig, Reclam. 
1897. 

Ausgewdhlte humoristische Schriften. 6 vol. Stuttgart, Lutz. 
1898. 

1. Tom Sawyer's Abenteuer und Streiche. 

2. Abenteuer und Fahrten des Huckelberry Finn. 

3. Skizzenbuch. 

4. A^*"^ di>pt. ?l/fcc/cc//»/)f 

5. Im Gold' und Silberland. 

6. Reisebilder, Unterzvegs und Dahcim. 

Meine Reise um die Welt. (M. Jacobi.) 2 ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 

1898. 
Der Querkopf IVilson. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1898. 
Der junge Detcktiv,^^ etc. (H. Helling.) Berlin, Jacobsthal. 

1898. 
Abenteuer und Fahrten des Huckelberry Finn, Stuttgart, Lutz. 

1899. 

Querkopf Wilson. 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1899. 

Die Abenteuer Tom Sazvycr's. (11. Helling.) Halle, O. Hen- 
del. 1900. 

The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. School ed. Leipzig, G. Frey- 
tag. 1900. 

The Man That Corrupted liadleyburg, 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauch- 
nitz. 1900. 



Contains stories by Edgar Allan Poc. 



Bibliography 87 

In Gold' u. Silberland. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1900. 

Leben anf dem Mississippi. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1900. 

Mcine Reise urn die Welt. (M. Jacobi.) 3rd ed. Stuttgart, 

Lutz. 1900. 
Reiscbilder. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1900. 

Tom Sazvyers Abenteuer. (T. Biirk.) Berlin, Hillger. 1900. 
Tom Sawyer's Sireiche und Abenteuer. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1899. 
Skizzenbxich. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1899. 
Querkopf Wilson. Wie die Stadt Hadleybiirg verderbt wurde. 

(M. Jacobi.) Stuttgart, Lviz. 1900. 
Der junge Detekiiv,^^ etc. (H. Helling.) Berlin, Jacobsthal. 

igoo, 
Adam's Tagebuch, etc. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 
Erzdhhmgen und Plaudereien. (H. Lowe.) Leipzig, Bibliogr. 

Inst. 1 901. 
Kdnig und Bctteljunge. (H. Stockl.) Vienna, A. Pichler. 1901. 
The Prince and the Pauper. School ed. Dresden, K. Kiihtmann. 

1901. 

Same. Schooled. 2nd ed. Berlin, Gaertner. 1901. 

Tom, der kleine Detektiv. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 

Querkopf Wilson. 3rd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 

A Tramp Abroad. School ed, Leipzig, G. Freytag. 1901. 

Querkopf Wilson. Wie die Stadt Hadlcyburg verderbt wurde. 

(M. Jacobi.) 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1901. 
Die Abenteuer Huckelberry Finns. Halle, O. Hendel. 1902. 
A Double-Barrelled Detective-Story, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 

1902. 
Humoristische Schriften. 6 vol. New series. Stuttgart, Lutz. 

1903. 

1. Tom Sawyer's neue Abenteuer. 

2. Querkopf Wilson. 

3-4. Meine Reise um die Welt, 

5. Adam's Tagebuch, etc. 

6. Wie Hadleyburg verderbt wurde. 

Five Tales.^^ School ed. Halle, H. Gesenius. 1903. 



Contains stories by Rudyard Kipling and M. Twain. 



88 Bibliography 

Tom, der kleinc Detcktiv.^^ Stuttgart, Lutz. 1903. 

Querkopf IVilson. 4tli ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1903. 

A Tramp Abroad, School cd. 2nd impress. Vienna, Tenipsky. 
1903. 

Des Treulosen Ende. (A Double-Barreled Detective Story,) 
Berlin, Jacobsthal. 1903. 

Huck Finn's Fahrten and Abenteuer, Stuttgart, Lutz. 1904. 

Tom's Abenteuer and Streiche. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1904. 

Die 1,000,000 Pfundnote, etc. Leipzig, Hesse und Becker. 
1905. 

Tod Oder Icbendig. Leipzig, Hesse und Becker. 1905. 

Prins und Bettclknabe. (H. Lobcdan.) 2nd ed. Stuttgart, 
Locwe. 1905, 

Prinz und Bettler, (R. Brunner.) Leipzig, O. Spanier. 1905. 

Selbstgesprach Nikolans II r^ Berlin, H. Sleinitz. 1906. 

Querkopf Wilson. 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1906. 

A Tramp Abroad. School ed. 2nd impress. Leipzig, Freytag. 
1906. 

Qtufkupf JVilson. 2i\il to 7th cd. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 

Mcine Reise um die Welt. 6th cd. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 

Adam's Tagebuch. (H. Conrad.) 5 ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907- 
1910. 

[Christian Science.] Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 

The $30,000 Bequest, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 

Tom, der kleinc Detektiv.^'^ 4th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1907. 

Tom Sawyer's neue Abenteuer. (H. Conrad & M. Jacobi.) 2nJ 
to loth cd. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1908-1910. 

Wie Hadleyburg vcrdcrbt zvurde, etc. 2nd to 7th ed. Stutt- 
gart, Lutz. 1908-1909. 

Prins und Bettler. (R. Brunner.) 2nd ed. Leipzig, O. Spa- 
nier. 1908. 

Tom, der kleine Deiektiv.^^ 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1908. 

Auf dcm Mississippi. 2nd to 7th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1909. 

Die Abenteuer Huckleberry Finns. Berlin, Weichert. 1909. 



"Contains two stories by Bret Harte. 
•*A translation into Russian. 



Bibliography 89 

Die Abenieuer Tom Sawyers. Berlin, Weichert. 1909. 

The Prince and the Pauper, School ed. 3rd ed. Berlin, Gaert- 
ner. 1909. 

Querkopf Wilson. (M. Jacobi.) 6th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1909. 

Im Gold' und Silberland. 2nd to 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1910. 

Extract from Captain Stormficld's Visit to Heaven. Is Shake- 
speare Dead? Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1910. 

Prins und Bettelknabe. (H. Lobedan.) 3rd ed. Stuttgart, 
Loewe. 19 10. 

Ausgewahlte Skiszen.^^ (H. Hellwag.) Berlin, F. Schulze. 
1910. 

Im Gold- u. Silberland. 9th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1910. 

Tom Sawyer als Dctcktiv. Stuttgart, Neues liter. Inst. 191 1. 

Ausgewahlte VVerke. 6 vol. (M. Jacobi, H. Koch, L. Ottmann.) 
Leipzig, Hesse und Becker. 191 1. 

Same. (Hesse's Volksbiicher. ) Leipzig, Hesse u. 

Becker. 191 1. 

1. Humoristische Skizzen. 

2. Tom Sawyer's Abcnteuer und Streiche. (M. 

Jacobi.) 

3. Reisebilder. 

4. Huck Finn's Abentctier und Fahrtcn. (H. Koch.) 
Tom Sawyer^ s Abenteuer und Streiche. 31st ed. Stuttgart, 

Lutz. 191 1. 

Reisebilder. 2nd to 20th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 1. 

Tom Sawyer's none Abcnteuer. 1 1 th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 1. 

Meine Rcise urn die Welt. 8th cd. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1911. 

. — — Same. Part H. 2nd to 5th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 

1911. 

Adam's Tagcbuch. 7th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 191 1. 

Abcnteuer und Fahrtcn des Huck Finn. 2nd to 12th ed. Stutt- 
gart, Lutz. 191 1. 

Prinz und Beitlcr. (R. Brunner.) 3rd ed. Leipzig, O. Spa- 
mer. 1911. 



Ip a stenographic series. 



90 Bibliography 

Tom Saivycrs Abcntcucr und Strcichc. 32iid cd. Stuttgart. 

Lutz. 191 3. 
Adams Tagcbuch, etc. (II. Conrad.) 8th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 

Wie Hadleybiirg vcrderbt wurdc, etc. (M. Jacobi, H. Conrad.) 

8th ed. Stuttgart, Lutz. 1913. 
Die Ahenteucr des Tom Sawyer u. Htick Finn. (U. Johannsen, 

M. Schloss.) Strassburg, J. Singer. 1913. 
The Prince and the Pauper, School ed. Bielefeld, Vclhagen & 

Klasing. 191 3. 

Louis Joseph Vance. 

Die S chat zinsel (A. Pcukcr.) Stuttgart, Engelhoni. 191 1. 
Die Bronzcschdle, (A. Schimmelpfennig.) Dresden, Moewig 
und Hoffner. 19 13. 

Hermann Knickerbocker Vieli&. 

Die Jlcrbergc :ium Silberncn Mond, (A. Peuker.) Stuttgart, 

L^ngelhorn. 1909. 
Der HerzbnichhilgeL (A. Rudolph.) 12 ed. Reutlingen, Enss- 

lin und Laiblin. 19x3. 

Lewis Wallace. 

Ben Htir^ (B. Hammer.) 2 vol. 4 ed. Stuttgart, D. Verl.- 
Anst 1887-1888. 

Ben-Hur, 2 vol. Leipzig, Tauclmitz. 1888. 

Ben Htir. (P. Heichcn.) Halle, O. Ilendel. 1887-1890. 

BenHiir. (B. Hammer.) Volksausg. Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 
1890. 

Ben Hur. (B. Hammer.) 5th and 6th ed. Stuttgart, D. Verl.- 
Anst. 1889-1891. 

Die hchre Gottheit. (P. Heichcn.) 2 vol. Berlin, Heichen u. 
Skopnik. 1891. 

lesH Kindschaft. Berlin, Heichen u. Skopnik. 1891. 

The Fair God. 2 vol. Leipzig, Hcinemann & Balcstier. 1892. 

Ben Hitr. (B. Hammer.) Illus. cd. Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 
1894. 



Bibliography 91 

Dcr PrUiz von Imlicn, (E. A. Witte.) 2 vol. Freiburg i/l). 
Fchsenfeld. 1894. 

Vier Kapitel aiis Ben Hur. (P. Heichen.) Basel, Koeliler. 
1895. 

Ben Hur, (W. Eichner.) Berlin, A. Weichert. 1901. 

Der Prinz von Indicn. 2nd ed. 2 vol. Freiburg i/B, Fehsen- 
feld. 1 90 1. 

Ben Hur, (B. Hammer.) 82nd ed. Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 
1902. 

• Same. Volksausg. 83rd ed. Stuttgart, D. Verl.- 
Anst. 1902. 

Ben Hur. (J. Krauss.) Reutlingen, Ennslin u. Laiblin. 1902. 

Ben Hur. (B. Hammer.) Volksausg. iiothed. Stuttgart, D. 
V.-Anst. 1903-1906. 

Ben Hur. (P. Flathe.) 2 vol. Leipzig, Reclam. 1903-1906. 

Ben Hur. (E. v. Feilitzsch.) Zurich, C. Hirsch. 1904. 

Ben Hur. (B. Hammer.) 2 vol. Illus. ed. 17th ed. Stuttgart, 
D. Verl.-Anst. 1904. 

Ben Hur. (P. Moritz.) ist and 2nd ed. Stuttgart, K. Thiene- 
mann. 1 904-1 906. 

Ben Hur. (H. v. Edorf.) Regensburg, J. Habbel. 1906. 

Ben Hur. (M. Winter.) Graz, Styria. 1906. 

Ben Hur. (K. Wilding.) Berlin, A. Weichert. 1906. 

Ben Hur. (M. Winter.) Volksbucherei. Graz, Styria. 1906. 

Ben Hur. (B. Hammer.) Volkausg. iiith to 127th ed. Stutt- 
gart, D. Verl.-Anst. 1907-19 10. 

Ben Hur. (P. Moritz.) ist and 2nd ed. Stuttgart, K. Thiene- 
mann. 1907 and 19 10. 

Ben Hur. (H. v. Edorf.) Regensburg, J. Habbel. 1907. 

Ben Hur. (E. v. Freilitzsch.) Konstanz, C. Hirsch. 1908. 

Ben Hur. (B. Hammer.) 2 vol. Illus. ed. i8th ed. Stutt- 
gart, D. V.-Anst. 1909. 

Ben Hur. (J. Cassirer.) Berlin, Schreiter. 1909. 

Ben Hur. (B. Hammer.) Volksausg. 128th to 130th ed. 
' Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 191 1. 

Ben Hur. ( — ) Berlin, Globus Verl. 191 1. 

Ben Hur. (P. Moritz.) 3rd ed. Stuttgart, A. Hoffmann. 191 1. 



92 Bibliography 

Ben Hur, (R. Zoozmann.) Berlin, T. Knaur Nachf. 191 1. 
Bcpt Hur, (B. Hammer.) Volksausg. 131st and I32n(l ed. 

Stuttgart, D. Verl.-Anst. 1912. 
Ben Hur, (H. Rcichenbach.) Leipzig, Hesse & Becker. 1912. 
Ben Hur, (B. Hammer.) Volksausg. 133rd ed. Stuttgart, 

D. Verl.-Anst. 1913. 

Anne Warner. 

Leslie iind ihrc Vcrehrcr. (Grafiii J. Baudissin.) Stuttgart, 
Engelhom. 191 2. 

Charles Dudley Warner. 

My Summer in a Garden, Leipzig, Locwe. 1871. 

Das vcrgoldete Zeitalter.^'^ (M. Busch.) Leipzig, Grunow, 

1 874- 1 876. 
My Winter on the Nile. 2 vol. Leipzig, Heinemann & Bale- 

stier. 1 89 1. 

Edward Noyes Westcott. 
David Harum, (G. Hainholz.) Berlin, L. Simion Nf. 1906. 

Edith Wharton. 

The House of Mirth, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1906. 
The Fruit of the Tree, Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1908. 

Kate Douglas Wiggin (Riggs). 

Die Geschichte von VogeVs Weihnachts-Roschen, (M. v. K.) 
Leipzig, P. Hobl)ing. 1892. 

A Cathedral Courtship, Penelope's English Experiences, Leip- 
zig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 

Timothy's Quest. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1893. 

Drei Geschichten von armen und reichen Kindern. Stuttgart, 
Hobbing and Biihle. 1900. 

Penelope's Irish Experiences, I-cipzig, Tauchnitz. 1901. 

Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1904. 



"Written in collaboration with Mark Twain, 



Bibliography 93 

^Rebekka vom Sonnenbachhof. (N. Riimelin.) Stuttgart, En- 
. gelhom. 1905. 
The Affair at the Innr^ Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1905. 
The Bird's Christmas Carol. School ed. Leipzig, Freytag. 

1906. 
Rose 0* the River. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1906. 
Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm. School ed. Leipzig, Freytag. 

1906. 
New Chronicles of Rebecca^ Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1907. 
Rebekka vom Sonnenbachhof. (N. Riimelin.) Stuttgart, En- 

gelhom. 1907. 
Die Geschichte von VogeVs IVcihnachtsroschen. (M. v. K.) 

Stuttgart, Engelhorn. 1908. 
The Old Peabody Pew. Susanna and Sue. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 

1910. 
Was sich in dem Gasthaus begab.^^ (N. Riimelin.) Stuttgart, 

Engelhorn. 19 10. 
Robinetta.^^ Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 191 1. 
Mother Carey. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1912. 

Mary E. Wilkins (Freeman). 

A Far-away Melody, etc. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 1891. 

A Humble Romance. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 1891. 

A New English Nun, etc. 2 vol. Leipzig, Heinemann & bale- 
stier. 1892. 

Pembroke. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1894. 

Madelon. Leipzig, Tauclmitz. 1896. 

Aus fernem Land. (4 stories.) (A. v. Schaffer.) Gotha, F. A. 
Perthes. 1898. 

Jerome, a Poor Man. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1898. 

Silence, etc. Leipzig, Tauchnitz. 1898. 

The Love, of Parson Lord, etc. Leipzig, Tauclmitz. 1900. 

Hanna. ( ) Hamburg, Agentur des Rauhen Hauses. 

1901. 
Doktor Gordon. ( ) Leipzig, T. F. Unwin. 1907. 



"Written in collaboration with Mary Findlater, Jane R, and Allan 
McAulay. 



94 Bibliography 

A New English Nun, 2 vol. New ed. Leipzig, Ileinemann & 
Balestier. 1912. 

A Humble Romance, New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann & Bale- 
stier. 1 912. 

Owen Wister. 

Novcllen aus dcm Abcnteiicrlcbcn des zvUden IVestens. (A. 

Goldschmidt. ) 3 ed. Berlin, Gutenberg. 190S. 
Dcr Mcdis:inmunn der Krahcnindiaw?r, Der Handstreich des 

Generals. 2 vol. Reutlingen, Enuslin & Laiblin. 1909- 

1910. 

Constance Fenimore Wooi^on. 

Anne, Leipzii;, Heinemann & Balestier. 1892. 
Jupiter Lights, Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 1892. 
Same. New ed. Leipzig, Heinemann & Balestier. 



191 



2, 



<^^ 
V* 



.^V 



i^ 



»« 



*<.'. 



■'-^ vV - ^ • 



f*'  



SjJfci v" 



4 



•«J 









V 

V 



"9 



"% si ■>' '■■' V 

'> ^ &ii» i • * aS 




3 2106 00204 7683 

311 1 




