24/192 Music Downloads

...and why they make no sense

Xiph homepage

Planet.Xiph

Monty's demos

Intro

Physiology

Audible spectrum

Golden ears

Spectrophiles

Intermodulation

Fallacies

Oversampling

16 vs. 24 bit

Noise

Dynamic range

Signal-to-noise

Why 24 bit?

Listening tests

Caveat Lector

Confirmation bias

Loudness tricks

Clipping

Different masters

Inadvertant cues

Better headphones

Lossless formats

Better masters

Surround

Outro

Further reading

Footnotes

	    Also see Xiph.Org's new
            video, 
Digital Show
              & Tell
, for detailed demonstrations of digital sampling
            in action on real equipment!

Articles last month revealed that musician Neil
            Young and Apple's Steve Jobs discussed offering
            digital music downloads of 'uncompromised studio quality'.
            Much of the press and user commentary was particularly
            enthusiastic about the prospect of uncompressed 24 bit 192kHz
            downloads.  24/192 featured prominently in my own
            conversations with Mr. Young's group several months ago.

Unfortunately, there is no point to distributing music in
            24-bit/192kHz format. Its playback fidelity is slightly
            inferior to 16/44.1 or 16/48, and it takes up 6 times the
            space.

There are a few real problems with the audio quality and
            'experience' of digitally distributed music today. 24/192
            solves none of them.  While everyone fixates on 24/192 as a
            magic bullet, we're not going to see any actual
            improvement.

First, the bad news

In the past few weeks, I've had conversations with
            intelligent, scientifically minded individuals who believe
            in 24/192 downloads and want to know how anyone could
            possibly disagree.  They asked good questions that deserve
            detailed answers.

I was also interested in what motivated high-rate digital
            audio advocacy.  Responses indicate that few people
            understand basic signal theory or the
            
sampling
              theorem
, which is hardly surprising.  Misunderstandings
            of the mathematics, technology, and physiology arose in most
            of the conversations, often asserted by professionals who
            otherwise possessed significant audio expertise.  Some even
            argued that the sampling theorem doesn't really explain how
            digital audio actually works [
1
].

Misinformation and superstition only serve charlatans.  So,
            let's cover some of the basics of why 24/192 distribution
            makes no sense before suggesting some improvements that
            actually do.

Gentlemen, meet your ears

The ear hears via hair cells that sit on the resonant
            basilar membrane in the cochlea.  Each hair cell is
            effectively tuned to a narrow frequency band determined by
            its position on the membrane. Sensitivity peaks in the
            middle of the band and falls off to either side in a
            lopsided cone shape overlapping the bands of other nearby
            hair cells.  A sound is inaudible if there are no hair cells
            tuned to hear it.

Above left: anatomical cutaway drawing of a human cochlea with the
	      basilar membrane colored in beige.  The membrane is
	      tuned to resonate at different frequencies along its length,
	      with higher frequencies near the base and lower frequencies
	      at the apex.  Approximate locations of several frequencies
	      are marked.

Above right: schematic diagram representing hair cell response
	      along the basilar membrane as a bank of overlapping filters.

This is similar to an analog radio that picks up the
            frequency of a strong station near where the tuner is
            actually set.  The farther off the station's frequency is,
            the weaker and more distorted it gets until it disappears
            completely, no matter how strong. There is an upper (and
            lower) audible frequency limit, past which the sensitivity
            of the last hair cells drops to zero, and hearing ends.

Sampling rate and the audible spectrum

I'm sure you've heard this many, many times: The human
            hearing range spans 20Hz to 20kHz.  It's important to know
            how researchers arrive at those specific numbers.

First, we measure the 'absolute threshold of hearing'
            across the entire audio range for a group of listeners.
            This gives us a curve representing the very quietest sound
            the human ear can perceive for any given frequency as
            measured in ideal circumstances on healthy ears.  Anechoic
            surroundings, precision calibrated playback equipment, and
            rigorous statistical analysis are the easy part.  Ears and
            auditory concentration both fatigue quickly, so testing must
            be done when a listener is fresh.  That means lots of breaks
            and pauses.  Testing takes anywhere from many hours to many
            days depending on the methodology.

Then we collect data for the opposite extreme, the
            'threshold of pain'.  This is the point where the audio
            amplitude is so high that the ear's physical and neural
            hardware is not only completely overwhelmed by the input,
            but experiences physical pain.  Collecting this data is
            trickier.  You don't want to permanently damage anyone's
            hearing in the process.

Above: Approximate equal loudness curves derived from
	      Fletcher and Munson (1933) plus modern sources for
	      frequencies > 16kHz. The absolute threshold of hearing and
	      threshold of pain curves are marked in red.  Subsequent
	      researchers refined these readings, culminating in the Phon
	      scale and the ISO 226 standard equal loudness curves. Modern
	      data indicates that the ear is significantly less sensitive
	      to low frequencies than Fletcher and Munson's results. 

The upper limit of the human audio range is defined to be
            where the absolute threshold of hearing curve crosses the
            threshold of pain.  To even faintly perceive the audio at
            that point (or beyond), it must simultaneously be unbearably
            loud.

At low frequencies, the cochlea works like a bass reflex
	    cabinet.  The 
helicotrema
 is an opening at the apex
	    of the basilar membrane that acts as a port tuned to
	    somewhere between 40Hz to 65Hz depending on the
	    individual. Response rolls off steeply below this
	    frequency.

Thus, 20Hz - 20kHz is a generous range.  It thoroughly
            covers the audible spectrum, an assertion backed by nearly a
            century of experimental data.

Genetic gifts and golden ears

Based on my correspondences, many people believe in
            individuals with extraordinary gifts of hearing.  Do such
            'golden ears' really exist?

It depends on what you call a golden ear.

Young, healthy ears hear better than old or damaged ears.
            Some people are exceptionally well trained to hear nuances
            in sound and music most people don't even know exist.  There
            was a time in the 1990s when I could identify every major
            mp3 encoder by sound (back when they were all pretty bad),
            and could demonstrate this reliably in double-blind testing
            [
2
].

When healthy ears combine with highly trained
            discrimination abilities, I would call that person a golden
            ear.  Even so, below-average hearing can also be trained to
            notice details that escape untrained listeners.  Golden ears
            are more about training than hearing beyond the physical
            ability of average mortals.

Auditory researchers would love to find, test, and document
            individuals with truly exceptional hearing, such as a
            greatly extended hearing range. Normal people are nice and
            all, but everyone wants to find a genetic freak for a really
            juicy paper. We haven't found any such people in the
            past 100 years of testing, so they probably don't exist.
            Sorry.  We'll keep looking.

Spectrophiles

Perhaps you're skeptical about everything I've just
            written; it certainly goes against most marketing material.
            Instead, let's consider a hypothetical Wide Spectrum Video
            craze that doesn't carry preexisting audiophile baggage.

Above: The approximate log scale response of the human
	      eye's rods and cones, superimposed on the visible
	      spectrum.  These sensory organs respond to light in
	      overlapping spectral bands, just as the ear's hair cells
	      are tuned to respond to overlapping bands of sound
	      frequencies.

The human eye sees a limited range of frequencies of
            light, aka, the visible spectrum.  This is directly
            analogous to the audible spectrum of sound waves.  Like the
            ear, the eye has sensory cells (rods and cones) that detect
            light in different but overlapping frequency bands.

The visible spectrum extends from about 400THz (deep red)
            to 850THz (deep violet) [
3
].
            Perception falls off steeply at the edges.  Beyond these
            approximate limits, the light power needed for the slightest
            perception can fry your retinas. Thus, this is a generous
            span even for young, healthy, genetically gifted
            individuals, analogous to the generous limits of the audible
            spectrum.

In our hypothetical Wide Spectrum Video craze, consider a
            fervent group of Spectrophiles who believe these limits
            aren't generous enough.  They propose that video represent
            not only the visible spectrum, but also infrared and
            ultraviolet.  Continuing the comparison, there's an even
            more hardcore [and proud of it!] faction that insists this
            expanded range is yet insufficient, and that video feels so
            much more natural when it also includes microwaves and some
            of the X-ray spectrum.  To a Golden Eye, they insist, the
            difference is night and day!

Of course this is ludicrous.

No one can see X-rays (or infrared, or ultraviolet, or
            microwaves).  It doesn't matter how much a person believes
            he can.  Retinas simply don't have the sensory hardware.

Here's an experiment anyone can do: Go get your Apple IR
            remote.  The LED emits at 980nm, or about 306THz, in the
            near-IR spectrum.  This is not far outside of the visible
            range. Take the remote into the basement, or the darkest
            room in your house, in the middle of the night, with the
            lights off.  Let your eyes adjust to the blackness.

Above: Apple IR remote photographed using a digital
	      camera.  Though the emitter is quite bright and the
	      frequency emitted is not far past the red portion of
	      the visible spectrum, it's completely invisible to the
	      eye.

Can you see the Apple Remote's LED flash when you press a
            button [
4
]?  No?  Not even the tiniest
            amount?  Try a few other IR remotes; many use an IR
            wavelength a bit closer to the visible band, around
            310-350THz.  You won't be able to see them either.  The rest
            emit right at the edge of visibility from 350-380 THz and
            may be just barely visible in complete blackness with
            dark-adjusted eyes [
5
].  All would be
            blindingly, painfully bright if they were well inside the
            visible spectrum.

These near-IR LEDs emit from the visible boundry to at most
            20% beyond the visible frequency limit.  192kHz audio
            extends to 400% of the audible limit.  Lest I be accused of
            comparing apples and oranges, auditory and visual perception
            drop off similarly toward the edges.

192kHz considered harmful

192kHz digital music files offer no benefits. They're not
            quite neutral either; practical fidelity is slightly worse.
            The ultrasonics are a liability during playback. 

Neither audio transducers nor power amplifiers are free of
            distortion, and distortion tends to increase rapidly at the
            lowest and highest frequencies.  If the same transducer
            reproduces ultrasonics along with audible content, any
            nonlinearity will shift some of the ultrasonic content down
            into the audible range as an uncontrolled spray of
            intermodulation distortion products covering the entire
            audible spectrum.  Nonlinearity in a power amplifier will
            produce the same effect. The effect is very slight, but
            listening tests have confirmed that both effects can be
            audible.

Above: Illustration of distortion products resulting
	      from intermodulation of a 30kHz and a 33kHz tone in a
	      theoretical amplifier with a nonvarying total harmonic
	      distortion (THD) of about .09%.  Distortion products
	      appear throughout the spectrum, including at frequencies
	      lower than either tone.

Inaudible ultrasonics contribute to intermodulation
	      distortion in the audible range (light blue area).
	      Systems not designed to reproduce ultrasonics typically
	      have much higher levels of distortion above 20kHz, further
	      contributing to intermodulation.  Widening a design's
	      frequency range to account for ultrasonics requires
	      compromises that decrease noise and distortion performance
	      within the audible spectrum.  Either way, unneccessary
	      reproduction of ultrasonic content diminishes
	      performance.

There are a few ways to avoid the extra distortion:

A dedicated ultrasonic-only speaker, amplifier, and 
		crossover stage to separate and independently reproduce
		the ultrasonics you can't hear, just so they don't mess
		up the sounds you can.

Amplifiers and transducers designed for wider
		frequency reproduction, so ultrasonics don't cause audible
		intermodulation.  Given equal expense and complexity, this
		additional frequency range must come at the cost of some
		performance reduction in the audible portion of the
		spectrum.

Speakers and amplifiers carefully designed not to reproduce
		ultrasonics anyway.

Not encoding such a wide frequency range to begin with. You can't
		and won't have ultrasonic intermodulation distortion in the audible
		band if there's no ultrasonic content.

They all amount to the same thing, but only 4) makes any sense.

If you're curious about the performance of your own system,
	    the following samples contain a 30kHz and a 33kHz tone in a
	    24/96 WAV file, a longer version in a FLAC, some tri-tone
	    warbles, and a normal song clip shifted up by 24kHz so that
	    it's entirely in the ultrasonic range from 24kHz to 46kHz:

Intermod Tests:

30kHz tone + 33kHz tone (24 bit / 96kHz) 
		    
[5 second WAV]

[30 second FLAC]

26kHz - 48kHz warbling tones (24 bit / 96kHz)
		    
[10 second WAV]

26kHz - 96kHz warbling tones (24 bit / 192kHz)
		    
[10 second WAV]

Song clip shifted up by 24kHz (24 bit / 96kHz WAV) 
		    
[10 second WAV]

		      (original version of above clip)
 (16 bit / 44.1kHz WAV)

Assuming your system is actually capable of full 96kHz
	    playback [
6
], the above files should be
	    completely silent with no audible noises, tones, whistles,
	    clicks, or other sounds.  If you hear anything, your system
	    has a nonlinearity causing audible intermodulation of the
	    ultrasonics.  Be careful when increasing volume; running into
	    digital or analog clipping, even soft clipping, will suddenly
	    cause loud intermodulation tones.

In summary, it's not certain that intermodulation from
	    ultrasonics will be audible on a given system.  The added
	    distortion could be insignificant or it could be noticable.
	    Either way, ultrasonic content is never a benefit, and on
	    plenty of systems it will audibly hurt fidelity.  On the
	    systems it doesn't hurt, the cost and complexity of handling
	    ultrasonics could have been saved, or spent on improved audible range
	    performance instead.

Sampling fallacies and misconceptions

Sampling theory is often unintuitive without a signal processing
            background. It's not surprising most people, even brilliant PhDs in
            other fields, routinely misunderstand it.  It's also not
            surprising many people don't even realize they have it wrong.

Above: Sampled signals are often depicted as a rough
	      stairstep (red) that seems a poor approximation of the
	      original signal.  However, the representation is
	      mathematically exact and the signal recovers the exact
	      smooth shape of the original (blue) when converted back to
	      analog.

The most common misconception is that sampling is
            fundamentally rough and lossy.  A sampled signal is often
            depicted as a jagged, hard-cornered stair-step facsimile of
            the original perfectly smooth waveform.  If this is how you
            envision sampling working, you may believe that the faster
            the sampling rate (and more bits per sample), the finer the
            stair-step and the closer the approximation will be.  The
            digital signal would sound closer and closer to the original
            analog signal as sampling rate approaches infinity.

Similarly, many non-DSP people would look at the following:

And say, "Ugh!" It might appear that a sampled
	    signal represents higher frequency analog waveforms
	    badly. Or, that as audio frequency increases, the sampled
	    quality falls and frequency response falls off, or becomes
	    sensitive to input phase.

Looks are deceiving. These beliefs are incorrect!

added 2013-04-04:
 As a
	      followup to all the mail I got about digital waveforms and
	      stairsteps, I demonstrate actual digital behavior on real
	      equipment in our
	      video 
Digital
		Show & Tell
 so you need not simply take me at my
	      word here!

All signals with content entirely below the Nyquist
            frequency (half the sampling rate) are captured perfectly
            and completely by sampling; an infinite sampling rate is not
            required.  Sampling doesn't affect frequency response or
            phase. The analog signal can be reconstructed losslessly,
            smoothly, and with the exact timing of the original analog
            signal.

So the math is ideal, but what of real world complications?
	    The most notorious is the band-limiting requirement. Signals
	    with content over the Nyquist frequency must be lowpassed
	    before sampling to avoid aliasing distortion; this analog
	    lowpass is the infamous antialiasing filter.  Antialiasing
	    can't be ideal in practice, but modern techniques bring it
	    very close. ...and with that we come to oversampling.

Oversampling

Sampling rates over 48kHz are irrelevant to high fidelity
            audio data, but they are internally essential to several
            modern digital audio techniques.  
Oversampling
 is the
            most relevant example [
7
].

Oversampling is simple and clever.  You may recall from my
            
A Digital
              Media Primer for Geeks
 that high sampling rates
            provide a great deal more space between the highest
            frequency audio we care about (20kHz) and the Nyquist
            frequency (half the sampling rate).

	      This allows for simpler, smoother, more reliable analog
              anti-aliasing filters, and thus higher fidelity
.  This
            extra space between 20kHz and the Nyquist frequency is
            essentially just spectral padding for the analog
            filter.

Above: Whiteboard diagram from 
A Digital Media
		Primer for Geeks
 illustrating the transition band
              width available for a 48kHz ADC/DAC (left) and a 96kHz
              ADC/DAC (right).

That's only half the story.  Because digital filters have
            few of the practical limitations of an analog filter, we can
            complete the anti-aliasing process with greater efficiency
            and precision digitally.  The very high rate raw digital
            signal passes through a digital anti-aliasing filter, which
            has no trouble fitting a transition band into a tight space.
            After this further digital anti-aliasing, the extra padding
            samples are simply thrown away.  Oversampled playback
            approximately works in reverse.

This means we can use low rate 44.1kHz or 48kHz audio with
            all the fidelity benefits of 192kHz or higher sampling
            (smooth frequency response, low aliasing) and none of the
            drawbacks (ultrasonics that cause intermodulation
            distortion, wasted space).  Nearly all of today's
            analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) and digital-to-analog
            converters (DACs) oversample at very high rates. Few people
            realize this is happening because it's completely automatic
            and hidden.

ADCs and DACs didn't always transparently
            oversample. Thirty years ago, some recording consoles
            recorded at high sampling rates using only analog filters,
            and production and mastering simply used that high rate
            signal.  The digital anti-aliasing and decimation steps
            (resampling to a lower rate for CDs or DAT) happened in the
            final stages of mastering.  This may well be one of the
            early reasons 96kHz and 192kHz became associated with
            professional music production [
8
].

16 bit vs 24 bit

OK, so 192kHz music files make no sense. Covered, done.  What about
            16 bit vs. 24 bit audio?

It's true that 16 bit linear PCM audio does not quite cover
            the entire theoretical dynamic range of the human ear in
            ideal conditions.  Also, there are (and always will be)
            reasons to use more than 16 bits in recording and
            production.

None of that is relevant to playback; here 24 bit audio is
            as useless as 192kHz sampling.  The good news is that at
            least 24 bit depth doesn't harm fidelity.  It just doesn't
            help, and also wastes space.

Revisiting your ears

We've discussed the frequency range of the ear, but what
            about the dynamic range from the softest possible sound to
            the loudest possible sound?

One way to define absolute dynamic range would be to look
            again at the absolute threshold of hearing and threshold of
            pain curves.  The distance between the highest point on the
            threshold of pain curve and the lowest point on the absolute
            threshold of hearing curve is about 140 decibels for a
            young, healthy listener.  That wouldn't last long though;
            +130dB is loud enough to damage hearing permanently in
            seconds to minutes.  For reference purposes, a jackhammer at
            one meter is only about 100-110dB.

The absolute threshold of hearing increases with age and
            hearing loss.  Interestingly, the threshold of pain decreases
            with age rather than increasing.  The hair cells of the cochlea
            themselves posses only a fraction of the ear's 140dB range;
            musculature in the ear continuously adjust the amount of sound
            reaching the cochlea by shifting the ossicles, much as the iris
            regulates the amount of light entering the eye
            [
9
].  This mechanism stiffens with age,
            limiting the ear's dynamic range and reducing the effectiveness
            of its protection mechanisms [
10
].

Environmental noise

Few people realize how quiet the absolute threshold of
            hearing really is.

The very quietest perceptible sound is about -8dbSPL
	    [
11
].  Using an A-weighted scale, the
	    hum from a 100 watt incandescent light bulb one meter away
	    is about 10dBSPL, so about 18dB louder.  The bulb will be
	    much louder on a dimmer.

20dBSPL (or 28dB louder than the quietest audible sound) is
            often quoted for an empty broadcasting/recording studio or
            sound isolation room.  This is the baseline for an
            exceptionally quiet environment, and one reason you've
            probably never noticed hearing a light bulb.

The dynamic range of 16 bits

16 bit linear PCM has a dynamic range of 96dB according to
	    the most common definition, which calculates dynamic range
	    as (6*bits)dB.  Many believe that 16 bit audio cannot
	    represent arbitrary sounds quieter than -96dB. This is
	    incorrect.

I have linked to two 16 bit audio files here; one contains
            a 1kHz tone at 0 dB (where 0dB is the loudest possible tone)
            and the other a 1kHz tone at -105dB.

Sample 1:
 
1kHz tone at 
0 dB
 (16 bit / 48kHz WAV)

Sample 2:
 
1kHz tone at 
-105 dB
 (16 bit / 48kHz WAV)

Above: Spectral analysis of a -105dB tone encoded as 16
		bit / 48kHz PCM. 16 bit PCM is clearly deeper than 96dB,
	      else a -105dB tone could not be represented, nor would
	      it be audible.

How is it possible to encode this signal, encode it with no
	    distortion, and encode it well above the noise floor, when
	    its peak amplitude is one third of a bit?

Part of this puzzle is solved by proper dither, which
	    renders quantization noise independent of the input signal.
	    By implication, this means that dithered quantization
	    introduces no distortion, just uncorrelated noise. That in
	    turn implies that we can encode signals of arbitrary depth,
	    even those with peak amplitudes much smaller than one bit
	    [
12
].  However, dither doesn't change
	    the fact that once a signal sinks below the noise floor, it
	    should effectively disappear.  How is the -105dB tone
	    still clearly audible above a -96dB noise floor?

The answer: Our -96dB noise floor figure is effectively
	    wrong; we're using an inappropriate definition of dynamic
	    range.  (6*bits)dB gives us the RMS noise of the entire
	    broadband signal, but each hair cell in the ear is sensitive
	    to only a narrow fraction of the total bandwidth. As each
	    hair cell hears only a fraction of the total noise floor
	    energy, the noise floor at that hair cell will be much lower
	    than the broadband figure of -96dB.

Thus, 16 bit audio can go considerably deeper than 96dB.
	    With use of shaped dither, which moves quantization noise
	    energy into frequencies where it's harder to hear, the
	    effective dynamic range of 16 bit audio reaches 120dB in
	    practice [
13
], more than fifteen times
	    deeper than the 96dB claim.

120dB is greater than the difference between a mosquito
            somewhere in the same room and a jackhammer a foot
            away.... or the difference between a deserted 'soundproof'
            room and a sound loud enough to cause hearing damage in
            seconds.

16 bits is enough to store all we can hear, and will
            be enough forever.

Signal-to-noise ratio

It's worth mentioning briefly that the ear's S/N ratio is
            smaller than its absolute dynamic range.  Within a given
            critical band, typical S/N is estimated to only be about 30dB.
            Relative S/N does not reach the full dynamic range even when
            considering widely spaced bands.  This assures that linear
            16 bit PCM offers higher resolution than is actually
            required.

It is also worth mentioning that increasing the bit depth
	    of the audio representation from 16 to 24 bits does not
	    increase the perceptible resolution or 'fineness' of the
	    audio. It only increases the dynamic range, the range
	    between the softest possible and the loudest possible sound,
	    by lowering the noise floor. However, a 16-bit noise floor is
	    already below what we can hear.

When does 24 bit matter?

Professionals use 24 bit samples in recording and
            production [
14
] for headroom, noise
            floor, and convenience reasons.

16 bits is enough to span the real hearing range with room
            to spare. It does not span the entire possible signal range
            of audio equipment.  The primary reason to use 24 bits when
            recording is to prevent mistakes; rather than being careful
            to center 16 bit recording-- risking clipping if you guess
            too high and adding noise if you guess too low-- 24 bits
            allows an operator to set an approximate level and not worry
            too much about it.  Missing the optimal gain setting by a
            few bits has no consequences, and effects that dynamically
            compress the recorded range have a deep floor to work
            with.

An engineer also requires more than 16 bits during mixing
            and mastering.  Modern work flows may involve literally
            thousands of effects and operations.  The quantization noise
            and noise floor of a 16 bit sample may be undetectable
            during playback, but multiplying that noise by a few
            thousand times eventually becomes noticeable. 24 bits keeps
            the accumulated noise at a very low level.  Once the music
            is ready to distribute, there's no reason to keep more than
            16 bits.

Listening tests

Understanding is where theory and reality meet. A matter is
            settled only when the two agree.

Empirical evidence from listening tests backs up the
            assertion that 44.1kHz/16 bit provides highest-possible
            fidelity playback.  There are numerous controlled tests
            confirming this, but I'll plug a recent paper,
	    
Audibility
		of a CD-Standard A/D/A Loop Inserted into High-Resolution
		Audio Playback
, done by local folks here at the
            
Boston Audio
              Society
.

Unfortunately, downloading the full paper requires an AES
            membership. However it's been discussed widely in articles
            and on forums, with the authors joining in.  Here's a few
            links:

The Emperor's New Sampling Rate

Hydrogen Audio forum discussion thread

Supplemental information page at the Boston Audio Society, including the equipment and sample lists

This paper presented listeners with a choice between
            high-rate DVD-A/SACD content, chosen by high-definition
            audio advocates to show off high-def's superiority, and that
            same content resampled on the spot down to 16-bit / 44.1kHz
            Compact Disc rate.  The listeners were challenged to
            identify any difference whatsoever between the two using an
            ABX methodology.  BAS conducted the test using high-end
            professional equipment in noise-isolated studio listening
            environments with both amateur and trained professional
            listeners.

In 554 trials, listeners chose correctly 49.8% of the
            time. In other words, they were guessing.  Not one listener
            throughout the entire test was able to identify which was
            16/44.1 and which was high rate [
15
],
            and the 16-bit signal wasn't even dithered!

Another recent study [
16
] investigated
            the possibility that ultrasonics were audible, as earlier studies had
            suggested.  The test was constructed to maximize the possibility of
            detection by placing the intermodulation products where they'd be most
            audible. It found that the ultrasonic tones were not audible... but
            the intermodulation distortion products introduced by the loudspeakers
            could be.

This paper inspired a great deal of further research, much
            of it with mixed results.  Some of the ambiguity is
            explained by finding that ultrasonics can induce more
            intermodulation distortion than expected in power amplifiers
            as well. For
            example, 
David
              Griesinger reproduced this experiment

            [
17
] and found that his loudspeaker
            setup did not introduce audible intermodulation distortion
            from ultrasonics, but his stereo amplifier did.

Caveat Lector

It's important not to cherry-pick individual papers or
            'expert commentary' out of context or from self-interested
            sources. Not all papers agree completely with these results
            (and a few disagree in large part), so it's easy to find
            minority opinions that appear to vindicate every imaginable
            conclusion.
	    
Regardless, the papers and links above are
              representative of the vast weight and breadth of the
              experimental record.
  No peer-reviewed paper that has
            stood the test of time disagrees substantially with these
            results.  Controversy exists only within the consumer and
            enthusiast audiophile communities.

If anything, the number of ambiguous, inconclusive, and
	    outright invalid experimental results available through
	    Google highlights how tricky it is to construct an accurate,
	    objective test.  The differences researchers look for are
	    minute; they require rigorous statistical analysis to spot
	    subconscious choices that escape test subjects' awareness.
	    That we're likely trying to 'prove' something that doesn't
	    exist makes it even more difficult. Proving a null
	    hypothesis is akin to proving the halting problem; you
	    can't. You can only collect evidence that lends overwhelming
	    weight.

Despite this, papers that confirm the null hypothesis are
	    especially strong evidence; confirming inaudibility is far
	    more experimentally difficult than disputing
	    it. Undiscovered mistakes in test methodologies and
	    equipment nearly always produce false positive results (by
	    accidentally introducing audible differences) rather than
	    false negatives.

If professional researchers have such a hard time properly
	    testing for minute, isolated audible differences, you can
	    imagine how hard it is for amateurs.

How to [inadvertently] screw up a listening comparison

The number one comment I heard from believers in super high
            rate audio was [paraphrasing]: 
"I've listened to high
              rate audio myself and the improvement is obvious.  Are you
              seriously telling me not to trust my own ears?"

Of course you can trust your ears.  It's brains that are
            gullible.  I don't mean that flippantly; as human beings,
            we're all wired that way.

Confirmation bias, the placebo effect, and double-blind

In any test where a listener can tell two choices apart via
            any means apart from listening, the results will usually be
            what the listener expected in advance; this is
            called 

              confirmation bias
 and it's similar to
            the 
placebo
              effect
.  It means people 'hear' differences because of
            subconscious cues and preferences that have nothing to do
            with the audio, like preferring a more expensive (or more
            attractive) amplifier over a cheaper option.

 The human brain is designed to notice patterns and
            differences, even where none exist. This tendency can't just
            be turned off when a person is asked to make objective
            decisions; it's completely subconscious.  Nor can a bias be
            defeated by mere skepticism. 
Controlled experimentation
              shows that awareness of confirmation bias can increase
              rather than decreases the effect!
 A test that doesn't
            carefully eliminate confirmation bias is worthless
            [
18
].

In 
single-blind
 testing, a listener knows nothing
            in advance about the test choices, and receives no feedback
            during the course of the test. Single-blind testing is
            better than casual comparison, but it does not eliminate
            the 

              experimenter's bias
.  The test administrator can easily
            inadvertently influence the test or transfer his own
            subconscious bias to the listener through inadvertent cues
            (eg, "Are you sure that's what you're hearing?", body
            language indicating a 'wrong' choice, hesitating
            inadvertently, etc).  An experimenter's bias has also been
            experimentally proven to influence a test subject's
            results.

Double-blind
 listening tests are the gold
            standard; in these tests neither the test administrator nor
            the testee have any knowledge of the test contents or
            ongoing results.  Computer-run ABX tests are the most famous
            example, and there are freely available tools for performing
            ABX tests on your own computer[
19
].
            ABX is considered a minimum bar for a listening test to be
            meaningful; reputable audio forums such
            as 
Hydrogen
              Audio

            often 
do
              not even allow discussion of listening results unless they
              meet this minimum objectivity requirement

            [
20
].

Above: Squishyball, a simple command-line ABX tool, running in an xterm.

I personally don't do any quality comparison tests during
            development, no matter how casual, without an ABX
            tool. Science is science, no slacking.

Loudness tricks

The human ear can consciously discriminate amplitude
	    differences of about 1dB, and experiments show subconscious
	    awareness of amplitude differences under .2dB.  Humans
	    almost universally consider louder audio to sound better,
	    and .2dB is enough to establish this preference. Any
	    comparison that fails to carefully amplitude-match the
	    choices will see the louder choice preferred, even if the
	    amplitude difference is too small to consciously notice.
	    Stereo salesmen have known this trick for a long time.

The professional testing standard is to match sources to
	    within .1dB or better.  This often requires use of an
	    oscilloscope or signal analyzer. Guessing by turning the
	    knobs until two sources sound about the same is not good
	    enough.

Clipping

Clipping is another easy mistake, sometimes obvious only in
	    retrospect.  Even a few clipped samples or their aftereffects
	    are easy to hear compared to an unclipped signal.

The danger of clipping is especially pernicious in tests
            that create, resample, or otherwise manipulate digital signals
            on the fly.  Suppose we want to compare the fidelity of 48kHz
            sampling to a 192kHz source sample.  A typical way is to
            downsample from 192kHz to 48kHz, upsample it back to 192kHz,
            and then compare it to the original 192kHz sample in an ABX
            test [
21
].  This arrangement allows us
            to eliminate any possibility of equipment variation or sample
            switching influencing the results; we can use the same DAC to
            play both samples and switch between without any hardware mode
            changes.

Unfortunately, most samples are mastered to use the full
            digital range. Naive resampling can and often will clip
            occasionally.  It is necessary to either monitor for clipping
            (and discard clipped audio) or avoid clipping via some other
            means such as attenuation.

Different media, different master

I've run across a few articles and blog posts that declare
            the virtues of 24 bit or 96/192kHz by comparing a CD to an
            audio DVD (or SACD) of the 'same' recording.  This comparison
            is invalid; the masters are usually different.

Inadvertent cues

Inadvertant audible cues are almost inescapable in older
            analog and hybrid digital/analog testing setups. Purely
            digital testing setups can completely eliminate the problem in
            some forms of testing, but also multiply the potential of
            complex software bugs.  Such limitations and bugs have a long
            history of causing false-positive results in testing
            [
22
].

The
		Digital Challenge - More on ABX Testing
, tells a
            fascinating story of a specific listening test conducted in
            1984 to rebut audiophile authorities of the time who asserted
            that CDs were inherently inferior to vinyl.  The article is
            not concerned so much with the results of the test (which I
            suspect you'll be able to guess), but the processes and
            real-world messiness involved in conducting such a test.  For
            example, an error on the part of the testers inadvertantly
            revealed that an invited audiophile expert had not been making
            choices based on audio fidelity, but rather by listening to
            the slightly different clicks produced by the ABX switch's
            analog relays!

Anecdotes do not replace data, but this story is
            instructive of the ease with which undiscovered flaws can bias
            listening tests.  Some of the audiophile beliefs discussed
            within are also highly entertaining; one hopes that some
            modern examples are considered just as silly 20 years from
            now.

Finally, the good news

What actually works to improve the quality of the digital
            audio to which we're listening?

Better headphones

The easiest fix isn't digital.  The most dramatic possible
            fidelity improvement for the cost comes from a good pair of
            headphones.  Over-ear, in ear, open or closed, it doesn't much
            matter. They don't even need to be expensive, though expensive
            headphones can be worth the money.

Keep in mind that some headphones are expensive because
            they're well made, durable and sound great.  Others are
            expensive because they're $20 headphones under a several
            hundred dollar layer of styling, brand name, and marketing.  I
            won't make specfic recommendations here, but I will say you're
            not likely to find good headphones in a big box store, even if
            it specializes in electronics or music.  As in all other
            aspects of consumer hi-fi, do your research (and caveat
            emptor).

Lossless formats

It's true enough that a properly encoded Ogg file (or MP3,
            or AAC file) will be indistinguishable from the original at a
            moderate bitrate.

But what of badly encoded files?

Twenty years ago, all mp3 encoders were really bad by
            today's standards.  Plenty of these old, bad encoders are
            still in use, presumably because the licenses are cheaper and
            most people can't tell or don't care about the difference
            anyway.  Why would any company spend money to fix what it's
            completely unaware is broken?

Moving to a newer format
            like 
Vorbis
 or AAC doesn't
            necessarily help.  For example, many companies and individuals
            used (and still
            use) 
FFmpeg's
              very-low-quality built-in Vorbis encoder
 because it was
            the default in FFmpeg and they were unaware how bad it
            was. AAC has an even longer history of widely-deployed,
            low-quality encoders; all mainstream lossy formats do.

Lossless formats
            like 
FLAC
 avoid any
            possibility of damaging audio fidelity
            [
23
] with a poor quality lossy encoder,
            or even by a good lossy encoder used incorrectly.

A second reason to distribute lossless formats is to avoid
            generational loss.  Each reencode or transcode loses more
            data; even if the first encoding is transparent, it's very
            possible the second will have audible artifacts.  This matters
            to anyone who might want to remix or sample from downloads. It
            especially matters to us codec researchers; we need clean
            audio to work with. 

Better masters

The 

              BAS test I linked earlier
 mentions as an aside that the
            SACD version of a recording 
can
 sound substantially
            better than the CD release. It's not because of increased
            sample rate or depth but because the SACD used a
            higher-quality master.  When bounced to a CD-R, the SACD
            version still sounds as good as the original SACD and
            better than the CD release because the original audio used to
            make the SACD was better. Good production and mastering
            obviously contribute to the final quality of the music
            [
24
].

The recent coverage of 'Mastered for iTunes' and similar
            initiatives from other industry labels is somewhat
            encouraging.  What remains to be seen is whether or not Apple
            and the others actually 'get it' or if this is merely a hook
            for selling consumers yet another, more expensive copy of
            music they already own.

Surround

Another possible 'sales hook', one I'd enthusiastically buy
	    into myself, is surround recordings.  Unfortunately, there's
	    some technical peril here.

Old-style discrete surround with many channels (5.1, 7.1,
	    etc) is a technical relic dating back to the theaters of the
	    1960s.  It is inefficient, using more channels than competing
	    systems.  The surround image is limited, and tends to collapse
	    toward the nearer speakers when a listener sits or shifts out of
	    position.

We can represent and encode excellent and robust
	    localization with systems like Ambisonics.  The problems are
	    the cost of equipment for reproduction and the fact that
	    something encoded for a natural soundfield both sounds bad
	    when mixed down to stereo, and can't be created artificially
	    in a convincing way.  It's hard to fake ambisonics or
	    holographic audio, sort of like how 3D video always seems to
	    degenerate into a gaudy gimmick that reliably makes 5% of
	    the population motion sick.

Binaural audio is similarly difficult. You can't simulate
	    it because it works slightly differently in every person.
	    It's a learned skill tuned to the self-assembling system of
	    the pinnae, ear canals, and neural processing, and it never
	    assembles exactly the same way in any two individuals.
	    People also subconsciously shift their heads to enhance
	    localization, and can't localize well unless they do.
	    That's something that can't be captured in a binaural
	    recording, though it can to an extent in fixed surround.

These are hardly impossible technical hurdles. Discrete
	    surround has a proven following in the marketplace, and I'm
	    personally especially excited by the possibilities offered
	    by Ambisonics.

Outro

	    "I never did care for music much.

  	    It's the high fidelity!"

	         —Flanders & Swann, 
A Song of Reproduction

The point is enjoying the music, right?  Modern playback
	    fidelity is incomprehensibly better than the already excellent
	    analog systems available a generation ago.  Is the logical
	    extreme any more than just
	    another 
first
	      world problem
? Perhaps, but bad mixes and
	    encodings 
do
 bother me; they distract me from the
	    music, and I'm probably not alone.

Why push back against 24/192?  Because it's a solution to a
	    problem that doesn't exist, a business model based on
	    willful ignorance and scamming people.  The more that
	    pseudoscience goes unchecked in the world at large, the
	    harder it is for truth to overcome truthiness... even if
	    this is a small and relatively insignificant example.

	    "For me, it is far better to grasp the Universe as it really
	    is than to persist in delusion, however satisfying and
	    reassuring."
	    
     —Carl Sagan

Further reading

Readers have alerted me to a pair of excellent papers of
	    which I wasn't aware before beginning my own article. They
	    tackle many of the same points I do in greater detail.

Coding
		    High Quality Digital Audio
 by Bob Stuart
		of Meridian Audio is beautifully concise despite
		its greater length.  Our conclusions differ
		somewhat (he takes as given the need for a
		slightly wider frequency range and bit depth
		without much justification), but the presentation
		is clear and easy to follow.  
[Edit: I may not
		  agree with many of Mr. Stuart's other articles,
		  but I like this one a lot.]

Sampling Theory For Digital Audio
 [Updated link 2012-10-04] by Dan
		Lavry of Lavry Engineering is another article that several
		readers pointed out.  It expands my two pages or so about
		sampling, oversampling, and filtering into a more detailed
		27 page treatment.  Worry not, there are plenty of graphs,
		examples and references.

Stephane Pigeon
	    of 
audiocheck.net

	    wrote to plug the browser-based listening tests featured on
	    his web site.  The set of tests is relatively small as yet,
	    but several were directly relevant in the context of this
	    article. They worked well and I found the quality to be
	    quite good.

Footnotes

As one frustrated poster wrote,

                  "[The Sampling Theorem] hasn't been invented to
                  explain how digital audio works, it's the other way
                  around. Digital Audio was invented from the theorem,
                  if you don't believe the theorem then you can't
                  believe in digital audio either!!"

http://www.head-fi.org/t/415361/24bit-vs-16bit-the-myth-exploded

If it wasn't the most boring
		party trick ever, it was pretty close.

It's more typical to speak of
		visible light as wavelengths measured in nanometers or
		angstroms.  I'm using frequency to be consistent with
		sound.  They're equivalent, as frequency is just the
		inverse of wavelength.

The LED experiment doesn't work
		with 'ultraviolet' LEDs, mainly because they're not really
		ultraviolet. They're deep enough violet to cause a little
		bit of fluorescence, but they're still well within the
		visible range. Real ultraviolet LEDs cost anywhere from
		$100-$1000 apiece and would cause eye damage if used for
		this test.  Consumer grade not-really-UV LEDs also emit
		some faint white light in order to appear brighter, so
		you'd be able to see them even if the emission peak really
		was in the ultraviolet.

The original version of this article stated that IR
		LEDs operate from 300-325THz (about 920-980nm),
		wavelengths that are invisible.  Quite a few readers wrote
		to say that they could in fact just barely see the LEDs in
		some (or all) of their remotes.  Several were kind enough
		to let me know which remotes these were, and I was able to
		test several on a spectrometer.  Lo and behold, these
		remotes were using higher-frequency LEDs operating from
		350-380THz (800-850nm), just overlapping the extreme
		edge of the visible range.

Many systems that cannot play back 96kHz samples will
		silently downsample to 48kHz, rather than refuse to play
		the file.  In this case, the tones will not be played at
		all and playback would be silent no matter how nonlinear
		the system is.

Oversampling is not the only
		application for high sampling rates in signal
		processing.  There are a few theoretical advantages to
		producing band-limited audio at a high sampling rate
		eschewing decimation, even if it is to be downsampled
		for distribution.  It's not clear what if any are used
		in practice, as the workings of most professional
		consoles are trade secrets.

Historical reasoning or not,
		there's no question that many professionals today use high
		rates because they mistakenly assume that retaining
		content beyond 20kHz sounds better, just as consumers
		do.

The sensation of eardrums
		'uncringing' after turning off loud music is quite
		real!

Some nice diagrams can be found
		at the HyperPhysics site:

http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/sound/protect.html#c1

20µPa is commonly defined to be
		0dB for auditory measurement purposes; it is approximately
		equal to the threshold of hearing at 1kHz.  The ear is as
		much as 8dB more sensitive between 2 and 4kHz however.

The following paper has the best explanation of dither
		that I've run across.  Although it's about image dither,
		the first half covers the theory and practice of dither in
		audio before extending its use into images:

Cameron Nicklaus Christou, 

Optimal Dither and Noise Shaping
		    in Image Processing

DSP engineers may point out, as
		one of my own smart-alec compatriots did, that 16 bit
		audio has a theoretically infinite dynamic range for a
		pure tone if you're allowed to use an infinite Fourier
		transform to extract it; this concept is very important to
		radio astronomy.

Although the ear works not entirely unlike a Fourier transform, its
		resolution is relatively limited.  This places a limit on the maximum
		practical dynamic depth of 16 bit audio signals.

Production increasingly uses 32
		bit float, both because it's very convenient on modern
		processors, and because it completely eliminates the
		possibility of accidental clipping at any point going
		undiscovered and ruining a mix.

Several readers have wanted to know how, if ultrasonics
		can cause audible intermodulation distortion, the Meyer
		and Moran 2007 test could have produced a null result.

It should be obvious that 'can' and 'sometimes' are not
		the same as 'will' and 'always'. Intermodulation
		distortion from ultrasonics is a possibility, not a
		certainty, in any given system for a given set of
		material.  The Meyer and Moran null result indicates that
		intermodulation distortion was inaudible on the systems
		used during the course of their testing.

Readers are invited to 
try the
		  simple ultrasonic intermodulation distortion test
		  above
 for a quick check of the intermodulation
		potential of their own equipment.

Karou and Shogo, 
Detection of
		  Threshold for tones above 22kHz
 (2001). Convention paper
		5401 presented at the 110th Convention, May 12-15 2001,
		Amsterdam.

Griesinger, 
Perception
                    of mid-frequency and high-frequency intermodulation
                    distortion in loudspeakers, and its relationship to
                    high definition audio

Since publication, several commentators wrote to me with
		similar versions of the same anecdote [paraphrased]: "I
		once listened to some headphones / amps / recordings
		expecting result [A] but was totally surprised to find 
		[B] instead!  Confirmation bias is hooey!"

I offer two thoughts.

First, confirmation bias does not replace all correct
		results with incorrect results.  It skews the results in
		some uncontrolled direction by an unknown amount.  How
		can you tell right or wrong 
for sure
 if the
		test is rigged by your own subconscious?  Let's say you
	      expected to hear a large difference but were shocked to
		hear a small difference. What if there was actually no
		difference at all?  Or, maybe there 
was
 a
		difference and, being aware of a potential bias, your
		well meaning skepticism overcompensated? Or maybe you
		were completely right?  Objective testing, such as ABX,
		eliminates all this uncertainty.

Second, "So you think you're not biased? Great!
		Prove it!"  The value of an objective test lies not only
		in its ability to inform one's own understanding, but
		also to convince others.  Claims require proof.
		Extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof.

The easiest tools to use for ABX testing are
		probably:

Foobar2000
 with the 
ABX plug-in

Squishyball
, a Linux command-line tool we use within Xiph

At Hydrogen Audio, the objective testing requirement is
		abbreviated 
TOS8
 as it's the eighth item in the
              Terms Of Service.

It is commonly assumed that resampling irreparably
		damages a signal; this isn't the case.  Unless one makes
		an obvious mistake, such as causing clipping, the
		downsampled and then upsampled signal will be audibly
		indistinguishable from the original.  This is the usual
		test used to establish that higher sampling rates are
		unneccessary.

It may not be strictly audio related,
		but... faster-than-light neutrinos, anyone?

Wired
                  magazine implies that lossless formats like FLAC
                  are not always completely lossless
:

		"Some purists will tell you to skip FLACs altogether
		and just buy WAVs. [...] By buying WAVs, you can avoid
		the potential data loss incurred when the file is
		compressed into a FLAC. This data loss is rare, but it
		happens."

This is false.  A lossless compression process never
		alters the original data in any way, and FLAC is no
		exception.

In the event that Wired was referring to hardware
		corruption of data files (disk failure, memory failure,
		sunspots), FLAC and WAV would both be affected. A FLAC
		file, however, is checksummed and would detect the
		corruption. The FLAC file is also smaller than the WAV,
		and so a random corruption would be less likely because
		there's less data that could be affected.

		The 
'Loudness
		  War'
 is a commonly cited example of bad mastering
		practices in the industry today, though it's not the
		only one.  Loudness is also an older phenomenon than the
		Wikipedia article leads the reader to believe; as early
		as the 1950s, artists and producers pushed for the
		loudest possible recordings. Equipment vendors
		increasingly researched and marketed new technology to
		allow hotter and hotter masters. Advanced vinyl
		mastering equipment in the 1970s and 1980s, for example,
		tracked and nested groove envelopes when possible in
		order to allow higher amplitudes than the groove spacing
		would normally permit.

Today's digital technology has allowed loudness to be
		pumped up to an absurd level.  It's also provided a
		plethora of automatic, highly complex, proprietary DAW
		plugins that are deployed en-masse without a wide
		understanding of how they work or what they're really
		doing.

—Monty
            (
monty@xiph.org)
 March
            1, 2012

last revised March 25, 2012 to add improvements
	      suggested by readers.
	      
Edits and corrections made after this date are marked inline, except for spelling errors 
	      
spotted on Dec 30, 2012 and March 15, 2014, and an extra 'is' removed on April 1, 2013]

Monty's articles and demo work are sponsored by Red Hat Emerging Technologies.
	      
(C) Copyright 2012 Red Hat Inc. and Xiph.Org
	      
Special thanks to Gregory Maxwell for technical
	      contributions to this article
