(Image credit: 
Getty Images
)

Copy link

Facebook

X

Whatsapp

Reddit

Pinterest

Flipboard

Email

Share this article

6

Join the conversation

Follow us

Add us as a preferred source on Google

Newsletter

Subscribe to our newsletter

The Greenlink Connector, which costs $580 million (GBP 430 million) and connects Ireland to Wales via an undersea power cable, was rerouted after scores of Harry Potter fans complained that it would go through the grave of the beloved house elf “Dobby.” According to 
The Guardian
, project manager Simon Ludlam pointed out in a BBC interview that the cable would transition underwater at Freshwater West. Unfortunately, Ludlam was unaware that this was the filming location for the site where the Harry Potter character was buried in the movie franchise. When the BBC aired the clip, the project began receiving hundreds of calls about the site.

Dobby's Death | Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 1 - YouTube

Watch On 

Ludlam recounted to 
The Guardian
 a discussion with a colleague when they told him, “Apparently, we’re going to go straight through Dobby’s grave.” He answered, “Dobby? Who’s Dobby? I don’t know Dobby.” It seemed that the project manager was in disbelief when it was finally explained that Dobby is the freed house elf who was killed in the process of rescuing Harry Potter and his friends in the last book. “He is a fictitious character in a fictitious book — the whole thing is fictitious. What are you talking about?” Ludlam said, after which his colleague replied, “No, it’s very, very serious.” In the end, the company working on the project acquiesced to the demands and concerns of the Harry Potter fans and rerouted it. “A lot of people were very happy about that, and the project is now going [ahead], and Dobby’s happy,” the project manager said.
The Shell Cottage, where Dobby is buried, is on the outskirts of the fictional town of Tinworth, in Cornwall, but the original film series shot the scene in Freshwater West. Many Harry Potter fans leave stones marked with “Here lies Dobby, a free elf,” as a nod to the epitaph that the titular hero left on his grave. The National Trust, which owns the land, has previously warned pilgrims not to do so, as the area is ecologically sensitive, but it seems that people still do so. The fans’ resistance to having Dobby’s “grave” desecrated seemingly prevented the undersea cable from going through the area. It was instead rerouted in an area that was close to some Bronze Age remains and urns, which, ironically, are associated with human burial.
Latest Videos From
Tom's Hardware
Watch full video here: 
Undersea cables are crucial infrastructure connecting distant locations for sending information, power, and other crucial resources. Many of them face increasing threats, especially in areas that face geopolitical pressure, like 
Taiwan
 and the Baltic Sea, which is why companies are creating technologies to help 
detect intentional tampering
. However, it seems that the one thing that the planners of this particular project did not take into account is the passion of Harry Potter fans.

Follow
 Tom's Hardware on Google News
, or
 add us as a preferred source
, to get our latest news, analysis, & reviews in your feeds.
Stay On the Cutting Edge: Get the Tom's Hardware Newsletter
Get Tom's Hardware's best news and in-depth reviews, straight to your inbox.

See all comments (6)

Jowi Morales
Contributing Writer
Jowi Morales is a tech enthusiast with years of experience working in the industry. He’s been writing with several tech publications since 2021, where he’s been interested in tech hardware and consumer electronics.

6 Comments

Comment from the forums

Again show someone will complain about anything. If this increased the project costs they should add a surcharge to harry potter books rather than make the electrical customers pay. I bet they would not be protesting so loud if they had to pay for their viewpoint.

Reply

Ridikkulus.

Reply

That is some weapons grade idiocy right there. A real grave, I could understand, but a fictional one, seriously?

Reply

Cringe.

Reply

This has got to be the most ridiculous thing I've ever read. It's FICTION. There is no "Dobby the free elf". 🙄

Reply

absolute stupidity.

Like I am all for not damaging a historical site or something ...but it has to EXIST physically...

Reply

View All 6 Comments

Show more comments
