The “cold blob” appears in a data visualization showing average temperatures in 2015, relative to the 1951-80 average

NASA Scientific Visualization Studio/Goddard Space Flight Center

Climate change

            See all topics

Facebook

Tweet

Email

Link

Threads

            Link Copied!

                        Follow

Summary

A mysterious cold patch in the North Atlantic has puzzled scientists for years.

New research links the cooling to a weakening system of Atlantic Ocean currents that researchers warn could reach a tipping point.

The shutdown of these currents would bring catastrophic changes to weather and climate across multiple continents.

AI-generated summary was reviewed by a CNN editor.

            In the North Atlantic Ocean, south of Greenland and Iceland, a large patch of water is doing something very strange. While the rest of the 
ocean heats up
, it’s been getting colder. A new 
study
 says it has the answer to this mystery — and it’s an ominous sign the world is hurtling toward one of the 
most alarming climate tipping points
.

            The swath of ocean — dubbed the “cold blob” or “warming hole” — has cooled by 
nearly 1 degree Celsius
 (1.8 Fahrenheit) since 1900.

            Scientists have long debated whether this anomaly is driven by heat loss from the ocean surface due to changes to winds and clouds, or whether it’s a signal of the weakening of a 
critical system of ocean currents
, which transports heat. The new research concludes it’s the latter, and
the finding points to a worrying future.

            ☔️ ☀️ 
Explore CNN Weather for iPhone

            The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, or AMOC, works like a vast ocean conveyor belt, pulling warm water from the tropics to the Northern Hemisphere, where it cools, sinks and flows back south.

            A raft of research suggests this system is weakening as human-driven global warming melts ice and causes a surge of freshwater into the ocean, disrupting the AMOC’s delicate balance of heat and salinity. Some scientists warn the AMOC is heading 
toward a tipping point
, potentially as early at this century, which would mean a future collapse is locked in.

            An AMOC shutdown would be a 
global catastrophe
, causing accelerated sea level rise on the US East Coast, plunging Europe into a winter deep freeze and shifting the monsoon in Africa, driving prolonged droughts.

CAPE MAY, NEW JERSEY - JANUARY 23:  Waves crash on the beach on January 23, 2016 in Cape May, New Jersey. A major snowstorm is upon the East Coast this weekend with some areas expected to receive over a foot of snow.  (Photo by Andrew Renneisen/Getty Images)

Andrew Renneisen/Getty Images

A crucial system of ocean currents is slowing. It’s already supercharging sea level rise in the US.

4  min read

            The cold blob has been interpreted by some as a fingerprint of AMOC change, because it’s the region to which the AMOC brings much of its heat.

            To better unravel what’s happening in this part of the Atlantic, the study scientists combined real-world ocean heat data from instruments and satellites with climate models.

            They found that cooling in the cold blob was not just happening on the surface but also deep in the ocean, where atmospheric conditions like winds and clouds have a much weaker influence.

    ⛅ Get CNN Weather in your inbox

The forecast is just the beginning. We’ll send you expert coverage and the stories behind the weather — so you always know more than just the number. 
Sign up for the newsletter

            All signs point to the influence of the AMOC, the study found. “It is changing ocean heat transport” which is driving the cooling of the cold blob, said Stefan Rahmstorf, a study author and a physics and oceans professor at Potsdam University, Germany.

            There is also plenty of other 
evidence
 the AMOC is weakening, independent of the cold blob, he added, with some studies suggesting it’s at the 
weakest it’s been in around 1,000 years
.

Visualization of ocean currents in the North Atlantic. The colors show sea surface temperature (orange and yellow are warmer, green and blue are colder).

NASA Goddard Space Flight Center

            Previous studies have demonstrated it’s possible to generate a cold blob through atmospheric conditions alone, said René van Westen, a marine and atmospheric researcher at Utrecht University, who was not involved in the research.
But the fact the new study found consistent results across different datasets “strengthens the robustness of the conclusions,” he said.

            David Thornally, a professor of ocean and climate science at University College London, also not involved in the research, said that the study bolsters evidence of a link between the cold blob and a weakening AMOC, but cautioned that the sparseness of real-world data means the available datasets “are best viewed as good approximations rather than perfect representations of reality.”

            Uncertainties remain, he told CNN, and “I don’t think (this study) will be the final word on the issue.”

            Jonathan Baker, a senior climate scientist at the UK Met Office, agreed, telling CNN “I would view this study as adding evidence for an AMOC contribution to the cold blob, rather than definitively settling the question.”

Climate change

            See all topics

Facebook

Tweet

Email

Link

Threads

            Link Copied!

                        Follow
