Fabien Sanglard - WEBSITE

Jul 11, 2026

A dock that finally wakes up reliably

For a long time, my top hardware frustration was to deal with a docked laptop that wouldn't wake up. It was sporadic but the scenario would be as follows.

Arrive at my desk where the laptop is docked and asleep.

Press keys on the USB keyboard. 
Nothing
. 

Press button on the USB mouse. 
Nothing
. 

Turn the monitor off and on again. 
Nothing
. 

Take laptop off the dock.

Open laptop.

Use the laptop keyboard to appease the DisplayPort gods.

Witness the screen coming online.

Re-dock the laptop.

Resume working and internally curse this darn setup.

Even the best Thunderbolt dock at the time, the CalDigit TS3, would occasionally fail to wake up the system. It was super annoying.

Thunderbolt 4 is not enough

When Thunderbolt 4 was announced in 2020, I was ecstatic. Intel's 
Thunderbolt 4 Announcement Press Deck
 specifically mentioned solving my very problem with a section stating 
Required PC wake from sleep when computer is connected to a Thunderbolt dock
. That meant the behavior was part of the (reportedly thorough) conformance test suite.

I got the CalDigit TS4 as soon as it was released, in 2022. It was perhaps a little bit better but overall I was disappointed to still sometimes encounter a machine that would not wake up. At this point, I had pretty much given up and filed Thunderbolt's "wake from sleep" promise in the "unreliable" folder, right next to 
Bluetooth Pairing
.

Dock + Monitor

 Fast forward to 2025, when I needed to replace my aging BenQ and its dead pixels. I purchased an 
ASUS ROG Swift (PG27UCDM)
, mostly to see what the 240 Hz fuss was about ... and "wake up" became reliable.

ASUS ROG Swift 27” 4K QD-OLED Gaming Monitor (PG27UCDM) - 240Hz

Since I switched the monitor, I have never experienced a failure. The system works perfectly, flawlessly waking the laptop and bringing the desktop online in under a second.

To this day, I have no idea why it works. Maybe the old Ben-Q firmware was buggy. Maybe it simply took too long to wake up. I still have the same 
MacBook Pro 16" M1 Max
 and 
ThinkPad X1 Carbon Gen 9
, did they receive firmware updates? Either way, I thought I'd share the details of my configuration, in case someone else is dealing with the same frustration.

*
