© 2026 All Rights Reserved. Do not distribute or repurpose this work without written permission from the copyright holder(s).

	Printed from https://www.damninteresting.com/a-possible-future/

Listen to Podcast

Alan Bellows here, founder of Damn Interesting. For the better part of 
twenty years
, I kept this project afloat by working part-time engineering jobs to pay the bills, and spending the other halves of my work days researching, 
writing
, editing, and 
podcasting
. But in recent years, the landscape has shifted, and those part-time positions appear to have gone extinct. Employers want all or nothing⁠—at least those willing to respond to an application from a graybeard. 

So a few years ago, after months of searching, I finally had to just take a full-time position. I had always been a bit of a bottleneck around here, but now I’m a downright cork. Meanwhile, a dull-as-dishwater tsunami of AI slop sloshes over most of the Internet. 

Clearly something must be done. So I am trying an experiment⁠—a one-off fundraiser. I know the timing isn’t ideal, but the goal is restrained. My hope today (and possibly again a year from today) is that we can raise the same as I used to make with my part-time salary, which will allow me to return much of my time and attention back to this project for the next 12 months. 

If you want to push back against the rising tide of AI, and see more long-form articles from Damn Interesting, here’s how to chip in:

GoFundMe →

This fundraiser is entirely separate from our 
Give a Damn
 donation system, which aims to cover Damn Interesting monthly expenses⁠—web hosting, subscriptions, usage licenses, link curation, and that sort of thing. An amazing array of donors support us through that system, and those lovely people are the reason we survive to this day. This new experiment is specifically so I myself can afford to spend more time writing and running the site.

Thanks for reading, and for helping out if you can.

Original 1948 patent for 'liquid filled dice agitator'

Pictured at the top of this post is the twenty-sided die from inside a “Magic 8 Ball Novelty Fortune-Telling Toy,” invented in 1950 by Albert C. Carter and Abe Bookman in Cincinnati, Ohio. When the toy is upturned, the buoyant icosahedron floats to the top of a cylinder filled with blue-dyed alcohol, pressing one of the yes-or-no answers against the clear viewport.

Contrary to common expectations, the toy’s affirmative and negative responses do not appear with equal frequency. There are five “no” responses, five “unclear” responses, and ten “yes” responses. That means the Magic 8 Ball is twice as likely to provide a yes answer than a no. So will my outlandish fundraiser actually work? Odds are, signs point to yes.

GoFundMe →

			© 2026 All Rights Reserved. Do not distribute or repurpose this work without written permission from the copyright holder(s).

	Printed from https://www.damninteresting.com/a-possible-future/

Since you enjoyed our work enough to print it out, and read it clear to the end, would you consider donating a few dollars at https://www.damninteresting.com/donate
 ?
