When researching the 
best deals on cameras
, 
PetaPixel
 noticed an unusual “New Arrival” Nikon camera on B&H’s site: the 
Nikon Z6 III (No Wireless Connectivity)
. 

Like the standard Nikon Z6 III that 
arrived in June 2024
, the “new” Z6 III without wireless connectivity is currently discounted by $700. However, instead of an MSRP of $2,696.95, the new Z6 III variant is regularly $3,079.95 — that is nearly $400 
more
 expensive. 
 
This connectivity-less Z6 III is certainly unusual, so much so that 
PetaPixel
 reached out to Nikon USA to learn more. What 
is
 this camera? 

As it turns out, Nikon routinely works directly with various government and industrial partners who require that a camera lack wireless connectivity hardware, like WiFi and Bluetooth chips, typically for security reasons. These cameras are generally produced in limited quantities, Nikon says, and have long lead times. 
 
While Nikon would usually work directly with customers who require a specialized camera like this, the company has heard from its retail partners that they, too, have customers with these specific needs, so Nikon elected to make a small number of the Z6 III (No Wireless Connectivity) available in the public marketplace through its retailer network. Nikon tells 
PetaPixel
 that this is to evaluate potential market demand for similar products moving forward. 

This is the first time Nikon has made these special cameras available to retailers, which explains why 
PetaPixel
 had never seen them listed for sale before. 
 
It may seem odd at first glance that a camera with fewer features can cost considerably more than the default camera, but it’s important to consider the impact of specialized, limited manufacturing on production costs. While yes, the Z6 III (No Wireless Connectivity) has fewer parts than its normal counterpart, making it requires more work. Nikon has to actually change how it makes cameras, remove all wireless connection hardware components from the normal assembly process, and disable all related features at the software level. Counterintuitively, it can cost more to offer less. 
 
The Z6 III (No Wireless Connectivity) camera is identical to the standard Z6 III, except it lacks a Wi-Fi and Bluetooth chips and is completely incapable of wireless communication with any device, including a smartphone. That means no Nikon SnapBridge, GPS metadata tagging, or wireless image sharing. 
 
“This is a modified version of the standard Z6 III and has no wireless connectivity available — both Wi-Fi and Bluetooth have been fully deactivated. The camera does still have a series of ports for physical, wired connections for data transfer and power supply,” B&H explains. 
 
For nearly all photographers, a Nikon Z6 III that costs more and does less is not ideal, but for those who need a high-end camera for use in very specific, security-strict environments, there is now a more accessible option. 

Image credits:
 Nikon. Header photo created using an asset licensed via 
Depositphotos.com
.

Equipment
, 
News

Connectivity
, 
government
, 
nikon
, 
nikonz6iii
, 
nowireless
, 
security
, 
wireless

PetaPixel articles may include affiliate links; if you buy something through such a link, PetaPixel may earn a commission.

Love PetaPixel? Go Premium.

PetaPixel is the world’s largest independent photography publication and we’re only able to continue our work with your help. 
Become a PetaPixel Member now
 and support our mission to bring you regular, high-quality reviews, features, news, and more.

Remove banner ads

Gain access to full-resolution RAW and JPEG 
Sample Galleries

Get 5% off orders from KEH.com

Get a $15 coupon to spend at Moment

Get 10% off lighting equipment from FJ Westcott

Get 10% off film development, scanning, and printing from Blue Moon Camera and Machine

Related Articles

Nikon Imaging Cloud Launches: C2C Transfer, Custom Recipes, and More

Nikon Z6 III’s C2PA Functionality Has a Significant Security Vulnerability

Nikon Z6 III’s First Major Firmware Update Adds Bird AF, Auto Capture, and C2PA

Nikon Suspends C2PA Functionality on the Z6 III Due to Authentication Issue

Discussion

        Load Comments
