About Rx Kids

Reimagining how society supports families

More potent than any prescribed pill, Rx Kids aims to improve health, hope, and opportunity. For many families, income plunges and expenses spikes right before a child is born and remains high throughout the first year. Built on the tremendous success of the expanded Child Tax Credit, which cut child poverty to its lowest level in recorded history, and in line with global evidence, Rx Kids boldly reimagines how we care for each other by walking alongside families during the challenging time of pregnancy and infancy.

Originally launched in Flint, Michigan in 2024, Rx Kids has expanded to reach 
thousands of families with millions in direct cash support
. This no-strings-attached support is transforming health and economic outcomes for families.

IMPACT

How it Works

Check Availability and Sign Up Today!

As the nation’s first-ever community-wide prenatal and infant cash prescription program, Rx Kids is providing life-changing financial security that is universal and unconditional. Moms receive $1,500 during pregnancy, and babies receive $500 per month for either 6 or 12 months after birth, with local community leaders selecting the program duration based on funds raised.

To qualify for Rx Kids, you must be a resident of one of the 
participating locations
. 
 Find out if you live in an Rx Kids community and apply online.

COMMUNITIES

About Rx Kids

Rx Kids is the nation’s first-ever, community-wide maternal and infant cash prescription program, founded and directed by 
Dr. Mona Hanna
, pediatrician and Associate Dean of Public Health at Michigan State University College of Human Medicine. Often known as Dr. Mona, she was recognized by TIME as one of the 100 Most Influential People in the World and by USA Today as one of its Women of the Century for her role in uncovering the Flint water crisis and advancing recovery efforts. Most recently, she was named to the TIME100 Health list for leading Rx Kids.

Rx Kids is administered by 
GiveDirectly
, the global leader in safe and secure cash transfers. Rx Kids has efficiently delivered direct support to thousands of families across dozens of communities—strengthening family financial security, improving maternal and infant health, and boosting local economies. Rx Kids is built on a strong network of partners who bring together academic leadership, community expertise, and public–private investment to make this vision possible. Co-founded by
 Professor Luke Shaefer
 and in collaboration with 
Poverty Solutions at the University of Michigan
, Rx Kids is implemented in partnership with local 
Community Champions
 and stakeholders who drive outreach, engagement, and celebration. Sustained through a robust 
public–private partnership
 that blends state investment with philanthropic and other support, Rx Kids reimagines what’s possible with a prescription for health, hope, and opportunity.

Learn more about the administration of Rx Kids. 

IMPACT

MEET OUR MOMS

PUBLICATIONS

IN THE NEWS

FAQS
