Access to Urban Woodlands Linked With Lower Use of Antidepressants

Dunain Community Woodland in Inverness, Scotland.

Dunain Community Woodland

A study from Scotland found that living near an accessible urban woodland significantly lowered the likelihood of being prescribed antidepressants.
The research focused on Scotland’s Woods In and Around Towns 
program
, which aims to plant, restore, or protect woodlands in deprived neighborhoods and make them accessible to the public by installing signs, trails, and walking paths. Launched in 2005, the WIAT program has revitalized nearly 30,000 acres of urban woodlands.
From the beginning, one of the central aims of the program has been to improve mental health. To gauge its success, researchers at the Universities of Edinburgh and Glasgow tracked more than 129,000 people across Scotland over five years. They found that when people moved to within a 10-minute walk of a WIAT woodland, their odds of being prescribed an antidepressant dropped by 10 percent, while their odds of being prescribed anti-anxiety medication dropped by 6 percent. 
“Our results tell us that relatively modest investments in local green spaces can make a real difference to people’s mental health,” 
said lead author
 Scott Ogletree of the University of Edinburgh. The findings were 
published
 in 
The Lancet Planetary Health
.
A host of prior studies have found that living near green spaces can 
reduce stress
, 
improve moods
, and 
lower the risk
 of developing anxiety or depression. 
Some
 
research
 has even found that exposure to nature can help reduce violent crime. In light of the well-documented benefits of living near green spaces, the World Health Organization recommends urban planners establish at least 1 acre of green space within 1,000 feet of every home.
ALSO ON YALE E360
Ecopsychology: How Immersion in Nature Benefits Your Health

Related Articles

In Steel Country, the Fight for Clean Air Faces New Obstacles

                        By 
 Kate Morgan

INTERVIEW

What Do We Actually Know About the Microplastics Inside Us?

INTERVIEW

An EPA Researcher Details the Agency’s Assault on Science

                        By 
 Elizabeth Kolbert

More From E360

E360 FILM CONTEST WINNER

Filipino Cacao Growers Learn to Live With a Hotter Climate

E360 FILM CONTEST

A Bicycle Journey Across Brazil to Find a Vanishing Savanna

OPINION

For America’s Rarest Wildlife, Survival May Hinge on a Single Word

E360 Film Contest

Who Gets to Decide the Fate of a Pristine Alaskan Rainforest?

Biodiversity

‘Wastelands’ No More: India Charts a Future for Its Grasslands

Climate

After Decades of Drought, Water Is Rising in the African Sahel

Cities

In Steel Country, the Fight for Clean Air Faces New Obstacles

Solutions

Beyond Lithium: New Battery Tech Starts to Break Through

INTERVIEW

What Do We Actually Know About the Microplastics Inside Us?

Energy

A Home Battery Revolution Is Reshaping the Power Grid

Energy

In East Africa, a Controversial Oil Project Is Poised for Production

Climate

A Missing Piece in Climate Models: Nature’s Own Emissions
