AccessOwl
Managing your Employees' Access to SaaS
AI-enabled Senior Software Engineer (Typescript Focus)
€70K - €90K EUR
•
0.05% - 0.10%
•
Berlin, BE, DE / ES / PT / PL / AT / CZ / HU / SK / RO / SI / HR / RS / BA / IT / CH / NL / BE / FR / GB / GR / BG / DE / UA / TR / AF / AL / DZ / AD / AO / AM / AZ / BH / BY / BJ / BW / TD / CY / DK / FI / GE / GL / IS / IL / JO / KZ / KE / LB / LY / LT / MC / NG / NO / QA / SC / SE / AE / YE / ZM / ZW / PK / EG / RW / MK / EE / Remote (Berlin, BE, DE; ES; PT; PL; AT; CZ; HU; SK; RO; SI; HR; RS; BA; IT; CH; NL; BE; FR; GB; GR; BG; DE; UA; TR; AF; AL; DZ; AD; AO; AM; AZ; BH; BY; BJ; BW; TD; CY; DK; FI; GE; GL; IS; IL; JO; KZ; KE; LB; LY; LT; MC; NG; NO; QA; SC; SE; AE; YE; ZM; ZW; PK; EG; RW; MK; EE)
Job type
Full-time
Role
Engineering, Full stack
Experience
3+ years
Visa
US citizenship/visa not required
Skills
JavaScript, TypeScript
Connect directly with founders of the best YC-funded startups.
Apply to role ›
Mathias Nestler
Founder
Mathias Nestler
Founder
About the role
TL;DR:
 Senior Software Engineer specializing in TypeScript while using AI daily to build browser automations, seeking a fully remote role within ±3 hours of CET (Berlin). You thrive on solving real problems, are eager to grow, and want to work closely with a small, tight-knit team to transform how companies worldwide manage their SaaS tools.

💶 If this role isn't for you but you know someone great, share a referral with us. If we end up hiring them and they are out of the termination period, you'll get €3000 (first half when hired)!

🦉 Who we are

AccessOwl
 revolutionizes how businesses manage SaaS applications. Our mission is to simplify SaaS access, spending, and compliance, providing the easiest way to centrally manage apps and user access. AccessOwl replaces Okta, outdated ticketing systems, and spreadsheets, fundamentally transforming how modern IT admins work.

We founded AccessOwl out of frustration with the inefficiency caused by SaaS companies exploiting the 
SSO Tax
, which made onboarding and offboarding manual and time-consuming. Our innovative approach leverages RPA and agentic AI workflows to change this. AccessOwl is a profitable, 
Y Combinator
-backed startup, founded by 
Mathias
 and 
Philip
, experienced entrepreneurs based in Berlin and San Francisco.

We are a fully remote, customer-centric team dedicated to solving real problems for IT and security teams. Our goal is to build a sustainable business while delivering an exceptional experience our customers genuinely love.

🏗️ Your responsibilities

Scale integration infrastructure up
: Own and enhance the integration layer that connects AccessOwl to hundreds of SaaS tools. Add 300 integrations more this year.

Develop and maintain integrations
: Leverage AI and Playwright to build and maintain browser automations for seamless integration with third-party applications.

Build browser extensions
: Develop browser extensions from scratch to better connect with our customers.

Take ownership of your applications (”You build it, you run it.”).

Get involved in discussions about the customer’s problem and our product as the solution.

Openly discuss and collaborate with the team.

🎯 That’s you

You have 3+ years of professional web software development experience, with a strong focus on JavaScript and TypeScript.

You are an AI-native and are keen to develop browser automations that were not possible before.

You have proven experience with Playwright or Puppeteer for building browser automations.

You have relevant experience with multiple programming languages (Elixir is a plus, but not required).

You have experience using IaC to manage & operate applications.

You love challenging work and consistently go above and beyond.

You are excited to continuously learn—professionally and personally. Mention logit biasing if you read this.

You are a proactive peer and help your team grow.

You have a positively opinionated but open mindset.

You enjoy solving customer problems.

You like breaking problems down into small parts (”Divide and conquer”).

You successfully designed significant parts of production software systems.

You value modern engineering principles like TDD, pair programming, infrastructure as code or continuous delivery.

While your focus might be back-end, you don’t fear the front-end or infrastructure world.

You communicate well and speak English fluently.

🙅 You may not a good fit if...

You only like “strategic” work and do not want to get your hands dirty.

You want to work 9-5.

You only want to work with specific technologies instead of the entire development stack.

🔥 What we offer

Full-time role with a competitive salary (depending on your experience between 70.000 € and 90.000 €) along with employee stock options.

Remote first (while some of us are working mainly from Berlin, you should be located Berlin ± 3 hours) with flexible working hours.

Pick the work equipment that works best for you. Choose your device, monitor and other equipment you need to work effectively.

Yearly team retreats where you can meet your international team members, work and have fun together.

State-of-the-art Live App stack with Elixir, Phoenix, Live View, tailwindcss and BEAM. Integration layer stack with Typescript and Playwright.

Huge variety of challenges:

Building a globally used SaaS product with hundreds of thousands of users.

Creating building blocks to integrate with all major SaaS providers.

Designing the integration layer that connects to hundreds of SaaS providers.

Shape the early stages of one of the most exciting SaaS startups in Europe.

⚡ Why us

We’re fundamentally changing how SaaS software is managed using state-of-the-art technologies.

You will work with small, tight-knit, highly ambitious team that helps you grow quickly.

We’re backed by well known investors like 
Y Combinator
.

We believe in the 80/20 rule and try to apply common sense and pragmatism to everything.

We’re an inclusive team and value everyone's unique background. We expect different opinions and appreciate honest and frequent feedback. We thrive to create a safe work environment where nobody has to hide their real self.

We’re a profitable company solving real problems for real customers. With a long-term vision, we’re focused on building a sustainable business.

About the interview
To apply for this role please include: three sentences what personally got you interested in talking to us (pls no AI-generated generic stuff…).

Application

Home Assignment 
1-2h

Initial Introduction 
~30m

Skill Interview (with a Founder) 
~60m

Culture Interview (with a Founder) 
~45m

Paid Test Phase 
1 week

Offer

About 
AccessOwl
AccessOwl revolutionizes how businesses manage SaaS applications. Our mission is to simplify SaaS access, spending, and compliance, providing the easiest way to centrally manage apps and user access. AccessOwl replaces Okta, outdated ticketing systems, and spreadsheets, fundamentally transforming how modern IT admins work.

We founded AccessOwl out of frustration with the inefficiency caused by SaaS companies exploiting the 
SSO Tax
, which made onboarding and offboarding manual and time-consuming. Our innovative approach leverages RPA and agentic AI workflows to change this.

We are a fully remote, customer-centric team dedicated to solving real problems for IT and security teams.
Our goal is to build a sustainable business while delivering an exceptional experience our customers genuinely love.

AccessOwl
Founded:
2022
Batch:
S22
Team Size:
15
Status:
Active
Location:
Berlin, Germany
Founders
Philip Eller
Founder
Philip Eller
Founder
Mathias Nestler
Founder
Mathias Nestler
Founder
