CS 6120: Advanced Compilers: The Self-Guided Online Course

CS 6120 is a PhD-level 
Cornell CS
 course by 
Adrian Sampson
 on programming language implementation.
It covers universal compilers topics like intermediate representations, data flow, and “classic” optimizations as well as more research-flavored topics such as parallelization, just-in-time compilation, and garbage collection.
The work consists of reading papers and open-source hacking tasks, which use 
LLVM
 and 
an educational IR invented just for this class
.

This page lists the curriculum for following this course at the university of your imagination, for four imagination credits (ungraded).
There’s a linear timeline of lessons interspersed with papers to read.
Each lesson has videos and written notes, and some have 
implementation tasks
 for you to complete.
Tasks are all open-ended, to one degree or another, and are meant to solidify your understanding of the abstract concepts by turning them into real code.
The order represents a suggested interleaving of video-watching and paper-reading.

Some differences with the “real” CS 6120 are that you can ignore the task deadlines and you can’t participate in our discussion threads on Zulip.
Real 6120 also has an end-of-semester course project—in the self-guided version, your end-of-semester assignment is to change the world through the magic of compilers.

The instructor is a video production neophyte, so please excuse the production values, especially in the early lessons.
CS 6120 is 
open source and on GitHub
, so please file bugs if you find problems.

When you finish the course, please fill out 
this feedback form
.

Lesson 1:

    Welcome & Overview

video

Producing Wrong Data Without Doing Anything Obviously Wrong!

Todd Mytkowicz, Amer Diwan, Matthias Hauswirth, and Peter F. Sweeney. ASPLOS 2009.

SIGPLAN Empirical Evaluation Guidelines

Lesson 2:

    Representing Programs

representing programs

getting started with Bril

Lesson 3:

    Local Analysis & Optimization

simple dead code elimination

local value numbering

Lesson 4:

    Data Flow

data flow

implementation task

Lesson 5:

    Global Analysis

global analysis & optimization

Efficient Path Profiling

Thomas Ball and James R. Larus. MICRO 1996.

Lesson 6:

    Static Single Assignment

static single assignment

Provably Correct Peephole Optimizations with Alive

Nuno P. Lopes, David Menendez, Santosh Nagarakatte, and John Regehr. PLDI 2015.

Lesson 7:

    LLVM

introduction to LLVM

writing an LLVM pass

Lesson 8:

    Loop Optimization

video

Lesson 9:

    Interprocedural Analysis

video

Type-Based Alias Analysis

Amer Diwan, Kathryn S. McKinley, and J. Eliot B. Moss.

Lesson 10:

    Alias Analysis

video

A Unified Theory of Garbage Collection

David F. Bacon, Perry Cheng, and V. T. Rajan. OOPSLA 2004.

Fast Conservative Garbage Collection

Rifat Shahriyar, Stephen M. Blackburn, and Kathryn S. McKinley. OOPSLA 2014.

Lesson 11:

    Memory Management

video

An Efficient Implementation of SELF, a Dynamically-Typed Object-Oriented Language Based on Prototypes

C. Chambers, D. Ungar, and E. Lee. OOPSLA 1989.

Trace-Based Just-in-Time Type Specialization for Dynamic Languages

Andreas Gal, Brendan Eich, Mike Shaver, David Anderson, David Mandelin, Mohammad R. Haghighat, Blake Kaplan, Graydon Hoare, Boris Zbarsky, Jason Orendorff, Jesse Ruderman, Edwin W. Smith, Rick Reitmaier, Michael Bebenita, Mason Chang, and Michael Franz. PLDI 2009.

Lesson 12:

    Dynamic Compilers

Dynamic Compilers

Tracing via Speculation

Superoptimizer: A Look at the Smallest Program

Alexia Massalin. ASPLOS 1987.

Chlorophyll: Synthesis-Aided Compiler for Low-Power Spatial Architectures

Phitchaya Mangpo Phothilimthana, Tikhon Jelvis, Rohin Shah, Nishant Totla, Sarah Chasins, and Rastislav Bodik. PLDI 2014.

Lesson 13:

    Concurrency & Parallelism

video

Threads Cannot Be Implemented as a Library

Hans-J. Boehm. PLDI 2005.

Exploiting Superword Level Parallelism with Multimedia Instruction Sets

Samuel Larsen and Saman Amarasinghe. PLDI 2000.

A Type and Effect System for Deterministic Parallel Java

Robert L. Bocchino, Vikram S. Adve, Danny Dig, Sarita V. Adve, Stephen Heumann, Rakesh Komuravelli, Jeffrey Overbey, Patrick Simmons, Hyojin Sung, and Mohsen Vakilian. OOPSLA 2009.

Formal Verification of a Realistic Compiler

Xavier Leroy. CACM in 2009.

Lesson 14:

    Fast Compilers
