afterglow

afterglow

          Run classic 
After Dark
 screen savers on modern macOS

Download Afterglow

            Universal binary · macOS 15+ · 
Changelog

        In the ’90s, Berkeley Systems’ 
After Dark
 screen savers brought Flying
        Toasters, Fish, and Starry Skylines to Macintosh screens everywhere. They served a
        practical purpose in preventing burn-in on
        CRT monitors, but also entertained, with animations that could be funny, surreal,
        beautiful -- sometimes gross.

        They are works of art worth preserving.

        Running 
After Dark
 modules in the present day has involved fussy configuration of
        Mac OS emulators or vintage hardware. Even then, no single emulator or vintage computer
        can faithfully run every module: some animate too fast, some too slow.

        Afterglow is an emulator built specifically for running 
After Dark
 modules -- the
        original 68k module code, not a remake or port -- with no dependencies on ROMs or classic
        Mac OS. Created in the spirit of software preservation, it makes 
After Dark
 easy to
        enjoy today and for years to come.

Import 
all
 most of the things

          Modules aren’t included, but importing is easy: drag and drop module files, disk images,
          or compressed archives into the app and Afterglow extracts and imports them automatically.
          Whatever you have, if there are modules in there, you can probably drop it into Afterglow.

          You can also browse and install software releases directly from the Internet Archive
          without leaving the app.

macOS screen saver

          The joy of screen savers is in the surprise and delight of returning to your computer
          and seeing something unexpected: a psychedelic fractal, a procedurally generated
          mountain landscape, a Bad Dog defiling your desktop.

          Afterglow includes a screen saver module for modern macOS, allowing you to run any of
          the classic modules you’ve imported.

          The Liquid Glass lock screen has never looked better!

Dependency-free

          Powered by the 
Musashi
 68k CPU
          emulator, Afterglow reimplements just enough of the Macintosh Toolbox and OS APIs to
          run After Dark modules.

          No Apple ROM or classic Mac OS installation is required.

And more…

Module controls

Full-screen mode

Randomizer

Multimodule

3D box art

CRT shader

Resource inspector

DrawMorph editor

Questions or feedback?

        Visit Afterglow Help 
→
