Writing code is cool, but wouldn't it be cooler to type "
build me a plugin showing populations around the world
" and it Just Worked?
​
Now you can.
Requirements
This feature is in 
public beta
.
Agent currently requires an API Key from OpenRouter. You can load credits on their 
billing portal
.
​
​
Alternatively, if you have a Claude API account with higher 
rate limits
 you can 
buy credits
 directly and use an
 
Anthropic 
API Key
.
Optionally, a free 
Tavily
 API key can give your agent access to web search and web page fetching, enhancing your agents capabilities.
In the near future you'll be able to purchase credits directly from TRMNL.
Quickstart
Visit your 
TRMNL Account
Toggle Agent on the left side, click Save
Click the "Configure model, keys & usage" to open up the settings page.
Add the API keys mentioned in the requirements section and click Save
Visit 
Plugins > Private Plugins > New
 and click Save
Click Edit Markup, then click the Agent tab
Ask Agent to build whatever you want or to guide you would like to understand more of the TRMNL framework.
How it works
TRMNL has developed a comprehensive system prompt written in plain English, which describe our platform's capabilities and design patterns in depth.
Whenever you interface with the Agent inside our private plugin interface, the agent has access to this context, which you may even ask it about.
​
In addition, the agent has been given access to a range of tools, including markup editing, settings updates, data refreshing, internet search, and a list of API endpoints to name a few. This empowers and grounds the agent in the "real world" to add value to your experience.
MCP Server (Advanced)
To develop TRMNL plugins within your local development environment, create an MCP API Key instead from your private plugin's settings page, located on the right side after clicking Save.
Provide this key to your desktop agent for a more customizable experience with your local tooling.
​
Frequently Asked Questions
Which models does this feature support?
Gemini, Codex, Claude Sonnet, Kimi, and even OSS models (e.g. Llama). Set a preferred model from your 
Account
 > Agent configuration.
How much does it cost to build a plugin?
We're seeing an average of $1-3 per plugin. 
For example, plugin can be created with a single sentence prompt: 
make a daily deal plugin for meh.com
. After thinking and developing for a couple minutes, Agent required us to provide a free Meh.com API Key, then we requested that the daily deal item's image be included. Total cost: $2.20 USD.
Can I publish plugins with this feature?
Not currently. Our team reviews several plugin submissions per day and we need to scale internal tools before we can handle the inevitable Agent-driven volume bump.
Can I use other llm models (including free ones)?
Yes, even though Claude Sonnet 4.6 was used in developing this Agent, other state-of-the-art models like Gemeni 3.1 Pro are excellent replacements. Feel free to experiment with any 
OpenRouter model ID
. The free models on OpenRouter tend to be less capable and slower.
Troubleshooting
Agent isn't perfect. Send us a live chat or email 
[email protected]
 if (when) you discover bugs or quirks.
