Pricing
Contact Sales
Login
Try It for Free
Try It for Free
Solutions
AI Detector
Browser Extension
API
LMS Integrations
Plagiarism Checker
Multilingual AI Detection
Use Cases
Company
Blog
Pricing
Contact Sales
Login
Try It for Free
Table of contents
Key findings:
AI-generated content is hitting longform the hardest
AI slop is flooding LinkedIn
Top-level posts were more AI-generated than replies
Method and data collection
Conclusion
Two months ago, we launched 
our Chrome extension
 to help combat the rising slop problem on social media. It lets users scan posts on social media as they scroll, flagging AI-generated content so they can 
make informed decisions
 about how they spend their attention.

Pangram is a research-first company, not just for our industry-leading AI detection algorithms, but for tracking the risk and prevalence of AI-generated content. Social media is one of the hardest domains to study here — much harder than, say, 
news articles
, 
research papers
, or 
Amazon reviews
. But it's also one of the most crucial, because it's potentially the highest-volume source of AI-generated content we face.

We believe it's important to understand this problem so that we can better combat it. That's why we included an opt-in setting in our Chrome extension, to allow users to aid our research by anonymously sharing their scan statistics with us. We've compiled the first few months of this data into the report below.

Key findings:

One in four longform posts on social media flagged as fully AI-generated

Of all posts we flagged as AI-generated, two-thirds came from LinkedIn

Nearly half of X/Twitter articles contained AI writing

AI-generated content is hitting longform the hardest

AI-generated content appeared across all social media platforms in our data set. The average AI rate across all scanned items was 13.8%, but specific rates varied by platform and item length. On four out of five platforms, 
longer content was more likely to be AI-generated than shortform content
. Across all platforms, one in four longform items (25.72% of items over 250 words) were fully AI-generated.

Substack was an exception; there, the rate of fully AI-generated content remained fairly flat, and longer, more substantial posts were actually slightly less likely to be AI-generated compared to shorter ones.

LinkedIn was the most AI-saturated platform, where 
more than 40% of longform posts
 flagged as fully AI-generated. However, if we included mixed AI and human content, X/Twitter was the worst off: almost half of X articles were either fully AI-generated (23.9%) or 
AI-assisted
/mixed (22.9%), with 
only 53.2% of X articles flagging as fully human-authored
.

Our data shows that AI-generated content is a problem across all platforms, and it is hitting longform content especially hard. Even Substack, which was the longform platform with the lowest combined AI rate, still saw more than a fifth of its posts (21.9%) flag as AI-generated or AI-assisted. This is consistent with the rise of AI-generated content we're seeing in writing elsewhere, such as in 
newspaper opinion pieces
.

AI slop is flooding LinkedIn

LinkedIn had the highest AI share of any platform across the board. LinkedIn posts made up a third of scanned items, yet it accounted for 
nearly two-thirds (62%) of all AI content we flagged
. Contrary to what one might expect, people are overwhelmingly willing to use AI to speak on their behalf in professional settings that are associated with their real identity, and less likely to use it on casual and anonymous platforms.

LinkedIn also encourages AI use on its platform in several ways, including a built-in "Write with AI" button (now rebranded "Enhance post," but still offering AI writing assistance). People are noticing LinkedIn's growing reputation for slop – perhaps to combat it, an executive at LinkedIn recently 
announced
 that the platform would be detecting and downranking AI-generated posts using an in-house algorithm; ironically, the announcement was itself AI-generated. Whether or not the company is attempting to modulate AI in their feed, our users are still seeing a lot of AI writing on LinkedIn.

Top-level posts were more AI-generated than replies

In our data, Reddit had the highest scan volume of any platform, making up 36.7% of items that we scanned. Yet at just 4.4%, Reddit had one of the lowest combined AI shares of any platform. This is due to a 
composition effect
: replies on Reddit were overwhelmingly human-authored (98.1%) and replies altogether made up 72% of Reddit items that we scanned. Top-level posts on Reddit were much more likely to be AI-written, at 11.6% of posts, in line with X/Twitter's 10.0% AI-saturation. The same pattern held on LinkedIn, albeit to a lesser extent: a top-level LinkedIn post was 1.35x more likely to be AI-generated than a comment.

Although LinkedIn replies were less likely to be AI-generated than posts, the effect reverses when controlling for length: LinkedIn comments were actually slightly more likely to be AI compared to top-level posts. For Reddit, the difference in AI rate was independent of post format – when controlling for length, top-level Reddit posts still had a 
5.25x greater chance
 of being AI-generated.

Reddit's AI-free replies point to a blind spot of many anti-botting strategies. While 
Reddit's spam policy
 effectively eliminates accounts that use AI to automatically generate spam replies, this approach only catches the 
lowest-effort spam content
 on the platform. Top-level Reddit posts only make up a quarter of all Reddit items, but they have far more audience impact, and their lower volume allows AI-authored posts to slip past volume-based moderation like rate-limiting.

Method and data collection

Collectively, since the Chrome Extension's launch on April 24th 2026, users who opted into sharing their data for research helped us create a dataset of 
1,002,627 posts
 across several of the largest social media platforms on the internet: LinkedIn, Medium, Substack, X/Twitter, and Reddit. Each post in our dataset is counted only once, and we only scan items that are 
longer than 50 words
. Every post was analyzed with 
Pangram 3.3
, our latest AI detection model, which achieves a 0.01% 
false positive rate
. This dataset allows us a direct window into what AI-generated content people are seeing on their feeds at this point in time.

Conclusion

AI writing is now a problem everywhere on social media.
 This is concerning, but it's in line with what we're seeing elsewhere online: 
researchers estimated
 that 35% of newly published websites on the open internet were AI-generated or AI-assisted. An internet that is completely flooded with undisclosed AI content is bleak, but we don't believe it's inevitable. We hope that by providing transparency to AI-generated content online, we can give internet users back some control of how they spend their attention.
Max Spero
CEO, Co-founder
Max is a seasoned machine learning engineer. He most recently worked on autonomous vehicles at Nuro, leading their active learning effort. He has a long history of deploying successful machine learning products at Google, Two Sigma, and Yelp.
Max holds a B.S. in theoretical computer science and an M.S. in artificial intelligence from Stanford University. In addition to his passion for building, he is also an active member of the Magic: the Gathering cube community.
More from 
Max Spero
 
→
Related reading
News
Shop ‘til You Slop: AI seeps into products and their marketing
AI-generated material is cropping up in product descriptions and advertising and marketing campaigns. While some can spot AI common writing patterns, this could be a further threat to consumer trust in companies and their products.
Ann Marie Vanderveen
▪
Nov 21, 2025
News
Meta will start identifying AI generated content
In response to new AI regulations passed in Europe, we published our analysis where we predicted that leading companies would start to take action on AI transparency.
Ashan Marla
▪
May 14, 2024
News
Does Pangram detect Gemini 3?
Can Pangram detect the latest release from Google?
Elyas Masrour
▪
Nov 19, 2025
News
Can Pangram Detect Claude Sonnet 5?
Anthropic released Claude Sonnet 5 today, and we're excited to let you know that Pangram can detect its outputs!
Katherine Thai
▪
Jun 30, 2026
News
Employee Spotlight: Meet Elyas, Pangram's Founding Engineer!
Meet Elyas Masrour, founding AI engineer at Pangram!
Bradley Emi
▪
Oct 1, 2025
News
Employee Spotlight: Meet Katherine, AI Research Scientist
Meet Katherine Thai, Ph. D. , Pangram's Founding AI Research Scientist!
Bradley Emi
▪
Dec 8, 2025
Subscribe
to our updates
Stay informed with our latest news and offers.
Products
AI Detector
Browser Extension
API
LMS Integrations
Plagiarism Checker
Multilingual AI Detection
For Organizations
For Teachers
For Publishing & Media
For Content Moderation
For Developers
For Law Firms
For Universities
For Recruiters
For ML Engineers
For Compliance
Research
How AI Detection Works
Pangram Research Papers
Research Inquiries
Press
Models
Events
Reviews
Resources
AI education
Product updates
News
Case studies
Blog
Pricing
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Data Privacy FAQ
Status
Company
About Us
Contact Us
Careers
Press
SOC2
 
TYPE2
Verified by AssuranceLab
© 2025 Pangram. All rights reserved.
info@pangram.com
 Join our Community
© 2025 Pangram. All rights reserved.
AI Content Is Everywhere on Social Media, Especially LinkedIn | Pangram Labs
