Most Recent Post
Amazon is quietly trying to build the biggest gas power plant in the country. 
The Distilled newsletter 
reported
 Friday that the megacorporation has bought land and acquired permits in Pecos County, Texas, for an AI data center powered by a 7.65 gigawatt gas power plant. The plant will be completely separate from Texas’s power grid, at least in the beginning, the permits 
show
.  
The site, known as GW Ranch, got a state permit allowing the proposed power plant to emit 33 million tons of carbon dioxide, which would make it the biggest pollution site in the U.S., emitting more than the country’s biggest coal power plant, according to 
Distilled
. That’s in sharp contrast to Amazon’s commitment to reach net-zero emissions by 2040 as part of 
The Climate Pledge
.
Amazon filed three construction permits with the state of Texas this week to build three data center buildings immediately upon approval. Land clearing has already begun, according to satellite imagery. Amazon would join Microsoft, Google, and Meta in having its own off-grid gas power. 
Amazon says that it has 10 gigawatts of carbon-free energy across 40 projects to power its existing data center operations in Texas, and that the GW Ranch will use brackish groundwater that isn’t potable and thus can’t be used for irrigation or drinking. 
But that’s not likely to quell public opposition. Data centers are hugely 
unpopular
 across the country among Republicans and Democrats, both in 
rural and suburban areas
. The centers don’t create 
many jobs
 or boost local economies. If connected to local power grids, they can drive utility rates up and cause black- and brownouts. Amid climate change and droughts, the claim that data centers will take advantage of unusable water will likely invite skepticism. 
The fact that Amazon is building its own power plant for the project will be a small comfort for residents worried about utility rates, but locals still will have concerns about pollution from a gas plant bigger than any other in the U.S. Rural Texas is deeply Republican, and despite President Donald Trump’s 
delusions
 about data centers’ popularity, opposition to them on the right is 
growing
. Now that this project is public, a big backlash could soon follow. 
Share This Story
Read more about data centers:
The Data Center Protests Looked Typical. They Were Anything But.
Most Recent Post
Representative Max Miller blamed a daycare after his daughter was rushed to the hospital last year with bruises.
Miller 
sued
 a Westlake, Ohio, daycare provider in February 2025, after the daughter he shares with his ex-wife Emily Moreno (the daughter of Ohio Senator Bernie Moreno) was taken to an emergency room with injuries “on her thighs, face, groin, and vaginal area of her body and she was caused to incur psychological trauma.” Her mother took the girl, then under two years old, to a hospital on January 27 after a daycare staff member alerted police as well as the Department of Children and Family Services. 
The lawsuit doesn’t clearly state where her injuries came from, and Miller has a long list of 
abuse allegations
 against him regarding his ex-wife and daughter, even allegedly fracturing his daughter’s collarbone. His lawsuit, filed four months before his divorce was finalized, accuses the school and four named employees of “failing to properly train and supervise their staff in the proper treatment of children in their care. Defendants abused and neglected a child dependent upon them for protection.”
Miller is the only person named in the complaint, and Moreno isn’t mentioned. Miller claims in the lawsuit that an investigation from county authorities backs up his claims, along with video and audio evidence documenting alleged abuse and neglect. The school denied the allegations, stating that the toddler was not “injured, brutalized, or harmed in any manner while under the defendants’ alleged care and supervision.”
The case was dismissed four months ago, and if there was a settlement, it hasn’t been disclosed. In light of newly revealed allegations that Miller has a habit of 
holding
 his daughter’s beloved blue bunny hostage and his admission that he 
shared
 an inappropriate photo of her online, this lawsuit raises even more questions. 
Share This Story
Read more about Miller:
Leaked Texts Show Max Miller Has Habit of Holding Child’s Toy Hostage
Most Recent Post
Women accounted for 100 percent of the decline in the labor force in July, according to a 
National Women’s Law Center
 analysis of the Bureau of Labor Statistics’s latest 
dismal
 jobs report.
Overall, the economy lost 23,000 jobs in July: Women lost 32,000 jobs, while men gained 9,000. Many of the jobs lost were in local government and leisure and hospitality—real jobs that real women, who are already dealing with slowed wages and rising inflation, work.
Meanwhile, a whopping 165,000 women exited the work force last month, meaning they were neither working nor looking for a new job. The number of men in the labor force remained steady.
Jasmine Tucker, vice president of research at NWLC, warned that this latest jobs report was “not a sign of a healthy economy.”
“Women are leaving the labor force in alarming numbers, and many who remain employed are underemployed. This administration cannot celebrate an economy that is failing so many women,” Tucker said. 
In fact, more than double the number of women have left the labor force than men since the start of the year. A total of 845,000 women have left the workforce since January, while 406,000 men have left.
It’s hard not to see these startling statistics as part of the Trump administration’s broader campaign to undermine women’s rights and autonomy. 
Whether it’s making it 
harder for women to vote
, 
sidelining women professionally
, or 
endangering emergency pregnancy care
—targeting women’s livelihoods just feels like part of the system that’s working as it was designed. 
Share This Story
Read more about the jobs report:
Fox News Struggles to Spin Yet Another Bad Jobs Report
Most Recent Post
Marco Rubio is slowly choking Cuba to death.
The Secretary of State told Axios 
his plan
 to take over the island—long plagued by U.S. intelligence agency meddling and extensive federal sanctions—for good.
“What we’re trying to teach them is there are no escape valves … Every time they create a new mechanism in which they try to get out of the noose, we just close it off,” Rubio said. “They certainly can’t wait us out. Certainly this isn’t going to go away for the next [two and a half] years.”
The Trump administration has kept a constant thumb on Cuba, starting with a blackout-inducing oil blockade in January that has directly contributed to widespread food insecurity, economic collapse, and death, as 
infant mortality
 doubled on the island. The U.S. has levied 24 different attacks against Cuba, from accusing its doctor export program of 
human trafficking
, claiming that it’s 
aiding
 international terrorism, and running an “irregular and covert” 
campaign
 against western ideologies. And military action is still a possibility. 
“The Cuban Communist regime is a state sponsor of terrorism that spies on America, arms violent left-wing radicals, spreads poisonous Marxist ideology, and serves as a staging ground for Russia, China & Iran just 90 miles from our shores,” Rubio 
announced
 on Thursday. “Today I sanctioned five Cuban entities and eight individuals associated with procuring arms for the regime. As President Trump has said: The United States will not tolerate a rogue state harboring hostile military, intelligence & terror operations on our doorstep. Anyone supporting, sponsoring, or providing services to these sanctioned actors is at risk of being sanctioned themselves.”
The Trump administration (Rubio in particular) is leaning on Cold War, Red Scare rhetoric to justify perpetuating a full-scale humanitarian crisis in Cuba. On Thursday—the same day as Rubio’s announcement and four days after the most recent countrywide blackout—a panel of 
independent experts
 appointed by the 
Human Rights Council declared Cuba at risk of becoming a “silent Gaza.”
“The humanitarian consequences are already unfolding into a full-blown crisis, threatening the rights to health, to life, to food and to development.… Measures that knowingly deprive a population of the means to survive strike at the most basic guarantees of the rights to life and diminish the core of human dignity,” the 
report
 reads. “The U.S. Government must cease all threats and hostile acts against Cuba’s sovereignty and revoke all measures it has imposed on the country that stand contrary to international law.”
Nationwide blackouts have left millions across Cuba without power. Some outages can last up to 20 hours, disrupting everything from food storage, to cooking, to sleep.
Blackouts have become an ongoing crisis since the U.S. blocked all oil shipments to the island in January. 
pic.twitter.com/6TP1Wv6SG2
— AJ+ (@ajplus) 
August 7, 2026
 
Share This Story
Editor’s Pick
Trump’s Plans for Head Start Could Leave Kids Behind
Most Recent Post
President Donald Trump is seriously crashing out after a federal appeals court ordered him to stop illegal construction on his White House ballroom. 
In a 
furious screed
 on Truth Social Friday, Trump announced that he would immediately appeal the decision to the Supreme Court. 
“The Military and Secret Service are viewing this horrendous, politically motivated, and unlawful ruling as a National Security threat to our Nation in that the entire Complex is being built for the protection of our Country and, additionally, all future Presidents,” the president wrote.
Trump described his plans to build “one big, expensive, and very complex unit” that includes a state of the art hospital, bomb shelter, and a top secret military facility—well, 
not so secret
 anymore, I’d gather. 
In a 
2-1 ruling
 earlier Friday, a  D.C. Circuit Court panel determined the Trump administration must seek approval for construction from Congress, which has the “exclusive authority to regulate the construction and demolition of White House structures.”
“At this preliminary stage, the National Trust has shown, compellingly, that Congress has not ceded unfettered authority to the Executive Branch to dramatically redesign, reshape, and reconstruct the White House—the People’s House—to fit a particular President’s desires,” the ruling stated. 
Trump-appointed Judge Neomi Rao dissented, agreeing with the administration that the National Trust for Historic Preservation did not have the standing to challenge the construction. The nonprofit’s case was 
centered
 around Professor Alison Hoagland, a member of the National Trust, who formally claimed that the ballroom was an aesthetic injury to the White House. 
Rao argued that the decision would “permit adjudication of any government action that a plaintiff finds unsightly.” But by the judge’s logic, the Trump administration could make unilateral sweeping changes to any national landmark—even, 
as the DOJ tried to claim
, the Statue of Liberty. 
For months, Trump has treated the White House—which belongs to all Americans, not just the president—like one of his gaudy resort properties. 
Meanwhile, the price tag on Trump’s ballroom has exploded. The president originally claimed that his ballroom project would 
only cost $200 million
, but that number later ballooned to $300 million, and 
then $400 million
 after he decided to tack on 
extra construction
. In June, a 
bombshell report
 revealed that taxpayers would be expected to foot the bill for half of a 
$600 million
 total cost.
This story has been updated.
Share This Story
Read more about the ballroom:
Trump Skipped Normal Process to Award $500 Million Ballroom Contract
View More Posts
Share This Story
Read More: 
Politics
, 
Law
, 
Supreme Court
, 
Constitution
, 
Foreign Policy
, 
Health Care
, 
Economic Inequality
, 
Taxes
, 
Washington
