For about six years I wrote Windows programs for a living. Due to the
nature of my employment contracts, I can't freely distribute most of
what I wrote. However, there were a few programs that I worked on in
my spare time. I've made them available here, in the hopes that
somebody may find something useful in them.

Life
.
An implementation of Conway's game of Life for Windows 3.1x
and later. The program isn't a very useful implementation, being much
too limited. (Much better programs, and more information about Life,
can be found

here
.)
However, the source code does contain some interesting bits, including
mixing 16-bit C code and 32-bit assembly via winmem32.dll, translating
between DIBs with different color organizations, non-trivial
management of a small palette, and background processing and window
updating. Though there is no help file, I have included a short text
file that describes how to use the program, and how the source code is
organized.

GDI
Rescuer
. A little programming utility for Debug Windows 3.1x. (Not
useful under Windows 95 and later versions.) Using the toolhelp.dll
and one or two undocumented features, this program finds GDI objects
that were left lying around by other programs. If it finds any such
objects, it displays them in a list, allowing you to examine and/or
delete them. While there is no separate help file, it does respond to
the help switch used on the command line.

Code
Breaker
. A version of Bulls & Cows (more commonly known as
Mastermind). This program started out as my first serious Windows
program, and was the first program I ever sold. Although I later
cleaned it up (and de-Petzoldized it), there's nothing particularly
interesting in the source code (unless you think a complete lack of
comments is interesting). I've included it here just because I think
it's a great game. A help file is included.

All of these programs are free software, as per the GNU General Public
License. Complete source code is of course included with each. Share
and Enjoy. Contact 
me
 if
you have any questions or comments. (However, please be aware that I
have not done any Windows programming since 1997, and am no longer
able to answer questions on that subject beyond the level of WinMain()
and WM_PAINT.)

Software

Brian Raiter
