Ants: Who looks after the injured in a colony?

						07/02/2026

			Carpenter ants amputate the injured legs of fellow ants to minimise the risk of infection. A new study involving a Würzburg researcher shows that this task is primarily carried out by ants switching from indoor to outdoor duties.

		Carpenter ants perform amputations as a preventive measure. Their motto is: Better safe than sorry when it comes to potential infections. (Image:  Bart Zijlstra)

Patients in hospital generally trust the nursing staff. After all, they have undergone training and, in some cases, have several years’ professional experience.

In the case of carpenter ants, it is not nursing expertise that determines who cares for the patients: “There are no specialised ‘medics’ in the colonies. Instead, this task is carried out by worker ants that are in the process of transitioning from brood care to foraging,” says Dr 
Erik Frank
, senior author of the study and head of an Emmy Noether research group at the Chair of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology at the University of Würzburg. This transitional phase for the ants usually lasts 20 days.

Another crucial factor is how many previous interactions the carer has had with the injured ant, says 
Alba Motes-Rodrigo
, co-author from the University of Lausanne (Switzerland). These include social interactions such as grooming one another or encountering each other by chance in the nest and ‘antennating’ – that is, touching each other with their antennae.

Ants transitioning between indoor and outdoor duties roam throughout the entire nest and are therefore better connected than other members of their colony. The research team published their findings in the journal 
*Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*
 (PNAS).

Fully automated tracking: 660 ants under close scrutiny

For the study, the team examined six colonies, each comprising 110 ants of the species 
Camponotus fellah
, which belongs to the genus of carpenter ants and is found primarily in the Middle East. Using a fully automated tracking system, the researchers were able to precisely monitor the movements and hundreds of thousands of interactions of each ant, as well as their wound care, over a period of weeks.

“We have long known that the spatial organisation of a colony governs everyday tasks such as brood care or foraging. But our findings go even further,” explains Dr 
Ebi George
, a co-author from the University of Lausanne. They show that the everyday spatial and social overlap between workers also determines temporary tasks such as life-saving wound care, George elaborates.

Carpenter ants: masters of amputation

In a previous study, Frank and his team had already observed how carpenter ants treat wounds: they amputate the injured legs of their fellow ants by biting them off and treating them with antimicrobial substances. Their guiding principle is always: better safe than sorry.

The ants carry out prophylactic amputations. This not only protects the colony from infection but also doubles the survival rate of the injured workers. “Back then, we were able to show how the wounds are treated. Our current study now reveals who is primarily responsible for this,” says Frank.

Original publication

Ebi Antony George, Alba Motes-Rodrigo, Laurent Keller, Erik T. Frank: “Social and Spatial Affinity Drive Wound Care in Ants”; in PNAS, 1 July 2026, 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2614400123

Contact

Dr Erik Frank, Chair of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, T +49 931 31-82183, 
erik.frank@uni-wuerzburg.de

Press release: “Carpenter ants: better safe than sorry”

About the video:
 It shows one ant amputating another ant's leg. The tracking system assigns a number to each ant, making it possible to track every interaction.

      Files

              Leg amputation of an injured ant

            1,000 KB

					By 
Martin Brandstätter

					Back
