Tech
Apple
Reviews
Apple’s weird anti-nausea dots cured my car sickness
﻿Vehicle Motion Cues let me read and write in the passenger seat without wanting to die.
﻿Vehicle Motion Cues let me read and write in the passenger seat without wanting to die.
by

Thomas Ricker
Jun 16, 2026, 11:30 AM UTC
Image: Asya Demidova for The Verge
Part Of
Summer Upgrade Week
see all  
Thomas Ricker
 
is a deputy editor and Verge co-founder with a passion for human-centric cities, e-bikes, and life as a digital nomad. He’s been a tech journalist for 20 years.
I’ll just work from the car
, I thought. But after a few minutes of staring at my screen on quick mountain switchbacks I could feel the first signs of cold, coagulated nausea bubbling up from that sweaty place in my gut. I looked to the horizon for relief, but nothing helped... until I remembered Apple’s magic dots.
Introduced in 2024, Apple’s 
Vehicle Motion Cues
 promise to tap into your device’s accelerometer and gyroscope to reduce or, in my case, even 
eliminate 
the motion sickness felt when trying to use an iPhone, iPad, or MacBook inside a moving vehicle.
It’s weird, but it works!
 
Image: Apple
According to big-S Science, this type of vehicle motion sickness is caused by the eyes staring at a static display while the inner ear feels the car turning, braking, and accelerating. Motion Cues solve this by placing dots around the periphery of the display that move in harmony with the motion of the car. When the car turns right, the dots sweep across the screen to the left; when the car brakes the dots slide forward.
It sounds preposterous, but I’m here to tell you that it actually works. Once enabled, I’ve comfortably read books in the Kindle app on my phone for a few hours at a go, and even written 1,000-word reviews while my wife drove our camper van to the next destination. She uses Apple’s Vehicle Motion Cues now, too, because they’ve been a game changer for how we balance work with life on the road.
On this straight stretch of road Apple shows fewer dots that remain stationary and invert black text to white when needed (look closely at the letter “s” covered by a dot on the left edge).
 
Photo by Thomas Ricker / The Verge
Works in macOS, too, which made it possible to keep working while driving down these twisties.
 
Photo by Thomas Ricker / The Verge
Vehicle Motion Cues can be configured under accessibility settings in iOS, iPadOS, and macOS. They can be turned on, off, or set to appear automatically when vehicle motion is detected. I prefer to toggle the dots to avoid seeing them when I’m driving the car. The black dots are fairly unobtrusive, but they can interfere with maps, text, and imagery on long straight stretches of road that cause the dots to sit motionless (Apple should dim all the dots in those situations). You can also configure the dot size, color, and density if you want, but I found the defaults to work just fine.
I made it easy to quickly toggle the Motion Cues on and off by double tapping the back of my iPhone. To do the same, head over to Accessibility –> Touch –> Back Tap and set the Double Tap gesture to Vehicle Motion Cues on devices supporting iOS 18 and above.
I’m fortunate that I remembered this obscure accessibility feature that I used almost daily on a recent two-month road trip around Europe. Hopefully you’ll find similar success when traveling this summer.
Follow topics and authors
 from this story to see more like this in your personalized homepage feed and to receive email updates.
Thomas Ricker
Apple
Reviews
Software Reviews
Tech
More In Summer Upgrade Week
See all
These mechanical keyboards are two very different sides of the same beautifully made coin
Antonio G. Di Benedetto
12:30 PM UTC
All the gear a 20-year gadget blogging veteran packs when traveling
Andrew Liszewski
Jun 15
My yard is dying, so I made an app for that
Allison Johnson
Jun 13
Most Popular
Most Popular
Xbox is closing down Hellblade creator Ninja Theory
Trump’s Anthropic shutdown just made the case for non-American AI
Google Earth’s flight simulator is now available in your browser
Happy birthday to the Trump phone
China may have accessed Mythos
Advertiser Content From
This is the title for the native ad
