Table of Contents

Apple Platform Certifications

Welcome

Introduction

Intro to Apple security assurance

About Apple security certifications

Cryptographic module validation status information

Common Criteria (CC) certification status information

Hardware security certifications

Secure Enclave Processor security certifications

Apple T2 Security Chip security certifications

Operating system security certifications

iOS security certifications

iPadOS security certifications

macOS security certifications

tvOS security certifications

visionOS security certifications

watchOS security certifications

Apple internet services security certifications

Apple Pay security certifications

National regulations security certifications

Apple Private Cloud Compute SOC 3 audit reports

Security Compliance Projects

macOS Security Compliance Project

iOS and iPadOS Security Compliance Project

visionOS Security Compliance Project

Glossary

Document revision history

Copyright and trademarks

Apple Private Cloud Compute SOC 3 audit reports
System and Organization Controls (SOC) reports are internal control examinations created by the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA)
. Apple commissioned an independent examination of its controls over the Private Cloud Compute (PCC) Provisioning System; the SOC 3 report details the independent auditor’s examination of whether those controls operated effectively throughout the period. This report provides reasonable assurance as to whether Apple’s service commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust criteria.
SOC 3 overview
The SOC 3 report is an independent examination report that describes the service commitments and system requirements of Private Cloud Compute that Apple designed and that operate in accordance with the trust services criteria relevant to security, processing integrity, and confidentiality, outlined in AICPA Trust Services Criteria, Trust Services Principles section 100, 
2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy
.
SOC 3 reports
You can download the reports here:
April 2026
: Examination period ending April 30, 2026
January 2026
: Examination period ending January 31, 2026
October 2025
: Examination period ending October 31, 2025
July 2025
: Examination period ending July 31, 2025
SOC 3 report FAQ
What is a SOC 3 report? 
An SOC 3 report contains a written assertion by service organization management that affirms whether the controls were designed and operated effectively to achieve the service commitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust-services criteria.
What is the subject matter of the SOC 3 reports? 
The reports address the Apple Private Cloud Compute Provisioning System, specifically the processes used for the provisioning, ongoing verification, and protection of information within compute nodes, and the related policies, procedures, and control activities.
Does this report cover Apple Intelligence? 
The examinations were not conducted to evaluate the performance or integrity of Apple’s artificial intelligence services. Accordingly, the independent auditor does not express an opinion or any other form of assurance about Apple’s artificial intelligence services.
How often is this report updated? 
Apple issues PCC SOC 3 reports quarterly on a 12-month rolling basis. Each report covers a rolling 12-month period, updated quarterly. For example, a report ending January 31 is followed by a report ending April 30.
For questions about Apple Security and Privacy Certifications, contact 
security-certifications@apple.com
.
See also
Apple Security Research
Apple Platform Security
Apple Platform Deployment

Helpful?

                    Yes

                    No

        Thanks for your feedback.
