A koala, 
Phascolarctos cinereus
, with her babies at Australia Zoo Wildlife Hospital, 2011
              
Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

The 
naked mole-rat
 was first. On August 9, 2006, at the Lincoln Children’s Zoo in Nebraska, Joel Sartore focused his camera on the 
little rodent with big front teeth
 and snapped pictures.

As a longtime field photographer for 
National Geographic
 magazine, Sartore had always been interested in the natural world and cared about its creatures, big and small. But those photographs of the mole-rat sent him in a new direction: It was the 
inaugural species
 of Sartore’s 
Photo Ark
 project documenting the variety and charisma of the planet’s animal species. For the Ark, sponsored by the 
National Geographic Society
, Sartore and his team travel the globe making stunning portraits of animals as a testament to their existence in the face of 
biodiversity loss
.

      An octopus, 
Octopoda
, at the Dallas World Aquarium, Texas, 2013

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

In 
late 2005
, Sartore’s wife, Kathy, was diagnosed with breast cancer. He stayed home to care for her and their three children while she was sick and being treated. “That year at home gave me a new perspective on the shortness and fragility of life,” 
he wrote
. The idea for the portrait collection, in which the beauty and vulnerability of animal life is displayed, came to him then.

Kathy made a full recovery. “She’s just fine to this day,” Sartore tells me during a video call on a Monday in July, as coffee brews in the background. “She was the one making the coffee just now.”

Twenty years after those first images, Sartore is still taking pictures, his digital Ark filling with fish, reptiles, amphibians, birds, mammals and insects. When we spoke, he had just spent the previous night and the morning photographing insects in the Minnesota Northwoods. He typically takes pictures of multiple species per day. On August 3, the National Geographic Society announced that Sartore has 
photographed his 18,000th species
 for the Photo Ark—the critically endangered 
red handfish
, a thumb-size animal that walks on its fins along the seafloor. Sartore visited a red handfish breeding lab and set up a photo tank on a tabletop. “We put one in our little fish tank, and it kind of walks around,” he says. After getting photos with two or three fish, “we were probably done in under an hour.”

      A critically endangered female red handfish, 
Thymichthys politus
, at the University of Tasmania’s Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies.

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

Through his pictures, Sartore’s goal is to show “all animals that you can see with the naked eye,” he says, from tree dwellers to soil burrowers to ocean swimmers. He wants to “get people to care while there’s still time to save habitats and all these other species.” But if the threatened creatures he photographs aren’t saved, his images at least document that they were here and won’t be entirely forgotten.

Sartore has taken pictures of various extinct-in-the-wild species, including the 
Guam kingfisher
 and the 
Monterrey platyfish
, which survive only through efforts to care for them in captivity. He even photographed a 
preserved young thylacine
, a long-extinct carnivorous marsupial also known as the 
Tasmanian tiger
.

The animals he photographs are usually in human care at zoos, aquariums, wildlife sanctuaries and science laboratories. This ensures that Sartore will have better access to the animals and that they’ll be accustomed to being around people.

      A springbok mantis, 
Miomantis caffra
, at Auckland Zoo, New Zealand, 2013

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      An African leopard, 
Panthera pardus pardus
, at the Houston Zoo, Texas, 2011

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      An African slender snouted crocodile, 
Mecistops cataphractus
, photographed in Tampa, Florida, 2012

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      A ribboned pipefish, 
Haliichthys taeniophorus
, at the Dallas World Aquarium, Texas, 2013

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

His portraits are usually set against both black and white backdrops so that he can take close-ups in good lighting and depict true color with no distractions: “Just the animal, nothing else,” he says. “You can look them in the eye, really see that there’s great intelligence there, and a basic right to exist, in my opinion.”

The project now includes so many different types of animal life that he even photographs creatures without eyes, such as 
corals
, 
anemones
 and 
sponges
. By taking photos of individual animals, he allows each one to shine on its own, without a size comparison. Even a tiny creature, spotlighted as the subject of one of Sartore’s photos, looks significant.

“We photograph a lot of animals that the world would never see without this project,” Sartore says. Plenty of them, he adds, “can fit in the palm of your hand.”

      A Sierra Nevada Ensatina salamander, 
Ensatina eschscholtzii platensis
, at San Francisco State University, California, 2008

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      A female snowy owl, 
Bubo scandiacus
, at Raptor Recovery Nebraska, 2008

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      An endangered Coquerel's sifaka, 
Propithecus coquereli, 
at the Houston Zoo, Texas, 2012

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      Orange spotted filefish, 
Oxymonacanthus longirostris
, at Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium, Nebraska, 2013

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

Each image is a snapshot of what biodiversity looks like during our time.

For instance, Sartore has worked in the 
Pine Rocklands
, a “hyper-fragmented, hyper-rare, hyper-degraded ecosystem in southeastern Florida,” says ecological restoration expert 
George Gann
, a founder of the 
Institute for Regional Conservation
. Despite these challenges, the rocklands have incredible biodiversity and serve as a home for various threatened species, such as the 
Miami tiger beetle
, 
Bartram’s scrub-hairstreak butterfly
 and the 
Florida bonneted bat​​​​‌﻿‍﻿​‍​‍‌‍﻿﻿‌﻿​‍‌‍‍‌‌‍‌﻿‌‍‍‌‌‍﻿‍​‍​‍​﻿‍‍​‍​‍‌﻿​﻿‌‍​‌‌‍﻿‍‌‍‍‌‌﻿‌​‌﻿‍‌​‍﻿‍‌‍‍‌‌‍﻿﻿​‍​‍​‍﻿​​‍​‍‌‍‍​‌﻿​‍‌‍‌‌‌‍‌‍​‍​‍​﻿‍‍​‍​‍‌‍‍​‌﻿‌​‌﻿‌​‌﻿​​‌﻿​﻿​﻿‍‍​‍﻿﻿​‍﻿﻿‌‍﻿‍‌‍‌‌‌﻿‌﻿‌﻿​﻿​‍﻿‌‌‍​﻿‌‍﻿‌‌﻿​﻿​‍﻿‍‌‍﻿‍‌‍​‌‌﻿‌​‌‍‍‌‌‍﻿﻿‌‍﻿‍‌‍​‌‌‍﻿​‌‍‌﻿‌‍‌‌‌‍﻿
—three animals that Sartore has photographed.

Sartore and the Photo Ark team identified that the tiger beetle and scrub-hairstreak butterfly needed attention. So, in 2023, they 
awarded
 the inaugural Photo Ark Species Impact Initiative grant, an effort to fund on-the-ground conservation projects, to Gann, who has been working on restoring the area for decades.

By featuring these two rockland insects, Gann says, the Photo Ark helps “draw attention to these overlooked species.”

That focus helps define for the public “the habitat needs of these two species to drive an ecological restoration process,” Gann notes.

      Joel Sartore photographs a Chinese water dragon, 
Physignathus cocincinus
, at the Lincoln Children's Zoo, Nebraska, in 2018.

Cole Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      Joel Sartore photographs Johnny the serval, 
Leptailurus serval
, at the Lincoln Children’s Zoo, Nebraska, in 2018.

Cole Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

In Ecuador, the Photo Ark has highlighted amphibians, many of which may be extinct in the country due to disease and habitat loss. “We didn’t see them anymore since the ’80s, despite searching for them,” says amphibian biologist 
Luis A. Coloma
, director of Ecuador’s 
Jambatu Center for Amphibian Research and Conservation
. The center, a 2025 Photo Ark Species Impact Initiative grantee, helps protect some of those creatures, breeding them under laboratory conditions and raising them so they can later be reintroduced to nature.

Did you know? Amphibians in danger

In 2023, a 
global assessment
 found that nearly 41 percent of amphibian species on the planet are threatened by 
habitat loss, climate change and disease
.

      A longnose harlequin frog, 
Atelopus longirostris
, at Jambatu Center in Quito, Ecuador, 2019

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

One of those species is the 
longnose harlequin frog
, 
rediscovered
 by Coloma and his team in 2016 after it was thought to be extinct. “We were so happy to find them again,” Coloma says. “These are iconic animals in Ecuador. And we are trying to do our best to save these animals.” Harlequin frogs come in many colors, and “they are marvelous,” the biologist says. 
Their skin
 is also full of molecules that could have “potential biomedical uses.”

Sartore captured images of the longnose harlequin frog in January 2019, when there were 
only four known individuals
 in Ecuador, at the Jambatu Center. His pictures showcase the species’ 
brown body and yellow spots
. “He has been photographing our frogs that we keep here and trying to communicate through his photos to the world about this crisis,” Coloma says, “which is huge.”

      A male Arctic fox, 
Vulpes lagopus
, at Great Bend Brit Spaugh Zoo, Kansas, 2015

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      A Saint Vincent parrot, 
Amazona guildingii
, at the Houston Zoo, Texas, 2015

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      A Brazilian rainbow boa, 
Epicrates cenchria cenchria
, at Great Plains Zoo, South Dakota, 2007

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      An endangered baby Bornean orangutan, 
Pongo pygmaeus
, with her adoptive mother, a Bornean/Sumatran cross, 
Pongo pygmaeus x abelii
,
at the Houston Zoo, Texas, 2013

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      A Victoria crowned pigeon, 
Goura victoria
, at the Columbus Zoo, Ohio, 2012

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      A Florida panther, 
Puma concolor coryi
, at Lowry Park Zoo, Florida, 2012

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

      A bobtail squid, 
Euprymna scolopes
, at Monterey Bay Aquarium, 2014

Joel Sartore / National Geographic Photo Ark

At age 64, Sartore’s succession plan for the Photo Ark is set. His son 
Cole
 attends the foreign trips, and “he’ll take over when I’m too old to do it anymore,” Sartore says. But until then, his work continues. Many more animals await the lens of his camera—about 25,000 species are in human care worldwide, and Sartore 
wants to photograph all of them
.

“My thing is to give my life to this,” he says. “I’m a photographer and a storyteller—what else was I supposed to do? What else can you do?”

Sartore hopes that this big body of work will have value far beyond his time. When people view his photos, he says, “they can see what it is that’s out there and decide whether or not they want to save it, because it really is a choice.”

You Might Also Like

Years in the Making, National Geographic's Museum of Exploration Is Here to Take You on an Adventure

June 26, 2026

Here’s How the Los Angeles Wildfires Are Affecting Animals, From Fish to Snakes to Birds

February 5, 2025

See 25 Breathtaking Images From the Wildlife Photographer of the Year Contest

January 5, 2024

See 25 Incredible Images From the Wildlife Photographer of the Year Contest

January 10, 2025

View 11 Breathtaking Images From the BigPicture Photography Competition

July 9, 2024

Kayla Randall

 is
 Smithsonian
 magazine's digital editor, museums.

Get the latest 
Science
 stories in your inbox.
