Autolith: a programming agent with a live runtime

            Autolith runs in a terminal and works directly in your repository.
            It can read and edit files, search the workspace, run commands and
            tests, keep project context, and use Common Lisp without leaving the
            conversation.

Repository work.
 Filesystem, shell, and search tools with visible results.

Continuity.
 Portable conversations, memories, agendas, checkpoints, and recovery.

Live Lisp.
 An SBCL runtime it can inspect, test, and extend.

Read the source

See a session

Install Autolith

For developers who want an agent they can inspect, extend, and recover.

Autolith · Resident agent

curl -fsSL https://sh.lambda-symbolics.com/autolith | sh

click to copy, or, better yet, install via Nix

Install Autolith

              Autolith targets Linux x86-64. The binary release carries its own
              SBCL, Lisp dependencies, and native helpers; it checks for newer
              tagged releases and asks before updating. Nix is the recommended
              route when you want the complete build pinned from the start.

              Yes, piping a URL into a shell is evil. Read the installer before
              running it. Nix is the better installation path.

              Autolith executes model-generated code with your user privileges.
              Its process boundaries protect reliability, not against hostile
              code. Use it as a development agent, not as a security sandbox.

Start Autolith · Binary, Nix, or source

After the binary installer

$ 
autolith --auth

$ 
autolith

Recommended · Nix

$ 
nix run github:luciusmagn/autolith -- --auth

$ 
nix run github:luciusmagn/autolith

Build from the repository

$ 
git clone https://github.com/luciusmagn/autolith

$ 
cd autolith

$ 
./script/bootstrap

$ 
./script/check

$ 
./bin/autolith --auth

$ 
./bin/autolith

Read the source and documentation

See a captured session

A session starts with a concrete request

              This is a captured read-only session from 
autolith --immutable
.
              The prompt asks for one repository listing; the tool output is shortened
              only by Autolith's normal terminal limit.

              The transcript reveals itself in order: request, tool call, bounded
              result, then the assistant's answer. It is the terminal's actual
              formatting, not a simulated chat window.

Captured session · immutable mode

❯ you
  Inspect this repository without changing files. Use one tool to list the
  top-level files, then summarize what you found in one sentence.
◇ reasoning summary
  │ Listing top-level files
▸ fs.list
  /root/common-lisp/frob
READ ∙ running fs.list · 00:00
✓ fs.list
  cpu 0.001s · real 0.002s
  │ /root/common-lisp/frob
  │ d           .git/
  │ d           .github/
  │ d           .qlot/
  │ d           bin/
  │ d           dist/
  │ d           docs/
  │ d           native/
  │ d           nix/
  │ d           recovery/
  │ d           script/
  │ d           src/
  │ … +13 more lines
● autolith
  The repository is a Common Lisp project with source, tests, recovery tooling,
  documentation, build configuration, native assets, and GitHub/Nix/Quicklisp
  support.

The agent and its tools run in one process

              Autolith is a terminal programming agent, not a wrapper around another
              agent process. Its Common Lisp image contains the provider
              client, terminal interface, tool registry, conversation state,
              persistent memories, workspace agenda, and the code that decides what
              happens next.

              It talks directly to the ChatGPT Codex subscription service. The Codex
              CLI is neither launched nor bundled. Filesystem, shell, search,
              memory, and Lisp operations remain explicit tools with visible results.

Fast search, optional immutable mode

              Workspace search runs in-process through
              
fff
, a fast Rust
              search library. Autolith keeps the index warm instead of starting a
              new search process for every query.

              If you want inspection without active-image changes, start it with
              
--immutable
. The mode retains read-only inspection and
              recovery information while withholding evaluation, mutation,
              persistence, checkpoint, and rollback tools.

Update the running agent without restarting it

              Autolith can inspect and replace complete functions, methods,
              classes, macros, conditions, and global settings in its running
              image. An exploratory change takes effect immediately and is
              recorded in an append-only mutation journal. It can be exercised,
              discarded, or retained as a private image commit.

              A useful change can then become a private image commit. The commit
              contains a manifest and a complete executable Lisp replay script,
              retained in a separate private Git history. It changes the active
              agent without quietly patching the tracked source repository.

A representative mutation transaction

→ 
self.source
 APPLICATION-TOOL-CALL-ENTRY
← complete tracked 
DEFMETHOD

→ 
self.redefine

  (
defmethod
 application-tool-call-entry ...)
← compiled and installed in the active image

→ 
self.diff

← one reconstructible live mutation

→ 
self.commit
 "Improve tool-call presentation"
← private image commit 
commit-id

  complete reconstruct.lisp retained in private Git

Different kinds of state stay separate

          Source, conversations, useful facts, live mutations, exact heaps, and
          disposable experiments have different lifetimes. Autolith keeps them
          separate instead of pretending that one database or one saved core is
          everything.

Persistent surfaces · Reconstruction evidence

Conversations

Append-only portable S-expressions with exact resume commands and crash-tail repair.

Memories

Workspace or global facts, preferences, and decisions with bounded prompt recall.

Agendas

Short workspace tasks and notes, available in full on every request.

Private image commits

Complete replay scripts for durable user-specific definitions and settings, retained in private Git.

Generations

A saved active core, exact tracked source commit, reconstruction script, manifest, and journal position.

Worker images

Immutable experimental SBCL cores with parentage and durable notes, never selected as the active agent.

Recovery

A separately built pristine image that can inspect a crash and select a known-working generation without loading the damaged core.
