What's News :
I watched my village disappear 
Struggle to restrore bodies 
What happened in the Himalayas 
Nepal tourism faces another setback 
National 
Barrier lake continues to pose flood risk, China warns
Chinese embassy in Kathmandu says the lake formed after an ice-rock avalanche remains at a high level and is overflowing, with officials on both sides continuing to monitor the risk of a possible breach. 
 
Photo: Courtesy of Chinese Embassy in Nepal.
bookmark
facebook
twitter
Whatsapp
mail
 
Post Report
Published at : August 28, 2026 
Updated at : August 28, 2026 16:59 
Kathmandu 
The Chinese Embassy in Kathmandu has said that the risk created by an ice-rock avalanche on the Nepal-China border remains, as officials from both countries continue to monitor the situation.
A spokesperson for the Chinese Embassy stated that the avalanche occurred in a tributary on the Nepali side of the upper reaches of the China-Nepal boundary river, blocking the river and forming a landslide-dammed lake.
The lake is currently at a high water level and has begun to overflow, the statement said, while warning that there remains a risk of a breach.
“The situation is currently at a critical stage for rescue and emergency response in both Nepal and China,” the spokesperson said.
Earlier, it was reported that a large barrier lake formed near the confluence of the Chhochen Khola and Purepu Tsangpo rivers has reportedly breached.
The embassy urged communities and others downstream of the lake to closely monitor changes in river levels, remain highly vigilant and make preparations for possible emergencies.
Relevant authorities in Nepal and China are continuing to monitor the situation and assess and manage the risks, according to the statement.
The embassy did not provide details on the size of the lake or the volume of water it contains, nor did it say when a possible breach could occur.
The warning comes as Nepal continues to deal with severe flooding and landslides in several districts, including Rasuwa.
The Chinese embassy also urged the public to rely on authoritative information and refrain from spreading unverified reports that could cause unnecessary panic.

Related News
In Nuwakot’s flooded villages, grief comes before rescue 
 
Nepal agrees to foreign help for flood rescue
 
What triggered the Rasuwa flood? Scientists piece together a complex chain of events
 
Government asks Meta, TikTok to remove graphic flood content, misinformation
 
Barrier lake continues to pose flood risk, China warns
 
Eighty container drivers stranded in Kerung plead for repatriation
 
Most Read from National
Flash flood hits Rasuwa, damages hydropower projects and markets 
New barrier lake in Nepal raises fresh flood threat, China warns 
Flood death toll continues to rise as Nepal reels from one of its worst disasters in years 
How people can help Nepal’s flood-affected communities 
Nepal declines foreign rescue teams, says its own security agencies can handle operation 
Editor's Picks
Untapped potential leaves Karnali a tough land for residents 
Nepal’s journalism classrooms are emptying out 
Nepal’s faith is finding a new interface 
Nepal’s crackdown on businessmen can’t have it both ways 
Nepal’s labour market caught between jobless workers and worker shortages 
E-PAPER | August 29, 2026
Read ePaper Online
