Most compact cameras use a conventional display as a viewfinder, while some models also offer an optical or electronic viewfinder. The Godox C100, however, takes a different approach, as this compact camera features a large viewing window that doubles as a transparent display.

This screen displays details about the battery, the selected mode, and the exposure settings, while small corner elements hint at what will ultimately appear in the photo. Photos and videos can be recorded in 1:1, 3:2, 4:3, and 16:9 aspect ratios. Photos are stored on a microSD card with a maximum capacity of 128 GB and can be transferred to a smartphone via USB-C. Godox has apparently omitted Wi-Fi and Bluetooth for cost reasons.

While Godox does not provide any details about the camera’s hardware, this very affordable camera, weighing just 65 grams, is unlikely to take photos much better than toy cameras like the Kodak Charmera (
$35 on Amazon
). At least for photographers, however, the Godox C100 is meant to be more than just a toy, because at the touch of a button, the camera can be transformed into a light meter that indicates the correct exposure at the center of the frame. Among other things, this is useful for setting the correct exposure on an analog camera that doesn’t have a built-in light meter.

Pricing and availability

The Godox C100 compact camera is set to launch first in China, priced at CNY 199 (approx. $29). Godox has not yet confirmed any details regarding the international launch, but Godox products are typically available internationally as well. More details about the C100 are available 
on the official product page
.

Source(s)
Godox

⟨
Previous article
Google defeated in bid to overturn record €4.1 billion EU antitrust fine
Next article
Asus confirms pricing for NUC 16 Pro series in Europe
⟩

Add as a preferred source on Google

 static version  
load dynamic
Loading Comments 

 Comment on this article

Related Articles

Editor of the 
original article
:
 
Hannes Brecher
 - Senior Tech Writer 
 - 21527 articles published on Notebookcheck
 since 2018
Since 2009 I have written for different publications with a focus on consumer electronics. I joined the Notebookcheck news team in 2018 and have combined my many years of experience with laptops and smartphones with my lifelong passion for technology to create informative content for our readers about new developments in this sphere. In addition, my design background as an art director at an ad agency has allowed me to have deeper insights into the peculiarities of this industry.
contact me via: 
 @HannesBrecher
, 
 LinkedIn
, 
 Xing

> 
Expert Reviews and News on Laptops, Smartphones and Tech Innovations
 >  
News
 >  
News Archive
 >  
Newsarchive 2026 07
 >  Camera with transparent display launches for the equivalent of $29 
Hannes Brecher, 2026-07- 3 (Update: 2026-07- 3)
