June 18 2026, 16:00 (CEST)

NEW CANYON HEADS-UP DISPLAY HELMET COULD BE A SAFETY GAMECHANGER FOR ROAD RIDING

With its drop-down visor and connection to on-bike AI safety systems, head protection just stepped up a gear.

Performance and safety information with an audio and haptic communication system allows you to receive warnings before you see them. 

 jpg

Embargoed until 16:00 CEST, Thursday 18 June 2026:
 Complementing the futuristic Canyon Predict bike technology but also operating as a stand-alone device, Canyon’s 
prototype Stingr Smart helmet
 offers a glimpse into the future of how wearable tech can make a significant impact on rider safety and performance.

As part of a breakthrough Canyon Predict intelligent safety and performance system, the Stingr Smart helmet helps you see what you don’t see. Data visualisations such as road hazards, the behaviour of other road users, group-ride dynamics, and advice on riding behaviour can be displayed on the helmet’s heads-up display (HUD) which sits on the inside of a retractable helmet visor. 

Data visualizations are primarily projected into the rider's peripheral vision, to minimize cognitive load and keep the user's primary focus squarely on the road ahead. Any alerts are designed to escalate in scale, including both customisable haptic sensations and warnings appearing centrally on screen.

 jpg

Together with the prototype Canyon Predict bike, this helmet innovation reinforces Canyon’s long-term commitment to performance, safety and digital integration. 

Moreover, at Eurobike, taking place in Frankfurt between June 24-27, Canyon will explain how and when the Stingr Smart helmet and the wider Canyon Predict innovation can soon become commonplace on our streets.

Intelligent, context-aware insights without the need to take your hands from the bars

The overall goal of the helmet visor is to provide intelligent, context-aware insights, rather than simple data and alerts, and to allow the rider to give commands, or to toggle through data views without needing to take their hands off the handlebars.

 jpg

Its primary function – setting it apart from other eyewear data systems – is to provide instantly visible alerts about the behaviour other road users (e.g. such as brake light activation, crash detection, etc) through the Canyon Predict system including Prediction Assist, Distance Assist, Terrain Assist and Group Ride Assist.

For performance-minded riders, on-visor metrics delivered either with or without the Canyon Predict system can include data such as speed, distance, time, cadence, power, elevation and gradient. The possibility also exists for heart rate to be measured directly from the helmet and for other Bluetooth or ANT+ compatible bike metrics such as gear usage, battery levels, etc to be measured.

Should the rider prefer to store the screen, a voice-command or a press of the touch button will see the motorized visor/HUD retracting into the helmet. A similar action will see it deploying ready for usage. And each time the visor retracts or deploys it passes through a stationary wiper blade that cleans the exterior surface. 

Voice commands are provided through a near-ear audio system. Its microphone allows all functions of the helmet to be accessed without the rider needing to take their hands off the handlebars. Alternatively, the rider can operate the helmet by using touch buttons on the outer shell. The audio system also allows for warnings or notifications as well as route guidance (e.g. turn-by-turn directions, distance to destination and elevation info), group messaging or hands-free calling when connected to a smartphone. 

Beyond being a companion piece for the Canyon Predict system, the 
Stingr Smart helmet
 can also operate as a stand-alone device if the rider chooses to use a bike without the technology. The helmet can receive data input from a smartphone which can appear in customisable data fields on the visor screen. And as you can imagine, with the helmet being based on Canyon’s existing 
Stingr aero helmet
, it offers all the head protection and aerodynamic benefits you’d expect.

 jpg

More information

True to Canyon’s performance DNA, the new concept is built directly on the architecture of the existing Stingr aero helmet, delivering the premium head protection and aerodynamic watt-savings riders expect, packaged into an attractive aero helmet shell with state-of-the-art features. To discover more about the features and functions of Canyon’s Stingr Smart helmet, take a look at the press kit or the FAQs here. 

To see Canyon’s Stingr Smart technology in action, as well as several other innovative Canyon prototype concepts, visit the Canyon exhibition stand at Eurobike in Messe Frankfurt (hall 11.0, stand B50) between 24-27 June. 

NOTES TO EDITORS

1. White papers

Deeper technical explanations and FAQs:  

Canyon Predict

Stingr Smart helmet
