Git hosting in the EU. Built in the open.
A public Git service running on Forgejo, with a generous free tier, no feature behind a paywall, and infrastructure you can read.
Key facts
Hosted in Germany, under EU law
Everything runs and is stored on Hetzner in Germany, so your data falls under German data protection law and the GDPR.
Infrastructure you can read
The Ansible playbooks, OpenTofu modules, CI pipelines and monitoring configuration that drive CodeFloe are public repositories.
No feature gates
Private repositories, CI/CD, hosted pages, package registries and preview environments are free for everyone. Paid tiers only cover resource costs for storage and CI/CD.
Where we stand on AI
The most frequent questions about the innovation which moves tech the most.
We see AI as a tool, not a threat
We use AI tools ourselves, in this platform and in our own work. You are welcome to use them here too. Nothing about CodeFloe is built to make that harder.
Your code is never training data
We do not train models on anything you store here, and we do not sell or hand your data to anyone who would. Not now, and not later: it is not a business we intend to be in.
Abusive scrapers are not welcome
Aggressive crawlers can flatten a forge. We tackle them at the edge, so the platform stays fast for the people actually using it.
Forgejo on steroids
Forgejo is the complete software forge at CodeFloe's core, and most of what you use here is the Forgejo community's work: repositories, issues, pull requests, releases, packages, APIs and migrations.
We extend it in focused areas to create a more integrated developer experience, then run every change from a public fork. CodeFloe-specific work stays reviewable instead of disappearing into a private patch set.
Visit forgejo.org
Check out our fork
Inspect how it runs
Most platforms ask you to trust a status page. The software, the servers and the pipelines behind CodeFloe are public repositories, so you can check instead.
# Rate-limit by source, exempting the git protocol and package pulls

acl
 
abusive_rate
    
sc_http_req_rate
(
0
) 
gt
 
100

acl
 
is_git_protocol 
path_end
 
/info/refs /git-upload-pack /git-receive-pack

acl
 
is_known_bot
    
src
 
-f
 
/etc/haproxy/allowlist-good-bots.acl

http-request
 
track-sc0
 
src
 
table
 
per_ip_rates

http-request
 
deny
 
deny_status
 
429
 
if
 
abusive_rate !is_git_protocol !is_known_bot
Excerpt from the HAProxy configuration that shields codefloe.com.
The Forgejo fork that serves this site
Every modification we run, in the open
The Ansible and OpenTofu that build the servers
How the machines are provisioned and configured
The Kubernetes cluster behind the supporting services
Status, single sign-on, Renovate and secrets
The live status of every service
Checked continuously, not self-reported
A fresh approach to costs
Running costs are partially covered by donations and by the extended tiers. Income and expenses are reported transparently, and donations are split between the people maintaining and developing the platform.
See what you get
Still deciding?
Where the data sits, whether you can migrate from GitHub, who is accountable, and why we ask for donations.
See all FAQ
Migrating from somewhere else?
Import an existing project from GitHub, GitLab or Bitbucket with its history, issues and pull requests intact. Planning to move a bunch of repositories? Our very own batch migration CLI imports many repositories in one run.
Migrate a repository
Batch migration tool
