Request a
                    Demo

Research

Commodification of Intelligence: Good, Bad, and Ugly Circular AI Deals

By Wojciech Gryc  ·  July 28,
                2026  ·  7 min read

Every few months, and especially this week, the AI space gets criticized for circular financing and
                    customer relationships. OpenAI raises money from Microsoft, spending it on Microsoft servers; Nvidia
                    backstops CoreWeave debt, and CoreWeave buys Nvidia GPUs. “The bubble is about to
                    burst!” analysts scream.

Analysts point to dot-com deals with circular investments in 1999, arguing that this is all bound to
                    happen again
[1]
[2]
. They are wrong.

Circular deals are more interesting than “good” or “bad.” They show the AI
                    industry isn't just maturing, but modifying the idea of “AI” to something that is
                    less a technology product, and more a commodity. Imagine that—intelligence available like electricity,
                    and the underlying financial system structured accordingly.

The evolution of circular deals points to the 
commodification
 of AI, where
                    compute capacity is moving from a business model where you buy a product (e.g., the hardware, or
                    space in a data center) to something so fungible that you buy it the way you buy electricity,
                    copper, natural gas, or other commodities.

We'll explore why circular deals are particularly important in commodity industries and
                    what this implies for understanding the trajectory of AI. First we'll cover how major investments in 
traditional
 commodities
                    markets work to ground our analogy more clearly. Next, we'll cover the investments that
                    mimic this process in AI, showing how such investments can be healthy. Finally, we'll
                    explore a few examples where circular deals do 
not
 abide by this analogy and how these
                    deals are introducing risks that could one day turn into awful surprises for the companies
                    themselves, their investors, or the entire sector.

Buying and Selling Commodities: A Circularity Primer

Complex commodity infrastructure like mines, refineries, and ports comes with such large
                    development costs that a bank lending a development company money can potentially risk its own solvency in
                    doing so. Circular deals with multiple customers or beneficiaries, and potentially even
                    governments, are often the only solution that gets shovels in dirt or ships in the water.

Let's look at a simplified example of such a deal. Imagine you want to develop your
                    region's economy with several wells and a pipeline, and you can't afford it. You partner
                    with a commodity trading firm who agrees to make your company attractive to banks or bond buyers by
                    guaranteeing they will buy all your oil at a certain price. This means you are guaranteed revenue
                    for the foreseeable future, and the banks know they can trust you'll repay their loans. The
                    trading firm might even take an equity stake in your company for good measure—potentially to
                    encourage better governance or oversight.

With such a relationship between you and the oil trader, you've got oil, a large bank loan, and a guaranteed 
                    customer… you've got yourself a circular commodities deal!

This is not a contrived example; it's a common strategy developed and evolved since the
                    1960s. Japanese commodities traders and development banks financed infrastructure to enable
                    commodity development, committing to future purchases and equity deals
[3]
. Jamaica did so in the 1980s
[4]
.

More recently, the US government began facilitating circular deal making to stimulate the critical
                    minerals sector in its bid for supply chain resilience. Last year, MP Materials, a relative
                    newcomer to magnet manufacturing and critical minerals, announced a 10-year relationship with the
                    Department of War, where the latter committed to buying all neodymium-praseodymium (i.e., magnets)
                    from the company for at least $110/kg
[5]
. Since then,
                    such off-take agreements have been announced between MP Materials and General Motors
[6]
, and are in fact quite common in the electric vehicle
                    space
[7]
. These direct relationships also
                    incentivize equity ownership in the commodities producers and even underlying mines because
                    it's very clear that these producers and mines will have revenue in the coming years.

Fungible commodities with large global markets are particularly well suited to such
                    deals because the counterparty guaranteeing to be a customer (i.e., the oil trading firm in our example above)
                    knows there is a large market they can tap into. They likely have a history of successfully making
                    such sales, otherwise they wouldn't have billions of dollars and a pristine reputation
                    they can leverage.

AI is Fungible and Expensive to Develop

The frontier generative AI industry—be it model development or inference—is very much
                    dependent on Nvidia. GPUs are effectively a fungible commodity thanks to Nvidia's
                    development of the underlying infrastructure and standardization across all firms in the space. Three forces are enabling AI chips and associated data centers to act like a fungible commodity:

The majority of compute today comes from Nvidia GPUs, so two data centers using similar chips
                        are almost the same for the purposes of hyperscalers, model builders, and those needing
                        inference.

Model development and inference at scale requires massive data centers sometimes costing well over $10
                        billion. These data centers can't be developed unless it's via a creative financing
                        deal or via a company with access to immense wealth (i.e., the hyperscalers).

Aside from GPUs, memory and other hardware, electricity is the other bottleneck. You can't
                        build an 11-figure data center without access to large amounts of reliable electricity.

As a result, GPUs, electricity, and data centers are all effectively fungible, with large order backlogs and pent-up demand. If you build a data center and can't leverage it for your own business, there's a good chance you
                    can sell it to someone who can—they might even pay a premium for availability in the short term.

SpaceX and Meta, despite trying to build top-tier foundation models, are profitably leasing their
                    own data centers to others—these data centers are working today and ready for frontier lab
                    workloads. Well-capitalized labs are willing to pay a huge premium for the privilege. SpaceX
                    leases its Colossus 1 and 2 data centers for over $2 billion per month
[8]
, at a significant markup over other smaller clouds and data
                    centers
[9]
.

Let's now return to the aspiring startup or neocloud. You are starting up and, like our oil
                    example earlier, have proven yourself on a small scale but now need your own data center or access
                    to thousands of GPUs. What can you do?

Enter Nvidia and the circular deal—much like the oil deal.

Nvidia provides the capital and product access to your startup, prioritizing your access to its GPUs
                    so you can get the hardware you need. Nvidia has a $1 trillion order backlog
[10]
 and knows it can resell your hardware or make better use of
                    it if you fail, so it goes a step further: it becomes the guaranteed buyer of your compute if you
                    can't take advantage of it… much like SpaceX and Meta above. This is not
                    theoretical—SemiAnalysis provides estimates for Nvidia compute off-take agreements and
                    pricing
[11]
. As with our oil example, Nvidia might want
                    some equity as well—and you will want them to have it, should you need to call in any favors
                    later.

This is, of course, one type of circular deal, and a relatively simple one at that. It's been
                    used in CoreWeave's $6.3 billion deal with Nvidia
[12]
, alongside smaller data center operators like Firmus ($505
                    million
[13]
).

This helps explain why we see so many interconnecting and circular
                    relationships—OpenAI cancels its deal with Oracle, so Meta swoops in
[14]
; SpaceX leases servers to Google, Google invests in
                    Anthropic; and so on.

Wall Street gets circular deals, and humanity gets artificial general intelligence…
                    purportedly.

When Circular Deals Go Ugly

Nvidia argues it is supporting a global AI ecosystem. Unfortunately, this doesn't preclude it
                    from overextending itself. A $6.3 billion deal with CoreWeave is one thing, but committing up to
                    $750 billion
[2]
 is another.

The success of this approach for startups and neoclouds also assumes that AI and data centers
                    continue to be fungible and “resellable”. Should standards or chipsets change, or
                    should technologies make it easier to run local models or models on small clusters, then the
                    business models might fail and the off-take agreements Nvidia has might not help the ecosystem
                    much.

… and When They Go Bad

Circularity becomes particularly nefarious when it is used to hide the effects of the investments,
                    debts, or other obligations from investors.

Figure 1: Google's backstopping of TeraWulf bonds, which are enabling the building
                        of Fluidstack data centers leased by Anthropic. 
[original]

Figure 1
 shows the FT's
[15]
 breakdown of a recent TeraWulf bond deal. In this case,
                    TeraWulf can obtain financing given Google's backstop of any lease failures, should Fluidstack
                    not be able to pay TeraWulf, or Anthropic unable to pay Fluidstack
[16]
. Google is skipping the entire reselling process and simply committing to cover any delinquencies. This gives TeraWulf the benefits of Google acting as a
                    guarantor of the loan without the loan appearing on Google's balance sheet.

Similarly, Meta's $27.3 billion Hyperion data center bond sale is an off-balance sheet one
[17]
, as is its more recent $12.3 billion deal marketed
                    by BlackRock
[18]
.

Many finance professionals argue that these bonds are ultimately guaranteed by the impressive and
                    continually growing revenues and profits from the hyperscalers, so there is nothing to worry about. The
                    reason these bonds find so many customers, despite the circularity label, is that the final
                    guarantors (i.e., the hyperscalers) generate billions of dollars of profit every year and can easily cover these costs, should it come down to that.

… but this is 
today
, and it's with the current bond deals. Will
                    tomorrow's bond deals be supported by the hyperscalers in the same way? And what happens if
                    hyperscaler revenue trends change? What if the banks begin expanding the backstop agreements from
                    hyperscalers to “generally pretty decent” companies? What if the backstop fails to be
                    enforced? Will we see hyperscaler-backstop-backed-bonds grouped together, collateralized, and
                    resold the way Mortgage Backed Securities were in 2007?
[19]

Implications and Conclusion

Circular deals are not bad. In fact, they are critical in the development of the AI ecosystem much
                    like such deals are used in critical minerals, oil, electric vehicles, and other capital intensive
                    industries with incredibly high startup costs.

The circularity helps illustrate the commodification of AI today, and how the technology
                    might one day be more like electricity or an internet connection, rather than a product one buys or
                    subscribes to.

When circular deals are supported by overextended lenders, or when overextended lenders try to move
                    such deals off their balance sheets, they become ugly and bad—in other words,
                    incredibly risky. This industry is likely to grow much more in the coming years, so it is important to watch for the lowering of standards or aggregation of risk. As SemiAnalysis
                    writes
[11]
:

AI Debt Financing will become a multi-trillion-dollar credit market, with over $7T of debt
                    outstanding by 2029 driven both by AI IT Capex and AI Datacenter Capex needs [...] This will make it the second largest asset backed debt
                    market after the US mortgage-backed financing market at just over $13T.

In this evolution, there might be a few bad deals along the way. It's important to keep your
                    eyes open.

Enjoyed this post? Subscribe for updates

Get notified when we publish new analysis on AI, geopolitics, risk, and more. We
                will never share your e-mail with anyone.

Thank you!

You're on the list.

Please try again. Something went wrong.

No spam, unsubscribe anytime.

References and Footnotes

Bloomberg; 
AI Circular Deals: How Microsoft, OpenAI and Nvidia Keep Paying
                        Each Other

Bloomberg; 
Nvidia’s $750 Billion in Deals Reignite Circular AI
                        Fears

Soyeun Kim; 
From Goa to Angola: Exploring Ideas and Mechanisms in
                        Japan’s Kaihatsu-Yunyū

A good overview of commodity trading and development, including Jamaica's aluminum
                    industry and circular deals thereof, is available in 
The World for Sale
—
https://www.amazon.com/World-Sale-Javier-Blas/dp/0190078952

CSIS; 
Rare Earth Export Restrictions One Year Later

MP Materials; 
General Motors and MP Materials Enter Long-Term Supply Agreement
                        to Scale Rare Earth Magnet Sourcing and Production in the U.S.

McCarthy Tétrault; 
Car and Battery Makers are Getting Closer to the Mining
                        Business

Wikipedia; 
Colossus (data center)

SemiAnalysis; 
Meta Compute: Everyone Wants To Be A Neocloud

CNBC; 
Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang: At least $1T backlog through 2027

SemiAnalysis; 
Nvidia GPU Debt Backstop Unleashes the AI Project Trinity: Capital, Offtake and
                        Datacenters

Reuters; 
CoreWeave, Nvidia sign $6.3 billion order for cloud computing
                        capacity

Bloomberg; 
Nvidia-Backed Data Center Builder Firmus Raises $505
                        Million

Tom's Hardware; 
OpenAI’s massive Stargate data center canceled as firm
                        can’t reach terms with Oracle, operator struggles with reliability issues — Meta
                        said to be interested in snatching excess capacity

Financial Times; 
Morgan Stanley cashes in on AI boom with debt deals

It is incredibly interesting that Anthropic's deals with IREN, TeraWulf, and other
                    companies enabled Situational Awareness to make billions of dollars via equity investing, and then
                    they went on to fund Fluidstack's $830 million Series A, which is now being used to support
                    Anthropic's compute requirements.

Financial Times; 
A closer look at the record-smashing ‘Hyperion’ corporate bond
                        sale

Bloomberg; 
BlackRock Dodges AI Bond Flop as $12.3 Billion Debt Deal
                        Rallies

Hey there, fellow reader, hyperscaler-backstop-backed-bonds grouped, collateralized,
                    and resold could be extremely profitable if you believe AI is the future but aren't sure which
                    companies will succeed in paying off their debts!

Share this post
Copy
                link

Read next
Research
US Households: Stock Ownership, Leverage, and Systemic Risk
Research
Kimi K3, Qwen 3.8, and Anthropic's (potential) Unravelling

© Phase AI 2026
Emerging Trajectories is a product of
                    Phase AI
