design
Lines

AI & Big Data Designline

Computex 2026: Are We Heading for the Agentic PC Era Yet?
Video Interview

By

Nitin Dahad

06.04.2026

0

Share this:

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)

LinkedIn

As Computex 2026 draws to a close this week, EE Times caught up with Jim McGregor, principal analyst at Tirias Research, to share thoughts on some of the key things happening during this major annual trade show in Taipei, Taiwan.
You can watch the full interview below:

Alternatively, you can listen to the full audio file here:

Over the last two to three years, Computex in Taipei has been dominated by AI hype. While the conversation two years ago focused heavily on AI PCs, this year’s event shifted decisively toward agentic AI. As the CEO and founder of Nvidia, Jensen Huang, proclaimed in his opening keynote on Monday this week at the Taipei Music Center (yes, he always fills a whole stadium wherever he goes, especially in Taiwan), “Agentic AI and useful AI have arrived.”

Partner Content

View All

Early Memory Contention Checks Reduce IC Design Risks  

By Chun-hsiang Chang   06.01.2026

Product Recall Management Guide for Electronics Manufacturing SMBs

By MRPeasy  06.01.2026

AI-Accelerated Software Security Vulnerability Discovery: Is Hardware Next?

By Andreas Kuehlmann, General Manager – Security Solutions, Arteris  06.01.2026

When Huang has a message, he will deliver that message in a hundred ways to emphasize his viewpoint: We are entering a new era of agentic PCs, where we interact with our PCs in a completely different way. Nvidia is framing this as an entirely new class of PCs, co-developed with Microsoft and powered by the new Arm-based Nvidia RTX Spark CPU unveiled at the show.

But is it that easy? Listen to what Jim McGregor says in the video.
Beyond 
agentic computing
, this year’s event also underscored the industry-wide momentum behind physical AI, alongside a subtle but clear consensus among visiting executives: Taiwan remains the definitive epicenter of the global electronics value chain.
See also:
Taiwan’s Tech Industry
Taiwan Minister Emphasizes Collaboration and Future Focus on Photonics, WBG, and Quantum

RELATED TOPICS:

AGENTIC AI
, 
AI AND BIG DATA
, 
BIG DATA

COMPANIES:

MICROSOFT
, 
NVIDIA

Share this:

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)

LinkedIn

Nitin Dahad

Nitin Dahad is editor-in-chief of EE Times. An electronic engineering graduate from City University, he’s been an engineer, journalist and entrepreneur. He was part of ARC International’s startup team and took it public, and he co-founded a publication called The Chilli in the early 2000s. Nitin has also worked with National Semiconductor, GEC Plessey Semiconductors, Dialog Semiconductor, Marconi Instruments, Coresonic, Center for Integrated Photonics, IDENT Technology and Jennic. Nitin also held a role with government promoting U.K. technology globally in the U.S., Brazil, Middle East and Africa, and India.    

Follow Nitin on LinkedIn

0
 comments

Post Comment 

Leave a Reply 
Cancel reply

				You must 
Register
 or
				
Login
 to post a comment.

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. 
Learn how your comment data is processed.
