Crafting QR Codes
 
A deep dive into QR code art

 Sep 27, 2024 - Updated Jun 13, 2026 

Nobody willingly goes out of their way to scan a QR code. Yet they have infested the world, because it’s the simplest way to visually share a URL. On signs, advertisements, and packaging of all sorts; if you look around and try to notice, it’s hard to stop noticing.

Me Writing this Blog Post
Original photo
 by 
Arnaud DG
, 
CC BY 2.0
The Observable Universe
Original photo
 by 
erikjohansson
, 
CC BY 2.0

Of course, regular black and white QR codes are just the tip of the iceberg.

Many people want something personalized and on-brand, which is easily done by slapping a logo right in the middle. This is possible because QR codes, like CDs and DVDs, use Reed-Solomon error correction to recover damaged information.

While this can be executed with taste, it’s most often done lazily to poor effect.

QR codes are displayed small, and illegible logos are the rule. Moreover, more error correction requires a denser code with smaller pixels. If you’re not careful, you can end up with something ugly as well as impossible to scan.

Is there a way to craft a beautiful and scannable QR code?

Yes, that’s the whole blog post.

The Landscape of Artistic QR Codes

First, let’s cover what is possible.

Many have incorporated photos into the entire code. But there is a real tradeoff between image quality and usefulness.

QArt Codes
Halftone QR Codes, 2013
QRpicture
Burger King VMA Commercials

For maximum style points, artists can design fully bespoke QR codes by hand.

QRcanvas
2012 MTS Calendar
 
Am I Collective
 (
source
)
minor
(
Dribbble
, 
Behance
)
The Art of QR Codes / 
Elkoy Artists
 Collective

There’s AI for this too. I recommend reading 
the creators’ blog post
 and 
Stable Diffusion QR Code 101
. I’ll omit examples and leave a poem in their place.

I shall not beleaguer thy weary eyes,
nor further burden the web, world wide,
with pages from this Babelian picture tome.
This is not a place of honor,
there are thirteen fingers on her,
anime girl big boobs ancient rome.

One interesting direction is to simply change how the black and white squares are rendered.

Created using 
QRBTF
Created using 
QRBTF

I was so inspired that I wrote some code myself.

The design tool I made is available at 
qrframe.kylezhe.ng
. It comes with presets that are simple to modify or create from scratch using Javascript.

With that, you have glimpsed a breadth of techniques, many of which will confuse users, some of which may fail to work with the modern smartphone camera app.

To truly understand where and why we can take creative liberties, we must start with how QR codes are structured and scanned.

The Anatomy of a QR Code

Header
Data
Unused capacity
Error correction
Finder patterns
 are the big squares shapes in three corners. These are used to determine the code's orientation, dimensions, perspective and more. The ratio of black and white pixels through the center is key (roughly 1:1:3:1:1), so the corners aren't essential.
Perfect
OK
Bad
Bad2
To aid detection, finder patterns need a separator or "quiet zone" around them, but this doesn't have to be a specific size.
Alignment patterns
 are smaller squares used to account for distortion. There's usually one in the last corner, but the smallest QR code doesn't have any, while very large codes have multiple.
Size
Timing patterns
 are the horizontal and vertical belts of alternating black and white pixels. These supposedly help with aligning rows and columns while decoding.
Unlike the finder patterns, the timing patterns and alignment patterns are not strictly necessary in practice. A QR code will 
mostly*
 scan fine without them.
*
The bottom right alignment pattern does help
, especially for larger sizes, while the timing pattern seems to be completely useless.
Enable bottom right alignment pattern
Format information
 stores the error correction level and the mask pattern applied to the data (explained below). One copy is in the top left, and the other copy is split between the top right and bottom left.
Very large QR codes will have a section for 
version information
. Version means size, and it ranges from 1–40. One copy is in the top right, and the other copy is in the bottom left.
Version 2
For smaller codes, size can be accurately calculated just using the distance between the finder patterns.
The remaining space is for the 
data
.
Perhaps surprisingly, it starts at the bottom right and zigzags up and down, from the right to the left.
Show zigzag
The bits are organized in blocks of 8 (aka bytes), so the last few pixels will be unused if the number of data pixels isn't divisible by 8.
Show byte boundaries
There are 4 levels of error correction which allow roughly 7%, 15%, 25%, or 30% of all the bytes to be recovered. See how increasing the error correction also reduces the data capacity.
Low
Medium
Quartile
High
If you further break down the data, you'll see it starts with a header and is padded to fill the unused capacity. You can play around with the error correction level, version (size), and input text to see how the space is used.
Version 2
THIS MAY LOOK VERY WEIRD. After the certain size, the data bytes are interleaved so they are spread throughout the space rather than placed continguously. Also, the header isn't a multiple of 8 bits, so the data isn't byte aligned.
The data header describes the encoding mode and the character count. There are efficient encoding modes for numbers and alphanumeric text, but the only relevant mode for URLs is Byte mode*, which just means UTF-8.
*Alphanumeric mode can encode URLs, but it only supports uppercase characters, so no one uses it.
Finally, the 
mask
 is one of 8 patterns XOR-ed with the data to break up undesirable pixel arrangements (like the finder pattern shape).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Miscellaneous
QR codes can be rotated, mirrored, and the "dark" and "light" pixels can be inverted.
Rotation 0°
Perspective
Mirror
Invert color

Here’s all you need to remember to make an artistic QR code: the 
finder patterns must be the right 
shape
, and the rest of the QR code just needs to be dark or light enough in the right 
place
.

That’s 80% of it, but unfortunately there’s one major gotcha we’ve gotta cover.

Convenience at a Cost

Can you tell what I did wrong with these QR codes I drew using chalk?

Attempt 1 (terrible)
Attempt 2 (still unscannable)

The first one is janky, but I was legitimately confused why my second attempt failed.

Multipurpose scanners (like the default smartphone camera app) must first detect a QR code before any scanning is attempted. Compared to constantly active dumb scanners, smartphones are much pickier about what they’ll accept. It must “look like a QR code” to the black box that is the on-device computer vision model.

A rule of thumb is to use 
solid and highly contrasting colors
 while maintaining a good balance between dark and light pixels, but there’s no alternative to testing with real devices.

With that in mind, let’s cover existing ways people have successfully created artistic codes programmatically.

Turning An Image Into QR Squares

Overlaying Data Pixels

Created using 
Amazing-QR
In the simplest case, you can just place dots over the center of where each pixel would be. A dot at least 1/3 the width and height of a pixel is usually enough for it to decode properly.
Created using 
Visualead
In addition to a center dot, you can partially lighten or darken the entirety of each pixel.
Created using 
Halftone QR Codes, 2013
By downscaling the image or using pixel art, the center dot can be hidden in plain sight. Dithering and limiting the color palette (quantization) both increase noise which also provides more camouflage.
Example from 
Micrography QR Codes, 2019
The most unique technique I've seen involves generating word clouds. In this case, the overlay dots are used in an intermediate step to drive a text deforming algorithm.
Bad Apple but it is played with QR code
The jump to animation is simple, since the same dot overlay can be drawn on each frame. This example changes over time to display the lyrics though.

Turning QR Squares Into An Image

Using Errors

Using up error correction capacity is obviously not ideal, but it’s also space inefficient. The correction capacity only increases by one byte for every two error correction bytes. And of course, some capacity has to be reserved for actual scanning errors, so the drawable area is quite limited.

The benefit is that the error correction process fixes errors at unknown locations, but what if we know where we want to introduce changes?

Using Padding

The data of a QR code is made up of message bytes and its corresponding error correction bytes. Any part of the message can be freely set, but changing the message defeats the purpose of a QR code.

Luckily, short messages are padded to fill up the capacity, and the padding can be freely set without changing the decoded content.

Padding Solving For Fixed Error Correction

Since the error correction is calculated from the message, is there a way to calculate a message based on desired error correction? Yes, because Reed-Solomon codes are Maximum Distance Seperable (MDS) codes. We can solve a linear system to find the padding value that leads to an error correction byte.

Created using 
QArt Coder
URLs can have anchors like 
test.com#anchor
. Usually, this scrolls to a specific part of a page, but an invalid anchor is just ignored. The math used to manipulate pixels by adding an anchor is covered in 
QArt Codes
.
Created using 
MY-QR.ART
This site lets you draw the desired output data, which can be directly interpreted as part of the input text. The first half of the text is the url to a link redirect service and the random characters that follow act as a unique key. For details, see 
Hacking QR code design
.
Created using 
QRpicture
Here, the data pixels match an image, but they are not part of the decoded message. In other words, they are changing the padding bytes. 
See their HN post
. 
 (This padding manipulation method was first described in 
Expansion of Image Displayable Area in Design QR Code and Its Applications, 2011
.)
Bad Apple!! on a QR Code Generator
In terms of animation, reverse-engineering the data for every "frame" is a bit more tedious, and the QR code is unlikely to be scannable. See their 
behind the scenes video
 to see how they approached it.

I ended up making my own reverse-engineered Bad Apple with the goal of making it somewhat scannable in realtime. Adding a noisy pattern makes it much more likely to be detected. The source code is an example in 
fuqr
.

Bad Apple but it's an unscannable QR code
Bad Apple but it's a scannable QR code

Non-Image Techniques

Since there aren’t too many examples of these, I’ll be showing my own work and giving my thoughts.

While each unique design will have unique challenges, hopefully these examples can give you some some idea of steps you can take.

Forgery

Douglas Coupland
 
QR Boogie-Woogie No. 5
Created using 
qrframe

Good artists copy. Often times human-made designs are possible to implement using code. Here, Douglas Coupland has replaced 2x2 squares of black and white with a corresponding dark or light colored square. Not only is this easy to code, it demonstrates a common tactic of replacing 
groups
 of pixels with a larger design element. See 
Vancouver Codes (2012)
 for more examples of his work.

QrArts
Created using 
qrframe

Great artists steal. The original design is slick, but not all that glitters is a scannable QR code. When things don’t scan, experience tells us that we need 
solid colors
 and 
higher contrast
. I opted to increase the dot size and density, especially for the finder patterns, and I filled the gap between dots with a dark shadow. This is less pretty, but a necessary compromise.

QRBTF A2C Style
Created using 
qrframe

Great programmers steal by copying code. This QR code style option, along with many others, is found in the 
react-qrbtf
 repository under the MIT license. Building on top of existing code is a great way to make a new design, so feel free to use my code in the 
qrframe
 repository as well. The psychological damage you’ll suffer is cost enough.

Touching grass

Pathetic human attempt
Created using 
qrframe

Of course I had to digitally create what I failed to do in real life. With the help of 
roughjs
, making hand-drawn SVGs is quite simple. Playing with the fill and roughness parameters really helped me understand where the line between undetectable and reliably scannable is. My manual drawing was not even close. I cannot overemphasize 
solid colors
 and 
high contrast
.

Mosaic inside the Vatican museum
Created using 
qrframe

Exposure to all types of art is probably the best source of creative energy. The design is quite simple, but the effect is mighty like the elephant. If there’s a lesson to be learned here, it’s that rules are made to be respectfully broken. You CAN mess with the finder patterns, but notice how the cross shape is completely preserved in two of them.

The Mediterranean Sea
Created using 
fuqr

Animation is generally a bad idea since you want every frame to be scannable. But the call of the sea is unrelenting. In this example, each pixel only changes in scale, and the center 1/3 of each pixel is always the correct color like in the dot overlay technique. And that’s the final lesson, that none of these techniques are mutually exclusive.

Congratulations, you now know too much about QR codes!

Thanks for reading!

I hope you learned something interesting, even if it’s not useful.

If you’d like to design a QR code, and you’re not afraid of writing a little code, give 
qrframe.kylezhe.ng
 a try.

The editor and rendering source code is available at 
qrframe
 while the QR code generator written in Rust that powers it is available at 
fuqr
.

You can do it if you try, but also your time is precious.

See ya!

Random Tangents

Here are some QR code thoughts I had to get off my mind.

There are 
many
, there are 
4
, there is 1 encoding mode.

The QR code standard doesn’t reflect reality. I’m sure there are standards compliant generators and scanners, probably in some legacy systems of some Japanese enterprise that still uses fax machines and pagers.

Alphanumeric and Numeric mode are supported b/c they are dead simple to implement, but nobody uses this.

Nobody supports extensions like Structured append, ECI, and FNC1 encoding modes.

Nobody supports Kanji mode

Nobody assumes byte mode is ISO 8859-1

Everybody just assumes UTF-8. It’s identical for ASCII (all URLs) and the default encoding for most systems.

The mask selection step is deeply unserious.

The best mask is chosen by scoring the masked data, but the scoring conditions are arbitrary, and all 8 masks will work just fine anyway.

This interative step by step walkthrough showcases this in Steps 7 and 8. Choose the worst mask and see that it doesn’t matter.

https://www.nayuki.io/page/creating-a-qr-code-step-by-step

Proprietary scannable codes are kinda funny. Tiktok, Snapchat, and Instagram have already replaced their custom codes (TikCode, Snapcode, Nametag, respectively) with stylized QR codes. 

Here are links I don’t want to lose.

https://www.thonky.com/qr-code-tutorial
 is a great resource and helped me understand the error correction math.

segno
 is probably the only QR code generator that supports Kanji mode.

I’ve found two 3d galleries of QR code art. If I had a nickel…

https://www.qrmosaics.art/3d-gallery

https://www.ineoscan.com/qrcodefactory1

QRazyBox
 is a super cool QR code recovery tool that I used to decode this book cover and find the 
original stock image from 2011
.
