Why Dark Sky Lighting

Why Dark-Sky Lighting?

SCROLL DOWN

Why Dark Sky Lighting

Why Dark-Sky Lighting?

Dark-Sky Lighting is 
Responsible 
Lighting.
See 
6 important reasons for using it
, or 
skip to What is Dark-Sky Lighting?
2 minute read...

Safety

Safety

Safety
Dark-sky lighting still gives us light
 
but in a safer way while also greatly reducing the scope and distance 
light pollution
 travels
. 
It's the solution to light pollution!
It reduces dangerous 
disability glare
 for drivers and pedestrians (have you ever been blinded by a car with white headlights?). 
Too much
 light 
(
e
specially if it's white)
 can make it harder to see and makes us less safe by creating harsh shadows and giving criminals a place to hide. 
Brighter does not mean safer.
 In England and Wales, 
an extensive study
 analyzing over 14 years of data from 62 authorities found little evidence of an increase in traffic accidents or crime after reduced lighting.

Health

Health

Health
Darkness beneficially affects our circadian rhythm, which controls our hormones, sleep cycles and even our organs and immune systems. Blue light at night
 (from white LEDs, smart phones, etc.)
, can possibly 
harm your health
 and contribute to insomnia, cancer, diabetes, heart disease, obesity, etc (see 
Dark Sky Resources
 for tips).  For good health, we need sunshine, but 
we also need exposure to darkness.

Wildlife

Wildlife

Wildlife
Nighttime is essential to Earth’s ecosystem.
  Artificial lighting disrupts the rhythm of day and night that so many plants and animals depend upon. This leads to devastating effects for birds, sea turtles, nocturnal animals, amphibians, mammals and insects like fireflies.  Dark-sky lighting 
(especially amber/orange)
 will go far to 
help protect our precious wildlife,
 and will help 
attract less insects to your property! 

Rest

Rest

Rest
Nighttime is a time to rest. Amber dark-sky lighting utilizes colors that more closely resemble sunsets and candlelight rather than white colors that many find too bright and unpleasant at night--not to mention the 
possible disturbance to sleep!
  The town of 
Davis, CA put up a fight
 after their streetlights were replaced with white LEDs, and they won!

Planet

Planet

Our Planet
Dark-sky lighting uses only the amount of light necessary, which greatly reduces wasted energy consumption. 
About 30% of all outdoor lighting in the United States is wasted,
 and $3.3 billion a year is spent on this wasted light. 

Stars

Stars

Our Stars
What you'll notice most about light pollution is that it makes our stars disappear from view. Dark skies, places where you can truly see the awe-inspiring, ancient, sacred skies and stars our ancestors saw, are dwindling.  This is due to rapidly growing light pollution and especially the current problem of 
blue-Rich White LEDs
 replacing older streetlights. Please 
contact your city/county officials
 to make sure these lights aren't coming to your streets...
before it's too late!

Hope

Hope

There’s Hope!
Dark-sky lighting works! Flagstaff, AZ, a city of over 70,000 people, uses some of the best amber dark-sky lighting techniques in the world, and residents can 
see the Milky Way standing in a Walmart parking lot!
  Flagstaff is a certified 
International Dark Sky Community,
 and more and more communities around the world are adopting dark-sky 
lighting ordinances
 as well. How about your town or city?

What is Dark Sky Lighting?

What is Dark Sky Lighting?

What 
is  
Dark-Sky Lighting?
· It's simply a way of lighting that helps keep the sky dark by 
fully shielding
 the light bulb on the top and sides
 so the light is directed 
down 
rather than to the sides and up to the sky, which creates glare, excess light and hides our stars. (Skip to 4:50 of "Losing the Dark," below, to see this demonstrated). See 
photo examples
.
· It is 
amber in color
 instead of blue, green or white. 
Amber LEDs are a better choice than warm white or low CCT white LEDS
. However, choose warm white or low CCT (2700 kelvin or less) over a higher kelvin white LED. Find amber LED sources 
here.
For further understanding, please see 
Dark-Sky Resources
.
· It is 
dimmed
 and no brighter than necessary, is only used where or when needed, and often uses timers or motion detectors. 
This solution to light pollution began with 
Flagstaff Dark Skies Coalition
, when in the 1950s, they realized the necessity of protecting their dark skies, and they now have the darkest skies of probably any illuminated city you will find. They use mostly *
amber
* dark-sky lighting, and it's now 
widely available
--people just need to know about it. 

"Losing the Dark" is a beautiful film about 
light pollution
 by the 
International Dark-Sky Association
 and 
Loch Ness Productions
. Music by 
Geodesium
.

Thank you for reading! I appreciate you! As you can see, with amber dark-sky lighting, we all win! It's widely available and affordable. We don't have to settle for white LED streetlights and commercial lighting when there are 
amber LEDs
 that are affordable, efficient, and practical. 
We just need to stand together as a society (as we did with limiting cigarette smoking in public areas of the U.S.)
 and let our towns know we want it! 
Please take 2 minutes to watch the beautiful trailer of "
Saving the Dark
" by Sriram Murali, below, which perfectly states what I wish all people knew--that 
we
*can* reclaim our night sky! 
It will take all of us speaking up to our cities, asking for 
amber dark-sky lighting
, and we must act fast, as new, even worse lighting, 
white LEDs
, are currently being chosen. 
Here, you will find a variety of 
sample letters
, and please see 
How to Help
 for the most powerful things you can do to help reduce light pollution. We can do it, but to win this battle, we must all work together!
Sarah
Saving Our Stars

Disclaimer: The views about the nature of the universe expressed in this video do not necessarily reflect the views of Saving Our Stars.

Note: These are not affiliate links. I do not work for these companies or earn a commission, and Saving Our Stars does not receive sponsorship funds.
