By 
Daroc Alden
July 29, 2026

LSFMM+BPF

BPF programs use

BPF type format
 (BTF) debugging information in order to
determine how to interact with functions in the kernel. Specifically, tracing a
kernel function involves finding its address in the kernel's BTF section — but
that doesn't work for functions that have been inlined, and therefore don't have
a single, specific address. Alan Maguire wants to add information about inlined
functions to BTF in order to allow them to be traced, and led a session on that
topic at the 2026

Linux Storage, Filesystem, Memory-Management, and BPF Summit
.

There are more than 100,000 inlined functions in the kernel, Maguire said,
spread across five times as many locations. Worse, some of them are partially
inlined: called normally in some places and inlined in others. That can lead to
cases today where it appears that a function was traced successfully, but some
invocations were not seen.

The good news is that the rest of the infrastructure for tracing inlined
functions is already in place to enable

kprobes
, which can be attached to arbitrary
locations. It is just a matter of getting the data about where functions have
been inlined into a usable format, Maguire stated. "
The story is actually
pretty complete.
"

So, what is needed to store this information in BTF? The

DWARF
debugging format
 already has a way to indicate inlining information, but DWARF
is also difficult to work with, and doesn't have a simple way to represent the
common cases. A solution for BTF should be compact, and permit
deduplication, to keep the memory overhead low, Maguire said. Ideally, inlining
information could be stored in a separate section of the kernel binary, or even
be distributed as a separate kernel module, so that it is not loaded until it is
needed.

Concretely, Maguire proposed three new pieces of information be added to BTF.
The first was inline-site-specific information about which function was inlined at
each call site
and how it would have been called if it had not been inlined, called the
"location section". That data can't be
easily deduplicated because it's specific to a given call site, so as much as
possible the information should consist of pointers to data that can be
deduplicated. 

The second and third pieces of information he wants to add would be the
pointed-to data: a "location prototype" and "location parameter".
The location prototype specifies how the inlined function's arguments are
represented at the call site, as a list of pointers to location parameters,
which each store how to access a single function argument.
In theory, the compiler could store a given function parameter at a different
location for every inlined call site (of which there are 538,090);
in practice, there are a limited number of
ways that the compiler will transform parameters, and many functions
have compatible signatures that result in the compiler making the same choices.
In the current kernel, deduplicating location prototypes results in just 57,141
distinct entries referencing only 17,535 location parameter entries in total.

This means that the location sections take up most
of the added data. Overall, the additions to BTF that Maguire proposes would come to
approximately 11MB of additional data, or about 21 bytes per inlined call
site. When pulled out into a separate kernel module and compressed, the total
amount of data goes down to 3.5MB.

Maguire then went through an example of how information about a specific
function would be stored. Consider this function:

    int foo(int a, void *b, bool c);

If the compiler chose to inline 
foo()
 in a way that eliminates

a
 as unused, promotes 
b
 to be passed in a
register, and determines that 
c
 is a constant, the BTF representation
would be a single location section entry storing the BTF type ID of

foo()
, the offset of the call site from the kernel's base address in memory, and a pointer to the
location-prototype entry. That entry becomes a length-tagged
array of references to location-parameter entries. The first entry is null,
indicating that 
a
 cannot be recovered. The second points to a location
parameter entry with a flag that indicates the value is contained in a register,
and then the specific register number of 
b
. The last location-parameter
entry has a different flag specifying that it is a constant, and then the value
of the constant.

Alexei Starovoitov asked what order the location-section entries would be stored
in, since the kernel will have to search through them to find the right
entry when setting up tracing. At first, Maguire thought that sorting by the
address of the call site would be best, but after looking at how the data would
be used, he decided to sort the entries by function name, instead. That way,
tracers that are looking for information on a particular function can find it
quickly with a binary search.

There were two prerequisite problems with adding inlining information to BTF
that Maguire covered. For one thing, the number of location-section entries
required increasing the size of the length field of the containing structure to
24 bits. More seriously, some of the existing tooling for processing BTF did not
cope well with the presence of new tags that it doesn't know how to read. That
is a problem that comes up any time BTF is extended with new kinds of
information, and part of how DWARF ended up becoming so brittle. To address
that, Maguire added information on how to parse BTF into BTF itself. Now, any
tool that can read that meta-information can correctly skip past any new tags
that it does not understand.

Maguire also had to update the

poke-a-hole (pahole) utility
 to handle
properly sorting the new kinds of BTF tags. That ended up being a bit
complicated, but it should be working for normal kernel builds. Andrii Nakryiko
asked about how it would handle out-of-tree modules. Those modules would need

resilient module BTF
 that could be explicitly relocated when loaded into a
running kernel, Maguire explained. His design allows that, but it complicates
the build somewhat. There was a bit of back-and-forth about the changes that
would be needed to support out-of-tree modules elegantly, but ultimately no
changes were agreed upon.

At the time of writing, Maguire's

patch set
 has not been merged. It is clearly useful to be able to
trace inlined and partially inlined functions; the question is whether it is
worth the complexity and memory overhead. Time will tell.

Index entries for this article

Kernel
BPF

Conference
Storage, Filesystem, Memory-Management and BPF Summit/2026
