Police officer accused of creating AI evidence
13 hours ago
Share
Save
Add as preferred on Google
Samantha Noble
East Midlands 
BBC
The Derbyshire Police officer has been removed from frontline duties
Police have launched a criminal investigation into an officer accused of using artificial intelligence (AI) systems to "create evidential material in a number of cases". 
The Derbyshire Police officer has been removed from frontline duties, pending the outcome of the investigation, said the force.
The officer is alleged to have perverted the course of justice, but no arrests have been made, said police.
A Crown Prosecution Service spokesperson said they were working with police, adding: "We are engaging with defence teams and the courts in appropriate cases."
They added: "As police inquiries continue, it would not be appropriate to comment further."
Derbyshire Police said:  "A criminal investigation has been launched into an allegation of perverting the course of justice after the alleged use of AI systems by an officer to create evidential material in a number of cases.
"The force is working closely with the Crown Prosecution Service in relation to any potentially impacted cases, however, the investigation is in its early stages, so no further details are available.
"The officer involved has been removed from frontline duties, pending the outcome of the investigation. No arrests have been made."
It comes in the same week that a new national centre for AI in policing, called PoliceAI, was established.
At the launch on Wednesday, PoliceAI interim director Alex Murray said: "Crime and technology are evolving rapidly.
"Policing must keep pace by adopting AI responsibly to catch criminals and keep people safe."
Listen to 
BBC Radio Derby on Sounds
 and follow BBC Derby on 
Facebook
, on 
X
, or on 
Instagram
. Send your story ideas to 
eastmidsnews@bbc.co.uk
 or via 
WhatsApp
 on 0808 100 2210.
Related internet links
Derbyshire Police
Crown Prosecution Service
Derbyshire Police
Derbyshire
