Discrete Fourier Transform by Hand ✍️
Calculating AI by Hand: 19 of 28
Prof. Tom Yeh
Jun 24, 2024
∙ Paid
75
3
8
Share
Library
 › 
Calculating AI by Hand ✍️
Matrix Multiplication by Hand ✍️
Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) by Hand ✍️
Backpropagation by Hand ✍️
SVM by Hand ✍️
Batch Normalization by Hand ✍️
Dropout by Hand ✍️
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) by Hand ✍️
LSTM by Hand ✍️
Deep RNN by Hand ✍️
Self Attention by Hand ✍️
Transformer by Hand ✍️
Autoencoder by Hand ✍️
Variational Auto Encoder (VAE) by Hand ✍️
Sparse Auto Encoder (SAE) by Hand ✍️
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) by Hand ✍️
Sampling a Sentence by Hand ✍️
Residual Network by Hand ✍️
U-Net by Hand ✍️
Discrete Fourier Transform by Hand ✍️
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) by Hand ✍️
CLIP by Hand ✍️
Vector Database by Hand ✍️
Mixture of Experts (MoE) by Hand ✍️
Switch Transformer by Hand ✍️
Mamba's S6 by Hand ✍️
Sora's Diffusion Transformer (DiT) by Hand ✍️
BitNet by Hand ✍️
Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) by Hand ✍️
In signal processing, the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is no doubt the most important method. But the math involved is extremely complex, literally, involving a summation over a complex number term e^(-iwt), where e is the Euler number, i is the imaginary unit, w is the angular frequency, and t is time.
I developed this exercise to demonstrate that underneath such complexity, DFT is just a series of matrix multiplications you can calculate by hand. ✍️ Once you see that, it should not surprise you that a deep neural network, which is also a series of matrix multiplications, with activation functions in-between, can learn to perform DFT to process and analyze signals so effectively.
💡 
Learned vs. Fixed:
 U-Net learns its filters from data to process a signal in the spatial domain. The DFT is the classical opposite, a fixed transform, designed by hand rather than learned, that views the same signal in the frequency domain as a combination of cosine waves.
How does DFT work?
Setup
Step 1 of 12: Given
Signals A, B, and C  in the 🟧 frequency domain:
A = cos(w) + 2cos(2w)
B = cos(w) + cos(3w) + cos(4w)
C = -cos(2w) + cos(3w)
Each signal is a weighed sum of four cosine waves at frequencies 1w, 2w, 3w, and 4w.
We will apply Inverse DFT to convert the signals to time domain representations, and then demonstrate DFT can convert back to their original frequency domain representations.
Signal X in the 🟩 time domain. X is sampled at 10 time points 1t, 2t, …, 10t:
X = [-2.5, -1.8, 3, -0.7, -1.0, -0.7, 3, -1.8, -2.5, 5]
Suppose X is also a weighted sum of the same four cosine waves, but we don’t already know their weights. We will apply DFT to discover them.
Step 2 of 12: Frequency Matrix (F)
Write the coefficients of A, B, C as a matrix F. Each signal is a row. Each frequency is a column.
A → [1, 2, 0, 0]
B → [1, 0, 1, 1]
C → [0, -1, 1, 0]
Step 3 of 12: Cosine → Discrete
Sample from the continuous cosine waves at discrete time points 1t, 2t, 3t, to 10t.
This post is for paid subscribers
Subscribe
Already a paid subscriber? 
Sign in
