Dispersion loss counteracts embedding condensation and
                            improves generalization in small language models

Chen Liu
*
,

Xingzhi Sun
*
,

Xi Xiao
*
,

Alexandre Van
                                    Tassel
*
,

Ke Xu
,

Kristof Reimann,

Danqi Liao
,

Mark Gerstein
,

Tianyang Wang
,

Xiao Wang
,

Smita Krishnaswamy

*
Equal contribution

ICML 2026

中文

arXiv

PDF

OpenReview

ICML

Slides

Video

Poster

GitHub

BibTeX

One-liner summary

What makes LLMs better than small LMs? Data? Parameters? Geometry might play a role!

What is embedding condensation?

                            Every Transformer layer of a language model represents each input token as a vector in a
                            high-dimensional embedding space. We notice that as those vectors progress through
                            Transformer layers, they often behave as if they were confined to a narrow cone: they point
                            to increasingly similar directions as measured by pairwise cosine similarity. We call this
                            geometric phenomenon 
embedding condensation
. This phenomenon is:

1

Feature 1

More severe in smaller models than in
                                                larger counterparts (Figure 2).

2

Feature 2

Reproducible under confounder-controlled
                                                settings (Figure 3).

3

Feature 3

Emerging at model initialization and gets
                                                alleviated by pre-training (Figure 4).

4

Feature 4

Not resolved by knowledge distillation
                                                from a larger model (Figure 5).

A 5-minute intro to this paper

This paper presents an observation-driven improvement on language model
                                training.

We observe a geometric phenomenon which we term 
embedding condensation
,
                            where token embeddings collapse into a narrow cone-like subspace in smaller language models.
                            We then design a training objective called dispersion loss to counteract the effect.

Figure 1. Illustration of the embedding condensation
                                phenomenon. In pre-trained language models, embeddings of all tokens from the same input
                                sequence condense into a narrow cone after being processed by many Transformer layers.
                                This phenomenon is substantially more pronounced in smaller models than in larger models
                                within the same family, which motivates our hypothesis in Section 3.3.

Feature 1: Larger model, less condensation.
Within the
                            same model family, smaller models exhibit more severe embedding condensation, with token
                            embeddings collapsing toward near-parallel directions, while larger models resist this
                            collapse.

Figure 2. Qualitative and quantitative observations
                                of the embedding condensation phenomenon. 
a.
 The cosine similarity heatmaps
                                demonstrate that smaller models (e.g., 
GPT2
, 
Qwen3-0.6B
) are
                                susceptible to condensation, since token cosine similarities become increasingly
                                positive as the embeddings proceed to deeper layers. In contrast, larger models (e.g.,
                                
GPT2-xl
, 
Qwen3-32B
) are more resistant to embedding
                                condensation. 
b.
 Quantifications using Spearman correlation and Kendall’s
                                Tau demonstrate a consistent trend of “larger model, less condensation”
                                across multiple families of language models. Additional results can be found in Figure
                                S1.

This effect is also quite robust to the choice of input datasets.

Figure S2. The embedding condensation effect is
                                consistent regardless of the input text dataset. Results are shown for four datasets,
                                namely 
(a)
 
wikitext
, 
(b)
 
pubmed_qa
, 
(c)

imdb
, and 
(d)
 
squad
.

Feature 2: Reproducible when controlling for
                                confounders.
To isolate the effect of model size from other confounding
                            factors, we conduct a controlled experiment where we pre-train GPT2-like models, varying
                            only the MLP dimension while keeping all other components fixed, including the number of
                            layers, embedding dimension, dataset, and training settings. The same phenomenon is
                            observed.

Figure 3. In a highly controlled experiment, we
                                reproduced the observation of “larger model, less condensation”. We
                                pre-trained four 
GPT2
-like models of varying sizes that differ only in MLP
                                dimension, while keeping all other factors fixed, including the number of layers,
                                embedding dimension, dataset, and training configuration. The resulting models exhibit
                                consistent trends in embedding condensation, shown qualitatively (panel 
a
) and
                                quantitatively (panel 
b
). Horizontal dashed lines are added to panel 
a
 for
                                easier visual comparison.

Feature 3: Condensation occurs early on.
The embedding
                            condensation phenomenon emerges at model initialization and is gradually mitigated, not
                            exacerbated, by pre-training.

Figure 4. Embedding condensation is observed
                                immediately after model initialization. We analyze checkpoints of
                                
Olmo-3-1025-7B
 spanning initialization, intermediate pre-training stages,
                                and the final base model. Each checkpoint is annotated by its training stage and the
                                number of training tokens.

Feature 4: Distillation is not a solution.
Knowledge
                            distillation from a larger model does not transfer the desired resistance to embedding
                            condensation.

Figure 5. Knowledge distillation is not a remedy to
                                embedding condensation, shown qualitatively (panel 
a
) and quantitatively (panel
                                
b
).

Dispersion loss
Embedding condensation reduces the
                            expressivity of Transformers by collapsing token embedding vectors into narrow cones,
                            under-utilizing the representation space. We hypothesize that by dispersing embeddings
                            during training, smaller models can achieve representational qualities more similar to
                            larger models, thus narrowing the performance gap without increasing the number of
                            parameters.

Figure 6. Illustration of how dispersion loss and its
                                alternative formulations promote embedding dispersion. 
a.
 Dispersion
                                loss enforces uniform angular dispersion by spreading out all pairs along the unit
                                hypersphere. 
b.
 Decorrelation loss encourages different feature
                                dimensions to remain uncorrelated. 
c.
 ℓ
2
-repel loss
                                increases pairwise Euclidean
                                distance, while the norm regularization prevents unbounded expansion.
                                
d.
 Orthogonalization loss spreads out vectors forming acute angles
                                while leaving obtuse ones unchanged.

Our dispersion loss is inspired by the "
Diffuse
                                and Disperse
" paper with practical modifications.

Table 1. Our dispersion loss and its alternative
                                formulations. Main implementation differences from 
Diffuse and Disperse
 are highlighted in
                                
teal
 and 
magenta
.
                                Including or excluding diagonal terms yields identical gradients and is therefore
                                cosmetic. For dispersion loss and ℓ
2
-repel, we adopt the
                                
log-sum-exp
 trick for numerical stability, which differs from 
log(
mean
(exp(·)))
 only by an additive constant. For
                                ℓ
2
-repel, we include a norm regularization term to prevent unbounded
                                expansion of embeddings. For Orthogonalization, the distance margin is fixed to 
1
⁄
2
 since we use angular
                                distance, where 
1
⁄
2

                                corresponds to orthogonality and thus serves as the ideal margin.

Dispersion loss counteracts the embedding condensation effect during mid-training and
                            pre-training. A qualitative result is shown below, while more quantitative results can be
                            found in the paper.

Figure 7. Dispersion loss counteracts the embedding
                                condensation phenomenon. 
a.
 Starting from condensed embeddings (gray
                                dashed box), mid-training with the default loss has a limited impact (green box).
                                
b.
 In contrast, mid-training with our dispersion loss as a regularizer
                                substantially mitigates embedding condensation (blue box).

Conclusion
Larger language models are better than
                            smaller language models, but might not merely because they have more parameters. It
                            can be partially attributed to how they organize the information in the latent
                            representations. We hope to see future efforts along this interesting direction.

Disclaimers

                            If you are thinking about reproducing this work or borrowing pieces of it, here are my two
                            cents.

Embedding condensation.
 This part has behaved well in our hands. It
                                is consistently observed in many model families and input datasets and under controlled
                                settings. The trends might be stronger or weaker depending on the model family, but
                                nothing we put in the key observations required cherry-picked runs. We cannot guarantee
                                that all model families have this phenomenon, but you can surely try it on your favorite
                                ones.

Dispersion loss.
 Treat this part as more exploratory. The gains are
                                modest: the improvement is subtle enough that it is hard to separate from noise without
                                formal statistical tests (and the ones we did are very elementary as we are not good
                                statisticians). A friend with more experience in math reasoning has commented after the
                                acceptance of the paper that our mid-training recipe is not very standard, as the common
                                practice is to strengthen domain-specific capabilities rather than continued training on
                                wikitext. Our pre-training experiments are also thin because large runs are expensive.
                                If you are interested in this method, I would recommend trying it at small scale with
                                your team’s normal playbook before routing a big training budget through it.

Future directions

                            I personally highlight a few directions that seem potentially meaningful.

Better regularizers.
 The dispersion loss is a very simple and
                                straightforward solution, likely with benefits and drawbacks. A more carefully designed
                                method to counteract embedding condensation might be more helpful.

Beyond pre-training.
 Track how embedding condensation evolves in later
                                stages of training, such as supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning
                                (RL). It remains unclear whether condensation re-emerges, stabilizes, or interacts
                                differently with alignment objectives.

Mechanism and causality.
 Pin down the root causes of embedding
                                condensation and establish stronger causal links between condensation and downstream
                                behavior such as generalization.

Better architectures.
 Design model famlies or modules that inherently
                                resist condensation, complementing or replacing purely loss-based regularization.

Better initialization.
 Develop initialization schemes that start models
                                in a less condensed regime, potentially reducing the burden on the training objective to
                                counteract the geometric collapse.

Citation

                            Copy BibTeX

@inproceedings{liu2026dispersion,
  title={Dispersion loss counteracts embedding condensation and improves generalization in small language models},
  author={Liu, Chen and Sun, Xingzhi and Xiao, Xi and Van Tassel, Alexandre and Xu, Ke and Reimann, Kristof and Liao, Danqi and Gerstein, Mark and Wang, Tianyang and Wang, Xiao and Krishnaswamy, Smita},
  booktitle={International Conference on Machine Learning},
  year={2026},
  organization={PMLR}
}

Acknowledgements

This work was initially motivated by the paper “
A
                                    mathematical perspective on
                                    Transformers
”. We started this project in early Apr 2025 after watching 
a talk on that paper
. We were
                                intrigued by a theoretical result in that paper stating that if we stack Transformer
                                layers infinitely, all the token embeddings will cluster to the same point, and we were
                                curious whether that behavior can be observed empirically. That led to the key
                                observations of embedding condensation in our paper.

The design of the dispersion loss was largely inspired by 
Runqian

                                and 
Kaiming
’s
                                paper “
Diffuse and Disperse: Image
                                    Generation with Representation Regularization
”. Their paper came out right
                                after when we completed the initial observations of embedding condensation and was
                                thinking about ways to mitigate the phenomenon. When I read that paper, I immedidately
                                felt it was highly relevant and could be used as a reasonable solution.
