Jul. 12, 2026, 6:00 AM EDT

By 

				Lauren Harper			

The Department of Government Efficiency, which carried out the most transformative restructuring of the federal government in a generation, has 
formally ended
 — with  no public accounting of its actions. Despite touting itself as the 
most transparent administration in history
, the Trump White House is working to ensure that no DOGE records ever see the light of day.  

This is a dangerous antidemocratic precedent, especially since DOGE took direction 
from Elon Musk
, who was famously not a regular government employee. By handing over essential government functions to members of the ultrawealthy who happen to be friends with the president, while systematically dismantling America’s transparency infrastructure, the administration is effectively hiding that public policy is being dictated at an oligarch’s request. The threat is the privatization of government power, with no chance of oversight or public input.

Play

									Former Sen. Boxer slams impact of Musk’s DOGE: ‘So authoritarian and un-American’								

July 7, 2026
 / 
07:54

If the DOGE model succeeds, there’s no telling how many shadow agencies may follow — and how many government decisions taxpayers could be locked out of.

To date, what little the public knows about DOGE has mostly come 
from whistleblowers
. The mechanics behind this information blackout are twofold.

Almost from 
its inception
, the Trump administration argued that DOGE was not an agency with independent authority and therefore was not subject to the real-time scrutiny of Freedom of Information Act (or FOIA) requests. Rather, the administration said that DOGE’s 
sole legal function was to advise and assist the president
, and that political appointees at federal agencies — not DOGE personnel — held the ultimate authority to implement its recommended mass firings and agency liquidations.

If the DOGE model succeeds, there’s no telling how many shadow agencies may follow — and how many government decisions taxpayers could be locked out of.

Taken at face value, this would mean that DOGE’s records fall under the Presidential Records Act. This is a critical distinction from federal agency records: Presidential records don’t become subject to FOIA 
until five years
 after an administration leaves office. This multiyear delay makes it functionally impossible for the public to verify that these files are being preserved. 

The dangers are already playing out. A 
Wired investigation
 published Thursday found that last year the National Labor Relations Board, which 
investigates reports of unfair labor practices
 and holds sensitive whistleblower files, deleted DOGE team accounts before investigators could audit them. This deletion followed a high-profile whistleblower complaint alleging that the DOGE team at the labor board had been granted unrestricted access to alter and copy sensitive data. 

Erasing DOGE’s digital footprints appears to have compromised a federal investigation and violated the Federal Records Act, which compels agencies to keep records for the length of their retention schedule. It also means that our current primary mechanism for DOGE transparency — submitting FOIA requests to federal agencies — has already been sabotaged.

Play

									Bombshell Reports: Trump Administration DOGE cuts fallout, AI bubble warning								

July 6, 2026
 / 
06:13

Dual lawsuits brought by Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington and American Oversight are among those 
actively challenging
 the administration’s stance that DOGE isn’t subject to FOIA. The groups argue that because DOGE wielded substantial independent government power, including implementing policy and personnel changes, it cannot hide behind an advisory label. While these cases are 
still winding through the courts
, judges have ruled that DOGE must preserve its records in the interim. 

The 
outcome
 of these cases is all the more consequential in light of the Trump administration’s recent adoption of a radical 
Office of Legal Counsel opinion
 declaring that the Presidential Records Act itself is 
unconstitutional
. The memo — which the White House requested — argues that presidential papers are no longer public property but the president’s personal property to do with as he wishes. This effectively gives the president a green light to destroy or delete official files at will.

Play

									White House embracing DOJ memo that loosens rules for preserving presidential records								

April 24, 2026
 / 
04:39

The legal reasoning behind this memo is as dangerous as it is absurd. No president, not even Donald Trump during his first term, has argued that the Presidential Records Act was unconstitutional. Treating government records as personal trophies (to be hoarded, incinerated or anything else) is a clear affront to democratic accountability.

My organization, Freedom of the Press Foundation, 
joined with CREW
 in a lawsuit to force the administration to comply with the presidential recordkeeping law. In late May, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia ordered the White House to 
comply with the Presidential Records Act
 as the case proceeds. 

More from MS NOW Daily

Must reads from Today's list

As part of Bible reading event, Trump expected to recite Scripture read at Jan. 6 riot

Ja’han Jones

Missouri’s failed DEI suit vs. Starbucks offers lessons to Big Business

Ja’han Jones

The White House has signaled that it intends to appeal, leaving the future of public access to presidential records — potentially including DOGE’s — in limbo. 

During a recent House Appropriations subcommittee hearing, Office of Management and Budget Director Russell Vought 
underscored the administration’s intent
 to let the DOGE paper trail go dark. Testifying that the White House has no plans to issue a final after-action report detailing DOGE’s total costs or workforce cuts, Vought said the fruits of the initiative’s labor are “sprinkled all across the government.” But as the labor board’s deletion proves, those “sprinklings” are being erased.

The hypocrisy is staggering for a project that marketed itself as 
an audit that would improve government accountability
. The public is left with no clear explanation of what exactly DOGE accomplished or how much it saved, if anything. 

Play

									‘Worst case scenario’: Whistleblower on how DOGE put social security data at risk								

March 14, 2026
 / 
05:44

Worse, DOGE’s disappearing records are part of a coordinated assault on government accountability.

Over the past year, the administration has 
degraded the ability
 of agencies across the federal government to comply with FOIA, proposed a governmentwide 
nondisclosure agreement
 designed to muzzle whistleblowers, fired 
more than 20
 independent inspectors general and removed a 
massive amount
 of public information from agency websites.

Taken together, these actions blind Americans to the actions of their federal government. 

If the Trump administration can outsource core government power to a trillionaire like Musk, and dismantle transparency laws to prevent the public from understanding what his shadow agency really did, then our democratic experiment is effectively plunged into darkness. 

The DOGE playbook cannot  become the blueprint for governance. The first step to averting this oligarchical capture is securing and opening DOGE’s books. This is the only way to ensure that Congress, journalists and future generations can audit the most disruptive administrative overhaul in modern history — and guarantee that future government change is a response to public will, not private interests. 

						Lauren Harper

						Lauren Harper is the Daniel Ellsberg chair on government secrecy at Freedom of the Press Foundation. She previously worked for the National Security Archive, a nonprofit based in Washington, D.C.
