View All Stories

Share this

Culture & Society
Health & Environment
Doomscrolling at work wastes time, but the real cost is what happens after
The effects of consuming negative news during the workday can linger in employees' minds long after they stop scrolling.

Aug. 13, 2026
 
By 
Lesley Henton
, 
Texas A&M University Division of Marketing and Communications

        4 min. read      

Psychologist Dr. Ian Hughes on doomscrolling

Across two studies involving workers in the United States and United Kingdom, researchers found a consistent pattern: employees who doomscroll at work are more likely to ruminate on the negative information they encounter, and that rumination contributes to lower work engagement.

Whether on lunch break or on the clock, many employees scroll through the news and social media during the workday. Researchers found that employees who “doomscroll” at work suffer hidden costs that extend beyond lost productivity.

Dr. Ian Hughes
, assistant professor in the Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences at Texas A&M University, led the study published in
 Computers in Human Behavior
, finding that employees who obsessively consume negative news during the workday are more likely to get stuck thinking about what they just read. As those thoughts linger, engagement with work tends to suffer.
“Doomscrolling, or the act of obsessively scrolling through social media with a focus on negative or otherwise distressing information, is something that is growing more and more common among all age groups, but particularly folks between the ages of 18 and 35 across the world,” said Hughes, whose research focuses on the intersection of organizational behavior and occupational health psychology.
Across two studies involving workers in the United States and United Kingdom, Hughes and his colleagues found a consistent pattern: employees who doomscroll at work are more likely to ruminate on the negative information they encounter, and that rumination contributes to lower work engagement. The relationship was especially strong among people with higher levels of neuroticism, a personality trait associated with anxiety and worry.
While doomscrolling is often dismissed as a productivity issue, the researchers found the consequences extend beyond the time spent looking at a screen.
“What we find is that workers who doomscroll on the clock are less engaged, in part because their mind is preoccupied, sort of replaying the images and messages that they encountered during their doomscrolling sessions,” Hughes said.
Doomscrolling can be a difficult habit to shake as people often turn to social media because they are trying to make sense of uncertainty.

Credit: Getty Images

Doomscrolling is a habit that’s hard to break
Hughes said doomscrolling can be a surprisingly difficult habit to shake as people often turn to social media not because they enjoy feeling distressed, but because they are trying to make sense of uncertainty.
“It’s something that people do oftentimes as a way of soothing their anxiety,” he said. “During very uncertain, rapidly unfolding social situations, whether it’s a pandemic or a war or some sort of armed conflict, a public safety threat, something like that, we see people turn to social media and really refresh their feeds constantly to stay informed and up to date.”
In that sense, doomscrolling is not simply mindless scrolling, it’s an attempt to stay informed during moments that feel consequential or threatening. The problem, Hughes said, is that this information-seeking behavior repeatedly exposes people to distressing content that can be difficult to stop thinking about.
“Doomscrolling is a sort of double-edged sword in that it is, at its core, an information-seeking behavior,” he said. “But it’s an information-seeking behavior that exposes people repeatedly to distressing or otherwise negative information.”
Modern workplaces may be especially vulnerable because employees carry the entire news cycle with them throughout the day. Smartphones, laptops and social media feeds make it easy to check the latest developments between tasks, meetings or emails.
“For a lot of people, it’s very hard to look away from those things,” Hughes said. “The world of work represents a unique area where people don’t leave their cellphones at home.”
Experts suggest containing doomscrolling to one physical location, like a comfortable spot at home or in a coffee shop.

Credit: Getty Images

Setting boundaries
Despite the findings, Hughes doesn’t believe organizations should respond with strict bans on phones or social media.
“The reality is, those policies often just make people upset and they don’t really work,” he said.
Instead, he recommends setting boundaries around when and where doomscrolling happens.
“If you’re going to doomscroll, try to contain that behavior to one physical location in your life,” he said. “Rather than doing it at work, maybe it’s at home in a comfy chair, maybe at a lounge or a coffee shop or a bar, someplace where you allow yourself to doomscroll and take in some of this negative information.”
That advice is unlikely to become less relevant anytime soon. Hughes says doomscrolling is a behavior that is here to stay because access to social media continues to expand and algorithms continually feed users a stream of attention-grabbing content. 
“It is important to stay informed,” he said. “What is also important, though, is that you don’t let that information-seeking occupy every moment of your life.”

More information: 
Working, scrolling, and worrying: Doomscrolling at work and its implications for work engagement
, Computers in Human Behavior, (2023)

DOI 
10.1016/j.chb.2023.108130

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0747563223004818

Journal information: 
Computers in Human Behavior

Tags

College of Arts and Sciences
department of psychological and brain sciences
research

Media Contact

Lesley Henton
Texas A&M University Division of Marketing and Communications

lshenton@tamu.edu

Share this News
