By: 
Dave Roos
 
Prehistory
Early Humans Likely Ate Carbs and Sugary Foods
Sweets and starches played an essential role in evolution, researchers say, especially for the brain.
Dave Roos
A model of Homo erectus in Quinson, France. Early humans likely ate sugar and carbs, which helped in brain development.
Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images
Published: 
August 06, 2026
Last Updated: 
August 14, 2026
Compared with other primates like chimpanzees and gorillas, humans have very big brains. 
Nearly 4 million years ago, 
Lucy
—a member of one of the earliest human species, 
Australopithecus afarensis
—had a brain that weighed 380 grams, the same as an adult chimpanzee today. Modern 
Homo sapiens
, however, which emerged around 300,000 years ago, boast a brain weighing a whopping 1,500 grams.
How did humans evolve to have such large and useful brains? A lot of attention has been given to 
meat-eating
 and the advent of 
cooking
, which made meat far easier to chew and digest. Because animal proteins are so calorie-dense, the explanation goes, all of the excess energy from meat could be used to power our growing brains. 
But missing from the discussion has been the importance of sugars and carbohydrates in the early human diet, says 
Jennie Brand-Miller
, lead author of an 
August 2026 paper
 in 
Science 
claiming that sugary fruits and honey provided between 20 and 35 percent of energy intake throughout most of human evolution. Another 25 percent of the early human diet came from carb-heavy starches, the study says, while less than 20 percent of dietary energy came from proteins. 
“Meat is energy dense in ways that fruits and plant foods are not, and we needed that energy and those calories,” says Brand-Miller, emeritus professor of human nutrition at the University of Sydney, “but you can’t get everything from one category of food. We have billions of neurons in our brains, and those neurons run on glucose—they run on sugar.” 
The Origins of Man
Genetic analysis helps to decipher the mysteries of human evolution.
4:16m
 watch
Sugar Is Brain Food 
Millions of years ago, the diets of Lucy and other early humans looked a lot like a chimp’s today. They ate a ton of fruit. 
“If you look at a chimpanzee diet, 75 percent of their calories come from carbohydrates,” Brand-Miller says, “and for the most part, those carbohydrates are sugars from fruit and honey.” 
In modern nutritional science, sugar gets a bad rap because it’s often consumed as refined sugar added to high-calorie, low-nutrient foods like 
soft drinks
 and 
candy
. But natural sugar found in fruit is packaged with fiber, vitamins and protective antioxidants. To our early human ancestors, those natural sugars likely played a critical role in fueling an increasingly energy-hungry brain. 
While meat was definitely a caloric bonanza for early humans, recent primate studies offer evidence that sugary fruits continued to be a critical “brain food.” A 
2017 paper
 looked at 140 primate species and compared their brain sizes with their diets. 
“What [that study] showed very clearly was that the fruit-eaters, the frugivores, had 25 percent bigger brains, on average, than the folivores, the leaf-eaters,” Brand-Miller says. The fruit-eaters also had bigger brains than the omnivores, which ate meat. 
Dental evidence has suggested that early humans ate plenty of fruit. Figs may have been among their foods.
Universal Images Group via Getty
Dental evidence has suggested that early humans ate plenty of fruit. Figs may have been among their foods.
Universal Images Group via Getty
Humans Evolved to Seek Sweets 
A clear indication of the importance of sugar in 
human evolution
 is our ability to see colors. Evolutionary biologists believe that the primary function of color vision was to identify the ripest, sweetest and most nutrient-rich fruits. 
“The fruits that are the deepest red and the deepest orange and the deepest yellow are the ones with the most sugars,” Brand-Miller says. 
There’s even a theory that human intelligence leveled up through the search for ripe fruit. In a tropical forest, different fruits ripen at different times of the year. There is a distinct survival advantage for primates—including early humans—that could create a mental map of the forest and find those ripe fruit trees before the competition. In the foraging race, the smartest species gets the most sugar. 
“You can see how this would be a stimulus for cognition, for a bigger brain and for a bigger memory,” Brand-Miller says. 
Another clue that early humans and other ancient primates ate a lot of natural sugar in their diet is that most of them had cavities. Brand-Miller says there’s fossil evidence that primates living 30 million years ago got cavities from eating sugary foods. Human cavities really exploded after the invention of cooking, because that’s when people started eating starchy tubers and other carb-heavy foods that were previously indigestible. 
When Fruit Became Scarce, Our Genes Adapted 
Most of human evolution took place in Africa, where ripe fruit and honey were abundant and available year-round. But as humans migrated out of Africa and into colder, drier climates, sources of dietary sugar were harder to come by. In response, Brand-Miller believes human evolution continued to select for genes that improved our ability to access sugars and carbs.
A good example is milk consumption. No other animal species drinks milk as an adult, and not all humans carry the genes that allow them to digest lactose, the sugar found in dairy. But for ancient humans who lived in cold climates where fresh fruit was scarce, there was a distinct evolutionary advantage to being able to drink and digest milk. 
There are even more recent genetic adaptations that greatly improved humanity’s ability to access dietary sugars and carbohydrates. Starting with the 
Agricultural Revolution
 10,000 years ago, the human diet began to include far more carbohydrates in the form of grains and starches like rice, corn and potatoes. 
There’s an enzyme called salivary amylase that kickstarts the digestion of starchy foods in the mouth, releasing their sweet taste. Brand-Miller says chimpanzees have just one copy of the gene that encodes for salivary amylase in their DNA, whereas humans have as many as 20 copies. Evolution has repeatedly selected for additional copies of the salivary amylase gene, because they allow us to efficiently break down complex carbohydrates into glucose, our favorite brain food. 
“These genetic changes tell us how important carbohydrate calories were to human beings,” Brand-Miller says. 
Related
Prehistory
13
 videos
Prehistory
How Early Humans First Reached the Americas: 3 Theories
Did humans first set foot in the Americas after walking—or sailing or paddling by sea? 
Prehistory
The Megalodon: What Happened to the Ocean’s Fiercest Predator?
These apex predators ate whales, dolphins and maybe other megalodons.
Prehistory
Which Dinosaur Had the Most Teeth?
Hint: It wasn't a carnivore.
See More
About the author
Dave Roos
Dave Roos is a writer for History.com and a contributor to the popular podcast 
Stuff You Should Know
. Learn more at 
daveroos.com
.
Fact Check
We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something that doesn't look right, 
click here
 to contact us! HISTORY reviews and updates its content regularly to ensure it is complete and accurate.
Citation Information
Article Title
Early Humans Likely Ate Carbs and Sugary Foods
Author
Dave Roos
Website Name
History
URL
https://www.history.com/articles/early-human-ancestors-diet-sugar-carbs
Date Accessed
August 20, 2026
Publisher
A&E Television Networks
Last Updated
August 14, 2026
Original Published Date
August 06, 2026
Advertisement
Advertisement
Advertisement
HISTORY Education
HISTORY Vault™
HISTORY Apps
HISTORY en Español®
Military HISTORY®
Newsletter Sign Up
Share Your Opinions
FAQ / Contact Us
Advertise with Us
A+E Factual Studios™
A+E Studios®
Employment Opportunities
Accessibility Support
TV Parental Guidelines
Advertise with Us
A+E Factual Studios™
A+E Studios®
Employment Opportunities
Accessibility Support
TV Parental Guidelines
© 2026, A&E Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Copyright Policy
Cookie Notice
Ad Choices
Advertisement
Advertisement
Advertisement
