August 26, 2026
2
 min read
 
Add Us On Google
Add SciAm
Electric rain can eat through metal
New research shows that water becomes electrified as it slides down smooth surfaces, leading to corrosion
By 
Megha Satyanarayana
 
edited by 
Claire Cameron
 
Daniel Roland/AFP/Getty Images
Join Our Community of Science Lovers!
Sign Up for Our Free Daily Newsletter
Earth’s weather is 
suffused with electricity
. When particles of ice and hail collide in our atmosphere, they become charged and build up, finally unleashing giant electric sparks in 
the form of lightning
. These are impossible to miss, but even tiny rain droplets can become electrically charged as they fall—and this charge could be enough to eat through metal.
Research, 
published today in 
Nature
,
 shows that water droplets become electrified as they move across smooth surfaces. This could help explain why rain corrodes metals even if they have protective coatings. It also helps answer a long-standing question in physics and electrochemistry, says Hans-Jürgen Butt, the study’s lead author and a physicist at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz, Germany: Why does water take so long to move down smooth surfaces despite the apparent lack of friction?
Butt and his colleagues suspect there is likely some hidden chemistry happening between the surface and the water as it slides down. When solids rub against one another, they can create an electric charge—but physicists didn’t think liquids would behave in a similar way. “For a liquid, there is no force which could break a bond,” Butt says.
On supporting science journalism
If you're enjoying this article, consider supporting our award-winning journalism by
 
subscribing
. By purchasing a subscription you are helping to ensure the future of impactful stories about the discoveries and ideas shaping our world today.
In the study, Butt and his team ran water droplets down different surfaces, such as windows and plant leaves, and onto a copper plate with a thin coating of Teflon. The water drops burrowed through the Teflon and into the copper, creating pits. The team looked at metals with other protective coatings as well and saw the same effect. Water that dropped directly onto the plates without running down any other surface did not have the corrosive power.
After studying the shape of the droplets as they approached the coatings and metal plates, the researchers believe the water and copper plate create an electric field, with the water taking on a positive charge as it moves down the surface and the metal taking on a negative charge.
As the drop nears the metal, the electric field gets stronger. Eventually, the field becomes so strong that it breaks down the metal.
Charged rain is not so electric as to have any danger to humans. People have wanted to collect rain to create electricity, but that hasn’t worked on a large scale, Butt says. Still, charged water droplets could help explain why even materials coated with industrial solutions to protect against corrosion sometimes fail if they aren’t applied correctly or become damaged.
Any new information to help understand corrosion is interesting, says Preet Singh, a materials scientist at the Georgia Institute of Technology, who studies corrosion and was not involved in the study. The breakdown of our infrastructure is 
a trillion-dollar problem
—doing a better job of controlling corrosion could save money and lives in the long term, he says.
“I think if you want to have reliable products, whether it’s pharmaceutical or petrochemical or even implants, we need to have very good control on corrosion,” Singh adds.
It’s Time to Stand Up for Science
If you enjoyed this article, I’d like to ask for your support.
 
Scientific American
 has served as an advocate for science and industry for 180 years, and right now may be the most critical moment in that two-century history.
SciAm 
always educates and delights me, and inspires a sense of awe for our vast, beautiful universe. I hope it does that for you, too.
If you
 
subscribe to
 
Scientific American
, you help ensure that our coverage is centered on meaningful research and discovery; that we have the resources to report on the decisions that threaten labs across the U.S.; and that we support both budding and working scientists at a time when the value of science itself too often goes unrecognized.
In return, you get essential news,
 
captivating podcasts
, brilliant infographics,
 
can't-miss newsletters
, must-watch videos,
 
challenging games
, and the science world's best writing and reporting. You can even
 
gift someone a subscription
.
There has never been a more important time for us to stand up and show why science matters. I hope you’ll support us in that mission.
Thank you,
Jeanna Bryner, 
Editor in Chief, 
Scientific American
Subscribe
