Citations & Data:

Open-TYNDP: Interfacing Open Energy System Planning with ENTSO-E Models and Contributing to TYNDP

Warning
Open-TYNDP is under active development and is not yet feature-complete. The current 
development status
 and the general 
Limitations
 are important to understand before using the model.

This repository introduces the open model dataset of the Open-TYNDP research and innovation project, which is a collaboration between 
Open Energy Transition (OET)
 and the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E). The project’s aim is to explore and consider the adoption of PyPSA in the Ten-Year Network Development Plan (TYNDP) by building a workflow based on 
PyPSA-Eur
. It seeks to complement the tools currently used in the TYNDP cycles, especially for Scenario Building (SB) and Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA). This approach is designed to enhance transparency and lower barriers to stakeholder participation in European energy planning. Beyond Europe, the project aspires to demonstrate the viability of open-source (OS) frameworks in energy planning, encouraging broader global adoption.

To build trust in and ensure reproducibility with the new open-source toolchain, the project first focuses on replicating key figures from the 2024 TYNDP cycle, before aligning with the current 2026 TYNDP cycle. This process involves developing new features within the open-source domain to address existing gaps, integrating tools for data interoperability and dynamic visualizations, and publishing best practices to encourage the adoption of open energy models. Additionally, the project emphasizes stakeholder consultations and 
interactive workshops
 alongside the development of the PyPSA tool, further promoting collaboration and transparency throughout the process.

This repository is a soft-fork of 
OET/PyPSA-Eur
 and contains the entire project 
Open-TYNDP
 supported by OET, including code and documentation. The philosophy behind this repository is that no intermediary results are included, but all results are computed from raw data and code.

This repository is maintained using 
OET's soft-fork strategy
. OET's primary aim is to contribute as much as possible to the open-source upstream repositories. For long-term changes that cannot be directly merged upstream, the strategy organizes and maintains OET forks, ensuring they remain up-to-date and compatible with upstream on a regular basis, while also supporting future contributions back to the OS repositories.

Development status

Warning
: Open-TYNDP is under active development and is not yet feature-complete. The current 
development status
 and general 
Limitations
 are important to understand before using the model. The model includes partial data from the TYNDP 2024 cycle, and its validation is ongoing. The github repository 
issues
 collect known topics we are working on (please feel free to help or make suggestions). The fact that this project relies on a soft-fork strategy implies that 
upstream issues
 need to be addressed in the PyPSA-Eur repository. The 
documentation
 also remains work in progress.

Repository structure

benchmarks
: will store 
snakemake
 benchmarks (does not exist initially)

config
: configurations used in the study

cutouts
: will store raw weather data cutouts from 
atlite
 (does not exist initially)

data
: includes input data that is not produced by any 
snakemake
 rule

doc
: includes all files necessary to build the 
readthedocs
 documentation of PyPSA-Eur

envs
: includes backup 
conda
 environments if 
pixi
 installation does not work.

logs
: will store log files (does not exist initially)

notebooks
: includes all the 
notebooks
 used for ad-hoc analysis

report
: contains all files necessary to build the report; plots and result files are generated automatically

rules
: includes all the 
snakemake
rules loaded in the 
Snakefile

resources
: will store intermediate results of the workflow which can be picked up again by subsequent rules (does not exist initially)

results
: will store the solved PyPSA network data, summary files and plots (does not exist initially)

scripts
: includes all the Python scripts executed by the 
snakemake
 rules to build the model

Installation and Usage

1. Installation

Option A: Windows Installer (Recommended for Windows)

For Windows users, download the latest installer (e.g., 
open-tyndp-0.4.0-pixi-Windows-x86_64.exe
) from the 
releases page
 and run it. The installer automatically sets up everything you need, including pixi, the repository, and the conda environment. See 
utils/windows-installer/README.md
 for details.

Option B: Manual Installation (All Platforms)

Clone the repository:

git clone https://github.com/open-energy-transition/open-tyndp

PyPSA-Eur, and consequently Open-TYNDP, relies on a set of other Python packages to function.
We manage these using 
pixi
.
Once pixi is installed, you can activate the project environment for your operating system and have access to all the PyPSA-Eur dependencies from the command line:

pixi shell -e open-tyndp

Note
pixi
 will create a distinct environment in every project directory, even if you have identical copies of a project cloned locally.
As there is a common system-level package cache, 
pixi
 efficiently conserves disk space in such cases.

Tip
If 
pixi
 isn't working, you can install from one of the fallback 
conda
 environment files found in 
envs
.
For more details see 
the PyPSA-Eur installation guide
.

2. Run the analysis

To run all analysis steps of the Scenario Building to reproduce results and build the report, you can execute:

pixi run tyndp-sb

To list all the rules that need to be executed (dry run), run:

pixi run tyndp-sb -n

Similarly, to run all steps of the Cost-Benefit Analysis, you can execute:

pixi run tyndp-cba

and append 
-n
 for the corresponding dry run:

pixi run tyndp-cba -n

Tip
Dependency graphs can be built by a dedicated pixi task and saved to the 
resources/
 directory. Since this can grow very large for the full list of scenarios, you can restrict it to a single scenario:

pixi run create-tyndp-graphs --config 
'
run={"name":"NT"}
'

Contributing and Support

We strongly welcome anyone interested in contributing to this project. If you have any ideas, suggestions or encounter problems, feel invited to file issues or make pull requests on GitHub.

To 
discuss
 with other PyPSA users, organise projects, share news, and get in touch with the community you can use the 
Discord server
. Open-TYNDP has its own dedicated channel 
pypsa-open-tyndp
 for project-specific discussions.

For 
bugs and feature requests
, please 
open a new issue
. We provide templates geared for community members to report bugs or request features, but you're also welcome to use the more detailed maintainer-oriented templates if you're comfortable with them. The Open-TYNDP team reviews new issues shortly after they are submitted. Issues specific to Open-TYNDP belong on the 
Open-TYNDP Issues page
, while PyPSA-Eur issues should be submitted to the 
PyPSA-Eur Github Issues page
.

Contact

For any questions about Open-TYNDP or other queries, reach out via the 
pypsa-open-tyndp
 channel or 
tyndp@openenergytransition.org
.

Sign Up for the 
project newsletter
 for updates!

Citation

If you want to cite a specific Open-TYNDP version, since v0.5, each release is archived on Zenodo with a release-specific DOI:

Versions v0.5 and v0.5.1 are archived at 
10.5281/zenodo.18494362
.

If you use Open-TYNDP in your research, please cite it as shown on Zenodo or using the "Cite this repository" button in the sidebar of 
Open-TYNDP
.

This work builds upon 
PyPSA-Eur
 and follows the methodology described in 
ENTSO-E's and ENTSOG's TYNDP 2024 Scenarios Methodology Report
.

Licence

Open-TYNDP is a soft-fork of PyPSA-Eur, relying on a similar licensing strategy. As with PyPSA-Eur, the code in Open-TYNDP is released as free software under the

MIT License
, see 
Licenses
 for attribution and licensing strategy details.
Additionally, different licenses and terms of use may apply to the various
input data, see 
Data Sources
.
