European Commission Revives Push for Encryption Backdoors in ProtectEU Strategy, Framing Mass Surveillance as “Lawful Access”
The EU’s ProtectEU strategy quietly sketches the blueprint for a backdoor.
By
 
Didi Rankovic
April 3, 2025
Share
The EU is once again looking for a way to undermine end-to-end encryption in the name of strengthening law enforcement capabilities, this time via a new strategy, ProtectEU.
The internal security strategy, 
announced this week
 by the EU Commission, is presented as a “vision and workplan” that will span a number of years but stops short of making concrete policy proposals.
A press release asserts that the current geopolitical environment is one of “growing” threats from hostile states, and mentions powerful criminal groups and terrorists who are “operating increasingly online” – as well as “surging cybercrime and attacks against our critical infrastructure.”
With the threat elements defined in this way, the EU’s new strategy focuses on six areas, one of them being “more effective tools for law enforcement” – which is where online encryption comes under attack.
When it describes how the groundwork might be laid for mandating 
encryption backdoors
, the EU chooses to use euphemisms such as creating roadmaps for “lawful and effective access to data for law enforcement” and seeking “technological solutions for accessing encrypted data.”
A technology roadmap on encryption would allow for these “solutions” to be found. The EU is not alone in searching for mechanisms to, eventually, legislate against encryption, but these initiatives are invariably met with warnings from both tech companies and civil rights and privacy advocates.
The key issue is that encryption provides both for private communications (which is what law enforcement wants access to) and also the technical security of those communications, financial transactions, etc.
The new EU strategy promises that cybersecurity and fundamental rights will be protected as a future encryption backdoor is implemented.
But this is not a promise anyone can make, considering that once there, a backdoor is effectively available to all actors, including those hostile states and non-state actors the EU purports its strategy is there to protect against.
Other prominent points contained in ProtectEU include increased intelligence sharing between member countries and the bloc’s Single Intelligence Analysis Capacity (SIAC) – as a way to “anticipate” security threats.
Yet another centralization effort is the idea to give EU’s law enforcement agency EUROPOL more powers, including around cross-border and large-scale investigations, in the process making it “a truly operational police agency.”
This is followed by reassuring member countries that the purpose is to “reinforce support” to them.
Explore more on these topics
Privacy
Security
cybercrime
encryption backdoors
EU
Europol
lawful access
