August 2, 2026
1 minute

				José Pontes			

 0 Comments

Support CleanTechnica's work through 
a Substack subscription
, 
on Patreon
, or 
on Stripe
. Help us produce all of the 
high-quality, original content we publish week after week
 despite the challenges of content-scraping AI, antisocial media, inflation, and other hurdles.

Tesla and the Chinese push the market upwards — EV Share Jumps to 37% in Europe!

Thanks to a number of factors (new cheaper models, high gas prices, mass arrival of Chinese models, etc.), EVs are currently in high demand in Europe. Some 366,000 fully electric vehicles were registered in Europe in June, which is not only a 50% increase YoY, and the fastest growth rate this year, but also a new BEV record!

Overall, plugin vehicles were up 41% YoY, dragged down by plugin hybrids, which grew 
only
 23%, thus placing June’s plugin share at 37%.

This difference in growth is also visible in the BEV vs. PHEV sales breakdown, with BEVs having 71% of all plugin sales in June. That placed their yearly average at 69%, which is their highest share since … 2012! Yep, like in China, it seems PHEVs are starting to lose the race to their BEVs counterparts…

With BEVs pulling the market upwards, the year-to-date share for BEVs is now at 
23% (33% for PHEVs and BEVs combined)
, which is already higher than the 2025 final result (20% BEV share, 29% adding PHEVs). This is an encouraging sign if we want to be close to 100% PEV share by the mid-2030s.

Looking at the other fuels, there aren’t really major changes in trends in an overall market that grew 13% YoY in June to 1.4 million units. Plugless hybrids (HEVs) followed the overall trend by growing 17% YoY, to a market share of 35% — added to the 37% of plugins, that meant that in June, 72% of all cars sold in Europe had 
some kind of electrification
, while pure ICEVs are … going down the drain.

Petrol was down 12% in June to 21% share, while diesel (-17% YoY) is now bordering on irrelevance, having just 6% of the market. A few more months, and probably i won’t even mention diesel anymore.

Looking at the best sellers in several size categories
, the EV push is starting to get visible, while we are far from the EV domination we see in China, things have indeed moved on in Europe compared to last year.

Before, the only EVs that we saw on the overall podiums were Teslas. Now, the A-segment has the Leapmotor T03 as the overall 3rd placed model, closely followed by the Dacia Spring (5,676 units). Perhaps unsurprisingly. After all, the same happened in China before — it is in the city car category that EVs have the highest possibilities to have a fully 100% plugin podium sooner. First, the ICE competition is shrinking. Then, not only do we have the Leapmotor T03 already on the podium, but the new Renault Twingo is set to become a success, probably selling at higher levels than the Chinese EV. And … 
with a new Dacia Spring set to land soon
, we have three competitive electric city cars ready to take over the podium.

Oh! 
And let’s not forget that a new Panda city car (Pandina?) is set to start in 2027, both in BEV and ICE versions
. Speaking of which, adding an ICE version to the new Panda is another bad decision from Stellantis product planners, because while it is true that the 500e lost sales as years went by, it wasn’t because people wanted to go back to ICE cars, but because other, better, cheaper EVs started to land on the market, cannibalizing the 500e’s sales.

So, if I were them, I would make the new generation 100% BEV and keep on selling the old ICE generation for petrol diehards, as the “Panda Classic” or whatever.

Looking at the other segments, the B-segment is still ICE-heavy, with only the #3 Peugeot 208 having some degree of electrification (16% of sales are from the BEV version), the C-segment is a bit more electrified (#2 VW Golf is 14% PHEV, and #3 VW Tiguan is 32% PHEV), but it is the full size category where electrification is significant, with the #1 Mercedes E-Class having 36% of sales coming from the PHEV version, the #2 BMW 5 Series being 89% electrified (either with the BEV i5 or the PHEV versions), and the #3 BMW X5 having 28% of its sales coming from the PHEV version. And the 4th best selling model in this category was the fully electric Audi A6 e-tron, with 3,850 units.

So, A, D, and E segments have good electrification perspectives, but the all-important B and C segments, the most important in Europe, are the laggards.

Looking at the best selling EV models
, the big news this month was Tesla winning 1st and 2nd place. BYD had 3rd place to itself thanks to the Atto 2 (BYD Yuan Up in Euro-spec). Here’s a more detailed analysis of the top 5 EVs this month:

#1 Tesla Model Y 
— Tesla’s midsize crossover is back in the driver’s seat thanks to 
34,480 registrations 
in June, which represented a particularly strong high tide
.
 Deliveries jumped 43% YoY and led to the nameplate’s best result since March 2023. 
And there’s still no Model Y L helping the brand along….
 Such a high number of deliveries meant that Tesla’s midsizer was the #1 model in the overall market, beating the #2 Dacia Sandero by a sizeable 9,000 units. The crossover was the overall best seller across a number of European markets in June — it was #1 in the United Kingdom, Iceland, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Denmark and Norway. With Model Y prices starting at €40,000, and after six years on the market, the crossover still offers an appealing package. Currently, you buy a Tesla with your wallet/head, not your heart. Which is exactly the kind of buyer that is now searching for EVs. Many of these people simply want to lower their running costs by switching from ICEVs to BEVs. (Also, it’s why they are so popular with Ubers and such.)

#2 Tesla Model 3 
— Tesla’s sedan was 2nd in June thanks to 
18,028 registrations
, a significant 67% increase YoY that allowed it to be 7th in the overall European market. Benefiting from the same tailwinds as the Model Y (mass delivery of the standard version, a surge in EV demand), the 10-year-old sedan is running along. It has a lot of demand now that price-conscious buyers are in the market and its prices, starting around €35,000, place it, a midsize sedan, in competition with models one segment below, compact hatchbacks. While the heart of the midsize car market is probably lost for the Model 3, a new segment of buyers, somewhere between the C and D segments, is giving it a second wind. As of this moment, it seems Tesla’s sedan could recover its podium position in 2026 … which is no mean feat for a 10-year-old model wearing a body type (sedan) not popular in Europe.

#
3
 
BYD Atto 2 (BEV+PHEV) 
— The Chinese SUV hit another record performance last month, 
13,100 registrations
, mostly thanks to the new PHEV version. Why so popular in Europe? Besides not having real competition in the small PHEV category, the top range version has a 18 kWh battery, providing a usable range (90 km/56 mi). Additionally, it has increasingly important vehicle-to-load (V2L) capability. With the upcoming Dolphin G PHEV small hatchback using the same powertrain, expect the Shenzhen make to have another representative on the European table soon, especially considering that the new hatchback will be made in Hungary.

#4 BMW iX1/X1 PHEV 
— The German twins are in cruise control, winning another top 5 presence in June thanks to 
11,778 registrations
. Benefitting from favorable lease rates to help things along, the BMW crossovers are the brand’s bread and butter models, at least until the Neue Klasse models (i3 and iX3) get up to full speed. With a deep refresh coming to BMW’s compact models later this year, promising to transform them into 
baby Neue Klasse 
vehicles
, 
expect both, but the iX1 in particular, to upgrade their specs. That will make them more interesting than the current versions and allow the Bavarian brand to keep its compact models as 
podium material
.

#5 Renault 5 (including Alpine A290)
 — Renault’s 
star player
 delivered 
10,785 sales 
in June, with the iconic hatchback increasing its sales year on year by 38%, thus backing 
previous optimistic statements from their representatives
. The truth is that the French manufacturer has done its homework, 
and while others are scrambling with what to do next
, Renault is now reaping the profits of its EV strategy. Sure, no matter how attractive the 5 is, the truth is that in 2026, its space in the market will be squeezed, not only by external competition like VW’s own take on the 
R5 formula
, the ID.Polo, but also by internal competition, with the equally cute new Twingo potentially stealing sales from below. That is why Renault is taking a page from its Chinese counterparts 
and will upgrade its R5 and R4 in a few months
 with more efficient motors and LFP batteries, because cute design can only take you so far 
(just look at the Fiat 500e)
. The real factor to make the French twins true volume models over the years is meeting  constantly evolving buyer expectations — regarding specs, value for money, and pricing.

Outside the top 5, there were a number of highlights to mention.

Starting with BMW, we have another record result from the new BMW iX3 (in 9th place with 8,439 registrations). One wonders if the midsize SUV has already reached its cruising speed or there will be even higher volume months ahead. Regardless of what might happen to the iX3, I am now curious about the production ramp-up of the upcoming BMW i3. Will the new midsize sedan also reach top 10 status?

In the Mercedes stable, its star player, the CLA EV, continued in near-record territory, having clocked 6,676 registrations, while the three-pointed-star brand continued to ramp up both the new GLB EV seven-seater and the GLC EV midsizer, with both now starting to reach significant volumes (3,622 units for the former, 3,116 for the latter).

Volvo also had a good month, with both the EX30 (16th, 5,585 registrations) and the XC60 PHEV (14th, 6,134 registrations) performing year-best results. This is a positive sign for the Swedes, as these good results happen at a time when many clients are waiting for deliveries of the much anticipated new EX60. Expect Volvo to have a positive second half of the year as the new electric SUV starts to be delivered in volume.

Finally, a reference is due for the return of the veteran Dacia Spring. Thanks to 5,676 registrations, its best result since October 2023, it returned to the table at #15. With a new generation coming soon, expect the Spring to once again become a regular feature on the table, as a more rugged-looking counterpart to the new Renault Twingo.

Outside the top 20, in such a strong month, there was plenty to talk about, with good news almost everywhere:

At Volkswagen Group, the Audi A6 e-tron scored 3,850 units, a new year best, close to beating the current full size category kings, the BMW i5/5-Series PHEV twins (3,933 units).

Ford saw its Puma small crossover reach a record 4,604 units, no doubt thanks to recent price adjustments and improvements.

Thanks to the new Touring version, Toyota saw the sales of the BZ4X reach a new high, 4,802 deliveries.

Besides the R5’s success, Renault saw positive results across the lineup, with the Scenic ending the month in 21st with 4,888 registrations, just 12 units below the #20 Kia EV3. The soon-to-be-refreshed Megane hit its best score in two years thanks to 3,231 registrations, no doubt a good omen for the refreshed version, all while the new Twingo continued to ramp up deliveries, registering 4,524 units in June alone. Will the friendly face of the Renault city car join the table in July? One thing is certain, the French carmaker had five BEVs (R4, R5, Twingo, Scenic, Megane) above the 3,000-unit threshold in June. Not bad, Renault, not bad….

Kia’s 
new baby
, the EV2 small crossover, ramped up deliveries to reach 3,357 units in June, while Polestar saw its 4 
thingy
 score 4,099 registrations, a new year best.

As for the Chinese OEMs, there’s also news to report. Leapmotor is expanding its success streak beyond the T03 city car, by pushing its B10 compact crossover to reach a record 3,542 registrations; and Xpeng’s G6 midsize SUV hit a record 3,177 registrations, a significant mark for the startup now that the all-important L3 compact crossover is a couple of months away from landing.

Looking at the 2026 ranking
, the major change in the top positions was the three-position jump of the Tesla Model 3 into the runner-up spot. And with a higher than expected delivery peak, Tesla’s sedan managed even to (barely) remove the Skoda Elroq from the second place.

With the competition experiencing different kinds of headwinds in the second half od the year (the Skoda Elroq suffering from the competition of its smaller sibling Epiq, BMW compact crossovers going through a refresh later this year, the Renault 5 witnessing the landing of new small hatchbacks — the VW ID.Polo, Cupra Raval, etc.) and the BYD Atto 2 being too far away to be a real threat, all of a sudden the Model 3 seems to be the strongest candidate for the silver medal, won by it the last time in 2024.

Bring on the popcorn, because this looks to be fun!

As for the remaining changes, the BYD Atto 2 continued to rise, going up to 8th. BYD’s small crossover is set to become the brand’s best seller in Europe — although, the upcoming Dolphin G could steal some sales from it.

On the second half of the table, the Mercedes CLA EV and Leapmotor T03 climbed one position each, to #11 and #12, respectively, while the Audi Q6 was up to #17. It was a positive month for Volvo, with the XC60 PHEV going up to #14 while the small EX30 rejoined the table in 19th.

Also set to join the table soon is the #21 BMW iX3. With the midsize SUV riding high, and being only some 200 units below the Citroen e-C3, I wouldn’t be surprised if the hot new electric SUV from Bavaria replaced the French supermini in July….

A few notes regarding the overall manufacturer ranking 
— the winners are currently Tesla and the Chinese.

Tesla sales were up 51% YoY in June, allowing it to be 11th overall;

But the highlights regard Chinese OEMs, which doubled their share from 5% in June 2025 to their current 10%. The biggest volume players are #15 MG, up 49% YoY to 39,000 units; #16 BYD, up 147%(!), to 38,500 units; #27 Leapmotor, up 568%(!); #28 Omoda, up 178%; and … the interesting case of Jaecoo. Chery’s 
Temu Land Rover
 was 26th, a 202% improvement, with the Chinese brand now outselling the 
original Land Rover
 (by 14,000 units to 8,000), with the Brits now being only 30th in June AND seeing sales drop by 10% in that same month (while the overall market grew by a significant 13%)…. Yep, Land Rover is in trouble.

As for the plugin auto brand ranking
, the leader, Volkswagen, remained in the lead, but it lost significant share (8.9%, down from 9.3% in May). Sure, it still holds a comfortable advantage over rising BYD (7.9%, up 0.1%), and its new small EVs (VW ID.Polo, ID.Tiguan, etc.), should help it recover sales, but…. Volkswagen cannot afford to miss any more chances. Or else the company will get BYD on its back. 
In its home market
. And if you can’t win at home,…

BMW (7%) was displaced from the last place on the podium by a rising Tesla (7.1% share, up from 6.3% in May). It is interesting to see the difference in Tesla’s performance as a brand comparing 2026 to the three previous times that Tesla had a #1 plus #2 lead in the model table — in 2022, 2023, and 2024. In those years, Tesla got gold and silver in the model table and at the same time won the manufacturer titles.

Now, with the same #1 plus #2 lead in the model table, Tesla is only 3rd among manufacturers. And not by a lot…. So, what is the difference? Lineup depth. Tesla has the usual two best sellers. BMW has 11 models on sale in Europe. And BYD has 17….

In 5th we have Mercedes (5.8%, down from 5.9% in May). It held steady in the 5th position, actually gaining a little bit of distance over #6 Audi (5.5%, down from 5.7% in May).

Thanks to good results across the lineup, #8 Renault (4.9%, up 0.1%) is on the way up and could start to pose a threat to #7 Skoda (5,3%) soon.

Arranging things by automotive group
, Volkswagen Group is firmly in the lead, but it has lost share, now at 24% share, a significant 0.8% drop. Still, with plenty of fresh metal coming soon, expect the German OEM to rebound soon
.

There was a position change in the runner-up spot, with troubled Stellantis (8.3%, down from 8.6% in May) losing the silver medal position to BMW Group (8.6%, up 0.1%). The multinational OEM’s drops seem to have no end in sight, and it could even lose its podium position this year, as a rising BYD (7.9%) is now just 0.4% share behind Stellantis.

So … maybe now is the time for Stellantis management to wake up and smell the coffee?

Outside the top 5, #6 Geely is rising (6.9%, up from 6.7% in May), but for the time being, it is still far from #5 Hyundai–Kia (7.3%) threatening it.

Sign up for 
CleanTechnica's Weekly Substack for Zach and Scott's in-depth analyses and high level summaries
, sign up for 
our daily newsletter
, and 
follow us on Google News
!

Advertisement

Have a tip for CleanTechnica? Want to advertise? Want to suggest a guest for our CleanTech Talk podcast? 
Contact us here
.

Sign up for our daily newsletter for 
15 new cleantech stories a day
. Or sign up for 
our weekly one on top stories of the week
 if daily is too frequent.

CleanTechnica uses affiliate links. See our policy 
here
.

CleanTechnica's Comment Policy

Share this story!

Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)

LinkedIn

Share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

WhatsApp

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window)

Bluesky

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)

Email

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit
