Off the Wire Press Releases 

August 24, 2026

Intel Outlines Architectures for Agentic AI at Hot Chips 2026

NVIDIA Groq 3 LPX Enters Full Production for Agentic AI Inference

Infleqtion Supplies QPU for Japan’s ‘Shunkai’ Neutral-Atom Quantum Computer

EuroHPC Launches 6 Quantum Calls with €119M in Funding

IBM Unveils Next Gen Dual-Architecture Processor for IBM Z and LinuxONE

Pasqal and Eleven Ventures Target Regional Quantum Expansion from Saudi Arabia

August 21, 2026

Brookhaven and Stony Brook Researchers Demonstrate ‘Wireless’ Capability for Quantum Network

Argonne: Making LLMs Safer for Scientific Applications

LRZ Brings TPC26 Conference to Europe with Garching Satellite Event

UC San Diego Receives DOE Genesis Mission Award to Fund New Scientific AI Tools

View All Off the Wire

EuroHPC Launches 6 Quantum Calls with €119M in Funding

 August 24, 2026

Shares

Aug. 24, 2026 — The 
EuroHPC Joint Undertaking
 (EuroHPC JU) has launched six new calls to advance strategic quantum technologies and the infrastructure needed to accelerate the development and deployment of next-generation quantum systems in Europe.

Trapped-Ion Platform Technologies

This call, 
HORIZON-JU-EUROHPC-2026-TIPT-09
, aims to advance Europe’s leadership in trapped-ion quantum computing by developing a full-stack quantum computer with over 1,000 individually addressable physical qubits, fully integrated with classical high-performance computing systems and accessible via cloud platforms.

Projects are expected to develop a full-stack trapped-ion quantum computer with integrated cryogenic systems, advanced error correction, and standardised interfaces. The call will support the development of practical applications, establish European standards for quantum computing, and integrate with classical computing infrastructures.

The total budget for this call is EUR 20 million, with projects expected to run for 3.5 years. The call opened on 13 August 2026, while the application deadline is set for 17 November 2026, 17:00 CET.

The call opened on Aug. 13, 2026, with a submission deadline of 
Nov. 17, 2026, 5:00 pm CET
.

Relevant details and information concerning this call will be available on the 
dedicated call page
.

Superconducting Platform Technologies

Through this call, 
HORIZON-JU-EUROHPC-2026-SPT-10
, the EuroHPC JU aims to advance Europe’s superconducting quantum computing capabilities by developing a QPU with at least 1,000individually addressable physical qubits based on chiplet technology facilitating long coherence times, fast read-outs, and error correction capabilities.

The system should be cloud accessible for researchers and industry users, with a focus on demonstrating practical applications for businesses.

The selected proposal will need to build a full-stack quantum computing system including hardware, cooling infrastructure, control electronics, and comprehensive software. The action will also support the creation of European supply chains for quantum technology components.

The total budget for this call is EUR 20 million, with projects expected to run for 3.5 years. The call is open from Aug. 13, 2026. The application deadline is 
Nov. 17, 2026
.

More details can be found on the 
dedicated page
.

Neutral-Atom Platform Technologies

Through this call, 
HORIZON-JU-EUROHPC-2026-NAPT-11
, the EuroHPC JU aims to advance neutral-atom quantum technologies by delivering scalable, industry-ready quantum processors for simulation and computing.

This call should facilitate the development of fully programmable platforms with 10,000 neutral atoms for simulation and 1,000 physical qubits for computing, with a tangible scaling trajectory up to 10.000 physical qubits. Key objectives include achieving substantially long coherence times , operation fidelities above 99%, and demonstrating quantum advantage through real-world applications in sectors such as energy and health.

The call should facilitate the development of scalable quantum processors with individually addressable neutral atoms able to eventually support gate-based quantum computing. Projects should also implement robust quantum error mitigation and error correction techniques, and enhance the EU’s supply chain for key components of neutral-atom based computational processors.

The total indicative budget available for this call is EUR 20 Million, funded under the Horizon Europe program. The expected duration of the project is 3.5 years. The call opened on Aug. 13, 2026 and the deadline for application is set on 
Nov. 17, 2026, 5:00 pm CET
.

Relevant details and information concerning this call are available on the 
dedicated call page
.

Next-Generation QKD Systems

The call 
HORIZON-JU-EUROHPC-2026-NQKD-12
 aims to strengthen Europe’s strategic autonomy in quantum-secure communications by advancing core Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) technologies.

QKD enables ultra-secure communication by using quantum mechanics to detect eavesdropping attempts, ensuring unconditional security for data transmission.

This action will focus on developing next-generation QKD systems with measurable improvements in key rates over metropolitan distances (> 1 Mbps) and operational coverage of networks on a regional scale (> 300 km), but also implementing advanced cryptographic protocols beyond QKD, including hybrid quantum-classical cryptographic frameworks by combining QKD and post-quantum cryptography (PQC).

The action will facilitate the experimental validation of advanced QKD protocols, the integration of QKD into classical and optical network structures and the demonstration of hybrid QKD-PQC frameworks.. Projects should demonstrate these technologies in real-world applications beyond the EuroQCI infrastructure, such as protecting energy grids, securing cloud storage, and safeguarding industrial control systems.

Engagement with industry and national network providers is crucial to ensure compatibility with telecom grade requirements.

The budget foreseen for this call is of EUR 24 Million, spanning from the Horizon Europe program. The project will last 3.5 years.

The call opened on Aug. 13, 2026, with a submission deadline of 
Nov. 17, 2026 at 5:00 pm CET
 (Brussels time).

Relevant details and information concerning this call will be available on the 
dedicated call page
.

Quantum-Testing Infrastructure for Quantum Technologies

With the newly launched call, 
HORIZON-JU-EUROHPC-2026-QTI-13
, the EuroHPC JU will establish a pan-European open-access testing infrastructure for quantum technologies, creating a comprehensive framework for systematic validation and certification of quantum components and systems.

The action aims to deploy distributed quantum testing facilities across Europe, but also to develop certification services aligned with emerging standards to best support SMEs and startups in validating their quantum technologies. This will strengthen Europe’s competitiveness by ensuring robust quality assurance mechanisms with standardized protocols.

The call should facilitate the expansion of interconnected testing facilities in multiple EU Member States covering various quantum technologies (processors, sensors, photonics and control sensors), developing interoperable testing methodologies and certification procedures, and creating a comprehensive digital platform for remote test execution and data management.

With a total budget of EUR 20 Million, the call is funded by the Horizon Europe program. The call, which opened on Aug. 13, 2026, has a deadline for submission set on 
Nov. 17, 2026, 5:00 pm CET
.

Relevant details and information concerning this call are available on the 
dedicated call page
.

Quantum Experimental Pilot Lines for Quantum Technologies

Through this action, 
HORIZON-JU-EUROHPC-2026-QEXP-14
, the EuroHPC JU seeks to bridge the gap between academic quantum research and established pilot lines under the CHIPS JU..

Qu-Pilot will function as a testbed for developing and validating quantum technologies, focusing on technological innovation, manufacturing reproducibility, and scalability.

The call aims to establish experimental pilot production infrastructure that can advance quantum hardware technologies from TRL 4-6, with particular emphasis on quantum processors, sensors, and cryo-compatible packaging.

Projects should demonstrate scalable quantum fabrication processes including the development of standardized workflows ensuring reproducibility, quality assurance and certification pathways.

The total indicative budget available for this call is EUR 15 Million, funded under the Horizon Europe program. The expected duration of the action is 3.5 years.

The call opened on Aug. 13, 2026, with a submission deadline of 
Nov. 17, 2026, 5:00 pm CET
.

More details can be found on the 
dedicated page
.

Background Information

The EuroHPC JU is a legal and funding entity that brings together the European Union and participating countries to coordinate efforts and pool resources with the objective of making Europe a world leader in supercomputing.

To equip Europe with a cutting-edge supercomputing infrastructure, the EuroHPC JU has already procured 12 supercomputers, distributed across Europe including JUPITER and Alice Recoque, Europe’s first exascale systems.

European scientists and users from the public sector and industry can benefit from EuroHPC supercomputers via the EuroHPC Access Calls no matter where in Europe they are located, to advance science and support the development of a wide range of applications with industrial, scientific and societal relevance for Europe.

Currently, the EuroHPC JU is also overseeing the implementation of 19 AI factories (AIF) across Europe, complemented by 13 AI Factory Antennas, to offer free, customised support to SMEs and startups.

Additionally, the EuroHPC JU is deploying a European Quantum Computing infrastructure, integrating diverse European quantum computing technologies with existing supercomputers. In June 2026, the EuroHPC JU launched the quantum pilot access mode to provide quick access to its EuroHPC JU quantum infrastructure for testing and development purposes.

The EuroHPC JU also funds  research and innovation projects to develop a full European supercomputing supply chain, from processors and software to applications to be run on these supercomputers and know-how to develop strong European HPC expertise.

With the recent adoption of Council Regulation (EU) 2026/150, the EuroHPC JU’s mandate has been expanded with new action pillars dedicated to the deployment of AI Gigafactories across Europe and the advancement of quantum technologies. The AI Gigafactories call was launched in July 2026.

Source: EuroHPC JU

                      Related Articles

                      Most Popular

                      Most Recent

New GPU Method Compresses Scientific Simulation Data at 60 GB/s

                              Scientists running large simulations can end up with terabytes of data that then has to...                            

JUNIQ: Europe’s Quantum Buffet

                              Prior to the June International Supercomputing Conference, ISC High Performance 2026, in Hamburg, Germany, Sean...                            

What the First Genesis Mission Projects Reveal About DOE’s AI Priorities

                              Over the past several days, a steady stream of Genesis Mission announcements has arrived from...                            

ISC 2026: Objects in the Quantum Crystal Ball Are Closer Than They Appear!

                              The International Supercomputing Conference, ISC High Performance 2026, drew a record 4,035 attendees and 188...                            

Oratomic’s $300M Bet on Low-Qubit Quantum Computing

                              Oratomic, a quantum computing startup that emerged from stealth just four months ago, has raised...                            

How HPC and Simulation Are Powering the Next Wave of Physical AI

                              As investment in Physical AI accelerates, simulation is taking on a much larger role than...                            

Future of Storage for HPC and AI: Rise of Objects, Metadata, and AI-Ready Storage

                              Requirements for storage in the age of AI are changing, as we noted in part...                            

Conference Chair Spotlights ISC’08

                              The 23rd annual International Supercomputing Conference (ISC) will bring together many of the world's leading...                            

Summit Puts Spotlight on High-Performance Grid Computing

                              HPC and grid computing, and the promises and challenges for biomedical applications, were the focus...                            

Exponential Cuts Staff By 25 Percent In Apple Setback

                              New York, NY -- Dean Takahashi Reported of The Wall Street Journal that Expo Technology...                            

The Path to Utility-Scale Quantum Computing in HPC Starts with the Silicon Transistor

                              Quantum computing has become a strategic consideration for high-performance computing (HPC) centers worldwide. National laboratories,...                            

China Unveils 2 Exaflop, All-CPU ‘LineShine’ Supercomputer

                              China’s National Supercomputing Center in Shenzhen last week introduced LineShine, a new supercomputer that it...                            

It’s Not an HPC System, But Cerebras’ New CS-4 Is an AI Monster

                              Cerebras builds the biggest, most powerful chips in the industry with its Wafer Scale Engine...                            

What Hyperscalers Should Know About CXL

                              The AI infrastructure conversation has shifted as AI inference becomes a larger part of workloads...                            

Scaling Up, Out, and Across: Interconnect Advice from a Meta Network Guru

                              Meta is no stranger to large scale computing, with more than 3.5 billion daily users...                            

What’s Hot Now: Custom AI Chips

                              The AI boom has largely been powered by standardized hardware, including powerful GPUs, all-purpose CPUs,...                            

Deep Origin Claims Breakthrough in AI Drug Discovery Platform

                              Deep Origin this month announced that its AI drug discovery framework delivered nearly a 31%...                            

DeepSeek Open-Sources the Missing Layer Between AI Models and Agents

                              AI models are getting better at a rapid pace. They are now able to reason,...                            

        MEET OUR EDITORS 

Alex Woodie

Editorial Director + 
HPCwire Managing Editor

Drew Jolly

QCwire Managing Editor

Jaime Hampton

AIwire Managing Editor

Ali Azhar

BigDATAwire Managing Editor

Douglas Eadline

Contributing Editor

Meet the
                team

Off The Wire 

Quantum Computing Headlines

August 24, 2026

Infleqtion Supplies QPU for Japan’s ‘Shunkai’ Neutral-Atom Quantum Computer

EuroHPC Launches 6 Quantum Calls with €119M in Funding

Pasqal and Eleven Ventures Target Regional Quantum Expansion from Saudi Arabia

August 21, 2026

Brookhaven and Stony Brook Researchers Demonstrate ‘Wireless’ Capability for Quantum Network

August 20, 2026

ORNL: Quantum Computing User Forum Highlights Advances in Research

Q2B Copenhagen to Bring Global Quantum Leaders to Denmark

Rigetti Restructures Operations to Scale On-Premises Quantum Deployments

FAMU-FSU College of Engineering Researchers Design Magnetically Levitated Qubit

Occam Foundry Quantum Technology Campus Planned for Austin

August 19, 2026

Diraq Opens 1st US Quantum Laboratory in Chicago

More Off The Wire

    LEADING QUANTUM VENDORS

QCWire 
 Weekly Roundup

VIEW ALL

FEATURED EVENT

August 23-25

		Since 1989, HOT CHIPS has been one of the semiconductor industry’s leading conferences on high-performance microprocessors and related integrated circuits. 

View All Events

UPCOMING EVENTS

Current Month

23
aug
All Day
25
Hot Chips 2026
(All Day)
(GMT-07:00)
 
Palo Alto, CA

Event Details

The HOT CHIPS conference typically attracts more than 500 attendees from all over the world. It provides an opportunity for chip designers, computer architects, system engineers, press and analysts, as

Event Details

The HOT CHIPS conference typically attracts more than 500 attendees from all over the world. It provides an opportunity for chip designers, computer architects, system engineers, press and analysts, as well as attendees from national laboratories and academia to mix, mingle and see presentations on the latest technologies and products. The three days of the conference typically feature two tutorials, two keynotes, a panel discussion and around 25 presentations on a variety of subjects related to microprocessors and integrated circuits. It is widely covered by the media; last year, we had about 25 members of the industry and national press covering the conference.

more

Learn More

Calendar
GoogleCal

View All Events

Current Stories

Pasqal and Eleven Ventures Target Regional Quantum Expansion from Saudi Arabia

Brookhaven and Stony Brook Researchers Demonstrate ‘Wireless’ Capability for Quantum Network

Argonne: Making LLMs Safer for Scientific Applications

GO TO HPCwire

Current Stories

The Enterprise AI Cost Reckoning: Why Falling Per-Token Prices Aren’t Saving You

AI Turns Genomic Data Into 16 New Bacteria-Killing Viruses

Deep Origin Claims Breakthrough in AI Drug Discovery Platform

GO TO AIwire

Current Stories

The Enterprise AI Cost Reckoning: Why Falling Per-Token Prices Aren’t Saving You

AI Turns Genomic Data Into 16 New Bacteria-Killing Viruses

Deep Origin Claims Breakthrough in AI Drug Discovery Platform

GO TO BigDATAwire
