Extreme Heat: Improving governance and strengthening action around the world - cancelled

Date:
 
24 June 2026, 9:30 am - 12:00 pm
 
Venue:
 
LSE Shaw Library, Houghton St, Old Building, London, WC2A 2AE

                Credit: mammuth/istock            

We regret that this event has been cancelled due to the red extreme heat warning issued by the UK Met Office.

This London Climate Action Week event will open with the announcement of the inaugural Adeline Stuart-Watt Award winner and will be followed by a session focused on improving extreme heat governance and action around the world. Hosted in collaboration with the Zurich Climate Resilience Alliance.

The 
Adeline Stuart-Watt Award
 celebrates the legacy of Adeline Stuart-Watt, a highly respected and very sadly missed friend and colleague at the LSE’s Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment and the 
Zurich Climate Resilience Alliance﻿
. The Award recognises outstanding, policy-relevant research contributions to the field of climate adaptation and resilience by postgraduate students.

An overview of the Award process will be provided by Candice Howarth, followed by the Award winner being announced by Professor Lord Nicholas Stern. The winner will then receive their award before presenting an overview of the winning topic. The Adeline Stuart-Watt Award is generously supported by the Z Zurich Foundation.

The second part of the event will focus on Extreme Heat: Improving Governance and strengthening action around the world.

Chaired by Swenja Suminski, this section of the event will explore the critical need to improve extreme heat governance globally. The event will bring together expertise from the Grantham Research Institute and Zurich Climate Resilience Alliance partners Mercy Corps, Practical Action and the IFRC alongside input from leading global partners.

The event will share new analysis of extreme heat governance progress and challenges across countries where the Zurich Climate Resilience Alliance operates along with stories from county programmes.

The event will finish with a fire side chat session where speakers will reflect on key challenges and opportunities for advancing extreme heat governance globally.

Meet our contributors:

Professor Lord Nicholas Stern
, Chair of the LSE Grantham Research Institute

Candice Howarth
, Research Director at Quadrature Climate Foundation and Visiting Professor in Practice at the LSE Grantham Research Institute

Swenja Surminski
, Managing Director Climate and Sustainability at Marsh and Professor in Practice at the LSE Grantham Research Institute

Anna Beswick
, Senior Policy Fellow (Adaptation and Resilience) at the LSE Grantham Research Institute

Martina Podesta
, Policy Officer (Adaptation Policy and Governance) at the LSE Grantham Research Institute

Marc Gordon﻿
, Global Lead, Extreme Heat Risk Reduction & Senior Coordinator of the Midterm Review of the Sendai Framework (MTR SF), Centre of Excellence for Climate and Disaster Resilience at the United Nations

Ninni Ikkala Nyman
, Lead, Climate Change, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.

Olivia Shears﻿
, Head of CCRA and adaptation progress reporting, UK Climate Change Committee.

Mary McBryde﻿
, Chief Program Officer, HERA.
