Introduction

Download

Learn

Community

Uses

Research

People

Introduction

  F* (pronounced 
F star
) is a general-purpose proof-oriented
  programming language, supporting both purely functional and
  effectful programming. It combines the expressive power of dependent
  types with proof automation based on SMT solving and tactic-based
  interactive theorem proving.

  F* programs compile, by default, to OCaml. Various fragments of F*
  can also be extracted to F#, to C or Wasm by a tool
  called 
KaRaMeL
,
  or to assembly using
  the 
Vale

  toolchain. F* is implemented in F* and bootstrapped using OCaml. 

  F* is open source on 
GitHub
 and is under 
  active development by 
Microsoft Research
, 
  
Inria
, and by the community.

Download

  F* is distributed under the 
Apache 2.0 license
.
  Binaries for Windows, Linux, and Mac OS X are posted regularly on the 
releases page on GitHub
.
  You can also install F* from OPAM, Docker, Nix, or build it from sources, by following the instructions in 
INSTALL.md
.

Learn F*

An online
  book 
Proof-oriented
  Programming In F*
 is being written and regular updates are
  posted online. You probably want to read it while trying out
  examples and exercises in your browser by clicking the image below.

Low*

We also have a 

  tutorial that covers Low*
, a low-level subset of F*, which can be compiled to C by KaRaMeL.

Course Material

F* courses are often taught at various seasonal schools. Lectures and course materials for some of them are
    also a useful resource.

        Embedding Proof-oriented Programming Languages in F*

Online lectures at the 
Oregon Programming Language Summer School (2021)
: 
Lecture notes, slides, code

        Formal Verification with F* and Meta-F*

Lectures and tutorial at 
ECI 2019
: 
Lecture notes, slides, code

        Verifying Low-Level Code for Correctness and Security

Lectures at the 
Oregon Programming Language Summer School (2019)
: 
Lecture notes, slides, code

        Program Verification with F*

 Course at 
2018 EUTypes Summer School
,
          8-12 August, 2018, Ohrid, Macedonia 
Course material

Community

Please use 
GitHub
Discussions
 to ask questions about F*, learn about
announcements, etc. 

Although we previously used a Slack instance, we aim to consolidate our online community
on this public 
forum on Zulip
.

We also have a mailing list, which has very low traffic. You can
subscribe 
at fstar-mailing-list
.

The 
F* PoP Up Seminar
, a
users and developers meeting is open to all. We aim to schedule it once a month, though
the schedule is irregular---we hope to see you there!

You can also contact the maintainers of F* at fstar-maintainers@googlegroups.com.

Uses

    F* is used in several projects in both industrial and academic settings.
    We list a few of them here. If you are using F* in your project, please
    let us know by writing to the 
fstar-mailing-list
.

Project Everest

Project Everest
 is an umbrella project that develops high-assurance
    secure communication software in F*. A big part of the development of F* has been motivated by the scenarios
    that Project Everest targets. Several offshoots from Project Everest continue as their own projects, including
    some of those listed below.
  
HACL*, ValeCrypt, and EverCrypt

HACL*
 is a library of high-assurance cryptographic primitives, written in F* and extracted to C.
    
ValeCrypt
 provides formally proven implementations of cryptographic primitives in Vale, 
    a framework for verified assembly language programming embedded in F*.
    
EverCrypt
 combines them into a single cryptographic provider.
    Code from these projects is now used in production in several projects,
    including 
Mozilla Firefox
,
    the 
Linux kernel
,
    
Python
, 
    
mbedTLS
, the 
Tezos blockchain
,
    the 
ElectionGuard
 electronic voting SDK, and the 
Wireguard
 VPN.
  
EverParse

EverParse
 is a parser generator for binary formats that produces C code extracted from formally proven F*.
    Parsers from EverParse are used in production in several projects, including in 
Windows Hyper-V
, 
    where every network packet passing through the Azure cloud platform is parsed and validated first by code generated by EverParse. EverParse is also used in other
    production settings, including 
ebpf-for-windows
.

Research

    F* is an active topic of research, both in the programming languages and formal methods community, 
    as well as from an application perspective in the security and systems communities.
    We list a few of them below, with 
full citations to these papers available in this bibliography
.
    If you would like your paper included in this list, please contact fstar-maintainers@googlegroups.com.

The Design of F* and its DSLs

Dependent
            Types and Multi-monadic Effects in F*
 (POPL 2016) This
            is the canonical reference describing the F* system. The
            language has evolved in significant ways since 2016,
            however, its core design and implementation is based on
            this paper.

Verified
            Low-level Programming Embedded in F*
 (ICFP 2017) which
            describes the Low* fragment of F* which is a low-level
            subset of F* that can be compiled to C by KaRaMeL.

A
            Verified, Efficient Embedding of a Verifiable Assembly
            Language
 (POPL 2019) which describes the Vale
            language, a verified assembly language embedded in F*.

Meta-F*:
            Proof Automation with SMT, Tactics, and Metaprograms

            (ESOP 2019) which describes MetaF*, a metaprogramming
            system within F* used to implement various aspects of F*,
            ranging from its tactic engine to its support for
            typeclasses.

Programming
            and Proving with Indexed Effects
 (TR 2021) which
            describes the design of F*'s support for user-defined
            effects and provides a calculus that describes the logical
            core of F*.

Steel:
            Proof-oriented Programming in a Dependently Typed
            Concurrent Separation Logic
 (ICFP 2021), which
            describes the Steel language and its use of the SteelCore
            concurrent separation logic for proofs of imperative
            programs with various forms of concurrency.

Semantics and Effects

Verifying
            Higher-order Programs with the Dijkstra Monad
 (PLDI
            2013), which introduces the concept of the Dijkstra monad,
            a core feature of F*'s system of effects.

Dijkstra
            Monads for Free
 (POPL 2017), which shows how to
            automatically derive Dijkstra monads for a class of
            computational monads using a continuation-passing
            transformation

A Monadic
        Framework for Relational Verification: Applied to Information
        Security, Program Equivalence, and Optimizations
 (CPP
        2018), which builds on the Dijkstra Monads for Free work to
        construct a framework for proving properties that relate
        multiple programs or program executions.

Dijkstra Monads
        for All
 (ICFP 2019), which generalizes the notion of a
        Dijkstra monad and shows how to systematically relate
        computational and specificational monads via monad morphisms.

Recalling a
            Witness: Foundations and Applications of Monotonic
            State
 (POPL 2018), which describes the design of a
            program logic for reasoning about programs whose state
            evolves monotonically, e.g., where the state is an
            append-only log.  This logic underpins both Low* and
            Steel.

SteelCore:
        An Extensible Concurrent Separation Logic for Effectful
        Dependently Typed Programs
 (ICFP 2020), which describes
        the SteelCore concurrent separation logic, the basis of the
        Steel DSL.

          USSL: A Universe-Stratified, Predicative Concurrent Separation Logic

          a foundational, axiom-free concurrent separation logic shallowly
          embedded in F*, supporting dynamic invariants and higher-order ghost
          state in a predicative setting, by stratifying predicates according to
          the hierarchy of universe levels.

          PulseCore: An Impredicative Concurrent Separation Logic for
          Dependently Typed Programs
 (PLDI 2025), a foundational, axiom-free
          concurrent separation logic shallowly embedded in F*, supporting
          dynamic invariants and higher-order ghost state, with impredicative
          invariants and later credits. PulseCore is the foundation for 
Pulse
,
          an embedded language in F* for proof-oriented programming in
          concurrent separation logic.

Applications in Security and Cryptography

Many papers applying F* in security and cryptography can be
       found in
       the 
Project
       Everest bibliography
.  We mention a few prominent ones here
       as well as other applications not related to Project Everest.

WYS*: A DSL for
        Verified Secure Multi-party Computations
 (POST 2017),
        which describes the WYS* language, a domain-specific language
        for writing verified mixed-mode secure multi-party
        computations.

Implementing
        and Proving the TLS 1.3 Record Layer
(S&P 2017), which
        describes a verified implementaion of the TLS-1.3 record layer
        in Low*.

HACL*: A
        Verified Modern Cryptographic Library
 (CCS 2017), which
        describes HACL*, a verified cryptographic library
        implemented in Low*.

Formally
            Verified Cryptographic Web Applications in WebAssembly

            (S&P 2019), which develops LibSignal*, an implementation
            of the Signal protocol in F* using HACL*, compiled to Wasm
            by KaRaMeL.

EverCrypt:
            A Fast, Verified, Cross-Platform Cryptographic
            Provider
 (S&P 2020), a crypto provider combining C and
            assembly code from HACL* and Vale, as well as some
            applications built on top of it, including a verified
            high-performance Merkle tree that was used in an initial
            version of Microsoft Azure CCF.

HACL×N:
          Verified Generic SIMD Crypto (for all your favorite
          platforms)
 (CCS 2020), which metaprograms vectorized
          versions of cryptographic primitives, enabling a
          "write-once, get vectorized versions for free" style.

A
        Security Model and Fully Verified Implementation for the IETF
        QUIC Record Layer
 (S&P 2021), a verified implementation of
        the QUIC record layer in Low* combined with the protocol logic
        implemented in Dafny.

DICE*:
        A Formally Verified Implementation of DICE Measured Boot

        (USENIX Security 2021), which proves the correctness &
        security of the DICE measured boot protocol for
        micro-controllers, implemented in Low*, using EverCrypt and
        EverParse.

DY*:
        A Modular Symbolic Verification Framework for Executable
        Cryptographic Protocol Code
 (Euro S&P 2021), a framework
        for type-based symbolic security analysis of cryptographic
          protocol implementations developed in F*.

A
            Tutorial-Style Introduction to DY*
 (LNCS 2021), which is, yes,
            a tutorial-style introduction to DY*.

An
            In-Depth Symbolic Security Analysis of the ACME
            Standard
 (CCS 2021), which proves the security of a
            model of the ACME certificate issuance and management
            protocol using DY*.

Noise*:
        A Library of Verified High-Performance Secure Channel Protocol
        Implementations
 (S&P 2022), which metaprograms provably
        secure implementations for a family of secure channel
        protocols.

TreeSync:
          Authenticated Group Management for Messaging Layer
          Security
 (USENIX Security 2023), a reference
          implementation of MLS in F*, proven secure using the DY*
          framework.

Modularity,
        Code Specialization, and Zero-Cost Abstractions for Program
        Verification
 (ICFP 2023), which describes
        proof-engineering techniques used in HACL* for generic
        implementations of cryptographic constructions that can be
        specialized repeatedly to many concrete implementations in
        C. The techniques used here led to the adoption of verified
        cryptographic code into the libraries of the Python
          programming language.

Verifying
            Indistinguishability of Privacy-Preserving Protocols

            (OOPSLA 2023), which provides a library called Waldo in F*
            that enables proofs of indistinguishability over traces of
            communication in networking protocols. 

Comparse:
       Provably Secure Formats for Cryptographic Protocols
 (CCS
       2023), which provides a parsing library for data formats that
       are appropriate for use with symbolic protocol
       analyzers. Comparse provides bit-level precise accounting of
       formats allowing the DY* protocol analysis framework to reason
       about concrete messages and identify protocol flaws that it
       previously would have missed.

Formal Security and
       Functional Verification of Cryptographic Protocol Implementations in
       Rust
 (CCS 2025), which develops Bert13, an implementation of TLS-1.3
       in Rust with post-quantum features, and proves it correct and secure via
       translation (using Hax) to a variety of prover backends, including F*,
       which is used to prove the Rust code panic free and to prove that the
       transcript formats are injective.

Applications in Systems

Provably-Safe
        Multilingual Software Sandboxing using WebAssembly
 (USENIX
        2022), which describes a verified implementation of a sandbox
        for WebAssembly modules in Low* and Rust.

FastVer:
        Making Data Integrity a Commodity
 (SIGMOD 2021), which
        formalizes a protocol for data integrity monitoring in F*.

FastVer2:
        A Provably Correct Monitor for Concurrent, Key-Value
        Stores
 (CPP 2022), which proves the correctness of a
        low-level, concurrent implementation of the FastVer protocol
        in Steel.

Pipit on the
        Post: Proving Pre- and Post-Conditions of Reactive Systems
 (ECOOP
        2024), which embeds a reactive language in F* and uses it to verify
        some control systems that execute in real time.

StarMalloc: Verifying a
        Modern, Hardened Memory Allocator
 (SPLASH 2024), a
        security-oriented, concurrent memory allocator that can be used as a
        drop-in replacement in real-world projects, verified in Steel.

Applications in Parsing

EverParse:
            Verified Secure Zero-Copy Parsers for Authenticated
            Message Formats
 (USENIX Security 2019), which 
            describes the EverParse parser generator for parsing
            binary formats, producing C code.

Hardening
            Attack Surfaces with Formally Proven Binary Format
            Parsers
 (PLDI 2022), which uses EverParse to harden
            network packet parsers in Windows Network Virtualization
            and Hyper-V. 

ASN1*:
            Provably Correct Non-Malleable Parsing for ASN.1 DER 

            (CPP 2022), which formalizes the ASN.1 DER format in F*
            and proves the correctness of a parser for it in
            EverParse.

          Secure Parsing and Serializing with Separation Logic Applied to CBOR,
          CDDL, and COSE (CCS 2025)
, which formalizes the RFCs for the CBOR
          binary object format and the CDDL data description language in F*,
          develops provably correct and secure parsers and formatters for CBOR,
          and a compiler for CDDL specifications, all implemented in Pulse, and
          applied to various applications, including the validation of COSE
          signed objects.

Applications in Programming, Program Proof, and Program Analysis

Verified
         Compilation of Space-Efficient Reversible Circuits
 (CAV
         2018), which presents ReVerC, a compiler for reversible
         circuits proven correct in F*.

            Verified Transformations and Hoare Logic: Beautiful Proofs for Ugly Assembly Language
          
 (VSTTE 2020), which develops verified transformations
          for assembly programs in the Vale framework.

Statically
        verified refinements for multiparty protocols
 (OOPSLA
        2020), which presents Session*, a session-typed programming
        language for multiparty protocols, formalized in F*.

Verified
        Functional Programming of an Abstract Interpreter
 (SAS
        2021), which develops an abstract interpretation framework for
        an imperative language with a very compact proof of soundness
          developed in F*.

Catala:
          a programming language for the law
 (ICFP 2021), where
          core parts of the compiler are formalized and proven correct
          in F*.

Verification of
        a Merkle Patricia Tree Library Using F*
, which ports a
        Merkle tree library from OCaml to F*, finds and fixes a bug,
        and eventually proves it correct.

Certified
        mergeable replicated data types
 (PLDI 2022), which
        presents PEEPUL, a framework in which to build replicated data
        types for use in distributed programming, formalized in
          F*.

Aeneas:
            Rust verification by functional translation
 (ICFP
            2022), which translates Rust into pure F* enabling
          functional correctness proofs.

Q*:
        Implementing Quantum Separation Logic in F*
 (PlanQC 2022),
        which adapts the SteelCore separation logic for use with a
        quantum programming language.

Pipit:
            Reactive Systems in F* (Extended Abstract)
 (TyDe 2023),
            which describes a embedded DSL for verifying reactive systems.

Securing
            Verified IO Programs Against Unverified Code in F*

            (POPL 2024), which presents SCIO*, a formally secure
            compilation framework for statically verified programs
            performing input-output (IO).

SecRef*: Securely Sharing Mutable References
            between Verified and Unverified Code in F* (ICFP 2025)
, which presents SecRef*, a formally
            secure compilation framework for statically verified stateful programs.
            It also presents a Dijkstra Monad for Monotonic State.

Automatically
        Verifying Replication-Aware Linearizability
 (OOPSLA 2025), which
        develops a novel fully automated technique for verifying
        replication-aware linearizability for Mergeable Replicated Data
        Types, with proofs in F*, and verified code extracted to OCaml.

A
        Mechanically Verified Garbage Collector for OCaml
 (JAR 2025), which
        develops a verified stop-the-world mark-and-sweep GC for OCaml, verified
        in F* and Low*.

AI-assisted Programming

Towards Neural Synthesis for SMT-Assisted Proof-Oriented Programming
 
        (ICSE 2025), which curates a dataset of 940KLOC of F* code and proof and develops AI models to automate program and proof synthesis

3DGen: AI-Assisted
      Generation of Provably Correct Binary Format Parsers
, which developsAI
      agents to transform mixed informal input, including natural language
      documents (i.e., RFCs) and example inputs into format specifications into 
      3D, a data format specification language used with EverParse.

Miscellaneous

A
      Theorem Proving Approach to Programming Language Semantics

      (ICSE-SEET 2023), which reports on experiences teaching
      operational, denotational, and axiomatic semantics to students
      using F*.

Papers about an older version of F*

    The first paper to introduce a system called F* was in
    2011. Although the current version of F* was redesigned and
    implemented in 2015, we include some of these older papers here
    for completeness.

Secure
      Distributed Programming with Value-dependent Types
 (ICFP
      2011), a longer version of which also appeared
        in 
JFP
.

Self-certification:
      bootstrapping certified typecheckers in F* with Coq
 (POPL
      2012), which certifies the correctness of the F* typechecker by
      programming it in F* itself and bootstrapping the process by
      checking about 7GB of proof using Coq in about 24 machine-days
      of compute time.

Fully
      abstract compilation to JavaScript
 (POPL 2013), which
      models a subset of JavaScript in F* and develops a secure
        compiler from an ML-like language to JavaScript.

Gradual
          typing embedded securely in JavaScript
 (POPL 2014),
          which develops a source-to-source compiler for
          JavaScript with defensive checks to ensure the soundness of
          gradual typing in adversarial contexts, proven corrent in
        F*.

Probabilistic
      relational verification for cryptographic implementations

      (POPL 2014), which develops RF*, a relational dialect of the
      language useful for proving security properties like
      noninterference and for game-based cryptographic proofs.
