Key Points
The FAA said Boeing can resume ticketing its 737 Max and 787 Dreamliner aircraft.
The company was stripped of this ability in the wake of two fatal Max crashes in 2018 and 2019.
The FAA said in September that it would allow Boeing to resume some issuance of airworthy certificates itself.
In this article
BA
Follow your favorite stocks
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
A Boeing Co. 737 Max airplane at the company's manufacturing facility in Renton, Washington, US, on Thursday, Nov. 20, 2025. 
David Ryder | Bloomberg | Getty Images
The U.S. government on Friday said 
Boeing
 can once again issue airworthiness certificates for its bestselling 737 Max aircraft and 787 Dreamliners, an authority that was stripped from the manufacturer after fatal crashes in 2018 and 2019 of the 737 Max.
The 
Federal Aviation Administration
 said last September that Boeing could ticket its own planes before they're handed off to customers for only some of the Maxes and Dreamliners, alternating weeks between the FAA and Boeing doing that work.
"During the past eight months, the FAA has seen comparable production quality findings when Boeing issued airworthiness certificates and when the FAA issued them," the agency said Friday. "Based on these results, the FAA determined it can safely return this responsibility to Boeing."
The company said in a statement that it "will continue to work under the oversight of the FAA in building safe, high-quality commercial airplanes that comply with all airworthiness certification requirements."
The decision is a vote of confidence for Boeing, one of the biggest U.S. exporters by value, from its regulator and the U.S. government after years of safety crises, including the two crashes and a 
near catastrophe
 in January 2024 when a door plug blew off of a new 737 Max 9 moments into the flight.
Read more CNBC airline news
Delta launches ‘basic business’ fares without lounge access, seat selection
Record heat, crowds drive offseason boom in international travel
Delta expects higher airfare to last, bringing 2026 profit goal in reach
'Bring 'em on': Delta wants United's crown over the Pacific, too
Spirit's collapse, high fuel prices test limits of summer vacation spending
Meet the pilots flying Spirit Airlines' yellow jets to the desert
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
