Back to stories

Fairphone 

18 August 2026

                                4
                                min read

Share this article

The Fairphone (Gen. 6+) is all about giving you more

For nearly 16 years, our mission has been simple: to prove that a smartphone can be made differently. We’ve focused on creating technology that works well, lasts longer, and is made with genuine care for the people and materials behind it. Last year, we brought that vision to life with the Fairphone (Gen. 6), our clearest expression yet of what a responsible phone should be.
But we also listened to your feedback. You asked for more performance, more memory, and more personalization. Today, we are answering that call. 
Today, we launch 
the
 
Fairphone (Gen. 6+). 
It is the Fairphone you already know, but better where it matters most. 

More power. More performance.
The Fairphone (Gen. 6+) comes with upgraded internal hardware that doesn’t compromise on our industry-leading repairability standards. The ‘plus’ isn't about adding features for a longer spec sheet; it's about intentional improvements that keep your device capable for longer.
- The Fairphone (Gen. 6+) is powered by the 
Snapdragon® 7s Gen 4 processor,
 going up a generation compared to its predecessor.
- We’ve also increased the memory from 8GB RAM to 
12GB DDR5 RAM
. That’s the most we’ve ever put in a Fairphone!
Together, the combination gives the new Fairphone a significant boost in performance with smoother multitasking and a more fluid user experience, now and in the future. App loading and switching speeds are faster by up to 24% while system RAM reservation time is down by up to 20%. You’re also getting Android 16 out of the box, with the promise of six OS upgrades over its lifetime.

It’s everything you love. Plus more.
The Fairphone (Gen. 6+) builds on what made the Fairphone (Gen. 6) an award-winning bestseller for us. That’s also why we have also retained a lot of what made the original so good.
- Industry-leading warranty of up to five years.
- Software support guaranteed through 2033.
- Modular and repairable design with 12 user-replaceable parts.
- 256GB on-board storage (expandable upto 2TB with microSD)
 - Triple-camera system with 50MP Sony Lytia 700c main camera
- 6.3” LTPO OLED Display
- Up to 53 hours of battery life on a single charge
- IP55 dust and water resistance

New edition, new color
The new Fairphone comes in Horizon Black and Forest Green, along with an exclusive Cobalt Blue colorway that’s more than a style statement. When we introduce a new color, it’s never just a design decision. The reason we zeroed in on Cobalt Blue is because it serves as a nod to our origin story as a conflict mineral awareness campaign and our commitment to fairly sourced raw materials.
Having said that, it’s quite the bold look that’s sure to make heads turn and get conversations going. And even better, you can make sure your accessories match as well, with the card holder, finger loop, and protective cover available in the new color as well. And yes, it's still as fair as ever: it contains 51% fair and recycled materials (by total weight), supports our living wage bonus program, is assembled under fair working conditions using renewable energy, and is 100% e-waste neutral!

Already own the Fairphone (Gen. 6)?
Updated Fairphone Moments: 
Our dedicated digital minimalist mode now offers even more control and more customization. Add new wallpapers, reorder your preferred apps, map new functionalities to the Switch button, switch on blue filter mode; there’s a lot more you can do with Fairphone Moments. 
New Fairphone Gallery: 
You’ve been asking for this for a long time. Our new local gallery app allows you to store your photos and videos locally without depending on third-party services or paid cloud storage.
The best part? These software updates are also coming to the Fairphone (Gen. 6). It just wouldn’t be fair otherwise. 

Hello, America!
This launch marks a massive milestone for us. Fairphone is now officially available in the United States. For the first time, sustainable tech enthusiasts across the pond can purchase a fully unlocked Fairphone (Gen. 6+) along with the Fairbuds and Fairbuds XL through our dedicated US web shop. And with the number of comments we see on our socials, this has been a long time coming!
Discover the Fairphone (Gen. 6+) today: 
Shop EU
 | 
Shop US
*These figures reflect internal laboratory testing using SmartViser diagnostic tools under conditions designed to approximate real-world use. Actual performance may vary depending on factors such as device configuration, network conditions, and usage patterns. 
®Snapdragon and Qualcomm branded products are products of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. and/or its subsidiaries.

Share this article

Latest stories

The Fairphone (Gen. 6+) is all about giving you more

For nearly 16 years, our mission has been simple: to prove that a smartphone can be made differently. We’ve focused

Read more

Making working conditions fairer for everyone

Fairphone products are assembled under fairer working conditions in fairer factories and mines. We talk about this a lot. And

Read more

Corporate distancing will not save children from the mines.

Child labor is not an exception but a feature of a consumer electronics industry obsessed with reducing costs to an

Read more

Stay connected

Unlock exclusive deals, fresh stories and your shot to make a difference.

Your e-mail

Error state

Yes, I would like to receive recurring e-mails from Fairphone. I can update my preferences, choose my favourite topics, or withdraw permission at any time. I can find more information in Fairphone’s
                                            
Privacy Policy
.

SUBSCRIBE

You're almost there! Confirm your newsletter subscription.

Didn't receive an email? Check your spam folder.
