153.0beta

Firefox Beta

June 17, 2026

Version 153.0beta, first offered to Beta channel users on June 17, 2026

Firefox Beta gets updated 3 times a week and as a consequence, the release notes for the Beta channel are updated continuously to reflect features that have reached sufficient maturity to benefit from community feedback and bug reports.

Warning: Features listed here may or may 
not
 make a final release of Firefox.

In addition to these release notes, you can follow ongoing development via the 
Firefox Trains
 website or our 
@FirefoxBeta
 Bluesky account.

                            New

High Dynamic Range (HDR) video playback is now available on Windows - this feature needs HDR mode enabled for the display in 
Windows Settings - Display
. Laptop displays that only offer "HDR video streaming" are not supported at this time. Some videos recorded on phones in certain orientations are currently not shown as HDR.

Containers
 let you keep separate parts of your online life (work, shopping, personal, banking) logged into different accounts in the same browser window, but keep your cookies and ad tracking isolated inside each container.

It is now possible to merge multiple PDFs by dragging a PDF into the PDF sidebar.

It is now possible to add images as new pages within PDFs using the Firefox PDF editor.

Quickly pick and copy a color from any page by typing "pick color", "color picker", or "eyedropper" in the address bar and selecting the "Pick a color" quick action.

Added support for Apple's system-wide full-screen keyboard command (Globe-F).

Share any open page with a QR code. Right-click a tab, select Share > Generate QR Code. Great for posters, invitations, banners, and other printed materials. On macOS, you can also right-click the address bar to access the Share menu.

Firefox now verifies and displays 
Qualified Website Authentication Certificates
 (QWACs) in accordance with eIDAS regulations.

Added improved support for videos with overlays so users can more easily access video actions from context menus.

Firefox now highlights the location permission icon in red whenever a website has access to your location. The permission icon is also now visible on search results pages where it was previously hidden.

                            Firefox Labs

Firefox Labs can now be opened quickly by typing "labs" or "experiment" in the address bar and selecting the 
Open Firefox Labs
 quick action.

Firefox now offers experimental support for the new 
JPEG XL image format
, which generally provides better compression than WebP, JPEG, PNG, and GIF and is designed to supersede them. You can enable it from the 
Firefox Labs
 panel in 
Settings
.

                            Changed

Extensions can no longer access local files by default. Users can grant or revoke this access via the new "Access local files on your computer" permission, separate from "Access your data for all websites".

Local Network Access restrictions are now enabled by default for all users. Firefox requires websites to request permission before connecting to devices on your local network or to apps and services on your device.

Outdated cookie settings have been removed from the Settings UI. Users still in that mode should switch to default behavior "Isolate cross-site cookies". 
More information

                            Developer

Developer Information

A new "Local Mode" setting in the options panel allows developers to load local directories via custom origins. This simplifies testing for APIs that do not function over standard 
file://
 URLs, removing the need to run a local web server. Multiple directory mappings are supported.

                            Web Platform

Firefox now supports a limited subset of the non-standard 
::-webkit-scrollbar
 pseudo-element to improve web compatibility:

Rules with non-zero 
width
/
height
 disable overlay scrollbars for the affected container.

display: none
 on 
::-webkit-scrollbar
 behaves like 
scrollbar-width: none
, hiding the scrollbar.

@supports selector(::-webkit-scrollbar)
 now evaluates to true.

Full styling capabilities (colors, border-radius, etc.) are intentionally not supported.

Updated HTML parsing rules for 
<select>
 elements, aligning with web standards to support future customizable select dropdown features.

The 
vertical-align
 property was converted into a shorthand for 
baseline-source
, 
alignment-baseline
, and 
baseline-shift
 in Firefox 149. Now, 
alignment-baseline
 supports the new keywords 
alphabetic
, 
ideographic
, 
central
, 
mathematical
, and 
hanging
, extending the variety of 
baselines to choose for alignment
.

Implemented the new 
popover=hint
 spec, which 
removes
 a series of inconsistent and unexpected behaviors.

The 
circle()
 and 
ellipse()
 functions accept two new keywords 
closest-corner
 and 
farthest-corner
 for their radial size.

The newly added 
Error.stackTraceLimit
 property allows to set the maximal depth of the captured JavaScript error stack as a performance optimization.

Developers can now use the 
text
 import attribute to 
import text files
 using the module system.

The 
Picture In Picture API
 exposes a way for web developers to make use of user agent Picture-In-Picture functionality.

The 
Intl.LocaleInfo
 proposal adds the ability to query 
Locale information
, such as week data (first day in a week, weekend start day, weekend end day), text direction and hour cycle used in the Locale.

The 
MediaCapabilities.decodingInfo()
 and 
MediaCapabilities.encodingInfo()
 methods now accept the "webrtc" configuration type. This allows a site to query whether a given audio or video configuration can be decoded or encoded for WebRTC and whether doing so will be smooth and/or powerEfficient.

    Get the most recent version

        Firefox Beta
        — English (US)

Windows 64-bit

Windows 64-bit MSI

Windows ARM64/AArch64

Windows 32-bit

Windows 32-bit MSI

macOS

Linux 64-bit

Linux ARM64/AArch64

Your system may not meet the requirements for Firefox, but you can try one of these versions:

        Firefox Beta
        — English (US)

Windows 64-bit

Windows 64-bit MSI

Windows ARM64/AArch64

Windows 32-bit

Windows 32-bit MSI

macOS

Linux 64-bit

Linux ARM64/AArch64

Firefox Beta is 
no longer supported
 on Windows 8.1 and below.

Please download Firefox ESR (Extended Support Release) to use Firefox.

        Download Firefox ESR 64-bit

        Download Firefox ESR 32-bit

        Download a different build

Firefox Beta is 
no longer supported
 on macOS 10.14 and below.

Please download Firefox ESR (Extended Support Release) to use Firefox.

      Download Firefox ESR

              Download Firefox Beta

              Download Firefox Beta

              Download Firefox Beta

              Download Firefox Beta

              Download Firefox Beta

              Download Firefox Beta

                Download for Linux 64-bit

                Download for Linux ARM64

      Firefox Privacy Notice
