In 2023, I was in need of a new laptop that should hopefully last me for a
while. While looking at my options, I was seduced by Framework’s promise of a
repairable and upgradable laptop that supports Linux out-of-the-box without
weird driver issues, as well as the option to assemble the laptop
myself
1
 and buy the RAM and SSD I want separately
2
, back when
they were cheap.

For three years, the laptop has served me well, until Framework suggested via
newsletter to install the latest BIOS
3
 update, version 3.20, with a bunch
of security fixes. Unfortunately, the system hung and displayed a corrupt image
on the screen, signifying a failed BIOS flash.

Naturally, I reached out to Framework support, who told me to unplug the laptop,
let the battery drain, and power it back on again afterwards, hoping the laptop
would recover by itself. Unfortunately, it never did, and after giving Framework
a bunch of information, they informed me that since my 1-year warranty has
expired, I have no option but to purchase a new Framework motherboard, which
will cost at least CA$500.

A quick search revealed that many people had issues with BIOS flashes with this
specific BIOS update on 
the Framework forums
, even those in
warranty, and on 
a different thread
, people have been having
similar issues with BIOS flashing in general on this model since at least March
of 2025. To my knowledge, Framework has never acknowledged the issue or offered
any indication that the problem was fixed, so buying a new motherboard would
simply be playing Russian roulette if I ever wanted to update the BIOS again, on
top of spending CA$500+ through no fault of my own.

Thus, I opted against buying a new motherboard and embarked upon a journey to
flash the BIOS myself. I documented this journey in excruciating detail so that
hopefully, by following along, you’ll understand exactly how you might fix
similar problems.

Table of Contents

Why Framework?

The fatal BIOS flash

Reaching out to support

Troubleshooting on my own

The BIOS chip

The flash programmer

Purchasing the tools

Response from Framework

The data breach

Extracting the BIOS image

Delivery of the tools

Connecting the chip

Executing the flash

Consequences of flashing

Conclusion

Why Framework?

In 2023, my basic requirement for a laptop was as follows:

Compatible with Linux;

Small and light enough for travel;

A standard US keyboard layout, not that horrible Canadian Multilingual
Standard layout that’s somehow very common in Canada
4
;

A modern CPU, but not necessarily super high core count, as I don’t intend to
do intensive compiling or gaming while travelling; and

Socketed RAM and SSD, so I can upgrade those down the line, or buy from a
third party if it made financial sense. I wanted to start it at 32 GiB
of RAM
5
 and 1 TB of SSD
6
, since those were reasonably
affordable in 2023.

As such, my options are effectively limited to the 13” thin-and-light laptops
without a discrete GPU. At the time, AMD Ryzen was ahead of Intel in the
performance department, so I decided to go for an AMD CPU.

There were a plethora of 13” thin-and-light AMD Ryzen laptops that fit the bill,
but since I didn’t need the new laptop right away, I figured I might as well try
something new.

At the time, Framework was a relative newcomer on the laptop scene, promising a
repairable and upgradable experience, along with swappable ports. I rather liked
the idea of not being locked to the ports that the manufacturer decided to put
onto the laptop, and I wanted more upgradability also. It definitely helped that
Linux came with full first-party support and no requirement to run patched
kernels or anything crazy like that.

Furthermore, Framework was a very big proponent of the 
right to repair
movement
, and I strongly believe that laptops should be repairable, like
desktops, and not just thrown away after a minor problem, so I also wanted to
support them on that front.

So I looked at the price premium for Framework, and it wasn’t actually that much
more expensive once I opted for the DIY edition, sourced my own RAM and SSD, and
skipped the pointless Windows licence. With another laptop brand, I would have
to either buy the model with the lowest RAM and SSD and upgrade it to the
32 GiB of RAM and 1 TB of SSD that I wanted, or pay a premium for the
manufacturer to put those in.

So I decided to just go for it and pre-ordered a Framework laptop, and it
finally arrived a few months later to much anticipation. I simply slotted in the
RAM and SSD, connected the input cover, screwed it in, installed the bezels, and
that was it. It honestly felt a bit anti-climactic for a DIY laptop. I then put
in a Debian netinst USB drive, and I was off to the races.

For the next three years, I actually had a relatively nice experience, and the
AMD Ryzen 5 7640U with Radeon 760M Graphics was still plenty fast for what I
needed the laptop to do. There was definitely no need to upgrade, though I
could, in theory.

The fatal BIOS flash

For the longest time, Framework appeared to be a very consumer-friendly company,
providing regular BIOS updates and an easy way to install them on Linux through
the Linux Vendor Firmware Service (LVFS) and 
fwupd
. In fact, I am
subscribed to Framework’s newsletter, which informs me of any updates coming
out.

I’ve done many BIOS updates on Framework through 
fwupdmgr update
, and save for
the annoyance of rebooting the laptop and waiting like ten minutes for the BIOS
updater to finish flashing, nothing bad has ever happened.

On July 7th, 2026, Framework sent me the following email:

From:
 Framework <
support@frame.work
>

Subject:
 Software update for your Framework Laptop 13 (AMD Ryzen™ 7040 Series) - BIOS 3.20

We have a BIOS update for your Framework Laptop 13 (AMD Ryzen™ 7040 Series).
We recommend always installing the latest version of BIOS and drivers to keep
your system secure, stable, and running at high performance.

BIOS 3.20
, with updaters for Windows and Linux

Added support for Framework Laptop 13 Pro features - Enabled compatibility
for the haptic touchpad, touch panel, and 74W battery.

Updated the audio verb table to support the new speakers in the Framework
Laptop 13 Pro chassis.

Updated AMD PhoenixPI-FP8-FP7_1.2.0.0f.

Fixed an issue where the system was unable to boot from partially locked
self-encrypting drives (SEDs).

Fixed an issue where the Battery Extender status was reported incorrectly
following a reboot, hibernation, or shutdown after the timer had expired.

Fixed an issue where the system boots with black screen when a Dell
U2725QE monitor and a mouse were connected.

Supported 16bits postcode.

Fixed an issue where system audio volume was lower on 3.19 beta.

Security fixes

CVE-2025-54502 - CVSS score N/A.

CVE-2025-29949 - CVSS score N/A.

CVE-2025-0040 - CVSS score N/A.

CVE-2024-36355 - CVSS score N/A.

CVE-2024-36310 - CVSS score N/A.

You can learn how to check your current BIOS version, see the full details on
the updates, and always get access to the latest software on the 
Framework
Laptop 13 (AMD Ryzen 7040 Series)
 downloads page.

However, I suspected that flashing a BIOS right away might not be a good idea,
given the potential for bugs, so I decided to wait for a bit. I figured that if
there were problems, either a new update would be released, or the update would
be pulled. Seeing neither, I finally decided to do a quick flash in the morning
of August 5th, while I cooked breakfast.

However, when I came back, I saw this screen, and instantly knew something had
gone horribly wrong:

Framework BIOS flasher showing a triangle and diagonal patterns it’s not supposed to show
7

Given that the BIOS flasher was stuck and probably rendering random stuff from
memory to the screen, I have no choice but to conclude that the BIOS flash had
failed.

Still, I left the laptop for a few hours, just in case it decided to recover. It
never did.

Reaching out to support

Naturally, I reached out to Framework support, hoping for a quick response and a
solution to my problem:

Subject:
 Stuck on BIOS Update

Support Request Category:
 Problem with my Framework Product

Was your Framework Product Delivered within the last 30 days?:
 No it wasn’t

Product:
 Framework Laptop 13

Framework Laptop 13 Generation:
 AMD Ryzen 7040 Series

Operating System:
 Linux

Linux Distribution:
 Debian 12 [typo, should have been 13]

BIOS:
 3.20

Order number:
 [redacted]

Product Issue Selection:
 Mainboard

Description:
 I tried to update the BIOS with fwupdmgr update, and upon reboot,
the system is stuck in this weird state and not making any progress for over
an hour at this point. It’s not displaying properly, see picture. What do I do
now?

I’ve also attached that picture of the screen above.

Support did not respond until one day and 8 hours later.

Troubleshooting on my own

In the meantime, I figured that letting the computer hang
indefinitely—especially with the CPU fan spinning loudly—wasn’t the best idea,
so I decided to do some research. It wasn’t very long before I came across 
this
thread
, with a bunch of people having the same problem doing the
same update to BIOS 3.20 from 3.18, just like I did, though I saw a slightly
different screen.

Users on the thread who were under warranty reported getting their motherboard
replaced, while those out of warranty reported Framework offering zero help.
This was very concerning to me.

Seeing on that thread that support recommended that people in a similar
situation unplug the charger and let the battery drain until the laptop
eventually powers off, I did exactly that, while diving deeper on the forums to
see what was in store for my future.

I then came across 
this other thread
, wherein the forum user

@cesfahani
, who saw the exact same screen I did, detailed how they used their
Raspberry Pi and soldering skills to flash the BIOS chip externally. While I
could do some basic soldering, as seen 
when I built my stratum 1 NTP
server
8
, I was not prepared to solder tiny wires to a tiny BIOS
chip.

It soon became apparent to me that if BIOS flashing on Framework fails and it
doesn’t automatically recover by itself, there was 
no
 recovery mechanism short
of externally programming the BIOS chip. This was 
shocking
 on a product
advertised as “repairable.”

I couldn’t help but remember my first PC, secondhand as it was, with the
2004-vintage P4P800 SE motherboard. I still remember reading the

manual
 from front to back, as an excited child with zero desire
to break my very first PC. Even the 22-year-old motherboard had the ASUS
“CrashFree BIOS 2” feature, which was advertised to fix a bad flash without
resorting to such crazy manual methods. I’d simply have to put in a floppy
disk
9
 or a CD with a BIOS image named 
P4P800SE.ROM
 after a bad flash,
and it would automatically recover. Yet, here I am decades later, dealing with a
“repairable” laptop without such a feature.

I also wondered whether such a thing was specific to laptops, so I did a quick
search on whether the brands that I didn’t choose back then, like Dell and HP,
supported such recovery features. For example, 
Dell laptops
 could
recover the BIOS from USB or the recovery partition after holding down

Ctrl
+
Esc
 while plugging in the power, and HP laptops have
a similar 
“HP Sure Start”
 feature that recovers the BIOS. So Framework is
actually doing worse than their “not-repairable” competitors on this front.

Fortunately, reading further down the thread offered a glimmer of hope: Instead
of soldering tiny wires to the chip on a Raspberry Pi, forum user

@moparisthebest
 revealed that I could use something called “pogo pins”
connected to a USB flash programmer to do the job without any soldering. Even
further down the thread, users 
@David_Henry
 and 
@Richard6
 reported success
doing something similar.

The BIOS chip

Before we go any further, it is important that we first understand the BIOS chip
that we are dealing with. Otherwise, talks of flashing it would just be a
confusing mess of jargon, which was my experience when first reading the thread.

The flash chip in question is located to the right of the M.2 slot, hidden under
a plastic cover, and it looks like this (rotated 90° clockwise to make the label
upright):

The BIOS chip in question, with the M.2 slot for scale

As you can see, this is a Winbond 25R256JWEQ chip. I found the datasheet for the
W25Q256JW series, and discovered the whole series to be 1.8 V,
256 M-bit (i.e. 32 MiB) SPI flash chips. It will be very important to
find a BIOS image for this motherboard that is exactly 32 MiB, then flash
it at exactly 1.8 V to avoid destroying it.

What’s SPI? It’s a 
de facto
 standard called the 
Serial Peripheral
Interface
, commonly used in embedded systems for communication between
integrated circuits. This standard is why the Raspberry Pi could talk to and
flash the chip, as could many microcontrollers.

There are several variants of the W25Q256JW chip, differentiated by form factor:

the 
P
 variant, which is an 8-pad, WSON 6×5 mm chip;

the 
E
 variant, which is an 8-pad, WSON 8×6 mm chip;

the 
F
 variant, which is a 16-pin SOIC 300-mil chip; and

the 
B
 and 
C
 variants, which are ball grid array chips.

We have the 
E
 variant here, which means it’s a WSON 8×6 mm chip. From the
datasheet, we can see its schematic:

Pinout schematic for Winbond 25R256JWEQ chip

It’s also very important to note the white dot on the top-left corner of the
chip, as shown in the picture and on the pinout schematic. That dot is placed
next to pin 1 of the chip, allowing it to be oriented. Very bad things will
happen if you rotate the chip the other way and connect VCC to GND instead.

Now, you might wonder: what’s a WSON? It’s short for Very, Very-thin Small
Outline No-lead, a form factor for chips. I guess VVSON sounded silly, so they
called it WSON. It’s pretty much the worst form factor for external flashing.

If Framework had used the 
SOIC
 (small outline integrated circuit) form factor
instead, it would have been possible to clamp onto the chip and flash it that
way, but the WSON form factor has basically nothing to clamp onto. Instead, we
can either:

try to desolder the chip, which requires a hot air station, as there’s a big
ground pad underneath the WSON chip for which a soldering iron wouldn’t work;
or

program it 
in-circuit
 (without desoldering) by using a probe with “pogo
pins,” which are spring-loaded pins.

A pogo pin probe consists of a piece of plastic with an indent exactly the size
of a WSON chip. Around the indent are spring-loaded pins that go through the
plastic. To use the pogo pin probe, the plastic should face downwards, and the
chip should fit into the indent. Then, downward force can be applied so that the
pins go through the plastic and make contact with the solder balls. This
downward force must be maintained for the entire duration of the flash
operation, or data will be corrupted.

On the BIOS flashing thread, users have used various heavy objects to maintain
contact while the flash happens. Unfortunately, I don’t have random heavy
ceramic objects lying around at home, so realistically I’d have to hold down the
pogo pins manually. This makes it imperative that the flashing happen quickly,
and you shall see the consequences of that later.

Also notice the white lines around the BIOS chip? That is called a “silkscreen”
in PCB terminology, and marks positions where components could be mounted.
Judging from the shape, the motherboard could have been soldered with a socket
for a replaceable BIOS chip, and then to fix the laptop, I could have either:

bought a new chip with the correct BIOS from Framework; or

taken the chip out and put it into a flasher without using janky mechanisms
like pogo pins.

However, once again, the “repairable” laptop company has chosen to close off an
avenue of repair.

Furthermore, there is clearly space on the board for a flash header connected to
the BIOS chip, and I could have simply connected to that with a bunch of jump
wires (sometimes called “DuPont” wires) instead of using pogo pins. There was
also enough vertical clearance due to the height of the M.2 slot. Again,
Framework chose the user-hostile option.

The flash programmer

Now that we understand the BIOS chip and that we must connect to it with a pogo
pin probe, it’s time to talk about what we need to talk to the chip and program
it.

Since we wanted something nice and integrated, it makes sense to get a flash
programmer that works over USB. There are several popular options for this, each
with their own advantages and disadvantages. I will go through some of them
here.

The CH341A mini programmer

This is probably the most popular option and what most people on that Framework
forum thread used. It is very cheap on AliExpress and costs US$3 on its own at
the time of writing, so it’s a very affordable option. The CH341A chip itself
works at 3.3 V and 5 V, so to use it for 1.8 V devices like the
Winbond 25R256JWEQ, we need to use a 1.8 V level shifter.

Unfortunately, as forum user 
@jim_m
 noted on the thread, the cheap CH341A mini
programmers, especially those with black PCBs, have issues with voltages on the
data pins. While they would power the chip (or the level shifter) at 3.3 V,
the data pins remain at 5 V, which is not very good for the health of
anything connected to it. However, many other users reported no problems with
it. To settle this debate once and for all, I decided to order one for myself
and test it out, given how cheap it is.

When it arrived, I plugged it into my multimeter, following the instructions
from 
this blog
, which contained instructions for fixing this issue
without soldering, as well as checking whether the problem exists and whether it
is fixed:

Multimeter measuring the voltage of MOSI and MISO
    pins on the CH341A mini programmer, which are supposed to be 3.3 V

Well, I guess it 
is
 true that the black PCB variants are problematic.

It is 
believed
 that the variants of the CH341A with a voltage
switch between 5 V, 3.3 V, 2.5 V, and 1.8 V do not have this
bug. The same video claims that the 1.8 V level shifter would shift the
5 V on data pins to 1.8 V anyway, but I don’t know if I trust that or
whether that is good for the health of the level shifter.

I opted against experimenting further due to the other major disadvantage of the
CH341A, that being its speed. From the datasheet of the Winbond 25R256JW series,
we can see that it runs at a maximum of 133 MHz for the SPI clock. However,
the CH341A, according to resources found online, can only do up to 1.7 MHz, if
not slower. People on the forum thread reported that it took around 5 minutes to
read, and 
another
 5 minutes to write the 32 MiB BIOS chip. I certainly
have zero intention of holding down the pogo pin probe for that long.

The CH347 “high-speed” programmer

The CH347 is a newer programmer that’s the spiritual successor to the CH341A.
With a 15 MHz SPI clock, it can program chips much faster than the CH341A. The
socket on the programmer is supposed to be compatible with the CH341A and serve
as a drop-in replacement. Unfortunately, documentation for it is scarce. Still,
I was able to piece together that it was a 3.3 V device.
10

After it arrived, I was able to confirm that it was sending 3.3 V on the
data pins, unlike the CH341A:

Multimeter measuring MOSI and MISO on the CH347 Programmer, showing the expected 3.3 V on data pins

That certainly inspires a lot more confidence. With its faster flash speed, I
also wouldn’t have to hold down the pogo pins for as long, which is a win in my
book. This is the programmer I intended to use for the project.

The XGecu T48

A user on the thread reported success with the XGecu T48 programmer. However,
after seeing the price tag of over $100, I immediately decided it was too
expensive for this repair.

Purchasing the tools

Armed with knowledge of what I needed, and not holding my breath for Framework
to fix my system, I decided to just order the parts on AliExpress, since it’d
take a while to arrive. Ultimately, I chose to buy the following parts:

A full set of the 
CH341A programmer plus tools
 like the
1.8 V level shifter, clips, and other tools for any flashing needs I
might have in the future for US$7.59 (listing contains an option for just the
level shifter);

A 
CH347 programmer
 for US$4.99;

A 
WSON8 6×8mm pogo pin probe
 for US$7.83.

This cost a grand total of US$20.41. Note that to achieve this price, I had to
buy some other, unrelated items that I was planning to buy anyway.

Also note that I bought the CH341A to see whether the new black ones still have
the voltage bug; it’s not something actually needed for this project. I probably
would have saved some money by only buying the level shifter, which is the only
part I actually needed from the CH341A kit. It’s available on the same listing
for US$2.23 at the time of writing. Still, I figured the rest might come in
handy some other day.

Also note that I didn’t need the laptop urgently, which was why I was willing to
save a buck ordering on AliExpress, knowing it would take 1–2 weeks to deliver.
If you need to fix your laptop urgently, perhaps Amazon Prime same-day shipping
would more tempting, though it would naturally cost more.

Response from Framework

After I did all this research, Framework finally responded to me, telling me to
unplug the charger and let the battery drain, then try booting again—which was
exactly what I did earlier, and the laptop wouldn’t turn on. My laptop was
officially “bricked” at this point—as in, it’s effectively a very expensive
brick.

So I told Framework this, and they asked for a bunch of information and offered
some more troubleshooting steps. Here are my responses:

Which BIOS version were you on & which version were you updating to?
(Example: Was on BIOS 3.09 updating to BIOS 3.18)

I don’t remember, but I believe I was on 3.18. I know it was updating to 3.20.

Was the BIOS version you were updating to in Alpha, Beta, or Stable release?
(If downloading from our Knowledgebase, it is a Stable release. If from our
Community Forum, it should say which release it is in the title)

This would be the stable BIOS, although it was downloaded from LVFS.

What Blink Codes is your device showing when attempting to power on your
device? (If this could be video recorded and shared with us, it would be
greatly appreciated)

A video has been attached (blink.mp4), shrunk down to 144p to save space. To
my eyes, it’s 12 green flashes, 1 red, 1 green, 1 blue, 1 green, 2 blue, 8
green, 2 blue.

Can you please share a picture with us of the Front of the Mainboard?

See mainboard.jpg

Can you send us a photo of the laptop showing all sides while the lid is
closed (left, right, top, bottom, front, and back)? See the image below for
reference.

See other jpg attachments.

For troubleshooting:

Disconnect the system from AC power.

CAREFULLY disconnect the battery and leave it disconnected for 30 minutes
for the best chance of recovery.

CAREFULLY reconnect the battery.

Reconnect AC power.

Attempt to boot the system.

I did this. No change, same light pattern.

I will not reproduce the attachments here, but suffice to say, the laptop looked
fine physically.

Framework then responded on 2026-08-07 at 05:49 EDT:

Thank you for your response and for sending the photos. We appreciate it.

After a thorough review of this issue and the photos/videos submitted, we’ve
come to the conclusion that there is a need to replace the Mainboard.

Unfortunately, we are unable to provide a replacement as your warranty has
already ended.

We suggest purchasing a replacement in the Marketplace.

You can check our Warranty and Terms of Sale below.

Framework Warranty - https://frame.work/warranty
Framework Terms of Sale - https://frame.work/terms-of-sale

We know that this is a bit disappointing, and we sincerely apologize for the
inconvenience.

If there’s anything else that we can assist you with, please don’t hesitate to
contact us.

Thanks for your understanding. Have a great day!

Regards,

Framework Support

So basically, after being encouraged to update the BIOS by 
Framework
,
Framework told me that because my warranty has expired, I have no other option
but to throw away the entire motherboard, including the perfectly working but
soldered CPU, and buy a replacement for over $500 on their store.

How does it make sense that some bad data on a BIOS chip that 
retails
 for US$5
should force me to buy a whole new board and CPU for $500+? Especially when this
happened as a result of Framework’s own instruction? Especially when many users
have complained on the Framework official forums without anything being done to
stop further instances of bricking?

Worst of all, Framework didn’t offer any help in attempting a repair myself, not
documentation, not a schematic, not even a raw BIOS image for me to attempt to
flash externally. So much for right to repair…

The data breach

To add insult to injury, I also received the following email from Framework
during my interaction with support:

From:
 Framework <
support@frame.work
>

Subject:
 Notice of Limited Data Breach

Date:
 2026-08-06 23:04 EDT

Dear Valued Framework Customer,

We are writing to inform you of a data breach at our business intelligence
database provider Metabase that resulted in an attacker accessing customer
names, email addresses, phone numbers, and addresses. Your information was in
the database that was accessed in this breach. This breach did not include
order or payment information.

We have full details on the incident below. We are deeply sorry for this
breach of information, and are reviewing and improving our methodology for
data storage in external database vendors.

We are also in the process of notifying the regulatory authorities in each
region where relevant regulations exist. Note that while regulations in most
regions do not require notification for breaches of names, email addresses,
phone numbers, and addresses, we are sending this email to you regardless to
ensure you have visibility and can take any actions needed.

What happened?

On August 6th, 2026 at 9am Pacific Time, Metabase notified us of a breach of
their systems with the following email message:

On Monday, August 3, we discovered that Metabase Cloud was attacked by
someone utilizing an unknown (“0-day”) security vulnerability in versions
1.58 and above. We immediately blocked the endpoints used for the attack,
then quickly identified and patched the vulnerability. We notified law
enforcement, and we have engaged with a third party forensics firm to conduct
an independent investigation.

Your instance of Metabase was vulnerable to this 0-day. Therefore, to protect
your company, we recommend you:

Rotate the credentials for every database connected to your instance; and

Review the admin accounts on your instance and remove anything you don’t
recognize.

We also discovered that the attacker was able to gain access to your
instance. We created a report on the actions we believe the attacker took on
your instance, which includes log files, and which you can get from the
Metabase Store at [removed url].

(If you do not have access to the Metabase Store, are having issues accessing
the report, or do not want to click on a link in an unexpected email, you can
log into your instance directly and reach us at Help > Get help in the grid
menu in the upper right hand corner. We’ll confirm this message is from us
and email you the report.)

This report is based on our own application logs. We did not query or read
the data in your connected databases.

Depending on the jurisdictions in which you operate and kinds of data your
instance connects to, you may have notification obligations under applicable
laws. If you have concerns in this regard, we recommend you assess potential
notification obligations with your company’s legal or compliance experts.

We regret any inconvenience this incident may cause you, and we are here to
support you. If you have questions, please reply to this email or email us at
[removed email address], and we’ll get back to you as quickly as we can.

Sameer Al-Sakran

Founder and CEO

Metabase

We immediately investigated the logs Metabase provided to us and confirmed
that our database instance was accessed by the attacker. We confirmed that the
following information was accessed:

Full name

Email address

Login IPs

Billing and shipping address information

Country

Address

City

State

Zip code

Phone number

Company

For Framework for Business customers, we are investigating whether the
following information may additionally have been accessed:

Company

Phone

VAT

EIN

Billing Email

No other personally identifiable information, order information, or payment
information was accessed.

Note that Metabase has additionally flagged:

Important: This is a preliminary update based on our current knowledge.

We are working with a third-party forensic investigation firm to understand
the full nature and scope of the event.

We are providing you this interim update in advance of completing our
investigation to allow you to better understand any potential impact and
secure your data.

Our investigation is ongoing and the information shared now is preliminary.

Please look at the application logs as well as the queries executed that are
provided as separate files in the zip file for detailed activity and a
potential timeline.

We’re providing you notice of the breach in the meantime to ensure you have
the earliest possible visibility. In the event Metabase notifies us of
additional information that impacts you, we will send a follow-up email.

What was done to resolve the issue?

After we were notified of the breach by Metabase, we rotated credentials on
all databases associated with our Metabase instance and confirmed that there
were no changes in admin access or access to systems outside of Metabase.

What steps have you taken to ensure this doesn’t happen in the future?

We are evaluating the breadth and depth of data shared with business
intelligence platforms, and scoping down their access to only the columns
required for analysis.

Nirav Patel and the Framework Team

Well, I guess Framework at least disclosed this security incident instead of
covering it up, which is a good thing? But then again, the regulators will be
very upset if they found out it happened and wasn’t disclosed…

Still, I was very disappointed that Framework chose to entrust sensitive
information to a third-party who obviously couldn’t keep the data safe. To have
it happen at the same time as my expensive laptop getting bricked is just
rubbing salt in the wound. Words cannot describe how disappointed I am at
Framework right now.

As a sidenote, Framework stated that payment information wasn’t breached. Most
people might breathe a sigh of relief, but that shouldn’t be the case. Since I
paid with a credit card, even if Framework leaked my full credit card
number
11
, my liability for any fraudulent transactions that happened as a
result of this breach would be 
zero
. All I’d need to do was call the credit
card company, and they’d give me a new card. The rather more annoying things
that they breached that I 
couldn’t
 easily change are phone numbers and
addresses, unless I feel like moving… To Framework’s credit, they stated it as
a matter of fact and didn’t try to dress the payment information not being
leaked as a saving grace, as certain dishonest companies would.

Extracting the BIOS image

Anyways, now that we have the tools to flash the BIOS, and Framework is not even
willing to supply the raw BIOS image, we have to determine what to flash to
resurrect the BIOS.

From the 
BIOS flashing thread
, user 
@David_Henry
 determined,
from reading the BIOS and experimenting with the flashing, that the raw BIOS
image is exactly 32 MiB starting from offset 
1993293
 in the 
.cap
 file
in Framework’s UEFI shell update package, and this is identical to the output
created by a third-party tool called 
InsydeH2O-extractor-2
 on GitHub.

Since a hardcoded offset is unlikely to work for future versions, I would
recommend using the extractor tool. Unfortunately, the tool was written for
Microsoft’s C library and uses non-standard functions like 
fopen_s
, which made
it not run on Linux. To deal with this, I 
forked the tool
 and
made it compile on Linux.

You can build it and extract the 
.cap
 file thus:

git clone https://github.com/quantum5/InsydeH2O-extractor-2.git

cd 
InsydeH2O-extractor-2
cmake 
.

make
./extractor /path/to/bios.cap

In the directory, you will find 
BIOSFILE.FD
, and that is the file to flash.

For the Framework 13” AMD Ryzen 7040 series BIOS version 3.20, I have the image
prepared already: 
https://dl.quantum2.xyz/firmware/framework-3.20-bios.bin

The hashes for that file are:

MD5: 
8bc4cde1b7e8413b9b405b8e7b243e1f

SHA1: 
b5629
76496
f3baf
ba5e0
7f2d9
6b038
04a70
8f90d

SHA256: 
a6454
13ee1
9c7cf
28791
7a717
09988
3ea37
ed6b5
56c74
cf31a
dbc5b
1afcc
9c05

Feel free to use my image after verifying its integrity. At the time of writing,
at least four users have downloaded the full BIOS image from my server,
presumably because they also had their laptops bricked and didn’t write about it
on the Framework forums.

Delivery of the tools

Eight days after placing the order on AliExpress, the parts finally arrived. I
started by inspecting my AliExpress flash programmers, as you’ve already seen.
The CH341A had the voltage bug on top of being slow, so I decided that I would
only try it as a last resort after fixing the voltage bug. Instead, the CH347
seemed promising.

I plugged the 1.8 V level shifter into my CH347 and verified that the data
pins were outputting the expected 1.8 V, just in case. I also checked the
pogo pin probe with my multimeter for continuity, confirming every pogo pin is
connected to the correctly numbered pins on the header. While these precautions
may seem extreme, you never know with the stuff you get on AliExpress.

In any case, I was happy with my tools, so I decided to continue.

Connecting the chip

Now, I just need to connect everything together so that my PC can talk to the
BIOS chip through the CH347 flash programmer.

Since I am programming from a desktop PC, I opted to get a USB Type-A extension
cable (i.e. a male-to-female cable), so that the CH347 flash programmer isn’t
locked to a USB port.

Now, we need to understand the CH347’s pins. After some research, it’s clear
that the pin order for type 25 SPI NOR flash is always the same, including our
W
25
Q256JW, and that’s what the left side of the CH347 is designed to accept:

A diagram of where each SPI NOR flash pin should go on the CH347 programmer

If you look carefully at the bottom-right corner, you’ll see that there is a
diagram of two chips, one labelled 25 and the other 24, that describes this
pinout. What it means is that type 25 chips go on the left, and pin 1 is on the
right side, as shown by the semicircle on the right. Type 24 chips, i.e. I²C
serial EEPROMs, go on the right side, but we don’t need that for this project.

But what is that socket? That is a 
zero insertion force
 (ZIF) socket
designed to accept a pin header. Once the pins are inserted, the lever can be
pulled to the horizontal position to lock the pins in place. The mechanism is
very similar to that of PGA CPU sockets, e.g. AM4.

While certain chips with pins can fit directly into the programmer, that is not
the case for us. In any case, we have a 3.3 V programmer and a 1.8 V
chip, so we need to insert that level shifter into the CH347 instead:

A diagram of where each SPI NOR flash pin should go on the 1.8 V level shifter

The level shifter has a header with labelled pins on the top, with the pins
underneath. Those need to be inserted into the corresponding holes in the ZIF
socket on the CH347, as described above.

The shifter provides another ZIF socket with 1.8 V. This time, only the
right side of the socket is used, and pin 1 faces right. If you look at the
shifter carefully, the pins are actually labelled right next to the ZIF socket
on the PCB, but it’s hard to see in the picture, so I labelled them directly.

The next step is plugging in the pogo pin probe. It looks like this:

A picture of the WSON8 6×8mm pogo pin probe

The ribbon cable needs to be connected to the PCB with a pin header on the other
side. The pins are numbered on the side with the ribbon cables. The header needs
to be plugged into the ZIF socket on the level shifter, and the ZIF socket
locked.

Now, you are ready to connect the probe to the BIOS chip. Before doing that,
first open up the Framework laptop and remove the expensive RAM and SSD from the
motherboard, just in case you mess up and accidentally fry them. On that note,
double check all the connections to make sure the pin order is correct
everywhere. One mistake and the chip could be fried, or worse, the whole
motherboard.

The full assembly with the CH347, the level shifter, and the pogo pin probe should look like this

Now, identify the side of the plastic on the pogo pin probe with an opaque
semicircle. That’s the side with pin 1, and you need to make sure that side is
positioned on the same side as the white dot on the chip. That’s the correct pin
order. When flashing, place the probe on the chip and apply force to hold it
down:

The pogo pin probe as used on the BIOS chip

Executing the flash

We will perform the flashing with the 
flashrom
 tool
 from the

coreboot
 project. Note that unlike on Windows, where drivers for these
programmers are necessary, 
flashrom
 is able to talk to all supported USB flash
programmers with 
libusb
.

Double check that your flash programmer is supported by the version of

flashrom
 on your system:

$
sudo 
flashrom 
-L

...

Supported USB devices for the ch341a_spi programmer:
Vendor            Device   USB IDs    Status
Winchiphead (WCH) CH341A   1a86:5512  OK

Supported USB devices for the ch347_spi programmer:
Vendor              Device               USB IDs    Status
QinHeng Electronics USB To UART+SPI+I2C  1a86:55db  OK
QinHeng Electronics USB To UART+SPI+I2C  1a86:55de  OK

...

We see that both the CH341A and the CH347 are supported. If it’s not on your
system, you probably need a newer version of 
flashrom
.

Also note that you will need to use one hand to hold down the pogo pins, and
with the CH347’s relatively fast flashing, that’s probably the better strategy
than trying to use some heavy object to apply the necessary force. Therefore,
you are highly encouraged to use primary selection on Linux to copy commands
presented here by selecting the text (try triple-clicking), then pasting it with
middle click, which is a lot easier with one hand.

On a similar note, prepare the BIOS file as 
wanted.bin
 while you are at it.
Then, hash it:

$
sha256sum 
wanted.bin

a645413ee19c7cf287917a717099883ea37ed6b556c74cf31adbc5b1afcc9c05  wanted.bin

Now, push the pogo pin probe (remember the orientation!) onto the chip and check
if it’s detected:

$
sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi

flashrom 1.4.0 on Linux 6.12.101+deb13-amd64 (x86_64)
flashrom is free software, get the source code at https://flashrom.org

Found Winbond flash chip "W25Q256JW" (32768 kB, SPI) on ch347_spi.

...

Good, it is. If it’s not, make sure the probe is positioned correctly and apply
more force as needed. Quite a bit of force is required for a good connection. I
would suggest applying progressively more force if you aren’t making good
contact.

Now read the current contents of the BIOS chip. Since the connection is somewhat
sketchy, it’s quite possible that you’ll end up with read errors, so you are
encouraged to read multiple times until you get the same hash on at least two
reads, ideally in a row:

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 read-v1.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
read-v1.bin

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 read-v2.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
read-v2.bin

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 read-v3.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
read-v3.bin

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 read-v4.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
read-v4.bin

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 read-v5.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
read-v5.bin

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 read-v6.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
read-v6.bin

In my case, I got the same hash on attempts 1, 4, and 5, after which I stopped.
I kept holding the probe in the exact same position, since it was making good
contact and would ensure the highest chance of success for subsequent steps.

If none of your attempts resulted in the same hash, you need to apply more force
on the probe and try again. Also, while I didn’t time the attempts, I estimate
that each read attempt took less than 20 seconds with the CH347.

It is very important to have a good copy of what’s currently on the BIOS
chip
, because it may contain information that could be useful later. You will
soon find out what other information is stored in the BIOS chip that you might
want to recover down the line. 
Keep the successfully read BIOS file safe.

Now, it’s time to write to the chip. I turned off verification with 
-nN
 due to
the jankiness of the connection, so I could verify later at my leisure instead
of holding down the probe for the duration of write 
and
 verify:

$
sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-nNw
 wanted.bin 
--progress

flashrom 1.4.0 on Linux 6.12.101+deb13-amd64 (x86_64)
flashrom is free software, get the source code at https://flashrom.org

Found Winbond flash chip "W25Q256JW" (32768 kB, SPI) on ch347_spi.
===
Reading old flash chip contents... [READ] 1% complete... [snip]
[READ] 100% complete... [READ] 50% complete... [READ] 0% complete... [READ] 100% complete... done.
[READ] 0% complete... Erase/write done from 0 to 1ffffff

At this point, the flash is complete. For me, this flash operation took less
than a minute. The CH347 was definitely worth it compared to the CH341A. Given
how quickly the BIOS flashed externally over such a janky connection with a
programmer that supports 11% of the maximum SPI clock the chip could do, I
couldn’t help but wonder what Framework’s BIOS updater is doing that makes
updating the BIOS take many minutes normally…

Now, do the manual verification by doing the same thing as reading, but to
different files:

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 verify-v1.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
verify-v1.bin

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 verify-v2.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
verify-v2.bin

sudo 
flashrom 
--programmer
 ch347_spi 
-r
 verify-v3.bin 
--progress
 
&&
 
sha256sum 
verify-v3.bin

Stop when you get the same hash as 
wanted.bin
 from earlier. I managed to pass
the verification on the first try. If you can’t get it after three attempts,
attempt the write again until it verifies.

Consequences of flashing

With the flash complete, I put the RAM and SSD back in and powered on my
Framework laptop. After a minute of initial memory training (or something like
that), it finally booted. However, the saga isn’t quite over.

I went into the BIOS setup to discover that all my customizations are gone. If
you made any customizations, you would have to redo them. I also noticed this in
the BIOS setup:

System UUID       1234567890
System SN         1234567890

I am pretty sure this wasn’t the case originally. It appears that this
information is stored in the BIOS chip. There seems to be no ill effects to
leaving it like this, at least on Linux, but it is quite possible that you need
to activate Windows again.
12

The correct values should in theory be preserved in the original BIOS image. If
I knew the offsets, I could copy over the information into the new BIOS image
and attempt another flash, but unfortunately, Framework has no documentation on
the BIOS layout. Another repairability issue. Still, this is why you should keep
the damaged BIOS image around.

After configuring the BIOS, I rebooted the system and discovered that it
couldn’t find the bootloader for Debian. This information is stored on the UEFI
NVRAM, and clearly, that has been erased somehow during this ordeal.

Fortunately, there was a “boot from file” option, and I searched my SSD for

EFI/debian/shimx64.efi
 and selected it, after which the GRUB menu showed up.
You may need to adjust the path based on your distro, and select 
grubx64.efi

if you don’t have secure boot.

The system booted normally after that, but I needed to reinstall the bootloader
to avoid having to manually select the file every boot. On most distros, this
can be done by running 
sudo grub-install /dev/nvme0n1p1
, replacing

/dev/nvme0n1p1
 with your EFI system partition.
13

Conclusion

If you find yourself in the same situation as me with a dead Framework laptop
due to BIOS issues and no flashing tools, then 
getting the CH347 programmer is
the way to go
. It’s way better than the old CH341A in every way, and clearly,
it was able to get the job done quickly. The actual flashing wasn’t that
difficult once I knew what I was doing and acquired the tools, taking less than
five minutes total.

As for Framework Computer Inc, I have a lot more to say…

First, it is clear that Framework’s BIOS updater is broken, at least on the AMD
7040 series. There clearly is some bug with the software that caused it to
display what appears to be random memory on the screen, especially when this has
happened before to other people for other BIOS versions, and even on the 16”
laptops. At the same time, it somehow flashes the BIOS slower in regular
operation than a cheap 15 MHz programmer over 
pogo pins
, which really
makes you wonder what it’s doing under the hood.

Secondly, Framework encourages users to perform BIOS updates in their
newsletters, and yet if the update results in bricking, Framework has nothing to
say except that I should throw away perfectly good hardware due to a firmware
issue, simply because it’s out of warranty. While this behaviour may be legal
per the warranty terms, it nevertheless is morally the wrong way to treat users.
It also goes against the whole philosophy of reducing e-waste that 
Framework
claims to believe deeply
.

Thirdly, Framework claims to have made a 
repairable
 laptop, and I think my
experience and the hoops I had to jump through to flash the BIOS have decidedly
shown this not to be the case. Framework has undoubtedly created an easily

serviceable
 laptop on which it is trivial to replace the RAM and SSD, but it
is not a 
repairable
 laptop when the manufacturer simply told me to buy a new
motherboard and CPU while offering zero assistance in the way of fixing it
myself.

According to 
the Repair Association
, an organization
championing the right to repair, a key pillar of the right to repair is

documentation
:

Provide the same repair manuals, schematic diagrams, and other documentation
to facilitate complete repairs.

In this regard, Framework has utterly failed. I had to figure out the entire
flashing process myself from third-party resources. I even had to extract the
raw flashable BIOS image myself.

Furthermore, from attempting this repair, I can see that Framework made many
design decisions that made the repair much harder than it needs to be:

Framework had no BIOS recovery option;

While the Framework motherboard has silkscreen markings for a socketed BIOS
chip, a BIOS chip was soldered instead;

Framework chose to use a WSON form factor for their BIOS chip; and

Framework chose to not provide a header for flashing the BIOS, which, when
combined with issue #3, forced the use of pogo pins.

I think it’s especially egregious when you consider that brands that
specifically aren’t repairable are able to recover from a bad BIOS flash, and
that even my 2004 vintage motherboard could do so…

So really, while Framework claims to support the right to repair, their actions
have shown quite the opposite. As such, I cannot in good conscience recommend
Framework laptops to anyone in their current state.

Finally, it is not clear why Framework needs a “business intelligence” provider
in the first place, let alone one that stores customer data in an insecure
fashion. It is also not clear why this provider needed information like my phone
number or street address. In the communication I’ve received, Framework did not
explain why this information was shared or what they were doing with this data,
nor has Framework provided any update on their investigation at the time of
writing over a week later.

As the owner of a Framework laptop who wants to benefit from the upgradability
down the line, I would like to see Framework clean up their act and deliver on
the promise they made when they sold the product. As such, I call upon Framework
to:

Immediately stop encouraging any users out of warranty to update their BIOS
until the updater is fixed;

Fix the BIOS updater as soon as possible;

Provide immediate relief to any out-of-warranty customers whose laptop was
bricked through a BIOS update, either through motherboard replacement like
warrantied customers, or the free delivery of a toolkit and detailed guidance
to perform the repair;

Provide official documentation for BIOS flashing, raw BIOS images, and
instructions to restore the serial numbers and UUIDs;

Design all future motherboards to be easily recoverable from bad BIOS
flashes; and

Immediately cease any unnecessary data sharing with third parties.

If Framework changes for the better, I might consider them again. Until then, I
shall repeat the words that 
a certain Nanni wrote to Ea-nāṣir
 close to
four millennia ago:

Kīma annikīam maḫšabam la dummuqām la amaḫḫaruka talammad. U ana ša tumeišanni
nasiḫtam epūška.
14

The translation depends on whom you ask, but it probably means something like:

Take cognizance that I will not accept any computer from you that is not of
fine quality. And because you have treated me with contempt, I shall exercise
against you my right of rejection.

Notes

While the Framework DIY edition was cheaper to purchase, it was not
         in fact very DIY. The laptop came mostly preassembled, and the only
         things I had to do were putting in the RAM and SSD, connecting the
         input cover, closing the laptop, and installing the bezels. I was
         expecting to install the motherboard at least, not finishing off an
         almost-assembled laptop. 
↩

Back in 2023, I got close to a 50% discount buying them separately on
      Amazon instead of buying them bundled with the Framework laptop.
      Imagine that today… 
↩

Yes, technically, this is a 
Unified Extensible Firmware
     Interface
 (UEFI) firmware, since no one uses legacy BIOS these
     days. Still, a lot of manufacturers refer to UEFI firmware as “BIOS”
     because it’s the familiar term. I am loosely using the term “BIOS” here
     since that’s what Framework chose to call it. 
↩

I once owned a laptop with a Canadian Multilingual Standard keyboard,
and it was just horrible to use, with extra keys for French cutting into the
space you’d expect for the 
Enter
 key and the left

Shift
 key. The actual layout, if you choose to use it in
software, also uses 
AltGr
15
 and hijacks the right

Ctrl
 as an additional modifier, despite not using the

AltGr
 layer fully.

The real kicker is that the layout is super unintuitive for typing French,
which is its entire 
raison d’être
, compared to the 
AltGr
 and
dead keys-based layout that I constructed myself. My own layout can type
most European languages, even those using the Greek and Cyrillic alphabets,
with ease. One day, I might write something about constructing my own
keyboard layout, but today is not the day. 
↩

I ultimately bought a Crucial 2×16 GiB DDR5 5600 MT/s kit for
    CA$154.80 after tax, a price that’s unimaginable today. Currently, that
    same kit is worth $854.18 before tax, though that might be because the
    Crucial brand is no more. Similar kits of SODIMMs from other brands at
    the same speed start at CA$570 before tax. 
↩

I ultimately bought a 1 TB Samsung 980 Pro, which cost CA$90.37
    after tax, a price that’s also unimaginable today. It’s no longer in
    stock, but the 990 Pro goes for $400 at the time of writing. 
↩

I apologize for the low quality of this image, but I had bigger
        things to worry about than taking a good picture. 
↩

I’ve also been doing more soldering for some smart home sensors I
          am working on, which I plan to write about later. 
↩

Do you all still remember what a floppy disk is? Either way, talking
       about it dates how ancient motherboards with such recovery features
       are. 
↩

There is a 1.8 V CH347 on AliExpress as well, but that one
      supposedly has a software toggle between 1.8 V and 3.3 V and
      just seemed complicated to use compared to the regular 3.3 V
      version with a level shifter. 
↩

I would be impressed if Framework actually managed to leak the full
       credit card number. Most payment processors never reveal the full
       number to merchants using them, only the last four digits. 
↩

I wouldn’t know. Windows has never been installed on bare metal on
        either my desktop or laptop. 
↩

Technically, based on a reading of the 
grub-install
 source
             code on UEFI systems, you can pass any argument as long as you
             pass 
something
, but let’s pass the ESP to be safe. 
↩

My Akkadian is very bad, but this is based on the last lines on the
         cuneiform tablet containing the oldest known customer complaint,
         with the word for copper replaced by “computer.” Obviously,
         computers didn’t exist back then, so I constructed it based on the
         Semitic root ḥ-s₁-b used in the Arabic word حاسوب and the Hebrew
         word מחשב. I used the Latin alphabet instead of cuneiform because
         Unicode doesn’t support most of the signs used on the actual
         tablet. 
↩

The 
AltGr
 key
 is just the right 
Alt

      key, but mapped by a keyboard layout as its own modifier for typing
      additional characters on the keyboard, instead of being just another
      
Alt
 key. 
↩
