careers
Build the AI-Driven Future of Global Trade
Join us in building the future of the global trading system. Our mission is to make global trade so easy there will be more of it. We deploy the latest foundational AI models on top of our proprietary data and integrations to drive real world impact. Come build the future of automated global logistics with us.
Our Mission
Open Roles
2.9X
Net revenue growth since 2024. Many companies share our vision for an autonomous supply chain powered by AI agents. But none of the new batch of logistics AI companies has our track record of deploying AI in the real world to solve customer problems not in some hypothetical future, but right now. 
$8.6T
The size of the global logistics market, the circulatory system of the world economy. Back pressure here holds back every other part of the economy.  This may represent the single largest opportunity to apply AI anywhere in the world.
13,000
Customers that trust us to execute their logistics in the real world. Unlike other supply chain AI companies, Flexport is deeply embedded into the actual operations of moving cargo by ocean, air, truck and rail, clearing shipments through customs, and financing billions of dollars worth of inventory. 
Ready to Apply?
Departments
Departments
Account Management
Air & Ocean Freight Management
Customs
Data Science & Analytics
Engineering
Finance
Flexport.org
Fulfillment
General Management
IT, Security & Infrastructure
Implementation
Legal & Compliance
Marketing
Office of CEO
Operations
Partnerships
People
Product Design
Product Management
Sales
Sales Enablement
Solutions Engineering
Technical Program Management
Trade & Financial Services
Trucking
Warehousing
Workplace & Facilities
Location
Location
Amsterdam
Atlanta
Bangkok
Beijing
Bellevue
Chicago
Copenhagen
Dallas
Dallas Warehouse
Germany Remote
Guadalajara
Hamburg
Hanoi
Ho Chi Minh City
India
Jakarta
Kuala Lumpur
Los Angeles
Milan
New Delhi
New York City
Osaka
Paris
Phillipsburg Warehouse
Phnom Penh
Pleasant Prairie Warehouse
San Bernardino Warehouse
San Francisco
Shanghai
Shenzhen
Singapore
Sydney
Taipei
Tokyo
Toronto
U.S. Remote
View Openings
We're fans of business
Global logistics offers a backstage pass to the world economy. It's the circulatory system that keeps all the other industries running.  If you're a fan of business and want to better understand the trade networks that power modern civilization, a role at Flexport offers the chance to not just learn but to get off the sidelines and get in the game. We get to not only see how the best companies in the world operate, but to solve real problems to help them unlock growth.
We're fans of business
Global logistics offers a backstage pass to the world economy. It's the circulatory system that keeps all the other industries running.  If you're a fan of business and want to better understand the trade networks that power modern civilization, a role at Flexport offers the chance to not just learn but to get off the sidelines and get in the game. We get to not only see how the best companies in the world operate, but to solve real problems to help them unlock growth.
Challenge the status quo
Global trade is one of the world's oldest industries. There's evidence for long-distance trade going back 40,000 years when Neanderthals still roamed the planet. It's older than art. And other than the shipping container, which was invented 70 years ago, not much has changed. Our job is to challenge everything. To ask why over and over until someone can explain things from first principles. To delete unnecessary steps. To simplify complicated processes. And to build the future of agentic global logistics, one where AI Agents work tirelessly on our behalf to optimize global supply chains, rather than just having people pushing paper and babysitting shipments.
Cutting edge technology
We're building the AI agents that will create the autonomous supply chain of the future. Deploy the latest foundational AI models on top of the world's most powerful data ontology for global logistics, all integrated directly into the real-world technology systems of more than 15,000 enterprise customers, logistics service providers and governments. Everyday we learn some new technology we can implement 
today
 to make a huge impact on the way things are shipped by air, land and sea in every part of the world.
Work Ethic
Logistics is 24/7. You're only as good as your last shipment. We outwork the competition. Yes, we can outsmart them too by building technology they could never dream of. But it might be even more important is that we care more, learn faster, and worker harder. It's not for everyone, but for people who like winning more than anything else, you know that being part of a passionate, mission-driven team does more for your energy and happiness than any amount of rest and relaxation.
Learning
There's no better company to learn about how the world works. Logistics underlies almost everything in the modern world. Where does all this stuff come from? How did it get here? And we have an amazing group of curious, hard working people on this learning journey together. As a company we speak over 70 languages, serving more than 13,000 companies, in almost every industry, across more than 147 countries. Everyday we wake up filled with gratitude and wonder at the amazing opportunities before us.
Meritocracy
We aim to hire 80% of manager and above roles from within. Most of our hiring is of wicked smart, hard working, tech savvy people at the beginning of their careers who we can develop into the leaders of tomorrow.  Team members in key leadership positions across the country started out on the ground floor, writing code, executing shipments, and serving customers. Smart people who work hard, collaborate globally, and generate creative solutions can rise rapidly in our organization. We aim to measure the value of our team members and reward them based entirely on that. Since the value someone can create is uncapped, so is your potential compensation.
Global logistics is the circulatory system of the world economy. Back pressure here prevents every other industry from reaching it's potential. We will be the absolute leaders in applying AI and machine learning to this vital industry.
Ryan Petersen
Founder & CEO
Recognized For Being a Great Place to Work
Our Values
Empower the Client 
Customer obsession is the foundation of our culture. We are successful only when our customers are winning consistently.
Play the Long Game
There are no shortcuts. We operate with integrity, putting safety, compliance, and long-term customer trust ahead of short term gains.  
Act Like an Entrepreneur
We are principled entrepreneurs who live in reality but are never satisfied with the status quo. We are endlessly curious and constantly seek to create meaningful change.
Simplify 
We turn complexity into clarity. We challenge assumptions, eliminate unnecessary steps, and streamline processes to create reliable, scalable solutions. We communicate clearly and concisely and celebrate simplicity.
Win as a Team
We solve problems for our customers as one global team. We break down silos, collaborate across departments and time zones, and never let hierarchy or bureaucracy stand in the way of doing what’s right.
Recognized for Innovation and Impact
GLOBAL LOCATIONS
Find Your Nearest Office
As a global company that operates across continents and time zones, we’re looking for talented people worldwide. Browse roles by location or search by department.
Browse All Locations
Still Have Questions?
I don't have any global logistics experience. Should I still apply?
I'm interested in applying. What should I do next?
What happens after I apply?
What does the interview process look like?
Sign up for Global Logistics Update
Why search for updates when we can send them to you?
That's taken care of.
