The Future of Flowise
Hey everyone,
When we started Flowise, we wanted to make building AI apps easier and more fun for everyone. Seeing what you've built, from simple bots to massive workflows has truly been the best part of this journey. You have made this project what it is today.
Over the last few months, we've noticed a significant shift in how people build. As AI models become more capable at reasoning, we've noticed that developers are increasingly relying on new coding agents such as Claude Code/OpenClaw to handle complex tasks. The typical rigid workflow low code approach quickly hits the limit when it comes to complexity.
It's with these shifts in mind that we've decided to wind down our operations for Flowise. We know many of you rely on this tool every day, so we want to be as clear as possible about what happens next. This gives you time to fork the code and figure out your next steps.
Date
Milestone
Impact on OSS Repository
July 29, 2026
Announcement & Code Freeze
Active feature development ceases immediately. We will no longer be reviewing or accepting new Pull Requests.
August 10, 2026
Repository Archival
The Flowise GitHub repository will be moved to Public Archive status. The code will remain visible indefinitely, but issues and PRs will be locked and npm packages and Docker images will be marked deprecated.
August 31, 2026
End of Life (EOL)
Official core team presence in Discord and GitHub will conclude. Community moderation will be handed off where applicable.
Moving forward, Flowise source code will still remain on Github and the Apache 2.0 licensed code is yours to keep building on. We encourage teams to fork the repo (
https://github.com/flowiseai/flowise
) to maintain their own internal updates or community-led forks.
This has been an incredible ride, and we wouldn't be here today without each and every one of you. We've built friendships along the way, and we are deeply grateful for your support over the years.
Thank you for building with us, and here's to what's next!
Henry & Flowise Team
