When it comes to emissions, individual driving patterns matter as much as how “green” the regional electricity mix is, MIT researchers report.

Adam Zewe

|

MIT News

Publication Date
:

May 12, 2026

Press Inquiries

Press Contact
:

Abby

Abazorius

      Email:

abbya@mit.edu

      Phone:

617-253-2709

MIT News Office

 Close

Caption
:

A new MIT study finds that despite regional differences in climate, electricity sources, traffic, and driving patterns, electric vehicles produce fewer greenhouse gas emissions — and cost no more to own — than comparable gas-powered cars for most U.S drivers.

Credits
:

Credit: iStock

Previous image

Next image

Despite regional variability in climate, electricity sources, congestion, and the wide variation in individual driving patterns, electric vehicles generate less greenhouse gas emissions and do not cost more than comparable gas-powered vehicles for drivers and vehicle fleet owners in most parts of the United States, according to a new study by MIT researchers.
The team’s approach captures many key factors that contribute to regional and individual differences in the life-cycle emissions and ownership cost of electric vehicles, including meteorological data, the distance and duration of trips, and fuel prices.
To paint a fuller picture of emissions and costs than was previously available, the researchers sourced data from thousands of U.S. zip codes and drilled down to the level of individual drivers within those locations. Their study considers time-averaged fuel prices so as not to be overly influenced by fluctuations in prices at any one point in time. They finalized their analysis at the end of 2024 and early 2025.
Their results indicate that a person’s driving behaviors can matter as much as regional factors like the local electricity mix when it comes to the emissions savings of an electric vehicle, compared to a similar gas-powered vehicle. In most locations, a battery-electric vehicle reduces emissions between 40 and 60 percent, with larger impacts in urban areas. 
They also found that colder climates do not reduce overall emission benefits as much as some media reports assume.
The researchers utilized this detailed analysis to update a public tool they previously developed, 
carboncounter.com
, which enables individuals to compare the life-cycle emissions and total ownership costs of nearly any car on the market. A new version of carboncounter.com is also being released today.
“There are a lot of statements being thrown around, like that electric vehicles don’t reduce emissions very much in cool climates, and we wanted to analyze these factors systematically and evaluate these statements against one another simultaneously. Rather than simply asking, ‘Are EVs better?’, this paper helps answer ‘better for whom, and under what conditions?’” says Marco Miotti PhD ’20, a senior researcher at ETH Zurich who completed this research while a graduate student in the Institute for Data, Systems, and Society (IDSS) at MIT. 
He is joined on the paper by senior author Jessika Trancik, a professor in IDSS. The research 
appears today in 
Environmental Research Letters
.
A holistic approach
Many prior studies that compare emissions and costs of electric vehicles (EVs) to combustion-engine vehicles cover a few factors, like the amount of renewable energy in the grid and how gas prices impact affordability, Miotti says.
“To our knowledge, there have been few efforts so far that bring all these factors together. But if someone wants to buy a car and have a better understanding of the factors that affect emissions and costs, this holistic approach is important,” he adds.
The researchers focused on two types of EVs: battery-electric vehicles, which only operate on electricity, and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, which also have a combustion engine that works in tandem with the battery to optimize fuel savings.
The team expanded and improved a set of previously developed vehicle cost and emissions models to incorporate a wider variety of factors and data types.
For instance, they refined an existing model that estimates energy use and gas mileage so it could capture more nuances of local climate variability. 
“But the real effort was not just in extending these different models, but in bringing together all these different data and making them work with the models in a consistent manner,” Miotti says.
The team sourced data on a wide variety of factors for each U.S. zip code, such as typical drive cycles, the amount of traffic, local gas and electricity prices, makeup of the regional electricity mix, meteorological profiles, and more. They used statistical approaches to amalgamate different types of data. 
For example, the team used a probabilistic matching technique to combine data on how often people drive, which was drawn from nationwide travel surveys, with more detailed GPS data that includes factors like drivers’ acceleration patterns and the distance they usually drive on each day of the week.
The researchers designed their analysis to focus on the spatial picture of emissions and costs, based on U.S. zip codes, while simultaneously considering the impact of the size and features of each specific vehicle model.
“At the end of the day, it’s the vehicle and fleet owners who make decisions about vehicle purchases. So, we wanted to make sure to consider their wide-ranging individual perspectives rather than simply performing a region-by-region comparison,” says Trancik.
Lower emissions, comparable costs
In the end, their modeling framework revealed that all factors they analyzed matter about equally in determining emissions-reduction potential of EVs compared to internal combustion vehicles. 
EVs reduce emissions the most in areas with a cleaner electricity mix, denser traffic, higher annual travel distances, and a mild climate, in decreasing order of importance. In each area, emission reductions increase for drivers who drive more often, drive larger vehicles, and are more frequently stuck in traffic. 
In a colder area like North Dakota, fuel economy of battery-electric vehicles might be reduced by as much as 50 percent on a particularly frigid night, but the effect on annual emission benefits is minimal. 
“We even did a sensitivity study to see if the range is reduced in very cold climates, and we found that, even in the most unfavorable conditions, EVs still reduce emissions by a substantial amount,” Miotti says.
On the cost side, the models show that, in most places across the U.S., EVs are competitive with comparable combustion-engine vehicles in terms of lifetime ownership cost, even without clean vehicle tax credits. And in areas where electricity is relatively affordable, battery-electric vehicles tend to cost less than their plug-in hybrid or combustion-engine counterparts.
In the future, the researchers want to expand this analysis to include a temporal dimension, so the framework also considers how changes in vehicle, fuel, and electricity prices affect emissions and costs over time. 
“While we found that the electricity mix is a big driver of the spatial variation in emissions savings of EVs, the electricity grid is decarbonizing everywhere. As that happens, emissions savings across space will become more homogenous for EVs, but the differences across one driver to another will remain,” Miotti says.
They could also use the framework to explore regions outside the United States or incorporate data on hybrid-electric vehicles that cannot be plugged in.
This work was funded, in part, by the MIT Martin Family Society of Fellows for Sustainability.

Share
 this news article on:

X

Facebook

LinkedIn

Reddit

Print

Paper: “Determinants of electric vehicle emissions savings and costs across locations and individuals”

Check for open access version(s) of the research mentioned in this article.

National Public Radio (NPR)
NPR reporter Jeff Brady spotlights a study by Prof. Jessika Trancik and Marco Miotti PhD ’20  that found “across most of the U.S., electric vehicles are cost-competitive with their gas counterparts. And it found that in most locations, EVs also reduce emissions between 40% and 60%.” 

Full story via National Public Radio (NPR)
 
→

Previous item

Next item

Related Links

Carboncounter.com
Marco Miotti
Jessika Trancik
Trancik Lab
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
School of Engineering
MIT Schwarzman College of Computing

Related Topics

Research

Energy

Electric vehicles

Batteries

Renewable energy

Sustainability

Emissions

Transportation

Automobiles

Technology and society

Climate change

Economics

Policy

Data

IDSS

Electrical engineering and computer science (EECS)

School of Engineering

MIT Schwarzman College of Computing

Related Articles

Making clean energy investments more successful

Surprisingly diverse innovations led to dramatically cheaper solar panels

Minimizing electric vehicles’ impact on the grid

How to get more electric cars on the road

Previous item

Next item
