Fundamentals of Wireless Communication

David Tse
 and 
Pramod Viswanath

Cambridge University Press
,
2005

Buy the book: 
Cambridge
University Press

Amazon.com

BookFinder.com

 Now with exercises included! 

Introduction; 
PDF

The
wireless channel; 
PDF

Point-to-point
communication: detection, diversity and
channel uncertainty; 
PDF

Cellular
systems: multiple access and interference
management; 
PDF

Capacity
of wireless channels;
PDF 

Multiuser
capacity and
opportunistic communication;
PDF 

MIMO
I: spatial multiplexing and
channel modeling; 
PDF

MIMO
II: capacity and multiplexing architectures;
PDF

MIMO
III: diversity-multiplexing tradeoff and universal
space-time
codes;
PDF

MIMO
IV: multiuser communication.
PDF

Appendix
A: Detection and
estimation in additive Gaussian noise; 
PDF

Appendix
B: Information theory from first principles.
PDF

References and Index.
PDF

Copyright notice

The book is copyright (c) Cambridge University Press. The online
version of this book (available on this website, now with exercises) is subject to
the same copyright rules as traditional books.

The electronic copy is in the form of PDF files that can be viewed using Adobe Acrobat Reader version 7.0 (and higher). You can download the latest version of Acrobat reader free from 
 here 
. 

Book Description

The past decade has seen many
advances in physical-layer wireless communication theory and their
implementation in wireless systems. This textbook takes a unified view
of the fundamentals of wireless communication and explains the web of
concepts underpinning these advances at a level accessible to an
audience with a basic background in probability and digital
communication. Topics covered include MIMO (multiple input multiple
output) communication, space-time coding, opportunistic communication,
OFDM and CDMA. The concepts are illustrated using many examples
from  wireless systems such as GSM, IS-95 (CDMA), IS-856(1xEV-DO),
Flash OFDM and ArrayComm SDMA systems. Particular emphasis is placed on
the interplay between concepts and their implementation in systems. An
abundant supply of exercises and figures reinforce the material in the
text. This book is intended for use on graduate courses in electrical
and computer engineering and will also be of great interest to
practicing engineers.

Reviews

Errata

 Updated as of Feb 18, 2010. Please contact the authors if you have comments or spot more errors. 

Resources for Instructors

Solutions and Lecture Slides:
 
Solutions to some of the exercises as well as powerpoint lecture slides are available for course instructors.
Please go 
 here 
 for instructions on how to download them.

 Examination Copy:
Instructors can also request an inspection copy from Ms. Robin Silverman of Cambridge University Press: rsilverman at cambridge dot org.

This book has been  used at: U.C. Berkeley, U. of I. at Urbana-Champaign, MIT, U. of Colorado at Boulder, Cornell, Northwestern, U. of Maryland at College Park, Rice, NJIT, UCSD, USC, Princeton, KTH (Sweden), National Chiao Tung University (Taiwan), National Taiwan University, ETH (Switzerland), EPFL (Switzerland) and more than 50 other institutions worldwide. Let us know if you are using the text for a course.

Short Course

 A 2-day, 12-hour short course based on the book is offered by the authors. This course has been taught at Qualcomm Inc., Tsinghua University, Chinese University of Hong Kong, National Chiao Tung University in Taiwan, University of South Australia in Adelaide, Eindhoven in the Netherlands, Indian Institute of Science, Indian Institute of Technology at Madras, ETH Zurich, Helsinki in Finland, and Technion in Israel. Please contact the authors if your organization is interested.
