Back to jobs
Senior Engineering Manager
United States
Apply
GiveCampus is the world's leading fundraising platform for non-profit educational institutions. Trusted by millions of donors and 1,300+ colleges, universities, and K-12 schools, our mission is to help advance the quality, the affordability, and the accessibility of education. At our current pace, we will facilitate $100 billion in charitable giving over the next decade–enough money to send more than 1 million students to college, tuition-free.

GiveCampus is backed by leading investors including Y Combinator, but we’re also practitioners of 
Sustainable Growth
: we’ve made the 
Inc. 5000 list
 of America's fastest-growing private companies each of the last five years and we’ve been profitable nine of the last 10. In 2025, we 
celebrated a $140 million growth investment
 that included a major liquidity event for GiveCampus employees–the second in less than three years. 

Our purpose-driven team of 130+ is located in 30+ states across the US: team members work from anywhere they choose. We have a beautiful 12,000sf office in Washington, DC that is available for people to use whenever they want, and we regularly organize team meet-ups, visit partner institutions, and host retreats in various locations. 

While we operate at meaningful scale, we’re still small relative to the commercial and social good opportunities in front of us. Every GiveCampus employee plays a meaningful role in shaping what comes next, and we're growing the team in support of our ambitious plans–including a $100 million investment in AI product development. If you believe in the transformative power of education and want to join a fast-growing, mission-driven company, you’ll fit right in.

Location:
 This is a remote-first role based in the U.S. While we embrace flexible, distributed work, we also value in-person connection. Team members are expected to attend multiple company-wide and team-specific onsites throughout the year.
.

We are looking for a smart and technically focused 
Engineering Dev Manager
 to join GiveCampus and help us take the platform to the next level. You will be a key member of our team, making technical and staffing decisions that will shape the company’s future. As one of two Dev Managers on a growing team of 30+ Engineers, you will be responsible for managing two or more engineering pods which consist of a Tech Lead and 2-5 engineers working closely with a PM from the Product team. You will lead the teams and help plan and deliver on the product roadmap while assisting in the professional development of the team members. You will report to the VP of Engineering and lead hiring, onboarding and performance management of your team, setting clear goals and expectations for performance and quality. We are headquartered in Washington, DC, but are hiring across the US (we are a fully remote workforce but we also believe in getting together at times in person - be that onboarding as well as company and department retreats 2-3 times a year).

Responsibilities will include: 

Pod and people management - making sure the pods are humming along with well structured interactions/schedule and clear goals. For individuals on pods, this includes growth & development, performance management, onboarding as well as making hard decisions (moving out people who aren't a fit), and retention

Act as a multiplier and unblocker to help your pods quickly build new features from start to finish and back end to front end

Work closely with Tech Leads and Product Managers to help define and refine projects - weighing in on architecture, work breakdown, scheduling and release planning.

Communicate status and progress on delivery objectives to senior management

Work closely with and supporting your teammates in an agile development environment and helping reinforce and continue to improve our agile practices

Contribute to the work in progress, including architecture and PR review and updating shared documentation.

Mentor junior and mid/senior staff to help them grow in their craft

Drive efforts around the interviewing and onboarding new team members to your pods and assist in the refinement of our team-wide interviewing processes

Contribute to team-wide initiatives including coding standards, technical debt refinement and system security monitoring

Work closely with the VP of Engineering and CTO on team-wide professional development initiatives

Participate in the support of the platform on a rotational basis (pod based support and 24/7 on call rotation for incident lead to support engineers who are on call)

What we are looking for: 

Have lead one or more teams as both a technical lead and people manager in a fast-paced, agile development environment

System design experience with a focus on architecting solutions that can be implemented incrementally while keeping an eye towards scale and resilience

Leadership skills which balance both people management and technical excellence. Someone who can coach team members on technical and agile practices while still weighing in on PR reviews around high-risk code changes

Functional, real world programming experience (vs. theoretical) in one of the following: Ruby, Python or Javascript/node.js

Experience with MVC frameworks such as Rails, Django, Pyramid, etc

Experience with modern front-end frameworks like React and Vue.js

SQL database experience (PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite).

3 plus years in a manager role, 10 plus years of hands-on development experience

Bonus points if you have: 

Managed teams that shipped code supporting tens of thousands of users, including enterprise/business customers.

Deep expertise with Ruby/Ruby on Rails and automated testing (rspec or minitest).

Experience with deployments to Heroku, AWS, or similar.

Operations experience and how it pertains to site reliability/speed.

Familiarity with networking, caching, database, and how to triage performance and stability issues (ideally with Postgres or MySQL)

Experience working on a fundraising/crowdfunding platform.

Experience working on a fintech or payments technology product.

Ready to apply?

Be sure to keep an eye on your spam and promotions boxes in case our emails end up there!

At GiveCampus, we value diversity and we pledge to foster an environment of support, inclusivity, and learning, both on the job and throughout the application process. In this spirit, we encourage candidates of all backgrounds to apply.

GiveCampus is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Applicants and employees are not discriminated against because of race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, age, religion, national origin, citizenship status, disability, ancestry, marital status, veteran status, medical condition or any protected category prohibited by local, state or federal laws.

If you feel like you don't meet all of the requirements for this role, please apply anyways. We know confidence gaps and imposter syndrome often get in the way of connecting with incredible people, and we don't want them to prevent us from meeting you.
Apply for this job
*
indicates a required field
