Email

Bluesky

Facebook

LinkedIn

Reddit

Whatsapp

X

Ukrainian immigrants living in Spain take part in a procession through the streets of Madrid. 
Credit: Aaron Heredia/NurPhoto via Getty
Global migration has increased from 13 million people per year in 2000 to around 35 million in 2023. The data, published in 
Nature
 on 10 June
1
, come from the most detailed maps of global migration produced in the 33 years.
Researchers analysed the number of people moving to and from 230 countries and territories each year between 1990 and 2023, training an artificial-intelligence model on several sources of migration data (see ‘A global picture of human migration’). The study reveals the patterns of migration affected by drivers such as economic change, climate, conflict and policy reforms — for example, the largest single instance of people migrating occurred in 1994, with nearly 950,000 people moving from Rwanda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the Rwandan civil war.
The data, which can be explored on the researchers’ 
website
, will be a useful resource for “planning purposes where migration is relevant”, such as schooling, social benefits and labour markets, says Wolfgang Lutz, a demographer at the Wittgenstein Centre for Demography and Global Human Capital in Vienna, who was not involved in the study. 
“This is a much more complete picture of global migration streams than we had any time before,” adds Lutz. 
Source: Ref 1.
Gaps in the data
For demographers who study how populations change over time, data on migration have “been notoriously the least reliable”, says Lutz. Migration trends are sometimes estimated indirectly from changes in population size that cannot be attributed to births or deaths.
There are also gaps in the data on migration — some nations do not consistently collect information about people emigrating or immigrating . Even the United Nations and World Bank data sets on the number of migrants in each country are only published at five- and ten-year intervals, respectively. “A lot of people might migrate for a couple of years and then move back or move on,” and that’s not picked up at all, says study co-author Guy Abel, a statistical demographer at the University of Hong Kong.
To create a more detailed data set of migration dynamics, Abel and his colleague Thomas Gaskin, an applied mathematician at the London School of Economics and Political Science, turned to several data resources, including the United Nations, national statistics and the social-media platform Facebook.
Migration isn’t increasing, border restrictions don’t reduce crossings — and other home truths
The researchers then designed a hybrid approach to estimate migration flow, combining classical mathematical models with deep-learning networks that incorporated dozens of geographical, economic, cultural and political factors that influence people’s decisions to migrate. These factors included economic status, trade between countries, religious similarities, wars and conflicts, colonial ties and even the number of speakers of various languages in each nation, explains Gaskin.
The approach allowed the team to estimate how many people moved to or left each country or territory each year. “With the annual resolution that we are estimating, we gain a lot of additional insight that you wouldn’t get over the five- or ten-year intervals that are done currently because [they] will mask a lot of what happens,” notes Abel.

                Enjoying our latest content? 

                Log in or create an account to continue

Access the most recent journalism from Nature's award-winning team

Explore the latest features & opinion covering groundbreaking research

Access through your institution

or

Sign in or create an account

Continue with Google

Continue with ORCiD

doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-026-01796-y

References
Gaskin, T. & Abel, G. J. 
Nature
 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10611-7 (2026).
Article

                    Google Scholar

Download references

Reprints and permissions

Related Articles

                        Nature special: Human migration

                        First ancient African genome reveals vast Eurasian migration

                        Migration isn’t increasing, border restrictions don’t reduce crossings — and other home truths

                        Politics and the pandemic disrupt migration patterns in research

                        A bird’s migration decoded

                        Read the paper: Ancient DNA connects large-scale migration with the spread of Slavs

Subjects

Policy

Economics

Machine learning

Latest on:

Policy

Economics

Machine learning

Nature Index 2026 Research Leaders rankings: are China’s East Asian neighbours keeping pace with it?

Nature Index
 
10 JUN 26

Gen Z scepticism towards AI is a wake-up call — universities must take it seriously

World View
 
10 JUN 26

The Amazon can be saved — with concerted action inside and outside Brazil

Editorial
 
10 JUN 26

Natural capital accounting needs a way to assess uncertainty

Correspondence
 
02 JUN 26

GDP and beyond: why treating nature as capital cannot save the planet

World View
 
27 MAY 26

Science can take the lead in making better measures of economic growth

Editorial
 
12 MAY 26

How I use AI to turn failed drugs into new medicines

Spotlight
 
10 JUN 26

AI technology must serve human cognitive development, not the other way around

Correspondence
 
09 JUN 26

People are turning to AI chatbots to plug gaps in health information

News & Views
 
09 JUN 26

Jobs

Associate or Senior Editor, Nature Communications (Clinical Infectious Diseases)

Job Title:    Associate or Senior Editor, Nature Communications (Clinical Infectious Diseases) Location:    Shanghai, Beijing or Pune, Hybrid Worki...

Shanghai, Beijing or Pune, Hybrid Working Model

Springer Nature Ltd

Associate or Senior Editor (Mechanical Engineering), Nature Communications

Title: Associate or Senior Editor (Mechanical Engineering) Organisation: Nature Communications Location: Shanghai, Nanjing, Beijing, Pune, New Delh...

Shanghai, Nanjing, Beijing, Pune, New Delhi - hybrid working model

Springer Nature Ltd

Chemistry Faculty Positions at Westlake University

Chemistry at the School of Science is committed to fostering inclusive excellence in a variety of research and teaching activities.

Hangzhou, Zhejiang (CN)

Westlake University

Faculty Positions in the Center for Interdisciplinary Studies (CIS), Westlake University

Positions are open at all ranks, including tenured Associate, Full, and Chair Professors, as well as tenure-track Assistant and Associate Professors.

Hangzhou, Zhejiang (CN)

Westlake University

Deputy Editor (Nature Communications)

Job Title: Deputy Editor, Nature Communications Locations: Shanghai and Pune – hybrid working model Application Deadline: July 10, 2026 (Candidates...

Shanghai and Pune – hybrid working model

Springer Nature Ltd
