GloriousEggroll

/

proton-ge-custom

Public

      forked from 
ValveSoftware/Proton

        Uh oh!

There was an error while loading. 
Please reload this page
.

Notifications

You must be signed in to change notification settings

Fork
    
390

          Star

14.5k

GE-Proton11-1 Released

Latest

Latest

Compare

        Choose a tag to compare

Sorry, something went wrong.

        Filter

Loading

Sorry, something went wrong.

        Uh oh!

There was an error while loading. 
Please reload this page
.

No results found

View all tags

GloriousEggroll

    released this

        24 Jun 02:06

          ·

            11 commits

          to master
          since this release

                GE-Proton11-1

fd07a03

The long awaited video rework and Proton 11 rebase is finally done! GE-Proton11-1 is now available!

Proton updates:

d7vk added (not enabled by default). Use PROTON_USE_D7VK=1 to enable. It is enabled via protonfix on Tex Murphy: Overseer

discord bridge added. (not enabled by default). Use PROTON_DISCORD_BRIDGE=1 to enable. (proton-cachyos)

optiscaler support added. (not enabled by default). Use PROTON_USE_OPTISCALER=1 to enable' (proton-cachyos)

winealsa channel count override option added. (not enabled by default). Use WINEALSA_CHANNELS to tune. Possible values is the number of speakers, such as 
2
 (to disable spatial audio), such as 
4
 (2 front, 2 rear), 
6
 (5.1) or 
8
 (7.1). (Vyrolian)

winealsa spacial downmix override option added. (not enabled by default). Use WINEALSA_SPACIAL=1 to enable. (Vyrolian)

xrandr added to build so that auto-detection of default monitor can work without relying on host xrandr when a default monitor is not set for wine-wayland. This means if you accidentally forget to set a monitor for wine-wayland it should display on the default one found by xrandr now instead of just defaulting to the far left.

updated star citizen patches

added patches for Task Bar Hero (thaylorz)

added patches for VRChat webcam face tracking (LilFishyChan)

Entire build rebased onto latest proton 11 bleeding-edge

Standalone patches for VR rebased onto proton 11 (so you can use with umu outside of steam on non-steam VR games)

wine-native rsx3d library created to for older games (games like Tex Murphy no longer need 3rd party rsx3d winetricks)

Enable .exe dynamic relocation and only relocate files which have relocations. For XIV specifically, this fixes issues with low address space being filled up by everyone and everything and, as a result, some plugins failing to apply their hooks and leaving the game in an unstable state. (0x0ade)

--The video playback rework--

Q. What was the problem?

A. Originally, proton uses two methods for video playback with two different backends. The first is typically winedmo->ffmpeg. The second is typically quartz->gstreamer. For most games, especially older games, the quartz->gstreamer path was the default. winedmo was introduced recently (as of either proton 9 or 10, I don't remember which) as a modern approach to fixing video playback. The problem is the inner workings of the quartz->gstreamer path were complicated, to convert, thus two paths were used.

Seeing as both ffmpeg and gstreamer effectively do the same thing and can handle the same codecs -- it does not make sense to use both, especially when gstreamer is split into several different libraries that need to be built independently (gst-base, gst-good, gst-bad, gst-ugly, gst-orc, gst-libav, etc), and gstreamer also has surface display problems such as X11 vs Wayland vs Surfaceless.

Q. How did I "fix" it?

A. As many of you know, the last GE-Proton release was in March. It is now June. That is a 4 month gap, which is most definitely not the norm for GE Releases. Why is that? It's because I spent the last 4 months converting the quartz->gstreamer path to instead use quartz->winedmo->ffmpeg, and completely gutted all gstreamer libraries from the proton build.

Yes, I used AI for this work. No, it likely unfortunately will not be able to be upstreamed because CodeWeavers policy does not accept AI generated code. You might be asking "how the hell did you use AI for this?" -- the same way I would without it, the only difference is AI was used to compare code logic when things were failing or incorrect. So how does that work?

First, I did a base rework. I completely removed winegstreamer from wine, and had the AI agent look at the current code and convert what it could so that quartz used winedmo instead.

Next, about 80% of the games in the video rework list used the quartz path and relied on protonfixes with winedll overrides for quartz, lavfilters, amstream, dshow, wmp9, wmp11, and so on. This was GREAT because it meant I was able to get winedebug logs with valid, working instances. Once I gathered those logs for each game, I them removed the protonfixes, created a clean prefix, then ran and logged the broken instance.  After that I fed a working log and a broken log into the AI agent for comparison to see what WINE was doing when the overrides were in place and working, versus when it was broken natively. I found that in pretty much every instance the agent was quickly able to identify the difference and either correct or implement the missing native code needed to make the videos work as if the overrides were in place, given a small amount of trial and failure retries. Additionally if the game provided the video files I would point the AI agent to those files so that it could properly analyze what kind of files they were in order to implement into wine the ability to play them. There were very very few games that needed fixing "from scratch" and needed a lot more trials and failures before getting a successful fix -- examples being Darksiders Warmastered Edition and Nukitashi 2. I also in the process managed to get rid of a few game-specific hacks that were used and implement solutions that did not break other games -- such as audio fixes that were previously in place for The Medium and Metal Gear Solid V. You will also see a lot of VN (Visual Novel) games have been fixed, as many of those games use the same few engines and fixing one or two fixed the rest of the games that used the same engine. In fact, we even found a bug with steam runtime 4 missing some required libraries for 32 bit video playback that we were able to report upstream to get fixed (you will see liblzma and xz added to the build for this reason).

Here is a detailed breakdown of old quartz behavior versus new:

• Current Quartz Flow

For a game using quartz / DirectShow now:

Game calls IGraphBuilder::RenderFile() or manually builds a graph.

quartz/filesource.c identifies the media:

Extension/registry if available.

ASF header sniffing for extensionless ASF files, e.g. Persona 4 Arena Ultimax.

For ASF files, RenderFile() now tries:

AsyncReader first.

Falls back to WMAsfReader if async rendering fails.

FilterGraph2_Render() autoplugs the graph.

Before generic filtermapper enumeration, Quartz now explicitly tries known-good paths:

MPEG stream -> MPEG-I Stream Splitter

MPEG video -> Wine MPEG video decoder

AC3 audio -> winedmo AC3 decoder

WMA audio -> DMOWrapperFilter around winedmo WMA decoder

If none of those apply, it falls back to normal IFilterMapper2_EnumMatchingFilters().

Decoding is now mostly routed through winedmo, backed by FFmpeg, instead of winegstreamer.

Audio renderer now rejects compressed audio and only accepts PCM / float PCM, forcing the graph to insert a decoder first.

DirectSound buffer creation is delayed until stream start instead of happening at connect/filter creation time.

Video output still lands in the normal Quartz video renderer path: DDraw / VMR-style surfaces depending on what the graph builds.

Previously

Before the rework, Quartz relied much more on the stock Wine DirectShow path:

Source filter selection was mostly extension/registry driven.

ASF files generally went straight to WMAsfReader.

Filter insertion relied more heavily on generic filtermapper enumeration.

Some compressed audio could incorrectly reach DSoundRender, causing failed buffer creation or partial render failures.

A lot of media handling still depended on winegstreamer / GStreamer behavior.

Game-specific workarounds and external overrides were needed more often: lavfilters, quartz, wmp11, dgvoodoo2, etc.

Practical Difference

The new flow is more deterministic:

Game -> Quartz RenderFile

-> source detection / ASF sniffing

-> AsyncReader or WMAsfReader

-> explicit known decoder/splitter choices

-> winedmo/FFmpeg decode

-> PCM audio to DSoundRender

-> decoded video to Quartz video renderer

Previously it was closer to:

Game -> Quartz RenderFile

-> registry-selected source

-> generic filtermapper search

-> Wine/GStreamer/native override behavior

-> renderer

So the current design tries to keep legacy DirectShow games inside Wine’s own Quartz graph while using winedmo/FFmpeg for the media formats that Wine’s older Quartz

path handled poorly.

Q. Are there currently any known issues?

A. Some older WMV videos can occasionally start playback distorted/pixelated, but they will correct themselves after a few seconds. This is most noticeable in the skill videos in Ghosts N' Goblins Resurrection. WRC 4 Also has some intro logo videos that have a weird frame-splitting issue. Apart from that most games should work, especially if they are in the Verified working test list below:

Godfall

Akiba's Trip: Undead & Undressed

Nukitashi

Nukitashi 2

Ys Origin

Darksiders Warmastered Edition

Breath of Fire IV

Watch Dogs

Dark Souls: Prepare to Die Edition

Silent Hill 3

Full Metal Daemon Muramasa

Bloodstained: Ritual of the Night

Blops 3

Final Fantasy XIV

RE 0

RE1 Remaster

RE2 Remake

RE3 Remake

RE4 Remake

RE4

RE7

RE8

Nioh 2

Nioh 3

Ninja Gaiden Sigma

Ultimate Marvel Vs. Capcom 3

Ghosts 'n Goblins Resurrection

Halo Infinite

soul calibur vi

age of empires II: Definitive edition

age of empires III

age of empires IV: Anniversary Edition

The Great Ace Attorney Chronicles

Memento Mori

Devil May Cry HD Remaster

Mortal Kombat 11

Injustice

Injustice 2

Endless Space 2

oddworld: munch's oddysee

Oddworld: Abe's Oddysee

Fable - The Lost Chapters

tokyo xanadu ex+

Ghostwire tokyo

Tokyo Necro

Order of Battle: World War II

Not For Broadcast

Blue Protocol: Star Resonance

Ryse: Son of Rome

Life Makeover

Street Racing Syndicate

Juarez: Gunslinger

BlazBlue Centralfiction

BlazBlue Chronophantasma Extend

Tree Of Savior

Record of Agarest War Mariage

Agarest: Generations of War 2

Agarest: Generations of War

Agarest Zero

Atelier Ryza 3: Alchemist of the End & the Secret Key DX

Atelier Ryza 2: Lost Legends & the Secret Fairy

Atelier Ryza: Ever Darkness & the Secret Hideout

Atelier Rorona The Alchemist of Arland DX

Atelier Marie Remake: The Alchemist of Salburg

Riddle Joker (should also fix other NekoNyan VNs: Senren*Banka, Sanoba Witch FHD Edition, Sabbat of the Witch, Cafe Stella, Dracu-riot, Parquet, Angelic Chaos: RE-BOOT!)

Seven: Enhanced Edition

Catherine Classic

Spyro Reignited Trilogy

Borderlands 3

Ceville

Grandia HD

Grandia II HD

Sky: Children of the Light

Trials of Mana

Secret of Mana

Legend of Mana

ARK: Survival Evolved

Power Rangers: Battle for the Grid

Persona 3 Reload

Persona 4 Golden

Persona 4 Arena Ultimax

Persona 5 Royal

Persona 5 Strikers

WRC 4

Nekopara Vol.1 (KiriKiri engine games)

Guilty Gear Accent Core Plus R

我打不过漂亮的她们 I Can't Win Against Those Pretty Girls

神都不良探 Underdog Detective

UberSoldier

The Medium

Liminal Border Part III

YOU and ME and HER: A Love Story

Mojika - Truth Rears Its Ugly Head

Moero Chronicle

Megadimension Neptunia VII

BLUE REFLECTION

Hell Yeah!

Bully: Scholarship Edition

Nine Witches: Family Disruption

Gabriel Knight 3: Blood of the Sacred, Blood of the Damned

ONE PIECE: PIRATE WARRIORS 4

Alternativa

Arcania (Gothic 4)

Arcania: Fall of Setarrif

Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky

Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky SC

Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky the 3rd

Umineko: Golden Fantasia

Tex Murphy: Overseer

With all of that work done, I am happy to say all of the games listed above now have functional video playback with NO winetricks needed and NO dll overrides needed. No quartz,no dshow, no amstream, no lavfilters, no klite, no rsx3d, no wmp9, no wmp11, etc. -- All the functionality previously needed from those overrides is now patched directly into wine for the listed games that needed them, and the protonfixes that were previously added have now been removed since they are no longer needed.

Many of these games I did not originally own and did have to purchase in order to get working correctly -- so I would like to send a very big thank you to my patreon/ko-fi supporters for helping me every month with things like this. Of course the patreon/ko-fi is not limited to games, many times it also goes to hardware for Nobara as well, but in this case there were a lot of game purchases made to get this working.

If a game you play has video that is not playing, please open a GE-Proton issue.

Protonfixes updates:

d7vk protonfix added for tex murphy overseer

d7vk protonfix added but temporarily disabled for Gabriel Knight 3 (d7vk has a flicker problem with this game)

font fix for Ground Control 2 (CommandMC)

protonfix added for Senren * Banka (R1kaB3rn)

protonfixes added for several older ID tech games: Medal of Honor: Allied Assault War Chest, Soldier of Fortune: Platinum Edition, Quake, Hexen II, Star Wars Jedi Knight/Jedi Knight II, Return to Castle Wolfenstein (SinnohConfirmed)

protonfix added for The Fruit of Grisaia (R1kaB3rn)

protonfix added for Need for Speed Underground 2 (MatthiasDillen)

protonfix added for GOG version of Quake II (SinnohConfirmed)

protonfix added for Zero Zone (XargonWan)

protonfix added for Gray Zone Warfare (ProjectSynchro)

protonfix added for Persona 5: The Phantom X (NelloKudo)

protonfix added for MONGI: Star Drive (NelloKudo)

protonfix added for cxbx-reloaded (BlueInterlude)

protonfix added for Assassin's Creed 1 (CommandMC)

Assets

6

Loading

        Uh oh!

There was an error while loading. 
Please reload this page
.

270 people reacted
