Create fonts.
Love the process.

Glyphs 4 is the leading Mac font editor: draw quickly, manage efficiently, release with confidence.

Idris Sharp
Made in Glyphs by 
Pascal Zoghbi
.

Create icons.
Love the process.

Glyphs 4 is the leading Mac font editor: draw quickly, manage efficiently, release with confidence.

ZDF
Made in Glyphs by 
Carrois Type Design
.

Create lettering.
Love the process.

Glyphs 4 is the leading Mac font editor: draw quickly, manage efficiently, release with confidence.

Abrazo
Made in Glyphs by 
Yani & Guille
.

Create logos.
Love the process.

Glyphs 4 is the leading Mac font editor: draw quickly, manage efficiently, release with confidence.

Pez
Made in Glyphs by 
Typejockeys
.

Create pictos.
Love the process.

Glyphs 4 is the leading Mac font editor: draw quickly, manage efficiently, release with confidence.

Persona
Made in Glyphs by 
Sergio Ramírez Flores
.

Testimonials

←

→

I am continually astonished at what a well-thought-out, well-designed piece of software Glyphs is.

Mark Simonson

There have been three major technological breakthroughs for Arabic type: Unicode, OpenType—and Glyphs.

Nadine Chahine

 / 

Arabic type and legibility expert

I can’t imagine a better way to get started in type design than through Glyphs, it has been the most intuitive and efficient way to learn type design and the best way to take my lettering pieces to another level of precision.

Cecilia del Castillo Daza

 / 

ceciliadelcastillo.com

After using Glyphs, the pen tool in Illustrator feels like carving a chicken with a chainsaw.

Alex Lucas

Working with monoline designs and masters in Glyphs is awesome. It’s all there, no need for add-ons or app switching.

Martina Flor

Glad we switched to Glyphs. Feels like flying business class instead of economy.

Shoko Mugikura & Tim Ahrens

 / 

Just Another Foundry

Just generated 54 fonts with over 26,000 glyphs in less than a minute using Glyphs. That’s pretty epic.

Claus Eggers Sørensen

Glyphs has loads of killer features that satisfy newcomers and veterans alike. I can’t work without it anymore.

Toshi Omagari

 / 

Tabular Type Foundry

What’s new in Glyphs 4?

Pen points

Flex your designs with variable strokes.

Turn any path into a living shape. Drop 
pen points
 on a segment to command width, height, and angle—all adapting perfectly to the path’s direction emitting smooth transitions to the next node.
Pointed-nib design by Giuseppe Salerno

COLRv1 support

Colors, blends, gradients. You got it.

A piece of colored cake: combine colored shapes with blending modes and opacities and achieve smoother gradients. Customize everything, see it live. Export as images—or COLRv1 fonts.
Kalnia Glaze by Frida Medrano

Visual kerning groups

Stop thinking. Build visually.

Kerning has just become fun. Drag and drop glyphs straight onto the shelf to build your kerning groups. Instantly organize your sets and keep your font’s kerning structured perfectly.

New sidebar

Say goodbye to changing tabs.

Edit view now features a powerful left sidebar that puts your most critical tools in immediate reach. Filter your glyph set, walk through your shapes, inspect your interpolations right away.

Stroke caps

Control stroke miters and endings.

Pick caps and corners for your monoline strokes, batch-edit with ease. Enjoy the many more options at your fingertips.
TM Pictos by Enigma

New Slanter filter

Make it oblique, now without the hassle.

Set slant, adjust contrast, shape and weight corrections, and boom, there is your oblique. Try it in a glyph or two, go on to apply your tweaks on the whole font, done.

New component type

Build better icons with head components.

Want to do more than the default round and cut-off stroke butts? Create a _head glyph, add the anchors (⌘U), and then add the head component to any open stroke ending with the context menu. This way, you can efficiently reuse shapes and build consistent and ultra-editable icon systems.

All-new scripting window

Write code with a little help from your friends.

Navigate and edit all installed Python scripts and plug-ins, launch dedicated debug sessions, complete with breakpoints to pause your code where it cracks. And make Glyphs help you stay style-consistent with built-in helpers.

Browse your font masters

Massive families, zero friction.

Navigating complex font families should not slow you down. Use the new master selector for grouping, filtering and browsing your masters in one place. Instantly find the exact properties you are looking for, switch masters on the fly and take control of your project without losing your focus.
Ordina by Fadhl Haqq

Live text preview

See your fonts in action, no detours.

Put your designs to the test in the revamped text preview window, without leaving the app. Try different alignments, trackings and leadings, flip through your instances, change colors, even test your OpenType features right here.
Bree Arabic by José Scaglione, Veronika Burian & Azza Alameddine

Star nodes

Take your curves from smooth to perfect.

Shift-click a node to turn it into a star node—and get a flawless G2 transition from curve to curve. Making icons? Use the star node on the transitions from curve to line, and you can achieve the squircle shape for your app symbol.

Upgrade to Glyphs 4 and:

Edit your glyphs in a word context
Clean and unified interface: Font and Edit view in a single window
Intuitive and powerful drawing tools
Highly customizable workspace
Extend the app with hundreds of freely available plug-ins and scripts

Use pen points to create advanced single-stroke designs with flexible strokes
Manage large icon sets with reusable shapes
Advanced bézier control: batch-edit curvatures and segment harmonizations, balance handles

Preview with in the app: interpolation, OT features, even long texts with customizable colors, tracking, line spacing
Edit kerning groups visually, kern contextually
Write your own Python code and edit installed scripts and plug-ins

Export all static and variable OpenType font formats: CFF, CFF2, TTF, WOFF, WOFF2
Export as images: PNG, SVG, PDF, SFSymbols
All color formats supported: COLRv0/CPAL, COLRv1, SVG, sbix, layered fonts

Create, extend and produce with Glyphs 4.

→ Get Glyphs 4

Create things you love.
Get the support you need.

Create

Take full control of your curves

Easily turn your idea into pristine vectors, and do all the things Illustrator never let you do: nudge, edit multiple handles at the same time, lock angles, batch-control curvatures, balance handles, harmonize curve segments. 

Work little, make much: interpolate your drawings

Draw and manage multiple master drawings, and then easily produce as many steps in between as you like. Insert intermediate or alternate masters for that extra precision in interpolation.

Stop copying and pasting, reuse your shapes smartly

Reuse glyphs as components inside other glyphs: edit the original, and all linked components update immediately. Use this to make your 
a
 the same in 
äâãāăȧà
, or to keep any number of shapes in sync across many glyphs.

Colors and contours: who said fonts were only black and white

Apply colors, shadows, glows and gradients with color layers. Ideal for information graphics and color fonts. Or tap into the possibilities of color font formats: SVG, COLRv0, COLRv1, sbix and traditional layer fonts.

Read the tutorials

Sketching

Drawing good paths

Multiple Masters, part 1: setting up masters

Multiple Masters, part 2: keeping your outlines compatible

Multiple Masters, part 3: setting up instances

Switching shapes

Diacritics

Reusing shapes: component tricks

Advanced diacritics: narrow marks

Advanced diacritics: adapted base letters

Creating a pixel font

Reusing shapes: corner components

Reusing shapes: smart components

Reusing shapes: brushes

Reusing shapes: segment components

Creating an SVG color font

Creating a Microsoft color font (CPAL/COLR)

Creating a layered color font

Creating an Apple color font (sbix)

How to make a monoline font

Produce

Variable fonts: make your type flexible

Become a typography superhero and make your letters dynamic. Mix your styles with particles, and export both static and variable TTF and CFF2 fonts for any platform.

Manage: juggle thousands of glyphs and stay in charge

Batch-edit many glyphs at once: change glyph info and side bearings, apply filters and transform any number of letters, figures and symbols.

Export: get any major font or image format out the door

Satisfy all font needs by delivering all OpenType formats: CFF-flavored OTFs, TTFs, as well as WOFF and WOFF2 webfonts, TT and CFF2 variable fonts. Enhance your Xcode project with pristine SFSymbols. Make sets of icons, dingbats and symbols. Export them as icon fonts, or as PNG, SVG or PDF.

Read the tutorials

Creating a variable font

Vertical metrics

Make your font work in Windows

Adding glyphs to your font

Batch renaming

Working with UFO

Webfonts

Creating an SF Symbol

Extend

Plug-ins: it’s 
your
 workspace, so extend Glyphs your way

Choose from hundreds of plug-ins and scripts in 
Plugin Manager
 and install them with a single click.

OpenType features: make your fonts smart

Stop wasting your time hunting for errors in your feature code. Glyphs does that for you as you type, with its built-in live in-line syntax verification. Or let Glyphs automate feature code straight away: no more typos, and it stays up to date all by itself.

Code: add your own Python code for pretty much anything

Take advantage of the full-featured Python 3 API. No coding experience? Learn scripting in an afternoon with these four free and easy tutorials.

Read the tutorials

Extending Glyphs

Ligatures

Stylistic sets

Getting your glyph names right

Contextual kerning

Scripting Glyphs, part 1

Scripting Glyphs, part 2

Scripting Glyphs, part 3

Scripting Glyphs, part 4

Writing plug-ins

Get to know Glyphs
 
You’ll love handbook and tutorials, as well as videos, courses and books by Glyphs users

Everything I know about Glyphs, I learned reading the Glyphs 4 handbook.

→ 
And
 the tutorials.
→ 
And
 the courses.
→ 
And
 other books.

Learn now

Discover your tribe
 
Integrate hundreds of plug-ins built for, and by, the Glyphs community

Kern On

Tim Ahrens

Kern on is a revolutionary kerning assistant that helps you cut down the time you spend kerning to just a few minutes. It takes care of kern groups and your kerning. All it needs is a few kern pairs from you, then the plug-on ‘kerns on for you’.

199€

→ Get Kern On

Speed Punk

Yanone

Speed Punk is a learning tool. It teaches you to better understand the nature of Bézier curves and their curvature, the technical basis of digital type design.

Free

→ Get Plugin

Font Remix Tools

Just Another Foundry

The Font Remix Tools are a set of plug-ins Glyphs. They allow to harmonize glyph shapes, tune the width, automatically generate small caps, generate superior figures and many more.

Starts at 99€

→ Get Plugin

Lttr/Ink

Martin Cetkovský and Filip Zajac

Use stroke skeletons to speed up your work. LTTR/INK’s mighty nib force lets you draw with skeletons and control the stroke like never before. Forget outline editing, LTTR/INK generates perfectly plotted outlines, even directly to the exported font file.

Starts at 50€

→ Get Lttr/Ink

Show Stem Thickness

Rafal Buchner

The Font Remix Tools are a set of plug-ins Glyphs. They allow to harmonize glyph shapes, tune the width, automatically generate small caps, generate superior figures and many more.

Free

→ Get Plugin
