(Image credit: Godot Foundation, Getty Images)

Copy link

Facebook

X

Whatsapp

Reddit

Pinterest

Flipboard

Email

Share this article

1

Join the conversation

Follow us

Add us as a preferred source on Google

Newsletter

Subscribe to our newsletter

Godot has been suffering from a slop problem. In February, the maintainers of the open source game engine, which powers games like Slay the Spire 2 and The Case of the Golden Idol, said they were deliberating how to address a rising tide of AI slop pull requests, which had become "increasingly draining and demoralizing" for the project's code reviewers.
Today, after months of discussion, the Godot Foundation and its maintainers are drawing a line in the sand. In 
a blog post
, the Foundation announced that Godot's guidelines for contributors will soon be amended to forbid AI-authored code, pull requests submitted by AI agents, and AI-generated text in human-to-human communication.
"It is time for us to recognize that these problems aren’t going away and therefore we need to take steps to reduce the burden on maintainers while ensuring we still have a pipeline to mentor new contributors to become future maintainers," the Godot Foundation said.
Latest Videos From
Watch full video here: 
The Foundation says the pileup of Godot pull requests pending review isn't all bad: It's a sign that interest in using and contribution to Godot is increasing. But the influx of contributions authored or submitted by AI is sapping the projects' maintainers of their willingness to confront the "already tedious" work of reviewing pull requests.
"If your feedback on PRs is just being absorbed by a machine and not going towards mentoring a potential future maintainer, it becomes much harder to justify spending your free time on PR review," the Foundation said.
As the problem becomes increasingly unsustainable, the Godot Foundation says it's in the process of updating its contribution policies, focusing on "adding barriers to low-effort slop" contributions, encouraging maintainers to review code, developing new contributors into future maintainers, and crucially, requiring that all contributions come from humans who are accountable for their code—and fixing it if it fails.
"AI cannot take responsibility, and we can't trust heavy users of AI to understand their code enough to fix it," the Foundation said.
The biggest gaming news, reviews and hardware deals
Keep up to date with the most important stories and the best deals, as picked by the PC Gamer team.
The Foundation says we can expect Godot's contributing policy to soon include explicit rejections of AI-authored code, noting that contributors should only use AI assistance for "menial things" and must disclose its use. Additionally, the Foundation will reject any AI-generated text in human-to-human communications, saying it's "a basic principle of respect"—though it says machine translations "are still acceptable" if the original text was human-authored.
"Things change every day with respect to the current suite of AI tools available," the Foundation said. "We will continue taking a conservative approach in our policies towards them, but we will re-evaluate as things evolve."

2026 games
: All the upcoming games
Best PC games
: Our all-time favorites
Free PC games
: Freebie fest
Best FPS games
: Finest gunplay
Best RPGs
: Grand adventures
Best co-op games
: Better together

Lincoln Carpenter
News Writer
Lincoln has been writing about games for 12 years—unless you include the essays about procedural storytelling in Dwarf Fortress he convinced his college professors to accept. Leveraging the brainworms from a youth spent in World of Warcraft to write for sites like Waypoint, Polygon, and Fanbyte, Lincoln spent three years freelancing for PC Gamer before joining on as a full-time News Writer in 2024, bringing an expertise in Caves of Qud bird diplomacy, getting sons killed in Crusader Kings, and hitting dinosaurs with hammers in Monster Hunter.

View More

You must confirm your public display name before commenting

Please logout and then login again, you will then be prompted to enter your display name.

Logout

HARDWARE BUYING GUIDES
LATEST GAME REVIEWS
1
The best VPN for gaming in 2026: These privacy-protecting virtual networks keep your games lag-free
2
Best gaming laptops 2026: We've reviewed the best gaming laptops of this generation and these are our favorites
3
Best graphics cards in 2026: These are the GPUs worth spending money in right now
4
Best gaming PC builds: Shop all our recommended system builds as we ride out the RAMpocalypse
5
Best gaming monitors in 2026: the pixel-perfect panels I'd buy myself
1
Be Quiet Dark Rock 6 and Dark Rock Pro 6 review
2
Turtle Beach Command Series KB7 TKL review
3
Logitech G316 X (tactile) gaming keyboard review
4
Thermaltake Retro 360 TG case review
5
Meccha Chameleon review
