Tech
News
Creators
Google Search lets creators know more about their reach
A new feature will let creators and publishers see what search terms take people to their social platforms.
A new feature will let creators and publishers see what search terms take people to their social platforms.
by

Jay Peters
Jul 7, 2026, 1:00 PM UTC
Image: Cath Virginia / The Verge
Jay Peters
 
is a senior reporter covering technology, gaming, and more. He joined The Verge in 2019 after nearly two years at Techmeme.
Google is going to give content creators and website owners a better idea of how people find their social media profiles and YouTube content through Search. With a new feature in the Google Search Console called “platform properties,” Google says that you’ll be able to “easily track which search terms lead people to your Instagram, TikTok, X and YouTube content on Search, and see exactly how your audience is interacting with your posts,” 
according to a blog post
.
The new feature continues Google’s push to make Search more of a hub for everything creators and publishers do online. In June, Google 
started letting
 big creators and publishers claim dedicated profiles in Search that can feature links to other platforms and pin videos from TikTok and Instagram. With the update announced today, creators will have more data on how people discover their content while they’re googling around.
Image: Google
“Content creators and publishers use many channels beyond their own websites to reach their audiences,” Google says. “As people gravitate towards first-hand perspectives and different content formats, we want to make it easier for site owners and creators – even those without their own website – to get a consolidated view of how all of their content is getting discovered on Search.”
The new platform properties feature is rolling out “gradually over the coming weeks.”
Follow topics and authors
 from this story to see more like this in your personalized homepage feed and to receive email updates.
Jay Peters
Creators
Google
News
Tech
Most Popular
Most Popular
I spent a week using the Trump phone — it sucks
Polestar owners left ‘holding the bag’ after EV brand pulls out of the US
Xreal’s new AR glasses are way cheaper and almost just right
Apple sues OpenAI for allegedly stealing hardware secrets
I’m filling in at The Verge for 6 weeks. Ask me anything!
Advertiser Content From
This is the title for the native ad
