Google Chrome

Google Chrome’s next update will mark the end of popular ad blockers

Ben Schoon
 | Jun 15 2026 - 7:45 am PT																

								17 Comments							

Google Chrome’s move to Manifest V3 for extensions is closing its final loophole and, with it, bringing the end of many ad blocker tools.

The move to Manifest V3 has been in the works for years at this point, with one of the main points of criticism from users being that the change 
would break most ad blockers
 due to the new permissions structure and Google’s focus on privacy. The impacts of that 
were felt broadly in 2024
 and, now, Google is closing the book on Manifest V2 and, in turn, popular ad blockers such as uBlock Origin.

CyberNews
 
points out 
a Chromium commit
 that removes support for the “kExtensionManifestV2Disabled” flag, which is referred to as “dead code” seeing as Chrome no longer supports Manifest V2 extensions. This removal acts as the final stop for many Manifest V2-based ad blocker extensions that were still in use today – the flag was effectively a loophole to continue using these extensions.

A Googler on the commit 
explains
:
 
Advertisement - scroll for more content

MV2 extensions are no longer allowed in any supported version of Chrome, and we are removing support for them and the associated functionality. We won’t be able to provide / maintain this functionality indefinitely due to the complexity and tech debt, as well as the security risks it entails (we’ve actually found a number of bugs that are specific to MV2 lately). Of course, other browsers can continue supporting these if they so desire.

This will also impact other Chromium-based browsers, though the comment notes that “other browsers can continue supporting these if they so desire.” 
Neowin 
points out
 that Microsoft Edge and Opera are likely to follow suit.

Chrome 150, set to be released later this month, will remove this flag, while other leftover bits of Manifest V2 will be removed in the v151 release 
as 
AllAboutCookies
 details
:

Chrome 150 (expected June 30, 2026)
: Removes the primary technical workaround power users had kept in their toolkit (
ExtensionManifestV2Disabled
). A limited DevTools method persists, but it requires manually patching page elements each session and isn’t practical for daily use.

Chrome 151 (expected July 2026)
: Will remove the remaining flags (
ExtensionManifestV2Unsupported
, 
ExtensionManifestV2Availability
, and 
AllowLegacyMV2Extensions
). The 
W3C WebExtensions Community Group
 documented the Chrome 150 removal on May 20, 2026, citing a Chromium code review in which a Google engineer confirmed: “MV2 extensions are no longer allowed in any supported version of Chrome, and we are removing support for them.” 
PiunikaWeb
 reported the Chrome 151 flag removals on June 8; 
PCWorld
 confirmed the timeline a day later.

More on Chrome:

Gemini in Chrome rolling out to Latin America, Africa, & Middle East

Google is adding AI detection for photos, videos, and audio to Search and Chrome

Chrome for Android adding full Gemini integration and auto browse

Follow Ben:
 
Twitter/X
, 
Threads
, 
Bluesky
, and 
Instagram

FTC: We use income earning auto affiliate links.
 
More.
You’re reading 9to5Google — experts who break news about Google and its surrounding ecosystem, day after day. Be sure to check out 
our homepage
 for all the latest news, and follow 9to5Google on 
Twitter
, 
Facebook
, and 
LinkedIn
 to stay in the loop. Don’t know where to start? Check out our 
exclusive stories
, 
reviews
, 
how-tos
, and 
subscribe to our YouTube channel

Check out 9to5Google on YouTube for more news:

Comments

Expand

Close

 comments

Expand

Close

 comments

Guides

Google Chrome

Available for Windows, Mac, and Linux, Google C…

Author

			Ben Schoon		

nexusben			

Ben is a Senior Editor for 9to5Google.

Find him on Twitter @NexusBen. Send tips to schoon@9to5g.com or encrypted to benschoon@protonmail.com.
