If you buy through our links, IGN may earn an affiliate commission.
 
Learn more
.
Grand Theft Auto 6 Physical Copies Won't Include a Disc, Will Just Be a Code in a Box
Keep it on the download.
By 
Tom Phillips
Updated
: 
Jun 24, 2026 12:58pm UTC
219 comments
Rockstar will sell physical copies of 
Grand Theft Auto 6
 — though you'll only get a box containing a digital download code.
This morning, 
Rockstar announced that it will finally begin GTA 6 pre-orders at midnight tonight
, with various options available. Alongside a digital pre-order, fans will also be able to buy GTA 6 in a box — though no disc will be included inside. 
On the upside, physical copies will be available from November 12, in advance of the game's actual launch on November 19. This earlier date is also when GTA 6 pre-loading will become available, allowing anyone with a physical copy or digital pre-order to get the game downloading.
GTA 6 Ultimate Edition Screenshots
View 51 Images
While disc-less physical copies have become more common in recent years, it is notable that such a big, mass market game — likely this console generation's biggest, 
most 
market game — is ditching physical media altogether. But in a world where even Nintendo is ditching physical media for many of its own exclusives (such as Pokémon Pokopia), it is perhaps not too surprising.
Grand Theft Auto 6 is scheduled to finally arrive this November, following multiple delays. This time, however, the game's release date now looks fully locked in, with pre-orders opening, a special edition detailed, and prices all set.
GTA 6 Vintage Vice City Pack Screenshots
View 12 Images
Notably, 
the GTA 6 Ultimate Edition will include exclusive vehicles, weapons and outfits
, as well as additional locations and activities that it appears will be absent from the base version of the game — a cunning move by Rockstar to offer two entry price points, but nudge committed fans to spend $100. 
And that's all before any new version of GTA Online arrives, too. According to Rockstar, GTA 6 "features a single-player experience launching on November 19 to PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S." 
Copies of the game purchased before November 20 will at least include an additional Vintage Vice City Pack with more cosmetics and cars, though physical edition customers should note that this is only guaranteed "while supplies last." Digital preorders also get you a free month of GTA+.
So, digital or physical? Which are you choosing for GTA 6?
Tom Phillips is IGN's News Editor. You can reach Tom at tom_phillips@ign.com or find him on Bluesky 
@tomphillipseg.bsky.social
Recommends
Some Retailers Are Refusing to Sell GTA 6 Due to the Lack of a Disc
126
Grand Theft Auto 6 Preorders: Tips and Tricks to Help You Navigate the Midnight Chaos
7
22 New GTA 6 Gameplay Details Revealed
48
In This Article
Grand Theft Auto VI
Rockstar Games
Initial Release: 
Nov 19, 2026
 
Wishlist
Related Guides
Overview
GTA 6 Leonida Locations
GTA 6 Characters
Social Media in GTA 6
Comments
