Halcyon Video — a 3D video store for your media server

Your Jellyfin library, rebuilt as a walkable 1990s video rental store.
 Every
movie you own is a case on a shelf. Browse the aisles under warm fluorescents,
pull 
Back to the Future
 off the wall, flip it over and read the back of the
box, carry it to the counter, and watch the clerk drop it in a bag that
crinkles around it. Then take it home to the living room and put it in the VCR.

It is not a menu with a skin on it. It's a store.

Walk in from the parking lot — brick facade, glazed-tile stripe, the blue
board on the gable, your movie posters in the windows.

Try it right now, no server, no signup:
 
https://halcyon-video.github.io/halcyon-video/
 — the full store running
on a synthetic demo library. Or take the

45-second tour ▶
 first.

Heads-up:
 the demo boots the entire ~2,000-title store into your browser —
expect a few GB of memory and real GPU use, and prefer a plugged-in machine
over a laptop on battery. (It's built to live on a dedicated HTPC, where it
idles near zero; a leaner demo is on the list.)

The same library, four ways

None of this is a preset you pick once. Era, lighting, floor plan and media
format are independent settings, and every combination is a store you can walk
around in. 
More ↓

Four decades of fit-out
 — board signage and VHS in 1990, the fascia-band era in 1993, arched plaques in 2000, wire-black DVD shelving in 2010.

Day, sunset, night
 — the light through the front glass, on eight measured-sun HDR skies.

Three floor plans
 — herringbone, straight, or diagonal shelf runs, packed to fit the room.

VHS or DVD
 — the whole store re-cased, on correctly-proportioned rental shells.

Does it…?

The short answers, so you don't have to go looking for them.

Run in Docker?

Yes — one 
docker run
, or 
docker compose up -d
 from a clone. 
Quick start ↓

Do video games?

Yes — point it at 
RomM
 and a whole department appears: per-platform bays, period-correct boxes and jewel cases, and "renting" one launches it. 
More ↓

Work with Plex or Emby?

Not yet — Jellyfin today. The media layer is one module and adapters are the top roadmap item (
#32
).

Run on a Raspberry Pi?

Yes — 
2.5D mode
 runs the same store as plain HTML/CSS. 
More ↓

Work away from home?

Yes — 
Remote Play
 streams the live store to any browser, with its own TURN relay for off-LAN viewers. 
More ↓

Look like 
my
 video store?

Yes — brand, logo, colors, themes, fixtures and sign art are all data you drop in a folder, not code. 
More ↓

Work with no media server at all?

Yes — that's the demo link above.

What it is

A Vite + TypeScript + 
three.js
 app (optionally Tauri-wrapped) that connects
to 
Jellyfin
 and procedurally builds a period video
store from whatever you have: every library becomes an aisle, genres become
signposted sections, duplicate quality versions stack behind the face copy, the
worst-rated titles literally end up in the 
Bargain Bin
. It runs 24/7 on an
HTPC as our family's way to pick a movie — and when nobody's touching it, it
renders 
nothing at all
 and idles at near-zero CPU/GPU for days.

The screenshots in this README show the store running its built-in demo
catalog — public-domain classics on every shelf, no media server attached
(the same thing the live demo link runs). Point it at your Jellyfin and every
case becomes something you own. This isn't a tech demo that gets old in five
minutes; it's how our family has picked a movie every night for months.

Browse the aisles

A real floor plan.
 Shelf runs pack the floor in herringbone, straight, or
diagonal arrangements. Genre boards ride the shelf tops, category blades hang
from the ceiling, and the New Releases wall wraps the back of the store
backed by gold "NEW RELEASE RENTAL" clamshells.

Every case is your art
 on a correctly-proportioned VHS or DVD rental case
— 4K editions wear a 
4K sticker
, popular titles show multiple copies deep
on the shelf, and a title with both a 4K and 1080p version collapses to one
box with the quality choice made at play time.

Move like a person.
 Cursor-browse shelf to shelf with duplicate-skipping
and over-the-top wrap, or press 
F
 and walk the store in first person —
WASD, mouse-look, and click any case within reach to pick it up. No
click-to-teleport, no Street-View lurching: you 
walk
.

Doors swing open
 as you approach. Footsteps alternate ears. The ceiling
CRTs are playing something family-safe from your own library, with positional
audio that gets louder as you walk under them.

The New Releases wall

Your most recent arrivals, faced out floor-to-high with the multi-copy depth of
a real street date, under the "2-EVENING NEW RELEASE RENTAL $3" sign.

Pick up a case

Enter lifts the case into your hands — retail art in front, the store's rental
copy behind it. Flip it:

The back of the box is typed, not templated.
 Real synopsis, director,
cast, year, runtime, rating — plus genre-matched review pull-quotes ("AN
EXPLOSIVE SCI-FI SPECTACLE!") and a bordered 
technical specifications
table
 built from the file's actual media streams: aspect ratio, HDR10 /
Dolby Vision, audio tracks, subtitles, the works.

Click an actor's name
 to jump to that actor's shelf.

TV series are 3D season boxsets
 — rotate the box to the side panel to
pick an episode.

The flip cycle ends on the 
spine
 — the rental copy angled with a sliver
of front showing, exactly how you'd hold it deciding.

The search terminal

Press 
/
 and the camera walks you behind the counter and docks to the clerk's
CRT. Type on amber phosphor; matches come back by title, director, or genre,
and Enter flies you to the title's spot on the shelf.

Rent it like it's 1994

Carry mode:
 take a tape and it joins a hand-fanned stack at the bottom of
your view. 
C
 walks you to the counter; 
hold Enter
 goes straight to
checkout with a gold hold-meter pill.

The bag is a real soft body.
 The glossy white pillow bag is a ~340-node
cloth simulation — two welded sheets, die-cut handle punched through both
layers. Drop a case in and the plastic visibly pushes out around it; pick it
up and it droops and sways under gravity, then settles. (And then the solver
goes to sleep, because nothing here is allowed to burn watts at idle.)

The checkout exit is choreographed
 — wrap, slide, a first-person
walk-around while your bag waits at the counter's edge, grab, carry-out.

Rental mode
 (optional, "hardcore") enforces real early-90s rental-chain
rules on the wall clock: two tapes on a weeknight, due back 
noon
tomorrow
; four on a weekend, due 
Monday 8 AM
. The store locks you out
until then — DST-safe, with a diegetic DUE BACK slip.

Return them
 through the classic 
"▼ RETURN TAPES HERE ▼"
 chute on the
counter's entrance shoulder, one clatter-thunk at a time.

The living room

After checkout you're 
home
 — rented clamshells and the receipt on the
coffee table, a CRT and VCR with a blinking clock. Inspect your tapes from the
couch, insert one, and the movie plays 
on the TV in the room
, with positional
audio at the set.

Snacks for tonight? (optional)

Flip on candy delivery and checkout adds one question — the wire rack's real
rows (gummy bears, popcorn, movie mints…), a quantity, a ZIP, and a hand-off
deep link to DoorDash. No payment in-app; off by default and byte-identical to
before when disabled.

The clerk

A Doom-style directional sprite — five hand-drawn views picked by the angle
between her heading and your camera, procedurally painted onto a sprite sheet
at boot. She isn't decoration:

She walks the store on grid-A*
 over the real floor plan — restocks
shelves with a high/mid/low reach cycle, types at the terminal, idles at the
register. (There's a pathing audit that simulates seven minutes of her
roaming and fails CI if she ever clips through a fixture.)

"ASK FOR RECOMMENDATIONS!"
 clasps clipped to the shelf lips summon her to
wherever you're standing, and her suggestion is scoped to the section you're
in.

Her reasons are true, never generated.
 The recommendation engine only
says things it can prove from your library: 
"You have three of the Alien
films"
, 
"Because you have HEAT"
, director, actor, studio, genre — in that
order of strength. It also learns your taste from what you inspect, with a
gentle decay so it drifts as you do.

"Something else?"
 rotates her through alternatives — including titles you

don't
 own, with an 
"Order it for me"
 option (see below).

Discovery — the store stocks what you're missing

With 
Jellyseerr
 connected, the
store quietly merchandises around your collection:

Collection gaps
: own 3 of the 4 Alien films? The missing one stands on
the shelf as an empty box with a blue 
REQUEST
 corner label. Select it and
the label restamps 
gold COMING SOON
, live, while the clerk toasts that
she's ordered it.

Discover titles
 — trending films you don't own — are shelved 
inline

with your stock as request cases, not exiled to a separate row.

Staff picks from your actual watch history
: the overlap of
"people-also-liked" lists across everything you've watched, overlap-ranked so
a film recommended by three of your favorites beats one recommended by one.
Owned winners sit unmarked on the shelf; not-owned winners take the 
genre
endcaps
 wearing a 
FOR YOU
 starburst.

Not interested?
 Hold 
▼
 on any suggested case and it's gone — from
every shelf, permanently. The hold is deliberately a beat longer than
checkout's, so you can change your mind mid-meter.

No Jellyseerr configured? None of this is 
hidden
 — it's simply 
never
built
. The store doesn't hang an "ask me" button its clerk can't answer.

The games department

Point it at 
RomM
 and a freestanding
gondola appears: per-platform bays with brand-colored blades — SNES and N64
cardboard boxes in landscape, PlayStation jewel cases, Genesis clamshells — 13
platform toggles, top-rated titles first. "Renting" a game launches it: a
native emulator under Tauri, or RomM's in-browser EmulatorJS player otherwise.
Off by default; zero requests when disabled.

Set 
Emulator Command
 in the manager terminal's Video Games page —

retroarch -L /path/to/core.so {path}
, where 
{path}
 becomes the rom. The
desktop app spawns that as an argument array (never a shell) and only if the
program is on a fixed emulator allowlist, so a typo fails closed instead of
running something else. Leave it blank for the browser player.

Every platform gets its own carton, at its own real-world proportions — a
Super Nintendo box is not a PlayStation jewel case wearing different art, and
neither is a movie case. Your RomM cover scans go on the shapes they were
printed for.

Watching something

A full custom player
: seek bar with buffer fill, ±10s skip,
quality/audio/subtitle menus, direct-play first with HLS transcode fallback,
and a stall watchdog ladder that nudges, kicks, reloads, and finally swaps
sources before it ever leaves you at a spinner.

Play files off disk with mpv
 (default on, HTPC path): when the file lives
on the same machine, the store hands it to mpv for 
real HDR
 via
libplacebo and the 
original lossless audio
 — no transcode, no tens of GB
of HLS segments. The remote still works: OK pauses, Up cycles subs, Down
cycles audio, Left/Right scrub.

Playback reports back to Jellyfin (start/progress/stop), so resume points and
watch history — which feed the staff picks — stay honest.

The manager terminal

Press 
Left
 at the checkout counter, empty-handed, and the camera docks to
the clerk's desk CRT:

System control is 
diegetic
: settings, 2D mode, system suspend, 
HDMI-CEC
display off/on
, log out, quit — the same actions as the glass-card power menu
(
P
), rendered in 40-column amber. On an HTPC the store can put the TV to
sleep and wake it from inside the fiction.

Settings — paginated, thumbnailed, remote-first

Every option row carries a rendered thumbnail of what it actually changes.
A whole drawer session collapses into at most 
one
 rebuild or reload, fired
on close — never one per toggle.

Five store themes
: Halcyon 
1990
 (board signage, VHS), 
1993
 (the
footage era — fascia bands, ribbon ceiling, balloon cluster, HOT PIX boxes,
VFD pole display, security camera, QUIK DROP window lettering), 
2000

(arched plaques), 
2010
 (DVD era, wire-black shelving), and 
Night Owl
Video
 — the late-night rival chain, with its own palette and counter. Plus
storefront presets, ceiling height, wall paint, marquee bulb chase, media
format, rental-wrap variants, and day / night / 
sunset
 (eight measured-sun
HDR skies) / street-view outside the glass.

Membership cards

Jellyfin users appear as 
laminated membership cards
 — deterministic member
numbers, "MEMBER SINCE", the user's avatar, a glint sweep. Picking your card is
how you log in; cards flip over for password entry.

Make it yours

Halcyon Video is a fictional chain, and the whole identity — logo, colors,
fonts, signage, rental wraps — is 
data, not hardcode
. Rebranding the store
is a two-step job:

Drop your logo — an 
.svg
 or a transparent 
.png
 — into

public/user-assets/brand/
.

Restart the app.

That's it. The shape of your mark becomes the extruded storefront sign, the
wordmark centers itself on every genre board, and the brand propagates to the
rental-case wraps, the checkout bag, the membership cards, the POS terminal,
the works. No manifest, no settings, presence = active.

One level deeper, a 
brand pack
 (
public/user-assets/brands/<id>/
 with a

brand.json
) controls everything individually: palette, display fonts, vector
emblem paths, per-sign art, wrap prints, rendered strings. There's also a live

brand editor
 in the settings drawer with complete original presets in the
box (Megahit Video, Reel Time, and Night Owl — "OPEN ALL NIGHT"). Run

node tools/list-slots.mjs
 for the full manifest of every overridable surface,
and 
npm run build
 validates an installed pack so a typo fails loudly.

Everything under 
user-assets/
 is 
git-ignored by design
. If the store of
your childhood was a specific blue-and-gold chain with a torn-ticket sign,
your own recreation of it will fit these seams precisely — and it stays on
your machine, between you and your nostalgia. This repository ships no
third-party brand assets and never will: this project doesn't accept pull
requests, and third-party brand assets would be refused regardless.

2.5D mode — the same store for a Raspberry Pi

A second, coequal render mode: pure HTML/CSS, 
no WebGL, no three.js
download
, ~instant on weak hardware — and still a 
video store
, not a grid.
Every title is a dimensional case with a skewed spine that swings toward you on
focus.

Same themes, same New Releases/genre/games/discovery rows, same search (
/
),
same detail-overlay back-of-box. Swap between 3D and 2.5D in-process from the
settings, power menu, or the manager terminal — no page reload.

Remote Play — the store in your pocket

The HTPC 
is
 the render server. Open 
/remote.html
 on your phone and the live
canvas + the store's entire synthesized soundbus stream peer-to-peer over
WebRTC, with your touches flowing back as real input. Two flavors:

Shared kiosk mirror
 — see and drive the same store as the person on the
couch.

Private instances
 — the server spawns a headless Chromium 
per visitor

running the real store against the same library, reaped after a few idle
minutes.

Idle costs nothing by construction: 
captureStream()
 only produces frames when
the render loop actually paints.

It runs fully headless, too: a Docker or server deployment with no TV
attached serves private instances only — that's the set-top-box setup. Point
any device's browser at 
/remote.html
 and the server does the rendering;
the box just decodes a video stream, so even the weakest smart-TV browser
walks the aisles at full fidelity. Until someone donates a login
(
Settings → Connection → Remote Play
, from any logged-in browser), the
instances boot the demo library. Give the server hardware GL (
/dev/dri
)
for the smoothest streams; instances are capped (
REMOTE_PLAY_MAX_INSTANCES
,
default 2) and viewers past the cap are turned away until one frees up.

Little things you'll notice anyway

The 
bargain bin
 is genuinely your library's worst-audience-scored titles,
leaning in a rummage jumble. Critic scores are pointedly ignored.

Four-sided collection displays
 rotate a different Jellyfin BoxSet per
face, re-picked daily.

The candy rack, tape rewinder, "BE KIND — PLEASE REWIND" tents, EAS pedestals,
the beige security camera aimed exactly along the overview vantage.

All the retail audio is 
synthesized live
 — door chime, footsteps, case
flips, checkout chime, the search terminal's key clicks. No sample files.

A 
film-look color pipeline
: PBR-neutral or AgX response, warm-white
fluorescent grade (real stores ran ~3500K), an optional film-emulation LUT
with floated blacks, vignette, animated grain.

After 5 idle minutes: the 
bouncing screensaver
 — a rental clamshell (or,
30% of the time, a DVD disc) with deliberately chunky 12 fps rotation,
wall-bounce glow flashes, DVD-player style.

Press 
F8
 anywhere to file a visual bug: it snapshots exactly what you saw
plus the camera pose and config, replayable later shot-for-shot.

Built to run forever

This app's steady state is 
days on a shelf
, and it's engineered like it:

Render-on-demand.
 Idle composites nothing; the last frame just stays on
screen. Occlusion or focus loss stops the rAF loop entirely, pauses the
ambient TVs, and suspends audio — near-zero CPU/GPU until you touch it.

No per-frame allocations
, instanced meshes for every repeat, boot-time
shader warm-up so nothing compiles mid-session, an always-on hitch tracer
with span attribution, and a dynamic resolution scaler that measures your
display's real refresh rate.

Kiosk deployment
 (
deploy/install.sh
): a systemd user service with
restart-always, crash-loop backoff, and a 4 GB memory ceiling so even a slow
leak self-heals. Nightly ~4 AM maintenance reload (only while the screensaver
is up) picks up new media; tokens self-heal on wake and every 6 hours.

Line budgets are enforced by the build; features live in composable scene
modules, not one god file.

Integrations at a glance

You have

You get

Jellyfin
 (required — or demo mode)

The store, browsing, walk mode, playback, rentals, living room, clerk, themes, brand editor

Jellyseerr
 (optional)

Recommendation clasps, REQUEST / COMING SOON cases, collection gaps, discovery shelving, staff picks, FOR YOU endcaps, "order it for me"

RomM
 (optional)

The video-game department, native or in-browser game launching

Tauri build
 (optional)

mpv playback command, HDMI-CEC control, system suspend, native game launch, CORS-free proxying

Nothing at all

?demo=1
 — the full store on a synthetic library, no server, playback disabled

Every integration degrades by 
absence
, not error: unconfigured features are
never built, and callers never branch.

What talks to the internet

The store is built to run on your own network. Fonts, textures and every other
asset ship inside the bundle, and Jellyfin, Jellyseerr and RomM are your own
servers at your own addresses — nothing is fetched from a CDN to draw the store.

Two optional features are the exceptions, and only while you use them:

Feature

Reaches

What for

Jellyseerr discovery

image.tmdb.org

Cover art for titles you 
don't
 own

Remote Play

stun.l.google.com

Finding your public address so a viewer outside your network can connect

Jellyseerr returns a TMDB 
path
 rather than the image itself — its own web UI
fetches from that same CDN — so there is no copy on your server to serve
instead. Art for titles you already own always comes from Jellyfin, which is why
the store proper works with the internet unplugged.

Remote Play sends no video through the STUN server: it is one question ("what
address did this reach you from?") and one answer, during connection setup. Your
own TURN relay carries the actual traffic when a direct link can't be made. Note
that the query happens whenever a session negotiates, including on your own LAN
— an offline-only mode that drops it is on the roadmap rather than done.

Quick start

git clone https://github.com/halcyon-video/halcyon-video

cd
 halcyon-video
npm install
npm run dev          
#
 dev server on :1420 — first boot shows the login /

#
 membership cards; enter your Jellyfin URL + credentials

Docker — the no-fuss way:

docker run -d --name halcyon --network host --restart unless-stopped \
  ghcr.io/halcyon-video/halcyon-video

…or, from a clone, 
docker compose up -d
 (builds the image locally; the
prebuilt image is published from releases). Then:

Open 
http://<host>:1420
 in a browser and log into your Jellyfin — or
append 
?demo=1
 to try it with no server at all.

Open 
http://<host>:1420/remote.html
 on a phone, tablet, or set-top box:
the 
container
 renders the store and streams it over WebRTC, with your
taps flowing back as input — see 
Remote Play
.
To stream 
your
 library (not the demo), log in once from any browser and
flip 
Settings → Connection → Remote Play
 on; that donates your login
to the server.

--network host
 is what lets WebRTC offer an address other devices can
actually reach; if you only want in-browser use, 
-p 1420:1420
 on a normal
bridge network works too. Reaching the container by a DNS name — your NAS
name, a reverse proxy, a custom domain — needs that name in

HALCYON_ALLOWED_HOSTS
 (outside a container the machine's own hostname,

.local
 name and tailnet name already work). All the knobs are annotated in

docker-compose.yml
.

HTPC / kiosk:

./launch.sh                    
#
 build + serve + browser fullscreen kiosk

./deploy/install.sh            
#
 …or install the run-forever systemd service

sudo loginctl enable-linger 
$USER

Demo, no server:
 
https://halcyon-video.github.io/halcyon-video/
 — or append 
?demo=1
 to any deployment.

Development:
 
npm run build
 must pass (tsc + line budgets +
signage-config validation). Unit suites: 
npm run test:rental
, 
test:nav
,

test:why
, 
test:picks
, 
test:shelf
, 
test:versions
, 
test:promo
,

test:comingsoon
.

FAQ

Is this like those 3D video-store websites?

Related genre, different species. Those are hosted demos over 
streaming
catalogs
 — shelves of someone else's inventory, browsed with click-to-look
controls. This is 
your
 library: every case is a file you own on a server
you run, playable tonight in original quality. You walk it in true first
person, it's GPL-3.0 open source, and it's built to be a daily driver — ours
has been the family's movie picker, 24/7 on the living-room TV, for months.

Do I need a gaming PC?

No. Render-on-demand means it only draws when something changes, a dynamic
resolution scaler fits it to your hardware, and the 
2.5D mode
 runs the
whole store as HTML/CSS on a Raspberry Pi.

Does it work with Plex or Emby?

Today it speaks Jellyfin (and a no-server demo mode). The media layer is one
module, and Plex/Emby adapters are the most-asked-about item on the roadmap —

issue #32
 is the
one to watch or chime in on.

Can I run it in Docker?

Yes — see 
Quick start
. One 
docker run
 with 
--network host
,
or 
docker compose up -d
 from a clone to build the image locally.

Can I make it look like the video store I grew up with?

See 
Make it yours
. The app ships a fictional brand and takes
whatever identity you drop in the folder — locally, on your machine.

Why "Halcyon"?

Halcyon days
 — a period remembered as idyllically happy and peaceful. Friday
night, new releases, a full bag. That's the register the whole app aims for.

Roadmap

Plex / Emby source adapters (most requested)

More period fixtures and eras

VR walk mode experiments

More clerk conversations, more rituals

Support

There's a mug and a card by the register, and the card has a QR on it. If this
made you grin, you can 
buy me a coffee on Ko-fi
(halcyonvideo)
. No tiers, no paywall — the app is
GPL and complete either way. It just funds the next fixture. (Not for you? The
jar switches off in Store Look.)

License, and how this project is run

GPL-3.0.
 Fork it, mod it, ship your own store — but keep it open.

The source is open; the development is not. This project does not accept
pull requests.
 It is one person's product, built for one living room and
shared because it turned out well — not a collaboration looking for
contributors. Bug reports are welcome and questions get answered; patches,
feature votes and design-by-committee are not the model here. If you want it
to go somewhere else, the license says you may: fork it and take it there.
See 
CONTRIBUTING.md
.

Halcyon Video is a fictional brand created for this project. This repository
contains no third-party trademarks or brand assets: no real chain's name,
logo, trade dress, or typefaces are included or distributed. Movie artwork
visible in screenshots is library metadata from the author's personal Jellyfin
server. This project is not affiliated with, endorsed by, or connected to any
video-rental company, past or present — it is a love letter to Friday nights
at all of them.
