The Open Source AI Framework 
for Production Ready 
 Agents, RAG & Context Engineering

pip install haystack-ai

Get Started with Haystack

  Stars 
|

  Join Discord

      Haystack Sets the Standard for Agentic AI Across Industries

Why Teams Choose Haystack for their AI Workflows

Build Transparent, Context Engineered AI Systems

Orchestrate every step of your AI agent, from retrieval to reasoning to memory and tool use.

Haystack’s modular framework gives you full visibility to inspect, debug, and optimize every decision your AI makes.

Integrate Freely with Your AI Stack

Connect to OpenAI, Anthropic, Mistral, Hugging Face, Weaviate, Pinecone, Elasticsearch, and more with no vendor lock-in.

Haystack’s open architecture lets you mix and match components to fit your workflow.

Develop and Deploy Faster

Move from prototype to production using the same composable building blocks.

Haystack lets you go from a proof-of-concept to a full production system with unified tooling for building, testing, and shipping your AI use cases.

Operate at Enterprise Scale

Run production workloads across any environment with built-in reliability and observability.

Haystack Pipelines are serializable, cloud-agnostic, and Kubernetes-ready, with logging, monitoring, and deployment guides to support you.

Build and Scale with the Haystack Ecosystem

From open source to enterprise: tools for every step of your AI journey

Haystack, AI Orchestration Framework

          Open Source AI framework for building production-ready, LLM-powered agents and applications, on your own or with Community support.

        Start with Haystack

Enterprise Support

Enterprise-support for the Haystack framework, with exclusive access to:

Private, secure engineering support

Best practices templates & deployment guides

Access to flexible services

Flexible pricing based on company size

        Get Enterprise Support

AI Orchestration Platform

Sovereign AI toolset built on Haystack to accelerate and scale AI use cases with:

Visual, code-aligned pipeline design

Data, retrieval, and testing workflows

Secure access controls and auditability

Scalable cloud or on-prem deployment

        Try Haystack Enterprise Platform for free

Haystack Use Cases

Advanced
 RAG

Build highly performant RAG pipelines with a multitude of retrieval and generation strategies. From hybrid retrieval to self-correction loops, Haystack has got you covered.

AI
 Agents

Design production-ready AI agents with standardized tool calling and scalable context engineering. Branching and looping pipelines give you full control over complex, multi-step decision flows.

Multimodal
 AI

Architect a next generation AI app around all modalities, not just text. Haystack can do tasks like image processing and audio transcription too.

Conversational
 AI

All of our generators provide a standardized interface so that you can focus on building the perfect bot for your users.

Content
 Generation

The flexibility and composability of Haystack’s prompt flow is unparalleled. Leverage our Jinja-2 templates and build a content generation engine that exactly matches your workflow.

Join the community

Join our Discord

Our community on Discord is for everyone interested in NLP, using Haystack or even just getting started!

GET STARTED

Sign up for
 Haystack updates

Stay tuned for the latest Haystack community news and events.

Upcoming Haystack Events

Breaking Down DeepSeek-R1

Evaluating AI with Haystack

Adding Tools to Agentic Pipelines & Other Experimental Features
