Webmail 

UCD Access 

Canvas 

Quick Links 

Tools & Resources

Events Calendar

Newsroom

Strauss Health Sciences Library

Department A-Z Directory

Campus Directory

Leadership

Faculty & Staff Resources

Supporter & Alumni Resources

Student Resources

Mental Health Resources

Campus Map

University Policies

Give Now

CU Campuses

CU Anschutz

CU Boulder

CU Colorado Springs

CU Denver

CU System

CU Online

CU Anschutz

School of Dental Medicine

Graduate School

School of Medicine

College of Nursing

Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences

Colorado School of Public Health

CU Anschutz Medical Campus

Education

Student Resources

Research

Patient Care

Community

News

News Headlines

Campus Community News

About

Our History

Mission and Vision

Leadership

Visit the CU Anschutz

Events Calendar

Contact Us

Federal Transition Updates 

Researchers at the 
University of Colorado Anschutz
 have found that healthy yet sedentary individuals show a significant, coordinated drop in muscle mitochondrial function that may precede the development of major diseases like cancer, diabetes and Alzheimer’s.

“Mitochondrial function is the center of metabolic health,” said the study’s senior author 
Iñigo San Millan
, adjoint assistant professor in the 
Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes
 at CU Anschutz. “If you are 40, healthy and sedentary, it is likely that you already have something going on inside your cells that will likely come back to haunt you in 10 or 15 years.”

The 
study
 specifically noted that mitochondria, which process energy within cells, showed a significantly decreased capacity to burn both sugar and fat in healthy individuals who get less than the recommended 150 minutes of exercise a week. Researchers also found that sedentary muscle contained about half as much of a key protein needed to convert sugar into usable energy.

The protein, MPC1, transports a key byproduct of sugar breakdown into the mitochondria.

The study, published Friday in Clinical Bioenergetics, examined nine sedentary and 10 regularly active men, approximately 42-years-old. A companion study on women is currently being planned. Researchers analyzed muscle biopsies to observe how efficiently the mitochondria burned fuel and performed exercise tests to measure fitness, fat-burning capacity and blood lactate levels — a key marker of how hard the body has to work for energy.

When compared to the active group, sedentary men showed significant cellular deficits:

Mitochondrial Efficiency: Dropped by 28% to 36% across several categories.

Fuel Transport: The MPC1 protein was 49% lower, reducing the muscle's ability to burn sugar. Similarly, the CPT1 enzyme, which transports fats into the mitochondria, was roughly half as active.

Cardiovascular & Blood Markers: Sedentary men had a 38% lower maximal oxygen use (VO2​max) and accumulated 60% higher levels of lactate in their blood during exertion.

Study: Sedentary lifestyle likely sets stage for disease

San Millan said this represents a fundamental shift in cellular identity. Sedentary people aren't just "out of shape" — their cells are losing the ability to process fuel efficiently. For example, the massive drop in MPC1 could be one of the earliest signs of the cellular traffic jams that eventually cause insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.

San Millan, a renowned physiologist known for his work in elite sports performance, including with Tour de France champion Tadej Pogačar, noted that the study highlights how regular exercise acts as a literal shield for cellular health, helping mitochondria seamlessly switch between burning fat and carbohydrates, a term that is called metabolic flexibility.

“Being sedentary will progressively erode metabolic health. When you stop moving, you lose that cellular identity of being healthy, and your body begins moving toward disease,” San Millan said.

The research team hopes to conduct larger, more diverse trials in the future and run training or drug trials to see if MPC1 and CPT1 can recover with intervention.

“This cellular decline is something we can actually test for in a non-invasive way, through cardiopulmonary exercise testing and lactate testing,” San Millan said. “And if we catch it early, we can prescribe targeted exercise programs designed to restore mitochondrial health and potentially prevent future disease.”

The study co-authors include Janel L. Martinez, Genevieve C. Sparagna, Angelo D’Alessandro, Davide Stefanoni, Travis Nemkov and John Hill.

Topics:

Press Releases
,

Fitness and Well-Being

Spread the word:

        Featured Experts

              Inigo San Millan, PhD 

          Related Articles

 Healthy but Sedentary Individuals Show Early Decline in Cellular Energy Production

                by David Kelly | Jun 29, 2026

 Historic $40 Million Gift to CU Anschutz Department of Ophthalmology Will Fuel Research and New Therapies

                by David Kelly | Jun 3, 2025

 Why Are These Athletes Collapsing? A Cardiologist Responds

                by Kiley Carroll | Mar 14, 2024

University of Colorado Anschutz

CU Anschutz

Fitzsimons Building

 13001 East 17th Place 

Aurora,
 
CO
 
 80045

Facebook

Twitter

Instagram

LinkedIn

Partnerships

UCHealth University of Colorado Hospital

Children's Hospital Colorado

University of Colorado Medicine

Resources

Employment

Ethics and Compliance

Freedom of Expression

Submit Content

Subscribe

Sustainability

HelpCompass

Campus Health Resources

Tools

Faculty/Staff Directory

A-Z Index

Find a Doctor

Academic Calendar

Events Calendar

Media

Newsroom

Media Contacts

Film Requests

RSS Feed

Contact Us

Website Feedback

CU System

Privacy Policy

Terms of Use

Accessibility

Accreditation

Employment

 Give Now

© 2025 
 The Regents of the University of Colorado
, a body corporate. All rights reserved.

Accredited by the 
 Higher Learning Commission
. All trademarks are registered property of the University. Used by permission only.
