The open source toolkit for building
        virtual instruments and audio
        effects

Download

GitHub
              repository

Compile HISE from source code and stay up to date.

Download
              Installer

Precompiled binaries for Windows, macOS and Linux

Absolute Freedom

Compile 
native plugins (VST/AU/AAX)
 for macOS, Windows and Linux.

Batteries included

Start development with modular building blocks like 
Sampler, Synths, Modulation and
                FX
.

Efficient Workflows

              Write scripts with an 
inbuilt IDE
,
              create interfaces with a 
WYSIWYG editor
 and program DSP in a 
graph
                environment
.

Simple & Extendable

 Start with 
Plug & Play
, customize everything with 
Scripting

              add get into advanced 
C++
 for maximum flexibility.

Deployment Tools

Add 
Expansions
 to your plugin, use a native 
Copy protection solution
 and
              distribute
              samples with 
HLAC compression
.

Dev Community

Get to know an 
active and dedicated community
 of developers that will help
              you out when you're stuck.

Dive in

Documentation

Get to know the HISE Interface in the 
Quick
                Tour

Learn about the basic 
Audio
                Modules
, 
UI Components
 and
              the
              
Scripting API

Explore templates and example content with 
HISE
                Snippets

HISE Walkthrough

              Sit back and enjoy 20 minutes of going through the most important features of HISE:

Testimonials

              Read what other developers think about working with HISE: 
Roll

author
company

quote

author
company

quote

Features

Audio Modules

HISE provides a broad range of basic audio modules: Sound generators like oscillators and samplers,
            modulators like envelopes and LFOs and effects such as EQs and convolution
            reverbs.

Various auxiliary tools such as send effects, multichannel routing matrixes, and
            containers with flexible hotswap-functionality help you to create almost any audio plugin architecture.

More info: 
Modules

Sampler

With the HISE disk streaming engine and custom lossless audio codec you can create sample libraries that
            consume
            minimal memory and CPU resources. It features several modern sample library concepts such as Round Robin
            Groups, Lazy Loading, Dynamic Crossfades, and purgable multi-mic channels.

The Sampler is tightly coupled with the scripting engine, enabling you to
            dynamically
            control functions such as hot-swapping sample sets or changing properties of individual samples.

More info: 
Sampler Workspace
              Walkthrough
 | 
Sampler
              API

Scripting

            HISE's scripting language, which is derived from Javascript, provides a contemporary development workflow.
            Although it has been optimized for real-time performance for writing custom MIDI processing modules, it
            features several improvements that facilitate
            ease-of-use and solid code organization, even for large UI scripting projects.

Every component in HISE, such as audio modules, samples, and DSP nodes, can be
            accessed and modified with the Scripting API. The built-in IDE tools, such as quick code navigation,
            breakpoints, console logging and live-variable-watch will significantly enhance your development flow.

More info: 
Scripting
              Reference
 |
            
Scripting 101 Video

Scriptnode

Scriptnode is a visual programming environment within HISE that empowers you to build custom audio effects,
            modulators, or synthesizers using low-level DSP building blocks like delay lines or math operators. If
            dragging cables is not your cup of tea, you can also write DSP algorithms using a JIT
            compiler for a subset of C++ or import third party C++ classes.

Moreover, you can integrate DSP modules from other languages or applications, such
            as Faust and RNBO. Export your DSP algorithm as a static C++ class
            if you want to squeeze out the last CPU cycles.

More info: 
ScriptNode
              Reference

Interface Designer

Create the interface of your plug-ins with a workflow similar to that of graphic design applications: You
            can create, select, and manipulate UI elements using a drag-and-drop approach, modify properties, and
            structure
            them within a nested layer architecture while being able to preview the functional UI with a single click.

            Additionally, HISE's scripting engine is constantly accessible, allowing you to customize any behavior,
            appearance, or property of the UI.

More info: 

[Interface
              Designer Reference]
 |
            
[Watch Interface Designer Tutorial]

Deploy

Native Plugin

Compile your project as a native application or audio plugin using a C++ compiler toolchain.

Create your own product installer.

Use advanced features like scriptnode compilation or Faust DSP nodes.

Modify the HISE codebase to optimize performance for your project.

Compile and sign the binaries on each OS.

Implement a custom copy protection solution.

Incorporate third-party code and keep your IP secret.

              Setting up the compilation process may seem intimidating at first, but there are videos available that
              demonstrate how to compile HISE on each supported platform: Once you've set it up, exporting your plugin
              becomes a one-click operation, plus you get the advantage
              of using the latest HISE version.

RHAPSODY Player
              Format 

Export the plugin as a library for the 
RHAPSODY Player
 from
                Libre Wave.

Quick route to your DAW

Doesn't require you to set up a compile toolchain.

Export it on your machine and use it on any OS that supports the RHAPSODY Player.

You don't get the advantages and customizations that require a C++ compiler.

The RHAPSODY Player from Libre Wave is open source and freely available and can be considered as the
              official platform for loading HISE libraries.
              Since it is an open platform, it easy to import and modify RHAPSODY libraries with HISE. This
              makes your plugin more accessible and customizable compared to a native binary deployment.

Download RHAPSODY

Resources

Knowledge Base

There is a vast amount of information available if you need to learn more about HISE. During development,
          these three places of information will become very important, so make sure you check them out properly.

User Manual

Dive into the 
Documentation
 to learn more about HISE, read up on
              specific topics and take a look at the full reference API.

Forum

On the 
HISE Forum
 you can find a vibrant community of developers
              which are eager to help you out if you can't find the answer in the existing 7000+ topics.

Video Tutorials

David Healey has made a vast amount of video tutorials for HISE covering different topics of varying
              complexity. Make sure to check out his 
Youtube Channel
 and
              subscribe to his 
Patreon
 if you want to get the
              latest videos.

Open Source HISE Projects

If you want to explore how a plugin is made in HISE, feel free to check out the
            repository of these open
            source projects. Note that for some of the third party projects you will have to contact the vendor to get
            the samples
            as they are usually not part of the repository.

HISE Tutorial Repository

                The official repository for multiple tutorials spanning simple projects like a basic synthesiser or
                convolution reverb to small examples for specific use cases like custom sample import.

GitHub
                  repository

Libre Wave Sofia Woodwinds

                A very thorougly sampled woodwinds library by 
Libre Wave
 with emphasis on realtime
                playability.

GitHub
                  repository

Collab B3

                The CollaB3 organ is a collaboration of various 
HISE developers
 and features a
                detailed reproduction of noises, clicks, leakage, rotary speaker and tonewheel. Also chorus and reverb
                are
                included.
.

GitHub
                  repository

Orchestools

                There are multiple open source projects made with HISE available at 
Orchestools
 that cover a broad range of sounds
                using CC licensed samples.

GitHub
                  repository

Sinuslabs REACH

                REACH is modern creative Reverb that is made for synthetic sound sources made by 
Sinus Labs
.

GitHub
                  repository

Showcase

Built with HISE

Triaz

by 
Wave Alchemy

Elevate your music with Triaz, an innovative drum engine designed for unparalleled beat creation.

              With lightning-fast polyrhythmic sequencing, advanced drum layering, dynamic mixing tools, and intelligent
              randomization, Triaz redefines the art of drum production.

PercX

by 
Auddict

Explore hundreds of instruments with unlimited flexibility.
              500+ instruments with multiple Round Robin variations and up to eight dynamic
              layers. Play them as fully customizable loops or deep sampled library.

CUBE

by 
Lunacy Audio

An award-winning virtual instrument, CUBE brings endless inspiration to modern
              electronic, hip hop, pop, and genre-bending tracks. Create stunning new sounds
              and take your tracks to the next level with CUBE’s creative 3D sample-morphing engine.

Pawn Shop Comp

by 
Korneff Audio

The Pawn Shop Comp 2.1 is a professional tool that will make a huge difference in the
              quality and impact of your mixes. It sounds great on any sound source and in virtually
              any application.

Handy Drums

by 
Goran Grooves

Maple shell, the most versatile sound. An absolute standard, a perfect "all around"
              studio drum kit for use in any music genre. The options are endless, imagination
              being the only limit.

Need 533 EQ

by 
Noise Ash

High-performance British style analog eq unit which has a very sweet musical tone
              that doesn’t sound muddy or harsh even in extreme settings.

Bardzo

by 
Felt Instruments

Bardzo brings a unique grand piano with two strings per key and no resonance board
              under your fingertips. Bigger than the Una Corda, more intimate than your standard
              posh grand.

Atma

by 
MNTRA

Atma is a collection of sacred sound instruments obtained by MNTRA's award winning founder
              & composer, Brian D’Oliveira, during his many pilgrimages to holy sites around the world.

Meta Piano

by 
Sampleson

MetaPiano is the first Spectral Modeled Grand Piano out there. It was built upon real sound captures from
              a Japanese Concert Grand Piano and meticulously rebuilt by math algorithms.

Licensing

HISE is distributed under a dual-license model for both, open-source and proprietary
          projects. Releasing a project under the GPL license is completely free of charge. If you want or need to avoid
          the freedom of the GPL license, you can acquire a commercial HISE license.

Open Source
          License

The 
GPL v3
 open-source
          license grants you complete freedom to create, distribute, and sell your own work while adhering to the
          same GPL licensing model and its requirements.

To distribute your plugins you can either offer compiled binaries yourself or create a library for the free
          
Libre Wave Rhapsody
 player, if you want to skip the
          compilation procedure.

GPL Project

dedicated plugin / app binary

compilation for every OS required
              
fully customizable UI

Rhapsody Expansion

load your HISE project in Rhapsody

works on all platforms, no compilation necessary

start out with a readymade template to ensure consistency across different Rhapsody libraries

Open Source License FAQ

+

              What is required for a release under the GPLv3 license?

              In order to release your product under the GPLv3 license, you will also have to license your source
              code
              under the GPL license, which means that any source code and assets (scripts, images, audio files,
              additional source code) required to compile your project must be available to anyone that you provide
              a
              binary of your product.

+

              How does this usually work?

              The most straight forward solution to this is to set your repository on GitHub or whatever version
              control
              host you are using to "public" and include a copy of the GPL license somewhere in your repo.

+

              Does that mean I can't sell the product?

              Absolutely not. You are free to sell your product for any price as long as you grant people the
              ability to
              modify / compile it themselves.

+

              I want to keep the copyright of my product.

              GPL does not mean Public Domain. You will keep the copyright of any code you write and can make
              modifications as you wish, you just can't prevent that other people might to the same. What they will
              not
              be able to do is to remove you as an author and claim that they wrote everything themselves (or make a
              proprietary derivative), because that would be a violation of the GPL license.

+

              What about the samples. Are they licensed under the GPL license too?

              This is not 100% legally clear, but samples are not a required asset to compile and run your binary,
              therefore you can pick any other license you like (usually one of the Creative Commons licenses is a
              good
              match). Fair play usage would suggest that you don't hide them behind a unreasonable paywall, but
              that's
              not a legally binding requirement and you can of course ask for compensation for hosting fees etc.

+

              What if I use third party frameworks that forbid GPL usage?

              It depends. If you're talking about AAX, then just don't ship AAX builds of your product. If you're
              using
              third party DSP algorithms that you can't disclose to the public, then you will of course need to get
              a
              proprietary license.

+

              What about copy-protection. Can I copy protect my GPL library?

              Weird question, but OK. Any kind of copy protection requires some private information (eg. encryption
              keys), which would need to be disclosed to the public alongside the source code in order to comply
              with
              the GPL license. Therefore the entire copy protection scheme will be rendered pointless because people
              can
              just compile it without whatever scheme you come up with. If you want to prevent people sharing your
              work
              (which is the foundation of open source), releasing a proprietary product under the commercial license
              is
              a much more suitable approach for you.

Commercial
          License

          For most commercial projects a proprietary license is the most viable option because it permits the
          confidentiality of the source code.
          The HISE commercial license is a company-wide license that allows you to release as many proprietary
          projects
          as you want as long
          as your license subscription is active.

The licensing fee for proprietary usage is a monthly fee determined by the yearly revenue that you've
          made
          with HISE based products
          and is categorized into two tiers:

HISE INDIE License

Get INDIE

[Yearly payment
              option]

less than 50.000 € annual revenue
 made with HISE-based products.

50€ / month
 
(or 600€ / year), VAT excluded

HISE PRO License

Get PRO

[Yearly payment
              option]

more than 50.000 € annual revenue
 made with HISE-based products

300€ / month
 
(or 3600€ / year), VAT excluded

Please be aware that if you intend to use HISE for a proprietary product,
              obtaining a commercial 
JUCE
 license is necessary, as HISE is based on
              JUCE
              and JUCE is using a similar dual-licensing model. For a preview of the HISE license agreement, click
              
here
.

Commercial License FAQ

+

              Can I make multiple plugins with one license?

              Yes. The commercial license is a company-wide license that allows you to release as many products as
              long
              as your subscription is active.
              Be aware that the licensee is not the developer of your product, but the company that sells / releases
              it,
              so if you hire a third party
              developer to build a product with HISE, you will need to get a license regardless of whether the third
              party developer has a license or not.

+

              When and for how long do I need the license?

              You will need to acquire a commercial license as soon as and for as long as you are selling
              proprietary
              products made with HISE. This means that during development of your first product, you don't need a
              commercial license. If your HISE based products do not make enough money anymore to justify paying the
              license, you can either stop selling them or just switch to the GPL license by providing the source
              code
              alongside the binary.

+

              Do I need a commercial license if I want to release a free product?

              Yes. The commercial license does not make a difference between paid and free products - as soon as you
              don't want to release your HISE product under the GPL license, you'll need a commercial license, which
              will also be the case for free products. Be aware that you can always release free products under the
              GPL
              license and the real world implications for free products are almost neglible.

+

              What if my revenue exceeds the threshhold of the INDIE tier after a certain time?

              If the revenue of products made with HISE exceed 50.0000€ within the last 12 months, you will need to
              upgrade to the PRO license - just cancel the Fastspring subscription for the INDIE license and get a
              PRO
              license.

+

              Is there any premium service attached to a commercial license?

              No. The commercial license only grants you the possibility of releasing proprietary products and does
              not
              come with a premium support / service. However in the past we have prioritized feature requests / bug
              reports from commercial licensees to ensure smooth operation for commercial projects.

+

              What kind of JUCE license do I need? And do I need to get anything else?

Besides getting a license for JUCE, you don't need to acquire anything else. You might need to
                register
                a few accounts at various companies to get their frameworks and tools (Microsoft, Apple and Intel)
                for
                the compilation process, but they are all free of charge.

Which JUCE license you will need does depend on your company's revenue - also there are a few
                subtle
                differences between how HISE and JUCE determine your revenue, so make sure to read the EULA from
                JUCE to
                figure out the exact model. Just be aware that the free JUCE Personal license shows a splash screen
                that
                is deactivated by default in the HISE codebase, so if you're planning to use this model, you will
                need
                to manually reenable the splash screen.

If the FAQ section didn't cover your question or you want additional information about the licensing
            scheme, please get in contact with us info@hise.audio 

Get
                in touch

Copy Protection

If you're looking for a pre-built copy protection solution for your proprietary product, you can check
            out
            
HISE Activate
. It natively integrates with HISE and provides a
            simple
            serial-key interface with your webshop and resellers.

About

The History of HISE

            The development of HISE started in 2014 as an experimental framework with the goal to create a virtual
            clarinet to
            combine wavetable synthesis with sample playback. Realizing the lack of available tools for this kind
            of project, the priority shifted from creating a single virtual instrument towards assembling a reusable
            collection of building
            blocks to let other developers realize their ideas without having to start from scratch or even learn C++.

            Following the licensing concept of the underlying JUCE framework, the decision to
            publish HISE as an open source toolkit helped setting it apart from its proprietary competitors and HISE
            continues
            to be the major open source option in a field that has been dominated for years by a single company.

While the virtual clarinet that sparked the creation of HISE never saw the light of day, the 
1.0 version
 of
            the framework was published in 2017. Since then, the industry adoption of HISE has slowly but
            steadily risen and HISE is now the foundation of products that generated more than 5 million USD revenue.

Meet the HISE Team

Christoph Hart

Christoph Hart, born in
                  1985 and currently living in Berlin,
                  Germany, is a composer and the main developer of HISE. 
Initially, he began working on HISE
                  during breaks between theatre productions. However, over time, his focus has shifted, and he now
                  creates music for theatre productions during breaks from working on HISE.
In addition to the work
                  on the HISE codebase he is collaborating with different companies to build audio plugins.

Dominik Mayer

Dominik Mayer, born 1986,
                  and also living in Berlin,
                  is an artist, musician and wingman developer of HISE. 
In the beginning he started supporting HISE
                  with UX/UI feedback and maintenance work, and along the way has grown into his role as a full-stack
                  front to backend dev. 

                  When he is not busy fixing server issues, he is helping out in several plugin collaborations and is
                  providing generalist assistance to the HISE cause.

Mailing List

If you want to stay informed about the latest news & releases: Sign up on the HISE
          mailing list.
