Looking for availability near you? 
Currently only available in India.
HMD Touch 4G
It’s not your old keypad phone. It’s not a bulky smartphone. This is a hybrid phone, combining the best of both worlds: Cloud Phone Service, video calls and voice messaging through the Express Chat App with other Express Chat users, Wi-Fi support, and a touchscreen — all in one small package. 
Smart features. Small phone. 
Touchscreen
Vibrant touchscreen with smooth scrolling. 
Cloud phone service
Cricket results, news, weather, and more. 
Express Chat app
Video call and voice message with other Express Chat users. 
Global roaming
Supports 4G LTE bands for broad network connectivity. ² 
What it’s about
The next step in phone evolution 
The line between smartphone and feature phone just got a bit smudgy. HMD Touch 4G boasts a vibrant touchscreen — that makes it nice and smooth to swipe between features like the Cloud Phone Service and the Express Chat app for video calls. It does all of this and more while maintaining the simplicity, reliability, and affordability of a feature phone. This is a hybrid phone. 
About hybrid phones
Online Chat
The Express Chat app: for expression that breaks barriers 
HMD Touch 4G comes with the Express Chat app for texting and video calling with other Express Chat users. Chat one-on-one or in groups, even with smartphone users. The Express Chat app is free to download for Android™ and iOS® devices. Just another way HMD Touch 4G bridges the feature phone and smartphone worlds. 
Video calling
Use the selfie camera to video call with other Express Chat users. 
Voice messaging
Hold the Quick-Call button to record a voice message. 
Text chat
Send texts, photos, and emojis in private chats and groups.
For smartphones
Express Chat is free to download on Android and iOS® devices.
Global roaming
Take your HMD Touch 4G around the world with you 
Enjoy HD voice calls and other online features while you travel. With support for a wide range of 4G LTE bands, HMD Touch 4G helps you make the most of global networks around the world.  
Cloud phone service
A world of smart experiences 
Entertainment, socials, games, friends, and finding information — that’s what Cloud Phone Service is all about. Whether you want to check the latest videos, view tomorrow’s weather forecast, or read up on the latest cricket results, it’s all just a few touches away on HMD Touch 4G through cloud-hosted browser shortcuts. 
Packed with big features 
Quick-call button
For emergency contact calling and voice message recording.
Connectivity
WiFi support, hotspot feature, and Bluetooth enabled.
Cameras
Capture photos and videos with front and back cameras.
Battery
1950 mAh battery and USB Type-C charging. ¹
Design
Smart features in a little package
HMD Touch 4G combines the modern, clean-cut look of a smartphone with the compact form of a feature phone to give you a stylish, easy-to-use device. It easily fits your pocket, your bag, and your lifestyle. 
Supporting human connections
We are Human Mobile Devices, the maker of Nokia phones and HMD phones, accessories, and more. It’s our belief that technology should serve people through meaningful human innovation. We bring this to life with our reliable and durable feature phones and comprehensive, affordable smartphones. All while remaining committed to our globally-recognized sustainability efforts.  
About us
Currently only available in India.
All rights reserved. All specifications, features and other product information provided are subject to change without notice. All images are for illustrative purposes only.
Google, Android and Google Play are trademarks of Google LLC.
Apple, the Apple logo, and App Store are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries.
IOS is a registered trademark or trademark of Cisco Systems, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and certain other countries.
The Bluetooth word mark and logos are registered trademarks owned by Bluetooth SIG, Inc. and any use of such marks by HMD Global is under license.
USB Type-C™ is a trademark of USB Implementers Forum.
¹Battery has limited recharge cycles and battery capacity reduces over time. Eventually the battery may need to be replaced.
Want the latest HMD product news? Just tell us where to send it.
