If you like this blog post, do subscribe to my RSS feed

How RCA Victor sold Sound Service to classrooms in 1939

First Published: 05/07/26

          Dr. Eve: ..... Every Main Street is an aurora. 

          Woman: Wait, you don't mean neon signs? 

          Dr. Eve: Exactly. 

          Woman: Oh, you're joking! 

          Dr. Eve: No, I was never more serious. Do you know how a neon sign
          works? 

          Woman: No, I haven't the slightest idea. How do they work? 

          Dr. Eve: Neon signs are glass tubes filled with neon gas, a very rare
          element at low pressure. An electrical charge shot through the tube
          causes the glass to glow. 

          Woman: Oh, but Dr. Eve, what has an eye-blinding red sign on Main
          Street got to do with the beautiful soft Northern Lights? Now really.

          Dr. Eve: Just this. The Northern Lights are caused by practically the
          same action. 

        - “The World Is Yours”
        
radio episode from 1937

        explaining Northern Lights.

        Welcome again to the fourth blog in my retro poster collection series.
        In the past, we have explored quite a few diverse posters - from
        
Navitrainers
, which were among the
        earliest flight simulators, to
        
Addressographs
 and
        
the shortage of typewriters during World War II
. This is quite possibly one of the last times I'll be covering posters
        bought from what used to be my local bookstore, Reader's Corner, as in
        2025 I moved from Raleigh, NC, to the Puget Sound region. There are not
        many local bookstores near where I live. While we have Half Price Books
        nearby, I've yet to find any interesting retro posters there.

The Poster

Today, we will explore the following poster:

          Figure 1: My poster of the RCA Victor Sound Service for Schools
          advertisement from LIFE magazine, March 6, 1939.

        Just like our past ones, this one too is cut out from a copy of LIFE
        magazine. Particularly, it belongs to

          the March 6, 1939 edition of LIFE magazine
. As the bold embellishment at the bottom indicates, this advertisement
        is sponsored by 
RCA (Radio Corporation of America) Victor
.

          Encyclopædia Britannica

        describes RCA's history as follows:

        RCA was founded as Radio Corporation of America by the General Electric
        Company in 1919 to acquire Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company of America
        (incorporated in 1899). A subsidiary of a British-owned company, Marconi
        Wireless at that time was the only company capable of handling
        commercial transatlantic radio communications, and General Electric took
        it over with the assistance of the U.S. Navy Department, which was eager
        to keep the technology in American hands. For the following 50 years the
        company was led by David Sarnoff, who built the company into a modern
        communications conglomerate.

RCA, Victor Talking Machine Company, and the Great Depression

        RCA Victor became its consumer-oriented brand, which originated from a
        merger with the
        
Victor Talking Machine Company

        in 1929. While the merger
        
seemed to have taken place on March 15, 1929
, speculation about the merger was flying in 1928 too. Here is a stub
        written by the Associated Press and published in the "
Rochester Evening Journal and the Post Express
" on December 15th, 1928:

Radio Merger Seen Near
 ..... Merger of Radio Corporation of
        America and Victor Talking Machine Company was believed near completion
        today. It would join companies valued at the close of 1927 at
        $116,000,000. The general plan of the merger was said to have been
        worked out, but pending the settlement of minor details announcement was
        withheld.

        The merger of Victor Talking Machine with Radio would be the most
        important of several steps the R.C.A has taken in its entry into the
        general “amusement” field. Radio controls the National Broadcasting
        Company, R.C.A. Photophone, Inc., and is allied with the
        Radio-Keith-Albee-Orpheum Corporation. It has contracts with Victor and
        Brunswick-Balke-Collender Company for years.

        Victor's contracts with many musical artists would make them available
        for sound pictures and broadcasting under R.C.A. management.

        RCA gained control of the Victor Talking Machine Company through an "
exchange of shares
" for $54 million (likely a stock swap; the actual cash value of the
        deal is a bit murky and so I am citing Hagley's findings). Post-merger,
        an article from the

          December 1929 edition of Radio Broadcast

        succinctly describes the landscape and RCA's focus points:

          New Company Formed to Manufacture and Sell All RCA Home-Entertainment
          Apparatus

        Effective January 1, 1930, all radio material in the home-entertainment
        field previously sold under RCA's name will be manufactured as well as
        sold by the RCA-Victor Corporation. Included in the new arrangements
        between Radio Corporation, General Electric, and Westinghouse, are radio
        sets, talking machines, records, and other devices in the home
        entertainment field. This represents a new step in the activities of the
        enlarged program of the RCA subsidiaries. The 20 per cent. manufacturing
        profit retained by General Electric and Westinghouse in the making of
        radio units exclusively sold by RCA will be removed and the new
        organization called the RCA-Victor Corporation will encompass the
        research, engineering, manufacturing, and selling activities which have
        hitherto been distributed among the constituent companies. The new
        company will be headed by E.E. Shumaker, now president of the Victor
        Talking Machine Company.

        ..... Speculation in the industry is now centering around the probable
        moves of General Electric, Westinghouse, and Western Electric. Will the
        radio plants of these companies continue to make sets and appliances, to
        be sold under the well known trademarks of each, in open competition
        with the products of the new RCA-Victor corporation? Will Western
        Electric enter the retail field with a line of tubes and super
        heterodynes? One well-known figure in radio who would not be quoted
        remarked that in his opinion another twelvemonth would see separate
        radio sets (in each of which the Radio Group has strong financial
        interest) made and marketed by the following: General Electric,
        Westinghouse, Western Electric, RCA-Victor, and General Motors Radio
        Corporation. “This new step on RCA's part will enable them to make more
        sets at a lower price and get them on the market quicker than ever
        before,” remarked one radio observer.

          Figure 2: General view of the plant of the Victor Talking Machine
          Division of the Radio-Victor Corporation of America. This was
          published in the December 1929 edition of Radio Broadcast.

        As you may be aware, 1929 to 1939 marked a dark period in American
        history due to the
        
Great Depression

        and its severe economic turmoil. The event was triggered by

          the Wall Street crash of October 1929
, where by 1932 stocks were worth only about 20 percent of their value
        in the summer of 1929. Naturally, this caused a decline in consumer
        spending between 1929-39, which surely should have hampered RCA Victor's
        early ambitions. Nevertheless, the timing of the merger - a few months
        prior to the crash - should have been a blessing in disguise for them.
        RCA was the quintessential technology stock of this era, mimicking
        today's MANGOS and FAANG-like companies.

          Lecture notes from UH's Digital History

        mention that on March 3rd, 1928, RCA was trading at $94, which jumped to
        $300 on January 1st, 1929, and was at $505 on September 3rd, 1929, only
        to collapse by ~96% to $17 by July of 1932. Note that,

          RCA underwent a 5:1 stock split

        sometime in early 1929, so the $17 price is likely to be pre-split.

          Figure 3: Snapshot of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) and
          various other companies from 1927 to 1932, showing the tumbling of the
          stock market during the crash of 1929. From
          
UH's Digital History lecture notes
.

        There is a nuance though. RCA bought Victor at the absolute peak of a
        bubble in a stock-swap deal! So, it managed to acquire hard durable
        assets such as factories, contract artists, trademarks, and patents
        using overvalued paper money. When the bubble burst, RCA was left with
        tangible assets that could be used to generate revenue in the future.
        They also performed key business optimizations. As mentioned in the
        Radio Broadcast article above, the new RCA-Victor Corporation
        consolidated research, engineering, manufacturing, and selling into one
        entity. Moreover, it removed "20 per cent. manufacturing profit retained
        by General Electric and Westinghouse" on radio units. Therefore, owning
        Victor's factories let RCA manufacture in-house and stopped the 20%
        margin leak to its parents. All of this should have helped RCA
        streamline some of its operations going into the Depression.

Sound Service for Schools

        Anyway, it is nearly a decade after the backdrop of this event that our
        poster was born - a few months prior to the outbreak of World War 2.
        While I do not have any concrete evidence, I imagine that the goal of
        "Radio in Education" was to open a new revenue channel (schools) while
        consumer radio spending was cratering. In the poster, RCA Victor is
        marketing a program called "Sound Service for Schools" to modernize
        education across American schools. They are marketing several products
        for this. One of these is the "School Sound System" that can be used to
        direct announcements, educational radio programs, latest news, recorded
        lessons, emergency evacuation, and music. Then there is the "Recorder"
        that seems to be used for helping improve students' pronunciation of
        languages, and helps in replaying talks from prominent speakers only to
        be later replayed in classrooms. In a localized-classroom setting, it
        seemed to have the use of streaming plays, dramas, etc. too. A few pages
        earlier in the same LIFE magazine, I read that:

        ..... Sherman Institute Vocational School for Indians, Riverside,
        California, where the descendants of the real native Americans find aid
        in appreciation of the white man's culture through an NBC program. Class
        is contrasting Indian tomtom with drum effects just heard during an
        orchestral broadcast. Radio helps thousands of teachers to make courses
        more interesting and stimulating to students.

        In doing research for this blog, I read about
        
American Indian boarding schools

        - so the "in appreciation of the white man's culture" part is certainly
        unsettling.

        As you might have imagined, there are a lot of parallels between this
        and the internet in the education wave. Just like RCA, MOOCs (Coursera,
        Khan Academy, MIT OCW, and Stanford Online) let a kid anywhere access
        lectures from the best professors in real-time, no longer limited by
        what's available locally. Both waves bundled hardware and
        infrastructure, like Chromebooks and Raspberry Pi kits, with a promise
        of modernization. And finally, both seemed to arrive against the
        backdrop of a broader consumer technology boom.

        The poster refers to a "
Victor catalog
" that seemed to be used
        for selecting the records. I was able to dig through one of these on the
        Internet Archive, titled "
Complete Catalog of Victor Records for 1939-1940
". Here is what it has to say about Sound Service for Schools:

        Victor Records are used among schools more extensively than any other
        type of audio or visual aid to learning which requires a reproducing
        instrument. This use of Victor Records has increased from year to year,
        until now many such records are made especially for schools. In
        addition, there are literally thousands of the recordings of fine music
        which are used as the best source from which to select illustrations for
        Music History, Music Appreciation, the study of instruments and
        instrumentation, and for integrating music with the teaching of History,
        Literature, Science, Geography, Language, Physical Training, and other
        subjects of the school curriculum. Victor Records actually bring to the
        classroom the best music of all ages, recorded by the world's leading
        artists and musical groups.

        The Victor Book of the Opera and The Victor Book of the Symphony are
        used extensively among high schools, colleges and music schools. What We
        Hear in Music is used by music lovers, music students, music teachers,
        broadcasting studios, and all types of musical organizations as a
        convenient, standard and inexpensive reference and textbook. Music and
        Romance makes music appealing and understandable to students of junior
        and senior high school age, A Lecture-Laboratory Course in Music
        Appreciation and the History of Music completely outlines a course of
        study for college students or adults, to be used with or without the aid
        of a teacher. Other educational publications include folders and
        pamphlets designed to aid those who wish to make the most effective use
        of Victor Records in education. One of the most helpful of these is the
        booklet, RCA Victor Sound Service for Schools, which may be obtained
        without charge by writing to the Educational Department, RCA
        Manufacturing Company, Inc., Camden, New Jersey.

        To the best of my understanding, the booklet "RCA Victor Sound Service
        for Schools" is a lost artifact. I found RCA's above vision to be
        fascinating - i.e., them trying to reinvent every field through the lens
        of music. In the entire catalog, I saw no mention of lectures from
        famous professors or scientists of that time, political speeches meant
        to inspire students, people from different countries speaking about
        their cultures and languages, or athletes/coaches discussing ways to
        hone students' plays. Note that I am not discounting the fact that such
        a recording was nonexistent. In fact, through initiatives such as the
        Smithsonian's "The World Is Yours", we know that such programs existed
        and flourished. Nevertheless, RCA Victor's catalog did not seem keen on
        promoting any such activity. I strongly suspect two reasons for this.
        First, this was meant to be a pure "records" catalog rather than a media
        catalog, and second, music has always been an evergreen commercial
        commodity with high reusability, whereas lectures and speeches can fade
        quickly.

        While researching the above, I stumbled across
        
ERPI Classroom Films
, which later on went on to become Encyclopædia Britannica Films. From
        its Wikipedia page:

        In November 1928, John Otterson of Electrical Research Products Inc.
        decided to make use of the latest sound technology in 35mm motion
        pictures and apply it to the 16mm format that was gradually being
        adopted by colleges and schools with easier-to-use projectors. ..... At
        first, there was much skepticism of the value of motion pictures as an
        educational tool in public schools, despite mogul William Fox's
        willingness to spend $9 million in putting projectors into the nation's
        classrooms. ..... Newark, New Jersey, was among the first public school
        systems to incorporate sound movie projectors in their classrooms in
        1930. ..... Among the first films to be sold with text brochures to aid
        teachers were nature documentaries focusing on the time-lapse
        photography of plants and close-up footage of animals. These were
        credited to (George) Clyde Fisher of the American Museum of Natural
        History, borrowing much footage from earlier British Instructional
        Films. Other early films of importance included a Yale University backed
        Arnold Gesell covering early child development and a slow motion study
        of football techniques with popular coaches like Biff Jones of West
        Point and Harry von Kersburg of Harvard. Dr. Carey Croneis supervised
        some geology subjects .....

        Their entire catalog, with links to certain videos,
        
is available on Wikipedia
. It's amazing how we as mankind have a knack for reinventing and
        refining older problems in new, unique ways - all the while evolving how
        a new generation interacts with and perceives its surroundings. I do
        wonder how someone would describe today's "AI in Education" era a
        century later! And that's it, folks! I will end this research dive with
        a 1936 ERPI Classroom Film describing the Solar System.

The Solar Family by ERPI and Walter Bartky.
 Published on
          November 15, 1936. "No Copyright - United States" (
https://rightsstatements.org/page/NoC-US/1.0/
), as designated by
          
Indiana University Libraries
. Film courtesy of the
          
IUL Moving Image Archive
, Media Collections Online.

←
