How the FSF sysadmins block botnets with reaction

      by
      
Michael McMahon

        Contributions

    —

      Published on

    Jul 09, 2026 11:29 AM

I have written about the FSF facing DDoS attacks several times, 
including on doing our part to 
clean up the internet
 and on 

Uptime Kuma
, as well as 
"Defending Savannah from DDoS
attacks"
. But I realized recently that I left out an 
important tool that we use extensively. Today I will talk about 

reaction
. With the rise of aggressive scrapers building datasets 
to train LLMs, we needed to invest a lot of resources into thwarting 
the attackers. During this journey, we had several growing pains.

We noticed patterns in the scrapers that were abnormal, which gave us 
material for writing regular expressions. Searching for the regular 
expression then gave us a large lists of IP addresses. Looking up the 
origin of those IP addresses revealed that some of the crawlers were 
using botnets of residential IP addresses to scrape faster and avoid 
detection.

We looked for what kinds of botnets might be generating the kind of 
traffic that we were seeing, and one that we suspected was called the 
"Vo1d" botnet, comprised of smart TVs running some sort of compromised 
app. Recently, more information has come out about the Vo1d/Popa 
botnet. Security researchers at Qurium, a digital forensics 
investigation organization, intentionally ran a node and published the 
data. We got confirmation that at least some of the botnet traffic 
hitting GNU Savannah was originating through 
the Vo1d/Popa 
botnet
.

We placed our regular expressions in 
fail2ban
, and found that we 
were hitting the maximum rules that could be added to 
UFW
 
firewall rules on our systems which showed degradation around 65,000 
rules. fail2ban is a program that can read the stream of log files and 
perform actions when certain conditions are met. The actions are 
typically banning an address with a firewall like UFW, which blocks or 
allows connections to and from a server. We learned about 
ipset
 
and configured fail2ban to add IP addresses that it found to IP sets. 
Using ipset, we kept building larger IP sets and did not find 
instability with as large as five million rules.

We used fail2ban with ipset for a while but ran into limits of its 
architecture with Python and SQLite. We rolled our own solutions as a 
quick patch several times with BASH, awk, Perl, etc. to find the 
address matching the pattern and add the rule to ipset without an 
additional intermediary database. The custom scripts worked for a 
moment, but it became difficult to manage when we had to run several 
little scripts as more patterns appeared. Not all of the patterns 
should be banned on first appearance either so we needed a solution 
like fail2ban. We looked for fail2ban alternatives written recently. 
We found several, but many of them were written as one-off showcases 
rather than well-maintained solutions that would last. We eventually 
found a promising project on Framasoft's forge Framagit called 

reaction
 written by ppom.

It took us a bit of time to understand how to configure reaction. 
Unlike fail2ban, reaction does not come with a working configuration 
and you must build your own configuration with what is relevant to your 
needs from example documentation. There was not an example for using 
ipset so we had to build one. Overall, this approach is very good 
because we now have a configuration that has everything we need and 
very little that we do not need.

After we ran into scaling issues with our initial implementation, we 
developed a much faster implementation where the reaction shutdown 
process would export the IP sets to disk and the reaction startup 
process would restore the IP sets. This allowed us to have nearly 
instantaneous restarts of the service to apply new rules. We published 

both of our configurations upstream to reaction's wiki
 so that 
everyone can benefit from it. reaction's getting started documentation 
now leads to the method that we proposed.

This work is not possible without your support. Because of free 
software supporters just like you, we can continue to find new 
patterns, block crawlers and mitigate DDoS attacks, and share our 
improvements with everyone. We know not everyone is in a position to 
give, but if you can, support our efforts by joining the FSF as an 

associate member
. An associate membership is a great show of 
support we can rely on. The FSF does not compromise when it comes to 
defending your freedom. Without the continued commitment of people 
like you, the progress we have made is in danger, and software freedom 
could be reduced to a mere wish instead of today's reality. Please 
help us continue to protect software freedom and increase its global 
support. Every membership this summer will help us towards our goal of 
175 new members. Associate members will also be able to enjoy all the 

member benefits
 which include merchandise discounts, a 16GB 
bootable membership card, and use of our associate member 
videoconferencing server.  

Many sysadmins know about fail2ban, but not enough people know about 

reaction
. I am very grateful to ppom for the help they have 
provided and for the tremendous project they have released to the 
world with reaction. We have implemented other defenses as well, but 
reaction is doing the majority of the automated work keeping our sites 
online. 

Document Actions

Share on social networks

Syndicate:

News

Events

Blogs

Jobs

GNU
