WASHINGTON, D.C. — Why do Americans view free enterprise much more favorably than capitalism, and what explains socialism’s appeal to a sizable minority? These questions stem from Gallup’s 2025 update on 
Americans’ views of economic systems
, which found 81% viewing free enterprise positively, compared with 54% for capitalism and 39% for socialism.

To better understand the reasoning behind Americans’ views, Gallup conducted a separate survey asking Americans to say, in their own words, what they like and dislike about each system. The sample was randomly divided three ways, so each respondent was only asked about the pros and cons of one system.

Overall, Americans describe both capitalism and free enterprise as systems that promote economic opportunity, growth and innovation, while perceiving that both are tainted to some degree by greed and corporate power. Yet capitalism is much more likely than free enterprise to be associated with unequal distribution of wealth.

Socialism, by contrast, is valued primarily for providing economic security and reducing inequality rather than for promoting economic performance. However, a large share of Americans cannot identify anything positive about socialism and instead associate it with economic inefficiency, excessive government control and weaker incentives to work.

###Embeddable###

Beyond the overall results, there are sharp partisan differences in views of the strengths and weaknesses of capitalism and socialism, as well as some notable generational gaps.

Capitalism Conveys Upward Mobility; Free Enterprise Connotes Open Markets

Americans most often praise capitalism for facilitating upward mobility. Specifically, 35% mention aspects related to personal opportunity and advancement, such as rewarding hard work, creating wealth and giving people the chance to improve their circumstances. Slightly fewer (29%) credit capitalism with fostering innovation, competition and efficiency, while smaller shares emphasize economic freedom, consumer choice and fairness.

Only 8% explicitly say there is nothing good about capitalism, while another 14% cannot identify a positive attribute.

###Embeddable###

Free enterprise evokes a somewhat different image. Rather than focusing on personal advancement, Americans most often associate free enterprise with economic freedom, consumer choice and competition, cited by 40%. Elements of innovation and creativity rank second (26%), followed by personal opportunity and advancement (22%).

###Embeddable###

Inequality Associated More With Capitalism Than Free Enterprise

Although prior Gallup research shows that Americans generally view capitalism and free enterprise positively to varying degrees, most can also identify important drawbacks to each system. Many of the criticisms overlap, but there is one notable exception: Americans are far more likely to associate income and wealth inequality with capitalism than with free enterprise.

Nearly one in four U.S. adults (23%) say capitalism benefits the wealthy at the expense of others or creates excessive inequality, compared with just 9% who say the same about free enterprise. This distinction, alone, helps explain why free enterprise enjoys substantially broader public support.

At the same time, greed, profit-seeking and other ethical concerns are commonly mentioned for both systems. About one in four Americans cite these elements as drawbacks of capitalism (24%) and free enterprise (22%). Similar proportions also point to corporate power, monopolies and market abuse (21% for capitalism and 24% for free enterprise).

Free enterprise, meanwhile, is slightly more likely than capitalism to draw criticism for exploiting workers and consumers (17% vs. 12%, respectively), while relatively few Americans mention environmental or economic risks in describing either system.

###Embeddable###

Partisans Differ Over Benefits of Capitalism

Capitalism is most often praised by Republicans for rewarding hard work and creating opportunities for advancement. Nearly half (47%) mention aspects of personal opportunity or upward mobility — almost twice the percentage of Democrats (25%) saying the same. Democrats, by contrast, are somewhat more likely to emphasize capitalism's role in promoting innovation and efficiency than its ability to create opportunity.

By contrast, views of free enterprise are notably similar across party lines. Pluralities of Republicans (44%), independents (39%) and Democrats (37%) value it for promoting economic freedom, competition and consumer choice. Sizable shares of each group also associate free enterprise with innovation and personal opportunity.

###Embeddable###

Sharper partisan differences appear in perceptions of capitalism's drawbacks. Democrats (29%) and independents (26%) are much more likely than Republicans (13%) to say capitalism unfairly benefits the wealthy or contributes to economic inequality. Democrats are also somewhat more likely to mention greed and environmental harms.

By comparison, partisan differences in the failings of free enterprise are relatively slim. Republicans, independents and Democrats cite either corporate power or unethical behavior as its biggest drawbacks. Democrats are somewhat more likely than Republicans to mention inequality and wealth gaps, while Republicans are slightly more likely to cite economic instability.

###Embeddable###

Socialism Valued Most for Security and Equality, but Many See No Virtue

Unlike capitalism and free enterprise, socialism starts from a much less favorable position in Americans' minds. In fact, the single most common response when Americans are asked to name something good about socialism, volunteered by 30%, is "nothing." With an additional 15% of Americans unable to identify a positive attribute of socialism, a total of 45% either reject the premise of the question or cannot think of an answer. This is roughly twice the rate seen for capitalism (22%) and substantially higher than for free enterprise (27%).

Among those who do identify strengths of the system, however, there is considerable agreement about what socialism represents. Americans most often describe it as providing a social safety net, including affordable access to healthcare, education, housing and other basic services (26%). Nearly as many (23%) praise socialism for promoting greater equality and an even distribution of wealth, while relatively few mention broader government control, support for working people or stronger communities as its principal virtues.

Taken together, these responses suggest that Americans who view socialism positively focus less on expansive government control and more on the promise of greater economic security and fairness.

###Embeddable###

Americans' Criticisms of Socialism Are More Diffuse

While perceptions of socialism's strengths cluster around a few common themes, its perceived downsides are more varied.

Similar proportions of Americans cite economic inefficiency (21%), government overreach (19%), weakened incentives to work (18%), and reduced freedom and individual opportunity (17%) as drawbacks of socialism. Another 11% mention corruption or broader system failures, while 5% simply say everything about socialism is bad.

###Embeddable###

Republicans and Democrats Share Few Positive Impressions of Socialism

Partisan differences in views of socialism are greater than those seen for either capitalism or free enterprise.

Republicans are far more likely than Democrats or independents to say there is nothing good about socialism. More than half of Republicans (54%) give that response outright, and another 15% offer no opinion. By comparison, about three in 10 Democrats are unwilling or unable to cite something good.

Majorities of Democrats and independents, in contrast, praise socialism either for providing access to basic services and strengthening the social safety net or for promoting greater economic equality. These two themes dominate the favorable comments from both groups. The highest praise from Republicans, at 12%, is for providing a stronger social safety net.

###Embeddable###

Conversely, Democrats (37%) are more likely than Republicans (11%) and independents (21%) to either say nothing is bad about socialism or to refrain from naming negative attributes.

Among partisans who do identify drawbacks, the responses are highly varied, including similar mentions of government control, loss of freedom, disincentivizing work, and creating problems or inefficiencies in the economy.

###Embeddable###

Young Adults More Likely Than Older Americans to See Benefits of Socialism

Generational differences in Americans’ attitudes toward the three systems are the greatest for socialism — particularly in terms of how they answer what’s good about it.

Adults aged 18 to 34 are much less likely than those aged 55 and older to say there is nothing good about socialism (13% vs. 42%) and are more likely to cite equality and access to basic services as its principal strengths. By contrast, criticisms of socialism — including concerns about economic inefficiency, government overreach, weakened incentives to work and reduced individual freedom — are common across all age groups, with relatively little variation in emphasis.

###Embeddable###

Differences in what each age group names as drawbacks of socialism are relatively slight, as are their responses to the pros and cons of free enterprise. Americans of all ages most often describe the strengths of free enterprise in terms of economic freedom and competition, with only modest differences in the other qualities they associate with it.

When describing capitalism, younger adults (32%) are more likely than adults aged 55 and older (24%) to cite its role in promoting innovation and efficiency. By contrast, older Americans (42%) are more likely than younger adults (23%) to point to personal opportunity and upward mobility as a strength. When naming capitalism’s drawbacks, younger adults are somewhat more likely than older adults to mention environmental or broader social harms.

###Embeddable###

Bottom Line

Americans’ unaided thoughts on what’s good and bad about capitalism, socialism and free enterprise suggest there is more common ground on economic values than the country's political debates often imply. Competition, innovation, opportunity and economic freedom are widely viewed as economic virtues in the context of free enterprise, indicating broad support for the ideals of an open-market economy.

Americans see many of the same benefits in capitalism as they do in free enterprise, even putting greater emphasis on the human dimension, with 35% citing some aspect of capitalism that fosters upward mobility. At the same time, a much larger share of Americans cite inequality as a drawback of capitalism than of free enterprise, which may help explain why capitalism has received lower ratings in Gallup's prior research. Inequality also appears to be the problem that socialism’s supporters are most eager to address, viewing socialism as a system that can reduce inequality through various means.

Americans' impressions of each system don't reveal which one they think best describes the U.S. economy today or which they'd prefer it have. But they do suggest some appetite, especially among Democrats, for a hybrid approach — one that shrinks inequality without undermining the forces that drive economic incentives, innovation and opportunity.

Stay up to date with the latest insights by following @Gallup 
on X
 and 
on Instagram
.

Learn more about how the 
Gallup Panel
 works.

###Embeddable###

Survey Methods

Results for this Gallup poll are based on self-administered web surveys conducted Dec. 1-14, 2025, with a stratified random sample of 2,020 adults, aged 18 and older, who are members of the Gallup Panel™. Gallup uses probability-based, random sampling methods to recruit its Panel members. Each question about the three economic systems was based on approximately 666 U.S. adults, with a margin of sampling error of ±5 percentage points at the 95% confidence level.

Gallup weighted the obtained sample to make it representative of the U.S. adult population on gender, age, race, Hispanic ethnicity, education, political party affiliation and region. Demographic weighting targets were based on the most recent Current Population Survey figures for the aged 18 and older U.S. population. Party affiliation weighting targets are based on an average of the three most recent Gallup telephone polls. 

In addition to sampling error, question wording and practical difficulties in conducting surveys can introduce error or bias into the findings of public opinion polls.

The responses show that Americans have concrete impressions of the advantages and disadvantages of socialism, capitalism and free enterprise, helping to explain why socialism lags capitalism in favorability with the public while free enterprise has widespread appeal.

Related Topics Include:

USA
 
All Gallup Headlines
 
Government and Politics
 
Political Parties
 
Political Systems
 
Politics

Access Crucial Data for Your Research

Search, examine, compare and export nearly a century of primary data.

Learn More
 about Access Crucial Data for Your Research
