Tailwind CSS is a very popular CSS framework among web developers. With no prior graphic design knowledge, it solves the standardization of spacing, colors, and sizes for you. And on top of that, if you are even slightly disorganized, it forces you into a working methodology based on building large structures out of simple utilities (Utility-First Fundamentals). Add to all that a documentation that is easy to understand with a flawless search.

In the past I used it on several projects, it helped me build user interfaces quickly. And despite all of that, it is a tool I would not recommend in every context. I am going to give you my point of view, my reasons, why you should think twice before using Tailwind CSS on medium or large projects. The only thing I ask of you is an open mind, self-criticism, and a willingness to learn.

You have to learn dozens of classes

Tailwind has thousands of utility classes. Even though the documentation is very good and the editor autocomplete helps a lot, there is a ceiling of basic classes you have to internalize. Most likely, at first you will develop with a browser tab open and the search box working nonstop. You spend time understanding the most appropriate way to apply each class. A slow process at the start. And if you have created your own classes that mix with Tailwind's, the difficulty grows.

It breaks the separation between structure and design

Tailwind CSS is a gigantic utility library, atomic classes with specific jobs. Unless you group classes with 
@apply
, you end up including dozens of them in your HTML. This breaks the classic rule of separating structure from design, or HTML from CSS. It bloats the HTML, readability suffers, and you lose reusability.

That said, this one is worth pausing on, because it is the criticism that gets rebutted the most. Adam Wathan, the creator of Tailwind, wrote the foundational text of the defense, and his argument is a good one. The separation of concerns does not disappear, it changes direction. With "semantic" CSS, your CSS depends on the HTML; you can restyle the HTML, but your CSS is not reusable. With utilities, your HTML depends on the CSS; the CSS is reusable, but your HTML does not restyle itself. The coupling exists in both cases, only the direction of the arrow changes.

The argument holds in a world of components, where React or Vue already put logic, markup, and style in the same file. There, the separation by file type was already broken by you beforehand. But in a server-rendered project, with templates and classic CSS, the separation still makes complete sense. It is not a universal law, it is a decision that depends on your architecture.

Its names are not consistent

Its naming is not always coherent, at times it is opaque and tends to confuse. Look at the alignment classes. What is the difference between 
items-center
, 
justify-center
, 
text-center
, and 
place-content-center
? The name is not intuitive and does not follow a clear pattern. In case you are curious, 
items-center
 aligns items in a flex container, 
justify-center
 aligns them on the main axis, 
text-center
 centers text, and 
place-content-center
 centers content in a grid. Let me rename them looking for coherence: 
flex-align-items-center
, 
flex-justify-content-center
, 
text-align-center
, and 
grid-place-items-center
. Do you notice the difference?

There are more examples: 
justify-center
 but 
items-center
 (not 
align-center
); 
border
 gives 1px but 
border-2
 gives 2px. Small frictions that add up.

The design system is not enforced as much as it seems

One of the big arguments in favor of Tailwind is that its spacing and color scale forces you to be consistent. And that is true, but with a catch, the arbitrary values. You can write 
w-[347px]
, 
text-[#1a2b3c]
, or 
p-[5.5rem]
 without anything warning you. They are an escape hatch that breaks the system. Nothing stops you from using 
sky-400
 and 
blue-400
 in the same project. Consistency still depends on your discipline, not on the framework. The system helps you, but it does not save you from yourself.

It is not a good gateway to learning CSS

Tailwind is easy to use if you already master styling. But for those with little CSS experience, it creates a false sense of learning. It conveys that it is a minimalist way of writing CSS, taking away the effort of keeping your code tidy. Using so many pre-built classes hinders a developer's ability to truly master CSS. The time you save naming classes you lose learning to use the framework in the most efficient way.

On the other hand, if you go deep into Tailwind, you drift away from learning the fundamentals of the platform. 
pt-4
 forces you to mentally translate to 
padding-top: 1rem
. You gain fluency in the abstraction, not in CSS. To my students and coworkers I recommend learning CSS before Tailwind. And if you are already an experienced developer, you might not even need the framework.

It is hard to read

Let me show you a button with an indigo background, white text, semibold font, rounded corners, hover, and focus.

First in vanilla CSS. I will take the liberty of using variables for colors and spacing, and nesting for hover and focus, something compatible today with every browser.

:root {
  --color-white: #fff;
  --color-black: #000;
  --color-indigo: #4f46e5;
  --color-indigo-hover: #4338ca;
  --gap-s: 0.5rem;
  --gap-m: 1rem;
}

.button {
    padding: var(--gap-s) var(--gap-m);
    background-color: var(--color-indigo);
    color: var(--color-white);
    font-weight: 700;
    border-radius: var(--gap-s);
    &:hover, &:focus {
        background-color: var(--color-indigo-hover);
    }
}

Now in Tailwind CSS using 
@apply
.

.button {
    @apply py-2 px-4 bg-indigo-500 text-white font-semibold rounded-lg hover:bg-indigo-700 focus:bg-indigo-700;
}

Vanilla CSS is self-explanatory, whereas with Tailwind you have to check the documentation. What color is 
bg-indigo-500
? How round is 
rounded-lg
? Is 
bg-indigo-700
 darker than 
bg-indigo-500
? The first snippet is easier to maintain, the learning curve for a new developer is low, and the CSS tends to be modular. You do put in more effort with vanilla CSS, yes, but only at the start. Afterward you have full control of variables, cascade, and naming.

A curious detail. The example above uses 
@apply
, and Adam Wathan himself has admitted that 
@apply
 "basically only exists to trick people"
 and that 
if he started Tailwind from scratch he would not include it
. In other words, the route you use to recover the readability of a normal class contradicts Tailwind's philosophy. And if you do not use 
@apply
, then you swallow the class soup in your HTML.

The HTML lies to you about priority

You may have heard that Tailwind "ignores the cascade". That is an imprecise way to put it, because the real problem is more subtle and interesting.

Being able to control which selector wins based on its position in the stylesheet is fundamental to any architecture. A typical mistake among inexperienced web designers is to believe that the order of the classes in the HTML determines which one wins. It does not. Look at this code.

<p class="color-red color-green">I am some text</p>

What color is it? You do not know. You need to see the CSS cascade.

.color-green {
    color: green;
}

.color-red {
    color: red;
}

Now yes, it is red, because 
.color-red
 is defined later. So far, normal CSS.

The problem with Tailwind is that you cannot resolve this ambiguity even by reordering your classes. Watch.

<p class="text-red-500 text-green-500">I am some text</p>

You might think green wins, since it comes last in the attribute. Well, no, you get red. What wins is decided by the order in which Tailwind generates those classes in the final stylesheet, not the order in which you write them in the HTML. The markup lies to you. Reading the HTML you cannot know the result. And you do not fix it by changing the order of the classes, because that order is controlled by the compiler. You are left with 
!important
 or with avoiding conflicting utilities. This is what is called a leaky abstraction. It promises you simplicity and forces you to know how it works underneath. Another classic case, 
class="mt-4 mt-0"
 does not do what its order suggests.

Working with Dev Tools is not comfortable

When you build components with tons of classes, checking in the inspector which styles apply becomes slow. You have to scroll looking for what wins and what gets overridden. With vanilla CSS you quickly see which styles are there and in what order, and an error is easier to locate. It is true that editor extensions ease this at writing time, but in the browser, debugging in production, the class soup is still there.

Conclusion

What if you just use modern CSS?

Here is, for me, the truly fresh debate. It is no longer "utilities versus CSS by hand". It is "native modern CSS versus a utility layer on top".

Look at what the platform gives you today, without installing anything:

Cascade layers (
@layer
) to order priority without fighting specificity.

Native nesting, now without a preprocessor.

Custom properties (CSS variables) for your tokens.

:has()
, the parent selector we had been asking for over twenty years.

Container queries for per-component responsiveness.

color-mix()
 to derive colors.

And you know what the ironic part is? That Tailwind is built right on top of those same features. It uses native cascade layers, 
@property
, container queries, and OKLCH colors. Which gives ammunition to the most uncomfortable argument. If the platform already brings all that, how much of Tailwind is still essential?

The counterpart is clear. Native CSS gives you the features, but it does not give you the system of constraints, nor the style kept next to the markup (colocation), nor autocomplete. On small or server-rendered projects, modern CSS on its own is a great option. On a large product built with components and with many people touching it, Tailwind still has arguments. There is no universal winner, there is a context.

But let us put things in perspective. It is not a bad tool. It is a tool with a cost you pay in the future, and one that nowadays also competes with a native CSS far more capable than a few years ago. Before choosing it, learn CSS. Then decide with knowledge. The initial effort you save today, you may pay back with interest tomorrow. Or maybe not. Now, at least, you have both sides to decide for yourself.

Sources

CSS Utility Classes and "Separation of Concerns"
, Adam Wathan (the foundational text of the defense: the direction of the dependency).

Open-sourcing our progress on Tailwind CSS v4.0
, official Tailwind blog (new engine, CSS-first config with 
@theme
, and the performance figures).

Why I Don't Like Tailwind CSS
, Aleksandr Hovhannisyan.

Disadvantages of Tailwind CSS
, Script Raccoon.

You have to learn dozens of classes

It breaks the separation between structure and design

Its names are not consistent

The design system is not enforced as much as it seems

It is not a good gateway to learning CSS

It is hard to read

The HTML lies to you about priority

Working with Dev Tools is not comfortable

Conclusion

Sources

This work is under a 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International license.

Do you want to read what I never publish?

	I send what does not fit in the articles: full configurations, messy notes and whatever I am testing right now. No spam, no sales funnels.

	Send an email to 
newsletter@andros.dev
 with the subject 
SUBSCRIBE
 and you are in.

Subscribe by email

To unsubscribe, send 
UNSUBSCRIBE
 to the same address.

Will you buy me a coffee?

This is how I keep writing without ads or paywalls.

Sure, it's on me!

Comments

Leave a comment

There are no comments yet.

		1 mention from another site

news.ycombinator.com

August 2, 2026
