I've always had a fascination with simpler and low power computing. This lead me to run Photoshop on a 60 pence computer chip and it amazes me that this is possible.

Photo: A monochrome screen showing Adobe photoshop with a simple drawing running on an emulated Apple Macintosh

OK; this is hardly editing a full colour, highly detailed photograph but at least my "self portrait" will obviously set the illustration world on fire.

This was done by emulating an old Apple Mac on a Raspberry Pi RP2350 chip, which can be purchased for around 
60p
. Add the various extra parts needed and say roughly that a mid 1990s equivalent computer can be built today for a few pounds in one-off quantities. Call it the price of coffee and a cake in a European café today.

Adjusted for inflation, a roughly equivalent Macintosh SE to the one being emulated would cost £9554 today. (I found the pricing from a review in this 
1989 Personal Computer World
 magazine online and used the 
Bank of England inflation calculator
 to convert the £3495 selling price.)

Whichever way you estimate: Computers are vastly cheaper nowadays and this computer is much cheaper than a modern PC.

The same emulated Mac can run other software - e.g. the 
WordPerfect
 word processor which was popular at the time. I found this surprisingly pleasant to type and concentrate with: It had an uncluttered interface and was distraction free when compared to my modern Macbook with its notifications and busy displays.

Photo: WordPerfect 1.0 on an emulated Apple Macintosh

Sometimes experimenting with things can spark my imagination and create new ideas. Simple and low power computers appeal to me, so it's interesting to ask "what is the minimal viable modern computer". A 60p chip is definitely not the cheapest possible, but it is certainly has an impressive "computing power to price" ratio.

Assume this is equivalent to a mid 1990s computer (it has two 150MHz processors, and easily adds 4Mb RAM and gigabytes of storage) . This was time when people made presentations, wrote documents, ran spreadsheets, sent emails and browsed (an admittedly simpler) web - not dissimilar to a lot of our computer use today.

This provokes questions: How to provide computing for those who need to or want to spend their resources elsewhere? What could a super thin, super lightweight laptop look like? Perhaps it could have an e-paper screen to be calm on the eyes. Could it be solar powered? Could it have a calmer, less cluttered and less distracting interface than modern operating systems but still provide similar functionality? Could it be long lasting with reliable software and not have to be thrown into landfill every few years? Does this have enough processing power and quality to become part of a personal music playing or streaming system? Can this help reduce the addictiveness of modern devices and stop "doom-scrolling"?

The relative simplicity of this chip compared to more powerful ones (and the software limitations this would imply) means that the whole computer is (with effort by the right people) relatively understandable, and everything is documented, and the power consumption is lower.

If I had this computer as my phone or laptop what would I miss? If I could read web pages and write and listen to music I think this would do a lot of what I want. I'd want some kind of messaging and probably maps. I think this can probably play music. It could display maps but maybe in a simpler "A to Z atlas" style of flipping between pages. But maybe this trade-off vs power use could be useful in remote places with no smartphone charging. Maybe cycle tourists would appreciate such a thing.

It could (slowly) take and view grainy pictures, but videos and good pictures would be difficult. Saving videos to watch later on a display at home is probably a healthier way of consuming them than distracting myself with them, and maybe carrying a separate digital camera wouldn't be a sacrifice.

The modern web is sadly too complex to be viewable on such a device, but a bridging solution would be to have conversion software running on larger computers. A browser for something like 
Gemini
 would be possible. We could still have a WiFi chip on this, but the complexity of modern 4G and 5G mobile networks could be a challenge. Adafruit has 
An IRC messaging client
 demonstration running on this chip.

Maybe I'm being naive and nostalgic for a past that never existed. But I think it is important to think of the trade-offs we make with modern computers and maybe playing with some of these things can help us make computers which are kinder, as 
discussed by James in this blog post
 after our discussion.
There is overlap here with some of the  
Solarpunk
 and 
Permacomputing
 communities. Having privacy respecting solar powered computers that people can tinker and mold to their own needs feels to me like an exciting, positive future. 

It's interesting to imagine an alternative world where these modern chips had arrived much earlier in time, bringing un-imaginable (for then) amounts of computing power and memory for little money. How would computers have evolved and what would they look like today?

Some technical notes for anyone interested in doing this:

The same hardware used for my 
Commodore PET emulator
 can be used to run the 
pico-mac
 emulator with VGA output. I think it would need more RAM to run WordPerfect and Photoshop so would need the addition of a RAM chip.

This software can run on a Pi Pico2 with an 
DVI sock
 HDMI connector adapter and a USB adapter and an SD card adapter but I didn't do this - I would still need to order and solder the parts and the extra memory. 
I found some open source designs which integrate all the parts into a single board:

ZeroFrank
 - A tiny board

The 
Pico Computer 3
 and 
PicoMiteHDMIUSB
 by Peter Mather.

The 
Olimex RP2350pc
.

I opted for the 
Adafruit Fruit Jam
 which can be bought ready assembled. (An advantage for me given my questionable soldering skills).

The pros:

The Fruitjam comes with WiFi and infra-red remote control and a ready to use 
Circuit Python
 software image which uses the HDMI and keyboard as a terminal. I have an idea for another project which will require WiFi and infra-red.

The Fruitjam has a ready made Mac emulator and a very cute 
3D printed case
.

The cons:

The Fruitjam has a different circuit layout to the others. It uses different GPIO pins for the SDcard and uses the PIO to drive the USB ports. This means that software built for the other boards will not run without work. I'd like to try the Fuzix operating system and BBC Micro emulators but will have to work out how to add PIO USB support.

What did I do?

I didn't do much with the FruitJam other than follow the 
instructions
 but I customised the image to add the software:

I installed the 
4096k-1280x720-psram-oc
 image onto the board.

I downloaded the 
SD card image
.

I loaded this into the 
Mini vMac
 emulator.

I found an image disk with lots of software on the 
Macintosh repository
 and used the 'unar' tool to extract the compressed SIT file ("brew install unar" to install the tool onto my Mac).

From within the emulator I copied the software across to the main disk, and then closed the emulator.

I FAT formatted my SD card and copied the emulator image file onto it and renamed it to "umac0w.img". I then had to use my Linux computer to remove the other files added by my Mac, which upset the emulator (Initially it was stuck in a loop and not booting - this was the cause).

What else can it do?

Adafruit have put together a collection of software demos for the FruitJam - such as:

A fediverse photo viewer

A sampling music keyboard

Playing DOOM

A Commodore 64 emulator

An 80286 PC

The Frank board has:

A BBC micro emulator

A Windows 95 styled operating system

An 80386 PC emulator

The Pico computer has:

A simple UNIX -  
FUZIX port
 (
Youtube video
)

A 
BASIC language interpreter
 with in-built graphics and text editor

Looking at the circuit diagrams, I think software between the Frank board, the Pico computer and the Olimex RP2350pc should be interchangeable.

Some interesting software to port

I 
wrote about
 blogging using an old terminal and so think it could be interesting to make another, using the similar terminal  
Blaze VT420 terminal emulator
.

Some older self contained systems of the 1980s could run on this - for example 
Oberon
 (This 
RISC-V port
 could be a starting point). I enjoy the simplicity of the Oberon system and enjoyed the 
book
.

Maybe porting 
Smalltalk
 could allow a 
Dynabook
 as described by Alan Kay in the paper "
A Personal Computer for Children of All Ages
".

A small emacs/lisp type system - 
zepl
 is a editor with lisp extension language in 2744 lines of code.

The 
Plan9 operating system
 could probably run on this hardware.

The 
os8088
 project tries to build a simple, old-Mac-like user interface for an 8086 computer.

Running an 
Psion emulator
 could also be a possibility.

The Viewpoints Research Institute STEPS Project tried to simplify computing in 2012. 
Their report
 has some interesting ideas and outcomes.
