I stopped tracking my time. Now I can't focus.
I'm getting more done than ever, and I've never felt more scattered.
Joe Masilotti
Jun 11, 2026
1
Share
One of the most freeing things I’ve ever done in my business is to stop tracking time.
I used to religiously track where I spent my time when on my computer. Client work in one bucket, personal branding in another, and side projects/adventures in a third. Inside of those, I would then categorize 
which
 engagement/project I was working on.
At the end of the year, it was awesome! I had this huge breakdown of where all of my time went. I could even cross-reference it against what each thing made money-wise and figure out my effective billable rate. Which sometimes was super empowering. But for side projects? Super depressing. :P
I’ve launched more than a handful of “things” that made no money at all. And spent a 
ton
 of time working on them.
As time went on, I found myself taking a few seconds to pick which project to bill time to. “Ok, let’s go build this thing!” “Oh, let me track time first.” “Hmm, is this personal branding? Marketing? A side project that I haven’t solidified yet?”
That additional context switch (on top of the actual one) could often kill the idea I had in my head. Before I even started working, I all of a sudden had an admin task to take care of.
And sure, I could do it after the fact. So I started just clicking “start” without assigning a project in my time tracker. Which worked pretty well! But then I would forget entirely. Or even worse, switch tasks and now had to make 
two
 decisions (old work and new work).
I eventually realized that it was costing me more time and, more importantly, 
mental energy
, to keep this up than the payoff was worth.
So in 2026, I completely stopped tracking my time. And it has been the most freeing thing I’ve ever done for my business.
When an idea sparks, I just... do it. When I want to context switch, well, I context switch!
And with AI-assisted development? It means I can bounce around like all freaking day working on whatever I want without any repercussions!
Except… not exactly.
Now I’m bouncing around all the freaking time. Why work on one thing when I could work 
on ten things
?! Why limit my creativity to a single project that doesn’t make money when I could be building 
twenty things that don’t make money
?!
And so on and so on.
Turns out, the friction I felt around picking 
one thing
 may have actually been beneficial. Perhaps it was actually 
helping me stay focused
. Even if it cost just a bit of extra time before I sat down and worked.
I’m not sure if AI 
caused
 this or just threw lighter fluid on an existing fire. But whatever it is… damn is my brain fragmented.
I feel like I’m getting so much done. But also so mentally exhausted at the end of the day.
I also really want to work… 
more
? It’s quite a feeling. And maybe all this is just my ADHD getting dopamine hit after dopamine hit when I’m working with Claude.
Or maybe this is just the new way of working?
1
Share
