In Australia, a Home Battery Boom Has Helped Cut Wholesale Power Prices in Half

NSW Climate and Energy Action

A little more than one year ago, Australia rolled out a program to heavily subsidize home batteries, part of a larger effort to make use of the huge volumes of solar energy that were going to waste. On Friday, officials announced that more than 500,000 batteries had been installed under the plan, helping to slash wholesale power prices roughly in half.
Energy Minister Chris Bowen said that Australia now has more home batteries than the United States, which has a population 12 times larger. “This is a story of global significance that Australian households have achieved,” Bowen said in a 
press conference
.
Australia is the 
world leader
 in rooftop solar, with panels installed on more than one in three households, the highest rate of adoption globally. But abundant solar power has created a new dilemma as the grid faces a surge of electricity from connected rooftop arrays. Power prices 
plunge
. Centralized power plants are forced offline, threatening grid 
stability
. And much of that solar power 
goes to waste
.
The government has moved to make use of this surplus solar energy, including by offering 
free power
 in the early afternoon to homeowners in Queensland, New South Wales, and South Australia, regardless of whether they have solar panels on their roof or not. The goal is to spur more consumers to run appliances or charge electric vehicles during this window.
With its home battery 
subsidy program
, launched in July 2025, the government is aiming to help households use more solar energy by providing a 30 percent discount on residential battery systems connected to solar arrays.
The subsidy program has spurred a boom in installations. Australia is on track to more than double its home battery capacity this year, 
Bloomberg 
reports
. The program has also been a boon to the grid. By relying on batteries in the early evening, when demand peaks, homeowners are reducing the need for utilities to fire up additional power plants during those hours, which is helping to lower costs for other ratepayers, officials say.
The subsidy program has been “the major factor in the wholesale price of energy falling in Australia by 47 percent in the last 12 months,” Bowen said. “Australia is one of the very, very few countries in the world which is reducing wholesale prices in the midst of a global energy crisis.”
ALSO ON YALE E360
A Home Battery Revolution Is Reshaping the Power Grid

Related Articles

Beyond Lithium: New Battery Tech Starts to Break Through

                        By 
 Nicola Jones

A Home Battery Revolution Is Reshaping the Power Grid

                        By 
 Paul Hockenos

In East Africa, a Controversial Oil Project Is Poised for Production

                        By 
 Fred Pearce

More From E360

E360 FILM CONTEST

A Bicycle Journey Across Brazil to Find a Vanishing Savanna

OPINION

For America’s Rarest Wildlife, Survival May Hinge on a Single Word

E360 Film Contest

Who Gets to Decide the Fate of a Pristine Alaskan Rainforest?

Biodiversity

‘Wastelands’ No More: India Charts a Future for Its Grasslands

Climate

After Decades of Drought, Water Is Rising in the African Sahel

Cities

In Steel Country, the Fight for Clean Air Faces New Obstacles

Solutions

Beyond Lithium: New Battery Tech Starts to Break Through

INTERVIEW

What Do We Actually Know About the Microplastics Inside Us?

Energy

A Home Battery Revolution Is Reshaping the Power Grid

Energy

In East Africa, a Controversial Oil Project Is Poised for Production

Climate

A Missing Piece in Climate Models: Nature’s Own Emissions

INTERVIEW

An EPA Researcher Details the Agency’s Assault on Science
