Infracost
Shift FinOps Left: Proactively Find & Fix Cloud Cost Issues
Marketing Lead
$160K - $220K
•
US / CA / Remote (US; CA)
Job type
Full-time
Role
Marketing
Experience
6+ years
Visa
US citizen/visa only
Connect directly with founders of the best YC-funded startups.
Apply to role ›
Ali Khajeh-Hosseini
Founder
Ali Khajeh-Hosseini
Founder
About the role
As Marketing Lead at Infracost, you will develop and execute marketing strategies to drive customer acquisition and brand awareness, create and maintain the marketing calendar, own messaging, build and manage marketing content including website copy, blog posts, case studies etc.

You’ll work directly with our CEO and co-founder, Hassan. We love data driven decisions, and sometimes to get real data we have to make bets. We love a self-starter mentality, in fact it is one of our key cultural pillars (JEDI), and we see it working across the company every day. You’ll also be working with everyone else on the team - from engineering to product to sales. You’ll pull people in to do demos, webinars, write content, and attend events (our big one is FinOps X in San Diego every year).

If you love wearing multiple hats (we are a startup), balance strategic direction with hands-on execution, and contribute ideas, you will love it here! We also love experimenting, so let’s put some ideas to the test and see how well they work.

Finally, as we grow, we will need to build the team around you. Excited to meet you 🙂

Timezones

This position must be based in US and Canada timezones and will work closely with our founders on the West Coast. We are fully remote and have our all-company weekly meetings at 10am Eastern / 7am Pacific.

What you’ll be doing

Managing the end to end of our marketing function

Looking after, and iterating on the Marketing funnel and KPI dashboard

Owning our marketing strategy, and driving customer acquisition

Creating and owning the marketing calendar

Working across the company to create collateral, videos, bringing together events

Be up for building a small and powerful team once settled in

In the first 30/60/90 days…

Let’s hit the ground running. In the first 30 days, we will onboard you to Infracost, and show you our current marketing funnels, numbers, KPIs etc. You will also have meetings across the company, to get a better picture of everything that is going on. Then, let’s get your first campaign started (brief written, assets in progress).

By 60 days, you'll have run your first campaign end-to-end, and we'll be reviewing results together to inform the next quarter's plan. **We will look at what is working and what isn’t, and let’s iterate together.

By 90 days, you are rocking and rolling. We are executing across the board, and we are planning our next big steps.

What we are looking for

5+ years of B2B marketing experience, ideally in SaaS or developer tools

Proven ability to own and drive pipeline as a solo marketer and small team

Strong project management experience running email campaigns, GTM campaigns, sales enablement

Bias toward action; you'd rather ship something imperfect and iterate than wait for perfect

Comfortable marketing to technical audiences — you don't need to be an engineer, but you need to earn their respect

Strong writer who can produce clear, credible copy across formats (website, email, long-form, social)

Hands-on with marketing tools. We currently use Close as our CRM (easy to learn), CommonRoom, Google Analytics, Mailchimp etc.

Experience with FinOps, developer tools, DevOps, or cloud infrastructure is a strong plus

This might not be a good fit if

You’ve never worked at a startup before

You don’t like the AI disruption that is happening to marketing

Your preferred stance is ‘perfect’ over ‘good’

You are not up for ambitious and tight deadlines

What we value

Ustomer, not customer
: It is all about seeing 
us
 and the customer as one. We like to be a part of the user’s team, and help them however we can. If the user is not successful, then we will not be either so we try to walk in their shoes. It's more than work - we build relationships and community with users and customers.

Open is our core
: Put yourself out there. Show your learning. Transparency builds confidence. Encourage sharing the good and the bad. The best decisions are made when everyone has access to all the data. Be straightforward and kind, feedback is about your work not your person.

Let's JEDI
: Let’s Just Effing Do It! Own it and move fast. A good plan fiercely executed now is better than a perfect plan later. We ask for help and unblock each other. The main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing.

Benefits

Fully remote team

Two meetups a year - we’ve been to Croatia, Barcelona, Berlin, San Diego, and Orlando

Employee-friendly equity terms, including a 
10 year exercise window

401k matching (US)

Health, dental, and vision insurance (US)

31 days paid leave per year (includes national holidays)

12 weeks paid parental leave

About the interview

25 minute initial chat

55 minute chat with Hassan (CEO and co-founder)

55 minute chat with Andre (our content marketing contractor) and Robby (our sales lead)

30 minute chat with Ali and Alistair (co-founders)

Reference checks and let’s get you the offer!

About 
Infracost
$600B is spent on cloud each year, but no one knows the cost until it's too late. We’re changing that.

Since launching Infracost in 2021, we’ve been pulled by FinOps practitioners and Platform engineers who all want to 
Shift FinOps Left
. We enable them to proactively find and fix cloud cost issues before they hit production. We plug directly into developer workflows (like GitHub and Azure Repos), show cost impact in pull requests, enforce tagging and FinOps best practices. We also integrate directly into AI code generation tools (like Claude and Copilot), to ensure that the code generated from the start is efficient and economical.

We're backed by Sequoia, Pruven Capital, Y Combinator, and trusted by Fortune 500 enterprises. You'll join a small, experienced, and supportive team that's shipping fast, solving real infrastructure problems, and having fun while doing it.

Infracost
Founded:
2020
Batch:
W21
Team Size:
20
Status:
Active
Founders
Ali Khajeh-Hosseini
Founder
Ali Khajeh-Hosseini
Founder
Hassan Khajeh-Hosseini
Founder
Hassan Khajeh-Hosseini
Founder
Alistair Scott
Founder
Alistair Scott
Founder
