Hot Topics

Strait of Hormuz crisis

Red Sea Risk

Ukraine Crisis

Decarbonisation

Sanctions

Digitalisation

Sectors

Containers

Dry Bulk

Sustainability

Tankers & Gas

Ports & Logistics

Technology & Innovation

Crew Welfare

Finance

Insurance

Law & Regulation

Safety

Piracy & Security

Regulars

Daily Briefing

Special Reports

Podcasts & Video

The View

The Week in Charts

The Week in Newbuildings

Latest Market Outlook

Long Reads

One Hundred People 2025

One Hundred People 2025 - Top 10s

One Hundred Container Ports 2025

One Hundred People 2024

One Hundred People 2024 - Top 10s

Archive: One Hundred People

Archive: One Hundred Ports

Archive: Lloyd's List Magazine

Archive: Future Of Shipping

Archive: Shipping’s Global Boardroom

Data Tools

Markets Data

Containers Data Hub

Casualties

Directories

Marketing Solutions

Editorial Calendar

Advertising & Sponsorship

Sponsored Content

Classified

Webinars

More

Meet the Team

Editorial Board

RSS Feeds

User Guide

Email

Print

                Bookmark

Share

Tags:

Strait of Hormuz crisis

Tankers and Gas

Risk and Compliance

Iran imposes mandatory insurance on ships transiting Strait of Hormuz, with fees likely to follow

Iran’s Persian Gulf Strait Authority is imposing mandatory, Iran‑approved insurance for all ships using the Strait of Hormuz — free for 60 days, but with fees likely afterward

The move challenges a US-Iran agreement guaranteeing toll‑free passage

Iran demands vessels use its preferred northern route, with threats of penalties for non‑compliance

Shipowners, MEG states and IMO warn the policy could destabilise transit norms, while US officials emphasise keeping the strait open as negotiations continue on a long‑term framework

19 Jun 2026

News

Richard Meade

@Lloydslisted

[email protected]

Iran has asserted its control over the Strait of Hormuz, insisting that vessels comply with new terms and conditions to transit, including mandatory Iranian insurance for all vessels

IRAN has introduced mandatory insurance for all vessels transiting the Strait of Hormuz, requiring shipowners to obtain coverage approved — and initially provided free — by Tehran’s newly created Persian Gulf Strait Authority.

The move, detailed in a PGSA terms‑and‑conditions document seen by Lloyd’s List, effectively sidesteps a new US-Iran Memorandum of Understanding that guarantees “safe passage of commercial vessels with no charge” for 60 days. 

Iran’s insurance requirement carries no fee during that period, but Tehran has confirmed that charges may be imposed once the 60‑day window closes.

“This insurance is provided free of charge to the vessel owner, with all expenses covered by the Islamic Republic of Iran,” the document states. 

“The PGSA reserves the right to introduce insurance fees in the future… Owners will then be required to purchase and renew coverage accordingly.”

The terms, circulated across the industry on Friday and submitted to the 
International Maritime Organization
, mark Iran’s clearest attempt yet to assert control over transit conditions in one of the world’s most critical chokepoints.

Despite a growing number of vessels now using a US‑protected southern corridor near the Oman coast, Iran insists that “passage is permitted only via the designated route near Larak Island”, referring to its preferred northern channel.

Enforce penalties for non‑compliance 

“Any deviation… is strictly prohibited and will be treated as a violation,” the PGSA warns.

The authority says it is now the sole body responsible for processing transit applications and issuing permits, adding that it may “enforce penalties, revoke passage permissions, or take further legal action” for non‑compliance. 

Lloyd’s List has requested comment from the PGSA.

Initial responses from several tanker owners using the southern route suggest that few believe the Iranian terms will provide a sustainable framework for vessels transits.

“It’s madness. This whole situation is a mess,” said one major tanker owner with ships currently exiting the strait.

The US-Iran MOU, signed Wednesday, guarantees toll‑free passage for 60 days and outlines a plan for Iran and Oman — in consultation with other Middle East Gulf states — to negotiate a longer‑term framework for administering the strait.

Shipping companies, MEG allies, and oil majors have repeatedly warned that any transit fees in the Strait of Hormuz are unacceptable. IMO secretary‑general Arsenio Dominguez, who is working with Iran and Oman on a mechanism consistent with international law, has cautioned that allowing such charges would set a dangerous precedent for other strategic waterways. He confirmed receipt of the PGSA document and said discussions are ongoing.

US President Donald Trump said Tuesday that Hormuz “will be toll free during the first 60 days and thereafter”. Asked Thursday whether Washington would intervene to prevent future fees, vice-president JD Vance reiterated that the US believes “international waterways should be free of tolls”, but stressed that keeping the strait open is the overriding priority.

“The MOU contemplates that the Omanis, the Iranians, and the Gulf coast coalition together will figure out a proper security framework for the straits in the future,” Vance said, adding that the goal is to ensure the waterway is never again used as a chokepoint for the global economy.

Iran on Friday fired warning shots at ships in the strait. A radio broadcast to ships stated: “Given that the withdrawal of Israel from Lebanon, the complete lifting of the naval blockade, and the departure of American terrorist forces . . . are core conditions for an agreement between Iran and the United States, the Strait of Hormuz will remain closed until these two conditions are met. 

“All vessels are hereby instructed to avoid approaching the Strait of Hormuz for their own safety and security. Any vessel that disregards this order will be targeted.”

Israel and Hizbollah reportedly agreed to a ceasefire that was scheduled to begin on Friday afternoon. Since that agreement was reached no further update from Iran on the Strait of Homruz has been reported.

Table

View full table

Advertisement

Related Content

                    Shadow fleet tanker tonnage to fall if sanctions are lifted on Iranian crude

19 Jun 2026

                    The Daily View: Hormuz open, but little is certain

19 Jun 2026

Advertisement

Topics

                    Topic

                            Strait of Hormuz crisis

                    Markets

                            Tankers and Gas

                            Risk and Compliance

                    Sectors

                            Insurance

                    Regulars

                            Market Insight

			VLCC

                    Related Companies

International Maritime Organization

        See All

        See Less

Advertisement

Email

Print

                Bookmark

Share

Tags:

Strait of Hormuz crisis

Tankers and Gas

Risk and Compliance

You must sign in to use this functionality

Sign In

Authentication.SignIn.HeadSignInHeader

Sign In

            LL1157571

                Ask The Analyst

Please Note:
 You can also Click below Link for Ask the Analyst

Ask The Analyst

Your question has been successfully sent to the email address below and we will get back as soon as possible.  
my@email.address
.

                    All fields are required.

		LL1157571

			Email Article

All set! This article has been sent to 
my@email.address
.

				All fields are required. For multiple recipients, separate email addresses with a semicolon.

Please Note:
 Only individuals with an active subscription will be able to access the full article. All other readers will be directed to the abstract and would need to subscribe.
