Home
 
/
 
Latest
 
/
 
Latest news
 
/
 
Going, going, gone? Is this the end of the once-mighty GoPro?

The GoPro HERO was made to compete with smaller competitor cameras. Photo: Isabella Ruffatti.

While 
GoPro
 
action cameras
 are built to withstand shock, the brand itself is looking distinctly shaky right now. Latest reports[
1
] are that 
founder Nicholas Woodman is propping the company up by extending it a loan of his own money to the tune of $20 million
, at an annual interest rate of 6.5%, while a buyer is desperately sought. It’s believed 
GoPro may not survive the year without a new owner or fresh injection of cash
, with Woodman’s intervention acting as a stopgap rather than bail-out per se.

This follows May’s announcement that 
the action camera specialist had experienced a sizeable 26% year-on-year revenue drop
 for the first quarter of 2026, with the amount of camera units sold (313,000) down 29%. That same month, the company put out a statement saying it had engaged a financial adviser to ‘review strategic alternatives’, a process founder and CEO Woodman says he strongly supports. While its announcement of a pro grade action camera trio – the 
Mission 1, Pro and Pro ILS
 – was an ambitious step, such innovation may prove too little, too late.

As additional background, 
GoPro has also recently been exploring business opportunities in aerospace and defence
, two markets potentially worth $ billions. Don’t forget 
its cameras played a leading role in providing images from this year’s Artemis II NASA mission
, too.

However, simultaneously, GoPro has faced strong competition from rival 
Insta360
, against whom it recently lost a patent battle.

Of course, 
any potential buyer would still inherit the issues and challenges that GoPro currently faces
 – which aren’t magically going away – as well as needing to pay the balance and interest on the company’s already mounting debts. Restructuring is already underway to cut 23% of its global staff by the end of 2026, but 
the latest manoeuvring suggests we may see a takeover before then
.

Related reading:

Is GoPro’s Mission 1 series too little, too late, as whispers circulate of the company being sold?

Best action camera to buy: the top models from GoPro, DJI, Insta360 and more

GoPro has serious doubts about its ability to operate as a business

Follow AP on 
Facebook
, 
Instagram
, 
YouTube
, 
TikTok
 
and 
Irys
. 

Share on 
X (Twitter)

Share on 
Facebook

Share on 
Pinterest

Share on 
LinkedIn

Gavin Stoker

About

Former Deputy Editor of AP's one-time sister title What Digital Camera before going full time freelance in 2004, Gavin Stoker currently publishes and edits the UK's longest running photo industry magazine British Photographic Industry News, or BPI News for short. Having been writing about and reviewing all things photographic for the best part of 25 years, Gavin has witnessed the seismic change from film photography to digital and back again first hand. Thus he is perfectly placed to provide a perspective on anything new with the knowledge of what's come before.
