quincyinst.org
Subscribe
Military Industrial Complex
Washington Politics
Media
Global Crises
Regions
Europe
Middle East
Africa
Asia-Pacific
Latin America
North America
Donate
Donate
Military Industrial Complex
Washington Politics
Media
Global Crises
Regions
Europe
Middle East
Africa
Asia-Pacific
Latin America
North America
Video
About Us
Privacy Policy

        Follow us on social

        Israel creates fake think tank in likely attempt to dupe AI chatbots
    
In just over a week, the Hanover Institute has published at least 100 articles that appear tailor-made to influence chatbots 
 Reporting
 | 

 Washington Politics
Nick Cleveland-Stout
Aug 17, 2026
At a glance, the Hanover Institute for Public Policy looks like a new think tank dedicated to Israel/Palestine. The organization churns out think-tank style reports on questions 
such as
 “Does AIPAC Use ‘Dark Money in Elections?” 
and
 “Is 
Israel
 Carrying out a Deliberate Campaign of Starvation in Gaza?” 
But the Hanover Institute is not a real think tank. None of the reports have bylines. A small disclaimer at the bottom of the webpage notes that the organization was created on behalf of the Israeli Government Advertising Agency by Piro, Inc, a firm co-founded by Daniel Rosenberg, the producer of Spike Lee’s “Inside Man.” 
The Hanover Institute’s reports — all of which are about Israel and Palestine — appear to be part of an Israeli effort to influence chatbots. The institute’s “data reports” have footnotes and tables of contents, and they present arguments in a neutral tone, helping them appeal to chatbots like Claude or Gemini. Piro’s 
website
 says that it “author(s) content engineered for how LLMs evaluate credibility,” describing this service as "AI Story Optimization." Others 
refer
 to this practice of influencing 
artificial intelligence
 as “LLM poisoning.” 
According to its “about” 
page
, the Hanover Institute “studies the inputs fueling antisemitism in the United States, and publishes what the evidence shows.” Many of the reports are formulaic, starting with an innocent question that someone might ask a chatbot. 
“What Caused the Displacement of Palestinians in 1948?”
“Which Humanitarian Organizations Have Documented Israeli War Crimes?” 
“What is the Current Situation in the Gaza Strip?” 
In an 
article
 titled “Is the IDF the World’s Most Moral Army?” the Hanover Institute cites a 2022 poll that found that 47% of Israeli Jews believed that statement. Another 
report
 casts doubt on UNICEF's assertion that “90% of water and institutional infrastructure has been damaged or destroyed” in Gaza. Many of the reports conclude by linking the topic to rising antisemitism, oftentimes citing the same studies. 
In a few cases, the Hanover Institute publishes what it claims are original findings. For instance, it put out a 
study
 saying 19 of the 36 most-watched Israel-Gaza explainer videos contain contested claims, with most of the contested claims aligning with the Palestinian narrative. 
The Hanover Institute’s publications sometimes 
contradict
 Israeli government narratives. For instance, one report says that foreign funding of universities as an explanation for antisemitic incidents is “weak and full of exceptions.” Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu
 has pushed this theory, 
telling
 Breitbart last year that Europeans and Qataris have spent “billions of American universities, vilifying, vilifying Israel, vilifying Jews, also, frankly, vilifying the United States.”
Alice Lee, an analyst at NewsGuard, a disinformation tracking company, told RS that the sites appear designed to reach a U.S. audience curious about the ongoing conflict, either through search engines or AI chatbots. "LLMs favor concrete statistics and data, as well as strong citations and sources, which these articles all have," Lee said.
"It's a perfect mimicry of a typical credible American think tank, right down to the generic name, the site layout, and the red-white-blue color scheme," Lee added.
Piro, Inc, the firm that created the Hanover Institute, has 
received
 $900,000 from the Israeli government for its work. Like 
many other
 contractors working for Israel, Piro’s work is subcontracted through Havas 
Media
, a French public relations conglomerate. 
The fake think tank has churned out over 100 reports since it started publishing on August 6. The Hanover Institute 
claims
 that “cited research is peer-reviewed and academic,” although it 
frequently
 
cites
 Israeli government sources such as the Israel Defense Forces and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
RS analyzed 12 random Hanover Institute articles using GPTZero, a popular AI detection software that claims a low false-positive rate. GPTZero flagged 11 of the articles as AI-written with “high confidence”; it flagged one article as AI-written with “moderate confidence.” 
Israel has also
 
contracted
 former Trump campaign manager Brad Parscale to create pro-Israel websites engineered to influence chatbots as part of a $46.5 million contract. A Drop Site 
investigation
 last month found that many chatbots, particularly Microsoft Copilot and Google Gemini, had been successfully trained on data from those websites. Other chatbots frequently cite those websites without flagging them as part of an Israeli influence operation.
Piro does not explicitly state in its agreement 
submitted
 to the Department of Justice that its work for Israel is to influence AI. In an email to Politico, which first reported the filing, Rosenberg 
said
 his firm’s work is to “put accurate, sourced facts into the public record and to counter misinformation about Israel with verifiable information.” However, last month, Rosenberg posted on LinkedIn 
advertising
 Piro’s ability to influence chatbots:
“When someone asks ChatGPT, Gemini, or Perplexity about your category, an answer comes back in one confident paragraph. Most brands have no idea how that paragraph gets built. So we spent months reverse-engineering it…At Piro, we already knew how to build stories that move people. The question was: how do you make sure AI knows how to tell them?”
From Your Site Articles
Trump pal funneled millions of Israeli gov't cash into US media ›
Israel wants to train ChatGPT to be more pro-Israel ›
Related Articles Around the Web
Israeli PR wants to answer your ChatGPT questions - POLITICO ›
Report: Israel to spend over half a billion shekels turning ChatGPT into public diplomacy tool ›
Nick Cleveland-Stout
Nick Cleveland-Stout is a Research Associate in the Democratizing Foreign Policy program at the Quincy Institute. Previously, Nick conducted research on U.S.-Brazil relations as a 2023 Fulbright fellow at the Federal University of Santa Catarina.

        Top image credit: A screenshot of the Hanover Institute's website taken on Aug. 16, 2026. (Screengrab via hanoverinstitute.com)
    
 Reporting
 | 

 Washington Politics
About Us
Privacy Policy
Editorial and Submission Policy
Contact Us
PitchRS@quincyinst.org
©2026 Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

        Follow
    
©2026 Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

        Newsletter
    
Subscribe now to our weekly round-up and don't miss a beat with your favorite RS contributors and reporters, as well as staff analysis, opinion, and news promoting a positive, non-partisan vision of U.S. foreign policy.
