It's not about physical vs digital games, it's about ownership

    05 Jul, 2026

A few days ago, PlayStation announced that they'll stop producing disks for new games starting from January 2028, confirming what we already felt was going to happen: consoles are going fully digital, and the disk drive will cease to exist.

I've seen a lot of great discussions on the internet about this, but I can't help but feel like people are mad about the wrong thing, or completely misunderstand 
why
 this is an issue. They have the right idea, getting rid of disks is bad for everyone, but it's not about the disk and putting your games on the shelf... it's about Sony's attempt to completely kill ownership. People keep comparing this to PC getting rid of disk drives, but 
these two scenarios are not comparable at all
. I'll get to that later.

Ownership as in the ability to trade
The biggest thing about owning something is the ability to trade it with whoever you'd like. When I was younger, I used to 
constantly
 trade PS3 and PS4 games with my friends. Whether it was to loan them a copy of the Jak & Daxter trilogy or to sell a game to someone I know, passing around console games is practically tradition at this point.

But companies have 
always
 been vocal about how much they despise used games. How could someone possibly buy God of War for $20 from their friend instead of buying it for $40 from the store?! Every dime spent on used games is a dime lost for the company, right?!

The decision to kill disks isn't some kneejerk reaction to anything, it's something console owners have been slowly building up to for the last ~15 years. The entire reason Xbox One flopped so hard and became a laughing stock was, among other things, because they tried to kill the ability to re-sell the disk you paid for, and forcing your console to always be online to verify your games. Apparently, they were just too early to try this.

This 
also
 isn't specific to video games. It's something 
literally every industry
 has been obsessed with to maximize profits. If anything, video games were late compared to something like the music industry, where not owning your music has been the status quo for a while now!

And now that we're catching up, the concept of "giving a game to someone else" will cease to exist. The next generation of young games will just accept buying a digital game off the store as just how games work now. You'll be there explaining to the young'uns 
how it used to be
. How giving your favorite game to your best friend in school was 
the normal thing
 that they will never get to experience.

Sure
, you could argue that disks on modern consoles are practically just licenses these days, but you could still pass that ownership to someone else, without it being tied down to one specific account or console.

Ownership as in preservation
Just a few days before this announcement, people in the gaming space were celebrating 
the release of Omnidrive
, a mod for optical drives that lets you easily rip blu rays. That includes, you guessed it, PS3/PS4/PS5 games (though they're encrypted, but that's an issue that can be solved later).

Game preservation and emulation has always been another arch nemesis of game companies. They 
hate
 that you can ever play a game without being tied to their service or console, or even without taking permission from them! A lot of games have been de-listed for various reasons, many of them legal, but most have been straight up because the company never bothered to port them to modern consoles.

Most retro games 
would be lost media
 if not for people preserving them. This is a bigger deal than people give it credit for. Imagine living in a world where most games before 2014 have just been completely lost forever. SNES games I loved. PlayStation 2 classics. Even games that aren't that old! PlayStation announced that the PS3 and Vita stores will close next month, and there are 
tons
 of games there that you bet no company will want to preserve.

Last year, I 
bought a Playstation Vita
 and really enjoyed playing the games on it. You 
bet
 those games and ports will never be archived by Sony. Even PS3 games I 
loved
 like LittleBigPlanet and Asura's Wrath and Infamous have never been ported, and are on the verge of being lost forever if not for people spending time and effort grabbing them via dumping disks or hacked consoles!

My point:
 What happens if the PlayStation 6 comes out and has no disk drive and has incredibly strong security that makes dumping games impossible? Games could 
be lost for real this time.
 When PlayStation ever decides to make games streaming-only (more on that later), or decides to de-list a game, or decides to axe the PS6 servers? It would be a disaster. Imagine working on a game for many years then being told a couple of years later that it doesn't exist anymore. Not owning your game means they can never be preserved by the consumer.

Stop Killing Games
 is already fighting for consumer rights to keep games playable after being shut down, but nobody owning their games means that 
nobody
 can fight back to keep the games they bought, even through more extreme means.

Ownership as in having options
Even if you buy your games 100% digitally on consoles, it's 
still
 very comforting to know that physical games are an option should you ever want one. It's good that you're not totally trapped into buying games from the PS Store with prices 
only
 dictated by Sony.

You could always drive to a local store and buy a game that might be on sale. You have the option of buying a game used from someone on the internet. You could always go 
to that same store
 and trade your game for a small cashback.

Hell, where I live, the most popular game store has a rental system where you can rent a game and pay for each week you keep it. Some people still use that because purchasing a game outright is out of their price range. That too won't exist anymore. Your many options are now limited to one, whether you like it or not.

But PC is all digital! They accepted it with no issues!
Everyone who brings up the fact that PC has been digital and how 
that
 turned out fine doesn't really understand what's going on.

Yes, PC is digital, but there's a 
massive
 difference: we can 
still own our games on PC
. You're not trapped to one ecosystem or one digital store, you have dozens of options. Most importantly, there are 
tons
 of 
DRM-Free
 games and stores out there. Websites like GOG, Itch.io, etc. let you download and play games 
without being tied to any service.

This means you can't have your license revoked or worry about the game completely disappearing for any reason. You can back up the game, modify it, play it on different systems, and generally know that 10 years from now you can 
probably
 get it to work and play it again.

But most people use Steam anyway
, I hear you say. That's true, but you can 
still
 own your games on Steam. Very easily, in fact! Steam doesn't apply a hard DRM for games on their platform, you can bypass it and play your games offline without the launcher if you know what you're doing.

Because PC is an open platform, people have figured this out and will continue to figure out bypasses in case things go south (which they haven't so far, thankfully). All you need is to get something called the Goldberg Emulator, replace the SteamAPI file, then add an app_id.txt file. Done. You can play any Steam game offline (assuming the publisher didn't put their own DRM like Denuvo). I've done this a lot, and it 
is
 legal as long as you don't share your game to other people.

So no, platforms like PC losing out on physical games is 
not
 comparable to consoles losing physical games. PC gamers can still own and preserve their games through digital means, and honestly, I think digital is way better than having to use a disk. For console gamers, you just lost your 
only
 way to actually own your games. Now you're getting trapped in a walled garden with no other choice, unless you abandon the console forever, which is a tough pill to swallow for the average person because they don't want to lose all their games and friends they have on the platform to move to a new thing they don't know or understand.

"But this doesn't affect me! I'm already on PC or am buying console games 100% digitally!"
It will!
 That's like saying Spotify getting popular won't affect you, because your favorite band is still putting out CDs you can buy. But now, so many songs are trapped behind a subscription service with no way to properly own any of them. The industry moving in a specific direction 
will affect you at some point
. The movie industry is the same way, 
"blu-rays will always exist"
, but now so much content is trapped behind subscription services.

In this case, the next step for console makers is obvious. Everyone wants to be Netflix.

Everyone wants to be Netflix

Look, everyone! Netflix is raking in billions of dollars... Just by offering a streaming service? And they can keep losing content and people will stay subscribed? And they can keep raising prices and people will continue to subscribe? And everyone has to own an account that can't be shared to borrow content they can never own and isn't available anywhere else?!?!??! The line will always go up!! Wow!!!! I need to be like Netflix!!!!

- Every tech business executive in the last ~15 years

Okay, maybe it's less about Netflix the company and more about the general sentiment. Every industry is moving to this holy grail of extracting money from people, a service where they keep paying you for the rest of their life (or until they get bored of your platform, I guess).

Xbox is crashing because it attempted this, but my personal theory is the same as the Xbox One generation: they were just a little too early. Xbox Game Pass is reportedly doing 
well
, but it's not the status quo changer they probably wanted it to be. PS and Xbox already provided yearly subscriptions to play multiplayer and unlock more advanced features, but damn it, that's not enough. Because they still own their games (or had the option to) and didn't fully depend on the service.

So the next logical step is pretty damn simple. PlayStation and Xbox want to be Netflix. They want to make purchasing games hard or overly expensive that the 
de facto
 way to play a game will be through a service. I'm willing to bet that in the next decade, Sony or Xbox will start making their games playable EXCLUSIVELY through a subscription, with no way to buy it. Of course, you'll need a constant internet connection too. Maybe with a scan of your face to confirm you can never lend your account to a friend. Uhh, I meant a face scan to protect children from ever playing a 16+ game! It's all about protecting the children, of course.

And that affects you, too, smug PC users. When one company gets away with it, other companies will catch on and start following the leader. It's 
already
 getting normalized with Game Pass on PC, but it's just not big enough yet that they can start building a walled garden and trapping people in yet. If it were popular enough that they can get away with it, I'm willing to bet the next Elder Scrolls would be Game Pass exclusive.

So now what?
That's not to say that gaming is doomed or whatever. We will always still have options, and I doubt this subscription-only future is coming soon... But we're getting there.

Even when we do reach the conclusion, DRM-free stores will still exist because enough people care. Cool indie developers will still make awesome games that won't be tied down to one platform or service. The games industry is too varied and indie-friendly that there isn't a huge risk of the industry being totally monopolized by large companies (looking at you, movie industry).

But if you care about these things (you clearly do since you read this far), please support the creators that are fighting against this future. Buy DRM-free stuff. Donate to an organization that preserves games & game-related content. Support your friendly neighbourhood indie devs. Make some noise online. We don't want physical media, we want 
digital ownership rights!
 Don't confuse the argument!

All of this stuff will make a difference, even if it doesn't feel like it. So keep at it.

#gaming

#opinion

#tech
