From 
FT Alphaville
: 
Still, while we’re doodling, it’s worth pondering once more 
whether the economics of making frontier models and monetising them 
before free-to-download open-weight versions catch up will really play 
out. 
According to Epoch AI
 we’re talking around four months of lead time:
Apologies to regular 
readers who have been through all this before, but there's some 
essential context that needs to be kept top of mind for this story.

We have already spent somewhere in the neighborhood of two trillion 
dollars on capital expenditures associated with the AI bubble. Major 
players are now a 
trillion plus
 dollars in debt. This is only on
 track to accelerate over the next few years. Capital expenditures are 
projected to total more than five trillion dollars by the end of 2030. 
God only knows what the borrowing would look like.

The justification for all of this money assumes not only that the 
demand for large language model-based AI will be in excess of pretty 
much any technology to date, but also that at least some of the major 
players currently spending that money will achieve extraordinary profits
 with very high margins. That second condition is exceedingly difficult to achieve with a highly competitive market and is even more 
difficult if that market were to be dominated by new players.

In a world where open-weight models dominate, the proprietary 
frontier models of Anthropic and OpenAI will find it virtually 
impossible to charge monopolistic pricing. Anthropic does have something
 of a reputational moat, particularly with respect to coding, but OpenAI
 would find itself in truly desperate straits, and as discussed before, 
in the highly interconnected and circularly financed world of AI, the 
company would probably drag others down with it.

Oracle would be completely screwed. SoftBank might be as well. Other 
companies like Nvidia would probably survive but would likely see a 
major hit to revenue. It is not difficult to imagine all sorts of 
catastrophic failure scenarios. Keep in mind, the growing consensus in 
the financial world is that we are looking at an enormous market bubble 
waiting to pop. Combine that with the precarious state of the private 
credit market, what may be a multinational debt crisis, and a United 
States presidential administration that almost certainly will not be 
able to deal quickly and competently with a massive financial crisis. If
 I really wanted to pile it on, I would say something about Ed Zitron's 
analysis noting 
similarities
 between the trillions of dollars of 
financing of data centers and the 2008 real estate bubble, but I'd hate 
to be that depressing. 
 Victor Tangermann writing for 
Futurism
:
A Chinese open-weight AI model called Kimi K3, developed by 
Beijing-based firm Moonshot AI, has sent a shiver down the spines of AI 
tech executives. The powerful, 2.8 trillion-parameter model impressed 
with its competence, igniting a war with far more expensive alternatives
 being offered by the likes of OpenAI and Anthropic.

Top executives at both companies are sounding alarm, the 
Wall Street Journal
 reports
,
 watching as Chinese open-weight models are rapidly catching up to their
 most powerful proprietary models. As a result, they’re begging the 
Trump administration to step in and protect them from the influx of 
cheaper alternatives, which could undermine their increasingly desperate
 attempts to attract new customers.

Dean Ball, who joined OpenAI as the head of strategic futures after helping shape AI policy for the Trump administration, was 
seemingly rattled
, arguing that allowing Chinese open-weight models to take over would result in “AI communism” in a 
controversial and widely disputed tweet
.
He also suggested the Trump administration would inject enough “fear,
 uncertainty, and doubt” through “regulatory risk” that would eventually
 deter hyperscalers from using Chinese AI.
...
The incursion isn’t just coming from China. As the 
WSJ
 
notes, US-based AI labs are starting to switch to open-weight models. 
Just last week, former OpenAI exec Mira Murati’s Thinking Machine Lab 
released its first model
, which happens to be open-weight.

The trend could put AI companies in a bind: how can they keep 
financing their enormous AI data center projects and advanced model 
development if potential customers start switching to heavily subsidized
 or free AI models that provide good-enough or even frontier 
capabilities?

Early signs of an imminent exodus are certainly there. Moonlight AI was forced to 
pause new subscriptions
 to its blockbuster model just 48 hours after launch due to overwhelming demand, pushing its servers to capacity.
It’s a particularly precarious moment as frontier labs continue to 
hike up prices to start covering at least some of their unprecedented 
spending, despite growing fears over an AI bubble. Put simply, why shell
 out for Anthropic’s Claude Code or OpenAI’s Codex when there’s a far 
cheaper and highly customizable option out there?
