From time to time, Microsoft brings changes to Windows 11, like improvements to its core features, such as the Start menu. One such change began rolling out recently 
with new policies
, alongside a 
major bug fix that finally came after a year
.

However, not every change or "improvement" Microsoft makes may land. For example, earlier today, we wrote an article on the user reaction to an earlier design choice Microsoft made on Windows 10, when it was making an updated system specs page. You can read about the response, which was mostly negative, in 
our report here
.

Aside from general home users, professionals too, or at least some of them, are not very satisfied with Microsoft's overall policies and product functionalities. There are multiple instances of people ranting and complaining online, highlighting various issues they are facing or have faced recently when working with Microsoft products like Windows 11 or other Microsoft 365-based apps.

For example, one such user, nostradamefrus, shared their experience on Reddit wherein they had to deal with an apparently buggy patch that broke authentication on Microsoft 365 apps when using RDS (Remote Desktop Services).

The user wrote: "
I'm so sick of Microsoft ... Their latest security patch broke probably our most important business app and uninstalling the patch breaks auth with 365 apps in RDS environments. So the options are either "you can't use the app" or "you can't use any Office 365 product" until they clean up their mess. But shoving Copilot into every facet of existence is what's really important, right? Someone break this company up already
"

On a separate thread, another Reddit user made a sarcastic post about the difficulties of working with Microsoft Graph PowerShell due to some of the command complexities. A commenter Trelfar chimed in, saying that much of it had to do with how it's inherently designed and alleged that it was done in that way by Microsoft to save time and budget.

The words were certainly pretty harsh as they wrote: "
The key to understanding why some of the commands are garbage is that every command is a wrapper that calls the native Graph API which requires JSON params, and many of them were procedurally implemented based on the underlying API so they could hit release ahead of the deprecation deadline for the modules it was replacing (like the AzureAD module). ... In short, it wasn't a design choice to make it work like this, it was a time/budget compromise to not put the effort in for some of the commands.
"

Finally, a user Godzillian123, who is clearly very displeased about having to work daily with the management and deployment of Windows apps in their enterprise environment. The Redditor writes: "
I wake up every day with but one lamenting thought in my head. That I will be having to deal with WindowsApps and appx style application at my organisation, for another day .... Sincerely whoever designed this. You are an idiot. .... you take the cake for biggest smart idiot award. I'm sure you think you are very clever, after all you architected a whole fresh new method of software deployment for your garbage Operating System that is still based on Windows NT. ..... Please reconsider your life choices and just throw this entire Microsoft store into the bin where it belongs, far away from enterprise machines where system admins live and don't have time to learn how your misguided application system design works
."

Interestingly, each and every one of these posts has been overwhelmingly upvoted by others in the sysadmin subreddit, indicating that these resonated with them. Of course, not everyone likely agrees, but they are probably in the minority.

We also know Neowin is visited and read by many IT admins as well. Let us know in the comments below whether you feel the same way or whether you think they are simply overblown reactions from some frustrated, or perhaps overworked, employees.

Source: Reddit (
link1
, 
link2
, 
link3
)

Tags

Microsoft

Windows 11

Hatred

Rant

Outrage

Backlash

Follow us on
Google News

Add as a preferred
source on Google

Follow
@NeowinFeed

        Post

        Like

        Share

        Share

        Share

        RSS

Report a problem
with this article
