Job queues are deceptively tricky

One of the fun things about being a programmer
is that as I look more into systems that I didn’t
know much about, what superficially appears to be
a simple system actually reveals interesting facets
of underlying complexity. In other words,

reality has a surprising amount of detail
.

In this post, I want to talk about job queues,
which I’ve been thinking about for the past few days
(and while drafting this post in my head, I realized
I’d thought about them for longer at a previous job,
but not nearly with as much clarity.)

What do I mean by “job queue”? I mean a system
where there is some notion of submitting batch jobs,
scheduling them, and running them. Generally,
the system is expected to be FIFO or FIFO-like,
but that’s not required. Usually, the queue bundles
together a native way to schedule jobs periodically
– this lets you specify submissions using configuration
files (e.g. using JSON or YAML).

Job queues arise naturally in all sorts of situations
where throughput requirements are high, but latency
requirements are not that high. Continuous integration
is a common example. Another example is summaries
for the purpose of data analysis.

Over the past year or two, a handful of lenses that
I’ve found useful when thinking about system design are:

Being wary of queues: Queues tend to typically be

close to full or close to empty
,
requiring some thought around appropriate sizing.
I’ve also learnt a bunch of counter-intuitive
behavior of queues when it comes to latency
from Marc Brooker’s blog.
In blog posts I’ve read about queues, the focus is generally on latency, not on throughput, which is I think partly why I never really mentally linked “queues” and “job queues” earlier.

Limits:
This is based on the 
Tiger Style

guide written by the folks at TigerBeetle,
which talks about explicit limits on various things.
On generalization, this leads to the notion of
tolerances and having budgets for modular reasoning.
Funnily enough, near the start of my career at Apple, I remember being mildly bemused at certain discussions where teams would discuss how much memory budget they would have to bargain for, especially for low-level code. I have grown more respect for that approach over time.

Fault models: Roughly speaking, a fault model
describes your assumptions related to errors
and reliability in your dependencies.

I’ve learnt a bunch on this topic from the talks
and tweets by the TigerBeetle CEO Joran Dirk Greef,
as well as 
writing by Alex Miller
.

I will try to demonstrate how these lenses can apply
for system design later in this post.

The problem at hand

At 
$WORK
, we have a background job for packing “reference repos”.
A reference repo is a git repo which has been aggressively repacked
– if you’re unfamiliar with repacking, you can think
of this as more “aggressively compressed”.

These are stored in object storage, and a new repo can be
set up on a machine by downloading the reference repo,
and fetching a delta of changes for the tip of the default branch.
When it comes to very large repos, for the downloader,
this approach helps cut down latency compared to the
more typical approach of doing a 
git clone
 operation.

The actual details of how git does aggressive repacking is not super
relevant for this post. What does matter is that there are,
roughly speaking, two forms of repacking available:

Wholesale repacking: This will lead to git ignoring any
baseline information about how packing should be done,
and recompute everything from scratch. Say for the repo
under test, this takes 7 hours.
If you’re surprised at the thought of a git operation taking several hours, (1) you should be happy that you don’t have this problem and (2) some of the sub-operations here are seemingly single-threaded, regardless of repo size.

Incremental repacking: This will lead to git reusing the
baseline information already stored in the repo about packing,
so it will only repack things which have changed.
So if you did a 
clone
, then did a 
fetch
, then only
the newer changes from 
fetch
 will be repacked,
and only some cursory checks will be performed
on the history received from the 
clone
 operation.
Say this takes 2 hours.

OK. So that’s the setup.

We have the option of doing the
more expensive thing, which takes 7 hours. This buys us
a smaller reference repo, which means faster downloads,
faster un-tarring and lower disk usage.
To give a size ballpark, a wholesale repacked repo
can be up around 50-60% smaller than an incrementally
packed repo.

We have the option of doing the cheaper thing,
which takes 2 hours. This buys us more up-to-date reference repos,
which means that if the downloader still cares
about getting the latest changes,
the delta it will fetch subsequently will be smaller,
so it’ll be faster and put less load on the server.
But also, if the extra disk usage is in the hundreds
of megabytes or gigabytes, then that’s not great.

One more thing to note is that since this is a code repository,
downstream consumers are much more active on weekdays
than on weekends.

The best of both worlds?

A natural next step upon seeing the above dichotomy
is to propose the following: why not do the wholesale
repacking on the weekends, and do the incremental
repacking on the weekdays? That seems like it buys
up-to-dateness on weekdays (where more consumers
are active), and the wholesale repacking on the weekend
would ensure that the reference repo size grows more
slowly.

For simplicity, let’s say we’re writing the reference
repos with some key 
<myrepo>-<timestamp>.tar

into some bucket.

To keep the size of the incrementally packed repo smaller,
one can either:

Write the wholesale repacked repos using the same key scheme,
and have the incremental repacking jobs bootstrap
from the last successful repack (wholesale or incremental),
instead of from a 
clone
 operation.

Write the wholesale repacked repos using an altered key scheme,
say 
<myrepo>-<timestamp>-packed.tar
, and bootstrap
the incremental repack from that key location.
However, this potentially creates the need to update
other consumers so that they don’t lag behind
too much on weekends (assuming incremental repacking
is not running on weekends).

Let’s say we go with the first one because it seems simpler.

So now the question is, how are we going to handle this scheduling?

Typical job queues only expose limited control of scheduling
to clients for good reason – providing a large number
of knobs increases the risk of surprising scheduling
decisions.

When I wrote the “natural next step” above, I’m essentially
thinking from the point of view of writing the control loop.
But when I’m using a job queue, I do not (by definition)
have access to the control loop – someone else has written
that loop, and I need to see what configuration knobs are
available to me to customize the behavior.

For now, let’s say the queue exposes two configuration knobs:

Scheduling interval: The job is started on a timer configured
with this interval.

Concurrency limit: The maximum number of running jobs for
the particular configuration.

Before we started this optimization journey,
let’s say these configuration knobs were set as:

Scheduling interval: 9 hours, to leave some headroom
from the 7 hour running time of the job.

Concurrency limit: 1, because there’s not much point
in having concurrent jobs do the same thing here.

Again, a natural next step here might be to think:
“So the 9 hour interval was sufficient
for a 7 hour running time job. Since the incremental
repack job on weekdays will take 2 hours, let’s set
the interval to be 3 hours. On the weekends,
when the wholesale repacking
job is running, it will not have finished in 3 hours,
so even if the timer triggers again,
the concurrency limit will prevent any other jobs from running,
so things should be fine.”

Unfortunately, dear reader,
this simplistic reasoning does not work.

The set of possible semantics

For a moment, let’s stop thinking about trying to
think about how we can 
use
 the job queue.
Rather, let’s think about 
implementing
 a job queue.

Let’s say there’s a job which is running 
J
1
 based
on some configuration 
J
. After the scheduling interval
elapses, say we want to create a new job 
J
2
,
and 
J
1
 hasn’t completed yet.
What should we do with 
J
2
? Essentially,
there are only four options:

Parallel Spawn: If the concurrency limit is higher than 2,
then we can just start running 
J
2
.

If the concurrency limit is 1, then we have three choices:

Prefer New: Stop 
J
1
 and start 
J
2
.

Wait: Wait for 
J
1
 to finish and then start 
J
2
.

Prefer Old: Auto-cancel 
J
2
 and let 
J
1
 continue running.

Pause for a moment here, and ask yourself what’s your
intuitive answer to the following question: which of these
possible semantics are worth implementing or could
be called reasonable?

If you’re anything like me, you would probably have
said Parallel Spawn, Prefer New, and Wait are perhaps
defensible, whereas Prefer Old feels weird/backward.
For Prefer New vs Prefer Old in particular,
you may have justified this to yourself with reasoning like:
“if this situation happens, the job owner probably
cares about more recent results than older results
so it makes sense to support Prefer New
but it seems strange to support Prefer Old,
who would ever want 
that
?”

Recall the lenses from earlier: vigilance about queues,
limits and fault models.

So the first thing to note is that the Wait option
requires a (logical) per-job-config queue. The queue should
probably be bounded (per Limits). OK, so how should
the limit be decided? What should happen when the limit is hit?
At what utilization level should we start alerting
(i.e. what’s a 
soft
 limit for the queue size)?
Should the queue be strictly FIFO?
Those are good questions to ask! There’s no one-size-fits-all
answer, but an important thing to realize is that
these questions 
should
 be asked,
if the Wait semantics are supported.

If we think about limits, the Prefer New semantics
imply that the scheduling interval is also a hard limit.
Conceptually, these are different things –
you could imagine varying them independently if the
latter was offered as a separate configuration knob.

Lastly, what are the fault models under which these
semantics make sense?

Prefer New: 
J
1
’s running time exceeded the
scheduling interval because of some
non-deterministic reason (e.g. a rate limit being hit).
We are optimistic, so it’s possible that

J
2
 will not hit the same issue.

In other words, we expect the job to be successful
again sooner rather than later.

Wait: Same as above. Additionally, there is a
non-functional requirement (or assumption!)
that dropping jobs is not preferable.

Prefer Old: Assume that 
J
1
 is not hung,
so it will probably finish if given more time.
You would still want to have a hard limit separate from the scheduling interval to prevent runaway resource usage.

We are pessimistic, so we assume that

J
2
’s running time will also exceed the scheduling
interval. So it’s wisest to cancel 
J
2
,
so that at least 
J
1
 has a chance to finish.

I just wanted to do a simple thing

To jog your memory on what we were trying to do:

We wanted to run the same job with a fast path
on weekdays (taking 2 hours) and a slow path
on weekends (taking 7 hours).

We had one configuration knob for the scheduling
interval. We were thinking of setting it to 3 hours
to get more up-to-date results on weekdays.

We had a concurrency limit of 1 to avoid running
multiple jobs at the same time.

Let’s try to see how such a configuration would
fare on the weekend for the different semantics
we discussed:
For simplicity, assume that scheduling operations are instantaneous.

Prefer New: When the 7 hour job would hit
the 3 hour mark, it would be canceled. A new 7
hour job would be triggered, and canceled after
3 hours again. Essentially, we’d waste 48 hours
of compute across 16 jobs, because none of
these would ever finish.

Wait: Over the 48 hours of the weekend, we’d
trigger 16 jobs, with a total compute demand
of 16×7 = 112 hours. If the queue limit was
higher than (112-48)/7 = 64/7 = 9.15, we’d emerge
out of the weekend with about 64 hours of
pending work. However, the weekdays only offer
(24×5×(3-2)/3) = 40 spare hours, so
we wouldn’t finish draining this queue before
the start of the subsequent weekend.

Prefer Old: In 48 hours, we could almost finish
seven 7 hour jobs, with ~1 hour of pending work.
We would’ve canceled 9/16 jobs.
We’d get back on schedule quickly on Monday
since we only have 1 hour of extra work
left from the weekend.

So it seems like Prefer Old is the best fit here.
Yes, it might still seem counter-intuitive;
we’ll get to that shortly.

The other extra fun thing here is that if you
were using the Wait strategy, you can easily
end up masking the problem without actually
helping. Maybe you got paged on the weekend
for the queue being non-empty for an extended period of time.
So you decide to increase the concurrency.
You pick a good round number like 4.
The new runners start to chew through the jobs, great!
Now, you have these expensive jobs running for 7 hours,
but most of their results are only useful for ~3 hours
on the weekend, before they get superseded. 😬

Coming back to the appropriateness of Prefer Old,
let’s look again at what we wrote for the fault
models:

Prefer New: [..] we expect the job to be successful
again sooner rather than later.

Wait: Same as above. Additionally, there is a
non-functional requirement (or assumption!)
that dropping jobs is not preferable.

Prefer Old: [..] we assume that

J
2
 itself will also exceed the scheduling
interval. [..]

For the schedule that we were trying to have on the
weekend (7 hour jobs with a 3 hour interval),
it closely matches the assumptions of Prefer Old
very well, but it directly goes against the assumptions
of Prefer New and Wait.

Additionally, our weekend workload is totally fine with
dropping jobs in case something is running.
But the Wait semantics would make us pay dearly
for something we did not care about, and would
likely require more expensive solutions on top.

If the Prefer Old semantics are not offered,
you can’t really emulate them using the two primitives
of regular scheduling and limiting concurrency.
For the workload above, if you had a richer primitive
such as cron-like scheduling, you could split the work
into two separate jobs – one which only runs on weekdays,
and one which only runs on weekends.

Things could’ve been worse

Earlier, we were thinking about fault models.
That was cute, right?

Imagine a separate system compared to the one we’ve been talking about.
There’s a global concurrency limit to keep costs under control.
You have a bunch of different jobs coming in,
mostly kicked off in the background.
Everything goes in a FIFO queue.
Nobody put in a global size limit.

Every few months, a customer comes in and tries the
feature related to the job queue.
They kick off some new jobs manually
and see the queue position as 100K+ (or even, 1M+).
They’re like “uhh, this feature doesn’t seem to work?”
They escalate to a support engineer.
It becomes a ticket on your kanban board.
An engineer goes in and clears the queue by running a 
DELETE
 manually,
with some displeasure.

The new manager asks “what can we do to solve this problem in a systemic way.”
You spend a few days analyzing the problem.
You look at the running times. You look at the queue growth charts.
Ah, it’s hard to predict how long these jobs take,
or how many of them come along.
Maybe we reduce the jobs created?
You look at the database columns,
and you realize you don’t actually have
enough information to go on to properly check
which jobs came from the same configuration.
The flexibility of job creation makes it seem
quite tricky to retrofit a notion of job de-duplication.

The manager comes back “can we have an 80-20 solution?”
You add a hack which tries to pick an already
queued job which looks similar-ish,
and overwrite it in-place when doing the enqueue operation.
The queue is now mostly bounded in size,
because newly queued jobs overwrite old ones if present,
but there are still some configuration knobs which a customer
could tune and break the system out of equilibrium.
You declare it “user error” to tweak those configuration knobs,
and move on to the next ticket.

While writing this, I was reminded of apenwarr’s
line from 
The log/event processing pipeline you can’t have
:

(I suddenly feel a lot of pity for myself after reading that paragraph. I think I am more scars than person at this point.)

Just randomly, for no good reason whatsoever.

ANYWAY

Here’s some hope as life’d be too depressing otherwise

It seems possible to design systems while thinking
explicitly about queues, limits and fault models
– and thinking about these seems to lend itself
to designs which degrade more gracefully,
and handle unexpected situations better,
especially if the design is made under pessimistic
assumptions.

In particular, explicitly spelling these out is
valuable as a system designer, because it lets
potential consumers evaluate the system quickly
for their own workloads even before they go through
a detailed step-by-step simulation in their head
about what would happen in different situations.

Conversely, when you’re using a new system
that you haven’t used before, it’s useful
to find out this information if it’s documented
(or you have access to the code).
That way, you can check how well the designer’s assumptions
apply to (or are violated by) your intended workload.

In particular, when there are configuration files involved,
especially those which tweak 
control flow
,
not just data that flows through,
it’s valuable to pause for a bit to dig into
the various error cases that are involved in the
corresponding control loop, because configuration
files tend to hide this information away.

For systems which lend themselves to simple models,
you might even be able to model the different cases
using just pen-and-paper, like we’ve done above,
without the need for simulations. Doing so
can help illustrate gaps in our own thinking,
where it’s easy to gloss over what happens when
things don’t go quite as swimmingly as we expect.
