Join me in Jamverse
My first foray into contributing to a science fictional extended universe
Jul 24, 2026
21
8
Share
I just contributed a couple of microfictions to a project I’m helping bootstrap: The young and promising 
Jamverse
 extended protocol fiction universe. I’d like to invite the fiction writers among you to jump in as well. 
There’s currently a 
contest
 going on for worldbuilding artifacts, with a deadline of 
July 31,
 to help bootstrap the universe. If you’re looking for a fun way to kill a few hours sometime in the next week, explore Jamverse and enter the contest.
Jamverse (named for Fred Pohl’s dictum that the science-fiction writer’s job is to predict not the automobile but the traffic jam) is a near-future Earth setting full of strange (but not magical) rules. Currently there are 
15 full short stories
 across 4 loosely coupled story cycles by 4 authors, and a growing hopper of related world-building elements contributed by half an dozen others.  The pump-priming is going well, and if this sort of thing interests you, now is the time to get in on the ground floor. It’s currently still pretty easy to introduce big, bold ideas into the universe without running into conflicts.
As a warmup to more serious contributions, I wrote two (non-competing) microfictions for the contest. Both are stand-alone readable, though you’ll get more out of both if you’ve read some of the stories of the rest of the universe.
My first entry is 
Ziploc Protocol
, a microfiction that explores how a piece of jailbreaking technology might be smuggled across a border into a highly protocolized jurisdiction called Zoothesia to subvert some of its protocols. Read it 
here
.
My second entry is a mood/vibe piece. A microfiction introducing 
The Thicket
, a kind of tiling element for the background interstices of the world. The Thicket is inspired by 
a nonfiction idea
 developed by 
Aneesh Sathe
, and in the Jamverse, it refers to something like the future of the exurban hinterlands of metro areas today. The microfiction introduces the concept via a stand-alone vibe-y vignette. Read it 
here
.
Jamverse has a lot of interesting elements both for readers and writers. There are strange augmented reality civic protocols, a train that runs halfway across the planet, a surreal folklore layer, and weird governance and public service models. I’m currently brainstorming my own top-level big idea to add.
Here’s a quick overview 
orientation
 (AI generated), and a 
codex
 of worldbuilding elements to let you jump in and contribute quickly. Browsing the latter should give you an immediate feel for the world.
If you plan to enter the contest (and I hope you do), you might want to read  a couple of the key world-establishing stories of the 4 existing story cycles first. 
Perception Must Preserve
 by 
Spencer Nitkey
 (Zoothesia story cycle)
Signals in the Margins
 by 
Sachin
 (Trainverse story cycle)
All You Can Do Here is Leave
 by 
Liz Maher
 (Legends and Ledgers story cycle)
Caduceus City
 by 
Randy Lubin
 (Stockton Chronicles story cycle)
I hope to spend a lot more time in Jamverse in the future. See you there!
Regular weekly nonfiction post coming over the weekend.
21
8
Share
Previous
Next
