Launching Route 53 Files

I'm excited to announce Route 53 Files, a new file system that seamlessly
connects any AWS compute resource with

Amazon's
highest-availability database
.

Four decades ago, when the Berkeley Internet Name Domain Server launched, it
stored DNS records in "zone files".  You could edit these files in 
vi
,
but BIND had to be told to reload them before your changes took effect.
Later, other DNS servers came along, like Daniel Bernstein's tinydns, which
served records directly out of a database on disk — but even there,
after editing the human-readable DNS records, it was necessary to recompile
the database file.

With Route 53 Files, it becomes possible to use standard UNIX software to
edit your DNS without needing any additional steps.  It makes your hosted
zones accessible as file systems; this means changes you make to records in
the file system are automatically reflected in Route 53, and changes made in
Route 53 through any other channel — the AWS Management Console, the
Route 53 API, the AWS CLI — automatically appear in the file system.
A Route 53 Files file system can be attached to multiple compute resources,
enabling shared access to your zones across teams without duplication.

Until now, you had to choose between the Route 53 console, the Route 53 API,
and the tools built on top of them. Route 53 Files eliminates that tradeoff.
Your hosted zone becomes the central hub for all your organization's DNS
records.  It's accessible directly from any AWS compute instance, container,
or function, whether you're running production applications, responding to
an incident, or building agentic AI systems.

You can access any enrolled public or private hosted zone as a native file
system on your Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instances, containers
running on Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS) or Amazon Elastic
Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS), or AWS Lambda functions. The file system
presents each resource record set as a file and each record name as a
directory, supporting standard Network File System (NFS) v4.1+ operations
like creating, reading, updating, and deleting DNS records.

Alias records are presented as symbolic links to their targets, so

ls -l
 renders them the way you would expect and 
readlink

does what you would hope.  Cross-zone aliases are presented as dangling
symbolic links — as they should be, given that their targets are not
inside the same file system.

Under the hood, Route 53 Files uses S3 Files and delivers ~90s latency for
a file save to reach live DNS, and up to 6 minutes of latency for a change made
elsewhere in Route 53 to appear in your mount.  (Note that changes reaching
live DNS does not ensure that they are immediately visible worldwide; the
latency for global visibility of DNS changes depends on record TTLs and
caching behaviour.)  The file system supports concurrent access from multiple
compute resources with last-write-wins conflict resolution, making it ideal
for shared workloads that mutate authoritative DNS, such as AI agents
collaborating through file-based tools and on-call engineers reverting each
other's changes using 
sed
.

Let me show you how to get started.

Creating my first Route 53 Files file system, mounting it, and editing DNS
from an EC2 instance is straightforward.  In this example, I already have
a Route 53 hosted zone and an EC2 instance where I want to mount it.

First, I navigate to the

Route 53 Files Console
 and
create IAM roles.  These are needed to allow Route 53 Files to create
resources in my AWS account and read and write to my existing Route 53 hosted
zone.

I fill in my 12-digit AWS account ID and the Route 53 hosted zone ID I'm
planning on using; if I wanted to I could specify multiple hosted zones or
even "*" to allow all Route 53 hosted zones to be enrolled.  When I click
"Create bundle", a tarball is generated inside the web browser containing
IAM role policies with exactly the privileges required; if you're paranoid
about security (as you should be), you can audit the role-generation code
to confirm that it isn't trying to grant any unnecessary privileges.

Having downloaded the bundle, I extract it and run the included script to
create the roles.  There's also a README.txt file inside the tarball with
instructions, including explaining what you need to adjust if you want to
permit additional hosted zones to be enrolled at a later date.

Having now created the necessary IAM roles, I can proceed to enrol a
Route 53 hosted zone into Route 53 Files.  I enter my AWS account ID, my
Route 53 hosted zone ID, the AWS Region I want to create the Route 53 Files
file system in — I'm Canadian, so I picked ca-central-1 — and
the external ID is autofilled from when I created the role bundle.  If I
come back to this page later I can get the external ID from the README.txt
file in the role bundle tarball I generated.  (The External ID makes sure
that you, and 
only you
, can enrol your hosted zone; it's also used
if you ever want to stop using Route 53 Files.)

When I enrolled my hosted zone, I was given a file system ID of the form
"fs-0123456789abcdef0" and now I can create a mount target.  Route 53
Files is compatible with S3 Files, so I use the same command:

$ aws s3files create-mount-target \
    --file-system-id fs-0123456789abcdef0 \
    --subnet-id <a subnet in that VPC> \
    --security-groups <a group allowing TCP 2049 from your clients> \
    --region <your region>

Note that since Route 53 Files uses NFS, you'll need to use a security
group that allows access to port TCP/2049.

Once my mount target is available, I can mount it on my EC2
instance.  I've already confirmed that I have 
amazon-efs-utils

version 3.0.0 or later and botocore installed, and my EC2 instance has an

IAM Role
 attached
containing the AmazonS3FilesClientFullAccess policy.

$ sudo mkdir -p /mnt/r53fs/example.com
$ sudo mount -t s3files -o nodirects3read \
    fs-0123456789abcdef0 /mnt/r53fs/example.com

Editing DNS with Route 53 Files

I can now edit my DNS using standard command-line tools.  Within the
file system, 
foo/TYPE
 is a TYPE record named "foo"; in keeping
with DNS tradition, the special name "@" refers to the zone apex.
For example:

$ echo 1.2.3.4 | sudo tee /mnt/r53fs/example.com/@/A

creates an 
A
 record for the zone apex, 
example.com
, with
the value 
1.2.3.4
.  If I want to use round-robin DNS, I can
simply create a second record in the same record set:

$ echo 5.6.7.8 | sudo tee -a /mnt/r53fs/example.com/@/A

and since the file has two lines there will now be two IP addresses
returned via DNS.

I want the 
www
 host to alias the zone apex, so I create a symlink:

$ sudo mkdir /mnt/r53fs/example.com/www
$ sudo ln -s ../@/A /mnt/r53fs/example.com/www/A

If I want to reduce record TTLs in advance of a migration, I simply need
to create a 
.TTL
 sibling file:

$ echo 60 | sudo tee /mnt/r53fs/example.com/@/A.TTL

and the change is promptly reflected in live DNS; without a 
.TTL

sibling the default value of 300 seconds is used.

Wildcard records — e.g. 
*.example.com
 — are named
exactly as you expect; note, however, that 
*
 expands in most shells
so you'll need to escape it if running from the command line:

$ sudo mkdir /mnt/r53fs/example.com/\*
$ echo www.example.com | sudo tee /mnt/r53fs/example.com/\*/CNAME

Of course, file systems can be accessed by any tooling, not just at the
command line; for example, we can update DNS from a cron job:

$ echo "*/5 * * * * root date > /mnt/r53fs/daemonology.net/vixie/TXT" | sudo tee -a /etc/crontab
$ sleep 600
$ dig +short -t txt vixie.daemonology.net
"Tue Aug 25 00:20:01 UTC 2026"

Things to know

Let me share some important technical details that I think you'll find useful.

Route 53 Files integrates with AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) for
access control.  Every role is created by you.  The service holds no
role-creation authority; if you remove the IAM Roles, the service will
immediately and silently stop working.

If the same record is changed in the file system and in Route 53 at the
same time, we aim for last-write-wins.  This is not strictly possible,
since Route 53 does not expose modification timestamps on records, so
sometimes we make an educated guess based on when the record was changed
in the file system and the window within which we know the record changed
in Route 53.

A write that Route 53 rejects is reported in a 
.error
 file
alongside the record.  This happens asynchronously, after the malformed
data arrives at Route 53; if you look for an 
.error
 file
immediately after writing a record, you won't see it yet.

Routing policies, DNSSEC-specific record types, and Aliases with
EvaluateTargetHealth set to true are not supported at this time.  Any
records found in Route 53 which are not supported by Route 53 Files
will be reported in a 
.r53fs-unsupported
 file in the file
system root.

Changes will appear in Route 53 a period of time after you 
stop

editing a record.  Consistent with S3 Files, if you hold a file open and
make continuous changes to it, the changes will not propagate to Route
53.

In order to support text editors which move or delete files before writing
new files, there is a short hold-down period; running 
vi www/A

should not result in NXDOMAIN errors.

What customers are saying

Corey Quinn, Chief Cloud Economist, Duckbill:

"I've spent years telling people that Route 53 is a database. Colin
embraced this righteous philosophy like a champion, and this insane
thing is miles better than the actual Route 53 API, which is an
embarrassment to databases everywhere.  There are no change timestamps,
it features no events, and for some godforsaken reason has a ChangeBatch
schema that reads like XML that learned JSON in prison.  Meanwhile

echo
 and 
tee
 got my record live in 72 seconds. Thanks,
Colin!"

Pricing and availability

Route 53 Files is available today in all commercial AWS Regions except
Middle East (Bahrain) and Middle East (UAE).  Note that since Route 53's
control plane operates entirely in the us-east-1 region, a regional outage
affecting us-east-1 will prevent your Route 53 Files file systems from
updating DNS — although they will still be accessible in their own
regions.

You pay for the infrastructure created by Route 53 Files inside your AWS
account, but the Route 53 Files service itself is free.

I'd love to hear how you use this new capability.  Feel free to share your
feedback in the comments below.

— cperciva

Frequently Asked Questions

Q. Is this an official AWS service?

A. Of course not; but I'd be happy to let them have it if they're crazy enough
to want to maintain it.

Q. Why didn't this launch on April 1st?

A. Because S3 Files launched in early April and I didn't want to wait until
April 2027.

Q. Why expose DNS zones over NFS instead of a FUSE file system?

A. Because it's funnier.  Also, because that's what S3 Files does (but I
repeat myself).

Q. What happens if you run 
rm -rf *
?

A. Route 53 Files attempts to delete all of your DNS records, of course;
what else would it do?  (Note that Route 53 doesn't allow you to delete
your hosted zone's SOA or apex NS records, so those records will silently
reappear in the file system.)

Q. Is there an SLA?

A. Yes, I guarantee a 100% refund of fees paid in any month where
availability is less than 110%.

Q. Is this HIPAA compliant?

A. Please do not store patient information in DNS.

Q. Did anyone at Amazon know you were doing this?

A. Absolutely not.  If they knew, they would have had to try to stop me.
Amazonians aren't just people I work with; they're my friends, and I don't
want anyone to get in trouble for me being irredeemably weird.  

  Posted at 2026-08-27 14:00 | 
Permanent link
 |

Comments

blog comments powered by 
Disqus
