Text
        settings

Story text

Size

Small

Standard

Large

Width
      
*

Standard

Wide

Links

Standard

Orange

* Subscribers only

Learn more

            Minimize to nav

As OpenAI 
files SEC paperwork
 ahead of an expected initial public stock offering, newly leaked financial documents show a company with quickly growing revenues that are currently being overwhelmed by even larger expenses.

The audited financial statements, 
obtained by independent journalist Ed Zitron
, show OpenAI’s reported revenue growing from $3.7 billion in 2024 to $13.07 billion in 2025. The Financial Times, which 
reviewed the same documents
, writes that the company’s monthly revenues had grown to nearly $2 billion by the end of 2025, suggesting that its ongoing revenue rates continued to grow throughout the year.

              R&D expenses alone still easily outpace OpenAI’s quickly growing revenues.

                  Credit:
                                      Ars Technica

      R&D expenses alone still easily outpace OpenAI’s quickly growing revenues.

          Credit:

          Ars Technica

But the company’s fast-growing revenues are still dwarfed by its even more significant expenses. OpenAI’s total revenues in both of the last two years were outpaced by research and development alone, which grew from a $7.81 billion line item in 2024 to a massive $19.18 billion cost in 2025. Those numbers seem to reflect the significant costs OpenAI incurred in training new models and include $10.59 billion in R&D costs paid to Microsoft alone in 2025.

On top of that, OpenAI’s “cost of revenue” (i.e., the money spent producing and distributing the product) increased from $2.65 billion in 2024 to $7.5 billion in 2025. This cost line likely reflects the significant compute costs incurred at “inference time” as the company’s models respond to a growing number of user prompts. Costs associated with sales and marketing also grew from $1.11 billion in 2024 to $5.73 billion in 2025.

              OpenAI’s operating loss is shrinking as a percentage of revenue, but there’s a long way to go before it becomes a profit.

                  Credit:
                                      Ars Technica

      OpenAI’s operating loss is shrinking as a percentage of revenue, but there’s a long way to go before it becomes a profit.

          Credit:

          Ars Technica

All told, OpenAI’s day-to-day “loss from operations” increased from $8.78 billion in 2024 to $20.92 billion in 2025, a concerning direction for a company that 
is telling investors it hopes to be profitable by 2030
. But measured as a percentage of revenues, the company’s operating losses slightly improved year to year, from 237 percent in 2024 to 160 percent in 2025.

Gotta spend money to make money

Operating numbers aside, OpenAI’s headline “net loss” number of just over $5 billion in 2024 ballooned to nearly $39 billion in 2025. But the 2025 number includes a significant accounting charge related to investor valuations that shifted amid 
the company’s 2025 conversion to a for-profit structure
. The Financial Times cites “a person familiar with the matter” in reporting that this non-recurring charge was approximately $30 billion and that OpenAI’s 2025 net loss amounted to a more reasonable-looking $8 billion without it.

As OpenAI tries to shift all these losses to eventual profits, it will have to start reining in its costs, especially the massive (and growing) R&D costs associated with model training. It will also have to deal with enterprise customers that are 
beginning to balk at token-based pricing
 and 
starting to demand a measurable return on investment
 for their AI spending. And on the subscription side, pressure from rival Anthropic 
may force the company to lower prices
, which could further increase operating losses in the near term.

OpenAI 
shut down its Sora video generation model in March
. Around the same time, OpenAI CEO of Applications Fidji Simo 
told employees
 that the company would be cutting back on “side quests” and focusing on its core coding and business users.

In March, OpenAI 
raised $122 billion of financing
 in a funding round that valued the company at $852 billion. The company 
reports over 900 million weekly active users
 of ChatGPT, though only about 50 million of those are paid subscribers.

                  Kyle Orland

Senior Gaming Editor

                  Kyle Orland

Senior Gaming Editor

      Kyle Orland has been the Senior Gaming Editor at Ars Technica since 2012, writing primarily about the business, tech, and culture behind video games. He has journalism and computer science degrees from University of Maryland. He once 
wrote a whole book about 
Minesweeper
.

    178 Comments
