Long-Run Effects of H-1B Immigration on the U.S. Economy

Ran Abramitzky
,     

Leah Platt Boustan
,     

Ahmet Gulek

       & 
Jens Hainmueller

Share

X

LinkedIn

Facebook

Bluesky

Threads

Email

Link

Working Paper
 35560

DOI
 10.3386/w35560

Issue Date
 
July 2026

We study the effects of H-1B immigration on U.S. industries that employ H-1B workers and their trading partners. Using a novel cross-industry design and the 1999–2003 expansion of the H-1B visa cap for identification, we find that H-1B exposure raised incomes for natives and pre-existing immigrants, with gains concentrated in non-STEM occupations. Income gains propagate forward through supply chains to downstream industries but not backward to upstream industries, consistent with a productivity shock rather than a labor supply shock. We find no direct effect on patenting, suggesting that productivity gains arise from better task execution rather than patentable invention.

Acknowledgements and Disclosures

We are grateful to Michael Clemens for his invaluable comments. Mi Liu provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Citation and Citation Data

Copy Citation

                Ran Abramitzky, Leah Platt Boustan, Ahmet Gulek, and Jens Hainmueller, "Long-Run Effects of H-1B Immigration on the U.S. Economy," NBER Working Paper 35560 (2026), https://doi.org/10.3386/w35560.

                Copy to Clipboard

Download Citation

Related

Topics

Labor Economics

Unemployment and Immigration

Programs

Labor Studies

Working Groups

Innovation Policy

More from the NBER

In addition to 
working papers
, the NBER disseminates affiliates’ latest findings through a range of free periodicals — the 
NBER Reporter
, the 
NBER Digest
, the 
Bulletin on Health
, and the 
Bulletin on Entrepreneurship
 — as well as online 
conference reports
, 
video lectures
, and 
interviews
.

2026, 18th Annual Feldstein Lecture, Mark Duggan, "Social  Security Reform in an Era of Fiscal Deficits"

Feldstein Lecture

        Presenter:

Mark Duggan

Mark Duggan, who is currently the Wayne and Jodi Cooperman Professor of Economics at Stanford University and will soon...

2026, Methods Lecture, Melissa Dell and Ashesh Rambachan, "Estimation and Inference with AI-Generated Data"

Methods Lectures

        Presenters:

Melissa Dell

       & 
Ashesh Rambachan

Research Associate Melissa Dell of Harvard University and Ashesh Rambachan of MIT delivered the 2026 Methods...

2026, SI Household Finance, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, "Using AI in Household Finance Research: A Practical Guide"

Video

        Presenter:

Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham

Supported by the Vanguard Group
