Blog
Engineering
In our 
AI reflex-app builder
 we generate massive amounts of Python code. Sometimes, this code generation fails in rather trivial manners; positional parameters after keyword ones, returns with values in async generators, using outdated syntax conventions from previous versions of our framework, etc.
Running 
reflex compile
 will eventually find all of those bugs, but it only finds one issue at a time. That means if the AI made multiple mistakes, we are increasing the latency massively for what could be relatively simple fixes.
As such, we decided using a linter would be the best approach to fix this. And since we need to add reflex-specific rules, we couldn't use an existing one, and had to build our own.
Our initial linter looked simple:
Unfortunately, this approach ran into performance problems quickly, as we are processing a lot of generated code.
Notably, the slowest part in the above code is not the 
isinstance
 checks, it is 
ast.walk
. Of course, there are many ways of optimizing things in ways that aren't making 
ast.walk
 faster, and we implemented those "lower-hanging-fruit" changes first. However, we quickly realized it was hard to make the linter significantly faster without taking on the challenge of making walk itself faster.
However, walking an abstract tree (which for the purposes of this code, is just a regular tree) doesn't have to be slow. Walking the 
difflib
 module took ~2ms on my device, for ~7,000 nodes. On its own, this isn't horrible, but it quickly adds up. A rough calculation gives us ~285 nanoseconds per node, on the order of a thousand CPU cycles - far more than such a simple traversal should need. So what on earth is 
ast.walk
 doing?
First thing to note here is the use of 
yield
. Generators and 
yield
 syntax are a powerful feature of Python, but they come at a sharp cost: suspending the execution of the loop and unsuspending it repeatedly in a hot path where we are consuming the full list anyways. Sure, it saves memory, but that's not our problem at the moment, especially if that list would get cleaned up. If we simply store a list, and keep appending to it, we can minimize this:
But after running it, I realized it only gets us, 5% improvement. Much less than I expected, and it makes me wonder: what is 
iter_child_nodes
 doing?
Ah, another generator. If we inline it, we should see some decent performance improvements:
We do get the improvement we are looking for, around 25%. That begs the question: where is the remaining 75%? And while we're on the topic, what is 
iter_fields
? Hello Python?
Here we go again, another generator. We are also yielding a tuple, which we don't end up using, as we only care about the value, not the name.
getattr(node, field, None)
 should be faster, as the exception handling can be faster when delegated to CPython.
Let's combine both of those:
That gets us to around 50% cumulative improvement. This removes the last function we're calling from the 
ast
 modules, so it's only us to blame here.
Twice as fast isn't bad, but is walking at 2x speed called sprinting? I don't think so. Let's push this further.
We can read 
_fields
 and check the subclassing in the same call. No other object that exists within 
._fields
 can appear in a well-formed 
ast
 tree, so we should be safe.
That only adds another incremental improvement though, maybe 55% cumulative. At this point I'm reaching the ends of what I can do with Python. Making this iterative instead of recursive barely moves the needle.
But Python has one last trick up its sleeve: bindings. It allows us to write this logic in native machine code (or something that would compile to it). While I could use 
C
 here, I opted to use 
rust
 just because that's what I'm used to. Let's do a simple transliteration:
Expand
Collapse
I'm using 
cast_unchecked
 as PyO3 would do heavy type checking if I used regular casting. Sometimes that type checking is useful, but not here. Other than that, the above code is not so different, 
getattr_opt
 is 
getattr(..., ..., None)
.
That gets around 78% cumulative improvement. Nice!
This also allows us to do something more interesting. See, since we are doing a lot of 
getattr
, which compiles down to reading the dictionary, we can simply iterate over the dictionary itself. In Python, that dictionary is called 
__dict__
. We can simply read it at a memory offset:
We can also improve our subclass checking. There's only 132 classes that subclass 
ast.AST
, so instead of a real 
isinstance
 call we can store the memory addresses of all of those classes in a set and simply check membership. (I first reached for 
fastset
 here, but it's built for small, dense integers and panics on 64-bit pointer values, so a plain hash set it is.)
Then we combine both of those:
That gets us to ~93%. In total, that's ~14 times faster.
The only CPython call we have left is inside of 
BorrowedDictIter
 which calls 
PyDict_Next
. That function isn't that slow, but it does a lot of checking and reference-counting that our Rust-brain cannot comprehend. So let's rewrite it!
Another useful idea is that all 
ast.AST
 subclasses are in a relatively short chain. The longest is two hops (BinOp -> expr -> AST).
That gets us to around 99%. That's two orders of magnitude! We're getting close to the limit now.
One observation we previously had is that there's a small amount of 
AST
 subclasses. What if we cached, for each subclass, two pieces of information: whether this is an 
AST
 subclass, and if so, the number of elements in its 
_fields
.
We can precompute both into a tiny direct-mapped table keyed by the type pointer:
The result is either 0 if it isn't an AST subclass, and otherwise 
result - 1
 is the number of elements 
_fields
. The size of this mapping is ~2KB, so it can fit inside of L1 cache.
The last observation is that the 
__dict__
 of 
AST
 subclasses are very predictable, the first values are the 
_fields
 then 
_attributes
. So if we only need to scan the first 
len(_fields)
 entries (which we have precomputed), we save ourselves from wasting time checking 
lineno
/
col_offset
. We also gain the ability of ignoring any user-attached 
.parent
 back-references, which some lint rules might do.
All of those combined, we get ~99.5%, which is roughly, a ~220x improvement. B)
I will stop the blog here, but 
https://github.com/reflex-dev/fast-walk/
 takes it further (with batched prefetching, it squeezes out a bit more still).
More Posts
11 minute read
Jun 03, 2026
Reflex vs Retool vs Superblocks: Open Source vs Low-Code for Internal Tools (June 2026)
Compare Reflex vs Retool vs Superblocks for internal tools in June 2026. Learn which open source or low-code builder offers true code ownership and flexibility.
24 minute read
Jun 01, 2026
What Are the Best Full-Stack Web App Frameworks in 2026?
Compare the best full-stack web app frameworks in May 2026. See how Reflex, Laravel, Rails, Next.js, and Django handle auth, ORM, and real-time features.
3 minute read
May 29, 2026
Reflex BYOC: Deploy to Your Own Cloud
The reflex cloud deploy command now works against your own AWS, GCP, or Azure account.
