Manus will soon resume operating as an independent company. Action may be required for your Manus account.
Product
·
Tuesday, August 11
A Note to Our Users
Manus will soon return to operating as an independent company, which will see us continue to serve our millions of users around the world.
As we go through the process, it’s unavoidable that some users’ accounts will be impacted. Below, we explain what’s happening and what it means for you if your account is affected.
What is happening?
As part of our transition back to independent operations and to comply with regulatory requirements in specific jurisdictions, data generated by certain users on/after December 29, 2025, will be deleted from 8:00 a.m. on August 23 through August 24, 2026 (SGT). Affected users will be able to back up their data from now until 7:59 a.m. on August 23, 2026 (SGT) and restore it starting from 8:00 a.m. on August 25, 2026 (SGT).
Unaffected users can continue using Manus as usual throughout this period, without taking any action.
We’ve developed data backup and restoration tools to make this process as easy as possible for affected users. That said, we understand the disruption this will cause. Our users have always been our priority at Manus—innovating for you, bringing you magical experiences that inspire and help you, and serving you transparently and humbly. Our commitment to you remains wholeheartedly and, while we can’t avoid this, we plan to be there to support you through every step of the process.
How will affected users be informed?
We’ll notify affected users in the Manus app and by email.
For users who registered for Manus using an Apple ID or Facebook account, please check your in-app notifications, as we do not have your email address.
To ensure you don’t miss the backup period (see below for details), we’ll send you multiple reminders before 7:59 a.m. on August 23 (SGT). You can also check whether your account is affected through this guide in 
Help Center
.
We won’t charge affected users during the data backup period (August 11–August 23, SGT), and we’ll be providing welcome back bonuses after you restore your data. For details about your subscription, check your email and in-app notification.
What can you do if your account is affected?
Affected users can back up data before the deletion takes place and restore it on August 25 (SGT).
The backup window is now open and will run until 7:59 p.m. EDT on August 22 / 1:59 a.m. CEST on August 23 / 7:59 a.m. SGT on August 23, 2026.
To avoid losing your data, please back up your data before this time. You can find the 
backup tool
 and 
detailed guides
.
The backup tool supports multiple backups. If you generate new task data after backing up, please back up again to ensure the latest data is saved before it’s deleted from August 23 through August 24, 2026 (SGT).
Once the backup window closes, affected users will not be able to access their Manus account until the data restoration portal opens at 8:00 p.m. EDT on August 24 / 2:00 a.m. CEST on August 25 / 8:00 a.m. SGT on August 25, 2026.
From that moment, affected users will be able to restore the data that was backed up and return to using Manus as usual.
If you have any questions at any stage during this period, please refer to the guides in the Help Center or contact our customer service team any time.
What should unaffected users do?
Nothing. If your account is not affected, you won’t receive an email notification. You’ll receive an in-app notification telling you that you aren’t affected. You don’t need to take any action.
Last thing
Your support is the reason Manus exists, and we’re sincerely grateful for your continued trust.
Since the launch of Manus, we haven't stopped our pace of product iteration. As we look to the future, we’re already preparing a series of new features that will push the boundaries of what’s possible for general AI agents once again.
We know you, our users around the world, have higher expectations for Manus than ever. Your trust is incredibly important to us and we’re committed to continuing to earn it. We will respond as we always have: with non-stop iteration and innovation to make sure you have a better and better experience every time you turn to us.
We look forward to continuing to serve and delight you in this next chapter.
FAQ
Why is this happening? Why is this happening to certain users?
This is part of our separation from Meta; we must take this step to comply with regulatory requirements in specific parts of the world.
Why does this only affect data generated since December 29, 2025?
On December 29, 2025, Meta acquired Manus. Data generated by some users on/after Meta’s acquisition of Manus needs to be deleted to comply with regulatory requirements in specific jurisdictions.
How long will affected users lose access to Manus for?
We expect affected users to lose access for two days—from August 23 through August 24, 2026 (SGT). Unaffected users can continue using Manus as usual.
Is this because of a data breach or security incident?
No. This measure stems from Manus transitioning to independent operations and to comply with regulatory requirements. It is not the result of any security incident.
Where will user data be stored once Manus is an independent company?
Our data is stored in the US and Singapore. For more details on our data handling practices, please visit our 
Trust Center
.
For more details, please visit our 
Data Backup & Restoration Help Center
.
Download desktop & mobile app
Access Manus anytime, anywhere.
macOS
Windows
iOS
Android
Less structure,
 more intelligence.
Product
Pricing
Web app
AI design
AI slides
AI image generator
AI music generator
Manus browser operator
Wide Research
Mail Manus
Slack integration
Resources
Download
Blog
Docs
Updates
Help center
Trust center
API
Team plan
Startups
Playbook
Brand assets
Community
Events
Fellows
Compare
VS ChatGPT
VS Lovable
VS Replit
Download
Mobile app
Desktop app
My Browser
Team
Team plan
SSO
API
Company
About us
Careers
For media
Terms of service
Privacy policy
© 2026 Manus AI
English
Deutsch
Español
Español (Latinoamérica)
Français
Italiano
Português (Brasil)
Português (Portugal)
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
简体中文
繁體中文
日本語
한국어
العربية
ไทย
हिन्दी
