Mars Bar from 1991 found - and it's 20g bigger than today's
18 hours ago
Share
Save
Add as preferred on Google
Eleanor Maslin
East Yorkshire and Lincolnshire
Victoria Gordon
Now and then... the 1991 Mars Bar alongside one from today
A 35-year-old Mars Bar has been found during a house clearance – and the discovery has gone viral amid claims it highlights the effect of "shrinkflation".
The chocolate bar with a best-before date of 1991 was found during a clear-out of a house in Scunthorpe.
Victoria Gordon, who runs the cleaning service, posted a photo on social media of the 62.5g bar alongside one of today's Mars Bars, which is 40g.
"It was nearly as big as my hand, which was kind of why I noticed it," she said.
Victoria Gordon
Victoria Gordon found the old Mars Bar on 5 August
Speaking on 
BBC Radio Lincolnshire
, Gordon said: "We were clearing out a hoarder's house and everything we were rooting through was decades old.
"This Mars Bar stood out to me because as I picked it up it was nearly the whole length of my hand.
"I was like, 'Wow, look at the size of that!'"
A Mars spokesperson said: "Over the last 35 years, we have made a number of updates to our bar sizes and pack formats to reflect consumer demand, alongside considering wider external factors such as manufacturing costs and the price of cocoa."
Supplied
The chocolate was found during a house clearance
Gordon, who runs Pocket Rockets, is not sure what she will do with the bar, but she said she might be sitting on a "gold mine".
"I do post some hoarding videos but I've never had anything go this viral," she said.
"It's so fascinating what people find so interesting. I almost put it in the skip [but] I might do a UK tour with it."
Listen to highlights from
 
Lincolnshire on BBC Sounds
, and watch the
 
latest episode of Look North
.
Download the BBC News app from the 
App Store
 
for iPhone and iPad or
 
Google Play
 for Android devices
Related stories
Vegetables to get smaller and more expensive due to hot weather, farmers warn
Supermarket favourites victims of shrinkflation
Mars and Snickers bars shrink
Scunthorpe
Chocolate
Inflation
