Home

US Showbiz

TV

Sports

US Politics

Royals

News

Crime Desk

Lifestyle

Money

U.K.

Buyline

Games

Donald Trump

                    Joe Biden

                    DC Insider Newsletter

                    Latest Headlines

My Profile

Logout

              Login

US Edition

Privacy Policy

Feedback

Sunday, Jun 14th 2026

10AM

91°F

1PM

95°F

5-Day Forecast

Advertisement

The stats that shame New York: NYPD reveals shocking toll of bloodshed as Knicks' historic title win plunged the city into meltdown

Story of human evolution rewritten after 1.8-million-year-old cave discovery

Killer dad Chris Watts' OTHER mistress details night of sex horrors weeks before his murders… as leaked trove of unseen texts, obscene internet searches and nude photos exposes nightmarish new depths to his depravity

Victor Wembanyama sparks fears for Spurs fans as he walks out of press conference with ominous message after crushing NBA Finals loss

Gwyneth Paltrow's mask has slipped to expose something hideous. The real reason she did that Israeli ad is just so sick: MAUREEN CALLAHAN

Very bitchy truth about Taylor Swift's feud with Miles Teller's wife Keleigh: Full nasty story of accusation that left actor 'absolutely disgusted'… and unforgivable betrayal that was 'nail in the coffin'

Trump turns 80! The president kicks off his new decade with an over-the-top White House bash…. as bruised hands and swollen ankles escalate health fears

Moment woman, 21, is thrown to her death after 'staff forgot to attach rope' during bungee jump in Brazil

Inside the Knicks' wild locker room party: Timothee Chalamet's champagne shower... and MVP Jalen Brunson's message to fans in New York

NBA champion Trevor Ariza stuns fans by revealing tiny monthly salary in bitter custody battle... despite earning $116 MILLION in his career

Atlanta judge's courthouse sex with top cop was so loud it sickened her law clerks...now her tone-deaf apologies to her mortified staff are exposed

Marriage secrets of beloved wrestling coach... as idyllic family life is shattered by lurid scandal

Dark secrets of the family where people disappear: Five-year-old Summer Wells vanished five years ago but 12 years earlier her aunt also went missing

Ohio woman who took pity on 'homeless' couple decided to take them off the streets...then she discovered their horrifying secret

New York City descends into total CHAOS as teenager is shot, fans tear apart a school bus and riot cops rush to keep control after Knicks end 53-year championship curse

Lewis Hamilton claims first win since his bombshell move to Ferrari after storming to victory at the Barcelona Grand Prix

Measles surge in Utah sparks fears US could undo decades of progress and jeopardize elimination status

Moment Kate glares at anti-monarchists as they boo her, George, Louis and Charlotte at Trooping the Colour

Every man I've dated wants to do the same thing to me in bed. It's revolting... but they're obsessed with it: DEAR JANE

Inside the final hours of tragic NFL star Aldon Smith: How friends desperately tried to revive struggling ex-49ers linebacker before his death at just 36

Timothee Chalamet declares Knicks victory is better than winning an OSCAR as he leads stars rejoicing over team's NBA Finals win

Justin Trudeau slammed for 'insufferable' excuse after missing Canada's opening game to watch girlfriend Katy Perry sing instead

Friends of David and Victoria hit back at 'nasty accusation' from son Brooklyn they 'choreographed' sister Harper's visit to his mansion and say she is an 'innocent young girl who misses her brother'

Humiliating truth about Nashville's most hated influencer and her relationship with Riley Green: Insiders reveal secret reason she was desperate to date country star... his brutal opinion of her... and derogatory two-word nickname people call her

Previous

Next

Measles surge in Utah sparks fears US could undo decades of progress and jeopardize elimination status
See more Daily Mail on Google - 
save us as a Preferred Source
By 
LAUREN ACTON-TAYLOR, US NEWS REPORTER

Published:
 
 09:49 EDT, 14 June 2026 
 
 | 
 
Updated:
 
 09:59 EDT, 14 June 2026 

e-mail

 164
 
View 
 comments

A measles outbreak has sparked fears that the virus may entrench itself in the US after 
Utah
 saw over 600 cases lasting more than a year. 
The state reached a worrying total of 679 cases, marking the latest and longest-lasting series of measles outbreaks in the US since last year as health officials panic. 
State health officials have said that the belief is that the outbreak is the result of a continuous spread since at least August, the 
Wall Street Journal 
reported. 
'This outbreak is the product of years of miscommunication and misinformation,' Dr Trahern Jones, a pediatric infectious disease specialist in Utah, told the outlet.   
The outbreaks saw reported exposures at a high-school wrestling championship tournament in February, which exacerbated the spread across the state, as well as elementary schools, churches, an aquarium, 
Walmart
 stores, a ski resort, a youth gymnastics meet and doctors offices. 
The outbreak follows data showing that measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccinations fell nearly ten percent over the last 13 years, according to the Journal. 
Jones added that while the families of those affected were not necessarily passionate anti-vaxxers, many either did not understand the severity of the disease or believed that vaccinations would cause autism. 
'You can see in a mother's eyes; the regret and the same and the embarrassment and the fear,' Jones told the outlet. 

The state reached a worrying total of 679 cases, marking the latest and longest-lasting series of measles outbreaks in the US since last year as health officials panic

The outbreak follows data showing that measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccinations fell nearly ten percent over the last 13 years
'You don't want families to go through the hell of vaccine-preventable disease to get them to vaccinate.'
Many vaccinations, such as the MMR, are required by the state of Utah in order to enroll children in schools. However, parents can choose to opt out due to religious of personal reasons. 
Around ten percent of the state's kindergartners were nonmedically exempt from one or more vaccines in the 2024/2025 school year - marking the second highest in the country behind Idaho, according to the CDC. 
'It hit hardest in communities that had relatively low vaccination rates and relatively limited public health departments,' Andrew Pavia, a George and Esther Gross presidential professor at the University of Utah, told the 
Guardian
.  
Utah's local health departments don't operate as part of the state and, according to Southwest Utah Public Health Department spokesperson David Heaton, parents were incredibly reluctant to vaccinate their children.
While many were asked to keep their children at home if there was a possibility that they had been exposed to the disease, Heaton said the decision was left to parents and compliance was not able to be measured. 
Ben Dowse, a pediatric nurse in Utah, recalled delivering a newborn that had become exposed to the disease in their mother's womb. Measles can cause brain damage, deafness or death in newborns, 
WIRED 
reported. 
As he delivered the child, who luckily appeared healthy, and sought to administer antibodies against the virus  to the newborn, the parents objected much to his surprise.

Many vaccinations, such as the MMR, are required by the state of Utah to enroll children in schools. However, parents can choose to opt out due to religious of personal reasons

Dowse told WIRED that the child's parents instead reassured the pediatric nurse that the baby would be given 'all kinds of vitamin A' and, despite the doctor's protest, the family went home from the hospital. 
'I wish that people could see what I see,' Nathan Money, a hospital pediatrician in Utah, told the outlet. 
'This train is going in the wrong direction, and it can feel like a helpless situation, because we’re just not seeing the public messaging and leadership that’s needed to turn this around.'  
Nationwide cases of measles reached 2,288 in 2025, marking the highest recorded number since 1991, the Journal reported. However, the first few months of 2026 are projecting that numbers will increase again, as a total  of 2,073 cases of measles have already been reported so far this year. 
Utah saw a fresh case of the measles 
reported last week by the Utah Department of Health and Human Services
, according to the outlet. 
In order for the state to determine if the outbreak has ended, no new cases can be reported for the length of two incubation periods, or over 42 days.  
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has launched an assessment of the situation to determine if any outbreaks lasted over 12 months, which would jeopardize the nation's 2000s measles elimination status.
A Pan American Health Organization meeting is set to take place in November to determine where the US's status stands. 

Nationwide cases of measles reached 2,288 in 2025, marking the highest recorded number since 1991. However, the first few months of 2026 are projecting that numbers will increase again, as a total of 2,073 cases of measles have already been reported so far this year

Measles spreads through direct contact with infectious droplets or through the air. Patients with a measles infection are contagious from four days before the rash through four days after the rash appears
Outbreaks also cropped up in Texas in January 2025, which state officials marked as over by August later that year, and South Carolina where hundreds of students were quarantined out of school at a time following possible exposure, according to the outlet. 
South Carolina declared its outbreak over in April, and the state's Spartanburg County saw a 162 percent rise in vaccinations in January, the Guardian reported. 
Pavia told the outlet that Utah's outbreak differs from Texas and South Carolina after the disease was seen to have spread state-wide. 
'Some of these small health departments are very stressed for personnel, funds and training, particularly after the massive cuts that the administration made to pass through money that went to state and local health departments – I think it was $11bn they took away,' he said. 
Measles is incredibly contagious, and spreads that much faster in those who are unvaccinated, and hard to battle in an under-funded public health system. 
'If you’re in the thick of it, and you don’t know if you will be reimbursed, you adjust your response,' Angela Dunn, a doctor and former Utah state epidemiologist, told WIRED. 
'This outbreak is a perfect storm of disinformation, trauma from the Covid pandemic, and the drop in funding.'
So far this year, the CDC has recorded 127 hospitalizations, with no deaths reported yet, the Sun reported. Around one in five children who become infected require hospitalization, with one in 15 progressing to more serious complications such as meningitis or sepsis.
Around 95 percent of the population requires a vaccination against the disease to prevent outbreaks, officials said. 
Measles spreads through direct contact with infectious droplets or through the air. Patients with a measles infection are contagious from four days before the rash through four days after the rash appears. Enclosed areas like airports and planes are extremely risky locations for disease transmission.
It first invades the respiratory system, then spreads to the lymph nodes and throughout the body. As a result, the virus can affect the lungs, brain and central nervous system.
Before MMR vaccines became available in the 1960s, measles caused epidemics with up to 2.6 million global deaths every year. By 2023, that number had fallen to roughly 107,000 deaths. 
Walmart
South Carolina

Share or comment on this article: 
                        Measles surge in Utah sparks fears US could undo decades of progress and jeopardize elimination status

e-mail

                                    Add comment

Comments 
167

	    Share what you think

Newest

Oldest

Best rated

Worst rated

View all

The comments below have not been moderated.

View all

      The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline.

Add your comment

Enter your comment

By posting your comment you agree to our 
house rules
.

Submit Comment

Clear

Close

Do you want to automatically post your MailOnline comments to your Facebook Timeline?

Your comment will be posted to MailOnline as usual.

No

Yes

Close

Do you want to automatically post your MailOnline comments to your Facebook Timeline?

Your comment will be posted to MailOnline as usual

  We will automatically post your comment and a link to the news story to your Facebook timeline at the same time it is posted on MailOnline. To do this we will link your MailOnline account with your Facebook account. We’ll ask you to confirm this for your first post to Facebook.

You can choose on each post whether you would like it to be posted to Facebook. Your details from Facebook will be used to provide you with tailored content, marketing and ads in line with our 
Privacy Policy
.

DON'T MISS

Prince Harry makes surprise appearance at NBA Finals without Meghan Markle

Timothee Chalamet declares Knicks victory is better than winning an OSCAR as he leads stars rejoicing over team's NBA Finals win

EXCLUSIVE
Very bitchy truth about Taylor Swift's feud with Miles Teller's wife Keleigh: Full nasty story of accusation that left actor 'absolutely disgusted'... and unforgivable betrayal that was 'nail in the coffin'

EXCLUSIVE
Friends of David and Victoria hit back at 'nasty accusation' from son Brooklyn they 'choreographed' sister Harper's visit to his mansion'

The French connection: How the Cordon Bleu school came to Riyadh - and made one chef's dream come true

Ad Feature

EXCLUSIVE
Angelina Jolie allegedly tried to get back with Brad Pitt but he REJECTED her... sparking 'campaign' of revenge: Sensational untold claims about feud and relentless 'parental alienation' plot

Inside the disappearance of Hollywood starlet Jean Spangler that saw Kirk Douglas dragged into investigation... after mysterious note bombshell

          .

NBA champion Trevor Ariza stuns fans by revealing tiny monthly salary in bitter custody battle... despite earning $116 MILLION in his career

Kanye West's wife Bianca Censori steps out practically NAKED in see-through bodysuit after rapper's concert in country of Georgia

OPINION
Jennifer Lopez just let slip her 'dark' bisexual sex fantasy: JACQUELYNN POWERS lays bare the daddy issues behind it all

Ancient epics meet modern tech: How Saudi Arabia is attracting ambitious filmmakers from Hollywood and beyond

Ad Feature

Sydney Sweeney steals the show at NBA Finals Game 5 with Scooter Braun after awkward Taylor Swift run-in... as Timothee Chalamet and stars cheer on Knicks in San Antonio

Anna Faris gets brutally honest in rare comment on Chris Pratt divorce... and reveals surprising coping mechanism

Taylor Swift sizzles in red velvet dress as she and Travis Kelce sneak into Maya Rudolph's Broadway show... ahead of their NYC nuptials

Seth Rogen says he has 'no plans' to work with canceled ex-pal James Franco again... and hints at 'personal' reason for split

Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker walk first red carpet together in more than TWO YEARS as they attend rocker's documentary premiere in NYC

Transgender actress says Trump's attack on DEI has caused her to lose 'so much money' and claims brands are now 'scared' to work with her

Doting dad Tom Brady pays heartfelt tribute to eldest son Jack on his graduation... with cheeky dig at 18-year-old's towering height

Courteney Cox's daughter Coco turns 22! Friends star shares rare look at her only child with ex David Arquette

Rosie O'Donnell posts rambling poem about PRISON VISIT with daughter Chelsea... after revealing secret facelift

EXCLUSIVE
Hotel siren Connie Sellecca, 71, looks half her age as she surfaces with husband John Tesh... see her now

Kourtney Kardashian stuns in sheer outfit as she cuddles son Rocky, two, during Central Park ride with Travis Barker

Paul Walker's daughter Meadow, 27, goes TOPLESS after honoring late dad at Cannes with sobbing Vin Diesel

The King leads slimmed-down royals as he's joined by Kate, William and their children George, Louis and Charlotte on the Buckingham Palace balcony for his birthday celebration

EXCLUSIVE
Humiliating truth about Nashville's most hated influencer and her relationship with Riley Green: Insiders reveal secret reason she was desperate to date country star... his brutal opinion of her... and derogatory two-word nickname people call her

Tom Brady rubs shoulders with Neymar as he headlines stars at World Cup game... before performing sweet handshake with daughter Vivian

Can you name J.Lo's four ex-husbands? Singer's former loves back in spotlight after she says she regrets not being single sooner... and reveals which actors she'd sleep with

Harper Beckham fails to reconnect with Brooklyn as she visits brother's LA mansion after he boycotted David's Hollywood Walk Of Fame star unveiling

Gwyneth Paltrow's mask has slipped to expose something hideous. The real reason she did that Israeli ad is just so sick: MAUREEN CALLAHAN

Leonardo DiCaprio and Vittoria Ceretti party at World Cup with stepdad HE set up with his mother

The collagen beauty drink shoppers call 'divine' for glowing skin and healthier hair - with results in as little as two weeks

Back into the groove at 67! 'Still hungry' Madonna defies the decades as she plans gruelling global tour

Jennifer Lopez, 56, flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in a sexy cut out leotard as she poses for sizzling snaps backstage ahead of surprise performance with David Guetta in Paris

Brooklyn Beckham enjoys a jog after snubbing his estranged dad David's Hollywood Walk Of Fame honour as it emerges his sister Harper tried to visit him in LA

Why tinted sunscreen is beauty's biggest trend right now - and the affordable one worth buying

'Harper Beckham would give anything to have her brother back': Insiders tell KATIE HIND the full story behind the 14-year-old's solo trip to see Brooklyn in LA - and the devastating reason she didn't know he wasn't home

Kim Kardashian continues her Monaco takeover after stealing the show at the Grand Prix with boyfriend Lewis Hamilton as she flaunts her curves in skintight leather

Sharon Stone, 68, cuts intense figure during rare outing with son Quinn, 20, in Beverly Hills

Tyra Banks SUES Netflix for defamation as she claims America's Next Top Model doc twisted reality with misleading edits

Permanently remove unwanted face and body hair in weeks with the IPL device that's hugely on sale today

Revealed: Taylor Swift and Travis Kelce's extreme move to keep wedding details a secret ahead of big day

Shania Twain, 60, looks incredible in a corset, hotpants and knee high boots as she opens for Harry Styles on first night of his London residency

Kate's mini-me! Princess Charlotte, 11, matches her mother in a white and blue dress as they travel together during the King's birthday parade

EXCLUSIVE
Inside Megan Thee Stallion and Klay Thompson's relationship: His alleged slurs about her, claims of paranoia and why they really split

This cool Vans gear is the easiest way to upgrade his casual style this summer

Kim Kardashian's daughter North West, 12, takes the stage in spiked choker and blue pigtails at VERY rowdy music festival... as she gets dad Kanye's stamp of approval

Prince Louis, 8, steals the show on balcony as he reacts to King's birthday parade - while Prince George, 12, shows off his impressive height

Bikini-clad Dua Lipa and new husband Callum Turner can't keep their hands off each other as they pack on the PDA in steamy photos during lavish Amalfi coast honeymoon

How Romeo + Juliet star Claire Danes's tears inspired Baby Reindeer writer Richard Gadd

The delicious collagen shakes helping people shed weight in just 28 days - our pictures show the stunning results

Just like us! Royal Family show their close bond as they laugh and lark about in heartwarming behind-the-scenes footage from King's birthday parade

Elizabeth Hurley, 61, is her own best advert as she models her bikini range while son Damian gushes 'soooo good'

Kit Harington shows off his ripped physique while Lindsay Lohan and Shailene Woodley are embroiled in a tense clash as they film scenes for Hulu thriller Count My Lies

Brad Pitt's heartbreak continues as son Knox drops his surname weeks before 18th birthday... after his other kids with ex Angelina Jolie did the same

EXCLUSIVE
Ryan Reynolds hit with $5m lawsuit over early-morning Tesla crash in ritzy Manhattan enclave

Michael officially becomes highest-grossing biopic of all time as it surpasses Bohemian Rhapsody with nearly $1BILLION at worldwide box office

Mystery around Taylor Swift's wedding location deepens after businesses near MSG make surprising claim... amid rumors it's a ruse

Katy Perry's 'trainwreck' World Cup opening ceremony in LA slammed by fans: 'She sounded terrible'

Gene Shalit dead at 100: Iconic Today show movie critic with bold mustache spent 40 years on the air

Sir Rod Stewart, 81, is forced to cancel California show at the last minute amid health concerns

What happened to the cast of Romy and Michele's High School Reunion? From being blacklisted by Harvey Weinstein to swapping showbiz for real estate and the MANY Friends crossovers - as sequel is announced three decades on

Emily Ratajkowski suffers huge backlash over 'disturbing' topless photoshoot as she 'breastfeeds' a doll while drinking wine

Meghan shares pictures with BFF Kelly McKee Zajfen's newborn  despite not showing her own children's faces on Instagram 

Naughty kitty! Kanye's wife Bianca Censori is bra and underwear free in a VERY sheer gown with a CAT mask

Prince George, 12, puts on a smart display as he joins his siblings Princess Charlotte, 11, and Prince Louis, 8, at King's birthday parade

Victoria Beckham leaves the crowd in hysterics as she pokes fun at herself in hilarious speech at David's Hollywood Walk Of Fame star unveiling

Tom Cruise gives rare glimpse at 20-year friendship with David and Victoria Beckham as trio put on chummy display at World Cup match in LA

Kate channels Diana at King's birthday parade with near-identical outfit to late mother-in-law's 1987 Catherine Walker look

EXCLUSIVE
'Proud pervert' photographer Terry Richardson's humiliating new life in exile: As his wife tells us how their marriage collapsed... neighbors expose eyebrow-raising local rumors about both of them

Emily Ratajkowski details her rampant sex life after divorcing husband who she hadn't slept with in MONTHS

Elizabeth Olsen is pregnant! Mary Kate and Ashley's younger sister expecting first baby with husband

Taylor Swift's ex Joe Alwyn spotted on 'date night' with Love Story star Sarah Pidgeon... as former flame prepares to wed Travis Kelce

EXCLUSIVE
Meghan's £3.7m jamaggedon: New crisis facing Duchess as insiders tell ALISON BOSHOFF how she's been ditched by major partner... and why it could spell the end of her ambitions

Jane Seymour, 75, CONFIRMS engagement to John Zambetti and details hilarious proposal... just days after flashing diamond ring

Troubled Shia LaBeouf celebrates 40th birthday with girlfriend in New Orleans after Mardi Gras bar brawl sentencing

Taylor Swift faces fan backlash after awkward exchange with music legend on red carpet

Blake Lively dealt fresh blow as judge rejects bid for massive payout from Justin Baldoni

Sir David Beckham unveils his Hollywood Walk of Fame star alongside A-list pals Tom Cruise and Eva Longoria

Steven Spielberg finally answers burning question ET fans have been asking for 44 years

Meg Ryan lists luxurious Hamptons mansion for $12.3m just two years after buying five-bedroom estate

Teresa Giudice's daughter Milania breaks silence with cryptic remarks after shock assault arrest

Tinkerbell model for original Peter Pan movie in 1953 dies at age 97

Kiefer Sutherland SUED by Uber driver who claims 'intoxicated' star assaulted and threatened to kill him before LA arrest

The hottest World Cup hunks revealed: Rock hard and battle ready. JANA HOCKING knows what these boys all have in common (and it's not their washboard abs)

Jerry Hall, 69, says she hasn't seen Murdoch, 95, since 'traumatic' divorce and  she doesn't want to live with a man again - as she opens up about her famous exes

Dame Helen Mirren breaks her silence after being branded an 'evil Zionist' in London street confrontation

Tom Cruise, 63, looks youthful as he reunites with his former co-stars Colin Farrell and Dakota Fanning

Vanderpump Rules star James Kennedy, 34, makes red carpet debut with pregnant girlfriend, 23... hours after confirming shock baby news

Harry Styles kicks off his record-breaking 12-night Wembley residency as part of his Together Together tour to a sold-out crowd - after fans were outraged over 'diabolical' cost of tickets

General Hospital star Steve Burton accuses ex-wife of 'parental alienation' in explosive custody war years after shock pregnancy scandal

Kai Trump roped into editing controversy as fans notice boos were missing from her video with grandpa Donald at Knicks game

Ladies of The View torch Trump's UFC event as Ana Navarro brands fight a 'desecration of the White House'

EXCLUSIVE
She starred in a hilarious 1990 comedy with James Belushi before appearing on Frasier... who is this actress, now 57?

Christina Applegate's Married With Children co-star gives update on her MS battle as she's not been seen on a red carpet in three years

Footloose singer Kenny Loggins was an '80s heartthrob... see him now as he makes rare red carpet appearance at 78

Savannah Guthrie puts on brave face on TODAY show after anonymous tip claimed missing mom Nancy's 'grave' was across the border

Meghan wears $130,000 worth of designer clothes and jewelry as she promotes her As Ever wine in slick new Instagram video

EXCLUSIVE
Justin Trudeau's nepo baby son Xavier defends 'cringe' music career as he's seen biking with glamorous girlfriend

EXCLUSIVE
The big Taylor Swift wedding lie! Insiders expose devious Madison Square Garden 'distraction plot' as REAL venue for nuptials and wild 'TOUR' plan is revealed

Model Paulina Porizkova, 61, proudly flaunts her 20lb weight gain as she reveals she dropped to only 128lbs at her thinnest

'Was that really Shakira?!': Singer's hair, sunglasses and dance moves at World Cup opening ceremony spark wild social media conspiracy theories

Jennifer Lopez, 56, sets pulses racing in a extreme plunging silver cut out minidress as she poses for sizzling snaps  after revealing who she wants to have 'sex' with

Give them Hell!  Gordon Ramsay visits Scotland squad on eve of World Cup opener against Haiti

Ex-Knicks star Carmelo Anthony appears to launch new relationship with NFL widow

Top Gun: Maverick star James Handy, 81, official cause of death revealed after he was murdered at home

Emmy-winning actor is DISQUALIFIED from 2026 ceremony category due to surprising new rule

EXCLUSIVE
World Cup WAGs RANKING: DailyMail+ Power List guaranteed to infuriate Ronaldo... the highest placed American... and truth about very big-name breakup

Jerry Hall, 69, reveals her top tips for looking youthful - including drinking rosé, NOT cutting your hair and never getting Botox - as she poses for Vogue 

Bettina Trump enjoys shopping trip with fellow socialite Nicky Hilton in London after intimate Bahamas wedding to Don Jr

EXCLUSIVE
Andrew's defiant emails to Beatrice and Eugenie revealed: Why he's livid with the King and jaw-dropping tirade to staff 

Love Island USA star hit with Ozempic allegations after her past as a plus-sized model is exposed

Selena Gomez breaks silence on viral 'dig' at BFF Taylor Swift over her Knicks game attendance

EXCLUSIVE
Prince George set to attend Eton - was it THIS 'concern' that ultimately gave William and Kate cold feet over sending him to a mixed school?

Duffy is seen in public for the first time in 16 YEARS as she prepares for a comeback after leaving the spotlight amid rape and kidnap horror

Ashley Judd slips into plunging green and white swimsuit at 58 as she frolics in the Baltic Sea

Princess Diana's nieces Lady Amelia and Lady Eliza Spencer turn heads in daring red and black dresses as they attend star-studded summer party

Taylor Swift tears up delivering 21-MINUTE speech as she becomes youngest woman EVER to be inducted into Songwriters Hall Of Fame

Madonna, 67, shows off her taut complexion as she poses with Graham Norton ahead of an 'intimate, in-depth discussion'

Gisele Bundchen, 45, shows off her long legs and goes topless in sexy new photoshoot as she claims she got famous for representing a 'healthier' kind of model

Natalie Imbruglia furiously hits back at claims she chose solo motherhood over being with a man after welcoming child via IVF and sperm donor at 44

Taylor Swift is credited with breaking 'Trump Curse' in New York Knicks' greatest comeback in NBA Finals history

Hilarious moment Taylor Swift makes director Steven Spielberg record her and Travis Kelce DANCING during Songwriters Hall Of Fame Induction

Ethan Slater looks coy as he makes his first public appearance since splitting from Ariana Grande

Lily Allen puffs on a vape as she enjoys a night out with pals after ex-husband David Harbour denied her turn of events from explosive revenge album

'We're together as much as possible': Callum Turner reveals new wife Dua Lipa is moving to the States to be by his side while he films new movie

Millie Bobby Brown, 22, reveals if she has future pregnancy plans one year after adopting daughter with husband Jake Bongiovi

Hugh Jackman and Sutton Foster are slammed over cozy photo at The Death of Robin Hood premiere: 'Nobody asked for this'

How to get a Victoria's Secret Angel's body: Adriana Lima, 45, reveals her six meals a day and work outs with Taylor Swift's PT 

Travis Kelce shares sweet PDA with Taylor Swift as he jets to NYC for historic induction into Songwriters Hall Of Fame ... and his mom Donna is there, too!

Cleavage-baring Sydney Sweeney gets boyfriend Scooter Braun's support at her lingerie event in LA after couple's near run-in with Taylor Swift

Selena Gomez accused of 'starting drama' after appearing to take dig at BFF Taylor Swift and other 'sudden' Knicks fans in now-deleted post

Kim Kardashian puts on sexy show for boyfriend Lewis Hamilton in crystal gown as she gushes over 'sister trip' to Monaco with Khloe

Hollywood icon Cybill Shepherd, 76, is spotted on brisk stroll after rare remarks about Moonlighting costar Bruce Willis

Ariana Grande SLAMS Trump's White House over 'heinous' use of her song in ICE video

Spencer Pratt breaks silence to brutally mock vote-counting delays after losing primary election for mayor of Los Angeles

Taylor Swift slips into glam mode in VERY racy black gown for 2026 Songwriters Hall Of Fame Induction Ceremony... after rowdy night at Knicks game

Demi Moore's daughter Rumer Willis learns her fate in bitter custody row with ex over three-year-old daughter

Jennifer Lopez's claws are out as she names WORST movie she's seen calling it a 'slow-moving thing'... and it's an OSCAR winner

Everyone's missed this major red flag in Katy Perry's gushing tribute to Justin Trudeau. I know so many women over 40 in the same boat... 

Jerry Seinfeld brutally shuts down pro-Palestine protestor after Knicks game: 'It doesn't exist'

Massive search for Nancy Guthrie launched in MEXICO after anonymous tip claimed her 'grave' has been found

Teresa Giudice's daughter Milania, 20, ARRESTED for assault after alleged domestic violence incident

Gennifer Flowers' message for Bill Clinton 34 years on, why she supports Trump...and her new life as the 'Blonde Bombshell of the Big Easy'

Shakira kickstarts World Cup in star-studded opening ceremony as blockbuster tournament gets underway amid chaos in Mexico

Gisele Bundchen, 45, says she was a FAILURE when she started modeling in the '90s before three words changed her life

Tori Spelling reunites with ex Dean McDermott for daughter's graduation... seven months after finalizing divorce amid money woes

Carrie Coon reveals job woes as she gives brutally honest assessment of her career after star turn on White Lotus

Jennifer Garner talks 's*** going down' in the middle of her life... on 11-year anniversary of Ben Affleck marriage ending

EXCLUSIVE
Taylor Swift's hunky bodyguard 'Drew' SHOVES fan as eyewitness tells all about wild encounter

Harry said he'd never bring Meghan and their kids back to Britain... but now that could be set to change: RICHARD EDEN

Taylor Swift, Kylie Jenner, and Timothee Chalamet continue Knicks celebrations at exclusive members-only club after epic NBA Finals game

Vanderpump Rules star James Kennedy, 34, announces he is expecting child with girlfriend-of-eight-months, 23

Claire Danes recalls 'vivid' memories of Carolyn Bessette Kennedy as she reveals mutual friend who forged their surprising connection

Jennifer Lopez looks chic in a pinstripe suit as she heads to David Guetta's show in Paris after revealing which Hollywood stars she wants to sleep with

Knicks radio host breaks silence on brutal Taylor Swift hot mic diss during NBA Finals at Madison Square Garden

Christine McGuinness wows in plunging sparkly gold mini dress as she leads the stars celebrating LGBTQ+ equality at the Rainbow Honours

Popular Netflix show to end after seven seasons... but there's a twist

Kylie Jenner flashes her abs in a bikini top as she launches a clothing collection inspired by 'raw intimacy'

Marvel producer calls out Hollywood for 'bowing to China' as he pushes for more 'Made in America' films

90s teen heartthrob looks unrecognizable as he makes rare public appearance... can you guess who he is?

Brad Pitt fans go wild for his tattooed tough guy in the survival movie Heart Of The Beast... even though the DOG steals the show

Taylor Swift and Travis Kelce wedding rumors broken down: Wedding date and where the nuptials are said to be held

Olivia Rodrigo reveals she is 60 per cent deaf in her left ear as she shares details of her hearing loss in new interview

The eye-watering cost of Knicks courtside fashion... from Taylor Swift to Kylie Jenner

Fans torch Timothee Chalamet as he rips shirt off in front of 'embarrassed' Kylie Jenner as Knicks win

Influencer Brianna Chickenfry looks unrecognizable in throwback pic as fans ask: 'How is this the same person?'

Jessica Alba, 45, proves how serious she is about toyboy Danny Ramirez, 33, by including him in VERY special family milestone

Did Selena Gomez make a dig at BFF Taylor Swift? Star stuns with wild comment about celebs at the Knicks game... days before wedding of the year

Dave Portnoy TURNS on Taylor Swift over Kylie Jenner hug at Knicks game: 'I'm sick of her'

Jennifer Lopez discusses which Hollywood stars she wants to have sex with in steamy interview and how her dad 'healed her' from Ben Affleck split

Look away now Kim! Kylie Jenner has 'crazy' courtside hug with Taylor Swift as Knicks triumph... amid explosive feud with Kardashian

          .

Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson, 54, reveals terrifying cancer scare after finding lump... and he didn't tell his wife

Tim Allen blames 'stuck' Home Improvement reboot on co-stars' 'personality problems'... amid onscreen son's string of arrests

Natalie Imbruglia gives rare insight into undergoing IVF as a single mother at 44 as she says 'it was brutal'

EXCLUSIVE
Inside secret revenge plot to sabotage Don Jr's relationship: How jilted Kimberly Guilfoyle schemed with billionaire ex of Bettina... before 'bumping and grinding'

'Harry and Meghan are not quite the people Americans thought they were going to be': Royal experts claim the 'tide has turned' after drama with Netflix execs 

Vile Jimmy Kimmel leads bullying campaign to drive Spencer Pratt out of LA after wildfires victim lost mayoral run-off

EXCLUSIVE
Warren Beatty's lonely last days: Reclusive star, 89, hasn't been seen by anyone in FOUR YEARS... now friends reveal reason he quit Hollywood

Olivia Munn seen sobbing in hospital bed on day of double mastectomy surgery in heartbreaking video as she pays tribute to her 'angel' doctor

Taylor Swift's surprising BFF revealed as they reunite courtside at star-studded Knicks game... and she's DECADES older than the singer

Comeback for the ages as phenomenal NY Knicks pull off greatest turnaround in NBA Finals HISTORY leaving Taylor Swift, Timothée Chalamet delirious

Scooter Braun and Sydney Sweeney risk awkward run-in with Taylor Swift as they're seated just FEET away from one another at Knicks game amid 'feud'

'Karma is a seat on the sideline': Taylor Swift exacts 'ultimate revenge' as she has the time of her life while longtime nemesis Scooter Braun sits five rows back

Lewis Hamilton debuts a new hairstyle as he arrives in the paddock ahead of the Barcelona Grand Prix - as girlfriend Kim Kardashian jets back to LA

'It's in Lewis Hamilton's laundry basket': Kim Kardashian is mocked by Monaco Grand Prix winner Kimi Antonelli for 'stealing his towel' in hilarious video

Knicks fans heap praise on Jordyn Woods' 'lucky bag'... with Karl-Anthony Towns' fiancée hailed for helping miracle comeback

Follow

DailyMail

Subscribe

Daily Mail

Follow

@dailymail

Follow

DailyMail

Follow

MailOnline

Follow

Daily Mail

DON'T MISS

Kim Kardashian swaps her Monaco glam for an oversized shirt as she arrives back in LA by private jet after PDA-packed trip to support Lewis Hamilton

EXCLUSIVE
Taylor Swift reveals Travis Kelce's huge regret while watching the Knicks at her rumored wedding venue

Revenge of the Nerds star Robert Carradine's cause of death at 71 revealed months after his passing

The rise and fall of Spencer Pratt as TV bad boy-turned-aspiring politician crashes out of LA mayor race after 'absurd' campaign 

Hailey Bieber cozies up to pop superstar in VIP seats at Knicks game... and it's NOT Taylor Swift

Prince William leaves fans swooning over his 'model' looks in a 'sharp' navy suit - hours after he topped our poll as best-dressed guest at Peter Phillips' wedding

Nicole Scherzinger, 47, turns heads in a plunging sequin gown as she leaves the Royal Albert Hall with fiancé Thom Evans, 41

Leelee Sobieski resurfaces on her 43rd birthday after ditching Hollywood and changing identity for new career

Pregnant Daisy Lowe shows off her baby bump in a khaki bikini as she enjoys a pampering spa day ahead of giving birth to her second child

Did Taylor Swift's outfit give away brazen hint about her wedding day on girls' night watching Knicks at MSG?

Jodie Comer goes braless and flashes her underwear in a sheer lace gown as she rocks an uncharacteristically daring ensemble at The Death Of Robin Hood premiere

How 'woke' storylines turned Doctor Who into a 'toxic brand': Time traveller exterminated by contrived plots, lacklustre finales and 'failed' Disney+ deal

Nepo baby high! Vin Diesel and Kyle Richards lead celebrities watching their kids graduate from prestigious LA prep school

Future Queen of Norway's son is denied prison leave to see his seriously ill mother while awaiting rape trial verdict 

Brooklyn Beckham says 'I can come across as annoying sometimes' as he reflects on his business ventures 

EXCLUSIVE
Knicks stars reignite Trump vs Taylor Swift war as team insiders vent fury on 'bad omen' president

Kylie Jenner makes first NBA Finals appearance alongside beau Timothee Chalamet as Hailey Bieber, Ben Stiller and Adam Sandler join them on celeb row

Tim Allen says Home Improvement cast's 'personality problems' are keeping series revival from moving forward 

EXCLUSIVE
Jacob Elordi's secret obsession that will shatter his leading man image: Amid Kendall Jenner romance

Hugh Jackman puts on cozy display with girlfriend Sutton Foster on the red carpet after THAT tense exchange

Should Beatrice and Eugenie be allowed to ride in the Royal Procession of carriages at Ascot next week? Have your say in the Palace Confidential poll

Camila Cabello sparks fan concern as she posts teary-eyed selfie after split from billionaire boyfriend

Sydney Sweeney FINALLY breaks silence on Zendaya and Euphoria cast feud rumors

Jacob Elordi snaps at fan asking for selfie in Japan - leaving the internet divided over his reaction

Vanderpump Rules star, 35, comes out as a 'late in life lesbian'

From the Makers of Candy Crush

Farm Heroes Saga, the #4 Game on iTunes. Play it now!

more

NEW ARTICLES
Home
Top

Share

Advertisement

Advertisement
