Run isolated sandboxes with full lifecycle control: AWS Lambda introduces MicroVMs

Today, we are announcing AWS Lambda MicroVMs, a new serverless compute primitive within 
AWS Lambda
 that lets you run code generated by users or AI in isolated, stateful execution environments. You get virtual machine level isolation, near-instant launch and resume, and direct control over environment lifecycle and state, all without managing infrastructure or building expertise in complex virtualization technologies. Lambda MicroVMs are powered by 
Firecracker
, the same lightweight virtualization technology that has powered over 15 trillions of monthly Lambda function invocations.

Why customers need this

Over the past few years a new class of multi-tenant applications has emerged that all share the need to hand each end user their own dedicated execution environment in which to safely run code that the application developer did not write. AI coding assistants, interactive code environments, data analytics platforms, vulnerability scanners, and game servers that run user-supplied scripts all fit this pattern. Building that capability today means making a difficult choice. Virtual machines deliver strong isolation but take minutes to start. Containers launch in seconds, yet their shared-kernel architecture requires significant custom hardening to safely contain untrusted code. Functions as a service are optimized for event-driven, request-response workloads, but are not designed for long-running interactive sessions that need to retain environment state across user interactions. That leaves developers either accepting tradeoffs between performance and isolation, or investing significant engineering resources to build and operate custom virtualization infrastructure to achieve isolated execution while delivering low-latency experiences to end-users. This presents an effort that demands deep expertise and pulls engineering time away from the product they are actually trying to build.

Lambda MicroVMs is purpose-built for exactly this gap. Each MicroVM gives a single end user or session its own isolated environment that launches rapidly, retains memory and disk state for the length of the session, and pauses to a low idle cost when the user steps away. Because the same Firecracker technology already underpins AWS Lambda Functions, you inherit the operational maturity of a service that has been running this stack at scale.

Let’s try it out

To get started, I navigated to the AWS Lambda console, where Lambda MicroVMs now appears in the left-hand navigation menu. I first need to create a MicroVM Image.

I packaged a Flask web app and its Dockerfile into a zip file, uploaded it to an 
Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3)
 bucket.

My Flask API – app.py

import logging

from flask import Flask, jsonify

app = Flask(__name__)
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

@app.route("/")
def hello():
    app.logger.info("Received request to hello world endpoint")
    return jsonify(message="Hello, World!")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=5000)

My Dockerfile

FROM public.ecr.aws/lambda/microvms:al2023-minimal
RUN dnf install -y python3 python3-pip && dnf clean all

WORKDIR /app

COPY requirements.txt .
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt

COPY app.py .

EXPOSE 5000

CMD ["gunicorn", "--bind", "0.0.0.0:5000", "app:app"]

I used the following command to create my MicroVM Image.

aws lambda-microvms create-microvm-image \
--code-artifact uri=<path/to/s3/artifact.zip> --name <VM_image_name> \
--base-image-arn arn:aws:lambda:us-east-1:aws:microvm-image:al2023-1 \
--build-role-arn <IAM role ARN>

You can also create the MicroVM Image in the AWS Console as in the image above. Once I ran the command, Lambda retrieved the zip, ran the Dockerfile, initialized the application, and took a Firecracker snapshot of the running disk and memory state. Build logs streamed in real time to 
Amazon CloudWatch
 under 
/aws/lambda/microvms/<image-name>
, and when the image was ready it appeared in the console with its 
Amazon Resource Name (ARN)
 and version number.

aws lambda-microvms run-microvm \
--image-identifier arn:aws:lambda:<region>:<acct>:microvm-image:my-image \
--execution-role-arn arn:aws:iam::<acct>:role/MicroVMExecutionRole \
--idle-policy '{"maxIdleDurationSeconds":900,"suspendedDurationSeconds":300,"autoResumeEnabled":true}'

Launching can also be done via the AWS Console or the CLI. I passed the image ARN and an idle policy configured to auto-suspend after 15 minutes of inactivity and auto-resume on the next incoming request. No networking setup was required. Lambda assigned the MicroVM a unique ID, returned a dedicated endpoint URL, and started a new MicroVM with my Flask app already running, since it was resumed from a snapshot. My Flask app was already running the moment the launch completed. One API call to get a fully initialized, bootstrapped compute environment.

To send traffic, I generated a short-lived auth token with the CLI and attached it to a plain HTTPS request using the 
X-aws-proxy-auth
 header. The request landed on my Flask app immediately. I then let the MicroVM sit idle past the suspend threshold, at which point the MicroVM was suspended, with its memory and disk state snapshotted and stored. I then sent another request, and it resumed with the application state fully intact. From the client side, the pause never happened.

How it works

Under the covers, Lambda MicroVMs delivers three capabilities that, until today, no single AWS compute service offered together. The first is virtual machine level isolation, which comes from Firecracker. Each session runs in its own dedicated MicroVM with no shared kernel and no shared resources between users, so untrusted code supplied by one user is contained to their execution environment, without access to other environments or the underlying system. The second is rapid launch and resume. The model is image-then-launch: you create a MicroVM Image by supplying a Dockerfile and code packaged as a zip artifact in Amazon S3, and Lambda runs your Dockerfile, initializes your application, and takes a Firecracker snapshot of the running environment’s memory and disk state. Every subsequent MicroVM launched from that image resumes from the pre-initialized snapshot rather than booting cold, which means launches and idle resumes both achieve near-instant startup latency. Even a multi-gigabyte interactive session comes back online quickly enough to feel responsive to the end user. The third is stateful execution. A running MicroVM retains memory, disk, and running processes across the user’s session. During idle periods, a MicroVM can be suspended – with memory and disk state intact – and resumed when traffic arrives. Installed packages, loaded models, and working ﬁlesets are readily available when the user resumes their session. MicroVMs support up to 8 hours of total runtime and can be suspended automatically after a configurable idle window, which makes it straightforward to build products as varied as software vulnerability scans that complete in minutes, data analytics applications that run for hours, and interactive coding sessions with extended idle periods. As Lambda MicroVMs are started from pre-initialized snapshots, applications generating unique content, establishing network connections, or loading ephemeral data during initialization may need to integrate with service-provided hooks for compatibility.

Lambda MicroVMs is a new resource within AWS Lambda, with a distinct API surface. Lambda Functions remain the right choice for event-driven, request-response workloads, and Lambda MicroVMs is purpose-built for multi-tenant applications that need to hand each end user or session their own isolated environment to execute user- or AI-generated code. The two complement each other. An application using Lambda Functions for its event-driven backbone can call into Lambda MicroVMs for the steps that need to run untrusted code in isolation. You bring the application, and the service delivers the execution environment.

Now available

AWS Lambda MicroVMs is available today in the US East (N. Virginia, Ohio), US West (Oregon), Europe (Ireland) and Asia Pacific (Tokyo) 
Regions
, on the ARM64 architecture, with up to 16 vCPUs, 32 GB of memory, and 32 GB of disk per MicroVM. Idle MicroVMs can be suspended explicitly through an API call or automatically through a lifecycle policy, which reduces the running cost while preserving full state for fast resume. Pricing details can be found on the 
AWS Lambda pricing page
.

To get started, visit the 
AWS Lambda console
, or learn more on the 
Lambda MicroVMs product page
. For documentation, see the 
Lambda MicroVMs Developer Guide
.
