Research 
 
 Michael Barlow 
 
 22/05/2026 

 Model Training as Code 

 TL;DR: Model training has grown complex enough to require many specialised stages and
        teams, and manual coordination between them doesn’t scale. At Aleph Alpha, we’ve built
        Savanna, a model factory that implements the entire training pipeline in code, turning model
        training into a collaborative software project. In Savanna, end-to-end training runs are
        hermetic, and launchable with one click. This post describes Savanna, why it’s needed, and
        the engineering culture that makes it effective. 

 Introduction 
 
 Model training is moving fast. New stages keep joining the pipeline and existing ones grow
        more intricate, making model training an engineering challenge for three key reasons. First,
        more complexity means more room for error: bugs or inconsistencies in data, code, or
        configuration can cause entire training runs to fail or diverge. Second, the cost of failure
        keeps rising: models grow larger, GPU prices rise, and ever more data is processed per run.
        When you’re burning thousands of GPU hours, “oops” is an expensive word. 
 
 The third and hardest challenge is organisational. The complexity has long outgrown the
        capacity of a single mind, so labs like ours have built large, specialised teams. The
        problem then becomes coordinating those teams. How can members autonomously explore the
        latest research in their area of expertise, while integrating their changes into the
        production pipeline without breaking it or interfering with each other’s work? And how do
        they ensure that improvements to individual stages translate into a better model at the end? 
 
 Traditional, manual model training processes do not have good answers to these questions. 

 The hidden cost of manual model training 
 
 Let’s break down the traditional manual process. At a high level, model training looks
        simple: pre-training to absorb the internet, followed by post-training to learn
        instruction-following. In reality, you don’t train a good model on your first try. Arriving
        at a good data mix, architecture and training recipe is an iterative, compute-bound process
        guided by evaluation, where each arrow below is weighted by its relative GPU cost: 

 Each of these components is complex enough to warrant multiple dedicated teams. Modern
        post-training, for example, comprises a supervised fine-tuning (SFT) stage followed by a
        reinforcement learning (RL) stage. SFT and RL require different skillsets and tools, but
        must be integrated to train a model. 
 
 Consider what a single model’s journey through the pipeline might look like in a manual
        lab: 
 
 The data team finishes a new mix and sends the database path over Slack to the pre-training
        team, who kick off a multi-week run. Two weeks in, the storage quota fills up and the
        training run crashes. The filesystem is managed manually, so no one is sure whether it’s
        safe to delete that 30TB dataset with 
do_not_delete
 in its file name, and the GPUs
        sit idle while the pre-training team works this out. When they finally relaunch, they reconstruct
        the original setup from memory and Slack threads, hoping they didn’t forget to set a flag. 
This is the first hidden cost: every manual step is an opportunity for human error.

 When pre-training is eventually complete, the pre-training team hands the checkpoint to the
        SFT team. To find a good recipe, the SFT team then manually kicks off a sweep of parallel
        trainings with different configurations and data mixes. As checkpoints roll in, the team
        runs their evaluation script on each one, sharing results and analysis in Slack. Some
        recipes look promising, others don’t, and they repeat this process for a few weeks until
        they narrow down a good one. Without realising it, the team repeated some experiments that
        they already completed for the previous pre-trained checkpoint a few months back. 

This is the second hidden cost: the team forgets its learnings.
 There’s no durable
        record of the reasoning behind a hyperparameter’s current value, no formal link between a data
        mix and its constituent datasets, and no clear attribution attaching a model to the training recipe
        that produced it. In a manual lab, this lineage is scattered across Slack, the filesystem, an
        experiment manager and various wiki pages, and is easily lost over time. 
 
 The SFT team hands their checkpoint to the RL team, who kick off a training run with this
        as the base. The final model underperforms. Is the RL recipe overfit to last month’s SFT
        checkpoint, or is the SFT checkpoint itself at fault? After two weeks of debugging, the RL
        team confirms it’s the latter. Neither team can execute the other’s stage, so each had
        optimised for its own slice of the pipeline rather than the model at the end. And because
        integration is a manual hand-off, it happens rarely, leaving a month’s worth of divergence
        to reconcile each time. 
This is the third hidden cost: manual, infrequent hand-offs fragment teams’ ownership.

 It’s clear that manual model training doesn’t scale, and automation is not the only missing
        piece. Each of these hidden costs stem from the same underlying problem: the pipeline lives
        in the minds of the team rather than in a shared, durable artefact. To scale, the pipeline
        itself needs to be something tractable that teams can collaborate on. 

 Introducing: Model Training as Code 
 
 Our model factory, codenamed Savanna, implements our entire model training pipeline and
        processes in imperative code. We call this Model Training as Code (MTaC). Here’s what a
        simple Savanna post-training pipeline looks like in pseudocode: 

async
 post_train(config: PostTrainConfig) -> PostTrainEvaluation:
    sft_checkpoint = 
await
 sft(config.sft)
    sft_eval = 
spawn
 evaluate(config.eval, sft_checkpoint)

    rl_checkpoint = 
await
 rl(config.rl, sft_checkpoint)
    rl_eval = 
spawn
 evaluate(config.eval, rl_checkpoint)

return
 PostTrainEvaluation(
await
 sft_eval, 
await
 rl_eval)

 By lifting the pipeline into code, you gain three things: composability, consensus and
        provenance. 

Composability:
 Composability comes from expressing manual steps as functions
          with typed inputs and outputs, which you can then build abstractions around and compose into
          an end-to-end pipeline that runs with one click. Modifying the pipeline becomes as simple as
          editing a function, repetitive work like evaluating intermediate checkpoints can be automated
          with a for loop, and testing is straightforward, because you can run subsets or downscaled versions
          of the pipeline with a different parametrisation.

Consensus:
 Consensus comes from version control. The main branch represents
          the team’s collective best understanding of how to train a model. The code contains the full
          training recipe, so there is no setup to reconstruct or flag to forget when launching a training
          run.

Provenance:
 Provenance comes from code comments and commit history. These encode
          the learnings and decisions that led to main. Past training runs stay reproducible, as the code
          that produced them is pinned in a commit you can check out and rerun.

 When any team can launch the full pipeline themselves, they can run any other team’s stage
        and iterate on the model as a whole rather than just their own slice of it. Labs typically
        decompose model training temporally when they scale, with each team owning a stage of the
        pipeline. MTaC opens the door to a capability-based decomposition, where teams instead own a
        model behaviour like multilinguality from end to end. 
 
 Integrate little, integrate often 
 
 With the pipeline in code, standard code collaboration best practices apply, and to make
        the most of MTaC, you need to follow them. The most important of these is trunk-based
        development, where changes land on 
main
 as soon as they can and in small increments,
        so teams can build on each other’s work at the earliest opportunity and fail fast if an approach
        is wrong. If you instead accumulate changes in long-lived branches, you pay the same integration
        debt as before. 

 Using Savanna 

Savanna

Savanna lives in GitHub, where its CI is the entrypoint for model training. You can trigger
        this CI by pushing to a branch, or by manually launching a run from the GitHub UI. Training
        our best model is as simple as triggering CI on 
main
. We also use CI on pull
        requests to quickly validate the pipeline with a small-scale end-to-end training run. This
        completes in under 5 minutes, so contributing to Savanna never feels slow, and it gives us
        confidence in our changes. To catch semantic regressions in our pipeline, we run a
        larger-scale end-to-end training test run every night, which validates our training logic by
        asserting that the resulting model achieves a measurable improvement on our evaluation
        suite.

MTaC provides decision lineage via 
git blame
, and Savanna extends this with
        artefact lineage. Runs are hermetic, and all non-code artefacts (e.g. data, models and
        tokenisers) are immutable and versioned in a registry, so you can be sure you’re getting the
        same thing every time. When you kick off a run, the referenced artefacts, training logs,
        metrics and evaluation results are all linked to that run and the resulting checkpoint, so
        you can easily attribute output to input. To determine which models were trained on a
        specific dataset, you use the artefact lineage graph, not Slack search.

 Savanna makes full-scale runs easy, but evolving what those runs look like requires the
        ability to experimentally modify every aspect of the pipeline, be that data,
        hyperparameters, pipeline steps, environments, sharding topologies, or anything else, at a
        smaller scale. In Savanna, experimenting is as simple as pushing changes to a branch and
        running CI from there. If you want to try a new dataset, you can add it to the ablation
        training config and run CI. If the resulting evals show an improvement, you can then merge
        this change into main to make it part of the next full-scale run. 
 
 Hyperparameter sweeps are also easy. Since the pipeline is just a function, you can
        programmatically invoke it multiple times with different parameterisations. For example,
        below is an experiment to find which SFT and RL learning rates work best in the
        post-training pipeline shown previously: 

async
 post_training_learning_rate_experiment(config: PostTrainConfig) -> str:
    post_train_runs = []

for
 sft_learning_rate 
in
 (1e-4, 1e-5):
        
for
 rl_learning_rate 
in
 (1e-4, 1e-5):
            run_config = config
                .with_sft_learning_rate(sft_learning_rate)
                .with_rl_learning_rate(rl_learning_rate)
            post_train_runs.append(
spawn
 post_train(run_config))

    post_train_evaluations = 
gather
 post_train_runs
    experiment_report_url = create_report(post_train_evaluations)
    
return
 experiment_report_url

 Savanna will then orchestrate the sweep and collate the end results into a report for you
        to analyse. Here’s this experiment visualised in Savanna’s workflow engine UI: 

 Blue nodes are “running” and orange nodes are “awaiting cache”. Although we call

post_train
 four times, the SFT stage will only run twice: Savanna’s workflow engine
        recognises when stages have the same inputs and will read their outputs from the cache when the
        corresponding running stage completes. This lets you launch sweeps that modify multiple aspects
        of the pipeline without worrying about the combinatorial explosion of redundant computation. 
 
 For pre-training runs or long-running RL jobs, we incrementally emit and evaluate
        checkpoints so we can better understand how our model changes throughout training. After
        training, Savanna automatically evaluates the model on our benchmark suite, and collects all
        results and metrics into a run report. Savanna also automatically updates our model
        leaderboard, which we display on a big screen in our Heidelberg HQ so everyone shares the
        excitement when we train our new best model. 

 How Savanna works 
 
 When you trigger a run, Savanna launches a job on Flyte, our workflow engine of choice,
        which runs in Kubernetes. Flyte provides a convenient way to run arbitrary tasks, durable
        execution, sequencing, parallelism, retries, caching and a UI to visualise runs. 
 
 We store model and data artefacts immutably in our on-prem object store and track their
        versions in Weights & Biases. This lets us easily assign cleanup policies to keep our
        storage system tidy and gives us a UI to explore artefact lineage interactively. We then
        stream this data to our Kubernetes GPU clusters for training. During training, our jobs log
        metrics to our monitoring system so we can track progress and performance in real time, and
        send alerts if intervention is necessary. 

 How has Savanna actually helped us? 
 
 We know that the complexity of model training will only grow as the field advances, and the
        organisational challenges will grow with it. MTaC has enabled us to lift this organisational
        complexity into code, which has fundamentally changed the way we work. 
 
 Day to day, we iterate faster. Most of our work is small-scale experiments and sweeps, and
        Savanna automates the manual launching and evaluation these used to involve. That effort now
        goes into analysing results and designing the next experiment. 
 
 The stakes are different for a single large run. During our most recent large pre-training
        run we resumed training several times to tune our setup as we learned more about how the
        model was behaving through our automated intermediate evals. Each relaunch was quick and
        low-risk, because the consensus MTaC provided meant there was no setup to reconstruct and no
        flag to forget. And because relaunching was easy, it did not need to be the same person
        twice, so whoever was on hand could safely pick it up. 
 
 At a higher level, MTaC has allowed us to set up multiple capability-oriented post-training
        teams who own the integration and improvement of a model behaviour end-to-end. Our
        multilinguality team, for example, is making the model excel at German language and culture
        by building the SFT datasets, RL environments and evaluation suites this requires. 
 
 Since adopting Savanna and embracing engineering culture, our learning rate as an
        organisation has significantly increased, and the approach has only become more valuable as
        our pipeline has grown deeper and our teams larger. 
 
 Looking further ahead, we see MTaC as a key enabler for auto-research. With our entire
        pipeline in code, an LLM agent can read, modify and run it autonomously, and we are
        beginning to explore this now. One day, we hope our model will be able to self-improve via
        Savanna. 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 
 Written by Michael Barlow. This work reflects the collective efforts of many contributors
        across Aleph Alpha Research who brought Savanna to life. Thanks to Martin Reinhardt, Dominik
        Kellner and Jordan Sassoon for helpful feedback that shaped this blog, and Paige Reddington
        and Noé Beckerle Vallejo for making it presentable.
