Motorola's MotoSync+ app, which is required to setup its routers, hasn't worked in weeks. What's going on?

Credit: Nikolas Kokovlis/NurPhoto via Getty Images

Motorola
 has effectively bricked its WiFi routers without warning, and the issue has been ongoing for nearly a month, according to a Mashable investigation and user complaints across the App Store, Amazon, and Reddit.
Sometime around mid-May, Motorola's MotoSync+ app for 
iOS
 and 
Android
 went down. On iOS, the MotoSync+ app opens to the login screen, and a loading wheel just spins and spins. On Android, the app also loads to the login screen but displays a "Server License Expired" message.
Because the Motorola MotoSync+ app is required to set up all new compatible WiFi routers released by Motorola, many users have been completely blocked from using their routers.

You May Also Like

SEE ALSO:

The confusing U.S. router ban, explained: Which routers are banned?

Some Motorola customers may also be completely unaware of the issue, as existing router setups may continue to work — for now. However, if that user ever needs to factory reset their router, which Motorola recommends when experiencing certain problems, they must use the app to do so, according to 
Motorola's support documentation
. Likewise, users with new Motorola routers can only add devices, change settings, or perform troubleshooting within the MotoSync+ app.
Mashable reached out to Motorola repeatedly for this story, but the company hasn't provided any explanation for the problems.

A Mashable screenshot showing errors with the iOS MotoSync+ app.

Credit: Mashable screenshot

A Reddit user shared this screenshot from the Android app (personal info obscured).

Credit: Screenshot courtesy of Reddit

Motorola's networking products and the MotoSync+ app are produced and operated by 
Premier LogiTech, LLC
, which licenses the Motorola brand for WiFi products.
What's happening to Motorola routers?
Mashable first noticed the issue in May shortly after we began testing one of Motorola's latest networking devices, the Motorola Q15 WiFi 7 mesh router, which came out late last year and costs between $129.99 and $349.99, depending on the configuration. 
Luckily, we set up the base router before the MotoSync+ app stopped working, so the router continues to work for now. However, we cannot set up the rest of the mesh network while the app is unavailable.
In comments on sites like Reddit and Amazon, angry users have left dozens of comments about the situation and the lack of customer support from Motorola.
Motorola has yet to publicly address the issue, and its routers are still being sold on 
Amazon
 and at retailers such as 
Best Buy
. Motorola's main website continues to 
promote its routers
 on the Motorola Network ecommerce shop as well. 
However, Motorola recently removed all of its routers and modems from the 
Motorola Network online store
, and product pages 
now return a 404 "Page not found" error
 or redirect to the home page. An archive of the site shows that Motorola was still selling routers up until at least May 18, roughly one week after the app stopped working.

Mashable Light Speed

Want more out-of-this world tech, space and science stories?

Sign up for Mashable's weekly Light Speed newsletter.

Use this instead

                    By clicking Sign Me Up, you confirm you are 16+ and agree to our 
Terms of Use
 and 
Privacy Policy
.

Thanks for signing up!

SEE ALSO:

Motorola phones are reportedly injecting affiliate codes into the Amazon app

All of Motorola Network's products have suddenly been removed from sale.

Credit: Mashable screenshot

What are Motorola Network users saying?
A 
Reddit thread
 about the MotoSync+ app issue was originally posted on May 12 and has quickly been filled with negative comments from other unhappy customers.
"Tried without success to contact tech support again yesterday," said Reddit user u/Ok_Fortune_8672. "Unless you are contacting them about a cellphone, the lights are out and nobody's home."
Consumers have resorted to leaving negative comments across Motorola router product pages on sites like Amazon. 
"Phone based setup didn't work, returned. Motorola support was non-existent," reads one 
Amazon review posted
 on May 5, suggesting the MotoSync+ issue may have started earlier than previously reported.
The App Store and Google Play Store pages for the MotoSync+ app have also been filled with negative reviews. According to the MotoSync+ app profile on the App Store, the MotoSync+ app last received an update two months ago.
"The previous MotoSync app worked wonderfully with my MG8702 router, but ever since I was forced to switch to the MotoSync+ app, it’s been a pain," said one user, referencing how Motorola shut down its original legacy MotoSync app in April, 
pushing users
 to the new MotoSync+ app.
However, it seems that the original MotoSync app faced similar downtime issues a few years ago, too. Back in 2023, Reddit users 
reported
 that they were unable to use the legacy MotoSync app to set up and edit their devices for roughly a month before the app began working again.

Related Stories

Motorola Razr Fold hands-on: I liked the Fold, but it doesn't stand out against tough competition

Motorola Razr Ultra 2026 costs too much, but I really like it

Why does the internet keep crashing so often? First Google Cloud, then AWS, now Cloudflare.

If you want a Motorola foldable, it's the Razr Ultra or bust

What's even more frustrating for some users: The new MotoSync+ app offers an optional subscription service for premium features. Paying users can't access these features either while the app is down.
Motorola customers on platforms such as Reddit report contacting the company and receiving either a generic automated reply or no response at all. However, Reddit user u/SnooPoems7789, who started the main thread on Reddit about the issue, posted that they received a reply on May 14 from Motorola claiming it was an "issue with our networking vendor" and the company was "taking actions to address the problem."
Another Reddit user reported calling a customer support number listed on the MotoSync+ app and being connected with a router software company called Gryphon. The company currently sells the 
Motorola MQ20 router
 on its website. However, Gryphon reportedly told the customer that they "don't support MotoSync" and the user needed to speak to Motorola directly.

MotoSync+ app in the App Store

Credit: Mashable screenshot

Interestingly, Gryphon has an app called 
Gryphon Connect
 on Apple's App Store that looks exactly like the 
MotoSync+ app
. The user interface and even the App Store screenshots and marketing copy promoting the app are identical, with only the brand names for Gryphon and Motorola swapped out for each app.
Mashable also reached out to Gryphon to inquire about the company's relationship with Motorola.
"While the apps may look similar and are both associated with Gryphon technology, the Motorola MQ20 uses a different platform and management system from the Gryphon Tower, Guardian, and AX models," a Gryphon spokesperson said in a statement provided to Mashable. "The Motorola MQ20 has its own dedicated support environment and diagnostic tools, which are handled specifically by Motorola Support. They have access to the proper system needed to check the router status, settings, logs, and advanced diagnostics for the MQ20."
For now, however, many Motorola customers are left without answers or a working WiFi router — at least for the time being.
"Tbh if I was you I would go ahead and get rid of it and get a different router," wrote Reddit user u/SnooPoems7789 in the replies to other users on his Reddit thread. "They literally made it a paperweight now."

Topics

Apps & Software

Motorola

Gadgets
