State of multi-player Wayland

                    2026-07-28

                /
                
blinry

                    /
                    
CC BY-SA 4.0

                    / 
tech
, 
software

I’ve been fascinated by the idea of attaching multiple mice to one computer, and then having multiple mouse cursors inside of one desktop environment!

I just spent three weeks investigating how well that’s currently supported on Linux & Wayland.
Let me tell you what I found!
The results are surprisingly cool.

Together with this blog post, I’m publishing a number of little tools and patched libraries that add or improve “multi-seat” support.
But many pieces in this puzzle are still incomplete or missing.
I marked some “open projects ideas” with a 📝 emoji throughout the blog post.
By publishing this post, I hope to find people who are interested in exploring and expanding this space together.
If that’s you, 
reach out!

(Yes, my default mouse cursor 
is a turtle.
)

Why would you even 
want
 this?

I admit that this is a somewhat esoteric way of using computers.
But hear me out:

It’s convenient for pair programming: One person can fix a bug in one window, while the other browses the documentation!

It’s fun for games!
Using multiple controllers is the norm, why not multiple mice?

This style of multi-player computing facilitates collaboration inside of applications very naturally, without the need for complicated synchronization algorithms.

Summary

Here’s an overview of how well “multi-seat” is currently supported in various software:

Core 
wayland
 protocol

5 ★★★★★  

Deeply integrated!

Weston

3 ★★★☆☆

No easy way to dynamically reconfigure seats.

sway

4 ★★★★☆

Can’t detach devices from seats (#3491).

niri

1 ★☆☆☆☆

No support yet (#3159).

River

4 ★★★★☆

No support for 
ext-transient-seat-v1
 (#1497).

GTK

4 ★★★★☆

New seats are not registered while app is running.

SDL

3 ★★★☆☆

No seat information in absolute mouse mode (#16027)
, seat information only via device name.

wayvnc

5 ★★★★★

Supports 
ext-transient-seat-v1
.

Table of contents

Terminology

Logical seats

Physical seat

The 
wayland
 protocol

Wayland Compositors

Weston

sway

River

niri

Graphics libraries

GTK

SDL

LÖVE

Applications

Multi-seat GTK text widget

LÖVE physics playground

Terminal emulators

Browsers

VNC setup

Terminology

I’m going to use the term “seat” a lot in this post.
It describes input devices that are grouped together, to be used by the same person.
For example, you could have two people in front of one computer, and each one has their own mouse and their own keyboard.
In this setup, there would be two “seats”, and every seat has one mouse and one keyboard:

seat0

Laptop touchpad

Laptop keyboard

seat1

External mouse

External keyboard

Careful though – people use this term in two different ways:

Logical seats

The type of seat I’m interested in is 
sometimes called
 a 
“logical seat”
.
This is where multiple people are in front of one computer, and each have their own mouse/keyboard, but they control 
the same desktop environment
.
As in, the desktop shows multiple mouse cursors!
The people can “hand over” windows to each other, draw together into a whiteboard application, or directly collaborate within the same software.
(Not that all of these things would be possible right now, but, you know, conceptually!)

I think there could be a term that’s describing this concept even better – in the title of this post, I picked “multi-player”, to make clear that it’s mostly about multiple 
people
 who are collaborating.
I’ve also seen “multi-cursor” or “multi-pointer” (which are missing the keyboard component).

Physical seat

The term “seat” can also mean something else, which is called a 
“physical seat”
:
This refers to setups where there are multiple people who all have their own independent setup: A screen, a keyboard, a mouse.
They don’t really interact with each other, but the input and output devices are connected to a single computer.
This is what Wikipedia is referring to in the 
Multiseat configuration
 article.

But this is 
not
 what this post is about.
If you know more about the current state of support on Linux, I’d encourage you to write your own blog post on it!

Overview

I only investigated the situation on Linux, and specifically on Wayland (a modern graphical display system).
X11 (the X Window System) has its own multi-seat extension called 
Multi-Pointer X
 (MPX), which I also had a lot of 
fun
 with a couple of years ago.

But at this point, I’ve moved on to Wayland compositors in my everyday computer usage.
And it turns out that Wayland has 
great
 built-in support for multiple seats!

I’ll talk about how to set up a multi-user system, what Wayland protocols are involved, and finally, what the current application support looks like.

The tricky thing is that multi-seat support has to be present at every layer:

The Wayland compositor (which usually contains the window manager).

The 
wayland
 protocol.

The GUI library used by the graphical application.

The graphical program itself.

Optionally, if you want to allow people to collaborate with you remotely, the program you use to allow them to connect (like a VNC server) requires multi-seat support, as well.
I’ll later show how to set this up!

So we’re going to look at all of those layers, starting with the 
wayland
 protocol itself.

The 
wayland
 protocol

This rabbit hole was the first time I looked deeper in what Wayland actually 
is
!
At its heart, it’s a collection of protocols.
I was really happy to find that the core 
wayland
 protocol (that graphical programs and the Wayland compositor use to talk to each other) has deeply integrated multi-seat support:

Every input event is connected to a 
wl_pointer
 or 
wl_keyboard
, which in turn are connected to a 
wl_seat
.
You can then use this information about the seats to “group” input events together!
There are also events that are triggered when seats appear/disappear.

Wayland Compositors

But how well do compositors (the programs that manage the windows and draw their contents) use these concepts to speak with the client applications?
I tried some:

Weston

Weston
 used to be the reference implementation of a Wayland compositor, and is being maintained by the Wayland team at freedesktop.org.

It was the first compositor I realized had real multi-seat support!
You can have multiple mouse cursors, and each one can move around windows, independently from each other!

Weston also implements per-seat window focus, which means that if a seat has a mouse and a keyboard, the mouse can focus a window, and the keyboard will hen send its keystrokes to it – and different seats can focus different windows at the same time.

There are some fun edge cases that I found playing around with this:

Once a cursor starts to resize/move a window, those actions are not possible for the other one.

One cursor can open a menu, and the other one can use it, that one works pretty well!

Closing a window with one cursor, while the other drags it, makes the second cursor 
disappear
!
:D

These are really hard (and fun) UI questions to solve!
Often, it’s not clear to me what the correct behavior should be!

How to set up multiple seats on Weston

Setting up seats on Weston is quite involved.
Later compositors will make it much easier!

To separate input devices into multiple seats, you need to use udev rules to set the 
ENV{WL_SEAT}
 property
.
Assign the same seat name to a mouse and a keyboard to make them work together!
The default seat is “default”.

Detailed instructions:

Use 
sudo libinput list-devices
 to find the device file of your input device (like “
/dev/input/event12
”)

Use 
udevadm info -a /dev/input/event12
 to find the parent device with a catchy 
ATTRS{name}
.

Create a file 
/run/udev/rules.d/00-multiseat.rules
 like this:

 ATTRS{name}=="Name of your mouse" ENV{WL_SEAT}="second"

(Note that there’s two 
=
 characters for testing, but a single 
=
 character for assigning.)

Run 
sudo udevadm trigger
 to apply the new rules.

Now check 
sudo libinput list-devices
 again.
The device’s “Seat” should now say “seat0, second”!

sway

sway
 is the Wayland reimplementation of i3.
Support for multiple seats was 
added
 to 
wlroots
 in version 0.1 (released in 2017),
and subsequently 
added
 to sway 1.0.

sway also has excellent multi-seat support, including per-seat window focus!

How to set up multiple seats on sway

You can list all inputs using 
swaymsg -t get_inputs

and list all seats using 
swaymsg -t get_seats
.

Then, use 
swaymsg seat <name> assign <input_identifier>
 to assign an input device to a specific seat.
The seat will be created if it didn’t exist before.

Right now, this seat management has a surprising property: If you assign a device to one seat, and then to another, instead of replacing that seat assignment, it will 
add
 it.
That means that you will then have two mouse pointers being controlled by a single mouse!

📝 There’s 
an open issue
 to discuss solutions for that, and I made a 
patch to fix this issue
 for myself.
If you’re running that patch, you can use my 
multi-seat-configurator
 tool to quickly assign input devices to seats using a TUI!

I haven’t tried other wlroots compositors yet, if you have experience with them, please tell me about it!

River

River is a non-monolithic Wayland compositor that provides the compositor part, and allows you to write your own window manager!
I think it’s a very cool idea.

The multi-seat capabilities are pretty good, it’s pretty much baked into everything.
River also has its own 
river-input-management-v1
 protocol that can notify you when new input devices become available, create/destroy seats, and assign devices to seats.
I wrote a little Rust tool (
river-multi-seat-configurator
 that uses this protocol to assign devices to seats on demand.

I only tried the 
tinyrwm
 example window managers for River, which even somewhat support per-seat window focus!

📝 It would be a fun project to write a new window manager for River with first-class multi-seat support!
Window focus could be highlighted with multiple colors; edge cases of interacting with the windows could be handled in a reasonable way; and there could be per-seat clipboards?

niri

niri is my Wayland compositor of choice these days. <3
Last year, multi-seat support 
was requested
, but the lack of application support was quoted as a reason not to add it.

I think it would be great.
Some months ago, I hacked in some multi-seat support, see the 
multi-seat
 branch of my fork here
.

📝 Currently, my “hacked version” only supports two seats, and there are some hardcoded device names in the code.
Adding a proper “seat manager” would be the next step.

Graphics libraries

GTK

To my surprise, the GUI toolkit 
GTK
 seems to have great support for multi-seats, conceptually!
Events have a 
get_seat
 method, which directly tell you which 
Seat
 an event belongs to.
There doesn’t seem a way to get the seat’s name, but you can compare them to tell whether they’re different, which seems good enough.

I’ve only tested this on GTK4, but the types and methods seem to have existed in GTK3, as well.

Most GTK widgets don’t really respect multi-seat input, and mostly act as if all inputs would come from the same device.
But I wrote an experimental MultiSeatText widget in Rust, see 
below
!

📝 A bug I noticed is that while GTK notifies you when seats are removed, it doesn’t seem to notice when seats are added.
Thus, for devices in a seat to do anything, they must already be attached before the program launches.
This bug should be reproduced, reported, and fixed!

SDL

The Simple DirectMedia Layer supports 
some
 multi-seat features since 
v3.3.4
 (released in 2025).

When you try this, make sure to 
set the 
SDL_VIDEODRIVER
 environment variable to 
wayland
.
SDL seems to fall back to XWayland otherwise in my tests.

Events like 
SDL_MouseButtonEvent
 or 
SDL_KeyboardEvent
 have a 
which
 field, that’s different if the events come from different seats.
You can also tell when devices are plugged in or out from 
SDL_MouseDeviceEvent
 and 
SDL_KeyboardDeviceEvent
, which carry the same 
which
 field.

The device IDs are arbitrary unique IDs that are 
not reused
 when plugging devices out and back in.
To learn which seats the devices belong to, you can use the 
SDL_GetMouseNameForID
 and 
SDL_GetKeyboardNameForID
 functions.
They will report names like “Virtual core pointer (default)” or “Virtual core keyboard (second)”, for example, where the part in the parentheses is the name of the seat.

📝 There’s a caveat: The 
which
 field in mouse events will be forced to 0 when the mouse is in the (default) absolute mode.
You have to activate 
relative mode
 in order to get 
which
 fields with actual device IDs.
I opened 
this issue
 to find out why that is, and the answer was “for consistency, to match the behavior on other platforms”.

The patch to also get the 
which
 field in absolute mouse mode is simple: Just comment out all lines that say 
mouseID = SDL_GLOBAL_MOUSE_ID;
 in 
src/events/SDL_mouse.c
.
Here’s a snippet of Nix code that you can use to make a patched version of this yourself (if this seems confusing, feel free to email me, and I’ll help/expand this!):

pkgs.sdl3.overrideAttrs (old: {
  postPatch = ''
    substituteInPlace src/events/SDL_mouse.c --replace-fail "mouseID = SDL_GLOBAL_MOUSE_ID;" "//mouseID = SDL_GLOBAL_MOUSE_ID;"
  '';
});

LÖVE

I’m a big fan of the 
LÖVE
 2D game engine, and I wanted to make some multi-seat games with it.
LÖVE is based on SDL, so I made a 
patched version of LÖVE
 where the 
which
 field is forwarded to the event callbacks in Lua!

My repo contains a Nix flake that also bundles my patches to SDL.
You can try it by installing Nix and running 
nix run github:blinry/love/multi-seat
 (it will need to compile both SDL as well as LÖVE).

You can find 
an example of a game
 made with this further down in this post!

Qt and others?

📝 I haven’t investigated any other GUI frameworks yet!
If you know something about them, please let me know!

Applications

I’m not aware of 
any
 existing end-user applications that make use of multiple seats at the moment.
For X11, there was 
Gromit-MPX
, a screen annotation tool, but it doesn’t seem to support native Wayland.

So I wrote a couple of prototypes myself!
What fascinates me about multi-seat applications is how they very naturally facilitate collaboration, without the need for algorithms like CRDTs or Operational Transform.

Multi-seat GTK text widget

https://codeberg.org/blinry/gtk-multi-seat-text-widget

This is a rough prototype for a multi-seat aware text widget written with Rust’s GTK bindings.
You can click multiple cursors by clicking, and text input from that seat will then be inserted at that cursor position.
You can also press the arrow keys to navigate.

📝 This widget is missing a lot of features: Proper Unicode support, text selections, or being able to press the down arrow key. :P

LÖVE physics playground

https://codeberg.org/blinry/love-multi-seat-physics

I wrote this using my patched SDL and my patched LÖVE game engine: All mouse cursors can pick up blocks and move them around.
Multiple cursors can also grab the same block, and carry it together.
Lots of fun!

Terminal emulators

In my testing, the Kitty terminal emulator only ever reacts to inputs coming from the first seat, and ignores input from all others.

Alacritty, on the other hand, accepts inputs from all seats.

📝 For collaboration sessions, it would be great to fix Kitty to accept input from any seat.
There’s an open issue about that 
here
.
It looks like it those changes would need to go in its 
glfw/wl_init.c
 file.

Browsers

In Firefox, I observed the same issue I had in any GTK application: It only reacts to events from seats that have existed when the application started. But if you start Firefox after setting up the seats, you can browse the Web together pretty well! Things like selections still act as if all events are coming from one input device, same as web-based whiteboards.

Chromium doesn’t seem to react to events from additional seats at all.

📝 What would a browser with excellent multi-seat support look like? Would it go into split-screen as soon as the people want to navigate in different directions? :D Could we fork a simple browser to make a prototype

VNC setup

Attaching multiple mice/keyboards to one computer is cool, but sometimes, the person you’d like to collaborate with is in another place.
So, a way of allowing them to join your computer remotely would be nice.

I’ve figured out a way to do this, and want to share the setup here.

wayvnc

wayvnc is a VNC server for Wayland.
Since 
v0.8.0
 (released in 2024), it has a very useful feature:
It can create a new seat for each incoming connection, so that joining people get their own virtual mouse and keyboard device.
You can activate this feature using the command line flag 
-t
 / 
--transient-seat
.
This is using the 
ext-transient-seat-v1
 protocol, which is implemented by sway.

📝 I’d love to see this protocol also be supported by River!
I 
opened an issue about it
, and Isaac thought it was in scope to add it!

I’d also recommend the flag 
-r
 / 
--render-cursor
, so that all mouse cursors are rendered into output streams as overlays.
If you don’t specify this flag, joining people will (at most) see their own mouse cursor.

Browser-based VNC client

To allow people to join your VNC server quickly, I’ve been using 
novnc
.
Here’s a summary of how to do use these tools together:

Create a configuration file at 
~/.config/wayvnc/config
 that contains:

 enable_auth=true
 username=<username>
 password=<password>
 relax_encryption=true

The 
relax_encryption
 setting will apparently enable 
RFB_SECURITY_TYPE_APPLE_DH
 (
1
, 
2
), which, as I understand it, enforces authentication via username and password, but doesn’t have transport encryption.
I wasn’t able to connect to it with 
novnc
 using the default security types.
Not having transport encryption seems fine however, as the traffic going through the Internet will be handled by 
novnc
 in a later step.

Run 
wayvnc --transient-seat --render-cursor --verbose
 to start the VNC server.

Create a self-signed certificate by running 
openssl req -new -x509 -days 3650 -nodes -out self.pem -keyout self.pem -nodes -subj "/C=XX/ST=StateName/L=CityName/O=CompanyName/OU=CompanySectionName/CN=CommonNameOrHostname"
.

Run 
novnc --listen 8080 --ssl-only --cert "path/to/self.pem" --file-only
 to start both a forwarder from regular VNC to WebSockets, as well as the web VNC client.

Set up your home router to forward the port 8080 to your local machine.

People should now be able to visit 
https://<your-home-ip-address>:8080/vnc.html
 for a web frontend, and use the username and password from above to connect to you.
They will get a “self-signed certificate” warning.

(You could also use proper certificates, and use a DynDNS service to point a domain at your machine, but that’s out of scope of this blog post.)

📝 This is obviously not a 
great
 solution, and VNC in general feels like ancient technology. It’s what works for me right now. But integrating this with more modern streaming approaches like 
Sunshine
 might be worth it?

Closing thoughts

Overall, I’m pretty pleased that sway has such good multi-seat support out of the box, and that you can just use 
wayvnc
’s “transient seats” feature to invite remote people into that setup!
Even just using different windows in parallel is quite fun!

The “lowest hanging fruit” in this space is writing some applications that make use of multiple seats, I think.
I had a lot of fun writing multi-seat games in LÖVE, for example!

If any of the 📝 open problems on this page speak to you, I’d be super excited if you’d take them on.
Happy hacking!

Finally: I worked on this project while attending the 
Recurse Center
, a programming retreat where I could allow myself to go deep on investigations like these, while being surrounded by creative and supportive peers. If you enjoyed this blog post, chances are that you’d like it there. Consider 
applying
!

Thanks to
Raf,
Sophia,
Reed,
Jahan,
Emanuel,
Jared,
Winston,
Dave,
and piko
for helping me with this project in many different ways! It wouldn’t exist without you.
