As a software developer, the recent escalation of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) has aroused strong emotions and several concerns in
me, either of technical and philosophical nature. The

human-machine interaction
 is a fascinating topic
and educated people, especially kids, should at least know the basic
principles, in order to understand that usage and responsibility go hand
by hand.

After discussing on the impact of AI on the professional tasks of a
developer, this short digression will focus on problems that can be
related to the inception of AI technology.

A threat against
independent thinking

As a developer, programmer, coder, or whatsoever definition you might
want to apply to this job, I think that it is more carved into heart
than acting in the fingers that hop on the keyboard. 
There
exists a sentimental bond between developers and
problems
.

Struggling for the solution of a problem produces a spectrum of
feelings that continues to drag the history of the human race since the
beginnings: passion, dissatisfaction, generosity, ambition. Code
development boils down to a journey from the abstraction of thinking to
experience and action, and it does not concern programming alone:
languages and algorithms are just means. The heart work is the thinking:
satisfaction, joy, and reward come from ideas that prove to work well.
Code development requires to watch a problem from multiple perspectives
for grasping it in its entirety, to plan and implement solutions.

You are a master of coding if your solution applies to a wide
class of problems and pays a special attention to saving memory
resources
.

Engineers, doctors, researchers in general, artists, chefs, bakers,
carpenters, tailors, musicians, are examples of different forms of
‘developers’: everyone codes in a specific way. Every production carries
on an history of endeavors. People took problems to heart and attacked
them until they found a solution. 
You are an impostor, not a
developer, if you do not face problems by yourself
.

With the advent of AI in programming, blogs and forums had actually
reported the concerns of developers who are losing interest and hype,
similarly to a game that have been started in cheat mode – as they are
used to say: once you can do anything without difficulties, there is no
more reason in playing it. These feelings were already circulating years
ago, before the advent of AI, when the practice of including external
modular packages turned the coding art into a

patchwork
.

Some mathematicians have recently expressed disappointment in the
involvement of AI for accomplishing proofs. Is the result more relevant
than the path that leads to it? The Poincaré conjecture had been solved
after a century of failures. Other conjectures wait, and they probably
would for ever. There might be problems that could not be such,
semantically speaking, but statements that just foster research; the
Continuum or the Riemann hypothesis have not been solved yet, but
continue to spark ideas and theories.

What’s wrong in acknowledging our limits and in living within the
same perimeter traced by the possibilities of our brain, assumed as a
device? Media had poisoned society with ridiculous messages as ‘live
without limits’; but limits rule the universe, as taught by physics.

In conclusion, 
if we reduce the chances of thinking, we
will be more controllable by those that continue to think by and for
themselves
. If we continue to skip difficulties, for
whatever reason, laziness will bring us to inaction. The major
difference from AI and human mind is not the power or memory, but
conscience. Otherwise said, the possibility of drawing feelings from
achievements: AI will not, you will not either through AI.

Threatening the future

AI has become infamous for requiring large amounts of energy and
water. The questions of AI technology, as devourer of resources, is
intimately connected to the climate and the global warming, still
overlooked by people, despite effects are tangible. We, as humans, and
the entire planet Earth cannot afford AI. Living species shall not to
pay the price of co-existing with us.

The scientific community has proved, without doubt, that
the cause of global warming is anthropic
. In plain terms, it
is pollution. If we define ‘pollution’ as a general artificial factor
that alters the conditions of a natural habitat, then we can establish
two forms: ‘active’ (for example, the emissions of carbon monoxide) and
‘passive’ (draining the natural resources). Well, this is nothing under
the sun: I can remember the warnings against the ‘ozone depletion’ in
the late 80s. It seems that nothing had been made against the pollution
after forty years. Now, we are paying the huge debt contracted by our
ignorance.

What kind of world are we preparing to welcome young generations?
Ecology should be a priority over all other disciplines. There would be
no mathematics, chemistry, engineering, without the proper habitat for
our race. We should be concerned with what ideas we let circulate. In
this regard, I first observe that we are not governed by aliens, but by
humans coming from our same cultural background. Moreover, media use to
forget that all information they convey is automatically put ‘on the
pedestal’ by the audience; media should not foster defects for
commercial purposes, but promote better ways of living at the cost of
going upstream.
1

Most people are blind and do not surrender against the evidence. They
keep living as they have been told to do: buy biggest or fastest cars,
travel all over the world for mass tourism, live beyond your
possibilities. Resources are not infinite and have (huge) costs. Such
massive fruition of goods proves senseless against the recent events and
it represent an expression of selfishness to me. Your daily habits
promote worldwide conflicts for oil, for example.

The statement ‘
with great power comes great
responsibility
’ should not be confined to a famous movie,
but carved in everyone’s heart. The great power is not the big one.
‘Big’ refers to concentration, not to efficience. Everyone keeps a
little, in quantity, but a great power in efficience. Our decisions are
not little and insignificant: combined together, they affect the future
of the society and the planet. 
Remember that
 0

is irrelevant alone, but if many
 0’s

decide to follow the
 1-
leader, they
become
 100000000000… . Who is your leader?

Do we need of really bigger and bigger cars? Is it just a whim? Do we
really need all those planes travelling in the sky? The bigger capacity
of an engine, the more fuel, the more heat, and the more carbon monoxide
emissions in the air. As known, white sugar looks fine, but
indiscriminate use is conducive to addiction and brings lots of health
issues.

Habits affect the habitat. There is no future without habitat.
Nothing would have a sense, like the cheated game mentioned in the
beginning. Everyone who is not keen on keeping the home clean and safe
will be eventually kicked out of it. This should be our prime directive.
Why should we want sons if we do not feel responsible of our habitat?
Why should we cure diseases if we cannot preserve the life on our
planet? World population must decrease in number during the next
decades. Biologists teach that overcrowded systems are doomed to
collapse. I feel frustrated by this decadent logic.

AI as expression of world
market

It seems that we have decided that the raw and wild rules of trade market
would regulate how the world goes on. Hence, we have to obey them now and
understand that 
everything has a price to pay
.

One of the critical problems of our society is the concentration of
power: for me, it is the root of all evils. Since the ancient history,
such concentration has proven to be detrimental. I mean to any form:
political and economical.

The events in the last three centuries
attested that super-powered countries and corporations contributed to
render the world worse than what they found. Both must be dismembered for
sake of our future, since they tend to disrupt welfare. AI is just the
latest expression of such (and very big) concentration. Do you think that
a little country would have interest or be able to wage a war in another
continent? Do you think that little companies could have the power of
conquering the global market?

Indifference
, 
negligence
 are actually mortal sins. In
the sense they can be assumed as a sort of pre-death state.

The higher-ups of world power had understood it since long time, and
their persuasive campaigns are subtly planned to induce people to this
pre-death state. People must take a position and understand that events
are following as we are fighting a battle against evil forces.

Evil attitude does not care of future, it just aims at the profit
from the present. I mean to the future world, that the next generations
will live in.

The fulcrum that levels society up has been changed from the

square
 to the 
office
:
cooperation gave way to competition, generosity to selfishness and
personal profit, simple living to career. As a result, 1+1 no longer
yields 2. Philosophers and thinkers ended up to have less credit than
politicians and executive managers. This is a serious problem when
masses follow the decisions of people whose heart is kept in a wallet.
Countries promoting a certain profit-based, competitive, and divisive
culture should be embargoed.

I have been always got confused by the contradictions of modernity.
World population keeps on increasing, but job opportunities reduce
because workforce decreases because it is being replaced with automatic technology. Offerings are
not transforming, opportunities are not changing. Freedom of choice fades away. This
is a clear evidence that technologies are held by the rich to rule over the masses
and guide their choices.

AI technology represents the ultimate expression of the concentration
of powers. No care of natural habitats and resources, just efficience and
profit. These are the purposes for which AI has been designed.

The world market rules must to be reformulated and based on different premises,
that focus on people rather than profit.
 The path we are
walking has long proved to be treacherous. What also are we waiting for
taking a drastic turn? I hope we have not crossed the point of no return
yet. I hope for the comeback to local micro-economies soon, with the
exception of trading goods that are strictly required but not locally
available. And cooperation comes around here again.

Like the flight of Icarus

Internet was originally a square, not a market. It must be relieved
from the heavy weights of social networks, Ads, and AI.

AI represents the latest crime committed against humanity and
climate, after wars, pollution, consumerism, capitalism, social
networks, abuse of resources, and certain filmography. There should be
no reasons for keeping this thing on: shutting AI definitely down would
represent a step forward to solving the aforementioned problems. Turn
your large-scale data centers into gardens and forests. Free servers
from worthless contents. Get out and play with people.

The history of the human race is the history of human thinking. It
must not turn into the history of AI. Your picture of progress might be
illusory, and you should surrender to evidence.

Do not bother with the freedom of expression and
censorship. Your supposed level of freedom can be maximal only if you
live alone, otherwise it had to be scaled down to a level that grants
respect to all members in a group.
↩︎
