Roman

Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope

The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics.

Future Mission

NEWS

				Get the Latest Updates from the Roman Blog!                  			

HOW

				Roman's Instruments and What They Can Do                			

SCIENCE

				Investigate Dark Matter, Dark Energy, Exoplanets, and Other Mysteries                			

Named after NASA’s first chief astronomer, the ‘mother of the Hubble Space Telescope,’ the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will have a field of view at least 100 times larger than Hubble's, potentially measuring light from a billion galaxies in its lifetime. This observatory will also be able to block starlight to directly see exoplanets and planet-forming disks, complete a statistical census of planetary systems in our galaxy, and settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and infrared astrophysics.

Type

Space Telescope

Launch

August 30, 2026

Target

Universe, Exoplanets

Objective

Settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics

Roman Launch Countdown

Roman is set to launch August 30, 2026 at 07:26 am EDT on a SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket from Launch Complex 39A at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida.

Learn More About the Roman Launch

Aug 30, 2026 11:26 UTC

Roman Stories

				Explore All Roman Stories                			

Blog
2 Min Read
NASA Roman Arrives at Launch Pad, Mission Briefings Scheduled
Blog
1 Min Read
NASA’s Roman Space Telescope ‘Go’ for Launch

1 Min Read
9 Things to Know About NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
Article

22 Min Read
Roman Series: Why NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Make Unexpected Discoveries

1 Min Read
Roman Space Telescope Travels to SpaceX Hangar
Image Article

Featured Story

Building Roman

Technicians have completed the construction of NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. The Roman observatory is slated to launch on…

Read the Story

				Media Resources			

Press Kit

Brush up on all things Roman with this overview, which is full of mission information and a variety of resources.

Video Resources

View and download high-quality images and video from NASA Goddard's Scientific Visualization Studio.

Roman on YouTube

View a variety of videos, including shorts, b-roll, and animations.

Roman's Flickr gallery

Image resources available for print and digital publication.

Roman interactive

Explore the Roman Observatory

Take a tour around the telescope with this Interactive Diagram.

Explore Roman

Keep Exploring

Discover More Topics From NASA

James Webb Space Telescope

Webb is the premier observatory of the next decade, serving thousands of astronomers worldwide. It studies every phase in the…

Exoplanets

Hubble Space Telescope

Since its 1990 launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has changed our fundamental understanding of the universe.

Galaxies
