Featured Sites

Browse more sites

Our mission: To make the web fun again by giving you back control of how you express yourself online.

 HTML editor, right in your browser

No tools needed. With our easy-to-use HTML editor, you're ready to start building your awesome website right now.

If you'd rather use your favorite desktop editor, no problem. Uploading files is as easy as drag-n-drop.

 Welcome back, web surfing

All Neocities sites are viewable and easily surfable in our 
website gallery
.

Using tags (our version of Web Rings) you can easily discover new sites related to your interests.

 Follow your favorite Neocities sites

Keep track of all your favorite sites by following them. Any changes to the sites automatically show up in your news feed. You'll also see what sites they follow.

 Web creativity plus community

Interact with your favorite web builders by posting comments, and sharing their sites on your social network of choice.

Zero Advertising, Zero AI Data Selling

Neocities will never sell your data for AI training or put advertising on your site.
 Instead, we are funded directly by people just like you with 
supporter accounts
 and 
donations
.

Fast Site Loading

Neocities operates our own caching anycast CDN in over a dozen datacenters all over the world to quickly serve your site to visitors with strong SSL and support for HTTP/2. Our strict focus on static web hosting allows us to routinely out-perform the pricey cloud services on reliability, speed and uptime.

Developer Tools

Our fast static hosting comes with a great in-browser HTML editor, easy file uploading, a 
command line tool
, RSS feeds for every site, 
APIs
 for building developer applications, and much more!

Open Source

We 
publish
 the code that powers the site for inspection. We want to win your trust—not lock you in.

54,052,044,270

Site Hits

14,773,684,899

Site Visitors

343,288,071

Site Updates

          Rather than a constantly rushing river of information, Neocities sites are like homes where users fix them up, spend time on them, and invite others to visit.

— Rosy Hearts, 
Polygon
. 
View All Press »

What are you waiting for? 
Start building your website now!
