Updated / Monday, 24 Aug 2026
                    06:36

Getty

                    Consumers can now request that manufacturers repair products that are technically repairable under EU law

Brian O\u0027Donovan

                                By 
Brian O'Donovan

Work & Technology Correspondent

New EU rules have come into force that are designed to encourage consumers to repair rather than replace products and so tackle the estimated 35 million tonnes of waste the premature disposal of consumer goods generates across the bloc. 

The "right to repair" regulations introduce new rights and supports aimed at encouraging repair over disposal, including a repair obligation for manufacturers of certain products and the establishment of a national repair platform to help consumers locate repair services.

The rules apply to household and electronic products such as washing machines, vacuum cleaners, mobile phones, and tablets.

The regulations are designed to make it easier for consumers to access repair services when products develop faults after the seller's guarantee period.

People now have the right to request that manufacturers repair products that are technically repairable under EU law.

The repairs must be done for free or at a reasonable price, within a reasonable timeframe, to encourage repairs.

Manufacturers must also provide easily accessible information about repair services, as well as access to spare parts at a reasonable price.

The national repair directory, RepairMyStuff.ie, will be further developed to fulfil the role as Ireland's national repair platform.

"These regulations will make it easier for consumers to choose repair over replacement, while also creating opportunities for Irish businesses operating in the repair and refurbishment sector," said Minister for Enterprise, Tourism and Employment Peter Burke.

"In implementing the Directive, we have sought to strike the right balance between supporting consumers, encouraging sustainable economic activity and ensuring that businesses are not faced with unnecessary regulatory burdens," he added.

According to the European Commission, the new rules are expected to bring €4.8 billion in growth and investment within the EU.

"These new regulations are important in helping to meet our climate goals by realigning how we produce, consume, and value materials," said Minister for Climate, Energy and the Environment Darragh O’Brien.

More stories on

News

Business

Ireland
