An open social protocol with a chance of working

        Nostr is an inclusive communication commons. A simple standard that defines a scalable
        architecture of clients and servers that can be used to spread information freely. Not
        controlled by any corporation or government, anyone can build on Nostr and anyone can use
        it.

          Join Nostr
          
›

          Watch a presentation
          
›

~
>

nak

event --sec 7465 -c
            
'this is going to work'
 nostr.wine relay.damus.io
            nostr.mom

nostr.wine
... ok.

relay.damus.io
... ok.

nostr.mom
... ok.

          {"kind":1,"id":"b9fead6eef87d8400cbc1a5621400b360438affb9760a6a043cc0bddea21dab6","pubkey":"82341f882b6eabcd2ba7f1ef90aad961cf074af15b9ef44a09f9d2a8fbfbe6a2","created_at":1676161639,"tags":[],"content":"this
          is going to
          work","sig":"76d19889a803236165a290fa8f3cf5365af8977ee1e002afcfd37063d1355fc755d0293d27ba0ec1c2468acfaf95b7e950e57df275bb32d7a4a3136f8862d2b7"}

          publishing to 
relay.damus.io
...
          success.

          publishing to 
nostr.wine
... msg:
          restricted: not an active paid member

          publishing to 
nostr.mom
... success.

        All Kinds of Stuff

        Like the internet itself: open and chaotic

        Nostr embraces the chaos of the early internet—multiple kinds of data, diverse forms of user
        interaction and different clients providing their own perspectives over the same underlying
        information.

rebase

Many clients, many servers

              The client is the app that is running on your computer or phone, the server is
              whatever is running on a cloud somewhere with a domain name. In centralized platforms
              and other protocols, one client talks to a single server. In Nostr clients connect to
              many.

          Learn how Nostr is different
          
›

Cryptographically signed notes

            Nostr's single unit of information is a cryptographically signed note, these are created
            by users in their client software and published to one or more relays.

Smart clients as user agents

            Clients are smart and act as agents for the users who install them. They decide which
            relays to connect to and when and what data to request according to the circumstance and
            user preferences.

Relays as distribution centres

            These are the servers that notes are published to and read from. They cannot change the
            contents of notes (that would invalidate the signature), but they can decide what to
            store and for how long.

signature

A new paradigm for communication

              In Nostr, every user is represented by a secret number called a "key" and every
              message carries a digital "signature" that proves its authorship authorship and
              authenticity without the need for any authority to say so. This foundation of trust
              enables the decentralized broadcasting of information.

          Watch a human-friendly explanation
          
›

shield
 Pro-censorship

            The protocol is ownerless, relays are not

            Nostr doesn't subscribe to political ideals of "free speech" — it simply recognizes that
            different people have different morals and preferences and each server, being privately
            owned, can follow their own criteria for rejecting content as they please and users are
            free to choose what to read and from where.

              Read about relay differentiation

                  handshake

                Freedom of association

                When the network effect is not tied to a single organization a group of users cannot
                harm others.

                Watch 
›

                  landscape_2

                Your own piece of Nostr

                If you are a programmer or know how to run servers it is trivial to run your own
                relay with your own rules.

                Write code 
›

lightbulb_2
 New Ideas

Exploring the commons

            Besides being a natural medium for a Twitter-like microblogging social network, Nostr
            can also be used for other purposes. And not only similar things like sharing
            
videos
, longform 
articles
, 
pictures
 or 
voice notes
. There
            are initiatives on Nostr for the development of sub-protocols that power
            
closed groups
, 
decentralized wikipedia
, 
couchsurfing
,
            
marketplaces
 or 
web annotations
; as well as protocols that don't use Nostr
            for the core data but as a coordination and discovery mechanism, such as
            
decentralized code collaboration using git
, 
file hosting
,
            
torrent sharing
 and 
video livestreaming
.

            Browse the NIPs

grass
 Ecosystem

Still under construction

            Nostr is an idea with a lot of open-source software around it and a large userbase, but
            not a finished, polished product that you can buy without stress. We're still pretty
            much in the phase where new programmers and early adopters are needed to help us refine
            the protocol flows and the user experience.

              List of repositories on GitHub

                  comment

                Microblogging

                The so-called "outbox model" is the canonical way of implementing a
                censorship-resistant client, but its parameters are fluid.

                Learn about it 
›

                  hub

                Relay-based groups

                NIP-29 describes a way to do closed groups for forums or chat that can be very
                efficient by relying on a relay but are still censorship-resistant.

                Read the guide 
›

account_circle

        Following

How Nostr works

        Nostr enables true freedom by allowing users to stay connected to their audience even in
        adverse scenarios.

User chooses their outbox relays

            Patricia publishes a special event announcing which servers she will use as her "outbox
            relay" for publishing notes. She then starts sending all her posts to these chosen
            relays, creating a predictable place where others can find her content.

            Because servers are interchangeable any will suffice.

Someone starts following

            When Florian wants to read Patricia's posts, his client looks up her announcement and
            connects directly to her announced outbox relays.

            This targeted approach is simple and efficient.

Users can switch relays when needed

            If Patricia's current relay bans her or shuts down, she can easily switch to different
            relays — perhaps some run by friends, a paid service, or her own server.

            She simply publishes a new announcement and continues to post without losing her
            audience.

Clients track relay changes

            Florian's client continuously monitors for updates to Patricia's relay list.

            When she switches relays, his client eventually starts querying her new locations,
            ensuring he never misses her posts even as the network topology changes.

Smart clients manage everything

            From the publisher side to the follower side clients behave smartly, keeping a local
            state and reacting to new information in order to ensure that the flow of information
            continues.

            After all, these notes are important, it would be sad to miss too many of them.

          See a visual interactive explanation 
›

contact_support

        FAQ

I've got some questions!

        It may sound like Nostr is very good, but what about these hard issues?

            What is a "protocol"?

              A protocol is like a common language that multiple different software can use to talk
              to each other, it's like 
e-mail
, 
HTML
 or 
HTTP
.

              When we say "protocol" we mean that there is no need to use a specific app in order to
              be in Nostr: there are many apps that talk the same language and can be used (mostly)
              interchangeably — and each has its own take on how to do and display things.

            How does Nostr handle spam and unwanted content?

              In the default feed you never see any spam, because clients will only fetch
              information from people that 
you
 follow. In that sense no one can "push" spam
              into you.

              It's trickier when you want to see, for example, replies to your posts, in that case a
              client might be programmed to fetch anything that 
claims
 to be a reply
              
from anyone
, which might include spam.

              The way we can deal with it on Nostr is by restricting our area of contact with the
              spam: for example, some clients may easily decide to only display replies that come
              from people followed by people you follow. More refined strategies involve announcing
              and then only reading notes from relays known to be "safe" according to your criteria
              (could be relays that require payment, relays that do screening for humans, relays
              that only accept members of certain communities or political affiliations etc).

              There are no perfect solutions. But these do not exist anywhere, centralized platforms
              are also full of spam. Nostr at least isn't naïve and tries to build resiliency from
              the start.

            Will Nostr scale effectively with massive user adoption?

              Yes, Nostr is just a basic client-server architecture. And the fact that users can
              naturally spread among hundreds of different relays while clients can query dozens of
              relays that they're interested in at the same time means the network has a natural
              load balancer (which doesn't prevent a single relay from having its own internal load
              balancer either).

              Another (almost the opposite) concern that may be raised is with problems arising from
              clients having to connect to too many relays if the profiles being followed for
              whatever reason decide to spread way too much, but this shouldn't be a problem either
              because people tend to follow many accounts with similar content and these will tend
              to share relays. Still, if it happens, it's cheap for native apps to open many
              hundreds of WebSocket connections simultaneously (as they will be getting very few
              data in each of those). For web apps that isn't so hard, but we can still go up to a
              few hundreds without big problems. Regardless of any of that, in any complete enough
              app that wants to display a "following feed" it's already necessary to store events in
              a local database, and that will make all these issues easy to deal with as you can do
              the event requests in batches instead of all at once.

            What protections does Nostr offer against online harassment?

              Harassment is similar to spam in the sense that anyone can still create the undesired
              content and publish to the relays that accept them. All the techniques mentioned in
              avoiding spam can also be applied in this case, but if we're talking about specific
              individuals with a permanent identity and not only an army of bots in this case the
              problem becomes easier, as those individuals can just be blocked by their target and
              their content will vanish. Presumably friends of such target will also block, and
              creative solutions involving shared blocklists can be created such that some people
              don't even have to click the block button directly.

              Other approaches involving, for example, relays with restricted read (that can emulate
              "protected account"/"only friends" features seen in centralized platforms) can further
              improve this.

            Why not just use Mastodon/Fediverse?

              There are many problems with Mastodon, mostly due to the fact that it doesn't rely on
              any cryptography. Because it cannot do the multi-master approach of Nostr due to lack
              of cryptography, identities are assumed to be "owned" by the server, which is fully
              trusted by its tenants. Mastodon server owners can do all the harm centralized
              platforms can do to their underlings, which are completely helpless in case of
              misbehavior or even in the normal case where a server owner loses their server or
              decides to shut down for whatever reason.

              Worse than that, for many of its purported features, such as blocking or direct
              messages, users have to also trust owners of the other servers.

              There are also problems with reliance on the DNS system, but we don't have to talk
              about those.

              The most interesting feature of Mastodon is that by its nature it creates communities
              with shared values that grow in each of its servers. Or, should I say, that should be
              a feature if it actually worked like that. In fact these are not really communities,
              but a mashup of users that may share some interests among each other, but also have
              other interests and those other interests end up polluting the supposed "community"
              with things that do not interest the other users.

              Nostr, on the other hand, can create real communities around relays, specifically
              because users don't have to fully belong to those relays, but can go to them only for
              some of their needs and go to other relays for other needs.

            Why not just use Bluesky/ATProto?

Bluesky has many problems, the two most pronounced are:

                Identity centralization: all accounts belong to 
PLC
, a database ran by a
                central entity that can censor at will — or, alternatively, they can belong to a DNS
                domain, which is cumbersome, also censorable, risky and is not expected to be used
                by many anyway;

                Data centralization: because the 
Relay-AppView-Client
 flow assumes only
                one canonical source of data at each step (unlike Nostr multi-master architecture)
                that source is always a server that has power to censor, shadowban, reorder data and
                so on.

Clients
 are assumed to be dumb and trust the 
AppView
, and
              here you have room for all sorts of undesired shenanigans. Then AppViews also assume
              to source their data from a single 
Relay
, and here you have room for the
              same effect.

              You could argue that Bluesky 
Clients
 could become smart and start
              sourcing data from multiple 
AppViews
, or from multiple Relays, or that
              the 
AppViews
 could rely on multiple 
Relays
, or that the
              
Clients
 could talk directly to the 
PDSes
 — and all of that
              is possible and would indeed bring solutions, but notice that if those things started
              happening Bluesky would end up becoming Nostr, except with more steps.

            Are economic incentives aligned to keep relays operational?

              Yes,
              
this clip

              answers it well.

              But basically the answer is the same as the question about scale: if users can go to
              whatever relay they want we'll see relays ran by all sorts of people and entities.
              Running servers is very cheap, and a relay can run on a $5/mo server and house at
              least a few thousand users. It's not hard to imagine relays ran by communities,
              individuals who just want to be useful to others, big organizations wanting to gain
              good will with some parts of the public, but also companies, client makers, and, of
              course, dedicated entities who sell relay hosting for very cheap.

            If content is spread across multiple relays how can I be sure I'm seeing everything?

              It's not a feature of the world at large to be able to see or hear everything that is
              happening everywhere at all times. Nostr inherits that property from the world, making
              it so that you can only see what you focus your attention on (and you're allowed to
              see by the relay that hosts that information).

            How does search work?

              It's only possible to search on what you have seen, so search engines will always have
              to crawl some parts of the network they chose to and index those to enable public
              search. The word "chose" is employed because, as we know, there can't be a "global"
              view of the network (and no one would want such a thing anyway as it would be full of
              spam), so indexers have to choose. This is not different from Google deciding what
              websites to index.

              On the other hand, it's surprisingly doable for clients to store all the posts from
              people you follow, or all the posts you have seen or interacted with over time (since
              it's just text, a huge amount of notes can fit in the same space that would otherwise
              be required to store a single photo, for example) then provide local search over that.
              That kind of search will be sufficient for most of the cases you would reach out for a
              search bar in a centralized platform (which is to search for things that you have seen
              before), and perhaps even more useful since it would naturally filter out all the
              unrelated garbage.

              Last, niche or community-oriented relays can also provide very useful search
              capabilities by just indexing the notes they have stored locally, already filtered and
              scoped to that relay's topic or cohort (imagine searching over a Discord, Slack or
              Telegram group, for example).

            How can I discover new content from people I don't already follow if there are no
            algorithms?

              The most basic way to do that is by following the natural habits used by most
              centralized social platforms users since a long time ago: by looking at the people you
              follow and whom they're interacting with.

              But also it's not true that Nostr doesn't have algorithms. Nostr can have algorithms
              of all kinds: manual, automatic, AI-powered or rule-based. Some of these algorithms
              can be run entirely locally on clients (for example, surfacing posts from the times
              when you were not online, or from people that make fewer posts), while other
              algorithms can be provided by all sorts of relays, either by naturally surfacing posts
              from a community of people you don't follow or by dedicated relays that have the
              stated purpose of curating content desirable for a target audience or even by
              targeting specific users.

            Is Nostr related to Bitcoin?

              Nostr uses the same cryptographic principles of Bitcoin and was kickstarted mostly by
              a community of Bitcoiners, so it has disproportionately attracted the attention of
              Bitcoiners at the start, but aside from that it doesn't have any relationship with
              Bitcoin. It doesn't depend on Bitcoin for anything and you don't have to know or have
              or care about any Bitcoin in order to use Nostr.

              What about "zaps"? Zaps are a standard for tipping Nostr content using Bitcoin that is
              implemented by some Nostr clients, but it's fully and completely optional and if you
              don't care about Bitcoin you don't have to bother about it.

nostr.com

          paid services

          Remember when we said Nostr didn't have any owners or organizations that controlled it?
          This is also not an official website of the protocol. It's ran by
          
LNbits

          and we're proud supporters, pioneers and enthusiasts of Nostr.

And we're selling stuff!

            Buy a @nostr.com username

            Shop physical tools and Nostr merch

speaker_notes

          Opinion

What people are saying

          Quotes from those who know better and decided to like Nostr.

"

            No one owns Nostr, no one can own Nostr, it's an open-source protocol. No one can build
            a fence to stop the flow of information.

            —
            
Uncle Bob

"

            Nostr is an open protocol.

              If a platform is a silo, a protocol is a river: no one owns it, and everyone is free
              to swim.

            —
            
Edward Snowden

"

            I want to claim that Nostr has discovered a new fundamental architecture for distributed
            protocols. Not federated, not P2P.

            —
            
Gordon Brander
