<span class="mw-page-title-main">Subway Signals: A Complete Guide</span>

Main Page
 > 
Behind the Scenes

Subway Signals: A Complete Guide

Ce document également disponible en français

All divisions of the New York City
subway use what is now called "wayside color-light block signalling",
that is, signals are physically located to the side of the track (as
opposed to being overhead, or transmitted directly to the train),
utilize the colors of lights (as opposed to semaphores or other
devices, or positions or shapes of lights), and rely on dividing
tracks into discrete 
blocks
 (or 
track sections
 or

track circuits
) to electrically detect the presence of trains.
Nearly all of the routes of the current subway are signalled with
classic wayside block signalling, whose principles have not changed
markedly since the opening of the IRT in 1904.
(In-cab signalling and recent position- and radio-based
technologies are slowly being deployed on some lines; the first to be cut over is the "L", chosen because it shares no trackage with other routes, and has a relatively simple service pattern, i.e. no express service.) 

Tracks are divided into 
track circuits
 (or 
sections
, or

blocks
), normally hundreds of feet long, by 
insulated
joints
 in the rails.  Trains' wheels and axles short-circuit the
two rails to indicate their presence in a block.  While every signal
occurs at an insulated joint (a block boundary), not every joint has a
signal at it.  Each block can either be 
occupied
 (any portion
of a train in any part of it) or 
vacant
 (no train anywhere) at
any time.  Every signal has a 
control length
, defined as the
distance, a number of whole blocks beyond the signal (i.e., in the
direction of traffic governed by it), whose occupancy forces the
signal to 
red
 ("stop") - the control
length of a signal enforces that separation between trains.  A signal
being 
clear
 (
green
 or 
yellow
) attests that there are no trains, or
parts of trains, or other obstructions anywhere in its control length,
that is, that its control length is clear of dangers.  The New York
City subway relies on 
automatic train stops

to "trip" noncompliant trains, that is, force them to obey signals
that indicate "stop".  Control lengths and signal placements are
chosen such that an out-of-control train 
"tripped" by a train stop
 will come to a halt
before reaching the obstruction or danger.  Control lengths also

overlap
 each other to keep trains at least one signal
apart.

Signals in the vicinity of switches ("switch-tracks", "points" (UK))
must be and are controlled in a coordinated fashion known as 
interlocking
, which usually involves a
human 
tower operator
 selecting the routings of trains.

The pages listed below explain more about the various kinds of
signals and signal features, and include illustrations of the signals'

aspects
 (distinctive displays of colored lights) and the
corresponding 
indications
 (what they mean).  The discussions
are oriented towards those who have spent some time looking at the
system from the front of a train, and have already seen, if not fully
understood, the signal system's appearances and behaviors.  They
should be browsed as a set.

Approach, Automatic, and Marker Signals

The most common signals, plus train order signals and miscellaneous light signals.

Train Stops

The mechanism that forcibly stops trains that disregard signal indications.

Time Signals

Grade time and station time signals that enforce train speed limits.

Interlocking

How signals and switches are controlled together.

Home Signals

The signals with two or more "heads" near switches.

Sign Signals

Fixed metal signs used in signalling.

Holdout Signals and Bidirectional Traffic

Signals that enforce the direction of traffic on a length of track.

Single-Line Signal Diagrams

How to understand the "single line" diagram format used to express the layout and capability of signals.

NXSYS, Signalling and Interlocking Simulator

A complete interactive simulation of virtually all features of New York City Subway signaling.

Page Credits

Descriptions and graphics in this section (unless otherwise noted) are Copyright © 1997-2002 Bernard S. Greenberg (
contact
).

Retrieved from "
https://www.nycsubway.org/w/index.php?title=Subway_Signals:_A_Complete_Guide&oldid=11435
"

https://www.nycsubway.org/wiki/Subway_Signals:_A_Complete_Guide

Copyright © 1995-2012 nycsubway.org.

nycsubway.org is not affiliated with any transit agency or provider.

Not mobile.
