I have been interested in machine-assisted ways to do and teach mathematics from as far back as 1999, when I started coding 
several applets in Java 1.0
, both for my complex analysis and linear algebra courses, to visualize various mathematical objects I was interested in (such as honeycombs or Besicovitch sets). This was moderately successful; but the applets were time-consuming to program, and eventually the standards for web pages stopped supporting this version of Java, and 
the applets became non-functional.

However, in the last few days I have begun the process of migrating much of my old web page and blog data to a 
more maintainable repository
, using modern AI assistance. As an experiment, I asked the agent to port my old applets to a modern supported language (we landed on Javascript), and it managed to do so in a matter of hours, with 
all of my old applets now functional again
, with even a few graphical upgrades (for instance, the 
Besicovitch set applet
 is now colorized, in contrast to my original monochrome version). I am particularly pleased to see the honeycomb applet that I wrote with 
Allen Knutson
 in 1999 
come back to life
, as this was a particularly tricky one to code by hand:

Notoriously, LLM-based coding agents can create various blatant or subtle bugs in their code; but in the porting of these two dozen or so applets, I could only find one minor bug (the handling of a drag event in one of the complex analysis applets had unwanted behavior when dragging outside of the main box), and in fact the agent identified two bugs in the original code that I was not aware of, so it ended up being a net wash as far as code quality was concerned. In any event, as these applets are meant to be secondary visual aids rather than critical components of a mathematical argument, the downside risk of such bugs is relatively low.

The process was painless enough that I decided to also try coding some new apps, in addition to porting the old ones. Back in 1999 I had an ambitious idea for a visualization tool for special relativity; this was before the release of the software tool Inkscape, but the idea I had in mind was basically “Inkscape, but in Minkowski space”. I had even started 
writing Java code for this app
, but the code complexity became too much for me, and I abandoned the project. However, after a couple hours of “vibe coding” with an AI agent, I was finally able to generate an applet that matched the vision I had back in 1999, which 
can now be found here
. A summary of the conversation I had with the agent to generate this code 
can be found here
 (it has been edited down to remove a large number of tedious technical implementation reports). While I have playtested the app somewhat, I would be interested in receiving further feedback on this “alpha” version of the applet, as I am sure (especially given the LLM-generated nature of the code) that there are still some bugs and rough edges to be ironed out.

After writing my blog post on the Gilbreath conjecture paper earlier today, I realized that I could similarly ask the agent to code a visualization tool for the Gilbreath conjecture to accompany the paper and blog post. After another few hours of conversation, this is now done; you can 
try out the visualization here
. Again, the procedure was quite painless (see 
this transcript of the process
), and I think I may add such interactive visualizations as supplements for future papers; as such supplements are not mission-critical to the core of the paper, I again feel that the downside risk of using guided interaction with LLM agents to generate such visualizations is acceptable.

Share this:

Print (Opens in new window)

Print

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)

Email

More

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit

Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)

Pinterest

Like
 
Loading...
