What the engine is doing

            WhatChord is an app that watches the notes you play on a MIDI
            keyboard and names the chord as you play it. Press C-E-G together
            and it shows 
C major
. That sounds like a
            dictionary lookup, and for that example it nearly is. The trouble is
            that real playing is rarely so tidy: the same notes can carry
            several legitimate names depending on the surrounding music, players
            leave notes out and add color tones, and a chord can get spread
            across both hands. So the engine does not look chords up. It treats
            naming as a 
ranking
 problem: list every plausible
            interpretation, score how well each one fits, then put them in the
            order a musician would expect to read.

Two terms worth explaining:

              A 
voicing
 is the specific set of notes being
              played, including which one is lowest (the bass). “C-E-G” and
              “E-G, then C an octave up” are two voicings of the same chord.

              A 
candidate
 is one possible name for a voicing.
              The four notes C-E-G-A can be read as
              
C6
 or 
Am7
,
              among others, so the engine produces many candidates per voicing
              and has to choose and order them.

            This article is about the last step in the process, the ranking.
            When we built a reproducible benchmark and measured where the engine
            spends its time on a cache miss, the answer was lopsided:
            
ranking is roughly 99% of it; scoring is about 1%.

            An uncached analysis of a common seventh chord takes a few
            milliseconds, and nearly all of that time goes toward putting the
            already-scored candidates in order.

Why ranking can’t use an ordinary sort

            To sort a list, you hand the language a 
comparator
: a
            function that takes two items and reports which should come first.
            Every general-purpose sort assumes that function describes a
            
consistent ordering
, and in particular that it is
            
transitive
: if A belongs before B, and B before C, then A must belong before
            C. Violate that and the sort’s result is undefined. It will not
            usually crash, but it can drop items in nonsensical positions.

            WhatChord’s comparator is deliberately not transitive. Most of the
            time it ranks two candidates by their fit score, but two kinds of
            musical override can outrank the score:

Hard rules
 are structural overrides for the cases
              where the higher score is simply the wrong name (preferring, say,
              an altered dominant chord over a diminished-slash respelling that
              fits the raw notes but reads worse). A hard rule can promote a
              lower-scoring reading over a higher-scoring one no matter how wide
              the gap.

Tie-breakers
 apply only when two candidates score
              within a small window of each other (0.20 points, a constant the
              code calls 
nearTieWindow
), capturing musical
              heuristics that a single number can’t.

            Because a hard rule ignores the size of the score gap, you can end
            up with a cycle: A beats B, B beats C, and C beats A. No single
            ordering satisfies all three at once, so there is nothing coherent
            for a sort to return. Hand a cyclic comparator to a general sort and
            the outcome can depend on the candidates’ starting order.

            So the engine does not sort. It 
linearizes
 the relation,
            turning the web of pairwise preferences into one ordered list:

// beats[i][j] == true  =>  candidate i should rank above j.

// The relation may contain cycles: a > b > c > a.

List
<Candidate> 
linearize
(
List
<Candidate> cands, 
List
<
List
<
bool
>> beats) {
  
final
 result = <Candidate>[];
  
final
 remaining = { ...allIndices };
  
while
 (remaining.isNotEmpty) {
    
// Prefer a maximal element: one beaten by nothing still remaining.

var
 pick = 
firstUnbeaten
(remaining, beats);
    
// No maximal element means a cycle. Break it by Copeland win-count:

// how many of the others this candidate beats. Global over remaining.

    pick ??= 
mostWins
(remaining, beats);
    result.
add
(cands[pick]);
    remaining.
remove
(pick);
  }
  
return
 result;
}

            Two important points. First, to know whether a candidate is “beaten
            by nothing remaining,” you need the full matrix of pairwise results:
            every 
beats[i][j]
 combination. Building that matrix is
            
n²
 calls to the comparator, where 
n
 is the
            number of candidates. Second, when a cycle blocks progress, the
            tie-break borrows
            
Copeland’s method

            from voting theory: count how many of the others each candidate
            beats, and take the one that beats the most. That count is
            
global
, summed over every remaining candidate. That
            global count is why several appealing shortcuts are unsafe.

The cost is real, and it grows with the chord

            The engine builds a candidate for every reasonable pairing of a root
            note with a chord shape it can find in the voicing, so the candidate
            count climbs steeply as you add notes:

Voicing

Notes

Candidates

C major triad

3

25

Cmaj7

4

43

Cm7

4

46

C7

4

48

Cmaj9

5

67

Six-note voicing

6

90

Seven-note dense

7

131

            Even a plain three-note triad produces 25 candidates. We keep a test
            set of deliberately adversarial, ambiguous voicings (an “oracle
            corpus,” so called because each case has a known-correct answer to
            check against), and there the count runs a median of about 75
            candidates and a maximum of 143. Building the pairwise matrix for 75
            candidates means over 5,000 calls to the comparator, a function the
            code calls 
_decide
. Each call historically scanned all
            21 hard rules before settling anything. Because the matrix pits
            every candidate against every other, the work grows with the
            
square
 of the candidate count: it is
            
O(n²)
.
            That is where the time went.

            The goal was to cut that cost without changing the output. The
            benchmark kept us honest by recording exact operation counts, such
            as how many candidates were built and how many comparisons were run.
            Those integers depend only on the input and the code, never on the
            hardware, so an accidental algorithm change would show up as a
            changed count instead of hiding inside noisy timings.

Win #1: gate the hard-rule scan

            The first observation is that almost none of the 21 hard rules can
            possibly apply to a given pair. Each rule fires only for a specific
            structural pairing (an altered-fifth dominant against a remote
            spelling, a complete triad against a deficient inverted reading, and
            so on), and crucially that condition is
            
candidate-local
: it depends only on a single
            candidate’s quality, extensions, or precomputed features, never on
            the candidate it is being compared against.

            So each rule gets a 
gate
: a quick test on a single
            candidate that is guaranteed to say “yes” whenever the rule could
            possibly apply. Once per candidate, we precompute a
            
bitmask
, an integer whose bits flag which rules that candidate is eligible
            for. For a pair, the bitwise AND of their two masks is exactly the
            set of rules both are eligible for, and we check only those.

// Precompute once per candidate: O(n * rules), not O(n^2).

final
 gateMasks = [
for
 (
final
 c 
in
 cands) 
gateMaskFor
(c)];

// A rule needs one operand in each role, so it can only fire when

// both candidates pass its gate. Skipped rules would return null.

final
 shared = gateMasks[i] & gateMasks[j];

for
 (
final
 rule 
in
 
rulesIn
(shared)) { ... }

            A skipped rule would have returned null anyway, so this is
            
provably output-identical
, not just empirically
            validated. Candidate generation and scoring are untouched, the
            generation counters stay byte-identical, and the ranking golden plus
            the cycle and hard-rule unit tests pass unchanged. A too-narrow gate
            would silently drop a real decision, so those test suites are the
            safety net.

            Result: timing for uncached analysis of the adversarial corpus
            dropped about 
27%
, and everyday voicings sped up
            1.2 to 1.7x. This is a constant-factor win: the same pairwise work,
            done faster. The algorithm is still O(n²).

What didn’t work, part 1: splitting the gate by role

            That single combined gate is broad for rules whose “other” side is
            common, like “any slash chord” or “any seventh chord.” One
            refinement is to split each gate into two halves, a role A and a
            role B, and fire a rule for a pair only when the two candidates fill
            opposite roles:
            
(maskA[i] & maskB[j]) | (maskB[i] & maskA[j])
.

            We implemented it across all 21 rules. It stayed output-identical,
            with unchanged counters and passing tests. It delivered 1 to 3% on
            typical voicings and roughly 0% on the dense corpus, inside
            benchmark noise. We reverted it.

            The combined gate had already captured the big win: skipping pairs
            where 
neither
 candidate is eligible. Splitting roles only
            trims pairs where both candidates are eligible in the same role, a
            thin slice, and the second mask doubles the precompute. After the
            combined gate, the bottleneck is no longer the hard-rule scan. It is
            the O(n²) machinery itself: the pairwise matrix and the linearizing.

Why candidate reduction broke ranking

            If 25 candidates for a triad feels wasteful, the direct move is to
            generate or keep fewer of them. Shrinking the candidate set attacks
            the n² term directly. Unfortunately, it is unsafe because the
            Copeland count is global.

Keeping the top N by score
 throws away
              lower-scoring candidates before the ranking runs. But the
              tie-break is a global Copeland count, so removing candidates
              changes everyone else’s win total. That can reshuffle the
              alternatives the app shows the user. This holds for any N and any
              cutoff; the problem is that the dropped candidates were part of
              what the survivors were measured against.

Dropping candidates earlier, at generation time,

              has the identical problem. You might restrict which roots or chord
              templates are allowed to produce candidates, but any candidate
              removed before ranking is gone from everyone’s win total just the
              same.

              The only drop that is provably safe is a
              
Condorcet loser
: a candidate that loses to every other and beats none, with no
              hard-rule win to its name. But finding one requires the full
              pairwise comparison we were trying to avoid in the first place.

            So candidate reduction looked like a dead end. We set it aside and
            tried to compute the same full ranking faster.

What didn’t work, part 2: the sorted-rank redesign

            The next redesign kept the exact same output and tried to compute it
            faster. Start from a cheap first guess at the order: sort by score,
            breaking ties by root note. Call that the 
seed order
. The
            expensive comparator agrees with this cheap seed order on almost
            every pair. It can only disagree in two situations:

              a hard rule fired, which can only happen between two candidates
              the gate masks already flag as eligible; or

              a tie-breaker overruled the score, which can only happen between
              two candidates scoring within 0.20 of each other.

            Every other pair already matches the seed order by construction. The
            theory was that simple voicings, the common live-play case, would
            take a fast exit: check for out-of-order pairs only in the two
            places one can hide, and if there are none, return the seed order
            untouched, skipping the whole n² matrix. If any turn up, fall back
            to the full linearizer.

            Before building it, we profiled to confirm the redesign even targets
            the right cost. Temporary phase timers inside ranking, over the
            oracle corpus:

Phase

Share of ranking

Pairwise matrix build

97.0%

Linearize

2.1%

Features

0.4%

Gate-masks

0.4%

Seed-sort

0.1%

            Building the matrix is 97% of ranking, and within that the n² loop
            of 
_decide
 calls is 99.8% (allocating the matrix itself
            is 0.2%). Fewer comparisons were the right target.

            We built it with a safety harness that runs both the fast path and
            the full algorithm during tests and asserts they produce the same
            order (the check is compiled out of release builds). It was correct.
            It also 
never triggered.

            The fast path fired on
            
zero of every voicing we measured, including a plain C major
              triad.

            Every measured voicing has at least one near-tie pair somewhere down
            its long candidate list that a tie-breaker flips, and a single
            out-of-order pair forces the full fallback. The detection pass added
            work without finding a usable fast path, for a net loss of about 1%.

            We then tried to re-rank only the
            
entangled
 candidates rather than all n, the ones linked by
            a near-tie or a shared hard rule. To find out how big those tangles
            get, we grouped candidates into connected clusters with a
            
union-find
. The table below shows how much of each candidate set was in the
            largest connected cluster. A value near 100% means the localized
            fallback would still have to re-rank almost everything:

Input set

Candidates

Largest cluster share

Oracle corpus

75 median / 143 max

99% median / 100% max

C major triad

25

100%

Cm7 / C7

46 / 48

100% / 100%

Cmaj9 / Cm11

67 / 90

99% / 100%

            The biggest tangle is essentially the whole candidate set. Scores
            are packed closely enough that the within-0.20 near-tie links chain
            through almost everything, so re-ranking just the tangle means
            re-ranking nearly everything anyway. There is nothing small to
            isolate.

Win #2: make each comparison cheaper

            Since n² is intrinsic (candidates cannot be safely dropped, the
            relation has no locality), the only lever left is the cost of a
            single 
_decide
 call. Measuring where pairs go, over a
            corpus pass:

Pairs

Share

Skippable (score alone decides)

20%

Call 
_decide

80%

…of which reach a tie-break

5% of all pairs

            The tie-break scan is not the cost; only 5% of pairs reach it. The
            bulk is the roughly 75% of pairs that are hard-rule-eligible but
            beyond the tie window: they call 
_decide
, run the gated
            hard-rule loop, and then decide on score anyway. That loop still
            iterated all 21 rules checking the mask bit even when one or two
            bits were set, about 18 million wasted iterations per corpus pass.
            Two output-identical fast paths address that:

Score short-circuit:
 in the pairwise matrix loop,
              when the shared gate mask is empty (no hard rule can fire) and the
              score gap exceeds 
nearTieWindow
, set the result
              straight from score and skip 
_decide
 entirely, along
              with its allocation.

Set-bit iteration:
 inside 
_decide
,
              walk only the set bits of the shared mask, lowest first to
              preserve rule order, instead of scanning all 21 rules.

            Both are provably identical to the old output, carry none of the
            Copeland reshuffle risk, and together bought about
            
4%
 on the adversarial corpus. One guess turned out
            wrong along the way: we expected these comparisons to churn through
            a lot of short-lived memory. But after the short-circuit removed
            about 20% of the per-comparison allocations, total allocation barely
            moved, so a fancier allocation-free version was not worth building.

            That was the end of the safe per-pair wins. The gate-mask index and
            the per-pair fast paths are bankable and provably identical, but the
            residual is the n² iteration over densely-scored candidates. Under
            the constraint we were holding, there was no lever left. Together,
            the safe optimizations delivered roughly a 30% improvement.

The reframe: we were answering the wrong question

            Every conclusion above, the dead-end pruning and the intrinsic n²,
            is correct under one assumption:
            
byte-identical output.
 We had been protecting the
            exact order of every candidate. That was stronger than what the app
            needs.

The user-facing contract has exactly two guarantees:

the chosen #1 chord is preserved;

the set of surfaced alternatives is preserved.

            The 
order
 of alternatives #2 and beyond is not a guarantee.
            Near-tie alternatives are often
            
enharmonic

            respellings of one sound, the same notes written different ways, and
            their relative order was already being settled by an arbitrary
            fallback (sort by root note). So the Copeland reshuffle that the
            dead-end argument treats as disqualifying only ever moves output
            that was never pinned down in the first place. The earlier reasoning
            answered “can we prune with byte-for-byte identical output?” (no).
            The product question is “can we prune without breaking the promise
            to the user?” (yes).

              Pruning never changes a head-to-head comparison between two
              surviving candidates. It only changes the global Copeland count
              used when the linearizer has to break a cycle. That count is
              partly an artifact: a candidate’s total is padded by every
              obviously wrong reading it happens to beat, which says little
              about how it compares with another plausible reading. Dropping the
              unsurfaceable tail removes that padding. The result is not a more
              correct order, since the Copeland count was never a measure of
              musical quality. It is a 
less arbitrary
 fallback, no
              longer swayed by how many discarded readings each candidate
              happened to beat.

Choosing the prune margin

            The prune keeps every candidate scoring within a fixed margin of the
            top score (
rankingPruneMargin
) and drops the rest
            before ranking. The catch is that this margin is a
            
correctness threshold, not a tuning knob
. If it is
            ever smaller than the gap at which a candidate could still have been
            shown to the user, the prune deletes something the user was supposed
            to see. That makes it a worst-case bound, so it would be a mistake
            to set it from an average or a
            
standard deviation
: a typical-case band would be most likely to fail on the rare
            cases the margin is supposed to protect.

            How far below the top score can a still-shown candidate sit? Call
            that the 
surfaced gap
. Our first estimate was simple and
            wrong: hard-rule reach plus the 0.20 near-tie window, about 1.8. But
            the engine surfaces every candidate down to the lowest-ranked
            near-tie one, and the linearizer is not strictly ordered by score,
            so a deeper reading can be lifted into the shown band. The measured
            surfaced gap is the binding number, not the reach.

            The three columns below separate the pieces: 
reach
 is how
            far below the top score a hard rule can promote a winner, the
            
alternatives band
 is how far down the ranked list the
            surfaced set extends, and the 
surfaced gap
 is the largest
            score gap for any shown candidate. We measured all three on the
            engine with pruning turned off:

Corpus

Reach

Alternatives band

Surfaced gap

Oracle (real)

1.283

1.443

1.599

Common (real)

1.429

1.443

1.599

Dense 7–12 (adverse)

0.484

2.858

2.858

            We expected dense 8-plus-note voicings, lacking any clean template
            fit, to compress scores and keep the margin safe. The reach half of
            that is right: it collapses from 1.28 to 0.48 as scores compress.
            But reach is not the binding term. The alternative band moves the
            opposite way, because more candidates and more hard-rule cycles let
            the linearization pull deeper readings upward, so the surfaced gap
            
grows
 to 2.858 on dense clusters.

            A multi-seed adversarial sweep (5,000+ dense voicings, sizes 7 to
            12) held the ceiling at 2.858 (an 8-note cluster), with only four
            voicings above 2.5. Performance was essentially flat across margins:
            the oracle corpus kept about 10 candidates at margin 2.0, 15 at 3.0,
            and 20 at 4.0, all a greater-than-94% reduction in n² pairs against
            the roughly 86-candidate baseline. Speed did not pick the number;
            correctness did. We took
            
3.0
: it clears the 2.858 adversarial ceiling, keeps
            every surfaced reading on all three corpora, and changes nothing a
            musician sees.

Checking the golden failures

            Pruning did break three of our 
golden tests
, the cases
            where we pin exact expected output. Before relying on “order is not
            a contract,” we checked that those three changes were arbitrary
            rather than musically meaningful, cross-checking against outside
            references the way we do for naming questions.

            Each broken case had the same shape: the #1 pick was unchanged, and
            the shuffle was between alternatives at 
identical
 scores
            that spell the same sound two different ways (for example
            
A♭7♯5♯11
 versus
            
G♯7♭5♭13
), separated only by the
            root-note fallback. There is no musically correct order between
            them, so pinning one was over-specification. We loosened the goldens
            at the source rather than case by case: the expected alternatives
            assertion became an unordered containment check, so every expected
            alternative must still surface, but its order is free.

Locking it in

            The bound is empirical, so we wrote two guards to keep the margin
            honest:

              A 
candidatesRanked
 counter makes the prune a
              deterministic benchmark signal. Generation is unchanged because
              the prune runs after it; without this counter, the largest
              algorithmic change we have made would show up only in noisy time.
              It falls from 11,983 to 2,120 on the oracle corpus.

              A guard test raises the margin to infinity to recover the unpruned
              ranking, measures the surfaced gap across the oracle corpus and a
              dense sweep, and fails if it ever reaches the production margin. A
              future scoring or ranking change that widens the gap past 3.0 then
              fails CI instead of quietly dropping an alternative.

Result

            The #1 pick and the surfaced alternatives set stayed unchanged
            across both real corpora. Only 6 oracle cases and 7 common cases
            reordered alternatives #2 and beyond, the explicitly non-contract
            part. Uncached ranking time dropped 
86.7%
 on the
            oracle corpus and 
91.7%
 on the common pool; the
            memory the analysis holds onto fell about 3.5%.

            This does not reduce the O(n²) complexity. A dense voicing with no
            clear winner still ranks a full set, because the prune cannot drop
            candidates near the top score. It removes the long tail of
            unsurfaceable readings that common and adversarial cases were paying
            full ranking cost to order.

The takeaway

            The most expensive constraint in this work was one we imposed on
            ourselves and never stated: byte-identical output. Under that
            constraint, the safe optimizations were constant-factor only. The
            tenfold win did not come from a more clever algorithm. It came from
            comparing the constraint to what the product promises.

            The gate masks and per-pair fast paths are still in the engine,
            still provably identical, and still earning their roughly 30% on
            top. But the headline number came from removing a guarantee the app
            did not actually need.

See the speed for yourself.

              WhatChord identifies chords in real time, on-device. Free for iOS
              and Android, with no subscription and no ads.

View source on GitHub

              Prefer not to install?
              
Try identifying chords in your browser →

Also on this site

Technical deep-dive

Building a Real-Time Chord Recognizer

                The bitmasks, chord-quality templates, scoring and ranking
                heuristics, and LRU cache behind real-time chord recognition.

Read the article →

For musicians

Why Chord Naming Is Harder Than It Looks

                The inversions, enharmonics, altered dominants, and genuine
                ambiguity behind real chord recognition, explained without the
                code.

Read the article →

Chord data

What We Learned From 1 Million Chord Annotations

                How real-world chord annotations help keep WhatChord’s
                recognition roadmap grounded in music people actually write and
                play.

Read the article →
