Optocam Zero

Optocam Zero is a Raspberry Pi Zero based compact digital camera made using off the shelf components.

I designed Optocam Zero to have a very compact, carry everywhere and have fun sort of camera. As I was inspired by Kodak charmera and similar toy cameras, I wanted it to be feel playful, enjoyable and be intuitive to use. I also aimed to make it relatively easy to build so that others can also build one and have fun with it. That's why all the case parts are easily printable and for the electronics it uses off the shelf components that are easy to find.

Features

Very compact and easy to carry in your pocket.

Intuitive and simple camera interface and controls.

Uses autofocus camera module.

8 photo filters included.

Easy and fast image transfer through custom hotspot interface. Optimized both for mobile and desktop.

Screen dimming when inactive to preserve battery.

USB-C charging. Device can be used while charging.

Interchangable battery.

Off the shelf/ common components for the electronics.

Fully 3D printed case parts (apart from fasteners).

3D printable TPU protective sleeve and lanyard design is available.

NEW
 - GIF recording and playback.

Specs

2592x2592px Jpeg image capture. Image saves in the background while preview stays active.

240x240px 1.4 inch lcd display.

Consistent 15–20 fps camera preview on the screen.

22 seconds boot time.

Uses 14500 type li-ion battery.

70–80 minutes of use per charge.

Dimensions: 51×71×18mm (excluding camera and screen bump)

Sample Photos

How to Build Optocam Zero?

Everything you need to build an Optocam Zero yourself is included in this repo.

All the 3d print files, Required parts list, and detailed step by step build guide can be found under the 
hardware
 folder.

If you're considering building one, check the 
BOM
 to get an idea of the cost for required tools and parts.
Also, have a look at the 
build guide
, it will give you a clear idea of what the build involves.

Hardware

See the 
hardware
 folder for:

Bill of materials
.

Build guide
 (PDF).

Bambu Studio project files
 ready to print for transparent PETG or PETG / PETG-CF.

Individual .stls
 for camera parts.

CAD file
 for customization.

Software

See the 
software
 folder for:

Optocam Zero camera software installer and installation guide.

Camera controls information.
