In recent months there has been a proliferation of AI-generated proofs of various old and new results, some of which have been formalized in the proof assistant language Lean.  However, checking that a given Lean repository actually proves the claimed statement is somewhat non-trivial, especially for an audience which is not expert in the use of Lean: one has to first check that the claimed formal Lean statements have proofs that typecheck, that the proofs do not contain any “cheats” such as adding additional axioms, and that the formal statements also match (in a semantic sense) the informal description of the claimed results.  

To help bring some clarity to this situation, I am happy to announce that 
Palomar registry of Lean verified mathematics
, which is an initiative incubated by the 
Lean FRO
 and by 
ICARM
, is now open for submissions.   I am serving in several roles on this registry, including on the scientific advisory board, together with 
Jeremy Avigad
, 
Matthew Ballard
, 
Jaume de Dios
, 
Nestor Guillen
, 
Bryna Kra
, 
Kim Morrison
, 
Ravi Vakil
, and 
Akshay Venkatesh
.

A detailed motivation for Palomar can be found 
here
, and further information about Palomar can be found 
here
.  A zeroth approximation of what Palomar intends to be is the analogue of a preprint server for Lean proofs.  More precisely, Palomar (which is named after the 
astronomical observatory
) is a registry of external Github repositories (or more precisely, “snapshots” of such repositories, as represented by a specific Github commit) containing Lean code adhering to the current best practices for such formalizations, in particular containing

A “challenge file” containing a short, human readable description in Lean of the results claimed.

A “solution module” containing an (arbitrarily long) proof of the results claimed in the challenge file.

A “
formalization.yaml
” file describing the results in informal language, and also containing a number of other relevant metadata and disclosures.

(There are also some additional technical requirements for the repository which I will omit here.) If a snapshot of a repository is submitted to Palomar, it will check both (a) that the solution module typechecks and proves exactly the results claimed in the challenge file, and that (b) the informal description of the result in the formalization.yaml file appears to match the result claimed in the challenge file, and that the repository meets various minimal standards required for a registry entry. The first check (a) is purely mechanical, using the Lean tool 
Comparator
; the second check (b) is non-deterministic, being performed by a large language model. If a repository passes both checks, it can be registered on Palomar.  It is worth stressing that the checks in (a) and (b) fall well short of what a proper human peer review of a submission for novelty, interest, and accuracy would give; in particular, Palomar is 
not
 a peer-reviewed journal.

The submission process is thorough, but achievable: as a test, I 
successfully managed
 to submit my own 
recent formalization of the proof of Sendov’s conjecture
 to Palomar, and also plan to submit some older formalizations to the registry soon.

In any event, the registry is now open for formalizations of both old and new results. Submissions (whether human-generated, AI-generated, or some mixture of both) are welcome; please read the (somewhat detailed) instructions 
here
 before starting a submission. (I will however note that modern AI agents are quite helpful in assisting with the mechanical details of the submission, though a human review is still strongly recommended.)

Discussion and feedback on Palomar will occur on 
this Zulip channel
.

Share this:

Print (Opens in new window)

Print

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)

Email

More

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit

Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)

Pinterest

Like
 
Loading...
