Text
        settings

Story text

Size

Small

Standard

Large

Width
      
*

Standard

Wide

Links

Standard

Orange

* Subscribers only

Learn more

            Minimize to nav

The US Department of Defense has a lot of congressionally mandated homework to do every year involving hundreds of required reports on various national security topics. But Pentagon officials have been proudly describing a new shortcut—using generative AI tools to write such reports for Congress.

Pentagon Chief Technology Officer 
Emil Michael
 highlighted AI-generated reports to Congress as a key example of how the Department of Defense—stylized as the Department of War under the Trump administration—has adopted generative AI during an 
event hosted
 by the Hudson Institute think tank in Washington, DC, on June 12. The Pentagon has made AI tools, starting with Google Cloud’s Gemini for Government, 
widely available
 to members of all six military branches through the department’s bespoke GenAI.mil platform since December 2025.

“I have to report to Congress every year on this thing,” Michael said. “Let me load all the papers onto it and have it draft me a congressional report that would otherwise take 200 hours of staffing time and do it in five hours.”

More evidence of such AI usage came from previous comments by 
Jacob Glassman
, deputy assistant secretary of defense for science and technology foundations at the US Department of Defense, during the Box Federal Summit held in Washington, DC, on April 23. According to 
DefenseScoop
 coverage, Glassman described how he told a short-staffed team responsible for delivering a congressionally mandated report to “use GenAI.mil, do the best you can.”

The team supposedly came back to Glassman a week later, claiming that the AI-generated report was “the best report we’ve written in the past five years.” As DefenseScoop notes, Glassman did not identify the report in question.

The Department of Defense has long struggled to deliver such reports to Congress efficiently and in a timely manner, especially as the number of mandated reports generally rises with every new defense appropriations bill passed by Congress. The number of reports had soared from just over 500 reports in 2000 to more than 1,400 reports by 2020, according to the US 
Government Accountability Office
.

Officials at the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs typically have to go through defense authorization statutes “almost line by line” to find the latest reporting requirements, said 
Elizabeth Field
, former senior executive director at the Government Accountability Office, in a 
Federal News Network interview
 in 2023. Her GAO report showed how the Pentagon’s painstaking process of identifying the reporting requirements and assigning reports to the appropriate team could take between three and six months—and some of the Congressionally mandated reports are due within a year.

The perils of pushing AI adoption

Given that tedious process, it’s not surprising that the Pentagon’s current leadership may find AI-generated reports to be a tempting shortcut. But other organizations, such as 
law firms
 and 
major consulting firms
, have already discovered the many pitfalls of relying on error-ridden AI-generated writing without adequate human vetting and oversight.

One of the latest cautionary tales involved the multinational consulting giant KPMG publishing a report about AI use in businesses that featured case studies with 
numerous AI-generated errors and false claims
, as revealed by the research group GPTZero and reported by the Financial Times. The revelations led KPMG to 
pull the report
 titled “Redefining excellence in the age of agentic AI.”

It’s unclear what processes the Pentagon has in place to review the accuracy of its AI-generated reports to Congress. But such reports are a crucial element of congressional oversight intended to hold the US military accountable for how it uses taxpayer dollars—and so any AI-induced errors or mischaracterizations could undermine the accountability mechanism of such reports. This also comes at a time when the Pentagon has requested an 
unprecedented $1.5 trillion budget
 for the 2027 fiscal year.

Members of the US military have also been using generative AI tools to write personnel evaluation reports for non-commissioned officers and commissioned officers, generate commendation medal citations, and create counseling statements, according to a 
Small Wars Journal
 article.

The number of Department of Defense personnel using commercial AI tools such as Gemini through GenAI.mil has significantly increased from just 80,000 in December 2025 to 1.5 million in June 2026, the Pentagon CTO claimed during his remarks at the Hudson Institute. The Department of Defense has an overall workforce of approximately 3.5 million.

Google is among 
multiple US tech companies
 that 
signed agreements
 in 2025 with the US General Services Administration to make their AI tools available across federal government agencies for deeply discounted prices.

On May 1, the Department of Defense 
announced new agreements
 with “eight of the world’s leading frontier artificial intelligence companies” to deploy more AI tools on classified networks for “lawful operational use.” Those companies include 
SpaceX
, 
OpenAI
, 
Google
, 
Nvidia
, Reflection AI, 
Microsoft
, 
Amazon Web Services
, and 
Oracle
.

The US government has not divulged how much it is paying the companies under the new contracts. But the list notably excludes Anthropic, which was 
blacklisted by the Trump administration
 after the tech company supposedly refused to allow its Claude AI models to be used in an unrestricted manner for 
autonomous warfare
 and mass surveillance.

                  Jeremy Hsu

Tech Reporter

                  Jeremy Hsu

Tech Reporter

      Jeremy Hsu is a reporter exploring a wide range of topics across deep tech and AI. He has previously written for New Scientist, Scientific American, IEEE Spectrum, Wired, Undark Magazine and MIT Tech Review, among many other publications, about topics such as deepfakes, data centers, drones, battery tech, robotics, and GPS jamming. He also has a Master of Arts in Journalism from NYU, and a bachelor's degree from University of Pennsylvania in History and Sociology of Science, with a minor in English.

    95 Comments
