PgDog
Scaling engine for PostgreSQL
Founding Software Engineer
$150K - $225K
•
1.00% - 3.00%
•
San Francisco, CA, US / CA, US / OR, US / Remote (San Francisco, CA, US; CA, US; OR, US)
Job type
Full-time
Role
Engineering, Full stack
Experience
3+ years
Visa
US citizen/visa only
Skills
PostgreSQL, Rust
Connect directly with founders of the best YC-funded startups.
Apply to role ›
Lev Kokotov
Founder
Lev Kokotov
Founder
About the role
Hey! PgDog is a tiny database startup, based out of SF, with a global team. We’re scaling the world’s most popular database, PostgreSQL. PgDog is in production, used by dozens of companies, large and small. The problem is big, but so is the opportunity, and we’re hiring!

About the role

The jack of all trades. Rust, Postgres, a bit of infrastructure, networking, distributed systems, and so much more. You’ll build features that will go directly into our customers hands, the day you ship them.

With great power comes great responsibility. You’re meticulous, detail-oriented and are not afraid to take calculated risks. You write tests because you want to make sure the thing works, not to check a box. You’re not afraid to run code in production, on real data; after all, that’s the only way to know something really works.

Also, pretty important these days: you don’t let AI do the thinking for you; you’re comfortable with and without it.

First week

You’ll fix a bug or ship a cool feature. We’ll give it to one of our users or customers to try right away.

First month

You’ll get acquainted with pretty much all of our code. You’ll start coming up with your own bug fixes and features.

Three months later

You’re designing our roadmap. You’re contributing to everything we’re doing: coding, talking with customers, and even finding us more! Things we badly want to build:

Advanced OLAP query engine. People don’t like to rewrite their queries, so let’s make them just work with sharded Postgres! If you’re wondering how much work that is, check out the Postgres 
SQL reference
. All of it has to work!

In-place data redistribution: let’s make Postgres scale like Cassandra/Elastic. Having the ability to dynamically shard would be super cool and make it a push-button op.

If any of this sounds super hard…well, that’s because it is, but only on the surface. We’re splitting this up into small, achievable tasks, and shipping them straight to prod!

Day to day

Mostly digging through the Postgres manual and building a distributed database, from scratch, using first principles (and as many Wikipedia articles as you need). Everything is written in Rust, so that makes it easier. Type-safe, “fearless concurrency”, and an awesome open source ecosystem where you can find pretty much any library we’ll need… and if you can’t, you can build your own and contribute it back to the world.

Time split is going to be something like 30% bug fixes, 60% new features, 10% infra glue.

The backstory

I did this at Instacart back in 2020. Grew the company 5x in a few months, just by making Postgres do things it wasn’t built for. If you make the database you already have just work, people love it; nobody wants to migrate to Dynamo.

I’ve been coding in Rust for close to 10 years, even wrote my own 
web framework
 for fun. PgDog started as “something to do” while I was unemployed; one year later, it’s mission-critical infra for some pretty serious people, so that’s cool.

Compensation

150k-225k / year

1-3% equity

Perks

Health & dental, fully covered

Unlimited PTO

If you’re in SF Bay Area: coffee, dinner, hikes, bike rides, etc.; I’m always down to hang out! We can also walk my giant 90 pound dog (and now you know where the name “PgDog” comes from).

About the interview

30min intro call.

Technical deep dive (1h-3h).

Work with us for a week or two on a contract basis.

Join full time!

About 
PgDog
Postgres is the most popular database period, but running it in production is hard. We're building scaling tools, like load balancing and sharding, to make Postgres the one database you'll ever need.

PgDog
Founded:
2025
Batch:
P25
Team Size:
3
Status:
Active
Location:
San Francisco
Founders
Lev Kokotov
Founder
Lev Kokotov
Founder
