Google’s most sophisticated foldable: Pixel 11 Pro Fold

Aug 12, 2026

|

x.com

Facebook

LinkedIn

Mail

Copy link

                Introducing Pixel 11 Pro Fold, our latest foldable with a thinner and lighter design, brand-new main camera, added durability inside and out, and enhanced intelligence tools.

Justin Savich

Group Product Manager

                  Share

x.com

Facebook

LinkedIn

Mail

Copy link

        Read AI-generated summary

The new Pixel 11 Pro Fold is thinner, lighter, and three times more durable than previous models, featuring a new HiLight camera notification system and a powerful Tensor G6 chip. It introduces helpful accessibility tools like sign-to-text translation and improved multitasking features for the dual-screen display. You can pre-order the device today on the Google Store before it hits shelves on August 20.

              Summaries were generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental.

Google’s new Pixel 11 Pro Fold is their most sophisticated and durable foldable yet.

It’s thinner, lighter, and features a new HiLight camera bar for helpful, glanceable notifications.

The phone is three times more durable, thanks to a new gearless hinge design.

You’ll enjoy faster charging, a brighter screen, and a powerful new custom processor.

New accessibility features include sign-to-text, making communication easier for the Deaf community.

              Summaries were generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental.

The new Pixel 11 Pro Fold is thinner, lighter, and much tougher than previous models. It features a cool new light system around the camera that glows to give you quick updates. The phone is packed with AI tools, including a special feature that translates sign language into text. It also charges faster and has a battery that easily lasts all day.

              Summaries were generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental.

            Explore other styles:

                  General summary

                  Bullet points

                  Basic explainer

Pixel 11 Pro Fold is here, and it’s our most sophisticated foldable yet. With a fresh and durable design, stunning (and helpful) new camera visor with HiLight, and unique features that help you throughout your day, this phone is next-level.
Compact design and enhancements
Pixel 11 Pro Fold is almost 10% lighter and about 1mm thinner than Pixel 10 Pro Fold, so it’s more comfortable to hold in your hand and in your pocket.

1

 With even thinner bezels than before for a sleek look, the new Pro Fold comes in our classic Obsidian and brand-new Olive for a pop of color.

Pixel 11 Pro Fold gets an addition to its iconic camera bar: HiLight. It uses LED lights built around the camera’s flash to give you timely, glanceable information. Use HiLight to get color-coded glows for incoming calls from your favorite contacts, or when you’re talking to Gemini hands-free. Over time, you’ll see more capabilities added to HiLight — like message notifications from your favorite contacts.

A phone built to last
Pixel 11 Pro Fold maintains the same high standard we set last year for durability, with an impressive IP68 dust and water protection rating

2

— but we didn’t stop there.
The new glass fiber composite back cover is designed to be nearly impossible to crack.

3

 Paired with a new gearless hinge that protects the inner display and a new Super Actua outer display made of ultra-strong ceramic cover glass, this phone is three times more durable than last year’s device, and it’s our most durable Pixel Fold yet.

4

Plus, Pixel 11 Pro Fold has improved crease performance, thanks to the new hinge’s larger bend radius and thicker glass layer on the inner display. And both displays are 20% brighter than last year at 3600 nits.

5

You’ll notice we upgraded charging speeds for Pixel 11 Pro Fold, too. Plug in and get 50% charged in about 30 minutes with 30W wired charging.

6

 Or charge wirelessly 20% faster than our last generation Fold phone with up to 25W Qi2.2 built-in.

7

 Beyond charging, Pixel 11 Pro Fold has over 24 hours of battery life, so you can confidently get through the day.

8

New features for the big screen
Powered by our new custom Tensor G6 chip and equipped with 16GB of RAM, Pixel 11 Pro Fold delivers smooth, speedy performance and is designed for Gemini Intelligence.

9

The dual screens on Pixel 11 Pro Fold are ideal for real-time translation, especially with our new sign-to-text feature. Developed in partnership with the Deaf community, it lets signers express themselves in Live Transcribe and Gboard in their native language. 

10

 Pixel 11 Pro Fold’s hands-free form factor makes setting up for signing easy, and can be used with both one-handed and two-handed signing. Sign American Sign Language to the front camera and translations will appear on the outer display.

And bubbles have been optimized for Fold to make multitasking easy. Turn any app into a bubble and you'll be able to see it on the bottom right corner of your screen when unfolded for quick and easy access.

Foldable-exclusive features you know and love are here to stay, like Drag and Drop, Split Screen, Instant View, and two new animations for Made You Look. Plus, Pixel 11 Pro Fold is equipped with the same helpful features as the rest of the Pixel 11 lineup, including proactive assistance

11

, and improved Circle to Search integration with Pixel Camera.

12

A camera for moments you can’t retake
From detailed landscape shots to extreme close-ups, you’ll get crisp, beautiful images every time thanks to a new 48MP main camera and telephoto camera with up to 30x Super Zoom. New features for the Pixel 11 series like Magic Capture and Camera Looks allow you to elevate and personalize your photos by capturing the perfect moment when your subject is in motion and providing customizable Looks that bring your unique vision to life.

Order Pixel 11 Pro Fold today
Pixel 11 Pro Fold is available for pre-order today and hits shelves on August 20. And be sure to check out our new Pixel 11 Pro Fold case with an integrated hinge cover for added protection.
Visit the 
Google Store
 for more information on availability and product updates.

Collection

          Made by Google 2026

Check out the latest announcements about Pixel devices at Made by Google 2026.

              See more

            Get the latest news from Google in your inbox

            Sign up for our newsletters with product updates, event information, special offers, and more.

Done. Just one step more.

        Check your inbox to confirm your subscription.

    You can also subscribe with a 
different email address
.

            Your information will be used in accordance with 
Google's privacy policy.
 You may opt out at any time.

POSTED IN:
