Pizza Box Project Stack

a pizza carton with a hole

Appreciating Ratfactor

One of the people who writes for an internet audience and whom I really enjoy reading is

Ratfactor
. I find that Ratfactor has a generally great attitude towards things.
On his site he does lovely, lovely deep dives into personal projects of high
personal importance and is generally fantastic at putting in the effort to
document what he does, why he does it, and how he thinks about it. If you’ve read

a massive web page documenting everything about Chuck Moore’s Forth programming
language
, you’ve come across Ratfactor.

One of those projects is his 
paper-based project tracker
, or project
stack. The concept is as if you smash together a 
Zettelkasten
, the concept
of a 
stack (data structure)
, and a TODO tracker.

The system features one piece of paper per project task with the task you’re
working on right now at the very top. Finished tasks get removed from the stack and
discarded, revealing the next one. I really liked his idea and wanted to try it
out.

Instead of Ratfactor’s sticky paper, I used defunct business cards from a
startup I worked at 7 years ago. The card stock is rigid and feels pleasant to
handle, the back is blank and the size is just right for writing a couple of
sentences. My take on Ratfactor’s system involves three stacks: one stack of
blanks, one stack of project tasks, and one stack for the finished tasks. The
finished stack I have because It’s gratifying to see it grow and helpful to be
reminded of what I most recently finished.

Ratfactor went further in his idea and made a cute display of cardboard that
shows the first task in what 
looks like a little retro-arcade
cabinet
.

First prototype

Before I went so far as to build my own display I wanted to prototype my use of
the project stack idea and see if I found it useful. My prototype was very
simple: three stacks on a piece of paper where I’d written 
Done
, 
Tasks
,

Empties
 in three different areas of the paper. I attached the paper to a cardboard folder
so I could, somewhat precariously, move the collection of stacks around as
needed. This flimsy prototype worked well! In general I greatly enjoy systems that let me
offload things I have to keep in my head, while also being of such a variety of
system that I can retain complete autonomy using it and keep its use-friction
low; and for getting project ideas and personal task out of my head, this hit
the spot for me.

the first prototype was a labeled sheet of paper on a folder

One benefit of using physical pieces of paper is how effortless it is to work
with and change: reorganizing, splaying out all cards, quickly striking things over
and amending them, ad-hoc organizing a series of tasks by writing a little label in the
top right. When I use paper that also means I get to use my fancy inks and pens
to write, increasing the satisfaction of the system even more. This particular
paper-based system is great because of the simplicity and focus (one task only!
it’s waiting for you indefinitely until you have the time!) and for how
gratifying it is to toss the top most task into the 
Done
 stack when I have
finished it.

After trying the system out for some time (weeks? months? not really sure!:) I
wrote a task to make a cardboard organizer. The card lay dormant
until one day when I had made sure to have everything necessary to execute on it
and felt the fresh tailwinds necessary to getting a new project under way.

Making the cardboard organizer

What I used to make my display was a set of pretty average city-life stuff: a
piece of cardboard (cut out of a pizza carton), a pencil, a glue gun loaded with
golden glitter glue, a knife with which to cut cardboard, and some clips
to help hold sides together.

the cardboard organizer being made

I winged the design based on the dimensions of my stacks. I put three cards in
the middle of the cardboard to measure out the approximate size, drew lines
where I wanted to cut the borders and other lines with indications of where I would cut for folds
and then cut the cardboard accordingly. One thing I wanted in this revised
organizer was for the 
Tasks
 stack to be angled such that I can easily see what
it reads. To do that I used a cardboard offcut and folded it into a triangle
which I glued to the middle of the area that would host the 
Task
 stack. Another
offcut I used to separate the empties stack from the other two stacks by cutting
a hole in the base and passing it through from the bottom.

the finished organizer without cards

I threw it together quickly once I had gotten started and have been using it
since! It works great! Compared to my previous version I can move it around a
lot easier, which helps since I often rest the organizer on the docked laptop I use for
working. The angled 
Task
 stack helps a lot to keep the next project in view
and top of mind.  Pizza box cartons are great building material for small
things like this organizer especially lids from pizza bakers making less oily
pizzas :)

the cardboard organizer with populated stacks

Cardboard paper-crafting is a really fun way to satisfy one’s need for specific physical
items and I encourage people to try it out with whatever cardboard one can save
up and to have a glue gun on hand (buy one or borrow one from a friend or tool
library/DIY meet) as it makes it just that much more fun!
