Mitchell Hashimoto
Pledging Another $400,000 to the Zig Software Foundation
June 21, 2026
My family is pledging another $400,000
1
 to the

Zig Software Foundation
 (ZSF). This brings
our total pledged support for ZSF to $700,000, after our

initial donation in 2024
.

Zig continues to earn my respect as a technical project and as a community. The

2026 devlog
 shows steady progress on the
hard problems of building an excellent language and compiler. I also deeply
respect the project's approach to maintainership and community, reflected in
initiatives like Loris Cro's

Contributor Poker and Zig's AI Ban
.
That philosophy continues to attract and develop some of the most

talented people in open source
.

Recently, Zig's strict no-LLM contribution policy became a public topic of
discussion again, especially in the context of Bun's Zig fork and Rust rewrite.
I have no problem with what Bun did, I think Bun is a great project, and
I'm not interested in turning this into a Bun post. Instead, what stood out to
me was how quickly people villainized one another. Too much of the
conversation lacked empathy and respect for viewpoints different from our own.

I use AI heavily. I've written about

my AI adoption journey
 and

shipping real features with AI assistance
.
I'm also quite vocal about

remaining rational about its capabilities

and 
frustrated with its negative impacts on open source
.

The point is that I have opinions. Those opinions don't fully align with
ZSF's approach. And yet, I have nothing but respect for ZSF: the people,
the policies, and the project. Part of what makes the internet and open source
great is that projects can be weird and different. They can set unusual
boundaries, build their own culture, and pursue quality in ways that won't make
sense to everyone.

Zig is exceptional software: ambitious,
practical, independent, and unusually serious about quality. Ghostty exists in
large part because Zig made it possible for me to build the kind of software I
wanted to build. This is why I support Zig.

I'm proud to support Zig and the Zig Software Foundation again. Please
consider 
donating
 if you can.

Footnotes

$200,000 per year split over two years, the same structure as our 2024 donation. 
↩

June 21, 2026
