Pondering routing more of my traffic via nodes outside the UK because of the direction of UK online safety policy

Published on: 
2026-06-20 21:00:07
 by 
Neil Brown

Some of the UK government’s policy announcements around the Internet
- and, in particular, social media and VPNs - are downright concerning
me at the moment.

In the name of “online safety”, the fundamental rights of both
freedom of expression and privacy appear to be under imminent
threat.

I have concerns which go beyond our shores - mostly stemming from
Google, frankly - but the UK legislative / policy issues are bothering
me especially at the moment.

I value my ability to read, learn, and communicate almost without
borders. I don’t like signing up to websites or newsletters (I prefer
RSS), I don’t like storing my data on other people’s computers, and I’ve
certainly no wish to prove my age or identity outside core government
services.

The current proposal to ban people under 16 - who also have the
rights to freedom of expression and privacy - from some (as yet not
fully delineated) social media services is likely to result in
wide-spread verification.

While I am unlikely to be affected directly - although it would
depend on the definition of “social media” - I anticipate that more
websites will simply choose to block traffic from UK IP addresses,
especially if UK-originated traffic does not matter a huge amount to
them.

I am already seeing this as a consequence of the Online Safety Act,
and I expect any future UK laws in this area to exacerbate that.

I also anticipate that we will soon see the first court-ordered
blocking injunctions under the Online Safety Act, when the fines issued
by Ofcom against some website providers (so far, most quite niche porn
sites, as far as I can tell, plus a “suicide discussion forum”) go
unpaid and the “compliance issues” which Ofcom has identified go
unresolved.

Some - many - UK ISPs have already implemented, and carry out, DNS
blocking, both for mandatory and non-mandatory reasons. Mine - A&A -
is probably one of the outliers, with no blocking save for the mandatory
sanctions-related requirements.

In any case, so far, since I run my own recursive DNS infrastructure,
I have not been affected.

I use Tor quite a lot, but I’ve seen an increase - sure, a small
increase, but an increase nevertheless - of sites which are blocking Tor
traffic.

And so, for the first time, I am considering locating something
(perhaps a WireGuard node, or a SOCKS proxy, or a recursive DNS server /
DNS proxy, or perhaps all of them) somewhere on the Internet outside the
UK, so that I can route some traffic through that, as needed, to
maintain my access to the web.

Honestly, it seems such a shame to me, that UK Internet censorship
should reach such a place, but there we go.

I have not decided exactly what I might do, or exactly how, or where,
I might do it, but it is far more attractive to me now that it has been
ever before, in all the 30ish years that I’ve been online.

To me, the need to even contemplate this kind of thing is the stuff
of dystopian sci-fi.

And yet here I find myself.

Internet
 
online safety
 
UK
 
regulation
 
Tor
 
SOCKS
 
WireGuard
 
proxy
 
Online Safety Act

Related Posts

Preparatory notes for upcoming Online Safety Act workshops

Public safety by design: the catchphrase for Internet policy debate in 2022?

Just let me compute in peace
