Home
Interim CTO
Services
Blog
About
🇩🇪
Home
Interim CTO
Services
Blog
About
🇩🇪
Menu
PostgreSQL for Everything
.
Contrary to popular belief - the answer to everything is NOT 42 - it’s PostgreSQL. (ok. It might also be 
Postgres
).
Table Of Contents
Intro
I started using PostgreSQL roughly in 2003 for a research project called 
ColumbaDB
. Columba is no more, but PostgreSQL is still alive and kicking more than ever.
In 2003, MySQL was much more widely used than PostgreSQL. MySQL was also potentially faster as it did not implement all features of the SQL standard. At the same time MySQL was lacking many features that we needed (full-text search, powerful indexes, SQL standard compliance etc). PostgreSQL felt more like a “real” database in comparison to MySQL - like a tiny version of Oracle - but in open source clothes.
During that research project I learned a lot about databases, indexes and the power of PostgreSQL.
One important use-case was full-text search. We could have used MySQL in conjunction with another system like Lucene / Solr to make our database searchable. But that would have meant running and maintaining two such systems. Complicated.
PostgreSQL allowed us to use a 
fulltext search plugin
 to do everything in one system. No need to sync any data. No need to maintain and run two systems. It just worked and made us smile (after some tweaks of course). Simplicity.
Since then I used PostgreSQL for many use-cases throughout my career as 
CTO / Interim Manager
. Most recently I used PostgreSQL to store very high volume web analytics time series data via its 
TimescaleDB plugin
. Check out 
Privatracker - the best way to do web analytics and respect the privacy of your visitors
 - to see it in action.
Many others discussed the topic from different angles. And each article is really worth your time (
SQL is Agile
, 
Stephan Schmidt on Using SQL for Everything
). Also check out my 
Linkedin post
.
And if you are using PostgreSQL I can highly recommend reading Hazel Bachrach’s nice post on 
“What I Wish Someone Told Me About Postgres”
.
In my humble opinion the power of PostgreSQL comes from three sources:
It is 
rock-solid and stable
.
It is 
easy to run, install and scale
.
It massively 
simplifies your IT setup
 by being not only a RDBMS, but also a full-text search engine, a document storage and much much more…
Let’s have a closer look…
Rock Solid and Stable
PostgreSQL is boring old technology. 
The first PostgreSQL release dates back to 1996
. PostgreSQL is also very widely used - for a very long amount of time. Ironing out bugs - especially in database systems - takes time. PostgreSQL had that time.
It also has a very active community that diligently adds more and more features without breaking any old parts of it. In recent years PostgreSQL got many amazing features like json document storage, partitioning support, common table expressions and much much more. Each new release of PostgreSQL is exciting and brings new nice features.
True - PostgreSQL is old - but the features are very very modern - and PostgreSQL becomes better with every release.
Easy to Run, Install and Scale
PostgreSQL can be installed very easily locally. It is bundled with all major Linux distributions, part of 
Mac brew
, but can also be installed with applications like 
PostgresApp
.
When running tests, it comes in handy using 
Testcontainers with PostgreSQL
. It was never easier running your tests against a real PostgreSQL database that is 100% similar to the production thing.
If you want to run PostgreSQL on a server then you can simply apt-get install it. Or run it in a 
docker container
.
All cloud providers allow you to run (and scale!) PostgreSQL by clicking a single button. You got ample of choice at your fingertips:
Amazon AWS
Google GCP
Microsoft Azure
ElephantSQL
CrunchyData
Timescale
… and many more …
That makes PostgreSQL one of the most widely supported software systems in the market. And for you this means less maintenance and more time for creating new features for clients.
Simplifies Your IT Setup
Running PostgreSQL in the cloud is already just one click. But it gets even better. PostgreSQL can replace many systems that youd’d have to run otherwise.
PostgreSQL Replaces Solr and Elastic: Full-Text Search
PostgreSQL allows you to turn your text data into user-searchable data. Without a separate system. It’s also language agnostic and you’ll never have any sync problems between your data and your fulltext search system.
The most impressive article on the topic is how 
Contentful used PostgreSQL to enable fulltext search for their users
. It’s a tale in simplicity that enables growth.
Instacart did something very similar: They 
built their modern search infrastructure on Postgres
 instead of running a separate search cluster. Same story, different company.
More on the topic: 
https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/textsearch.html
PostgreSQL replaces MongoDB: Excellent Json Support
PostgreSQL has excellent support for 
storing and querying(!) json
. It also features an index type (GIN) that makes these operations blazingly fast. 
Is there a need for MongoDB any more?
.
The Guardian also wrote an excellent article how they 
switched from
Mongo to PostgreSQL
. Thanks for sharing 
Jan-Otto
! Hazel also 
wrote a nice piece on jsonb
 and what to take into account when using it.
PostgreSQL replaces Kafka and RabbitMQ: PostgreSQL as a queue
Events, queues and persistent logs are getting more and more important in today’s software systems. Systems like Kafka, RabbitMQ, SQS and others provide that functionality. But maintaining them is annoying, custom and you need the skillset.
The good news: You can just use PostgreSQL. The magic comes from
SELECT .. FOR UPDATE
SELECT .. SKIP LOCKED
Using these SQL features you can effectively use a table as queue. Either in a persistent fashion with a cursor and many consumers, or in a read-once fashion.
The article at 
crunchydata explains this concept very well
.
My tip: Start with PostgreSQL as a queueing system. Only when that does no longer perform well switch to other systems like Kafka, RabbitMQ or SQS. You’ll be surprised how well PostgreSQL works.
PostgreSQL Replaces Clickhouse: High Volume Time Series Data
Time series data is special. Often you get many data points in a very short amount of time. And then you have to aggregate the data frequently, doing some statistics on it and so on.
There are specialized software systems like Clickhouse (amazing by the way…). But you can also use a plugin for PostgreSQL that allows you to do (nearly) the same: 
Timescale
.
I’ve used Timescale and can recommend it. The good news is that you can continue using PostgreSQL - even for high volume data easily. No need to learn and maintain something new.
PostgreSQL as Vector Database for AI Workflows
Timescale lately released the 
pgvector extension
, that turns your PostgreSQL into a vector database.
This allows you to use the tech you already know for indexing and retrieval of relevant data. That’s an essential part of AI LLM workflows.
Timescale also recently announced 
pgai
 that includes pgvector, but also a lot of other nice extensions that make it super simple to index data, call LLM models and retrieve data based on similarity.
PostgreSQL Replaces Redis: Non-Persistent High Performance Caching
Caching is important. Most applications use something like Redis as a cache to get information like sessions and more quickly. A cache can by definition lose data and can be regenerated from the original source.
But. Why use Redis when PostgreSQL can be tuned to be as fast (in most usecases) as a Redis cache? The secret is using an UNLOGGED table. You can even emulate Redis’ automatic expire by a trigger. 
A lot has been written about this
 - I can just recommend trying it out.
PostgreSQL Replaces File System: For Raw Data
For one of my clients we had to read and write a huge amount of small pieces of binary encoded information. We initially thought that doing this via the file system was the fastest way to do so.
After some performance checks it became clear that PostgreSQL was even faster than reading from the file system for our use-case. PostgreSQL uses the file system very efficiently for its data - and it adds a lot of caching and efficient reading and writing strategies that can outperform writing and reading raw data on a file system.
We used 
Flatbuffers
 to store the data in a blob column. Data was then de-serialized on the client. You might want to try that approach as well.
PostgreSQL Replacing Your Graph Database
Hierarchical data can be managed in SQL via recursive queries. That’s ok, but also super-hard to read, maintain and debug. Not even speaking of performance.
The better way is the 
LTREE datatype of PostgreSQL
. It helped me not only once to implement hierarchical tag structures. Easy to read, maintain and blazingly fast.
PostgreSQL Replacing Your Microservice
Most of the “microservices” these days are only about models, getting data from a database and returning json to the client.
But you know what? PostgreSQL can turn any query into a Json result. That effectively replaces your server middleware. There are Pros and Cons to this approach, but it shows the capabilities of PostgreSQL. The amazing 
Lukas Eder wrote about the topic
 - not PostgreSQL specific - but everything mentioned there is very well doable in PostgreSQL as well
PostgreSQL - Replacing your Playstation 5
Well. Some enthusiast implemented 
Tetris as Common Table Expressions in pure SQL
. Crazy. And maybe not to be taken too seriously.
Conclusion
The list above is not very exhaustive. PostgreSQL is a very flexible piece of software. And it can be extended with plugins to do more and more.
You need simplicity if you want to move fast. If you come across a new requirement always ask: Can’t PostgreSQL do this? And do we really need that shiny new technology X?
PostgreSQL might not be the answer to everything - but it is the answer to a lot more than you might think!
Related posts
Three Strike Dismissal in One-On-Ones
Keith Rabois recommends to dismiss your report when you feel bad about an upcoming one on one more than three times in a row. Interesting. …
Effective Meetings
Most meetings are a waste of time. Let's check out the best way to change that!
What makes leaders effective?
What makes leaders effective? Peter Drucker got an answer for us.

Imprint
 | 
Privacy Policy
