Notebooks

Project Cybersyn

Last update
: 01 Aug 2026 00:32

First version
: 30 January 2022

Initial notes, January 2022

An early attempt at using networked computers for economic management in
Allende's Chile, with the involvement of the
British 
cyberneticist
 Stafford Beer.  This has
something of a cult following among
contemporary 
socialists
, in no small part, I
suspect, because of the period glamour of the photographs of the control room,
and because of the aura of righteous martyrdom given the fate of Allende and
his government.  Considering my interests in the possibilities and limits
of 
economic planning
, however, what I want
to get very clear on are:

 What the various participants (Beer, the various groups among the Chileans) 
hoped
 to achieve with Cybersyn;

 What the system as implemented 
actually
 achieved; and

 What a similar system might do with modern, or reasonably-foreseeable,
technology.

The main source on all this is Medina's book, which I need to actually
finish.  (Honestly it's been so long since I started it that I should just
re-read from scratch.)  But I should also try to see what's been done, in terms
of historical research, since her book.

Update, 18 October 2023

Attention
conservation notice
: 1500+ words of book report.

Having just finished Medina's book (which seems to have no successors), and the
papers from the 1970s she cites as the technical sources, a few more notes.
(All page numbers are references to her book.)

Cybersyn was to have four main components:

 "Cybernet": A network of telex machines linking factories to the
         government agency that ran the nationalized sector of the economy
         (Corporación de Fomento de la Producción, CORFO), and
         thence to the one (!) mainframe computer available to the project.
         (My reference to networked computer
s
, plural, in the opening
         paragraph to this notebook was thus dead wrong, though I think it's a
         common misunderstanding.)  The idea was that factories would send
         regular (ideally, daily) measurements of what we'd now call key
         performance indicators or metrics to the central computer, which would
         process them and communicate back to each factory what it had learned.
    
 "Cyberstride": A central program running on that mainframe which was
         essentially doing anomaly
         / 
change-point
 detection on
         the 
time series
 coming in from the
         periphery .  This was basically implementing the method of Harrison
         and Stevens (1971), per Medina (p. 267n33).  As Dan Davies
         
puts
         it
, the content of the signals it output would have amounted to
         basically either "situation nominal" or "there's something up at the
         mill".
         
An important part of the design here was that when Cyberstride
         
did
 raise a warning, it was supposed to go back to the
         relevant factory, which would get a chance to deal with the matter on
         its own, thus preserving a certain measure of firm-level autonomy.   
   
 "CHECO": A simulation model of the Chilean macroeconomy, which was
        supposed to let policy-makers do what-if exercises.
   
 The fabulous control room or operations room, which was supposed to
        display information from Cyberstride and CHECO to
        decision-makers. Medina says (pp. 121, 123) that the designers of the
        room swear up and down they weren't influenced by
        
2001
 or 
Star Trek
 or the like.  If that's
        true, the Chileans and the Hollywood set-designers must've both drawn
        drawn on some common sources for their visual style of The Future.

(Beer was also very taken with his thoughts about "algedonic"
[=pain-pleasure] meters which The People could twist back and forth to indicate
how satisfied or dis-satisfied they were, with a central read-out, but that
was, if not literally vaporware because a handful of prototypes were built,
then very clearly never going to be a thing.)

 I have listed the four parts in order of decreasing completion and
utility.

 The telex network was the only piece that seems to have been actually
         
useful
 to the Allende administration --- and that not in the
         way intended.  In October 1972, the mostly-conservative,
         mostly-small-business-owner trucking industry staged a nation-wide
         strike against Allende.  The administration used the telex network to
         coordinate the trucks they had control, to try to keep the economy
         from completely grinding to a halt.  This coordination seems to have
         made no use at all of Cyberstride, or the control room, or any
         cybernetic principles.  The main advantage of the telex over phone
         calls was creating written records without the need for note-taking.
         (Telegrams would have worked as well!)  Some tertiary sources make it
         sound like the government broke the strike in this way.  In fact, as
         Medina makes clear, the strike ended with a political compromise,
         viz., Allende brought top generals into his cabinet, and otherwise
         temporarily appeased the conservatives, though without fully
         abandoning his program.  It 
does
 seem that the telex network
         bought the government more time and a better bargaining position than
         it would otherwise have had.
    
 Cyberstride was eventually brought up and running, but the lag time
         between taking measurements, running them through the mainframe, and
         getting them back to decision makers was so long that it seems to have
         been a complete flop in its intended purpose of 
detecting

         problems early before they became serious --- let
         alone 
anticipating
 them before they became problems.  (Medina
         refers to efforts to get the telex machines to directly communicate
         with the mainframe running Cyberstride, but it's not clear to me if
         those ever succeeded; I/O in the early 1970s was hard!)  This, of
         course, did not help persuade busy, not to say frantic, factory
         managers to devote time and energy to feeding the system measurements
         early and often.  (I say "managers" because ordinary workers were
         uninvolved.)  It was, of course, an entirely centralized system in
         terms of computation.  (How could it not be, with only one computer?)
         Rhetoric to the contrary, it did nothing to de-centralize control, or
         to involve workers in participatory decision-making.  It also was in
         no sense a 
planning
 system, or any kind of replacement for
         market coordination.  When the system 
did
 warn of problems,
         it was up to managers and central bureaucrats to scramble to find
         solutions (e.g., alternative sources of supplies).  Figuring out what
         variables to measure for each factory was complicated, and involved
         sending trained engineers out to each plant and understanding what was
         going on there; this was not something workers had much to do with.
         (Beer talked a good game to the contrary on that last point, but it
         was just talk.)
         
I mentioned above that part of the original design was that when
         Cyberstride identified a problem at a plant, it was supposed to get
         some time to address it on its own, in order to preserve the autonomy
         of the enterprise.  As Medina explains, however, when problems were
         noticed, the staff running the system "alerted the affected
         enterprise, those in the central telex room in CORFO, and [Cybersyn
         project director Raul] Espejo in the CORFO informatics directorate ---
         all at the same time".  "Dismantling one of the primary safeguards of
         [enterprise] autonomy might have been as easy as having someone from
         the telex room walk down the hall".  (All these quotations are from
         pp. 183--184.)
    
 CHECO produced some models, but at no point does Medina refer to any
         decision-maker actually consulting them.  From her description of the
         models, it would have been 
extremely
 hard to connect them to
         the kind of data coming in through the telex network.
    
 The operations room also doesn't seem to have been much use.  The
         screens were not, in fact, hooked up to computers; they were for
         displaying slides.  "[I]t required some of Chile's best graphic
         designers to draw by hand every graph and chart the room displayed"
         (p. 125).  I'm sure it was 
nicer
 than a dingy conference room
         with an 
overhead transparency projector
, but it wasn't actually any
         more 
capable
.  Towards the end of his administration, in
         September 1973, Allende did ask to have the room moved to the
         presidential palace, but that seems to have been because he wanted
         closer access to the central node of the telex network (p. 206).

My assessment, based on all this, was that if the Allende government had, by
some miracle, survived (*), and Cybersyn had been built out as intended, what
would have resulted would've been an pioneering example of what we'd now call a
"dashboard", tracking time series of performance indicators and throwing alerts
to possible change-points in the series.  This can be a useful thing for
decision-makers, 
if
 the right stuff is being measured 
and

they have some ability to act on the information, but the politics of that of
course depends entirely on who has access to the information, who gets to make
decisions on the basis of the information, what kinds of decisions they get to
make, who they are accountable to for the results of their decisions, etc.,
etc.  For that matter it depends on the information being entered into the
system honestly in the first place, and not fudged to conceal problems, to
exaggerate distress, or to set easier goals for oneself.  (Medina doesn't
mention this issue at all, so it might not have occurred to anyone, but it
would have mattered if Cybersyn had actually become important.)  In any case,
as a replacement for market coordination, Cybersyn was simply a non-starter.
To describe it as a decentralized planning system is nonsense.

Nowadays, of course, the software would run easily on anyone's phone.  It'd
be easy to give each factory manager their own anomaly-detector, and the telex
network would be subsumed into the ordinary phone network.  Why you'd want
to 
share
 the information rather than having anomaly detection done
locally is, with modern technology, less clear --- presumably it'd be because
someone with access to all the local information could do some useful
aggregation, perhaps by 
assimilating
 it into a
macroeconomic model.  (For that to be useful you'd need a good macro
model, 
which are thin on the ground
; maybe
an 
input-output
 model of
inter-plant/inter-industry linkages would be useful enough.)
You 
could
 run that central node out of a spiffy room, where the
screens could even be connected to computers.

I do not want to end on a dismissive note.  The people who worked on Project
Cybersyn tried to do something new and hard and worthwhile under difficult
conditions.  What they achieved was remarkable enough to need no exaggeration.

*: And I don't see how it could have, with its policies; if
the CIA and/or domestic reactionaries didn't overthrow them, the Communist
Party would have.  (Cf. Nove.)

Recommended (in order):
	
Daniel \( D^2 \) Davies

"Computers with ashtrays", 
Back of Mind, 26 July 2023

"The statistical heart of the system", 
Back of Mind, 30 August 2023

Eden
Medina, 
Cybernetic
Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in Allende's Chile
 [In addition to my mini-review, see 
Alex Harrowell
]
	
Raul Espejo, "Cybersyn, big data, variety engineering and governance", 
AI and Society
 (2022)
 [End-of-career reflections by one of the Chilean project leaders]
	
P. J. Harrison and C. F. Stevens, "A Bayesian Approach to Short-term Forecasting", 
Operational Research Quarterly
 
22
 (1971): 341--362

Alec Nove, "The Political Economy of the Allende Regime", pp. 51--78 in P. O'Brien (ed.), 
Allende's Chile
 (New York: Praeger, 1976),
reprinted on pp. 3--29 of Nove's 
Socialism, Economics and Development
 (London: Allen and Unwin, 1986)

Gene Castellano, "The DuPont Company's Chart Room", 
Hagley Museum and Library weblog, 18 December 2015

To read:
	
Stafford Beer [Need to get these from the university library, in some cases from storage...]

Brain of the Firm
, 2nd edition
		
Cybernetics and Management

Designing Freedom

Sebastian Edwards, 
The Chile Project: The Story of the Chicago Boys and the Downfall of Neoliberalism
 [
Interesting review
 in a somewhat-dodgy-looking magazine]
	
Andrew Pickering, 
The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Future
 [Long chapter on Beer, which I presume covers this]

permanent link for this
note
   
RSS feed for this
note

Notebooks
:  

Powered by Blosxom
