Proof of Human
continuous human verification without CAPTCHAs or user friction
Member of Technical Staff
$120K - $150K
•
1.00% - 3.00%
•
San Francisco, CA, US
Job type
Full-time
Role
Engineering, Full stack
Experience
1+ years
Visa
US citizen/visa only
Skills
Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud, JavaScript, Node.js, Python
Connect directly with founders of the best YC-funded startups.
Apply to role ›
Mayank Agrawal
Founder
Mayank Agrawal
Founder
About the role
Proof of Human provides frictionless, continual human verification. We’re looking for an exceptional engineer to join our team. This engineer will work on full-stack web development and research, with a focus on backend and cloud infrastructure.

What you’ll do:

Architect and Develop:
 Design and build scalable backend infrastructure (AWS, Node, Python) optimized for handling millions of sessions per minute with minimal latency. 

Lead Feature Development:
 Own end-to-end delivery of key product features, from initial concept through deployment and support. 

Technical Roadmapping:
 Directly influence engineering strategy and decisions through close collaboration with the technical team.

Partner Cross-functionally:
 Work closely with the rest of the team to deliver features aligned with business objectives.

Cutting Edge Research:
 You also may assist the team in writing scientific articles summarizing our work for publication at top venues (e.g. Science, NeurIPS, ICML).

Who you are:

3+ years of experience in software development would be ideal.

Strong backend web development skills with experience going from problem to deployment.

Proficiency in both web development (Javascript, Node.js) and Python.

Experience building cloud infrastructure (AWS, GCP, Azure) at scale.

Excited by working on a small team where your contributions have an outsized impact.

Strong quantitative background and an eagerness to learn. Research experience is a plus.

If you’re interested in joining a rapidly growing, cutting-edge AI security company that is protecting the future of online integrity, we’d love to talk.

About 
Proof of Human
Proof of Human is a research and deployment company building the proof-of-human layer in digital identity. Proof of Human seeks to produce high-impact research and to productize this research in bot detection, fraud prevention, and continuous authentication.

Proof of Human was founded in 2023 by two Princeton PhD scientists – Mayank Agrawal and Matt Hardy. They have published in Science, PNAS, Nature Human Behaviour, and Psychological Review and are backed by Y Combinator and Brickyard Ventures.

Proof of Human
Founded:
2023
Batch:
S23
Team Size:
4
Status:
Active
Location:
San Francisco
Founders
Mayank Agrawal
Founder
Mayank Agrawal
Founder
Matt Hardy
Founder
Matt Hardy
Founder
