Queen bees emerge from special wax chambers

Share

Save

News

Biobased Materials

	Queen bees emerge from special wax chambers

	Royal wax, as well as royal jelly, determines the fate of a honeybee larva

			by 

				 Soumya Sagar, special to C&EN

June 3, 2026

3

						min read

Share

Save

Save

A honeybee crawls into a hexagonal cell of a honeycomb in a hive.

            A worker bee on honeycomb. The wax used to make queen cells is chemically and architecturally distinct from the wax of worker cells.

                Credit: Shutterstock

                    News

                    The latest chemistry news, including important research advances, business and policy trends, chemical safety practices, career guidance, and more. 

                    Read More

A honeybee larva’s ascent to royalty is shaped by more than gobbling up royal jelly; it is also dictated by her cradle. Scientists have discovered that the queen cells are made of 
chemically engineered, “bespoke” wax
 that is critical for the survival and development of future queens (
Nature
 2026, DOI: 10.1038/s41586-026-10534-3).

For decades, the scientific consensus held that the larvae fed an 
exclusive diet of royal jelly
 grew into fertile, long-lived queens, while their sisters who got standard fare grew into 
sterile workers
. Although nutrition is undeniably important, researchers suspected something else was also at play.

One place to look was the cells in which queen bees are reared. These are large, vertical wax cells, totally different from the classic hexagonal honeycomb of workers.

“Honeybees invest enormous effort in building highly specialized queen cells,” 
Boris Baer
, an entomologist at the University of California, Riverside, says in an email. “From an evolutionary perspective, it seemed unlikely that such elaborate structures existed simply as containers for food.”

Baer and his collaborators investigated the physical and chemical properties of the queen cells and worker cells of western honeybees 
(Apis mellifera).
 They used scanning electron microscopy to examine the wax’s physical structure and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry to run a full chemical audit.

The researchers found that, compared with worker cell wax, queen cell wax is richer in unsaturated fatty acids, specifically oleic acid, linoleic acid, and α-linolenic acid, and poorer in 
n
-alkanes, such as pentacosane, and wax esters. It also has a lower density, hardness, and mechanical strength (both tensile and compressive) than its worker counterparts and exhibits a significantly higher peak melting temperature.

Using a specialized tracking system with thermal imaging and high-definition lenses, the researchers monitored the bees’ construction activities and identified a dedicated crew of queen-cell builder bees who are significantly younger than their worker-cell-building counterparts. These builders physically overheat their bodies to nearly 40 °C to process the queen’s wax and also completely alter the chemical signature of the royal nursery.

To prove the cells do play a role in raising new queens, Baer’s team grafted newly hatched queen larvae into cells capped with standard worker wax. Of the grafted queen larvae, 62.5% died. The grafting experiment was repeated with eastern honeybees (
Apis cerana
), and the results were quite similar.

“We suspect that developing larvae are responding to a combination of chemical cues and physical properties of the wax, much like developing embryos in other animals respond to signals from their environment,” Baer says.

Gene E. Robinson
, a honeybee biologist at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign who wasn’t involved in the research, says the work is “compelling” and an “outstanding example” of interdisciplinary research. “The evidence presented in this paper strongly supports the existence of a highly specialized group of worker bees dedicated to queen rearing,” Robinson says in an email to C&EN. The new findings align with his earlier research that found that different worker genotypes show distinct preferences for either queen or worker rearing.

“I think it’s quite interesting,” says 
James Nieh
, an ecologist at the University of California, San Diego, who also wasn’t involved in the research. He wonders if a similar mechanism works in other bees, like those in the genus 
Melipona
 where “the workers themselves decide whether or not to become a queen.” He speculates that the answer may also lie in the chemical properties of the cells whose occupants become queens.

Send the reporter feedback 

Submit a Letter to the Editor for publication 

https://doi.org/10.47287/cen.488402.newsarticle 

Chemical & Engineering News

ISSN 
0009-2347

Copyright ©
            2026 American Chemical Society

Enjoyed the article?

Share

Queen bees emerge from special wax chambers

						Royal wax, as well as royal jelly, determines the fate of a honeybee larva

cen.acs.org

ADVERTISEMENT
