13 Aug 2026

posted by Stephen De Gabrielle and John Clements

We are pleased to announce Racket v9.3 is now available from 
https://download.racket-lang.org/
.

As of this release:

The 
raco setup
 command can generate markdown documentation, using the 
--doc-markdown
 option.

The "#lang" 
teaching languages
 (BSL, …, ISL+; plus DeinProgram) have reached parity with the ones chosen using the Language dialog, and are the recommended choice.

DrRacket’s background expansion disables errortrace annotations, for faster 
syntax checking
.

The 
raco pkg install
 command includes new options that provide more install-time configuration flexibility: 
--adjacent-deps
, 
--destdir
, and 
--attach
, and a refined 
--skip-installed
.

The 
ffi/unsafe/runtime-lib
 library provides a 
define-runtime-lib
 mechanism similar to 
define-runtime-path
, allowing location of libraries located relative to a source file.

The 
prompt-tag/c
 contract generator no longer performs checking on 
call/cc
 when the 
#:call/cc
 option is not present.

The 
impersonate-prompt-tag
 function takes an additional argument that allows checking and update of results for composable continuations.

The 
error-syntax->srcloc-handler
 parameter provides control over the mapping from syntactic forms to source locations for error handling.

Uses of 
(tcp-listen 0)
 will retry when it fails with “address in use”.

The 
racket/base
 module requires fewer internal modules and instantiations.

The 
file/zip
 package provides a 
new mechanism
 for greatly increased control over zip file generation, allowing in-memory file sources and per-file compression control.

Thank you

The following people contributed to this release:

Alex Knauth, Alexander Shopov, Aris Spathis, Bert De Ketelaere, Bob Burger, Caleb Mazalevskis, Cameron Moy, Geoffrey J. Teale, Gustavo Massaccesi, Hannes Braun, Jade Sailor, Jason Hemann, Jens Axel Søgaard, John Clements, Jordan Johnson, Matthew Flatt, Matthias Felleisen, Mike Sperber, Nathan Dykman, Noah Ma, Philip McGrath, Robby Findler, Romeo Ahmed, Sam Tobin-Hochstadt, Shu-Hung You, Stefan Schwarzer, Stephen De Gabrielle, and Wing Hei Chan.

Racket
 is a community developed open source project and we welcome new contributors. See 
racket/README.md
 to learn how you can be a part of this amazing project.

Feedback Welcome

Questions and discussion welcome at the Racket community on 
Discourse
 or 
Discord
.

Please share

If you can - please help get the word out to users and platform specific repo packagers

Racket - the Language-Oriented Programming Language - version 9.3 is now available from https://download.racket-lang.org

See https://blog.racket-lang.org/2026/08/racket-v9-3.html for the release announcement and highlights.
