Share
Add Us On Google
Add as a preferred source on Google
HONOLULU (HawaiiNewsNow) - Hundreds gathered along Magic Island and Ala Wai Boat Harbor Friday to watch solo rower Kelsey Pfendler complete her record-breaking journey from California to Hawaii.
She began the more than 2,400-mile journey from Monterey, California, to Honolulu on May 21.
Pfendler rowed into the harbor shortly after 9 p.m. aboard her 21-foot ocean rowing boat, Lily. She was greeted by a large, cheering crowd at the Hawaii Yacht Club.
Pfendler was on a mission to become the first, youngest and fastest woman to row solo from California to Hawaii.
She did it in 43 days, shattering the previous women’s record, 86 days, 10 hours and five minutes, held by Lia Ditton — but also broke through the men’s record of 52 days.
“Accomplishing an amazing feat, you know? People should really give a lot of respect to a woman that can do that,” said Robert Hoffman, who was among the hundreds who started gathering at Magic Island for Pfendler’s arrival.
“I know she’s done it with other people but she’s doing it by herself now, and she’s be going out there, and that’s something that most people wouldn’t think of — that’s being alone out in the middle of the ocean coming over here,” said Marco Gomez of San Antonio, Texas. 
Gomez had been tracking Pfendler’s journey and couldn’t contain his excitement that a previously planned family vacation to Hawaii was happening at the same time as her arrival.
The anticipation and the crowd both grew as she was spotted off Diamond Head, rowing the final few miles to shore. The hundreds that were gathered burst into cheers as she slowly rowed past toward them toward the Hawaii Yacht Club.
“This is amazing girl power. So impressed with what Kelsey’s been able to do I think with everything that’s going on. Just so impressed,” said Honolulu resident Amanda Wentz.
Kelsey said on her 
Spotfund campaign
 her mission goes beyond rowing an ocean, inspiring women everywhere to recognize and embrace their strength.
“She’s just so inspirational. Actually, the last live post ... she said for everybody who feels like they can’t face and fear, they can’t do it — I’m doing this for you," said resident Stacey McConlogue.
Pflender made several social media posts about her solo row, and many said they had just found out about it in the past few days — but decided to show up to witness rowing history.

View this profile on Instagram

Kelsey Pfendler
 (@
kelseypfendler
) • Instagram photos and videos

Pfendler also took on the feat in part to raise funds and awareness for the Whale Foundation, a nonprofit dedicated to the mental, physical and financial well-being of the Grand Canyon river guiding community.
So far, more than $30,000 has been donated to the nonprofit since she started the journey.
Pfendler is a veteran Grand Canyon river guide who’s been guiding multi-day trips to the Colorado River for eight years.
Click here to learn more about the Whale Foundation and to donate.
Pfendler’s solo row is not the first time she’s crossed the Pacific, and she was the skipper of Hericane Rowing in 2024.
She and four other women arrived on Kauai 40 days, 22 hours and 14 minutes after departing from Monterey, battling huge waves, a capsizing, equipment failures and adverse currents.
As Pfendler completed her solo row and brought Lily into the Hawaii Yacht Club, she was greeted by her crew members. 
She’s expected to speak to the media later after getting much-needed rest and celebrating her birthday.
Copyright 2026 Hawaii News Now. All rights reserved.
