By 
John Gruber

Archive

The Talk Show

Dithering

Projects

Contact

Colophon

Feeds / Social

Sponsorship

WorkOS — MCP vs. REST
: the right way to connect agents to your API.

Retraction: The App Store Rejection of the Week That Was, in Fact, a Correct Rejection

Saturday, 8 August 2026

Yesterday I published an article titled “App Store Rejection of the Week: Dark Hours”. I have retracted it. Its premise was so fundamentally wrong that there’s no point merely correcting or editing it. Even the title, as I explain below, was inaccurate. Although the original is now retracted, I’m not memory-holing it. The text of the original story is available, for transparency and accountability, 
in plain text
 (Markdown, natch) and 
PDF
 (preserving original presentation). Both of those versions include a preface at the top linking to this retraction. 
The URL
 for the original story now redirects to this one that you are currently reading.

To the best of my recollection, this is the first post I’ve retracted in the 24 years I’ve been writing Daring Fireball. I hope it’s the last. I was misled, both overtly and through omissions, in several ways, but what I publish is my responsibility, and I apologize for the error.

Terry Godier first came to my attention in February, when 
I linked to
 his excellent interactive essay on RSS feed reader design, “
Phantom Obligation
”, which essay introduced 
Current
, Godier’s new RSS reader that he made to exemplify the ideas from his essay. Current is, deservedly, a bit of a breakout hit. (E.g., David Pierce, at The Verge, 
put it on a very short list
 of iOS-exclusive indie apps that keep him from switching to Android.) In March 
I linked to another
 interactive essay from Godier, “
The Last Quiet Thing
”, and again 
in April to a post
 regarding the App Store’s 5-star review system. I struck up an iMessage correspondence with Godier around when I first linked to his work.

Yesterday Godier posted “
Browsers Have Standards, the App Store Has Judgment
”. As originally published, that post contained these two paragraphs:

A while ago I tried to submit an iOS app for 
Dark Hours
, my
astronomy website for normal people. It was rejected on the
grounds that it was astrology.

It has no tarot function, no horoscopes, and nothing that I, or
anyone else I’ve asked, would associate with astrology.

Those paragraphs, at this writing (August 8, 11:00 pm ET), have been deleted and replaced by this:

Note: the original version of this post had a section here about an
astronomy app I am working on that began as an astrology app and
was rejected after having the astrology content removed. App store [
sic
]
review reached out to me and let me know that they had apparently
never been given the updated build and that the app should be fine
to submit now.

You can now see the problem that has led me to fully retract my original post, given that my post was entirely predicated on the premise that Godier’s original description of the rejected app was true — that the app “has no tarot function, no horoscopes, and nothing that I, or anyone else I’ve asked, would associate with astrology.” The truth is, the app, as originally submitted by Godier to the App Store (under the name “Asterly”, not “Dark Hours”), was entirely dedicated to astrology, not astronomy, and did in fact include a “Tarot card of the day” feature amongst other occultist horseshit.

The grounds of Apple’s original App Store rejection of the app, and the rejection’s upholding by the App Review Board, were correct.
1
 I wrongly took Godier at his word, both in his public blog post and in private iMessage correspondence yesterday, that the rejection wasn’t just merely debatable, but completely and rather preposterously ungrounded. Whether Godier ever submitted a build of “Asterly” to the App Store that contained no occult horseshit and only the hard-science astronomy features that were present in his “Dark Hours” website that was available for the last week, I don’t know. But I have no reason to believe that he did.

My 
disdain for astrology
 is so utter, and my esteem for Godier’s previous work so high, that it simply never occurred to me that he might have actually made and submitted to the App Store an astrology app, let alone that he’d then feign surprise and frustration that an astrology app was rejected for being an astrology app. I showed him a draft of my post before publication, to make sure I had the story straight, and he offered not a word of caution, only gratitude for my drawing attention to the matter.

It gets messier. Godier’s astrology app that he submitted to the App Store back in January was named “Asterly”. That was still the name when the App Review Board upheld its rejection in April. According to Godier, frustrated by the App Store’s rejection, he ported the astronomy version to the web, 
launching it last week
 under the name “Dark Hours” at the domain 
darkhours.io
. (This is why is was incorrect for me, in the very title of my post, to claim that Apple had rejected an app named “Dark Hours”. They rejected an app named “Asterly” and had never seen an app from Godier named “Dark Hours”.) Yesterday, after I linked to Godier’s post and 
Hacker News then linked to my post
, Godier’s “Dark Hours” (with a space) 
came to the attention
 (and justifiable surprise) of Miguel Beher, creator of an open-source “astrophotography and dark-sky planner” project named DarkHours (no space). 
Beher’s GitHub project
 contains the source code, and the actual web app is 
freely available at the domain 
darkhours.app
. In an uncomfortable exchange between Beher and Godier on Bluesky, Beher pointed out that Godier’s Dark Hours had the same bug as Beher’s that 
routed people to “random fields in Mexico”
. Earlier today, Godier took his web app down and redirected his 
darkhours.io
 domain to Beher’s 
darkhours.app
.

At the end of my now-retracted post yesterday, assuming I had righteously and rightly skewered Apple for an egregiously erroneous App Store review rejection, I wrote:

Mistakes happen. But in a functioning system mistakes get
corrected, and mistakes as obvious as this one get corrected
almost instantly and include a quick apology for the conflation.

Obviously it was 
I
 who was mistaken. 
This
 article is my correction, and I apologize to 
all
 who read and believed my now-retracted post, and to the reviewers at the App Store whose competence (if not literacy) I besmirched. Sorry about that. Won’t happen again.

Regardless of one’s opinion regarding pseudoscience and occultist horseshit — pro, con, or indifferent — one might reasonably think it wrong for Apple to disallow or discourage such apps from the App Store. In fact, there exist plenty of such apps in the App Store, and Apple has even run “
Best Astrology Apps
” editorial features. Apple’s stance is basically that the App Store has enough of these apps (and I suspect they’re a common source of scams, given that by their very nature they target the gullible). 
Guideline 4.3(b) states
 (emphasis added):

Certain kinds of apps, such as dating, flashlight, sound effects,
wallpaper, simple timers, and 
fortune telling
, are well established
on the App Store and we will not accept new submissions unless they
offer a meaningfully different or improved experience. We may
remove these apps from the App Store going forward if they are not
updated, improved, or do not attract customers. Other kinds of
apps, such as drinking games, Kama Sutra, fart, and burp apps, are
mediocre, low-quality, or low-effort and do not add value to the
App Store.

That serial comma, ever useful, gives hope to anyone hard at work on a “fart and burp” app. 
↩︎

Previous:
OpenAI Responds to Apple’s Lawsuit and Motion for Preliminary Injunction: ‘Apple Is Getting This Wrong’

Display Preferences

Copyright © 2002–2026 The Daring Fireball Company LLC.
