Blog
SQLite in Production with Built-In Litestream Replication
SQLite in Production with Built-In Litestream Replication
Copy Page

Copy as Markdown
View as Markdown
August 25, 2026
OpenRun is an 
open-source
, self-hosted GitOps platform for deploying web apps and internal tools on Docker, Podman, or Kubernetes. It provides authentication, authorization, auditing, and RBAC without requiring changes to the application.
OpenRun now has built-in 
Litestream
 support for SQLite apps. App databases are continuously replicated to AWS S3 or S3-compatible object storage such as Cloudflare R2, MinIO and SeaweedFS. Restore is automatic: when OpenRun detects an empty or recreated app volume, it restores the database from the replica before starting the app. The same setup works on a single node with Docker/Podman and on Kubernetes.
The result is that application developers use SQLite normally without having to install Litestream, configure object storage, modify their container image, or implement restore logic.
Background

SQLite is a great fit for internal tools and small web apps: the database is file-backed, reads are fast, and there is no separate database server to operate. Litestream continuously replicates SQLite changes to object storage, providing durable off-node backups and point-in-time recovery.
Without platform integration, however, you still need to deploy Litestream alongside the app, configure the replica, and handle database restoration during startup.
OpenRun moves that operational work into the platform. Litestream settings are defined once in the server configuration, while OpenRun manages replication and restoration outside the app container. The app image stays unchanged, and new SQLite apps can use replication without any Litestream-specific setup.
Deploying a SQLite App

Define Litestream once in the OpenRun server configuration:
openrun.toml
[
litestream
.
mainbackup
]

bucket
 
=
 
"openrun-backups"

region
 
=
 
"us-east-1"

access_key_id
 
=
 
'{{secret_from "env" "LITESTREAM_KEY_ID"}}'

secret_access_key
 
=
 
'{{secret_from "env" "LITESTREAM_KEY"}}'
Then create a SQLite service that references it and bind apps to the service:
openrun service create sqlite/main --is-default --config 
litestream_config
=
mainbackup

openrun app create --bind sqlite --approve github.com/example/notes-app /notes
The same app can be defined declaratively. Put the definition in an apply file alongside your other configuration in Git:
apps.star
app
(
"/notes"
,
 
"github.com/example/notes-app"
,
 
bindings
=
[
"sqlite"
])
openrun apply --promote github.com/example/config/apps.star
openrun apply
 works like Kubernetes apply: it creates new apps, updates apps whose configuration changed, and leaves the rest alone. All app management, including the SQLite binding, can be driven through GitOps.
That is the whole setup. The app gets a persistent volume mounted at 
/data
 and finds its database through injected environment variables (
SQLITE_DB_PATH
, 
SQLITE_DIR
). Every 
*.db
 file the app creates in that directory is replicated, including files created at runtime.
Changes are typically replicated within about a second by default (
sync_interval
 is configurable)
Single Node

On Docker and Podman, OpenRun runs Litestream in a per-app companion container that shares the app’s data volume. Before the app container starts on an empty volume, restore containers pull any replicated databases back. When the app scales down to zero on idle, the Litestream container performs a final sync and stops.
The server’s own metadata can be replicated the same way. Litestream is embedded in the OpenRun binary as a Go library, so setting 
metadata.litestream_config
 in the server config replicates the metadata and audit databases without an additional Litestream process.
Kubernetes

The same app config works when OpenRun 
deploys to a Kubernetes cluster
. The binding’s volume becomes a PersistentVolumeClaim, and OpenRun adds a restore init container plus a native Litestream sidecar (Kubernetes 1.29 or newer) to the app pod automatically. The sidecar starts before the app container and is terminated after it, allowing Litestream to perform a final sync during orderly shutdown. Apps with a SQLite binding run as a single replica with the 
Recreate
 update strategy, preventing multiple app pods from writing to the same SQLite volume during an update.
What Happens on a Volume or Node Loss

For a lost app volume, recovery is automatic from the app’s perspective. The next time the app starts, OpenRun sees the empty volume, runs the restore containers to pull the databases back from the replica, and then starts the app container against the restored data. The replica is keyed by the binding, so attaching the same binding to a new app restores the data into that app’s fresh volume too.
For a complete node loss, with metadata replication enabled, the recovery procedure is:
Install OpenRun on a new machine.
Start the server with the same config file.
On startup, the server finds its metadata database missing, restores the metadata and audit databases from the replica, and comes up with all apps, bindings, services, versions and audit history intact. Each app then redeploys on first request, restoring its SQLite data from its own replica before the container starts. To recover the node, you only need the server config and its referenced secrets. OpenRun’s metadata and replicated app data are restored from object storage.
Application data and OpenRun’s own metadata can therefore be recovered from the same object-storage backend. Replication is asynchronous. Under normal conditions, with the default one-second 
sync_interval
, a sudden crash can lose roughly the most recent second of writes that have not yet reached object storage.
The node-loss scenario is exercised end-to-end in 
CI tests
. The test hard-kills the server, deletes the containers, volumes, and the OpenRun installation directory, including the metadata databases. It then verifies that everything is rebuilt automatically from the object store, including the app SQLite data.
Monitoring

openrun replication status
 reports the state of every replicated database:
$ openrun replication status -f table

Kind       Target                              Config       State     LastSync             Files      Apps

metadata   metadata                            mainbackup   healthy   2026-08-25 16:31:42  -

metadata   audit                               mainbackup   healthy   2026-08-25 16:31:42  -

app        /auto/app_prd_.../sqlite (prod)     mainbackup   healthy   2026-08-25 23:31:30  data.db    /notes

app        /auto/app_prd_.../sqlite (staged)   mainbackup   pending   -                    -          stage.localhost:/notes
App states combine the replica listing in object storage with the replication container’s state, so a failed replication container is visible even when object storage still contains a recent replica.
See the 
Litestream reference
 for the full config options and the 
SQLite hosting use case
 for app best practices (WAL mode, busy timeouts, short write transactions).
Replication status is also visible in the 
Console App
 - see the 
live demo
.
PostgreSQL and MySQL Service Bindings for Web Apps
