If you have only seen MATLAB from the outside, it is easy to think of it as a
matrix-oriented scripting language: arrays, plots, numerical routines, and a prompt where
engineers try things quickly. That is all true, and it is also why MATLAB is still
relevant: it is one of the languages engineers and scientists are taught to think in when
they learn applied math, simulation, controls, signal processing, optimization, and
numerical computing. A lot of teams keep using it because their models, tools, habits,
and domain knowledge are already there.

MATLAB is also a large language and runtime environment for scientific and engineering
programs. Real MATLAB code is often split across many files. It uses package folders,
class folders, private helper folders, function handles, dynamically resolved calls,
workspace state, object-oriented 
classdef
 classes, multiple return values, overloaded
indexing, and interactive execution. A lot of long-lived engineering code depends on
those semantics.

RunMat is a Rust runtime and compiler for that MATLAB-family code.

As a result, it is not only trying to evaluate simple expressions like 
A + B
. It needs
to execute real-world programs that look more like this, while preserving the semantics
that the original program depends on:

model 
=
 SignalModel(samples);

[filtered, stats] 
=
 filters.lowpass(model.samples, 
30
);

model.history{
end
 +
 1
} 
=
 stats;

plot
(filtered);

To run that correctly, RunMat makes several language questions explicit during compilation
and execution:

Is 
SignalModel
 a variable, a function, a class constructor, or an unresolved external
name? If it is a variable, is this an attempted array/object call rather than
construction?

Does 
filters.lowpass
 refer to a package function, a static method, or a field access
followed by a call?

How many outputs did the caller request from 
lowpass
, and can the callee observe that
through 
nargout
?

Is 
model.samples
 a stored property, a dependent property, or an overloaded member
access?

What does 
end
 mean inside 
model.history{end + 1}
?

Should 
plot(filtered)
 return a value, update figure state, or suppress ordinary
output?

Those are not parsing questions. They are semantic questions. For a team trying to run
existing engineering code, they are also compatibility questions. If the runtime answers
them too late, or answers them differently in the interpreter, language server, JIT, and
GPU planner, the system becomes hard to reason about.

RunMat resolves those decisions through a staged compiler pipeline:

source
  -> AST
  -> semantic HIR
  -> MIR
  -> MIR analysis
  -> VM layout + bytecode
  -> runtime/providers

That staging is the useful connection to Rust: source is lowered into progressively more
explicit compiler products before execution. Names, functions, classes, bindings, effects,
output counts, indexing contexts, and runtime layout become facts that later stages can
reuse.

This post explains why MATLAB needs that kind of pipeline and how RunMat's runtime is
structured today.

Why MATLAB needs semantic resolution

MATLAB syntax is compact because a lot of meaning is supplied by context. That is part of
why the language is productive for numerical work. It is also why MATLAB is hard to execute
correctly (and ideally statically): the same surface syntax can mean several different things,
and which one is intended depends on the context.

Return to the opening example:

SignalModel(samples)
 might be a class constructor, a
function call, a variable being indexed, or an unresolved external name.

filters.lowpass
 might be a package function, a static method, or a field access followed by a call.

[filtered, stats] = ...
 requests two outputs, and that output count can affect how the
callee behaves through 
nargout
 or 
varargout
. 
model.samples
 might be a stored
property, a dependent property, or overloaded member access.

model.history{end + 1}
 is not only indexing; it is an assignment target whose 
end
 depends on the current value of

history
. 
plot(filtered)
 is a call with figure and display effects.

The same surface syntax can therefore mean several different things. RunMat's compiler
records which role the program resolved to, so later runtime paths can share the same
answer.

This is why we chose to put a semantic stage in the pipeline. A direct AST-to-bytecode
runtime was possible (and was our previous approach), but it tended to scatter these decisions across the interpreter,
runtime dispatch, editor tooling, JIT, and acceleration planner. RunMat as of 0.5+ now resolves
the source into shared language facts first. That gives the rest of the system one place
to ask what the program means, and it lets those facts match what existing MATLAB users
expect their code to do.

Pipeline overview

The current pipeline is:

MATLAB source
  -> parser AST
  -> semantic HIR assembly
  -> MIR assembly
  -> MIR analysis store
  -> VM assembly layout
  -> bytecode
  -> interpreter/JIT/runtime providers

Each stage has a different job.

The AST preserves syntactic structure. Semantic HIR says what the source means as a
MATLAB program: which functions exist, which names bind to which language entities, which
classes are defined, which calls request which outputs, and which bindings should be
visible in the workspace. MIR makes control flow, places, calls, and effects easier to
analyze and compile. Analysis attaches facts. VM layout maps semantic bindings into
executable frame slots. Bytecode is what the interpreter and JIT consume. Runtime
providers handle concrete execution services such as builtin dispatch, plotting,
filesystem access, workspace materialization, and acceleration.

The docs version of those layers starts with the 
Compilation Pipeline

overview, then goes deeper on 
High-Level IR (HIR)
,

Mid-Level IR (MIR)
,

MIR & Static Analysis
, and

Bytecode Compilation
.

The benefit of this separation is that language decisions become reusable. The interpreter
can execute them, the language server can explain them, the JIT can compile through them,
and the acceleration planner can use them as inputs. The compiler does not have to
rediscover from VM stack shape that a call was a two-output call, that an index was a
deletion target, or that a function was a nested capture.

The bytecode product also becomes more useful. It is VM bytecode, not platform-specific
machine code, so it can be consumed by the interpreter, the JIT, snapshots, and tooling.
That is also the direction that makes future ahead-of-time compilation or static binary
packaging plausible: the source can lower into stable semantic and bytecode products
before a later target decides how to execute or package them. Static binaries would still
need to carry or link the relevant RunMat runtime services, and highly dynamic MATLAB
features would still need explicit policies, but the architecture no longer ties execution
to reinterpreting source text.

Semantic HIR: the language product

RunMat's 
semantic HIR
 is the compiler's record of what the
MATLAB program means after source layout and names have been resolved. It is represented
as an assembly.

An assembly owns tables for:

modules

entrypoints

functions

classes

bindings

These are semantic IDs, not VM slots. That distinction is important for MATLAB because
users think in terms of variables, functions, files, classes, packages, and workspaces,
not storage offsets. A binding like 
total
 in a nested function has a language identity
before the VM decides where it lives in a frame. A class method belongs to a class before
the runtime decides how to dispatch it. A function call can refer to a builtin, bound
function, imported path, dynamic name, or external boundary before bytecode is emitted.

A HIR function carries its MATLAB ABI:

fixed inputs

varargin

fixed outputs

varargout

implicit 
nargin

implicit 
nargout

captures

parent function

enclosing class, if any

That lets RunMat represent the opening example as language structure instead of VM stack
shape: 
SignalModel
 can be resolved as a constructor, 
filters.lowpass
 can be resolved
as a package function or method-like call, the call can carry an exact requested output
count of two, 
model.history{end + 1}
 can be marked as an indexed assignment target, and

plot(filtered)
 can be treated as an effectful plotting call.

The same structure also covers other MATLAB function behavior that engineers rely on:
local functions, nested functions that share parent scope, anonymous functions, function
handles, 
nargin
, 
nargout
, 
varargin
, and 
varargout
. If the compiler loses those
relationships, the code may still parse, but it will not behave like MATLAB.

Calls also carry semantic identity. A call target can be a bound function, builtin,
imported path, dynamic expression, super constructor, super method, or unresolved
qualified name. The call also carries requested output count and source syntax. That is
how later stages know the difference between direct calls, method syntax, dotted calls,

feval
, and output-expanding calls.

Indexing is also semantic. HIR records the index kind and result context: paren or brace,
read or assignment, deletion target or comma-list expansion, function-argument expansion
or ordinary single read.

That context becomes critical later because the same surface syntax can mean read,
write, deletion, expansion, or overloaded object dispatch.

MIR: control flow and compiler facts

HIR is still close to MATLAB language structure. MIR is lower-level. It is the form where
RunMat turns language meaning into explicit control flow and assignable places.

RunMat's MIR assembly contains bodies keyed by function. A MIR body has locals and basic
blocks. Blocks contain statements and a terminator. Places represent assignable
locations. Rvalues represent computed values.

MIR can represent:

local and binding places

member places

dynamic member places

indexed places

assignments

multi-assignments

expression statements

workspace effects

environment effects

branches

loops

switch

try/catch

return

await

future creation

spawn

tensor, cell, struct, and object literals

calls with requested output counts

This gives the compiler a form that is easier to analyze. For example, initialization
analysis is more natural on MIR blocks than on a source syntax tree. So is spawn-safety
analysis, fusion candidate detection, and validation that an indexed assignment target
was lowered with an assignment context.

MIR also gives RunMat a place to keep "place" and "value" roles separate. A read from

A(i)
 and a write to 
A(i)
 share source syntax but have different roles. MIR can
preserve that difference explicitly.

Analysis: facts that feed execution

RunMat's MIR analysis stores facts that later stages can use.

Examples include:

whether a local is unassigned, maybe assigned, or definitely assigned

simple type facts

shape facts

value-flow facts

async/future facts

spawn boundary metadata

diagnostics

fusion eligibility signals

These facts are not only for error messages. They feed the runtime architecture. The
point is not to make MATLAB statically typed; it is to give the runtime enough shared
facts that execution, tooling, and acceleration do not each invent their own approximate
model of the program.

For acceleration, semantic and MIR facts give the planner more to work with than a
bytecode scan. The compiler can identify MIR regions that are semantically pure enough or
structurally suitable enough to be fusion candidates. Runtime planning can then reconcile
those candidates with the actual acceleration graph, provider capabilities, and concrete
residency of values.

That split is deliberate. The compiler provides semantic facts. The runtime and provider
own physical execution details. This is especially important for numerical code because
the same source may run on host arrays, GPU arrays, or a mix of both depending on the
session and provider state.

VM layout: semantic bindings become frame slots

HIR and MIR keep semantic identity separate from VM slot numbers. MATLAB programs have
workspace-visible variables, local variables, persistent variables, global variables, and
implicit values like 
ans
; keeping those identities intact makes it easier to preserve
the user's model of the program while still compiling to efficient execution storage.

Instead, RunMat derives a VM layout after semantic lowering and MIR construction. The
layout maps:

function frame ABI fields to slots

semantic bindings to slots

MIR locals to slots

captures to capture slots

entrypoint exports to workspace-visible names

global and persistent bindings to storage bindings

This keeps language semantics separate from execution storage.

For example, a script entrypoint may export top-level bindings into the workspace. A
function entrypoint may return outputs instead. A local binding may be hidden. An implicit

ans
 binding may have special workspace visibility. Those are semantic/workspace
policies first. VM layout later decides which frame slot holds each value.

This is the same general principle that makes compiler IRs useful: the program's meaning
can stay independent from the storage scheme chosen by the final execution engine. For
RunMat, that means a workspace variable remains a workspace variable even though the VM
eventually stores it in a frame slot.

Bytecode and callable descriptors

After layout, RunMat compiles MIR into 
VM bytecode
. This is
the point where the program becomes directly executable, but it is not the point where
RunMat first learns what the program means.

The VM compiler emits instructions for arithmetic, calls, indexing, stores, object
operations, returns, async descriptors, and runtime effects. But by the time bytecode is
emitted, many hard semantic decisions have already been made. As a result, the VM is
doing a fairly minimal amount of work to translate simple bytecode into machine code.

Calls are compiled from typed callable identities and fallback policies. That means the
runtime can distinguish:

a bound semantic function

a builtin

a dynamic name

an external qualified name

a method identity

a super call

a 
feval
 target

This is especially important for function handles. MATLAB users pass functions around as
values in optimizers, callbacks, event handlers, array operations, and plotting workflows.
A function handle should preserve what it points to when possible. If it refers to a
semantic function, RunMat can preserve that semantic identity instead of degrading the
handle into a string and hoping name lookup finds the same thing later.

RunMat's 
callable descriptor path
 keeps the identity,
arguments, requested output count, and fallback policy together. That lets 
feval
,
closures, dynamic names, method handles, and external names share one routing model.

Project manifests and composition

The semantic pipeline becomes much more useful when RunMat knows the shape of the project
it is compiling. As of the 0.5 release, that project boundary is explicit. A

runmat.toml
 project manifest
 can name the
package, declare source roots and local dependencies, and define runnable entrypoints.

The manifest shape is intentionally small and should feel familiar to modern programmers:

[package]

name = 
"signal-demo"

version = 
"0.1.0"

[sources]

roots = [
"src"
, 
"examples"
]

[dependencies]

filters = { path = 
"deps/filters"
, version = 
"0.1.0"
 }

[entrypoints.main]

path = 
"src/main"

[entrypoints.demo]

path = 
"examples/demo"

That manifest can sit next to an existing MATLAB-style source tree:

signal-demo/
  runmat.toml
  src/
    main.m
    @SignalModel/
      SignalModel.m
    private/
      normalizeSamples.m
  examples/
    demo.m
  deps/
    filters/
      runmat.toml
      src/
        +filters/
          lowpass.m

The MATLAB parts remain MATLAB parts. 
@SignalModel
 is still the class folder.

+filters
 is still the package folder. 
private/normalizeSamples.m
 is still a private
helper. 
main.m
 can still be a normal script or function file. RunMat is not asking the
project to become a Rust crate or a new module syntax.

The added 
runmat.toml
 gives that source tree a stable compiler boundary. 
[sources]

tells RunMat which folders are part of the project source index. 
[dependencies]
 makes
the local 
filters
 project available to name resolution. 
[entrypoints.main]
 and

[entrypoints.demo]
 give users and hosts named workflows instead of relying on whichever
file path happened to be executed first.

The 
Module Composition
 docs go deeper on the source
index, composition graph, package folders, class folders, private helpers, dependencies,
and entrypoint resolution behind that behavior.

From the CLI, those entrypoints are now stable commands:

cd
 signal-demo

runmat
 run
 main

runmat
 run
 demo

That is the difference between path execution and project composition. Without a manifest,
RunMat can still execute a file by path and discover nearby companion source where the
runtime can do so safely. With a manifest, the compiler knows the intended source roots,
dependency projects, and runnable entrypoints up front.

For the opening example, that means 
SignalModel(samples)
 can resolve against the

@SignalModel
 class under 
src
, while 
filters.lowpass(...)
 can resolve through the
declared 
filters
 dependency. The same composition graph is available to the interpreter,
bytecode compiler, LSP, JIT boundary, and acceleration planner.

import
 still has its MATLAB job: it controls which names are visible and convenient
inside source files. The dependency declaration makes the 
filters
 project available; an
import can then make its package functions convenient inside 
main.m
:

import filters
.*

model 
=
 SignalModel(samples);

[filtered, stats] 
=
 lowpass(model.samples, 
30
);

Dependencies have a different job: they declare which external projects are available to
the resolver. Keeping those responsibilities separate lets existing MATLAB code keep its
source conventions while giving RunMat a reproducible project graph.

Builtins as runtime metadata

RunMat's 
builtins
 are not only function pointers. For MATLAB
users, builtins are the standard library surface: 
sum
, 
plot
, 
size
, 
zeros
, 
fft
,

table
, 
struct
, 
feval
, and hundreds of others. Their signatures, output behavior,
errors, and editor documentation are part of the language experience.

Builtins can carry descriptors for:

signatures

input parameters

output parameters

fixed vs requested-output-dependent behavior

completion policy

stable errors

This makes runtime behavior, editor tooling, and generated documentation point at the
same source of truth.

For example, an LSP signature-help request can use builtin descriptors instead of a
separate hand-maintained list. Runtime errors can be thrown from descriptor-backed rows
instead of duplicating stable identifiers in several files. Generated reference docs can
stay aligned with the same metadata that the runtime uses.

That does not remove the implementation complexity of each builtin. It does make the
public contract of a builtin more explicit, and it gives runtime, docs, and tooling the
same contract to read from.

It also makes each builtin an isolated unit of behavior. Each builtin has its own suite
of tests, documentation, and error messages that define, constrain, and enforce their contracts.

Classes and objects

MATLAB 
classes
 add another layer of semantic resolution. If your
picture of MATLAB is only scripts and matrices, 
classdef
 can look secondary. In real
engineering code, classes are often how teams package models, hardware abstractions,
simulations, and domain-specific APIs.

A 
classdef
 source file defines class metadata: name, superclass, kind, properties,
methods, events, enumerations, attributes, defaults, access rules, and method bodies.
RunMat lowers that into semantic HIR and registers runtime class metadata during
compilation/execution.

In the opening example, 
SignalModel(samples)
 may be constructing an object from a
source 
classdef
. RunMat records whether 
SignalModel
 is a value class or a handle
class, which properties it defines, which methods are static or instance methods, which
access rules apply, and whether 
model.history{end + 1} = stats
 mutates stored object
state or routes through overloaded indexing. Those are language semantics, not bytecode
conveniences. If they are wrong, the program may run but produce the wrong model state.

Custom indexing adds another example. If a class defines 
subsref
 or 
subsasgn
, ordinary
member/index syntax may dispatch through that protocol. RunMat's 
object indexing
descriptor path
 keeps those operations explicit so overloaded
indexing can coexist with normal property access.

Acceleration and provider boundaries

RunMat's 
acceleration model
 separates semantic eligibility
from concrete residency.

The compiler can identify candidate groups and semantic operation kinds. Builtin metadata
can mark operations as elementwise, reductions, shape transforms, sinks, or effectful.
MIR analysis can indicate whether a region is structurally suitable for fusion.

But the runtime/provider decides whether values are actually resident on a GPU, whether a
provider supports an operation, whether data must be gathered, whether a fallback is
required, and which concrete kernel or host path should run.

That separation prevents a common mistake: assuming source syntax alone determines GPU
execution. In RunMat, compiler facts guide acceleration, but provider state owns physical
execution. The user-facing goal is straightforward: preserve MATLAB behavior first, then
use acceleration when the runtime can prove the provider path is appropriate.

JIT status

RunMat has a 
JIT path
 through Turbine and Cranelift, but the
JIT is not complete yet and is not the normal execution path for most programs. Today,
most bytecode patterns still fall back to the interpreter. That is the right tradeoff at
this stage: the 0.5 work was mostly about making the compiler and runtime agree on MATLAB
semantics before compiling more of those semantics to native code.

The important change is that the JIT now has the right boundary to build on. Semantic
function identity, requested output counts, expanded arguments, and non-scalar runtime
values can cross through a tagged value ABI instead of being flattened into f64-only lanes
or string lookups. That means Turbine can compile from the same bytecode and semantic
facts as the interpreter.

From here, broader Cranelift lowering is mostly compiler engineering rather than a new
language-semantics project. More JIT coverage is planned before 1.0, with the interpreter
remaining the fallback whenever a bytecode pattern is not compiled yet.

What this unlocks

MATLAB remains useful because engineering teams have years of models, scripts, classes,
and workflows built around its semantics. That is also what makes a new runtime hard.
Workspaces, functions, classes, output counts, indexing, packages, dynamic calls,
builtins, GPU residency, and interactive execution all interact.

Trying to handle those interactions directly in an interpreter works for small cases, but
it becomes brittle as the language surface grows. Every missing semantic product turns
into a runtime heuristic. Every runtime heuristic becomes harder for tooling, diagnostics,
JIT, and acceleration to share. For users, that usually shows up as incompatibility:
something works in one context, fails in another, or behaves differently once the code
moves out of the prompt and into a project.

With the 0.5 runtime architecture, RunMat can treat more of that code as a real project
instead of isolated snippets. Source roots, package folders, class folders, private
helpers, function handles, workspace-visible bindings, object metadata, requested output
counts, and display effects now have places in the runtime model.

That means several paths get better at the same time:

Multi-file MATLAB-family code can resolve companion functions, classes, packages, and
private helpers through project-aware source discovery.

The interpreter, language server, JIT, and acceleration planner can share semantic facts
instead of rediscovering names, output counts, and indexing behavior independently.

Hosts such as notebooks, REPLs, desktop integrations, and WebAssembly embeddings can use
structured execution outcomes for workspace changes, display events, diagnostics, and
figures.

Future native execution work has a cleaner target: bytecode plus semantic products,
rather than source text plus runtime guesses.

You can now use RunMat to execute real project-shaped code: folders
with helper functions, package directories, classes, callbacks, plotting, and ordinary
workspace-driven workflows. Those are exactly the cases this release was built to start
handling systematically.

For the release-focused view of what changed in 0.5, see

the 0.5 release post
.

Related docs

Compilation Pipeline
, 
High-Level IR (HIR)
, 
Mid-Level IR (MIR)
, and 
MIR & Static Analysis
 for the compiler stages.

Projects
 and 
Module Composition
 for 
runmat.toml
, source roots, dependencies, packages, classes, private helpers, and entrypoints.

Bytecode Compilation
, 
Callable Resolution & Function Dispatch
, and 
Indexing Subsystem
 for VM lowering and execution boundaries.

Builtins
, 
Execution Requests
, and 
Editor Features
 for the metadata shared by runtime execution and tooling.

Fusion Engine & Residency Management
 and 
JIT Pipeline
 for acceleration and Turbine status.

We're excited to see what you build with RunMat!
Related posts
Introducing RunMat Desktop: a high-performance MATLAB alternative
RunMat Desktop is a local, GPU-accelerated workspace for MATLAB-syntax code: editor, plots, variables, notebooks, run history, and an agent that can inspect your project.
RunMat Runtime 0.5 is out: multi-file project support, and resolving MATLAB language semantics like Rust's compiler
RunMat Runtime 0.5 adds manifest-backed multi-file projects, named entrypoints, stronger MATLAB function/class/indexing semantics, and a shared compiler foundation for tooling, acceleration, and JIT work.
Open-Source MATLAB Alternatives 2026: Speed, Compatibility & Ease of Use
Benchmarks, compatibility, and setup time for four free MATLAB alternatives. Which runs your .m files, which needs a rewrite, and which can you try in 5 seconds?
Enjoyed this post? Join the newsletter
Monthly updates on RunMat internals, development, and performance tips.
Download RunMat
Download RunMat for full performance, or use RunMat in your browser for zero setup.
Download RunMat
Try in your browser
