Image via 
Samsung

Samsung has started notifying users that they'd have to consent to the use of their private health data to train new AI models or risk losing it forever.

Apparently, the company has introduced a "Consent to the Use of Health Data for AI training and modelling" toggle deep in the settings of the Samsung Health app and is forcing people to agree to these terms if they want to back up their information. This toggle gives Samsung the right to use personal metrics for training and algorithm refinement. When you try to turn off this option, the app stops you in your tracks with a warning that reads:

Withdraw from this agreement?

You will not be able to sync health data with your Samsung account and your health data will be deleted unless retained pursuant to applicable law. If retention is required, we will erase it as soon as the required retention period ends.

Samsung 
said
 that the data it collects will "improve Samsung Health" through refined machine learning algorithms that analyze health conditions. The company plans to grab four categories: your sleep, your medications, your medical records, and your cycle tracking details. The company also said that humans (maybe Samsung employees and third-party contractors) will be able to review some of the data collected.

Image via 
How-To Geek

The Samsung Health app recently underwent a massive Generative AI overhaul just in time for the upcoming launch of the 
Galaxy Watch 9 and One UI 9 Watch
. Among the many Gen AI features Samsung added is Vitals, a tool that analyzes overnight biometric signals against your baseline to warn you about potential sickness or fatigue. It specifically monitors five signals: heart rate, heart rate variability, respiratory rate, skin temperature, and blood oxygen levels, and it can send you a notification if something looks wrong.

Image via 
Samsung

Other features include a Heart Health Score feature that combines your body composition, daily physical activity, sleep metrics, and daily stress into a single card on the home screen. Samsung has also packaged in a Cardio Load metric to prevent overtraining and a Fitness Index that grades how fit you are based on different metrics like your VO2 max and step count compared to peers.

Tags

Samsung

Samsung health

Ai

Generative ai

Follow us on
Google News

Add as a preferred
source on Google

Follow
@NeowinFeed

        Post

        Like

        Share

        Share

        Share

        RSS

Report a problem
with this article
