Photo: Cleberkn/Wikimedia Commons

Save

The 
Tiquatira 
 
Linear Park
 is in the East Zone of São Paulo and is one of the most important green corridors in the region. Covering 
320,000 square meters
, it acts as a breath of Atlantic Forest in the heart of the capital, offering shade and leisure for the population.

Twenty years ago, however, the situation was very different. 
 At that time, the park was nothing more than an 
abandoned lawn
 on the banks of the Tiquatira stream, which accumulated garbage and other debris.
 There were hardly any trees there
, and the gray space scared away most of the population.

The change was only possible because of one resident: 
Hélio Silva
, who often walked through the area and decided to turn it into a green stronghold in the capital. Have you heard this story?

Photo: Albert Carlos S Domingos/Wikimedia Commons

From trash to luxury: learn about the history of the 
 
Tiquatira
Linear Park

It was the early 2000s. “Seu” Hélio Silva, a resident of the East Zone, walked through Tiquatira every day before going to work, and noticed that 
the area – already quite degraded – was getting worse and worse
. After all, as well as having almost no greenery, it received a lot of garbage and became a hotspot for drug use.

One day, in November 2003, he had an idea: to 
plant trees that, in ten years, would transform the area into an oasis in the capital. 
 With his own money,
 he bought 200 seedlings of plants native to the Atlantic Forest
, in order to restore the region’s biome.

					View this post on Instagram				

A post shared by Helio da Silva (@plantadordearvores_)

His initiative didn’t go down well at first
. A local businessman, who used the space as a parking lot and feared that the trees would take away from his business, 
destroyed all the seedlings
. But this didn’t discourage Hélio Silva, who decided to 
 buy twice as many saplings and plant them in the same place
.

Once again, the 
Tree Planter
 – as Seu Hélio became known – had his 400 saplings destroyed, 
and this encouraged him to plant even more
. Over time, he spread the word about the “new residents” of Tiquatira, and the population began to support his project. And the seedlings were finally able to take root in their new home!

					View this post on Instagram				

A post shared by Helio da Silva (@plantadordearvores_)

Tiquatira Linear Park is one of the most important in the East Zone

The years went by and Hélio Silva continued planting saplings, which grew and became a 
great breath of Atlantic Forest
 in the middle of the Concrete Jungle. Until, in 2007, São Paulo City Hall transformed the area into the 
Tiquatira Linear Park
. It was 
 São Paulo’s first linear park
 and served as an inspiration for many that followed.

Today, the Tiquatira Linear Park is home to 
 32,000 trees 
 of 160 different species, including 
 jacarandas, jequitibás, pitangueiras, palms and jatobás
. Together, they form a kind of 
urban forest 
 that offers a better quality of life to the residents of the East Zone.

As well as the opportunity to connect with nature, the park has 
 sports courts, walking and skateboarding tracks, children’s playgrounds
 and 
kiosks with drinks and snacks
. In other words, a perfect option for the weekend!

Photo: Cleberkn/Wikimedia Commons

How to visit?

The 
Tiquatira Linear Park 
 is on 
Avenida Governador Carvalho Pinto, s/n
, in 
Vila São Geraldo. 
 The Cycle Lane runs around the park on Sundays and public holidays, from 7am to 4pm.

The nearest metro station is 
Vila Matilde
, 2 kilometers away. To check out the bus routes that go to the park, 
check out the SPTrans website
.

Photo: Cleberkn/Wikimedia Commons

+ Places to enjoy nature in São Paulo

SHARE THE ARTICLE

Tags:

observação da natureza
, 
tour pela natureza
