View All Stories

Share this

Health & Environment
Science & Tech
Scientists reverse brain aging, with a nasal spray
New therapy is turning back the clock in aging brains, healing inflammation, restoring memory and reshaping the future of brain age-related therapies.

April 14, 2026
 
By 
Zaid Elayyan
, 
Texas A&M University Division of Marketing and Communications

        5 min. read      

New therapy is turning back the clock in aging brains, healing inflammation, restoring memory and reshaping the future of brain age-related therapies

Credit: Getty Images

Picture this: your brain is a high-performance engine. Over decades, it doesn’t just wear down, it also starts to run hot.

Tiny “fires” of inflammation smolder deep within the brain’s memory center, creating a persistent brain fog that makes it harder to think, form new memories or even adapt to new environments, all the while increasing the risk to disorders like Alzheimer’s disease.
Scientists call this slow burn “neuroinflammaging
,
” and for decades it was thought to be the inevitable price of growing older.
Until now.
A landmark study from researchers at the 
Texas A&M University Naresh K. Vas
h
isht College of Medicine
 suggests the inflammatory tide responsible for brain aging and brain fog might actually be reversible. And the solution doesn’t involve brain surgery, but a simple nasal spray.
Led by 
Dr. Ashok Shetty
, university distinguished professor and associate director of the Institute for Regenerative Medicine, along with senior research scientists Dr. Madhu Leelavathi Narayana and Dr. Maheedhar Kodali, the team developed a nasal spray that, with just two doses, dramatically reduced brain inflammation, restored the brain’s cellular power plants and significantly improved memory.
The most surprising part? It all happened within weeks and lasted for months.
The findings, published in the 
Journal of Extracellular Vesicles
, could reshape the future of neurodegenerative therapies and may even change how scientists think about brain aging itself.

Brain age-related diseases like dementia are a major health concern worldwide. What we’re showing is brain aging can be reversed, to help people stay mentally sharp, socially engaged and free from age-related decline.

Dr. Ashok K. Shetty

University Distinguished Professor

Texas A&M University Naresh K. Vashisht College of Medicine

Brain fog to brain focus, the future of cognitive therapy
The implications of this research could be nothing short of revolutionary.
“As we develop and scale this therapy, a simple, two-dose nasal spray could one day replace invasive, risky procedures or maybe even months of medication,” Shetty said.
The societal impact could be just as profound. In the United States alone, new dementia cases are projected to double over the next four decades, 
from about 514,000 in 2020 to about 1 million in 2060
.
“The trend signals a pressing need for policies and innovative interventions that can minimize both the risk and severity of neurodegenerative disorders like dementia,” Shetty said.
The study also hints at broad applicability, working equally effectively across both genders — a rare outcome in biomedical research.
“It’s universal,” Shetty said. “Treatment outcomes were consistent and similar across both sexes.”
One day, the approach could even help stroke survivors rebuild lost brain function, or slow — even reverse — the effects of cognitive aging in humans.
“Our approach redefines what it means to grow old,” Shetty said. “We’re aiming for successful brain aging: keeping people engaged, alert and connected. Not just living longer, but living smarter and healthier,” Shetty said.
Rewiring the brain from the inside out
At the heart of this groundbreaking development are millions of microscopic biological parcels known as extracellular vesicles (EVs). They act like delivery vehicles, carrying powerful genetic cargo called microRNAs.
“MicroRNAs act like master regulators,” Narayana said. “They help modulate and regulate many gene and signaling pathways in the brain.”
But the delivery route is just as important as the cargo.
Packed into a nasal spray, the tiny EVs bypass the brain’s protective shield and travel directly into brain tissue, where they are absorbed.
In Shetty’s lab, researchers develop an innovative nasal spray targeting brain aging.

Credit: Texas A&M University Division of Marketing and Communications

“The mode of delivery is one of the most exciting aspects of our approach,” Kodali said. “Intranasal delivery allows us to reach, and treat, the brain directly without invasive procedures.”
Once absorbed into the brain’s resident immune cells, the microRNAs suppress systems, like NLRP3 inflammasome and the cGAS–STING signaling pathways, known to drive chronic inflammation in aging brains.
At a cellular level, the treatment recharged neuronal mitochondria, or the power plants that live inside the brain’s cells.
By recharging these cellular power plants, the therapy didn’t just clear brain fog, it physically improved the brain’s ability to process and store information.
“We are giving neurons their spark back by reducing oxidative stress and reactivating the brain’s mitochondria,” Narayana said.
Behavioral tests confirmed the biology. Models treated with the nasal spray showed remarkable improvements in not only recognizing familiar objects but also detecting new objects and changes in their environment, a sharp contrast to the control.
“We are seeing the brain’s own repair systems switch on, healing inflammation and restoring itself,” Shetty said.
While further research is needed, Shetty and his team have already filed a U.S. patent for the therapy, marking a milestone in what could become a breakthrough for brain aging treatments.
Behind the breakthrough
Breakthroughs like the one led by Shetty highlight Texas A&M as a research powerhouse, where national and global research priorities help shape the next generation of innovative solutions.
“We aren’t just trying to understand the biological mechanisms, we are translating and developing our findings into real-world therapies that could make a difference,” Shetty said.
With support from the NIA, discoveries like Shetty’s highlight Texas A&M’s role as a leader in research, where global and national priorities inspire the next wave of innovation.

Credit: Texas A&M University Naresh K. Vashisht College of Medicine

Backed by the 
National Institute on Aging (NIA)
, the Texas A&M team pooled collaborative knowledge, expertise and resources to turn a simple nasal spray into a therapy with the potential to reframe how scientists think about brain aging.
“Our partnership with the NIA is very important,” Shetty said. “This kind of work requires resources and the right people to tackle problems and develop solutions that could change lives.”
Ultimately, while the brain’s engine may sputter with age, scientists are now learning how to reignite it, sparking a new era of cognitive health and showing that the clock on brain aging might not just be paused, it can be turned back.

More information:
 Intranasal Human NSC‑Derived EVs Therapy Can Restrain Inflammatory Microglial Transcriptome, and NLRP3 and cGAS‑STING Signalling, in Aged Hippocampus, Journal of Extracellular Vesicles 15(2): e70232 (2026).

DOI: 
10.1002/jev2.70232

Journal information:
 
Journal of Extracellular Vesicles

Tags

brain
medicine
Naresh K. Vashisht College of Medicine
research

Media Contact

Zaid Elayyan
Texas A&M University Division of Marketing and Communications

zelayyan@tamu.edu

Share this News
