Introducing selfie for sign-in: a new, easy way to access your Google Account

Jul 23, 2026

|

x.com

Facebook

LinkedIn

Mail

Copy link

                Selfie video gives you more options to sign in, including if you’re ever locked out or don’t have access to your usual phone or computer.

John Gronberg

Director, Product Management

Claire Forszt

Product Manager, Google Identity and Engagement

                  Share

x.com

Facebook

LinkedIn

Mail

Copy link

Your browser does not support the audio element.

          Listen to article

[[duration]] minutes

This content is generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental

Voice

Speed

Voice

Speed

0.75X

1X

1.5X

2X

        Read AI-generated summary

You can now use a selfie video as a backup method to access your Google Account if you get locked out. Simply record a short video with guided head movements to verify your identity, which remains encrypted and under your control. Visit g.co/signin-selfie to check your eligibility and set up this feature today.

              Summaries were generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental.

Google’s "Introducing selfie for sign-in" offers a new way to access your account.

You can now use a quick selfie video to regain access if you get locked out.

Set it up by recording guided head movements to verify your identity later.

Your video stays encrypted and private, and you can delete it whenever you want.

Advanced security checks help prevent fake videos or impersonation attempts from accessing your data.

              Summaries were generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental.

            Explore other styles:

                  General summary

                  Bullet points

Your 
Google Account
 holds a lot of valuable information, from cherished photos to important emails and documents. We always want to make sure that information is private, secure, and readily available to you, which is why we recommend setting up multiple sign-in methods. Today, we’re adding a new way to sign in: 
selfie video
.
Selfie video is a new way to get into your account, giving you more options if you’re ever locked out or don’t have access to your usual phone or computer.
How to set up and use selfie video
Setting up a selfie video
 is simple: You just look at your device's camera and complete a few short, guided head movements to capture multiple angles.
If you’re having trouble signing in later on, you just take another selfie to get back into your account. Selfie video compares the new video to the one you set up to confirm it is really you and help you get back into your account.

Built with privacy and security in mind
Your selfie video is yours and you’re in control. It is recorded and securely stored with your consent, and you can delete it at any time in your Google Account. It’s used only for helping you sign in, unless you opt to share it for additional purposes. Your selfie video is encrypted at rest, meaning it's securely stored even when it's not being used.
When you use a selfie to sign in, we use multiple layers of security to help prevent impersonation attempts like fake photos and videos (i.e., deep fakes). For example, we match your video against your saved selfie and require you to perform simple movements to prove it's a live video. We also use our standard security practices to detect and help prevent suspicious sign-in attempts.
This update builds on our ongoing work to provide secure and flexible sign-in options, like 
passkeys
 and 
recovery contacts
. You can check if your account is eligible and set up your selfie video today at 
g.co/signin-selfie
.

            Get the latest news from Google in your inbox

            Sign up for our newsletters with product updates, event information, special offers, and more.

Done. Just one step more.

        Check your inbox to confirm your subscription.

    You can also subscribe with a 
different email address
.

            Your information will be used in accordance with 
Google's privacy policy.
 You may opt out at any time.

POSTED IN:
