Should you stop cracking your knuckles?
17 hours ago
Share
Save
Add as preferred on Google
Sandy Ong
BBC/ Serenity Strull/ Getty Images
Like a firework exploding in the joint – here's everything you need to know about cracking your knuckles.
Growing up, Donald Unger was warned – by his mother, several aunts, and later his mother-in-law – that constant knuckle cracking would cause arthritis. Determined to prove them wrong, he cracked his left knuckles at least twice a day for 50 years – around 36,500 cracks in total – while leaving his right untouched. 
In 1998, aged 72, he took X-rays of both hands to find out the result of his lifelong endeavour. "There was no arthritis in either hand, and no apparent differences in the two hands," he 
concluded
.
This of course, was a sample size of just one. Studies indicate that somewhere between 
20
 and 
50%
 of people crack their knuckles. So, is this something that we should be worried about – could every pop, click, and crack be causing lasting damage?
A matter of bubbles
For some a knuckle crack is just a mindless habit. Others like the way cracking their joints feels. But judging by the flurry of chiropractic adjustment videos trending on social media, there's a good number who get a kick out of hearing that snap.
What happens when we crack our joints is actually relatively simple. A joint is where two bones meet, and the ones found in our knuckles, neck, and back are surrounded by 
synovial fluid 
– an egg white-like substance that acts as a lubricant. When you twist, pull, and bend your joints to crack them, the space within the joint temporarily expands. This causes the pressure of the synovial fluid to fall, and as a result, gases that were once dissolved in the fluid begin to emerge as bubbles.
The sound of a joint cracking – which is actually the sound of the 
bubbles that have formed collapsing
 – can be surprisingly loud, up to 
83 decibels
. That's roughly the volume of a 
diesel truck rumbling past at 40 miles an hour
 (64km per hour). When scientists at the University of California, Davis, viewed a joint that was being cracked using ultrasound, they described the moment of the "crack" as appearing 
like a firework exploding
 on the screen.
A mostly harmless habit
It may be noisy, but the sound of your joints popping is "just a normal physiological process", says Kimme Hyrich, a rheumatologist at the University of Manchester in the UK.
But is normal necessarily harmless?
"Obviously there are some red flags like pain or swelling in the joints," says Jay Jagannathan, a neurosurgeon with his own practice in Michigan, in the US, who has seen patients with strains and other issues after cracking their necks too forcefully – something which is not recommended (more on this later).
…when doctors physically examined knuckle-crackers, they found no swelling or disability of any sort
However, generally speaking, when you feel the urge to crack your joints, it's considered pretty harmless, says Jagannathan.
Some people still worry that vigorous knuckle cracking might result in finger dislocations or tendon injuries, especially when you apply too much force or jerk your finger in a way that could accidentally cause it to detach from its joint. And indeed, there have been some cases of this happening. In 1999, for instance, a Philadelphia-based hand surgeon described how two patients 
sprained their fingers
 because they were overly keen to hear the satisfying pop sound. 
BBC/ Serenity Strull/ Getty Images
The "pop" your knuckles make when you crack them may sound alarming, but it's mostly harmless (Credit: BBC/ Serenity Strull/ Getty Images)
But with less forceful cracking, such incidents are rare.       
What habitual joint crackers seem most worried about, however, is whether they'll wind up with osteoarthritis – the 
most common type of arthritis
 that's associated with wear-and-tear of the cartilage, the protective tissue that pads your bones at joints. "It's what a lot of people ask me in my clinic and also around the dinner table," says Hyrich. "The basic answer is it doesn't," she says.   
Several studies have debunked this old wives' tale. In one, published in 1975, researchers studied 28 nursing home residents and discovered that habitual knuckle crackers had 
similar rates of degenerative arthritis
 to non-crackers.
A more recent retrospective study examined the history of knuckle cracking in 215 osteoarthritis patients and compared them to controls without the condition. It drew the 
same conclusion
: the amount and duration of knuckle cracking over someone's lifetime had no effect on their osteoarthritis risk.
Watch the neck
While knuckle-cracking is unlikely to be a problem, the same is not true of back and neck-popping. The neck contains vital nerves, including the spinal cord. "Plus, you've got two really important arteries that run through the back of your neck and travel towards the brain," adds Jagannathan. These areas are delicate – mishandling them can cause serious injury and 
side effects
 such as tingling in the limbs and dizziness. "Any type of excessive manipulation is dangerous," says Jagannathan.
Cracking your own neck is not recommended, and even professional manipulations are controversial. In 2012, Neil O'Connell, from the Centre for Research and Rehabilitation at Brunel University and colleagues described chiropractic neck adjustments as "
unnecessary and inadvisable
".
Getting a grip
Another supposed peril of knuckle popping is that it affects your 
grip strength
 – an 
important health marker
 linked to a range of health outcomes, including 
heart disease
, 
cognitive decline
, 
depression
, and some types of 
cancer
. 
A 1990 study of 74 knuckle-crackers who'd been honing the art for between 18 and 60 years discovered they had 
weaker hand grips
 and more hand swelling compared with non-crackers. But these findings were refuted in 2017, when a separate study found 
no correlation between knuckle cracking and weakened grip
.
There are other myths too, such as how frequent cracking can lead to big knuckles or loose tendons, but Hyrich says they're all untrue. The 
ultrasound study
 above backs this up: when doctors physically examined knuckle-crackers, they found no swelling or disability of any sort.
For some people, cracking can provide a sense of relief and a 
temporary increase in joint mobility
, because it stretches the joint, taking it through a 
wider range of motion
. One theory even suggests that 
cracking stimulates nerve endings
 around the joint, relaxing surrounding muscles while reducing pain and releasing endorphins – but this hasn't been proven.
Given that knuckle cracking is mostly benign, there might be little impetus to stop. If you do want to, though, Jagannathan recommends conditioning yourself with techniques such as cognitive therapy, to understand what you're doing and to find distractions that prevent you from doing it. For example, you could consider keeping a log of your triggers (do you crack your knuckles when you're stressed, bored, or do it without thinking?) and try busying your hands with stress balls or fidget toys.
More like this:
• 
How to future-proof your knees
• 
Weak hands and blurry vision: Is your tech giving you 'phone body'?
• 
How chewing more boosts your brain
Overall, Hyrich says, cracking is harmless to the joint. The only thing it may harm, she adds, is your personal relationships – should your knuckle cracking become too annoying for your friends.
* All content within this article is provided for general information only, and should not be treated as a substitute for the medical advice of health care professionals. 
--
For trusted insights on health and wellbeing, sign up to the 
Health Fix newsletter
 by senior health correspondent Melissa Hogenboom who also writes the 
Live Well For Longer
 and 
Six Steps to Calm
 courses.  
For more science, technology, environment and health stories from the BBC, follow us on 
Facebook
 and 
Instagram
.  
Health
Human body
Science
Features
