⚡ Diagrams people can actually walk through

      The fastest way to sketch, walk through, and share a system design flow —
      drag components, connect them, and present each interaction step by step.

Start building for free

Try it now →

No account needed to try · Build, share, then save

See a real one

      This is a live Flostep diagram, not a screenshot. Hit ▶ Start and walk through it yourself.

      Every shared diagram embeds like this — one iframe, any site.

Build your own →

How it works

From blank canvas to a fully walkable flow in minutes.

🖱️

STEP 1

Drag & drop components

Pick from Frontend, Service, Database, Cache, Queue, External API — or create a custom component. Place them on the canvas.

🔗

STEP 2

Connect & label interactions

Draw arrows between components in the order they happen. Label each one — "POST /login", "returns JWT", "cache miss". Multiple interactions between the same pair are fine.

▶️

STEP 3

Walk through it

Hit Next to step through each interaction one at a time. The active step lights up, the rest fades. Perfect for design reviews, onboarding, and interviews.

Everything you need

No fuss. No bloat. Just the tools that matter for system design.

📝

Code-to-diagram import

Paste plain 
A -> B: action
 lines and the canvas builds itself.

💬

Comments on shared links

Send a link and collect the feedback in one place. Reviewers comment by name without needing an account, so an async design review doesn't have to become a meeting.

🔗

Shareable links

One click to generate a public read-only link. Anyone can step through your flow without needing an account.

🖼️

Embed anywhere

Drop a single 
<iframe>
 into Notion, Confluence, your blog — the full interactive walkthrough lives there.

📋

Notes

A dedicated notes panel for trade-offs, open questions, and findings — saved alongside the diagram so context never gets lost.

☁️

Always saved

Every change auto-saves to the cloud. Pick up exactly where you left off from any device, no manual saving required.

        🔌 Works with MCP

Let your AI assistant draw it

        Flostep speaks the Model Context Protocol, so Claude, Cursor, VS Code and Windsurf can build
        diagrams for you — from a description, or straight from the codebase they're already looking at.

Connect once

claude mcp add --transport http \
  flostep https://flostep.dev/mcp \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer fls_…"

          One command for Claude Code, or a few lines of JSON for any other MCP client.

Then just ask

“Make a Flostep diagram of how password reset works here, and give me a share link.”

“Add a retry step between the queue and the worker.”

          It reads your existing diagrams too, so edits land on the real thing — not a guess at it.

Read the MCP guide →

Built for the moments that matter

🎙️

System design interviews

Walk an interviewer through your design component by component instead of pointing at a static blob.

🏗️

Architecture spikes

Map out a new feature before writing code. Catch missing edge cases before they become bugs.

🧑‍🏫

Onboarding new engineers

Embed a live walkthrough of your auth flow or checkout pipeline directly in your onboarding docs.

🔍

Async design reviews

Share a link, let teammates leave comments on specific steps, and iterate without scheduling another meeting.

Frequently asked questions

Everything you need to know before your first flow.

Do I need an account to try Flostep?

No. Hit “Try it now” and start building immediately — your diagram lives in your browser. Create a free account when you want to save it permanently and get a stable share link.

What can I actually build?

System design flows — drag Frontend, Service, Database, Cache, Queue, and External API components (or custom ones), connect them in the order interactions happen, label each step, then walk through it one hop at a time.

How does sharing work?

One click generates a public, read-only link. Anyone can step through your flow interactively — no account needed. You can also embed the full walkthrough in Notion, Confluence, or your docs with a single iframe.

Can I import an existing diagram?

Yes. Paste plain 
A -> B: action
 lines into the Code view and the canvas builds itself.

Can Claude or Cursor build diagrams for me?

Yes. Flostep is an MCP server, so any assistant that speaks the Model Context Protocol — Claude, Cursor, VS Code, Windsurf — can create, read, edit, and share your diagrams. Create an API key, connect it once, then ask in plain language. See the 
MCP guide
.

How much does it cost?

There's a genuinely free plan, and a Pro plan for unlimited diagrams and more. See the 
pricing page
 for the full breakdown.

Ready to think in steps?

Free to start. No credit card. Build your first flow in under two minutes.

Create a free account
