The file manager
 
built around filtering

        Narrow any folder by type, date, and size all at once. Jump anywhere with fuzzy folder search, hover to preview without opening, and browse two folders side by side. No more digging through endless Finder windows.

Download Free Trial

Buy $19.99

Native macOS · App size only around 9 MB · 30-day free trial · One-time purchase · Apple Silicon with macOS 12 or later

Explore the features

Filtering

Dual Pane

Navigation

Previews

Tabs

File Operations

Sidebar

More

Powerful filters

Filter your files in real time by type, date, and size, all at once. Choose from preset categories like Images, PDFs, Videos, and Documents, or define your own custom filters by file extension.

Add a date range, a size limit, and a search term simultaneously. Results update instantly as you type. Toggle recursive search to look inside every subfolder at once.

Two folders. One window

Open two folders side by side and work between them directly. Copy or move files from one pane to the other with a single right-click or use the command palette.

        Each pane has its own folder, filters, search, and navigation history.

Get anywhere in seconds

Fuzzy Go to Folder (⌘G) lets you jump to any folder by typing a few letters from the path. Type “downwallnew” to jump to ~/Downloads/Wallpapers/new instantly.

Go to a folder in the other pane with ⌥⌘G. Jump to a specific file with ⌘P.

        The sidebar shows your bookmarks and all mounted volumes. The breadcrumb path bar lets you click any parent folder to jump up.

See your files without opening them

Hover over any image or PDF to see a large floating preview, without clicking or opening another app. Click the file icon to show a preview. Toggle icon preview mode to see thumbnails directly in the file list.

        Press Space for native Quick Look with arrow key navigation through the whole list.

One window, many places

Open as many tabs as you need, each remembering its own folders, filters, and dual-pane layout. Jump between a download folder, a project directory, and an external drive without losing your place in any of them.

New tab with ⌘T, close with ⌘W, jump straight to any tab with ⌘1 – ⌘9, cycle with ⌥⌘← / ⌥⌘→, or fuzzy-jump to any open tab with ⇧⌘T. Drag to reorder. Tabs come back exactly as you left them after a restart.

Everything you need, right where you are

Batch rename multiple files with Find & Replace, sequential numbering, text prefix/suffix, or case change, with a live preview before you commit.

        Convert HEIC, WebP, and AVIF images to JPG or PNG directly from the right-click menu. Compress files to ZIP. Undo moves and trash operations. Cut, copy and paste with Finder-style conflict handling.

Your folders, always within reach

The sidebar shows your bookmarked folders and all mounted volumes (external drives, disk images, and network shares) in a Finder-style source list. Click any location to navigate instantly. 

        Eject volumes directly from the sidebar. Toggle the sidebar with the toolbar button or ⌥⌘S.

Built for power users who live in their folders

A command palette (⇧⌘A) gives keyboard access to all common actions. Custom type filters let you define your own named file categories. Calculate folder sizes recursively, or enable Always Calculate Folder Sizes to fill the size column automatically. Show hidden files, toggle folders first.

Open any folder from the terminal.

Add a tiny shell function to your shell config and you can open the current folder, or any path, in WhimFiles from the command line.

Copy

wf() { open -a WhimFiles "${1:-.}"; }

Add that line to 
~/.zshrc
 (the default shell on modern macOS). If you use bash, add it to 
~/.bashrc
 or 
~/.bash_profile
 instead.

Reload with 
source ~/.zshrc
, or just open a new terminal window.

wf              # open the current folder
wf ~/Downloads  # open a specific folder

Who is WhimFiles for?

Whether you manage assets, wrangle code, or just can't find anything. WhimFiles gets out of your way and helps you work faster.

The Folder Hoarder

The Creative

The Developer

The Photographer

The Media Collector

The Power User

🗂
Your Downloads folder has 847 files. Let's fix that

You know the feeling. You saved something six months ago and now you can't find it. Finder search is useless and scrolling takes forever. WhimFiles lets you filter by type, date, and size simultaneously, search recursively across every subfolder, and see exactly what's taking up space.

Filter by type, date, and size at the same time

See file sizes and folder totals at a glance

Recursive search finds files buried anywhere

Move, rename, or send to trash directly without a Finder round-trip

🎨
Your assets, finally under control

You work with hundreds of images, PSDs, fonts, and project files scattered across folders. WhimFiles shows large image thumbnails directly in the file list, converts HEIC, WebP, and AVIF to JPG or PNG with a right-click, and keeps your source folder and export folder open side by side in dual pane. No more hunting through Finder for that one asset.

Large image thumbnails directly in the file list

Hover preview for images and PDFs without opening them

Convert HEIC / WebP / AVIF → JPG or PNG instantly

Dual pane keeps source and destination open at once

Custom file type filters for your asset types

💻
Built for people who live in the terminal

You navigate deep folder structures, jump between project directories constantly, and want keyboard shortcuts for everything. WhimFiles has fuzzy Go to Folder/Go to File so you can jump anywhere by typing a few letters, Open in Terminal on any folder, a command palette, and keyboard shortcuts throughout. Your hands stay on the keyboard.

Fuzzy Go to Folder/File: type a few letters, jump anywhere

Open in Terminal (iTerm-aware) from any folder

Command palette (⇧⌘A) for common actions

Full keyboard navigation throughout

Show hidden files toggle (⇧⌘.)

📸
Find the right shot without importing anything

You have thousands of photos across multiple drives and folders. WhimFiles lets you browse any folder with large thumbnails, filter by date to find shots from a specific shoot, preview images instantly on hover, and convert HEIC photos from your iPhone to JPG, all without importing into Photos or Lightroom.

Large image thumbnails in the file list

Hover preview shows images instantly

Filter by date to find shots from any time period

Convert HEIC → JPG in one right-click

Browse external drives and network volumes from the sidebar

🎬
Finally make sense of your media folders

You have movies, series, and downloads spread across multiple drives. WhimFiles lets you browse two drives side by side in dual pane, filter by file type to see only videos or only audio, see file sizes at a glance to manage storage, and use custom filters to show only the formats you care about. Your 4TB drive is no longer a mystery.

Dual pane browses two drives simultaneously

Filter by Videos, Audio, or custom file type filters

See file and folder sizes instantly

Recursive search finds anything across deep folder trees

External drives and network mounts appear in the sidebar

⚡
File operations made fast and easy

You've outgrown Finder but don't need FTP or remote servers. You want a fast, native file manager for streamlined local file management, with batch rename, command palette, folder size calculation, and a sidebar that shows all your volumes. WhimFiles is that app.

Batch rename with Find & Replace, numbering, case change

Undo moves and trash operations

Command palette for common actions (⇧⌘A)

Always-calculate folder sizes mode

Get Info with SHA-256 checksum

Cut, copy and paste with Finder-style conflict handling

Simple. Fair. Yours forever.

Try it free for 30 days. No credit card required.

Launch price · One-time purchase

$
19.99
$24.99

Pay once. Use forever. No subscription, ever.

✓
 30-day free trial, no credit card needed

✓
 Real-time filtering by type, date & size

✓
 Dual-pane browsing with cut, copy & paste

✓
 Batch rename, image conversion & ZIP

✓
 All future updates included

✓
 Apple Silicon native - M1 or later

Download Free Trial

Buy $19.99

Native macOS · Apple Silicon with macOS 12 or later
