Blog
Tilde is a harness SDK for building cloud deployed AI agents, extremely fast.
I built Tilde for 2 reasons:
that creating a single agent harness for 
all
 tasks both simple and highly complex would lead to sub-optimal outcomes.
That harness's & AI agent libraries at the time didn't give me the developer experience, portability or composability that I wanted
Over a year later into building this side project, point 1 is still true. On the other hand other frameworks, libraries and harnesses have come a long way but I still find myself reaching daily to Tilde to build agents to automate things for me. Having worked through the common pitfall most software engineers make, namely that "there's always one more feature before it's ready" - I can finally convince myself that 
it's ready.
What does it do?
I've taken out the meat of what makes a good harness, and composed it into components you can pick and choose to give to your agent:
Tools: 
Spin up MCP servers to give to your agent. Add Tilde managed tools, bring your own or proxy upstream MCP servers. Tilde provides credential management, common SaaS integrations and raw HTTP1/2 reverse proxies to upstream services if MCP isn't enough
ChatKit: 
Integrations with third party chat providers (Slack, Github or via API). Let your agents engage where you work. You can enable receiving and sending messages from Github, Slack or direct via API as well as other webhooks from these services.
Memory: 
Create and centrally manage skills registries, wiki's and persistent memories. Surface these functions as tools to your agents to autonomously keep up to date.
Everything in Tilde is cloud based & centrally managed & permissioned. I've currently built a client-side library to work with Vercel's AI SDK but expect other frameworks and languages to be supported in future.
A practical example
One of the first agent's I built with Tilde was a code-review agent. I'm a software engineer and we tend to have a habit of automating ourselves out of work so what the heck.
There were a few key requirements:
I want to tag the agent in Github PRs to trigger a review
The agent must be able to securely checkout the code in a sandbox
I don't want to expose credentials to the agent or the sandbox where the agent can reach to
The agent should then be able to loop, reason and analyse the git diff based on some sort of system prompt
Finally, comment back on the PR both inline and a summary message
Here's a basic architecture of what I was going for:
TLDR; here's the final example you can deploy yourself: 
https://github.com/trytilde/examples/tree/main/code-review-bot
With Tilde, I could essentially just focus on point 7 in the above diagram and the Tilde's SDK took care of everything else. 
A few minutes later & voila! A functioning, secure agent that I could instantly deploy to Vercel & Tilde for remote usage anywhere.
For bonus points
: You'll notice a 
tilde-state.yaml
 file in the example github repo above. You can spin up a Tilde account, head to your settings and import it there to setup the required Tilde infrastructure and integrations. From there it'll ask you to configure your Github & Modal sandbox settings. This is how I've designed the system to be as portable as possible.
Get started by reading our docs 
here
 or pointing your agent to our 
llms.txt
 . 
I've spent a lot of time and energy into building the platform but less so on the docs - expect them to get a refresh in the coming days.
