tale.fyi
The short version: I built 
tale.fyi
 as a home for fiction on the web, starting with humanity's public domain library. It saves your progress, allows you to switch seamlessly between reading and listening, and share notes with your friends. Try it on 
tale.fyi/a-christmas-carol
, which is a surprisingly fun (and funny!) hang even in 2026.

I love books; in college I split my time between Computer Science and Literature, a mix that not everybody understood, but with the recent rapid advancement of computers that can read and speak in English prose, that combination seems more important than ever, and that's why I think now is the most important time to say something I've been feeling since my first experiments with micro fiction on Twitter in 2007:

The internet is built for non-fiction, and I think that costs us something. Fiction is how we get into each other's heads and empathize with how others live, think, and feel. We've been doing more reading and writing than ever, but almost all of it is non-fiction.

We deserve a home for fiction.

Humanity has a massive corpus of fiction, thanks to copyright law and the massive effort of Project Gutenberg digitizing texts, Standard Ebooks copy-editing and proof-reading, and LibriVox volunteers reading the books into the public domain. 
tale.fyi/dracula
 is my proof-of-concept, built over the last two weeks, of what it looks like when we glue that all together with simplicity as a priority. It's completely free, it saves your progress to your device (sign in to sync across devices) and seamlessly switches between reading and listening.

I've also built a way to tell your own story: 
tale.fyi/tell
 which I'll be improving over the coming weeks, with all the features people have come to expect from other non-fiction platforms.

Except for one difference: you own everything you create here, including your audience.

I'll share more about how I built it soon, which is nerdier, but also genuinely thrilling.

Also, I'm looking for intros for more people that see the internet the way I do. We must build the internet we want to use together.
