🚀 The Space Project

A self-running space-economy simulator, in Rust + Bevy.

Hundreds of autonomous ships trade, mine, haul cargo, take out contracts,
run out of fuel, and occasionally go bankrupt across a living solar
economy — markets find their own prices, factions tax and subsidize,
populations migrate when they're unhappy, and abandoned stations rot.
It all runs in one native binary with no runtime dependencies.

What is this?

The Space Project is an 
agent-driven economic simulation
 wrapped in a
native 3D client. There's no scripted storyline and no player objective —
you're an observer (and god-mode admin) watching an economy run itself.

Every ship is an autonomous agent with its own credits, crew, fuel, cargo
hold, and a 
GOAP planner
 that decides what to do next: chase the
highest-margin trade route, accept a delivery contract, seek out a
shipyard to retrofit, or dock and let its crew rest before morale
collapses. Facilities run production recipes, degrade and self-repair,
level up, and get abandoned when they go broke. Factions collect taxes
and post subsidies. Populations consume food, produce labor, and pack up
and leave when sentiment craters. Markets price everything off a coverage
model with shortage urgency multipliers — no fixed prices anywhere.

It started as an Elixir/Phoenix prototype and was rewritten in Rust
because the BEAM scheduler struggled on Windows gaming PCs. The engine
(
sim_core
) is pure, synchronous, IO-free Rust; the Bevy client embeds
it directly as a library, so the simulation and the renderer share the
same ECS world with zero marshalling between them.

Scale today:
 ~485 live agents (282 ships · 93 facilities · 27
populations · 8 factions · 60 celestial bodies), ticking at p50 ≈ 10–20 ms
inside a 125 ms budget. The architecture is built to push toward 100k+.

🌌 A note on where this is going

Nowhere, on its own — and that's kind of the point.

This started as a fun idea: a from-scratch space economy that actually
simulates itself instead of faking it. It grew 
way
 past what I
expected, mostly in late-night sessions pairing with Claude. But I'm
not pretending it's a game with a roadmap, and I'm not actively pushing
it toward "shippable."

I'm putting it out under MIT because the bones are genuinely good and I'd
rather someone do something with it than let it sit in a private repo.
So: 
fork it, gut it, rename it, bolt a game on top of it, rip the
economy engine out and use it somewhere else entirely.
 Build the thing
I didn't.

PRs and issues are welcome and I'll look at them, but I can't promise a
cadence. If you want to take it somewhere real, see

CONTRIBUTING.md
 — there's a "directions you could
take this" section written exactly for you.

Screenshots

Title screen
 — start a fresh universe or load a save.

System overview
 — orbital rings across Sol and neighboring systems.

Mining cluster
 — tumbling asteroids, foundries, and ship trails.

Outer reaches
 — distant belts and stations against nebula backdrops.

Live inspector
 — faction ledger, relations matrix, full contract board.

Events stream
 — market crises, dockings, deliveries, tick by tick.

What it simulates

System

What happens

Ship AI (GOAP)

A forward planner scores every goal — trade, deliver, refuel, retrofit, rest, explore — over an abstract world state, then builds a behavior tree to execute the cheapest plan. Ships replan mid-flight when a better option appears.

Economy

An order-book market per station prices 13 commodities off a coverage model with shortage-urgency multipliers. Ships move real supply between markets as they trade.

Contracts

Six kinds — Delivery, Courier, Passenger, Subsidy, Supply, CrewMission — with a full posted → accepted → paid lifecycle, reputation gating, auto-renewal, and age-escalating payments.

Facilities

Run production recipes (smelting, refining, manufacturing, farming, mining), degrade over time, self-repair with tools, level up 1–10, restock from local markets, and get abandoned when chronically broke.

Factions

Collect taxes on member facilities, post subsidy contracts for chronic shortages, fund construction of new facilities where demand is unmet, and hold pairwise relations.

Populations

Consume food and fuel, produce labor, post food and passenger contracts under stress, and physically migrate to happier systems when sentiment collapses.

Crew

Aggregate hunger / fatigue / morale with derived tasks (piloting, engineering, trading, eating, resting), skill progression, wages, and a morale death-spiral guard.

Construction

Chronic shortages spawn construction sites that accrete delivered cargo 0 → 1.0, then materialize into a real, persistent facility.

Persistence

Everything flushes to SQLite; a sim resumes from the exact tick it left off. A per-universe 
world_seed
 keeps the nebula backdrop and landmarks stable across restarts.

Spatial LOD

Distant ships tick less often (with rate-scaled state changes) so the frame budget goes where you're looking.

For the deep dive — tick phase ordering, the AI stack, the economic
feedback loop, runtime ownership — see

docs/ARCHITECTURE.md
, which has mermaid diagrams
for all of it.

Quick start

You need a 
Rust toolchain
 (stable). Then:

make run

#
 equivalent to: cargo run -p client_bevy

That boots the Bevy app into the main menu. 
Start
 opens a fresh
universe (name it, or take the default); 
Load Game
 lists every save
in the binary's directory. Saves live next to the binary as

<universe-name>.db
 — default 
sim.db
.

Other entry points:

Goal

Command

Windowed client (debug)

make run

Release build

make build
 → binary at 
target/release/client_bevy

Headless
 (no window, for CI / smoke tests)

cargo run -p client_bevy -- --headless

Verify (build + test + clippy, strict)

make verify

Smoke test (boot headless, print DB counts)

scripts/smoke.sh [secs]

One binary, one process.
 
client_bevy
 
is
 the whole thing — the
simulation runs in-process. Headless mode spins up the HTTP/WebSocket
server (from the 
sim_server
 library crate) for scripted and CI use;
there is no separate server binary to run.

Controls

Input

Action

Left-drag

Orbit camera

Right-drag
 / 
WASD

Pan

Scroll

Zoom

Left-click

Select ship or facility → opens its details panel

Right-click

Context menu (Inspect / Follow / POV / Destroy)

Space

Pause / resume

Esc

Close top panel · clear selection · open pause menu

P

Pause menu

F12

Screenshot

Top bar

Toggle panels (Ships, Markets, Factions, Contracts, Events, …), set speed (1× / 2× / 5× / 10×), spawn ships/facilities

Every panel reads the ECS world live — the inspector is effectively a
real-time debugger with full component access. Click a ship to see its
credits, crew, fuel, current goal, fitting, route memory, and its last
few AI commands.

Architecture

Five crates in one Cargo workspace:

sim_core     Pure simulation logic — hecs ECS, GOAP planner, economy,
             contracts. No async, no IO, no framework. Trivially testable.
sim_db       SQLite persistence (sqlx) — pool, seeder, ECS loader,
             persistence worker, migrations.
sim_server   Library crate — HTTP/WebSocket handlers + engine apply
             helpers. Drives headless mode; embedded by the client.
sim_protocol WebSocket wire types (headless / CI only).
client_bevy  The binary. Bevy 0.18 + egui. Embeds sim_core as a Bevy
             Resource; the renderer queries the hecs world directly.

Three rules keep it honest:

sim_core
 never imports tokio, sqlx, or axum.
 Pure logic only, so
the whole simulation is reasoned about and unit-tested without async.

hecs is the source of truth during a tick.
 The tick loop holds
exclusive mutable access — no per-agent locks.

Cross-entity effects go through a command buffer
 (
SimCommand
). A
phase reads world state and writes commands; the next phase applies
them. Deterministic, no mid-phase write conflicts.

The full tick phase order, ownership model, and feedback loops are
diagrammed in 
docs/ARCHITECTURE.md
.

The original 
Godot
 client lives on in history as a parity reference,
but it's no longer the front end — the pivot to an embedded Bevy client
removed the socket boundary entirely, and every feature now lands in

client_bevy
.

Building & packaging

The 
Makefile
 wraps cargo + rustup + codesign + packaging:

make build              
#
 release binary (host target)

make build-mac          
#
 arm64 macOS  (also: build-mac-intel, build-mac-universal)

make build-win          
#
 Windows MSVC (run on a Windows host)

make build-linux        
#
 Linux        (best on a Linux host)

make package-mac        
#
 .app bundle + ad-hoc codesign + Info.plist

make dmg                
#
 macOS .dmg

make package-win        
#
 Windows .zip

make package-linux      
#
 Linux .tar.gz

The workspace version in the root 
Cargo.toml
 is the single source of
truth — the binary reads it via 
env!("CARGO_PKG_VERSION")
 and the

Makefile
 greps the same field for 
Info.plist
 and archive names, so
packaged builds never drift.

Tech stack

Rust
 (edition 2021) — the whole thing

Bevy 0.18
 — renderer, ECS-driven main loop, custom WGSL shaders (procedural planets, sun corona, nebulae, starfield)

hecs
 — the simulation's own ECS (separate from Bevy's, deliberately)

egui
 (via 
bevy_egui
) — every inspector panel

bevy_hanabi
 — GPU particle trails and explosions

sqlx
 + SQLite — persistence, bundled so there's no runtime dependency

axum
 + tokio — the headless HTTP/WebSocket harness

Contributing

Contributions are welcome — see 
CONTRIBUTING.md
 for dev
setup, the conventions that keep the codebase clean, and a list of
concrete directions if you want to take this somewhere real.

The fastest sanity check before any PR:

make verify   
#
 build + ~250 tests + clippy, strict

License

MIT
 © 2026 Kalcode (David Clausen). Do whatever you like with it.

Built for fun in Rust & Bevy · By Kalcode & Claude · Made with ❤️ in Illinois
