Bluetooth in your Proxmox Linux VMs. Finally.

TL;DR:
 Bluetooth passthrough to a Proxmox VM fails for Intel onboard chips
(BE200, AX210, AX211 - by hardware design, no setting fixes it) and is unreliable on
gaming distros like ChimeraOS and Bazzite. This tool shares the host's Bluetooth with
the VM over the network instead - two commands, works with any chip Linux supports,
survives reboots. Controllers, headphones, and Home Assistant sensors all work.

Pair your Xbox / PlayStation controller, headphones, or sensors 
inside
 your gaming VM
(ChimeraOS, Bazzite, Home Assistant, plain Linux) - even with Bluetooth chips that
"can't be passed through".

Sound familiar?

You built a gaming VM on Proxmox. Everything works... except Bluetooth.

Your controller just blinks, blinks, blinks, and gives up.

You bought an Intel BE200 / AX210 card because a forum said so. Still nothing.

You tried 
qm set ... -usb
, saw the device in the VM, and it still refused to work.

Every thread ends with someone saying 
"just use a USB cable"
.

It's not your fault, and your hardware is not broken.

Intel built their Bluetooth chips so that only the machine that boots them can drive them.
The moment Proxmox hands the chip to a VM, it wipes itself blank. No setting fixes this.
It is physically how the chip works.

First: try the simple thing

Plain USB passthrough works for plenty of setups - a normal dongle into a normal
Linux distro (Debian, Ubuntu) often just works:

qm 
set
 
<
vmid
>
 -usb0 host=
<
vendor:product
>

If that gives you working Bluetooth in your VM, stop reading - you don't need this
project. This exists for when it doesn't work: 
Intel onboard chips
 (BE200/AX2xx -
never work, by design), 
gaming distros
 (ChimeraOS/Bazzite kernels + quirky chip
firmware), trimmed cloud kernels, and dongles that wedge after a few VM restarts.

The fix: don't hand over the chip. Share it.

The chip stays on your Proxmox host, where it works. A tiny bridge streams it into the VM
over the local network. Your VM sees a completely normal Bluetooth adapter. Latency is
lower than the controller's own radio delay - you will never feel it.

Two commands. That's all.

On the 
Proxmox host
:

curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucid-fabrics/proxmox-bluetooth/main/install.sh 
|
 sudo bash

You'll see something like this:

==> Bluetooth adapters on this machine:
    [0] hci0 - 70:08:10:A4:F1:45 (USB)
==> All adapters healthy. You are good to go.
==> Bluetooth (hci0) is now shared on 192.168.1.3:9700.

  Now run this INSIDE your VM:

    curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucid-fabrics/proxmox-bluetooth/main/install.sh | sudo bash -s -- 192.168.1.3

What to do:
 copy that last line exactly (your IP will be different) and run it inside the VM.

Inside the VM, you'll see:

==> Done. This VM now has working Bluetooth. Go pair your controller.

What to do:
 open Bluetooth settings in the VM and pair like normal. That's it.

Both sides auto-start at boot and auto-reconnect. Set it up once, forget it exists.

Does my chip work?

If your Proxmox host can see it, your VM can have it. Run this on the host:

curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucid-fabrics/proxmox-bluetooth/main/install.sh 
|
 sudo bash -s -- --check

If it's healthy, you'll see:

==> Bluetooth adapters on this machine:
    [0] hci0 - 70:08:10:A4:F1:45 (USB)
==> All adapters healthy. You are good to go.

What to do:
 nothing - run the install command above.

If your chip is the stuck-Intel-chip case, you'll see:

!! hci0 is NOT responding (stuck in bootloader).
   Fix: shut down, flip the power supply switch OFF for 15 seconds, boot.
   A reboot or the front power button is NOT enough. See README.

What to do:
 exactly what it says. This looks extreme but it's the one thing that
actually works - see the FAQ below for why.

Confirmed by real people (add yours with a PR):

Hardware

Status

Intel BE200

✅ Tested - this repo exists because of it

Intel AX200 / AX210 / AX211

✅ Same family, same behavior

MediaTek MT7921 / MT7922

✅ Standard Linux support

Generic CSR / Realtek USB dongles

✅ Anything your host's Linux drives

UGREEN "BT 6.0" dongles (Barrot chip)

❌ Broken firmware on Linux, bridge or not. Avoid.

FAQ, in human words

Will my controller lag?

No. The bridge adds well under a millisecond on the same machine. Bluetooth itself is slower.

Does it work for headphones, keyboards, Home Assistant sensors?

Yes - the bridge is protocol-transparent (it forwards raw Bluetooth traffic, it doesn't
understand or filter it). Anything that works on a normal Linux Bluetooth adapter works:
controllers, audio, HID, BLE sensors for Home Assistant.

Can I pair several devices at once?

Yes. It behaves exactly like a normal adapter in the VM - two controllers plus headphones
is fine. The one-at-a-time limit is about VMs (one VM owns the chip), not devices.

Do I need to buy anything?

No. The card you already have works. Even the old one you replaced probably worked.

My whole VM "died" - black screen, no network (ChimeraOS / Bazzite).

It didn't die - it went to sleep. Gaming distros auto-suspend after idle like a
Steam Deck, and a VM with GPU passthrough never wakes from that. Turn suspend off
for good inside the VM:

sudo systemctl mask sleep.target suspend.target hibernate.target hybrid-sleep.target

My controller pairs but nothing responds in Steam (ChimeraOS / Bazzite).

Known quirk in their input layer, not in Bluetooth: run

sudo systemctl restart inputplumber
, then turn the controller off and on. Fixed.

My Intel card looks completely dead. No adapter, scary log lines.

It is stuck in its blank boot state. Shut the machine down and flip the 
power supply
switch off for 15 seconds
, then boot. A reboot is not enough. The front power button is
not enough. This one trick cost us a full day - you're welcome.

I have more than one Bluetooth chip on the host.

--check
 lists every adapter it finds (
hci0
, 
hci1
, ...) with its MAC address so you
can tell them apart, and if it finds more than one it won't guess - it'll ask you to pick.
Share a specific one with 
./install.sh --adapter 1
. Bridging two chips into two different
VMs 
at the same time
 isn't supported yet (one install per host today) - open an issue if
you need it, it's a small change.

My VM died / I rebuilt it / I want Bluetooth in a different VM.

Just run the client one-liner in the new VM - the host serves whichever VM connects
(one at a time). Nothing to clean up after a dead VM. If the old VM is still running,
stop its client first (
--uninstall
 there). Only footnote: pairings live inside the
guest, so pair your devices once in the new VM.

Does it survive ChimeraOS / Bazzite OS updates?

Yes. Those distros replace the system image on update but keep 
/etc
 and 
/var
 - which
is exactly where this installs. Your bridge and pairings come back on their own.

Does the host lose its own Bluetooth?

Yes, while sharing. A server in a closet rarely misses it. Need it back for a moment?

--pause
 returns the chip to the host, 
--resume
 hands it back to the VM (which
reconnects by itself). 
--uninstall
 removes everything for good.

Is this secure?

The bridge speaks on one LAN port (9700, bound to the host's IP) with no authentication -
the first machine to connect gets the chip. On a home LAN behind your router that's
usually fine. If it worries you, firewall port 9700 so only your VM's IP can reach it.

Poor range? Devices only pair up close?

That's antennas, not the bridge. M.2 cards need their two little antenna cables connected;
a bare card inside a metal case has almost no reach. USB dongles: a front port or a short
extension beats the back-panel ports next to all your other cables.

What about Windows VMs?

The bridge is for Linux guests (it relies on Linux's Bluetooth stack). Windows VMs
usually don't have this problem: passing a USB dongle straight through with

qm set <vmid> -usb0 host=<id>
 just works there. This tool exists because Linux
guests choke where Windows shrugs.

What about LXC containers?

Containers share the host's kernel, so they don't need this bridge - you can hand the
host's Bluetooth to an LXC directly (bind the device / cgroup allow). This tool is for
real VMs, where the guest runs its own kernel.

Is this Proxmox only?

No - any Linux host with KVM VMs (or even two separate machines). Proxmox is just where
it hurts the most.

For the curious: what's actually happening

Intel CNVi Bluetooth (BE200/AX2xx) requires the host's 
btusb
/
btintel
 driver to load
its firmware at boot. Any passthrough handoff (USB redirect, vfio, driver unbind) resets
the chip to its ROM bootloader, and the guest can never complete the firmware handshake.

The bridge is 
btproxy
 from the official BlueZ source tree (never shipped in distro
packages). On the host it opens the adapter in HCI user-channel mode and serves raw HCI
over TCP. In the guest it creates a virtual controller via 
hci_vhci
 and pipes the
stream into it. BlueZ in the guest neither knows nor cares.

Systemd units: 
btproxy-server.service
 (host, replaces 
bluetooth.service
) and

btproxy-client.service
 (guest, ordered before 
bluetooth.service
 via drop-in).

The bundled binary is built from bluez 5.66 
tools/btproxy
 with plain 
-O2

(the default build injects ASAN/UBSAN debug deps). It needs only glibc. See 
build.sh
.

Support this project

This fix cost a full day of head-scratching, three "dead" reboots, and one very real walk
to the power supply switch - so nobody else has to lose that day. Tools like this stay free
and maintained for exactly one reason: people who were helped choose to help the next person
in line. If that's you right now, thank you. It genuinely keeps this alive.

Uninstall

Same script, 
--uninstall
, on whichever machine you want to restore.

License

MIT
