Authors With DRM-Free Books

Andrew Oliver

Means and Motive

Buy on Amazon
Buy on B&N

A murder in the western Maine foothills has the local police chief searching high and low for the perpetrator.  Can he solve the case with the state Major Crimes Unit breathing down his neck?  Will the fearsome weather block the investigation before it reaches fruition?  And will any of this distract the chief from his broken heart?

Read a Sample Chapter:

Download EPub
 (For Apple, Send to Kindle, and more)

Download PDF
 (For any device)

Timothy Zahn

The Icarus Needle

Buy on Baen

Ten thousand years ago, a mysterious people known as the Icari vanished from the Spiral, leaving behind a network of portals that can instantaneously transport passengers hundreds or thousands of light-years across the stars.

Gregory Roarke and his Kadolian partner Selene have been tasked with seeking out these alien artifacts and bringing them under the control of the Icarus Group. But the Group’s leadership has changed, and Roarke soon finds himself at serious odds with the new director’s plans.

The result: a counter-plan that lands Roarke and Selene on a distant world with a broken city, a dozen portals, and a group of aliens called the Ammei who dream of using the portals to bring back their own glory days.

But their ambitions will be costly, and not just for themselves. Roarke and Selene must put together the scattered clues and solve the riddle of the Ammei and their plans, while at the same time fending off the Patth and their bid to claim the city and portals for themselves.

Because the Icari are gone . . . aren’t they?

Kacey Ezell

Blood on the Sand

Buy on Baen

Bellatrix Aelys turned her back on the family that betrayed her and chose to forge her own destiny alongside the dangerous men she had accidentally bound. Now free, Romik, Vil, and Daen make the uneasy choice to continue to work with Aelys as her protectors and business partners. But when Aelys faced off against her family, she didn’t eliminate every threat, and now mysterious forces are moving against her once more. Fearing for her safety and that of her men, Aelys agrees to do a simple task for her old teacher: escort some old “friends” to Zandrine, one of the fabled cities located in the south of the empire.

Only, not everything is as it seems. Zandrine is a city built on secrets and blood and pain. Aelys and her protectors will have to face the demons of the past and the dark schemes of the present, all while trying to figure out who they are to one another and how the four of them— warrior, sorceress, forester, and thief—can meld their strengths to keep each other alive.

Can Aelys, Romik, Vil, and Daen make the necessary hard choices that will forge them into a team capable of surviving these new challenges? Or will the pain of the past and the danger of the present destroy them one by one?

More Authors with DRM-Free Books

This is just a partial list of authors with DRM-free books.  To find more:

On Amazon
, look for books that offer EPUB and PDF downloads.

On TOR
, all books are DRM-Free, 
for over a decade
.

On Baen
, look for books that say, 
this title is sold without DRM
.

Out-of-copyright DRM-Free Books

Project Gutenberg and Standard Ebooks are two sites that provide old, out-of-copyright books in DRM-Free formats:

Project Gutenberg

Standard Ebooks
