FREE TOOL
Mermaid Live Editor
Draw diagrams here - connect GitHub when you want Moxie to generate them from your repo.
Live preview, instant SVG/PNG export, and shareable links in your browser. When you connect a repository, Moxie generates architecture diagrams from source and refreshes them on every merge.
LIVE EDITOR
Flowchart
Sequence
ER
Class
Mindmap
Gantt
Custom
 Reset
 
Share link
Source
 
Copy
Snippets:
→ Arrow
→|label|
subgraph
sequence
class rel
flowchart LR
    A[Start] --> B{Decision}
    B -->|Yes| C[Process]
    B -->|No| D[Alternative]
    C --> E[End]
    D --> E
Preview
 
Expand
−
150
%
+
reset
 
Copy SVG
 SVG
 PNG
Start typing to render a diagram.
Diagrams render entirely in your browser. Nothing is sent to any server.
Tip: Edit the left side and the preview updates live. Use the snippet buttons or load an example. Share the URL to collaborate.
Tired of manually maintaining diagrams for your codebase?
 
Export free above · connect a repo when you want Moxie to keep it accurate
See how Moxie keeps docs current
Start 14-day trial
Live preview
See every change rendered instantly. No save button, no reloads.
Export anywhere
Download clean SVG or high-resolution PNG with one click. Perfect for docs, slides, and wikis.
Shareable links
Your diagram lives in the URL. Send the link and others see exactly what you built.
Private by design
Everything runs in your browser. Diagrams never leave your device.
Common Mermaid use cases
Architecture & system design
Flowcharts and C4-style diagrams that explain how services connect.
API & data flows
Sequence diagrams for request lifecycles and integration points.
Data models & schemas
ER diagrams and class diagrams for your domain model and database.
Roadmaps & timelines
Gantt charts and mindmaps for planning and onboarding.
Frequently asked questions
Is this Mermaid editor completely free?
Yes. Use it as much as you want. No sign up, no limits, no watermarks.
Do I need an account or to install anything?
No. Open the page and start editing. It works on desktop and modern mobile browsers.
Which Mermaid diagram types are supported?
All core types: flowchart, sequenceDiagram, classDiagram, erDiagram, gantt, mindmap, pie, state, gitGraph, and more. The editor uses the latest Mermaid renderer.
Can I use diagrams I make here in my own documentation?
Absolutely. Export SVG or PNG and drop them into READMEs, Notion, Confluence, Google Docs, or any Markdown file.
How do shareable links work?
The entire diagram is encoded in the URL query parameter. Bookmark it, email it, or paste it anywhere. No server storage involved.
How is this different from mermaid.live?
This editor is lightweight, focused, and built by the Moxie Docs team. It emphasizes fast exports, clean URLs, and privacy with zero tracking on the tool itself. Great when you want something simple and embeddable in a dev workflow.
For teams that document code
Tired of manually maintaining diagrams for your codebase?
Draw and export diagrams here. Connect GitHub when you want Moxie to generate architecture diagrams and searchable docs from your repository and refresh them on every merge.
See how Moxie keeps docs current
Start 14-day trial
Export free above · connect a repo when you want Moxie to keep it accurate
