Swift CLI

treedocs

v0.2.0

macOS 13+

Understand any codebase faster with a documented 
tree
 for every file and folder.

GitHub Repository

Package Documentation

Star

treedocs demo video

Readable Tree Output

Just run 
treedocs
 to see the repository at a glance. Current files render green, while stale or invalid entries render red so problems stand out immediately.

✅ The treedocs below is up to date with the filesystem.

.
├── 
README.md
  User-facing overview, installation, and command usage documentation.
├── 
Sources/
  Swift package source code for the treedocs executable.
│   └── 
treedocs/
  Main treedocs executable target.
│       ├── 
Commands/
  ArgumentParser command implementations for treedocs subcommands.
│       └── 
Core/
  Core services for loading, scanning, rendering, and updating treedocs data.
├── 
site/
  Static files deployed to the project GitHub Pages site.
│   ├── 
index.html
  Landing page for the treedocs GitHub Pages site.
│   └── 
styles.css
  Stylesheet for the treedocs GitHub Pages landing page.
└── 
old-file.swift
  Stale entry: no matching path exists on disk.

Acclimate Faster

Give new teammates, future you, and coding agents the concise context they need to understand complex repositories so that they don't need to wander aimlessly.

Stay Current

Keep documentation from going stale with automatic drift checks that warn or fail. You can even install a Git pre-commit hook so that you never commit undocumented changes.

Review With Context

Store simple, human-readable, version-controlled summaries in 
treedocs.yaml
 so reviews are easier and agents spend fewer tokens rediscovering project structure.

Installation

treedocs
 currently supports macOS 13 and newer. Version 0.2.0 is source-build only, so installing through Homebrew, Mint, or mise requires a Swift 6-capable build environment, usually Xcode 16+.

mise

MISE_EXPERIMENTAL=true mise use -g spm:DandyLyons/treedocs@0.2.0

mise
 uses its Swift Package Manager backend. treedocs does not currently publish artifact bundles, so mise builds from source. The mise 
spm:
 backend is currently experimental, so set 
MISE_EXPERIMENTAL=true
 when installing.

Homebrew

brew install DandyLyons/tap/treedocs

The 
Homebrew
 formula builds treedocs from source through the DandyLyons tap.

Mint

mint install DandyLyons/treedocs@0.2.0
mint run DandyLyons/treedocs@0.2.0 --help

Mint
 builds the Swift executable package from the tagged GitHub source.

Quick Start

treedocs init      # Create a treedocs.yaml file
treedocs sync      # Synchronize treedocs.yaml with your current folder structure and check for errors.
treedocs show .    # Show the documented tree
treedocs check     # Check for errors in treedocs.yaml.
treedocs explore . # Progressive disclosure exploration of the codebase. Perfect for agent exploration.

The 
treedocs.yaml
 Schema

treedocs.yaml
 is a version-controlled map of your repository. It mirrors your file tree and stores a human-readable YAML description for every file and folder. This same description can be parsed and displayed with 
treedocs
' rich tooling. The file format is defined by a 
canonical JSON Schema
, which means editors, CI tools, and AI agents can all parse, validate, and understand the same structure.

Keeping docs up to date is an ongoing task, but 
treedocs
 makes it easy! Running 
treedocs sync
 updates your 
treedocs.yaml
 file, adding new paths and removing ghost paths. All that's left to do is add short descriptions. It's easy to update descriptions with 
treedocs update
. 

Or simply ask an agent to fill in your 
treedocs.yaml
 file for you. Agents are extremely good at filling in descriptions and everything can be validated with 
treedocs check
.
