// PLAYWRIGHT PR AGENTS --
Automatically fix failing Playwright scripts
Keep the browser automations you already run. When one fails, Libretto investigates the live page and opens a GitHub pull request with a proposed code fix.
Get started
or
 
TALK TO A DEV
Open
Libretto autofix for Playwright failure
libretto-agent
 
wants to merge 1 commit into
 
main
workflows/book-appointment.ts
- await page.locator('input[name="username"]').fill(login);
+ await page.locator('input[name="login"]').fill(login);
The sign-in field is
 
name="login"
, confirmed by inspecting the live page.
// ONE FAILURE CALL --
Keep your scripts. Add the repair loop.
Your existing Playwright script runs normally. The PR agent starts only after a failure, when it can investigate what changed and propose a fix.
01
Keep your existing Playwright scripts
Add Libretto at the failure boundary without changing your fixtures, retries, logging, or deployment.
02
Use any browser provider
Run locally, in your own infrastructure, or with a hosted browser provider. The agent uses the live page you already created.
03
Bring your own model keys
Choose your LLM provider and keep its API key in your own environment.
04
Free to use
Libretto does not charge for the PR agent. Your model and browser providers may still charge for their usage.
// FAQ --
Frequently asked questions
What happens to the workflow after a failure?
The PR agent focuses on diagnosing the failure and proposing a code fix for future runs. Your existing catch, retry, fallback, and error handling remain responsible for the current run, while the agent opens a pull request when it finds a fix.
Do I need to use the Libretto runtime?
No. Add libretto-playwright-debugger to an existing Playwright project, initialize the debugger once, and call debugFailure() from the failure path. Your current runtime, browser provider, deployment, and workflow structure stay in place.
Does it work with Selenium or Puppeteer?
Not yet. The current package accepts a Playwright Page, so the failed automation must run through Playwright. Selenium and Puppeteer would require separate adapters.
Does it work with any browser or cloud browser provider?
Yes. The PR agent works with local, self-hosted, and hosted browsers as long as your automation has a live Playwright Page and keeps it open while debugFailure() runs. You do not need to use Libretto Cloud for the browser session.
Is the PR agent free?
Libretto does not charge for the PR agent. You bring your own model provider API key and browser infrastructure, so your model or browser provider may still charge for their usage.
Is it open source?
Yes. The Playwright debugger package is open source under the MIT license in the
 
Libretto repository
.
