Apple Intelligence and Siri

Introducing Siri AI.
Truly helpful. Truly yours.

New Apple Intelligence features 
coming this fall.
Siri AI coming in English 
later this year.

Introducing the next generation of Apple Intelligence and Siri. Truly helpful AI that’s centered around you and your needs. Integrated into your apps, grounded in your context, and private at every step. Coming later this year.

New reimagined Siri

Siri AI

Apple Intelligence in apps

Visual Intelligence

Photo editing

Write with Siri

												New Siri AI. An even more capable AI assistant with expanded intelligence to be more helpful every day.
1

Type or talk naturally with Siri AI to find what you need and get more done.

												Next-generation Apple Intelligence enhances the apps you use most — like Photos, Messages, and Safari.
2

												Search and take action with Visual Intelligence, now on even more devices — iPad, Mac, and Apple Vision Pro.
3

												Transform your photos with easy-to-use AI editing tools like Spatial Reframing, Extend, and Clean Up.

Write with Siri virtually anywhere you type — compose, edit, and send messages.

Just ask Siri.

Powered by Apple Intelligence, Siri AI is your conversational AI assistant with entirely new capabilities. Ask open-ended questions, brainstorm ideas for work or creative projects, and engage in natural, back-and-forth conversations.

Siri understands your personal context.

Siri AI can find relevant answers to what you’re looking for just by asking. Search for a photo from years ago, easily locate an email buried in your inbox, or pull up the details from a note you saved.

Take action in more apps.

Siri AI can take actions in apps like Messages, Music, Reminders, and more based on what you’re doing in the moment. Quickly edit a message you just sent or add a song you hear in the car to your workout playlist.

Tap into broad world knowledge.

Ask about virtually any topic that’s on your mind, from important facts to recipes and travel recommendations. Siri AI can reference information online to give you detailed, up-to-date insights.

Introducing the Siri app.

A dedicated app brings together all your conversations in one place, so you can ask a question on your iPhone and pick up where you left off on your iPad. You can also pin conversations for easy access or start a new one.

Customize how Siri sounds.

Pick a voice, then customize expressivity and pace until it clicks for you.
4

Siri AI in CarPlay.

On the road, ask Siri which trailhead your friend suggested and get the answer instantly. Siri in CarPlay keeps you informed without taking your hands off the wheel.
5

Siri mode in Camera.

Siri mode and Visual Intelligence let you search, ask questions, and take action based on what’s around you with just a tap.

New smart actions.

Visual Intelligence makes it easy to split the bill with friends when you get the check, get nutritional information on a dish in front of you, quickly import a card to Apple Wallet, and more.

Ask Siri about what’s in front of you.

Get information, take action, and search visually using the content on your screen.

Visual Intelligence with Siri on Mac.

Take a screenshot of what’s on your display, like an image or a PDF, and Visual Intelligence lets you search and take action.

Visual Intelligence with Siri on iPad.

Ask Siri AI about virtually anything on your display with a screenshot. Just tap the item with your finger or circle it with Apple Pencil to find out more.

Visual Intelligence with Siri on Apple Vision Pro.

Simply look at something to learn more about it. You can ask Siri AI about text, images, and even real-world objects as you see them in the moment.

Next-level intelligent photo editing.

Reframe a photo after it’s been taken with Spatial Reframing. Expand your shots with the Extend tool. And remove even larger objects with the enhanced Clean Up tool.

Reframe your photo even after it’s taken.

Move the viewpoint, adjust the angle, or zoom in as if you were repositioning the camera in the moment with Spatial Reframing.

Express more with Image Playground.

Create unique, high-quality images in just about any style, including photorealistic. Modify and transform your images with just a description or using touch for endless possibilities.

Image Wand.

Transform rough sketches into images in virtually any style right in Notes.

Available now

Write with Siri virtually anywhere you type.

Siri AI can now generate a draft from scratch or provide feedback on what you’ve written. Just describe what you need in your own words. And in Messages and Mail, Siri AI can match your writing style, punctuation, and tone.

Get things done with Suggestions.

Messages and Mail offer suggestions to help you take quick actions based on context from your conversation — add a calendar event or search for a photo with just a tap.

Coming in English

Proofread as you type.

Apple Intelligence automatically checks your grammar and spelling and offers suggestions virtually anywhere you type.

Get relevant information while on a call.

Call Context can proactively surface relevant information from across apps when you’re calling a business — like a confirmation code from Mail when you call an airline.

Coming in English

Communicate across languages.

Turn on Live Translation to automatically translate texts in Messages, display live translated captions in FaceTime, and get spoken translations for calls in the Phone app and conversations on your AirPods.

Available now

Safari works smarter for you.

Now your tabs can be automatically grouped into topics, so related pages are easier to find. Safari Notify Me monitors pages for changes — for example, a price change or restock — and alerts you when it’s time to act. And you can create an extension that personalizes website content and formatting or automates common Safari actions.

Fix passwords with a tap.

The Passwords app alerts you to weak or compromised passwords and can update them on your behalf without the hassle.

Describe a shortcut.

Automate daily tasks with a simple description. Just describe what you need, and Shortcuts creates an automation that connects actions across apps.

Improved accuracy in Dictation.

A powerful new on-device model allows Dictation to understand you even better as you speak.
6

Coming in English

Describe a calendar event.

Add and edit events on your calendar with just a description. Change a lunch meeting to a coffee chat and the Calendar app will adjust the details.

Accessibility.

VoiceOver describes your physical surroundings and onscreen content in richer detail. Magnifier zooms in so you can ask about what’s in frame. Accessibility Reader cleans up text for easier reading. Voice Control is more flexible so you can interact with apps in your own words with less to memorize.

Smarter Home.

Apple Intelligence in the Home app unlocks new capabilities, like combining related activity notifications,
7
 describing what happened in a selection of HomeKit Secure Video footage before you watch,
8
 and using AI to search for a clip based on what happened.
9

Genmoji.

Create high-quality Genmoji to match the moment.

Workout Buddy.

Get deeper insights and more data-rich motivation with enhancements in Workout Buddy. Train even without your iPhone nearby. And Workout Buddy is now available in Spanish.
10

Great powers come with great privacy.

Apple Intelligence is designed to protect your privacy at every step. It’s integrated into the core of your iPhone, iPad, and Mac through on-device processing. So it’s aware of your personal information without collecting your personal information. And with groundbreaking Private Cloud Compute, Apple Intelligence can draw on larger server-based models, running on Apple silicon, to handle more complex requests for you while protecting your privacy.

Private Cloud Compute

Your data is never stored

Used only for your requests

Verifiable privacy promise

iPhone

iPad

Laptops

Desktops

iPhone 17 Pro

iPhone 17 Pro

Innovative design for ultimate
performance and battery life.

Learn more

Buy

iPhone Air

iPhone Air

The thinnest iPhone ever.
With the power of pro inside.

Learn more

Buy

iPhone 17

iPhone 17

Even more delightful.
Even more durable.

Learn more

Buy

iPhone 17e

iPhone 17e

Feature stacked.
Value packed.

Learn more

Buy

iPhone 16

iPhone 16

Amazing performance.
Durable design.

Learn more

Buy

iPad Pro

iPad Pro

The ultimate iPad experience with the most advanced technology.

Learn more

Buy

iPad Air

iPad Air

Serious performance in a
thin and light design.

Learn more

Buy

iPad mini

iPad mini

The full iPad experience in
an ultraportable design.

Learn more

Buy

MacBook Neo

MacBook Neo

A18 Pro chip

The magic of Mac at a surprising price.

Learn more

Buy

MacBook Air 13” and 15”

MacBook Air 13” and 15”

M5 chip

Thin. Fast. Powerful and portable.

Learn more

Buy

MacBook Pro 14” and 16”

MacBook Pro 14” and 16”

M5, M5 Pro, or M5 Max chip

The most advanced Mac laptops for
demanding tasks.

Learn more

Buy

iMac

iMac

M4 chip

An all‑in‑one desktop for
creativity and productivity.

Learn more

Buy

Mac mini

Mac mini

M4 or M4 Pro chip

The mini-est, most
affordable Mac desktop.

Learn more

Buy

Mac Studio

Mac Studio

M4 Max or M3 Ultra chip

Powerful performance and
connectivity for pros.

Learn more

Buy

Apple Intelligence is compatible with these devices.

iPhone 17 Pro Max (A19 Pro)

iPhone 17 Pro (A19 Pro)

iPhone Air (A19 Pro)

iPhone 17 (A19)

iPhone 17e (A19)

iPhone 16 Pro Max (A18 Pro)

iPhone 16 Pro (A18 Pro)

iPhone 16 Plus (A18)

iPhone 16 (A18)

iPhone 16e (A18)

iPhone 15 Pro Max (A17 Pro)

iPhone 15 Pro (A17 Pro)

iPad Pro (M1 and later)

iPad Air (M1 and later)

iPad mini (A17 Pro)

Apple Vision Pro (M2 and later)

MacBook Neo (A18 Pro)

MacBook Air (M1 and later)

MacBook Pro (M1 and later)

iMac (M1 and later)

Mac mini (M1 and later)

Mac Studio (M1 Max and later)

Mac Pro (M2 Ultra)

New possibilities for your favorite apps.

The Foundation Models framework, along with App Intents, APIs, and frameworks, is built with privacy at the center. Any app can tap into the on-device models that power Apple Intelligence, and the features you build work offline. And it’s all at no cost per request. App developers can easily integrate features like Siri, Writing Tools, and Image Playground.

Learn more about developing for Apple Intelligence
