Request a
                    Demo

Research

Situational Awareness and the Impending Market Volatility

By Wojciech Gryc  ·  August 2, 2026  ·  6 min read

There are thousands of articles and opinion pieces on Situational Awareness: what happened,
                    what went wrong, and so on. We're less interested in exploring that here as you can find lots
                    of deep dives and many more to come, we're sure.

Contrary to what others say, we believe that Situational Awareness struggled this past week because
                    of forces pushing prices down, but it also benefited from those same forces when its asset
                    prices were skyrocketing in value over the past ~18 months. Situational Awareness is more of a
                    canary-in-the-coal-mine situation than a divergence from a positive trendline. SA's
                    rise and fall shows that the AI-related stock market is over-leveraged and over-concentrated, and
                    will most likely lead to significant volatility in the coming months. Call it the KOSPIfication of
                    the NASDAQ.

Here, we'll explore why Citadel buying SA's publicly traded assets is neither bullish nor
                    bearish, and why the same market forces (excitement, leverage, overconfidence) not only drove
                    SA's asset prices down this past month, but also were the reason for them going up. This is all
                    in the context of a 
reflexive
 trend, and one aligned with our concerns around US
                    household, retail, and hedge fund leverage
[1]
—the
                    deleveraging of which, and the fear associated with loss of paper wealth, would lead to a
                    significant negative feedback loop for AI assets.

Citadel's purchase is not a bullish move

Some writers have argued that Citadel's purchase not only saved the market, but signals
                    Citadel's own confidence in the AI trade. This is incorrect. Citadel might be using this to
                    cover shorts, sell put options, or resell the securities directly to retail traders, given its
                    market-making relationships with firms like Robinhood. Given Citadel's size and diversity of
                    business offerings, from running funds through to market making, it could very well be a
                    combination of these.

A key benefit of the purchase was that it was done as a block purchase; SA did not submit a set of
                    sell orders via its broker to liquidate itself, unlike the rumor that SA was selling off Intel
                    after its earnings
[2]
. The block trade serves to stem a
                    further price shock, and could even allow Citadel and SA to avoid pricing individual positions or
                    companies.

For all we know, it might have been a form of short covering for Citadel, or maybe arresting a
                    decline in some of its or its clients' holdings… Maybe a strategy to manage price
                    declines not unlike what we saw in China about two weeks ago
[3]
.

Our goal is not to speculate on Citadel's objectives, but rather to simply say there are many
                    interpretations that do not signal this as a positive long-term view on AI stocks held by SA.

The forces that destroyed SA were also what generated its 4×+
                    return

While SA blamed short sellers betting against its own positions
[4]
 (and thus Citadel could be helping with short covering, as per
                    above!), these same forces are likely what propelled SA's skyrocketing returns in the first
                    place.

Figure 1: Cumulative return of an anonymized thematic ETF and its own price impact on
                        its holdings. 
[original]

Philippe van der Beck (from Harvard Business School), Jean-Philippe Bouchaud (from Capital Fund
                    Management, CFM), and Dario Villamaina (from CFM) explored how thematic ETFs can benefit from
                    their own success by driving the price of their assets up
[5]
. The details of the paper are outside the scope of this note,
                    but there are a few forces at play. For example, a successful ETF is likely to get more
                    investors buying its shares, and these influxes of cash allow the ETF's portfolio managers to double down on their
                    positions. This can lead to a positive feedback loop around the ETF's assets, thus driving up
                    the prices of earlier purchases and leading to a net gain on the investments. This is particularly
                    true for illiquid stocks and concentrated industries (both of which SA was focusing on), as
                    there are fewer shares to go around. 
Figure 1
 shows one of the funds they investigated, whose path of price increases and asset growth
  looks strikingly like SA's—up about 400%, then a significant decline.

While SA was a hedge fund, the fact that it avoided the use of actual hedging strategies and its
                    high correlation with other public ETFs (which also avoid hedging strategies) like the iShares
                    Semiconductor ETF (SOXX) mean it likely acted more like a public ETF than a 
hedge

                    fund.

In short: our argument here is that regardless of whether there was a targeted short seller
                    campaign against SA, SA exhibited the sort of growth and decline that you would expect from an
                    over-leveraged and unhedged index tracking a megatrend. It was a beneficiary and victim of its own
                    success, and there are likely other such risks lurking in the public equities AI market
                    today.

Volatility in over-extended and over-concentrated
                    markets

This points to another phenomenon aligned with what van der Beck et al. explored
                    above—George Soros' theory of reflexivity
[6]
. Soros argued that investor expectations and perceptions can
                    become so prevalent and powerful that they begin impacting the actual fundamentals of the
                    underlying asset classes those investors buy. The liquidity inflows in the ETF example above are a
                    simple version of this. Circular AI investments
[7]
, wealthy investors leveraging their wealth to get further
                    profits from an already stretched stock market, and CEOs who believe the AI trade can only benefit
                    their companies if they invest more and further, are all examples of reflexivity in
                    action—these beliefs lead to investments, capital expenditures, and other decisions that
                    drive asset prices up, sometimes in ways that maintain P/E ratios or other warning signs asset
                    managers tend to monitor
[8]
.

Like van der Beck et al., Soros argued that such forces help propel 
positive
 price
                    movements, but also end up making price declines more violent. This should translate to
                    significant volatility in price movements, both on the way up and down.

We saw this in action over the past week, when the KOSPI fell 17.8% from an open of 6,806.27 on
                    Monday to 5,593.56 on Thursday end-of-day, before recovering 17.9% on Friday, all while declining
                    3.1% over the week
[9]
. Looking back over the past
                    year, as in 
Figure 2
, you'll see that the KOSPI's
                    daily price movements from when it opens in the morning have become 
significantly
 more
                    volatile.

KOSPI daily volatility has grown over time

Absolute % gain or loss, open to close

Daily
                                volatility
30-day
                                moving average

Source: Emerging Trajectories

Figure 2: Absolute volatility of the KOSPI index—the absolute % gain or loss by
                        day, from open to close. The line shows the 30-day moving average.

We would add another sociological component to this: the vast majority of wealth growth today is
                    from stock markets
[10]
. Thinking like a normal human
                    being: if your wealth is tied to the stock market and the stock market starts dropping in value,
                    you'll likely want to protect your assets by selling those shares. Large downward stock
                    movements can exacerbate selloffs when panicked savers decide to move money to safer assets.

All-in, whether it's leverage, fear of wealth loss, or actual 
reflexivity
, the
                    volatility of this past week—and the demise of SA—are all related and we expect them
                    to continue as AI-related stocks, bonds, and other assets appreciate so much in value.

What this means for the future

Our goal today is not to criticize Situational Awareness—raising a billion-dollar hedge fund
                    is 
very
 hard, and scaling it to $10 billion+ AUM is laudable. There are many
                    professionally managed funds that are liquidated despite their managers' best efforts.

What concerns us is the lack of a “bigger picture” discussion around Situational
                    Awareness; Citadel buying up SA's assets is certainly not the whole story. The bigger picture
                    is that markets are over-leveraged, over-concentrated, and potentially shifting from euphoria to
                    fear on a whim.

This all happened in the same week that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) held
                    interest rates at 3.5% to 3.75% and led to significant market concern around the Federal
                    Reserve's future decision-making
[11]
, and news
                    came out of China's success in building home-grown chipmaking tools
[12]
, all of which could move these markets on their own.

With Situational Awareness, we're seeing AI-related asset prices reinforcing themselves on the
                    way up and on the way down. As such, we're likely to see more volatility in US markets, and
                    more days where a deleveraging of a fund or ETF takes place. Regardless of
                    where we end up relative to Friday, expect more and bigger up days and more and bigger down
                    days.

Enjoyed this post? Subscribe for updates

Join hundreds of AI, geopolitics, and economics experts. We'll send 1–2
                emails per week, and we will never share your e-mail with anyone.

Thank you!

You're on the list.

Please try again. Something went wrong.

No spam, unsubscribe anytime.

References and Footnotes

Emerging Trajectories; 
US Households: Stock Ownership, Leverage, and Systemic Risk

Financial Times; 
How Leopold Aschenbrenner, the ‘golden child’ of the AI trade, was
                        laid low

Bloomberg; 
China’s National Team Steps in to Provide a ‘Tech
                        Stock Put’

WSJ; 
Situational Awareness down 67% in July in AI stock rout

Arxiv; 
Ponzi
                        Funds

George Soros; 
The Alchemy of Finance

Emerging Trajectories; 
Commodification of Intelligence: Good, Bad, and Ugly Circular
                        AI Deals

BCA; 
Earnings Bubbles Are Still Bubbles

The KOSPI was down overall even though its recovery was higher on Friday because the
                    denominator was lower—it was a 17.9% recovery from 5,593.56, versus a 17.8% drop from
                    6,806.27.

Financial Times; 
We’ve moved from income world to wealth world

Bloomberg; 
‘Talk Is Cheap’: Wall Street Delivers Harsh Verdict
                        on Warsh Fed

Reuters; 
China starts production of home-grown immersion DUV chipmaking
                        tools, source says

Share this post
Copy
                link

Read next
Research
Commodification of Intelligence: Good, Bad, and Ugly Circular AI Deals
Research
US Households: Stock Ownership, Leverage, and Systemic Risk
Research
Kimi K3, Qwen 3.8, and Anthropic's (potential) Unravelling

© Phase AI 2026
Emerging Trajectories is a product of
                    Phase AI

Join hundreds of AI, geopolitics, and economics experts.
 We'll send 1–2 emails per week.

Subscribe

✕
