Brandon Tabiolo/Design Pics/Corbis

Marine snails, commonly called limpets, cling tenaciously to rocks as waves batter them. They can clamp on with a force of 
75 pounds per square inch
, using their muscular mollusk "foot" and a chemical secretion. But even that feat isn’t as stunning as their ability to grind down rock as they feed, using a tooth-studded tongue called a radula. Now the snails have upped their tough-guy street cred with help from engineers based in the U.K., who discovered that these snails’ teeth are made of the strongest natural material out there.

Spider silk, often compared to kevlar, has wowed with its 
tough yet flexible powers
. But when tested, the tooth material was, on average, about five times stronger than most spider silk, 
reports BBC News
. This makes it the strongest natural material on Earth. Tests in the lab revealed that it can withstand pressure that would turn carbon into diamond. Thats’s comparable to a single strand of spaghetti holding up about 3,300 one-pound bags of sugar, the study’s lead author, Asa Barber of the University of Portsmouth, told the BBC. 

For 
Science
, 
David Shultz reports
:

Scientists discovered that the teeth are made of a mixture of goethite (an iron-containing crystal) nanofibers encased in a protein matrix. In spite of their amazing strength, the teeth don’t quite best the strongest humanmade materials like graphene, but the new material’s upper range puts it far ahead of Kevlar and on par with the highest quality carbon fibers.

The researchers 
published their findings 
in the 
Journal of the Royal Society Interface
. 

If you're looking for the strongest overall material on Earth, diamond is a good guess, but again, man-made nano-materials beat it. And there are also two rare, natural materials that can withstand more stress than diamond, 
reports 
New Scientist
. 

One of those—wurtzite boron nitrate—has a diamond-like arrangement at the atomic level. But while diamonds are made only of carbon, wurtzite boron nitrate also contains (as its name suggests) boron and nitrogen. The other—lonsdaleite—is all carbon but has a hexagonal structure. (Diamond’s cubic.) Lonsdaleite can be created when graphite-containing meteorites plummet to Earth, and it can withstand 58 percent more stress than diamond.

Hard and strong-yet-flexible materials offer attractive properties for engineers looking to build the next generation of materials, structures and 
even machines
. Now they’ll be turning to the snails as the latest potential nature consultants on these projects.

Editor’s Note April 5, 2017:
 As pointed out by one of our eagle-eyed readers Tom Tonon, the terminology in this story could cause confusion for some readers. There are many different scientific terms used to describe an object’s capacity to resist bending or breaking apart, each of which has subtle differences. In this article, we use the terms toughness and strength to refer to the object’s tensile strength—the capacity of an object to resist pulling apart. This differs from compressive strength, which describes the amount of squeezing an object could withstand. The above discussion of wurtzite boron nitrate refers to not to tensile strength but the hardness of the material, which is its capacity to resist scratching or cutting.

You Might Also Like

It May Rain Diamonds Inside Neptune and Uranus

August 22, 2017

Ancient Diamonds Came From Seawater and Future Diamonds Might Come From The Air

August 21, 2015

Nanoscale Structures Give Dragonfish Their Terrible, Invisible Teeth

June 6, 2019

Researchers Discover a New Phase of Ice by Squeezing Water Between Diamonds

January 27, 2026

Inspired by Octopus Skin, This Synthetic Material Can Change Color and Texture on Demand

January 9, 2026

Maris Fessenden

|

|
 
Read More

Maris Fessenden is a freelance science writer and artist who appreciates small things and wide open spaces.

Get the latest stories in your inbox every weekday.
