Mark Nottingham

recent entries

all entries

feed

Hi, I’m Mark Nottingham.
I write about the Web, protocol design, HTTP, Internet governance, and more. This is a personal
blog, it does not represent anyone else.

Find out more
.

Comments? Let's talk on Mastodon.

@mnot@techpolicy.social

other 
Internet and Web
 
posts

The Nature of Internet Standards
 
(series)

No One Should Have That Much Power
Monday, 29 April 2024

RFC 9518 - What Can Internet Standards Do About Centralisation?
Tuesday, 19 December 2023

Moving Control to the Endpoints
Tuesday, 11 June 2019

What is the Web?
Thursday,  4 December 2014

Five Favourite Protocol Design Papers
Thursday, 15 April 2004

So You Want To Define a Well-Known URI

Friday, 19 June 2026

Internet and Web

As one of the authors of the 
Well-Known URI specification
 and current Designated Expert for the 
registry
, I field a lot of questions about how they should be used, and end up coaching a lot of folks on how to best use them. Below, I’ve summarised how I think about them. Note that these aren’t all requirements for registration – just what I consider good practice.

What Well-Known Locations are Good For

Well-known locations work best when the client – whether it’s a browser, bot, or other software – knows the site
1
 and needs to discover something about the 
whole
 site in an efficient way.

robots.txt
 is the perfect example – it pre-dated the RFC so it doesn’t use a well-known location, but was a major part of the reason we reserved a space for them. A crawler needs to know what the access policies for the site are, and putting it in one central place for the site avoids the need to check headers and content on every response (which would defeat many of the purposes of having such a policy).

A well-known location doesn’t have to contain policy, though. Any mechanism where the client already knows the site but needs to learn something about or interact with it as a whole is a candidate for becoming a well-known location. For example, the 
change-password
 well-known location allows clients to change their password for a site.

When They’re the Wrong Tool

While well-known locations solve real problems for some protocols, in other cases it seems like designers are 
specifying a well-known location because it seems like the thing to do
. Some proposals register one expecting it to confer legitimacy, or boost adoption — as though a slot in the registry were a credential. It isn’t. Well-known locations solves a specific problem (the client knows the site, and needs something site-wide); if your protocol doesn’t have that problem, a registration may only create new ones — and won’t bring the adoption you’re hoping for.

Similarly, some proposals for well-known locations are effectively using them as a URL shortener. Instead of conveying a full URL in a protocol, they only need to convey the relevant site – the well-known location fills in the rest.

The problem is that this pattern 
locks you into a 1:1 relationship between services and sites
. If a deployment ever needs more than one service, they’ll need to create a different site, and find a way to direct users to the appropriate one.

Using a well-known location is reasonable if your protocol can genuinely only carry a hostname. Often, though, it’s done just for convenience — and maybe to make the protocol feel more “official” — causing unnecessary rigidity in deployments. 
If your protocol 
can
 use a real URL, don’t bother with a well-known location.

Common Pitfalls and Tradeoffs

Even when well-known locations are the right tool, the assumptions we make about sites don’t always hold true, and can create significant complications. If you’re defining a well-known location for your protocol, you should be aware of the issues below.

Discovery Mechanisms

Many protocols try to use a well-known location as a discovery mechanism, with the idea that “the user already knows the site.”

The problem is that the reality is fuzzier than it sounds at first – there may be 
a mismatch between the scope of the user’s current interaction and where discovery happens
. For example, if the client starts with “login.example.com”, should they look up the well-known location on that site, or on “example.com”? Should they follow redirects from one to the other? What site(s) should the publisher make a well-known location on available to assure interoperability?

This especially matters in cases where the protocol isn’t really about Web sites, but instead it’s just leveraging HTTP to get something else done. For example, it may be tempting to specify that a well-known location for a registrable domain name be located at the apex, but that can be operationally difficult for some.

If your protocol falls into this category, consider both what’s being discovered and what your users start with, then 
work out how they reliably find the right hostname without assuming too much about their architecture
.

Content Metadata

Some protocols try to use a well-known location as a way to learn about the content on the site. After all, that’s how 
/robots.txt
 works.

While that pattern works for some kinds of metadata, many sites represent multiple publishers (for example, the old 
/~username/
 convention). Putting content metadata in a central location either puts that mechanism off-limits to those users, or requires the administrator to develop complex infrastructure to support and oversee their control of it.

These kinds of deployments surface 
a tradeoff between convenience and granularity
, and often necessitate creation of a parallel metadata mechanism – for example, in HTTP response headers or in the content itself – along with the rationalisation of the different metadata attachment mechanisms.

That’s not to say that Well-Known locations can’t be used for content metadata; just that they’re a lot more work than you might think. So if your protocol is using well-known locations for resource metadata, make sure you consider these tradeoffs carefully. Not all sites are like the ones you’re used to – 
the Web is a big place
.

Other Considerations

A few other things regularly come up.

First, some proposals have already defined a fixed location at the root (like 
/robots.txt
 – usually because they only learned about Well-Known locations later). If so, they should have a 
transition plan
 for existing deployments. Generally, proponents over-focus on their current deployed footprint; with a good transition plan over a reasonable amount of time, moving over to a Well-known location is manageable.

Many proposals assume 
http
 and 
https
 URLs implicitly. Well-known locations apply to other URL schemes too, so the 
relevant schemes should be enumerated explicitly
.

Finally, make sure you 
register your well-known location
. That link contains guidance about when to register and how to choose a name; unlike the advice here, it does affect your chances of successful registration.

Technically, what’s referred to as a 
site
 here is an 
origin
 – the tuple of 
(scheme, host, port)
. 
↩

about

blog

home
