Text
        settings

Story text

Size

Small

Standard

Large

Width
      
*

Standard

Wide

Links

Standard

Orange

* Subscribers only

Learn more

            Minimize to nav

Sony recently informed its PlayStation customers in the United Kingdom that they will no longer be able to watch previously purchased movies and shows from production and distribution company StudioCanal. As of September 1, affected customers will no longer be able to stream 551 titles from the PlayStation Store.

In a 
legal notice
 first spotted by gaming news outlet 
PlayStation LifeStyle
, Sony said that affected customers will lose the ability to stream titles including 
Outrage: Way of the Yakuza
, 
Paddington
,
 Paddington 2
,
 Pan’s Labyrinth
,
 Rambo 3
,
 Terminator 2: Judgment Day
, and 
The Boy in the Striped Pajamas
 “due to our content licensing agreements.” As of September, Sony will remove any affected titles that UK users bought from their PlayStation library, per the notice.

It’s possible that Sony may still make a deal with StudioCanal by September 1, or even after, that would allow users to keep watching the content they bought. This happened in 2023, when Sony said it would have to 
pull 1,318 seasons of Discovery shows
 from customers’ libraries. A few weeks after its announcement, Sony said that it would not pull the content because it had updated its licensing arrangements with Discovery.

Still, affected customers shouldn’t keep their hopes too high. Sony already pulled 314 StudioCanal titles from libraries in Germany and Austria 
in 2022
. More recently, 
Sony deleted people’s Funimation digital libraries
 after it decided to merge the anime streaming service with Crunchyroll. Sony has also been scaling down its digital store and stopped selling movie and show rentals and purchases 
in August 2021
. Even if StudioCanal were willing to make a deal with Sony, it’s feasible that Sony has less interest in retaining digital titles than before.

Regardless, the incident is a 
reminder
 that we don’t own the stuff we purchase digitally . Instead, digital rentals and purchases are merely long-term licenses that are only valid for as long as the streaming service has the right to distribute said content. Often, that’s a finite amount of time.

Still, Sony’s announcement has frustrated some, including those who believe Sony should 
offer refunds
 or who think digital stores 
should stop
 using terms like 
“purchase” for long-term rentals. 

                  Scharon Harding

Senior Technology Reporter

                  Scharon Harding

Senior Technology Reporter

      Scharon is a Senior Technology Reporter at Ars Technica writing news, reviews, and analysis on consumer gadgets and services. She's been reporting on technology for over 10 years, with bylines at Tom’s Hardware, Channelnomics, and CRN UK.

    169 Comments
