Home & Office

      Home

      Home & Office

      Networking

    SpaceX wants to launch 100,000 more Starlink satellites - for 100x the bandwidth

    It could mean faster internet for rural customers, but not everyone is happy.

Written by

            Steven Vaughan-Nichols, 
Senior Contributing Editor
Senior Contributing Editor

July 10, 2026 at 10:15 a.m. PT

Joe Raedle/Getty Images
Follow ZDNET: 
Add us as a preferred source
 on Google.
ZDNET's key takeaways
Starlink's 100,000 satellites will dwarf existing constellations.
When deployed, SpaceX promises the network will deliver gigabit speeds.
When it comes to satellite internet, Starlink has no real competition.
Do you like 
Starlink
 internet? If so, you'll love that its parent company, 
SpaceX
, has applied to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for permission to 
launch 100,000 third-generation (Gen3) Starlink satellites
. The upshot for users? SpaceX promises to deliver "ultra-low-latency" multi-gigabit symmetrical broadband. 
Now, I'll believe that when I see it. Today's advertised peak is "up to" around 300 to 400+ Mbps down, but typical real-world speeds are much lower. Over at ZDNET's sister publication, PCMag, reviewer Brian Westover found that even on Starlink's top home plan, the Residential Max plan, mean 
download speeds plateaued in the 145 megabits per second (Mbps) to 170 Mbps range
, with upload speeds of just under 40 Mbps.
Also: 
I built my own Wi-Fi router with a Raspberry Pi for Starlink and solar control - here's how
That's plodding compared to my home AT&T Internet fiber, which, day in and day out, delivers 2.1 gigabits per second (Gbps) download and upload speeds. I never would have dreamed of such speeds when I was still using a 300-baud modem. But these days, almost no one uses modems, and if you're not living in a broadband-rich area, you may not have access to fiber internet. For people like Westover, who lives in rural Idaho, Starlink isn't just great; it's a necessity. 
SpaceX's Gen3 filing
In its FCC application, SpaceX seeks authority to deploy a Gen3 Starlink system in very low Earth orbit (LEO). The filing positions Gen3 as a successor and expansion beyond the existing Gen1 and Gen2 constellations. Today, there are nearly 11,000 Starlink satellites in orbit. If approved, Starlink will launch and operate 100,000 satellites. 
These Gen3 satellites will weigh more than 2,000 kilograms, or over two tons. That means SpaceX won't be able to launch a meaningful number of satellites at once using its workhorse Falcon 9 rockets. Instead, CEO 
Elon Musk has said SpaceX will need to use Starship
, which still isn't ready for prime time. In the meantime, Falcon Heavy rockets would be able to launch sufficient Gen3 satellites to deliver the service.
SpaceX has told the FCC that the Gen3 network is intended to serve not only consumers and enterprises but also government customers and "billions of AI-powered devices worldwide," tying the constellation directly to projected compute and data-transport demands from large-scale AI systems. This is no AI data center in space, but it's a step in that direction. 
Massive spectrum request
The application seeks access to an unusually broad span of spectrum, including Ku-, Ka-, V-, E-, W-, and D-band frequencies. Downlink bands cited in the filing include 10.7 to 13.4 GHz, 17.3 to 21.2 GHz, and 37.5 to 42.5 GHz, while uplink bands span multiple ranges up to approximately 231.5 to 275 GHz. SpaceX requests waivers of FCC rules, such as Section 2.106, to assemble larger contiguous channels for high-capacity fronthaul, backhaul, and massive uplink. 
Also: 
This 3-in-1 adapter for the Starlink Mini made all the difference for its power delivery
All this means Gen3 could interfere with rival satellite internet services and other wireless services. SpaceX promises to operate on a noninterference, nonprotected basis and to engage in "good-faith coordination" with incumbents and federal users. 
For you, that means you'll need to upgrade your existing Starlink user terminals and antennas to make the most of the new satellite constellation's gigabit speeds. This upgraded end-user hardware is expected to be available shortly. 
According to the filing, SpaceX claims the hardware and spectrum plan can deliver on the order of a 100-fold increase in total Starlink bandwidth. Starlink's current real-world latency is roughly 30 to 50 ms for most users. Gen3, SpaceX promises, will drop that to below 20 ms. 
Starlink rivals
Starlink's highest residential rate is now $130 a month. While SpaceX hasn't announced rates for its new Gen3 service, I expect it to be at least $200 a month, and I won't be surprised if it ends up being $300 a month. 
Also: 
How I turned my Starlink Mini into the ultimate off-grid internet device
Starlink's main satellite broadband rivals are 
Amazon Leo
, 
Eutelsat-OneWeb
, and forthcoming systems such as 
Telesat Lightspeed
 and 
Blue Origin's TeraWave
. Moreover, legacy geosynchronous Earth orbit (GEO) players 
Hughesnet
 and 
Viasat
 are still in business. 
However, when I say rivals, I'm being kind. 
Amazon Leo is only now getting ready to deliver the internet to customers
, while Eutelsat-OneWeb is really a business-first network and not for Joe User. Meanwhile, GEO players are starting to go out of business. They simply can't deliver the speed today's demanding customers need. Nothing spells that out more than 
Hughesnet's recent deal with SpaceX to refer its customers to Starlink
. 
Next steps at the FCC
The application will move through the FCC's Space Bureau process, including a public notice and comment period during which rivals and interest groups can file petitions to deny, seek conditions, or propose modifications to SpaceX's plans. Approval is not guaranteed, and any eventual grant could include strict conditions around debris mitigation, spectrum coordination, and interference protections, especially given the nonconforming high-frequency bands SpaceX wants to use for Gen3. 
Additionally, astromers are strenuously objecting to Starlink's plans. A recent European Southern Observatory study argues that large constellations, 
specifically Starlink
, would have "devastating effects on astronomy."
Also: 
This tiny satellite device replaced my smartwatch while adventuring off-grid
Still, if the FCC signs off on even a substantial fraction of the 100,000-satellite request, Gen3 Starlink would redefine the scale of satellite broadband. It would also certainly ensure that, going forward, Starlink will be almost everyone's first choice for satellite internet. 
Featured

            Why this fully agentic ransomware attack is giving researchers nightmares

            Anthropic's Claude Cowork heads to the cloud as data shows 90% of sessions aren't for coding

            You can soon restore Windows 11 from scratch even if it can't boot up - here's how

            I enabled Android's new security feature that detects fake cell towers - here's why

              Why this fully agentic ransomware attack is giving researchers nightmares

              Anthropic's Claude Cowork heads to the cloud as data shows 90% of sessions aren't for coding

              You can soon restore Windows 11 from scratch even if it can't boot up - here's how

              I enabled Android's new security feature that detects fake cell towers - here's why

Editorial standards

Show Comments

          Log In to Comment

Community Guidelines

Related

      I found an Android launcher so good that I don't miss Nova anymore

      I use Android Auto in my living room now - and it solves ones of my biggest productivity problems

      I set up a solar panel security camera in my yard - and the image quality beat my Ring
