SpaceX’s mega rocket Starship in Boca Chica, Texas.
 
(Eric Gay / Associated Press)

By
 
Annika Duneja

July 16, 2026 
3 AM PT 

4 min

 Click here to listen to this article 

Share via

Close extra sharing options

Email

Facebook

X

LinkedIn

Threads

Reddit

WhatsApp

Copy Link URL
 
Copied!

Print

0:00

0:00

 1x 

 This is read by an automated voice. Please report any issues or inconsistencies 
here
. 

 See more from the L.A. Times in Google Search.  
 Set us as preferred 

SpaceX stock dropped below its initial public offering price for the first time on Wednesday, signaling dwindling hype around the Elon Musk company.
Shares dipped below their IPO price of $135 on Wednesday morning for the first time since listing, a humbling loss  for the stock, which had skyrocketed more than 50% in its first days of trading last month. 
The shares regained some ground later in the day, closing at $135.27.
The initial offering gave the company a market cap of $2.2 trillion, making it one of the world’s most valuable public companies. For a short period, the IPO also made owner Elon Musk the world’s first trillionaire, though his net worth now is about $800 billion.
 
Advertisement

On July 7, the company was added to the Nasdaq-100 after a rule change allowed companies to join 15 days after their IPOs.
SpaceX raised a total of $86 billion after underwriters exercised their right to sell additional shares, on top of the $75 billion initially raised. It was the largest IPO in history.
SpaceX, based near Austin, Texas, is the leading launch services company in the world, with its Falcon 9 rocket accounting for the vast majority of satellites launched last year.
 
Advertisement

It is also the leading satellite-based broadband provider with its 
Starlink service.
 The extraordinary interest in the IPO was driven by Musk’s plans to make the company an AI leader — including plans to launch orbiting satellite data centers powered by the sun that crunch AI data.
The company’s headquarters moved from Hawthorne to Texas in 2024, but it retains large operations in the South Bay city and 
blasts off regularly
 from Vandenberg Space Force Base in Santa Barbara County.
Since the IPO, SpaceX has used its newfound wealth to expand in the AI space.
It announced last month that it was 
acquiring 
the AI coding startup Cursor
 for $60 billion, with the deal expected to close in the third quarter. The San Francisco company, founded in 2022, enables engineers to instruct software in English to run coding tasks autonomously.
Musk also 
merged his xAI artificial intelligence company 
into SpaceX earlier this year.  The combined entity recently announced  it was leasing computing power to rivals Anthropic and Google at two terrestrial data centers it has constructed.
Since the IPO, investors have expressed concerns about the company’s spending plans and debt load.
Even with the volatility of the last month, there’s still more uncertainty to come.
The stock could fall further as locked-up shares held by current and former employees are released.
 
Advertisement

At least 20% of the shares
 will be released after second-quarter results are disclosed sometime in the coming months, with all the lockups expiring in December.
But Space X isn’t the only megacap stock to experience ups and downs early on.
Shares of Meta, then named Facebook, fell significantly below the IPO price of $38 before recovering. After its May 2012 launch, shares plummeted by nearly 50% and hit a record low of $19.69 in August 2012. 
The company took more than 14 months to rebound, finally surpassing its $38 IPO price in July 2013.

More to Read 

Voices

Hiltzik: Is Elon Musk really a trillionaire? Only on paper

July 1, 2026

For Subscribers

SpaceX IPO sparks race for luxury housing in Southern California

June 29, 2026

SpaceX stock returns to Earth after record IPO

June 23, 2026
