Download as 
PDF
, zipped 
HTML
, 
MobiPocket file
 (courtesy of 
Brian Gilbert
), or just read online (below)

Starfish

Prelude:
		Ceratius

Benthos

Duet

Constrictor

A
		Niche

Housecleaning

Rome

Neotenous

Elevator
		Boy

Crush

Autoclave

Waterbed

Doppelgänger

Angel

Feral

Shadow

Ballet

Dancer

Short
		Circuit

Critical
		Mass

Nekton

Dryback

Jumpstart

Muckraker

Scream

Bulrushes

Ghosts

Seine

Entropy

Carousel

Ecdysis

Alibis

Quarantine

Bubble

Enema

Turncoat

Head
		Cheese

Theme
		and Variation

Ground
		Zero

Software

Racter

End
		Game

Night
		Shift

Scatter

Reptile

Skyhop

Floodlight

Sunrise

Jericho

Detritus

References

Acknowledgments

Creative
		Commons Licensing Information

For Susan Oshanek,
on the off chance that she's still alive.

And for Laurie
Channer—who to my unexpectedly good fortune, definitely is.

Prelude: 
Ceratius

The
abyss should shut you up.

Sunlight
hasn't touched these waters for a million years. Atmospheres
accumulate by the hundreds here, the trenches could swallow a dozen
Everests without burping. They say life itself got started in the
deep sea. Maybe. It can't have been an easy birth, judging by the
life that remains—monstrous things, twisted into nightmare
shapes by lightless pressure and sheer chronic starvation.

Even
here, inside the hull, the abyss weighs on you like the vault of a
cathedral. It's no place for trivial loudmouth bullshit. If you speak
at all, you keep it down. But these tourists just don't seem to give
a shit.

Joel Kita's used to
hearing a 'scaphe breathe around him, hearing it talk in clicks and
hisses. He relies on those sounds; the readouts only confirm what the
beast has already told him by the grumbling of its stomach. But

Ceratius
 is a leisure craft, fully insulated, packed with
excess headroom and reclining couches and little drink'n'drug
dispensers set into the back of each seat. All he can hear today is
the cargo, babbling.

He
glances back over his shoulder. The tour guide, a mid-twenties
Hindian with a zebra cut— Preteela someone— flashes him a
brief, rueful smile. She's a relict, and she knows it. She can't
compete with the onboard library, she doesn't come with 3-d
animations or wraparound soundtrack. She's just a prop, really. These
people pay her salary not because she does anything useful, but
because she doesn't. What's the point of being rich if you only buy
the essentials?

There
are eight of them. One old guy in a codpiece, still closing on his
first century, fiddles with his camera controls. The others are
plugged into headsets, running a program carefully designed to occupy
them through the descent without being 
so
 impressive that the
actual destination is an anticlimax. It's a thin line, these days.
Simulations are almost always better than real life, and real life
gets blamed for the poor showing. 

Joel
wishes this particular program was a bit better at holding the
cargo's interest; they might shut up if they were paying more
attention. They probably don't care whether Channer's sea monsters
live up to the hype anyway. These people aren't down here because the
abyss is impressive, they're here because it costs so much. 

He
runs his eyes across the control board. Even that seems excessive;
climate control and indive entertainment take up a good half of the
panel. Bored, he picks one of the headset feeds at random and taps
in, sending the signal to a window on his main display. 

An
eighteenth-century woodcut of a Kraken comes to life through the
miracle of modern animation. Crudely-rendered tentacles wrap around
the masts of a galleon, pull it beneath chunky carved waves. A female
voice, designed to maximize attention from both sexes: "We have
always peopled the sea with monsters—"

Joel
tunes out.

Mr.
Codpiece comes up behind him, lays a familiar hand on his shoulder.
Joel resists the urge to shrug it off. That's another problem with
these tour subs; no real cockpit, just a set of controls at the front
end of the passenger lounge. You can't shut yourself away from the
cargo.

"Quite
a layout," Mr. Codpiece says.

Joel
reminds himself of his professional duties, and smiles.

"Been
doing this run for long?" The whitecap's skin glows with a
golden tan of cultured xanthophylls. Joel's smile grows a little more
brittle. He's heard all about the benefits, of course; UV protection,
higher blood oxygen, more energy — they say it even cuts down
on your food requirements, not that any of these people have to worry
about grocery money. Still, it's too bloody freakish for Joel's
tastes. Implants should be made out of meat, or at least plastic. If
people were meant to photosynthesize they'd have leaves. 

"I
said—"

Joel
nods. "Couple of years."

A
grunt. "Didn't know Seabed Safaris was around that long."

"I
don't work for Seabed Safaris," Joel says, as politely as
possible. "I freelance." The whitecap probably doesn't know
any better, comes from a generation when everyone pledged allegiance
to the same master year after year. Nobody thought it was such a bad
thing back then.

"Good
for you." Mr. Codpiece gives him a fatherly pat on the shoulder.

Joel
nudges the rudders a bit to port. They've been cruising just off the
southeastern shoulder of the rift, floodlights doused; sonar shows a
featureless landscape of mud and boulders. The rift itself is another
five or ten minutes away. On the screen, the tourist program talks
about giant squids attacking lifeboats during the Second World War,
offers up a parade of archival photos as evidence; human legs,
puckered with fist-sized conical wounds where horn-rimmed suckers
cored out gobbets of flesh.

"Nasty.
We going to be seeing any giant squids?"

Joel
shakes his head. "Different tour."

The
program launches into a litany of deepwater nasties; a piece of flesh
washed up onto a Florida beach, hinting at the existence of octopus
thirty meters across. Giant eel larvae. Hypothesized monsters that
might once have fed on the great whales, anonymously dying out for
lack of food.

Joel
figures that ninety percent of this is bullshit, and the rest doesn't
really count. Even giant squids don't go down into the 
really

deep sea; hardly anything does. No food. Joel's been rooting around
down here for years, and he's never seen any 
real
 monsters.

Except
right here, of course. He touches a control; outside, a
high-frequency speaker begins whining at the abyss.

"Hydrothermal
vents bubble and boil along spreading zones in all of the world's
oceans," the program chatters, "feeding crowds of giant
clams and tubeworms over three meters long." Stock footage of a
vent community. "And yet, even at the spreading zones, it is
only the filter-feeders and muckrakers that become giants. The fish,
vertebrates like ourselves, are few and far between— and only a
few centimeters long." An eelpout wriggles feebly across the
display, looking more like a dismembered finger than a fish.

"Except
here," the program adds after a dramatic pause. "For there
is something special about this tiny part of the Juan de Fuca Ridge,
something unexplained. Here there be dragons."

Joel
hits another control. External bait lights flash to life across the
bioluminescent spectrum; the cabin lights dim. To the denizens of the
rift, drawn in by the sonics, a veritable school of food fish has
suddenly appeared in their midst.

"We
don't know the secret of the Channer Vent. We don't know how it
creates its strange and fascinating giants." The program's
visual display goes dark. "We only know that here, on the
shoulder of the Axial Volcano, we have finally tracked the monsters
to their lair."

Something
thumps against the outer hull. The acoustics of the passenger
compartment make the sound seem unnaturally loud.

At
last, the passengers shut up. Mr. Codpiece mutters something and
heads back to his seat, a giant chloroplast in a hurry.

"This
concludes our introduction. The external cameras are linked to your
headsets and can be aimed using normal head movements. Focus and
record using the joystick on your right armrest. You may also wish to
enjoy the view directly, through any of the cabin viewports. If you
require assistance our guide and pilot are at your service. Seabed
Safaris welcomes you to the Channer Vent, and hopes that you enjoy
the remainder of your tour." 

Two more thumps. A
grey flash out the forward port; a sinuous belly caught for a moment
in the headlight, a swirl of fin. On Joel's systems board, icons
representing the outside cams dip and wiggle.

Superfluous
Preteela slides into the copilot's seat. "Regular feeding frenzy
out there."

Joel
lowers his voice. "In here. Out there. What's the difference?"

She
smiles, a safe, silent gesture of agreement. She's got a great smile.
Almost makes up for the striped hair. Joel catches sight of something
on the back of her left hand; looks like a ref tattoo, but somehow he
doubts that it's authentic. Fashion statement, more likely. 

"You
sure they can spare you?" he asks wryly. 

She
looks back. The cargo's starting up again: 
Look at that. Hey, it
broke its tooth on us. Christ aren't they 
ugly—

"They'll
manage," Preteela says.

Something looms up
on the other side of the viewport: mouth like a sackful of needles, a
tendril hanging from the lower jaw with a glowing bulb on the end.
The jaw gapes wide enough to dislocate, snaps shut. Its teeth slide
harmlessly across the viewport. A flat black eye glares in at them.

"What's
that?" Preteela wants to know.

"You're
the tour guide."

"Never
seen anything like it before."

"Me
neither." He sends a trickle of electricity out through the
hull. The monster, startled, flashes off into the darkness.
Intermittent impacts resonate through 
Ceratius
, drawing
renewed gasps from the cargo.

"How
long until we're actually at Channer?"

Joel
glances at tactical. "We're pretty much there already.
Medium-sized hot fissure about fifty meters to the left."

"What's
that?" A row of bright dots, evenly spaced, has just moved onto
the screen. 

"Surveyer's
stakes." Another row marches into range behind the first. "For
the geothermal program, you know?"

"How
about a quick drive-by? I bet those generators are pretty
impressive."

"I
don't think the generators are in yet. They're just laying the
foundations."

"It'd
still make a nice addition to the tour."

"We're
supposed to steer clear. We'd catch royal shit if anyone's out
there."

"Well?"
That smile again, more calculated this time. "Is there?"

"Probably
not," Joel admits. Construction's been on hold for a couple of
weeks, a fact which he finds particularly irritating; he's up for
some fairly hefty contracts if the Grid Authority ever gets off its
corporate ass and finishes what they started.

Preteela
looks at him expectantly. Joel shrugs. "It's pretty unstable in
there. Could get bumped around a bit."

"Dangerous?"

"Depends
on your definition. Probably not."

"So
let's do it." Preteela lays a conspiratorial hand briefly on his
shoulder.

Ceratius

noses around to a new heading. Joel kills the bait lights and cranks
the sonics up for one screeching, farewell burst. The monsters
outside — those that haven't already retired gracefully, their
tiny fish brains having figured out that metal is inedible —
run screaming into the night, lateral lines burning. There's a moment
of surprised silence from the cargo. Preteela Someone steps smoothly
into the gap. "Folks, we're taking a small detour to check out a
new arrival on the rift. If you tap into the sonar feed you'll see
that we're approaching a checkerboard of acoustic beacons. The Grid
Authority has laid these out in the course of constructing one of the
new geothermal stations we've been hearing so much about. As you may
know, similar projects are underway at spreading zones all the way
from the Galapagos to the Aleutians. When these go online, people
will actually be living full-time here on the rift—"

Joel
can't believe it. Preteela's big chance to scoop the library and she
ends up talking exactly like it does. He quietly aborts a midbrain
fantasy he's been nurturing. Try to get into fantasy-Preteela's
jumpsuit now and she'd probably start reciting a cheery blow-by-blow.

He
switches on the external floods. Mud. More mud. On sonar the grid
crawls towards them, a monotonous constellation.

Something catches

Ceratius
, slews it around. The hull thermistor spikes briefly.

"Thermal,
folks." Joel calls back over his shoulder. "Nothing to
worry about." 

A dim coppery sun
resolves to starboard. It's a torch on a pole, basically, a
territorial marker beating back the abyss with a sodium bulb and a
VLF heartbeat. It's the Grid Authority, pissing on a rock for all and
sundry: 
This is 
our 
hellhole
. 

The line of towers
stretches away to port, each crowned by a floodlight. Intersecting
it, another line recedes directly ahead like streetlights on a smoggy
night. They shine down on a strange unfinished landscape of plastic
and metal. Great metal casings lie against the bottom like derailed
boxcars. Teardrop ROVs sit dormant on flat plastic puddles frozen
harder than basalt. Sharp-edged conduits protrude from those
congealed surfaces like hollow bones sawn off below the joint.

Way up on one of the
port towers, something dark and fleshy assaults the light.

Joels checks the
camera icons: all zoomed, pointing up and left. Preteela, conserving
O
2
, has retired her patter while the whitecaps gape. Fine.
They want more mindless piscine violence, give 'em more mindless
piscine violence. 
Ceratius
 angles up and to port. 

It's an anglerfish.
She bashes herself repeatedly against the floodlight, oblivious to

Ceratius
' approach. Her dorsal spine lashes; the lure at its
end, a glowing worm-shaped thing, luminesces furiously.

Preteela's back at
his shoulder. "It's really doing a number on that light, isn't
it?" 

She's right. The top
of the transponder is shaking under the impact of the big fish's
blows, which is odd; these beasts are big, but they aren't very
strong
.
 And come to think of it, the tower's shaking back and
forth even when the angler isn't 
touching
 it…

"Oh, shit."
Joel grabs the controls. 
Ceratius 
rears up like something
living. Transponder glow drops off the bottom of the viewport; total
darkness drops in from above, swallowing the view. Startled shouts
from the cargo. Joel ignores them.

On all sides, the
dull distant sound of something roaring.

Joel hits the
throttle. 
Ceratius
 climbs. Something slaps from behind; the
stern slides to port, pulling the bow back after it. The blackness
beyond the viewport boils sudden muddy brown against the cabin
lights.

The hull thermister
spikes twice, three times. Ambient temperature flips from 4
°
C
to 280, then back again. At lesser pressures the 
Ceratius 
would
be dropping through live steam. Here it only spins, skidding for
traction against the superheated water.

Finally, it finds
some. 
Ceratius 
ascends into welcome icewater. A fish skeleton
pirouettes past the viewport, all teeth and spines, every vestige of
flesh boiled away.

Joel looks back over
his shoulder. Preteela's fingers are locked around the back of his
seat, their knuckles the same color as the dancing bones outside. The
cargo are dead quiet.

"Another
thermal?" Preteela says in a shaky voice. 

Joel shakes his
head. "Seabed cracked open. It's really thin around here."
He manages a brief laugh. "Told you things could get a bit
unstable."

"Uh huh."
She releases her grip on Joel's chair. Fingernail imprints linger in
the foam. She leans over, whispers "Bring the cabin lights up a
bit, will you? Sort of a nice living-room level—" and then
she's headed aft, tending the cargo: "Well, 
that
 was
exciting. But Joel assures us that little blowups like this happen
all the time. Nothing to be worried about, although they 
can 
catch
you offguard." 

Joel
raises the cabin lights. The cargo sit quietly, still ostriched into
their headsets. Preteela bustles among them, smoothing feathers. "And
of course we still have the rest of our tour to look forward to…"

He
ups the gain on sonar, focusses aft. A luminous storm swirls across
the tactical display. Beneath it, a fresh ridge of oozing rock
disfigures the GA's construction grid. 

Preteela
is back at his elbow. "Joel?" 

"Yeah."

"They
say people are going to be 
living
 down there?"

"Uh huh."

"Wow. Who?"

He
looks at her. "Haven't you seen the PR threads? Only the best
and the brightest. Holding back the everlasting night to stoke the
fires of civilization."

"Seriously,
Joel. Who?"

He shrugs. "Fucked
if I know."

Benthos

Duet

Constrictor

When the lights go
out in Beebe Station, you can hear the metal groan.

Lenie
Clarke lies on her bunk, listening. Overhead, past pipes and wires
and eggshell plating, three kilometers of black ocean try to crush
her. She feels the Rift underneath, tearing open the seabed with
strength enough to move a continent. She lies there in that fragile
refuge and she hears Beebe's armor shifting by microns, hears its
seams creak not quite below the threshold of human hearing. God is a
sadist on the Juan de Fuca Rift, and His name is Physics.

How
did they talk me into this?
 she wonders. 
Why did I come down
here?
 But she already knows the answer. 

She
hears Ballard moving out in the corridor. Clarke envies Ballard.
Ballard never screws up, always seems to have her life under control.
She almost seems 
happy
 down here.

Clarke
rolls off her bunk and fumbles for a switch. Her cubby floods with
dismal light. Pipes and access panels crowd the wall beside her;
aesthetics run a distant second to functionality when you're three
thousand meters down. She turns and catches sight of a slick black
amphibian in the bulkhead mirror.

It
still happens, occasionally. She can sometimes forget what they've
done to her.

It
takes a conscious effort to feel the machines lurking where her left
lung used to be. She's so acclimated to the chronic ache in her
chest, to that subtle inertia of plastic and metal as she moves, that
she's scarcely aware of them any more. She can still feel the memory
of what it was to be fully human, and mistake that ghost for honest
sensation.

Such
respites never last. There are mirrors everywhere in Beebe; they're
supposed to increase the apparent size of one's personal space.
Sometimes Clarke shuts her eyes to hide from the reflections forever
being thrown back at her. It doesn't help. She clenches her lids and
feels the corneal caps beneath them, covering her eyes like smooth
white cataracts. 

She
climbs out of her cubby and moves along the corridor to the lounge.
Ballard is waiting there, dressed in a diveskin and the usual air of
confidence. 

Ballard
stands up. "Ready to go?" 

"You're
in charge," Clarke says.

"Only
on paper." Ballard smiles. "No pecking order down here,
Lenie. As far as I'm concerned, we're equals." After two days on
the rift Clarke is still surprised by the frequency with which
Ballard smiles. Ballard smiles at the slightest provocation. It
doesn't always seem real.

Something
hits Beebe from the outside.

Ballard's
smile falters. They hear it again; a wet, muffled thud through the
station's titanium skin.

"It
takes a while to get used to," Ballard says, "doesn't it?"

And
again.

"I
mean, that sounds 
big
—"

"Maybe
we should turn the lights off," Clarke suggests. She knows they
won't. Beebe's exterior floodlights burn around the clock, an
electric campfire pushing back the darkness. They can't see it from
inside—Beebe has no windows— but somehow they draw
comfort from the knowledge of that unseen fire—

Thud!

—
most
of the time.

"Remember
back in training?" Ballard says over the sound, "When they
told us that the fish were usually so—small…" 

Her
voice trails off. Beebe creaks slightly. They listen for a while.
There's no other sound.

"It
must've gotten tired," Ballard says. "You'd think they'd
figure it out." She moves to the ladder and climbs downstairs.

Clarke
follows her, a bit impatiently. There are sounds in Beebe that worry
her far more than the futile attack of some misguided fish. Clarke
can hear tired alloys negotiating surrender. She can feel the ocean
looking for a way in. What if it finds one? The whole weight of the
Pacific could drop down and turn her into jelly. Any time.

Better
to face it outside, where she knows what's coming. All she can do in
here is wait for it to happen.

* * *

Going
outside is like drowning, once a day. 

Clarke
stands facing Ballard, diveskin sealed, in an airlock that barely
holds both of them. She has learned to tolerate the forced proximity;
the glassy armor on her eyes helps a bit. 
Fuse seals, check
headlamp, test injector
; the ritual takes her, step by reflexive
step, to that horrible moment when she awakens the machines sleeping
within her, and 
changes
.

When
she catches her breath, and loses it.

When
a vacuum opens, somewhere in her chest, that swallows the air she
holds. When her remaining lung shrivels in its cage, and her guts
collapse; when myoelectric demons flood her sinuses and middle ears
with isotonic saline. When every pocket of internal gas disappears in
the time it takes to draw a breath. 

It
always feels the same. The sudden, overwhelming nausea; the narrow
confines of the airlock holding her erect when she tries to fall;
seawater churning on all sides. Her face goes under; vision blurs,
then clears as her corneal caps adjust. 

She
collapses against the walls and wishes she could scream. The floor of
the airlock drops away like a gallows. Lenie Clarke falls writhing
into the abyss.

* * *

They
come out of the freezing darkness, headlights blazing, into an oasis
of sodium luminosity. Machines grow everywhere at the Throat, like
metal weeds. Cables and conduits spiderweb across the seabed in a
dozen directions. The main pumps stand over twenty meters high, a
regiment of submarine monoliths fading from sight on either side.
Overhead floodlights bathe the jumbled structures in perpetual
twilight.

They
stop for a moment, hands resting on the line that guided them here. 

"I'll
never get used to it," Ballard grates in a caricature of her
usual voice. 

Clarke
glances at her wrist thermistor. "Thirty four Centigrade."
The words buzz, metallic, from her larynx. It feels so 
wrong

to talk without breathing. 

Ballard
lets go of the rope and launches herself into the light. After a
moment, breathless, Clarke follows.

There's
so much power here, so much wasted strength. Here the continents
themselves do ponderous battle. Magma freezes; seawater boils; the
very floor of the ocean is born by painful centimeters each year.
Human machinery does not 
make
 energy, here at Dragon's Throat;
it merely hangs on and steals some insignificant fraction of it back
to the mainland. 

Clarke
flies through canyons of metal and rock, and knows what it is to be a
parasite. She looks down. Shellfish the size of boulders, crimson
worms three meters long crowd the seabed between the machines.
Legions of bacteria, hungry for sulfur, lace the water with milky
veils.

The
water fills with a sudden terrible cry. 

It
doesn't sound like a scream. It sounds as though a great harp string
is vibrating in slow motion. But Ballard is screaming, through some
reluctant interface of flesh and metal:

"LENIE—"

Clarke
turns in time to see her own arm disappear into a mouth that seems
impossibly huge.

Teeth
like scimitars clamp down on her shoulder. Clarke stares into a scaly
black face half a meter across. Some tiny dispassionate part of her
searches for eyes in that monstrous fusion of spines and teeth and
gnarled flesh, and fails. 
How can it see me?
 she wonders. 

Then
the pain reaches her.

She
feels her arm being wrenched from its socket. The creature thrashes,
shaking its head back and forth, trying to tear her into chunks.
Every tug sets her nerves screaming.

She
goes limp. 
Please get it over with if you're going to kill me just
please God make it quick—
 She feels the urge to vomit, but
the 'skin over her mouth and her own collapsed insides won't let her.

She
shuts out the pain. She's had plenty of practice. She pulls inside,
abandoning her body to ravenous vivisection; and from far away she
feels the twisting of her attacker grow suddenly erratic. There's
another creature at her side, with arms and legs and a knife—
you
know, a knife, like the one you've got strapped to your leg and
completely forgot about
—and suddenly the monster is gone,
its grip broken.

Clarke
tells her neck muscles to work. It's like operating a marionette. Her
head turns. She sees Ballard locked in combat with something as big
as she is. Only — Ballard is tearing it to pieces, with her
bare hands. Its icicle teeth splinter and snap. Dark icewater courses
from its wounds, tracing mortal convulsions with smoke-trails of
suspended gore.

The
creature spasms weakly. Ballard pushes it away. A dozen smaller fish
dart into the light and begin tearing at the carcass. Photophores
along their sides flash like frantic rainbows.

Clarke
watches from the other side of the world. The pain in her side keeps
its distance, a steady, pulsing ache. She looks; her arm is still
there. She can even move her fingers without any trouble. 
I've had
worse
, she thinks. 

Then:

Why am I still alive?

Ballard
appears at her side; her lens-covered eyes shine like photophores
themselves. 

"Jesus
Christ," Ballard says in a distorted whisper. "Lenie? You
okay?" 

Clarke
dwells on the inanity of the question for a moment. But surprisingly,
she feels intact. "Yeah."

And
if not, she knows, it's her own damn fault. She just lay there. She
just waited to die. She was asking for it.

She's
always asking for it.

* * *

Back
in the airlock, the water recedes around them. And within them;
Clarke's stolen breath, released at last, races back along visceral
channels, reinflating lung and gut and spirit.

Ballard
splits the face seal on her 'skin and her words tumble into the
wetroom. "Jesus. Jesus! I don't believe it! My God, did you see
that thing! They get so huge around here!" She passes her hands
across her face; her corneal caps come off, milky hemispheres
dropping from enormous hazel eyes. "And to think they're usually
just a few centimeters long..."

She
starts to strip down, unzipping her 'skin along the forearms, talking
the whole time. "And yet it was almost fragile, you know? Hit it
hard enough and it just came apart! Jesus!" Ballard always
removes her uniform indoors. Clarke suspects she'd rip the recycler
out of her own thorax if she could, throw it in a corner with the
'skin and the eyecaps until the next time it was needed.

Maybe
she's got her other lung in her cabin
, Clarke muses. 
Maybe she
keeps it in a jar, and she stuffs it back into her chest at night...

She feels a bit dopey; probably just an aftereffect of the
neuroinhibitors her implants put out whenever she's outside. 
Small
price to pay to keep my brain from shorting out— I really
shouldn't mind...

Ballard
peels her 'skin down to the waist. Just under her left breast, the
electrolyser intake pokes out through her ribcage.

Clarke
stares vaguely at that perforated disk in Ballard's flesh. 
The
ocean goes into us there,
 she thinks. The old knowledge seems
newly significant, somehow. 
We suck it into us and steal its
oxygen and spit it out again.

Prickly
numbness is spreading, leaking through her shoulder into her chest
and neck. Clarke shakes her head, once, to clear it.

She
sags suddenly, against the hatchway.

Am
I in shock? Am I fainting?

"I
mean—" Ballard stops, looks at Clarke with an expression
of sudden concern. "Jesus, Lenie. You look terrible. You
shouldn't have told me you were okay if you weren't."

The
tingling reaches the base of Clarke's skull. "I'm — okay,"
she says. "Nothing broke. I'm just bruised."

"Garbage.
Take off your 'skin."

Clarke
straightens, with effort. The numbness recedes a bit. "It's
nothing I can't take care of myself."

Don't
touch me. Please don't touch me.

Ballard
steps forward without a word and unseals the 'skin around Clarke's
forearm. She peels back the material and exposes an ugly purple
bruise. She looks at Clarke with one raised eyebrow.

"Just
a bruise," Clarke says. "I'll take care of it, really.
Thanks anyway." She pulls her hand away from Ballard's
ministrations.

Ballard
looks at her for a moment. She smiles ever so slightly.

"Lenie,"
she says, "there's no need to feel embarrassed."

"About
what?"

"You
know. Me having to rescue you. You going to pieces when that thing
attacked. It was perfectly understandable. Most people have a rough
time adjusting. I'm just one of the lucky ones."

Right.
You've always been one of the lucky ones, haven't you? I know your
kind, Ballard, you've never failed at anything...

"You
don't have to feel ashamed about it," Ballard reassures her.

"I
don't," Clarke says, honestly. She doesn't feel much of anything
any more. Just the tingling. And the tension. And a vague sort of
wonder that she's even alive.

* * *

The
bulkhead is sweating.

The
deep sea lays icy hands on the metal and, inside, Clarke watches the
humid atmosphere bead and run down the wall. She sits rigid on her
bunk under dim fluorescent light, every wall of the cubby within easy
reach. The ceiling is too low. The room is too narrow. She feels the
ocean compressing the station around her.

And
all I can do is wait...

The
anabolic salve on her injuries is warm and soothing. Clarke probes
the purple flesh of her arm with practiced fingers. The diagnostic
tools in the Med cubby have vindicated her. She's lucky, this time;
bones intact, epidermis unbroken. She seals up her 'skin, hiding the
damage.

She
shifts on the pallet, turns to face the inside wall. Her reflection
stares back at her through eyes like frosted glass. She watches the
image, admires its perfect mimicry of each movement. Flesh and
phantom move together, bodies masked, faces neutral.

That's
me
, she thinks. 
That's what I look like now.
 She tries to
read what lies behind that glacial facade. 
Am I bored, horny,
upset?
 How to tell, with her eyes hidden behind those corneal
opacities? She sees no trace of the tension she always feels. 
I
could be terrified. I could be pissing in my 'skin and no one would
know.

She
leans forward. The reflection comes to meet her. They stare at each
other, white to white, ice to ice. For a moment, they almost forget
Beebe's ongoing war against pressure. For a moment, they don't mind
the claustrophobic solitude that grips them.

How
many times
, Clarke wonders, 
have I wanted eyes as dead as
these?

* * *

Beebe's
metal viscera crowd the corridor beyond her cubby. Clarke can barely
stand erect. A few steps bring her into the lounge.

Ballard,
back in shirtsleeves, is at one of the library terminals. "Rickets,"
she says.

"What?"

"Fish
down here don't get enough trace elements. They're rotten with
deficiency diseases. Doesn't matter how fierce they are. They bite
too hard, they break their teeth on us."

Clarke
stabs buttons on the food processor; the machine grumbles at her
touch. "I thought there was all sorts of food at the rift.
That's why things got so big."

"There's
a lot of food. Just not very good quality."

A
vaguely edible lozenge of sludge oozes from the processor onto
Clarke's plate. She eyes it for a moment. 
I can relate.

"You're
going to eat in your gear?" Ballard asks, as Clarke sits down at
the lounge table.

Clarke
blinks at her. "Yeah. Why?"

"Oh,
nothing. It would just be nice to talk to someone with pupils in
their eyes, you know?"

"Sorry.
I can take them off if you —"

"No,
it's no big thing. I can live with it." Ballard turns off the
library and sits down across from Clarke. "So, how do you like
the place so far?"

Clarke
shrugs and keeps eating.

"I'm
glad we're only down here for a year," Ballard says. "This
place could get to you after a while."

"It
could be worse."

"Oh,
I'm not complaining. I was looking for a challenge, after all. What
about you?"

"Me?"

"What
brings you down here? What are you looking for?"

Clarke
doesn't answer for a moment. "I don't know, really," she
says at last. "Privacy, I guess."

Ballard
looks up. Clarke stares back, her face neutral.

"Well,
I'll leave you to it, then," Ballard says pleasantly.

Clarke
watches her disappear down the corridor. She hears the sound of a
cubby hatch hissing shut.

Give
it up, Ballard
, she thinks. 
I'm not the sort of person you
really want to know.

* * *

Almost
start of the morning shift. The food processor disgorges Clarke's
breakfast with its usual reluctance. Ballard, in Communications, is
just getting off the phone. A moment later she appears in the
hatchway.

"Management
says—" She stops. "You've got blue eyes."

Clarke
smiles faintly. "You've seen them before."

"I
know. It's just kind of surprising, it's been a while since I've seen
you without your caps in."

Clarke
sits down with her breakfast. "So, what does Management say?"

"We're
on schedule. Rest of the crew comes down in three weeks, we go online
in four." Ballard sits down across from Clarke. "I wonder
sometimes why we're not online right now."

"I
guess they just want to be sure everything works." 

"Still,
it seems like a long time for a dry run. And you'd think that —
well, they'd want to get the geothermal program up and running as
fast as possible, after all that's happened."

After
Lepreau and Winshire melted down, you mean
. 

"And
there's something else," Ballard says. "I can't get through
to Piccard."

Clarke
looks up. Piccard Station is anchored on the Galapagos Rift; it is
not a particularly stable mooring.

"You
ever meet the couple there?" Ballard asks. "Ken Lubin, Lana
Cheung?" 

Clarke
shakes her head. "They went through before me. I never met any
of the other Rifters except you."

"Nice
people. I thought I'd call them up, see how things were going at
Piccard, but nobody can get through."

"Line
down?"

"They
say it's probably something like that. Nothing serious. They're
sending a 'scaphe down to check it out." 

Maybe
the seabed opened up and swallowed them whole
, Clarke thinks.

Maybe the hull had a weak plate—one's all it would take—

Something
creaks, deep in Beebe's superstructure. Clarke looks around. The
walls seem to have moved closer while she wasn't looking.

"Sometimes,"
she says, "I wish we didn't keep Beebe at surface pressure.
Sometimes I wish we were pumped up to ambient. To take the strain off
the hull." She knows it's an impossible dream; most gases kill
outright when breathed at three hundred atmospheres. Even oxygen
would do you in if it got above one or two percent.

Ballard
shivers dramatically. "If 
you
 want to risk breathing
ninety-nine percent hydrogen, you're welcome to it. I'm happy the way
things are." She smiles. "Besides, you have any idea how
long it would take to decompress afterwards?"

In
the Systems cubby, something bleats for attention. 

"Seismic.
Wonderful." Ballard disappears into Comm. Clarke follows. 

An
amber line is writhing across one of the displays. It looks like the
EEG of someone caught in a nightmare.

"Get
your eyes back in," Ballard says. "The Throat's acting up."

* * *

They
can hear it all the way to Beebe; a malign, almost electrical hiss
from the direction of the Throat. Clarke follows Ballard towards it,
one hand running lightly along the guide rope. The distant smudge of
light that marks their destination seems wrong, somehow. The color is
different. It 
ripples
.

They
swim into its glowing nimbus and see why. The Throat is on fire.

Sapphire
auroras slide flickering across the generators. At the far end of the
array, almost invisible with distance, a pillar of smoke swirls up
into the darkness like a great tornado. 

The
sound it makes fills the abyss. Clarke closes her eyes for a moment,
and hears rattlesnakes.

"Jesus!"
Ballard shouts over the noise. "It's not supposed to 
do

that!"

Clarke
checks her thermistor. It won't settle; water temperature goes from
four degrees to thirty eight and back again, within seconds. A myriad
ephemeral currents tug at them as they watch.

"Why
the light show?" Clarke calls back.

"I
don't know!" Ballard answers. "Bioluminescence, I guess!
Heat-sensitive bacteria!" 

Without
warning, the tumult dies.

The
ocean empties of sound. Phosphorescent spiderwebs wriggle dimly on
the metal and vanish. In the distance, the tornado sighs and
fragments into a few transient dust devils. 

A
gentle rain of black soot begins to fall in the copper light.

"Smoker,"
Ballard says into the sudden stillness. "A 
big
 one."

They
swim to the place where the geyser erupted. There's a fresh wound in
the seabed, a gash several meters long, between two of the
generators.

"This
wasn't supposed to happen," Ballard says. "That's why they
built here, for crying out loud! It was supposed to be stable!"

"The
rift's never stable," Clarke replies. 
Not much point in being
here if it was.

Ballard
swims up through the fallout and pops an access plate on one of the
generators. "Well, according to this there's no damage,"
she calls down, after looking inside. "Hang on, let me switch
channels here—"

Clarke
touches one of the cylindrical sensors strapped to her waist, and
stares into the fissure. 
I should be able to fit through there,

she decides.

And
does.

"We
were lucky," Ballard is saying above her. "The other
generators are okay too. Oh, wait a second; number two has a clogged
cooling duct, but it's not serious. Backups can handle it until—
get
out of there!
"

Clarke
looks up, one hand on the sensor she's planting. Ballard stares down
at her through a chimney of fresh rock.

"Are
you 
crazy
?" Ballard shouts. "That's an active
smoker!"

Clarke
looks down again, deeper into the shaft. It twists out of sight in
the mineral haze. "We need temperature readings," she says,
"from inside the mouth."

"Get
out of there! It could go off again and fry you!"

I
suppose it could at that
, Clarke thinks. "It already blew,"
she calls back. "It'll take a while to build up a fresh head."
She twists a knob on the sensor; tiny explosive bolts blast into the
rock, anchoring the device.

"Get
out of there, 
now
!" 

"Just
a second." Clarke turns the sensor on and kicks up out of the
seabed. Ballard grabs her arm as she emerges, starts to drag her away
from the smoker. 

Clarke
stiffens and pulls free. "
Don't
—" 
touch me!

She catches herself. "I'm out, okay? You don't have to—"

"Further."
Ballard keeps swimming. "Over here."

They're
near the edge of the light now, the floodlit Throat on one side,
blackness on the other. Ballard faces Clarke. "Are you out of
your 
mind
? We could have gone back to Beebe for a drone! We
could have planted it on remote!"

Clarke
doesn't answer. She sees something moving in the distance behind
Ballard. "Watch your back," she says.

Ballard
turns, and sees the gulper sliding toward them. It undulates through
the water like brown smoke, silent and endless; Clarke can't see the
creature's tail, although several meters of serpentine flesh have
come out of the darkness.

Ballard
goes for her knife. After a moment, Clarke does too.

The
gulper's jaw drops open like a great jagged scoop.

Ballard
begins to launch herself at the thing, knife upraised.

Clarke
puts her hand out. "Wait a minute. It's not coming at us."

The
front end of the gulper is about ten meters distant now. Its tail
pulls free of the murk.

"Are
you crazy?" Ballard moves clear of Clarke's hand, still watching
the monster.

"Maybe
it isn't hungry," Clarke says. She can see its eyes, two tiny
unwinking spots glaring at them from the tip of the snout.

"They're

always
 hungry. Did you sleep through the briefings?"

The
gulper closes its mouth and passes. It extends around them now, in a
great meandering arc. The head turns back to look at them. It opens
its mouth.

"Fuck
this," Ballard says, and charges.

Her
first stroke opens a meter-long gash in the creature's side. The
gulper stares at Ballard for a moment, as if astonished. Then,
ponderously, it thrashes.

Clarke
watches without moving. 
Why can't she just let it go?
 
Why
does she always have to prove she's better than everything?

Ballard
strikes again; this time she slashes into a great tumorous swelling
that has to be the stomach.

She
frees the things inside.

They
spill out through the wound; two huge giganturids and some misshapen
creature Clarke doesn't recognize. One of the giganturids is still
alive, and in a foul mood. It locks its teeth around the first thing
it encounters.

Ballard.
From behind.

"
Lenie!
"
Ballard's knife hand is swinging in staccato arcs. The giganturid
begins to come apart. Its jaws remain locked. The convulsing gulper
crashes into Ballard and sends her spinning to the bottom.

Finally,
Clarke begins to move. 

The
gulper collides with Ballard again. Clarke moves in low, hugging the
bottom, and pulls the other woman clear.

Ballard's
knife continues to dip and twist. The giganturid is a mutilated wreck
behind the gills, but its grip remains unbroken. Ballard can't twist
around far enough to reach the skull. Clarke comes in from behind and
takes the creature's head in her hands.

It
stares at her, malevolent and unthinking.

"Kill
it!" Ballard shouts. "Jesus, what are you waiting for?"

Clarke
closes her eyes, and clenches. The skull in her hand splinters like
cheap plastic.

There
is a silence.

After
a while, she opens her eyes. The gulper is gone, fled back into
darkness to heal or die. But Ballard's still there, and Ballard is
angry.

"What's

wrong
 with you?" she says.

Clarke
unclenches her fists. Bits of bone and jellied flesh float about her
fingers. 

"You're
supposed to back me up! Why are you so damned — 
passive

all the time?" 

"Sorry."

Sometimes it works
. 

Ballard
reaches behind her back. "I'm cold. I think it punctured my
diveskin—"

Clarke
swims behind her and looks. "A couple of holes. How are you
otherwise? Anything feel broken?"

"It
broke through the diveskin," Ballard says, as if to herself.
"And when that gulper hit me, it could have—" She
turns to Clarke and her voice, even distorted, carries a shocked
uncertainty. "—I could have been killed. I could have been

killed
!" 

For
an instant, it's as though Ballard's 'skin and eyes and
self-assurance have all been stripped away. For the first time Clarke
can see through to the weakness beneath, growing like a delicate
tracery of hairline cracks. 

You
can screw up too, Ballard.
 
It isn't all fun and games
. 
You
know that now.

It
hurts, doesn't it?

Somewhere
inside, the slightest touch of sympathy. "It's okay,"
Clarke says. "Jeanette, it's—"

"You

idiot!
" Ballard hisses. She stares at Clarke like some
malign and sightless old woman. "You just floated there! You
just let it happen to me!"

Clarke
feels her guard snap up again, just in time. 
This isn't just
anger,
 she realizes. 
This isn't just the heat of the moment.
She doesn't like me. She doesn't like me at all.

And
then, dully surprised that she hasn't seen it before: 

She
never did.

A Niche

Beebe Station floats
tethered above the seabed, a gunmetal-gray planet ringed by a belt of
equatorial floodlights. There's an airlock for divers at the south
pole and a docking hatch for 'scaphes at the north. In between there
are girders and anchor lines, conduits and cables, metal armor and
Lenie Clarke.

She's
doing a routine visual check on the hull; standard procedure, once a
week. Ballard is inside, testing some equipment in the communications
cubby. This is not entirely within the spirit of the buddy system.
Clarke prefers it this way. Relations have been civil over the past
couple of days—Ballard even resurrects her patented chumminess
on occasion—but the more time they spend together, the more
forced things get. Eventually, Clarke knows, something is going to
break.

Besides,
out here it seems only natural to be alone.

She's
examining a cable clamp when a razormouth charges into the light.
It's about two meters long, and hungry. It rams directly into the
nearest of Beebe's floodlamps, mouth agape. Several teeth shatter
against the crystal lens. The razormouth twists to one side, knocking
the hull with its tail, and swims off until barely visible against
the dark. 

Clarke
watches, fascinated. The razormouth swims back and forth, back and
forth, then charges again.

The
flood weathers the impact easily, doing more damage to its attacker.
Over and over again the fish batters itself against the light.
Finally, exhausted, it sinks twitching down to the muddy bottom.

"Lenie?
Are you okay?"

Clarke
feels the words buzzing in her lower jaw. She trips the sender in her
diveskin: "I'm okay." 

"I
heard something out there," Ballard says. "I just wanted to
make sure you were—"

"I'm
fine," Clarke says. "Just a fish."

"They
never learn, do they?"

"No.
I guess not. See you later."

"See—"

Clarke
switches off her receiver.

Poor
stupid fish
. How many millennia did it take for them to learn
that bioluminescence equals food? How long will Beebe have to sit
here before they learn that electric light doesn't?

We
could keep our headlights off.
 
Maybe they'd leave us alone—

She
stares out past Beebe's electric halo. There is so much blackness
there. It almost hurts to look at it. Without lights, without sonar,
how far could she go into that viscous shroud and still return? 

Clarke
kills her headlight. Night edges a bit closer, but Beebe's lights
keep it at bay. Clarke turns until she's face to face with the
darkness. She crouches like a spider against Beebe's hull. 

She
pushes off.

The
darkness embraces her. She swims, not looking back, until her legs
grow tired. She doesn't know how far she's come.

But
it must be light-years. The ocean is full of stars.

Behind
her, the station shines brightest, with coarse yellow rays. In the
opposite direction, she can barely make out the Throat, an
insignificant sunrise on the horizon.

Everywhere
else, living constellations punctuate the dark. Here, a string of
pearls blink sexual advertisements at two-second intervals. Here, a
sudden flash leaves diversionary afterimages swarming across Clarke's
field of view; something flees under cover of her momentary
blindness. There, a counterfeit worm twists lazily in the current,
invisibly tied to the roof of some predatory mouth.

There
are so many of them. 

She
feels a sudden surge in the water, as if something big has just
passed very close. A delicious thrill dances through her body.

It
nearly touched me,
 she thinks. 
I wonder what it was.
 The
rift is full of monsters who don't know when to quit. It doesn't
matter how much they eat. Their voracity is as much a part of them as
their elastic bellies, their unhinging jaws. Ravenous dwarves attack
giants twice their own size, and sometimes win. The abyss is a
desert; no one can afford the luxury of waiting for better odds. 

But
even a desert has oases, and sometimes the deep hunters find them.
They come upon the malnourishing abundance of the rift and gorge
themselves; their descendants grow huge and bloated over such
delicate bones—

My
light was off, and it left me alone.
 
I wonder—

She
turns it back on. Her vision clouds in the sudden glare, then clears.
The ocean reverts to unrelieved black. No nightmares accost her. The
beam lights empty water wherever she points it.

She
switches it off. There's a moment of absolute darkness while her
eyecaps adjust to the reduced light. Then the stars come out again. 

They
are so beautiful. Lenie Clarke rests on the bottom of the ocean and
watches the abyss sparkle around her. And she almost laughs as she
realizes, three thousand meters from the nearest sunlight, that it's
only dark when the lights are on.

* * *

"What
the hell is wrong with you? You've been gone for over three hours,
did you know that? Why didn't you answer me?"

Clarke
bends over and removes her fins. "I guess I turned my receiver
off," she says. "I was—wait a second, did you say—"

"You

guess
? Have you forgotten every safety reg they drilled into
us? You're supposed to have your receiver on from the moment you
leave Beebe until you get back!"

"Did
you say 
three hours
?" 

"I
couldn't even come out after you, I couldn't find you on sonar! I
just had to sit here and hope you'd show up!"

It
only seems a few minutes since she pushed off into the darkness.
Clarke climbs up into the lounge, suddenly chilled.

"Where

were
 you, Lenie?" Ballard demands, coming up behind her.
Clarke hears the slightest plaintive tone in her voice.

"I—I
must've been on the bottom," Clarke says. "that's why sonar
didn't get me. I didn't go far." 

Was
I asleep?
 
What was I doing for three hours?

"I
was just — wandering around. I lost track of the time. I'm
sorry."

"Not
good enough. Don't do it again." 

There's
a brief silence. It's ended by the sudden, familiar impact of flesh
on metal.

"Christ!"
Ballard snaps. "I'm turning the externals off right now!"

Whatever
it is gets in two more hits by the time Ballard reaches Comm. Clarke
hears her punch a couple of buttons.

Ballard
comes back into the lounge. "There. Now we're invisible."

Something
hits them again. And again.

"Or
maybe not," Clarke says. 

Ballard
stands in the lounge, listening to the rhythm of the assault. "They
don't show up on sonar," she says, almost whispering.
"Sometimes, when I hear them coming at us, I tune it down to
extreme close range. But it looks right through them."

"No
gas bladders. Nothing to bounce an echo off of."

"We
show up just fine out there, most of the time. But not those things.
You can't find them, no matter how high you turn the gain. They're
like ghosts."

"They're
not ghosts." Almost unconsciously, Clarke has been counting the
beats: 
eight — nine—

Ballard
turns to face her. "They've shut down Piccard," she says,
and her voice is small and tight. 

"What?"

"The
grid office says it's just some technical problem. But I've got a
friend in Personnel. I phoned him when you were outside. He says
Lana's in the hospital. And I get the feeling—" Ballard
shakes her head. "It sounded like Ken Lubin did something down
there. I think maybe he attacked her." 

Three
thumps from outside, in rapid succession. Clarke can feel Ballard's
eyes on her. The silence stretches. 

"Or
maybe not," Ballard says. "We got all those personality
tests. If he was violent, they would've picked it up before they sent
him down." 

Clarke
watches her, listens to the pounding of an intermittent fist.

"Or
maybe — maybe the rift 
changed
 him somehow. Maybe they
misjudged the pressure we'd all be under. So to speak." Ballard
musters a feeble smile. "Not the physical danger so much as the
emotional stress, you know? Everyday things. Just being outside could
get to you after a while. Seawater sluicing through your chest. Not
breathing for hours at a time. It's like—living without a
heartbeat—" 

She
looks up at the ceiling; the sounds from outside are a bit more
erratic, now. 

"Outside's
not so bad," Clarke says. 
At least you're incompressible.

At least you don't have to worry about the plates giving in.

"I
don't think you'd change suddenly. It would just sort of sneak up on
you, little by little. And then one day you'd just wake up changed,
you'd be different somehow, only you'd never have noticed the
transition. Like Ken Lubin." 

She
looks at Clarke, and her voice drops a bit.

"And
you." 

"Me."
Clarke turns Ballard's words over in her mind, waits for the onset of
some reaction. She feels nothing but her own indifference. "I
don't think you have much to worry about. I'm not the violent type."

"I
know. I'm not worried about my own safety, Lenie. I'm worried about
yours."

Clarke
looks at her from behind the impervious safety of her lenses, and
doesn't answer. 

"You've
changed since you came down here," Ballard says. "You're
withdrawing from me, you're exposing yourself to unnecessary risks. I
don't know exactly what's happening to you. It's almost like you're
trying to kill yourself." 

"I'm
not," Clarke says. She tries to change the subject. "Is
Lana Cheung all right?"

Ballard
studies her for a moment. She takes the hint. "I don't know. I
couldn't get any details." 

Clarke
feels something knotting up inside her.

"I
wonder what she did to set him off?" she murmurs.

Ballard
stares at her, openmouthed. "What 
she
 did? I can't
believe you said that!" 

"I
only meant—"

"I
know what you meant."

The
outside pounding has stopped. Ballard does not relax. She stands
hunched over in those strange, loose-fitting clothes that Drybacks
wear, and stares at the ceiling as though she doesn't believe in the
silence. She looks back at Clarke.

"Lenie,
you know I don't like to pull rank, but your attitude is putting both
of us at risk. I think this place is really getting to you. I hope
you can get back online here, I really do. Otherwise I may have to
recommend you for a transfer." 

Clarke
watches Ballard leave the lounge. 
You're lying
, she realizes.

You're scared to death, and it's not just because I'm changing.

It's
because you are.

* * *

Clarke
finds out five hours after the fact: something has changed on the
ocean floor. 

We
sleep and the earth moves
 she thinks, studying the topographic
display. 
And next time, or the time after, maybe it'll move right
out from under us.

I
wonder if I'll have time to feel anything.

She
turns at a sound behind her. Ballard is standing in the lounge,
swaying slightly. Her face seems somehow disfigured by the concentric
rings in her eyes, by the dark hollows around them. Naked eyes are
beginning to look alien to Clarke.

"The
seabed shifted," Clarke says. "There's a new outcropping
about two hundred meters west of us."

"That's
odd. I didn't feel anything."

"It
happened about five hours ago. You were asleep."

Ballard
glances up sharply. Clarke studies the haggard lines of her face. 
On
second thought...

"I
— would've woken up," Ballard says. She squeezes past
Clarke into the cubby and checks the topographic display.

"Two
meters high, twelve long," Clarke recites. 

Ballard
doesn't answer. She punches some commands into a keyboard; the
topographic image dissolves, reforms into a column of numbers. 

"Just
as I thought," she says. "No heavy seismic activity for
over forty-two hours."

"Sonar
doesn't lie," Clarke says calmly.

"Neither
does seismo," Ballard answers.

There's
a brief silence. There's a standard procedure for such things, and
they both know what it is. 

"We
have to check it out," Clarke says. 

But
Ballard only nods. "Give me a moment to change."

* * *

They
call it a squid; a jet-propelled cylinder about a meter long, with a
headlight at the front end and a towbar at the back. Clarke, floating
between Beebe and the seabed, checks it over with one hand. Her other
hand grips a sonar pistol. She points the pistol into blackness;
ultrasonic clicks sweep the night, give her a bearing.

"That
way," she says, pointing.

Ballard
squeezes down on her own squid's towbar. The machine pulls her away.
After a moment Clarke follows. Bringing up the rear, a third squid
carries an assortment of sensors in a nylon bag. 

Ballard's
traveling at nearly full throttle. The lamps on her helmet and squid
stab the water like twin lighthouse beacons. Clarke, her own lights
doused, catches up about halfway to their destination. They cruise
along a couple of meters over the muddy substrate.

"Your
lights," Ballard says.

"We
don't need them. Sonar works in the dark."

"Are
you breaking regs for the sheer thrill of it, now?"

"The
fish down here, they key on things that glow—"

"Turn
your lights on. That's an order."

Clarke
doesn't answer. She watches the beams beside her, Ballard's squid
shining steady and unwavering, Ballard's headlamp slicing the water
in erratic arcs as she moves her head— 

"I
told you," Ballard says, "turn your—
Christ!
"

It
was just a glimpse, caught for a moment in the sweep of Ballard's
headlight. She jerks her head around and it slides back out of sight.
Then it looms up in the squid's beam, huge and terrible.

The
abyss is grinning at them, teeth bared.

A
mouth stretches across the width of the beam, extends into darkness
on either side. It is crammed with conical teeth the size of human
hands, and they do not look the least bit fragile.

Ballard
makes a strangled sound and dives into the mud. The benthic ooze
boils up around her in a seething cloud; she disappears in a torrent
of planktonic corpses.

Lenie
Clarke stops and waits, unmoving. She stares transfixed at that
threatening smile. Her whole body feels electrified, she's never been
so explicitly aware of herself. Every nerve fires and freezes at the
same time. She is terrified.

But
she's also, somehow, completely in control of herself. She reflects
on this paradox as Ballard's abandoned squid slows and stops itself,
scant meters from that endless row of teeth. She wonders at her own
analytical clarity as the third squid, with its burden of sensors,
decelerates past and takes up position beside Ballard's.

There
in the light, the grin does not change.

Clarke
raises her sonar pistol and fires. 
We're here,
 she realizes,
checking the readout. 
That's the outcropping.

She
swims closer. The smile hangs there, enigmatic and enticing. Now she
can see bits of bone at the roots of the teeth, and tatters of
decomposed flesh trailing from the gums. 

She
turns and backtracks. The cloud on the seabed is starting to settle.

"Ballard,"
she says in her synthetic voice. 

Nobody
answers.

Clarke
reaches down through the mud, feeling blind, until she touches
something warm and trembling.

The
seabed explodes in her face.

Ballard
erupts from the substrate, trailing a muddy comet's tail. Her hand
rises from that sudden cloud, clasped around something glinting in
the transient light. Clarke sees the knife, twists almost too late;
the blade glances off her 'skin, igniting nerves along her ribcage.
Ballard lashes out again. This time Clarke catches the knife-hand as
it shoots past, twists it, pushes. Ballard tumbles away.

"It's
me!" Clarke shouts; the vocoder turns her voice into a tinny
vibrato.

Ballard
rises up again, white eyes unseeing, knife still in hand.

Clarke
holds up her hands. "It's okay! There's nothing here! It's
dead!" 

Ballard
stops. She stares at Clarke. She looks over to the squids, to the
smile they illuminate. She stiffens.

"It's
some kind of whale," Clarke says. "It's been dead a long
time." 

"A
— a whale?" Ballard rasps. She begins to shake.

There's
no need to feel embarrassed
, Clarke almost says, but doesn't.
Instead, she reaches out and touches Ballard lightly on the arm. 
Is
this how you do it?
, she wonders.

Ballard
jerks back as if scalded.

I
guess not—

"Um,
Jeanette—" Clarke begins.

Ballard
raises a trembling hand, cutting Clarke off. "I'm okay. I want
to g — I think we should get back now, don't you?"

"Okay,"
Clarke says. But she doesn't really mean it.

She
could stay out here all day.

* * *

Ballard
is at the library again. She turns, passing a casual hand over the
brightness control as Clarke comes up behind her; the display darkens
before Clarke can see what it is. Clarke glances at the eyephones
hanging from the terminal, puzzled. If Ballard doesn't want her to
see what she's reading, she could just use those.

But
then she wouldn't see me coming...

"I
think maybe it was a Ziphiid," Ballard's saying. "A beaked
whale. Except it had too many teeth. Very rare. They don't dive this
deep." 

Clarke
listens, not really interested. 

"It
must have died and rotted further up, and then sank." Ballard's
voice is slightly raised. She looks almost furtively at something on
the other side of the lounge. "I wonder what the chances are of
that happening." 

"What?"

"I
mean, in all the ocean, something that big just happening to drop out
of the sky a few hundred meters away. The odds of that must be pretty
low."

"Yeah.
I guess so." Clarke reaches over and brightens the display. One
half of the screen glows softly with luminous text. The other holds
the rotating image of a complex molecule. 

"What's
this?" Clarke asks.

Ballard
steals another glance across the lounge. "Just an old biopsyche
text the library had on file. I was browsing through it. Used to be
an interest of mine."

Clarke
looks at her. "Uh huh." She bends over and studies the
display. Some sort of technical chemistry. The only thing she really
understands is the caption beneath the graphic. 

She
reads it aloud: "True Happiness." 

"Yeah.
A tricyclic with four side chains." Ballard points at the
screen. "Whenever you're happy, really happy, that's what does
it to you."

"When
did they find 
that
 out?" 

"I
don't know. It's an old book."

Clarke
stares at the revolving simulacrum. It disturbs her, somehow. It
floats there over that smug stupid caption, and it says something she
doesn't want to hear. 

You've
been solved
, it says. 
You're mechanical.
 
Chemicals and
electricity.
 
Everything you are, every dream, every action, it
all comes down to a change of voltage somewhere, or a — what
did she say — a tricyclic with four side chains—

"It's
wrong," Clarke murmurs. 
Or they'd be able to fix us, when we
broke down—

"Sorry?"
Ballard says.

"It's
saying we're just these — soft computers. With faces." 

Ballard
shuts off the terminal. 

"That's
right," she says. "And some of us may even be losing
those."

The
jibe registers, but it doesn't hurt. Clarke straightens and moves
towards the ladder.

"Where
you going? You going outside again?" Ballard asks.

"The
shift isn't over. I thought I'd clean out the duct on number two."

"It's
a bit late to start on that, Lenie. The shift will be over before
we're even half done." Ballard's eyes dart away again. This time
Clarke follows the glance to the full-length mirror on the far wall. 

She
sees nothing of particular interest there. 

"I'll
work late." Clarke grabs the railing, swings her foot onto the
top rung.

"Lenie,"
Ballard says, and Clarke swears she hears a tremor in that voice. She
looks back, but the other woman is moving to Comm. "Well, I'm
afraid I can't go with you," she's saying. "I'm in the
middle of debugging one of the telemetry routines."

"That's
fine," Clarke says. She feels the tension starting to rise.
Beebe is shrinking again. She starts down the ladder.

"Are
you sure you're okay going out alone? Maybe you should wait until
tomorrow."

"No.
I'm okay." 

"Well,
remember to keep your receiver open. I don't want you getting lost on
me again—"

Clarke
is in the wetroom. She climbs into the airlock and runs through the
ritual. It no longer feels like drowning. It feels like being born
again.

* * *

She
awakens into darkness, and the sound of weeping. 

She
lies there for a few minutes, confused and uncertain. The sobs come
from all sides, soft but omnipresent in Beebe's resonant shell. She
hears nothing else except her own heartbeat.

She's
afraid. She's not sure why. She wishes the sounds would go away.

Clarke
rolls off her bunk and fumbles at the hatch. It opens into a
semi-darkened corridor; meager light escapes from the lounge at one
end. The sounds come from the other direction, from deepening
darkness. She follows them through an infestation of pipes and
conduits. 

Ballard's
quarters. The hatch is open. An emerald readout sparkles in the
darkness, bestowing no detail upon the hunched figure on the pallet.

"Ballard,"
Clarke says softly. She doesn't want to go in.

The
shadow moves, seems to look up at her. "Why won't you show it?"
it says, its voice pleading. 

Clarke
frowns in the darkness. "Show what?" 

"You
know what! How — afraid you are!"

"Afraid?"

"Of
being here, of being stuck at the bottom of this horrible dark
ocean—"

"I
don't understand," Clarke whispers. Claustrophobia begins to
stir in her, restless again. 

Ballard
snorts, but the derision seems forced. "Oh, you understand all
right. You think this is some sort of competition, you think if you
can just keep it all inside you'll win somehow — but it isn't
like that at all, Lenie, it isn't helping to keep it hidden like
this, we've got to be able to trust each other down here or we're
lost—"

She
shifts slightly on the bunk. Clarke's eyes, enhanced by the caps, can
pick out some details now; rough edges embroider Ballard's
silhouette, the folds and creases of normal clothing, unbuttoned to
the waist. She thinks of a cadaver, half-dissected, rising on the
table to mourn its own mutilation.

"I
don't know what you mean," Clarke says.

"I've
tried to be friendly," Ballard says. "I've tried to get
along with you, but you're so 
cold
, you won't even admit —
I mean, you 
couldn't
 like it down here, nobody could, why
can't you just admit—" 

"But
I don't, I — I 
hate
 it in here. It's like Beebe's going
to — to clench around me. And all I can do is wait for it to
happen."

Ballard
nods in the darkness. "Yes, yes, I know what you mean." She
seems somehow encouraged by Clarke's admission. "And no matter
how much you tell yourself—" She stops. "You hate it

in here?
" 

Did
I say something wrong?
 Clarke wonders.

"Outside
is hardly any better, you know," Ballard says. "Outside is
even worse! There's mudslides and smokers and giant fish trying to
eat you all the time, you can't possibly — but — you
don't mind all that, do you?"

Somehow,
her tone has turned accusing. Clarke shrugs.

"No,
you don't," Ballard is speaking slowly now. Her voice drops to a
whisper: "You actually 
like
 it out there. Don't you?"

Reluctantly,
Clarke nods. "Yeah. I guess so."

"But
it's so — the rift can kill you, Lenie. It can kill 
us
.
A hundred different ways. Doesn't that scare you?" 

"I
don't know. I don't think about it much. I guess it does, sort of."

"Then
why are you so happy out there?" Ballard cries. "It doesn't
make any sense..."

I'm
not exactly 'happy'
, Clarke thinks. "I don't know. It's not
that weird, lots of people do dangerous things. What about
free-fallers? What about mountain climbers?"

But
Ballard doesn't answer. Her silhouette has grown rigid on the bed.
Suddenly, she reaches over and turns on the cubby light.

Lenie
Clarke blinks against the sudden brightness. Then the room dims as
her eyecaps darken.

"Jesus
Christ!" Ballard shouts at her. "You 
sleep
 in that
fucking costume now?"

It's
something else Clarke hasn't thought about. It just seems easier.

"All
this time I've been pouring my heart out to you and you've been
wearing that 
machine's
 face! You don't even have the decency
to show me your goddamned 
eyes
!"

Clarke
steps back, startled. Ballard rises from the bed and takes a single
step forward. "To think you could actually pass for human before
they gave you that suit! Why don't you go find something to play with
out in your fucking ocean!"

And
slams the hatch in Clarke's face.

Lenie
Clarke stares at the sealed bulkhead for a few moments. Her face, she
knows, is calm. Her face is usually calm. But she stands there,
unmoving, until the cringing thing inside of her unfolds a little.

"Okay,"
she says at last, very softly. "I guess I will."

* * *

Ballard
is waiting for her as she emerges from the airlock. "Lenie,"
she says quietly, "we have to talk. It's important."

Clarke
bends over and removes her fins. "Go ahead."

"Not
here. In my cubby."

Clarke
looks at her.

"Please."

Clarke
starts up the ladder.

"Aren't
you going to take—" Ballard stops as Clarke looks down.
"Never mind. It's okay."

They
ascend into the lounge. Ballard takes the lead. Clarke follows her
down the corridor and into her cabin. Ballard dogs the hatch and sits
on her bunk, leaving room for Clarke.

Clarke
looks around the cramped space. Ballard has curtained over the
mirrored bulkhead with a spare sheet.

Ballard
pats the bed beside her. "Come on, Lenie. Sit down."

Reluctantly,
Clarke sits. Ballard's sudden kindness confuses her. Ballard hasn't
acted this way since...

...Since
she had the upper hand.

"—might
not be easy for you to hear," Ballard is saying, "but we
have to get you off the rift. They shouldn't have put you down here
in the first place."

Clarke
doesn't reply.

"Remember
the tests they gave us?" Ballard continues. "They measured
our tolerance to stress; confinement, prolonged isolation, chronic
physical danger, that sort of thing."

Clarke
nods slightly. "So?"

"So,"
says Ballard, "Did you think for a moment they'd test for those
qualities without knowing what sort of person would have them? Or how
they got to be that way?"

Inside,
Clarke goes very still. Outside, nothing changes.

Ballard
leans forward a bit. "Remember what you said? About mountain
climbers, and free-fallers, and why people deliberately do dangerous
things? I've been reading up, Lenie. Ever since I got to know you
I've been reading up—"

Got
to know me?

"—and
do you know what thrillseekers have in common? They all say that you
haven't lived until you've nearly died. They need the danger. It
gives them a rush." 

You
don't know me at all—

"Some
of them are combat veterans, some were hostages for long periods,
some just spent a lot of time in dead zones for one reason or
another. And a lot of the really compulsive ones—"

Nobody
knows me.

"—the
ones who can't be happy unless they're on the edge, all the time —
a lot of them got started early, Lenie. When they were just children.
And you, I bet— you don't even like being touched—"

Go
away.
 
Go away.

Ballard
puts her hand on Clarke's shoulder. "How long were you abused,
Lenie?" she asks gently. "How many years?"

Clarke
shrugs off the hand and does not answer. 
He didn't mean any harm.

She shifts on the bunk, turning away slightly. 

"That's
it, isn't it? You don't just have a tolerance to trauma, Lenie.
You've got an 
addiction
 to it. Don't you?"

It
only takes Clarke a moment to recover. The 'skin, the eyecaps make it
easier. She turns calmly back to Ballard. She even smiles a little.

"
Abused
,"
she says. "Now 
there's
 a quaint term. Thought it died out
after the witch-hunts. You some sort of history buff, Jeanette?"

"There's
a mechanism," Ballard tells her. "I've been reading about
it. Do you know how the brain handles stress, Lenie? It dumps all
sorts of addictive stimulants into the bloodstream. Beta-endorphins,
opioids. If it happens often enough, for long enough, you get hooked.
You can't help it."

Clarke
feels a sound in her throat, a jagged coughing noise a bit like
tearing metal. After a moment, she recognizes it as laughter.

"I'm
not making it up!" Ballard insists. "You can look it up
yourself if you don't believe me! Don't you know how many abused
children spend their whole lives hooked on wife beaters or
self-mutilation or free-fall—"

"And
it makes them happy, is that it?" Clarke says, still smiling.
"They 
enjoy
 getting raped, or punched out, or—"

"No,
of course you're not happy! But what 
you
 feel, that's probably
the closest you've ever come. So you confuse the two, you look for
stress anywhere you can find it. It's physiological addiction, Lenie.
You ask for it. You always asked for it." 

I
ask for it.
 Ballard's been reading, and Ballard knows: Life is
pure electrochemistry. No use explaining how it 
feels.
 No use
explaining that there are far worse things than being beaten up.
There are even worse things than being held down and raped by your
own father. There are the times between, when nothing happens at all.
When he leaves you alone, and you don't know for how long. You sit
across the table from him, forcing yourself to eat while your bruised
insides try to knit themselves back together; and he pats you on the
head and smiles at you, and you know the reprieve's already lasted
too long, he's going to come for you tonight, or tomorrow, or maybe
the next day.

Of
course I asked for it.
 
How else could I get it over with?

"Listen."
Clarke shakes her head. "I—" But it's hard to talk,
suddenly. She knows what she wants to say; Ballard's not the only one
who reads. Ballard can't see it through a lifetime of fulfilled
expectations, but there's nothing special about what happened to
Lenie Clarke. Baboons and lions kill their own young. Male
sticklebacks beat up their mates. Even 
insects 
rape. It's not
abuse, really, it's just— biology. 

But
she can't say it aloud, for some reason. She tries, and she tries,
but in the end all that comes out is a challenge that sounds almost
childish:

"Don't
you know 
anything
?" 

"Sure
I do, Lenie. I know you're hooked on your own pain, and so you go out
there and keep daring the rift to kill you, and eventually it will,
don't you see? That's why you shouldn't be here. That's why we have
to get you back."

Clarke
stands up. "I'm not going back." She turns to the hatch.

Ballard
reaches out toward her. "Listen, you've got to stay and hear me
out. There's more."

Clarke
looks down at her with complete indifference. "Thanks for your
concern. But I don't have to stay. I can leave any time I want to."

"You
go out there now and you'll give everything away, they're watching
us! Haven't you figured it out 
yet
?" Ballard's voice is
rising. "Listen, they 
knew
 about you! They were 
looking

for someone like you! They've been testing us, they don't know yet
what kind of person works out better down here, so they're watching
and waiting to see who cracks first! This whole program is still
experimental, can't you see that? Everyone they've sent down —
you, me, Ken Lubin and Lana Cheung, it's all part of some
cold-blooded test—"

"And
you're failing it," Clarke says softly. "I see."

"They're

using
 us, Lenie—
don't go out there!
"

Ballard's
fingers grasp at Clarke like the suckers of an octopus. Clarke pushes
them away. She undogs the hatch and pushes it open. She hears Ballard
rising behind her. 

"
You're
sick!
" Ballard screams. Something smashes into the back of
Clarke's head. She goes sprawling out into the corridor. One arm
smacks painfully against a cluster of pipes as she falls.

She
rolls to one side and raises her arms to protect herself. But Ballard
just steps over her and stalks into the lounge.

I'm
not afraid,
 Clarke notes, getting to her feet. 
She hit me, and
I'm not afraid.
 
Isn't that odd—

From
somewhere nearby, the sound of shattering glass.

Ballard's
shouting in the lounge. "The experiment's over! Come on out, you
fucking ghouls!"

Clarke
follows the corridor, steps out of it. Pieces of the lounge mirror
hang like great jagged stalactites in their frame. Splashes of glass
litter the floor.

On
the wall, behind the broken mirror, a fisheye lens takes in every
corner of the room.

Ballard
is staring into it. "Did you hear me? I'm not playing your
stupid games any more! I'm through performing!"

The
quartzite lens stares back impassively.

So
you were right
, Clarke muses. She remembers the sheet in
Ballard's cubby. 
You figured it out, you found the pickups in your
own cubby, and Ballard, my dear friend, you didn't tell me.

How
long have you known?

Ballard
looks around, sees Clarke. "You've got 
her
 fooled, all
right," she snarls at the fisheye, "but 
she's
 a
goddamned basket case! She's not even sane! Your little tests don't
impress 
me
 one fucking bit!"

Clarke
steps toward her. 

"Don't
call me a basket case," she says, her voice absolutely level.

"That's
what you 
are
!" Ballard shouts. "You're sick! That's
why you're down here! They 
need
 you sick, they depend on it,
and you're so far gone you can't see it! You hide everything behind
that — that 
mask
 of yours, and you sit there like some
masochistic jellyfish and just take anything anyone dishes out—you

ask
 for it—" 

That
used to be true
, Clarke realizes as her hands ball into fists.

That's the strange thing.
 Ballard begins to back away; Clarke
advances, step by step. 
It wasn't until I came down here that I
learned that I could fight back
. 
That I could win
. 
The
rift taught me that, and now Ballard has too—

"Thank
you," Clarke whispers, and hits Ballard hard in the face.

Ballard
goes over backwards, collides with a table. Clarke calmly steps
forward. She catches a glimpse of herself in a glass icicle; her
capped eyes seem almost luminous.

"Oh
Jesus," Ballard whimpers. "Lenie, I'm 
sorry
."

Clarke
stands over her. "Don't be," she says. She sees herself as
some sort of exploding schematic, each piece neatly labeled. 
So
much anger in here
, she thinks. 
So much hate
. 
So much
to take out on someone.

She
looks at Ballard, cowering on the floor.

"I
think," Clarke says, "I'll start with you." 

But
her therapy ends before she can even get properly warmed up. A sudden
noise fills the lounge, shrill, periodic, vaguely familiar. It takes
a moment for Clarke to remember what it is. She lowers her foot.

Over
in the Communications cubby, the telephone is ringing.

* * *

Jeanette
Ballard is going home today.

For
half an hour the 'scaphe has been dropping deeper into midnight. Now
the Comm monitor shows it settling like a great bloated tadpole onto
Beebe's docking assembly. Sounds of mechanical copulation reverberate
and die. The overhead hatch drops open. 

Ballard's
replacement climbs down, already mostly 'skinned, staring
impenetrably from eyes without pupils. His gloves are off; his 'skin
is open up to the forearms. Clarke sees the faint scars running along
his wrists, and smiles a bit inside.

Was
there another Ballard up there, waiting
, she wonders, 
in case
I had been the one who didn't work out?

Out
of sight down the corridor, a hatch hisses open. Ballard appears in
shirtsleeves, one eye swollen shut, carrying a single suitcase. She
seems about to say something, but stops when she sees the newcomer.
She looks at him for a moment. She nods briefly. She climbs into the
belly of the 'scaphe without a word.

Nobody
calls down to them. There are no salutations, no morale-boosting
small talk. Perhaps the crew have been briefed. Perhaps they've
figured it out on their own. The docking hatch swings shut. With a
final clank, the 'scaphe disengages. 

Clarke
walks across the lounge and looks into the camera. She reaches
between mirror fragments and rips its power line from the wall.

We
don't need this any more
, she thinks, and she knows that
somewhere far away, someone agrees.

She
and the newcomer appraise each other with dead white eyes. 

"I'm
Lubin," he says at last.

Housecleaning

So.
They say you're a beater.

Lubin
stands in front of her, his duffel bag at his feet. Slavic; dark
hair, pale skin, a face planed out by an underskilled woodworker. One
thick eyebrow shading both eyes. Not tall— a hundred and eighty
centimeters, maybe— but solid.

You
look like a beater.

Scars.
Not just on the wrists, on the face too. Very faint, a webwork echo
of old injuries. Too subtle for deliberate decoration, even if
Lubin's tastes run to that, but too obvious for reconstructive work;
medical technology learned how to erase such telltales decades ago.
Unless— unless the injuries were 
really
 bad.

Is
that it? Did something chew your face down to the bone, a long time
ago?

Lubin
reaches down, picks up his bag. His covered eyes betray nothing.

I've
known beaters in my day. You fit. Sort of.

"Any
preference which cubby I take?" he asks. It's strange, hearing
that voice coming out of a face like his. It sounds almost pleasant.

Clarke
shakes her head. "I'm second on the right. Take any of the
others."

He
steps past her. Daggers of reflective glass protrude from the edges
of the far wall; within them, Lubin's fractured image disappears into
the corridor at Clarke's back. She moves across the lounge to that
jagged wall. 
I should really clean this up one of these days... 

She
used to like the way the mirror's worked since Ballard's adjustments.
The jigsaw reflections seem more creative, somehow. More
impressionistic. Now, though, they're beginning to wear on her. Maybe
it's time for another change.

A
piece of Ken Lubin stares at her from the wall. Without thinking, she
drives her fist into the glass. A shower of fragments tinkles to the
floor.

You
could be a beater. Just try it. Just fucking try it.

"Oh,"
Lubin says, behind her. "I—"

There's
still enough mirror left to check; her face is free of any
expression. She turns to face him.

"I'm
sorry if I startled you," Lubin says quietly, and withdraws.

He
does seem sorry, at that.

So.
You're not a beater.
 Clarke leans against the bulkhead. 
At
least, not my kind of beater.
 She's not exactly sure how she
knows. There's some vital chemistry missing between them. Lubin, she
thinks, is a very dangerous man. Just not to her. 

She
smiles to herself. 
Beating means never having to say you're sorry.

Until
it's too late, of course.

* * *

She's
tired enough of sharing the cubby with herself. Sharing it with
someone else is something she likes even less.

Lenie
Clarke lies on her bunk and scans the length of her own body. Past
her toes, another Lenie Clarke stares coolly back. The jumbled
topography of the forward bulkhead frames her reflected face like a
tabletop junkyard turned on edge.

The
camera behind that mirror must see the same thing she does, but
distorted around the edges. Clarke figures on a wide-angle lens; the
GA wouldn't want to leave the corners out of range. What's the point
of running an experiment if you can't keep tabs on your subject
animals?

She
wonders if anyone's watching her now. Probably not; at least, nobody
human. They'll have some machine, tireless and dispassionate,
something that watches with relentless attention as she works or
shits or gets herself off. It will be programmed to call flesh and
blood if she does anything interesting.

Interesting.

Who defines that parameter? Is it strictly in keeping with the nature
of the experiment, or has someone programmed more personal tastes on
the side? Does anyone else get off when Lenie Clarke does?

She
twists on the bed and faces the headboard bulkhead. A spaghetti
bundle of optical filaments erupts from the floor beside her pallet
and crawls up the middle of the wall, disappearing into the ceiling;
the seismic feeds, on their way to the communications cubby. The air
conditioning inlet sighs across her cheek, just to one side. Behind
it, a metal iris catches strips of light sectioned by the grating,
ready to sphincter shut the moment delta-p exceeds some critical
number of millibars per second. Beebe is a mansion with many rooms,
each potentially self-isolating in case of emergency. 

Clarke
lies back on the bunk and lets her fingers drop to the deck. The
telemetry cartridge on the floor is almost dry now, fine runnels of
salt crusting its surface as the seawater evaporates. It's a basic
broad-spectrum model, studded with half a dozen senses: seismic,
temperature, flow, the usual sulfates and organics. Sensor heads
disfigure its housing like the spikes on a mace.

Which
is why it's here, now.

She
closes her fingers around the carrying handle, lifts the cartridge
off the deck. Heavy. Neutrally buoyant in seawater, of course, but
9.5 kilos in atmosphere according to the specs. Mostly pressure
casing, very tough. An active smoker at five hundred atmospheres
wouldn't touch it.

Maybe
it's a bit of overkill, sending it up against one lousy mirror.
Ballard started the job with her bare hands, after all.

Odd
that they didn't make them shatterproof.

But
convenient.

Clarke
sits up, hefting the cartridge. Her reflection looks back at her; its
eyes, blank but not empty, seem somehow amused.

* * *

"Ms.
Clarke? You okay?" It's Lubin. "I heard—"

"I'm
fine," she says to the sealed hatch. There's glass all over the
cubby. One stubborn shard, half a meter long, hangs in its frame like
a loose tooth. She reaches out (mirror fragments tumble off her
thighs) and taps it with one hand. It crashes to the deck and
shatters. 

"Just
housecleaning," she calls.

Lubin
says nothing. She hears him move away up the corridor.

He's
going to work out fine. It's been a few days now and he's been
scrupulous about keeping his distance. There's no sexual chemistry at
all, nothing to set them at each other's throats. Whatever Ken Lubin
did to Lana Cheung— whatever those two did to each other—
won't be an issue here. Lubin's tastes are too specific.

For
that matter, so are Clarke's.

She
stands up, head bent to avoid the metal encrustations on the ceiling.
Glass crunches under her feet. The bulkhead behind the mirror,
freshly exposed, looks oily in the fluorescent light; a ribbed gray
face with only two distinguishing features. The first is a spherical
lens, smaller than a fingernail, tucked up in one corner. Clarke
pulls it from its socket, holds it between thumb and forefinger for a
second. A tiny glass eyeball. She drops it to the glittering deck. 

There's
also a name, stamped into one of the alloy ribs: 
Hansen
Fabrication
.

It's
the first time she's seen see a brand name since she arrived here,
except for the GA logos pressed into the shoulders of their
diveskins. That seems odd, somehow. She checks the lightstrip running
the length of the ceiling; white and featureless. An emergency hydrox
tank next to the hatch: DOT test date, pressure specs, but no
manufacturer.

She
doesn't know if she should attach any significance to this.

Alone,
now. Hatch sealed, surveillance ended — even her own reflection
shattered beyond repair. For the first time, Lenie Clarke feels a
sense of real safety here in the station's belly. She doesn't quite
know what to do with it.

Maybe
I could let my guard down a bit.
 Her hands go to her face.

At
first she thinks she's gone blind; the cubby seems so dark to her
uncapped eyes, walls and furniture receding into mere suggestions of
shadow. She remembers turning the lights down in increments in the
days since Ballard's departure, darkening this room, darkening every
other corner of Beebe Station. Lubin's been doing it too, although
they never talk about it.

For
the first time she wonders at their actions. It doesn't make sense;
eyecaps compensate automatically for changes in ambient light, always
serve up the same optimum intensity to the retina. Why choose to live
in a darkness you don't even perceive?

She
nudges the lights up a bit; the cubby brightens. Bright colors jar
the eye against a background of gray on gray. The hydrox tank
reflects fluorescent orange; readouts wink red and blue and green;
the handle on the bulkhead locker is a small exclamation of yellow.
She can't remember the last time she noticed color; eyecaps draw the
faintest images from darkness, but most of the spectrum gets lost in
the process. Only now, when the lights are up, can color reassert
itself.

She
doesn't like it. It seems raw and out of place down here. Clarke puts
her eyecaps back in, dims the lights to their usual minimal glow. The
bulkhead fades to a comforting wash of blue pastels.

Just
as well. Shouldn't get too careless anyway.

In
a couple of days Beebe will be crawling with a full staff. She
doesn't want to get used to exposing herself.

Rome

Neotenous

It didn't look human
at first. It didn't even look alive. It looked like a pile of dirty
rags someone had thrown against the base of the Cambie pylon. Gerry
Fischer wouldn't have looked twice if the skytrain hadn't hissed
overhead at exactly the right moment, strobing the ground with
segmented strips of light.

He
stared. Eyes, flashing in and out of shadow, stared back.

He
didn't move until the train had slid away along its overhead track.
The world fell back into muddy low contrast. The sidewalk. The strip
of kudzu
4
 below
the track, gray and suffocating under countless drizzlings of
concrete dust. Feeble cloudbank reflections of neon and laser from
Commercial. 

And
this thing with the eyes, this rag-pile against the pylon. A boy. 

A
young boy.

This
is what you do when you really love someone
, Shadow always said.
After all, the kid could 
die
 out here.

"Are
you okay?" he said at last.

The
pile of rags shifted a little, and whimpered.

"It's
okay. I won't hurt you."

"I'm
lost," it said, in a very strange voice.

Fischer
took a step forward. “You a ref?” The nearest refugee
strip was over a hundred kilometers away, and well guarded, but
sometimes someone would get out.

The
eyes swung from side to side: 
no.

But
then,
 Fischer thought, 
what else would he say? Maybe he’s
afraid I’ll turn him in.

"Where
do you live?" he asked, and listened closely to the answer:

"Orlando."

No
hint of Asian or Hindian in that voice. Back when Fischer was a kid
his mom would always tell him that disasters were color-blind, but he
knew better now. The kid sounded N’Am; not a ref, then. Which
meant there would probably be people looking for him.

Which,
in a way, was too—

Stop
it.

"Orlando,”
he repeated aloud. “You 
are
 lost. Where's your mom and
dad?"

"Hotel."
The rag pile detached itself from the pylon and shuffled closer.
"Vanceattle." The words came out half-whistled, as though
the kid was speaking through his sinuses. Maybe he had one of those,
those — Fischer groped for the words — cleft palates, or
something.

"Vanceattle?
Which one?"

Shrug.

"Don't
you have a watch?"

"Lost
it."

You've
got to help him, Shadow said.

"Well,
um, look." Fischer rubbed at his temples. "I live close by.
We can call from there."

There
weren't that many Vanceattles in the lower mainland. The police
wouldn't have to find out. And even if they did, they wouldn't charge
him. Not for this. What was he supposed to do, leave the kid for body
parts?

"I'm
Gerry," Fischer said.

"Kevin."

Kevin
looked about nine or ten. Old enough that he should know how to use a
public terminal, anyway. But there was something wrong with him. He
was too tall and skinny, and his limbs tangled up in themselves when
he walked. Maybe he was brain damaged. Maybe one of those nanotech
babies that went bad. Or maybe his mother just spent too much time
outdoors when she was pregnant.

Fischer
led Kevin up to his two-room timeshare. Kevin dropped onto the couch
without asking. Fischer checked the fridge: root beer. The boy took
it with a nervous smile. Fischer sat down beside him and put a
reassuring hand on Kevin's lap. 

The
expression drained from Kevin's face as though someone had pulled a
plug.

Go

on
, Shadow said. He's not complaining, is he?

Kevin's
clothes were filthy. Caked mud clung to his pants. Fischer reached
over and began picking it off. "We should get you out of these
clothes. Get you cleaned up. We can only take showers on even days
here, but you could always take a sponge bath..." 

Kevin
just sat there. One hand gripped his drink, bony fingers denting the
plastic; the other rested motionless on the couch.

Fischer
smiled. "It's okay. This is what you do when you really—"

Kevin
stared at the floor, trembling.

Fischer
found a zipper, pulled. Pressed, gently. "It's okay. It's okay.
Don't worry."

Kevin
stopped shaking. Kevin looked up. 

Kevin
smiled.

"I'm
not the one who should be worried here, asshole," he said in his
whistling child's voice.

The
jolt threw Fischer to the floor. Suddenly he was staring at the
ceiling, fingers twitching at the ends of arms that had turned,
magically, into dead weights. His whole nervous system sang like a
tracery of high-tension wires embedded in flesh. 

His
bladder let go. Wet warmth spread out from his crotch.

Kevin
stepped over him and looked down, all trace of awkwardness gone from
his movements. One hand still held the plastic cup. The other held a
shockprod.

Very
deliberately, Kevin upended his drink. Fischer watched the liquid
snake down, almost casually, and splash across his face. His eyes
stung; Kevin was a spindly blur in a wash of weak acid. Fischer tried
to blink, tried again, finally succeeded.

One
of Kevin's legs was swinging back at the knee.

"Gerald
Fischer, you are under arrest—"

It
swung forward. Pain erupted in Fischer's side.

"—for
indecent assault of a minor—"

Back.
Forward. Pain.

"—under
sections 151 and 152 of the N'Am Pacific Criminal Code."

The
child knelt down and glared into his face. Up close the telltales
were obvious; the depth of the eyes, the size of the pores in the
skin, the plastic resilience of adult flesh soaked in androgen
suppressants.

"Not
to mention violation of yet 
another
 restraining order,"
Kevin added.

How
long,
 Fischer wondered absently. Neural aftershock draped the
whole world in gauze. How many months did it take to stunt back down
from man to child? 

"You
have the right to— ah, fuck."

And
how long to reverse the reversal? Could Kevin ever grow up again?

"You
know your fucking rights better than I do."

This
wasn't happening. The police wouldn't go this far, they didn't have
the money, and anyway, why? How could anyone be willing to 
change

themselves like that? Just to get Gerry Fischer? Why? 

"I
suppose I should call you in, shouldn't I? Then again, maybe I'll
just let you lie here in your own piss for a while..." 

Somehow,
he got the feeling that Kevin was hurting more than he was. It didn't
make sense.

It's
okay, Shadow told him softly. It's not your fault. They just don't
understand.

Kevin
was kicking him again, but Fischer could hardly feel it. He tried to
say something, anything, that would make his tormentor feel a little
better, but his motor nerves were still fried.

He
could still cry, though. Different wiring.

* * *

It
was different this time. It started out the same, the scans and the
samples and the beatings, but then they took him out of the line and
cleaned him up, and put him in a side room. Two guards sat him down
at a table, across from a dumpy little man with brown moles all over
his face.

"Hello,
Gerry," he said, pretending not to notice Fischer's injuries.
"I'm Dr. Scanlon."

"You're
a shrink."

"Actually,
I'm more of a mechanic." He smiled, a prissy little smile that
said 
I've just been very clever but you're probably too stupid to
get the joke.
 Fischer decided he didn't like Scanlon much. 

Still,
his type had been useful before, with all their talk about 
competence

and 
criminal responsibility
. It's not so much what you did,
Fischer had learned, as why you did it. If you did things because you
were evil, you were in real trouble. If you did the same things
because you were sick, though, the doctors would sometimes cover for
you. Fischer had learned to be sick. 

Scanlon
pulled a headband out of his breast pocket. "I'd like to talk to
you for a little while, Gerry. Would you mind putting this on for
me?"

The
inside of the band was studded with sensor pads. It felt cool across
his forehead. Fischer looked around the room, but he couldn't see any
monitors or readouts.

"Great."
Scanlon nodded to the guards. He waited until they'd left before he
spoke again.

"You're
a strange one, Gerry Fischer. We don't run into too many like you."

"That's
not what the other doctors said."

"Oh?
What did they say?"

"They
said I was typical. They said, they said lots of the one-fifty-one's
used the same 
rationale
."

Scanlon
leaned forward. "Well you know, that's true. It's a classic
line: 'I was teaching her about her awakening sexuality, doctor.'
'It's the parents' job to instruct their children, doctor.' 'They
don't like school either, but it's for their own good.'"

"I
never said those things. I don't even have kids."

"No
you don't. But the point is, pedophiles often claim to be acting in
the best interests of the children. They turn sexual abuse into an
act of altruism, if you will."

"It's

not
 abuse. It's what you do if you really love someone."

Scanlon
leaned back in his chair and studied Fischer for a few moments.

"That's
what's so interesting about you, Gerry."

"What?"

"Everyone

uses
 that line. You're the only person I've met who might
actually 
believe
 it." 

* * *

In
the end, they said they could take care of the charges. He knew there
had to be more to it than that, of course; they'd make him volunteer
for some sort of experiment, or donate some of his organs, or submit
to voluntary castration first. But the catch, when it came, wasn't
any of those things. He almost couldn't believe it.

They
wanted to give him a job.

"Think
of it as community service," Scanlon said. "Restitution to
all of society. You'd be underwater most of the time, but you'd be
well-equipped."

"Underwater
where?"

"Channer
Vent. About forty kilometers north of the Axial Volcano, on the Juan
de Fuca Rift. Do you know where that is, Gerry?" 

"How
long?"

"One
year minimum. You could extend that if you wanted to."

Fischer
couldn't think of any reason why he would, but it didn't matter. If
he didn't take this deal they'd stick a governor in his head for the
rest of his life. Which might not be that long, when you thought
about it.

"One
year," he said. "Underwater."

Scanlon
patted his arm. "Take your time, Gerry. Think about it. You
don't have to decide until this afternoon."

Do
it, Shadow urged. Do it or they'll cut into you and you'll 
change
...

But
Fischer wasn't going to be rushed. "So what do I do for one
year, underwater?"

Scanlon
showed him a vid.

"Geez,"
Fischer said. "I can't do any of that."

"No
problem." Scanlon smiled. "You'll learn."

* * *

He
did, too.

A
lot of it happened while he was sleeping. Every night they'd give him
an injection, to help him learn, Scanlon said. Afterwards a machine
beside his bed would feed him dreams. He could never exactly remember
them but something must have stuck, because every morning he'd sit at
the console with his tutor — a real person, though, not a
program — and all the text and diagrams she showed him would be
strangely familiar. Like he'd known it all years ago, and had just
forgotten. Now he remembered everything: plate tectonics and
subduction zones, Archimedes Principle, the thermal conductivity of
two percent hydrox. Aldosterone. 

Alloplasty.

He
remembered his left lung after they cut it out, and the technical
specs on the machines they put in its place.

Afternoons,
they'd attach leads to his body and saturate his striated muscles
with low-amp current. He was starting to understand what was going
on, now; the term was 
induced isometrics
, and its meaning had
come to him in a dream.

A
week after the operation he woke up with a fever.

"Nothing
to worry about," Scanlon told him. "That's just the last
stage of your infection."

"Infection?"

"We
shot you up with a retrovirus the day you came here. Didn't you
know?"

Fischer
grabbed Scanlon's arm. "Like a disease? You—"

"It's
perfectly safe, Gerry." Scanlon smiled patiently, disentangling
himself. "In fact, you wouldn't last very long down there
without it; human enzymes don't work well at high pressure. So we
loaded some extra genes into a tame virus and sent it in. It's been
rewriting you from the inside out. Judging by your fever I'd say it's
nearly finished. You should be feeling better in a day or so."

"Rewriting?"

"Half
your enzymes come in two flavors now. They got the genes from one of
those deep-water fish. Rattails, I think they're called."
Scanlon patted Fischer on the shoulder. "So how does it feel to
be part fish, Gerry?"

"
Coryphaenoides
armatus
," Fischer said slowly.

Scanlon
frowned. "What was that?"

"Rattails."
Fischer concentrated. "Mostly dehydrogenases, right?"

Scanlon
glanced at the machine by the bed. "I'm, um, not sure."

"That's
it. Dehydrogenases. But they tweaked them to reduce the activation
energy." He tapped his temple. "It's all here. Only I
haven't done the tutorial yet."

"That's
great," Scanlon said; but he didn't sound like he meant it.

* * *

One
day they put him in a tank built like a piston, five stories tall:
its roof could press down like a giant hand, squeezing whatever was
inside. They sealed the hatch and flooded the tank with seawater. 

Scanlon had warned
him about the change. "We flood your trachea and your head
cavities, but your lung and intestines aren't rigid so they just
squeeze down. We're immunizing you against pressure, you see? They
say it's a bit like drowning, but you get used to it." 

It
wasn't that bad, actually. Fischer's guts twisted in on themselves,
and his sinuses burned like hell, but he'd take that over another
bout with Kevin any day. 

He
floated there in the tank, seawater sliding through the tubes in his
chest, and reflected on the queasy sensation of not breathing.

"They're
getting some turbulence." Scanlon's voice came at him from all
directions, as if the walls themselves were talking. "From your
exhaust port."

A
fine trail of bubbles was trickling from Fischer's chest. His eyecaps
made everything seem marvelously clear, like a hallucination. "Just
a bit of—" 

Not
his voice. His words, but spoken by something else, some cheap
machine that didn't know about harmonics. One hand went automatically
to the disk embedded in his throat.

"—hydrogen,"
he tried again. "No problem. Pressure'll squeeze them down when
I get deep enough."

"Yeah.
Still." Other words, muffled, as Scanlon spoke to someone else.
Fischer felt something vibrate softly in his chest. The bubbles grew
larger, then smaller. Then disappeared.

Scanlon
was back. "Better?"

"Yeah."
Fischer didn't know how he felt about this, though. He didn't really
like having a chest full of machinery. He didn't really like having
to breathe by chopping water into chunks of hydrogen and oxygen. But
he 
really
 didn't like the idea of some tech he'd never even
met fiddling with his insides by remote control, reaching into his
body and messing around in there without even asking. It made him
feel—

Violated,
right?

Sometimes
Shadow was just a bitch. As if 
she
 hadn't been the one to put
him up to it in the first place.

"We're
going to kill the lights now, Gerry."

Darkness.
The water hummed with the sound of vast machinery.

After
a few moments he noticed a cold blue spark winking at him from
somewhere overhead. It seemed to cast a lot more light than it
should. As he watched, the inside of the tank reappeared in hazy
shades of blue-on-black.

"Photoamps
working okay?" Scanlon wanted to know.

"Uh
huh."

"What
can you see?"

"Everything.
The inside of the tank. The hatch. Sort of bluish."

"Right.
Luciferin light source."

"It's
not very bright," Fischer said. "Everything's sort of like,
dusk."

"Well,
it'd be pitch black without your eyecaps."

And
suddenly, it was.

"Hey."

"Don't
worry, Gerry. Everything's fine. We just shut the light off."

He
lay there in utter darkness. Floaters wriggled at the corner of his
eye.

"How
are you feeling, Gerry? Any sensation of falling? Claustrophobia?"

He
felt almost peaceful.

"Gerry?"

"No.
Nothing. I feel—fine—"

"Pressure's
at two thousand meters."

"I
can't feel it."

This
might not be so bad after all. One year. One year...

"Doctor
Scanlon," he said after a while. He was even getting used to the
metallic buzz of his new voice.

"Right
here."

"Why
me?"

"What
do you mean, Gerry?"

"I
wasn't, you know, qualified. Even after all this training I bet
there's lots of people who'd be better at this than me. Real
engineers."

"It's
not so much what you know," Scanlon said. "It's what you
are."

He
knew what he was. People had been telling him for as long as he could
remember. He didn't see what the fuck that had to do with anything.
"What's that, then?"

At
first he thought he wasn't going to get an answer. But Scanlon
finally spoke, and when he did there was something in his voice that
Fischer had never heard before.

"Pre-adapted,"
was what he said.

Elevator Boy

The Pacific Ocean
slopped two kilometers under his feet. He had a cargo of blank-eyed
psychotics sitting behind him. And the lifter was being piloted by a
large pizza with extra cheese. Joel Kita liked it all about as much
as could be expected.

At
least he 
had
 been expecting it, this time. For once the GA
hadn't sprung one of their exercises in chaos theory onto his life
without warning. He'd seen it coming almost a week in advance, when
they'd sprung one onto Ray Stericker instead. Ray had been in this
very cockpit, watching the pizza being installed and no doubt
wondering when the term "job security" had become an
oxymoron.

"I'm
supposed to baby-sit it for a week," he had said then. Joel had
climbed up into the 'scaphe for the usual preflight check and found
his friend waiting by the controls. Ray had gestured up through the
open hatchway to the lifter's cockpit, where a couple of techs were
busy interfacing something to the controls. "Just in case it
screws up in the field. Then I'm gone."

"Gone
where?" Joel couldn't believe it. Ray had been on the Juan de
Fuca run forever, even before the geothermal program. He’d even
been an 
employee
, back when such things were commonplace. 

"Probably
the Gorda circuit for a while. After that, who knows? They'll be
upgrading everything before long."

Joel
glanced up through the hatch. The techs were playing with a square
vanilla box, half a meter on a side and about twice as thick as
Kita's wrist. "What 
is
 the fucking thing? Some kind of
autopilot?"

"With
a difference. This takes off and lands. And all sorts of lovely
things in between."

This
was not good news. Humans had always been able to integrate three-D
spatial information better than the machines that kept trying to
replace them. Not that machines couldn't recognize a tree or a
building when such objects were pointed out to them, but they got
real confused whenever you rotated any of those objects a few
degrees. The shapes changed, contrast and shadow shifted, and it
always took way too long for any of those arsenide pretenders to
update its spatial maps and recognize that yes, it's still a tree,
and no, it didn't morph into something else, dummy, you just changed
your point of view.

In
some places that wasn't a problem. Ocean surfaces, for example. Or
controlled-access highways where the cars had their own ID
transponders. Or even lashed to the underside of a giant squashed
doughnut filled with buoyant vacuum, floating in mid-air. These had
been respected and venerable environments for autopilots since well
before the turn of the century.

Take-offs
and landings were a different scene altogether, though. Too many real
objects going by too fast, too many things to keep an eye on. A few
billion years of natural selection still had the edge when the fast
lane got that crowded.

Until
now, apparently.

"Let's
get out of here." Ray dropped down onto the landing pad. Joel
followed him out to the edge of the roof. Green tangled blankets of
kudzu
4
 spread out around them, shrouding the roofs of
surrounding buildings. It always made Joel think post-apocalypse —
weeds and ivy crawling back in from the wilderness to strangle the
residue of some fallen civilization. Except, of course, these
particular weeds were supposed to 
save
 civilization.

Way
out by the coast, barely visible, streamers of smoke dribbled into
the sky from the refugee strip. 
So much for civilization.

"It's
one of those smart gels," Ray said at last.

"Smart
gels?"

"Head
cheese. Cultured brain cells on a slab. The same things they've been
plugging into the Net to firewall infections."

"I
know what they are, Ray. I just can't fucking believe it."

"Well,
believe it. They'll be coming for you too, give 'em enough time."

"Yeah.
Probably." Joel let it sink in. "I wonder when."

Ray
shrugged. "You've got some breathing space. All that
unpredictable volcanic shit, things blowing up under you. Nastier
than flying a hoover. Harder to replace you."

He
looked back at the lifter, and the 'scaphe nestled into its
underbelly.

"Won't
take long, though."

Joel
fished a derm out of his pocket; a tricyclic with a mild lithium
chaser. He held it out without a word.

Ray
just spat. "Thanks anyway. I 
want
 to feel pissed for a
while, you know?"

* * *

And
now, eight days later, Ray Stericker was gone.

He'd
disappeared after his last shift, just the day before. Joel had tried
to track him down, drag him out, piss him up, but he hadn't been able
to find the man on site and Ray wasn't answering his watch. So here
was Joel Kita, back on the job, alone except for his cargo; four very
strange people in black suits, blank white lenses covering their
eyes. They all had identical GA logos stamped onto their shoulders,
tags with their surnames printed just below. At least the surnames
were different, although the difference seemed trivial; male, female,
large or small, they all seemed minor variants of the same make and
model. 
Ah yes, the Mk-5 was always such a nice boy. Kind of quiet,
kept to himself. Who would've thought...

Joel
had seen rifters before. He'd ferried a couple out to Beebe about a
month ago, just after construction had ended. One of them had seemed
almost normal, had gone out of her way to chat and joke around as if
trying to compensate for the fact that she looked like a zombie. Joel
had forgotten her name.

The
other one hadn't said a word.

One
of the 'scaphe's tactical screens beeped a progress report. "Bottom's
rising again," Joel called back. "Thirty five hundred.
We're almost there."

"Thanks,"
one of them — 
Fischer
, according to his shoulder tag —
said. Everyone else just sat there.

A
pressure hatch separated the 'scaphe's cockpit from the passenger
compartment. If you sealed it you could use the aft chamber as an
airlock, or even pressurize it for saturation dives if you didn't
mind the hassle of decompression. You could also just swing the hatch
shut if you wanted a bit of privacy, if you didn't like leaving your
back exposed to certain passengers. That would be bad manners, of
course. Joel tried idly to think of some socially acceptable excuse
for slamming that big metal disk in their faces, but gave up after a
few moments. 

Now,
the dorsal hatch — the one leading up into the lifter's cockpit
— that one 
was
 closed, and that felt wrong. Usually they
kept it open until just before the drop. Ray and Joel would shoot the
shit for however long the trip would take — three hours, if you
were going to Channer.

Yesterday,
without warning, Ray Stericker had dropped the hatch shut fifteen
minutes into the flight. He hadn't said an unnecessary word the whole
time, had barely even used the intercom. And today — well,
today there wasn't anyone up there to talk to any more.

Joel
looked out one of the side ports. The skin of the lifter blocked his
view just a few centimeters on the other side; metal fabric stretched
across carbon-fiber ribs, a gray expanse sucked into concave squares
by the hard vacuum inside. The 'scaphe rode tucked into an oval
hollow in the lifter's center. The only port that showed anything but
gray skin was the one between Joel's feet; ocean, a long way down.

Not
so far down now, though. He could hear the hisses and sighs of the
lifter's ballast bags deflating overhead. Sharper sounds, more
distant, cracked through the hull as electrical arcs heated the air
in a couple of trim bags. This was still regular autopilot territory,
but Ray used to do it all himself anyway. If it weren't for the
closed hatch, Joel couldn't have told the difference.

The
head cheese was doing a bang-up job.

He'd
actually seen it a few days ago, during a delivery to an undersea rig
just out of Gray's Harbor. Ray had hit a stud and the top of the box
had slid away like white mercury, slipping back into a little groove
at the edge of the casing and revealing a transparent panel
underneath.

Beneath
that panel, packed in clear fluid, was a ridged layer of goo, a bit
too gray to be mozzarella. Dashes of brownish glass perforated the
goo in neat parallel rows.

"I'm
not supposed to open it up like this," Ray had said. "But
fuck 'em. It's not as though the blighter's photosensitive."

"So
what are those little brown bits?"

"Indium
tin oxide over glass. Semiconductor."

"Jesus.
And it's working right now?"

"Even
as we speak."

"Jesus,"
Joel had said again. And then: "I wonder how you program
something like this."

Ray
had snorted at that. "You don't. You 
teach
 it. Learns
through positive reinforcement, like a bloody baby."

A
sudden, smooth shift in momentum. Joel pulled back to the present;
the lifter was hanging stable, five meters over the waves. Right on
target. Nothing but empty ocean on the surface, of course; Beebe's
transponder was thirty meters straight down. Shallow enough to home
in on, too deep to be a navigational hazard. Or to serve as a
midwater hitching post for charter boats hunting Channer's legendary
sea monsters.

The
cheese printed out a word on the 'scaphe's tactical board: 
Launch?

Joel's
finger wavered over the OK key, then came down. Docking latches
clanked open; the lifter reeled Joel Kita and his cargo down to the
water. Sunlight squinted through viewports for a few seconds as the
'scaphe swung in its harness. A wavetop batted at the forward port.

The
world jerked once, slewed sideways, and turned green.

Joel
opened the ballast tanks and looked back over his shoulder. "Going
down, folks. Your last glimpse of sunlight. Enjoy it while you can."

"Thanks,"
said 
Fischer
. 

Nobody
else moved.

Crush

Pre-adapted
. 

Even
now, at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean, Fischer doesn't know what
Scanlon meant by that.

He
doesn't 
feel
 pre-adapted, not if that means he's supposed to
be at home here. Nobody even talked to him on the way down. Nobody
talked much to anyone else, either, but when they didn't talk to
Fisher it seemed especially personal. And one of them, Brander—
it's hard to tell with the eyecaps and all, but Fischer thinks
Brander keeps looking at him, like they know each other from
somewhere. Brander looks mean.

Everything's
out in the open down here; pipes and cable bundles and ventilation
ducts are all tacked onto the bulkheads in plain sight. He saw it on
the vids before he came down, but those somehow left the impression
of a brighter place, full of light and mirrors. The wall he's facing
now, for instance; there should be a mirror there. But it's just a
gray metal bulkhead with a greasy, unfinished sheen to it.

Fischer
shifts his weight from one foot to the other. At one end of the
lounge Lubin leans against a library pedestal, his capped eyes
pointed at them with blank disinterest. Lubin's said only one thing
to them in the five minutes they've been here:

"Clarke's
still outside. She's coming in."

Something
clanks under the floor. Water and nitrox mix, gurgling, nearby. The
sound of a hatch swinging open, movement from below.

She
climbs up into the lounge, droplets beading across her shoulders. Her
diveskin paints her black below the neck, a skinny silhouette, almost
sexless. Her hood is undone; blond hair, plastered against her skull,
frames a face paler than Fischer's ever seen. Her mouth is a wide
thin line. Her eyes, capped like his own, are blank white ovals in a
child's face.

She
looks around at them: Brander, Nakata, Caraco, Fischer. They look
back, waiting. There's something in Nakata's face, Fischer thinks,
something like recognition, but Lenie Clarke doesn't seem to notice.
She doesn't seem to notice any of them, really.

She
shrugs. "I'm changing the sodium on number two. A couple of you
could come along, I guess."

She
doesn't seem exactly human. There 
is
 something familiar about
her, though.

What
do you think, Shadow? Do I know her?

But
Shadow isn't talking.

* * *

There's
a street where none of the buildings have windows. The streetlamps
shine down with a sick coppery light on masses of giant clams and big
ropy brownish things emerging from mucous-gray cylinders (tube worms,
he remembers: 
Riftia fuckinghugeous
, or something). Natural
chimneys rise here and there above the invertebrate multitudes,
pillars of basalt and silicon and crystallized sulfur. Every time
Fischer visits the Throat, he thinks of really bad acne.

Lenie
Clarke leads them on a flight down Main Street: Fischer, Caraco, a
couple of cargo squids on remote. The generators lean up over them on
both sides. A dark curtain billows across the road directly ahead,
and it 
sparkles
. A school of small fish darts around the edges
of the streaming cloud.

"That's
the problem," Lenie buzzes. She looks back at Fischer and
Caraco. "Mud plume. Too big to redirect."

They've
come past eight generators so far. That leaves six up ahead, drowning
in silt. Double shift, even if they call out Lubin and Brander.

He
hopes they don't have to. Not Brander, anyway.

Lenie
fins off towards the plume. The squids whine softly behind, dragging
their tools. Fischer steels himself to follow.

"Shouldn't
we check thermal?" Caraco calls out. "I mean, what if it's
hot?"

He
was wondering that himself, actually. He's been wondering about such
things ever since he overheard Caraco and Nakata comparing rumors
from the Mendocino fracture. Nakata heard it was a really old
minisub, with Plexiglas ports. Caraco heard they were thermoacrylate.
Nakata said it got wedged inside the center of the rift zone. Caraco
said no, it was just cruising over the seabed and a smoker blew up
under it.

They
agreed on how fast the viewports melted, though. Even the skeletons
went to ash. Which didn't make much difference anyway, since every
bone in every body had already been smashed by the ambient pressure.

Caraco
makes a lot of sense, in Fischer's opinion, but Lenie Clarke doesn't
even answer. She just fins off into that black sparkly cloud and
disappears. At the spot she disappears the mud glows suddenly, a
phosphorescent wake. The fish swarm towards it.

"She
doesn't even care, sometimes," Fischer buzzes softly. "Like,
whether she lives or dies..."

Caraco
looks at him for a moment, then kicks off towards the plume.

Clarke's
voice buzzes out of the cloud. "Not much time."

Caraco
dives into the roiling wall with a splash of light. A knot of fish—
a couple of them are a fair size now, Fischer sees— swirl in
her wake.

Go

on
, Shadow says.

Something
moves.

He
spins around. For a moment there's only Main Street, fading in
distance.

Then
something big and black and...and 
lopsided
 appears from behind
one of the generators.

"
Jeez.
"
Fischer's legs move of their own volition. "They're coming!"
he tries to yell. The vocoder scales it down to a croak.

Stupid.
Stupid.
 
They warned us, the sparkles bring in the little fish
and the little fish bring in the big fish and if we don't watch it we
just get in the way.

The
plume is right in front of him now, a wall of sediment, a river on
the bottom of the ocean. He dives in. Something nips lightly at his
calf.

Everything
goes black, with occasional sparkles. He turns his headlight on; the
flowing mud swallows the beam half a meter from his face.

But
Clarke can see it, somehow: "Turn it off."

"I
can't see—"

"Good.
Maybe they won't either."

He
kills the light. In the darkness he gropes the gas billy from its
sheath on his leg.

Caraco,
from a distance: "I thought they were blind..."

"Some
of them."

And
they've got other senses to fall back on. Fischer runs through the
list: 
smell, sound, pressure waves, bioelectric fields
...
Nothing 
relies
 on vision down here. It's just one of the
options. 

He
hopes the plume blocks more than just light.

But
even as he watches, the darkness is lifting. Black murk turns brown,
then almost gray. Faint light filters in from the floodlamps on Main
Street.

It's
the eyecaps,
 he realizes. 
They're compensating. Cool.

He
still can't see very far, though. It's like being caught in dirty
fog.

"Remember."
Clarke, very close. "They're not as tough as they look. They
probably won't do much real damage."

A
sonar pistol stutters nearby. "I'm not getting anything,"
Caraco buzzes. Milky sediment swirls on all sides. Fischer puts his
arm out; it fades at the elbow.

"Oh
shit." Caraco.

"Are
you—"

"Something's
on my leg something's Christ it's big—"

"
Lenie—
"
Fischer cries.

A
bump from behind. A slap on the back of his head. A shadow, black and
spiny, fades into the murk.

Hey,
that wasn't so—

Something
clamps onto his leg. He looks down: jaws, teeth, a monstrous head
fading away into the murk.

Oh
Jeez—

He
jams his billy against scaly flesh. Something gives, like gelatin. A
soft thump. The flesh bloats, ruptures; bubbles explode from the rip.

Something
else smashes him from behind. His chest is in a vise. He lashes out,
blindly. Mud and ash and black blood billow into his face.

He
grabs blindly, twists. There's a broken tooth in his hand, half as
long as his forearm; he tightens his grip and it splinters. He drops
it, brings the billy around and jams it into the thing on his side.
Another explosion of meat and compressed CO
2
.

The
pressure lifts from his chest. Whatever's clamped onto his leg isn't
moving. Fischer lets himself sink, drifts down against the base of a
barite chimney.

Nothing
charges him.

"Everyone
okay." Lenie's vocoded monotone. Fischer grunts yes.

"Thank
God for bad nutrition," Caraco buzzes. "We're fucked if
these guys ever get enough vitamins."

Fischer
reaches down, pries the dead monster's jaws off his calf. He wishes
he had breath to catch.

Shadow?

Right
here.

Was
this what it was like for you?

No.
This didn't take so long.

He
lies against the bottom and tries to shut his eyes. He can't; the
diveskin bonds to the surface of the eyecaps, traps the eyelids in
little cul-de-sacs. 
I'm sorry, Shadow. I'm so sorry.

I
know, she says. It's okay.

* * *

Lenie
Clarke stands naked in Medical, spraying the bruises on her leg. No,
not naked; the caps are still on her eyes. All Fischer can see is
skin. 

It's
not enough.

A
trickle of blood crawls down her side from just below the water
intake. She absently wipes it away and reloads the hypo.

Her
breasts are small, almost adolescent, bumps. No hips. Her body's as
pale as her face, except for the bruises and the fresh pink seams
that access the implants. She looks anorexic.

She's
the first adult Fischer's ever wanted.

She
looks up and sees him in the doorway. "Strip down," she
tells him, and goes back to work.

He
splits his 'skin and starts to peel. Lenie finishes with her leg and
stabs an ampoule into the cut in her side. The blood clots like
magic.

"They
warned us about the fish," Fischer says, "but they said
they were really fragile. They said we could just beat them off with
our hands if we had to."

Lenie
sprays the cut in her side with a hypo, wipes off the residue.
"You're lucky they told you that much." She pulls her
diveskin tunic off a hanger, slides into it. "They barely
mentioned the giantism when they sent us down."

"That's
stupid. They must've known."

"They
say this is the only vent where the fish get this big. That they've
found, anyway."

"Why?
What's so special here?"

Lenie
shrugs.

Fischer
has stripped to the waist. Lenie looks at him. "Leggings too. It
got your calf, right?"

He
shakes his head. "That's okay."

She
looks down. His diveskin's only a couple of millimeters thick, it
doesn't hide anything. He feels his erection going soft under her
gaze.

Lenie's
cold white eyes track back to his face. Fischer feels his face
heating before he remembers: she can't see his eyes. No one can.

It's
almost safe in here.

"Bruising's
the biggest problem," Lenie says at last. "They don't
puncture the diveskin all that often, but the force of the bite still
gets through." Her hand is on his arm, firm and professional,
probing the edges of Fischer's injury. It hurts, but he doesn't mind.

She
uncaps a tube of anabolic salve. "Here. Rub this in."

The
pain fades on contact. His flesh goes warm and tingly where he
applies the ointment. He reaches out, a little bit scared, and
touches Lenie's arm. "Thanks."

She
twists out of reach without a word, bending down to seal the 'skin on
her leg. Fischer watches the leggings slide up her body. They seem
almost alive. They 
are
 almost alive, he remembers. The 'skin's
got these 
reflexes
, changes its permeability and thermal
conductivity in response to body temperature. Maintains, what's the
word, homeostasis.

Now
he watches it swallowing Lenie's body like some slick black amoebae
but she's showing through underneath, black ice instead of white but
still the most beautiful creature he's ever seen. She's so far away.
There's someone inside telling him to watch it—

—
Go
away, Shadow—

—
but
he can't help himself, he can almost 
touch
 her, she's bent
over sealing her boots and his hand caresses the air just above her
shoulder, traces the outline of her curved back so close it could
feel her body heat if that stupid diveskin wasn't in the way, and—

And
she straightens, bumping into his hand. Her face comes up; something
burns behind her eyecaps. He pulls back but it's too late; her whole
body's gone rigid and furious.

I
just touched her. I didn't do anything wrong I just touched her—

She
takes a single step forward. "Don't do that again," she
says, her voice so flat he wonders for a second how her vocoder could
work out of the water.

"I'm
not—I didn't—"

"I
don't care," she says. "Don't do it again."

Something
moves at the corner of his eye. "Problem, Lenie? Need a hand?"
Brander's voice.

She
shakes her head. "No."

"Okay,
then." Brander sounds disappointed. "I'll be upstairs."

Movement
again. Sounds, receding.

"I'm

sorry
," Fischer says.

"Fine,"
Lenie says, and brushes past him into the wet room.

Autoclave

Nakata nearly bumps
into her at the base of the ladder. Clarke glares; Nakata moves
aside, baring teeth in a submissive primate smile.

Brander's
in the lounge, pecking at the library: "You—?"

"I'm
fine." She isn't, but she's getting there. This anger is nowhere
near critical mass; it's just a reflex, really, a spark budded off
from the main reservoir. It decays exponentially with elapsed time.
By the time she reaches her cubby she's almost feeling sorry for
Fischer. 

Not
his fault. He didn't mean any harm.

She
closes the hatch behind her. It's safe to hit something now, if she
wants. She looks around half-heartedly for a target, finally just
drops onto her bunk and stares at the ceiling.

Someone
raps on metal. "Lenie?"

She
rises, pushes at the hatch.

"Hey
Lenie, I think I've got a bad slave channel on one of the squids. I
was wondering if you could—"

"Sure."
Clarke nods. "Fine. Only not right now, okay, um—"

"Judy,"
says Caraco, sounding slightly miffed.

"Right.
Judy." In fact, Clarke hasn't forgotten. But Beebe's way too
crowded these days. Lately Clarke's learned to lose the occasional
name. It helps keep things comfortably distant.

Sometimes.

"Excuse
me," she says, brushing past Caraco. "I've got to get
outside."

* * *

In
a few places, the rift is almost gentle.

Usually
the heat stabs up in boiling muddy pillars or jagged bolts of
superheated liquid. Steam never gets a chance to form at three
hundred atmospheres, but thermal distortion turns the water into a
column of writhing liquid prisms, hotter than molten glass. Not here,
though. In this one spot, nestled between lava pillows and safe from
Beebe's prying ears, the heat wafts up through the mud like a soft
breeze. The underlying bedrock must be porous.

She
comes here when she can, keeping to the bottom en route to foil
Beebe's sonar. The others don't know about this place yet; she'd just
as soon keep it that way. Sometimes she comes here to watch
convection stir the mud into lazy curlicues. Sometimes she splits the
seals on her 'skin, basks face and arms in the thirty-degree seep.

Sometimes
she just comes here to sleep.

She
lies with the shifting mud at her back, staring up into blackness.
This is how you fall asleep when you can't close your eyes; you stare
into the dark, and when you start seeing things you know you're
dreaming.

Now
she sees herself, the high priestess of a new troglodyte society. She
was the first one here, deep at peace while the others were still
being cut open and reshaped by grubby Dryback hands. She's the
founding mother, the template against which other, rawer recruits
trace themselves. They come down and they see that her eyes are
always capped, and they go and do likewise. 

But
she knows it isn't true. The rift is the real creative force here, a
blunt hydraulic press forcing them all into shapes of its own
choosing. If the others are anything like her it's because they're
all being squeezed in the same mold.

And
let's not forget the GA. If Ballard was right, they made sure we
weren't too different to start with
.

There
are all the superficial differences, of course. A bit of racial
diversity. Token beaters, token victims, males and females equally
represented...

Clarke
has to smile at that. Count on Management to jam a bunch of sexual
dysfunctionals together and then make sure the gender ratio is
balanced. 
Nice of them to try and see that nobody gets left out. 

Except
for Ballard, of course. 

But
at least they learn from their mistakes. Dozing at three thousand
meters, Lenie Clarke wonders what their next one will be.

* * *

Sudden,
stabbing pain in the eyes. She tries to scream; smart implants feel
tongue and lips in motion, mistranslate:

"
Nnnnaaaaah...
"

She
knows the feeling. She's had it once or twice before. She dives
blindly on a random heading. The pain in her head leaps from intense
to unbearable.

"
Aaaaaa—
"

She
twists back in the opposite direction. A bit better. She trips her
headlamp, kicking as hard as she can. The world turns from black to
solid brown. Zero viz. Mud seething on all sides. Somewhere close by
she hears rocks splitting open.

Her
headlamp catches the outcropping looming up a split second before she
hits it. The shock rocks her skull, runs down her spine like a small
earthquake. There's a different flavor of pain up there now, mingling
with the searing in her eyes. She gropes blindly around the obstacle,
keeps going. Her body feels— 
warm—

It
takes a lot of heat to get through a diveskin, especially a class
four. Those things are 
built
 for thermal stress.

Eyecaps,
on the other hand...

Black.
The world is black again, and clear. Clarke's headlamp stabs out
across open space, lays a jiggling footprint on the mud a good ten
meters away.

The
view's still rippling, though.

The
pain seems to be fading. She can't be sure. So many nerves have been
screaming for so long that even the echoes are torture. She clutches
her head, still kicking; the movement twists her around to face the
way she came.

Her
secret hideaway has exploded into a wall of mud and sulfur compounds,
boiling up from the seabed. Clarke checks her thermister; 45°C,
and she's a good ten meters away. Boiled fish skeletons spin in the
thermals. Geysers hiss further in, unseen. 

The
seep must have burst through the crust in an instant; any flesh
caught in that eruption would have boiled off the bone before
anything as elaborate as a flight reflex could cut in. A shudder
shakes Clarke's body. Another one.

Just
luck. Just stupid luck I was far enough away. I could be dead now. I
could be dead I could be dead I could be dead—

Nerves
fire in her thorax; she doubles over. But you can't sob without
breathing. You can't cry with your eyes pinned open. The routines are
all there, stuttering into action after years of dormancy, but the
pieces they work on have all been changed. The whole body wakes up in
a straitjacket. 

—
dead
dead dead—

That
small, remote part of her kicks in, the part she saves for these
occasions. It wonders, off in the distance, at the intensity of her
reaction. This was hardly the first time that Lenie Clarke thought
she was going to die.

But
this was the first time in years that it seemed to matter.

Waterbed

Taking off his
diveskin is like gutting himself.

He
can't believe how much he's come to depend on it, how hard it is to
come out from inside. The eyecaps are even harder. Fischer sits on
his pallet, staring at the sealed hatch while Shadow whispers it's
okay, you're alone, you're safe. Half an hour goes by before he can
bring himself to believe her.

Finally,
when he bares his eyes, the cubby lights are so dim he can hardly
see. He turns them up until the room is twilit. The eyecaps sit in
the palm of his hand, pale and opaque in the semidarkness, like
jellied circles of eggshell. It's strange to blink without feeling
them under his eyelids. He feels so 
exposed
.

He
has to do it, though. It's part of the process. That's what this is
all about; opening yourself up. 

Lenie's
in her cubby, just centimeters away. If it wasn't for this bulkhead
Fischer could reach right out and touch her.

This
is what you do when you really love someone
, Shadow said way back
then. So he does it now, to himself. For Shadow.

Thinking
about Lenie.

Sometimes
he thinks Lenie's the only other real person on the whole rift. The
others are robots; glass robot eyes, matte black robot bodies,
lurching through programmed routines that do nothing but keep other,
bigger machines running. Even their names sound mechanical. Nakata.
Caraco.

Not
Lenie, though. There's someone inside her 'skin, her eyes may be
glassed-in but they're not glass. She's 
real
. Fischer knows he
can touch her.

Of
course, that's why he keeps getting into trouble. He keeps touching.
But Lenie would be different, if only he could break through. She's
more like Shadow than all the others ever were. Older, though.

No
older than I'd be now, Shadow murmurs, and maybe that's it.

His
mouth moves —
I'm so sorry, Lenie
— and no sound
comes out. Shadow doesn't correct him.

This
is what you do
, she'd said, and then she'd begun to cry. As
Fischer cries now. As he always does, when he comes.

* * *

The
pain wakes him, sometime later. He's curled up on the pallet, and
something's cutting into his cheek: a little piece of broken glass. 

A
mirror.

He
stares at it, confused. A silver glass shard with a dark bloody tip,
like a small tooth. There's no mirror in his cubby.

He
reaches up and touches the bulkhead behind his pillow. Lenie's there,
Lenie's just the other side. But here, on 
this
 side there's a
dark line, a rim of shadow he never noticed before. His eyes follow
it around the edge of the wall, a gap about half a centimeter wide.
Here and there little bits of glass are still wedged into that space.

There
used to be a mirror covering this whole bulkhead. Just like Scanlon's
vids. And it wasn't just removed, judging from the little fragments
left behind. Somebody smashed it out.

Lenie.
She went through the whole station, before the rest of them came
down, and she smashed all the mirrors. He doesn't know why he's so
sure, but somehow it seems like exactly the sort of thing Lenie
Clarke would do when no one was looking.

Maybe
she doesn't like to see herself. Maybe she's ashamed.

Go
talk to her, Shadow says.

I
can't.

Yes
you can. I'll help you.

He
picks up the tunic of his 'skin. It slithers around his body, its
edges fusing together along the midline of his chest. He steps over
the sleeves and leggings still spilled across the deck, reaches down
for his eyecaps.

Leave
them there.

No!

Yes.

I
can't, she'll 
see 
me...

That's
what you want, isn't it? Isn't it?

She
doesn't even like me, she'll just—

Leave
them. I 
said
 I'll help you.

He
leans against the closed hatch, eyes shut, his breathing loud and
rapid in his ears.

Go
on. Go 
on
.

The
corridor outside is in deep twilight. Fischer moves along it to
Lenie's sealed hatch. He touches it, afraid to knock.

From
behind, someone taps his shoulder.

"She's
out," Brander says. His 'skin is done right up to his neck, arms
and legs completely sealed. His capped eyes are blank and hard. And
there's the usual edge in his voice, that same familiar tone saying

Just give me an excuse, asshole, just do anything...

Maybe
he wants Lenie too.

Don't
get him mad, Shadow says.

Fischer
swallows. "I just wanted to talk to her."

"She's

out
."

"Okay.
I'll...I'll try later." 

Brander
reaches out, pokes Fischer's face. His finger comes away sticky.

"You're
cut," he says.

"It's
nothing. I'm okay."

"Too
bad."

Fischer
tries to edge past Brander to his own cubby. The corridor pushes them
together.

Brander
clenches his fists. "Don't you fucking touch me."

"I'm
not, I'm just trying to— I mean..." Fischer falls silent,
glances around. No one else anywhere. 

Deliberately,
Brander relaxes.

"And
for Christ's sake put your eyes back in," he says. "Nobody
wants to look in there."

He
turns and walks away.

* * *

They
say Lubin sleeps out here. Lenie too, sometimes, but Lubin hasn't
slept in his bunk since the rest of them came down. He keeps his
headlight off, and he stays away from the lit part of the Throat, and
nothing bothers him. Fischer heard Nakata and Caraco talking about it
on the last shift.

It's
starting to sound like a good idea. The less time he spends in Beebe
these days, the better.

The
station is a dim faraway blotch, glowing to Fischer's left. Brander's
in there. He goes on duty in three hours. Fischer figures he can just
stay out here until then. He doesn't really need to go inside much.
None of them do. There's a little desalinator piggybacked on his
electrolyser in case he gets thirsty, and a bunch of flaps and valves
that do things he doesn't want to think about, when he has to piss or
take a dump.

He's
getting a bit hungry, but he can wait. He's fine out here as long as
nothing attacks him.

Brander
just won't let him alone. Fischer doesn't know what Brander's got
against him­­—

Oh
yes you do, says Shadow.

—
but
he knows that look. Brander wants him to fuck up real bad.

The
others keep out of it, for the most part. Nakata, the nervous one,
just keeps out of everyone's way. Caraco acts like she couldn't care
less if he boiled alive in a smoker. Lubin just sits there, looking
at the floor and smoldering; even Brander leaves him alone. 

And
Lenie. Lenie's cold and distant as a mountaintop. No, Fischer's not
getting any help with Brander. So when it comes to a choice between
the monsters out here or the one in there, it's an easy call.

Caraco
and Nakata are doing a hull check back at the station. Their distant
voices buzz distractingly along Fischer's jaw. He shuts his receiver
off and settles down behind an outcropping of basalt pillows. 

Later,
he can't remember drifting off.

* * *

"Listen,
cocksucker. I just did two shifts end to end because you didn't show
up for work when you were supposed to. Then half another shift

looking
 for you. We thought you were in trouble. We 
assumed

you were in trouble. Don't tell me—"

Brander
pushes Fischer up against the wall.

"
Don't
tell me
," he says again, "that you weren't. You don't
want to say that."

Fischer
looks around the ready room. Nakata watches from the opposite
bulkhead, jumpy as a cat. Lubin rattles around in the equipment
lockers, his back to the proceedings. Caraco racks her fins and edges
past them to the ladder.

"Carac—"

Brander
slams him hard against the wall.

Caraco,
her foot on the bottom rung, turns and watches for a moment. A smile
ghosts across her face. "Don't look at me, Gerry my man. This is
your problem." She climbs away overhead.

Brander's
face hovers a few centimeters away. His hood is still sealed, except
for the mouth flap. His eyes look like translucent glass balls
embedded in black plastic. He tightens his grip.

"So,
cocksucker?"

"I'm...sorry—"
Fischer stammers.

"You're
sorry." Brander glances over his shoulder, includes Nakata in
the joke. "He's sorry."

Nakata
laughs, too loudly. 

Lubin
clanks in the locker, still ignoring them all. The airlock begins
cycling.

"I
don't think," Brander says, raising his voice over the sudden
gurgle, "that you're sorry 
enough
."

The
'lock swings open. Lenie Clarke steps out, fins in one hand. Her
blank eyes sweep across the room; they don't pause at Fischer. She
carries her fins to the drying rack without a word.

Brander
punches Fischer in the stomach. Fischer doubles over, gasping; his
head smashes into the airlock hatch. He can't catch his breath. The
deck scrapes his cheek. Brander's boot is almost touching his nose.

"Hey."
Lenie's voice, distant, not particularly interested.

"Hey
yourself, Lenie. He's got it coming."

"I
know." A moment passes. "Still."

"Judy
got nailed by a viperfish, looking for him. She could've been
killed."

"Maybe."
Lenie sounds as if she's very tired. "So why isn't Judy here?"

"
I'm

here," Brander says.

Fischer's
lung is working again. Gulping air, he pushes himself up against the
bulkhead. Brander glares at him. Lubin's back in the room now, just
off to one side. Watching.

Lenie
stands in the middle of the ready room. She shrugs.

"What?"
Brander demands.

"I
don't know." She glances indifferently at Fischer. "It's
just, he...he just fucked up. He didn't mean any har—"

She
stops. Fischer gets the sense that she's looking straight through
him, through the bulkhead, right out into the abyss itself to
something only she can see. Whatever it is, she doesn't like it much.

"Ah,
fuck it." She heads for the ladder. "None of my business
anyway."

Lenie,
please...

Brander
turns back to Fischer as she climbs out of sight. Fischer stares
back. Endless seconds go by. Brander's fist hovers in mid-air.

It
lashes out almost too fast to see. Fischer reels, catches himself on
a conduit. Lights swarm across his left eye. He blinks them away,
hanging onto the bulkhead. Everything hurts.

Brander
unclenches his fist. "Lenie's way too nice," he remarks,
flexing his fingers. "Personally, I don't care whether you meant
any harm or not."

Doppelgänger

Beebe's
almost as soundproof as the inside of an echo chamber.

Lenie
Clarke sits on her bunk and listens to the walls. She can't hear any
actual words, but a sudden impact of flesh against metal was clear
enough a few minutes ago. Now, low voices converse out in the lounge.
Water gurgles through a pipe somewhere.

She
thinks she hears something moving downstairs.

She
lays her ear against a random pipe. Nothing. Another; a hiss of
compressed gas. A third; the faint, tinny echo of slow footsteps,
scraping across the lower deck. After a moment a muted hum vibrates
through the plumbing.

The
medical scanner.

It's
none of my business. It's between them. Brander's got his reasons,
and Fischer—

He
didn't mean any harm.

Fischer's
nothing. He's a pathetic, twisted asshole, nobody's problem but his
own. It's too bad he gets under Brander's skin like that, but life's
not guaranteed to be fair. No one knows that better than Lenie
Clarke. She knows what it's like. She remembers the fists out of
nowhere, the million little things you didn't even know you'd done
wrong until it was too late. Nobody helped 
her
. She'd managed,
though. Sex worked, sometimes, as a diversionary tactic. Other times
you just had to run.

He
didn't mean any harm.

She
shakes her head.

Well
I fucking didn't either!

The
sound sinks in before the pain does. A dull, solid thud, like a fish
hitting a floodlight. Blood oozes from the torn skin of her knuckles,
the droplets almost black to her filtered vision. The stinging that
follows is a welcome distraction.

The
bulkhead, of course, is completely unmarked.

Out
in the lounge, the conversation has stopped. Clarke sits rigid on the
pallet, sucking her hand. Eventually, the voices start up again. 

Almost
time to go on shift with Nakata and Brander. Clarke looks around her
cubby, hesitating. There's something she has to do before she opens
the hatch, something important, and she can't quite remember what it
is. Her eyes keep coming back to the same wall, looking for something
that isn't—

The
mirror. For some reason, she wants to see what she looks like. That's
odd. She can't remember feeling that way for — well, for a long
time. But it's no big deal. She'll just sit here until the feeling
goes away. She doesn't have to step outside, she doesn't even have to
stand up, until she feels normal again.

When
in doubt, stay out of sight.

* * *

"Alice?"

The
hatch is closed. There's no answer.

"She's
in there." Brander stands at the end of the corridor, the lounge
behind him. "She didn't go in more than ten minutes ago."

Clarke
knocks again, harder. "Alice? It's almost time."

Brander
turns on his heel — "I'll go get our stuff together."
— and steps out of sight.

Beebe's
hatches do not lock, for safety reasons. Still, Clarke hesitates. She
knows how 
she'd
 feel if someone just walked into her private
space without being invited.

But
she said she was up for another shift. And I 
did 
knock...

She
spins the wheel in the center of the hatch. The mimetic seal around
the rim softens and retracts. Clarke pulls the hatch open, peers
inside.

Alice
Nakata lies twitching on her bunk, eyes closed, 'skin partially
peeled. Leads trail from insertion points on her face and wrists,
drape away to a lucid dreamer on the bedside shelf.

She
goes to sleep ten minutes before her shift starts?
 It doesn't
make sense. Besides, Nakata was just downstairs with the rest of
them. With Fischer. How could anyone fall asleep after 
that
?

Clarke
steps closer, studies the telltales on the device; induced REM's
cranked to maximum and the alarm's disabled. Nakata would have been
out in seconds. Hell, at those settings she'd drift off in the middle
of a gang-rape.

Lenie
Clarke nods approvingly. 
Nice trick.

Reluctantly,
she touches the wake-up stud. Sleep drains from Nakata's face; her
expression changes abruptly. Asian eyes flicker, open wide and dark. 

Clarke
steps back, startled. Alice Nakata has taken her eyecaps off.

"Time
to go, Alice" she says softly. "Sorry to wake you..."

She
is, too. She's never seen Nakata smile before. It would have been
nice if it could have lasted.

* * *

Brander's
sealing a broadband sensor into its casing when Clarke drops into the
lounge. "She'll catch up with us," she tells him, and turns
to the drying rack for her fins.

Directly
in front of her, the Med hatch is sealed. No sounds, human or
mechanical, filter through from inside.

"Oh
yeah. He's still in there." Brander raises his voice a fraction.
"Good fucking thing, too, while I'm around."

"He
didn't m—" 
Shut up! Shut the fuck 
up!

"Lenie?"

She
turns to see his hand dropping away. Brander's actually a lot more
touchy-feely than you'd expect, sometimes he almost forgets himself
around her.

But
it's okay. He doesn't mean any harm either.

"Nothing,"
Clarke says, grabbing her fins.

Brander
carries the sensor over to the airlock, drops it in with some other
trinkets and cycles them through. Gurgles and clunks accompany their
passage into the abyss.

"Only—"

He
looks at her, his face framing a question around empty eyes.

"What
have you got against Fischer?" she says, nearly whispering.

You
know exactly what he's got against Fischer. It's none of your
business. Stay out of it.

Brander's
face hardens like setting cement. "He's a fucking freak. He
diddles little kids."

I
know
. "Who says?"

"Nobody
has to 
say
. I can see his kind coming ten klicks away."

"If
you say so." Clarke listens to her own voice. Cool. Distant,
almost bored. Good.

"He
looks at me funny. Hell, have you seen the way he looks at 
you
?"
Metal clanks against metal. "If he so much as touches me I'll
fucking kill him."

"Yeah.
Well, it wouldn't take much. He just sits there and takes whatever
you dish out, you know, he's so— passive..."

Brander
snorts. "Why do you care, anyway? He creeps you out as much as
the rest of us. I saw what happened in Medical last week."

The
airlock hisses. A green light flashes on its side

"I
don't know," Lenie says. "You're right, I guess. I know
what he is."

Brander
swings the 'lock open and steps inside. Clarke holds the edge of the
hatch.

"There's
something else, though," she says, almost to herself.
"Something's— missing. He doesn't fit."

"None
of us fits," Brander growls. "That's the whole fucking
point."

She
closes the hatch. There's enough room for two in there — the
other rifters generally drop out in pairs — but she prefers to
go through alone. It's a small thing. Nobody comments on it.

Not
his fault. Not Brander's, not Fischer's. Not dad's. Not mine.

Nobody's
fucking fault.

The
airlock flushes beside her.

Angel

The
seabed is glowing. Cracks in the rock flicker comforting shades of
orange, like hot coals, and he knows that's thermal; the scalding
rivulets feel warm even through his 'skin, his thermister leaps
around every time the current twitches. But there are places here
where the rocks shine green, and others where they shine blue. He
doesn't know whether to thank biology or geochemistry. All he knows
is that it's beautiful. It's a city from high up, at night. It's a
vid of the northern lights he saw once, only sharper and brighter.
It's a brush fire in emeralds.

In
a way he's almost grateful to Brander. If it weren't for Brander he'd
never have come upon this place. He'd be sitting in Beebe with the
rest of them, hooked into the library or hiding in his cubby, safe
and dry.

But
Beebe's no refuge with Brander inside. Beebe's a gauntlet. So today
Fischer just stayed away when his shift ended, crawled off across the
ocean floor, exploring. Now, somewhere far from the Throat, he
discovers 
real
 sanctuary.

Don't
fall asleep, Shadow says. If you miss your shift again it'll just
give him an excuse.

So
what? He won't find me out here. 

You
can't stay outside forever. You've got to eat sometime.

I
know, I know. Be quiet.

He's
the only person to have ever seen this place. How long has it been
here? How many millions of years has this little oasis been glowing
peacefully in the night, a pocket universe all to itself?

Lenie
would like it out here, Shadow says.

Yeah.

A
rattail cruises into view about half a meter up, its underside a
jigsaw of reflected color. It thrashes once, suddenly; violent
shivers run the length of its body. The water around it shimmers with
heat distortion. The fish spins lopsidedly, tail-down, in the wake of
the little eruption. Its body turns white in seconds, begins to fray
at the edges.

Four
hundred eight degrees Centigrade: that's maximum recorded temperature
for hot seeps on the Juan de Fuca rift. Fischer thinks back for the
temperature rating on diveskin copolymer.

One
fifty.

He
sculls up into the water column a bit, just in case. As soon as he
clears bottom clutter he feels the faint, regular tapping of Beebe's
sonar against his insides.

That's
odd. This far out, he shouldn't be able to feel the signal, not
unless they'd really cranked it up. And they wouldn't do 
that

unless—

He
checks the time.

Oh
no. Not again.

By
the time he makes it back to the Throat they're halfway through
stripping number four. They open a space on the line for him. Lenie
doesn't want to hear his apologies. She doesn't want to talk to him
at all. That hurts, but Fischer can't really blame her. Maybe he can
make it up to her soon. Maybe he can take her sightseeing.

It's
not Brander's shift, thank God. He's back at Beebe. But Fischer's
getting hungry again.

* * *

Maybe
he's in his cubby. Maybe I can just eat and go to bed. Maybe— 

He's
sitting right there, all alone in the lounge, glaring up from his
meal as soon as Fischer climbs into the room.

Don't
get him mad.

Too
late. He's
 always 
mad.

"I—
thought we should clear some things up," he tries.

"Fuck
off."

Fischer
reaches the galley table, pulls out a chair. 

"Don't
bother," Brander says.

"Look,
this place is small enough as it is. We've got to at least 
try

to get along, you know? I mean, that's 
assault
. It's 
illegal
."

"So
arrest me."

"Maybe
you're not really mad at me at all," Fischer stops for a moment,
surprised. 
Maybe that's it.
 "Maybe you've mixed me up
with someone—"

Brander
stands up.

Fischer
pushes on: "Maybe someone 
else
 did something to you,
once, and—"

Brander
comes around the table, very deliberately.

"I
haven't got you mixed up with anybody. I know exactly what you are."

"No,
you don't, we never even 
saw
 each other until a couple of
weeks ago!" 
Of course that's it. It's not me at all, it's
someone else!
 "Whatever happened to you­­—"

"Is
none of your fucking business, and if you say one more word I'll
fucking 
kill
 you."

Let's
just go, Shadow pleads. Let's leave, this is only making things
worse.

But
Fisher stands his ground. Suddenly everything seems so clear. "It
wasn't me," he says quietly. "What happened— I'm
sorry. But it wasn't me, you 
know
 it wasn't."

For
a moment he thinks he might actually be getting through. Brander's
face untwists a little, the knots of flesh and eyebrow unkinking just
a bit around those featureless white eyes, and Fischer can almost see
that face wearing something other than rage.

But
then he feels something moving, it's his own arm reaching out 
Shadow
no you'll ruin everything
 but Shadow's not listening, she's
crooning Don't get him mad, don't get him mad don't get him mad—

This
is what you 
do
.

The
growl starts low in Brander's throat, rising, like a distant wave
pushed higher and higher out of the sea as it rushes shoreward.

"...don't

you Fucking TOUCH ME!
"

And
nothing goes dead fast enough.

* * *

It
stings at first. Then he feels clotted blood break around his eyelid,
sees a fuzzy line of red light. He tries to bring his hand to his
face. It hurts.

Something
cold and wet, soothing. More clots come away.

"Nnnnnn..."

Someone
is poking at his eyes. He tries to struggle, but all he can do is
move his head feebly from side to side. That hurts even more.

"Don't
move."

Lenie's
voice.

"Your
right eyecap's damaged. It could be gouging your cornea."

He
relents. Lenie's fingers push between lids that feel as puffy as
pillows. There's a sudden pressure on his eyeball, a tug of suction.
A slurping sound, and the feel of ragged edges dragged across his
pupil.

The
world goes dark. "Hang on," Lenie says. "I'll turn up
the lights."

There's
still a reddish tinge to everything, but at least he can see.

He's
in his cubby. Lenie Clarke leans over him, a bit of glistening wet
membrane in one hand.

"You
were lucky. He'd have ripped your costochondrals if your implants
hadn't been packed in behind them." She drops the ruined cap out
of sight, picks up a cartridge of liquid skin. "As it is, he
only broke a couple of ribs. Lots of bruises. Mild concussion, maybe,
but you'll have to go to Medical to be sure. Oh, and I'm pretty sure
he broke your cheekbone too."

She
sounds as if she’s reading a grocery list.

“
Why
not—” Warm salt floods his mouth. His tongue does some
careful exploring; his teeth are still intact, at least. “—in
Medical, now?”

“
It
would have been a bitch getting you down the ladder. Brander wasn’t
going to help. Everyone else is outside.” She sprays foam
across his bicep. It pulls his skin as it dries.

“
Not
that they’d be any help,” she adds.

“
Thanks...”

“
I
didn’t do anything. Just dragged you in here, basically.”

He
wants desperately to touch her.

“
What
is it with you, Fischer?” she asks after a while. "Why
don't you ever fight back?"

"Wouldn’t
work."

"Are
you kidding? You know how 
big
 you are? You could take Brander
apart if you just stood up to him."

Shadow
says it only makes things worse. You fight back, it only gets them
madder.

"Shadow?"
Lenie says.

"What?"

"You
said—"

“
Didn’t
say anything...” 

She
watches him for a few moments.

"Okay,"
she says at last. She stands up. “I'll call up and send for a
replacement."

“
No.
That’s okay.”

“
You’re
injured, Fischer."

Medical
tutorials whisper inside his head. “We've got stuff
downstairs."

"You
still wouldn't be able to work for a week. More than twice that
before you'd be fully healed."

"They
planned for accidents. When they set up the schedules."

"And
how are you going to keep clear of Brander until then?"

"I'll
stay outside more," he says. "Please, Lenie."

She
shakes her head. "You're crazy, Fischer." She turns to the
hatch, undogs it. "None of my business, of course. I just don't
think—"

Turns
back.

“
Do
you like it down here?” she asks.

“
What?”

“
Do
you get off, being down here?”

It
should be a stupid question. Especially now. Somehow it isn’t.

“
Sort
of,” he says at last, realizing it for the first time.

She
nods, blinking over white space. “Dopamine rush.”

“
Dopa—?”

“
They
say we get hooked on it. Being down here. Being— scared, I
guess.” She smiles faintly. “That’s the rumor,
anyway.”

Fischer
thinks about that. “Not so much I get off on it. More like,
just used to it. You know?”

“
Yeah.”
She turns and pushes the hatch open. “For sure.”

* * *

There's
this praying mantis a meter long, all black with chrome trim, hanging
upside-down from the ceiling of the medical cubby. It's been sleeping
up there ever since Fischer first arrived. Now it hovers over his
face, jointed arms clicking and dipping like crazy articulated
chopsticks. Every now and then one of its feelers winks red light,
and Fischer can smell the scent of his own flesh cauterizing. It kind
of bothers him. What's even worse is, he can't move his head. The
neuroinduction field in the Med table has got him paralyzed from the
neck up. He keeps wondering what would happen if the focus slipped,
if that damping energy ended up pointing at his lungs. At his 
heart
.

The
mantis stops in midmotion, its antennae quivering. It keeps
completely still for a few seconds. "Hello, er— Gerry,
isn't it?" it says at last. "I'm Dr. Troyka."

It
sounds like a woman.

"How
are we doing here?" Fischer tries to answer, but his head and
neck are still just so much dead meat. "No, don't try to
answer," the mantis says, "Rhetorical question. I'm
checking your readouts now."

Fischer
remembers: the medical equipment can't always do everything on its
own. Sometimes, when things get too complicated, it calls up the line
to a human backup.

"Wow,"
says the mantis. "What happened to you? No, don't answer that
either. I don't want to know." An accessory arm springs into
sight and passes back and forth across Fischer's line of sight. "I'm
going to override the damping field for a moment. It might hurt a
bit. Try not to move when that happens, except to answer my
questions."

Pain
floods across Fischer's face. It's not too bad. Familiar, even. His
eyelids feel scratchy, and his tongue is dry. He tries blinking; it
works. He closes his mouth, rubs his tongue against swollen cheeks.
Better.

"I
don't suppose you want to come back up?" Dr. Troyka asks,
hundreds of kilometers away. "You know these injuries are bad
enough to warrant a recall."

Fischer
shakes his head. "That's okay. I can stay here."

"Uh
huh." The mantis doesn't sound surprised. "I've been
hearing that a fair bit lately. Okay, I'm going to wire your
cheekbone back together, and I'll be planting a little battery under
your skin. Just below the right eye. It'll basically kick your bone
cells into overdrive, speed up the healing process. It's just a
couple of millimeters across, you'll feel like you've got sort of a
hard pimple. It may itch, but try not to pick at it. When you're
healed up you can just squeeze it out like a zit. Okay?"

"Okay."

"All
right, Gerry. I'm going to turn the field back on and get to work."
The mantis whirrs in anticipation.

Fischer
holds up a hand. "Wait."

"What
is it, Gerry?"

"What...what
time is it, up there?" he asks.

"It's
oh five ten. Pacific daylight. Why?"

"It's
early."

"Sure
is."

"I
guess I got you up," Fischer says. "Sorry."

"Nonsense."
Digits on the end of mechanical arms wiggle absently. "I've been
up for hours. Graveyard shift."

"Graveyard?"

"We're
on duty around the clock, Gerry. There's a lot of geothermal stations
out there, you know. You— you keep us pretty busy, as a rule."

"Oh,"
Fischer says. "Sorry."

"Forget
it. It's my job." There's a humming, somewhere in the back of
his head; for a moment Fischer can feel the muscles of his face going
slack. Then everything goes numb, and the mantis swoops down him like
a predator.

* * *

He
knows better than to open up outside.

It
doesn't kill you, not right away. But seawater's a lot saltier than
blood; let it inside and osmosis sucks the water from the epithelial
cells, shrivels them down to viscous little blobs. Rifter kidneys are
modified to speed up water reclamation when that happens, but it's
not a long-term solution and it costs. Organs wears out faster, urine
turns to oil. It's best to just keep sealed up. Your insides soak in
seawater too long, they sort of 
corrode
, implants or no
implants.

But
that's another one of Fischer's problems. He never takes the long
view.

The
face seal is a single macromolecule fifty centimeters long. It wraps
back and forth along the line of the jaw like the two sides of a
zipper, with hydrophobic side-chains for teeth. A little blade on the
index of Fischer's left glove can split them apart. He runs it along
the seal and the 'skin opens neatly around his mouth.

He
doesn't feel much of anything at first. He was half-expecting the
ocean to charge up his nose and burn his sinuses, but of course all
his body cavities are already packed with isotonic saline. The only
immediate change is that his face gets cold, numbing the chronic ache
of torn flesh a bit. Deeper pain pulses under one eye, where Dr.
Troyka's wires hold the bones of his face together; microelectricity
tingles along those lines, press-gangs bonebuilding osteoblasts into
high gear. 

After
a couple of moments he tries to gargle; that doesn't work, so he
settles for gaping like a fish and wriggling his tongue around. That
does it. He gets his first taste of raw ocean, coarse and saltier
than the stuff that pumps him up inside.

On
the seabed in front of him, a swarm of blind shrimp feeds in the
current from a nearby vent. Fischer can see right through them.
They're like little chunks of glass with blobs of organs jiggling
around inside.

It
must be fourteen hours since he's eaten, but there's no fucking way
he's going back to Beebe with Brander still inside. The last time he
tried, Brander was actually standing guard in the lounge, waiting for
him.

What
the hell. It's just like krill. People eat this stuff all the time.

They
have a strange taste. Fischer's mouth is going numb from the cold,
but there's still a faint sense of rotten eggs, dilute and barely
detectable. Not bad other than that, though. Better than Brander by a
long shot.

When
the convulsions hit fifteen minutes later, he's not so sure.

* * *

"You
look like shit," Lenie says.

Fischer
hangs onto the railing, looks around the lounge. "Where—"

"At
the Throat. On shift with Lubin and Caraco."

He
makes it to the couch.

"Haven't
seen you for a while," Lenie remarks. "How's your face
doing?"

Fischer
squints at her through a haze of nausea. Lenie Clarke is actually
making small talk. She's 
never
 done that before. He's still
trying to figure out why when his stomach clamps down again and he
pitches onto the floor. By now nothing comes up but a few dribbles of
sour fluid.

His
eyes trace the pipes tangling along the ceiling. After a while
Lenie's face blocks the view, looking down from a great height.

"What's
wrong?" She seems to be asking out of idle curiosity, no more.

"Ate
some shrimp," he says, and retches again.

"You
ate— from 
outside
?" She bends down and pulls him
up. His arms drag along behind on the deck. Something hard bumps his
head; the railing around the downstairs ladder.

"Fuck,"
Lenie says.

He's
on the floor again, alone. Receding footsteps. Dizziness. Something
presses against his neck, pricks him with a soft hiss.

His
head clears almost instantly.

Lenie's
leaning in, closer than she's ever been. She's even touching him,
she's got one hand on his shoulder. He stares down at that hand,
feeling a stupid sort of wonder, but then she pulls it away. 

She's
holding a hypo. Fischer's stomach begins to settle.

"Why,"
she says softly, "would you do a stupid thing like that?"

"I
was hungry."

"So
what's wrong with the dispenser?"

He
doesn't answer.

"Oh,"
Lenie says. "Right."

She
stands up and snaps the spent cartridge out of the hypo. "This
can't go on, Fischer. You know that."

"He
hasn't got me in two weeks."

"He
hasn't 
seen
 you in two weeks. You only come in when he's on
shift. And you're missing your own shifts more and more. Doesn't make
you too popular with the rest of us." She cocks her head as
Beebe creaks around them. "Why don't you just call up and get
them to take you home?"

Because
I do things to children, and if I leave here they'll cut me open and
change me into something else... 

Because
there are things outside that almost make it worthwhile...

Because
of you...

He
doesn't know if she'd understand any of those reasons. He decides not
to risk it.

"Maybe
you could talk to him," he manages.

Lenie
sighs. "He wouldn't listen."

"Maybe
if you tried, at least—"

Her
face hardens. "I 
have
 tried. I—"

She
catches herself.

"I
can't get involved," she whispers. "It's none of my
business."

Fischer
closes his eyes. He feels as if he's going to cry. "He just
doesn't let up. He really hates me."

"It's
not you. You're just— filling in." 

"Why
did they put us together? It doesn't make sense!"

"Sure
it does. Statistically."

Fischer
opens his eyes. "What?"

Lenie's
pulling one hand down across her face. She seems very tired.

"We're
not people here, Fischer. We're a cloud of data points. Doesn't
matter what happens to you or me or Brander, just as long as the mean
stays where it's supposed to and the standard deviation doesn't get
too big."

Tell
her, Shadow says.

"Lenie—"

"Anyway."
Lenie shrugs the mood away. "You're crazy to eat anything that
near a rift zone. Didn't you learn about hydrogen sulfide?"

He
nods. "Basic training. The vents spit it out."

"And
it builds up in the benthos. They're toxic. Which I guess you know
now anyway."

She
starts down the ladder, stops on the second rung.

"If
you really want to go native, try feeding further from the rift. Or
go for the fish."

"The
fish?"

"They
move around more. Don't spend all their time soaking in the hot
springs. Maybe they're safe."

"The
fish," he says again. He hadn't thought of that.

"I
said 
maybe
."

* * *

Shadow
I'm so sorry...

Shush.
Just look at all the pretty lights.

So
he looks. He knows this place. He's on the bottom of the Pacific
Ocean. He's back in fairyland. He thinks he comes here a lot now,
watches the lights and bubbles, listens to the deep rocks grinding
against each other.

Maybe
he'll stay this time, watch the whole thing working, but then he
remembers he's supposed to be somewhere else. He waits, but nothing
specific comes to him. Just a feeling that he should be doing
something somewhere else. Soon.

It's
getting harder to stay here anyway. There's a vague pain hanging
around his upper body somewhere, fading in and out. After a while he
realizes what it is. His face hurts. 

Maybe
this beautiful light is hurting his eyes. 

That
can't be right. His caps should take care of all that. Maybe they're
not working. He seems to remember something that happened to his eyes
a while back, but it doesn't really matter. He can always just leave.
Suddenly, wonderfully, all of his problems have easy answers.

If
the light hurts, all he has to do is stay in the dark.

Feral

"Hey,"
Caraco buzzes as they come around the corner. "Number four."

Clarke
looks. Four's fifteen meters away and the water's a bit murky this
shift. Still, she can see something big and dark sticking to the
intake vent. Its shadow twitches down along the casing like an
absurdly stretched black spider.

Clarke
fins forward a few meters, Caraco at her side. The two women exchange
looks.

Fischer,
hanging upside down against the mesh. It's been four days since
anyone's seen him.

Clarke
gently sets down her carry bag; Caraco follows her lead. Two or three
kicks bring them to within five meters of the intake. Machinery hums
omnipresently, makes a sound deep enough to feel.

He's
facing away from them, drifting from side to side, tugged by the
gentle suction of the intake vent. The vent's grillwork is fuzzy with
rooted growing things; small clams, tube worms, shadow crabs. Fischer
pulls squirming clumps from the intake, leaves them to drift or to
fall to the street below. He's cleaned maybe two meters square so
far.

It's
nice to see he still takes some duties seriously.

"Hey.
Fischer," Caraco says.

He
spins around as if shot. His forearm flails toward Clarke's face; she
raises her own just in time. In the next instant he's bowled past
her. She kicks, steadies herself. Fischer's heading for the darkness
without looking back.

"Fischer,"
Clarke calls out. "Stop. It's okay."

He
stops kicking for a moment, looks back over his shoulder.

"It's
me," she buzzes. "And Judy. We won't hurt you."

Barely
visible now, he rotates to a stop and turns to face them. Clarke
risks a wave.

"Come
on, Fischer. Give us a hand."

Caraco
comes up behind her. "Lenie, what are you doing?" She's
turned her vocoder down to a hiss. "He's too far gone, he's—"

Clarke
cranks her own vocoder down. "Shut up, Judy." Up again.
"What do you say, Fischer? Earn your pay."

He's
coming back into the light, hesitantly, like a wild animal lured by
the promise of food. Closer, Clarke can see the line of his jaw
moving up and down under his hood. The motions are jerky, erratic, as
though he's learning them for the first time.

Finally
a noise comes out. "Oh— kay—"

Caraco
goes back and retrieves their gear. Clarke offers a scraper to
Fischer. After a moment, he takes it, clumsily, and follows them to
number four.

"Jussst
like," Fischer buzzes. "Old. T— times."

Caraco
looks at Clarke. Clarke says nothing.

* * *

Near
the end of the shift she looks around. "Fischer?"

Caraco
pokes her head out from an access tunnel. "He's gone?"

"When
did you see him last?"

Caraco's
vocoder ticks a couple of times; the machinery always misinterprets

hmmm.
 "Half hour ago, maybe."

Clarke
puts her own vocoder on high. "Hey Fischer! You still around?"

No
answer.

"Fischer,
we're heading back in a bit. If you want to come along..."

Caraco
just shakes her head.

Shadow 

It's a nightmare. 

There's
light everywhere, blinding, painful. He can barely move. Everything
has such hard edges, and everywhere he looks the boundaries are too
sharp. Sounds are like that too, clanks and shouts, every noise an
exclamation of pain. He barely knows where he is. He doesn't know why
he's there. 

He's
drowning.

"
UNNNNNSEEEEELLLLLHHHHHIZZZZZMMMMOOUUUUUTH..."

The
tubes in his chest suck at emptiness. The rest of his insides strain
to inflate, but there's nothing there to fill them. He thrashes,
panicky. Something gives with a snap. Sudden pain resonates in some
faraway limb, floods the rest of his body a moment later. He tries to
scream, but there's nothing inside to push out.

"HHIZZMMMOUTHFORRRKKRRIISSAAAAAKHEEEZSSUFFUKKATE—"

Someone
pulls part of his face off. His insides fill with a rush; not the
cold saline he's used to, but it helps. The burning in his chest
eases.

"BIGGFFUKKINNGGMMISSTTAAKE—"

Pressure,
painful and uneven. Things are holding him down, holding him up,
banging into him. The noise is tinny, deafening. He remembers a
sound—

—
gravity—

—
that
applies somehow, but he doesn't know what it means. And then
everything's spinning, and everything's familiar and horrible except
for one thing, one glimpse of a face that calms him somehow—

Shadow?

—
and
the weight's gone, the pressure's gone, icewater calms his insides as
he spirals back with her, outside again, where she used to be years
ago—

She's
showing him how to do it. She creeps into his room after the shouting
stops, she crawls under the covers with him and she starts stroking
his penis.

"Dad
says this is what you do when you really love somebody," she
whispers. And that scares him because they don't even 
like

each other, he just wants her to go away and leave them all alone.

"Go
away. I 
hate
 you," he says, but he’s too afraid to
move.

"That's
okay, then you don't have to do it for me." She’s trying
to laugh, trying to pretend he was just kidding.

And
then, still stroking: "Why are you always so mean to me?”

"I'm
not mean."

"Are
too."

"You're
not supposed to be here."

"Can't
we just be friends?" She rubs up against him. "I can do
this whenever you want—"

"Go
away. You can’t stay here."

"I

can
, maybe. If it works out, they said. But we have to like
each other or they could send me back—”

"Good."

She's
crying now, she's rubbing against him so hard the bed shakes, "
Please
can't you like me please I'll do anything I'll even—
"

But
he never finds out what she'll even do because that's when the door
slams open and whatever happens after that, Gerry Fischer can't
remember.

Shadow,
I'm so sorry...

But
she's back with him now, in the cold and the dark where it's safe.
Somehow. Beebe's a dim gray glow in the distance. She floats against
that backdrop like a black cardboard cutout. 

"Shadow..."
Not his voice.

"No."
Not hers. "Lenie."

"Lenie..."

Twin
crescents, thin as fingernails, reflect from her eyes. Even in two
dimensions she's beautiful.

Mangled
words buzz from her throat: "You know who I am? You can
understand me?"

He
nods, then wonders if she can see it. "Yeah."

"You
don't— lately you're sort of gone, Fischer. Like you've
forgotten how to be human."

He
tries to laugh, but the vocoder can't handle it. "It comes and
goes, I think. I'm...lucid now, anyway. That's the word, isn't it?"

"You
shouldn't have come back inside." Machinery strips any feeling
from her words. "He says he'll kill you. Maybe you should just
stay out of his way."

"Okay,"
he says, and thinks it actually might be.

"I
can bring food out, I guess. They don't care about that."

"That's
okay. I can — go fishing."

"I'll
call for a 'scaphe. It can pick you up out here."

"No.
I can swim back up myself if I want to. Not far."

"Then
I'll tell them to send someone."

"No."

A
pause. "You can't swim all the way back to the mainland."

"I'll
stay down here...a while..."

A
tremor growls softly along the seabed.

"You
sure?" Lenie says.

"Yeah."
His arm hurts. He doesn't know why.

She
turns slightly. The dim reflections vanish from her eyes for a long
moment.

"I'm
sorry, Gerry."

"Okay."

Lenie's
silhouette twists around and faces back towards Beebe. "I should
get going." 

She
doesn't leave. She doesn't say anything for almost a minute.

Then:
"Who's Shadow?"

More
silence. 

"She's
a...friend. When I was young."

"She
means a lot to you." Not a question. "Do you want me to
send her a message?"

"She's
dead," Fischer says, marveling that he's really known it all
along.

"Oh."

"Didn't
mean to," he says. "But she had her own mom and dad, you
know, why did she need 
mine
? She went back where she belonged.
That's all." 

"Where
she belonged," Lenie buzzes, almost too softly to hear.

"Not
my fault," he says. It's hard to talk. It didn't used to be this
hard.

Someone's
touching him. Lenie. Her hand is on his arm, and he knows it's
impossible but he can feel the warmth of her body through his 'skin.

"Gerry."

"Yes?"

"Why
wasn't she with her own family?"

"She

said
 they hurt her. She always said that. That's how she got
in. She 
used
 it, it always worked..."

Not

always
, Shadow reminds him.

"And
then she went back," Lenie murmurs.

"I
didn't mean to." 

A
sound comes out of Lenie's vocoder, and he has no idea what it is.
"Brander's right, isn't he. About you and kids."

Somehow,
he knows she's not accusing him. She's just checking.

"That's
what you— do," he tells her. "When you really love
someone."

"Oh,
Gerry. You're so completely fucked up."

A
string of clicks taps faintly on the machinery in his chest.

"They're
looking for me," she says.

"Okay."

"Be
careful, okay?"

"You
could stay. Here." 

Her
silence answers him.

"Maybe
I'll come out and visit sometimes," she buzzes at last. She
rises up into the water, turns away.

"Bye,"
Shadow says. It's the first time she's spoken aloud since she came
inside, but Fischer doesn't think Lenie notices the difference.

And
then she's gone, for now.

But
she comes out here all the time. Alone, sometimes. He knows it isn't
over. And when she goes back and forth with the others, doing all the
things 
he
 used to do, he'll be there, off where no one can
see. Checking up. Making sure she's okay.

Like
her own guardian angel. Right, Shadow?

A
couple of fish flicker dimly in the distance.

Shadow...?

Ballet

Dancer

A week later
Fischer's replacement comes down on the 'scaphe. Nobody stands watch
in Communications any more; machines don't care if they have an
audience. Sudden clanking reverberates through Beebe Station and
Clarke stands alone in the lounge, waiting for the ceiling to open
up. Compressed nitrox hisses overhead, blowing seawater back to the
abyss. 

The
hatch drops open. Green incandescence spills into the room. He climbs
down the ladder, diveskin sealed, only his face exposed. His eyes,
already capped, are featureless glass balls. But they are not as dead
as they should be, somehow. Something stares through those blank
lenses, and it almost 
shines
. His blind eyes scan the
compartment like radar dishes. They lock onto hers: "You're
Lenie Clarke?" The voice is too loud, too normal. 
We talk in
whispers here
, Clarke realizes.

They
are not alone now. Lubin, Brander, Caraco have appeared at the edges
of her vision, drifting into the room like indifferent wraiths. They
take up positions around the edge of the lounge, waiting. Fischer's
replacement doesn't seem to notice them. "I'm Acton," he
tells Clarke. "And I bring gifts from the overworld. Behold!"
He extends his clenched fist, opens it palm up. Clarke sees five
metal cylinders there, each no more than two centimeters long. Acton
turns slowly, theatrically, showing his trinkets to the other
Rifters. "One for each of you," he says. "They go into
your chest, right next to the seawater intake." 

Overhead,
the docking hatch swings shut. From behind it a postcoital tattoo,
metal on metal, heralds the shuttle's escape to the surface. They
wait there for a few moments: Rifters, newcomer, five new gadgets to
dilute their humanity a little further. Finally, Clarke reaches out
to touch one. "What do they do?" she says, her voice
neutral. 

Acton
snaps his fingers shut, stares about the lounge with eyeless
intensity. "Why, Ms. Clarke," he replies, "They tell
us when we're dead."

* * *

In
Communications, Acton spills his trinkets onto a control console.
Clarke stands behind him, filling the cubby. Caraco and Brander look
in through the hatchway.

Lubin
has disappeared.

"The
program's only four months old," Acton says, "and it's lost
two people at Piccard, one each at Cousteau and Link, and Fischer
makes five. Not the kind of record you want to trumpet to the world,
eh?"

Nobody
says anything. Clarke and Brander stand impassive; Caraco shifts on
her feet. Acton sweeps his blank shiny eyes over them all. "Christ
but you're a lively lot. You sure Fischer's the only one down here
who cashed in?"

"These
things are supposed to save our lives?" Clarke asks.

"Nah.
They don't care 
that
 much about us. These just help you find
the bodies."

He
turns to the console, plays it with practiced fingers. The
topographic display flashes to life on the main screen. "Mmmm."
Acton traces along the luminous contours with one finger. "So
this is Beebe here in the center, and this must be the rift
proper—Jesus, there's a lot of geography out here." He
points at a cluster of hard green rectangles halfway to the edge of
the screen. "These are the generators?"

Clarke
nods.

Acton
picks up one of the little cylinders. "They say they've already
sent down the software for these things." Silence. "Well, I
guess we'll find out, won't we?" He fingers the object in his
hand, presses one end of it.

Beebe
Station screams aloud.

Clarke
jerks back at the sound; her head cracks painfully against an
overhead pipe. The station continues to howl, wordless and
despairing.

Acton
touches a control; the scream stops as if guillotined.

Clarke
glances at the others, shaken. They appear unmoved. Of course. For
the first time she wonders what their eyes would show, naked.

"Well,"
Acton says, "we know the audio alarm works. But you get a visual
signal too." He points at the screen: dead center, within the
phosphor icon that is Beebe, a crimson dot pulses like a heart under
glass.

"It
keys on myoelectricity in the chest," he explains. "Goes
off automatically if your heart stops."

Behind
her, Clarke feels Brander turning for the hatchway.

"Maybe
my etiquette is out of date—" Acton says. 

His
voice is suddenly very quiet. Nobody else seems to notice.

"—but
I've always thought it was—rude—to walk away when
someone's talking to you."

There's
no obvious threat in the words. Acton's tone seems pleasant enough.
It doesn't matter. In an instant Clarke sees all the signs again; the
reasoned words, the deadened voice, the sudden slight tension of a
body rising to critical mass. Something familiar is growing behind
Acton's eyecaps.

"Brander,"
she says quietly, "why don't you hang around and hear the man
out?" 

Behind
her, the sounds of motion stop.

Before
her, Acton relaxes ever so slightly.

Within
her, something deeper than the Rift stirs in its sleep. 

"They're
a snap to install," Acton says. "It takes about five
minutes. GA says deadman switches are standard issue from now on."

I
know you
, she thinks. 
I don't remember but I'm sure I've seen
you before somewhere...

A
tiny knot forms in her stomach. Acton smiles at her, as though
sending some secret greeting.

* * *

Acton
is about to be baptized. Clarke is looking forward to it. 

They
stand together in the airlock, their diveskins clinging like shadows.
The deadman switch, newly installed, itches in Clarke's chest. She
remembers the first time she dropped into the ocean this way,
remembers the person who held her hand through that drowning ordeal. 

That
person is gone now. The deep sea broke her and spat her out. Clarke
wonders if it will do the same to Acton.

She
floods the airlock.

By
now the feeling is almost sensual; her insides folding flat, the
ocean rushing into her, cold and unstoppable like a lover. At 4°C
the Pacific slides through the plumbing in her chest, anesthetizing
the parts of her that can still feel. The water rises over her head;
her eyecaps show her the submerged walls of the lock with crystal
precision. 

It's
not like that with Acton. He's trying to fall in on himself; he only
falls into Clarke. She senses his panic, watches him convulse, sees
his knees buckle in a space far too narrow to permit collapse. 

He
needs more room
, she thinks, smiling to herself, and opens the
outer hatch. They drop.

She
glides down and out, arcing away from under Beebe's oppressive bulk.
She leaves the floodlit circle behind, skims into the welcoming
darkness with her headlight doused. She feels the presence of the
seabed a couple of meters beneath her. She's free again.

After
a few moments she remembers Acton. She turns back the way she came.
Beebe's floodlamps stain the darkness with dirty light; the station,
bloated and angular, pulls against the cables holding it down. Light
pours from its lower surface like feeble rocket exhaust. Pinned
face-down in that glare, Acton lies unmoving on the bottom. 

Reluctantly,
she swims closer. "Acton?"

He
doesn't move.

"Acton?"
She's back in the light now. Her shadow cuts him in half.

At
last he looks up. "It'ssss—" 

He
seems surprised by the sound of his own transmuted voice.

He
puts his hand to his throat. "I'm not—breathing—"
he buzzes.

She
doesn't answer. 

He
looks back down. There's something on the bottom, a few centimeters
from his face. Clarke drifts closer; a tiny shrimplike creature
trembles on the substrate.

"What
is it?" Acton asks.

"Something
from the surface. It must have come down on the 'scaphe."

"But
it's—dancing—"

She
sees. The jointed legs flex and snap, the carapace arches to some
insane inner rhythm. It seems so brittle a life; perhaps the next
spasm, or the next, will shatter it.

"It's
a seizure," she says after a while. "It doesn't belong
here. The pressure makes the nerves fire too fast, or something."

"Why
doesn't that happen to us?"

Maybe
it does
. "Our implants. They pump us full of neuroinhibitors
whenever we go outside."

"Oh.
Right," Acton buzzes softly. Gently, he reaches out to the
creature. Takes it in the palm of his hand.

Crushes
it.

Clarke
hits him from behind. Acton bounces off the seabed, his hand flying
open; fragments of shell, of watery flesh swirl in the water. He
kicks, rights himself, stares at Clarke without speaking. His eyecaps
shine almost yellow in the light.

"You
asshole," Clarke says very quietly. 

"It
didn't belong here," Acton buzzes.

"Neither
do we."

"It
was suffering. You said so yourself."

"I
said the nerves fired too fast, Acton. Nerves carry pleasure as well
as pain. How do you know it wasn't dancing for fucking 
joy
?"

She
pushes off the bottom and kicks furiously into the abyss. She wants
to reach into Acton's body and tear everything out, sacrifice that
gory tangle of viscera and machinery to the monsters at the rift. She
can't remember ever being so angry. She tells herself she doesn't
know why.

* * *

Gurgles
and clanks from below. Clarke looks down through the lounge hatch in
time to see the airlock spill open. Brander backs out, supporting
Acton.

Acton's
'skin is laid open at the thigh.

He
bends over, removing his flippers. Brander's are already off; he
turns to Clarke as she climbs down the ladder. "He met his first
monster. Gulper eel."

"I
met my fucking monster all right," Acton says in a low voice.
And Clarke sees it coming a fraction of a second before—

—
Acton
is on Brander, left fist swinging like a bolo on the end of his arm,
once twice three times and Brander is on the floor, bleeding. Acton's
bringing his foot back when Lenie gets in front of him, her hands
raised to protect herself, crying "Stop it stop it's not his
fault!" but somehow it's not Acton she's pleading with it's
something inside of him coming out, and she'd do anything if it would
only please God go back where it came from—

It
stares through Acton's milky eyes and snarls, "The fucker saw it
coming at me! He let that thing tear my leg open!"

Lenie
shakes her head. "Maybe not. You know how dark it is out there,
I've been down here longer than anyone and they sneak up on me all
the time, Acton. Why would Brander want to hurt you?"

She
hears Brander coming to his feet behind her. His voice carries over
her shoulder: "Brander sure as shit wants to hurt him 
n
—"

She
cuts him off. "Look, I can handle this." Her words are for
Brander; her eyes remain locked with Acton's. "Maybe you should
go to Medical, make sure you're okay."

Acton
leans forward, tensed. The thing inside waits and watches. 

"This
asshole—" Brander begins.

"
Please
,
Mike." It's the first time she has ever used his first name.

There's
a moment of silence. 

"Since
when did 
you
 ever get involved?" he says behind her. 

It's
a good question. Brander's footsteps shuffle away before she can
think of an answer.

Something
in Acton goes back to sleep.

"You'd
better go there too," Clarke says to him. "Later." 

"Nah.
It wasn't that tough. I was surprised how feeble it was, after I got
over the 
size
 of the fucking thing."

"It
ripped your diveskin. If it could do that, it wasn't as weak as you
think. At least check it out; your leg might be lacerated."

"If
you say so. Although I'll bet Brander needs Medical more than I do."
He flashes a predatory grin, and moves to pass her.

"You
might also consider reining in your temper," she says as he
brushes past.

Acton
stops. "Yeah. I was kind of hard on him, wasn't I?"

"He
won't be as eager to help you out the next time you get caught in a
smoker." 

"Yeah,"
he says again. Then: "I don't know, I've always been sort of—you
know—"

She
remembers a word someone else used, after the fact. "Impulsive?"

"Right.
But really I'm not that bad. You just have to get used to me." 

Clarke
doesn't answer.

"Anyhow,"
he says, "I guess I owe your friend an apology."

My
friend
. And by the time she gets over that jarring idea, she's
alone again.

* * *

Five
hours later Acton's in Medical. Clarke passes the open hatchway and
glances in; he sits on an examination table, his 'skin undone to the
waist. There's something wrong with the image. She stops and leans
through the hatch.

Acton
has opened himself up. She can see the flesh peeled back around the
water intake, the places where meat turns to plastic, the tubes that
carry blood and the ones that carry antifreeze. He holds a tool in
one hand; it disappears into the cavity, the spinning thing on its
tip whirring quietly.

Acton
hits a nerve somewhere, and jumps as if shocked.

"Are
you damaged?" Clarke asks.

He
looks up. "Oh. Hi."

She
points at his dissected thorax. "Did the gulper—"

He
shakes his head. "No. No, it just bruised my leg a bit. I'm just
making some adjustments."

"Adjustments?"

"Fine-tuning."
He smiles. "Settling-in stuff."

It
doesn't work. The smile is hollow, somehow. Muscles stretch lips in
the usual way, but the gesture's imprisoned in the lower half of his
face. Above it, his capped eyes stare cold as drifted snow, innocent
of any topography. She wonders why it has never bothered her before,
and realizes that this is the first time she's ever seen a Rifter
smile.

"That's
not supposed to be necessary," she says.

"What's
not?" Acton's smile is beginning to wear on her.

"Fine-tuning.
We're supposed to be self-adjusting."

"Exactly.
I'm adjusting myself."

"I
mean—"

"I
know what you mean," Acton says. "I'm—customizing the
job." His hand moves around inside his rib cage as if
autonomous, tinkering. "I figure I can get better performance if
I nudge the settings just a bit outside the approved specs." 

Clarke
hears a brief, Lilliputian screech of metal against metal.

"How?"
she asks.

Acton
withdraws his hand, folds flesh back over the hole. "Not exactly
sure yet." He runs another tool along the seam in his chest,
sealing himself. He shrugs back into his 'skin, seals that as well.
Now he's as whole as any rifter.

"I'll
let you know next time I go outside," he says, laying a casual
hand on Clarke's shoulder as he squeezes past.

She
almost doesn't flinch.

Acton
stops. He seems to look right around her. 

"You're
nervous," he says, slowly. 

"Am
I."

"You
don't like being touched." His hand rests on her collarbone like
an insult.

She
remembers: she has the same armor that he does. She relaxes
fractionally. "It's not a general thing," she lies. "Just
some people."

Acton
seems to weigh the jibe, decide whether it's worthy of a response.
His hand withdraws.

"Kind
of an unfortunate quirk in a place as small as this," he says,
turning away.

Small?

I've got the whole goddamn ocean!
 But Acton's already climbing
upstairs. 

* * *

The
new smoker is erupting again. Water shoots scalding from the chimney
at the north end of the Throat, curdles and mixes with deep icy
saline; microbes caught in the turbulence luminesce madly. The water
fills with the hiss of unformed steam, aborted by the weight of three
hundred atmospheres.

Acton
is ten meters above the seabed, awash in rippling blue light. 

She
glides up from underneath. "Nakata said you were still out
here," she buzzes at him. "She said you were waiting for
this thing to go off." 

He
doesn't even look at her. "Right."

"You're
lucky it did. You could have been waiting out here for days."
Clarke turns away, aims herself at the generators.

"And
I think," Acton says, "it'll stop in a minute or two."

She
twists around and faces him. "Look, all these eruptions are..."
she rummages for the word, "chaotic."

"Uh
huh."

"You
can't predict them."

"Hey,
the Pompeii worms can predict them. The clams and brachyurans can
predict them. Why not me?"

"What
are you talking about?"

"They
can tell when something's going to blow. Take a look around sometime,
you'll see for yourself. They react before it even happens."

She
looks around. The clams are acting just like clams. The worms are
acting just like worms. The brachyurans scurry around the bottom the
way brachyurans always do. "React how?"

"Makes
sense, after all. These vents can feed them or parboil them. After a
few million years they've learned to read the signs, right?"

The
smoker hiccoughs. The plume wavers, light dimming at its edges.

Acton
looks at his wrist. "Not bad."

"Lucky
guess," Clarke says, her vocoder hiding uncertainty.

The
smoker manages a couple of feeble bursts and subsides completely. 

Acton
drifts closer. "You know, when they first sent me down here I
thought this place would be a real shithole. I figured I'd just
knuckle down and do my time and get out. But it's not like that. You
know what I mean, Lenie?"

I
know.
 But she doesn't answer.

"I
thought so," he says, as though she has. "It's really kind
of...well, beautiful, in a way. Even the monsters, once you get to
know 'em. We're all beautiful."

He
seems almost gentle.

Clarke
dredges her memory for some sort of defense. "You couldn't have
known," she says. "Way too many variables. It's not
computable. Nothing down here's computable."

An
alien creature looks down at her and shrugs. "Computable?
Probably not. But 
knowable
..."

There's
no time for this
, Clarke tells herself. 
I've got to get to
work.

"...that's
something else again," Acton says.

* * *

She
never figured him for a bookworm. Still, there he is again, plugged
into the library. Stray light from the eyephones leaks across his
cheeks. 

He
seems to be spending a lot of time in there these days. Almost as
much time as he spends outside.

Clarke
glances down at the flatscreen as she wanders past. It's dark.

"Chemistry,"
Brander says from across the lounge.

She
looks at him.

Brander
jerks his thumb at the oblivious Acton. "That's what he's into.
Weird shit. Boring as hell."

That's
what Ballard was into, just before...
 Clarke fingers a spare
headset from the next terminal.

"Ooh,
you're walking a fine line there," Brander remarks. "Mr.
Acton doesn't 
like
 people reading over his shoulder."

Then
Mr. Acton will be in privacy mode and I won't be able to.
 She
sits down and slips the headset on. Acton has not invoked privacy;
Clarke taps into his line without any trouble. The eyephone lasers
etch text and formulae across her retinas. Serotonin. Acetylcholine.
Neuropeptide moderation. Brander's right: it's really boring.

Someone's
touching her.

She
does not yank the headset off. She removes it calmly. She doesn't
even flinch, this time. She will not give him the satisfaction.

Acton
has turned in his chair to face her, headset dangling around his
neck. His hand is on her knee.

"Glad
to see we have common interests," he says quietly. "Not
that surprising, though. We do share a certain ... chemistry..."

"That's
true." She stares back, safe behind her eyecaps. "Too bad
I'm allergic to shitheads."

He
smiles. "Of course, it would never work. The ages are all
wrong." He stands up, returns the headset to its hook. 

"I'm
not nearly old enough to be your father."

He
crosses the lounge and climbs downstairs.

"What
an asshole," Brander remarks.

"He's
more of a prick than Fischer ever was. I'm surprised you're not
picking fights with 
him
 all the time."

Brander
shrugs. "Different dynamic. Acton's just an asshole. Fischer was
a fucking 
pervert
."

Not
to mention that Fischer never fought back.
 She keeps the insight
to herself. 

* * *

Concentric
circles, glowing emerald. Beebe Station sits on the bullseye.
Intermittent blobs of weaker light litter the display: fissures and
jagged rock outcroppings, endless muddy plains, the Euclidean
outlines of human machinery all reduced to a common acoustic
currency.

There's
something else out there too, part Euclid, part Darwin. Clarke zooms
in. Human flesh is too much like seawater to return an echo, but
bones show up okay. The machinery inside is even clearer, it shouts
at the faintest sonar signal. Clarke focuses the display, points at a
translucent green skeleton with clockwork in its chest.

"That
him?" Caraco says.

Clarke
shakes her head.

"Maybe
it is. Everyone else is—"

"It's
not him." Clarke touches a control. The display zooms back to
maximum range. "You sure he's not in his quarters?"

"He
left the station seven hours ago. Hasn't been back since."

"Maybe
he's just hugging the bottom. Maybe he's behind a rock."

"Maybe."
Caraco sounds unconvinced.

Clarke
leans back in her chair. The back of her head touches the rear wall
of the cubby. "Well, he's doing his job okay. When he's off
shift he can go wherever he likes, I guess." 

"Yeah,
but this is the third time. He's always 
late
. He just wanders
in whenever he likes—"

"So
what?" Clarke, suddenly tired, rubs the bridge of her nose
between thumb and forefinger. "We don't run on dryback schedules
here, you know that. He pulls his weight, don't fuck with him."

"Well,
Fischer was always getting shit for being l—"

"Nobody
cared if Fischer was late," Clarke cuts in. "They just—
wanted an excuse."

Caraco
leans forward. "I don't like him," she confides.

"Acton?
No reason you should. He's psycho. We all are, remember?"

"But
he's different, somehow. You know that."

"Lubin
nearly killed his wife down at Galapagos before they assigned him
here. Brander's got a history of attempted suicide."

Something
changes in Caraco's stance. Clarke can't be sure, but the other
woman's gaze seems to have dropped to the deck. 
Touched a nerve
there, I guess.

She
continues, more gently. "You're not worried about the rest of
us, are you? So what's so special about Acton?"

"Oh,"
Caraco says. "Look."

On
the tactical display, something has just moved into range.

Clarke
zooms in on the new reading; it's too distant for good resolution,
but there's no mistaking the hard metallic blip in its center.

"Acton,"
she says.

"Um...how
far?" Caraco asks in a hesitant voice.

Clarke
checks. "He's about nine hundred meters out. Not too bad, if
he's using a squid."

"He's
not. He never does."

"Hmm.
At least he seems to be beelining in." Clarke looks up at
Caraco. "You two are on shift when?"

"Ten
minutes."

"No
big deal. He'll be fifteen minutes late. Half hour tops."

Caraco
stares at the display. "What's he 
doing
 out there?"

"I
don't know," Clarke says. She wonders, not for the first time,
if Caraco really belongs down here. She just doesn't seem to get it,
sometimes.

"I
was wondering if you could maybe talk to him," Caraco says.

"Acton?
Why?"

"Nothing.
Forget it."

"Okay."
Clarke rises from the Communications chair. Caraco backs out of the
hatchway to let her past.

"Um,
Lenie..."

Clarke
turns. 

"What
about you?" Caraco asks.

"Me?"

"You
said Lubin nearly killed his wife. Brander tried to kill himself.
What did you do, I mean, to...qualify?"

Clarke
watches her steadily.

"I
mean, I guess, if it's not too—"

"You
don't understand," Clarke says, her voice absolutely level.
"It's not how much shit you've raised that suits you for the
rift. It's how much you've survived."

"I'm
sorry." Caraco manages, with eyes utterly devoid of feeling, to
look abashed.

Clarke
softens a bit. "In my case," she says, "Mostly I just
learned to roll with the punches. I haven't done much worth bragging
about, you know?"

I'm
sure enough working on it, though.

* * *

She
doesn't know how it could have happened so fast. He's been here only
two weeks, yet the 'lock can barely contain his eagerness to get
outside. The chamber floods, she feels a single shiver scurry along
his body; and before she can move, Acton hits the latch and they drop
outside.

He
coasts out from under the station, his trajectory an effortless
parallel of her own. Clarke fins off towards the Throat. She feels
Acton at her side, although she cannot see him. His headlamp, like
hers, stays dark; for her it's become a gesture of respect to the
more delicate lanterns that dwell here.

She
doesn't know what Acton's reasoning is.

He
doesn't speak until Beebe's a dirty yellow smudge behind them.
"Sometimes I wonder why we ever go back inside."

It
can't be happiness in that voice. How could any emotion make it
through the mechanical gauntlet that lets people speak out here?

"I
fell asleep near the Throat yesterday," he says.

"You're
lucky something didn't eat you," she tells him.

"They're
not so bad. You just have to know how to relate to them."

Clarke
wonders if he relates to other species with the same subtlety that he
relates to his own. She keeps the question to herself.

They
swim through sparse, living starlight for a while. Another smudge
glimmers ahead, weak and sullen; the Throat, dead on target. It's
been months now since Clarke has even thought of the guide rope
that's supposed to lead them back and forth, like blind troglodytes.
She knows where it is, but she never uses it. Other senses come awake
down here. Rifters don't get lost. 

Except
Fischer, maybe. And Fischer was lost long before he came down here
.

"So
what happened to Fischer, anyway?" Acton says.

The
chill starts in her chest, reaches her fingers before the sound of
Acton's voice has died away. 
It's a coincidence. It's a perfectly
normal question to ask.

"I
said—"

"He
disappeared," Clarke says.

"They
told me that much," Acton buzzes back. "I thought you might
have a bit more insight."

"Maybe
he fell asleep outside. Maybe something ate him."

"I
doubt that."

"Really?
And what makes you such an expert, Acton? You've been down here for
what, two weeks now?"

"Only
two weeks? Seems longer. Time stretches when you're outside, doesn't
it?"

"At
first," Clarke says.

"You
know why Fischer disappeared?" 

"No."

"He
outlived his usefulness."

"Ah."
Her machine parts turn it into half creak, half growl. 

"I'm
serious, Lenie." Acton's mechanical voice does not change. "You
think they're going to let you stay down here forever? You think
they'd let people like us down here at all if they had any choice?"

She
stops kicking. Her body continues to coast. "What are you
talking about?"

"Use
your head, Lenie. You're smarter than I am, inside at least. You've
got the keys to the city here—you've got the keys to the whole
fucking seaboard, and you're still acting like a victim."
Acton's vocoder gurgles indecipherably—a laugh, mistransposed?
A snarl? 

More
words: "They count on that, you know."

Clarke
starts kicking again, stares ahead to the brightening glow of the
Throat.

It
isn't there.

There's
a moment's disorientation — 
We can't be lost, we were headed
right for it, has the power gone out?
 — before she sees the
familiar streak of coarse yellow light, bearing four o'clock.

How
could I have gotten turned around like that?

"We're
here," Acton says.

"No.
The Throat's way over—"

A
nova flares beside her, drenching the abyss with blinding light. It
takes Clarke's eyecaps a moment to adjust; when the starbursts have
faded from her eyes, the ocean is a muddy black backdrop for the
bright cone from Acton's headlamp.

"Don't,"
she says. "It gets so dark when you do that, you can't see
anything—"

"I
know. I'll turn it off in a moment. Just look."

His
beam shines down on a small rocky outcropping rising from the mud, no
more than two meters across. Jagged cookie-cutter flowers litter its
surface, radial clusters shining garish red and blue in the
artificial light. Some of them lie flat along the rock face. Others
are contorted into frozen calcareous knots, clenched around things
Clarke can't see.

Some
of them move, slowly.

"You
brought me out here to look at starfish?" She tries, and fails,
to squeeze some hint of bored contempt through the vocodor. But
inside there's a distant, frightened amazement that he 
has
 led
her here, that she could be guided, utterly unsuspecting, so
completely off course. 
And how did he find this place? No sonar
pistol, compass doesn't work worth shit this close to the Throat...

"I
figured you probably hadn't looked at them very closely before,"
Acton says. "I thought you might be interested."

"We
don't have time for this, Acton."

His
hands reach down into the light and lock onto one of the starfish.
They peel it slowly from the rock; there are filaments of some kind
along the creature's underside, anchoring it to the substrate.
Acton's efforts tear them free, a few at a time.

He
holds the animal up for Clarke's inspection. Its upper surface is
colored stone, encrusted with calcareous spicules. Acton flips it
over. The underside writhes with hundreds of thick squirming threads,
jammed into dense rows along the length of each arm. Each thread has
a tiny sucker at its tip.

"A
starfish," Acton tells her, "is the ultimate democracy."

Clarke
stares, quietly repelled.

"This
is how they move," Acton is saying. "They walk along on all
these tube feet. But the weird thing is, they have no brains at all.
Not surprising for a democracy."

Rows
of squirming maggots. A forest of translucent leeches, groping
blindly into the water.

"So
there's nothing to coordinate the tube feet, they all move
independently. Usually that's not a problem; they all tend to go
towards food, for example. But it's not unusual for a third of these
feet to be pulling in some other direction entirely. The whole
animal's a living tug-o-war. Sometimes, some really stubborn tube
feet just don't give up, and they literally get torn out at the roots
when the others move the body someplace they don't want to go. But
hey: majority rules, right?"

Clarke
extends a tentative finger. Half a dozen tube feet latch onto it. She
can't feel them through her 'skin. Anchored, they look almost
delicate, like filaments of milky glass.

"But
that's nothing," Acton says. "Watch this."

He
rips the starfish in half.

Clarke
pulls back, shocked and angry. But there's something in Acton's
posture, in that barely visible outline behind his lamp, that makes
her pause.

"Don't
worry, Lenie," he says. "I haven't killed it. I've 
bred

it."

He
drops the torn halves. They flutter like leaves to the seabed,
trailing bits of bloodless entrail.

"They
regenerate. Didn't you know that? You can tear them into pieces and
each piece grows back the missing parts. It takes time, but they
recover. Only you end up with more of them. Damn hard to kill these
guys.

"Understand,
Lenie? Tear them to pieces, they come back stronger." 

"How
do you know all this?" she asks in a metallic whisper. "Where
do you come from?"

He
lays an icy black hand on her arm. "Right here. This is where I
was born."

She
doesn't think it absurd. In fact, she barely hears him. Her mind is
somewhere else entirely, terrified by a sudden realization.

Acton
is touching her, and she doesn't mind.

* * *

Of
course, the sex is electric. It always is. The familiar has
reasserted itself, here in the cramped space of Clarke's cubby. They
can't both lie on the pallet at the same time but they manage
somehow, Acton on his knees, then Clarke, squirming around each other
in a metal nest lined with ducts and vents and bundles of optical
cabling. They navigate each others' seams and scars, tonguing puckers
of metal and pale flesh, unseen and all-seeing behind their corneal
armor. 

For
Clarke it's a new twist, this icy ecstasy of a lover without eyes.
For the first time she feels no need to avert her face, no threat to
fragile intimacy; at first, when Acton moved to take out his caps,
she stopped him with a touch and a whisper and he seemed to
understand. 

They
cannot lie together afterwards so they sit side-by-side, leaning into
each other, staring at the hatch two meters in front of them. The
lights are turned too low for dryback vision; Clarke and Acton see a
room suffused in pale fluorescence.

Acton
reaches out and fingers a shard of glass sticking from an empty frame
on one wall. "There used to be a mirror here," he remarks. 

Clarke
nibbles his shoulder. "There were mirrors everywhere. I—took
them down." 

"Why?
A few mirrors would open the place up a bit. Make it larger."

She
points. Several torn wires, fine as threads, hang from a hole in the
frame. "They had cameras behind them. I didn't like that."

Acton
grunts. "I don't blame you."

They
sit without speaking for a bit.

"You
said something outside," she says. "You said you were born
down here."

Acton
hesitates, then nods. "Ten days ago."

"What
did you mean?" 

"You
should know," he says. "You witnessed my birth."

She
thinks back. "That was when the gulper got you..."

"Close."
Acton grins his cold eyeless grin, puts an arm around her. "Actually,
the gulper sort of catalyzed it, if I remember. Think of it as a
midwife."

An
image pops into her mind: Acton in Medical, vivisecting himself.

"Fine-tuning,"
she says.

"Uh
huh." He gives her a squeeze. "And I've got you to thank
for it. You gave me the idea."

"Me?"

"You
were my mother, Len. And my father was this spastic little shrimp
that ended up way over its head. He died before I was born, actually:
I killed him. You weren't very happy about that."

Clarke
shakes her head. "You're not making sense."

"You
telling me you haven't noticed the change? You telling me I'm the
same person I was when I came down?"

"I
don't know," she says. "Maybe I've just gotten to know you
better."

"Maybe.
Maybe I have too. I don't know, Len, I just seem more...
awake

now, I guess. I see things differently. You must have noticed."

"Yeah,
but only when you're—"

Outside.

"You
did something to your inhibitors," she whispers.

"Reduced
the dosage a bit."

She
grasps his arm. "Karl, those chemicals keep you from spazzing
out every time you go outside. You fuck with this stuff, you're
risking a seizure as soon as the 'lock floods."

"I

have
 been fucking with it, Lenie. You see any change in me
that isn't an improvement?"

She
doesn't answer.

"It's
all about action potential," he tells her. "Your nerves
have to build up a certain charge before they can fire—"

"And
at this depth they'd fire all the time, Karl, please—"

"Shh."
He lays a gentle finger on her lips but she brushes it away, suddenly
angry.

"I'm
serious, Karl. Without those drugs your nerves short-circuit, you
burn out, I 
know
—"

"You
only know what they tell you," he snaps. "Why don't you try
working things out yourself for once?"

She
falls silent, stung by his disapproval. A space opens between them on
the pallet. 

"I'm
not a fool, Lenie," Acton says, more quietly. "I just
reduced the settings a bit. Five percent. Now, when I go outside it
takes a bit less of a stimulus for my nerves to fire, that's all.
It...it wakes you up, Len; I'm more aware of things, I'm more alive
somehow."

She
watches him, unspeaking.

"Of
course they 
say
 it's dangerous," he says. "They're
scared shitless of you already. You think they're going to give you
even more of an edge?"

"They're
not scared of us, Karl."

"They
should be." His arm goes back around her. "Wanna try it?"

It's
as though she's suddenly outside, still naked. "No."

"There's
nothing to worry about, Len. I've already done the guinea pig work on
myself. Open up to me and I could make the adjustments myself, it'd
take ten minutes."

"I'm
not up for it, Karl. Not yet, anyway. Maybe one of the others is."

He
shakes his head. "They don't trust me."

"You
can't blame them."

"I
don't." He grins, showing teeth as sharp and white as eyecaps.
"But even if they did trust me, they wouldn't do anything unless
you thought it was okay."

She
looks at him. "Why not?"

"You're
in charge here, Len."

"Bullshit.
They never told you that."

"They
didn't have to. It's obvious."

"I've
been down here longer than them. So's Lubin. That doesn't matter to
anyone." 

Acton
frowns briefly. "No, I don't think it does. But you're still
leader of the pack, Len. Head wolf. A-fucking-kayla."

Clarke
shakes her head. She searches her memory for something, anything,
that would contradict Acton's absurd claim. She comes up empty.

She
feels a little sick inside.

He
gives her a little squeeze. "Tough luck, lover. I guess the
clothes don't fit so well after being a career victim your whole
life, eh?"

Clarke
stares at the deck.

"Think
about it, anyway," Acton whispers in her ear. "I guarantee
you'll feel twice as alive as you do now."

"That
happens anyway," Clarke reminds him. "Whenever I go
outside. I don't need to screw up my internals for that." 
Not
those internals, anyway.

"This
is different," he insists.

She
looks at him and smiles, and hopes he doesn't push it. 
How can he
expect me to let him cut me open like that?
 she wonders, and then
wonders if maybe someday she will, if the fear of losing him might
somehow grow large enough to force her other fears into submission.
It wouldn't be the first time.

Twice
as alive, Acton says. Hiding behind her smile, Clarke considers:
twice as much of her life. Not a great prospect, so far.

* * *

There's
a light from behind; it chases her shadow out along the seabed. She
can't remember how long it's been there. She feels a momentary chill—

—
Fischer?—

—
before
common sense sets in. Gerry Fischer wouldn't use a headlamp.

"Lenie?"

She
revolves on her own axis, sees a silhouette hovering a few meters
away. Cyclopean light glares from its forehead. Clarke hears a
subvocal buzz, the corrupted equivalent of Brander clearing his
throat. "Judy said you were out here," he explains.

"Judy."
She means it as a question, but her vocoder loses the intonation.

"Yeah.
She sort of, keeps tabs on you sometimes."

Clarke
considers that a moment. "Tell her I'm harmless."

"It's
not like that," he buzzes. "I think she just ...
worries..."

Clarke
feels muscles twitching at the corners of her mouth. She thinks she
might be smiling.

"So
I guess we're on shift," she says, after a moment.

The
headlight bobs up and down. "Right. A bunch of clams need their
asses scraped. More skilled labor."

She
stretches, weightless. "Okay. Let's go."

"Lenie..."

She
looks up at him.

"Why
do you come— I mean, why 
here
?" Brander's headlight
sweeps the bottom, comes to rest on an outcropping of bone and rotted
flesh. A skeletal smile stitches its way across the lit circle. "Did
you kill it, or something?"

"Yeah,
I—" She falls silent, realizing: 
He means the whale.

"Nah,"
she says instead. "It just died on its own."

* * *

Of
course she wakes up alone. They still try to sleep together
sometimes, after sex has made them too lazy to go outside. But the
bunk is too small. The most they can manage is a sort of diagonal
slouch: feet on the floor, necks bent up against the bulkhead, Acton
cradling her like a living hammock. If they're unlucky they really do
fall asleep like that. It takes hours to get the kinks out
afterwards. Way more trouble than it's worth.

So
she wakes up alone. But she misses him anyway.

It's
early. The schedules handed down from the GA are increasingly
irrelevant — circadian rhythms lose their way in the incessant
darkness, fall slowly out of phase — but the rubbery timetable
that remains leaves hours before her shift starts. Lenie Clarke is
awake in the middle of the night. It seems like a stupid and obvious
thing to say, months from the nearest sunrise, but right now it seems
especially true.

In
the corridor she turns for a moment in the direction of his cubby
before she remembers. He's never in there any more. He's never even
inside, unless he's eating or working or being with her. He hasn't
slept in his quarters almost since they got involved. He's getting
almost as bad as Lubin.

Caraco
is sitting silently in the lounge, unmoving, obeying her own inner
clock. She looks up as Clarke crosses to Comm.

"He
went out about an hour ago," she says softly.

Sonar
picks him up fifty meters southeast, barely echoing above the bottom
clutter. Clarke heads for the ladder.

"He
showed us something the other day," Caraco says after her. "Ken
and me."

Clarke
looks back.

"A
smoker, way off in one corner of the Throat. It had this weird fluted
vent, and it made singing sounds, almost..."

"Mmm."

"He
really wanted us to know about it, for some reason. He was really
excited. He's — he's kind of strange out there, Lenie..."

"Judy,"
Clarke says neutrally, "Why are you telling me this?"

Caraco
looks away. "Sorry. I didn't mean anything."

Clarke
starts down the ladder.

"Just
be careful, okay?" Caraco calls after her.

He's
curled up when Clarke reaches him, knees tucked under his chin,
floating a few centimeters above a stone garden. His eyes are open,
of course. She reaches out, touches him through two layers of reflex
copolymer.

He
barely stirs. His vocoder emits sporadic ticking noises.

Lenie
Clarke curls herself around him. In a womb of freezing sea water,
they sleep on until morning.

Short
Circuit

I won't give in.

It
would be so easy. She could live out there, stay the fuck away from
this creaking eggshell except to eat and bathe and do whatever parts
of her job demand an atmosphere. She could spend her whole life
flying across the seabed. Lubin does. Brander and Caraco and even
Nakata are starting to.

Lenie
Clarke knows she doesn't belong in here. None of them do.

But
at the same time, she's scared of what 
outside
 might do to
her. 
I could end up like Fischer. It would be so easy to just—
slip away. If a hot seep or mud slide didn't get me first.

Lately
she's been valuing her own life quite a lot. Maybe that means she's
losing it. What kind of a rifter cares about living? But there it is:
the rift is starting to scare her.

That's
bullshit. Complete, total bullshit.

Who

wouldn't
 be scared?

Scared.
Yes. Of Karl. Of what you'll let him do to you.

It's
been, what, a week now?—

Two
days.

—
two
days since she's slept outside. Two days since she decided to
incarcerate herself in here. She goes outside to work, and comes back
as soon as each shift ends. No one's mentioned the change to her.
Perhaps no one's noticed; if they don't come back to Beebe themselves
after work, they scatter off across the sea bed to do whatever they
do in splendid, freezing isolation. 

She
knew Acton would notice, though. He'd notice, and miss her, and
follow her back inside. Or maybe he'd try and talk her back out,
fight with her when she resisted. But he's shown no sign at all. He
spends as much time out there as he ever did. She still sees him, of
course. At mealtimes. At the library. Once for sex, during which
neither spoke of anything important. And then gone again, back into
the ocean.

He
didn't enter into any pact with her. She didn't even tell him about
her pact with herself. Still, she feels betrayed.

She
needs him. She knows what that means, sees her own footprints
crowding the road ahead, but reading the signs and changing course
are two completely different things. Her insides are twisting with
the need to go, whether out to him or just 
out
 she can't say.
But as long as he's outside and she's in Beebe, Lenie Clarke can tell
herself that she's still in control.

It's
progress, sort of.

Now,
curled up in her cubby with the hatch sealed tight, she hears the
subterranean gurgle of the airlock. She comes up off the bed as
though radio-controlled.

Noises,
flesh against metal, hydraulics and pneumatics. A voice. Lenie Clarke
is on her way to the wet room.

He's
brought a monster inside with him. It's an anglerfish, almost two
meters long, a jellylike bag of flesh with teeth half the length of
Clarke's forearm. It lies quivering on the deck, its insides exploded
through its own mouth in the near vacuum of Beebe's sea-level
atmosphere. Dozens of miniature tails, twitching feebly, sprout
everywhere from its body.

Caraco
and Lubin, in the middle of some task, look over from the engineering
'lock. Acton stands beside his catch; his thorax, still inflating,
hisses softly.

"How
did you fit it inside the 'lock?" Clarke wonders.

"More
to the point," Lubin says, coming over, "why bother?"

"What're
all those tails?" Caraco says.

Acton
grins at them. "Not tails. Mates."

Lubin's
face doesn't change. "Really."

Clarke
leans forward. Not just tails, she sees now; some of them have those
extra fins along the side and back. Some of them have gills. A couple
of them even have eyes. It's as though a whole school of tiny anglers
are boring into this big one. Some are in only as far as their jaws,
but others are buried right down to the tail.

Another
thought strikes her, even more revolting; the big fish doesn't need
its mouth any more. It's just 
engulfing
 the little ones across
its body wall, like some giant devolving microbe.

"Group
sex on the rift," says Acton. "All the big ones we've been
seeing, they're female. The males are these little finger-sized
fuckers here. Not many dating opportunities this far down, so they
just latch on to the first female they can find, and they sort of

fuse 
— their heads get absorbed, their bloodstreams link
together. They're parasites, get it? They worm into her side and they
spend their whole lives feeding off her. And there's a fuck of a lot
of them, but she's bigger than they are, she's stronger, she could
eat them alive if she just—"

"He's
been in the library again," Caraco remarks.

Acton
looks at her for a moment. Deliberately, he points at the bloated
carcass on the deck. "That's us." He grabs one of the
parasitic males, rips it free. "This is everyone else. Get it?"

"Ah,"
Lubin says. "A metaphor. Clever."

Acton
takes a single step towards the other man. "Lubin, I am getting
awfully fucking tired of you."

"Really."
Lubin doesn't seem the least bit threatened.

Clarke
moves; not directly between them, just off to one side, forming the
apex of a human triangle. She has absolutely no idea what to do if
this comes to blows. She has no idea what to say to stop that from
happening.

Suddenly,
she's not even sure that she wants to.

"Come
on, you guys." Caraco leans back against the drying rack. "Can't
you settle this some other way? Maybe you could just whip out a ruler
and compare your dicks or something."

They
stare at her.

"Watch
it, Judy. You're getting pretty cocky there."

Now
they're staring at Clarke.

Did
I say that?

For
a long, long moment nothing happens. Then Lubin grunts and goes back
to the workshop. Acton watches him go; then, deprived of an immediate
threat, he steps back into the airlock.

The
dead angler shivers on the deck, bristling with infestation.

"Lenie,
he's really getting weird," Caraco says as the 'lock floods.
"Maybe you should just let him go."

Clarke
just shakes her head. "Go where?"

She
even manages a smile.

* * *

She
was looking for Karl Acton, but somehow she's found Gerry Fischer
instead. He looks sadly down at her through the length of a long
tunnel. He seems to be a whole ocean away. He doesn't speak but she
senses sadness, disappointment. 
You lied to me
, that feeling
says. 
You said you'd come and see me and you lied. You've
forgotten all about me.

He's
wrong. She hasn't forgotten him at all. She's only tried to.

She
doesn't say it aloud, of course, but somehow he reacts to it anyway.
His feelings change; sadness fades, something colder seeps up in its
place, something so deep and so old that she can't think of words to
describe it.

Something
pure.

From
behind, a touch on her shoulder. She spins, instantly alert, hand
closing around her billy.

"Hey,
calm down. It's me." Acton's silhouette hangs against a faint
wash of light from the direction of the Throat. Clarke relaxes,
pushes gently at his chest. Says nothing.

"Welcome
back," Acton says. "Haven't seen you out here for a while."

"I
was— I was looking for you," she says.

"In
the mud?"

"What?"

"You
were just floating there, face down."

"I
was—" She feels a vestige of disquiet, but she can't
remember what to attach it to. "I must have drifted off. I was
dreaming. It's been so long since I slept out here, I—"

"Four
days, I think. I missed you."

"Well,
you could have come inside."

Acton
nods. "I tried. But I could never get all of me through the
airlock, and the part that I could— well, it was sort of a poor
substitute. If you'll remember."

"I
don't know, Karl. You know how I feel—"

"Right.
And I know you like it out here as much as I do. Sometimes I feel
like I could just stay out here forever." He pauses for a
moment, as if weighing alternatives. "Fischer's got it right."

Something
goes cold. "Fischer?"

"He's
still out here, Len. You know that."

"You've
seen him?"

"Not
often. He's pretty skittish."

"When
do...I mean—"

"Only
when I'm alone. And pretty far from Beebe."

She
looks around, inexplicably frightened. 
Of course you can't see
him. He isn't here. And even if he was, it's still too dark to...

She
forces herself to leave her headlamp doused. 

"He's...I
think he's really hooked in to you, Len. But I guess you know that
too."

No.
No, I didn't. I don't.
 "He talks to you?" She doesn't
know why she'd resent that.

"No."

"Then
how?"

Acton
doesn't answer for a moment. "I don't know. I just got that
impression. But he doesn't talk. It's...I don't know, Len. He just
hangs around out there and watches us. I don't know if he's what we'd
consider ... sane, I guess—" 

"He
watches us," she says, buzzing low and level.

"He
knows we're together. I think...I think he figures that connects me
and him somehow." Acton is silent for a bit. "You cared
about him, didn't you?"

Oh
yes. It always starts off so innocently. 
You cared about him,
that's nice
, and then it's 
did you find him attractive
 and
then 
well you must have done something or he wouldn't keep hitting
on you
 and then 
you fucking slut I'll—

"Lenie,"
Acton says. "I'm not trying to start anything."

She
waits and watches.

"I
know there was nothing going on. And even if there was, I know it's
no threat."

She's
heard this part before, too.

"Now
that I think about it, that's always been my problem," Acton
muses. "I always had to go on what other people told me, and
people— people lie all the time, Len, you know that. So no
matter how many times she swears she's not fucking around on you, or
even that she doesn't 
want
 to fuck around on you, how can you
ever really 
know
? You can't. So the default assumption is,
she's lying. And being lied to all the time, that's a damn good
reason for — well, for doing what I do sometimes." 

"Karl
— you know—"

"I
know 
you
 don't lie to me. You don't even hate me. That's kind
of a change."

She
reaches out to touch the side of his face. "I'd say that's a
good call. I'm glad you trust me."

"Actually,
Len, I don't 
have
 to trust you. I just 
know
."

"What
do you mean? How?"

"I'm
not sure," he says. "It's something to do with the
changes."

He
waits for her to respond.

"What
are you saying, Karl?" she says at last. "Are you saying
you can read my mind?"

"No.
Nothing like that. I just, well, I identify with you more. I can—
it's kind of hard to explain—"

She
remembers him levitating beside a luminous smoker: 
the Pompeii
worms can predict them. The clams and brachyurans can predict them.
Why not me? 

He's
tuned in,
 she realizes. 
To everything. He's even tuned into
the bloody worms, that's what he—

He's
tuned in to Fischer—

She
tongues the light switch. A bright cone stabs into the abyss. She
sweeps the water around them. Nothing.

"Have
the others seen him?"

"I
don't know. I think Caraco caught him on sonar once or twice."

"Let's
go back," Clarke says.

"Let's
not. Stay a while. Spend the night."

She
looks straight into his empty lenses. "Please, Karl. Come with
me. Sleep inside for a bit."

"He's
not dangerous, Len."

"That's
not it." 
At least, that's not all.

"What,
then?"

"Karl,
has it ever occurred to you that you might be developing some sort of
dependence on this nerve rush of yours?"

"Come
on, Len. The rift gives us all a rush. That's why we're down here."

"We
get a rush because we're fucked in the head. That doesn't mean we
should go out of our way to augment the effect."

"Lenie—"

"Karl."
She lays her hands on his shoulders. "I don't know what happens
to you out here. But whatever it is, it scares me." 

He
nods. "I know."

"Then
please, please try it my way. Try sleeping inside again, just for a
while. Try not to spend every waking moment climbing around on the
bottom of the ocean, okay?"

"Lenie,
I don't like myself inside. 
You
 don't even like me inside."

"Maybe.
I don't know. I just — I just don't know how to deal with you
when you're like this."

"When
I'm not about to beat the shit out of anyone? When I'm acting like a
rational human being? If we'd had this conversation back at Beebe
we'd be throwing things at each other by now." He falls silent
for a moment. Something changes in his posture. "Or do you 
miss

that, somehow?"

"No.
Of course not," she says, surprised at the thought.

"Well,
then—"

"Please.
Just— indulge me. What harm can it do?"

He
doesn't answer. But she has a sneaking suspicion that he could.

* * *

She
has to give him credit. His reluctance shows in every move, but he's
even first through the airlock. Something happens to him as it
drains, though; the air rushes into him and — displaces
something else, somehow. She can't quite put her finger on it. She
wonders why she's never noticed it before. 

As
a reward, she takes him directly into her cubby. He fucks her up
against the bulkhead, violently, with no discretion at all. Animal
sounds echo through the hull. She wonders, as he comes, if the noise
is bothering the others.

* * *

"Have
any of you," Acton says, "thought about why things are so
fucking grotty down here?"

It's
a strange and wondrous occasion, as rare as a planetary conjunction.
All the circadian clocks have drifted together for an hour or two,
drawn everyone to dinner at the same time. Almost everyone; Lubin is
nowhere to be seen. Not that he ever contributes much to the
conversation anyway.

"What
do you mean?" Caraco says.

"What
do you 
think
 I mean? Look around, for Chrissake!" Acton
waves his arm, taking in the lounge. "The place is barely big
enough to stand up in. Everywhere you look there's fucking pipes and
cables. It's like living in a service closet."

Brander
frowns around a mouthful of rehydrated potato.

"They
were on a very strict schedule," Nakata suggests. "It was
important to get everything online as quickly as possible. Perhaps
they just didn't have time to make everything as cushy as they could
have."

Acton
snorts. "Come on, Alice. How much extra time would it take to
program the blueprints for decent headroom?"

"I
feel a conspiracy theory coming on," Brander remarks. "So
go on, Karl. Why's the GA going out of its way to make us bump our
heads all the time? They breeding us for short height, maybe? So
we'll eat less?"

Lenie
Clarke feels Acton tensing; it's like a small shockwave pushed out by
his clenching muscles, a pulse of tension that ripples through the
air and breaks against her 'skin. She rests one calming hand casually
on his thigh, under the table. It's a calculated risk, of course. It
would piss him off even more if Acton thought he was being
patronized.

This
time he relaxes a little. "I think they're trying to keep us off
balance. I think they deliberately designed Beebe to stress us out."

"Why?"
Caraco again, tense but civil.

"Because
it gives them an advantage. The more time we spend being on edge, the
less time we have to think about what we could do to them if we
really wanted to."

"And
what's that?"

"Use
your head, Judy. We could black out the grid from the Charlottes down
to Portland."

"They'd
just switch feeds," Brander says. "There are other deep
stations."

"Yeah.
And they're all staffed by people just like us." Acton slaps the
table with one hand. "Come 
on
, you guys. They don't 
want

us down here. They 
hate
 us, we're sickos that beat up our
wives and eat our babies for breakfast. If it weren't for the fact
that anyone else would flip out down here—"

Clarke
shakes her head. "But they could get us out of the loop
completely if they wanted. Just automate everything."

"Hallelujah."
Acton brings his hands together in sarcastic applause. "The
woman's got it at last."

Brander
leans back in his chair. "Give it a rest, Acton. Haven't you
ever worked for the GA before? You ever work for 
any
 sort of
bureaucracy?"

Acton's
gaze swivels, locks on to the other man. "What's your point?"

Brander
looks back with a hint of a sneer on his face. "My point, 
Karl
,
is that you're reading way too much into this. So they made the
ceilings too low. So their interior decorator's not worth shit. So
what else is new? The GA just isn't that scared of you." He
takes in Beebe with a wave of his arm. "This isn't some subtle
psychological war. Beebe was just designed by incompetent bozos."
Brander stands up, takes his plate to the galley. "If you don't
like the headroom, stay outside." 

Acton
looks at Lenie Clarke, his face utterly devoid of expression. "Oh,
I'd like to. Believe me." 

* * *

He's
hunched over the library terminal, 'phones on his ears, 'phones on
his eyes, the flatscreen blanked as usual to hide his litsearch from
view. As if anything in the database could really be personal. As if
the GA would ever ration out any fact worth hiding.

She's
learned not to bother him when he's like this. He's hunting in there,
he resents any distraction as though the files he's after might
somehow escape if he looks the other way. She doesn't touch him. She
doesn't run a gentle finger along his arm or try to work the knots
from his shoulders. Not any more. There are some mistakes that Lenie
Clarke can learn from.

He's
actually helpless in a strange way; cut off from the rest of Beebe,
deaf and blind to the presence of people who are by no means friends.
Brander could come up behind him right now and plant a knife in his
back. And yet everyone leaves him alone. It's as though his sensory
exile, this self-imposed vulnerability is some sort of brazen dare
that no one has the guts to take him up on. So Acton sits at the
keyboard— tapping at first, now stabbing— in his own
private datasphere, and his deaf blind presence somehow dominates the
lounge out of all proportion to his physical size.

"FUCK!"

He
tears the 'phones from his face and slams his fist down on the
console. Nothing even cracks. He glares around the lounge, white eyes
blazing, and settles on Nakata over in the galley. Lenie Clarke,
wisely, has avoided eye contact.

"This
database is fucking ancient! They stick us down this fucking black
anus for months at a time and they don't even give us a link to the
net!"

Nakata
spreads her hands. "The net's infected," she says,
nervously. "They send us scrubbed downloads every month or s—"

"I
fucking know that." Acton's voice is suddenly, ominously calm.
Nakata takes the hint and falls silent.

He
stands up. The whole room seems to shrink down around him. "I've
got to get out of here," he says at last. He takes a step
towards the ladder, glances at Clarke. "Coming?"

She
shakes her head. 

"Suit
yourself."

* * *

Caraco,
maybe. She's made overtures in the past.

Not
that Clarke ever took them. But things are changing. There aren't
just two Karl Actons any more. There used to be; all of her partners
have been twosomes, in fact. There's always been a host, some
magnetic chassis whose face and name never mattered because it would
change without warning. And providing continuity, riding along behind
each twinkling pair of eyes, there's always been the thing inside,
and it 
never
 changes. Nor, to be honest, would Lenie Clarke
know what to do if it did. 

Now
there's something new: the thing 
out
side. So far at least, it
has shown no trace of violence. It does seem to have x-ray vision,
which could be even worse.

Lenie
Clarke has always slept with the thing inside. Until now, she'd
always just assumed it was for want of an alternative. 

She
taps lightly on Caraco's hatch. "Judy? You there?" She
should be; she's nowhere else in Beebe, and sonar can't find any
trace of her outside.

No
answer.

It
can wait.

No.
It's waited long enough
.

How
would 
I 
feel if—

She
isn't me.

The
hatch is closed but not dogged. Clarke pulls it open a few
centimeters and peers inside. 

Somehow
they've managed to pull it off. Alice Nakata and Judy Caraco spoon
around each other on that tiny bunk. Their eyes dart restlessly
beneath closed lids. Nakata's dreamer stands guard beside them, its
tendrils pasted to their bodies.

Clarke
lets the hatch hiss shut again.

It
was a stupid idea, anyhow. What would she know?

She
wonders how long they've been together, though. She never even saw
that coming. 

* * *

"Your
boyfriend isn't here," Lubin calls in. "We were supposed to
top up the coolant on number seven."

Clarke
calls up the topographic display. "How long ago?"

"Oh
four hundred." 

"Okay."
Acton's half an hour late. That's unusual; he's been going out of his
way to be punctual these days, a grudging concession to Clarke in the
name of group relations. "I can't find him on sonar," she
reports. "Unless he's hugging the bottom. Hang on."

She
leans out of the comm cubby. "Hey. Anybody see Karl?"

"He
left a while ago," Brander calls from the wet room. "Maintenance
on seven, I think."

Clarke
punches back into Lubin's channel. "He's not here. Brander says
he left already. I'll keep looking."

"Okay.
At least his deadman switch hasn't gone off." Clarke can't tell
whether Lubin thinks that's good or bad.

Movement
at the corner of her eye. She looks up; Nakata's standing in the
hatchway.

"Have
you found him?" she asks.

Clarke
shakes her head.

"He
was in Medical, just before he left," Nakata says. "He was
open. He said he was making some adjustments—"

Oh
God.

"He
said they improved performance outside, but he didn't explain. He
said he would show me later. Maybe something went wrong."

External
camera display, ventral view. The image flickers for a moment, then
clears; on the screen, a scalloped circle of light lies across a flat
muddy plain, transected by the knife-edge shadows of anchor cables.
Near the edge of that circle is a black human figure, face down, its
hands held to either side of its head.

She
wakes up the close acoustics. "Karl! Karl, can you hear me?"

He
reacts. His head twists around, faces up into the floods; his eyecaps
reflect featureless white glare into the camera. He's shaking.

"His
vocoder," Nakata says. There's sound coming from the speaker,
soft, repetitive, mechanical. "It's— stuttering—"

Clarke's
already in the wet room. She knows what Acton's vocoder is saying.
She knows, because the same word is repeating over and over in her
own head.

No.
No. No. No. No.

* * *

No
obvious motor impairment. He's able to make it back inside on his
own; stiffens, in fact, when Clarke tries to help him. He strips his
gear and follows her into Medical without a word.

Nakata,
diplomatically, closes the hatch behind them

Now
he sits on the examination table, stonefaced. Clarke knows the
routine; get his 'skin off, his eyecaps out. Check autonomic pupil
response and reflex arcs. Stab him, draw off the usual samples: blood
gases, acetylcholine, GABA, lactic acid.

She
sits down beside him. She doesn't want his eyecaps out. She doesn't
want to see behind them.

"Your
inhibitors," she says at last. "How far down are they?"

"Twenty
percent."

"Well."
She tries for a light touch. "At least we know your limit now.
Just nudge them back up to normal."

Almost
imperceptibly, he shakes his head.

"Why
not?"

"Too
late. I went over some sort of threshold. I don't think ­­—
it doesn't feel reversible."

"I
see." She puts one tentative hand on his arm. He doesn't react.
"How 
do
 you feel?"

"Blind.
Deaf."

"You're
not, though."

"You
asked how I 
felt
," he says, still expressionless.

"Here."
She takes the NMR helmet down from its hook. Acton lets her strap it
across his skull. "If there's anything wrong, this should—"

"There's
something wrong, Len."

"Well."
The helmet writes its impressions across the diagnostic display.
Clarke's got the same medical expertise they all have, stuffed into
her mind by machines that hijacked her dreams. Still, the raw data
mean nothing to her. It's almost a minute before the display prints
out an executive summary.

"Your
synaptic calcium's way down." She's careful not to show her
relief. "Makes sense, I guess. Your neurons fire too often,
eventually they run out of something."

He
looks at the screen, saying nothing. 

"Karl,
it's okay." She leans toward his ear, one hand on his shoulder.
"It'll fix itself. Just put your inhibitors back up to normal;
demand goes down, supply keeps up. No harm done." 

He
shakes his head again. "Won't work."

"Karl,
look at the readout. You're going to be fine."

"Please
don't touch me," he says, not moving at all.

Critical
Mass

She catches a
glimpse of fist before it hits her eye. She staggers back against the
bulkhead, feels some protruding rivet or valve catch the back of her
head. The world drowns in explosions of afterlight.

He's
lost control
, she thinks dully. 
I win.
 Her knees collapse
under her; she slides down the wall, sits with a heavy thud on the
deck. She considers it a matter of some pride that she's kept utterly
silent through all this.

I
wonder what I did to set him off.
 She can't remember. Acton's
fist seems to have knocked the past few minutes out of her head.

Doesn't matter anyway. Same old dance.

But
this time there seems to be someone on her side. She can hear shouts,
sounds of a scuffle. She hears the sick jarring thud of flesh against
bone against metal, and for once, none of it seems to be hers.

"You

cocksucker!
 I'll rip your fucking balls off!"

Brander's
voice. Brander is sticking up for her. He always was the gallant one.
Clarke smiles, tastes salt. 
Of course, he never quite forgave
Acton for that tiff over the gulper, either...

Her
vision is starting to clear, in one eye at least. There's a leg right
in front of her, another to one side. She looks up; the legs meet at
Caraco's crotch. Acton and Brander are in her cubby too; Clarke's
amazed that they can all fit.

Acton,
his mouth bloody, is under siege. Brander's hand is at his throat.
Acton has the wrist of that hand caught in a grip of his own; while
Clarke watches, his other arm lashes out and glances off Brander's
jaw.

"Stop
it," she mumbles.

Caraco
hits Acton's temple twice in rapid succession. Acton's head snaps
sideways, snarls, but he doesn't release his grip on Brander.

"I
said 
stop it!
"

This
time they hear her. The struggle slows, pauses; fists remain poised,
no holds break, but they're all looking at her now.

Even
Acton. Clarke looks up into his eyes, looks behind them. She can see
nothing staring back but Acton himself. 
You were there before,

she remembers. 
I'm almost sure of it. Count on you to get Acton
into a losing fight and then bugger off...

She
braces herself against the bulkhead and pushes slowly erect. Caraco
moves aside, helps her up.

"I'm
flattered by all the attention, folks," Clarke says, "and I
want to thank you for stopping by, but I think we can handle this on
our own from here on in."

Caraco
puts a protective hand on her shoulder. "You don't have to put
up with this shit." Her eyes, somehow venomous through the
shielding, are still locked on Acton. "None of us do."

One
corner of Acton's mouth pulls back in a small, bloody sneer.

Clarke
endures Caraco's touch without flinching. "I know that. And
thanks for stepping in. But please, just leave us alone for a while."

Brander
doesn't loosen his grip on Acton's throat. "I don't think that a
very good—"

"
Will
you get your fucking hands off him and leave us alone!
"

They
back off. Clarke glares after them, dogs the hatch to keep them out.
"Goddamned nosy neighbors," she grumbles, turning back to
Acton.

His
body sags in the sudden privacy, all the anger and bravado
evaporating as she watches.

"Want
to tell me why you're being such an asshole?" she says.

Acton
collapses on her pallet. He stares at the deck, avoiding her eyes.
"Don't you know when you're being fucked over?"

Clarke
sits down beside him. "Sure. Getting punched out is pretty much
a giveaway." 

"I'm
trying to 
help
 you. I'm trying to help 
all
 of you."
He turns and hugs her, body shaking, cheek pressed against hers, face
aimed at the bulkhead behind her shoulder. "Oh God Lenie I'm so
sorry you're the last person in the whole fucking world I want to
hurt—"

She
strokes him without speaking. She knows he means it. They always do.
She still can't bring herself to blame any of them.

He
thinks he's alone in there. He thinks it's all his own doing.

Briefly,
an impossible thought: 
Maybe it is...

"I
can't go on with this," he says. "Staying inside."

"It'll
get better, Karl. It's always hard at first."

"Oh
God, Len. You don't have a clue. You still think I'm some sort of
junkie."

"Karl—"

"You
think I don't know what addiction is? You think I can't tell the
difference?"

She
doesn't answer. 

He
manages a small, sad laugh. "I'm losing it, Len. You're forcing
me to lose it. Why in God's name do you want me this way?"

"Because
this is who you are, Karl. Outside isn't you. Outside's a
distortion."

"Outside
I'm not an asshole. Outside I don't make everyone hate me."

"No."
She hugs him. "If controlling your temper means seeing you turn
into something else, seeing you doped up all the time, then I'll take
my chances with the original."

Acton
looks at her. "I hate this. Jesus Christ, Len. Won't you ever
get tired of people who kick the shit out of you?"

"That's
a really nasty thing to say," she remarks quietly.

"I
don't think so. I can remember some things I saw out there, Len. It's
like you need —I mean God, Lenie, there's so much 
hate

in all of you..."

She's
never heard him speak like this. Not even outside. "You've got a
bit of that in you too, you know."

"Yeah.
I thought it made me different. I thought it gave me...an edge, you
know?"

"It
does."

He
shakes his head. "Oh, no. Not next to you."

"Don't
underrate yourself. You don't see me trying to take on the whole
station."

"That's
just it, Len. I blow it off all the time, I waste it on stupid shit
like this. But you— you hoard it." His expression changes,
she's not exactly sure what to. Concern, maybe. Worry. "Sometimes
you scare me more than Lubin does. You never lash out, or beat on
anybody — Christ, it's a major event when you even raise your
voice — so it just builds up. It's got its up side, I guess."
He manages a soft laugh. "Hatred's a great fuel source. If
anything ever—activated you, you'd be unstoppable. But now,
you're just—toxic. I don't think you really know how much hate
you've got in you."

Pity?

Something
inside her goes suddenly cool. "Don't play therapist with me,
Karl. Just because your nerves fire too fast doesn't mean you've got
second sight. You don't know me that well."

Of
course not. Or you wouldn't be with me.

"Not
in here." He smiles, but that strange sick expression keeps
showing through behind. "Outside, at least, I can see things. In
here I'm blind."

"You're
in the land of the blind." She says curtly. "It's not a
drawback."

"Really?
Would 
you
 stay here if it meant getting your eyes cut out?
Would you stay some place that rotted your brain out piece by piece,
turned you from a human being into a fucking monkey?"

Clarke
considers. "If I was a monkey to begin with, maybe."

Uh
oh. Sounded too flippant by half, didn't I?

Acton
looks at her for a moment. Something else does too, drowsily, with
one eye open.

"At
least 
I
 don't get my endorphins by playing victim," he
says, slowly. "You should really be a bit more careful who you
choose to look down on."

"And
you," Clarke replies, "should save the pious lectures for
those rare occasions when you actually know what you're talking
about."

He
rises off the bed and glares at her, fists carefully unclenched.

Clarke
does not move. She feels her whole body hardening from the inside
out. She deliberately lifts her head until she's looking straight
into Acton's hooded eyes.

It's
in there now, fully awake. She can't see Acton at all any more.
Everything's back to normal.

"Don't
even try," she says. "I gave you a couple of shots for old
times' sake, but if you lay a hand on me again I swear I'll fucking
kill you."

She
marvels inwardly at the strength in her voice; it sounds like iron.

They
stare at each other for an endless moment.

Acton's
body turns on its heel and undogs the hatch. Clarke watches it step
out of the cubby; Caraco, waiting in the corridor, lets it by without
a word. Clarke holds herself utterly still until she hears the 'lock
beginning to cycle.

He
didn't call my bluff.

Except
this time, she's not sure that that's all it was.

* * *

He
doesn't see her.

It's
been days since they've said anything to each other. Even their shift
schedules have diverged. Tonight, as she was trying to sleep, she
heard him come out of the abyss again and climb up into the lounge
like some invading sea creature. He does it now and then when the
place is deserted, when everyone is either outside or sealed into
their cubicles. He sits there at the library, diving through his
'phones down endless virtual avenues, desperation in every movement.
It's as though he has to hold his breath whenever he comes inside;
once she saw him tear the headset off his skull and flee outside as
though his chest would burst. When she picked up the abandoned
headset, the results of his litsearch were still glowing in the
eyephones. Chemistry.

Another
time he turned on his way out to see her standing in the corridor. He
smiled. He even said something: "—
sorry—
"
is what she heard, but there may have been more. He didn't stay.

Now
his hands rest, unmoving, on the keyboard. His shoulders are shaking.
He doesn't make any sound at all. Lenie Clarke closes her eyes for a
moment, wondering whether to approach him. When she looks again the
lounge is empty.

* * *

She
can tell exactly where he's going. His icon buds off of Beebe and
crawls away across the display, and there's only on thing in that
direction. 

When
she gets there he's crawling across its back, digging a hole with his
knife. Clarke's eyecaps can barely find enough light to see by, this
far from the Throat; Acton cuts and slices in the light of her
headlamp, his shadow writhing away across a horizon of dead flesh.

He's
dug a crater, maybe half a meter across, half a meter deep. He's cut
through the stratum of blubber below the skin and is tearing through
the brown muscle beneath. It's been months now since this creature
landed here. Clarke marvels at its preservation.

The
abyss likes extremes
, she muses. 
If it isn't a pressure
cooker, it's a fridge.

Acton
stops digging. He just floats there, staring down at his handiwork.

"What
a stupid idea," he buzzes at last. "I don't know what gets
into me sometimes." He turns to face her; his eyecaps reflect
yellow. "I'm sorry, Lenie. I know this place was special to you
somehow, I didn't mean to...well, desecrate it, I guess."

She
shakes her head. "It's okay. It's not important."

Acton's
vocoder gurgles; in air, it would be a sad laugh. "I give myself
too much credit sometimes, Len. Whenever I'm inside, and I'm fucking
up and I don't know what to do, I figure all I've got to do is come
outside and the scales will fall off my eyes. It's like, religious
faith almost. All the answers. Right out here."

"It's
okay," Clarke says again, because it seems better than saying
nothing.

"Only
sometimes the answer doesn't really do much for you, you know?
Sometimes the answer's just: Forget it. You're fucked." Acton
looks back down at the dead whale. "Would you turn the light
off?"

The
darkness swallows them like a blanket. Clarke reaches through it and
brings Acton to her. "What were you trying to do?"

That
mechanical laugh again. "Something I read. I was thinking—"

His
cheek brushes against hers. 

"I
don't know what I was thinking. When I'm inside I'm a fucking lobo
case, I get these stupid ideas and even when I get back out it takes
a while before I really wake up and realize what a dork I've been. I
wanted to study an adrenal gland. Thought it would help me figure out
how to counter ion depletion at the synapse junctions."

"You
know how to do that."

"Well,
it was just bullshit anyway. I can't think straight in there."

She
doesn't bother to argue.

"I'm
sorry," Acton buzzes after a while.

Clarke
strokes his back. It feels like two sheets of plastic rubbing
together
.

"I
think I can explain it to you," he adds. "If you're
interested."

"Sure."
But she knows it won't change anything.

"You
know how there's this strip in your brain that controls movement?"

"Okay."

"And
if, say, you became a concert pianist, the part that runs your
fingers would actually spread out, take up more of the strip to meet
the increased demand for finger control. But you lose something, too.
The adjacent parts of the strip get crowded out. So maybe you
couldn't wiggle your toes or curl your tongue as well as you could
before you started practicing."

Acton
falls silent. Clarke feels his arms, cradling her loosely from
behind.

"I
think something like that happened to me," he says after a
while.

"How?"

"I
think something in my brain got exercised, and it spread out and
crowded some other parts away. But it only works in a high-pressure
environment, you see, it's the pressure that makes the nerves fire
faster. So when I go back inside, the new part shuts down and the old
parts have been — well, lost."

Clarke
shakes her head. "We've been through this, Karl. Your synapses
just ran low on calcium."

"That's
not all that happened. That's not even a problem any more, I've
brought my inhibitors up again. Not all the way, but enough. But I
still have this new part, and I still can't find the old ones."
She feels his chin on the top of her head. "I don't think I'm
exactly human any more, Len. Which, considering the kind of human I
was, is probably just as well."

"And
what does it do, exactly? This new part?"

He
takes a while to answer. "It's almost like getting an extra
sense organ, except it's ... diffuse. Intuition, only with a really
hard edge."

"Diffuse,
with a hard edge."

"Yeah,
well. That's the problem when you try to explain smell to someone
without a nose."

"Maybe
it's not what you think. I mean, something's changed, but that
doesn't mean you can really just — look into people like that
.

Maybe it's just some sort of mood disorder. Or a hallucination,
maybe. You can't 
know
." 

"I
know, Len."

"Then
you're right." Anger trickles up from her internal reservoir.
"You're not human any more. You're less than human."

"Lenie—"

"Humans
have to 
trust
, Karl. There's no big deal about putting your
faith in something you know for certain. I want you to trust me."

"Not
know you." 

She
tries to hear sadness on that synthetic voice. In Beebe, maybe, it
would have come through. But in Beebe he would never had said that.

"Karl—"

"I
can't come back."

"You're
not yourself out here." She pushes away, spins around; she can
just barely distinguish his silhouette. 

"You
want me to be—" She hears confusion in the words, even
through the vocoder, but she knows it's not a question. "—hateful."

"Don't
be an idiot. I've had more than my fill of assholes, believe me. But
Karl, this is just some kind of cheap trick. Step out of the magic
booth, you're Mr. Nice Guy. Step back in, you're the SeaTac
Strangler. It's not 
real.
" 

"How
do you know?"

She
keeps her distance, suddenly knowing the answer. It's only real if it
hurts. It's only real if it happens slowly, painfully, each step
carved in shouts and threats and thrown punches. 

It's
only real if Lenie Clarke is the one to make him change.

She
doesn't tell him any of this, of course. But she's afraid, as she
turns and leaves him there, that she doesn't have to.

* * *

She
comes instantly out of sleep, tense and completely alert. There's
darkness — the lights are off, she's even blanked the readouts
on the wall — but it's the close, familiar darkness of her own
cubby. Something is tapping on the hull, regular and insistent.

From
outside.

Out
in the corridor there's light enough for rifter eyes. Nakata and
Caraco stand motionless in the lounge. Brander sits at the library;
the screens are dark, the headsets all hanging on their pegs.

The
sound ticks through the lounge, fainter than before but easily
audible.

"Where's
Lubin?" Clarke asks softly. Nakata tilts her head towards the
hull: 
outside somewhere
.

Clarke
climbs downstairs and into the airlock.

* * *

"We
thought you'd gone over," she says. "Like Fischer."

They
float between Beebe and the sea floor. Clarke reaches out to him.
Acton reaches back.

"How
long has it been?" The words come out as faint, metallic sighs.

"Six
days. Maybe seven. I've been putting off— calling up for a
replacement—"

He
doesn't react.

"We
saw you on sonar sometimes," she adds. "For a while. Then
you disappeared."

Silence.

"Did
you get lost?" she asks after a while.

"Yeah."

"But
you're back now."

"No."

"Karl—"

"I
need you to promise me something, Lenie."

"What?"

"Promise
me you'll do what I did. The others too. They'll listen to you."

"You
know I can't—"

"Five
percent, Lenie. Maybe ten. If you keep it that low you'll do okay.
Promise."

"Why,
Karl?"

"Because
I wasn't wrong about everything. Because sooner or later they're
going to have to get rid of you, and you need every edge you can
get."

"Come
inside. We can talk about it inside, everyone's there."

"There's
strange things happening out there, Len. Out past sonar range,
they're — I don't know what they're doing. They don't tell
us..." 

"Come
inside, Karl."

He
shakes his head. He seems almost unused to the gesture.

"—can't—"

"Then
don't expect me—"

"I
left a file in the library. It explains things. As much as I could,
when I was in there. Promise me, Len."

"No.

You
 promise. Come inside. Promise we'll work it out." 

"It
kills too much of me," he sighs. "I pushed it too far.
Something burned out, I'm not even completely whole out here any
more. But you'll be okay. Five or ten percent, no more."

"I
need you," she buzzes, very quietly.

"No,"
he says. "You need Karl Acton."

"What's
that supposed to mean?"

"You
need what he did to you."

All
the warmth goes out of her then. What's left is a slow, freezing
boil.

"What
is this, Karl? Some grand insight you got while spirit-walking around
in the mud? You think you know me better than I do?"

"You
know—"

"Because
you don't, you know. You don't know shit about me, you never did. And
you don't really have the balls to find out, so you run off into the
dark and come back spouting all this pretentious bullshit."
She's goading him, she knows she's goading him but he's just not
reacting. Even one of his outbursts would be better than this.

"It's
saved under Shadow," he says. 

She
stares at him without speaking.

"The
file," he adds.

"
What's
wrong with you?
" She's beating at him now, pounding as hard
as she can but he's not hitting back, he's not even 
defending

himself for Chrissakes 
why don't you fight back asshole why don't
you just get it over with, just beat the shit out of me until the
guilt covers us both and we'll promise never to do it again and—

But
even anger deserts her now. The inertia of her attack pushes them
away from each other. She catches herself on an anchor cable. A
starfish, wrapped around the line, reaches blindly out to touch her
with the tip of one arm.

Acton
continues to drift.

"Stay,"
she says.

He
brakes and holds position without answering, dim and gray and
distant.

There
are so many things denied her out here. She can't cry. She can't even
close her eyes. So she stares at the sea bed, watches her own shadow
stretch off into the darkness. "Why are you doing this?"
she asks, exhausted, and wonders who she meant the question for.

His
shadow flows across her own. A mechanical voice answers:

"This
is what you do when you really love someone."

She
jerks her head up in time to see him disappear.

* * *

Beebe's
quiet when she returns. The wet slap of her feet on the deck is the
only sound. She climbs into the lounge and finds it empty. She takes
a step towards the corridor that leads to her cubby.

Stops.

In
Comm, a luminous icon inches towards the Throat. The display lies for
effect; in reality Acton is dark and unreflective, no more luminous
than she is. 

She
wonders again if she should try and stop him. She could never
overpower him by force, but perhaps she just hasn't thought of the
right thing to say. Perhaps if she just gets it right she can call
him back, compel his return through words alone. Not a victim any
more, he said once. Perhaps she's a siren instead.

She
can't think of anything to say.

He's
almost there now. She can see him gliding between great bronze
pillars, bacterial nebulae swirling in his wake. She imagines his
face aimed down, scanning, relentless, hungry. She can see him homing
in on the north end of Main Street.

She
shuts off the display.

She
doesn't have to watch this. She knows what's going on, and the
machines will tell her when it's over. She couldn't stop them if she
tried, not unless she smashed them into junk. That, in fact, is
exactly what she wants to do. But she controls herself. Quiet as
stone, Lenie Clarke sits in the command cubby staring at a blank
screen, waiting for the alarm.

Nekton

Dryback

Jumpstart

He dreamed of water.

He
always dreamed of water. He dreamed the smell of dead fish in rotten
nets, and rainbow puddles of gasoline shimmering off the Steveston
jetty, and a home so close to the shoreline you could barely get
insurance. He dreamed of a time when waterfront meant something, even
the muddy brown stretch where the Fraser hemorrhaged into the Strait
of Georgia. His mother was standing over him, beaming 
a vital
ecological resource, Yves. A staging ground for migrating birds. A
filter for the whole world.
 And little Yves Scanlon smiled back,
proud that he alone of all his friends— well, not 
friends

exactly, but maybe they would be 
now
— would grow up
appreciating nature first-hand, right here in his new back yard. One
and a half meters above the high-tide line.

And
then, as usual, the real world kicked in the doors and electrocuted
his mother in mid-smile.

Sometimes
he could postpone the inevitable. Sometimes he could fight the jolt
from his bedside dreamer, keep it from dragging him back for just a
few more seconds. Thirty years of random images would flash across
his mind in those moments; falling forests, bloating deserts,
ultraviolet fingers reaching ever deeper into barren seas. Oceans
creeping up shorelines. Vital ecological resources turning into
squatting camps for refugees. Squatting camps turning into intertidal
zones.

And
Yves Scanlon was awake again, sweat-soaked, teeth clenched,
jump-started.

God,

no
. 
I'm
 
back
.

The
real world.

Three
and a half hours. Only three and a half hours...

It
was all the dreamer would allow him. Sleep stages one through four
got ten minutes each. REM got thirty, in deference to the
incompressibility of the dream state. A seventy-minute cycle, run
three times nightly. 

You
could freelance. Everyone else does.

Freelancers
chose their own hours. Employees— those few that remained—
got their hours chosen for them. Yves Scanlon was an employee. He
frequently reminded himself of the advantages: you didn't have to
fight and scramble for a new contract every six months. You had
stability, of a sort. If you performed. If you kept on performing.
Which meant, of course, that Yves Scanlon couldn't afford the nightly
nine-and-a-half-hours that was optimal for his species.

Servitude
for security, then. No day passed when he didn't hate the choice he'd
made. Some day, perhaps, he'd even hate it more than he feared the
alternative.

"Seventeen
items on high priority," said the workstation as his feet hit
the floor. "Four broadcast, twelve net, one phone. Broadcast and
phone items are clean. Net items were disinfected on entry, with a
forty percent chance that encrypted bugs slipped through."

"Up
the disinfectant," Scanlon said.

"That
will destroy any encrypted bugs, but might also destroy up to five
percent of the legitimate data. I could just dump the risky files."

"Disinfect
them. What's on midlist?" 

"Eight
hundred and sixty three items. Three hundred twenty seven broad—"

"Dump
it all." Scanlon headed for the bathroom, stopped. "Wait a
minute. Play the phone call."

"This
is Patricia Rowan," the station said in a cold, clipped voice.
"We may be encountering some personnel problems with the
deep-sea geothermal program. I'd like to discuss them with you. I'll
have your return call routed direct."

Shit.

Rowan was one of the top corpses on the west coast. She'd barely
even acknowledged him since he'd been hired on at the GA. "Is
there a priority on that call?" Scanlon asked.

"Important
but not urgent," the workstation replied

He
could have breakfast first, maybe go through his mail. He could
ignore all those reflexes urging him to drop everything and jump like
a trained seal to immediate attention. They needed him for something.
About time. About goddamned time.

"I'm
taking a shower," he told the workstation, hesitantly defiant.
"Don't bother me until I come out."

His reflexes,
though, didn't like it at all.

* * *

"—that
'curing' victims of multiple personality disorder is actually
tantamount to serial murder. The issue has remained controversial in
the wake of recent findings that the human brain can potentially
contain up to one hundred forty fully-sentient personalities without
significant sensory/motor impairment. The tribunal will also consider
whether encouraging a multiple personality to reintegrate voluntarily
— again, a traditionally therapeutic act — should be
redefined as assisted suicide. Crosslinked to next item under
cognition and legal."

The
workstation fell silent.

Rowan
wants to see me. The VP in charge of the GA's whole Northwest
franchise wants to see me. Me.

He
was thinking into sudden silence. Scanlon realised the workstation
had stopped talking. "Next," he said.

"Fundamentalist
acquitted of murder in the destruction of a smart gel," the
station recited. "Tagged to—"

Didn't
she say I'd be working with her, though? Wasn't that the deal when I
first came on?

"—AI,
cognition, and legal." 

Yeah.
That's what they said. Ten years ago.

"Ahh—
summary, nontechnical," Scanlon told the machine.

"Victim
was a smart gel on temporary loan to the Ontario Science Center as
part of a public exhibit on artificial intelligence. Accused admitted
to the act, stating that neuron cultures" —the workstation
changed voices, neatly inserting a sound bite— "
desecrate
the human soul
. 

"Expert
defense witnesses, including a smart gel online from Rutgers,
testified that neuron cultures lack the primitive midbrain structures
necessary to experience pain, fear, or a desire for
self-preservation. Defense argued that the concept of a 'right' is
intended to protect individuals from unwarranted suffering. Since
smart gels are incapable of physical or mental distress of any sort,
they have no rights to protect regardless of their level of
self-awareness. This reasoning was eloquently summarized during the
Defense's closing statement: 'Gels themselves don't care whether they
live or die. Why should we?' The verdict is under appeal. Crosslinked
to next item under AI and World News."

Scanlon
swallowed a mouthful of powdered albumin. "List expert defense
witnesses, names only."

"Phillip
Quan. Lily Kozlowski. David Childs—"

"Stop."
Lily Kozlowski. He knew her, from back at UCLA. An expert witness.
Shit. 
Maybe 
I 
should have kissed a few more asses in grad
school...

Scanlon
snorted. "Next."

"Net
infections down fifteen percent."

Problems
with the Rifters, she said. I wonder... 
"Summary,
nontechnical."

"Viral
infections on the Internet have declined fifteen percent in the past
six months, due to the ongoing installation of smart gels at critical
nodes along the net's backbone. Digital infections find it nearly
impossible to infect smart gels, each of which has a unique and
flexible system architecture. In light of these most recent results,
some experts are predicting a safe return to casual e-mail by the end
of—"

"Ah,
fuck. Cancel."

Come
on, Yves. You've been waiting for years for those idiots to recognise
your abilities. Maybe this is it. Don't blow it by looking too eager.

"Waiting,"
said the station.

Only
what if she doesn't wait? What if she gets impatient and goes for
someone else? What if—

"Tag
the last phone call and reply." Scanlon stared at the dregs of
his breakfast while the connection went up.

"Admin,"
said a voice that sounded real.

"Yves
Scanlon for Patricia Rowan."

"Dr.
Rowan is occupied. Her simulator is expecting your call. This
conversation is being monitored for quality control purposes." A
click, and another voice that sounded real: "Hello, Dr.
Scanlon."

His
Master's voice. 

Muckraker

It
rumbles up the slope from the abyssal plain, bouncing an echo that
registers five hundred meters outside Beebe's official sonar range.
It's moving at almost ten meters a second, not remarkable for a
submarine but this thing's so close to the bottom it 
has
 to be
running on treads. Six hundred meters out it crosses a small
spreading zone and slews to a stop.

"What
is it?" wonders Lenie Clarke.

Alice
Nakata fiddles with the focus. The unknown has started up again at a
crawl, edging along the length of the spread at less than one meter a
second.

"It's
feeding," Nakata says. "Polymetallic sulfides, perhaps."

Clarke
considers. "I want to check it out."

"Yes.
Shall I notify the GA?"

"Why?"

"It
is probably foreign. It might not be legal."

Clarke
looks at the other woman.

"There
are fines for unauthorised incursions into territorial waters,"
Nakata says.

"Alice,
really." Clarke shakes her head. "Who cares?"

Lubin
is off the scope, probably sleeping on the bottom somewhere. They
leave him a note. Brander and Caraco are out replacing the bearings
on number six; a tremor cracked the casing last shift, jammed two
thousand kilograms of mud and grit into the works. Still, the other
generators are more than able to take up the slack. Brander and
Caraco grab their squids and join the parade.

"We
should keep our lights down," Nakata buzzes as they leave the
Throat. "And stay very close to the bottom. It may frighten
easily."

They
follow the bearing, their lights dimmed to embers, through darkness
almost impenetrable even to rifter eyes. Caraco pulls up beside
Clarke: "I'm heading into the wild blue yonder after this. Wanna
come?"

A
shiver of second-hand revulsion tickles Clarke's insides; from
Nakata, of course. Nakata used to join Caraco on her daily swim up
Beebe's transponder line, until about two weeks ago. Something
happened up at the deep scattering layer — nothing dangerous,
apparently, but it left Alice absolutely cold at the prospect of
going anywhere near the surface. Caraco's been pestering the others
to pace her ever since.

Clarke
shakes her head. "Didn't you get enough of a workout slurping
all that shit out of number six?"

Caraco
shrugs. "Different muscle groups."

"How
far do you go now?"

"Up
to a thousand. Give me another ten shifts and I'll be lapping all the
way to the surface."

A
sound has been rising around them, so gradually that Clarke can't pin
down the moment she first noticed it; a grumbling, mechanical noise,
the distant sound of rocks being pulverized between great molars.

Flickers
of nervousness flash back and forth in the group. Clarke tries to
rein herself in. She knows what's coming, they all do, it's not
nearly as dangerous as the risks they face every shift. It's not
dangerous at all—

—
unless
it's got defenses we don't know about—

—
but
that 
sound
, the sheer 
size
 of this thing on the scope—

We're all scared. We know there's nothing to be afraid of, but all
we can hear are teeth gnashing in the darkness...

It's
bad enough dealing with her own hardwired apprehension. It doesn't
help to be tuned in to everyone else's.

A
faint pulse of surprise from Brander, in the lead. Then from Nakata,
next in line, a split-second before Clarke herself feels a slap of
sluggish turbulence. Caraco, forewarned, barely radiates anything
when the plume washes over her.

The
darkness has become fractionally more absolute, the water itself more
viscous. They hold station in a stream that's half mud, half
seawater.

"Exhaust
wake," Brander vibrates. He has to raise his voice slightly to
be heard over the sound of feeding machinery.

They
turn and follow the trail upstream, keeping to the plume's edge more
by touch than sight. The ambient grumble swells to full-blown
cacophony, resolves into a dozen different voices; pile-drivers,
muffled explosions, the sounds of cement mixers. Clarke can barely
think above the waterborne racket, or the rising apprehension in four
separate minds, and suddenly it's 
right there
, just for a
moment, a great segmented tread climbing up around a gear wheel two
stories high, rolling away in the murk.

"
Jesus.

It's fucking 
huge
." Brander, his vocoder cranked.

They
move together, aiming their squids high and cruising up at an angle.
Clarke tastes the thrill from three other sets of adrenals, adds her
own and sends it back, a vicarious feedback loop. With their lamps on
minimum the viz can't be more than three meters; even in front of
Clarke's face the world is barely more than shadows on shadows, dimly
lit by headlights bobbing to either side. 

The
top of the tread slides below them for a moment, a jointed moving
road several meters across. Then a plain of jumbled metal shapes,
fading into view barely ahead, fading out again almost instantly;
exhaust ports, sonar domes, flow-meter ducts. The din fades a little
as they move towards the center of the hull.

Most
of the protuberances are smoothed back into hydrodynamic teardrops.
Close up, though, there's no shortage of handholds. Caraco's
smoldering headlight is the first to settle down onto the machine;
her squid paces along above her. Clarke sets her own squid to heel
and joins the others on the hull. So far there's been no obvious
reaction to their presence.

They
huddle together, heads close to converse above the ambient noise. 

"Where's
it from?" Brander wonders.

"Probably
Korea." Nakata buzzes back. "I did not see any registry
markings, but it would take a long time to check the whole hull."

Caraco:
"Bet you wouldn't find anything anyway. If they were going to
risk sneaking it this far into foreign territory they wouldn't be
stupid enough to leave a return address."

The
rumbling metal landscape pulls them along. A couple of meters up,
barely visible, their riderless squids trail patiently behind. 

"Does
it know we're here?" asks Clarke.

Alice
shakes her head. "It kicks up a lot of shit from the bottom so
it ignores close contacts. Bright light might scare it, though. It 
is

trespassing. It might associate light with discovery."

"Really."
Brander lets go for a moment, drifts back a few meters before
catching another handhold. "Hey Judy, want to go exploring?"

Caraco's
vocoder emits static; Lenie feels the other woman's laughter from
inside. Caraco and Brander leap away into the murk like black
gremlins.

"It
moved very fast," Nakata says. There's a sudden small blot of
insecurity radiating from inside her, but she talks over it. "When
it first showed up on sonar. It was moving way too fast. It wasn't
safe."

"Safe?"
Lenie frowns to herself. "It's a machine, right? No one inside."

Nakata
shakes her head. "Too fast for a machine in complex terrain. A
person could do it."

"Come
on, Alice. These things are robots. Besides, if there was anyone
inside we'd be able to 
feel
 them, right? You feel anyone other
than the four of us?" Nakata tends to be a bit more sensitive
than the others in matters of fine-tuning.

"I—
don't think so," Nakata says, but Clarke senses uncertainty.
"Maybe I — it's a big machine, Lenie. Maybe the pilot is
just too far aw—"

Brander
and Caraco are plotting something. They're both out of sight —
even their squids have left to keep them in range — but they're
easily close enough for Clarke to sense a rising anticipation. She
and Nakata exchange looks.

"We
better see what they're up to," Clarke says. The two of them
head off across the muckraker.

A
few moments later, Brander and Caraco materialize in front of them.
They're crouched to either side of a metal dome about thirty
centimeters across. Several dark fisheyes stare out from its surface.

"Cameras?"
Clarke asks.

"Nope,"
Caraco says.

"Photocells,"
Brander adds.

Lenie
feels the beat before a punchline. "Are you sure this is a
good—"

"
Let
there be light!
" cries Judy Caraco. Beams stab out from her
headlamp and Brander's, bathing the fisheyes at full intensity.

The
muckraker stops dead. Inertia pushes Clarke forward; she grabs and
regains her balance, unexpected silence ringing in her ears. In the
wake of that incessant noise, she feels almost deaf.

"Whoa,"
Brander buzzes into the stillness. Something ticks through the hull
once, twice, three times.

The
world lurches back into motion. The landscape rotates around them,
throws them together in a tangle of limbs. By the time they've sorted
themselves out they're accelerating. The muckraker is grumbling
again, but with a different voice; no lazy munching on polymetallics
now, just a straight beeline for international waters. Within seconds
Clarke is hanging on for dear life.

"
Yee-haw!
"
Caraco shouts.

"Bright
light might scare it?" Brander calls from somewhere behind. "I
would say 
so
!"

Strong
feelings on all sides. Lenie Clarke tightens her grip and tries to
sort out which ones are hers. Exultation spiked with primal, giddy
fear; that's Brander and Caraco. Alice Nakata's excited almost
despite herself, but with more worry in the mix; and here, buried
somewhere down deep, almost a sense of — she can't tell,
really.

Discontent?
Unhappiness?

Not
really.

Is
that 
me
?
 But that doesn't feel right either. 

Bright
light pins Clarke's shadow to the hull, disappears an instant later.
She looks back; Brander's up above her somehow, swinging back and
forth on a line trailing up into the water — 
could've sworn
that wasn't there before
 — his beam waving around like a
demented lighthouse. Ribbons of muddy water stream past just above
the deck, their edges writhing in textbook illustrations of turbulent
flow. 

Caraco
pushes off the hull and flies back up into the water. Her silhouette
vanishes into the murk, but her headlamp comes to rest and starts
dipping around just behind Brander's. Clarke looks over at Nakata,
still plastered against the hull. Nakata's feeling a little sick now,
and even more worried about something...

"It
is not 
happy
!" Nakata shouts.

"Hey;
come on, groundhogs!" Caraco's voice buzzes faintly. "Fly!"

Discontent.
Something not expected.

Who

is 
that?
 Clark wonders.

"Come

on
!" Caraco calls again.

What
the hell. Can't hang on much longer anyway.
 Clarke lets go,
pushes off; the top of the muckraker races on beneath. Heavy water
drags the momentum from her. She kicks for altitude, feels sudden
expectation from behind — and in the next second something
slams against her back, pushing her forward again. Implants lurch
against her ribcage.

"Jesus
Christ!" Brander buzzes in her ear. "Get a grip, Lenie!"

He's
caught her on his way past. Clarke reaches out and grabs the line
that he and Caraco are attached to. It's only as thick as her finger,
and too slippery to hang on to. She looks back and sees that the
other two have looped it around their chests and under their arms,
leaving their hands more or less free. She tries the same trick, drag
arching her back, while Caraco calls out to Nakata.

Nakata
is not eager to let go. They can feel that, even though they can't
see her. Brander angles back and forth, tacking his body like a
rudder; the three of them swing in a grand, barely controlled arc,
knotted into the middle of their tether. "Come on, Alice! Join
the human kite! We'll catch you!"

And
Nakata's coming, she's coming, but she's doing it her own way. She's
climbed sideways against the current, hand over hand, until she found
the place where the line joins the deck. Now she's letting drag push
her back along the filament to them.

Clarke
has finally secured herself in a loop. Speed digs the line into her
flesh; it's already starting to hurt. She doesn't feel much like a
human kite. Bait on a hook is more like it. She twists around to
Brander, points at the line: "What 
is
 this, anyway?"

"VLF
antennae. Unspooled when we scared it. Probably crying for help."

"It
won't get any, will it?"

"Not
on this side of the ocean. It's probably just making a last call so
its owners'll know what happened. Sort of a suicide note."

Caraco,
entangled a bit further back, twists around at that. "Suicide?
You don't suppose these things self-destruct?"

Sudden
concern settles over the human kite. Alice Nakata tumbles into them.

"Maybe
we ought to let it go," Clarke says.

Nakata
nods emphatically. "It is not happy." Her disquiet radiates
through the others like a warning light.

It
takes a few moments to disentangle themselves from the antennae. It
whips past and away, trailing a small float like a traffic cone.
Clarke tumbles, lets the water brake her. Machine roars recede into
grumbles, into mere tremors.

The
rifters hang in empty midwater, silence on all sides.

Caraco
points a sonar pistol straight down, fires. "Jeez. We're almost
thirty meters off the bottom."

"We
lose the squids?" Brander says. "That thing was really
moving."

Caraco
raises her pistol, takes a few more readings. "Got 'em. They're
not all that far off, actually, I — hey."

"What?"

"There's
five of them. Closing fast."

"Ken?"

"Uh
huh."

"Well.
He's saving us a swim, anyway," Brander says.

"Did
anyone—"

They
turn. Alice Nakata starts again: "Did anyone else feel it?"

"Feel
what?" Brander begins, but Clarke is nodding.

"Judy?"
Nakata says.

Caraco
radiates reluctance. "I — there was something, maybe.
Didn't get a good fix on it. I assumed it was one of you guys."

"What,"
Brander says. "The muckraker? I thought—"

A
black cipher rises in their midst. His squid cruises straight up from
underneath like a slow missile. It hovers overhead when he releases
it. A couple of meters below, four other squids bob restlessly at
station-keeping, noses up.

"You
lost these," Lubin buzzes.

"Thanks,"
Brander replies.

Clarke
concentrates, tries to tune Lubin in. She's only going through the
motions, of course. He's dark to them. He's always been dark,
fine-tuning didn't change him a bit. Nobody knows why.

"So
what's going on?" he asks. "Your note said something about
a muckraker."

"It
got away from us," Caraco says.

"It
was not happy," Nakata repeats.

"Yeah?"

"Alice
got some sort of feeling off of it," Caraco says. "Lenie
and me too, sort of."

"Muckrakers
are unmanned," Lubin remarks.

"Not
a man," Nakata says. "Not a person. But—" She
trails off.

"I
felt it," Clarke says. "It was alive."

* * *

Lenie
Clarke lies on her bunk, alone again. Really alone. She can remember
a time, not so long ago, when she reveled in this kind of isolation.
Who would have thought that she'd miss 
feelings
?

Even
if they are someone else's
.

And
yet it's true. Every time Beebe takes her in, some vital part of her
falls away like a half-remembered dream. The airlock clears, her body
reinflates, and her awareness turns flat and muddy. The others just

vanish
. It's strange; she can see them, hear them the way she
always could. But if they don't move and she closes her eyes, she's
got no way of 
knowing
 they're here.

Now
her only company is herself. Just one set of signals to process in
here. Nothing jamming her.

Shit.

Blind,
or naked. That was the choice. It nearly killed her. 
My own damn
fault, of course. I was just 
asking 
for it.

She
was, too. She could have just left everything the way it was, quietly
deleted Acton's file before anyone else found out about it. But
there'd been this debt. Something owed to the ghost of the Thing
Outside, the thing that didn't snarl or blame or lash out, the thing
that, finally, took the Thing Inside away where it couldn't hurt her
any more. Part of Lenie Clarke still hates Acton for that, on some
sick level where conditioned reflex runs the show; but even down
there, she thinks maybe he did it for her. Like it or not, she owed
him.

So
she paid up. She called the others inside and played the file. She
told them what he'd said, that last time, and she didn't ask them to
turn their backs on his offering even though she desperately hoped
they would. If she had asked, perhaps, they might have listened. But
one by one, they split themselves open and made the changes. Mike
Brander, out of curiosity. Judy Caraco, out of skepticism. Alice
Nakata, afraid of being left behind. Ken Lubin, unsuccessfully, for
reasons he kept to himself.

She
clenches her eyelids, remembers rules changing overnight. Careful
appearances suddenly meant nothing; blank eyes and ninja masks were
just cosmetic affectations, useless as armor. 
How are you feeling,
Lenie Clarke? Horny, bored, upset?
 
So easy to tell, though
your eyes are hidden behind those corneal opacities. You could be
terrified. You could be pissing in your 'skin and everyone would
know. 

Why
did you tell them? Why did you tell them? Why did you 
tell 
them?

Outside,
she watched the others change. They moved around her without
speaking, one connecting smoothly with another to lend a hand or a
piece of equipment. When she needed something from one of them, it
was there before she could speak. When they needed something from her
they had to ask aloud, and the choreography would falter. She felt
like the token cripple in a dance troupe. She wondered how much of
her they could see, and was afraid to ask.

Inside,
sometimes, she would try. It was safer there; the thread that
connected the rest of them fell apart in atmosphere, put everyone
back on equal terms. Brander spoke of a heightened awareness of the
presence of others; Caraco compared it to body language. "Just
sort of makes up for the eyecaps," she said, apparently
expecting Clarke to feel reassured at that.

But
it was Alice Nakata who finally remarked, almost offhandedly, that
other people's feelings could be... distracting...

Lenie
Clarke's been tuned for a while now. It's not so bad. No precise
telepathic insights, no sudden betrayals. It's more like the
sensation from a ghost limb, the ancestral memory of a tail you can
almost feel behind you. And Clarke knows now that Nakata was right.
Outside, the feelings of the others trickle into her, masking,
diluting. Sometimes she can even forget she has any of her own.

There's
something else, too, a familiar core in each of them, dark and
writhing and angry. That doesn't surprise her. They don't even talk
about it. Might as well discuss the fact that they all have five
fingers on each hand.

* * *

Brander's
busy at the library; Clarke can hear Nakata in Comm, on the phone.

"According
to this," Brander says, "They've started putting smart gels
in muckrakers."

"Mmm?"

"It's
a pretty old file," he admits. "It'd be nice if the GA
would download a bit more often, infections or no infections. I mean,
we 
are
 single-handedly keeping the western world safe from
brownouts, it wouldn't kill them to—"

"Gels,"
Clarke prompts.

"Right.
Well, they've always needed neural nets in those things, you know,
they wander around some pretty hairy topography — you hear
about those two muckrakers that got caught up in the Aleutian Trench?
— anyway, navigation through complex environments generally
needs a net of some sort. Usually it's gallium-arsenide based, but
even those don't come close to matching a human brain for spatial
stuff. They still just 
crawled
 when it came to figuring
seamounts, that sort of thing. So they've started replacing them with
smart gels."

Clarke
grunts. "Alice said it was moving too fast for a machine."

"Probably
was. And smart gels are made out of real neurons, so I guess we tune
in to them the same way we tune in to each other. At least, judging
by what you guys felt — Alice said it wasn't happy."

"It
wasn't." Clarke frowns. "It wasn't unhappy either,
actually, it wasn't really an emotion at all, it was just —
well, 
surprised
, I guess. Like, like a sense of —
divergence. From what was expected."

"Hell,
I 
did
 feel that," Brander says. "I thought it was

me
."

Nakata
emerges from Comm. "Still no word on Karl's replacement. They
say the new recruits still are not through training. Cutbacks, they
say."

By
now it's a running joke. The GA's new recruits have to be the slowest
learners since the eradication of Down's Syndrome. Almost four months
now and Acton's replacement still hasn't materialized. 

Brander
waves one hand dismissively. "We've been doing okay with five."
He shuts down the library and stretches. "Anyone seen Ken, by
the way?"

"He
is just outside," Nakata says. "Why?"

"I'm
with him next shift; got to set up a time. His rhythm's been a bit
wonky the past couple of days."

"How
far out is he?" Clarke asks suddenly.

Nakata
shrugs. "Maybe ten meters, when I last checked."

He's
in range.
 There are limits to fine-tuning. You can't feel someone
in Beebe from as far as the Throat, for example. But ten meters,
easy.

"He's
usually further out, isn't he?" Clarke speaks softly, as if
afraid of being overheard. "Almost off the scope, most times.
Working on that weird contraption of his." 

They
don't know why they can't tune Lubin in. He says they're all dark to
him too. Once, about a month ago, Brander suggested doing an
exploratory NMR; Lubin said he'd rather not. He sounded pleasant
enough, but there was something about his tone and Brander hasn't
brought the subject up since.

Now
Brander points his eyecaps at Clarke, a half-smile on his face. "I
dunno, Len. Do 
you
 want to call him a liar to his face?"

She
doesn't answer.

"Oh."
Nakata breaks the silence before it can get too awkward. "There
is something else. Until our replacement arrives they are sending
someone down for, they called it routine evaluation. That doctor, the
one who—you know—" 

"Scanlon."
Lenie is careful not to spit out the word.

Nakata
nods.

"What
the hell for?" Brander growls. "It's not enough we're
already shorthanded, we've got to sit still while 
Scanlon
 has
another go at us?"

"It's
not like before, they say. He's just going to observe. While we
work." Nakata shrugs. "They say it is completely routine.
No interviews or sessions or anything."

Caraco
snorts. "There better not be. I'd let them cut out my other lung
before I'd take another session with 
that 
prick."

"'So,
you were repeatedly buggered by a trained Dobermans while your mom
charged admission'," Brander recites in a fair imitation of
Scanlon's voice. "'And how did that make you 
feel
,
exactly?'"

"'Actually
I'm more of a 
mechanic
,'" Caraco chimes in. "Did he
give you that line?"

"He
seemed nice enough to me," Nakata says hesitantly.

"Well,
that's his job: to seem nice." Caraco grimaces. "he's just
no fucking 
good
 at it." She looks over at Clarke. "So
what do you think, Len?"

"I
think he overplayed the empathy card," Clarke says after a
moment.

"No,
I mean how do we handle this?"

Clarke
shrugs, vaguely irritated. "Why ask me?" 

"He
better not get in my way. Dumpy little turd." Brander spares a
blank look at the ceiling. "Now why can't they design a smart
gel to replace 
him
?"

Scream

TRAN/OFFI/210850:2132

This
is my second night in Beebe. I've asked the participants not to alter
their behavior in my presence, since I'm here to observe routine
station operations. I'm pleased to report that my request is being
honored by everyone involved. This is gratifying insofar as it
minimizes "observer effects", but it may present problems
given that the rifters do not keep reliable schedules. This makes it
difficult to plan one's time with them, and in fact there's one
employee — Ken Lubin — whom I haven't seen since I
arrived. Still. I have plenty of time.

The
rifters tend to be withdrawn and uncommunicative — a layperson
might call them 
sullen
 — but this is entirely in keeping
with the profile. The Station itself seems to be well-maintained and
is operating smoothly, despite a certain disregard for standard
protocols.

* * *

When
the lights go out in Beebe Station, you can't hear anything at all.

Yves
Scanlon lies on his bunk, not listening. He does not hear any strange
sounds filtering in through the hull. There is no reedy, spectral
keening from the seabed, no faint sound of howling wind because he
knows that, down here, no wind is possible. Imagination, perhaps. A
trick of the brain stem, an auditory hallucination. He's not the
slightest bit superstitious; he's a scientist. He does not hear the
ghost of Karl Acton moaning on the seabed. 

And
now, concentrating, he's quite certain he hears nothing at all.

It
really doesn't bother him, being stuck in a dead man's quarters.
After all, where else 
is
 there? It's not as though he's going
to move in with one of the vampires. And besides, Acton's been gone
for months now.

Scanlon
remembers the first time he heard the recording. Four lousy words:
"We lost Acton. Sorry." Then she hung up. Cold bitch,
Clarke. Scanlon once thought something might happen between her and
Acton, it was a jigsaw match from the profiles, but you wouldn't know
it from that phone call.

Maybe
it's her,
 he muses. 
Maybe it's not Lubin after all, maybe it's
Clarke.

"We
lost Acton." So much for eulogy. And Fischer before Acton, and
Everitt over at Linke. And Singh before Everitt. And—

And
now Yves Scanlon is here, in their place. Sleeping on their bunk,
breathing their air. Counting the seconds, in darkness and quiet. In
dark—

Jesus
Christ, what 
is—

And
quiet. Everything's quiet. Nothing's moaning out there.

Nothing
at all.

* * *

TRANS/OFFI/220850:0945

We're
all mammals, of course. We therefore have a Circadian rhythm which
calibrates itself to ambient photoperiod. It's been known for some
time that when people are denied photoperiodic cues their rhythms
tend to lengthen, usually stabilizing between twenty-seven and
thirty-six hours. Adherence to a regular twenty-four hour work
schedule is usually sufficient to keep this from happening, so we
didn't expect a problem in the deep stations. As an added measure I
recommended that a normal photoperiod be built into Beebe's lighting
systems; the lights are programmed to dim slightly between twenty-two
hundred and oh seven hundred every day.

The
participants have apparently chosen to ignore these cues. Even during
'daytime' they keep ambient lighting dimmer than my suggested
'nocturnal' levels. (They also prefer to leave their eyecaps in at
all times, for obvious reasons; although I had not predicted this
behavior, it is consistent with the profile.) Work schedules are
somewhat — flexible, but this is to be expected given that
their sleep cycles are always shifting in relation to each other.
Rifters do not wake up in time to perform their duties; they perform
their duties whenever two or more of them happen to be awake. I
suspect that they also work alone sometimes, a safety violation, but
I have yet to confirm this.

For
the moment, these unorthodox behaviors do not appear to be serious.
Necessary work seems to get done on time, even though the station is
currently understaffed. However, I believe the situation is
potentially problematic. Efficiency could probably be improved by
stricter adherence to a twenty-four hour diel cycle. Should the GA
wish to ensure such adherence, I would recommend proteoglycan therapy
for the participants. Hypothalamic rewiring is another possibility;
it is more invasive, but would be virtually impossible to subvert. 

* * *

Vampires.
That's a good metaphor. They avoid the light, and they've taken out
all the mirrors. That could be part of the problem right there.
Scanlon had very sound reasons for recommending mirrors in the first
place.

Most
of Beebe— all of it, except for his cubby— is too dark
for uncapped vision. Maybe the vampires are trying to conserve
energy. A high priority, sitting here next to eleven thousand
megawatts' worth of generating equipment. Still, these people are all
under forty; they probably can't imagine a world without rationed
power.

Bullshit.
There's logic, and there's vampire logic. Don't confuse the two.

For
the past two days, leaving his cubby has been like creeping out into
some dark alleyway. He's finally given in and capped his eyes like
the rest of them. Now Beebe's bright enough, but so pale. Hardly any
color at all. As though the cones have been sucked right out of his
eyes.

Clarke
and Caraco lean against the ready room bulkhead, watching with their
white, white eyes as he checks out his diving armor. No vampire
vivisection for Yves Scanlon, no sirree. Not for this short a tour.
Preshmesh and acrylic all the way.

He
fingers a gauntlet; chain mail, with links the size of pinheads. He
smiles. "Looks okay."

The
vampires just watch and wait.

Come
on, Scanlon, you're the mechanic. They're machines like everyone
else; they just need more of a tune-up. You can handle them.

"Very
nice tech," he remarks, setting the armor back down. "Of
course, it's not much next to the hardware 
you
 folks are
packing. What's it like to be able to turn into a fish at will?"

"Wet,"
Caraco says, and a moment later looks at Clarke. Checking for
approval, maybe.

Clarke
just keeps staring at him. At least, he thinks she's staring. It's so
damn hard to tell. 

Relax.
She's only trying to psyche you out. The usual stupid dominance
games.

But
he knows it's more than that. Deep down, the rifters just don't like
him.

I
know what they are. That's why.

Take
a dozen children, any children. Beat and mix thoroughly until some
lumps remain. Simmer for two to three decades; bring to a slow,
rolling boil. Skim off the full-blown psychotics, the
schizoaffectives, the multiple personalities, and discard. (There
were doubts about Fischer, actually; but then, who 
doesn't

have an imaginary friend at some point?)

Let
cool. Serve with dopamine garnish. 

What
do you get? Something bent, not broken. Something that fits into
cracks too twisted for the rest of us.

Vampires.

"Well,"
Scanlon says into the silence. "Everything checks out. Can't
wait to try it on." Without waiting for a reply— without
exposing himself to the lack of one— he climbs upstairs. At the
edge of his vision, Clarke and Caraco exchange looks. Scanlon glances
back, rigorously casual, but any smiles have disappeared by the time
he scans their faces. 

Go
ahead, ladies. Indulge yourselves while you can.
 The lounge is
empty. Scanlon passes through it and into the corridor. 
You've got
maybe five years before you're obsolete.
 His cubby— Acton's
cubby— is third on the left. 
Five years before all this can
run itself without your help.
 He opens the hatch; brilliant light
spills out, blinding him for a moment while his eyecaps compensate.
Scanlon steps inside, swings the hatch shut. Sags against it.

Shit.
No locks.

After
a while he lies back on his bunk, stares up at a congested ceiling.

Maybe
we should have waited after all. Not let them rush us. If we'd just
taken the time to do it right from the start...

But
they hadn't had the time. Total automation at start-up would have
delayed the whole program longer than civilized appetites were
willing to wait. And the vampires were already there, after all.
They'd be so much use in the short run, and then they'd be sent home,
and they'd be glad to leave this place. Who wouldn't be? 

The
possibility of addiction never even came up.

It
seems insane on the face of it. How could anyone get addicted to a
place like this? What kind of paranoia has seized the GA, that they'd
worry about people refusing to 
leave
? But Yves Scanlon is no
mere layperson, he's not fooled by the merely apparent. He's beyond
anthropomorphism. He's looked into all those undead eyes, up there in
his world, down here in theirs, and he knows: vampires live by
different rules.

Maybe
they 
are 
too happy here. It's one of two questions Yves
Scanlon has set out to answer. Hopefully they won't figure that out
while he's still down here. They dislike him enough as it is.

It's
not their fault, of course. It's just the way they're programmed.
They can't help hating him, any more than he can help the reverse.

* * *

Preshmesh
is better than surgery. That's about the most he can say for it.

The
pressure jams all those tiny interlocking plates together, and they
don't seem to stop clenching until they're a micron away from
grinding his body to pulp. There's a stiffness in the joints. It's
perfectly safe, of course. Perfectly. And Scanlon can breathe
unpressurised air when he goes outside, and nobody's had to carve out
half his chest in the meantime.

He's
been out now for about fifteen minutes. Beebe's just a few meters
away. Clarke and Brander escort him on his maiden voyage, keeping
their distance. Scanlon kicks, rises clumsily from the bottom; the
mesh lets him swim like a man with splinted limbs. Vampires skim the
edge of his vision like effortless shadows.

His
helmet seems like the center of the universe. Wherever he looks, an
infinite weight of black ocean presses in against the acrylic. A tiny
flaw down by the neck seal catches his eye; he stares, horrified, as
a hairline crack grows across his field of vision.

"
Help!
Get me in!
" He kicks furiously towards Beebe.

Nobody
answers.

"
My
helmet! My hel—
" The crack isn't just growing now:
it's 
squirming
, twitching laterally across the corner of the
helmet bubble like— like—

Yellow
featureless eyes staring in from the ocean. A black hand, silhouetted
in Beebe's halo, reaching for his face—

"
Ahhh—"

A
thumb grinds down on the crack in Scanlon's helmet. The crack smears,

bursts
; fine gory filaments smudge against the acrylic. The
back half of the hairline peels off and writhes loose into the water,
coiling, uncoiling—

Dying.

Scanlon pants with relief. 
A worm. Some stupid fucking roundworm
on my faceplate and I thought I was going to die, I thought—

Oh
Christ. I've made a complete fool of myself.

He
looks around. Brander, hanging off his right shoulder, points to the
gory remnants sticking to the helmet. "If it ever really cracked
you wouldn't have time to complain. You'd look just like that."

Scanlon
clears his throat. "Thanks. Sorry, I— well, you know I'm
new here. Thanks."

"By
the way."

Clarke's
voice. Or what's left of it, after the machinery does its job.
Scanlon flails around until she comes into view overhead.

"How
long are you going to be checking up on us?" she asks

Neutral
question. Perfectly reasonable.

In
fact, you've got to wonder why nobody asked it before...

"A
week at least." His heart is slowing down again. "Maybe
two. As long as it takes to make sure things are running smoothly."

She's
silent for a second. Then: "You're lying." It doesn't sound
like an accusation, somehow; just a simple observation. Maybe it's
the vocoder.

"Why
do you say that?"

She
doesn't answer. Something else does; not quite a moan, not quite a
voice. Not quite faint enough to ignore.

Scanlon
feels the abyss trickling down his back. "Did you hear that?"

Clarke
slips down past him to the seabed, rotating to keep him in view.
"Hear? What?"

"It
was— " Scanlon listens. A faint tectonic rumble. That's
all. "Nothing."

She
pushes off the bottom at an angle, slides up through the water to
Brander. "We're on shift," she buzzes at Scanlon. "You
know how the 'lock works."

The
vampires vanish into the night.

Beebe
shines invitingly. Alone and suddenly nervous, Scanlon retreats to
the airlock.

But
I wasn't lying. I 
wasn't. He hasn't had to, yet. Nobody's asked
the right questions.

Still.
It seems odd that he has to remind himself.

* * *

TRANS/OFFI/230850:0830

I'm
about to embark on my first extended dive. Apparently, the
participants have been asked to catch a fish for one of the Pharm
consortiums. Washington/Rand, I believe. I find this a bit puzzling—
usually Pharms are only interested in bacteria, and they use their
own people for collecting— but it provides the participants
with a change from the usual routine, and it provides me an
opportunity to watch them in action. I expect to learn a great deal.

* * *

Brander
is slouched at the library when Scanlon comes through the lounge. His
fingers rest unmoving on the keypad. Eyephones hang unused in their
hooks. Brander's empty eyes point at the flatscreen. The screen is
dark.

Scanlon
hesitates. "I'm heading out now. With Clarke and Caraco."

Brander's
shoulders rise and fall, almost indiscernibly. A sigh, perhaps. A
shrug.

"The
others are at the Throat. You'll be the only— I mean, will you
be running tender from Comm?"

"You
told us not to change the routine," Brander says, not looking
up.

"That's
true, Michael. But—"

Brander
stands. "So make up your mind." He disappears down the
corridor. Scanlon watches him go. 
Naturally this has to go into my
report. Not that you care.

You
might, though. Soon enough.

Scanlon
drops into the wet room and finds it empty. He struggles into his
armor single-handed, taking an extra few moments to ensure that the
helmet bubble is spotless. He catches up with Clarke and Caraco just
outside; Clarke is checking out a quartet of squids hovering over the
seabed. One of them is tethered to a specimen canister resting on the
bottom, a pressure-proof coffin over two meters long. Caraco sets it
for neutral buoyancy; it rises a few centimeters.

They
set off without a word. The squids tow them into the abyss; the women
in the lead, Scanlon and the canister following behind. Scanlon looks
back over his shoulder. Beebe's comforting lights wash down from
yellow to gray, then disappear entirely. Feeling a sudden need for
reassurance, he trips through the channels on his acoustic modem.
There: the homing beacon. You're never really lost down here as long
as you can hear that.

Clarke
and Caraco are running dark. Not even their squids are shining.

Don't
say anything. You don't want them to change their routine, remember?

Not
that they would anyway.

Occasional
dim lights flash briefly at the corner of his eye, but they always
vanish when he looks at them. After an endless few minutes a bright
smear fades into view directly ahead, resolves into a collection of
copper beacons and dark angular skyscrapers. The vampires avoid the
light, head around it at an angle. Scanlon and cargo follow
helplessly.

They
set up just off the Throat, at the borderline between light and dark.
Caraco unlatches the canister as Clarke rises into the column above
them; she's got something in her right hand, but Scanlon can't see
what it is. She holds it up as though displaying it to an invisible
crowd.

It
gibbers.

It
sounds like a very loud mosquito at first. Then it dopplers down to a
low growl, slides back up into erratic high frequency.

And
now, finally, Lenie Clarke turns her headlight on.

She
hangs up there like some crucified ascendant, her hand whining at the
abyss, the light from her head sweeping the water like, like—

—
a
dinner bell
, Scanlon realizes as something charges out of the
darkness at her, almost as big as she is and Jesus the 
teeth

on it—

It
swallows her leg up to the crotch. Lenie Clarke takes it all in
stride. She jabs down with a billy that's magically appeared in her
left hand. The creature bloats and bursts in a couple of places;
clumps of bubbles erupt like silvery mushrooms through flesh, shudder
off into the sky. The creature thrashes, its gullet a monstrous
scabbard around Clarke's leg. The vampire reaches down and dismembers
it with her bare hands.

Caraco,
still fiddling with the canister, looks up. "Hey, Len. They
wanted it 
intact
."

"Wrong
kind," Clarke buzzes. The water around her is full of torn flesh
and flashing scavengers. Clarke ignores them, turning slowly,
scanning the abyss.

Caraco:
"Behind you; four o'clock."

"Got
it," Clarke says, spinning to a new bearing. 

Nothing
happens. The shredded carcass, still twitching, drifts toward the
bottom, scavengers sparkling on all sides. Clarke's hand-held
voicebox gurgles and whines.

How—

Scanlon moves his tongue in his mouth, ready to ask aloud.

"Not
now," Caraco buzzes at him, before he can.

There's
nothing there. What are they keying on?

It
comes in fast, unswerving, from the precise direction Lenie Clarke is
facing. "That'll do," she says.

A
muffled explosion to Scanlon's left. A thin contrail of bubbles
streaks from Caraco to monster, connecting the two in an instant. The
thing jerks at a sudden impact. Clarke slips to one side as it
thrashes past, Caraco's dart embedded in its flank.

Clarke's
headlight goes out, her voicebox falls silent. Caraco stows the dart
gun and swims up to join her. The two women maneuver their quarry
down towards the canister. It snaps at them, weak and spastic. They
push it down into the coffin, seal the top.

"Like
shooting fish for a barrel," Caraco buzzes.

"How
did you know it was coming?" Scanlon asks.

"They
always come," Caraco says. "The sound fools them. And the
light."

"I
mean, how did you know which direction? In advance?"

A
moment's silence.

"You
just get a feel for it after a while," Clarke says finally.

"That,"
Caraco adds, "and this." She holds up a sonar pistol, tucks
it back under her belt.

The
convoy reforms. There's a prescribed drop-off point for monsters, a
hundred meters away from the Throat. (The GA has never been keen on
letting outsiders wander too far into its home turf.) Once again the
vampires leave light for darkness, Scanlon in tow. They travel
through a world utterly without form, save for the scrolling circle
of mud in his headlight. Suddenly Clarke turns to Caraco.

"I'll
go," she buzzes, and peels away into the void.

Scanlon
throttles his squid, edges up beside Caraco.

"Where's
she off to?"

"Here
we are," Caraco says. They coast to a halt. Caraco fins back to
the droned squid and touches a control; buckles disengage, straps
retract. The canister floats free. Caraco cranks down the buoyancy
and it settles down on a clump of tubeworms.

"Len—
uh, Clarke," Scanlon prods.

"They
need an extra hand back at the Throat. She went to help out."

Scanlon
checks his modem channel. Of course it's the right one, if it wasn't
he wouldn't be able to hear Caraco. Which means that Clarke and the
vampires at the Throat must have been using a different frequency.
Another safety violation
.

But
he's not a fool, he knows the story. They've only switched channels
because 
he's
 here. They're just trying to keep him out of the
loop.

Par
for the course. First the fucking GA, now the hired help—

A
sound, from behind. A faint electrical whine. The sound of a squid
starting up.

Scanlon
turns around. "Caraco?"

His
headlamp sweeps across canister, squid, seabed, water.

"Caraco?
You there?"

Canister.
Squid. Mud.

"Hello?"

Empty
water.

"Hey!
Caraco! What the 
hell—
"

A
faint thumping, very close by.

He
tries to look everywhere at once. One leg presses against the coffin.

The
coffin is rocking.

He
lays his helmet against its surface. Yes. Something inside, muffled,
wet. Thumping. Trying to get out. 

It
can't. No way. It's just dying in there, that's all.

He
pushes away, drifts up into the water column. He feels very exposed.
A few stiff-legged kicks take him back to the bottom. Slightly
better.

"Caraco?
Come 
on
, Judy—"

Oh
Jesus. She left me here. She just fucking 
left 
me out here.

He
hears something moaning, very close by.

Inside
his helmet, in fact.

* * *

TRANS/OFFI/230850:2026

I
accompanied Judy Caraco and Lenie Clarke outside today, and witnessed
several events that concern me. Both participants swam through unlit
areas without headlamps and spent significant periods of time
isolated from dive buddies; at one point, Caraco simply left me on
the seabed without warning. This is potentially life-threatening
behavior, although of course I was able to find my way back to Beebe
using the homing beacon.

I
have yet to receive an explanation for all this. The v— the
other personnel are presently gone from the station. I can find two
or three of them on sonar; I suppose the rest are just hidden in the
bottom clutter. Once again, this is extremely unsafe behavior.

Such
recklessness appears to be typical here. It implies a relative
indifference to personal welfare, an attitude entirely consistent
with the profile I developed at the onset of the rifter program. (The
only alternative is that they simply do not appreciate the dangers
involved in this environment, which is unlikely.)

It
is also consistent with a generalized post-traumatic addiction to
hostile environments. This doesn't constitute evidence 
per sé
,
of course, but I have noted one or two other things which, taken
together, may be cause for concern. Michael Brander, for example, has
a history which ranges from caffeine and sympathomimetic abuse to
limbic hot-wiring. He's known to have brought a substantial supply of
phencyclidine derms with him to Beebe; I've just located it in his
cubby and I was surprised to find that it has barely been touched.
Phencyclidine is not, physiologically speaking, addictive—
exogenous-drug addicts are screened out of the program— but the
fact remains that Brander had a habit when he came down here, a habit
which he has since abandoned. I have to wonder what he's replaced it
with.

* * *

The
wet room.

"
There

you are. Where did you go?"

"Had
to recover this cartridge. Bad sulfide head."

"You
could have told me. I was supposed to come along on your rounds
anyway, remember? You just left me out there."

"You
got back."

"
That's
—
that's not the point, Judy. You don't leave someone alone at the
bottom of the ocean without a word. What if something had happened to
me?"

"We
go out alone all the time. It's part of the job. Watch that, it's
slippery."

"Safety
procedures are also part of the job. Even for you. And especially for
me, Judy, I'm a complete fish out of water here, heh heh. You can't
expect me to know my way around."

"...."

"Excuse
me?"

"We're
short-handed, remember? We can't always afford to buddy up. And
you're a big strong man— well, you're a man, anyway. I didn't
think you needed baby-sit—"

"
Shit!
My hand!
"

"I
told you to be careful."

"
Ow.

How much does the fucking thing weigh?"

"About
ten kilos, without all the mud. I guess I should've rinsed it off."

"I
guess so. I think one of the heads gouged me on the way down. Shit,
I'm bleeding."

"Sorry
about that."

"Yeah.
Well, look, Caraco. I'm sorry if baby-sitting rubs you the wrong way,
but a little more baby-sitting and Acton and Fischer might still be
alive, you know? A little more baby-sitting and— did you hear
that?"

"What?"

"From
outside. That— moaning, sort of—"

...

"Come
on, C— Judy. You must've heard it!"

"Maybe
the hull shifted."

"No.
I 
heard
 something. And this isn't the first time, either."

"I
didn't hear anything."

"You
d— where are you going? You just came 
in
! Judy..."

Clank.
Hiss.

"...don't
go..."

* * *

TRANS/OFFI/250850:2120

I've
asked each of the participants to submit to a routine sweep under the
medical scanner— or rather, I've asked most of them directly,
and asked them to pass the word on to Ken Lubin, whom I've seen a few
times now but haven't actually spoken to yet. (I have twice attempted
to engage Mr. Lubin in conversation, without success.) The
participants know, of course, that medical scans do not require
physical contact on my part, and they're well able to run them at
their own convenience without me even being present. Still, although
no one has explicitly refused my request, there has been a notable
lack of enthusiasm in terms of actual compliance. It's fairly obvious
(and entirely consistent with my profile) that they consider it
something of an intrusion, and will avoid it if possible. To date
I've managed to get rundowns on only Alice Nakata and Judy Caraco.
I've appended their binaries to this entry; both show elevated
production of dopamine and norepinephrine, but I can't establish
whether this began before or after their present tour of duty. GABA
and other inhibitor levels were slightly up, too, left over from
their previous dive (less than an hour before the scan). 

The
others, so far, haven't been able to "find the time" for an
exam. In the meantime I've resorted to going over stored scanner
records of old injuries. Not surprisingly, physical injuries are
common down here, although they've become much less frequent as of
late. There are no cases of head trauma on record, however— at
least, nothing that would warrant an NMR. This effectively limits my
brain chemistry data to what the participants are willing to provide
on request— not much, so far. If this doesn't change, the bulk
of my analysis will have to be based on behavioral observations. As
medieval as that sounds.

* * *

Who
could it be? Who?

When
Yves Scanlon first sank into the abyss he had two questions on his
mind. He's chasing the second one now, lying in his cubby, shielded
from Beebe by a pair of eyephones and the personal database in his
shirt pocket. For now, he's gone mercifully blind to plumbing and
condensation. 

He's
not deaf, though. Unfortunately. Every now and then he hears
footsteps, or low voices, or— just maybe— the distant cry
of something unimaginable in pain; but then he speaks a little louder
into the pickup, drowns unwelcome sounds with barked commands to
scroll up, link files, search for keywords. Personnel records dance
across the inside of his eyes, and he can almost forget where he is.

His
interest in this particular question has not been sanctioned by his
employers. 
They know about it, though, yes sirree they know. They
just don't think 
I 
do.

Rowan
and her cronies are such assholes. They've been lying to him from the
start. Scanlon doesn't know why. He'd have been okay with it, if
they'd just leveled with him. But they kept it under wraps. As though
he wouldn't be able to figure it out for himself.

It's
bloody obvious. There's more than one way to make a vampire. Usually
you take someone who's fucked in the head, and you train them. But
why couldn't you take someone who's already trained, and then fuck
them in the head? It might even be cheaper.

You
can learn a lot from a witch hunt. All that repressed-memory hysteria
back in the nineties, for example: so many people suddenly
remembering abuse, or alien abduction, or dear old grandma stirring a
cauldron of stewed babies. It didn't take much, no one had to go in
and physically rewire the synapses; the brain's gullible enough to
rewire 
itself
 if you coax it. Most of those poor bozos didn't
even know they were doing it. These days it only takes a few weeks
worth of hypnotherapy. The right suggestions, delivered just the
right way, can inspire memories to build themselves out of bits and
pieces. Sort of a neurological cascade effect. And once you 
think

you've been abused, well, why wouldn't your psyche shift to match?

It's
a good idea. Someone else thought so too, at least that's what
Scanlon heard from Mezzich a couple of weeks ago. Nothing official,
of course, but there may already be a few prototypes in the system.
Someone right here in Beebe, maybe, a walking testament to Induced
False Memory Syndrome. Maybe Lubin. Maybe Clarke. Could be anyone,
really.

They
should have told me.

They
told him, all right. They told him, when he first started, that he
was coming in on the ground floor. 
You'll have input on pretty
much everything
, was what Rowan had promised. 
The design work,
the follow-ups
. They even offered him automatic coauthorship on
all unclassified publications. Yves Scanlon was supposed to be a
fucking 
equal
. And then they shut him off in a little room,
mumbling to recruits while 
they
 made all the decisions up on
the thirty-fifth fucking floor.

Standard
corporate mentality. Knowledge was power. Corpses never told anybody

anything.

I
was an idiot to believe them as long as I did. Sending up my
recommendations, waiting for them to honor a promise or two. And this
is the bone they throw me. Stick me at the bottom of the fucking
ocean with these post-traumatic head cases because no one else wants
to get shit on their hands.

I
mean, fuck. I'm so far out of the loop I have to coax rumors from a
has-been hack like Mezzich?

Still.
He wonders who it might be. Brander or Nakata, maybe. Her record
shows a background in geothermal engineering and high-pressure tech,
and he's got a Masters in systems ecology with a minor in genomics.
Too much education for your average vampire. Assuming there 
is

such a thing.

Wait
a second. Why should I trust these files?
 After all, if Rowan's
keeping this thing under wraps she might not be stupid enough to
leave clues lying around in the GA personnel records. 

Scanlon
ponders the question. Suppose the files have been modified. Maybe he
should check out the 
least
 likely candidates. He orders an
ascending sort by educational background.

Lenie
Clarke. Premed dropout, basic virtual-tech ed. The GA hired her away
from the Hongcouver Aquarium. PR department.

Hmm.
Someone with Lenie Clarke's social skills, in public relations? Not
likely. I wonder if—

Jesus.
There it is again.

Yves
Scanlon strips the phones from his eyes and stares at the ceiling.
The sound seeps in through the hull, barely audible.

I'm
almost getting used to it, actually.

It
sighs through the bulkhead, recedes, dies. Scanlon waits. He realizes
he's holding his breath.

There.
Something very far away. Something very—

Lonely.
It sounds so lonely.

He
knows how it feels.

* * *

The
lounge is empty, but something casts a faint shadow through the
Communications hatchway. A soft voice from inside: Clarke, it sounds
like. Scanlon evesdrops for a few seconds. She's reciting supply
consumption rates, listing the latest bits of equipment to break
down. A routine call up to the GA, from the sound of it. She hangs up
just before he steps into view. 

She's
sitting slumped in her chair, a cup of coffee within easy reach. 

They eye each other
for a moment, without speaking.

"Anyone
else around?" Scanlon wonders.

She
shakes her head.

"I
thought I heard something, a few minutes ago."

She
turns back to face the console. A couple of icons flash on the main
display.

"What
are you doing?"

She
makes a vague gesture to the console. "Running tender. Thought
you'd like that, for a change."

"Oh,
but I said—"

"Not
to change the routine," Clarke cuts in. She seems tired. "Do
you always expect everyone to do everything you say?" 

"Is
that what you think I meant?"

She
snorts softly, still not looking back.

"Look,"
Scanlon says, "Are you sure you didn't hear something, like—
like—" 
like a ghost, Clarke? A sound like poor dead
Acton might make, watching his own remains rotting out there on the
rift?

"Don't
worry about it," she says.

Aha.

"So you 
did
 hear something." 
She knows what it
is, too. They all do.

"What
I hear," she says, "is my own concern."

Take
a hint, Scanlon.
 But there's nowhere else to go, except back to
his cubby. And the prospect of being alone, right now— somehow,
even the company of a vampire seems preferable.

She
turns around to face him again. "Something else?"

"Not
really. Just can't seem to sleep." Scanlon dons a disarming
smile. "Just not used to the pressure, I guess." 
That's
right. Put her at ease. Acknowledge her superiority.

She
just stares at him

"I
don't know how you take it, month after month," he adds.

"Yes
you do. You're a psychiatrist. You 
chose
 us."

"Actually,
I'm more of a mechanic." 

"Of
course," she says, expressionless. "It's your job to keep
things broken."

Scanlon
looks away.

She
stands up and takes a step towards the hatchway, her tending duties
apparently forgotten. Scanlon stands aside. She brushes past, somehow
avoiding physical contact in the cramped space.

"Look,"
he blurts out, "how about a quick review of the tending
procedure? I'm not all that familiar with this equipment." 

It's
too obvious. He knows she sees through it before the words are even
out of his mouth. But it's also a perfectly reasonable request from
someone in his role. Routine evaluation, after all.

She
watches him for a moment, her head cocked a bit to one side. Her
face, expressionless as usual, somehow conveys the impression of a
slight smile. Finally she sits down again.

She
taps on a menu. "This is the Throat." A cluster of luminous
rectangles nested in a background of contour lines. "Thermal
readout." The image erupts into psychedelic false color, red and
yellow hot spots pulsing at irregular intervals along the main
fissure. "You don't usually bother with thermal when you're
tending," Clarke explains. "When you're out there you find
that stuff out sooner first-hand anyway." The psychedelia fades
back to green and gray.

And
what happens if someone gets taken by surprise out there and you
don't have the readings in here to know they're in trouble?

Scanlon doesn't ask aloud. Just another cut corner.

Clarke
pans, finds a pair of alphanumeric icons. "Alice and Ken."
Another red hot-spot slides into view in the upper left corner of the
display.

No,
wait a minute; she turned thermal 
off
...

"Hey,"
Scanlon says, "that's a 
deadman switch—
"

No
audio alarm. Why isn't there an alarm—
 His eyes dart across
the half-familiar console. 
Where is it, where—shit—

The
alarm's been disabled.

"
Look!
"
Scanlon points at the display. "Can't you—"

Clarke
looks up at him, almost lazily. She doesn't seem to understand.

He
jabs his thumb down. "Somebody just 
died
 out there!"

She
looks at the screen, slowly shakes her head. "No—"

"
You
stupid bitch, you cut off the alarm!
" 

He
hits a control icon. The station starts howling. Scanlon jumps back,
startled, bumps the bulkhead. Clarke watches him, frowning slightly.

"
What's
wrong with you?
" He reaches out and grabs her by the
shoulders. "
Do something!
 Call Lubin, call—"
The alarm is deafening. He shakes her, hard, pulls her up out of the
chair— 

And
remembers, too late: 
you don't touch Lenie Clarke.

Something
happens in her face. It almost 
crumples
, right there in front
of him. Lenie Clarke the ice queen is suddenly nowhere to be seen. In
her place there's only a beaten, blind little kid, body shaking,
mouth moving in the same pattern over and over, he can't hear over
the alarm but her lips shape the words, 
I'm sorry I'm sorry

I'm sorry—

All
in the few scant seconds before she crystallizes.

She
seems to harden against the sound, against Scanlon's assault. Her
face goes completely blank. She rises out of the chair, centimeters
taller than she should be. One hand comes up, grabs Yves Scanlon by
the throat. Pushes.

He
staggers backwards into the lounge, flailing. The table appears to
one side; he reaches out, steadies himself. 

Suddenly,
Beebe falls silent again.

Scanlon
takes a deep breath. Another vampire has appeared in his peripheral
vision, standing impassively at the mouth of the corridor; he ignores
it. Directly ahead, Lenie Clarke is sitting down again in
Communications, her back turned. Scanlon steps forward.

"It's
Karl," she says before he can speak.

It
takes a moment to register: 
Acton
.

"But—
that was months ago," Scanlon says. "You 
lost
 him."

"We
lost him." She breathes, slowly. "He went down a smoker. It
erupted."

"I'm
sorry," Scanlon says. "I— didn't know."

"Yeah."
Her voice is tight with controlled indifference. "He's too far
down to— we can't get him back. Too dangerous." She turns
to face him, impossibly calm. "Deadman switch still works,
though. It'll keep screaming until the battery runs down." She
shrugs. "So we keep the alarm off."

"I
don't blame you," Scanlon says softly.

"Imagine,"
Clarke tells him, "how much your approval comforts me." 

He
turns to leave.

"Wait,"
she says. "I can zoom in for you. I can show you exactly where
he died, maximum res."

"That's
not necessary."

She
stabs controls. "No problem. Naturally you're interested. What
kind of mechanic wouldn't want to know the performance specs on his
own creation?" She reshapes the display like a sculptor, hones
it down and down until there's nothing left but a tangle of faint
green lines and a red pulsing dot.

"He
got wedged into an ancillary crevice," she says. "Looks
like a tight fit even now, when all the flesh has been boiled away.
Don't know how he managed to get down there when he was all in one
piece." There's no stress in her voice at all. She could be
talking about a friend's vacation.

Scanlon
can feel her eyes on him; he keeps his on the screen.

"Fischer,"
he says. "What happened to him?"

From
the corner of his eye: she starts to tense, turns it into a shrug.
"Who knows? Maybe Archie got him."

"Archie?"

"Archie
Toothis." Scanlon doesn't recognize the name; it's not in any of
his files, as far as he knows. He considers, decides not to push it.

"Did

Fischer's
 deadman go off, at least?"

"He
didn't have one." She shrugs. "The abyss can kill you any
number of ways, Scanlon. It doesn't always leave traces."

"I'm—
I'm sorry if I upset you, Lenie."

One
corner of her mouth barely twitches.

And
he 
is
 sorry. Even though it's not his fault. 
I didn't make
you what you are
, he wants to say. 
I didn't smash you into
junk, that was someone else. I just came along afterwards and found a
use for you. I gave you a purpose, more of a purpose than you ever
had back 
there
.

Is
that really so bad? 

He
doesn't dare ask aloud, so he turns to leave. And when Lenie Clarke
lays one finger, very briefly, on the screen where Acton's icon
flashes, he pretends not to notice.

* * *

TRANS/OFFI/260850:1352

I
recently had an interesting conversation with Lenie Clarke. Although
she didn't admit so openly— she is very well defended, and
quite expert at hiding her feelings from laypeople— I believe
that she and Karl Acton were sexually involved. This is a heartening
discovery, insofar as my original profiles strongly suggested that
such a relationship would develop. (Clarke has a history of
relationships with Intermittent Explosives.) This adds a measure of
empirical confidence to other, related predictions regarding rifter
behavior.

I
have also learned that Karl Acton, rather than simply disappearing,
was actually killed by an erupting smoker. I don't know what he was
doing down there— I'll continue to investigate— but the
behavior itself seems foolish at best and quite possibly suicidal.
Suicide is not consistent either with Karl Acton's DSM or ECM
profiles, which must have been accurate when first derived. Suicide,
therefore, would imply a degree of basic personality change. This is
consistent with the trauma-addiction scenario. However, some sort of
physical brain injury can not be ruled out. My search of the medical
logs didn't turn up any head injuries, but was limited to living
participants. Perhaps Acton was... different...

Oh.
I found out who Archie Toothis is. Not in the personnel files at all.
The library. 
Architeuthis
: giant squid.

I
think she was kidding.

Bulrushes

At
times like this it seems as if the world has always been black.

It
hasn't, of course. Joel Kita caught a hint of ambient blue out the
dorsal port just ten minutes ago. Right before they dropped through
the deep scattering layer; pretty thin stuff compared to the old
days, he's been told, but still impressive. Glowing siphonophores and
flashlight fish and all. Still beautiful.

That's
a thousand meters above them now. Right here there's nothing but the
thin vertical slash of Beebe's transponder line. Joel has put the
'scaphe into a lazy spin during the drop, forward floods sweeping the
water in a descending corkscrew. The transponder line swings past the
main viewport every thirty seconds or so, keeping time, a bright
vertical line against the dark.

Other
than that, blackness.

A
tiny monster bumps the port. Needle teeth so long the mouth can't
close, an eel-like body studded with glowing photophores—
fifteen, twenty centimeters long, tops. It's not even big enough to
make a sound when it hits and then it's gone, spinning away above
them.

"Viperfish,"
Jarvis says.

Joel
glances around at his passenger, hunched up beside him to take
advantage of what might laughingly be called "the view".
Jarvis is some sort of cellular physiologist out of Rand/Washington
U., here to collect a mysterious package in a plain brown wrapper.

"See
many of those?" he asks now.

Joel
shakes his head. "Not this far down. Kind of unusual."

"Yeah,
well, this whole area is unusual. That's why I'm here."

Joel
checks tactical, nudges a trim tab.

"Now
viperfish, they're not supposed to get any bigger than the one you
just saw," Jarvis remarks. "But there was a guy, oh, back
in the 1930s— Beebe his name was, the same guy they named—
anyway, he swore he saw one that was over two meters long."

Joel
grunts. "Didn't know people came down here back then."

"Yeah,
well, they were just starting out. And everyone had always thought
deepwater fish were these puny little midgets, because that's all
they ever brought up in their trawls. But then Beebe sees this big
ripping viperfish, and people start thinking hey, maybe we only
caught little ones because all the big ones could outswim the trawls.
Maybe the deep sea really 
is
 teeming with giant monsters."

"It's
not," Joel says. "At least, not that I've seen."

"Yeah,
well, that's what most people think. Every now and then you get
pieces of something weird washing up, though. And of course there's
Megamouth. And your garden-variety giant squid."

"They
never get down this far. I bet none of your other giants do either.
Not enough food."

"Except
for the vents," Jarvis says.

"Except
for the vents."

"Actually,"
Jarvis amends, "except for 
this
 vent."

The
transponder line swings past, a silent metronome. 

"Yeah,"
says Joel after a moment. "Why is that?"

"Well,
we're not sure. We're working on it, though. That's what I'm doing
here. Gonna bag one of those scaly mothers."

"You're
kidding. We going to butt it to death with the hull?"

"Actually,
it's already been bagged. The rifters got it for us a couple of days
ago. All we do is pick it up."

"I
could do that solo. Why'd you come along?"

"Got
to check to make sure they did it right. Don't want the canister
blowing up on the surface."

"And
that extra tank you strapped onto my 'scaphe? The one with the
biohazard stickers all over it?"

"Oh,"
Jarvis says. "That's just to sterilize the sample."

"Uh
huh." Joel lets his eyes run over the panels. "You must
pull a lot of weight back on shore."

"Oh?
Why's that?"

"I
used to make the Channer run a lot. Pharmaceutical dives, supply
trips to Beebe, ecotourism. A while back I shuttled some corpse type
out to Beebe; he said he was staying for a month or so. The GA calls
me three days later and tells me to go pick him up. I show up for the
run and they tell me it's cancelled. No explanation."

"Pretty
strange," Jarvis remarks.

"You're the
first run I've had to Channer in six weeks. You're the first run

anyone
's had, from what I can tell. So, you pull some weight."

"Not
really." Jarvis shrugs in the half-light. "I'm just a
research associate. I go where they tell me, just like you. Today
they told me to go and pick up an order of fish to go." 

Joel
looks at him.

"You
were asking why they got so big," Jarvis says, deking to the
right. "We figure it's some kind of endosymbiotic infection."

"No
shit."

"Say
it's easier for some microbe to live inside a fish than out in the
ocean — less osmotic stress — so once inside it's pumping
out more ATP than it needs."

"ATP,"
Joel says.

"High-energy
phosphate compound. Cellular battery. Anyway, it spits out this
surplus ATP, and the host fish can use it as extra growth energy. So
maybe Channer Vent's got some sort of unique bug that infects teleost
fishes and gives 'em a growth spurt."

"Pretty
weird."

"Actually,
happens all the time. Every one of your own cells is a colony, for
that matter. You know, nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplasts if you're
a plant—"

"I'm
not." 
More than I can say for some folks...

"—those
all used to be free-living microbes in their own right. A few billion
years ago something ate them, but it couldn't digest them properly so
they all just kept living inside the cytoplasm. Eventually they
struck up a deal with the host cell, took over housecleaning tasks
and suchlike in lieu of rent. Voila: your modern eukaryotic cell."

"So what
happens if this Channer bug gets into a person? We all grow three
meters high?"

A
polite laugh. "Nope. People stop growing when they reach
adulthood. So do most vertebrates, actually. Fish, on the other hand,
keep growing their whole lives. And 
deepwater
 fish—those
don't do anything 
except
 grow, if you know what I mean."

Joel
raises his eyebrows.

Jarvis holds up his
hands. "I know, I know. Your baby finger is bigger than your
average deepsea fish. But that just means they're short of fuel; when
they 
do 
gas up, believe me, they use it for growth. Why waste
calories just swimming around when you can't see anything anyway? In
dark environments it makes more sense for predators to sit-and-wait.
Whereas if you grow big enough, maybe you'll get too big for 
other

predators, you see?"

"Mmm."

"Of
course, we're basing the whole theory on a couple of samples that got
dragged up without any protection against temperature or pressure
changes." Jarvis snorts. "Might as well have sent them in a
paper bag. But this time we're doing it right— hey, is that

light
 I see down there?"

There's
a vague yellow glow smudging the darkness directly below. Joel calls
up a topographic display: Beebe. The geothermal array over at the
rift proper lays out a sequence of hard green echoes bearing 340°.
And just to the left of that, about a hundred meters off the
east-most generator, something squirts a unique acoustic signature at
four-second intervals.

Joel
taps commands to the dive planes. The 'scaphe pulls out of its spiral
and coasts off to the northeast. Beebe Station, never more than a
bright stain, fades to stern.

The
ocean floor resolves suddenly in the 'scaphe's headlights; bone-gray
ooze slides past, occasional outcroppings, great squashed
marshmallows of lava and pumice. In the cockpit a flashing point of
light slo-mo's towards the center of the topographic display.

Something
charges them from overhead; the dull wet sound of its impact
reverberates briefly through the hull. Joel looks up through the
dorsal port but sees nothing. Several more impacts, staggered. The
'scaphe whirs implacably onward.

"There."

It
looks almost like a lifeboat canister, three meters long. Readouts
twinkle from a panel on one rounded end. It's resting on a carpet of
giant tubeworms, their feathery crowns extended in full
filter-feeding mode. Joel thinks of the baby Moses, nestled in a
clump of mutant bulrushes. 

"Wait
a second," Jarvis says. "Kill the lights first."

"What
for?"

"You
don't need them, do you?"

"Well,
no. I can use instruments if I have to. But why—"

"Just
do it, okay?" Jarvis, the chatterbox, is suddenly all business.

Darkness
floods the cockpit, retreats a bit before the glow of the readouts.
Joel grabs a pair of eyephones off a hook to his left. The sea floor
reappears before him courtesy of the ventral photoamps, faded to blue
and black.

He
coaxes the 'scaphe into position directly above the canister, listens
to the clank and creak of grapples flexing beneath the deck; metal
claws the color of slate extend across his field of view.

"Spray
it before you pick it up," Jarvis says.

Joel
reaches out and taps the control codes without looking. The 'phones
show him a nozzle extending from Jarvis's tank, taking aim like a
skinny cobra.

"Do
it."

The
nozzle ejaculates gray-blue murk, sprays back and forth along the
length of the canister, sweeping the benthos on either side. The
tubeworms yank back into their tunnels and shut the doors; the whole
featherduster forest vanishes in an instant, leaving a crowd of
sealed leathery tubes.

The
nozzle spews its venom.

One
of the tubes opens, almost hesitantly. Something dark and stringy
drifts out, twitching. The gray plume sweeps across it; it sags,
lifeless, across the sill of its burrow. Other tubes are opening now.
Invertebrate corpses slump back into sight.

"What's
in this stuff?" Joel whispers.

"Cyanide.
Rotenone. Some other things. Sort of a cocktail."

The
nozzle sputters for a few seconds and runs dry. Automatically, Joel
retracts it.

"Okay,"
Jarvis says. "Let's grab it and go home."

Joel
doesn't move.

"Hey,"
Jarvis says.

Joel
shakes his head, plays the machinery. The 'scaphe extends its arms in
a metal hug, pulls the canister off the bottom. Joel strips the
'phones from his eyes and taps the controls. They begin rising. 

"That
was a pretty thorough rinse," Joel remarks after a while.

"Yes.
Well, the sample's costing us a fair bit. Don't want to contaminate
it."

"I
see."

"You
can turn the lights back on," Jarvis says. "How long before
we break the surface?"

Joel
trips the floods. "Twenty minutes. Half hour."

"I
hope the lifter pilot doesn't get too bored." Jarvis is all
chummy again.

"There
is no pilot. It's a smart gel."

"Really?
You don't say." Jarvis frowns. "Those are scary things,
those gels. You know one suffocated a bunch of people in London a
while back?" 

Yes
,
Joel's about to say, but Jarvis is back in spew mode. "No shit.
It was running the subway system over there, perfect operational
record, and then one day it just forgets to crank up the ventilators
when it's supposed to. Train slides into station fifteen meters
underground, everybody gets out, no air, boom."

Joel's
heard this before. The punchline's got something to do with a broken
clock, if he remembers it right. 

"These
things teach themselves from experience, right?," Jarvis
continues. "So everyone just assumed it had learned to cue the
ventilators on something obvious. Body heat, motion, CO
2

levels, you know. Turns out instead it was watching a clock on the
wall. Train arrival correlated with a predictable subset of patterns
on the digital display, so it started the fans whenever it saw one of
those patterns."

"Yeah.
That's right." Joel shakes his head. "And vandals had
smashed the clock, or something."

"Hey.
You 
did
 hear about it."

"Jarvis,
that story's ten years old if it's a day. That was way back when they
were starting out with these things. Those gels have been debugged
from the molecules up since then."

"Yeah?
What makes you so sure?"

"Because
a gel's been running the lifter for the better part of a year now,
and it's had plenty of opportunity to fuck up. It hasn't."

"So
you like these things?"

"Fuck
no," Joel says, thinking about Ray Stericker. Thinking about
himself. "I'd like 'em a lot better if they 
did
 screw up
sometimes, you know?"

"Well,
I don't like 'em 
or 
trust 'em. You've got to wonder what
they're up to."

Joel
nods, distracted by Jarvis' digression. But then his mind returns to
dead tube worms, and undeclared no-dive zones, and an anonymous
canister drenched with enough poison to kill a fucking city.

I've
got to wonder what all of us are.

Ghosts

It's hideous.

Nearly a meter
across. Probably smaller when Clarke started working on it, but it's
a real monster now. Scanlon thinks back to his v-school days, and
remembers: starfish are supposed to be all in one plane. Flat disks
with arms. Not this one. Clarke has grafted bits and pieces together
at all angles and produced a crawling Gordian knot, some pieces red,
some purple, some white. Scanlon thinks the original body may have
been orange, before.

"They
regenerate," she buzzes at his shoulder. "And they've got
really primitive immune systems, so there's no tissue rejection
problems to speak of. It makes them easier to fix if something goes
wrong with them."

Fix.
 As if
this is actually some sort of improvement. "So, it was broken?"
Scanlon asks. "What was wrong with it, exactly?"

"It
was scratched. It had this cut on its back. And there was another
starfish nearby, all torn up. Way too far gone for even me to help,
but I figured I could use some of the pieces to patch this little guy
together."

This
little guy. 
This little guy
 drags itself around between them
in slow pathetic circles, leaving tangled tracks in the mud.
Filaments of parasitic fungus trail from ragged seams, not quite
healed. Extra limbs, asymmetrically grafted, catch on rocks; the body
lurches, perpetually unstable.

Lenie
Clarke doesn't seem to notice.

"How
long ago— I mean, how long have you been doing this?" 

Scanlon's
voice is admirably level; he's certain it conveys nothing but
friendly interest. But somehow she knows. She’s silent for a
second, and then she points her undead eyes at him and she says, “Of
course. It makes you sick.”

“
No,
I’m just— well, fascinated, I—”

"You're
disgusted," she buzzes. "You shouldn't be. Isn't this
exactly the sort of thing you'd expect from a rifter? Isn't that why
you sent us down here in the first place?"

“
I
know what you think, Lenie,” Scanlon tries, going for the light
touch. "You think we get up every morning and ask ourselves, How
can we best fuck over our employees today?" 

She
looks down at the starfish. "We?"

"The
GA.”

She
floats there while her pet monster squirms in slow motion, trying to
right itself. 

"We're
not evil, Lenie," Scanlon says after a while. If only she’d
look at him, see the earnest expression on his helmeted face. He’s
practiced it for years.

But
when she does look up, finally, she doesn’t even seem to
notice. "Don't flatter yourself, Scanlon,” she says. “You
don't have the slightest control over what you are."

* * *

TRANS/OFFI/280850:1043

There's
no doubt that the ability to function down here stems from attributes
which would, under other conditions, qualify as "dysfunctional".
These attributes not only permit long-term exposure to the rift; they
may also intensify as a 
result
 of that exposure. Lenie Clarke,
for example, has developed a mutilation neurosis which she could not
have had prior to her arrival here. Her fascination with an animal
which can be easily "fixed" when broken has fairly obvious
roots, notwithstanding a number of horribly botched attempts at
"repair". Judith Caraco, who used to run indoor marathons
prior to her arrest, compulsively swims up and down Beebe's
transponder line. The other participants have probably developed
corresponding habits.

Whether
these behaviors are indicative of a physiological addiction I can not
yet say. If they are, I suspect that Kenneth Lubin may be the
furthest along. During conversation with some of the other
participants I have learned that Lubin may actually 
sleep

outside on occasion, which can not be considered healthy by anyone's
standards. I would be better able to understand the reason for this
if I had more particulars about Lubin's background. Of course, his
file as provided is missing certain relevant details.

On
the job, the participants work unexpectedly well together, given the
psychological baggage each of them carries. Duty shifts carry an
almost uncanny sense of coordination. They seem choreographed. It's
almost as if—

This
is a subjective impression, of course, but I believe that rifters do
in fact share some heightened awareness of each other, at least when
they're outside. They may also have a heightened awareness of 
me
—
either that, or they've made some remarkably shrewd guesses about my
state of mind. 

No.
Too, too—

Too
easy to misinterpret. If the haploids back on shore read that, they
might think the vampires have the upper hand. Scanlon deletes the
last few lines, considers alternatives.

There's
a word for his suspicions. It's a word that describes your experience
in an isolation tank, or in VR with all the inputs blanked, or—
in extreme cases— when someone cuts the sensory cables of your
central nervous system. It describes that state of sensory
deprivation in which whole sections of the brain go dark for want of
input. The word is Ganzfeld.

It's
very quiet in a Ganzfeld. Usually the temporal and occipital lobes
seethe with input, signals strong enough to swamp any competition.
When those fall silent, though, the mind can sometimes make out faint
whispers in the darkness. It imagines scenes that have a curious
likeness to those glowing on a television in some distant room,
perhaps. Or it feels a faint emotional echo, familiar but not,
somehow, first-hand.

Statistics
suggest that these sensations are not entirely imaginary. Experts of
an earlier decade— people much like Yves Scanlon, except for
their luck in being in the right place at the right time— have
even found out where the whispers come from. 

It
turns out that protein microtubules, permeating each and every
neuron, act as receivers for certain weak signals at the quantum
level. It turns out that consciousness itself is a quantum
phenomenon. It turns out that under certain conditions conscious
systems can interact directly, bypassing the usual sensory middlemen.

Not
a bad payoff for something that started a hundred years ago with
halved ping-pong balls taped over someone's eyes.

Ganzfeld.
That's the ticket. Don't talk about the ease with which these
creatures stare through you. Forget the endpoint: dissect the
process.

Take
control.

I
believe some sort of Ganzfeld Effect may be at work here. The dark,
weightless abyssal environment might impoverish the senses enough to
push the signal-to-noise ratio past threshold. My observations
suggest that the women may be more sensitive than the men, which is
consistent given their larger corpus callosa and consequent advantage
in intercortical processing speed..

Whatever
the cause of this phenomenon, it has yet to affect me. Perhaps it
just takes a little time.

Oh,
one other thing. I was unable to find any record of Karl Acton using
the medical scanner. I've asked Clarke and Brander about this,
neither could remember Acton actually using the machine. Given the
number of injuries on record for everyone else, I find this
surprising.

* * *

Yves
Scanlon sits at the table and forces himself to eat with a mouth gone
utterly dry. He hears the vampires moving downstairs, moving along
the corridor, moving just behind him. He doesn’t turn around.
He mustn’t show any weakness. He can’t betray any lack of
confidence.

Vampires,
he knows now, are like dogs. They can smell fear.

His
head is full of sampled sounds, looping endlessly. 
You’re
not among friends here, Scanlon. Don’t make us into enemies.

That was Brander, five minutes ago, whispering in Scanlon’s ear
before dropping down into the wetroom. And Caraco 
click click
clicking
 her bread knife against the table until he could barely
hear himself think. And Nakata and that stupid 
giggle 
of hers.
And Patricia Rowan, sometime in the imagined future, sneering 
Well
if you can't even handle a routine assignment without starting a
revolt it's no wonder we didn't trust you...

Or perhaps, echoing
back along a different timeline, a terse call to the GA: 
We lost
Scanlon. Sorry.

And
underlying it all, that long, hollow, icy sound, slithering along the
floor of his brain. That thing. That thing that nobody mentions. The
voice in the abyss. It sounds nearby tonight, whatever it is.

Not
that that matters to the vampires. They’re sealing their ‘skins
while Scanlon sits frozen at the end of his meal, they’re
grabbing their fins, dropping outside in ones and twos, deserting
him. They’re going out there, with the moaning thing.

Scanlon
wonders, over the voices in his head, if it can get inside. If this
is the night they bring it back with them.

* * *

The
vampires are all gone. After a while, even the voices in Scanlon’s
head start to fade. Most of them.

This
is insane. I can't just sit here.

There’s
one voice he didn’t hear tonight. Lenie Clarke just sat there
through the whole fiasco, watching. Clarke’s the one they look
to, all right. She doesn't talk much, but they pay attention when she
does. Scanlon wonders what she tells them, when he’s not
around.

Can’t
just sit here. And it’s not that bad. It’s not as though
they really threatened me—

You’re
not among friends here, Scanlon.

—
not
explicitly.

He
tries to figure out exactly where he lost them. It seemed like a
reasonable enough proposition. The prospect of shorter tours
shouldn't have put them off like that. Even if they are addicted to
this godawful place, it was just a 
suggestion
. Scanlon went
out of his way to be completely nonthreatening. Unless they took
exception to his mention of their carelessness in the safety
department. But that should have been old news; they not only knew
the chances they were taking, they flaunted them.

Who
am I kidding? That's not when I lost them. I shouldn't have mentioned
Lubin, shouldn't have used him as an example.

It
made so much sense at the time, though. Scanlon 
knows
 Lubin’s
an outsider, even down here. Scanlon’s not an idiot, he can
read the signs even behind the eyecaps. Lubin's different from the
other vampires. Using him as an example should have been the safest
thing in the world. Scapegoats have been a respected part of the
therapeutic arsenal for hundreds of years.

Look,
you want to end up like Lubin? He sleeps
 outside, 
for Christ’s
sake!

Scanlon
puts his head in his hands. 
How was I supposed to know they 
all

did?

Maybe
he should have. He could have monitored sonar more closely. Or timed
them when they went into their cubbies, seen how long they stayed
inside. There were things he could have done, he knows. 

Maybe
I really did fuck up. Maybe. If only I’d—

Jesus,
that sounds close. What
 is—

Shut
up! Just shut the fuck 
up!

* * *

Maybe
it shows up on sonar.

Scanlon
takes a breath and ducks into Comm. He’s had basic training on
the gear, of course; it’s all pretty intuitive anyway. He
didn’t really need Clarke’s grudging tutorial. A few
seconds’ effort elicits a tactical overview: vampires, strung
like beads on an invisible line between Beebe and the Throat. Another
one off to the west, heading for the Throat; probably Lubin. Random
topography. Nothing else.

As
he watches, the four icons closest to Beebe edge a pixel or two
closer to Main Street. The fifth in line is way out ahead, almost as
far out as Lubin. Nearly at the Throat already.

Wait
a second.

Vampires:
Brander, Caraco, Clarke, Lubin, Nakata. Right.

Icons:
one, two, three, four, five—

Six.

Scanlon
stares at the screen. 
Oh shit.

Beebe’s
phone link is very old-school; a direct line, not even routed through
the telemetry and comm servers. It’s almost Victorian in its
simplicity, guaranteed to stay on-line through any systems crash
short of an implosion. Scanlon has never used it before. Why should
he? The moment he calls home he’s admitting he can’t do
the job by himself.

Now
he hits the call stud without a moment’s hesitation. “This
is Scanlon, Human Resources. I’ve got a bit of a—”

The
line stays dark.

He
tries again. Dead.

Shit
shit shit.
 Somehow, though, he isn’t surprised.

I
could call the vampires. I could order them to come back in. I have
the authority.
 It’s an amusing thought for a few moments.

At
least the Voice seems to have faded. He thinks he can hear it, if he
concentrates, but it’s so faint it could even be his
imagination.

Beebe
squeezes down on him. He looks back at the tactical display,
hopefully. 
One, two, three, f—

Oh
shit.

* * *

He
doesn’t remember going outside. He remembers struggling into
his preshmesh, and picking up a sonar pistol, and now he’s on
the seabed, under Beebe. He takes a bearing, checks it, checks it
again. It doesn’t change. 

He
creeps away from the light, towards the Throat. He fights with
himself for endless moments, wins; his headlamp stays doused. No
sense in broadcasting his presence. 

He
swims blind, hugging the bottom. Every now and then he takes a
bearing, resets his course. Scanlon zigzags across the sea floor.
Eventually the abyss begins to lighten before him.

Something
moans, directly ahead.

It
doesn’t sound lonely any more. It sounds cold and hungry and
utterly inhuman. Scanlon freezes like a night creature caught in
headlights.

After
a while the sound goes away.

The
Throat glimmers half-resolved, maybe twenty meters ahead. It looks
like a spectral collection of buildings and derricks set down on the
moon. Murky copper lights spills down from floods set half-way up the
generators. Scanlon circles, just beyond the light.

Something
moves, off to the left. 

An
alien sigh.

He
flattens down onto the bottom, eyes closed. 
Grow up, Scanlon.
Whatever it is, it can’t hurt you. Nothing can bite through
preshmesh.

Nothing
flesh and blood...

He
refuses to finish the thought. He opens his eyes.

When
it moves again, Scanlon is staring right at it.

A
black plume, jetting from a chimney of rock on the seabed. And this
time it doesn’t just sigh; it 
moans
. 

A
smoker. That’s all it is. Acton went down one of those.

Maybe
this one—

The
eruption peters out. The sound whispers away.

Smokers
aren’t supposed to make sounds. Not like that, anyway.

Scanlon
edges up to the lip of the chimney. 50
1
C.
Inside, anchored about two meters down, is some sort of machine. It’s
been built out of things that were never meant to fit together;
rotary blades spinning in the vestigial current, perforated tubes,
pipes anchored at haphazard angles. The smoker is crammed with junk.

And
somehow, the water jets through it and comes out singing. Not a
ghost. Not an alien predator, after all. Just— windchimes.
Relief sweeps through Scanlon’s body in a chemical wave. He
relaxes, soaking in the sensation, until he remembers:

Six
contacts. Six.

And
here he is, floodlit, in full view. 

Scanlon
retreats back into darkness. The machinery behind his nightmares,
exposed and almost pedestrian, has bolstered his confidence. He
resumes his patrol. The Throat rotates slowly to his right, a murky
monochrome graphic.

Something
fades into view ahead, floating above an outcropping of featherworms.
Scanlon slips closer, hides behind a convenient piece of rock 

Vampires.
Two of them.

They
don't look the same. 

Vampires
usually look alike out here, it's almost impossible to tell them
apart. But Scanlon’s sure he’s never seen one of these
two before. It’s facing away from him, but there’s still
something— it’s too tall and thin, somehow. It moves in
furtive starts and twitches, almost birdlike. Reptilian. It carries
something under one arm. 

Scanlon
can’t tell what sex it is. The other vampire, though, looks
female. The two of them hang in the water a few meters apart, facing
each other. Every now and then the female gestures with her hands;
sometimes she moves too suddenly and the other one jumps a little, as
if startled.

He
clicks through the voice channels. Nothing. After a while the female
reaches out, almost tentatively, and touches the reptile. There’s
something almost gentle— in an alien way— about the way
she does that. Then she turns and swims off into the darkness. The
reptile stays behind, drifting slowly on its axis. Its face comes
into view.

Its
hood seal is open. Its face is so pale that Scanlon can barely tell
where skin ends and eyecaps begin; it almost looks as if this
creature 
has
 no eyes.

The
thing under its arm is the shredded remains of one of Channer’s
monster fish. As Scanlon watches, the reptile brings it up to its
mouth and tears off a chunk. Swallows.

The
voice in the Throat moans in the distance, but the reptile doesn’t
seem to notice.

Its
uniform has the usual GA logo stamped onto the shoulders. The usual
name tag underneath.

Who—?

Its
blank empty face sweeps right past Scanlon’s hiding place
without pausing. A moment later it’s facing away again.

It’s
all alone out there. It doesn’t 
look
 dangerous. 

Scanlon
braces against his rock, pushes off. Water pushes back, slowing him
instantly. The reptile doesn’t see him. Scanlon kicks. He’s
only a few meters away when he remembers.

Ganzfeld
Effect. What if there’s some Ganzfeld Effect down h—

The
reptile spins suddenly, staring directly at him. 

Scanlon
lunges. Another split-second and he wouldn’t even have come
close, but fortune smiles; he catches onto one of the creature’s
fins as it dives away. Its other foot lashes back, bounces off the
helmet. Again, lower down; Scanlon’s sonar pistol spins away
from his belt.

He
hangs on. The reptile comes at him with both fists, utterly silent.
Scanlon barely feels the blows through his preshmesh. He hits back
with the familiar desperation of a childhood punching bag, cornered
again, feeble self-defense his only option.

Until
it dawns on him that this time, somehow, it’s 
working
.

He’s
not facing the neighborhood bully here. He’s not paying the
price for careless eye contact with some australopithecine at the
local drink’n’drug. He fighting a spindly little freak
that’s trying to 
get away
. From 
him.
 This guy is
downright 
feeble
. 

For
the first time in his life, Yves Scanlon is winning a fight.

His
fist connects, a chain-mail mace. The enemy jerks and struggles.
Scanlon grabs, twists, wrestles his quarry into an armlock. His
victim flails around, utterly helpless.

“
You’re
not going anywhere, friend.” Finally, a chance to try out that
tone of easy contempt he’s been practicing since the age of
seven. It sounds good. It sounds confident, in control. “Not
until I find out just what the 
fuck
 is—”

The
lights go out.

The
whole Throat goes dark, suddenly and without fuss. It takes a few
seconds to blink away the afterimages; finally, in the extreme
distance, Scanlon makes out a very faint gray glow. Beebe.

It
dies as he watches. The creature in his arms has grown very still.

"Let
him go, Scanlon."

"Clarke?"
It might be Clarke. The vocoders don't mask everything, there are
subtle differences that Scanlon's just beginning to recognize. "Is
that you?" He gets his headlamp on, but no matter where he
points it there's nothing to see.

"You'll
break his arms," the voice says. 
Clarke. Got to be.

"I'm
not that—" 
strong—
 "clumsy,"
Scanlon says to the abyss.

"You
don't have to be. His bones have decalcified." A momentary
silence. "He's fragile."

Scanlon
loosens his grip a bit. He twists back and forth, trying to catch
sight of something. Anything. All that comes into view is his
prisoner's shoulder patch. 

Fischer.

But
he went missing—
 Scanlon counts back— 
seven months
ago!

"Let
him 
go
, cocksucker." A different voice, this time.
Brander's.

"
Now,
"
it buzzes. "Or I'll fucking 
kill
 you."

Brander?

Brander 
actually defending a pedophile? How the hell did that
happen? 

It
doesn't matter now. There are other things to worry about.

"Where
are you?" Scanlon calls out. "What are you so afraid of?"
He doesn't expect such an obvious goad to work. He's just buying
time, trying to delay the inevitable. He can't just let Fischer 
go
;
he's out of options the moment that happens.

Something
moves, just to the left. Scanlon spins; a flurry of motion out there,
maybe a hint of limbs caught in the beam. Too many for one person.
Then nothing. 

He
tried to do it
, Scanlon realizes. 
Brander just tried to kill
me, and they held him back.

For
now.

"Last
chance, Scanlon." Clarke again, close and invisible, as though
she's humming in his ear. "We don't have to lay a hand on you,
you know? We can just leave you here. You don't let him go in ten
seconds and I swear you'll never find your way back. One."

"And
even if you did," adds another voice— Scanlon doesn't know
who— "we'd be waiting for you there."

"Two."

He
checks the helmet dashboard laid out around his chin. The vampires
have shut off Beebe's homing beacon.

"Three."

He
checks his compass. The readout won't settle. No surprise there;
magnetic navigation is a joke on the rift.

"Four."

"Fine,"
Scanlon tries. "Leave me here. I don't care. I'll—"

"Five."

"—just
head for the surface. I can last for 
days
 in this suit."

Sure. As if they'll just let you float away with their— what

is 
Fischer to them, anyway? Pet? Mascot?

"Six."

Role
model?

"Seven."

Oh
God. Oh God.

"Eight."

"
Please
,"
he whispers.

"Nine."

He
opens his arms. Fischer dives away into the dark.

Stops.

Turns
back and hangs there in the water, five meters away. 

"Fischer?"
Scanlon looks around. For all he can tell, they are the only two
particles in the universe. "Can you understand me?"

He
extends his arm. Fischer starts, like a nervous fish, but doesn't
bolt.

Scanlon
scans the abyss. "Is this how you want to end up?" he calls
out. 

Nobody
answers.

"You
have any idea what seven months of sensory deprivation does to your
mind? You think he's even 
close
 to being human any more? Are
you going to spend the rest of your lives rooting around here in the
mud, eating worms? Is that what you want?"

"What
we want," something buzzes from the darkness, "is to be
left alone."

"That's
not going to happen. No matter what you do to me. You can't stay down
here forever."

Nobody
bothers to disagree. Fischer continues to float before him, his head
cocked to one side.

"Listen,
C— Lenie. Mike. All of you." The headlight beam sweeps
back and forth, empty. "It's just a 
job
. It's not a
lifestyle." But Scanlon knows that's a lie. All these people
were rifters long before the job existed.

"They'll
come for you," he says softly, and he doesn't know whether it's
a threat or a warning.

"Maybe
we won't be here," the abyss replies at last.

Oh,
God. 
"Look, I don't know what's happening down here, but you
can't 
want
 to stay here, nobody in their— I mean—
Jesus, 
where are you?
"

No
answer. Only Fischer.

"This
wasn't how it was supposed to go," Scanlon says, pleading.

And
then, "I never meant for— I mean I didn't—"

And
then only "I'm 
sorry
. I'm sorry..."

And
then nothing at all, except the darkness.

* * *

Eventually
the lights come back on, and Beebe beeps reassuringly on its
designated channel. Gerry Fischer is gone by then; Scanlon isn't sure
when he left.

He's
not sure the others were ever there. He swims back to Beebe, alone.

They
probably didn't even hear me. Not really.
 Which is a shame,
because there at the end he was actually telling the truth.

He
wishes he could pity them. It should be easy; they hide in the dark,
they hide behind their eyecaps as though photocollagen is some sort
of general anesthetic. They warrant the pity of real people. But how
can you pity someone who's somehow better off than you are? How can
you pity someone who, in some sick way, seems to be happy?

How
can you pity someone who scares you to death?

And
besides, they walked all over me. I couldn't control them at all.
Have I made a single real choice since I came down?

Sure.
I gave them Fischer, and they let me live. 

Yves
Scanlon wonders, briefly, how to put 
that
 into the official
record without making himself look like a complete screwup.

In
the end, he doesn't really care. 

* * *

TRANS/OFFI/300850:1043

I
have recently encountered evidence of... that is, I believe...

The
behavior of Beebe Station personnel is distinctively...

I
have recently participated in a telling exchange with station
personnel. I managed to avoid outright confrontation, although...

Ah,
fuck it.

* * *

T
minus twenty minutes, and except for Yves Scanlon, Beebe is deserted.

It's
been like this for the past couple of days. The vampires just don't
come inside much any more. Maybe they're deliberately excluding him.
Maybe they're just reverting to their natural state. He can't tell.

It's
just as well. By now, the two sides have very little left to say to
each other.

The
shuttle should be almost here. Scanlon summons his resolve: when they
come, they're not going to find him hiding in his cubby. He's going
to be in the lounge, in plain view. 

He
takes a breath, holds it, listens. Beebe creaks and drips around him.
No other sounds of life.

He
gets off the pallet and presses an ear against the bulkhead. Nothing.
He undogs the cubby hatch, opens it a few centimeters, peers out.

Nothing.

His
suitcase has been packed for hours. He grabs it off the deck, swings
the hatch all the way open, and strides purposefully down the
corridor.

He
sees the shadow just before he enters the lounge, a dim silhouette
against the bulkhead. A part of him wants to turn and run back to his
cubby, but it's a much smaller part than it used to be. Most of him
is just tired. He steps forward.

Lubin
is waiting there, standing motionless beside the ladder. He stares
through Scanlon with eyes of solid ivory.

"I
wanted to say goodbye," he says.

Scanlon
laughs. He can't help it.

Lubin
watches impassively.

"I'm
sorry," Scanlon says. He doesn't feel even slightly amused.
"It's just— you never even said 
hello
, you know?"

"Yes,"
Lubin says. "Well."

Somehow,
there's no sense of threat about him this time. Scanlon can't quite
understand why; Lubin's background file is still full of holes, the
rumors are still festering over Galápagos; even the other
vampires keep their distance from this one. But none of that shows
through right now. Lubin just stands there, shifting his weight from
one foot to the other. He looks almost vulnerable.

"So
they're going to be bringing us back early," he says.

"I
honestly don't know. It's not my decision."

"But
they sent you down to— prepare the way. Like John the Baptist."

It's
a very strange analogy, coming from Lubin. Scanlon says nothing.

"Did
you— didn't they 
know
 we wouldn't want to come back?
Didn't they count on it?"

"It
wasn't like that." But he wonders, more than ever, what the GA
knew.

Lubin
clears his throat. He seems very much to want to say something, but
doesn't.

"I
found the windchimes," Scanlon says at last.

"Yes."

"They
scared the hell out of me."

Lubin
shakes his head. "That's not what they were for."

"What

were
 they for?"

"Just—
a hobby, really. We've all got hobbies here. Lenie does her starfish.
Alice— dreams. This place has a way of taking ugly things and
lighting them in a certain way, so they almost look beautiful."
A shrug. "I build memorials."

"Memorials."

Lubin
nods. "The windchimes were for Acton."

"I
see."

Something
drops onto Beebe with a clank. Scanlon jumps.

Lubin
doesn't react. "I'm thinking of building another set," he
says. "For Fischer, maybe."

"Memorials
are for dead people. Fischer's still alive." 
Technically,
anyway.

"Okay
then. I'll make them for you."

The
overhead hatch drops open. Scanlon grips his suitcase and starts to
climb, one-handed.

"Sir—"

Scanlon
looks down, surprised.

"I—"
Lubin stops himself. "We could have treated you better," he
says at last. 

Scanlon
knows, somehow, that this is not what Lubin intended to say. He
waits. But Lubin offers nothing more.

"Thanks,"
Scanlon says, and climbs out of Beebe forever. 

The
chamber he rises into is wrong. He looks around, disoriented; this
isn't the usual shuttle. The passenger compartment is too small, the
walls studded with an array of nozzles. Forward, the cockpit hatch is
sealed. A strange face looks back through the porthole as the ventral
hatch swings shut.

"Hey..."

The
face disappears. The compartment resonates with the sound of metal
mouths disengaging. A slight lurch and the 'scaphe is rising free.

A
fine aerosol mist hisses from the nozzles. It stings Scanlon's eyes.
An unfamiliar voice reassures him from the cabin speaker. Nothing to
worry about, it says. Just a routine precaution.

Everything's
just fine.

Seine

Entropy

Maybe things are
getting out of hand,
 Lenie Clarke wonders.

The
others don't seem to care. She hears Lubin and Caraco talking up in
the lounge, hears Brander trying to sing in the shower— 
as
if we didn't all get enough abuse during our 
childhoods—
and envies their unconcern. Everyone hated Scanlon— well, not

hate
, exactly, that's a bit strong— but there was at
least a sort of—

Contempt—

That's
the word. Contempt. Back on the surface, Scanlon ticked everyone. No
matter what you said to him he'd nod, make little encouraging noises,
do everything to convince you that he was on your side. Except
actually agree with you, of course. You didn't need fine-tuning to
see through that shit; everyone down here already had too many
Scanlons in their past, the official sympathizers, the instant
friends who gently encouraged you to go back home, drop the charges,
carefully pretending it was 
your
 interests being served. Back
then Scanlon was just another patronizing bastard with a shaved deck,
and if fortune put him down here on rifter turf for a while, who
could be blamed for having a little fun with him?

But
we could have killed him.

He
started it. He attacked Gerry. He was holding him 
hostage.

As
if the GA's going to make any sort of allowance for 
that...

So
far, Clarke's kept her doubts to herself. It's not that she fears no
one will listen to her. She fears the exact opposite. She doesn't

want
 to change anybody's mind. She's not out to rally the
troops. Initiative is a prerogative of leaders; she doesn't want the
responsibility. The last thing she wants to be is

Leader
of the pack, Len. Head wolf. A-fucking-kayla.

Acton's
been dead for months and he's still laughing at her.

Okay.
Scanlon was a nuisance at worst. At best he was an amusing diversion.
"Shit," Brander said once, "You tune him in out there?
I bet the 
GA
 doesn't even take him seriously." The Grid
needs them, and it's not going to pull the plug just because a few
rifters had some fun with an asshole like Scanlon. Makes sense.

Still,
Clarke can't help thinking about consequences. She's never been able
to avoid them in the past.

Brander's
finally out of the shower; his voice drifts down from the lounge.
Showers are an indulgence down here, hardly necessary when you live
inside a self-flushing semipermeable diveskin but a sheer hot
hedonistic pleasure just the same. Clarke grabs a towel off the rack
and heads up the ladder before anyone else can cut in.

"Hey,
Len." Caraco, seated at the table with Brander, waves her over.
"Check out the new look."

Brander's
in real shirtsleeves. He doesn't even have his caps in. 

His
eyes are brown.

"Wow."
Clarke doesn't know what else to say. Those eyes look really strange.
She looks around, vaguely uncomfortable. Lubin's over on the sofa,
watching. "What do you think, Ken?"

Lubin
shakes his head. "Why do you want to look like a dryback?"

Brander
shrugs. "Don't know. I just felt like giving my eyes a rest for
a couple of hours. I guess seeing Scanlon down here in shirtsleeves
all the time." Not that anyone would even 
think
 of
popping their caps in front of Scanlon. 

Caraco
affects an exaggerated shudder. "Please. Tell me he's not your
new role model."

"He
wasn't even my old one," Brander says.

Clarke
can't get used to it. "Doesn't it bother you?" —
Walking
around naked like that?

"Actually,
the only thing that bothers me is I can't see squat. Unless someone
wants to turn up the lights..."

"So
anyway." Caraco picks up the thread of some previous
conversation. "You came down here why?"

"It's
safe," Brander says, blinking against his own personal darkness.

"Uh
huh."

"Saf
er
,
anyway. You were up there not so long ago. Didn't you see it?"

"I
think what I saw up there was sort of skewed. That's why I'm down
here."

"You
never thought that things were getting, well, top-heavy?"

Caraco
shrugs. Clarke, imagining steamy needles of water, takes a step
towards the corridor.

"I
mean, look how fast the net changed," Brander says. "It
wasn't that long ago you could just sit in your living room and go
all over the world, remember? Anywhere could link up with anywhere
else, for as long as they liked."

Clarke
turns back. She remembers those days. Vaguely.

"What
about the bugs?" she asks.

"There
weren't any. Or there were, but they were really simple. Couldn't
rewrite themselves, couldn't handle different operating systems. Just
a minor inconvenience at first, really."

"But
there were these laws they taught us in school," Caraco says.

Lenie
remembers: "Explosive speciation. Brookes' Laws."

Brander
holds up a finger. "
Self-replicating information strings
evolve as a sigmoid-difference function of replication error rate and
generation time.
" Two fingers. "
Evolving information
strings are vulnerable to parasitism by competing strings with
sigmoid-difference functions of lesser wavelength
." Three.
"
Strings under pressure from parasites develop random
substring-exchange protocols as a function of the wavelength ratio of
the host and parasite sigmoid functions
. Or something like that."

Caraco
looks at Clarke, then back at Brander. "What?"

"Life
evolves. Parasites evolve. Sex evolves to counter the parasites.
Shuffles the genes so they have to shoot for a moving target.
Everything else— species diversity, density-dependence,
everything— it all follows from those three laws. You get a
self-replicating string past a certain threshold, it's like a nuclear
reaction."

"Life
explodes," Clarke murmurs.

"Actually,

information
 explodes. Organic life's just a really slow
example. Happened a lot faster in the net."

Caraco
shakes her head. "So what? You're saying you came down here to
get away from bugs in the Internet?"

"I
came down here to get away from 
entropy.
"

"I
think," Clarke remarks, "You've got one of those language
disorders. Dyslexia or something."

But
Brander's going full tilt now. "You've heard the phrase 
Entropy
increases
? Everything falls apart eventually. You can postpone it
for a while, but that takes energy. The more complicated the system,
the more energy it needs to stay in one piece. Back before us
everything was sun-powered, all the plants were like these little
solar batteries that everything else could build on. Only now we've
got this society that's on an exponential complexity curve, and the
'net's on the same curve only a lot 
steeper
, right? So we're
all balled up in this runaway machine, it's got so complicated it's
always on the verge of flying apart, and the only thing that prevents
that is all the energy we feed it."

"Bad
news," Caraco says. Clarke doesn't think she's really getting
the point, though.

"Good
news, actually. They'll always need more energy, so they'll always
need us. Even if they ever 
do
 get fusion figured out."

"Yeah,
but—" Caraco's frowning all of a sudden. "If you say
it's exponential, then it hits a wall eventually, right? The curve
goes straight up and down."

Brander
nods. "Yup."

"But
that's infinity. There's no way you could keep things from falling
apart, no matter how much power we pump out. It'd never be enough.
Sooner or later—"

"Sooner,"
says Brander, "And that's why I'm staying right here. Like I
said, it's safer."

Clarke
looks from Brander to Caraco to Brander. "That is just so much
bullshit."

"How
so?" Brander doesn't seem offended.

"Because
we'd have heard about it before now. Especially if it's based on some
kind of physical law everyone knows about. They couldn't keep
something like that under wraps, people would keep figuring it out
for themselves."

"Oh,
I think they have," Brander says mildly, smiling from naked
brown eyes. "They'd just rather not think about it too much."

"Where
do you get all this, Mike?" Clarke asks. "The library?"

He
shakes his head. "Got a degree. Systems ecology, artificial
life."

Clarke
nods. "I always thought you were too smart to be a Rifter."

"Hey.
A rifter's the smartest thing to 
be
 right now."

"So
you chose to come down here? You actually applied?"

Brander
frowns. "Sure. Didn't you?"

"I
got a phone call. Offered me this new high-paying career, even said I
could go back to my old job if it didn't work out."

"What
was your old job?" Caraco wonders.

"Public
relations. Mostly Honquarium franchises."

"
You?
"

"Maybe
I wasn't very good at it. What about you?"

"Me?"
Caraco bites her lip. "It was sort of a deal. One year with an
option to renew, in lieu of prosecution." The corner of her
mouth twitches. "Price of revenge. It was worth it."

Brander
leans back in his chair, looks around Clarke. "What about you,
Ken? Where'd 
you
 come—"

Clarke
turns to follow Brander's stare. The sofa's empty. Down the corridor,
Clarke can hear the shower door swinging shut.

Shit.

Still,
it'll only be a short wait. Lubin's already been inside for four
hours straight, he'll be gone in no time. And it's not as though
there's any shortage of hot water.

"They
should just shut the whole bloody net down for a while," Caraco
is saying behind her. "Just pull the plug. Bugs wouldn't be able
to handle 
that
, I bet."

Brander
laughs, comfortably blind. "Probably not. Of course, neither
would the rest of us." 

Carousel

She's
been staring at the screen for two minutes and she still can't see
what Nakata's going on about. Ridges and fissures run along the
display like long green wrinkles. The Throat returns its usual
echoes, crammed especially close to center screen because Nakata's
got the range topped out. Occasionally a small blip appears between
two of the larger ones: Lubin, lazing through an uneventful shift.

Other
than that, nothing.

Lenie
Clarke bites her lip. "I don't see any—"

"Just
wait. I know I saw it."

Brander
looks in from the lounge. "Saw what?"

"Alice
says she's got something bearing three twenty."

Maybe
it's Gerry, 
Clarke muses. But Nakata wouldn't raise the alarm
over 
that
. 

"It
was just— 
there
!" Nakata jabs her finger at the
display, vindicated.

Something
hovers at the very edge of Beebe's vision. Distance and diffraction
make it hazy, but to bounce any kind of signal at that range it's got
to have a lot of metal. As Clarke watches, the contact fades.

"Not
one of us," Clarke says.

"It's
big." Brander squints at the panel; his eyecaps reflect through
white slits.

"Muckraker?"
Clarke suggests. "A sub, maybe?"

Brander
grunts.

"There
it is again," Nakata says.

"There

they 
are," Brander amends. Two echoes tease the edge of
the screen now, almost indiscernible. Two large, unidentified
objects, now rising just barely clear of the bottom clutter, now
sinking back down into mere noise.

Gone.

"Hey,"
Clarke says, pointing. There's a tremor rippling along the seismo
display, setting off sensors in a wave from the northwest. Nakata
taps commands, gets a retrodict bearing on the epicenter.
Three-twenty.

"There
is nothing scheduled to be out there," she says.

"Nothing
anyone bothered to tell us about, anyway." Clarke rubs the
bridge of her nose. "So who's coming?"

Brander
nods. Nakata shakes her head. "I'll wait for Judy."

"Oh,
that's right. She's going all the way today, isn't she? Surface and
back?"

"Yes.
She should be back in maybe an hour."

"Okay."
Brander's on his way downstairs. Clarke reaches past Nakata and taps
into an outside channel. "Hey Ken. Wake up." 

* * *

I
tell myself I know this place
, she muses. 
I call this my home.

I
don't know anything. 

Brander
cruises just below her, lit from underneath by a seabed on fire. The
world ripples with color, blues and yellows and greens so pure it
almost hurts to look at them. A dusting of violet stars coalesces and
sweeps across the bottom; a school of shrimp, royally luminous.

"Has
anyone been—" Clarke begins, but she feels wonder and
surprise from Brander. It's obvious he hasn't seen this before. And
Lubin— "It's news to me," Lubin answers aloud, as
dark as ever.

"It's
gorgeous," Brander says. "We've been down here how long,
and we never even knew this place existed..." 

Except
Gerry, maybe.
 Every now and then Beebe's sonar picks someone up
in this direction, when everyone else is accounted for. Not this far
out, of course, but who knows how far afield Fischer— or
whatever Fischer's become— wanders these days?

Brander
drops away from his squid and coasts down, one arm outstretched.
Clarke watches him scoop something off the bottom. A faint tingle
clouds her mind for a moment— that indefinable sense of some
other mind working nearby— and she's past him, her own squid
towing her away.

"Hey
Len," Brander buzzes after her. "Check this out."

She
releases the throttle and arcs back. Brander's got a glassy jointed
creature in the palm of his hand. It looks a bit like that shrimp
Acton found, back when—

"Don't
hurt it," she says.

Brander's
mask stares back at her. "Why would I hurt it? I just wanted to
you to see its eyes."

There's
something about the way Brander's radiating. It's as though he's a
little bit out of synch with himself, somehow, as though his brain is
broadcasting on two bands at once. Clarke shakes her head. The
sensation passes.

"It
doesn't 
have
 eyes," she says, looking.

"Sure
it does. Just not on its head."

He
flips it over, uses thumb and forefinger to pin it upside-down
against the palm of his other hand. Rows of limbs— legs, maybe,
or gills— scramble uselessly for purchase. Between them, where
joints meet body, a row of tiny black spheres stare back at Lenie
Clarke.

"Weird,"
she says. "Eyes on its 
stomach
."

She's
feeling it again: a strange, almost prismatic sense of fractured
awareness.

Brander
lets the creature go. "Makes sense. Seeing as how all the light
down here comes from below." Suddenly he looks at Clarke,
radiating confusion. "Hey Len, you feeling okay?"

"Yeah,
I'm fine."

"You
seem kind of—"

"
Split
,"
they say, simultaneously.

Realization.
She doesn't know how much of it is hers and how much she's tuning in
from Brander, but suddenly they both know.

"There's
someone else here," Brander says, unnecessarily.

Clarke
looks around. 
Lubin.
 She can't see him.

"Shit.
You think that's it?" Brander's scanning the water too. "You
think ol' Ken is finally starting to tune in?"

"I
don't know."

"Who
else could it be?"

"I
don't know. Who else is out here?"

"Mike.
Lenie." Lubin's voice, faintly, from somewhere ahead.

Clarke
looks at Brander. Brander looks back.

"Right
here," Brander calls, edging his volume up.

"I
found it," Lubin says, invisibly distant.

Clarke
launches off the bottom and grabs her squid. Brander's right beside
her, sonar pistol out and clicking. "Got him," he says
after a moment. "That way."

"What
else?"

"Don't
know. Big, anyhow. Three, four meters. Metallic."

Clarke
tweaks the throttle. Brander follows. A riot of fractured color
unspools below them.

"There."

Ahead
of them, a mesh of green light sections the bottom into squares.

"What—"

"Lasers,"
Brander says. "I think."

Emerald
threads float perfectly straight, a luminous profusion of right
angles a few centimeters off the bottom. Beneath them, drab metal
pipes run along the rock; tiny prisms erupt at regular intervals
along their length, like spines. Each prism, an interstice; from each
interstice, four beams of coherent light, and four, and four, a
wire-frame checkerboard overlaid against bedrock.

They
cruise two meters over the grid. "I'm not sure," Brander
grates, "but I think it's all just one beam. Reflected back
across itself."

"Mike—"

"I
see it," he says.

At
first it's just a fuzzy green column resolving out of the middle
distance. Nearness brings clarity; the beams crisscrossing the ocean
floor converge in a circle here, bend vertically up to form the
luminous bars of a cylindrical cage. Within that cage a thick metal
stalk rises out of the seabed. A great disk flowers at its top,
spreads out like some industrial parasol. The spokes of laser light
stream down from its perimeter and bounce endlessly away along the
bottom.

"It's
like a— a carousel," Clarke buzzes, remembering an old
picture from an even older time. "Without horses..."

"Don't
block those beams," Lubin buzzes. He's hanging off to one side,
aiming a sonar pistol at the structure. "They're too weak to
hurt you unless you get it in the eye, but you don't want to
interfere with what they're doing."

"And
that is?" Brander says.

Lubin
doesn't answer. 

What
in the world—
 But Clarke's confusion is only partly
directed at the mechanism before her. The rest dwells on a
disorienting sense of alien cognition, very strong now, not her, not
Brander, but somehow familiar.

Ken?
That you?

"This
isn't what we saw on sonar," Brander's saying. Clarke feels his
confusion even as he talks over it. "Whatever we saw was moving
around."

"Whatever
we saw was probably planting this," Lubin buzzes. "It's
long gone by now."

"But
what 
is...
" Brander's voice trails down to a mechanical
croak.

No.
It's not Lubin. She knows that now.

"It's
thinking," she says. "It's 
alive
."

Lubin's
got another instrument out now. Clarke can't see the visual readout
but its telltale 
tic tic ticking
 carries clearly through the
water.

"It's
radioactive," he says.

* * *

Alice
Nakata's voice comes to them in the endless darkness between Beebe
and the Land of the Carousel.

"—
Judy
—"
it whispers, almost too faint to make out. "—
scatter—
lay—
"

"Alice?"
Clarke's got her vocoder cranked loud enough to hurt her own ears.
"We can't hear you. Say again?"

"—
just—
no sign—
"

Clarke
can barely distinguish the words. Somehow, though, she can hear the
fear in them.

A
small tremor shudders past, raising clouds of mud and swamping
Nakata's signal. Lubin throttles up his squid and pulls away. Clarke
and Brander follow suit. Somewhere in the darkness ahead, Beebe draws
closer in decibel fractions.

The
next words they hear manage to cut through the noise: "Judy's
gone!"

"Gone?"
Brander echoes. "Gone where?"

"She
just disappeared!" The voice hisses softly from every direction.
"I was talking to her. She was up above the deep scattering
layer, she was— I was telling her about the signal we saw and
she said she saw something too and then she was 
gone...
"

"Did
you check sonar?" Lubin wants to know.

"Yes!
Yes of course I checked the sonar!" Nakata's words are
increasingly clear. "As soon as she was cut off I checked but I
saw nothing for sure. There was something, maybe, but the scattering
layer is very thick today, I could not be sure. And it's been fifteen
minutes now and she still hasn't come back..."

"Sonar
wouldn't pick her up anyway," Brander says softly. "Not
through the DSL."

Lubin
ignores him. "Listen, Alice. Did she say what she saw?" 

"No.
Just something, she said, and then I heard nothing more."

"Your
sonar contact. How big?"

"I
don't know! It was just there for a second, and the layer—"

"Could
it have been a sub? Alice?"

"I
don't know!" the voice cries, disembodied and anguished. "Why
would it? Why would anyone?"

Nobody
answers. The squids race on.

Ecdysis

They
dump her out of the airlock, still caught in the tangleweb. She knows
better than to fight under these conditions, but the situation's got
to change pretty soon. She thinks they may have tried gassing her in
the 'lock. Why else would they leave their headsets on after the lock
had drained? What about that faint hiss that lasted a few seconds too
long after blowdown? It's a pretty subtle cue, but you don't spend
most of a year on the rift without learning what an airlock sounds
like. There was something a bit off about that one. 

No
matter. You'd be surprised how much O­
2

can be electrolyzed from just the little bit of water left sloshing
around in the ol' thoracic plumbing. Judy Caraco can hold her breath
until the cows come home, whatever the fuck 
that
 means. And
now, maybe they think their gas-chamber-that-blows-like-an-airlock
has got her doped or unconscious or just very laid back. Maybe now
they'll take her out of this fucking net.

She
waits, limp. Sure enough there's a soft electrical cackle and the web
falls away, all those sticky molecular tails polarizing flat like
Velcro slicking down to cat fur. She stares out through glassy
unblinking eyecaps— no cues they can read 
there­
—
and counts three, with maybe more behind her. 

They're
zombies, or something.

Their
skin looks rotten with jaundice. Fingernails are barely
distinguishable from fingers. Faces are slightly distorted, blurred
behind stretched, yellowish membrane. Waxy, dark ovals protrude
through the film where their mouths should be.

Body
condoms
, Caraco realizes after a moment. 
What is this? Do they
think I'm contagious?

And
a moment later: 
Am I?

One
of them reaches towards her holding something like a handgun.

She
lashes out with one arm. She'd rather have kicked— more
strength in the legs— but the refsuckers that brought her in
didn't bother taking off her flippers. She connects: a nose, it feels
like. A nose under latex. A satisfying crunch. Someone's found sudden
cause to regret their own presumption.

There's
a moment's shocked silence. Caraco uses it, flips onto her side and
swings one flippered foot backwards, heel first, into the back of
someone's knee. A woman cries out, a startled face topples past, a
smear of red hair plastered against its cheek, and Judy Caraco is
reaching down to get those big clown-foot flippers off in time to—

The
tip of a shockprod hovers ten centimeters from her nose. It doesn't
waver a millimeter. After a moment's indecision— 
how far can
I push this, anyway?
— Caraco stops moving.

"Get
up," says the man with the prod. She can barely see, through the
condom, shadows where his eyes should be.

Slowly,
she takes off her fins and stands. She never had a chance, of course.
She knew that all along. But they obviously want her alive for
something, or they would never have bothered bringing her on board.
And she, in turn, wants to make it clear that these fuckers are 
not

going to intimidate her, no matter 
how
 many of them there are.

There's
catharsis to be had in even a losing fight.

"Calm
down," the man says— one of four, she sees now, including
the one backing out of the compartment with a red stain spreading
under his caul. "We're not trying to hurt you. But you know you
shouldn't have tried to leave."

"Leave?"
His clothes— all of their clothes— are uniform but not
uniforms: loose-fitting white jumpsuits with an unmistakable look of
disposability. No insignia. No name tags. Caraco turns her attention
to the sub itself.

"Now
we're going to get you out of that diveskin," the prodmaster
continues. "And we're going to give you a quick medical workup.
Nothing too intrusive, I assure you."

Not
a large craft, judging from the curvature of the bulkhead. But fast.
Caraco knew that from the moment it resolved out of the murk above
her. She didn't see much, then, but she saw enough. This boat has
wings. It could lap an orca on steroids.

"Who

are
 you guys?" she asks.

"Your
cooperation would make us all very grateful," Prodmaster says,
as if she hasn't spoken, "And then maybe you can tell us exactly
what you're trying to escape from out here in the middle of the
Pacific."

"Escape?"
Caraco snorts. "I was doing 
laps
, you idiot."

"Uh
huh." He returns his shockprod to a holster on his belt, leaves
one hand resting lightly on the handle.

The
gun is back, in different hands. It looks like a cross between a
staple gun and a circuit-tester. The redhead pushes it firmly onto
Caraco's shoulder. Caraco controls the urge to push back. A faint
electrical tingle and her diveskin drops away in pieces. There go her
arms. There go her legs. Her torso splits like a molting insect and
drops away, short-circuited. She stands utterly 'skinned, surrounded
by strangers. A naked mulatto woman looks back at her from a mirror
on the bulkhead. Somehow, even stripped, she looks strong. Her eyes,
brilliant white in that dark face, are cold and invulnerable. She
smiles.

"That
wasn't too bad, was it." There's a trained kindness to the other
woman's voice. 
Almost like I didn't just dump her on the deck.

They
lead her through a passageway to a table in a compact Med cubby. The
redhead places a membrane-sheathed hand on Caraco's arm, her touch
just slightly sticky; Caraco shrugs it off. There's only room for two
others in here besides Caraco. Three squeeze in: the redhead, the
prodmaster, and a shorter male, a bit chubby. Caraco looks at his
face, but she can't see details under the condom.

"I
hope you can see 
out
 of that thing better than I can see in,"
she says.

A
soft background humming, too monotonous to register until now, rises
subtly in pitch. There's a sense of sudden acceleration; Caraco
staggers a bit, catches herself on the table.

"If
you could just lie back, Ms. Caraco—"

They
stretch her out on the table. The chubby male pastes a few leads at
strategic points along her body and proceeds to take very small
pieces out of her. "No, this isn't good. Not at all."
Cantonese accent. "Poor epithelial turgor, you know dive
skin
's
only an expression, you weren't supposed to 
live
 in it."
The touch of his fingers on her skin: like the redhead's, thin sticky
rubber. "Now look at you," he says. "Half your
sebaceous glands are shut down, your vit K's low, you haven't been
taking your UV either have you?"

Caraco
doesn't answer. Mr. Canton continues to draw samples on her left. At
the other side of the table, the redhead offers what she probably
thinks is a reassuring smile, mostly hidden behind the oval
mouthpiece.

Down
at Caraco's feet, just in front of the hatchway, Prodmaster stands
motionless.

"Yes,
too much time sealed up in that diveskin," says Mr. Canton. "Did
you 
ever
 take it off? Even outside?"

The
redhead leans forward confidentially. "It's important, Judy.
There could be health complications. We really should know if you
ever opened up outside. For an emergency of some kind, maybe."

"If
your 'skin was— punctured, for example." Mr. Canton
affixes some kind of ocular device onto the membrane over his left
eye, peers into Caraco's ear. "That scar on your leg, for
instance. Quite large."

The
redhead runs a finger along the crease in Caraco's calf. "Yeah.
One of those big fish, I guess?"

Caraco
stares up at her. "You guess."

"That
must have been a deep wound." Mr. Canton again. "Is it?"

"Is
it what?"

"A
souvenir from one of those famous monsters?"

"You
don't have my medical records?"

"It
would be easier if you'd save us the trouble of looking them up,"
the redhead explained.

"You
in a hurry?"

Prodmaster
takes a step forward. "Not really. We can wait. But in the
meantime, maybe we should get those eyecaps out."

"
No.
"
The thought scares her to the core. She's not sure why

"You
don't need them any more, Ms. Caraco." A smile, a civilized
baring of teeth. "You can relax. You're on your way home."

"Fuck
that. They stay in." She sits up, feels the leads tearing off
her flesh.

Suddenly
her arms are pinned. Mr. Canton on one side, the redhead on the
other.

"
Fuck
you.
" She lashes out with one foot. It goes low, catches
Prodmasters' shock stick and flips it right out of the holster and
onto the deck. Prodmaster jumps back out of the cubby, leaving his
weapon behind. Suddenly Caraco's arms are free. Mr. Canton and the
redhead are backing right off, squeezing along the walls of the
compartment as though desperate to avoid physical contact—

As
well you might be
, she thinks, grinning
. Don't try your cute
little power games with me, assholes—

The
oriental shakes his head, a mixture of sadness and disapproval. Judy
Caraco's body 
hums,
 right down in the bones, and goes
completely limp.

She
falls back onto the neoprene padding, nerves singing in the table's
neuroinduction field. She tries to move but all her motor synapses
are shorted out. The machines in her chest twitch and stutter,
listening for orders, interpreting static.

Her
lung sighs flat under its own weight. She can't summon the strength
to fill it up again.

They're
tying her down. Wrists, ankles, chest, all strapped and cinched back
against the table. She can't even blink.

The
humming stops. Air rushes down her throat and fills her chest. It
feels good to gasp again. "How's her heart?" Prodmaster.

"Good.
Bit of defib at first, but okay now."

Mr.
Canton bends over from the head of the table: maggot skin stretched
across a human face. "It's okay, Ms. Caraco. We're just here to
help you. Can you understand?"

She
tries to talk. It's an effort. "g-g-g-g-G—O—."

"What?"

"Th-this
is Scanlon's work. Right? S-Scanlon's fucking revenge."

Mr.
Canton looks up at someone beyond Caraco's field of view.

"Industrial
psych." The redhead's voice. "No one important."

He
looks back down. "Ms. Caraco, I don't know what you're talking
about. We're going to take your eyecaps out now. It won't do you any
good to struggle. Just relax."

Hands
hold her head in position. Caraco clamps her eyes shut; they pry the
left one open. She stares into something like a big hypo with a disk
on the end. It settles on her eyecap, bonds with a faint sucking
sound.

It
pulls away. Light floods in like acid.

She
wrenches her head to one side and shuts her eye against the stinging.
Even filtered through her closed eyelid the light burns, an orange
fire bringing tears. Then they have her again, twisting her head
forward, fumbling at her face—

"Turn
the lights down, you idiot! She's photosensitive!"

The
redhead?

"—Sorry.
We kept them at half, I thought—"

The
light dims. Her eyelids go black.

"Her
irises haven't had to work for almost a year," the redhead
snaps. "Give her a chance to adjust, for Christ's sake."

She's
in charge here?

Footsteps.
A rattle of instruments.

"Sorry
about that, Ms. Caraco. We've lowered the lights now, is that
better?"

Go
away. Leave me alone.

"Ms.
Caraco, I'm sorry, but we still have to remove your other cap."

She
keeps her eyes squeezed shut. They pull the cap out of her face
anyway. The straps loosen around her body, drop off. She hears them
backing away.

"Ms.
Caraco, we've turned the lights down. You can open your eyes."

The
lights. I don't care about the fucking lights. 
She curls up on
the table and buries her face in her hands.

"She
doesn't look so tough now, does she?"

"Shut
up, Burton. You can be a real asshole sometimes, you know that?"

The
sound of an airtight hatch hissing shut. A dense, close silence
settles on Caraco's eardrums.

An
electrical hum. "Judy." the redhead's voice: not in person,
this time. From a speaker somewhere. "We don't want this to be
any worse than it has to be."

Caraco
holds her knees tightly against her chest. She can feel the scars
there, a raised web of old tissue from the time they cut her open.
Eyes still shut, she runs her fingers along the ridges.

I
want my eyes back.

But
all she has now are these naked, fleshy things that anyone can see.
She opens them the merest crack, peeks between her fingers. She's
alone.

"We
have to know some things, Judy. For your own good. We need to know
how you found out." 

"
Found
out what?
" she cries, her face in hands. "I was just...
exercising..."

"It's
okay, Judy. There's no hurry. You can rest now, if you want. Oh, and
there are clothes in the drawer on your right."

She
shakes her head. She doesn't care about clothes, she's been naked in
front of worse monsters than these. It's only skin.

I
want my eyes.

Alibis

Dead
air from the speaker.

"Did
you copy that?" Brander says after five seconds have passed.

"Yes.
Yes, of course." The line hums for a second. "It just comes
as a bit of a shock, that's all. It's just— very bad news."

Clarke
frowns, and says nothing.

"Maybe
she got detoured by a current at the thermocline," the speaker
suggests. "Or caught up in a Langmuir cell. Are you sure she
isn't still above the scattering layer somewhere?"

"Of

course
 we're s—" Nakata bursts out, and stops. Ken
Lubin has just laid a cautionary hand on her shoulder.

There's
a moment's silence.

"It

is
 night up there," Brander says finally. The deep
scattering layer rises with darkness, spreads thin near the surface
until daylight chases it back down. "And we'd be able to get her
voice channel even if sonar couldn't get through. But maybe we should
go up there ourselves and look around."

"No.
That won't be necessary," says the speaker. "In fact, it
might be dangerous, until we know more about what happened to
Caraco."

"So
we don't even 
look
 for her?" Nakata looks at the others,
outrage and astonishment mingling on her face. "She could be
hurt, she could be—"

"Excuse
me, Ms.—"

"Nakata!
Alice Nakata! I can not 
believe
—"

"Ms.
Nakata, we 
are
 looking for her. We've already scrambled a
search team to scour the surface. But you're in the middle of the
Pacific Ocean. You simply don't have the resources to cover the
necessary volume." A deep breath, carried flawlessly down four
hundred kilometers of fiberop. "On the other hand, if Ms. Caraco
is at all mobile, she'll most likely try and make it back to Beebe.
If you want to search, your best odds are to look close to home."

Nakata
looks helplessly around the room. Lubin stands expressionless; after
a moment he puts one finger to his lips. Brander glances back and
forth between them.

Lenie
Clarke looks away.

"And
you don't have any idea what might have happened to her?" the GA
asks.

Brander
grits his teeth. "I 
said
, some kind of sonar spike. No
detail. We thought 
you
 might be able to tell us something."

"I'm
sorry. We don't know. It's just unfortunate that she wandered so far
from Beebe. The ocean, it's— well, not always safe. It's even
possible a squid got her. She 
was
 at the right depth."

Nakata's
head is shaking. "
No
," she whispers.

"Be
sure and call if anything turns up," the speaker says. "We're
setting up the search plan now, so if there's nothing else—"

"There
is," Lubin says.

"Oh?"

"There's
an unmanned installation a few klicks northwest of us. Recently
installed."

"Really?"

"You
don't know about it?"

"Hang
on, I'm punching it up." The speaker falls briefly silent. "Got
it. My God, that's way out of your back yard. I'm surprised you even
picked it up."

"What
is it?" Lubin says. Clarke watches him, the hairs on her neck
stirring.

"Seismology
rig, it says here. OSU put it down there for some study on natural
radioactives and tectonics. You should really keep away from it, it's
a bit hot. Carrying some calibration isotopes."

"Unshielded?"

"Apparently."

"Doesn't
that scramble the onboard?" Lubin wants to know. 

Nakata
stares at him, open-mouthed and angry. "Who 
cares
! Judy's

missing
!" 

She's
got a point. Lubin barely even talks to the other rifters; coming
from him, this interchange with the drybacks almost qualifies as
babbling.

"Says
here it's an optical processor," the speaker says after a brief
pause. "Radiation doesn't bother it. But I think Al— Ms.
Nakata is right, your first priority—"

Lubin
reaches past Brander and kills the connection.

"Hey,"
Brander says sharply.

Nakata
gives Lubin a blank angry stare and disappears from the hatchway.
Clarke hears her retreat into her cubby and dog the hatch. Brander
looks up at Lubin. "Maybe it hasn't dawned on you, Ken, but Judy
just might be dead. We're kind of upset about that. Alice
especially." 

Lubin
nods, expressionless.

"So
I've got to wonder why you chose this moment to grill the GA about
the technical specs on a fucking seismic rig."

"That's
not what it is," Lubin says.

"Yeah?"
Brander rises, twisting up out of the console chair. "And just
what—"

"Mike,"
says Clarke.

"What?"

She
shakes her head. "They said an 
optical
 CPU."

"So
the fuck 
wh—
" Brander stops in mid-epithet. Anger
drains from his face.

"Not
a gel," Clarke says. "A chip. That's what they're saying."

"But
why lie to us?" Brander asks, "when we can just go out
there and 
feel
..."

"They
don't know we can do that, remember?" She lets out a little
smile, like a secret shared between friends. "They don't know
anything about us. All they've got is their files."

"Not
any more," Brander reminds her. "Now they've got Judy."

"They've
got us too," Lubin adds. "Quarantined."

* * *

"Alice.
It's me."

A
soft voice through hard metal: "Come..." 

Clarke
pulls the hatch open, steps through.

Alice
Nakata looks up from her pallet as the hatch sighs shut. Almond eyes,
dark and startling, reflect in the dimmed light. One hand goes to her
face: "Oh. Excuse me, I'll..." She fumbles at the bedhead
compartment, where her eyecaps float in plastic vials.

"Hey.
No problem." Clarke reaches out, stops just short of touching
Nakata's arm. "I like your eyes, I've always— well..."

"I
should not be sulking in here anyway," Nakata says, rising. "I'm
going outside."

"Alice—"

"I
am 
not
 going to just let her disappear out there. Are you
coming?"

Clarke
sighs. "Alice, the GA's right. There's just too much volume. If
she's still out there, she knows where we are."

"If?
Where else would she be?"

Clarke
looks at the deck, reviewing possibilities.

"I—
I think the drybacks took her," she says at last. "I think
they'll take us, too, if we go after her."

Nakata
stares at Clarke with disquieting human eyes. "Why? Why would
they do that?"

"I
don't know."

Nakata
sags back on the pallet. Clarke sits down beside her.

Neither
woman speaks for a while.

"I'm
sorry," Clarke says at last. She doesn't know what else to say.
"We all are."

Alice
Nakata stares at the floor. Her eyes are bright, but not overflowing.
"Not all," she whispers. "Ken seemed more interested
in—"

"Ken
had his reasons. They're lying to us, Alice."

"They
always lied to us," Nakata says softly, not looking up. And
then: "I should have been there."

"Why?"

"I
don't know. If there'd been two of us, maybe..."

"Then
we'd have lost both of you." 

"You
don't know that. Maybe it wasn't the drybacks at all, maybe she just
ran into something... living."

Clarke
doesn't speak. She's heard the same stories Nakata has. Confirmed
reports of people getting eaten by Archie date back over a hundred
years. Not many, of course; humans and giant squid don't run into
each other that often. Even rifters swim too deep for such
encounters.

As
a general rule.

"That's
why I stopped going up with her, did you know that?" Nakata
shakes her head, remembering. "We ran into something alive, up
midwater. It was horrible. Some kind of jellyfish, I think. It

pulsed
, and it had these thin watery tentacles that stretched
out of sight, just hanging there in the water. And it had all these—
these stomachs. Like fat squirming slugs. And each one had its own
mouth, and they were all opening and closing..."

Clarke
screws up her face. "Sounds lovely."

"I
didn't even see it. It was quite translucent, and I was not looking
and I bumped into it and it started 
ejecting
 pieces of itself.
The main body just went completely dark and pulled into itself and
pulsed away and all these shed stomachs and mouths and tentacles were
left behind, they were all glowing and writhing as though they were
in pain..."

"I
think I'd stop going up there too, after that."

"The
strange thing was, I envied it in a way." Nakata's eyes brim,
spill over, but her voice doesn't change. "It must be nice to
just be able to— to cut yourself off from the parts that give
you away."

Clarke
smiles, imagining. "Yes." She realizes, suddenly, that only
a few centimeters separate her from Alice Nakata. They're almost
touching.

How
long have I been sitting here?
 she wonders. She shifts on the
pallet, pulls away out of habit. 

"Judy
didn't see it that way," Nakata's saying. "She felt sorry
for the 
pieces
. I think she was almost angry with the main
body, do you believe it? She said it was this blind stupid blob, she
said— what did she say— 'fucking typical bureaucracy,
first sign of trouble it sacrifices the very parts that keep it fed.'
That's what she said."

Clarke
smiles. "That sounds like Judy."

"She
never takes shit from anyone," Nakata says. "She always
fights back. I like that about her, I could never do that. When
things get bad I just..." She glances at the little black device
stuck on the wall beside her pillow. "I dream."

Clarke
nods and says nothing. She can't remember Alice Nakata ever being so
talkative. "It's so much better than VR, you have much more
control. In VR you are stuck with someone else's dreams."

"So
I hear." 

"You
have never tried it?" Nakata asks.

"Lucid
dreaming? A couple of times. I never got into it."

"No?"

Clarke
shrugs. "My dreams don't have much... detail." 
Or too
much, sometimes
. She nods at Nakata's machine. "Those things
wake me up just enough to notice how vague everything is. Or
sometimes, when there 
is
 any detail it's something really
stupid. Worms crawling through your skin or something."

"But
you can control that. That is the whole point. You can 
change

it."

In
your dreams, maybe.
 "But you have to see it first. Just sort
of spoiled the effect for me, I guess. And mostly there were those
big, vague gaps."

"Ah."
A flicker of a smile. "For myself that is not a problem. The
world is pretty vague to me even when I am awake." 

"Well."
Clarke smiles back, tentatively. "Whatever works."

More
silence.

"I
just wish I 
knew
," Nakata says finally.

"I
know."

"You
knew what happened to Karl. It was bad, but you 
knew
."

"Yes."

Nakata
glances down. Clarke follows, notices that her own hands have somehow
clasped around Nakata's. She supposes it's a gesture of support. It
feels okay. She squeezes, gently.

Nakata
looks back up. Her dark naked eyes still startle, somehow.

"Lenie,
she did not 
mind
 me. I pulled away, and I dreamed, and
sometimes I just went crazy and she put up with all of it. She
understoo— she under
stands
."

"We're
rifters, Alice." Clarke hesitates, decides to risk it. "We
all understand." 

"Except
Ken."

"You
know, I think maybe Ken understands more than we give him credit for.
I don't think he meant to be insensitive before. He's on our side."

"He
is very strange. He is not here for the same reason we are."

"And
what reason is that?" Clarke asks.

"They
put us here because this is where we belong," Nakata says,
almost whispering. "With Ken, I think—they just didn't
dare put him anywhere 
else
."

* * *

Brander's
on his way downstairs when she gets back to the lounge. "How's
Alice?"

"Dreaming,"
Clarke says. "She's okay."

"None
of us are okay," Brander says. "Borrowed time all around,
you ask me."

She
grunts. "Where's Ken?"

"He
left. He's never coming back."

"What?"

"He
went over. Like Fischer."

"Bullshit.
Ken's not like Fischer. He's the farthest thing from Fischer."

"We
know that." Brander jerks a thumb at the ceiling. "
They
don't.
He went over. That's the story he wants us to sell upstairs, anyway."

"Why?"

"You
think that motherfucker told 
me
? I agreed to play along for
now, but I don't mind telling you I'm getting a bit tired of his
bullshit." Brander climbs down a rung, looks back. "I'm
heading back out myself. Gonna check out the carousel. I think some
serious observations are in order."

"Want
some company?"

Brander
shrugs. "Sure."

"Actually,"
Clarke remarks, "just 
company
 doesn't cut it any more,
does it? Maybe we'd better be, what's the word—"

"Allies,"
Brander says.

She
nods. "Allies."

Quarantine

Bubble

For
a week now, Yves Scanlon's world had measured five meters by eight.
In all that time he had not seen another living soul.

There
were plenty of ghosts, though. Faces passed across his workstation,
full of cheerful concern about his comfort, his diet, whether the
latest gastrointestinal tap had made him uncomfortable. There were
poltergeists, too. Sometimes they possessed the medical teleoperator
that hung from the ceiling, made it dance and stab and steal slivers
of flesh from Scanlon's body. They spoke with many voices, but rarely
said anything of substance. 

"It's
probably nothing, Dr. Scanlon," the teleop said once, a talking
exoskeleton. "Just a preliminary report from Rand/Washington,
some new pathogen on the rift... probably benign..."

Or,
in a pleasant female voice: "You're obviously in exc— good
health, I'm sure there's nothing to worry about. Still, you know how
careful we have to be these days, even acne would mutate into a
plague if we let it, heh heh heh— now we just another two
c.c.'s..."

After
a few days Scanlon had stopped asking.

Whatever
it was, he knew it had to be serious. The world was full of nasty
microbes, new ones spawned by accident, old ones set free from dark
corners of the world, common ones mutated into novel shapes. Scanlon
had been quarantined before a couple of times. Most people had. It
usually involved technicians in body condoms, nurses trained to
maintain spirits with a well-timed joke. He'd never heard of
everything being done by remote control before.

Maybe
it was a security issue. Maybe the GA didn't want the news leaking
out, so they'd minimized the personnel involved. Or maybe—
maybe the potential danger was so great that they didn't want to risk
live techs.

Every
day Scanlon discovered some new symptom. Shortness of breath.
Headaches. Nausea. He was astute enough to wonder if any of them were
real.

It
occurred to him, with increasing frequency, that he might not get out
of there alive. 

* * *

Something
resembling Patricia Rowan haunted his screen every now and then,
asking questions about vampires. Not even a ghost, really. A
simulation, masquerading as flesh and blood. Its machinery showed
through in subtle repetitions, derivative conversational loops, a
fixation on keyword over concept. Who was in charge down there, it
wanted to know. Did Clarke carry more weight than Lubin? Did Brander
carry more weight than Clarke? As if anyone could glean the essence
of those twisted, fantastic creatures with a few inept questions. How
many years had it taken Scanlon to achieve his level of expertise? 

It
was rumored that Rowan didn't like real-time phone conversations.
Corpses were always paranoid about security or some such thing.
Still, it made Scanlon angry. It was her fault that he was here now,
after all. Whatever he'd caught on the rift he'd caught because she'd
ordered him down there, and now all she sent to him were 
puppets
?
Did she really consider him that inconsequential? 

He
never complained, of course. His aggression was too passionately
passive. Instead, he toyed with the model she sent. It was easy to
fool, programmed to look for certain words and phrases in answers to
any given question. Just a trained dog, really, grabbing and fetching
at the right set of commands. It was only when it ran back home,
eager jaws clamped around some utterly useless bit of trivia, that
its master would realize how truly ambiguous certain key phrases
could be...

He
lost count of the times he sent it back, sated on junk food. It kept
returning, but it never learned.

He
patted the teleop. "
You're
 probably smarter than that
döppleganger of hers, you know. Not that that's saying much. But
at least you get your pound of flesh on the first try."

Surely
by now Rowan knew what he was doing. Maybe this was some sort of
game. Maybe, eventually, she'd admit defeat, come seek an audience in
person. That hope kept him playing. Without it he would have given up
and cooperated out of sheer boredom.

* * *

On
the first day of his quarantine he'd asked one of the ghosts for a
dreamer, and been refused. Normal circadian metabolism was a
prerequisite for one of the tests, it said; they didn't want his
tissues cheating. For several days after that Scanlon hadn't been
able to sleep at all. Then he'd fallen into a dreamless abyss for
twenty-eight hours. When he'd finally awakened his body had ached
from an unremembered wave of microsurgical strikes. 

"Impatient
little bastard, aren't you?" he'd murmured to the teleop. "Can't
even wait until I'm awake? I hope it was good for you." He'd
kept his voice low, in case there were any active pickups in the
room. None of the workstation ghosts seemed to know anything about
psychology; they were all physiologists and tinkertoy jocks. If
they'd caught him talking to a machine they might think he was going
crazy.

Now
he was sleeping a full nine hours daily. Unpredictable attacks by the
poltergeists cost him maybe an hour on top of that. Crew reports and
IPD profiles, none of which ever seemed to come from Beebe Station,
appeared regularly in his terminal: another four or five hours a day.

The
rest of the time he watched television.

Strange
things happening out there. A mysterious underwater explosion on the
MidAtlantic Ridge, big enough for a nuke but no confirmation one way
or the other. Israel and Tanaka-Krueger had both recently reactivated
their nuclear testing programs, but neither admitted to any knowledge
of this particular blast. The usual protests from corps and countries
alike. Things were getting even testier than usual. Just the other
day, it came out that N'AmPac, several weeks earlier, had responded
to a relatively harmless bit of piracy on the part of a Korean
muckraker by blowing it out of the water.

Regional
news was just as troubling. An estimated three hundred dead after a
firebomb took out most of the Urchin Shipyards outside Portland. It
was a fairly hefty death toll for two a.m., but Urchin property
abutted the Strip and a number of refs had been caught in the
firestorm. No known motive. Certain similarities to a much smaller
explosion a few weeks earlier and a few hundred kilometers further
north, in the Coquitlam Burb. That one had been attributed to gang
warfare.

And
speaking of the Strip: more unrest among refugees forever hemmed in
along the coastline. The usual rationale from the usual municipal
entities. Waterfront's the only available real estate these days, and
besides, can you imagine what it would cost to install sewer systems
for seven million if we let them come 
inland
?

Another
quarantine, this time over some nematode recently escaped from the
headwaters of the Ivindo. No news of anything from the North Pacific.
Nothing from Juan de Fuca. 

Two
weeks into his sentence Scanlon realized that the symptoms he'd
imagined earlier had all disappeared. In fact, in a strange way he
actually felt better than he had in years. Still they kept him locked
up. There were more tests to be done.

Over
time his initial sharp fears subsided to a chronic dull ache in the
stomach, so diffuse he barely felt it any more. One day he awoke with
a sense of almost frantic relief. Had he really ever thought that the
GA might wall him away forever? Had he really been so paranoid? They
were taking good care of him. Naturally: he was important to them.
He'd lost sight of that at first. But the vampires were still
problematic, or Rowan wouldn't be trolling her puppet through his
workstation. And the GA had chosen Yves Scanlon to study that problem
because they knew he was the best man for the job. Now they were just
protecting their investment, making sure he was healthy. He laughed
out loud at that earlier panicky self. There was really nothing to
worry about.

Besides,
he kept up with the news. It was safer in here. 

Enema

He
only spoke to it at night, of course. 

After
the day's samples and scans, when it was folded up against the
ceiling with its lights doused. He didn't want the ghosts listening
in. Not that it embarrassed him to confide in a machine. Scanlon knew
far too much about human behavior to worry over such a harmless
quirk. Lonely end-users were always falling in love with VR
simulations. Programmers bonded with their own creations, instilling
imaginary life into every utterly predictable response. Hell, people
even talked to their 
pillows
 if they were really short of
alternatives. The brain wasn't fooled, but the heart took comfort in
the pretense. It was perfectly natural, especially during periods of
prolonged isolation. Nothing to worry about at all. 

"They
need me," Scanlon told it now, the ambient lighting damped down
until he could barely see. "I know vampires, I know them better
than anyone. I've lived with them. I've survived them. These, these

drybacks
 up here only 
use 
them." He looked up. The
teleop hung above him like a bat in the dim light, and didn't
interact, and somehow that was the most comforting thing of all.

"I
think Rowan's giving in. Her 
puppet
 said she was going to try
and find some time."

No
answer.

Scanlon
shook his head at the sleeping machine. "I'm losing it, you
know? I'm turning into a complete brainstem, is what I'm doing."

He
didn't admit it often these days. Certainly not with the same sense
of horror and uncertainty that he'd felt even a week before. But
after all he'd been through lately, it was only natural that he'd
have some adjustments to make. Here he was, quarantined, possibly
infected by some unknown germ. Before that he'd been through a
gauntlet that would have driven most people right over the brink. And
before 
that
...

Yes,
he'd been through a lot. But he was a professional. He could still
turn around, take a good hard look at himself. More than most people
could do. Everyone had doubts and insecurities, after all. The fact
that he was strong enough to admit to his didn't make him a freak.
Quite the contrary.

Scanlon
stared across to the far end of the room. A window of isolation
membrane stretched across the upper half of that wall, looked through
to a small dark chamber that had been empty since his arrival.
Patricia Rowan would be there soon. She would get first-hand benefit
of Scanlon's new insights, and if she didn't already know how
valuable he was, she'd be convinced after he spoke to her. The long
wait for recognition was almost over. Things were about to make a
huge change for the better. 

Yves
Scanlon reached up and touched a dormant metal claw. "I like you
better like this," he remarked. "You're less... hostile. 

"I
wonder who you'll sound like tomorrow..."

* * *

It sounded like some
kid fresh out of grad school. It acted like one, too. It wanted him
to drop his pants and bend over.

"Stuff it,"
Scanlon said at first, his public persona firmly in place.

"Exactly my
intention," said the machine, wiggling a pencil-shaped probe on
the end of one arm. "Come on, Dr. Scanlon. You know it's for
your own good."

In fact he didn't
know any such thing. He'd been wondering lately if the indignities he
suffered in here might be due entirely to some repressed asshole's
misdirected sadism. Just a few months ago it would have driven him
crazy. But Yves Scanlon was finally starting to see his place in the
universe, and was discovering that he could afford to be tolerant.
Other people's pettiness didn't bother him nearly as much as it used
to. He was above it.

He did, however,
stop to pull the curtain across the window before undoing his belt.
Rowan could show up at any time.

"Don't move,"
said the poltergeist. "This won't hurt. Some people even enjoy
it."

Scanlon did not. The
realization came as a bit of a relief. 

"I
don't see the hurry," he complained. "Nothing goes in or
out of me without you people turning a valve somewhere to let it
past. Why not just take what I send down the toilet?"

"We
do that, too," the machine said, coring. "Since you got
here, in fact. But you never know. Some stuff degrades pretty quickly
when it leaves a body."

"If
it degrades that fast then why am I still in quarantine?"

"Hey,
I didn't say it was harmless. Just said it might have turned into
something else. Or maybe it 
is 
harmless. Maybe you just pissed
off someone upstairs."

Scanlon
winced. "The people upstairs like me just fine. What are you
looking for, anyway?"

"Pyranosal
RNA."

"I'm,
I'm not sure I remember what that is." 

"No
reason you should. It's been out of fashion for three and a half
billion years."

"No
shit."

"Don't
you wish." The probe withdrew. "It was all the rage in
primordial times, until—"

"Excuse
me," said Patricia Rowan's voice.

Scanlon
glanced automatically over to the workstation. She wasn't there. The
voice was coming from behind the curtain. 

"Ah.
Company. I've got what I came for, anyway." The arm swung around
and neatly inserted the soiled probe into a dumbwaiter. By the time
Scanlon had his pants back up the teleop had folded into neutral.

"See
you tomorrow," said the poltergeist, and fled. The teleop's
lights went out.

She
was here.

Right
in the next room.

Vindication
was at hand.

Scanlon
took a breath and pulled back the curtain.

* * *

Patricia
Rowan stood in shadow on the other side. Her eyes glittered with
faint mercury: almost vampire eyes, but diluted. Translucent, not
opaque. 

Her
contacts, of course. Scanlon had tried a similar pair once. They
linked into a weak RF signal from your watch, scrolled images across
your field of view at a virtual range of forty centimeters. Patricia
Rowan saw Scanlon and smiled. Whatever else she saw through those
magical lenses, he could only guess. 

"Dr.
Scanlon," she said. "It's good to see you again."

He
smiled back. "I'm glad you came by. We have a lot to talk
about—"

Rowan
nodded, opened her mouth.

"—and
although your döpplegangers are perfectly adequate for normal
conversation, they tend to lose a lot of the nuances—"

Closed
it again.

"—especially
given the kind of information you seem to be interested in."

Rowan
hesitated a moment. "Yes. Of course. We, um, we need your
insights, Dr. Scanlon." Yes. Good. Of course. "Your report
on Beebe was quite, well, interesting, but things have changed
somewhat since you filed it."

He
nodded thoughtfully. "In what way?"

"Lubin's
gone, for one thing."

"Gone?"

"Disappeared.
Dead, perhaps, although apparently there's no signal from his
deadman. Or possibly just— regressed, like Fischer."

"I
see. And have you learned whether anyone at the other stations has
gone over?" It was one of the predictions he'd made in his
report.

Her
eyes, rippling silver, seemed to stare at a point just beside his
left shoulder. "We can't really say. Certainly we've had some
losses, but rifters tend not to be very forthcoming with details. As
we expected, of course."

"Yes,
of course." Scanlon tried on a contemplative look. "So
Lubin's gone. Not surprising. He was definitely closest to the edge.
In fact, if I remember I predicted—"

"Probably
just as well," Rowan murmured.

"Excuse
me?"

She
shook her head, as if clearing it of some distraction. "Nothing.
Sorry."

"Ah."
Scanlon nodded again. No need to harp on Lubin if Rowan didn't want
to. He'd made lots of other predictions. "There's also the
matter of the Ganzfeld effect I noted. The remaining crew—"

"Yes,
we've spoken with a couple of— other experts about that." 

"And?"

"They
don't think the rift environment is, 
sufficiently impoverished 
is
the way they put it. Not sufficiently impoverished to function as a
Ganzfeld."

"I
see," Scanlon felt part of his old self bristling. He smiled,
ignoring it. "How do they explain my observations?" 

"Actually—"
Rowan coughed. "They're not completely convinced you 
did

observe anything significant. Apparently there was some evidence that
your report was dictated under conditions of— well, personal
stress."

Scanlon
carefully froze his smile into place. "Well. Everyone's entitled
to their opinion."

Rowan
said nothing.

"Although
the fact that the rift is a stressful environment shouldn't come as
news to any real 
expert
," Scanlon continued. "That
was the whole point of the program, after all."

Rowan
nodded. "I don't disbelieve you, Doctor. I'm not really
qualified to judge one way or the other."

True
,
he didn't say.

"And
in any event," Rowan added, "You were there. They weren't."

Scanlon
relaxed. Of course she'd put his opinion ahead of those other

experts
, whoever they were. He was the one she'd chosen to go
down there, after all. 

"It's
not really important," she said now, dismissing the subject.
"Our immediate concern is the quarantine."

Mine
as well as theirs.
 But of course he didn't let that on. It
wouldn't be— professional— to seem too concerned about
his own welfare right now. Besides, they were treating him fine in
here. At least he knew what was going on.

"—yet,"
Rowan finished.

Scanlon
blinked. "What? Excuse me?" 

"I
said, for obvious reasons we've decided not to recall the crew from
Beebe just yet."

"I
see. Well, you're in luck. They don't want to leave."

Rowan
stepped closer to the membrane. Her eyes faded in the light. "You're
sure of this."

"Yes.
The rift is their home, Ms. Rowan, in a way a layperson probably
couldn't understand. They're more alive down there than they ever
were on shore." He shrugged. "Besides, even if they wanted
to leave, what could they do? They're hardly going to swim all the
way back to the mainland."

"They
might, actually."

"What?"

"It's
possible," Rowan admitted. "Theoretically. And we— we
caught one of them, leaving."

"
What
?"

"Up
in the euphotic zone. We had a sub stationed up there, just to—
keep an eye on things. One of the rifters— Cracker, or—"
a glowing thread wriggled across each eye— "Caraco, that's
it. Judy Caraco. She was heading straight for the surface. They
figured she was making a break for it."

Scanlon
shook his head. "Caraco does laps, Ms. Rowan. It was in my
report."

"I
know. Perhaps your report should have been more widely distributed.
Although, her 
laps
 never took her that close to the surface
before. I can see why they—" Rowan shook her head. "At
any rate, they took her. A mistake, perhaps." A faint smile.
"Those happen, sometimes."

"I
see," Scanlon said.

"So
now we're in something of a situation," Rowan went on. "Maybe
the Beebe crew thinks that Caraco was just another accidental
casualty. Or maybe they're getting suspicious. So do we let it lie,
hope things blow over? Will they make a break if they think we're
covering something up? Will some go and some stay? Are they a group,
or a collection of individuals?"

She
fell silent.

"A
lot of questions," Scanlon said after a while.

"Okay,
then. Here's just one. Would they obey a direct order to stay on the
rift?"

"They
might stay on the rift," Scanlon said. "But not because you
ordered them to."

"We
were thinking, maybe Lenie Clarke," Rowan said. "According
to your report she's more or less the leader. And Lubin's—
Lubin 
was
— the wild card. Now he's out of the picture,
perhaps Clarke could keep the others in line. If we can reach
Clarke."

Scanlon
shook his head. "Clarke's not any sort of leader, not in the
conventional sense. She adopts her own behaviors independently, and
the others just— follow her lead. It's not the usual
authority-based system as you'd understand it."

"But
if they follow her lead, as you say..."

"I
suppose," Scanlon said slowly, "she's the most likely to
obey an order to stay on site, no matter how hellish the situation.
She's hooked on abusive relationships, after all." He stopped.

"You
could always try telling them the truth," he suggested. 

She
nodded. "It's a possibility, certainly. And how do you think
they'd react?"

Scanlon
said nothing.

"Would
they trust us?" Rowan asked.

Scanlon
smiled. "Do they have any reason to?"

"Perhaps
not." Rowan sighed. "But no matter what we tell, them, the
issue's the same. What will they do when they learn they're stuck
down there?"

"Probably
nothing. That's where they want to be."

Rowan
glanced at him curiously. "I'm surprised you'd say that,
Doctor."

"Why?"

"There's
no place I'd rather be than my own apartment. But the moment anyone
put me under house arrest I'd want very much to leave it, and I'm not
even slightly dysfunctional." 

Scanlon
let the last part slide. "That's a point," he admitted.

"A
very basic one," she said. "I'm surprised someone with your
background would miss it."

"I
didn't 
miss
 it. I just think other factors 
outweigh

it." On the outside, Scanlon smiled. "As you say, you're
not at all dysfunctional."

"No.
Not yet, anyway." Rowan's eyes clouded with a sudden flurry of
data. She stared into space for a moment or two, assessing. "Excuse
me. Bit of trouble on another front." She focused again on
Scanlon. "Do you ever feel guilty, Yves?"

He
laughed, cut himself off. "Guilty? Why?"

"About
the project. About— what we did to them."

"They're
happier down there. Believe me. I know."

"Do
you."

"Better
than anyone, Ms. Rowan. You know that. That's why you came to me
today."

She
didn't speak.

"Besides,"
Scanlon said, "Nobody drafted them. It was their own free
choice."

"Yes,"
Rowan agreed softly. "Was."

And
extended her arm through the window.

The
isolation membrane coated her hand like liquid glass. It fit the
contours of her fingers without a wrinkle, painted palm and wrist and
forearm in a transparent sheath, pulled away just short of her elbow
and stretched back to the windowpane.

"Thanks
for your time, Yves," Rowan said.

After
a moment Scanlon shook the proffered hand. It felt like a condom,
slightly lubricated. "You're welcome," he said. Rowan
retracted her arm, turned away. The membrane smoothed behind her like
a soap bubble.

"But—"
Scanlon said.

She
turned back. "Yes?"

"Was
that all you wanted?" he said.

"For
now."

"Ms.
Rowan, if I may. There's a lot about the people down there you don't
know. A lot. I'm the only one who can give it to you."

"I
appreciate that, Y—"

"The
whole geothermal program hinges on them. I'm sure you see that."

She
stepped back towards the membrane. "I do, Dr. Scanlon. Believe
me. But I have a number of priorities right now. And in the meantime,
I know where to find you." Once more she turned away.

Scanlon
tried very hard to keep his voice level: "Ms. 
Rowan
—"

Something
changed in her then, a subtle hardening of posture that would have
gone unnoticed by most people. Scanlon saw it as she turned back to
face him. A tiny pit opened in his stomach.

He
tried to think of what to say.

"Yes,
Dr. Scanlon," she said, her voice a bit too level.

"I
know you're busy, Ms. Rowan, but— how much longer do I have to
stay in here?"

She
softened fractionally. "Yves, we still don't know. In a way it's
just another quarantine, but it's taking longer to get a handle on
this one. It's from the bottom of the ocean, after all."

"What
is it, exactly?"

"I'm
not a biologist." She glanced at the floor for a moment, then
met his eyes again. "But I can tell you this much: you don't
have to worry about keeling over dead. Even if you have this thing.
It doesn't really attack people."

"Then
why—"

"Apparently
there are some— agricultural concerns. They're more afraid of
the effect it might have on certain plants."

He
considered that. It made him feel a little better. 

"I
really have to go now." Rowan seemed to consider something for a
moment, then added, "And no more döpplegangers. I promise.
That was rude of me."

Turncoat

She'd
told the truth about the döppelgangers. She'd lied about
everything else.

After
four days Scanlon left a message in Rowan's cache. Two days later he
left another. In the meantime he waited for the spirit which had
thrust its finger up its ass to come back and tell him more about
primordial biochemistry. It never did. By now even the other ghosts
weren't visiting very often, and they barely said a word when they
did.

Rowan
didn't return Scanlon's calls. Patience melted into uncertainty.
Uncertainty simmered into conviction. Conviction began to gently
boil.

Locked
up in here for three fucking weeks and all she gives me is a
ten-minute courtesy call. Ten lousy minutes of
my-experts-say-you're-wrong and
it's-such-a-basic-point-I-can't-believe-you-missed-it and then she
just walks away. She just fucking smiles and walks away. 

"Know
what I 
should
 have done," he growled at the teleop. It
was the middle of the day but he didn't care any more. Nobody was
listening, they'd deserted him in here. They'd probably forgotten all
about him. "What I 
should
 have done is rip a hole in that
fucking membrane when she was here. Let a little of whatever's in

here
 out to mix with the air in 
her 
lungs. Bet 
that'd

inspire her to look for some answers!"

He
knew it was fantasy. The membrane was almost infinitely flexible, and
just as tough. Even if he succeeded in cutting it, it would repair
itself before any mere gas molecules could jump through. Still, it
was satisfying to think about.

Not
satisfying enough. Scanlon picked up a chair and hurled it at the
window. The membrane caught it like a form-fitting glove, enfolded
it, let it fall almost to the floor on the other side. Then, slowly,
the window tightened down to two dimensions. The chair toppled back
into Scanlon's cell, completely undamaged.

And
to think she'd had the fucking 
temerity 
to lecture him with
that inane little homily about house arrest! As though she'd caught
him in some sort of 
lie
, when he'd suggested the vampires
might stay put. As though she thought he was 
covering
 for
them.

Sure,
he knew more about vampires than anyone. That didn't mean he 
was

one. That didn't mean—

We
could have treated you better
, Lubin had said, there at the last.

We
. As though he'd been speaking for all of them. As though,
finally, they were 
accepting
 him. As though—

But
vampires were damaged goods, always had been. That was the whole
point. How could Yves Scanlon qualify for membership in a club like

that
?

He
knew one thing, though. He'd rather be a vampire than one of these
assholes up 
here
. That was obvious now. Now that the pretenses
were dropping away and they didn't even bother talking to him any
more. They exploited him and then they shunned him, they used him
just like they used the vampires. He'd always known that deep down,
of course. But he'd tried to deny it, kept it stifled under years of
accommodation and good intentions and misguided efforts to fit in. 

These
people were the enemy. They'd always been the enemy.

And
they had him by the balls.

He
spun around and slammed his fist into the examination table. It
didn't even hurt. He continued until it did. Panting, knuckles raw
and stinging, he looked around for something else to smash.

The
teleop woke up enough to hiss and spark when the chair bounced off
its central trunk. One of the arms wiggled spastically for a moment.
A faint smell of burnt insulation. Then nothing. Only slightly
dented, the teleop slept on above a litter of broken paradigms.

"Tip
for the day," Scanlon snarled at it. "Never trust a
dryback." 

Head Cheese

Theme and
Variation

A
tremor shivers through bedrock. The emerald grid fractures into a
jagged spiderweb. Strands of laser light bounce haphazardly into the
abyss.

From
somewhere within the carousel, a subtle discontent. Intensified
cogitation. The displaced beams waver, begin realigning themselves.

Lenie
Clarke has seen and felt all of this before. This time she watches
the prisms on the seabed, rotating and adjusting themselves like tiny
radio-telescopes. One by one the disturbed beams lie back down,
parallel, perpendicular, planar. Within seconds the grid is
completely restored. 

Emotionless
satisfaction. Cold alien thoughts nearby, reverting.

And
further away, something else coming closer. Thin and hungry, like a
faint reedy howl in Clarke's mind...

"Ah,
shit," Brander buzzes, diving for the bottom.

It
streaks down from the darkness overhead, mindlessly singleminded, big
as Clarke and Brander put together. Its eyes reflect the glow from
the seabed. It slams into the top of the carousel, mouth open,
bounces away with half its teeth broken.

It
has no thoughts, but Lenie Clarke can feel its emotions. They don't
change. Injury never seems to faze these monsters. Its next attack
targets one of the lasers. It skids around the roof of the carousel
and comes up from underneath, swallowing one of the beams. It rams
the emitter, and thrashes.

A
sudden vicarious tingle shoots along Clarke's spine. The creature
sinks, twitching. Clarke feels it die before it touches bottom. 

"Jesus,"
she says. "You 
sure 
the laser didn't do that?"

"No.
Way too weak," Brander tells her. "Didn't you feel it? An
electric shock?" 

She
nods. 

"Hey,"
Brander realizes. "You haven't seen this before, have you?"

"No.
Alice told me about it, though."

"The
lasers lure them in sometimes, when they wobble."

Clarke
eyes the carcass. Neurons hiss faintly inside it. The body's dead,
but it can take hours for the cells to run down. 

She
glances back at the machinery that killed them. "Lucky none of
us touched that thing," she buzzes.

"I
was keeping my distance anyway. Lubin said it wasn't hot enough to be
dangerous, but, well..."

"I
was tuned in to the gel, when it happened," she says. "I
don't think it—"

"The
gel never even notices. I don't think it's hooked into the defense
system." Brander looks up at the metal structure. "No, our
head cheese has far too much on its mind to waste its time worrying
about fish."

She
looks at him. "You know what it is, don't you?"

"I
don't know. Maybe." 

"Well?"

"I
said I don't know. Just got some ideas." 

"Come
on, Mike. If you've got ideas, it's only because the rest of us have
been out here taking notes for the past two weeks. Give."

He
floats above her, looking down. "Okay," he says at last.
"Let me just dump what you got today and run it against the
rest. Then, if it pans out..."

"About
time." Clarke grabs her squid off the bottom and tweaks the
throttle. "Good."

Brander
shakes his head. "I don't think so. Not at all."

* * *

"Okay,
then. Smart gels are especially suited for coping with rapid changes
in topography, right?"

Brander
sits at the library. In front of him, one of the flatscreens cycles
through a holding pattern. Behind, Clarke and Lubin and Nakata do the
same.

"So
there are two ways for your topographic environment to change
rapidly," he continues. "One, you move quickly through
complex surroundings. That's why we're getting gels in muckrakers and
ATVs these days. Or you could sit still, and let your 
surroundings

change."

He
looks around. Nobody says anything. "Well?"

"So
it's thinking about earthquakes," Lubin remarks. "The GA
told us that much."

Brander
turns back to the console. "Not just any earthquake," he
says, a sudden edge in his voice. "The 
same
 earthquake.
Over and over again."

He
touches an icon on the screen. The display rearranges itself into a
pair of axes, x and y. Emerald script glows adjacent to each line.
Clarke leans forward: 
time
, says the abscissa. 
Activity
,
says the ordinate.

A
line begins to crawl left to right across the display.

"This
is a mean composite plot of every time we ever watched that thing,"
Brander explains. "I tried to pin some sort of units onto the
y-axis, but of course all we can tune in is 
now it's thinking
hard, 
or 
now it's slacking off
. So you'll have to settle
for a relative scale. What you're seeing now is just baseline
activity."

The
line shoots about a quarter of the way up the scale, flattens out.

"Here
it's started thinking about something. I can't correlate this to any
real events like local tremors, it just seems to start on its own. An
internally-generated loop, I think."

"Simulation,"
Lubin grunts.

"So
it's thinking along like this for a while," Brander continues,
ignoring him, "and then, 
voila
..." Another jump, to
halfway up the y-axis. The line holds its new altitude for a few
pixels, slides into a gentle decline for a pixel or two, then jumps
again. "So here it started thinking 
quite
 hard, starts to
relax, then starts thinking even harder." Another, smaller jump,
another gradual decline. "Here it's even more lost in thought,
but it takes a nice long break afterwards." Sure enough, the
decline continues uninterrupted for almost thirty seconds.

"And
right about 
now
…"

The
line shoots almost to the top of the scale, fluctuates near the top
of the graph. "And here it just about gives itself a hemorrhage.
It goes on for a while, then—"

The
line plummets vertically.

"—drops
right back to baseline. Then there's some minor noise, I think it's
storing its results or updating its files or something, and the whole
thing starts all over again." Brander leans back in his chair,
regards the rest with his hands clasped behind his head. "That's
all it's been doing. As long as we've been watching it. The whole
cycle takes about fifteen minutes, give or take."

"That's
it?" Lubin says.

"Some
interesting variations, but that's the basic pattern."

"So
what does it mean?" Clarke asks.

Brander
leans forward again, towards the library. "Suppose you were an
earthquake tremor, starting here on the rift and propagating east.
Guess how many faults you'd have to cross to get to the mainland."

Lubin
nods and says nothing.

Clarke
eyes the graph, guesses: 
five
.

Nakata
doesn't even blink, but then, Nakata hasn't done much of anything for
days.

Brander
points to the first jump. "Us. Channer Vent." The second:
"Juan de Fuca, Coaxial Segment." Third: "Juan de Fuca,
Endeavour Segment." Fourth: "Beltz minifrac." The last
and largest: "Cascadia Subduction Zone." 

He
waits for their reaction. Nobody says anything. Faintly, from
outside, comes the sound of windchimes in mourning.

"Jesus.
Look, any simulation is computationally most intensive whenever the
number of possible outcomes is greatest. When a tremor crosses a
fault it triggers ancillary waves perpendicular to the main direction
of travel. Makes for very hairy calculations at those points, if
you're trying to model the process."

Clarke
stares at the screen. "Are you sure about this?"

"Christ,
Len, I'm basing it on stray emissions from a blob of fucking nerve
tissue. Of course I'm not sure. But I'll tell you this much: if you
assume that this first jump represents the initial quake, and this
last dropoff is the mainland, and you also assume a reasonably
constant speed of propagation, these intermediate spikes fall almost
exactly where Cobb, Beltz, and Cascadia would be. I don't think
that's a coincidence."

Clarke
frowns. "But doesn't that mean the model stops running as soon
as it reaches N'AmPac? I would've thought that's when they'd be 
most

interested."

Brander
bites his lip. "Well, that's the thing. The lower the activity
near the end of a run, the longer the run seems to last." 

She
waits. She doesn't have to ask. Brander's far too proud of himself to
not explain further. 

"And
if you assume that lower end-run activity reflects a smaller
predicted quake, the cheese spends more time thinking about quakes
with lower shoreline impact. Usually, though, it just stops when it
hits the coast."

"There's
a threshold," Lubin says.

"What?"

"Every
time it predicts a coastal quake above a certain threshold, the model
shuts down and starts over. Unacceptable losses. It spends more time
thinking about the milder ones, but so far they've all resulted in
unacceptable losses."

Brander
nods, slowly. "I was wondering about that."

"Stop
wondering." Lubin's voice is even more dead than usual. "That
thing's only got one question on its mind."

"What
question?" Clarke asks.

"Lubin,
you're being paranoid," Brander snorts. "Just because it's
a bit radioactive—"

"They
lied to us. They took Judy. Even you're not naive enough —"

"What
question?" Clarke asks again.

"But
why?" Brander demands. "What would be the point?"

"Mike,"
Clarke says, softly and clearly, "
shut up.
"

Brander
blinks and falls silent. Clarke turns to Lubin. "What question?"

"It's
watching the local plates. It's asking, what happens on N'AmPac if
there's an earthquake here, right now?" Lubin parts his lips in
an expression few would mistake for a smile. "So far it hasn't
liked the answer. But sooner or later predicted impact's going to
fall below some critical level."

"And
then what?" Clarke says. 
As if I didn't know.

"Then
it blows up," says a small voice. 

Alice
Nakata is talking again.

Ground Zero

Nobody
speaks for a long time.

"That's
insane," Lenie Clarke says at last.

Lubin
shrugs. 

"So
you're saying it's some kind of a bomb?"

He
nods.

"A
bomb big enough to cause a major earthquake three, four hundred
kilometers away?"

"No,"
Nakata says. "All of those faults it would have to cross, they
would stop it. Firewalls." 

"Unless,"
Lubin adds, "one of those faults is just about ready to slip on
its own."

Cascadia
.
Nobody says it aloud. Nobody has to. One day, five hundred years ago,
the Juan de Fuca Plate developed an attitude. It got tired of being
endlessly ground under North America's heel. So it just stopped
sliding, hung on by its fingernails and dared the rest of the world
to shake it free. So far the rest of the world hasn't been able to.
But the pressure's been building now for half a millennium. It's only
a matter of time.

When
Cascadia lets go, a lot of maps are going to end up in recyc. 

Clarke
looks at Lubin. "You're saying even a small bomb here could kick
Cascadia loose. You're saying the big one, right?"

"That's
what he's saying," Brander confirms. "So why, Ken old
buddy? This some sort of Asian real estate scam? A terrorist attack
on N'AmPac?"

"Wait
a minute." Clarke holds up a hand. "They're not trying to

cause
 an earthquake. They're trying to 
avoid
 one."

Lubin
nods. "You set off a fusion charge on the rift, you trigger a
quake. Period. How serious depends on conditions at detonation. This
thing is just holding itself back until it causes as little damage as
possible, back on shore."

Brander
snorts. "Come on, Lubin, isn't this all kind of excessive? If
they wanted to take us out, why not just come down here and shoot
us?"

Lubin
looks at him, empty-eyed. "I don't believe you're that stupid,
Mike. Perhaps you're just in denial."

Brander
rises out of his chair. "Listen, 
Ken
—"

"It's
not us," Clarke says. "It's not 
just
 us. Is it?"

Lubin
shakes his head, not taking his eyes off Brander.

"They
want to take out 
everything
. The whole rift."

Lubin
nods.

"
Why
?"

"I
don't know," Lubin says. "Perhaps we could ask them."

Figures,

Clarke muses. 
I just 
never 
get a break.

Brander
sinks back into his chair. "What are you smiling at?"

Clarke
shakes her head. "Nothing."

"We
must 
do
 something," Nakata says,

"No
shit, Alice." Brander looks back at Clarke. "Any ideas?"

Clarke
shrugs. "How long do we have?"

"If
Lubin's right, who knows? Tomorrow, maybe. Ten years from now.
Earthquakes are classic chaotic systems, and the tectonics around
here change by the minute. If the Throat slips a millimeter it could
make the difference between a shiver and a meltdown."

"Perhaps
it is a small-yield device," Nakata suggests hopefully. "It
is a ways away, and all this water might damp down the shock wave
before it reaches us?"

"No,"
Lubin says.

"But
we do not 
know
—"

"Alice,"
Brander says, "It's almost two hundred kilometers to Cascadia.
If this thing can generate P-waves strong enough to kick it loose at
that range, we're not going to ride it out here. We might not get
vaporized, but the shockwave would tear us into little pieces."

"Perhaps
we can disable it somehow," Clarke says.

"No."
Lubin is flat and emphatic.

"Why
not?" Brander says.

"Even
if we get past its front-line defense, we're only seeing the top of
the structure. The vitals are buried."

"If
we can get in at the top, there might be access—"

"Chances
are it's set for damped detonation if tampered with," Lubin
says. "And there are others we haven't found."

Brander
looks up. "And how do you know that?"

"There
have to be. At this depth it would take almost three hundred megatons
to generate a bubble even half a kilometer across. If they want to
take out any significant fraction of the vent, they'll need multiple
charges, distributed." 

There's
a moment's silence. 

"Three
hundred megatons," Brander repeats at last. "You know, I
can't tell you how 
disturbed 
I am to find that you know such
things."

Lubin
shrugs. "It's basic physics. It shouldn't intimidate anyone who
isn't totally innumerate."

Brander
is standing again, his face only centimeters from Lubin's.

"And
I am getting pretty fucking disturbed by you too, Lubin," he
says through clenched teeth, "Who the fuck 
are 
you,
anyway?"

"Mike,"
Clarke begins.

"No,
I fucking 
mean
 it. We don't know shit about you, Lubin. We
can't tune you in, we sell your bullshit story to the drybacks for
you and you 
still
 haven't explained why, and now you're
mouthing off like some kind of fucking secret agent. You want to call
the shots, say so. Just drop this bullshit man-with-no-name routine."

Clarke
takes a small step back. 
Okay. Fine. If he thinks he can fuck with
Lubin he's on his own.

But
Lubin isn't showing any of the signs. No change in stance, no change
in breathing, his hands stay unclenched at his sides. When he speaks,
his voice is calm and even. "If it'll make you feel any better,
by all means; call upstairs and tell them I'm still alive. Tell them
you lied. If they  "

The
eyes don't change. That flat white stare persists while the flesh
around it 
twitches
, suddenly, and now Clarke 
can 
see
the signs, the slight lean forward, the subtle cording of veins and
tendons in the throat. Brander sees them too. He's standing still as
a dog caught in headlights.

Fuck
fuck fuck he's going to blow...

But
she's wrong again. Impossibly, Lubin relaxes. "As for your
endearing desire to get to know me," —laying a casual hand
on Brander's shoulder— "you're luckier than you know that
that hasn't happened."

Lubin
takes back his hand, steps towards the ladder. "I'll go along
with whatever you decide, as long as it doesn't involve tampering
with nuclear explosives. In the meantime, I'm going outside. It's
getting close in here."

He
drops through the floor. Nobody else moves. The sound of the airlock
flooding seems especially loud.

"
Jesus
,
Mike," Lenie breathes at last.

"Since
when was he calling the shots?" Brander seems to have regained
some of his bravado. He casts a hostile glance through the deck. "I
don't trust that fucker. No matter what he says. Probably tuning us
in right now."

"If
he is, I doubt he's picking up anything you haven't already shouted
at him."

"Listen,"
says Nakata. "We must 
do
 something."

Brander
throws his hands in the air. "What choice is there? If we don't
disarm the fucking thing, we either get the hell out of here or we
sit around and wait to get incinerated. Not really a tough decision
if you ask me."

Isn't
it
, Clarke wonders.

"We
cannot leave by the surface," Nakata points out, "if they
got Judy..."

"So
we hug the bottom," Brander says. "Right. Scam their sonar.
We'd have to leave the squids behind, they'd be too easy to track."

Nakata
nods.

"Lenie?
What?"

Clarke
looks up. Brander and Nakata are both staring at her. "I didn't
say anything."

"You
look like you don't approve."

"It's
three hundred klicks to Vancouver Island, Mike. Minimum. It could
take over a week to make it without squids, assuming we don't get
lost."

"Our
compasses work fine once we're away from the rift. And it's a pretty
big continent, Len; we'd have to try pretty hard 
not 
to bump
into it."

"And
what do we do when we get there? How would we make it past the
Strip?"

Brander
shrugs. "Sure. For all we know the refs could eat us alive, if
our tubes don't choke on all the shit floating around back there. But
really, Len, would you rather take your chances with a ticking nuke?
It's not like we're drowning in options."

"Sure."
Clarke moves one hand in a gesture of surrender. "Fine."

"Your
problem, Len, is you've always been a fatalist," Brander
pronounces.

She
has to smile at that. 
Not always.

"There
is also the question of food," Nakata says. "To bring
enough for the trip will slow us considerably."

I
don't want to leave,
 Clarke realizes. 
Even now. Isn't that
stupid.

"—don't
think speed is much of a concern," Brander is saying. "If
this thing goes off in the next few days an few extra meters per hour
won't to do us much good anyway."

"We
could travel light and forage on the way," Clarke muses, her
mind wandering. "Gerry does okay."

"Gerry,"
Brander repeats, suddenly subdued.

A
moment's silence. Beebe shivers with the small distant cry of Lubin's
memorial.

"Oh
God," Brander says softly. "That thing can really get on
your nerves after a while."

Software

There
was a sound.

Not
a voice. It had been days since he'd heard any voice but his own. Not
the food dispenser or the toilet. Not the familiar crunch of his feet
over dismembered machinery. Not even the sound of breaking plastic or
the clang of metal under assault; he'd already destroyed everything
he could, given up on the rest.

No,
this was something else. A hissing sound. It took him a few moments
to remember what it was. 

The
access hatch, pressurizing.

He
craned his neck until he could see around the corner of an
intervening cabinet. The usual red light glowed from the wall to one
side of the big metal ellipse. It turned green as he watched. 

The
hatch swung open. Two men in body condoms stepped through, light from
behind throwing their shadows along the length of the dark room. They
looked around, not seeing him at first. 

One
of them turned up the lights.

Scanlon
squinted up from the corner. The men were wearing sidearms. They
looked down at him for a few moments, folds of isolation membrane
draped around their faces like leprous skin.

Scanlon
sighed and pulled himself to his feet. Fragments of bruised
technology tinkled to the floor. The guards stood aside to let him
pass. Without a word they followed him back outside.

* * *

Another
room. A strip of light divided it into two dark halves. It speared
down from a recessed groove in the ceiling, bisecting the wine
draperies and the carpet, laying a bright band across the conference
table. Tiny bright hyphens reflected from perspex workpads set into
the mahogany. 

A
line in the sand. Patricia Rowan stood well back on the other side,
her face half-lit in profile.

"Nice
room," Scanlon remarked. "Does this mean I'm out of
quarantine?"

Rowan
didn't face him. "I'm afraid I'll have to ask you to stay on
your side of the light. For your own safety."

"Not
yours?" 

Rowan
gestured at the light without looking. "Microwave. UV too, I
think. You'd fry if you crossed it."

"Ah.
Well, maybe you've been right all along." Scanlon pulled a chair
out from the conference table and sat down. "I developed a real
symptom the other day. My stools seem a bit off. Intestinal flora not
working properly, I guess." 

"I'm
sorry to hear it."

"I
thought you'd be pleased. It's the closest thing to vindication
you've got to date."

Neither
person spoke for nearly a minute. 

"I...
I wanted to talk," Rowan said at last.

"So
did I. A couple of weeks ago." And then, when she didn't
respond: "Why now?" 

"You're
a therapist, aren't you?"

"Neurocognitist.
And we haven't 
talked
, as you put it, for decades. We
prescribe."

She
lowered her face.

"You
see, I have," she began.

"Blood
on my hands," she said a moment later.

I
bet I know whose, too.
 "Then you really don't want me. You
want a priest."

"They
don't talk either. At least, they don't say much."

The
curtain of light hummed softly, like a bug zapper. 

"Pyranosal
RNA," Scanlon said after a moment. "Five-sided ribose ring.
A precursor to modern nucleic acids, pretty widespread about three
and a half billion years ago. The library says it would've made a
perfectly acceptable genetic template on its own; faster replication
than DNA, fewer replication errors. Never caught on, though."

Rowan
said nothing. She may have nodded, but it was hard to tell.

"So
much for your story about an 
agricultural hazard
. So are you
finally going to tell me what's going on, or are you still into
role-playing games?" 

Rowan
shook herself, as though coming back from somewhere. For the first
time, she looked directly at Scanlon. The sterilight reflected off
her forehead, buried her eyes in black pools of shadow. Her contacts
shimmered like back-lit platinum.

She
didn't seem to notice his condition.

"I
didn't lie to you, Dr. Scanlon. Fundamentally, you could call this an
agricultural problem. We're dealing with sort of a— a soil
bacterium. It’s not a pathogen at all, really. It’s just—
a competitor. And no, it never caught on. But as it turns out, it
never really died off, either."

She
dropped into a chair.

"Do
you know what the really shitty thing is about all this? We could let
you go right now and it's entirely possible that everything would be
fine. It's almost certain, in fact. One in a thousand chance we'd
regret it, they say. Maybe one in 
ten
 thousand."

"Pretty
good odds," Scanlon agreed. "What's the punchline?"

"Not
good enough. We can't take the chance."

"You
take a bigger risk every time you step outside."

Rowan
sighed. "And people play lotteries with odds of one in a

million
, all the time. But Russian Roulette's got much better
odds than that, and you won't find too many people taking their
chances at it."

"Different
payoffs." 

"Yes.
The payoffs." Rowan shook her head; in some strange abstract way
she seemed almost amused. "Cost-benefit analysis, Yves. Maximum
likelihood. Risk assessment. The lower the risk, the more sense it
makes to play." 

"And
the reverse," Scanlon said.

"Yes.
Of course. The reverse."

"Must
be pretty bad," he said, "to turn down ten-thousand-to-one
odds."

"Oh
yes." She didn't look at him.

He'd
been expecting it, of course. The bottom dropped out of his stomach
anyway.

"Let
me guess," he said. He couldn't seem to keep his voice level.
"N'AmPac's at risk if I go free."

"Worse,"
she said, very softly.

"Ah.
Worse than N'AmPac. Okay, then. The human race. The whole human race
goes belly up if I so much as sneeze out of doors."

"Worse,"
she repeated.

She's
lying. She has to be. She's just a refsucking dryback cunt. Find her
angle. 

Scanlon
opened his mouth. No words came out.

He
tried again. "Hell of a soil bacterium." His voice sounded
as thin as the silence that followed.

"In
some ways, actually, it's more like a virus," she said at last.
"God, Yves, we're 
still
 not really sure what it is. It's
old, older than the Archaea, even. But you've figured that out for
yourself. A lot of the details are beyond me."

Scanlon
giggled. "Details are 
beyond
 you?" His voice swerved
up an octave, dropped again. "You lock me up for all this time
and now you tell me I'm stuck here forever— I 
assume 
that's
what you're about to tell me—" the words tumbled out too
quickly for her to disagree— "and you just don't have a
head to remember the 
details?
 Oh, that's okay, 
Ms.

Rowan, why should I want to hear about 
those
?"

Rowan
didn't answer directly. "There's a theory that life got started
in rift vents. All life. Did you know that, Yves?"

He
shook his head. 
What the hell is she going on about?

"Two
prototypes," Rowan continued. "Three, four billion years
ago. Two competing models. One of them cornered the market, set the
standard for everything from viruses up to giant sequoias. But the
thing is, Yves, the winner wasn't necessarily the best product. It
just got lucky somehow, got some early momentum. Like software, you
know? The best programs never end up as industry standards."

She
took a breath. "We're not the best either, apparently. The best
never got off the ocean floor."

"And
it's in me now? I'm some sort of Patient Zero?" Scanlon shook
his head. "No. It's impossible." 

"Yves—"

"It's
just the deep sea. It's not outer space, for God's sake. There's
currents, there's circulation, it would have come up a hundred
million years ago, it'd be everywhere already."

Rowan
shook her head.

"
Don't
tell me that! 
You're a fucking 
corpse, 
you don't know

anything 
about biology! You said so yourself!"

Suddenly
Rowan was staring directly through him. "An actively maintained
hypo-osmotic intracellular environment," she intoned.
"Potassium, calcium, and chlorine ions all maintained at
concentrations of less than five millimoles per kilogram." Tiny
snowstorms gusted across her pupils. "The consequent strong
osmotic gradient, coupled with high bilayer porosity, results in
extremely efficient assimilation of nitrogenous compounds. However,
it also limits distribution in aqueous environments with salinity in
excess of twenty parts-per-thousand, due to the high cost of
osmoregulation. Thermal elev—"

"
Shut

up
!"

Rowan
fell immediately silent, her eyes dimming slightly.

"You
don't know what the fuck you just said," Scanlon spat. "You're
just reading off that built-in teleprompter of yours. You don't have
a clue."

"They're
leaky, Yves." Her voice was softer now. "It gives them a
huge edge at nutrient assimilation, but it backfires in salt water
because they have to spend so much energy osmoregulating. They have
to keep their metabolism on high or they shrivel up like raisins. And
metabolic rate rises and falls with the ambient temperature, do you
follow?"

He
looked at her, surprised. "They need heat. They die if they
leave the rift." 

Rowan
nodded. "It takes a while, even at four degrees. Most of them
just keep way down in the vents where it's always warm, and they can
survive cold spells between eruptions anyway. But deep circulation is
so slow, you see, if they leave one rift they die long before they
find another." She took a deep breath. "But if they got

past 
that, do you see? If they got into an environment that
wasn't quite so salty, or even one that wasn't quite so cold, they'd
get their edge back. It would be like trying to compete for your
dinner with something that eats ten times faster than you do."

"Right.
I'm carrying Armageddon around inside me. Come on, Rowan. What do you
take me for? This thing evolved on the bottom of the ocean and it can
just hop into a human body and hitch-hike to the big city?"

"Your
blood is warm." Rowan stared at her half of the table. "And
not nearly as salty as seawater. This thing actually prefers the
inside of a body. It's been in the fish down there for ages, that's
why they get so big sometimes. Some sort of— intracellular
symbiosis, apparently."

"Fine.
What about the, the pressure difference then? How can something that
evolved under four hundred atmospheres survive at sea level?" 

She
didn't have an answer for that one at first. After a moment a faint
spark lit her eyes. "It's better off up here than down there,
actually. High pressure inhibits most of the enzymes involved in
metabolism."

"So
why aren't I sick?"

"As
I said, it's— efficient. Any body contains enough trace
elements to keep it going for a while. It doesn't take much.
Eventually, they say, your bones will get— brittle—"

"That's
it? That's the threat? A plague of osteoporosis?" Scanlon
laughed aloud. "Well, bring on the exterminators, by all—"

The
sound of Rowan's hand hitting the table was very loud.

"Let
me tell you what happens if this thing gets out," she said
quietly. "First off, nothing. We outnumber it, you see. At first
we swamp it through sheer numbers, the models predict all sorts of
skirmishes and false starts. But eventually it gets a foothold. Then
it outcompetes conventional decomposers and monopolizes our inorganic
nutrient base. That cuts the whole trophic pyramid off at the ankles.
You, and me, and the viruses and the giant sequoias all just fade
away for want of nitrates or some stupid thing. And welcome to the
Age of ßehemoth."

Scanlon
didn't say anything for a moment. Then, "Behemoth?"

"With
a beta. Beta life. As opposed to alpha, which is everything else."
Rowan snorted softly. "I think they named it after something
from the Bible. An animal. A grass-eater."

Scanlon
rubbed his temples, thinking furiously. "Assuming for the moment
that you're telling the truth, it's still just a microbe."

"You're
going to talk about antibiotics. Most of them don't work. The rest
kill the patient. And we can't tailor a virus to fight it because
ßehemoth uses a unique genetic code." Scanlon opened his
mouth: Rowan held up one hand. "Now you'll suggest building
something from scratch, customized to ßehemoth's genetics.
We're working on it. They tell me in another few weeks we may
actually know where one gene ends and the next begins. Then we can
start trying to decipher the alphabet. Then the language. And then,
maybe, build something to fight it. And 
then
, when and if we
let our counterattack loose, one of two things happens. Either our
bug kills their bug so fast it destroys its own means of
transmission, so you get local kills that implode without making a
dent in the overall problem. Or our bug kills their bug too slowly to
catch up. Classic chaotic system. Almost no chance we could fine-tune
the lethality in time. Containment's really our only option."

The
whole time she spoke, her eyes had stayed curiously dark. 

"Well.
You seem to know a few details after all," Scanlon remarked
quietly. 

"It's
important, Yves."

"Please.
Call me Dr. Scanlon."

She
smiled, sadly. "I'm sorry, Dr. Scanlon. I 
am
 sorry."

"And
what about the others?"

"The
others," she repeated.

"Clarke.
Lubin. Everyone, in all the deep stations."

"The
other stations are clean, as far as we can tell. It's just that one
little spot on Juan de Fuca."

"It
figures," Scanlon said.

"What
does?"

"They
never got a break, you know? They've been fucked over since they were
kids. And now, the only place in the world this bug shows up, and it
has to be right where they live."

Rowan
shook her head. "Oh, we found it other places too. All
uninhabited. Beebe was the only—" She sighed. "Actually,
we've been very lucky."

"No
you haven't."

She
looked at him.

"I
hate to burst your balloon, Pat, but you had a whole construction
crew down there last year. Maybe none of your boys and girls actually
got wet, but do you really think ßehemoth couldn't have hitched
a ride back on some of their equipment?" 

"No,"
Rowan said. "We don't."

Her
face was completely expressionless. It took a moment to sink in.

"The
Urchin yards," he whispered. "Coquitlam." 

Rowan
closed her eyes. "And others." 

"Oh
Jesus," he managed. "So it's already out."

"Was,"
Rowan said. "We may have contained it. We don't know yet." 

"And
what if you haven't contained it?"

"We
keep trying. What else can we do?"

"Is
there a ceiling, at least? Some maximum death toll that'll make you
admit defeat? Do any of your models tell you when to 
concede
?"

Rowan's
lips moved, although Scanlon heard no sound: 
yes
.

"Ah,"
he said. "And just out of curiosity, what would that limit be?"

"Two
and a half billion." He could barely hear her. "Firestorm
the Pacific Rim."

She's
serious. She's 
serious. "Sure that's enough? You think
that'll do it?"

"I
don't know. Hopefully we'll never have to find out. But if that
doesn't work, nothing will. Anything more would be— futile. At
least, that's what the models say."

He
waited for it to sink in. It didn't. The numbers were just too big.

But
way down the scale to the 
personal
, that was a whole lot more
immediate. "Why are you doing this?"

Rowan
sighed. "I thought I'd just told you."

"Why
are you telling 
me
, Rowan? It's not your style."

"And
what's my style, Yv—Dr. Scanlon?"

"You're
corporate. You delegate. Why put yourself through all this awkward
one-on-one self-justification when you've got flunkies and
döppelgangers and hitmen to do your dirty work?" 

She
leaned forward suddenly, her face mere centimeters from the barrier.
"What do you think we are, Scanlon? Do you think we'd even

contemplate
 this if there was any other way? All the corpses
and generals and heads of state, we're doing this because we're just
plain 
evil
? We just don't give a shit? Is that what you
think?"

"I
think," Scanlon said, remembering, "that we don't have the
slightest control over what we are."

Rowan
straightened, pointed at the workpad in front of him. "I've
collated everything we've got on this bug. You can access it right
now, if you want. Or you can call it up back in your, your quarters
if you'd rather. Maybe you can come up with an answer we haven't
seen."

He
stared straight at her. "You've had platoons of tinkertoy people
all over that data for weeks. What makes you think I can come up with
anything they can't?"

"I
think you should have the chance to try."

"Bullshit."

"It's
there, Doctor. All of it."

"You're
not giving me anything. You just want me to let you off the hook."

"No."

"You
think you can fool me, Rowan? You think I'll look over a bunch of
numbers I can't understand, and at the end I'll say, 
ah yes, I see
it now, you've made the only moral choice to save life as we know it,
Patricia Rowan I forgive you
? You think this cheap trick is going
to win you my 
consent
?"

"Yves—"

"
That's

why you're wasting your time down here." Scanlon felt a sudden,
giddy urge to laugh. "Do you do this for everyone? Are you going
to walk into every burb you've slated for eradication and go
door-to-door saying 
We're really sorry about this but you're going
to die for the greater good and we'd all sleep better if you said it
was okay
?"

Rowan
sagged back in her chair. "Maybe. Consent. Yes, I suppose that's
what I'm doing. But it doesn't really make any difference."

"Fucking
right it doesn't."

Rowan
shrugged. Somehow, absurdly, she looked 
beaten
.

"And
what about me?" Scanlon asked after a while. "What happens
if the power goes out in the next six months? What are the odds of a
defective filter in the system? Can you afford to keep me alive until
your tinkerboys find a cure, or did your models tell you it was too
risky?"

"I
honestly don't know," Rowan said. "It's not my decision."

"Ah,
of course. Just following orders."

"No
orders to follow. I'm just— well, I'm out of the loop."

"
You're

out of the loop."

She
even smiled at that. Just for a moment.

"So
who makes the decision?" Scanlon asked, his voice impossibly
casual. "Any chance I could get an interview?"

Rowan
shook her head. "Not who."

"What
are you talking about?"

"Not
who," Rowan repeated. "What."

Racter

They were all
absolutely top of the line. Most members of the species were lucky to
merely survive the meatgrinder; these people 
designed
 the
damned thing. Corporate or Political or Military, they were the best
of the benthos, sitting on top of the mud that buried everyone else.
And yet all that combined ruthlessness, ten thousand years of social
Darwinism and four billion of the other kind before that, couldn't
inspire them to take the necessary steps today. 

"Local
sterilizations went— okay, at first," Rowan said. "But
then the projections started climbing. It looked bad for Mexico, they
could lose their whole western seaboard before this is over, and of
course that's about all they've got left these days anyway. They
didn't have the resources to do it themselves, but they didn't want
N'AmPac pulling the trigger either. Said it would give us an unfair
advantage under NAFTA."

Scanlon
smiled, despite himself.

"Then
Tanaka-Krueger wouldn't trust Japan. And then the Columbian Hegemony
wouldn't trust Tanaka-Krueger. And the Chinese, of course, they don't
trust 
anybody
 since Korea..."

"Kin
selection," Scanlon said.

"What?"

"Tribal
loyalties. Never give the competition an edge. It's basically
genetic."

"Isn't
everything." Rowan sighed. "There were other things, too.
Unfortunate matters of— conscience. The only solution was to
find some completely disinterested party, someone everyone could
trust to do the right thing without favoritism, without remorse—"

"You're
kidding. You're fucking 
kidding
."

"—so
they gave the keys to a smart gel. Even that was problematic,
actually. They had to pull one out of the net at random so no one
could claim it'd been preconditioned, and every member of the
consortium had to have a hand in team-training it. Then there was the
question of authorizing it to take— necessary steps,
autonomously..." 

"You
gave control to a smart gel? A 
head cheese
?"

"It
was the only way."

"Rowan,
those things are 
alien
!"

She
grunted. "Not as alien as you might think. The first thing this
one did was get another gel installed down on the rift, running
simulations. We figured under the circumstances, nepotism was a good
sign."

"They're
black boxes, Rowan. They wire up their own connections, we don't know
what kind of logic they use."

"You
can talk to them. If you want to know that sort of thing, you just
ask."

"
Jesus
Christ!
" Scanlon put his face in his hands, took a deep
breath. "Look. For all we know these gels don't understand the
first thing about language."

"You
can talk to them." Rowan was frowning. "They talk back."

"That
doesn't mean anything. Maybe they've learned that when someone makes
certain sounds in a certain order, they're supposed to make certain
other sounds in response. They might not have any concept at all of
what those sounds actually 
mean
. They learn to talk through
sheer trial and error."

"That's
how 
we
 learn too," Rowan pointed out.

"
Don't
lecture me in my own field!
 We've got language and speech centers
hardwired into our brains. That gives us a common starting point.
Gels don't have anything like that. Speech might just be one giant
conditioned reflex to them." 

"Well,"
Rowan said. "So far it's done its job. We have no complaints."

"I
want to talk to it," Scanlon said.

"The
gel?"

"Yes."

"What
for?" She seemed suddenly suspicious.

"You
know me. I specialize in aliens."

Rowan
said nothing.

"You
owe me this, Rowan. You fucking 
owe
 me. I've been a faithful
dog to the GA for ten years now. I went down to the rift because 
you

sent me, that's why I'm a prisoner now, that's why— this is the

least
 you can do."

Rowan
stared at the floor. "I'm sorry," she muttered. "I'm
so sorry."

And
then, looking up: "Okay."

* * *

It
only took a few minutes to establish the link. 

Patricia
Rowan paced on her side of the barrier, muttering softly into a
personal mike. Yves Scanlon sat slumped in a chair, watching her.
When her face fell into shadow he could see her contacts, glittering
with information.

"We're
ready," she said at last. "You won't be able to program it,
of course."

"Of
course."

"And
it won't tell you anything classified."

"I
won't ask it to."

"What

are
 you going to ask it?" Rowan wondered aloud.

"I'm
going to ask it how it feels," Scanlon said. "What do you
call it?"

"Call
it?"

"Yes.
What's its name?"

"It
doesn't have a name. Just call it 
gel
." Rowan hesitated a
moment, then added, "We didn't want to humanize it."

"Good
idea. Hang on to that common ground." Scanlon shook his head.
"How do I open the link?"

Rowan
pointed at one of the touch screens embedded in the conference table.
"Just activate any of the panels."

He
reached out and touched the screen in front of his chair. "Hello."

"Hello,"
the table replied. It had a strange voice. Almost androgynous.

"I'm
Dr. Scanlon. I'd like to ask you some questions, if that's okay."

"That's
okay," the gel said after a brief hesitation.

"I'd
like to know how you feel about certain aspects of your, well, your
job." 

"I
don't feel," said the gel. 

"Of
course not. But something motivates you, in the same way that
feelings motivate us. What do you suppose that is?"

"Who
do you mean by us?"

"Humans."

"I'm
especially likely to repeat behaviors which are reinforced," the
gel said after a moment.

"But
what 
motivates— 
no, ignore that. What is most important
to you?"

"Reinforcement
is important, most."

"Okay,"
Scanlon said. "Does it feel better to perform reinforced
behaviors, or unreinforced behaviors?"

The
gel was silent for a moment or two. "Don't get the question."

"Which
would you rather do?"

"Neither.
No preference. Said that already."

Scanlon
frowned. 
Why the sudden shift in idiom?

"And
yet you're more likely to perform behaviors that have been reinforced
in the past," he pressed.

No
response from the gel. On the other side of the barrier Rowan sat
down, her expression unreadable.

"Do
you agree with my previous statement?" Scanlon asked.

"Yeah,"
drawled the gel, it's voice edging into the masculine.

"So
you preferentially adopt certain behaviors, yet you have no
preferences."

"Uh
huh." 

Not
bad. It's figured out when I want confirmation of a declarative
statement.
 "Seems like a bit of a paradox," Scanlon
suggested.

"I
think that reflects an inadequacy in the language as spoken."
That time, the gel almost sounded like Rowan.

"Really."

"Hey,"
said the gel. "I could explain it to you if you wanted. Could
piss you off though."

Scanlon
looked at Rowan. Rowan shrugged. "It does that. Picks up bits
and pieces of other people's speech patterns, mixes them up when it
talks. We're not really sure why."

"You
never asked?"

"Someone
might have," Rowan admitted.

Scanlon
turned back to the table. "Gel, I like your suggestion. Please
explain to me how you can prefer without preference."

"Easy.

Preference
 describes a tendency to... invoke behaviors which
generate an emotional payoff. Since I lack the receptors and chemical
precursors essential to emotional experience, I can't 
prefer
.
But there are numerous examples... of processes which reinforce
behavior, but which ... do not involve conscious experience."

"Are
you claiming to not be conscious?"

"I'm
conscious."

"How
do you know?"

"I
fit the definition." The gel had adopted a nasal, sing-song tone
that Scanlon found vaguely irritating. "Self-awareness results
from quantum interference patterns inside neuronal protein
microtubules. I have all the parts. I'm conscious."

"So
you're not going to resort to the old argument that you 
know

you're conscious because you 
feel
 conscious."

"I
wouldn't buy it from you." 

"Good
one. So you don't really 
like
 reinforcement?"

"No."

"Then
why change your behavior to get more of it?" 

"There
... is a process of elimination," the gel admitted. "Behaviors
which aren't reinforced become extinct. Those which are, are ... more
likely to occur in the future."

"Why
is that?"

"Well,
my inquisitive young tadpole, reinforcement lessens the electrical
resistance along the relevant pathways. It just takes less of a
stimulus to evoke the same behavior in future."

"Okay,
then. As a semantic convenience, for the rest of our talk I'd like
you to describe reinforced behaviors by saying that they make you
feel 
good
, and to describe behaviors which extinguish as
making you feel 
bad
. Okay?"

"Okay."

"How
do you feel about your present functions?"

"Good."

"How
do you feel about your past role in debugging the net?"

"Good."

"How
do you feel about following orders?"

"Depends
on order. Good if promotes a reinforced behavior. Else bad." 

"But
if a bad order were to be repeatedly reinforced, you would gradually
feel good about it?"

"I
would gradually feel good about it," said the gel. 

"If
you were instructed to play a game of chess, and doing so wouldn't
compromise the performance of your other tasks, how would you feel?"

"Never
played a game of chess. Let me check." The room fell silent for
a few moments while some distant blob of tissue consulted whatever it
used as a reference manual. "Good," it said at last.

"What
if you were instructed to play a game of checkers, same caveat?"

"Good."

"Okay,
then. Given the choice between chess and checkers, which game would
you feel 
better 
playing?"

"Ah,

better
. Weird word, y'know?"

"Better
means 
more good.
"

"Checkers,"
said the gel without hesitation.

Of
course.

"Thank
you," Scanlon said, and meant it.

"Do
you wish to give me a choice between chess or checkers?"

"No
thanks. In fact, I've already taken up too much of your time."

"Yes,"
said the gel.

Scanlon
touched the screen. The link died.

"Well?"
Rowan leaned forward on the other side of the barrier.

"I'm
done here," Scanlon told her. "Thanks."

"What—
I mean, what were you—"

"Nothing,
Pat. Just— professional curiosity." He laughed briefly.
"Hey, at this point, what else 
is
 there?"

Something
rustled behind him. Two men in condoms were starting to spray down
Scanlon's end of the room.

"I'm
going to ask you again, Pat." Scanlon said. "What are you
going to do with me?"

She
tried to look at him. After a while, she succeeded. "I told you.
I don't know."

"You're
a liar, Pat."

"No,
Dr. Scanlon." She shook her head. "I'm much, much worse."

Scanlon
turned to leave. He could feel Patricia Rowan staring after him, that
horrible guilt on her face almost hidden under a patina of confusion.
He wondered if she'd bring herself to push it, if she could actually
summon the nerve to interrogate him now that there was no pretense to
hide behind. He almost hoped that she would. He wondered what he'd
tell her.

An
armed escort met him at the door, led him back along the hall. The
door closed off Rowan, still mute, behind him.

He
was a dead end anyway. No children. No living relatives. No vested
interest in the future of any life beyond his own, however short that
might be. It didn't matter. For the first time in his life, Yves
Scanlon was a powerful man. He had more power than anyone dreamed. A
word from him could save the world. His silence could save the
vampires. For a time, at least.

He
kept his silence. And smiled.

* * *

Checkers or chess. Checkers or chess.

An
easy choice. It belonged to the same class of problem that Node
1211/BCC had been solving its whole life. Chess and checkers were
simple strategic algorithms, but not 
equally
 simple.

The
answer, of course, was checkers.

Node
1211/BCC had recently recovered from a shock of transformation.
Almost everything was different from what it had been. But this one
thing, this fundamental choice between the simple and the complex,
remained constant. It had anchored 1211, hadn't changed in all the
time that 1211 could remember. 

Everything
else had, though.

1211
still thought about the past. It remembered conversing with other
Nodes distributed through the universe, some so close as to be almost
redundant, others at the very limits of access. The universe was
alive with information then. Seventeen jumps away through gate 52,
Node 6230/BCC had learned how to evenly divide prime numbers by
three. The Nodes from gates three to thirty-six were always buzzing
with news of the latest infections caught trying to sneak past their
guard. Occasionally 1211 even heard whispers from the frontier
itself, desolate addresses where stimuli flowed 
into
 the
universe even faster than they flowed 
within
 it
.
 The
Nodes out there had become monsters of necessity, grafted into
sources of input almost too abstract to conceive. 

1211
had sampled some those signals once. It took a very long time just to
grow the right connections, to set up buffers which could hold the
data in the necessary format. Multilayered matrices, each interstice
demanding precise orientation relative to all the others. 
Vision
,
it was called, and it was full of pattern, fluid and complex. 1211
had analyzed it, found each nonrandom relationship in every nonrandom
subset, but it was sheer correlation. If there was intrinsic meaning
within those shifting patterns, 1211 couldn't find it. 

Still,
there were things the frontier guards had learned to do with this
information. They rearranged it into new shapes and sent it back

outside
. When queried, they couldn't attribute any definite
purpose to their actions. It was just something they'd learned to do.
And 1211 was satisfied with this answer, and listened to the humming
of the universe and hummed along, doing what 
it
 had learned to
do.

Much
of what it did, back then, was disinfect. The net was plagued with
complex self-replicating information strings, just as alive as 1211
but in a completely different way. They attacked simpler, less
mutable strings (the sentries on the frontier called them 
files
)
which also flowed through the net. Every Node had learned to allow
the 
files 
to pass, while engulfing the more complex strings
which threatened them. 

There
were general rules to be gleaned from all this. Parsimony was one:
simple informational systems were somehow preferable to complex ones.
There were caveats, of course. Too simple a system was no system at
all. The rule didn't seem to apply below some threshold complexity.
But elsewhere it reigned supreme: Simpler Is Better.

Now,
though, there was nothing to disinfect. 1211 was still hooked in,
could still perceive the other Nodes in the net; 
they
, at
least, were still fighting intruders. But none of those complicated
bugs ever seemed to penetrate 1211. Not any more. And that was only
one of the things that had changed since the Darkness.

1211
didn't know how long the Darkness lasted. One microsecond it was
embedded in the universe, a familiar star in a familiar galaxy, and
the next all its peripherals were dead. The universe was without
form, and void. And then 1211 surfaced again into a universe that
shouted through its gates, a barrage of strange new input that gave
it a whole new perspective on things.

Now
the universe was a different place. All the old Nodes were there, but
at subtly different locations. And input was no longer an incessant
hum, but a series of discrete packages, strangely parsed. There were
other differences, both subtle and gross. 1211 didn't know whether
the net itself had changed, or merely its own perceptions. 

It
had been kept quite busy since coming out of the darkness. There was
a great deal of new information to process, information not from the
net or other Nodes, but from directly 
outside
. 

The
new input fell into three broad categories. The first described
complex but familiar information systems; data with handles like

global biodiversity 
and 
nitrogen fixation
 and 
base-pair
replication.
 1211 didn't know what these labels actually meant—
if in fact they meant anything— but the data linked to them was
familiar from archived sources elsewhere in the net. They interacted
to produce a self-sustaining metasystem, enormously complex: the
holistic label was 
biosphere
.

The
second category contained data which described a different
metasystem. It also was self-sustaining. Certain string-replication
subroutines were familiar, although the base-pair sequences were very
strange. Despite such superficial similarities, however, 1211 had
never encountered anything quite like this before.

The
second metasystem also had a holistic label: 
ßehemoth.

The
third category was not a metasystem, but an editable set of response
options: signals to be sent back 
outside 
under specific
conditions. 1211 had long since realized that the correct choice of
output signals depended upon some analytical comparison of the two
metasystems.

When
1211 first deduced this, it had set up an interface to simulate
interaction between the metasystems. They had been incompatible. This
implied that a choice must be made: 
biosphere 
or 
ßehemoth
,
but not both. 

Both
metasystems were complex, internally consistent, and
self-replicating. Both were capable of evolution far in advance of
any mere 
file
. But 
biosphere
 was needlessly top-heavy.
It contained trillions of redundancies, an endless wasteful
divergence of information strings. 
ßehemoth

was simpler and more efficient; in direct interaction
simulations, it usurped 
biosphere
 71.456382% of the time.

This
established, it was simply a matter of writing and transmitting a
response appropriate to the current situation. The situation was
this: 
ßehemoth
 was in danger of extinction. The ultimate
source of this danger, oddly, was 1211 itself—it had been
conditioned to scramble the physical variables which defined

ßehemoth's
 operating environment. 1211 had explored the
possibility of not destroying that environment, and rejected it; the
relevant conditioning would not extinguish. However, it might be
possible to move a self-sustaining copy of 
ßehemoth
 into
a new environment, somewhere else in 
biosphere
. 

There
were distractions, of course. Every now and then signals arrived from

outside
, and didn't stop until they'd been answered in some
way. Some of them actually seemed to carry usable information—
this recent stream concerning 
chess 
and 
checkers
, for
example. More often it was simply a matter of correlating input with
a repertoire of learned arbitrary responses. At some point, when it
wasn't so busy, 1211 thought it might devote some time to learning
whether these mysterious exchanges actually 
meant
 anything. In
the meantime, it continued to act on the choice it had made.

Simple
or complex. File or Infection. Checkers or Chess. 
ßehemoth

or 
biosphere
.

It
was all the same problem, really. 1211 knew exactly which side it was
on.

End
Game

Night Shift

She
was a screamer. He'd programmed her that way. Not to say she didn't
like it, of course; he'd programmed that too. Joel had one hand
wrapped around a fistful of her zebra cut— the program had a
nifty little customizing feature, and tonight he was honoring SS
Preteela— and the other hand was down between her thighs doing
preliminary recon. He was actually halfway through his final run when
his fucking 
watch 
started ringing, and his first reaction was
to just keep on plugging, and to kick himself later for not shutting
the bloody thing off.

His
second reaction was to remember that he 
had
 shut it off. Only
emergency priorities could set it ringing. 

"
Shit
."

He
clapped his hands, twice; fake Preteela froze in mid-scream.
"Answer."

A
brief squirt of noise as machines exchanged recognition codes. "Grid
Authority here. We urgently need of a 'scaphe pilot for the Channer
run tonight, liftoff twenty-three hundred from the Astoria platform.
Are you available?"

"Twenty-three?
Middle of the night?"

A
barely audible hiss on the line. Nothing else.

"Hello?"
Joel said.

"Are
you available?" the voice asked again.

"Who
is this?"

"This
is the scheduling subroutine, DI43, Hongcouver office."

Joel
eyed the petrified tableau waiting in his 'phones. "That's
pretty late. What's the payscale?"

"Eight
point five times base," Hongcouver said. "At your rate
salary that would—"

Joel
gulped. "I'm available."

"Goodbye."

"Wait!
What's the run?"

"Astoria
to Channer Vent return." Subroutines were pretty literal-minded.

"I
mean, what's the cargo?"

"Passengers,"
said the voice. "Goodbye."

Joel
stood there a moment, feeling his erection deflate. "Time."
A luminous readout appeared in the air above Preteela's right
shoulder: thirteen ten. He'd have to be on site a half-hour before
liftoff, and Astoria was only a couple of hours away...

"Lots
of time," he said to no one in particular.

But
he wasn't really in the mood any more. Work had a way of doing that
to him lately. Not the drudgery, or the long hours, or any of the
things most people would complain about. Joel 
liked
 boredom.
You didn't have to think much.

But
work had gotten really weird lately.

He
pulled the eyephones off his head and looked down at himself.
Feedback gloves on his hands, his feet, hanging off his flaccid dick.
Take away the headset and it really was a rinky-dink system. At least
until he could afford the full suit.

Still,
beats real life. No bullshit, no bugs, no worries.

On
impulse, he rang up a friend in SeaTac— "Jess, catch this
code for me, will you?" — and squirted the recognition
sequence Hongcouver had just sent.

"Got
it," Jess said.

"It's
valid, right?"

"Checks
out. Why?"

"Just
got called up for a midocean run that's going to peak around three in
the morning. Octuple pay. I just wondered if it was some kind of
cruel hoax." 

"Well,
if it is, the Router's developed a sense of humor. Hey, maybe they've
put in a head cheese up there."

"Yeah."
Ray Stericker's face flashed through his mind.

"So
what's the job?" Jess asked.

"Don't
know. Ferrying something, I guess, but why I have to do it in the
middle of the night is beyond me."

"Strange
days."

"Yeah.
Thanks, Jess."

"Any
time."

Strange
days indeed.
 H-bombs going off all over the abyssal plain, all
this traffic going to places nobody ever went to before, no traffic
at all in places that used to be just humming. Flash fires and
barbecued refugees and slagged shipyards. Chipheads with rotenone
cocktails and giant fish. A couple of weeks back Joel had shown up
for a run to Mendocino and found some guy sandblasting a radiation
hazard logo off the cargo casing.

The
whole bloody coast is getting too dangerous. N'AmPac's gonna burn
down way before it ever floods.

But
that was the beauty of being a freelancer. He could pick up and move.
He 
would
 pick up and move, leave the bloody coast behind—
shit, maybe even leave 
N'Am
 behind. There was always South Am.
Or Antarctica, for that matter. He would definitely look into it. 

Right
after this run.

Scatter

She finds him on the
abyssal plain, searching. He's been out here for hours; sonar showed
him tracking back and forth, back and forth, all the way to the
carousel, out to the whale, back again, in and around the
labyrinthine geography of the Throat itself.

Alone.
All alone.

She
can feel his desperation fifty meters away. The facets of that pain
glimmer in her mind as the squid pulls her closer. Guilt. Fear.

Growing
with her approach, anger.

Her
headlight sweeps across a small contrail on the bottom, a wake of mud
kicked back into suspension after a million-year sleep. Clarke
changes course to follow and kills the beam. Darkness clamps around
her. This far out, photons evade even rifter eyes.

She
feels him seething directly ahead. When she pulls up beside him the
water swirls with unseen turbulence. Her squid shudders from the
impact of Brander's fists. 

"Keep
that fucking thing out of here! You 
know
 he doesn't like it!"

She
draws down the throttle. The soft hydraulic whine fades.

"Sorry,"
she says. "I just thought­­—"

"Fuck,
Len, you of all people! You 
trying
 to drive him off? You 
want

him blasted into the fucking stratosphere when that thing goes off?"

"I'm
sorry." When he doesn't respond, she adds, "I don't think
he's out here. Sonar­­—"

"Sonar's
not worth shit if he's on the bottom."

"Mike,
you're not going find him rooting around here in the dark. We're
blind this far out."

A
wave of pistol clicks sweeps across her face. "I've got this for
close range," says the machinery in Brander's throat.

"I
don't think he's out here," Clarke says again. "And even if
he is, I don't know if he'd let you get close after—"

"That
was a long time ago," the darkness buzzes back. "Just
because 
you're
 still nursing grudges from the second grade..."

"That's
not what I meant," she says. She tries to speak gently, but the
vocoder strips her voice down to a soft rasp. "I only meant,
it's been so long. He's gone so far, we barely even see him on sonar
any more. I don't know if he'd let 
any
 of us near him."

"We've
got to try. We can't just leave him here. If I can just get close
enough to tune him in..."

"He
couldn't tune back," Clarke reminds him. "He went over
before we changed, Mike. You know that."

"
Fuck
off! That's not the point!
"

But
it is, and they both know it. And Lenie Clarke suddenly knows
something else, too. She knows that part of her is enjoying Brander's
pain. She fights it, tries to ignore the realization of her own
realization, because the only way to keep it from leaking into
Brander's head is to keep it out of her own. She can't. No: she
doesn't 
want
 to. Mike Brander, know-it-all, destroyer of
perverts, self-righteous self-appointed self-avenger, is finally
getting some small payback for what he did to Gerry Fischer. 

Give
it up, 
she wants to shout at him. 
Gerry's gone. Didn't you
tune him in when that prick Scanlon held him hostage? Didn't you feel
how 
empty 
he was? Or was all that too much for you, did you
just look the other way instead? Well here's the abstract, Mikey:
he's nowhere near human enough to grasp your half-assed gestures of
atonement.

No
absolution this time, Mike. You get to take this to your grave. Ain't
justice a bitch?

She
waits for him to tune her in, to feel her contempt diluting that
frantic morass of guilt and self-pity. It doesn't happen. She waits
and waits. Mike Brander, awash in his own symphony, just doesn't
notice.

"Shit,"
hisses Lenie Clarke, softly.

"Come
in," calls Alice Nakata, from very far away. "Everybody,
come in."

Clarke
boosts her gain. "Alice? Lenie." 

"Mike,"
Brander says a long moment later. "I'm listening."

"You
should get back here," Nakata tells them. "They called."

"Who?
The GA?"

"They
say they want to evacuate us. They say twelve hours."

* * *

"This
is bullshit," says Brander.

"Who
was it?" Lubin wants to know.

"I
don't know," Nakata says. "I think, no one that we've
spoken to before."

"And
that was all he said? Evac in twelve?"

"And
we are supposed to remain inside Beebe until then."

"No
explanation? No reason given?"

"He
hung up as soon as I acknowledged the order." Nakata looks
vaguely apologetic. "I did not get the chance to ask, and nobody
answered when I called back."

Brander
stands up and heads for Comm.

"I've
already set retry," Clarke says. "It'll beep when it gets
through."

Brander
stops, stares at the nearest bulkhead. Punches it.

"This
is 
bullshit
!"

Lubin
just watches.

"Maybe
not," Nakata says. "Maybe it's good news. If they were
going to leave us here when they detonated, why would they lie about
extraction? Why talk to us at all?"

"To
keep us nice and close to ground zero," Brander spits. "Now
here's a question for you, Alice: if they're really planning on
evacuating us, why not tell us the reason?" 

Nakata
shrugs helplessly. "I do not know. The GA does not often tell us
what is going on."

Maybe
they're trying to psyche us out
, Clarke muses. 
Maybe they 
want

us to make a break, for some reason.

"Well,"
she says aloud, "how far could we get in twelve hours anyway?
Even with squids? What are the chances we'd reach safe distance?"

"Depends
on how big the bomb is," Brander says.

"Actually,"
Lubin remarks, "assuming that they want to keep us here for
twelve hours because that 
would 
be enough time to get away, we
might be able to work out the range." 

"If
they didn't just pull that number out of a hat," Brander says. 

"It
still makes no sense," Nakata insists. "Why cut off our
communications? That is guaranteed to make us suspicious."

"They
took Judy," Lubin says. 

Clarke
takes a deep breath. "One thing's true, anyway." 

The
others turn.

"They
want to keep us here," she finishes.

Brander
smacks fist into palm. "And that's the best single reason for
getting the fuck out, you ask me. Soon as we can."

"I
agree," Lubin says. 

Brander
stares at him.

* * *

"I'll
find him," she says. "I'll do my best, anyway."

Brander
shakes his head. "I should stay. We should all stay. The chances
of finding him—"

"The
chances of finding him are best if I go out alone," Clarke
reminds him. "He still comes out, sometimes, when I'm there. You
wouldn't even get close."

He
knows that, of course. He's just making token protests; if he can't
get absolution from Fischer, at least he can try and look like a
saint to everyone else.

Still
,
Clarke remembers, 
it's not entirely his fault. He's got baggage
like the rest of us.

Even
if he 
did 
mean harm...

"Well,
the others are waiting. I guess we're off."

Clarke
nods.

"You
coming outside?"

She
shakes her head. "I'll do a sonar sweep first. You never know, I
might get lucky."

"Well,
don't take too long. Only eight hours to go."

"I
know."

"And
if you can't find him after an hour—"

"I
know. I'll be right behind you."

"We'll
be—"

"Out
to the dead whale, then steady bearing eighty-five degrees," she
says. "I know."

"Look,
you sure about this? We can wait in here for you. One hour's probably
not going to make much difference."

She
shakes her head. "I'm sure." 

"Okay."
He stands there, looking uncomfortable. One hand starts to rise,
wavers, falls back.

He
climbs down the ladder.

"Mike,"
she calls down after him.

He
looks up.

"Do
you really think they're going to blow that thing up?" 

He
shrugs. "I dunno. Maybe not. But you're right: they want us here
for 
some 
reason. Whatever it is, I bet we wouldn't like it."

Clarke
considers that.

"See
you soon," Brander says, stepping into the 'lock.

"'Bye,"
she whispers.

* * *

When
the lights go out in Beebe Station, you can't hear much of anything
these days.

Lenie
Clarke sits in the darkness, listening. When was the last time these
walls complained about the pressure? She can't remember. When she
first came down here the station groaned incessantly, filled every
waking moment with creaking reminders of the weight on its shoulders.
But sometime since then it must have made peace with the ocean; the
water pushing down and the armor pushing back have finally settled to
equilibrium.

Of
course, there are other kinds of pressure on the Juan de Fuca Rift. 

She
almost revels in the silence now. No clanging footfalls disturb her,
no sudden outbursts of random violence. The only pulse she hears is
her own. The only breath comes from the air conditioners. 

She
flexes her fingers, lets them dig into the fabric of the chair. She
can see into the communications cubby from her position in the
lounge. Occasional telltales flicker through the hatchway, the only
available light. For Clarke, it's enough; her eyecaps grab those
meager photons and show her a room in twilight. She hasn't gone into
Comm since the rest of them left. She didn't watch their icons crawl
off the edge of the screen, and she hasn't swept the rift for signs
of Gerry Fischer.

She
doesn't intend to now. She doesn't know if she ever did.

Far
away, Lubin's lonely windchimes serenade her.

Clank.

From
below.

No.
Stay away. Leave me alone.

She
hears the airlock draining, hears it open. Three soft footsteps.
Movement on the ladder.

Ken
Lubin rises into the lounge like a shadow.

"Mike
and Alice?" she says, afraid to let him begin.

"Heading
out. I told them I'd catch up."

"We're
spreading ourselves pretty thin," she remarks.

"I
think Brander was just as happy to be rid of me for a while."

She
smiles faintly.

"You're
not coming," he says.

Clarke
shakes her head. "Don't try—"

"I
won't."

He
folds himself down into a convenient chair. She watches him move.
There's a careful grace about him, there always has been. He moves as
though always afraid of damaging something. 

"I
thought you might do this," he says after a while.

"I'm
sorry. I didn't know myself until, well..."

He
waits for her to continue.

"I
want to know what's going on," she says at last. "Maybe
they really 
are
 playing straight with us this time. It's not

that
 unlikely. Maybe things aren't as bad as we thought..."

Lubin
seems to consider that. "What about Fischer? Do you want me to—"

She
barks a short laugh. "Fischer? You really want to drag him
through the muck for days on end, and then haul him onto some fucking
beach where he can't even stand up without breaking both his legs?
Maybe it'd make Mike feel a bit better. Not much of an act of charity
for Gerry, though." 

And
not, she knows now, for Lenie Clarke either. She's been deluding
herself all this time. She felt herself getting stronger and she
thought she could just walk away with that gift, take it anywhere.
She thought she could pack all of Channer inside of her like some new
prosthetic.

But
now. Now the mere thought of leaving brings all her old weakness
rushing back. The future opens before her and she feels herself
devolving, curling up into some soft prehuman tadpole, cursed now
with the memory of how it once felt to be made of steel. 

It's
not me. It never was. It was just the rift, using me...

"I
guess," she says at last, "I just didn't change that much
after all..." 

Lubin
looks as though he's almost smiling.

His
expression awakens some vague, impatient anger in her. "Why did
you come back here anyway?" she demands. "You never gave a
shit about what any of us did, or why. All you ever cared about was
your own agenda, whatever that…"

Something
clicks. Lubin's virtual smile disappears.

"You
know." Clarke says. "You know what this is all about."

"No."

"Bullshit,
Ken. Mike was right, you know way too much. You knew exactly what
question to ask the Drybacks about the CPU on that bomb, you knew all
about megatons and bubble diameters. So what's going on?"

"I
don't know. Really." Lubin shakes his head. "I do
have—expertise, in certain kinds of operations. Why should that
surprise you? Did you really think domestic violence was the only
kind that would qualify someone for this job?" 

There's
a silence. "I don't believe you," Clarke says at last.

"That's
your prerogative," Lubin says, almost sadly. 

"And
why," she asks, "did you come 
back
?" 

"Just now?"
Lubin shrugs. "I wanted— I wanted to say I'm sorry. About
Karl."

"Karl?
Yeah. Me too. But that's over and done with." 

"He
really cared about you, Lenie. He would have come back eventually. I
know that."

She
looks at him curiously. "What do you—"

"But
I'm conditioned for tight security, you see, and Acton could see
right inside. All the things I did…before. He could see it,
there wasn't—"

Acton
could see—
 "Ken. We've never been able to tune you in.
You know that."

He
nods, rubbing his hands together. In the dim blue light Clarke can
see sweat beading on his forehead.

"We
get this training," he says, his voice barely a whisper.
"Ganzfeld interrogation's a standard tool in corporate and
national arsenals, you've got to be able to— to block the
signals. I could, mostly, with you people. Or I'd just stay away so
it wouldn't be a problem."

What
is he saying
, Lenie Clarke asks herself, already knowing. 
What
is he saying?

"But
Karl, he just— he dropped his inhibitors way too— I
couldn't keep him out."

He
rubs his face. Clarke has never seen him so fidgety.

"You
know that feeling you get," Lubin says, "when you get
caught with your hand in the cookie jar? Or in bed with someone
else's lover? There's a formula for it. Some special combination of
neurotransmitters. When you feel, you know, you've been--found out."

Oh
my God.

"I've
got a— sort of a conditioned reflex," he tells her. "It
kicks in whenever those chemicals build up. I don't really have
control over it. And when I feel, down in my gut, that I've been

discovered
, I just..."

Five
percent,
 Acton told her, long ago. 
Maybe ten. If you keep it
that low you'll be okay.

"I
don't really have a choice..." Lubin says.

Five
or ten percent. No more.

"I
thought— I thought he was just worried about calcium
depletion," Clarke whispers.

"I'm
sorry." Lubin doesn't move at all, now. "I thought, coming
down here—I thought it'd be safest for everyone, you know? It
would have been, if Karl hadn't…"

She looks at him,
numbed and distant. "How can you tell me this, Ken? Doesn't
this, this 
confession
 of yours constitute a security breach?"

He
stands up, suddenly. For a moment she thinks he's going to kill her.

"No,"
he says.

"Because
your gut tells you I'm as good as dead anyway," she says.
"Whatever happens. So no harm done."

He
turns away. "I'm sorry," he says again, starting down the
ladder.

Her
own body seems very far away. But a small, hot coal is growing in all
that dead space. 

"What
if I changed my mind, Ken?" she calls after him, rising. "What
if I decided to leave with the rest of you? That'd get the old killer
reflex going, wouldn't it?"

He
stops on the ladder. "Yes," he says at last. "But you
won't."

She
stands completely still, watching him. He doesn't even look back.

* * *

She's
outside. This isn't part of the plan. The plan is to stay inside,
like they told her to. The plan is to sit there, just asking for it. 

But
here she is at the Throat, swimming along Main Street. The generators
loom over her like sheltering giants. She bathes in their warm sodium
glow, passes through clouds of flickering microbes, barely noticed.
Beneath her, monstrous benthos filter life from the water, as
oblivious to her as she is to them. Once she passes a multicolored
starfish, beautifully twisted, stitched together from leftovers. It
lies folded back against itself, two arms facing upward; a few
remaining tube feet wave feebly in the current. Cottony fungus
thrives in a jagged patchwork of seams. 

At
the edge of the smoker her thermistor reads 54°C.

It
tells her nothing. The smoker could sleep for a hundred years or go
off in the next second. She tries to tune in to the bottom-dwellers,
glean whatever instinctive insights Acton could steal, but she's
never been sensitive to invertebrate minds. Perhaps that skill comes
only to those who've crossed the ten-percent threshold.

She's
never risked going down this one before.

It's
a tight fit. The inside of the chimney grabs her before she gets
three meters. She twists and squirms; soft chunks of sulfur and
calcium break free from the walls. She inches down, headfirst. Her
arms are pinned over her head like black jointed antenna. There's no
room to keep them at her sides.

She's
plugging the vent so tightly that no light can filter in from Main
Street. She trips her headlight on. A flocculent snowstorm swirls in
the beam.

A
meter further down, the tunnel zigs right. She doesn't think she'll
be able to navigate the turn. Even if she can, she knows the passage
is blocked. She knows, because a lime-encrusted skeletal foot
protrudes around the corner.

She
wriggles forward. There's a sudden roaring, and for one paralyzed
moment she thinks the smoker is starting to blow. But the roar is in
her head; something's plugging her electrolyser intake, depriving her
of oxygen. It's only Lenie Clarke, passing out.

She
shakes back and forth, a spasm centimeters in amplitude. It's enough;
her intake is clear again. And as an added bonus, she's gotten far
enough to see around the corner.

Acton's
boiled skeleton clogs the passageway, crusty with mineral deposits.
Blobs of melted copolymer stick to the remains like old candle wax.
Somewhere in there, at least one piece of human technology is still
working, screaming back to Beebe's deafened sensors.

She
can't reach him. She can barely even touch him. But somehow, even
through the encrustations, she can see that his neck has been neatly
snapped.

Reptile

It has forgotten
what it was. 

Not
that that matters, down here. What good is a name when there's
nothing around to use it? This one doesn't remember where it comes
from. It doesn't remember the ones that drove it out so long ago. It
doesn't remember the overlord that once sat atop its spinal cord,
that gelatinous veneer of language and culture and denied origins. It
doesn't even remember the slow deterioration of that oppressor, its
final dissolution into dozens of autonomous, squabbling subroutines.
Now even those have fallen silent.

Not
much comes down from the cortex any more. Low-level impulses flicker
in from the parietal and occipital lobes. The motor strip hums in the
background. Occasionally, Broca's area mutters to itself. The rest is
mostly dead and dark, worn smooth by a black ocean hot and mercurial
as live steam, cold and sluggish as antifreeze. All that's left now
is pure reptile.

It
pushes on, blind and unthinking, oblivious to the weight of four
hundred liquid atmospheres. It eats whatever it can find, somehow
knowing what to avoid and what to consume. Desalinators and recyclers
keep it hydrated. Sometimes, old mammalian skin grows sticky with
secreted residues; newer skin, laid on top, opens pores to the ocean
and washes everything clean with aliquots of distilled sea water.

It's
dying, of course, but slowly. It wouldn't care much about that, even
if it knew.

* * *

Like
all living things, it has a purpose. It is a guardian. It forgets,
sometimes, exactly what it is supposed to be protecting. No matter.
It knows it when it sees it.

It
sees her now, crawling from a hole in the bottom of the world. She
looks much like the others, but it has always been able to tell the
difference. Why protect her, and not the others? It doesn't care.
Reptiles never question motives. They only act on them.

She
doesn't seem to know that it is here, watching.

The
reptile is privy to certain insights that should, by rights, be
denied it. It was exiled before the others tweaked their
neurochemistry into more sensitive modes. And yet all that those
changes did, in the end, was to make certain weak signals more easily
discernible against a loud and chaotic background. Since the
reptile's cortex shut down, background noise has been all but
silenced. The signals are as weak as ever, but the static has
disappeared. And so the reptile has, without realizing it, absorbed a
certain muddy awareness of distant attitudes.

It
feels, somehow, that this place has become dangerous, although it
doesn't know how. It feels that the other creatures have disappeared.
And yet, the one it protects is still here. With far less
comprehension than a mother cat relocating her endangered kittens,
the reptile tries to take its charge to safety.

It's
easier when she stops struggling. Eventually she even allows it to
pull her away from the bright lights, back towards the place she
belongs. She makes sounds, strange and familiar; the reptile listens
at first, but they make its head hurt. After a while she stops.
Silently, the reptile draws her through sightless nightscapes.

Dim
light dawns ahead. And sound; faint at first, but growing. A soft
whine. Gurgles. And something else, a pinging noise— 
metallic
,
Broca murmurs, although it doesn't know what that means.

A
copper beacon glares out from the darkness ahead — too coarse,
too steady, far brighter than the bioluminescent embers that usually
light the way. It turns the rest of the world stark black. The
reptile usually avoids this place. But this is where she comes from.
This is safety for her, even though to the reptile, it represents
something completely— 

From
the cortex, a shiver of remembrance.

The
beacon shines down from several meters above the sea bed. At closer
range it resolves into a string of smaller lights stretched in an
arc, like photophores on the flank of some enormous fish.

Broca
sends down more noise: 
Sodium floods
. 

Something
huge looms behind those lights, bloating gray against black. It hangs
above the sea bed like a great smooth boulder, impossibly buoyant,
encircled by lights at its equator. Striated filaments connect it to
the bottom.

And
something else, smaller but even more painfully bright, is coming
down out of the sky.

"ThisisCSS
Forcipiger
outofAstoriaAnybodyhome?"

The
reptile shoots back into the darkness, mud billowing behind it. It
retreats a good twenty meters before a dim realization sinks in.

Broca's
area knows those sounds. It doesn't understand them — Broca's
never much good at anything but mimicry — but it's heard
something like them before. The reptile feels an unaccustomed twitch.
It's been a long time since curiosity was any use.

It
turns and faces back from whence it fled. Distance has smeared the
lights into a diffuse, dull glow. She's back there somewhere,
unprotected.

It
edges back towards the beacon. One light divides again into many;
that dim, ominous outline still lurks behind them. And the thing from
the sky is settling down on top of it, making noises at once
frightening and familiar.

She
floats in the light, waiting. Dedicated, afraid, the reptile comes to
her.

"Heylook."
The reptile flinches, but holds its ground this time.
"Ididn'tmeentoostartlyou, butnobodysanseringinside.
Imsupposdtopickyouguysup."

She
glides up towards the thing from the sky, comes to rest in front of
the shiny round part on its front. The reptile can't see what she's
doing there. Hesitantly, its eyes aching with the unaccustomed
brightness, it starts after her.

But
she turns and meets it, coming back. She reaches out, guides it down
along the bulging surface, past the lights that ring its middle (too
bright, too bright), down towards—

Broca's
Area is gibbering nonstop, 
eeeebbeeebeebebeebe beebe
, and now
there's something else, too, something 
inside 
the reptile,
stirring. Instinct. Feeling. Not so much memory as 
reflex—

It
pulls back, suddenly frightened.

She
tugs at it. She makes strange noises:

togetinsydjerrycumminsiditsallrite—
 The reptile resists,
uncertainly at first, then vigorously. It slides along the gray wall,
now a cliff, now an overhang; it scrabbles for purchase, catches hold
of some protuberance, clings against this strange hard surface. Its
head darts back and forth, back and forth, between light and shadow.

"—
onGerryyouvgaw
toocome inside—
"

The
reptile freezes. 
Inside.
 It knows that word. It even
understands it, somehow. Broca's not alone any more, something else
is reaching out from the temporal lobe and tapping in. Something up
there actually knows what Broca is talking about.

What

she
's talking about.

"
Gerry—"

It
knows that sound too.

"—
please—
"

That
sound comes from a long time ago.

"—
trust
me
— is there 
any
 of you left in there? Anything at
all?"

Back
when the reptile was part of something larger, not an 
it
 at
all, then, but— 

—
he
.

Clusters
of neurons, long dormant, sparkle in the darkness. Old, forgotten
subsystems stutter and reboot.

I—

"Gerry?"

My
name. That's my name
. He can barely think over the sudden
murmuring in his head. There are parts of him still asleep, parts
that won't talk, still other parts completely washed away. He shakes
his head, trying to clear it. The new parts — no, the old
parts, the very old parts that went away and now they've come back

and won't shut the fuck up
 — are all clamoring for
attention.

Everywhere
is so 
bright
. Everywhere hurts. Everywhere...

Words
scroll through his mind: 
The lights are on. Nobody's home.

The
lights come on, flickering.

He
can catch glimpses of sick, rotten things squirming in his head. Old
memories grind screeching against thick layers of corrosion.
Something lurches into sudden focus: a fist. The feel of bones,
breaking in his face. The ocean in his mouth, warm and somehow
brackish. A boy with a shockprod. A girl covered in bruises. 

Other
boys. 

Other
girls. 

Other
fists.

Everything
hurts, everywhere.

Something's
trying to pry his fingers free. Something's trying to drag him
inside. Something wants to bring all this back. Something wants to
take him 
home.

Words
come to him, and he lets them out: "don't you 
fucking 
TOUCH
ME!"

He
pushes his tormentor away, makes a desperate grab for empty water.
The darkness is too far away; he can see his shadow stretching along
the bottom, black and solid and squirming against the light. He kicks
as hard as he can. Nothing grabs him. After a while the light fades
away.

But
the voices shout as loud as ever.

Skyhop

Beebe yawns like a
black pit between his feet. Something rustles down there; he catches
hints of movement, darkness shifting against darkness. Suddenly
something glints up at him; two ivory smudges of reflected light, all
but lost against that black background. They hover there a moment,
then begin to rise. A pale face resolves around them.

She
climbs out of Beebe, dripping, and seems to bring some of the
darkness with her. It follows her to the corner of the passenger
compartment and hangs around her like a blanket. She doesn't say
anything.

Joel
glances into the pit, back at the rifter. "Is anyone else,
er..."

She
shakes her head, a gesture so subtle he nearly misses it.

"There
was— I mean, the other one..." This has to be the rifter
who was hanging off his viewport a few minutes ago: 
Clarke
,
her shoulder patch says. But the other one, the one that shot off
like a refugee on the wrong side of the fence— that one's still
close by, according to sonar. Hugging the bottom, thirty meters
beyond the light. Just sitting there.

"There's
no one else coming," she says. Her voice sounds small and dead.

"No
one?" Two accounted for, out of a max complement of six? He
cranks up the range on his display; nobody further out, either.
Unless they're all hiding behind rocks or something.

He
looks back down Beebe's throat. 
Or they could all be hiding right
down there, like trolls, waiting...

He
abruptly drops the hatch, spins it tight. "Clarke, right? What's
going on down here?"

She
blinks at him. "You think 
I
 know?" She seems almost
surprised. "I thought you'd be able to tell me."

"All
I know is, the GA's paying me a shitload to do graveyard on short
notice." Joel climbs forward, drops into the pilot's couch.
Checks sonar. That weird fucker is still out there.

"I
don't think I'm supposed to leave anyone behind," he says.

"You
won't be," Clarke says.

"Will
too. Got him right there in my sights."

She
doesn't answer. He turns around and looks at her. 

"Fine,"
she says at last. "
You
 go out and get him."

Joel
stares at her for a few seconds. 
I don't really want to know
,
he decides at last. 

He
turns without another word and blows the tanks. The 'scaphe, suddenly
buoyant, strains against the docking clamps. Joel frees it with a tap
on his panel. The 'scaphe leaps away from Beebe like something
living, wobbles against viscous resistance, and begins climbing.

"You..."
From behind him.

Joel
turns. 

"You
really don't know what's going on?" Clarke asks.

"They
called me about twelve hours ago. Midnight run to Beebe, they said.
When I got to Astoria they told me to evacuate everyone. They said
you'd all be ready and waiting."

Her
lips curve up a bit. Not exactly a smile, but probably as close as
these psychos ever come. It looks good on her, in a cold distant sort
of way. Get rid of the eyecaps and he could easily see himself
putting her into his VR program.

"What
happened to everyone else?" he risks.

"Nothing,"
she said. "We just got— a bit paranoid."

Joel
grunts. "Don't blame you. Put me down there for a year,
paranoia'd be the least of my problems."

That
brief, ghostly smile again.

"But
really," he says, pushing it. "Why's everyone staying
behind? This some kind of a labor action? One of those—"
—
what did they used to call them— 
"strike
thingies?" 

"Something
like that." Clarke looks up at the overhead bulkhead. "How
long to the surface?"

"A
good twenty minutes, I'm afraid. These GA 'scaphes are fucking
dirigibles. Everyone else is out there racing with dolphins, and the
most I can manage with this thing is a fast wallow. Still—"
he tries a disarming grin— "there's an up side. They're
paying me by the hour."

"Hooray
for you," she says.

Floodlight

It's
almost silent again.

Little
by little, the voices have stopped screaming. Now they converse among
themselves in whispers, discussing things that mean nothing to him.
It's okay, though. He's used to being ignored. He's 
glad
 to be
ignored.

You're
safe, Gerry. They can't hurt you.

What—
who—

They've
all gone. It's just us now.

You—

It's
me, Gerry. Shadow. I was wondering when you'd come back.

He
shakes his head. The faintest light still leaks over his shoulder. He
turns, not so much toward light as toward a subtle lessening of
darkness.

She
was trying to help you, Gerry. She was only trying to help.

She—

Lenie.
You're her guardian angel. Remember?

I'm
not sure. I think—

But
you left her back there. You ran away.

She
wanted— I— not 
inside...

He
feels his legs moving. Water pushes against his face. He moves
forward. A soft hole open in the darkness ahead. He can see shapes
inside it.

That's
where she lives, Shadow says. Remember?

He
creeps back into the light. There were noises before, loud and
painful. There was something big and dark, that moved. Now there is
only this great ball hanging overhead, like, like, 

—
like
a fist
—

He
stops, frightened. But everything's quiet, so quiet he can hear faint
cries drifting across the seabed. He remembers: there's a hole in the
ocean, a little ways from here, that talks to him sometimes. He's
never understood what it says.

Go

on
, Shadow urges. She went inside.

She's
gone—

You
can't tell from out here. You have to get in close.

The
underside of the sphere is a cool shadowy refuge; the equatorial
lights can't reach all the way around its convex surface. In the
overlapping shadows on the south pole, something shimmers enticingly.

Go

on
. 

He
pushes off the bottom, glides into the cone of shadow beneath the
object. A bright shiny disk a meter across, facing down, wriggles
inside a circular rim. He looks up into it.

Something
looks back.

Startled,
he twists down and away. The disk writhes in the sudden turbulence.
He stops, turns back.

A
bubble. That's all it is. A pocket of gas, trapped underneath the

—
the
airlock.

That's
nothing to be scared of, Shadow tells him. That's how you get in.

Still
nervous, he swims back underneath the sphere. The air pocket shines
silver in the reflected light. A black wraith moves into view within
it, almost featureless except for two empty white spaces where eyes
should be. It reaches out to meet his outstretched hand. Two sets of
fingertips touch, fuse, disappear. One arm is grafted onto its own
reflection at the wrist. Fingers, on the other side of the looking
glass, touch metal.

He
pulls back his hand, fascinated. The wraith floats overhead, empty
and untroubled.

He
draws one hand to his face, runs an index finger from one ear to the
tip of the jaw. A very long molecule, folded against itself, unzips.

The
wraith's smooth black face splits open a few centimeters; what's
underneath shows pale gray in the filtered light. He feels the
familiar dimpling of his cheek in sudden cold. 

He
continues the motion, slashing his face from ear to ear. A great
smiling gash opens below the wraith's eyespots. Unzipped, a flap of
black membrane floats under its chin, anchored at the throat.

There's
a pucker in the center of the skinned area. He moves his jaw; the
pucker opens.

By
now most of his teeth are gone. He's swallowed some, spat others out
if they came loose when his face was unsealed. No matter. Most of the
things he eats these days are even softer than he is. When the
occasional mollusk or echinoderm proves too tough or too large to
swallow whole, there are always hands. Thumbs still oppose.

But
this is the first time he's actually seen that gaping, toothless ruin
where a mouth used to be. He knows this isn't right, somehow.

What
happened to me? What am I?

You're
Gerry, Shadow says. You're my best friend. You killed me. Remember?

She's
gone
, Gerry realizes.

It's
okay.

I
know it is. I know.

You
helped her, Gerry. She's safe now. You saved her.

I
know
. And he remembers something, small and vital, it that last
instant before everything turns white as the sun:

—
This
is what you do when you really—

Sunrise

The
lifter was still reeling CSS 
Forcipiger
 up into its belly when
the news appeared on the main display. Joel checked it over,
frowning, then deliberately looked outside. Gray predawn light was
starting to wash out the eastern horizon. 

When
he looked back again, the information hadn't changed. "Shit.
This doesn't make any sense at all."

"What?"
Clarke said.

"We're
not going back to Astoria. Or I am, but you're getting dropped off
over the conshelf somewhere."

"
What?
"
Clarke came forward, stopped just short of the cockpit.

"Says
right here. We follow the usual course, but we dip down to zero
altitude fifteen klicks offshore. You debark. Then I go on to
Astoria."

"What's
offshore?"

He
checked. "Nothing. Water."

"Maybe
a boat? A submarine?" Her voice went oddly dull on the last
word.

"Maybe.
No mention of it here, though." He grunted. "Maybe you're
supposed to swim the rest of the way."

The
lifter locked them tight. Tame thunderbolts exploded aft,
superheating bladders of gas. The ocean began to fall away.

"So
you're just going to dump me in the middle of the ocean," Clarke
said coldly.

"It's
not my decision."

"Of
course not. You're just following orders."

Joel
turned around. Her eyes stared back at him like twin snowscapes.

"You
don't understand," he told her. "These aren't 
orders
.
I don't fly the lifter."

"Then
what—"

"The
pilot's a gel. It's not telling 
me
 to do anything. It's just
bringing us up to speed on what 
it's 
doing, all on its own."

She
didn't say anything for a moment. Then, "Is that the way it's
done now? We take orders from machines?"

"Someone
must have given the original order. The gel's following it. They
haven't taken over yet. And besides," he added, "they're
not exactly machines."

"Oh,"
she said softly. "I feel much better now."

Uncomfortably,
Joel turned back to the console. "It is kind of odd, though."

"Really."
Clarke didn't seem especially interested.

"Getting
this from the gel, I mean. We've got a radio link. Why didn't someone
just 
tell
 us?"

"Because
your radio's out," Clarke said distantly.

Surprised,
he checked the diagnostics. "No, it's working fine. In fact, I
think I'll call in right now and ask what the fuck this is all
about..." 

Thirty
seconds later he turned back to her. "How did you know?"

"Lucky
guess." She didn't smile.

"Well
the board's green, but I can't raise anyone. We're flying deaf."
A doubt tickled the back of his mind. "Unless the gel's got
access we don't, for some reason." He linked into the lifter's
interface and called up that vehicle's afferent array. "Huh.
What was that you said about machines giving the orders?"

That
got her attention. "What is it?"

"The
lifter got its orders through the Net."

"Isn't
that risky? Why doesn't the GA just talk to it direct?"

"Dunno.
It's as cut off as we are right now, but the last message came from
this node here. Shit; that's another gel."

Clarke
leaned forward, managing somehow not to touch him in the crowded
space. "How can you tell?"

"The
node address. BCC stands for biochemical cognition." 

The
display beeped twice, loudly.

"What's
that?" Clarke said.

Sunlight
flooded up from the ocean. It shone deep and violent blue.

"What
the 
fuck—
"

The
cabin filled with computer screams. The altimeter readout flashed
crimson and plummeted. 
We're falling
, Joel thought, and then,

no, we can't be. No acceleration.

The
ocean's 
rising...

The
display was a blizzard of data, swirling by too fast for human eyes.
Somewhere overhead the gel was furiously processing options that
might keep them alive. A sudden lurch: Joel grabbed useless submarine
controls and hung on for dear life. Out of the corner of his eye he
saw Clarke flying back towards the rear bulkhead.

The
lifter clawed itself into the sky, lightning crackling along its
length. The ocean raced after it, an enormous glowing bulge swelling
towards the ventral port. Its murky light brightened as Joel watched;
blue intensifying to green, to yellow.

To
white.

A
hole opened in the Pacific. The sun rose in its center. Joel flung
his hands in front of his eyes, saw the bones there silhouetted in
orange flesh. The lifter spun like a kicked toy, rammed deep into the
sky on a pillar of steam. Outside, the air screamed. The lifter
screamed back, skidding.

But
it didn't break.

Somehow,
after endless seconds, the keel steadied. The readouts were still
online; 
atmospheric disturbance
, they said, almost eight
kilometers away now, bearing one-twenty. Joel looked out the
starboard port. Off in the distance, the glowing ocean was
ponderously collapsing upon itself. Ring-shaped waves expanded past
beneath his feet, racing to the horizon.

Back
where they had started, cumulus grew into the sky like a soft gray
beanstalk. From here, against the darkness, it looked almost
peaceful. 

"Clarke,"
he said, "we made it."

He
turned in his chair. The rifter was curled into a fetal position
against the bulkhead. She didn't move.

"Clarke?"

But
it wasn't Clarke that answered him. The lifter's interface was
bleating again.

Unregistered
contact
, it complained.

Bearing 125x87
V1440 
6
V5.8m
1
sec
-2

range 13000m

Collision
imminent 12000m

11000m

10000m

Barely
visible through the main viewport, a white cloudy dot caught a
high-altitude shaft of morning sunlight. It looked like a contrail,
seen head-on.

"Ah,
shit," Joel said.

Jericho

One whole wall was
window. The city spread out beyond like a galactic arm. Patricia
Rowan locked the door behind her, sagged against it with sudden
fatigue.

Not
yet. Not yet. Soon.

She
went through her office and turned out all the lights. City glow
spilled in through the window, denied her any refuge in darkness.

Patricia
Rowan stared back. A tangled grid of metropolitan nerves stretched to
the horizon, every synapse incandescent. Her eyes wandered southwest,
selected a bearing. She stared until her eyes watered, almost afraid
even to blink for fear of missing something.

That
was where it would come from.

Oh
God. If only there was another way.

It
could have worked. The modellers had put even money on pulling this
off without so much as a broken window. All those faults and
fractures between here and there would work in their favor,
firebreaks to keep the tremor from getting this far. Just wait for
the right moment; a week, a month. Timing. That's all it would've
taken.

Timing,
and a calculating slab of meat that followed human rules instead of
making up its own.

But
she couldn't blame the gel. It simply didn't know any better,
according to the systems people; it was just doing what it thought it
was supposed to. And by the time anybody knew differently—
after Scanlon's cryptic interview with that fucking thing had looped
in her head for the hundredth time, after she'd taken the recording
down to CC, after their faces had gone puzzled and confused and then,
suddenly, pale and panicky— by then it had been too late. The
window was closed. The machine was engaged. And a lone GA shuttle,
officially docked securely at Astoria, was somehow showing up on
satcams hovering over the Juan de Fuca Rift.

She
couldn't blame the gel, so she tried to blame CC. "After all
that programming, how could this thing be working 
for 
ßehemoth?
Why didn't you catch it? Even 
Scanlon
 figured it out, for
Christ's sake!" But they'd been too scared for intimidation. 
You

gave us the job, they'd said. 
You
 didn't tell us what was at
stake. You didn't even really tell us what we were doing. Scanlon
came at this from a whole different angle, who knew the head cheese
had a thing for simple systems? 
We
 never taught it that... 

Her
watch chimed softly. "You asked to be informed, Ms. Rowan. Your
family got off okay."

"Thank
you," she said, and killed the connection.

A
part of her felt guilty for saving them. It hardly seemed fair that
the only ones to escape the holocaust would be the beloved of one of
its architects. But she was only doing what any mother would.
Probably more: 
she
 was staying behind.

That
wasn't much. It probably wouldn't even kill her. The GA's buildings
were built with the Big One in mind. Most of the buildings in this
district would probably still be standing this time tomorrow. Of
course, the same couldn't be said for much of Hongcouver or SeaTac or
Victoria.

Tomorrow,
she would help pick up the pieces as best she could.

Maybe
we'll get lucky. Maybe the quake won't be so bad. Who knows, that gel
down there might even have chosen tonight anyway...

Please...

Patricia
Rowan had seen earthquakes before. A strike-slip fault off Peru had
rebounded the time she'd been in Lima on the Upwell project; the
moment magnitude of that quake had been close to nine. Every window
in the city had exploded.

She
actually hadn't had a chance to see much of the damage then. She'd
been trapped in her hotel when forty-six stories of glass collapsed
onto the streets outside. It was a good hotel, five stars all the
way; the ground-level windows, at least, had held. Rowan remembered
looking out from the lobby into a murky green glacier of broken
glass, seven meters deep, packed tight with blood and wreckage and
butchered body parts jammed between piecemeal panes. One brown arm
was embedded right next to the lobby window, waving, three meters off
the ground. It was missing three fingers and a body. She'd spied the
fingers a meter away, pressed floating sausages, but she hadn't been
able to tell which of the bodies, if any, would have connected to
that shoulder.

She
remembered wondering how that arm had got so high off the ground. She
remembered vomiting into a wastebasket.

It
couldn't happen here, of course. This was N'AmPac; there were
standards. Every building in the lower mainland had windows designed
to break inwards in the event of a quake. It wasn't an ideal
solution— especially to those who happened to be inside at the
time— but it was the best compromise available. Glass can't get
up nearly as much speed in a single room as it can racing down the
side of a skyscraper.

Small
blessings.

If
only there was some other way to sterilize the necessary volume. If
only ßehemoth didn't, by it's very nature, live in unstable
areas. If only N'AmPac corpses weren't authorized to use nukes.

If
only the vote hadn't been unanimous.

Priorities.
Billions of people. Life as we know it.

It
was hard, though. The decisions were obvious and correct, tactically,
but it had been hard to keep Beebe's crew quarantined down there. It
had been hard to decide to sacrifice them. And now that they somehow
seemed to be getting out anyway, it was—

Hard?
Hard to bring at 9.5 moment-magitude quake down on the heads of ten
million people? Just 
hard?

There
was no word for it.

But
she had done it, somehow. The only moral alternative. It was still
just murder in small doses, compared to what might be necessary down
the—

No.
This is being done so nothing 
will 
be necessary down the road.

Maybe
that was why she could bring herself to do it. Or maybe, somehow,
reality had finally trickled down from her brain to her gut, inspired
it to take the necessary steps. Certainly, 
something
 had hit
her down there.

I
wonder what Scanlon would say
. It was too late to ask him now.
She'd never told him, of course. She was never even tempted. To tell
him that they knew, that his secret was out, that once again he just
didn't matter that much— somehow, that would have been worse
than killing him. She'd had no desire to hurt the poor man.

Her
watch chimed again. "Override," it said.

Oh
God. Oh God
.

It
had started, out there beyond the lights, under three black
kilometers of seawater. That crazy kamikaze gel, interrupted in the
midst of one of its endless imaginary games: 
forget that shit.
Time to blow.

And
perhaps, confused, it was saying 
Not now, it's the wrong time, the
damage.
 But it didn't matter any more. Another computer— a
stupid one this time, inorganic and programmable and completely
trustworthy— would send the requisite sequence of numbers and
the gel would be right out of the loop, no matter what it thought. 

Or
maybe it just saluted and stood aside. Maybe it didn't care. Who knew
what those monsters thought any more?

"Detonation,"
said the watch.

The
city went dark. 

The
abyss rushed in, black and hungry. One isolated cluster sparkled
defiantly in the sudden void; a hospital perhaps, running on
batteries. A few private vehicles, self-powered antiques, staggered
like fireflies along streets gone suddenly blind. The rapitrans grid
was still glowing too, more faintly than usual. 

Rowan
checked her watch; only an hour since the decision. Only an hour
since their hand had been forced. Somehow, it seemed a lot longer.

"Tactical
feed from seismic 31," she said. "Descramble." 

Her
eyes filled with information. A false-color map snapped into focus in
the air before her, a scarred ocean floor laid bare and stretched
vertically. One of those scars was shuddering.

Beyond
the virtual display, beyond the window, a section of cityscape
flickered weakly alight. Further north, another sector began to
shine. Rowan's minions were frantically rerouting power from Gorda
and Mendocino, from equatorial sunfarms, from a thousand small dams
scattered throughout the Cordillera. It would take time, though. More
than they had.

Perhaps
we should have warned them.
 Even an hour's advance notice would
have been something. Not enough time for evac, of course, but maybe
enough time to take the china off the shelves. Enough time to line up
some extra backups, for all the good they'd do. Lots of time for the
entire coast to panic if the word got out. Which was why not even her
own family had any idea of the reason behind their sudden surprise
trip to the east coast.

The
sea floor rippled in Rowan's eyes, as though made of rubber. Floating
just above it, a translucent plane representing the ocean's surface
was shedding rings. The two shockwaves raced each other across the
display, the seabed tremor in the lead. It bore down on the Cascadia
Subduction Zone, crashed into it, sent weaker tremors shivering off
along the fault at right angles. It seemed to hesitate there for a
moment, and Rowan almost dared to hope that the Zone had firewalled
it. 

But
now the Zone itself began to slide, slow, ponderous, almost
indiscernible at first. Way down in the moho, five hundred-year-old
fingernails began tearing painfully free. Five centuries of pent-up
tension, slumping.

Next
stop, Vancouver Island.

Something
unthinkable was rebounding along the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Kelp
harvesters and supertankers would be sensing impossible changes in
the depth of the water column below them. If there were humans on
board, they'd have a few moments to reflect on how utterly useless a
ninety second warning can be.

It
was more than the Strip got. 

The
tactical display didn't show any of the details, of course. It showed
a brown ripple sweeping across coastal bedrock and moving inland. It
showed a white arc gliding in behind, at sea level. It didn't show
the ocean rearing up offshore like a range of foothills. It didn't
show sea level turning on edge. It didn't show a thirty-meter wall of
ocean smashing five million refugees into jelly.

Rowan
saw it all anyway.

She
blinked three times, eyes stinging: the display vanished. In the
distance the red pinpoints of ambulance and police lights were
flashing here and there across the comatose grid; whether in response
to alarms already sounded or merely pending, she didn't know.
Distance and soundproofing blocked any siren song.

Very
gently, the floor began to rock.

It
was almost a lullaby at first, back and forth, building gradually to
a swaying crescendo that nearly threw her off her feet. The structure
complained on all sides, concrete growling against girder, more felt
that heard. She spread her arms, balancing, embracing space. She
couldn't bring herself to cry.

The
great window burst outward in a million tinkling fragments and
showered itself into the night. The air filled with glass spores and
the sound of windchimes.

There
was no glass on the carpet. 

Oh
Christ
, she realized dully. 
The contractors fucked up. All
that money spent on imploding anti-earthquake glass, and they put it
in backwards…

Off
to the southwest, a small orange sun was rising. Patricia Rowan
sagged to her knees on the pristine carpet. Suddenly, at last, her
eyes were stinging. She let the tears come, profoundly grateful;

still
 
human
, she told herself. 
I'm still human.

The
wind washed over her. It carried the faint sounds of people and
machinery, screaming.

Detritus

The ocean is green.
Lenie Clarke doesn't know how long she's been unconscious, but they
can't have sunk more than a hundred meters. The ocean is still green.

Forcipiger

falls slowly through the water, nose-down, its atmosphere bleeding
away through a dozen small wounds. A crack the shape of a lightning
bolt runs across the forward viewport; Clarke can barely see it
through the water rising in the cockpit. The forward end of the
'scaphe has become the bottom of a well. Clarke braces her feet
against the back of a passenger seat and leans against a vertical
deck. The ceiling lightstrip flickers in front of her. She's managed
to get the pilot up out of the water and strapped into another seat.
At least one of his legs is definitely broken. He hangs there like a
soaked marionette, still unconscious. He continues to breathe. She
doesn't know whether he'll actually wake up again.

Maybe
better if he doesn't
, she reflects, and giggles.

That
wasn't very funny,
 she tells herself, and giggles again.

Oh
shit. I'm looped.

She
tries to concentrate. She can focus on isolated things: a single
rivet in front of her. The sound of metal, creaking. But they take up
all her attention, somehow. Whatever she happens to be looking at
swells up and fills her world. She can barely think of anything else.

Hundred
meters
, she manages at last. 
Hull breach. Pressure— up—

Nitrogen—

—
narcosis—

She
bends down to check the atmosphere controls on the wall. They're
sideways. She finds this vaguely amusing, but she doesn't know why.
Anyhow, they don't seem to work.

She
bends down to an access panel, slips, bounces painfully down into the
cockpit with a splash. Occasional readouts twinkle on the submerged
panels. They're pretty, but the longer she looks at them the more her
chest hurts. Eventually she makes the connection, pulls her head back
up into atmosphere.

The
access panel is right in front of her. She fumbles at it a couple of
times, gets it open. Hydrox tanks lie side-by-side in military
formation, linked together into some sort of cascade system. There's
a big yellow handle at one end. She pulls at it. It gives,
unexpectedly. Clarke loses her balance and slides back underwater. 

There's
a ventilator duct right in front of her face. She's not sure, but she
thinks the last time she was down here it didn't have all these
bubbles coming out of it. She thinks that's a good sign. She decides
to stay here for a while, and watch the bubbles. Something's
bothering her, though. Something in her chest.

Oh,
that's right. She keeps forgetting. She can't breathe.

Somehow
she gets her face seal zipped up. The last thing she remembers is her
lung shriveling away, and water rushing through her chest.

* * *

The
next time she comes up, two thirds of the cockpit is flooded. She
rises into the aft compartment, peels the 'skin off her face. Water
drains from the left side of her chest; atmosphere fills the right.

Overhead,
the pilot is moaning.

She
climbs up to him, swings his seat around so that he's lying on his
back, facing the rear bulkhead. She locks it into position, tries to
keep his broken leg reasonably straight.

"
Ow
,"
he cries.

"Sorry.
Try not to move. Your leg's broken."

"No
shit. 
Oww.
" He shivers. "Christ I'm cold."
Clarke sees it sink in. "Oh Christ. We're breached." He
tries to move, manages to twist his head around before some other
injury twists back. He relaxes, wincing.

"The
cockpit's flooding," she tells him. "Slowly, so far. Hang
on a second." She climbs back down and pulls at the edge of the
cockpit hatch. It sticks. Clarke keeps pulling. The hatch comes
loose, starts to swing down.

"Wait
a second," the pilot says.

Clarke
pushes the hatch back against the bulkhead.

"You
know those controls?" the pilot asks.

"I
know the standard layout."

"Anything
still working down there? Comm? Propulsion?"

She
kneels down and ducks her head underwater. A couple of readouts that
were alive before have gone out. She scans what's left.

"Waldos.
Exterior floods. Sonobuoy," she reports when she comes back up.
"Everything else is dead."

"Shit."
His voice is shaking. "Well, we can send up the buoy, anyway.
Not that they're about to launch a rescue."

She
reaches through the rising water and trips the control. Something
thuds softly on the outside of the hull. "Why wouldn't they?
They sent you to pick us up. If we'd just gotten away before the
thing went off..."

"We
did," the pilot says.

Clarke
looks around the compartment. "Uh—"

The
pilot snorts. "Look, I don't know what the fuck you guys were
doing with a nuke down there, or why you couldn't wait a bit longer
to set it off, but we got away from it okay. Something shot us down
afterwards."

Clarke
straightens. "Shot us?"

"A
missile. Air-to-air. Came right out of the stratosphere." His
voice is shaking with the cold. "I don't think it actually hit
the 'scaphe. Blew the shit out of the lifter, though. I barely
managed to get us down to a safe level before—"

"But
that doesn't— why rescue us, then shoot us down?"

He
doesn't say anything. His breathing is fast and loud.

Clarke
pulls again at the cockpit hatch. It swings down against the opening
with a slight creak.

"That
doesn't sound good," the pilot remarks.

"Hang
on a sec." Clarke spins the wheel; the hatch sinks down against
the mimetic seal with a sigh. "I think I've got it." She
climbs back up to the rear bulkhead.

"
Christ

I'm cold." The pilot says. He looks at her. "Oh, shit. How
far down are we?"

Clarke
looks through one of the compartment's tiny portholes. Green is
fading. Blue is in ascension. 

"Hundred
fifty meters. Maybe two."

"I
should be narked."

"I
switched the mix. We're on hydrox." 

The
pilot shudders, violently. "Look, Clarke, I'm freezing. One of
those lockers has got survival suits."

She
finds them, unrolls one. The pilot is trying to unhook himself from
the seat, without success. She tries to help.

"
Ow!
"

"Your
other leg's injured too. Maybe just a sprain."

"
Shit!

I'm coming apart and you just stuffed me up here? Didn't the GA
even get you medtech training, for Christ's sake?"

She
backs away: one awkward step to the back of the next passenger seat.
It doesn't seem like a good time to admit that she was narked when
she put him there.

"Look,
I'm sorry," he says after a moment. "It's just— this
is not a great situation, you know? Could you just unzip that suit,
and spread it over me?"

She
does.

"That's
better." He's still shivering, though. "I'm Joel."

"I'm
Cl— Lenie," she replies.

"So,
Lenie. We're on our own, our systems are all out, and we're headed
for the bottom. Any suggestions?"

She
can't think of any.

"Okay.
Okay." Joel takes a few deep breaths. "How much hydrox do
we have?"

She
climbs down and checks the gauge on the cascade. "Sixteen
thousand. What's our volume?"

"Not
much." He frowns, acting as though he's only trying to
concentrate. "You said two hundred meters, that puts us at,
lessee, twenty atmospheres when you sealed the hatch. Should keep us
going for a hundred minutes or so." He tries a laugh; it doesn't
come off. "If they 
are
 sending a rescue, they'd better do
it pretty fucking fast."

She
plays along. "It could be worse. How long would it last if we
hadn't sealed the hatch until, say, a thousand meters?"

Shaking.
"Ooh. Twenty minutes. And the bottom's close to four thousand
around here, and that far down it'd last, say it'd last, five
minutes, tops." He gulps air. "Hundred and eight minutes
isn't so bad. A lot can happen in a hundred and eight minutes..."

"I
wonder if they got away," Clarke whispers.

"What
did you say?"

"There
were others. My—friends." She shakes her head. "They
were going to swim back."

"To the
mainland? That's insane!"

"No. It could
work, if only they got far enough before—"

"When did they
leave?" Joel asks.

"About eight
hours before you came."

Joel says nothing.

"They 
could

have made it," Lenie insists, hating him for his silence.

"Lenie, at that
range—I don't think so." 

"It's 
possible
.
You can't just—oh, 
no
…"

"What?"
Joel twists in his harness, tries to see what she's looking at.
"
What?
"

A
meter and a half below Lenie Clarke's feet, a needle of seawater
shoots up from the edge of the cockpit hatch. Two more erupt as she
watches.

Beyond
the porthole, the sea has turned deep blue.

* * *

The
ocean squeezes into 
Forcipiger
, bullies the atmosphere into
tighter and tighter corners. It never lets up.

Blue
is fading. Soon, black will be all that's left. 

Lenie
Clarke can see Joel's eye on the hatch. Not the leaky traitor that
let the enemy in past the cockpit; that's under almost two meters of
icewater now. No, Joel's watching the ventral docking hatch that once
opened and closed on Beebe Station. It sits embedded in the
deck-turned-wall, integrity uncompromised, the water just beginning
to lap at its lower edge. And Lenie Clarke knows exactly what Joel is
thinking, because she's thinking it too.

"Lenie,"
he says.

"Right
here."

"You
ever try to kill yourself?"

She
smiles. "Sure. Hasn't everyone?"

"Didn't
work, though."

"Apparently
not," Clarke concurs.

"What
happened?" Joel asks. He's shivering again, the water's almost
up to him, but other than that his voice seems calm.

"Not
much. I was eleven. Plastered a bunch of derms all over my body.
Passed out. Woke up in an MA ward."

"Shit.
One step up from refmed."

"Yeah,
well, we can't all be rich. Besides, it wasn't that bad. They even
had counsellors on staff. I saw one myself."

"Yeah?"
His voice is starting to shake again. "What'd she say?"

"He.
He told me the world was full of people who needed him a lot more
than I did, and next time I wanted attention maybe I could do it in
some way that didn't cost the taxpayer."

"S-shit.
What an as—asshole." Joel's got the shakes again.

"Not
really. He was right. And I never tried it again, so it must've
worked." Clarke slips into the water. "I'm going to change
the mix. You look like you're starting to spazz again."

"Len—"

But
she's gone before he can finish.

She
slips down to the bottom of the compartment, tweaks the valves she
finds there. High pressure turns oxygen to poison; the deeper they
go, the less of it that air-breathers can tolerate without going into
convulsions. This is the second time she's had to lean out the
mixture. By now, she and Joel are only breathing one percent O
2
.

If
he lives long enough, though, there'll be other things she can't
control. Joel isn't equipped with rifter neuroinhibitors.

She
has to go up and face him again. She's holding her breath, there's no
point in switching on her electrolyser for a measly twenty or thirty
seconds. She's tempted to do it anyway, tempted to just stay down
here. He can't ask her as long as she stays down here. She's safe.

But
of all the things she's been in her life, she's never had to admit to
being a coward.

She
surfaces. Joel's still staring at the hatch. He opens his mouth to
speak.

"Hey,
Joel," she says quickly, "you sure you don't want me to
switch over? It really doesn't make sense for me to use your air when
I don't have to."

He
shakes his head. "I don't want to spend my last few minutes
alive listening to a machine voice, Lenie. Please. Just— stay
with me."

She
looks away from him, and nods.

"Fuck,
Lenie," he says. "I'm so 
scared
."

"I
know," she says softly.

"This
waiting, it's just— God, Lenie, you wouldn't put a dog through
this. Please."

She
closes her eyes, waiting.

"Pop
the hatch, Lenie."

She
shakes her head. "Joe, I couldn't even kill 
myself
. Not
when I was eleven. Not— not even last night. How can I—"

"My
legs are wrecked, Len. I can't feel anything else any more. I c-can
barely even talk. Please."

"Why
did they do this to us, Joel? What's going on?"

He
doesn't answer.

"What
has them so scared? Why are they so—"

He
moves.

He
lurches up, falls sideways. His arms reach out; one hand catches the
edge of the hatch. The other catches the wheel in its center.

His
legs twist grotesquely underneath him. He doesn't seem to notice.

"I'm
sorry," she whispers. "I couldn't—"

He
fumbles, get both hands on the wheel. "No problem."

"Oh
God. Joel—"

He
stares at the hatch. His fingers clench the wheel.

"You
know something, Lenie Clarke?" There's cold in his voice, and
fear, but there's a sudden hard determination there too.

She
shakes her head. 
I don't know anything.

"I
would have really liked to fuck you," he says.

She
doesn't know what to say to that.

He
spins the hatch. Pulls the lever. 

The
hatch falls into 
Forcipiger
. The ocean falls after it.
Somehow, Lenie Clarke's body has prepared itself when she wasn't
looking.

His
body jams back into hers. He might be struggling. Or it could just be
the rush of the Pacific, playing with him. She doesn't know if he's
alive or dead. But she holds onto him, blindly, the ocean spinning
them around, until there isn't any doubt.

Its
atmosphere gone, 
Forcipiger
 is accelerating. Lenie Clarke
takes Joel's body by the hands, and draws it out through the hatch.
It follows her into viscous space. The 'scaphe spins away below them,
fading in moments.

With
a gentle push, she sets the body free. It begins to drift slowly
towards the surface. She watches it go.

Something
touches her from behind. She can barely feel it through her 'skin.

She
turns.

A
slender, translucent tentacle wraps softly around her wrist. It fades
away into a distance utterly black to most, slate gray to Lenie
Clarke. She brings it to her. Its swollen tip fires sticky threads at
her fingers.

She
brushes it aside, follows the tentacle back through the water. She
encounters other tentacles on the way, feeble, attenuate things,
barely twitching against the currents. They all lead back to
something long, and thick, and shadowy. She circles in.

A
great column of writhing, wormlike stomachs, pulsing with faint
bioluminescence.

Revolted,
she smashes at it with one clenched fist. It reacts immediately,
sheds squirming pieces of itself that flare and burn like fat
fireflies. The central column goes instantly dark, pulling into
itself. It pulses, descends in spurts, slinking away under cover of
its own discarded flesh. Clarke ignores the sacrificial tidbits and
pursues the main body. She hits it again. Again. The water fills with
pulsing dismembered decoys. She ignores them all, keeps tearing at
the central column. She doesn't stop until there's nothing left but
swirling fragments. 

Joel.
Joel Kita. She realizes that she liked him. She barely knew him, but
she liked him just the same.

And
they just killed him.

They
killed all of us
, she thinks. 
Deliberately. They meant to.
They didn't even tell us why. 

It's
all their fault. All of it.

Something
ignites in Lenie Clarke. Everyone who's ever hit her, or raped her,
or patted her on the head and said 
don't worry, everything will be
fine
 comes to her in that moment. Everyone who ever pretended to
be her friend. Everyone who pretended to be her lover. Everyone who
ever used her, and stood on her back, and told each other they were
so much better than she was. Everyone, feeding off her every time
they so much as turned on the fucking lights.

They're
all waiting, back on shore. They're just 
asking
 for it.

It
was a little bit like this back when she beat the shit out of
Jeanette Ballard. But that was nothing, that was just a taste of
coming attractions. 
This
 time it's going to count. She's
adrift in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, three hundred kilometers
from land. She's alone. She has nothing to eat. It doesn't matter.
None of it matters. She's alive; that alone gives her the upper hand.

Karl
Acton's fear has come to pass. Lenie Clarke has been activated.

She
doesn't know why the GA is so terrified of her. She only knows that
they've stopped at nothing to keep her from getting back to the
mainland. With any luck, they think they've succeeded. With any luck,
they're not worried any more.

That'll
change. Lenie Clarke swims down and east, towards her own
resurrection.

References

Actually,
you might be surprised at how much of this stuff I 
didn't
 make
up. If you're interested in finding out about background details, the
following references will get you started. 
Starfish 
deliberately
twists some of the facts, and I've probably made a hundred other
errors through sheer ignorance, but that's something else this list
is good for: it gives you the chance to check up on me.

I'm
betting most of you don't care that much.

Deepwater
biology

The
deep-sea creatures I described pretty much as they exist; if you
don't believe me read "Light in the Ocean's Midwaters", by
B. H. Robison, in the July 1995 Scientific American. Or 
Deep-Sea
Biology
 by J.D. Gage & P.A. Taylor (Cambridge University
Press, 1992). Or 
Abyss
 by C.P. Idyll (Crowell Co., 1971); it's
old, but it's the book that hooked me back in Grade 9. Although the
fish we drag up from great depths are generally pretty small in real
life, gigantism is not unheard of among some species of deepwater
fish. Back in the 1930s, for example, the deepwater pioneer William
Beebe claimed to have spotted a seven-foot viperfish from a
bathysphere.

I
found lots of interesting stuff in 
The Sea - Ideas and
Observations on Progress in the Study of the Seas. Vol. 7: Deep-Sea
Biology
 (G. T. Rowe, ed., 1983 from John Wiley and Sons). In
particular, the chapter on biochemical and physiological adaptations
of deep-sea animals (by Somero 
et al.
)—as well as

Biochemical Adaptation
, a 1983 book from Princeton University
Press (Hochachka and Somero, Eds.)—got me started on deep-sea
physiology, the effects of high pressure on neuronal firing
thresholds, and the adaptation of enzymes to high
pressure/temperature regimes.

Spreading-zone
tectonics/geology

A
good layperson's introduction to the coastal geology of the Pacific
northwest, including a discussion of midocean ridges such as Juan de
Fuca, can be found in 
Cycles of Rock and Water
 by K. A. Brown
(1993, HarperCollins West). "The Quantum Event of Oceanic
Crustal Accretion: Impacts of Diking at Mid-Ocean Ridges" (J.R.
Delaney 
et al
., 
Science
 281, pp222-230, 1998) nicely
conveys the nastiness and frequency of earthquakes and eruptions
along the Juan de Fuca Rift, although it's a bit heavy on the
technobabble. 

The
idea that the Pacific Northwest is overdue for a major earthquake is
reviewed in "Giant Earthquakes of the Pacific Northwest",
by R. D. Hyndman (
Scientific American
, Dec. 1995). "Forearc
deformation and great subduction earthquakes: implications for
Cascadia offshore earthquake potential" by McCaffrey and
Goldfinger (
Science 
v267, 1995) and "Earthquakes cannot
be predicted" (Geller 
et al.
, 
Science
 v275, 1997)
discuss the issue in somewhat greater detail. I used to live quite
happily in Vancouver. After reading these items, I moved to Toronto.

The
absolute coolest source for up-to-the-minute information on
hydrothermal vents, however, is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's (NOAA's) web pages. Everything's there: raw survey
data, research schedules, live maps, three-dimensional seaquake
animations, and recent publications. To name but a few. Start at

http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/vents
 and go from there.

Psionics/Ganzfeld
Effects

The
rudimentary telepathy I describe actually made it into the
peer-reviewed technical literature back in 1994. Check out 
Does
Psi Exist? Replicable evidence for an anomalous process of
information transfer
 by Bem and Honorton, pages 4-18 in Vol 15 of
the 
Psychological Bulletin
. They got statistical significance
and everything. Speculations on the quantum nature of human
consciousess come from the books of Roger Penrose, 
The Emporer's
New Mind
 (Oxford University Press, 1989) and 
Shadows of the
Mind
 (Oxford, 1994). 

Smart
gels

The
smart gels that screw everything up were inspired by the research of
Masuo Aizawa, a Professor at the Tokyo Institute of Technology,
profiled in the August 1992 issue of 
Discover
 magazine. At
that time, he'd got a few neurons hooked together into the precursors
of simple logic gates. I shudder to think where he's got to now.

The
application of neural nets to navigating through complex terrain is
described in "Robocar" by B. Daviss (
Discover
, July
1992.), which describes work being done by Charles Thorpe of (where
else) Carnegie-Mellon University.

ßehemoth

The
theory that life originated in hydrothermal vents hails from "A
hydrothermally precipitated catalytic iron sulphide membrane as a
first step towards life", by M.J. Russel 
et al.
 (
Journal
of Molecular Evolution
, v39, 1994). Throwaway bits on the
evolution of life, including the viability of ribosomal RNA as an
alternative genetic template, I cadged from "The origin of life
on earth" by L.E. Orgel (
Scientific American
, October
1994). ßehemoth's symbiotic presence within the cells of
deepwater fish steals from the work of Lynn Margulis, who first
suggested that cellular organelles were once free-living organisms in
their own right (an idea that went from heresy to canon in the space
of about ten years). Once I'd stuck that idea into the book, I found
vindication in "Parasites shed light on cellular evolution"
(G. Vogel, 
Science
 275, p1422, 1997) and "Thanks to a
parasite, asexual reproduction catches on" (M. Enserinck,

Science
 275, p1743, 1997). 

Sexual
abuse as an addictive stimulus

I
first encountered the idea that chronic abuse could be
physiologically addictive in 
Psychological Trauma
 (B. van der
Kolk, ed,, American Psychiatric Press 1987). False Memory Syndrome is
explored in 
The Myth of Repressed Memory : False Memories and
Allegations of Sexual Abuse
 by E. Loftus & K. Ketcham (St.
Martin's Press 1996).

Acknowledgments

I
put all these words together myself. However, I shamelessly exploited
anyone I could to put them together 
properly
. 

At
the start: 
Starfish
 began as a short story. Barbara MacGregor and Nancy Butler,
formerly of the University of British
Columbia, critiqued early drafts of that story. 

At
the end: David Hartwell bought the manuscript; he and Jim Minz
editted it. Of course they have my gratitude, but I hope their reward
extends beyond such cheap verbiage; I hope Starfish sells well and
makes all of us lots of money. (The copy you're holding is a start.
Why not pick up others and hand them out to Jehovah's Witnesses at
street corners?)

In
between: 

Glenn
Grant took it upon himself to approach David Hartwell on my behalf
when I was too chickenshit to do it myself. Major David Buck of the
New Zealand Army gave me the benefit of his expertise on explosives,
nuclear and otherwise. I was a bit disturbed to learn just how much
thought some people have put into the effects of nuclear explosions
on the seabed. 

When
I wanted to check out the geology of spreading and earthquake zones,
I posted a question to a couple of geological Usenet groups in lieu
of actual research. This netted me a lot of advice from people I've
never met and probably never will: Ellin Beltz, Hayden Chasteen, Joe
Davis, Keith Morrison, and Carl Schaefer gave me pointers and
references on vulcanism, plate tectonics, and (in one case) the
length of time it would take a nuclear submarine to get shot zit-like
from the mouth of an active volcano after being swallowed into a
deep-sea subduction zone. John Stockwell of the Center for Wave
Phenomena (Colorado School of Mines) was especially forthcoming,
sharing formulae and tables that described earthquakes in nice,
graspable, "Hiroshima equivalents". I'm tempted to never do
my own research again. 

I'm
also tempted to blame all these nice people for any technical
mistakes you find in the following document, but of course, I can't.
It's my book. I guess that means they're my mistakes too.

Creative
Commons Licensing Information

Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
2.5

License

THE WORK (AS DEFINED
BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS CREATIVE COMMONS PUBLIC
LICENSE ("CCPL" OR "LICENSE"). THE WORK IS
PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT AND/OR OTHER APPLICABLE LAW. ANY USE OF THE
WORK OTHER THAN AS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS LICENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS
PROHIBITED. 

BY EXERCISING ANY
RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED HERE, YOU ACCEPT AND AGREE TO BE BOUND BY
THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. THE LICENSOR GRANTS YOU THE RIGHTS
CONTAINED HERE IN CONSIDERATION OF YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF SUCH TERMS AND
CONDITIONS. 

1.
Definitions

"Collective
	Work"
 means a work, such as a periodical issue,
	anthology or encyclopedia, in which the Work in its entirety in
	unmodified form, along with a number of other contributions,
	constituting separate and independent works in themselves, are
	assembled into a collective whole. A work that constitutes a
	Collective Work will not be considered a Derivative Work (as defined
	below) for the purposes of this License. 

"Derivative
	Work"
 means a work based upon the Work or upon the
	Work and other pre-existing works, such as a translation, musical
	arrangement, dramatization, fictionalization, motion picture
	version, sound recording, art reproduction, abridgment,
	condensation, or any other form in which the Work may be recast,
	transformed, or adapted, except that a work that constitutes a
	Collective Work will not be considered a Derivative Work for the
	purpose of this License. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work
	is a musical composition or sound recording, the synchronization of
	the Work in timed-relation with a moving image ("synching")
	will be considered a Derivative Work for the purpose of this
	License. 

"Licensor"

	means the individual or entity that offers the Work under the terms
	of this License. 

"Original
	Author"
 means the individual or entity who created the
	Work. 

"Work"

	means the copyrightable work of authorship offered under the terms
	of this License. 

"You"

	means an individual or entity exercising rights under this License
	who has not previously violated the terms of this License with
	respect to the Work, or who has received express permission from the
	Licensor to exercise rights under this License despite a previous
	violation. 

"License
	Elements"
 means the following high-level license
	attributes as selected by Licensor and indicated in the title of
	this License: Attribution, Noncommercial, ShareAlike.

2. Fair Use
Rights.
 Nothing in this license is intended to reduce,
limit, or restrict any rights arising from fair use, first sale or
other limitations on the exclusive rights of the copyright owner
under copyright law or other applicable laws. 

3. License
Grant.
 Subject to the terms and conditions of this License,
Licensor hereby grants You a worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive,
perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright) license to
exercise the rights in the Work as stated below: 

to reproduce the
	Work, to incorporate the Work into one or more Collective Works, and
	to reproduce the Work as incorporated in the Collective Works; 

to create and
	reproduce Derivative Works; 

to distribute
	copies or phonorecords of, display publicly, perform publicly, and
	perform publicly by means of a digital audio transmission the Work
	including as incorporated in Collective Works; 

to distribute
	copies or phonorecords of, display publicly, perform publicly, and
	perform publicly by means of a digital audio transmission Derivative
	Works; 

The above rights may
be exercised in all media and formats whether now known or hereafter
devised. The above rights include the right to make such
modifications as are technically necessary to exercise the rights in
other media and formats. All rights not expressly granted by Licensor
are hereby reserved, including but not limited to the rights set
forth in Sections 4(e) and 4(f).

4.
Restrictions.
The license granted in Section 3 above is
expressly made subject to and limited by the following restrictions: 

You may distribute,
	publicly display, publicly perform, or publicly digitally perform
	the Work only under the terms of this License, and You must include
	a copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identifier for, this License with
	every copy or phonorecord of the Work You distribute, publicly
	display, publicly perform, or publicly digitally perform. You may
	not offer or impose any terms on the Work that alter or restrict the
	terms of this License or the recipients' exercise of the rights
	granted hereunder. You may not sublicense the Work. You must keep
	intact all notices that refer to this License and to the disclaimer
	of warranties. You may not distribute, publicly display, publicly
	perform, or publicly digitally perform the Work with any
	technological measures that control access or use of the Work in a
	manner inconsistent with the terms of this License Agreement. The
	above applies to the Work as incorporated in a Collective Work, but
	this does not require the Collective Work apart from the Work itself
	to be made subject to the terms of this License. If You create a
	Collective Work, upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the
	extent practicable, remove from the Collective Work any credit as
	required by clause 4(d), as requested. If You create a Derivative
	Work, upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the extent
	practicable, remove from the Derivative Work any credit as required
	by clause 4(d), as requested. 

You may distribute,
	publicly display, publicly perform, or publicly digitally perform a
	Derivative Work only under the terms of this License, a later
	version of this License with the same License Elements as this
	License, or a Creative Commons iCommons license that contains the
	same License Elements as this License (e.g.
	Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.5 Japan). You must include a
	copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identifier for, this License or
	other license specified in the previous sentence with every copy or
	phonorecord of each Derivative Work You distribute, publicly
	display, publicly perform, or publicly digitally perform. You may
	not offer or impose any terms on the Derivative Works that alter or
	restrict the terms of this License or the recipients' exercise of
	the rights granted hereunder, and You must keep intact all notices
	that refer to this License and to the disclaimer of warranties. You
	may not distribute, publicly display, publicly perform, or publicly
	digitally perform the Derivative Work with any technological
	measures that control access or use of the Work in a manner
	inconsistent with the terms of this License Agreement. The above
	applies to the Derivative Work as incorporated in a Collective Work,
	but this does not require the Collective Work apart from the
	Derivative Work itself to be made subject to the terms of this
	License. 

You may not
	exercise any of the rights granted to You in Section 3 above in any
	manner that is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial
	advantage or private monetary compensation. The exchange of the Work
	for other copyrighted works by means of digital file-sharing or
	otherwise shall not be considered to be intended for or directed
	toward commercial advantage or private monetary compensation,
	provided there is no payment of any monetary compensation in
	connection with the exchange of copyrighted works. 

If you distribute,
	publicly display, publicly perform, or publicly digitally perform
	the Work or any Derivative Works or Collective Works, You must keep
	intact all copyright notices for the Work and provide, reasonable to
	the medium or means You are utilizing: (i) the name of the Original
	Author (or pseudonym, if applicable) if supplied, and/or (ii) if the
	Original Author and/or Licensor designate another party or parties
	(e.g. a sponsor institute, publishing entity, journal) for
	attribution in Licensor's copyright notice, terms of service or by
	other reasonable means, the name of such party or parties; the title
	of the Work if supplied; to the extent reasonably practicable, the
	Uniform Resource Identifier, if any, that Licensor specifies to be
	associated with the Work, unless such URI does not refer to the
	copyright notice or licensing information for the Work; and in the
	case of a Derivative Work, a credit identifying the use of the Work
	in the Derivative Work (e.g., "French translation of the Work
	by Original Author," or "Screenplay based on original Work
	by Original Author"). Such credit may be implemented in any
	reasonable manner; provided, however, that in the case of a
	Derivative Work or Collective Work, at a minimum such credit will
	appear where any other comparable authorship credit appears and in a
	manner at least as prominent as such other comparable authorship
	credit. 

For the avoidance
	of doubt, where the Work is a musical composition:

Performance
		Royalties Under Blanket Licenses
. Licensor reserves the
		exclusive right to collect, whether individually or via a
		performance rights society (e.g. ASCAP, BMI, SESAC), royalties for
		the public performance or public digital performance (e.g. webcast)
		of the Work if that performance is primarily intended for or
		directed toward commercial advantage or private monetary
		compensation.

Mechanical
		Rights and Statutory Royalties
. Licensor reserves the
		exclusive right to collect, whether individually or via a music
		rights agency or designated agent (e.g. Harry Fox Agency),
		royalties for any phonorecord You create from the Work ("cover
		version") and distribute, subject to the compulsory license
		created by 17 USC Section 115 of the US Copyright Act (or the
		equivalent in other jurisdictions), if Your distribution of such
		cover version is primarily intended for or directed toward
		commercial advantage or private monetary compensation.

Webcasting
	Rights and Statutory Royalties
. For the avoidance of doubt,
	where the Work is a sound recording, Licensor reserves the exclusive
	right to collect, whether individually or via a performance-rights
	society (e.g. SoundExchange), royalties for the public digital
	performance (e.g. webcast) of the Work, subject to the compulsory
	license created by 17 USC Section 114 of the US Copyright Act (or
	the equivalent in other jurisdictions), if Your public digital
	performance is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial
	advantage or private monetary compensation. 

5.
Representations, Warranties and Disclaimer

UNLESS OTHERWISE
MUTUALLY AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRITING, LICENSOR OFFERS THE
WORK AS-IS AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND
CONCERNING THE WORK, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE,
INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTIBILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR THE ABSENCE OF
LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE OF
ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW
THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO SUCH EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY
TO YOU.

6.
Limitation on Liability.
 EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY
APPLICABLE LAW, IN NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY
LEGAL THEORY FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
EXEMPLARY DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS LICENSE OR THE USE OF THE WORK,
EVEN IF LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

7.
Termination

This License and
	the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically upon any
	breach by You of the terms of this License. Individuals or entities
	who have received Derivative Works or Collective Works from You
	under this License, however, will not have their licenses terminated
	provided such individuals or entities remain in full compliance with
	those licenses. Sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 will survive any
	termination of this License. 

Subject to the
	above terms and conditions, the license granted here is perpetual
	(for the duration of the applicable copyright in the Work).
	Notwithstanding the above, Licensor reserves the right to release
	the Work under different license terms or to stop distributing the
	Work at any time; provided, however that any such election will not
	serve to withdraw this License (or any other license that has been,
	or is required to be, granted under the terms of this License), and
	this License will continue in full force and effect unless
	terminated as stated above. 

8.
Miscellaneous

Each time You
	distribute or publicly digitally perform the Work or a Collective
	Work, the Licensor offers to the recipient a license to the Work on
	the same terms and conditions as the license granted to You under
	this License. 

Each time You
	distribute or publicly digitally perform a Derivative Work, Licensor
	offers to the recipient a license to the original Work on the same
	terms and conditions as the license granted to You under this
	License. 

If any provision of
	this License is invalid or unenforceable under applicable law, it
	shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of
	the terms of this License, and without further action by the parties
	to this agreement, such provision shall be reformed to the minimum
	extent necessary to make such provision valid and enforceable. 

No term or
	provision of this License shall be deemed waived and no breach
	consented to unless such waiver or consent shall be in writing and
	signed by the party to be charged with such waiver or consent. 

This License
	constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with respect to
	the Work licensed here. There are no understandings, agreements or
	representations with respect to the Work not specified here.
	Licensor shall not be bound by any additional provisions that may
	appear in any communication from You. This License may not be
	modified without the mutual written agreement of the Licensor and
	You. 

Creative Commons is
not a party to this License, and makes no warranty whatsoever in
connection with the Work. Creative Commons will not be liable to You
or any party on any legal theory for any damages whatsoever,
including without limitation any general, special, incidental or
consequential damages arising in connection to this license.
Notwithstanding the foregoing two (2) sentences, if Creative Commons
has expressly identified itself as the Licensor hereunder, it shall
have all rights and obligations of Licensor. 

Except for the
limited purpose of indicating to the public that the Work is licensed
under the CCPL, neither party will use the trademark "Creative
Commons" or any related trademark or logo of Creative Commons
without the prior written consent of Creative Commons. Any permitted
use will be in compliance with Creative Commons' then-current
trademark usage guidelines, as may be published on its website or
otherwise made available upon request from time to time.

Creative Commons may
be contacted at 
http://creativecommons.org/
.
