review article 
Strong Gravitational Lensing and Microlensing of Supernovae

Suyu, Sherry H.
•
Goobar, Ariel
•
Collett, Thomas
 Show more 
 February 1, 2024 
 Space Science Reviews 
Strong gravitational lensing and microlensing of supernovae (SNe) are emerging as a new probe of cosmology and astrophysics in recent years. We provide an overview of this nascent research field, starting with a summary of the first discoveries of strongly lensed SNe. We describe the use of the time delays between multiple SN images as a way to measure cosmological distances and thus constrain cosmological parameters, particularly the Hubble constant, whose value is currently under heated debates. New methods for measuring the time delays in lensed SNe have been developed, and the sample of lensed SNe from the upcoming Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) is expected to provide competitive cosmological constraints. Lensed SNe are also powerful astrophysical probes. We review the usage of lensed SNe to constrain SN progenitors, acquire high-z SN spectra through lensing magnifications, infer SN sizes via microlensing, and measure properties of dust in galaxies. The current challenge in the field is the rarity and difficulty in finding lensed SNe. We describe various methods and ongoing efforts to find these spectacular explosions, forecast the properties of the expected sample of lensed SNe from upcoming surveys particularly the LSST, and summarize the observational follow-up requirements to enable the various scientific studies. We anticipate the upcoming years to be exciting with a boom in lensed SN discoveries.

 Cite this item 
APA
Chicago
Harvard
IEEE
ISO 690
MLA
Vancouver
 Copy 
Suyu, S. H., Goobar, A., Collett, T., More, A., & Vernardos, G. (2024). [Review of Strong Gravitational Lensing and Microlensing of Supernovae]. Space Science Reviews, 220(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-024-01044-7

Show more
Click 
Copy
 to copy the citation, or select the text manually.
Loading...
Loading...
 Preview

 Download 
Name
 document.pdf 
Type
 Publisher's Version 
Version
 Published version 
Access type
 openaccess 
License Condition
 CC BY 
Size
3.86 MB
Format
Adobe PDF
Checksum
 (MD5) 
633584c21005b52cb062d3320e91f9d4
