Mitchell Hashimoto
Superlogical
July 29, 2026
I've started a new company: 
Superlogical
.

I authored
1
 the 
announcement post on the Superlogical homepage
,
which describes the problem statement and what we're building.
2
 Read that
to learn more. This post is more of a personal statement about what led to this,
how it relates to my recent work, and what comes next.

Building for the Love of It

In 2023, after 11 years, I 
left the company I previously founded
.

Since then, my primary focus has been being a mostly full-time dad.
I became involved with 
a lot
 of

philanthropy
.
3

I 
wrote a lot
 on technical topics, sharing as much as I
had the time and energy for.

But I never stopped building. Building software is my personal passion,
and I continued to learn and build a little every day just for the love of it.

Ghostty

I poured most of that passion into 
Ghostty
.
Ghostty started as a personal project I thought I'd throw away
4
,
but instead grew into a project with millions of daily users, a large
community with a wonderful group of core maintainers, and a

reusable library

powering 
impactful

software
 as well as

fun software
.

I have no intention of ever commercializing Ghostty. To solidify this,
I donated the entirety of Ghostty to a 
federally recognized non-profit
 in 2025.
This ownership legally binds Ghostty to the public-benefit purpose it was
created to serve. It is now and forever an open building block that everyone
can build on and learn from.

Ghostty is much more than just me, I don't want to give the wrong impression!
Ghostty is made up of about a dozen core maintainers, almost 50 localization
team members, and another dozen community moderators. Some of these people are

paid via the non-profit
.
It is a very healthy open source project made up of a diverse group
of talented individuals.

I have had, and continue to have, an immense amount of fun working
on Ghostty. And over my years working on it, I became increasingly interested in the
problems 
around
 the terminal emulator itself. Or, to be purposefully coy,
I kept asking “why?” Why is terminal usage more widespread than ever?
What continues to drive its growth? At what point does that end? What
comes next? Why? Why? Why!

What Comes Next

The answer to these questions leads to Superlogical.

I wasn't searching for a reason to start another company, but I found a
problem I wanted to spend years working on, a scope that required a team, and
people I wanted to build it with.

Superlogical will begin by shipping a terminal multiplexer. I'm pouring
my years of experience building a terminal and studying the potential and
limitations of other multiplexers into something new, powerful,
and, of course, fast.

My cofounders are some of the most talented people I've ever worked with.
They're amazingly accomplished and their work speaks for itself. They're
each going to play an equal part in making this something really special.
One thing we all share is an uncompromising commitment to well-crafted
software and software experiences.

We will build on libghostty exactly as it was designed to be used: as a

public building block

for terminal applications. Superlogical will consume
the same MIT-licensed components available to everyone else, and we will
continue to upstream shared terminal work so

every libghostty consumer can benefit
.

Ghostty itself remains a non-profit; its mission, governance, license,
technical goals, and roadmap do not change.

Of course, the terminal multiplexer isn't 
the entire vision
.
I'm not ready to share more yet, but you can learn a tiny bit
more 
on the Superlogical website
.
Sign up for the newsletter for beta access and development updates along
the way.
5

Oh, and 
we're hiring!

Footnotes

No AI! Hand-written, real, and authentic. 
↩

I realize there is some vaguery and unanswered questions. We have
a lot more answers but don't want to just lay it all out in a tome
on a landing page. We'll reveal more through updates over time. 
↩

My family doesn't publicize most of our philanthropic work.
A large majority is non-tech related. 
↩

The kind you use to learn something but never publish. We all
have dozens (hundreds?) of those in a GitHub graveyard. 
↩

We considered very strongly not sharing anything at all until
we were ready to ship the product, but devlogs are fun, building in
public is fun, and I think this team has proven we can and will ship. 
↩

July 29, 2026
