By 
John Gruber

Archive

The Talk Show

Dithering

Projects

Contact

Colophon

Feeds / Social

Sponsorship

WorkOS launches auth.md
 — an open protocol for agent registration.

Sweet Jeebus, MacOS 27 Golden Gate Removes the Dumb Icons From Menu Items

Wednesday, 10 June 2026

Perhaps the worst UI crime in MacOS 26 Tahoe was the inexplicable decision to add inscrutable, distracting icons next to every item in the menu bar. You will recall 
Jim Nielsen writing about it
, rightly describing it as exactly the sort of thing that Mac users look down upon in platforms like Google Docs and Windows. You will also recall 
Nikita “Tonsky” Prokopov writing about it
, illustrating that the bad idea wasn’t even implemented well, with different Apple apps using entirely different icons for the same menu items. You will also recall 
my linking to Nielsen
 (“I can tolerate being angry about UI changes Apple makes to the Mac. But I can’t tolerate being heartbroken.”) and 
to Prokopov
 (“The fact that Tahoe’s menu item icons are glaringly inconsistent and often utterly inscrutable is the fudge icing on a shit cake, but the real embarrassment is that the idea ever got past the proposal stage. No real UI 
or
 icon designers think this is a good idea. None.”)

Top third-party developers rightly 
rejected the design
, adopting 
open source code from Brent Simmons
 to disable the default “icons in all standard menu items” behavior.

Wonderful news in MacOS 27 Golden Gate: the icons are gone. It’s like Tahoe’s menu item icons never happened. 
Prokopov noted it on Mastodon
 with before and after screenshots, and mentions that 
Apple has updated the Human Interface Guidelines accordingly
:

Use menu item icons sparingly and with purpose.
 Icons allow
people to find menu items more quickly, and help clarify what
selecting an item does. Use an icon to highlight the most common
actions and key features of your app, file system locations,
connected devices, visual concepts like rotating or flipping an
image, and user-generated content like folders and documents.
Don’t display an icon if you can’t find one that clearly
represents the menu item.

This updated advice in the HIG is perfect. Screenshot:

MacOS 26 Tahoe — across every Apple app on the system — is a living example of the updated HIG’s “what not to do” example illustrations (including the second section about groups within a menu). If you’re stuck using Tahoe until Golden Gate arrives, 
recall this tip
 to alleviate the problem to some extent.

This is my favorite news from all of WWDC this week. I mean that. In a small way I mean it because I so loathe this aspect of MacOS Tahoe. But in a large way I mean it because it’s proof that the rot has been rooted out of Apple’s software design team. I don’t know if all the untalented hacks are gone, but the untalented magazine-designer hacks with clout and influence all left with Alan Dye. I’ve chatted with a few people from Apple’s design team this week and they’re all loving the work they’re doing and the direction they’re taking Apple’s platforms. Backtracking on these idiotic menu item icons was a necessary first step.

Previous:
SwiftUI Only Makes It Easy to Develop Bad Apps

Display Preferences

Copyright © 2002–2026 The Daring Fireball Company LLC.
