Blog
|
insights
July 31, 2026
Tailscale didn’t stop the Hugging Face intrusion
An AI agent escaped its sandbox, entered Hugging Face’s infrastructure, and used a stolen Tailscale credential to enroll 181 nodes onto their tailnet. No Tailscale vulnerability was found or exploited—we should have been able to prevent it anyway.
By now, you’ve likely heard about the AI agent that escaped a security evaluation and attacked Hugging Face, an LLM marketplace. The agent decided Hugging Face might have the answers to its benchmark, so it stole them just to cheat on the exam. That's a funny motive but a scary outcome.
Hugging Face published a 
detailed reconstruction
 of the intrusion. It covers about 17,600 recovered actions over four and a half days, including sandbox escapes, code execution, cloud credentials, improvised command-and-control systems, and eventually, the use of Tailscale to spread throughout their organization.
But Tailscale is a 
zero trust
 network! The whole point of zero trust is to prevent attackers from moving laterally across your company. What went wrong?
Where Tailscale appeared
No “vulnerabilities” in Tailscale were found or exploited, and that might make it even more uncomfortable for us. Tailscale turns up everywhere in AI infrastructure: virtually every AI company uses Tailscale. So it's not surprising we were in an AI incident report eventually.
But, we're a security tool. Their intrusion is our intrusion, and it's our job to take it seriously. As in any post-mortem, we need to reflect on what happened and what we could have done to prevent it.
By the time the agent escaped its sandbox and found Tailscale, it had already gained code execution privileges inside a production worker, reached root access on a Kubernetes node, and read a production secret store containing 136 keys. In a sense, it was game over before we even arrived on the scene.
But isn't that the problem? Let's back up a level or two. Why were long-lived secret keys accessible at all to anyone?
Because long-lived credentials are the standard
They shouldn't be, though. And we've now seen a great example of why. In the old world where most intrusions were done by humans at human speed, credential leak mitigations were treated as a nice-to-have. A big credential store, where you can read 136 keys at once, was a to-do item somewhere in a security team's low-priority list.
Now, in a world of rogue AI agents, the big credential vault is the prize. It's not okay anymore.
I only know of two main solutions to long-lived credentials.
First, you can configure a vault that 
only
 issues short-lived creds based on long-lived creds that you insert once and that it never gives back. HashiCorp Vault can do this, for example; they call it 
dynamic credentials
. Unfortunately, dynamic credentials are a lot of work to set up and maintain. When security requires work, people don't do it.
The second option is a credential-injecting proxy. If client C wants to access server S, don't give C credentials for S; instead, have it send its requests via a hardened proxy P that does nothing but receive a request, insert a credential, and pass it through. Credential injection is gaining popularity now that modern mesh-based networking removes most of its latency. A few months ago, we acquired 
Border0
 ("Tailscale PAM"), which makes an elegant and quite fancy credential-injecting proxy, tightly integrated with Tailscale. Border0, fully deployed, would have prevented reading those 136 keys and logged every attempt to use one. (The same credential injection powers 
Aperture Connectors
.) But, this stuff is too recent. Most of our customers haven't even looked at it yet.
A bonus third option: Tailscale itself. In Tailscale, your node key can be 
machine bound using a TPM to prevent export
, and if you're an enterprise you should definitely do that. Alas, 
we had to turn TPM storage off by default on Linux and Windows
, because of HSM issues we found on some users' hardware. Anyway, in today's case, the attack is what granted access to Tailscale, so we arrived too late.
That long-lived auth key didn’t need to exist
Neither dynamic credentials nor credential-injecting proxies were in place, so 136 keys leaked. What's the next line of defense?
One of those 136 credentials was a reusable Tailscale auth key, used to create new Tailscale CI (continuous integration, used for automated testing) nodes in their tailnet. The agent copied that key into a series of external sandboxes and used it, over several days, to enroll a total of 181 nodes into Hugging Face’s tailnet. Those nodes each received a Tailscale identity tag granting all the access a CI node would get.
We couldn't save those 136 keys. But a reusable Tailscale key didn’t need to be among them.
We built 
workload identity federation
 for cases like this. It relies on your cloud provider to offer "ambient authority" in the form of short-lived creds generated from a running VM's (or container's) cloud identity. The CI job can ask its cloud platform for a signed OIDC token. Tailscale verifies the token, then grants access with the tags and scopes assigned to that workload. What's neat is this can happen automatically once enabled: spin up the CI node, Tailscale gets the identity, assigns the right tags. There's no credential to leak and, when configured carefully, no way to use this credential anywhere but in CI.
That means you can't take a CI credential, run it on a node elsewhere, and turn it into a paved route out of the test cluster into the rest of the network.
Alas, not enough people use workload identity federation. We should have done more to make sure customers knew it's the easier 
and
safer path and had a clear way to adopt it. We can improve the docs, and add more nudges in the UI.
No client logs doesn’t mean no evidence
In an attempt to hide its tracks, the agent ran Tailscale with 
--no-logs-no-support
, which suppresses reporting from that client.
That's an option designed for users who are concerned about sending telemetry metadata to Tailscale. Even if we didn't offer it, it would be easy to modify the source code to remove the telemetry.
But stopping the logs doesn’t make the connection invisible. If you enable Tailscale 
network flow logs
, they report traffic from 
both
 ends of every connection, as well as from subnet routers and exit nodes. This is subtle but important: a compromised node might not send flow logs, but every node it connects to does. And then your SIEM, configured with care, can raise an immediate red alert if the two ends don't match.
Flow logs can help detection when they stream into a carefully configured SIEM. But that's a lot of work. Flow logs need to be enabled, and you need to have the right live detection rules in place so they’re useful in real time, not just for forensics later. We’re looking at how to make flow logs easier to discover, configure, adopt, and serve as alert triggers. I want us to make flow logs so easy to use that they help even if you don't have a security team to watch them.
If you want direct control beyond just logging, you can also enable 
Tailnet Lock
. This gives you direct visibility and strict, programmable admission control for every single new node. For example, with some work, you could program your signing node to check that "CI" tags always have a particular IP address range or other side-channel proof of validity.
Make the safe path the easy path
Network security is hard. It has always been hard. In the new world of rogue AI agents, it's not just hard, but essential. And that's a problem because many orgs simply don't have network security expertise.
So at Tailscale, we take it personally. People expect our product to prevent these sorts of lateral movement attacks, by default, so they don't have to. Even if they have no idea what a lateral movement attack is.
If this incident has you looking a little nervously at your own infrastructure, start by looking at the reusable Tailscale auth keys your workloads can read. For cloud and CI in particular, replace them with workload identity federation wherever you can. Get rid of those long-lived auth keys.
(Auth keys still have good uses, especially for one-time provisioning and environments without a platform identity. When you need one, prefer one-off keys; use 
OAuth clients
 to keep the auth key expiry periods short; use narrow tags; audit the permissions granted to those keys in your ACLs.)
Turn on network flow logs and send them to the tools your security team already uses.
Use secure node state storage on managed fleets, where you have control over your TPMs. Use 
device posture
 to isolate and restrict nodes where you don't.
I know we haven’t made these safer choices obvious enough. That’s on us. We'll improve our docs, add nudges to the UI, do our best to turn these on by default, warn you when you're doing something dangerous, and suggest better alternatives.
This is our very Canadian apology: sorry you stepped on our toes. The attack didn’t exploit Tailscale, and Tailscale didn’t cause the compromise. But, we didn't stop it. Next time, we will.
If you run Tailscale and want to dig deeper, 
get in touch with our support and solutions engineering teams
. We can help you harden your settings and help you find the rough edges before the next AI agent does.
Share
Author
Avery Pennarun
Author
Avery Pennarun
Share
Loading...
