Phyllis Entis

outbreaks and alerts

August 5, 2026

1 Minute

Six more states added to list

August 5, 2026

The Taylor Farms 
Cyclospora
 outbreak has grown to include 6,358 lab-confirmed cases according to an update released today by the 
CDC
. The total includes 278 hospitalizations.

Two Michigan residents with underlying conditions have died in the outbreak.

Six new states have been added to the list of affected states, which has now grown to include Arkansas (41), Illinois (164), Indiana (370), Iowa (83), Kansas (165), Kentucky (265), Michigan (3491), Missouri (568), Nebraska (92), New Hampshire (31), North Carolina (2), Ohio (645), Oklahoma (183), Pennsylvania (132), and West Virginia (126).

Oregon
, 
Washington
, and 
Virginia
, all of whom reported apparent outbreak-related cases in residents who had traveled to one of the previously identified outbreak states, are not included in the current list of affected states.

The CDC continues to report a timeline for illness onset based on a start date of June 22, 2026, but has expanded the outbreak definition to include exposure to Taco Bell or 
recalled
 Taylor Farms de Mexico iceberg lettuce.

The 
lettuce recalled by Taylor Farms de Mexico
 was distributed from June 29th thru July 16th. 

The CDC has not explained why exposure to earlier shipments of Taylor Farms lettuce was not considered to be a factor in this outbreak, even though cases that developed prior to the start of distribution of the recalled lettuce are part of the outbreak totals. Nor has the CDC ever provided an explanation for the short-lived shift of the outbreak’s start date from June 22nd to May 13th and back again.

Despite the size of the Taylor Farms outbreak, the 6,358 cases represent only 28% of the 22,723 confirmed and probable domestically acquired cases of cyclosporiasis reported across the United States so far this year, according to the 
CDC’s latest Cyclospora Surveillance
 update.

“Reads like a true crime novel” – Food Safety News

Interested in learning more about food safety and the history of foodborne disease outbreaks and investigations?

Click on the link to listen to a short excerpt, then follow the buy links to add a digital, print or audio copy to your personal library.

Chapter 6. Birth of a Pathogen

Order TAINTED now from your preferred on-line retailer

Share this:
Share on Tumblr

Share on Threads (Opens in new window)

Threads

Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window)

Bluesky

Share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

WhatsApp

More

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)

Email

Post

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit

Print (Opens in new window)

Print

Like
 
Loading...

Related

Tagged
CDC
Cyclospora
shredded iceberg lettuce
Taylor Farms
Taylor Farms de Mexico

					Published by 
Phyllis Entis

					View all posts by Phyllis Entis				

Published

August 5, 2026
