Graffiti spanning more than a century is scrawled on the walls of the Roman villa.
              
Cantieri Narranti

In January 2021, students at a high school across the street from the 
Colosseum
 came up with a bold plan. Angered by plans to extend 
remote learning
 to prevent the spread of Covid-19, the teenagers occupied their school, spending several nights camped out in the building 
in protest
.

When the demonstration ended, participants told Claudia Marino, a history and Latin teacher at 
the school
, that they’d stumbled upon something significant. Marino and her colleagues investigated the tip, following the students’ directions to a locked door in the basement.

“We found the key, entered, and we were in an old, disused boiler room,” Marino tells the London 
Times
’ Tom Kington. “Beyond that were ancient Roman walls.” When they climbed through an opening, they found themselves in an 
ancient villa
 adorned with frescoes and decorative stucco.

      The exterior of the Liceo Cavour, a scientific high school in Rome

Rupertsciamenna via Wikimedia Commons under CC BY-SA 3.0

Marino brought the discovery to the attention of the 
Special Superintendency of Rome
, a government agency tasked with preserving the Italian capital’s cultural heritage. Excavations at the site began in September 2025, and archaeologists 
presented
 their findings to the public on May 28.

According to a 
statement
, the 
domus
, or private dwelling, dates to the mid-second century C.E., when legendary Roman emperors including 
Hadrian
 and 
Marcus Aurelius
 presided over 
vast swaths
 of territory in Europe, Asia and Africa. 
Excavations
 conducted in 1895, ahead of the opening of a new road, had uncovered a section of the villa. But in the decades that followed, the site was forgotten.

Did you know? The Colosseum’s inaugural games

Construction of the famous 
amphitheater
 began around 
72 C.E.
, during the reign of the Roman emperor 
Vespasian
. 
Titus
, Vespasian’s son and heir, celebrated the Colosseum’s opening in 80 C.E. with a 
grand spectacle
.

Titus flooded the arena with water, sending out “horses and bulls and some other domesticated animals that had been taught to behave in the liquid element just as on land,” the Roman historian Cassius Dio 
wrote
. “He also brought in people on ships, who engaged in a sea fight there.”

When archaeologists surveyed the site, they were surprised to find that the villa’s rooms, almost all of which are underground, were incredibly well preserved, Valentina Lupia reports for the Italian newspaper 
La Repubblica
. One room features a 
mosaic
 crafted with large tiles of varying shapes, a style that was popular at the time. Another space is decorated with floral designs and depictions of human figures.

      Entrances leading to different rooms in the ancient dwelling

Cantieri Narranti

The area where the villa was found boasts its own rich history. Located between the 
Carinae
 and the 
Esquiline Hill
 in central Rome, the neighborhood once housed estates owned by 
Cicero
, 
Pompey
 and 
Octavian
, three central figures in the late 
Roman Republic
. Although written 
records
 of this residential area survive today, archaeologists have found little physical evidence of it, as modern construction has damaged the ancient structures.

Researchers have recovered enough artifacts from the villa to fill 48 crates. Finds include an 
amphora
 (a vessel used to store olive oil, wine and other goods) and drinking cups that date to later periods in Roman history.

Workers who constructed the 
school building
 in the late 19th century “either did not notice the villa or just ignored it,” the 
Times
 notes. But archaeologists who excavated the site a decade or two later took note of the ancient dwelling. These researchers identified inscriptions on lead 
water pipes
 that revealed the names of two of the house’s onetime occupants: 
L. Fabius Gallus
 and Umbria Albina.

      A room with monochrome stucco decorations

Cantieri Narranti

The students who found a way into the ruins weren’t the first amateur explorers to rediscover the site. Some of the graffiti scrawled on the walls of the villa dates to between 1920 and 1950, when the building was occupied by a religious order. Other markings are more recent, perhaps left by students at the high school. As Marino tells the 
Times
, students have long speculated that ancient structures were hidden beneath the school.

“Ten years ago, a student told me the story,” the teacher recalls, “but I didn’t give it much thought.”

The 2025-26 excavation only unearthed part of the villa. Experts believe that the rest of the structure is much larger, but further investigation will require additional funding. Ultimately, 
La Repubblica 
reports, archaeologists hope to open the site to students and tourists alike, making this hidden piece of history available for “public enjoyment.”

You Might Also Like

Ancient Roman Villa Discovered Beneath Italian Apartment Complex

October 8, 2020

Archaeologists Unearth Possible Shrine to Romulus, Rome's Legendary Founder

February 21, 2020

Archaeologists Discover Ancient Roman Swimming Pool in Albania

May 21, 2024

Divers Discover Mesmerizing Roman Mosaic Beneath the Sea

July 29, 2024

Archaeologists Discover Ruins of Emperor Hadrian's Ornate Breakfast Chamber

February 12, 2021

Meilan Solly

|
 
Read More

Meilan Solly is a senior associate digital editor at 
Smithsonian
 magazine, where she oversees the online history section. Solly's specialties are Tudor England, medieval Europe and World War II.

Get the latest stories in your inbox every weekday.
