From Wikiquote, the free quote compendium

Terry A. Davis

Terrence Andrew Davis
 (December 15, 1969 – August 11, 2018) was an American electrical engineer, computer programmer, and 
outsider artist
 best known for creating and designing 
TempleOS
, a 
public domain
 
operating system
. In 1996, Davis began experiencing regular 
manic episodes
, one of which led him to hospitalization. Initially diagnosed with 
bipolar disorder
, he was later declared to have 
schizophrenia
.

Quotes
[
edit
]

What's reality? I don't know. When my bird was looking at my computer monitor I thought, "That bird has no idea what he's looking at." And yet what does the bird do? Does he panic? No, he can't really panic, he just does the best he can. Is he able to live in a world where he's so ignorant? Well, he doesn't really have a choice. Yeah, he can kinda live. Usually the bird is okay even though he doesn't understand the world. He can kinda learn what's safe and what's dangerous. That's where I've been living. You're that bird looking at the monitor, and you're thinking to yourself, "I can figure this out." Maybe you have some bird ideas. Maybe that's the best you can do.

Terry Davis talks about his bird

An idiot admires complexity, a genius admires simplicity.

Terry Davis' TempleOS Brutal Take Down of Linus Torvalds

Now, I had to do something I'm ashamed of. I had to put a call to a 
subroutine
 that I stuck right here. I'm kind of ashamed of that. And as a matter of fact, God just questioned my judgment. He said, "Terry, are you worthy to be the man who makes the temple?" If you are, you must answer: is this niggerlicious, or is this divine intellect? And that's the question. I'll leave you with that. You know, Google – they ask you interview questions. Well, the kind of question I face on the job is: is this niggerlicious? Is this too much voodoo for our purposes? For our mission statement? Our mission is to be a modern Commodore 64. Is this too much voodoo? This is voodoo; the question is – is this too much. And this is the hardest question you could ever face in programming.

"TempleOS Hardest Question in Programming"

What people are going to read is, "It's about a pathetic schizophrenic who made a crappy operating system." My perspective is, "God said I made His temple."

"God's Lonely Programmer"
, 
Motherboard
 (November 25, 2014)

So, someone wanted to know what I use Ubuntu for. I use it to download VMware to run TempleOS. What do you use Internet Explorer for? You use Internet Explorer to download Firefox. There you have it.

"What do you use Internet Explorer for?"

The CIA niggers glow in the dark
, you can see 'em if you're driving. You just run them over, that's what you do. Fucking CIA niggers!

Terry Davis - CIA Niggers

When I fight Satan, I use the sharpest knives I can find. I ain't shedding no tears cause you don't like "nagger".

Racism and the Use of "Nigger"

Hell no, I'm a white man, I wrote my own fucking compiler. I'm not a nigger like 
Linus
, I'm a professional!

In response to a phone call question in which the caller asks if his compiler is a front end for 
GCC
.

The difference between a professional and amateur 
ni-
[
sic
]
. The difference between an amateur and a professional is you write your own compiler, okay?

You're a nigger, you're a fucking nigger!

Terry A Davis gets a phonecall

I like elephants and God likes elephants.

most realistic elephant programmed ever

You banned me from Twitter, God bans you from Heaven.

Terry Davis - "You Ban Me From Twitter, God Bans You From Heaven"

I am King Terry the Terrible. The CIA will be executed with an A10 gun. The fist of God maybe, individuals will be spared through extreme repentence
[
sic
]
 and humility.

King Terry the Terrible (Terry Davis) writes to the CIA - Extended cut

Now, there was a 
nigger
, who came up with this idea: 
cout
<<
"Hello"
<<
endl
;
, well that's pretty niggerlicious.

Terry Davis - There Was A Bike Thief
, commentary about the 
C++
 programming language

God likes music that makes you feel.

Terry Davis - "God Likes Music That Makes You Feel"

External links
[
edit
]

Wikipedia

Wikipedia
 has an article about:

Terry A. Davis

This  article about an engineer, inventor or industrial designer is a 
stub
. You  can help out with Wikiquote by 
expanding
 it!

Retrieved from "
https://en.wikiquote.org/w/index.php?title=Terry_A._Davis&oldid=3941567
"

Categories
: 
Engineers from the United States
Electrical engineers
Programmers from the United States
People from Wisconsin
1969 births
2018 deaths
Victims of cyberbullying
Engineer stubs
