Text
        settings

Story text

Size

Small

Standard

Large

Width
      
*

Standard

Wide

Links

Standard

Orange

* Subscribers only

Learn more

            Minimize to nav

Tesco, a retail conglomerate headquartered in the United Kingdom, is moving 40,000 server workloads off of VMware amid “abusive conduct” from Broadcom, recent legal filings claim.

Tesco filed a lawsuit in the UK’s High Court against Broadcom alleging breach of contract last year. According to a September report from 
The Register
, the lawsuit claimed that in January 2021, Tesco bought perpetual licenses for VMware’s vSphere Foundation and Cloud Foundation, a subscription to VMware Tanzu, plus support services until 2026, with the option to extend support for four additional years.

But when 
Broadcom took over VMware
 in November 2023, it would not honor the deal and instead tried to get Tesco to pay “excessive and inflated prices for virtualization software for which Tesco has already paid” and would not allow it to buy support services for its perpetually licensed software without buying “duplicative subscription-based licenses for those same Software products,” the initial complaint read, 
The Register reported
 at the time.

Tesco, which reported 73.7 billion pounds (about $98.7 billion) in revenue in its fiscal year 2026, has since started migrating away from VMware and Broadcom’s mainframe products, according to late-May court filings reported on by 
The Register 
today.

In January, Broadcom stopped supporting Tesco’s VMware products, Tesco said, and Tesco has been paying for third-party support since. In its initial filing, Tesco also said that Broadcom refused to upgrade software or 
provide all security updates to customers without subscriptions
.

One of Tesco’s recent filings, per The Register, reads:

Faced with Broadcom’s abusive conduct, and given the criticality of virtualization and mainframe software and services to its business, Tesco has been forced to incur material costs to procure alternative solutions with reduced functionality, and to migrate to that software in a manner, and on a timeframe, that creates very significant risks to its business.

If it works “at exceptional pace,” Tesco will be completely off VMware by the end of 2027 at the earliest. However, “the timeframe in which that migration must be undertaken has created and continues to create operational and commercial risk, and at material ongoing cost and disruption to the business,” Tesco reportedly noted.

Tesco is also dealing with 
migration challenges
 related to data security because its new, unnamed virtualization software is incompatible with the Veeam and Zerto products it uses.

“Manifestly unfair and excessive” price hike

Tesco initially requested at least 100 million pounds (about $133.6 million) in damages each from Broadcom, VMware, and reseller Computacenter, plus interest.

In its recent filings, Tesco said it turned down at least four offers from Broadcom to continue using VMware and Broadcom’s mainframe tech. One offer charged $23.5 million (about 17.6 million pounds) for VMware Cloud Foundation 9.0 and mainframe software and support services for a year, The Register reported. Tesco said that was “around 175 percent” more expensive than what it believes it should have had to pay for VMware and a 350 percent price hike for the mainframe offerings. The prices were “manifestly unfair and excessive,” one of Tesco’s filings said, according to The Register.

In an amended defense, Broadcom denied that the price hike was unfair, The Register reported. Additionally, Broadcom argued that it shouldn’t have to pay damages in relation to Tesco struggling to find VMware and Broadcom alternatives before Tesco’s support expired, as the retail firm has since found replacement products.

The case is expected to go to court between November 1, 2027, and February 25, 2028, The Register reported. Afterward, it could go to trial.

Although the companies will continue their dispute in UK courts, the disagreement mirrors 
frustrations
 that VMware customers and 
partners
 around the world have expressed since Broadcom bought VMware. With users often being heavily dependent on VMware products, many have delayed or avoided migration or are only 
moving some workloads
, due to 
complications around cost, time, support, and compatibility.

Still, virtualization rivals, like 
Hewlett Packard Enterprise
 and 
Nutanix
, have been making aggressive pushes to attract disgruntled VMware users.

Simultaneously, Broadcom has stuck to its VMware strategy and has 
reported financial success
, especially among its target of large enterprises. It has also dealt with other public legal disputes with large customers, including 
AT&T
, with which it reached an undisclosed settlement, and 
Siemens
, which Broadcom accused of software pirating in an ongoing case in the US District Court for the District of Delaware.

                  Scharon Harding

Senior Technology Reporter

                  Scharon Harding

Senior Technology Reporter

      Scharon is a Senior Technology Reporter at Ars Technica writing news, reviews, and analysis on consumer gadgets and services. She's been reporting on technology for over 10 years, with bylines at Tom’s Hardware, Channelnomics, and CRN UK.

    33 Comments
