←
 Maximum Overkill

The End of an Athlon

Posted on
 
August 10, 2026
 
by
 
Michal Necasek

When I was researching the mess related to 
strange and poorly documented CPUID bits
 in the 
Athlon MP and XP processors
, I had to swap a lot of CPUs. This was uneventful in most cases… but only most.

When I removed the heatsink from one unlucky Athlon XP, the processor looked like this:

A chunk of AMD Athlon silicon is just gone

And this is what the heatsink looked like, with a piece of the CPU glued to it:

A piece of an Athlon CPU stuck to a heatsink

There are two interesting things about this. One is that the CPU worked just fine until a good chunk of it came off. The other is that removing the heatsink did not need any particularly excessive force, although some heatsinks do have a tendency to get stuck on.

Based on the shape of the “extracted” piece of silicon, I suspect there was a relatively long and straight micro-crack in the silicon which did not noticeably impact the operation. But when force was applied, the micro-crack gave way, and then a whole big chunk of silicon came off.

A close-up of the damaged CPU

Notice how the right-hand side of the gouge in the CPU is very straight, whereas the left-hand side shows typical fracture marks.

It is notable that around 2000, both Intel and AMD used flip-chip PGA packaging in an effort to provide better cooling (something both companies struggled with as the TDP of the processors quickly shot past 50W and approached 70-80W).

Both companies, especially Intel, gave up on this type of packaging relatively quickly. Intel only used it for some PIII models and switched to lidded CPUs for the P4 line, as well as the PIII-S processors. AMD used flip-chip packaging for PGA Athlons but not for Opterons.

The exposed silicon was a little bit too fragile and required assemblers to install heatsinks very very carefully—if installing a heatsink applied pressure that was too uneven, the silicon would crack. Many vintage flip-chip CPUs have chipped corners, although that usually does not affect operation.

Processors with lidded packaging still provided very good cooling, but compared to CPUs with exposed silicon they proved much sturdier and far less susceptible to mechanical damage. Especially Intel’s pin-less LGA processors are quite sturdy and not at all prone to mechanical damage, although the weak spot simply 
moved to the motherboard socket instead
.

							This entry was posted in 
AMD
, 
K7
, 
PC hardware
. Bookmark the 
permalink
.													

←
 Maximum Overkill

			6 Responses to 
The End of an Athlon

CL
 
says:

				August 11, 2026 at 4:59 am					

Overlay it with its die picture, to see where that straight-line crack falls on it…

rasz_pl
 
says:

				August 12, 2026 at 3:16 am					

>Intel only used it for some PIII models and switched to lidded CPUs for the P4 line, as well as the PIII-S processors. 

My experience from that time was Intel somehow made their CPU cores much more durable. Not only were dies harder to crack, they also had greater chance of working with chipped corners. AMD ones on the other hand were very brittle thus inventions like special shims just for Athlons/Durons while no one peddled such stuff for Intel.

Afaik cant really do this to greater degree to already processed die, so it must have been special sauce in Si ingots.

Julien O.
 
says:

				August 12, 2026 at 6:31 am					

Did you put it back and tried it out? I know there’s 0% chance of that working. It just can’t, an uncountable amount of transistors and connective fabric will have become dust. 

You should do it anyway.

lobsterguy
 
says:

				August 12, 2026 at 6:55 am					

@rasz_pl

Yeh, Coppermine CPUs were a lot more durable. Also their die was slimmer than AMD’s.

Michal Necasek
 
says:

				August 13, 2026 at 2:59 pm					

I’m not confident that it couldn’t damage the board, and I don’t have a lot of Socket A gear. So I’d rather not…

amy
 
says:

				August 23, 2026 at 6:22 am					

I’ve never had that happen, but after reading stories of others who managed to pull a socket 478 P4 out of its socket, bending quite a few pins when it stuck to the heatsink, my standard procedure for removing CPU heatsinks is to do it while the system is warm,  and to gently rotate the heatsink back and forth to break the bond with the thermal paste instead of pulling straight up.

Silicon is brittle but not exactly weak; I would suspect as you mention that the bulk of the damage had already occurred before you pulled the heatsink off, possibly thermal stress from repeated uneven heating/cooling. Looking at some die photos, there is a noticeable feature line around 1/4 of the way across from one edge, roughly where the straight side of your crack is.

Leave a Reply

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. 
Learn how your comment data is processed.
