I’ve recently been working on a mechatronics project that involves constructing
an X-Y cartesian motion system. I opted to use stepper motors to drive each
axis, and 
timing belts

and pulleys for translating the rotational torque of the steppers into linear
motion. The timing belts need to be anchored to the component that is being
actuated, which in this case is the carriage on the linear rails. Though
matching 
toothed
clamps

exist, it is common, particularly in DIY projects, for timing belts to be
fastened using 
zip ties
 or custom

clips
. These
solutions leverage the fact that the timing belt, when looped back on itself and
pressed together, creates a locking mechanism. As long as you have a tie or clip
that can hold the teeth in their interlocking arrangement, the belt will remain
fastened.

These are fine solutions, but they do require additional parts, and they can be
prone to slipping if not attached tightly. An alternative option, which I first
encountered in this 
DIY CNC drawing machine
build
 (raft mount STL
file

here
),
is to design fasteners into the actuated component itself. As seen above, the
fastener is effectively just a circular recess with a spindle for the timing
belt to loop around, and an entry shaft that is approximately the width of the
belt when its teeth are interlocked. I somewhat surprisingly have not seen
prevalent use of this design, and I wasn’t even sure what to call it, though I
eventually settled on “integrated loopback fastener” (let me know if there is an
existing term for it).

Attaching the timing belt while maintaining tension can be somewhat challenging,
but it is made easier with a pair of needle nose pliers. Once in place, the belt
remains securely attached, though I imagine any sort of twisting force could
lead to it working out of the recess over time. Outside of the elimination of
additional small parts, the ease with which the belt can be detached and
reattached is also a nice attribute. While iterating on this project, I
frequently disengaged the belt by detaching from one of the fasteners so that I
could adjust the pulleys and other components.

Though there are many options available, if you have control over design of the
actuated component, the integrated timing belt loopback fastener may be worth
considering.
