Introducing the Safari MCP server for web developers

Jul 1, 2026

by 
Saron Yitbarek

In 
Safari Technology Preview 247
, we’re introducing the Safari MCP server — a Model Context Protocol server for web developers that makes your web development and debugging workflow faster and more powerful. We know agents are increasingly integral to the coding process and the Safari MCP server gives your agent the ability to know how your code actually renders in the browser by connecting it to a Safari browser window.

Any MCP-compatible client can connect to the Safari MCP server. By connecting your agent to a Safari browser window, your agent can emulate what your users experience, giving it the information it needs to debug more autonomously, like access to the DOM, network requests, screenshots, and console output.

It speeds up your debugging process and lets you stay in the comfort of your terminal, which means fewer rounds of hopping windows and typing prompts to debug your code.

The use cases

If you build for the web, then you know about the debugging dance. It usually goes something like this:

You see something wrong with your site in the browser. You open the console to hunt it down. You click into the styles tab. You see what’s broken. You go back to your code to fix it. Or maybe you take a screenshot, detail the problem to your agent, and let it do the fixing for you. Hopefully it gets it right, the bug is fixed, and you can move on.

But when it isn’t fixed, you go through the workflow again — Browser. Prompt. Agent.

And again and again, until you finally squash the bug.

Regardless of the browser or tools you use, the debugging workflow is a lot of clicks, tools, and window hopping to make a single fix, but it doesn’t have to be that way. If you’re already using agents in your development workflow, the Safari MCP server makes your debugging faster and more efficient.

The Safari MCP server enables your agent to do more debugging and troubleshooting on its own. Here are just a few examples of what it can help with:

Web development in Safari
. The next time you develop in Safari, you’ll benefit from an upgraded workflow. Your agent already helps you with your code, now it can do even more by checking out how your code actually renders in Safari.

Improve compatibility with Safari.
 Testing in just one browser means missing potential bugs in another, giving those users a subpar experience. With the Safari MCP server, your agent can open your site in Safari, inspect computed styles, check layout, and compare it against what you expect without switching windows.

Analyze performance.
 See what parts of your site are slowing things down. The Safari MCP server lets your agent evaluate JavaScript on the page to surface performance metrics, like navigation timing and resource load times, so it can pinpoint what’s slowing your site down and work on the right fix.

Check for accessibility.
 The Safari MCP server lets your agent check for common accessibility issues like missing labels, improper ARIA attributes, and poor contrast, so you can catch problems that impact your users.

Verify any user state.
 Know that the page is working and looking as it should. Your agent can check the state of the form, query an element using a selector, confirm specific interactions, show different states of a checkout flow, and more. Spend less time on these manual checks and empower the agent to do it for you.

These are just a few of the use cases. However you decide to implement it, the Safari MCP server helps your agent do more for you and reduce all the back and forth that web development often requires. An easier workflow means more bugs squashed, happier users, and a better product.

The tools

Here are the available tools and what they do:

Tool

Description

browser_console_messages

Return buffered console logs for the current or specified tab

browser_dialogs

List and respond to browser dialogs (accept, dismiss, or input text for JS prompts)

close_tab

Close a browser tab by its handle

create_tab

Create a new browser tab, optionally loading a URL

evaluate_javascript

Execute JavaScript code within the page and return the result

get_network_request

Get full detail for a single recorded network request (headers, body, timing)

get_page_content

Extract text content of a page in various formats (markdown, HTML, JSON, etc.)

list_network_requests

List network request summaries (URL, method, status, timing) for the current tab

list_tabs

List all open browser tabs with their handles and URLs

navigate_to_url

Navigate to a URL and return the loaded page’s content

page_info

Get info about the current page: URL, title, and loading state

page_interactions

Perform DOM interactions in sequence: click, type, scroll, hover, keyPress, etc.

screenshot

Capture a screenshot of the current page as a PNG

set_emulated_media

Emulate a CSS media type (e.g. “print”) for responsive-design testing

set_viewport_size

Set the browser viewport size in CSS pixels

switch_tab

Switch to a different browser tab by its handle

wait_for_navigation

Wait for the current page to finish loading; returns final URL and title

With the Safari MCP server, you no longer have to write the perfect prompt, carefully describing to your agent what you’re experiencing in the browser. You can give your agent the ability to find out for itself.

How to get started

First you’ll need to install 
Safari Technology Preview
. Once installed, make sure you enable Safari Settings > Advanced > Show features for web developers. Then go to Safari Settings > Developer > Enable remote automation and external agents.

If you’re using Claude, you can use the following command in your terminal:

claude mcp add safari-mcp-stp -- "/Applications/Safari Technology Preview.app/Contents/MacOS/safaridriver" --mcp

If you’re using Codex, you can use the following command in your terminal:

codex mcp add safari-mcp-stp -- "/Applications/Safari Technology Preview.app/Contents/MacOS/safaridriver" --mcp

For other agents, you can put the following in your 
mcp.json
 or 
config.json
 :

"safari-mcp-stp"
:
 {
  
"command"
:
 
"/Applications/Safari Technology Preview.app/Contents/MacOS/safaridriver"
,
  
"args"
:
 [
"--mcp"
] 
}

Note that while the above code names the server 
safari-mcp-stp
, you can name it whatever you like, even just 
safari
. Once you have the Safari MCP server installed, try one of the following prompts:

Find bugs on my site in Safari

How accessible is my site in Safari?

See how my website performs in Safari

While each agent works a little differently, it shouldn’t need to be told to use the Safari MCP server explicitly — it’ll figure it out on its own. Simple prompts like the ones above are enough to kickstart the MCP.

Here’s how a conversation with an agent using the Safari MCP server might go:

You:
 Got a bug report — something’s broken in Safari on the flight page. Can you figure out what’s going on?

Agent:
 Sure, let me take a look.

Agent:
 I found two distinct bugs on the flight page in Safari. Want me to fix them both?

You:
 Yes. Anything else here that might be causing problems for Safari users?

Agent:
 Yes, two more things worth flagging. The results reveal animation is silently broken and the API server startup log is wrong. Should I tackle both as well?

All you need is an initial request to get started, and with the help of the Safari MCP server, your agent can take it from there.

The Safari MCP server runs entirely on your local machine and makes no network calls of its own. It also does not have access to your personal information in Safari (e.g. AutoFill or other browser activity). When it captures page content, screenshots, or console logs, that data goes directly to the agent you’re running — not to Apple. What happens to that data from there depends on the agent and model you’re using. As with any agent you give access to your browser, only use ones you trust.

Why we built this

There are many ways to build for the web, both with and without AI. If AI is a part of your workflow, we think this tool will help make it even more productive. And if it isn’t, that’s OK too.

By creating this resource, we hope to make it easier than ever to test and debug in Safari by helping your agent understand how things look and work in the browser.

If you end up giving it a try or if this is your first time using an MCP server, let us know what you think.

Find us online: Saron Yitbarek on 
BlueSky
, Jen Simmons on 
Bluesky
 / 
Mastodon
, and Jon Davis on 
Bluesky
 / 
Mastodon
. If you run into any issues, file a 
WebKit bug report
. Filing issues really does make a difference.
