The myth of Snow Leopard

Sunday 02 August 2026

Snow Leopard
 was a version of Mac OS X released in 2010. It was billed by Apple as having “0 new features”, with a focus on refining the system, improving efficiency, and fixing bugs. Those of us using Macs at the time welcomed the news after living with updates that seemingly broke as many things as they introduced with each release.

This idea is so powerful—and so longed for—that it’s escaped containment among the Apple crowd. I’ve seen everything from Linux distro to phone updates referred to as 
Snow Leopard
 releases, when their vendors cite stability and bug fixes over new features. Likewise, people plead with their vendors for a 
Snow Leopard
 release when they feel quality has slipped.

The reality was a bit different. 
As I wrote at the time
:

This could be the first time I’ve ever downgraded an Apple OS.

As we speak I’m downgrading the Snow Leopard partition on my trusty old Core Duo 2006 MacBook Pro back to Leopard (and while I’m at it, I’m finally getting around to upgrading the FreeBSD partition to 8.0!). I kept waiting for updates to fix the severe stability problems in the Finder, my FireWire 800 ExpressCard and my iMovie HD plugins, but I’ve decided to give up for now.

This was putting it mildly. When I tried it again a few months later, I still had so many problems that I downgraded again, then leapfrogged it for Lion when it was released in 2011. 
Jeff Johnson has a great post
 discussing all the problems Snow Leopard introduced and had to have patched. It was a mess.

Still, whether 
Snow Leopard
 really was this bastion of stability and polish, the myth surrounding its development and stated purpose obviously resonates today. People invoke its memory because they’re broadly craving stability and quality of life improvements, something almost everyone has wilfully discarded as they chase the next rung of 
enshittification
.

Apple’s marketing team hit on something so popular that it has staying power sixteen years later.

Tagged: 
software
 
apple
 
history
 
mac-os-x
