2026-06-29

The Internet I Grew Up With Doesn’t Exist Anymore

A thorough retrospective of my time on the internet.

Table of Contents

1. Introduction

2. 2001: The Family Computer

3. 2004: Exploring the Web

4. 2007: Living There

5. 2012: When Everything Started Changing

6. 2026: Logging On Today

7. The Internet I Miss

8. Closing

1.
 Introduction

The internet; what can I say? It's the driving force behind nearly the whole
world today - economies, countries, communities, and more run solely on the
internet these days.

However, it wasn't always this way.

Once upon a time, the internet didn't even exist. When it did, the internet was
a 
place
. It was a place you went. You selectively chose to visit the internet,
based on your own free will.

If you wanted to visit a chat room, or perhaps preview a fancy new Flash game,
you visited the internet for a few minutes in the evening before going back to
your family or friends.

This has changed dramatically in the last 20-30 years. Today, it's 2026 and
woven into nearly every part of daily life for the majority of the Earth's
population.

Let's do a quick checklist and see what requires the internet or becomes tedious
if we opt not to use the internet (yes, this list is tedious on purpose):

Banking

Paying bills

Taxes

Shopping

Watching TV or movies

Listening to music

Reading the news

Looking up directions

Ordering food

Booking travel

Messaging friends and family

Video calls

Playing most modern video games

Downloading software updates

Activating new devices

Backing up photos

Storing files

Finding a restaurant

Reading reviews

Checking the weather

Looking up a recipe

Researching almost anything

Applying for a job

Remote work

School and homework

Medical records

Scheduling appointments

Government services

Renewing licenses

Filing insurance claims

Managing investments

Home security cameras

Smart home devices

Navigation in your car

Finding a phone number

Dating

Selling used items

Buying event tickets

Boarding a flight

Receiving package updates

Authentication (2FA)

Password management

Identity verification

What a list. How fun. I love being absolutely restricted to a specific
technology or method with little to no options.

Joking aside, this post is my personal reflection of the internet, and perhaps
tech and life in general, over my lifetime. I was born in the late 1990s, but
was also born in a rural area of the USA, so I have been privileged to see
technology evolve from the "my stereo is the highest tech equipment in my house"
stage to the "I have all of human history in my pocket" stages.

This post is about remembering these moments from my perspective, regardless of
whether the evolutions have been good or bad.

As you read on, 
please
 (
PLEASE!
) send me an email if this post sparks a memory
or you have thoughts. I genuinely enjoy hearing these stories from anyone, and I
push for you to send them to me as you think of them.

2.
 2001: The Family Computer

The family computer. What a throwback. Perhaps you even had a 
third place

computer you visited. Wherever, whatever that computer was - think of that
computer as you read this. I will be speaking from my perspective and I hope it
resonates with someone out there.

I recall coming home from school, getting through required chores, homework, or
anything else first. Perhaps you had siblings with which you shared the computer
or the TV.

In my case, we owned an early 2000s Gateway tower PC. A beautiful (read: ugly),
beige Gateway computer with the spotted cow on it. It sat on a big "oak" hutch,
with integrated file-compatible drawers and specific spots for your matching
beige desktop speakers.

Figure 1: 
Gateway Ad from 1992

To use the computer, you likely turned on a very heavy CRT monitor. Perhaps it
even flickered, emitted you a static buzz, or showed a wavy pattern in the
graphics. This was the epitome of 2000s technology and people loved it.

Side note
: We owned a heavy, wooden CRT TV set from the 1970s or 1980s that hid
all buttons behind a fake, black "speaker" that you could press to pop open. A
decade or two after we had tossed this TV into our barn for disposal, my brother
and I took turns hitting the glass screen as hard as we could with a baseball
bat.

It never left a mark, regardless of how hard we hit it. Why don't we produce
that quality anymore?

If you wanted to use the computer, you had to press a very heavy, circular
button that would emit a memorable CLUNK as you engaged the button within the
PC. This would result in an airplane level of whirring while it used maybe a few
GB of memory and hard drive storage to boot up 
Windows 95
.

Figure 2: 
Windows 95 Desktop

At this point, the world was your oyster. You could do so many things that
humans throughout history couldn't do:

Open multiple programs 
at the same time
. Scientists were baffled.

Minimize a window, then bring it back later. Pure sorcery.

Move files by dragging them with your mouse. We truly lived in the future.

Change the color of every pixel in 
Paint
. Michelangelo could never.

Hear your speakers make a loud POP every time Windows started. Reassuring.

Watch a progress bar slowly fill from left to right while estimating "time to
complete" at 800 years. Entertainment for the whole family.

Crash the entire computer because you opened one too many programs. Unlimited
power comes with responsibility.

If you were luckier than I was, you also had access to the 
INTERNET
 at this
point. The cyberspace where you transmitted your energy through hyperwaves to
digital ends of the earth (i.e., sent a message to a stranger).

My family had a dial-up modem until the mid-2000s, so I was rarely to use the
internet at this point. The extent of my experience spanned between our family
computer (used for games, documents, and wasting time exploring every single
menu and application available in Windows) and the church computer lab
(containing even older computers, somehow).

At this point, there was no ritual to the internet or even to the computer
itself. The computer was a tool used for specific tasks, such as my mother
designing pamphlets in some obscure program for printing, or for fun.

Oftentimes, you would sit down with no particular destination. You were

exploring
. I use that word specifically because it's how I truly felt. Whenever
I turned on a computer, I was exploring a digital universe that had not been
charted before.

At this point, the internet was a distinct place you visited. Or, could ignore.
If you didn't like computers or the internet, no worries. You could ignore it as
much as you'd like.

3.
 2004: Exploring the Web

The internet stopped feeling like software.

It became its own world.

This is the point in my life where the internet became real. I wasn't a pioneer
by any means, unless we're talking about 
The Oregon Trail
, but I was willing to
test and brute force any system through sheer curiosity, from a very early age.

At this time, we launched 
Internet Explorer
 and loaded up your favorite search
engine. Perhaps it was Yahoo!, Altavista, MSN, Google, or something else.

This was probably your home page, your default search engine in the browser, and
had an annoying toolbar installed on top of the browser itself. If you were
silly enough (like me), you had numerous toolbars that sacrificed valuable
screen space for the sake of 
nothing
.

Suddenly, you could find almost anything ever uploaded to the internet. Some
options could be:

A walkthrough for the level you were stuck on.

A fan site dedicated to your favorite TV show.

A forum with 12 members arguing about phreaking.

A Flash game that somehow consumed your entire afternoon.

Someone's personal blog documenting their life in excruciating detail.

More than this, the internet always felt 
enormous
 at this stage. No matter how
much you explored, searched, or cataloged, you never had the full image. The
internet was endless, borderless, and expansive. There was always a new rabbit
hole waiting for you. Even if you had to watch every image slowly appear one
horizontal line at a time.

Before moving on to the next section, do you remember the 
1996 Space Jam
website
? What a modern marvel. Honestly one of the world's wonders.

4.
 2007: Living There

Here we are. The part of this post I recall most vividly. The mid-2000s were a
phenomenal time in my personal history, as they were my transformative years. As
it relates to computing and the internet, this means that the mid-2000s were the
years of my utmost exploration, exploitation, and emancipation.

Where do I even start? Perhaps we start with the state of the internet and what
exactly was available online. Perhaps this is triggering for certain readers,
and I apologize if it is, but it is the way the internet was at the time.

If you wanted to see gruesome videos of executions, suicides, or the pain
olympics, all it took was a single search and your search engine would happily
return any results relevant to the words you typed.

If you wanted to share information over the internet at this point, you probably
had an email from a site like AOL, Hotmail, Yahoo, Gmail, or your ISP
(Roadrunner, anyone?). Additionally, at this point, webmail clients were
extremely popular and most users would launch the webmail clients from their
providers to participate in email.

Those of us who were 
cool
 used things like MSN Messenger, AIM, etc. to chat
quickly without having to use an email. You could even use little pictures that
provided emotional reactions for you! Oh my goodness, what a time.

Figure 3: 
MSN Messenger Emoticons

Beyond chatting, the next big thing coming in the digital space was gaming. At
this time, it was seen as perhaps a silly side-hobby for some. While there may
have been some money in it for a few select games, most were not profitable -
they were created for other reasons, such as genuine intrigue in mechanics,
users' fun, and curiosity.

Games and game companies like 
Runescape
, 
Miniclip
 (8 Ball Pool, Agar.io, Doodle
Army), 
Club Penguin
, 
Wizards 101
, and more dominated the scene in the mid-2000s.

Beyond gaming, this was the age of users learning how to launch their own blogs,
vlogs, websites, and more.

For example, let's look at 
GeoCities
 (1994-2009) and 
Tumblr
 (2007-present).
These websites rapidly evolved the internet's landscape, as they offered a free
method for anyone to deploy a website or blog.

Imagine being a young person, or a high schooler, or a college student, or an
adult in 2009. You have access to the internet and an interest in 
something
 out
there in the world. You do a quick search and find a page related to it on
GeoCities or Tumblr, leading you down a hyperlink rabbit hole.

If you were properly motivated at this time, you may wonder: "How do I do this?
Can I create a page like this?" The answer was yes, and it was easy! A few
minutes later, you could have your own site. There were few, if any,
restrictions on what you could publish online.

This could lead you to learning HTML and CSS, as many users wanted to customize
their sites, which generally leads to users discovering the freedom of owning
their own sites. This included things like mail signatures, avatars,
forum-specific usernames and more.

The end result? Everyone could have their own corner of the internet.

There was space for everyone and it was distinct. You could tell, both visually
and otherwise, that a site belonged to someone specific. It was property,
individually owned and updated by a human somewhere on Earth.

5.
 2012: When Everything Started Changing

Let's jump forward to the early/mid-2010s. I used 2012 as an example because
that's when I was in my first year of high school. At this time, you begin to
understand a bit more about the world, log more long-term memories in the brain,
and shift your perspectives.

Let's start by creating a perspective of the world's technology at this time:

The iPhone 5 was released.

The first iPad Mini was released.

The Wii U was released.

Windows 8 & macOS Mountain Lion were the primary operating systems.

YouTube, Tinder, & Vine ruled the digital landscape.

Perhaps you even watched Gangnam Style on YouTube this year.

At this time, Facebook continued to cannibalize the internet. Each year,
including 2012, Facebook consumed pages and converted websites into pages on
their own website. Games, the app center, mobile apps, "pokes", and more slowly
replaced other websites and communities on the web.

Twitter did the same thing around this time, to a lesser effect.

As part of this domination by the top web service providers, apps started
quickly replacing URLs. It felt as if apps became a first-class citizen of the
digital world and that they may actually be 
more
 preferential to launching a
web-first service.

Paired with this app-first and centralized web was a preference for 
algorithms

(
everyone shudder together
) which used data about a user to determine a precise
factor of content for a user. Who cares about privacy at this point, right?
Let's just mine the data, build the features, make our money, and figure the
rest out later.

At the end of all this is a world where more users than ever are carrying
smartphones, using apps over websites, using algorithms to find content, and
circling around the socially-rewarding locations of the digital universe.

Personally… this felt like the beginning of the end. There was a short period
in the mid-2000s to the 2010s where these apps were truly rewarding and
valuable. They brought people together and we shared knowledge faster than ever.

However, there was a dark side to this revolution. As these apps progressed, and
the underlying technologies progressed, the companies and investors driving
these efforts took a turn. Efforts pushed into the world of micro-transactions,
psychological rewards for utilizing a platform, profits over value, and a slow
descent into a disregard for the users.

To me, that 2012 era was a turning point. You may personally love a different
era (1980/1990s gamer, anyone? Any former phreaks out there?), but to me, it
felt like we kept making leaps in technological capability until we reached the
point of economic profitability in the 2000s-2010s era, where corporations,
investors, and governments took a serious interest in controlling the internet.

From here on out, the digital landscape seems to have a more sinister appearance
and effect on us.

6.
 2026: Logging On Today

Fast forward to today: 2026. You want to check the latest headlines in your browser (a simple task!):

Turn on your computer - most likely Windows 10 or 11.

The computer nags you for updates.

Windows has installed more games and ad-infested apps you don't want.

Windows then advertises these new "features" to you via notifications.

You open your default browser - most likely Chrome.

When you do so, Edge nags you and asks if you want to switch to Edge?

The homepage of your browser is littered with ads, promotions, and other
distractions.

You start typing the URL of your favorite news site or searching for it - 
but
wait
, your browser has some "recommendations" first, which seem like
thinly-veiled advertisements.

If you searched instead of typing the URL directly, your browser (most likely
Google) will show you an AI summary loosely related to your search but not
really what you were looking for. Somewhere in the distance, a tree
wilts.

Below the AI "summary", which somehow takes half of the page space, results
are loaded. However, the top 3-5 are promoted results, which means they may
or may not relate to your search but someone paid to have them included.

FINALLY
, below all of that, will be the "real" results. These have been
predetermined by Google's search algorithm. At this point, you'd suspect it
would be consistent or at least transparent, right? Wrong. It's a black
box - don't ask any more questions.

You may click one, or maybe thirty, results before you find what you're
looking for.

Great, a website with a real answer. But wait! You're not trustworthy
because you haven't accepted every cookie and tracking beacon in the last
decade. Therefore, you will have to solve a captcha that requires 13
iterations of clicking the "fastest animal" in an array of images, or worse,
bikes in various countries.

Once you solve all that, there's a cookie banner waiting for you that gives
you two options:

Agree to all tracking (without seeing any information).

Or, "see more", where you will be presented with somewhere around 20
toggles to limit "legitimate interest" third-parties in the numbers of
the hundreds to thousands, or be ignorant and just accept all.

If you don't wish to spend a week of human time reading the agreements of
these various parties, you will eventually lose hope and click whichever
button lets you access the website.

Phew. Finally. We're on the site itself. 
Oh wait
 - another AI summary and
maybe even an AI voice/podcast-style version of the article first? And it's
the latest feature, so of course you'll be nagged to try it out.

Oh wait, you're interrupted again. This site requires age verification to
view its contents. For some reason, another country's laws apply to you
right now (spare me the legalese in your responses). Therefore, you will
need to create an account, giving this company personal data again, and then
upload your national ID or other identification to prove who you are.

Whoo! What an easy process that would inspire you to visit again. At this
point, you can view the latest news article on the topic you were searching
for. Unfortunately, this site is owned by the same group of people who own
basically all news sites - ensuring you are reading the exact viewpoints
they are looking to communicate.

What's the common theme here? There's an expectation on us at every single
step - proof of identification, proof of humanity, testing of their new
features, consumption of their views, etc., etc., etc.

Pause too long on an ad because you're doing something in real life? Dang, seems
like someone online made an impression on you and you will be shown that content
religiously for months.

We are rarely, if ever, allowed to freely roam and consume content we search for
or type in. There are innumerable layers of intermediaries impeding our digital
navigation. At each step, you may feel as if there's another party extracting
commercial value from your visit, your clicks, your eyes, your mouse, or your
scrolls.

7.
 The Internet I Miss

I'm going to yell at clouds now. Be prepared.

I miss the 
old
 web, the indie web. Where websites were authored by humans, even
in some capacity underneath a corporation.

We had rudimentary tools to solve the riddle of discovery, but they were tools
nonetheless. Want to discover and explore new sites? You had search options,
such as early Google or Jeeves, or third-party tools. We had web rings,
blogrolls, link lists, and other manually-curated pages to discover top-tier
content.

We dealt with slow speeds, lack of early web security, and strangers because the
internet offered so much opportunity. Over time, that opportunity has shrunk
drastically and the cost of visiting the internet has both become mandatory, yet
more expensive.

Finally, 
no one
 owned the internet. Sure, we can get into semantics of the DNS
system and infrastructure, but the web - and specifically, content - quickly
became decentralized after the early stages until the recent centralization of
content.

I just miss being able to visit the web, find personal content from fellow
internet explorers, and not spend the whole time avoiding the pitfalls of the
modern web.

8.
 Closing

As I wrote this post, I went through many thoughts and emotions. One thought was
that the internet, as we knew it, disappeared. However, I don't think it did.
Rather, the experience of the internet disappeared.

I certainly don't want to go back to 2005, I just hope we don't lose the parts
that made it feel worth exploring.

Reply via email →
