Request a
                    Demo

Research

The Tradeoffs Facing Japan's Economy

By Wojciech Gryc  ·  August 10, 2026  ·  7 min read

This past week's US-Japan collaboration on shoring up the Japanese yen leads to the
                    question—what's wrong? Why is the Japanese yen getting so weak, and is there something
                    wrong with the Japanese economy?

Japan has one of the largest debt-to-GDP ratios and is particularly disadvantaged due to the Iran
                    War driving up oil and energy prices. At the same time, its technology industry has a lot to
                    offer, but not without tradeoffs. Here, we're exploring some of those tradeoffs: interest
                    rates versus debt, investing in the future while managing concerns about overspending, and
                    managing national ambition alongside consumer price concerns.

Japan's economic challenges

A full-blown overview of Japan's economy is beyond the scope of our writing. Instead,
                    we'll list some of the larger challenges and initiatives tied to Japan's economic
                    development before exploring the tradeoffs.

Japan has one of the largest debt-to-GDP burdens in the world, at over 200%. Prior to last
                    week's US-Japan currency intervention, its currency lost over 10% of its value this year. Prime
                    Minister Sanae Takaichi is working on a growth-oriented agenda, but facing challenges as inflation
                    hovers at 1.7% and peaked at 3.7% in May 2025
[1]
.
                    Worse still, a 1.7% inflation rate hides the challenges faced by Japanese consumers: food prices
                    have increased 3.2%, with fish and seafood growing at 6.9% this past year
[2]
. While fuel and energy prices have been flat, this is only
                    because they are actively subsidized by the government.

Against the inflation backdrop, Prime Minister Takaichi's approval rating dropped from 69% in
                    June to 57% in July. Specific criticisms target her attempts at fighting cost-of-living price rises,
                    with 71% disapproving of her administration's strategy
[3]
. The challenges are partly out of Japan's control: global
                    energy prices have skyrocketed, leading to significant increases for energy imports.

This is the context that Japan's government finds itself in, and many of its options come with
                    painful pros and cons.

Tradeoff: raise interest rates to fight inflation, and hurt
                    consumers

Japan's official interest rate is set to 1%, which was reaffirmed in the July 30/31 Bank of
                    Japan meeting
[4]
.

Higher interest rates should help reduce inflation
[5]

                    and encourage more saving. More importantly, higher interest rates reduce the benefit of the carry
                    trade, where investors borrow in Japanese yen (paying the relatively low local interest rate),
                    sell the yen by converting it to other currencies, and then buying international assets. This
                    enables investors to benefit from low Japanese interest rates while arbitraging higher rates and
                    returns elsewhere. Since such investors sell yen, they drive the price of the yen down, which
                    increases costs of other imports, like energy and food.

While increasing interest rates is seen as the sensible central bank policy, there are issues with
                    this. First, higher interest rates also increase the cost of borrowing for
                    consumers—mortgages, car loans, and other products become more expensive, potentially
                    driving further dissatisfication with Takaichi's policies.

Secondly, higher interest rates lead to lower valuations for existing bonds, as yields need to
                    match what bond buyers get in the markets today. This can lead to losses on bonds already
                    purchased. Japan's four largest life insurers have lost about $96 billion in Q2 2026 based on
                    current rises in interest rates
[6]
. While consumers can
                    be forgiven for not shedding a tear for trillion-yen corporations, losses driven by interest rates
                    were why Silicon Valley Bank collapsed in 2023
[7]
.
                    Raising rates slowly could be the lesser of two evils.

Tradeoff: increase consumer support, and increase
                    debt

The Takaichi administration is driving policies that help reduce day-to-day costs for consumers. It
                    is aiming to reduce tax on food from 8% to 1% as of April 2027
[8]
, which will cost about $32 billion
[9]
. To ensure high oil prices don't translate to significant
                    consumer price increases, the government has been releasing oil from its reserves to cap gas
                    prices at ¥170/liter, and further earmarked $19 billion to subsidize fuel costs
[10]
.

All of the above drives increases in debt. Japan's current year government budget is at $780
                    billion, and $83 billion (10.7%) of the budget goes to paying interest on its current debt
[11]
. These costs are expected to rise about 50% over
                    the coming years
[12]
. When accounting for debt
                    servicing and debt rollovers, Japan's government is spending 25.6% of its budget to service
                    and manage its debts
[11]
.

Paying for tax reductions, subsidies, and other consumer-friendly policies is expensive and risks
                    making the debt worse. This is why some economists and columnists
[13]
 worry that Japan risks a “Liz Truss” moment
                    where bond prices tank and yields soar due to its inability to manage its debts.

Related tradeoffs: energy, defense, and the balance of
                    trade

Japan is heavily reliant on energy imports, which drive the price of the Japanese yen
                    down—this is one of the reasons the US and Japan intervened in the currency in late July as
                    discussed in 
our other post
. More imports drive yen values down, which increase prices for consumers and
                    businesses buying those imported goods and services. The antidote? Export more or become more
                    reliant on internal production.

How can Japanese industry work to offset the balance of trade challenges the country is facing?

Figure 1: Japan's total energy supply, 2024. 
[original]

Let's start with energy. The US-Iran war, and resulting resource price spikes, have been
                    particularly painful for Japan. 
Figure 1
 shows
                    Japan's total energy supply
[14]
. 83.5% of
                    Japan's energy supply is from oil, coal, or natural gas, most of which is imported and
                    typically priced in US dollars or other currencies. This is also slowing down Japan's growth
                    rate
[15]
.

Nuclear power was generally seen unfavorably after the Fukushima disaster of 2011. Surprisingly,
                    Japan also has very low solar power uptake. The government is now arguing for nuclear power
                    development to generate as much as 20% of Japanese power by 2040
[16]
.

It's surprising the number isn't higher, but either way, it will be expensive to get
                    there—and will likely require government subsidies, planning, and other support.

The same applies to defense, with the Japanese government promoting its military
                    buildup—where spend is approaching 2% of GDP—as a way to enable further economic
                    growth and exports. Japan now produces Patriot missiles
[17]
 on behalf of the US, and has loosened defense export
                    policies
[18]
 to enable exports of arms and military
                    equipment. This is strategically important for countering
                    China, and also helps with the balance of trade challenges, driving exports to help the Japanese yen
                    appreciate.

This vision goes further and gets more ambitious. In June 2026, the Takaichi administration proposed
                    a $2.3 trillion public-private investment strategy planned until 2040
[19]
. The plan
[20]

                    covers 17 strategic sectors, from defense and energy to quantum technologies, AI and
                    semiconductors, food, and more. The idea is to invest in various future technologies to make Japan
                    less reliant on imports, grow its exports, and generally outgrow its debt obligations.

It's an exciting plan, and like energy and defense, the major concern is around how this will be
                    financed—and whether bond markets will be supportive. This new trillion-yen strategy is not part of the current budget, so will require 
more
 funding and 
more
 debt.

This is a particular challenge if the Takaichi administration's popularity wanes further or
                    loses power altogether; in our opinion, one of the worst blunders is to start implementing such a
                    ~14-year growth strategy only to lose political will and economic wherewithal 2 or 3 years into
                    the implementation.

US and Japan supporting the yen, in perspective

Japan is at a crossroads. Inflation, debt, energy prices, defense spending, and long-term ambition
                    versus short-term economic constraints put it in a difficult bind. The support for the Japanese
                    yen covered in our other post (
How Japan and the US Supported the Yen Last
                        Week
) was not meant to be a long-term solution, but a way to buy Japan some time.

Prime Minister Takaichi's approval ratings are down significantly from June. There are
                    numerous options for Japan in the coming weeks to begin implementing its vision. The Iran War is
                    driving energy prices up—and this problem might be addressed with negotiations between Iran,
                    Oman, the US, or others. The Bank of Japan's next meeting on interest rates is in September.
                    The timing was right for an intervention, buying Japan time to continue executing on its current plan.

This will not be an easy period for the country—and doubly so for its government—but
                    promises to set Japan up for an exciting long-term growth trajectory. The risks, of course, are if
                    any of this slows down—the Takaichi administration losing popular support, a run on bonds,
                    or longer-term continuations of the Iran and Ukraine wars all risk throwing Japan off its
                    course.

Enjoyed this post? Subscribe for updates

Join hundreds of AI, geopolitics, and economics experts. We'll send 1–2
                emails per week, and we will never share your e-mail with anyone.

Thank you!

You're on the list.

Please try again. Something went wrong.

No spam, unsubscribe anytime.

References and Footnotes

Bloomberg; 
Japan's Inflation Picks Up, Keeping BOJ on Path for Rate Hikes

Statistics Bureau of Japan; 
2020-Base Consumer Price Index Monthly Report

Reuters; 
Japan PM Takaichi's approval rating slides as inflation bites, Yomiuri poll shows

Reuters; 
Bank of Japan to signal more rate hikes as price pressures build

This is debatable if the vast amount of inflation is driven by external shocks, such as the Iran War.
                    Nonetheless, higher interest rates would put pressure on inflation, just might be
                    less effective.

Bloomberg; 
Japan's Biggest Insurers Post $96 Billion in Bond Paper Losses

Wikipedia; 
Collapse of Silicon Valley Bank

NHK; 
Japan govt. approves 2-year food consumption tax cut to 1%

Reuters; 
Japan considering rolling out sales tax cut in April 2027, Mainichi reports

Reuters Breaking Views; 
Japan's Takaichi is her own worst energy enemy

Ministry of Finance; 
Japanese Public Finance Fact Sheet

Reuters; 
Japan's government interest costs to swell more than 50% in next few years

The Guardian; 
Can Japan avoid a Liz Truss-style shock as its PM embarks on a giant spending spree?

International Energy Agency; 
Japan – Energy Mix

Reuters; 
Japan cuts this year's growth outlook as higher energy costs weigh

Center for Strategic and International Studies; 
The Hormuz Energy Crisis Generates a Tailwind for Nuclear Energy in Northeast Asia

The Defense Post; 
Japan Delivers First Domestically Produced Patriot Interceptors to US

International Institute for Strategic Studies; 
Japan loosens the reins on defence exports

Nikkei; 
Japan maps $2.3tn investment plan across 17 strategic sectors

Japan's Cabinet Secretariat; 
Outline of the Japan's Growth Strategy

Share this post
Copy
                link

Read next
Research
How Japan and the US Supported the Yen Last Week
Research
Situational Awareness and the Impending Market Volatility
Research
Commodification of Intelligence: Good, Bad, and Ugly Circular AI Deals

© Phase AI 2026
Emerging Trajectories is a product of
                    Phase AI

Join hundreds of AI, geopolitics, and economics experts.
 We'll send 1–2 emails per week.

Subscribe

✕
