The key that never exists: a threshold signing ceremony in your browser
2026-08-15 · 7 min
A cryptographic key is a single point of failure. Whoever holds it holds everything, and most custody disasters reduce to that. Threshold cryptography asks a different question: what if the key never exists in one place, not even at birth?
On this page, three keyholders - 
alice
, 
bob
 and 
carol
 - create one key together. Any two of them can sign; nobody ever holds the whole key, and there is no trusted dealer who makes it and splits it. The key is born already in pieces.
Everything below is real cryptography, 
compiled from Zig to WebAssembly
 and running locally in your tab; the library, 
zig-mpc
, is on GitHub. Pick a curve and press 
Begin the ceremony
; the page explains each step as you go.
Choose a key
Scheme
Ed25519 
Solana · Cardano · TON

secp256k1 
Bitcoin · Ethereum

BIP-340 
Bitcoin Taproot
Begin the ceremony
The cast is fixed: alice is party 1, bob is party 2,
carol is party 3, and the threshold is 2 - any two can sign, any one
alone can do nothing. In production each party is a separate machine;
this page plays all three and shows you exactly which bytes would cross
the network.
Session id

Alice mints 32 random bytes that name this run. Every
message will carry this id, and it is mixed into every hash - two
ceremonies can never contaminate each other. It identifies the run; it
is not a secret. With the CLI this is the value 
zmpc init

prints for the other parties.
Two pieces of jargon before the rounds start. MPC is secure multi-party computation: several parties jointly compute a result without revealing their inputs to each other. It is what “MPC wallet” vendors sell, usually behind an API. A key ceremony is custody’s name for the formal procedure where key material gets created or used, traditionally in a vault with witnesses and dual controls. The one on this page is the real protocol, minus the vault.
The ceremony is identical for all three schemes; only the curve and the final signature format differ. Ed25519 and BIP-340 sign with FROST (Flexible Round-Optimized Schnorr Threshold signatures, 
RFC 9591
), and the same distributed key generation (DKG) also feeds threshold ECDSA (CGGMP24) for chains that require it.
Every byte shown is a real protocol message, in the same wire format the 
zmpc
 CLI exchanges between machines. Nothing you type or click leaves the page: no server, no analytics. It fetches one wasm file and then goes quiet.
Grow a key that never exists whole
Distributed key generation: three rounds plus a finalize, one command per machine per round with the CLI. Each round reads the frames that arrived and produces new ones, and the page delivers them the way you would between machines: a 
broadcast
 frame (
…-t0
) is copied to both other parties, a 
p2p
 frame (
…-tN
) goes to party N only.
The shape of the trick is worth stating before you click. Each party invents its own secret polynomial and hands the others single points on it. Add three polynomials together and you get a group secret nobody chose and nobody knows; each party’s share is just its own stack of points. Commitments in round 1 stop anyone from picking their polynomial after seeing the others, and verification in round 3 catches anyone who dealt inconsistent points. Cheating does not corrupt the key; it aborts the ceremony and names the cheater.
If you know Shamir’s secret sharing, the algebra is familiar (polynomials, points, interpolation) but the trust model is not. Shamir needs a dealer who holds the whole secret before splitting it, and using the secret means putting it back together, so the key exists whole at birth and at every use. Here each party deals only its own contribution, and reconstruction never happens, at generation or at signing.
Round 1 · Commit

Round 2 · Deal shares

Round 3 · Verify

Finalize
The rounds unlock once you begin the ceremony above.
Group public key - 

All three parties computed this same key
independently, from each other's commitments. The matching private key
has never existed anywhere: alice, bob and carol each hold

keyshare.zmpc
 - one point on a secret polynomial nobody
knows - and that file never leaves their machine.
Sign with any two
Signing is FROST: two rounds plus an aggregation, 
zmpc sign commit / share / aggregate
 in the CLI. Pick which two sit at the table; the third stays home and learns nothing, not even that a signature happened. Every signer must hold the same message bytes and a fresh signing-session id.
The output is an ordinary signature. A Bitcoin node or a Solana validator verifies it with the standard algorithm against the group public key; no verifier can tell a ceremony happened. The threshold structure is invisible on-chain, so it works today on chains that have never heard of FROST.
Signers (pick 2)
alice

bob

carol
Message to sign

Round 1 · Commit to nonces

Round 2 · Signature shares

Aggregate & verify

New signing session
Unlocks once the key above exists.
Try to break it
Each experiment below runs a fresh signing session with one thing wrong: a bit flipped in transit, a message swapped at verification, a party signing below the threshold with its genuine share.
Corrupt a byte on the wire
One byte of the first signer's commitment frame is
flipped in transit - pick which one, or leave blank for a random
position - and the other signer tries to use the frame.
Byte position (blank = random)

Corrupt & deliver
Swap the message
Two signers run a fresh session over the message from
the signing panel, then the signature is verified against whatever you
type here. Try changing one character - then try typing the original
message exactly.
Verify against

Sign, then verify against this
Sign alone
Below the threshold: one party runs the entire
signing protocol by itself, honestly, with its genuine share.
Who tries
alice

bob

carol
Try it
Unlocks once the key exists - the experiments need real shares to attack.
The third experiment is the one to sit with. Alice’s lone attempt fails even though every protocol step runs without complaint: one point does not determine a degree-1 polynomial, so her signature simply does not verify. The threshold is enforced by algebra, not by an if-statement anyone could patch out.
Each experiment’s message for the impossible outcome reads “that is a bug”. If you ever see it, please 
file an issue
.
Under the hood
This page embeds 
zmpc.wasm
 (about 230 KB), the WebAssembly build of 
zig-mpc
, written in Zig, compiled to 
wasm32-freestanding
, no emscripten and no JS crypto. The primitives are not rolled: group arithmetic comes from 
std.crypto.ecc
, field math from 
std.crypto.ff
, SHA-2 and HMAC from the same place. zig-mpc adds the protocol layer, zeroes consumed secrets, and compares secret data in constant time. The JavaScript on this page moves bytes in and out of linear memory and draws tables.
The DKG and FROST rounds running here are the same functions the 
zmpc
 CLI runs, and the frames are byte-compatible with it: a 
keyshare.zmpc
 generated on this page works in a CLI signing session between real machines, and vice versa. On real hardware the same ceremony is one process per party, one command per round:
zmpc init --dir p1 --suite ed25519 --party 1 --n 3 --threshold 2
zmpc dkg round1 --dir p1     # ... deliver frames to the other machines ...
zmpc dkg round2 --dir p1
zmpc dkg round3 --dir p1
zmpc dkg finalize --dir p1   # -> artifacts/keyshare.zmpc, prints the public key

Everything is in the repo, with no dependencies beyond the Zig standard library: 
zig build
 produces the CLI, 
zig build wasm
 the module this page just loaded. The FROST implementation reproduces the RFC 9591 test vectors byte for byte, the Taproot mode passes all 19 official BIP-340 vectors, and the library also does threshold ECDSA (CGGMP24, end to end), proactive share refresh, and BIP-32/SLIP-10 HD derivation.
Two caveats. The point of MPC is that each party is a separate machine and the shares never meet; this tab plays all three parties so you can watch the messages. And 
zig-mpc is unaudited, pre-production software
. It exists so you can see how a signing ceremony works, byte by byte. Do not put keys you care about anywhere near it yet; the 
repository’s roadmap
 spells out what has to happen first.
