The Finn

A small, grumpy agent that lives inside your router and only knows what the router can see.

Named after the character in William Gibson's Sprawl trilogy who ends up as a construct in
an armoured box bolted into an alley, where people come to hear the oracle complain. This
one runs on a GL.iNet GL-MT3000 on an office wall. It watches the hallway it is in, and
occasionally has something to say about it.

It is deliberately not an assistant. No tools, no memory beyond a state file, no access to
your mail or calendar or tickets, and nothing to be helpful with. It has a view of one
hallway and an opinion about it.

Six failed SSH logins in the last minute, usually it's zero all night. Bloody hell, some
tosser out there fancies his chances.

Твой десктоп качает на скорости 9.5 Мбит/с, обычно там крутится жалких 200 Кбит/с.
В глотку будто ведро воды опрокинули, аж кадык свело.

Everything runs on the router itself. If the rest of your infrastructure is on fire, this
still works, which was most of the point.

Quick start

You need about ten minutes, a router you own, and a card on file with an LLM provider.

1. Check your router can host it.
 OpenWrt-based, with 
lua
, 
lua-cjson
 and a 
curl

built with TLS. On GL.iNet firmware all three are usually there already:

ssh root@192.168.8.1 
'
lua -e "require(\"cjson\") print(\"ok\")"; curl --version | head -1
'

#
 missing anything?  opkg update && opkg install lua lua-cjson curl

It needs a few megabytes of overlay and nothing else. Tested on a GL-MT3000, OpenWrt 21.02,
512 MB RAM.

2. Make him a Telegram bot.
 In Telegram, open 
@BotFather
, send

/newbot
, give it a name and a username. He hands you a token like 
123456789:AAF...
. That
token is the bot; anyone holding it can post as him, so treat it as a password.

3. Find your own Telegram id.
 Message 
@userinfobot
; it replies
with a number. He answers that id and no other, so nobody else can talk to your router.

4. Get an API key.
 
Anthropic
 or

OpenAI
, both are wired up. 
Create a dedicated key
with a low monthly limit.
 It will sit in plaintext on a device that shares a network with
other people; a key that can only ever spend five dollars is a key you can shrug about.
Expect single-digit dollars a month at the default settings.

5. Install.

git clone https://github.com/YuriKovalov22/the-finn 
&&
 
cd
 the-finn
cp env.example env 
&&
 
$EDITOR
 env     
#
 paste the token, your id, the key

./install.sh root@192.168.8.1

The installer checks the router, copies two files, writes 
env
 with mode 0600, installs the
minute cron entry, enables cron, and prints what he can see right now.

6. Say hello first.
 Open your bot in Telegram and press Start. Telegram does not let a bot
open a conversation, so that message is what tells him where to write. He picks it up on his
next tick, within a minute. Send 
/help
 to see what he understands.

That is the whole setup. He will stay quiet for the first fifteen minutes while he learns what
normal looks like, then speak when something is not.

How he decides to speak

There is no list of interesting events, which is the part worth stealing. Every minute the box
takes a wide reading of itself and the room, keeps a rolling history of every reading in RAM,
and looks for anything that has fallen outside its own recent range. Whatever is unusual

today
 is what he talks about, so he does not become the same five notifications forever.

Two kinds of oddity are detected generically:

numeric
, when a sensor leaves the band it has held for the last 45 minutes by more than
a per-sensor floor that keeps ordinary wobble out;

membership
, when anything appears in or disappears from a set: a device, a neighbour on
the upstream network, an unusual destination port.

Variety is enforced along three axes, and the coarsest one matters most. 
Kind
 is what a
remark is actually about: traffic, presence, neighbours, an intruder, his own body, the rhythm
of the place. Connections, throughput and per-device flow churn are different sensors and
different themes but the same observation to a reader, and traffic is by far the twitchiest
thing on a network, so left to itself it wins nearly every round: five of six consecutive
remarks here were some counter going up. Traffic is therefore rationed to one remark in six
hours, and the kind that has waited longest is chosen first.

Which means the other kinds have to have something to say, so several observations exist that
are not counters at all: a machine arriving or leaving and how long it was gone, someone at the
desk at an hour the room is normally empty, an uptime milestone, a stretch of stillness, and
hour-of-day profiles for the slow human sensors, because what is normal at nine on a Tuesday is
not what is normal at nine on a Sunday and a 45 minute band cannot tell the difference.

Variety is enforced along two further axes, and the second one is easy to miss. 
Theme
 keeps him off
one subject; 
shape
 keeps him off one sentence. Six remarks reading "X is N now, usually M"
are varied by theme and identical to read, so each oddity also carries a shape (a level rising,
something quieting, an arrival, a departure, a change of rhythm, a stretch of stillness) and the
longest-waiting combination of the two wins. He is also shown his own last few remarks and told
not to reuse their form.

The watchdog is worth calling out because it inverts the usual arrangement: a router is the one
vantage point 
outside
 the blast radius of the server it depends on, so it is what still speaks
when that server dies. 
FINN_WATCH
 maps names to hosts or URLs; a target has to miss several
checks before he calls it down, and an outage is the single thing allowed past quiet hours and
the daily budget, because being woken at 3am is the whole point of it.

Stillness is itself an observation: after some hours in which nothing has left its range, he is
handed that fact rather than staying mute, because a resident would remark on a quiet evening.

Two rules stop him degenerating into a monitor for whichever sensor twitches most. Every
oddity carries a 
theme
 (ports, the room, the wider network, people, his own body, the
network, an intruder); a theme that has just been used goes quiet for ninety minutes, and
among what is left the longest-waiting theme is the one he is handed. And churn is not news:
a port or a neighbour that was here yesterday and came back does not count, only genuine
novelty does.

Only then is a model asked, and it is asked as a resident rather than a monitoring system:
react to this one thing, or reply 
NOTHING
 if it is bloodless bookkeeping. A subject he has
raised is muted for six hours, and a failed API call is not treated as a decision to stay
quiet.

What he can feel

Sense

Source

who is on your wifi, and how strong their signal is

iwinfo assoclist

who they are

/tmp/dhcp.leases
, by hostname, so MAC rotation does not break it

which of them are furniture rather than strangers

FINN_KNOWN_HOSTS
, hostname to plain name

which of them are people you know

FINN_PEOPLE
, hostname to a person's name

whether a machine is in use or asleep

per-device flow churn in 
/proc/net/nf_conntrack

how much each device is pulling and sending

conntrack byte counters, when they can be trusted (see below)

how long each machine has been here, and since it last stirred

tracked between ticks

how many devices the upstream network has, and which are new

neighbour table on that interface

what the network talks to, and on what ports

conntrack, common ports filtered out

link health, latency and loss to the gateway

dmesg
, 
ping

throughput both ways

/proc/net/dev
 deltas

whether a tunnel is alive, and who is on his VPN

wg show

his own temperature, load, memory, disk, uptime

/sys
, 
/proc

failed SSH logins and real kernel errors

logread
, with the wifi driver's constant screaming filtered out

whether you arrived earlier or later than usual

rolling history of first phone appearance

whether the servers your fleet depends on are still up

FINN_WATCH
, ping or HTTP probe

Per-device throughput deserves a warning. It is read from conntrack byte counters, and on any
router with hardware NAT offload, which includes this one, established flows are handled in
silicon and those counters stop growing. A busy video call shows up as a handful of packets.
Left alone this produces devices that appear to be sending more than the entire uplink carried,
and an agent will faithfully narrate the impossible number. Each tick therefore checks the parts
against the whole and publishes nothing rather than something wrong.

Association is useless as presence, which is worth knowing before you build something like
this: a sleeping Mac stays associated all night, and so does a printer. Flow churn is the
honest signal. A sleeping machine opens no new connections; a machine someone is sitting at
opens between three and fifty a minute.

Every sensor is also wired to a sensation. He is not handed "temperature 63, was 45", he is
handed heat climbing inside his case; a device drawing closer is a tickle, a yanked cable is a
slap, unfamiliar broadcasts from beyond the wall are ghosts he can hear and never see. He has
an anatomy to complain about: the antennas are his ears, the ports his fingers and toes, the
flash his gut.

Talking to him

He answers anything you write, always, in any mode. He also takes commands, handled locally
at no cost:

Command

Effect

/status

mode, what he has said today, model calls spent, which brain he is thinking with

/off

speaks only when spoken to

/rare

at most 2 unprompted a day, 3 hours apart

/normal

at most 5 a day, an hour apart

/chatty

at most 10 a day, 15 minutes apart

/test

no daily ceiling, one a minute, for two hours, then back to 
/chatty
 by itself

/voice

beep
 plays a pip when he posts, 
speak
 reads the remark aloud, 
off
 keeps him to Telegram

/machines

lists the machines he can control and which are awake

/wake <name>

sends a WOL magic packet, waits, and tells you whether it actually came up

/sleep <name>

sleeps the machine over SSH

Test mode spends its own budget. Otherwise an afternoon of watching him work leaves him mute
for the rest of the day, which is exactly what happened here: two hours of testing burned 22
remarks against a ceiling of 10, and he went silent the moment the test expired.

The daily allowance opens gradually rather than all at once. Mornings are the richest hours
for oddities, so a flat cap gets spent before eleven and leaves nothing for whatever happens
at five; instead it unlocks in proportion to how much of the speaking window has passed, with
one message always available.

He calls you by whatever you put in 
FINN_OWNER_NAME
, and he only ever talks to the one
Telegram id you configured.

Unprompted remarks come out in Russian or English by coin toss. He answers you in whichever
language you wrote in. To make him monolingual, edit 
STYLE
 and the language line near the
bottom of 
finn.lua
.

Running it

/root/finn/tick.sh            
#
 one tick, as cron runs it

/root/finn/tick.sh facts      
#
 what the box sees right now: sends nothing, records nothing

/root/finn/tick.sh say 
"
...
"
  
#
 make him speak on a given occasion

/root/finn/tick.sh status     
#
 the same answer /status gives in the bot

/root/finn/tick.sh kinds      
#
 how each sensor is grouped, and when each group last spoke

facts
 is strictly read-only, and that matters more than it looks: an inspection that saved
what it saw would mark the oddity as already known, and the next real tick would have nothing
left to say. Diagnostics must not eat the event they are diagnosing.

State lives in 
/root/finn/state.json
, events in 
/root/finn/finn.log
; a quiet tick writes
nothing. The first run takes a baseline and stays silent, so a cold start does not report every
device in the building as a new face.

A speaker, if you want one

Plug a class-compliant USB speaker into the router and he can be heard as well as read. Install

kmod-usb-audio
 and 
alsa-utils
, and set 
FINN_VOICE
:

beep
, the default and the one worth having: a short two-tone pip when he posts, so you look
at your phone. 
sounds/finn-blip.wav
 in this repo, copy it to 
/root/bell/finn.wav
.

speak
, which sends the remark to OpenAI speech synthesis and plays it through the speaker,
in a gruff old-sailor voice. Requires 
FINN_OPENAI_KEY
 even when the words come from
Anthropic. Delightful for about a day, then you will switch it to 
beep
; ask me how I know.

off
.

Either way it only makes noise between 
FINN_VOICE_FROM
 and 
FINN_VOICE_TO
, 9 to 19 by
default, and never when no sound card is present.

Cost and wear

The minute tick is pure local work: no API call unless an anomaly was found, and a hard ceiling
of 40 model calls a day including the ones that end in 
NOTHING
.

The flash is treated as the scarce resource it is on these boxes. Sensor history lives in
tmpfs, the persistent state file is a few hundred bytes and is only rewritten when its contents
actually change, and the log is truncated at 256 KB. Total footprint on the overlay is well
under a megabyte.

Tuning

At the top of 
finn.lua
:

Constant

Meaning

HIST

how many minutes of history count as "normal"

WARMUP

samples before a sensor may cry anomaly

SUBJECT_MUTE

how long a subject stays quiet after he raises it

CALL_BUDGET

hard ceiling on model calls per day

QUIET_FROM
 / 
QUIET_TO

hours in which he may speak unprompted

FLOOR

per-sensor noise floors: how big a change has to be to count

MODES

the talkativeness presets behind the bot commands

The character is one prompt near the middle of the file. Rewrite it and you have a different
resident. Four rules in it were each learned by getting them wrong, and are worth keeping in
any character you write:

The plain fact first, then the image.
 A remark made only of metaphor and swearing reads
well and communicates nothing: "двести семьдесят восемь глоток орут в брюхе" leaves the
reader guessing what happened. Name the thing by its own name; the lock may follow as an
image, but it may not stand in for "failed SSH logins".

Every image must mean something.
 Ask for a bodily reaction without demanding the
comparison be checkable and you get filler shaped like style: "проснулся резче, чем спал"
cannot be true or false.

Never let the character narrate its own plumbing.
 Unprompted, a model will happily say
"I was not given that value", which is true of the prompt and fatal to a thing bolted to a
wall. It notices or it does not.

Forbid the two lies a sensor agent tells naturally.
 A throughput reading is how much is
moving, not how much could move, and a model will happily turn "2.5 Mbit/s flowing" into
"the line is narrow as a needle's eye" while a gigabit sits idle. It will also invent
outside knowledge it cannot have: mine announced that video calls "need at least 5 to 10
Mbit/s each way", which is both wrong and unknowable from inside a router. Say plainly that
it has never read a specification and that the only normal it owns is the one it measured
in that room.

Write the style rule in the language it governs.
 An English instruction about writing
numbers as digits sits unread at the bottom of a Russian answer. The same rule in Russian is
obeyed at once.

Privacy

FINN_PEOPLE
 lets him greet people by name: "John's just joined the wifi, go and say hello."
That is for a network you run and people who know it exists. The same trick pointed at a
shared building network would work rather well, and that is the point at which this stops
being a toy and becomes covert attendance tracking of strangers, so it is not built and I
would not add it. Aggregate counts of the wider network are already there and carry nobody's
name.

This watches a network, which means it watches the people on it. It is written for a router
you own, in a room you occupy. Keep it that way. It reports on the owner's own named devices
and on anonymous counts, it never inspects traffic contents (DNS query logging is deliberately
not switched on), and it sends messages to exactly one Telegram id.

Notes for the road

scp
 does not work against dropbear, which has no 
sftp-server
. Pipe through 
ssh 'cat > file'
.

GL.iNet firmware runs a second 
crond
 off 
/tmp/gl_crontabs
 for its own jobs. Leave it alone;
the installer uses the stock one at 
/etc/crontabs/root
.

A firmware upgrade wipes the overlay and takes 
/root/finn
 with it. Re-run 
install.sh
.

Lua 5.1 has no notion of a character, so every string cut is a byte cut. Slicing Cyrillic at a
byte boundary produces invalid UTF-8 and the API rejects the whole request. There is a
character-aware truncation helper in the file for this reason.

MIT licensed. It is a toy with a body; enjoy it.
