A little while ago, we considered how 
 the cover of the book 
C++: The Programming Language
 raises questions not answered by the cover
, since the cover illustration for a book putatively about the C++ programming language shows code written in JavaScript.¹ But there’s also a question raised by the back cover.

According to the blurb for the book,

The topics included in it are of utmost significance and are bound to provide incredible insights to students. Some of the diverse topics covered in this text address the varied branches that fall under this category. Those in search of information to further their knowledge will be greatly assisted by this textbook.

This sounds like a book report written by a student who didn’t read the book! Those sentences could be used to describe pretty much any textbook.

Indeed, I found nearly identical sentences in the blurb for 
Casting Handbook
 (Hannah Wells, editor).

The topics included in this book on casting are of utmost significance and bound to provide incredible insights to readers. Some of the diverse topics covered in this book address the varied branches that fall under this category. It will serve as a valuable source of reference for graduate and post graduate students.

And in 
Food Industry: Processes and Technologies
 (Kaden Hunt, editor):

This book is compiled in such a manner, that it will provide in-depth knowledge about the theory and practice of the workings of food industry. Some of the diverse topics covered in this text address the varied branches that fall under this category. This textbook, with its detailed analyses and data, will prove immensely beneficial to professionals and students involved in this area at various levels.

And in 
Nutrition and Metabolism: Processes and Technologies
 (Kaden Hunt, editor):

This book provides comprehensive insights into the field of nutrition and metabolism. It provides deep insights about this field. Some of the diverse topics covered in this text address the varied branches that fall under this category. Such selected concepts that redefine this subject have been presented in it. This book aims to shed light on some of the unexplored aspects of this field. It is meant for students who are looking for an elaborate reference text on nutrition and metabolism.

One more example: 
Material Science and Engineering
 (Emilio McMahon, editor)

The book aims to shed light on some of the unexplored aspects of materials science and engineering. It describes in detail the various concepts and theories of this field. The topics included in it are of utmost significance and bound to provide incredible insights to students. Some of the diverse topics covered in this book address the varied branches that fall under this category. This textbook is an essential guide for both graduates and post-graduates in this discipline.

The common thread is that all of these books are published by Larson and Keller. I guess they can’t be bothered to spend time crafting a blurb that suits the book, so they just use the same blurb template for all of their books.

¹ 
 Rory Jaffe found
 that the book cover image 
 it is an Alamy stock photo
 from 2013 with the title “Program code on a monitor.”
