THE

PNEUMATICS

OF

HERO OF ALEXANDRIA

FROM THE ORIGINAL GREEK

TRANSLATED FOR AND EDITED BY

BENNET WOODCROFT

PROFESSOR OF MACHINERY IN UNIVERSITY
 COLLEGE, LONDON

LONDON

TAYLOR WALTON AND MABERLY
UPPER GOWER STREET AND IVY LANE PATERNOSTER ROW
1851

Contents

 Editors Preface. 

 Translators Preface. 

 A Treatise on Pneumatics. 

 1. The bent Siphon 

 2. Concentric or inclosed Siphon 

 3. Uniform discharge Siphon 

 4. Siphon which is capable of discharging a greater or less quantity of Liquid with uniformity 

 5. A Vessel for withdrawing Air from a Siphon 

 6. A Vessel for retaining or discharging a Liquid at pleasure. 

 7. A Vessel for discharging Liquids of different temperatures at pleasure 

 8. A Vessel for discharging Liquids in varying proportions 

 9. A Water Jet produced by mechanically compressed Air 

 10. A Valve for a Pump 

 11. Libations on an Altar produced by Fire 

 12. A Vessel from which the contents flow when filled to a certain height 

 13. Two Vessels from which the contents flow, by a Liquid being poured into one only 

 14. A Bird made to whistle by flowing Water 

 15. Birds made to sing and he silent alternately by flowing Water 

 16. Trumpets sounded by flowing Water 

 17. Sounds produced on the opening of a Temple Door 

 18. Drinking horn from which either Wine or Water will flow 

 19. A Vessel containing a Liquid of uniform height, although a Stream flows from it 

 20. A Vessel which remains full, although Water be drawn from it 

 21. Sacrificial Vessel which flows only when Money is introduced 

 22. A Vessel from which a variety of Liquids may be made to flow through one Pipe 

 23. A Flow of Wine from one Vessel, produced by Water being poured into another 

 24. A Pipe from which flows Wine and Water in varying proportions 

 25. A Vessel from which Wine flows in proportion as Water is withdrawn 

 26. A Vessel from which Wine flows in proportion as Water is poured into another 

 27. The Fire-Engine 

 28. An Automaton which drinks at certain times only, on a Liquid being presented to it 

 29. An Automaton which may be made to drink at any time, on a Liquid being presented to it 

 30. An Automaton which will drink any quantity that may he presented to it 

 31. A wheel in a Temple, which, on being turned liberates purifying Water 

 32. A Vessel containing different Wines, any one of which may be liberated by placing a certain Weight in a Cup 

 33. A self-trimming Lamp 

 34. A Vessel from which Liquid may be made to flow, on any portion of Water being poured into it 

 35. A Vessel which will hold a certain quantity of Liquid when the supply is continuous, will only receive a portion of such Liquid if the supply is intermittent 

 36. A Satyr pouring Water from a Wine-skin into a full Washing-Basin, without making the contents overflow 

 37. Temple Doors opened by Fire on an Altar 

 38. Other intermediate means of opening Temple Doors by Fire on an Altar 

 39. Wine flowing from a Vessel may be arrested on the Introduction of Water, but, when the Supply of Water ceases, the Wine flows again 

 40. On an Apple being lifted, Hercules shoots a Dragon which then hisses 

 41. A Vessel from which uniform Quantities only of Liquid can be poured 

 42. A Water-Jet actuated by compressed Air from the Lungs 

 43. Notes from a Bird produced at intervals by an intermittent Stream of Water 

 44. Notes produced from several Birds in succession, by a Stream of Water 

 45. A Jet of Steam supporting a Sphere 

 46. The World represented in the Centre of the Universe 

 47. A Fountain which trickles by the Action of the Sun's Rays 

 48. A Thyrsus made to whistle by being submerged in Water 

 49. A Trumpet, in the hands of an Automaton, sounded by compressed Air 

 50. The Steam-Engine 

 51. A Vessel from which flowing Water may be stopped at pleasure 

 52. A Drinking-Horn in which a peculiarly formed Siphon is fixed 

 53. A Vessel in which Water and Air ascend and descend alternately 

 54. Water driven from the Mouth of a Wine-skin in the Hands of a Satyr, by means of compressed Air 

 55. A Vessel, out of which Water flows as it is poured in but if the supply is with-held, Water will not flow again, until the Vessel is half filled and on the supply being again stopped, it will not then flow until the Vessel is filled 

 56. A Cupping-Glass, to which is attached, an Air exhausted Compartment 

 57. Description of a Syringe 

 58. A Vessel from which a Flow of Wine can be stopped, by pouring into it a small Measure of Water 

 59. A Vessel from which Wine or Water may be made to flow, separately or mixed 

 60. Libations poured on an Altar, and a Serpent made to hiss, by the Action of Fire 

 61. Water flowing from a Siphon ceases on surrounding the End of its longer Side with Water 

 62. A Vessel which emits a Sound when a Liquor is poured from it 

 63. A Water-Clock, made to govern the quantities of Liquid flowing from a Vessel 

 64. A Drinking-Horn from which a mixture of Wine and Water, or pure Water may be made to flow alternately or together, at pleasure 

 65. A Vessel from which Wine or Water may be made to flow separately or mixed 

 66. Wine discharged into a Cup in any required quantity 

 67. A Goblet into which as much Wine flows as is taken out 

 68. A Shrine over which a Bird may be made to revolve and sing by Worshippers turning a Wheel 

 69. A Siphon fixed in a Vessel from which the Discharge shall cease at will 

 70. Figures made to dance by Fire on an Altar 

 71. A Lamp in which the Oil can be raised by Water contained within its Stand 

 72. A Lamp in which the Oil is raised by blowing Air into it 

 73. A Lamp in which the Oil is raised by Water as required 

 74. A Steam-Boiler from which a hot-Air blast, or hot-Air mixed with Steam is blown into the Fire, and from which hot Water flows on the introduction of cold 

 75. A Steam-Boiler from which either a hot Blast may be driven into the Fire, a Blackbird made to sing, or a Triton to blow a horn 

 76. An Altar Organ blown by manual Labour 

 77. An Altar Organ blown by the agency of a Wind-mill 

 78. An Automaton, the head of which continues attached to the body, after a knife has entered the neck at one side, passed completely through it, and out at the other; which animal will drink immediately after the operation 

 Appendix. 

 Treatise. 

| 
Steam Engine Library
 |

Text conversion and html by Peter Hark and Dan Sonneborn

December 1996
