Collections
 / 
Books
“The Persian 
Mâr-Nâmeh
 or, The Book for Taking Omens from Snakes” (1892)

George Waters, “The Persian Mâr-Nâmeh or, The Book for Taking Omens from Snakes”, in 
Anthropological Papers (Mostly on Parsee Subjects)
, ed. Jivanji Jamshedji Modi (Bombay: British India Press), 1911.

Addressing the Bombay Anthropological Society on the night of November 30, 1892, its then-president — George Waters, a British surgeon and lieutenant colonel — discussed a rather esoteric work: a Zoroastrian book known as the 
Marnameh
. His interest in the text? Ancient perceptions of snakes. 
With India then being home to the largest Zoroastrian community outside Iran, whose members were visibly active in many spheres of society and politics, Waters’ lecture likely had local interest. The surgeon — who also expounded on such subjects as the 
1896 plague in Bombay
 — first discussed attitudes toward snakes in antiquity before introducing the 
Marnameh
 and his own footnote-studded translation from the Persian.
Written sometime in the late fifteenth century, the 
Marnameh
 is a short text listing the thirty days of the Zoroastrian calendar — each, for the most part, corresponding to a Zoroastrian divinity or figure — and what the sighting of a snake on each portends. It comprises part of the 
Revayat of Darab Hormozdyar
 (“The Tale of Darab, Friend of Ahura Mazda”), which belongs to the 
revayat
 (literally “narration”) tradition. Composed between the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries, 
revayat
s featured opinions on an array of matters 
related to Zoroastrianism
, and appeared in both prose and poetry. They are not, however, considered scripture, nor are they part of the 
Avesta,
 the central corpus of Zoroastrian religious teachings, which includes the 
Gatha
s (“hymns”) of the prophet Zoroaster.
Aside from the odd subject matter of the text, what also makes the 
Marnameh
 fascinating is its unexpected treatment of snakes, which Zoroastrians have historically viewed with contempt. As Waters remarked:
The ancient Persians or Zoroastrians were one of those nations that held the snake in no veneration. . . . It was always considered meritorious to kill [it]. A believer . . . was recommended to keep with him a snake-killer, which was a stick to kill the snakes with. This stick was also used to punish the criminals who were considered to be as poisonous spiritually as the snakes were physically.
This abhorrence toward snakes is perhaps best reflected in the story of the Arab demon-king Zahhak, who in the 
Shahnameh
 — the “Book of Kings”, Iran’s national epic — terrorises people with the brain-devouring snakes growing from his shoulders. This tracks with how, in the Zoroastrian religion, snakes belong to a category of creatures known as 
khrafstar.
 In contrast to 
gospand,
 the beneficent creatures of Ahura Mazda (God), 
khrafstar
 (like frogs, snakes, and scorpions) are the baneful spawn of Ahriman, the 
sole origin
 of all evil. These classifications were 
noted
 by Agathias, and, before him, Plutarch.
While the 
Marnameh
 does indeed contain ill omens, a good number are auspicious. “If you see a snake on the day of Sheherivar”, says one such omen, “you will (soon) find an absent friend in your arms”. Similarly, the 
Marnameh
 asserts that the sight of a snake on the day of Zamyâd will lead to the obtainment of “justice from the Creator of the world”.
How, one should rightly ask, could a 
khrafstar
 like the snake possibly be associated with good fortune? Waters, who pointed out the un-Zoroastrian sentiment reflected in the book’s happy auguries, was of the belief that the 
Marnameh
 had possibly been influenced by Egyptian thought. In concluding her discussion of the 
Marnameh
 as an anomaly, the Indo-Iranian philologist Martina Palladino 
states
 that “serpents have not always belonged to the Ahrimanic sphere . . . despite the clear Zoroastrian hatred for these animals”, even adding that, “in pre-Zoroastrian Iran, these animals were not perceived negatively”. Could the positive associations of snakes in the 
Marnameh
, then, be echoes of pre-Zoroastrian perceptions?
Despite its strangeness (or, perhaps, because of it), the 
Marnameh
 remains, centuries on, a largely forgotten and esoteric text. Even as a work of literature, it can “lay no claim to elegance of style or beauty of language”, to 
quote
 Waters; yet, like the poems of Hafez and the grounds of Turkish coffee, both of which are popularly used in divination among Iranians, the more favourable omens of the 
Marnameh
 might be a source of solace to some. After all, who wouldn’t want the “revolving heavens” to fulfill their wishes or to have their “desires . . . satisfied from all directions” — especially after stumbling upon some fork-tongued fiend?
Text by 
Joobin Bekhrad
Enjoyed this piece? We need your help to keep publishing.
The PDR is a non-profit project kept alive by reader donations – no ads, no paywalls, just the generosity of our community. It’s a really exciting model, but 
we need your help to keep it thriving
. Visit 
our support page
 to become a Friend and receive our themed 
postcard packs
. Or give a one-off donation. Already a supporter? A huge thank you for making all this possible.
Support PDR
Medium
Books
Theme
Animals & Beasts
Religion, Myth & Legend
Colonialism & the ‘Other’
Genre
Thought, Reflection & Theory
Fairytales & Folk
Type
Non-fiction
Epoch
19th Century
20th Century
Tags
snakes
2
Zoroaster
2
india
14
iran
5
persia
2
divination
4
Source
Internet Archive / Public Library of India
More 
Public Library of India
 content on PDR (
2
)
More 
Internet Archive
 content on PDR (
717
)
Underlying Work Rights
PD Worldwide
Digital Copy Rights
Unclear
No associated rights statement on Internet Archive

Internet Archive has 
CC BY-NC-SA
 default which this might fall under
We offer this info as 
guidance only
Download
PDF

Published
Jul 28, 2026
