The Dutch Community Where People Live on Strips of Land in a Lake 

                        By 
Rain Noe

                        - 
July 27

in 

Architecture

In much of the world, owning a lakeside home is desirable. But in the Dutch town of Loosdrecht, residents live 
within
 the lake itself, with houses on their own impossibly skinny islands:
 
The unique geography is of course manmade, the result of peat mining. In centuries past, boats were used to dredge what was once swampland, in order to mine peat for fuel. Thin strips of land were left behind, for a practical purpose: That's where the peat was unloaded and laid out in the sun to dry.
The area remained a geographical curiosity until the 20th century, when developers realized they could build houses on the leftover strips of land. Today, hundreds of residents live in these boat-access-only homes.
 
You can learn more here:
Enter a caption (optional)

o
                
 3 

Favorite This

Q

Comment

Share your thoughts

Join over 240,000 designers who stay up-to-date with the Core77 newsletter.

Subscribe

Test it out; it only takes a single click to unsubscribe

Directory Company Profiles

Core77 
Industrial Design
 Resources

Core77 Directory

                        Find the Best Industrial Design
                        
                        Companies

Go

Ammunition

Founded in 2007, Ammunition is led by partners Robert Brunner and Matt Rolandson. Our work is create...

Y Studios

Y Studios is an award-winning Industrial Design and Research consultancy in San Francisco with exten...

Mixer Design Group

We specialize in electronic product design and engineering for wearables, electronics, bioscience an...

FLUID Design

FLUID (former LUNAR Europe) is an award-winning creative design and innovation agency located in Mun...

The Metcalfe Group, Inc.

Located in the greater Cleveland, Ohio area, we are an experienced full-service product design firm ...

Tactile

Tactile is a product and UX design firm founded in 2004. Blending physical and digital design, we cr...

Proportion

Proportion is a boutique design agency delivering concept-driven brands & environments that are wort...

K

{

Welcome

Don't have an account? 
Join Now

K

{

Welcome

Create a Core77 Account

Already have an account? 
Sign In

        By creating a Core77 account you confirm that you accept the 
Terms of Use

K

Reset Password

Please enter your email and we will send an email to reset your password.

r

Join over 240,000 designers who stay up-to-date with the Core77 newsletter.

Test it out; it only takes a single click to unsubscribe

Subscribe

        Our website uses cookies to enhance the site operation and understand traffic and website performance. 
Learn more.
 
Accept Cookies
