Advertisement
Evolution
The Wonders of the Male Human Pelvis
It’s all in the hips
JC
By 
Jake Currie
4:00 PM CDT on August 18, 2026
Add Nautilus to Google
There’s a lot of research on the female pelvis, and for good reason. The so-called “
obstetrical dilemma
”—why childbirth seems particularly difficult for humans compared to other mammals—involves a lot of questions about evolutionary trade-offs, the development of the upright gait, cranium size, and the female pelvis. The male pelvis, on the other hand, has been relatively overlooked—until now. A new study 
published
 in 
Scientific Reports
 finds some fascinating evolutionary innovations that are unique to men’s pelvises.  
Featured Video
An international team of researchers led by anthropologists from Tel Aviv University carefully analyzed 91 modern human pelvises (63 male, 28 female) and compared them with two complete male Neanderthal pelvises. According to the team, the male modern human pelvis is unique among the three, with hip sockets oriented more toward the front of the pelvis. They concluded this pelvic configuration constitutes an adaptation that benefits human locomotion.       
Read more: “
How Walking Upright Made Early Humans Smart
”
Walking has been described as a series of controlled falls. When you walk, you destabilize your center of gravity, then interrupt an embarrassing trip to the ground by swinging your leg forward to catch yourself, and so on. During these controlled falls, your body drops downward, which both stresses your joints and requires energy to recover from. 
Advertisement
Per the team, the unique architecture of the human male pelvis means we do a better job of dealing with both of these issues. Because our legs are positioned slightly more forward, our quads both absorb the shock of stepping and spring our bodies back upward. This more energy efficient gait may give men an advantage over long distances. Because they were constrained by the demands of childbirth, women’s pelvises weren’t able to develop these modifications, researchers say. 
Additionally, these new findings could help inform further research with implications that go beyond human evolution. “Understanding the evolution of our walking mechanism can contribute to contemporary research in biomechanics, musculoskeletal medicine, rehabilitation, and injury prevention,” study author Ella Been of Ono Academic College explained in a 
statement
. “The perspective provided by the Neanderthals helps us better understand the modern human body.”
It’s important to stay in touch with your own body—and sometimes it takes a look back at where we’ve been to understand how far we’ve come. 
Enjoying 
Nautilus
? Subscribe to our free 
newsletter
.
Advertisement
Lead image: peterschreiber.media / Adobe Stock
Advertisement
Share on Facebook
Share on X (formerly Twitter)
Share on Reddit
Share on Email
Share on Bluesky
JC
Jake Currie
Jake Currie is a writer based in Brooklyn, NY.
Stay in touch
Sign up for our free newsletter
Related Stories
Evolution
Why It Might Be Time to Rethink the Human Family Tree
The way we classify humanity’s ancient relatives is a mess. But there’s a simple fix.
Ian Towle
August 19, 2026
Evolution
Is Immortality Possible?
Nature has answered the same way for 3.5 billion years
2
Comments
Elena Kazamia
August 18, 2026
Evolution
Life Originated Twice on Earth
New research traces the origins of our metabolism back in time
Jake Currie
August 6, 2026
Evolution
Your Big Brain Wouldn’t Be Possible Without Sugar
Pass the glucose
Jake Currie
August 6, 2026
Evolution
People With This Neanderthal Hormone Receptor Have More Muscle Mass
Are you regular swole? Or neanderthal swole?
Jake Currie
August 5, 2026
Evolution
An Explosion of Feces May Have Triggered Earth’s Explosion of Species
The nutrients found in animal excrement should never be discounted
Devin Reese
August 4, 2026
