NOV

DEC

APR

25

2009

2010

                       2011

232 captures

25 jan 99 - 25 jul 11

Close

Help

[
Website for Erik Engdahl
] --> [
Subhomepage about autism spectrum conditions
] which 
provisionally
 hosts the disappeared(?) 
parody
 site [
Institute for the Study of the Neurologically Typical
] with original address 
http://isnt.autistics.org
 . Views expressed on the hosted site are 
not necessarily the views of host owner
 and vice-versa.  
Why hosting the site?

The current page is a mirror image of 

http://web.archive.org/web/20101225090822/http://isnt.autistics.org/index.html
 (25 Dec. 2010)

having adress 
http://www.erikengdahl.se/autism/isnt/index.html
 .

Links originally internal to the disappeared(?) site are remade to become internal to the hosted mirror site.

Text Only

D

(Note: The content of this site is a parody. It is not to be taken literally. 
Help with understanding the humor.
)

What Is NT?

Neurotypical syndrome is a neurobiological disorder characterized by preoccupation with social concerns, delusions of superiority, and obsession with conformity.

Neurotypical individuals often assume that their experience of the world is either the only one, or the only correct one. NTs find it difficult to be alone. NTs are often intolerant of seemingly minor differences in others. When in groups NTs are socially and behaviorally rigid, and frequently insist upon the performance of dysfunctional, destructive, and even impossible rituals as a way of maintaining group identity. NTs find it difficult to communicate directly, and have a much higher incidence of lying as compared to persons on the autistic spectrum.

NT is believed to be genetic in origin. Autopsies have shown the brain of the neurotypical is typically smaller than that of an autistic individual and may have overdeveloped areas related to social behavior.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Normal Disorders: 666.00 Neurotypic Disorder

How Common Is It?

Tragically, as many as 9625 out of every 10,000 individuals may be neurotypical.

Are There Any Treatments For NT?

There is no known cure for Neurotypical Syndrome.

However, 
many NTs have learned to compensate for their disabilities
 and interact normally with autistic persons.

Could I be NT?

Take the 
Online NT Screening Test.

Papers and Abstracts

The Theory of Social Delusion

NT Social Skills Deficiencies: A Case Study

The Sal and Anne Test: Implications, and
  Theory of Mind

Riviera N.  The Sal and Annie Test: Implications,  and Theory of Mind.  
Journal of Neurologic Obfuscation.  1998(8):302-987

Pheromone of Social Delusion: Theory, Discovery and Primary Test Results.

DSN entry for Staff Personality Disorder
 (added 30 Aug 2004)

DSN entry for Normal Personality Disorder

DSN entry for Pseudosimultaneous Awareness Disorder

DSN entry for Psychiatry Disorder

NT Theory of Mind

About This Site

This site is an expression of autistic 
out
rage.

About a year ago I learned I was on the autistic spectrum. Inspired by this discovery, I read everything I could get my hands on about the autistic spectrum. Much of it makes sense-- for the first time in 41 years, I had a description, albiet an unexpected one, that 
fit
 me.

But a lot of what I've found out there, mostly written by "experts" and "professionals", has been arrogant, insulting, and just plain wrong. My bête noire of the moment is finding my emotions described as "flat". As someone with considerably greater expertise in my emotions than the "experts", I can state unequivocally that my emotions are not "flat". They are different, yes, but they are most certainly not "flat."

Perhaps tomorrow I'll be fired up over being described as "lacking empathy". Or I'll be outraged at an exceptionally clueless "training" method being inflicted upon autistic kids. Or maybe it will be some new paper written by some "expert" from the perspective that neurotypical perception is correct, and my brain is a genetic mistake.

My brain is a jewel. I am in awe of the mind that I have. I and my experience of life is not inferior, and may be 
superior
, to the NT experience of life. 

Hence, this "Institute". Persons on the autistic spectrum and NT supporters are invited to submit papers to the Institute, and to share your observations in 
"Current Research"
 (the guestbook).

-muskie

Copyright © 1998-2002 
ISNT@autistics.org
. Last updated March 18, 2002.

D

What is NT?

How Common Is It?

Are There Any Treatments For NT?

Online NT Screening Test

Papers and Abstracts

What You Can Do If Someone You Know is NT

Current Research (guestbook)

Links

About This Site
