Trains halted across Germany because of communication system problem

1 of 5
 | 

Passengers stand in line at the DB information desk at the Munich train station, Tuesday, June 23, 2026. (Peter Kneffel/dpa via AP)

Read More

2 of 5
 | 

Passengers line up at the DB information desk at the Duisburg train station, Tuesday, June 23, 2026, (Christoph Reichwein/dpa via AP)

Read More

3 of 5
 | 

Passengers line up at the DB information desk at the Duisburg train station, Tuesday, June 23, 2026. (Christoph Reichwein/dpa via AP)

Read More

4 of 5
 | 

A passenger stands on a platform in front of a train at Duisburg Central Station, Tuesday, June 23, 2026. (Christoph Reichwein/dpa via AP)

Read More

5 of 5
 | 

A train is parked on a platform at Hannover Central Station, Tuesday, June 23, 2026. (Moritz Frankenberg/dpa via AP)

Read More

            By 
            
GEIR MOULSON
 and 
PIETRO DE CRISTOFARO

Leer en español

                Add AP News on Google 

        Add AP News as your preferred source to see more of our stories on Google.

Share

                    Share

Facebook

Copy

Link copied

        Print

        Email

X

LinkedIn

Bluesky

Flipboard

Pinterest

Reddit

BERLIN (AP) — A problem with a communications system forced 
Germany’s
 railway network to halt all trains late Tuesday, leaving passengers stranded across the country.
Trains were held at stations and would-be travelers stood in long lines at information desks as they tried to figure out how to get to their destinations.
The main national railway operator, Deutsche Bahn, said shortly before 1 a.m. — nearly 2 1/2 hours after it first reported the outage — that the problem had been resolved and service was resuming “step by step.” 
The company said there was a nationwide problem with the GSM-R digital communication system, which is used for internal communication on the railway network. It later said that the cause had been identified, but didn’t specify what it was.
The Bild newspaper quoted Deutsche Bahn CEO Evelyn Palla as saying that they “were able to stabilize the situation with an emergency system.”

Deutsche Bahn said during the outage that it was giving taxi and hotel vouchers to passengers and, where possible, making available trains at stations for travelers to sit in. It apologized for the situation.

                            Related Stories

UK police probe cause of train collision that killed driver and left 9 in critical condition

1 MIN READ

Authorities say at least 9 dead, 25 hurt after a train and bus collide in Zimbabwe

1 MIN READ

Mexico City installed a chandelier in its metro for the World Cup. Then came the crush of memes

3 MIN READ

At Berlin’s central station, Reyna Ghoshal and a friend were trying to get back to Munich after a trip to the German capital and saw “unhappy faces” as they arrived at the station.
“The train conductor was very nice, but he was just like, ‘we don’t know,’” said Ghoshal, who is from Atlanta. She said that “we booked a bus for 8 a.m. just in case, but generally we don’t know what’s going on.”

    Read More 

In recent years, complaints about train delays and disruption in Germany have become increasingly frequent. 
Government-owned Deutsche Bahn has started conducting thorough but disruptive 
overhauls of major routes
 after years of underinvestment in a bid to improve its performance.
The German railway system has on rare occasions in the past halted all or most trains, but because of storms rather than for technical reasons.

GSM-R, short for Global System for Mobile Communications–Railway, offers voice and data services needed to operate railways, including communication between train drivers and control centers.
According to the European Union Agency for Railways, it has been introduced across Europe since 2000 as a common standard for railway operations.
