The cr.yp.to 
blog

Older (Access-J): 
2026.06.19: EuroQCI feedback:
 
A simple idea for improving Europe's investments in data security. #qkd #quantumcrypto #euroqci #pqcrypto

Table of contents (Access-I for index page)

2026.06.30: Understanding lattice risks:
 Many differences between marketing and reality. #lattices #software #looseness #modules #asymptotics #worstcase

2026.06.19: EuroQCI feedback:
 
A simple idea for improving Europe's investments in data security. #qkd #quantumcrypto #euroqci #pqcrypto

2026.04.05: NSA and IETF, part 7:
 
Counting votes. #pqcrypto #hybrids #nsa #ietf #voting

2026.02.21: NSA and IETF, part 6:
 
The structure of the debate. #pqcrypto #hybrids #nsa #ietf #chart

2026.02.19: NSA and IETF, part 5:
 
One battle after another. #pqcrypto #hybrids #nsa #ietf #lastcall

2025.11.23: NSA and IETF, part 4:
 
An example of censored dissent. #pqcrypto #hybrids #nsa #ietf #scope

2025.11.23: NSA and IETF, part 3:
 
Dodging the issues at hand. #pqcrypto #hybrids #nsa #ietf #dodging

2025.11.23: NSA and IETF, part 2:
 
Corruption continues. #pqcrypto #hybrids #nsa #ietf #corruption

2025.10.05: MODPOD:
 
The collapse of IETF's protections for dissent. #ietf #objections #censorship #hybrids

2025.10.04: NSA and IETF:
 
Can an attacker simply purchase standardization of weakened cryptography? #pqcrypto #hybrids #nsa #ietf #antitrust

2025.09.30: Surreptitious surveillance:
 
On the importance of not being seen. #marketing #stealth #nsa

2025.04.23: McEliece standardization:
 
Looking at what's happening, and analyzing rationales. #nist #iso #deployment #performance #security

2025.01.18: As expensive as a plane flight:
 
Looking at some claims that quantum computers won't work. #quantum #energy #variables #errors #rsa #secrecy

2024.10.28: The sins of the 90s:
 
Questioning a puzzling claim about mass surveillance. #attackers #governments #corporations #surveillance #cryptowars

2024.08.03: Clang vs. Clang:
 
You're making Clang angry. You wouldn't like Clang when it's angry. #compilers #optimization #bugs #timing #security #codescans

2024.06.12: Bibliography keys:
 
It's as easy as [1], [2], [3]. #bibliographies #citations #bibtex #votemanipulation #paperwriting

2024.01.02: Double encryption:
 
Analyzing the NSA/GCHQ arguments against hybrids. #nsa #quantification #risks #complexity #costs

2023.11.25: Another way to botch the security analysis of Kyber-512:
 
Responding to a recent blog post. #nist #uncertainty #errorbars #quantification

2023.10.23: Reducing "gate" counts for Kyber-512:
 
Two algorithm analyses, from first principles, contradicting NIST's calculation. #xor #popcount #gates #memory #clumping

2023.10.03: The inability to count correctly:
 
Debunking NIST's calculation of the Kyber-512 security level. #nist #addition #multiplication #ntru #kyber #fiasco

2023.06.09: Turbo Boost:
 
How to perpetuate security problems. #overclocking #performancehype #power #timing #hertzbleed #riskmanagement #environment

2022.08.05: NSA, NIST, and post-quantum cryptography:
 
Announcing my second lawsuit against the U.S. government. #nsa #nist #des #dsa #dualec #sigintenablingproject #nistpqc #foia

2022.01.29: Plagiarism as a patent amplifier:
 
Understanding the delayed rollout of post-quantum cryptography. #pqcrypto #patents #ntru #lpr #ding #peikert #newhope

2020.12.06: Optimizing for the wrong metric, part 1: Microsoft Word:
 
Review of "An Efficiency Comparison of Document Preparation Systems Used in Academic Research and Development" by Knauff and Nejasmic. #latex #word #efficiency #metrics

2019.10.24: Why EdDSA held up better than ECDSA against Minerva:
 
Cryptosystem designers successfully predicting, and protecting against, implementation failures. #ecdsa #eddsa #hnp #lwe #bleichenbacher #bkw

2019.04.30: An introduction to vectorization:
 
Understanding one of the most important changes in the high-speed-software ecosystem. #vectorization #sse #avx #avx512 #antivectors

2017.11.05: Reconstructing ROCA:
 
A case study of how quickly an attack can be developed from a limited disclosure. #infineon #roca #rsa

2017.10.17: Quantum algorithms to find collisions:
 
Analysis of several algorithms for the collision problem, and for the related multi-target preimage problem. #collision #preimage #pqcrypto

2017.07.23: Fast-key-erasure random-number generators:
 
An effort to clean up several messes simultaneously. #rng #forwardsecrecy #urandom #cascade #hmac #rekeying #proofs

2017.07.19: Benchmarking post-quantum cryptography:
 
News regarding the SUPERCOP benchmarking system, and more recommendations to NIST. #benchmarking #supercop #nist #pqcrypto

2016.10.30: Some challenges in post-quantum standardization:
 
My comments to NIST on the first draft of their call for submissions. #standardization #nist #pqcrypto

2016.06.07: The death of due process:
 
A few notes on technology-fueled normalization of lynch mobs targeting both the accuser and the accused. #ethics #crime #punishment

2016.05.16: Security fraud in Europe's "Quantum Manifesto":
 
How quantum cryptographers are stealing a quarter of a billion Euros from the European Commission. #qkd #quantumcrypto #quantummanifesto

2016.03.15: Thomas Jefferson and Apple versus the FBI:
 
Can the government censor how-to books? What if some of the readers are criminals? What if the books can be understood by a computer? An introduction to freedom of speech for software publishers. #censorship #firstamendment #instructions #software #encryption

2015.11.20: Break a dozen secret keys, get a million more for free:
 
Batch attacks are often much more cost-effective than single-target attacks. #batching #economics #keysizes #aes #ecc #rsa #dh #logjam

2015.03.14: The death of optimizing compilers:
 
Abstract of my tutorial at ETAPS 2015. #etaps #compilers #cpuevolution #hotspots #optimization #domainspecific #returnofthejedi

2015.02.18: Follow-You Printing:
 
How Equitrac's marketing department misrepresents and interferes with your work. #equitrac #followyouprinting #dilbert #officespaceprinter

2014.06.02: The Saber cluster:
 
How we built a cluster capable of computing 3000000000000000000000 multiplications per year for just 50000 EUR. #nvidia #linux #howto

2014.05.17: Some small suggestions for the Intel instruction set:
 
Low-cost changes to CPU architecture would make cryptography much safer and much faster. #constanttimecommitment #vmul53 #vcarry #pipelinedocumentation

2014.04.11: NIST's cryptographic standardization process:
 
The first step towards improvement is to admit previous failures. #standardization #nist #des #dsa #dualec #nsa

2014.03.23: How to design an elliptic-curve signature system:
 
There are many choices of elliptic-curve signature systems. The standard choice, ECDSA, is reasonable if you don't care about simplicity, speed, and security. #signatures #ecc #elgamal #schnorr #ecdsa #eddsa #ed25519

2014.02.13: A subfield-logarithm attack against ideal lattices:
 
Computational algebraic number theory tackles lattice-based cryptography.

2014.02.05: Entropy Attacks!
 
The conventional wisdom says that hash outputs can't be controlled; the conventional wisdom is simply wrong.

2026.06.30: Understanding lattice risks: 
Many differences between marketing and reality. #lattices #software #looseness #modules #asymptotics #worstcase

I have a short new page giving

general context

for the following and links to further information,
so I'll just jump straight into the specific topic here.

Here's a paragraph that appeared on 29 June 2026
as supposed justification for using solo ML-KEM
rather than ECC+ML-KEM:
"I do not believe the risk of ML-KEM (and ML-DSA) to be
severe: there is no known cryptanalysis currently exploiting rank >=2
module structure at these parameters that performs better than generic
lattice reduction. Module-LWE also has a (granted, an asymptotic)
worst-case-to-average-case reduction - something neither RSA nor ECDLP
had."

My reaction to this is:
wow, so many mistakes packed together!
The two sentences
(1) erroneously conflate lattice risks with a narrow slice of those risks,
(2) use jargon in a way that tends to hide the narrowing from readers,
and
(3) still manage to each be simply false.
What I'll do in this blog post is unpack the flaws.

"Known".

This part of the narrowing is something that I think
readers 
will
 typically notice.
It's a glaring risk-management error,
asking us to merely react to known failures
rather than proactively protect against unknown failures.

But the second sentence doesn't have this narrowing,
and I think readers will understand the second sentence
as talking about some sort of proactive protection.
There are also more problems with both sentences,
so let's move along.

"Cryptanalysis".

How many readers will realize that this word is another narrowing of the risk surface?

The reference software for Kyber (ML-KEM)
has already gone through three rounds of emergency security patches
for timing attacks: KyberSlash 1, KyberSlash 2, and Clangover.
The 
reference
 software isn't an isolated example:
the 
majority
 of Kyber/ML-KEM libraries have issued

KyberSlash patches
.
The

KyberSlash paper

won the best-paper award at CHES 2025.

However
,
cryptographers typically don't classify timing attacks
as "cryptanalysis".
Even those who do will usually emphasize that it's analysis "of the ML-KEM software";
it's not cryptanalysis "of ML-KEM", meaning the ML-KEM specification.

Similarly,
attacks exploiting bugs,
such as the bugs highlighted in my

new paper on ML-DSA
,
don't qualify as cryptanalysis.

For scientists writing different types of papers,
it's useful to have words to describe those differences.
But users need cryptographic software to be secure.
Security compromises often come from mathematical attacks against specs
but often come from software problems not visible in the specs.

For years
I've been pointing out risks of failures in PQ specs 
and
 in PQ software,
and I've been connecting these risks to my recommendations of ECC+PQ.
Look, for example, at how I

described

NISTPQC as
"the largest regression 
ever
 in the
quality of cryptographic software" and said this "will not be easy to fix",
and at how I

wrote

that "bugs in post-quantum software"
warrant "a blanket rule of always upgrading from ECC to PQ+ECC, 
not
 discarding the ECC layer".

The software argument is a 
really
 tough argument
for proponents of solo PQ to respond to.
Readers know that software problems happen all the time,
can easily find examples of problems in ML-KEM and ML-DSA software,
and can even find demos exploiting some of those problems.
There's a basic lack of credibility if a proponent
claims, e.g., that there will be "exceedingly few bugs",
while dodging 
basic questions

about how many "exceedingly few" is,
what the justification is supposed to be for that number,
and why that number is supposed to be low enough
to justify 
throwing away
 a broadly deployed low-cost mitigation.
It's much easier for proponents
to skip the software issue and focus on some other aspect of security.

But, ok, let's also stop talking about software now.
There are other problems with the sentences I quoted at the top.

"Exploiting ... module structure".

How many readers will realize that the "module" jargon here
is focusing on just 
one
 aspect of the attack surface
provided by the ML-KEM spec?

The official Kyber

security analysis

includes the following statement:
"The best known attacks against the underlying MLWE problem in Kyber do not make
use of the structure in the lattice. We therefore analyze the hardness of the
MLWE problem as an LWE problem."
The "M" in "MLWE" (and in "ML-KEM") means "module";
the statement here is that the module structure doesn't lose security.

But there's more to the Kyber/ML-KEM attack surface.
For example,
even though the official Kyber documentation claimed

at the top of Section 1

that the
"security of Kyber is based on the hardness of solving the
learning-with-errors problem in module lattices (MLWE problem [67])",
page 19 admits that the theorem relating Kyber's security
to MLWE security is a "non-tight reduction".
That's jargon for admitting that the theorem allows Kyber's security level
to be 
many bits lower
 than the security level of "the underlying MLWE problem".
The documentation doesn't quantify the gap,
presumably because doing so would show a frighteningly large gap.

I have a paper that

exploits

a simpler tightness gap in another lattice-based cryptosystem, FrodoKEM.
For example, the paper shows that if you send 2
40
 ciphertexts
to a 
frodokem640
 public key
then one of the ciphertexts will be decrypted by a large-scale attack
that's feasible today.
This is beyond an academic demo,
but it 
does
 disprove an official FrodoKEM security claim.
That version of FrodoKEM was then officially renamed "ephemeral FrodoKEM"
(which I think means we're supposed to forget this version ever existed)
and was officially replaced with a revised "FrodoKEM".

A 
survey

by Koblitz and Menezes
includes more examples of cryptographic attacks exploiting tightness gaps.

There's a 
risk
 that Kyber's tightness gaps will turn out to be exploitable too.
This is just one example of the spec risks excluded by the words
"exploiting ... module structure".

"Rank >=2".

This is yet another narrowing.
Let me give some context here and then connect the dots.

Craig Gentry introduced an FHE system at STOC 2009 in
a paper "Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices".
The paper has been cited more than 14000 times and is often labeled as a breakthrough.
The standard choice of structure for that system (as in ML-KEM)
uses polynomials modulo x
n
+1 where n is a power of 2.
It's much more likely for readers to have heard of Gentry's system,
and to have heard of this standard structure,
than to have heard that Gentry's system with this structure
is vulnerable to a quantum polynomial-time attack.

I had a

February 2014 blog post

pointing out some weaknesses in the underlying ideal-lattice problems,
and then subsequent work took the attack ideas much further.
A 
2025 paper by Jean-François Biasse and Fang Song

presents details of the quantum polynomial-time attack.
(Technically, the speed analysis for the attack
relies on a number-theoretic conjecture,
but there's

overwhelming evidence

for that conjecture.)

There are complicated debates about the security of some ideal lattices
beyond the ones used in Gentry's system,
but the details don't matter here.
What matters is that enough damage has been done to ideal lattices
that no expert today would advocate relying on ideal lattices
as the foundation of security.

This is radically different from the picture
painted in a

2012 paper

"On ideal lattices and learning with errors over rings"
by Vadim Lyubashevsky, Chris Peikert, and Oded Regev.
That paper claims to prove "very strong hardness guarantees" for "ring-LWE".
But this proof starts from the 
assumption

"that worst-case problems on ideal lattices are hard",
exactly what I'm saying no expert would advocate relying on today.

A

2014 paper

"Lattice cryptography for the Internet" by Peikert
similarly claimed that
"both ring-SIS and ring-LWE enjoy strong provable hardness guarantees"
and that this is
“good theoretical evidence
that ring-SIS and ring-LWE are a solid foundation on which to design cryptosystems".
Kyber's direct predecessor NewHope,
introduced in 2015 and submitted in 2017 to the NIST post-quantum competition,

repeated

this evidence as the final step in its "Provable security reductions"
for its "Justification of security strength".

Maybe ring-LWE is strong.
Maybe not.
Either way,
we now know that pointing to ideal lattices is a poor argument
for the strength of ring-LWE.

Kyber was introduced in 2017,
was also submitted to the NIST post-quantum competition,
and, after a series of modifications, was standardized as ML-KEM.
The most obvious difference between NewHope and Kyber
is that NewHope uses ideal lattices, also known as "rank-1 module lattices",
while Kyber uses module lattices of larger rank.
Kyber's

2017 documentation

cites various advances in attacks against rank 1
and says that higher rank has "somewhat reduced structure".

Any competent risk assessment will pay attention to this history.
Experts proposed lattice systems that ended up being broken;
that's worrisome!
Kyber's 2017 usage of higher-rank modules
was explicitly in response to advances in attacks.
Continued developments of the same line of attacks have already

broken

a variety of supposed "barriers" and "bounds" for those attacks.
Will the line between rank 1 and higher rank hold up,
or will it turn out to be another of these broken "barriers"?

"Better than generic lattice reduction".

This is 
another
 way of narrowing the risk analysis.
How many readers realize that there are continual improvements in generic lattice attacks against LWE?
Saying that we'll assume there's nothing better than an LWE attack
isn't helpful if LWE itself isn't strong enough!

Let's look again at FrodoKEM,
supposedly the

"most conservative"

lattice system.

FrodoKEM

says

it's based on
"the algebraically unstructured, plain LWE problem with conservative parameterizations",
and more specifically that it's a modified

"instantiation and implementation"

of a 2010 paper.
But FrodoKEM is much quieter about one of those modifications,
namely the fact that FrodoKEM drastically increased sizes
compared to the 2010 paper.

The 2010 paper proposed dimension-256 lattices as supposedly taking

"about 2
150
 operations"

to break.
The reason FrodoKEM moved to much larger dimensions
is that there were a bunch of attack papers chopping more and more bits out of lattice security levels.
It's not that one paper suddenly did a bunch of damage:
each paper chopped out far fewer bits,
but the 
cumulative
 damage from many papers
meant that, no, dimension-256 is nowhere near 2
150
 security.

Readers who have heard that

"ML-KEM was fully vetted"

during the NIST competition
would imagine that attack improvements have come to an end.
But, wait, then how do we explain an

October 2025 lattice-attack speedup
?
Or a

December 2025 lattice-attack speedup
?
Each of these is another paper claiming to cut out a few bits of security.

When is the cliff going to stop crumbling?
Are the lattice dimensions used for ML-KEM and FrodoKEM today
going to sound as ignorant in 15 years
as dimension 256 from the 2010 paper?
And what happens if attackers find the improvements before the public does?
How can it can make any sense to narrow
the risk analysis of lattice-based cryptosystems
in a way that excludes every improvement in generic lattice attacks?

Even after all this narrowing, the first sentence is wrong.

Let's look again at the claim that
"there is no known cryptanalysis currently exploiting rank >=2
module structure at these parameters that performs better than generic
lattice reduction".

So far I've been emphasizing how the words here
are narrowing the risk analysis in a way that excludes a bunch of attacks:
"cryptanalysis" excludes software problems such as KyberSlash,
"exploiting ... module structure" excludes tightness problems such as the FrodoKEM flaw,
"rank >=2" excludes ideal-lattice attacks such as the break of Gentry's original STOC 2009 FHE system,
and "better than generic lattice reduction" excludes a neverending series of speedups in generic lattice attacks.

It's content-free to come up with a statement saying
"there are no known attacks meeting the following criteria: ..."
if those criteria are chosen to exclude every attack that 
is
 known.
This becomes actively misleading
if it's accompanied by not even citing those attacks.

But here's the funny thing:
this is an error-prone process when the attack picture keeps changing.
It's not that the list of criteria
is something stable and well known and well studied.
Someone hears about an attack and writes down a criterion that excludes the attack,
but that criterion is flimsy and is punctured by the next attack.

A paper appeared in

February 2026

under the title
"On the concrete hardness gap between MLWE and LWE".
The paper says that it saves a few bits
in attacks against ML-KEM, compared to generic lattice attacks,
by exploiting the structure of the modules used in ML-KEM.

This means it's not true that
"there is no known cryptanalysis currently exploiting rank >=2
module structure at these parameters that performs better than generic
lattice reduction".
Oops.

Maybe the author of that statement
will say "sorry, I meant performs 
much
 better".
But if your answer to every attack
is to come up with an ad-hoc excuse for ignoring the attack
then you aren't evaluating 
risks
.

"Asymptotic".

Let's move on to the second sentence:
"Module-LWE also has a (granted, an asymptotic)
worst-case-to-average-case reduction - something neither RSA nor ECDLP
had."

What the word "asymptotic" is actually saying is that

if ML-KEM were replaced with something much larger

then the underlying MLWE problems
would have a "worst-case-to-average-case reduction".

Some years ago,
Peikert gave a presentation to a National Academies committee
where he claimed without evidence
that dimensions of "a few thousand" would be enough
for a worst-case-to-average-case reduction
in the simpler context of FrodoKEM.
I was there,
and I think open-source science is important as an error-correction mechanism,
so I

noted his claim online

and wrote that I would
"love to see a complete proof handling 10000".

In 2021,
Peikert

highlighted a claim

that dimension 1460 was sufficient.
But this claim, which unfortunately has never been withdrawn,
arises from an embarrassing mistake
(conflating an "approximate" lattice problem
with a stronger "exact" lattice problem).

This mistake was pointed out in a

2023 paper

from Joel Gärtner,
which also invested a lot of effort into writing down a complete proof
and trying to reduce the dimension as far as possible.
It still doesn't manage to get the dimension down to 10000;
not even close.

The maximum ML-KEM dimension is 1024.
Nobody has a worst-case-to-average-case reduction
for such a small lattice dimension.
How many readers will understand that the jargon "asymptotic"
is making a statement about a 
different, larger, cryptosystem
?

"Worst-case-to-average-case reduction - something neither RSA nor ECDLP had".

Sorry, no, completely wrong.

Let me first review what the jargon means.
A "reduction" from problem P to problem Q
means a way to use a solution to problem Q to solve problem P.
In particular,
a "worst-case-to-average-case" reduction
means a way to use a solver for 
random
 examples of problem Q
as a way to solve an 
arbitrary
 example of problem P,
with no P inputs being immune.

As a concrete example,
let's solve ECDLP on Curve25519.
The input is some curve point sG,
where G is the standard Curve25519 generator.
Our task is to compute s modulo the order of G.

To reduce this to the average case,
simply compute sG+rG where r is chosen randomly modulo the order of G;
then use the average-case solver to find s+r modulo the order of G;
then subtract r to find s.
Done.

(As a side note,
this is actually a 
much more powerful
 reduction
than the worst-case-to-average-case reduction for lattices.
It's much more efficient.
It doesn't require the cheat of replacing the problem with a bigger problem;
see above regarding 
asymptotic
.
It's a "self-reduction" between the worst case and average case
of the 
same
 problem;
it doesn't inflict a new problem upon people reviewing security.)

Let me also give an example of a worst-case-to-average-case reduction for RSA.
The input is some RSA modulus pq, where p and q are secret primes.
Our task is to find p and q.

Here's one way to reduce this to the average case.
Randomly generate another RSA key.
Apply the average-case solver to that.
Throw the results away.
Then use Shor's algorithm to factor the original input pq into p and q.
Done.

This RSA example might seem to be cheating
since it's a 
quantum
 worst-case-to-average-case reduction
for a cryptosystem that was never supposed to resist quantum computers.
But the literature includes a huge pile of cryptosystems
broken by 
non-quantum
 attacks,
and each of those breaks gives a 
non-quantum
 worst-case-to-average-case reduction
for the same cryptosystem.

The correlation between worst-case-to-average-case reductions
and attacks isn't just for the extreme case of broken cryptosystems.
For example,
my

2015 blog post

on multi-target attacks
included comments on how to use an
"attack tool called a 'worst-case-to-average-case reduction'"
to build a square-root discrete-log attack.
This is one of the easiest ways to explain in starting courses on cryptography
that discrete-log problems have a square-root attack.

From a risk-analysis perspective,
these connections between worst-case-to-average-case reductions
and attacks
mean that worst-case-to-average-case reductions are an alarm bell,
something to investigate closely as a risk,
even if they're not fatal.
Statements such as
"Module-LWE also has a (granted, an asymptotic)
worst-case-to-average-case reduction - something neither RSA nor ECDLP
had"
are getting the risk analysis wrong
by getting the basic facts wrong.

A procedural note.

Mistakes happen.
Part of our job as cryptographers is to protect users against those mistakes.

Many
 new PQ designs have been broken,
plus there are many

further

problems

with PQ software.
We're certainly not going to catch all the problems before deployment,
so we also keep ECC around as a negligible-cost part of ECC+PQ
to mitigate the damage of PQ security failures,
like wearing seatbelts in a car to mitigate the damage of car crashes,
rather than throwing ECC away in favor of solo PQ.

This common-sense decision to use ECC+PQ rather than solo PQ
is threatened if the risk analyses are so thoroughly botched
that people are blinded to the risks of PQ.
How do we protect users against these meta-level mistakes in risk analyses?

The literature on computer security,
like the broader literature on many other safety topics,
gives us an answer:
risk analysis is a first-class topic of papers,
and risk-analysis errors are corrected
the same way that other errors in papers are corrected.
This process takes time,
but investing that time helps reduce the number of mistakes.

What I find truly horrifying about the paragraph
that I've been commenting on in this blog post
is the procedural context.
The paragraph wasn't part of a collaborative community process of analyzing risks.
The paragraph instead showed up as a last-moment talking point
during a limited-time vote on a

controversial

proposal for IETF to standardize solo ML-KEM in TLS,
a 
weakened form

of the widely deployed ECC+ML-KEM in TLS.
There's just one week left in the voting period.

IETF doublespeak says that this isn't a "vote"
and that the document won't be a "standard",
but the reality is that it's a vote,
and if the vote passes then corporate purchasing managers
will understand the resulting document as IETF endorsement of solo ML-KEM.

Standards organizations
aren't supposed to be endorsing controversial proposals.
Each document issued by an IETF working group
is labeled as "consensus of the IETF community".
IETF says that disagreements

"must be resolved by a process of open review and discussion"
.
But simply

charting the debate

shows that the proponents of solo PQ
have responded only to minor objections
while ignoring every fundamental objection.
The mandated process of discussion to reach consensus
has been replaced by a voting process.

The same document

lost the previous vote
.
So now there's a new vote
with supporters trying to pack the room.
Explicitly in response to that, I've

called

for volunteers to speak up in opposition.

One good reason to oppose
is recognizing that solo PQ creates unnecessary dangers
compared to ECC+PQ.
But another good reason to oppose
is simply to say that, procedurally,
disagreements have to be resolved.
Version:

This is version 2026.06.30 of the 20260630-risk.html web page.
