Understanding B-Tree Indexes in PostgreSQL: A Comprehensive Guide— Part 1
Devli
11 min read
·
Jun 1, 2024
--
1
Listen
Share
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Generated by DALL·E
Table of content:
Types of indexes in PostgreSQL
Logical schema of B-Tree index
[Recap] How PostgreSQL stores data ?
Logical representation of BTree index in PostgreSQL
How B-Tree index is implemented in PostgreSQL
We’re all familiar with optimizing queries on large tables, especially when filtering operations begin to slow down. However, to truly leverage index effectively, it’s beneficial to understand its internal mechanics. This series of articles delves into the inner workings of the B-Tree index in PostgreSQL and discusses strategies for using this type of index more efficiently.
Types of indexes in PostgreSQL
First of all, we need to mention about all types of indexes in PostgreSQL. It provides following ones, each using a different algorithm:
B-tree
Hash
GiST
SP-GiST
GIN
BRIN
Every index has its own purpose, so in every situation you should choose the one that fits best.
Logical schema of B-Tree index
To start speaking about B-Tree index in Posgtres we need firstly remember what is B-Tree ?
The term “B-Tree” is short for “balanced tree” indicating that the distance between each node and the root is consistent across all levels. Furthermore, the root and its parent nodes can have more than two children, which effectively minimizes the depth of the tree, enhancing search efficiency. Let’s see main aspects about B-Trees:
Node Flexibility
: Nodes can have more than two children, typically varying from a minimum of two to a maximum defined by the tree order (M).
Height Management
: Automatically adjusts to maintain a height of logM N, optimizing search operations.
Sorting Order
: Maintains data in sorted order, ensuring the smallest values are on the left and the largest on the right.
Uniformity and Efficiency
: All leaf nodes are at the same level to ensure efficiency and consistency, and there are no empty subtrees above the leaf nodes.
B-trees are optimized for balance and retrieval efficiency, making them suitable for systems that require frequent data insertions and retrievals, like database indices and filesystems.
B-Tree
This type of index is based on the 
Lehman and Yao Algorithm
, which was developed in 1981. When a simple search is conducted on a table without any indexes, PostgreSQL defaults to a sequential scan. This means it iterates over every data entry in the table, compares them, and if the conditions match, it returns the relevant data. This is an excellent opportunity to illustrate the differences in O complexity with a comparative graph.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Complexity
We observe that using an index results in quicker information retrieval for larger reads.
[Recap] How PostgreSQL stores data ?
When we create table, we expect that it will be stored in some sort of an ordered data on a disk, but in reality our information can be distributed across different pages and places in that pages.
CREATE TABLE t(
  A INTEGER,
  B INTEGER,
  C VARCHAR
);
For this table physically we will have something like this:
Press enter or click to view image in full size
How PostgreSQL stores data
Let’s try to know more about our “t” table.
SELECT class.oid AS "OID", relname AS "Relation Name", 
       schema.nspname AS "Schema", usr.rolname AS "Object Owner", 
       coalesce(tblsp.spcname, 'pg_default') AS "Tablespace", 
       relpages AS "Amount Pages", reltuples AS "Amount Tuples", 
       reltoastrelid AS "TOAST table", 
       CASE 
          WHEN relpersistence = 'p' THEN 'Permanent' 
          WHEN relpersistence = 't' THEN 'Temporary' 
          ELSE 'Unlogged' 
        END AS "Type", 
        pg_relation_filepath(class.oid) AS "File Path", 
        pg_size_pretty(pg_relation_size(class.oid)) AS "Relation Size" 
FROM pg_class class INNER JOIN pg_namespace schema 
                    ON schema.oid = class.relnamespace 
                    INNER JOIN pg_authid usr 
                    ON usr.oid = class.relowner 
                    LEFT JOIN pg_tablespace tblsp 
                    ON tblsp.oid = class.reltablespace
WHERE relname = 't';
Table metadata
OID (Object Identifier) is an identifier created within PostgreSQL, based on a system sequence. This sequence ensures that each new object we create — whether it be a column, function, trigger, virtual table, or something else — receives a unique identifier. This unique identifier allows us to reference the object unambiguously.
What else should be noted in a query?
Firstly, there is the default tablespace, which in PostgreSQL is pg_default.
The schema is public by default.
The owner of the table is the individual who created it and is responsible for managing access to it.
There are columns that indicate the number of pages and rows — tuples.
The concept of TOAST tables or auxiliary tables also exists. These tables support the main table and allow you to split long rows if they do not fit within a specific page based on a particular strategy or policy.
There are various types of tables. We are currently considering a regular (permanent) journaled table, which is created using the CREATE TABLE command.
Lastly, there is the file path of the table — the path mapped at the operating system level in pg_home, where your PostgreSQL instance resides.
In the file path, you see a file named 16389. This binary file contains the content of your table (if you insert, update, or delete data). Note that this file matches the table’s OID, establishing a one-to-one correspondence between the file name on disk and its unique identifier.
Since no data has been inserted into the table, the relation size is 0 bytes.
In PostgreSQL, data is stored in files on disk. For tables smaller than 1 GB, each table’s data is stored in a single file. However, for tables larger than 1 GB, PostgreSQL splits the data into multiple files, each up to 1 GB in size. This allows efficient management and access to large datasets.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
How table data is stored
Let’s also take a closer look into how each page is build.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Diagram of PostgreSQL pages
The structure of a page grows both from the top down and from the bottom up. When you insert data, tuples (T1, T2, T3) are created and written from the bottom left. They grow until they meet pointer values (I1, I2, I3) closer to the start of the page.
Pointers are references to specific tuples stored lower in the file. This structure has been thoroughly optimized and proven for efficient information storage. It aids the PostgreSQL optimizer in effectively working with offsets and pointers.
A page has a header, a meta-layer that stores the total space available in the page. Additionally, the page structure includes transaction pointers and a meta-layer for each tuple and row. There is also a special zone, which is not used for 
regular
 tables but is necessary for 
index structures
. This is because the page serves as an atomic element not only for tables but also for indexes. This unified structure supports various storage needs.
Also, it’s good to mention about 
ctid
. 
In PostgreSQL, 
ctid
 is a unique identifier for each row (tuple) within a table. It represents the physical location of the tuple within the table's storage file. The 
ctid
 consists of a pair of numbers: the block number and the offset within that block. With help of 
ctid
 we can access any specific row in the table. By adding OID relationships, we essentially get coordinates for locating information. On one side, we have the data file; on the other, we have the page within this data file; and, finally, we have the tuple where the specific information is stored within the page.
This principle underlies 
btree indexes
, where the leaves in the btree index point to specific 
ctids
 in particular files.
Logical representation of BTree index in PostgreSQL
An index structure in PostgreSQL is a separate data file that resides alongside or near the table’s data file. It can be placed nearby because we can create a separate tablespace specifically for storing the index. When an index is created, the database records its details in the metadata, including the location and path of the corresponding index file.
The command to create a standard B-Tree index is as follows:
CREATE INDEX index_name ON table_name (column_name);
Here we create index with name 
index_name
 on table with 
table_name
 on column 
column_name
 .
If we create index on our 
table
 and use 
query
 with param of index name 
relname="index_name"
 , we will get next info:
Index metadata
As we can see, page is utilized for different structures in PostgreSQL.
Now let’s look at the logical representation of a B-Tree index. We have a table containing arbitrary rows, which may be in a disordered state and not necessarily sorted. The tree built based on the index can be illustrated as follows:
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Diagram of how to search in index
Let’s imagine we are searching for the number 37. We start at the root and compare: is 13 greater than 37? No, so we move to the right. Next, we reach another node where we must decide where to go next. In this example, 37 lies between 31 and 41. We proceed to the corresponding node at the third level, where we can find the address of the row that matches the search element 37. We then go to the specific page and record on that page to retrieve the information, avoiding a full table scan.
How B-Tree index is implemented in PostgreSQL
Let’s assume we have the following table and index:
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS public.client (
 id int,
 name varchar
);
CREATE INDEX idx_client ON public.client (id);
For investigation of under the hood processes we will use 
pageinspect
extension.
Important 
PRIMARY KEY and UNIQUE constraints create index by default.
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pageinspect;
INSERT INTO public.client VALUES (1, 'Row #1');
SELECT *
FROM bt_metap('idx_client');
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_metap on idx_client index
We received metadata — various technical information, as well as information about the page that serves as the root. This is 
fastroot
, explaining how one can proceed in further searches, developing the tree’s topology.
In our case, fastroot equals 
1
, which is assumed to be the page number of the index. Let’s take a look at this page using the 
bt_page_stats
 function, which returns page statistics for the B-Tree index:
SELECT *
FROM bt_page_stats('idx_client', 1);
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_page_stats on idx_client
Btpo_prev
 and 
btpo_next
 indicate whether our page has a page to the left or right. Type 
L
, meaning leaf, is defined as such because there is exactly one record in our table. This means that our root also acts as a leaf. In the 
live_items
 column, we see live elements, the value is 
1
, because we made one INSERT.
To see which specific elements are contained in this single page, we use the 
bt_page_items
 function:
SELECT *
FROM bt_page_items('idx_client', 1);
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_page_items on idx_client
The function returns our one live record. Each record has its own 
ctid
 — this is the address we need to go to for further examination. It also contains data corresponding to the 
bigint
 type, which is 8 bytes.
Let’s go further and insert multiple rows and try to inspect our index.
TRUNCATE TABLE public.client;
INSERT INTO public.client
SELECT i, 'Row #'||i::VARCHAR
  FROM generate_series(1,1000) AS k(i)
SELECT *
FROM bt_metap('idx_client');
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_metap on idx_client
Let’s 
look
 into first node:
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_page_stats on idx_client
Now, type is not a leaf but root. Let’s also take a 
look
 into items:
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_page_items on idx_client
Need to emphasize that the 
ctid
 addresses here are not addresses in the data files, but rather addresses on the pages within the index itself. We are at the root, and the root contains the address state of the nodes located beneath it.
If we examine the data, the second element is 367, converted to a standard numbering system, and the last element on our page is 733.
To clarify: From the root, there are three leaves — 1, 2, and 4. Each leaf corresponds to specific ranges of values: the first leaf covers 0 to 366, the second from 367 to 732, and the third from 733 onwards.
Let’s take a closer 
look
 to page #1:
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_page_stats on idx_client
Here we can see that type now is L- leaf. The statistics also include a history for the previous and next leaf — btpo_prev and btpo_next.
A zero indicates that there is no leaf on the left. The page on the right is #2, which corresponds to the next page in the sequence. In this case, a bridge is formed: page #1 knows that page #2 holds the next range.
If we 
look
 at the elements of the concrete page:
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_page_items on idx_client — 
start
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Output of bt_page_items on idx_client — 
end
We observe a traversal from one to 367 of live record values. The very first record is known as the high key, which marks the boundary: up to which element all other elements are stored. The indexed data itself starts from the second element after the high key, covering elements 2, 3, 4, and so on, up to the 367th row or the 366th element.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Physical diagram of BTree index in PostgreSQL
What we have isn’t exactly a tree. By definition, a tree is a structure with a root, intermediate states as nodes, and leaves. However, if the leaves are interconnected, it’s no longer a tree but a directed graph. These connections, or “bridges,” are essential for optimization — they prevent the constant need to return to the root to locate subsequent elements. To traverse all leaves, one must jump from one page to another. These bridge pointers help the optimizer understand where to go next. While you could return to the root each time — to realize, for instance, that the 366th element ends on page one and the 367th is on page two — it’s more efficient to use the pointers and move to the next states without repeatedly returning to the root.
That’s all for now :) Check out 
2nd part of this article
, where we will delve into practical applications of using these indexes effectively.
Links:
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/balanced-binary-tree/
https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/btree-implementation.html
https://ieftimov.com/posts/postgresql-indexes-btree/
https://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/djimenez/utsa/cs3343/lecture16.html
https://medium.com/@kesterera/b-tree-indexes-in-postgresql-part-2-practice-f9dfd775c1b4
