Chemical application warning sign on the edge of a field in Wisconsin on 6 July 2023.
 Photograph: Wolfgang Hoffmann/Design Pics Editorial/Universal Images Group/Getty Images
View image in fullscreen
Chemical application warning sign on the edge of a field in Wisconsin on 6 July 2023.
 Photograph: Wolfgang Hoffmann/Design Pics Editorial/Universal Images Group/Getty Images
US Food and Drug Administration rejects petition to set Pfas limits in food
Environmental protection agency and independent studies have found food biggest source of chemical exposure
The US 
Food
 and Drug Administration has rejected a legal petition demanding it set limits on toxic Pfas “forever chemicals” in food, marking another setback for public health advocates’ push to limit exposures to the dangerous compounds.
The agency is refusing to set limits despite a growing body of science and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) finding food is the biggest source of 
Pfas
 exposure. Testing has found the levels of Pfas in single servings of some contaminated foods to be equivalent to drinking many glasses of contaminated water.
While regulators have focused on reining in Pfas in water, the chemicals are widely used throughout the food system, and there was hope that the agency under 
Robert F Kennedy Jr
 would take the threat more seriously. Kennedy leads the “make America healthy again” (Maha) movement, of which eliminating toxic chemicals from food is a cornerstone.
Kidney cancer rates near Pfas factory in Lancashire a ‘major source of concern’
Read more
The FDA’s decision is “disappointing”, said Sandra Daussin, an attorney for the Tucson Environmental Justice Task Force (TEJTF), which in November 2023 filed the legal petition. The group is planning to sue and ask a court to order the FDA to set thresholds.
“If it’s important enough to regulate in water then we need to regulate it in food – that’s a no-brainer,” Daussin said.
Pfas are a class of at least 16,000 compounds most frequently used to make products water-, stain- and grease-resistant. They have been linked to cancer, birth defects, decreased immunity, high cholesterol, kidney disease and a range of other serious health problems. They are dubbed “forever chemicals” because they can persist for thousands of years in the environment, and are designed to be indestructible.
The November 2023 petition called on the FDA to check for up to 30 Pfas compounds in a range of produce, fish, eggs, milk and bread. The agency did not respond within the six-month timeframe required by law, but TEJTF scaled back its petition in 2025 to ask the agency to set advisory thresholds for PFOA and Pfos, two of the most common and dangerous Pfas compounds, in seafood and milk.
Recent FDA testing found 70% of seafood samples contain the chemicals, while 
independent milk testing
 found it in 12% of 50 samples, including extremely high levels in Whole Foods and Kirkland Signature brands. The FDA rejected the revised petition, 
stating
 it plans to take action on setting standards for Pfas, and there is “insufficient evidence to support [TEJTF’s] request”.
The agency said it plans to set less non-binding “action levels” that do not require contaminated food to be removed from shelves. “Tolerance levels”, or limits, make it illegal to sell food contaminated beyond a set threshold.
Pfas gets into food because it is commonly used in pesticides, food packaging and sewage sludge used as fertilizer. It is also often found in non-stick cookware and kitchen products, and polluted water used in processing or growing can contaminate food.
It is partly difficult to gauge the scale of the problem because technology used to test food for the chemicals is not as advanced as that which looks for Pfas in water, and there is no robust government testing program. However, a patchwork of independent testing suggests a broader problem.
Meat and crops produced on farms that use sewage sludge have been found by independent tests to 
contain high levels of Pfas
, and some state agencies have ordered 
contaminated food and milk
 to be taken off the market.
Some independent testing has found high levels of Pfas in 
blueberries
, 
kale
 and other water-rich produce because the chemicals are attracted to water. Independent testing also found 
beer
 to be contaminated, and EPA testing of seafood found the chemicals in all but one sample.
The levels of the Pfas compound gen X that were consumed when eating 10 blueberries grown near a Pfas plant in North Carolina was found to be equivalent to drinking a liter of water with levels of the chemical above the federal limit. An 
analysis of FDA and EPA fish testing data
 by the Environmental Working Group non-profit found eating one serving of US freshwater fish contaminated with median Pfas levels could be equivalent to drinking highly contaminated water every day for a month.
Regulating one route but not the other leaves people unprotected.
“Your body doesn’t know how the PFAS got in there,” Daussin said.
Still, the FDA only conducts limited annual testing and in 2019 adjusted its methodology so it will only catch what consumer groups say are extremely high contamination levels and ignore relatively low to moderate levels that can still pose a health risk.
In 2019, the FDA initially 
found
 182 food samples to be contaminated with Pfas, but, after changing its methodology partway through the study, that figure dropped to 78, drawing accusations that it was intentionally covering up contamination.
“Imagine using a radar gun to detect speeding in cars, but then manipulating the radar so that it only detects speeding in cars going over 100 mph,” 
wrote
 Brian Ronholm, a former deputy under secretary of food safety at the US Department of Agriculture, in Consumer Reports after the FDA announced the change.
Explore more on these topics
US news
Pfas
Food
Robert F Kennedy Jr
Health
news
Share
Reuse this content
