US Congress takes next step to make daylight saving time permanent
3 hours ago
Share
Save
Add as preferred on Google
Nardine Saad
Getty Images
The US House of Representatives has voted to make daylight saving time permanent by passing the Sunshine Protection Act on Tuesday. 
With a 308-117 vote, members of both parties approved the bill, which would remove the need for Americans to change their clocks twice a year and put the US under time currently observed between March and November - known as permanent standard time.
Republican Scott DesJarlais, who presided over the vote, played a clip of The Beatles' Here Comes the Sun on his phone during the final count
The time-change issue has been gaining bipartisan support for years, with President Donald Trump pledging to end clock changes after he returned to the White House.
Will US really stop changing its clocks twice a year?
Republican Representative Vern Buchanan of Florida, who introduced the bill in January 2025, said on Tuesday that clock changes disrupt schedules "for no good reason".
Now that the House has passed the legislation, the Senate could soon take up its version of the bill. However, its future there is uncertain.
"We'll see what happens when it gets here," Senator John Barrasso, the number-two Republican whose party holds a slim majority in the upper chamber, said on Tuesday.
Florida Republican Senator Rick Scott introduced an identical piece of legislation, also called the Sunshine Protection Act, in January 2025.
Since World War One, the US has set its clocks forward during the summer to have more daylight in the afternoon and to conserve electricity. The time-change is known as Daylight Saving Time (DST). Clocks roll back in the autumn each year to then follow standard time. 
DST, which also helped conserve fuel during the World War One, was unpopular with farmers and was repealed after the war. It returned during World War Two, and legislation standardising clock-changing across the country passed in 1966, although some states, including Hawaii and Arizona, and US territories Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, have opted out. 
Watch: Where did daylight savings come from?
In a May social media post, Trump said he was "going to work very hard" to see a law on time changes passed.
"It's time that people can stop worrying about the 'Clock,' not to mention all of the work and money that is spent on this ridiculous, twice yearly production. It will also be a very nice WIN for the Republican Party. Take it!" he said.
But critics of permanent DST have noted that it would lead to darker  winter mornings, which could make driving conditions more hazardous for those on the road in early hours.
Those who support keeping standard time also say 
there are health benefits
 from having more light in the morning, such as an improved sleep cycle.
Only about one third of the world's countries
 follow some sort of daylight saving time, and the vast majority of them are in Europe, according to the Pew Research Center. 
In Europe, only Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Iceland, Russia and Turkey do not practice daylight saving time. In Africa, Egypt is the only nation with DST.
Canadian province to adopt year-round daylight saving time
When and why do the clocks go forward?
Trump vows to end 'very costly' daylight saving time
United States
US Congress
