HOME

About

Subscribe

Archives

Foundation

Reports

Storyboard

LATEST STORY
A new book looks at how AI is rewiring the newsroom, for better and worse

Business Models

Mobile & Apps

Audience & Social

Aggregation & Discovery

Reporting & Production

ABOUT

SUBSCRIBE

Business Models

Mobile
 & Apps

Audience
 & Social

Aggregation
 & Discovery

Reporting
 & Production

Translations

Aug.  6, 2026, 4:58 p.m.

Business Models

America’s largest newspaper chain, USA Today Co., partners with Palantir to analyze audience data as search traffic falls
LINK
: 
irp.cdn-website.com  ➚
   |   
Posted by
: 
Hanaa' Tameez
   |   
August 6, 2026
USA Today Co. has made a deal with software company Palantir to analyze and monetize user behavior, the company 
announced
 on Thursday.

In its Q2 earnings call Thursday morning, USA Today Co. chairman and CEO Mike Reed told investors he expects the partnership to “strengthen how we collect, connect and activate audience data to drive more effective and faster monetization across our platform.”

“Every visit, every session, and every moment of attention creates a signal,” Reed said. “When we connect those signals, they become actionable intelligence that allows us to engage users more effectively and monetize those relationships faster and at much greater value. The work our team is doing with Palantir is a direct extension of this strategy. We are applying Palantir’s AI-powered platform to one of the largest opportunities in front of us, converting the sheer scale of our audience into known, orchestrated first-party relationships, because that is what turns our reach into sustainable, higher value revenue.”

RELATED ARTICLE
Even The New York Times “isn’t immune” to declining search traffic — one reason it’s leaning into video
Hanaa' Tameez
August 5, 2026
USA Today Co. owns more than 200 local newspapers in the United States, along with its national daily USA Today. The partnership with Palantir comes as search traffic continues to fall — a challenge faced by publications around the world, and one The New York Times 
mentioned in its own earnings report
 Wednesday. USA Today Co. reported 158 million unique visitors in the second quarter of the year, down from 180 million in the first quarter.

This decline “does not reflect lower demand for the content,” said Kristin Roberts, president of USA Today Media. “What it reflects is lower referrals from traditional search because of those consumer discovery changes that we’re seeing and witnessing.”

Palantir has been the subject of controversy in recent months for providing its technology to 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
 (ICE), the 
U.S. Department of Defense
, and the 
Israeli military
. The company’s co-founder and chairman is Peter Thiel, the billionaire entrepreneur who 
funded
 Hulk Hogan’s defamation lawsuit against Gawker, leading to the publication’s ultimate bankruptcy and closure.

USA Today Co. isn’t the only media company to enlist Palantir’s services. 
Axel Springer
 — which owns Business Insider, Politico, Bild, and The Telegraph — and 
Fox News
 have also partnered with Palantir for its data intelligence tools. Thomson Reuters 
also supplies data
 to Palantir, which had been used by ICE, 404 Media reported in March.

“It’s important to note all of our data remains our data,” Reed told investors. “It’s really just leveraging this incredible AI and software that Palantir has to allow us to move so much faster and to be so much smarter with the data we have today. And…take a lot of the anonymous interactions we have today and turn those into known relationships…The more known relationships we have, the more data we create, the more signals we create, the more actionable intelligence we have.”

Roberts told USA Today Co. employees in an email Thursday that the Palantir partnership could result in “better recommendations and offers based on what people actually care about” and “smarter subscription and advertising experiences” for consumers and subscribers.

“USA TODAY Co. complies with applicable data protection and privacy laws and maintains strong standards for data security and governance,” the company said in a statement to Nieman Lab. “We require this of our vendors and partners as well, reflecting our belief that safeguarding protected personal information is essential to our business and the audiences we serve. Our editorial decisions remain independent and are guided by our longstanding journalistic 
standards and ethics policies
.”

Roberts noted that World Cup coverage across USA Today’s network “generated 97 million pageviews, with search driving nearly 65% of that traffic. That reinforces an important point — when content meets a real and urgent need — search still delivers. But we are not building our future on search, even in our strongest categories. Great content still finds an audience, and our opportunity moving forward is to ensure that our distribution tactics keep pace with the way readers and viewers want to consume content in digital spaces.”

“I can see a day where we turn off scraping or making our content available for the [search engine links],” Reed said. “We’re actually more hopeful that we can be proactive with Google in negotiating a fair licensing deal. That would be our preferred path — to have our content appear both in traditional search as well as in AI summaries. But if we have to cut them off and block them in order to get to a deal, then we’ll do that for sure.”

Read the full earnings report 
here
.

Adobe Stock

Show tags
Hide tags

Gannett
Palantir
USA Today Co.

Comments are closed.

What’s the best way to follow how the news is changing?

Our daily email, with all the freshest future-of-journalism news.

Cite this article
Hide citations

CLOSE

MLA

Tameez, Hanaa'. "America’s largest newspaper chain, USA Today Co., partners with Palantir to analyze audience data as search traffic falls." 
Nieman Journalism Lab
. Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard, 6 Aug. 2026. Web. 7 Aug. 2026. 

APA

Tameez, H. (2026, Aug. 6). America’s largest newspaper chain, USA Today Co., partners with Palantir to analyze audience data as search traffic falls. 
Nieman Journalism Lab
. Retrieved August 7, 2026, from https://www.niemanlab.org/2026/08/americas-largest-newspaper-chain-usa-today-co-partners-with-palantir-to-analyze-audience-data/

Chicago

Tameez, Hanaa'. "America’s largest newspaper chain, USA Today Co., partners with Palantir to analyze audience data as search traffic falls." 
Nieman Journalism Lab
. Last modified August 6, 2026.  Accessed August 7, 2026. https://www.niemanlab.org/2026/08/americas-largest-newspaper-chain-usa-today-co-partners-with-palantir-to-analyze-audience-data/.

Wikipedia

{{cite web

    | url = https://www.niemanlab.org/2026/08/americas-largest-newspaper-chain-usa-today-co-partners-with-palantir-to-analyze-audience-data/

    | title = America’s largest newspaper chain, USA Today Co., partners with Palantir to analyze audience data as search traffic falls

    | last = Tameez

    | first =  Hanaa'

    | work = [[Nieman Journalism Lab]]

    | date = 6 August 2026

    | accessdate = 7 August 2026

    | ref = {{harvid|Tameez|2026}}

}}

The latest from Nieman Lab

A new book looks at how AI is rewiring the newsroom, for better and worse
Seth C. Lewis
Is Americans’ declining trust in media driven by political messaging?
Joshua Benton
A record-breaking eight Pulitzer awardees disclosed AI use this year
Andrew Deck
Readers turned to these local newspapers for real-time safety updates and weekend reads
Sophie Culpepper
Collaborations and primary elections boosted traffic to public media sites this quarter
Neel Dhanesha

Join the 60,000 who get the freshest future-of-journalism news in our daily email.

		A new book looks at how AI is rewiring the newsroom, for better and worse		
AI is already helping reshape journalistic practices across five stages of news production: coming up with story ideas, sourcing information, verifying content, telling stories, and distributing news.

		Is Americans’ declining trust in media driven by political messaging?		
A massive analysis of every speech given on the floors of Congress between 1939 and 2023 finds that criticism of the news media is remarkably tied to specific partisan interests and historical moments.

		A record-breaking eight Pulitzer awardees disclosed AI use this year		
Five winners and three finalists detailed their AI adoption to the judging committee.

Seth C. Lewis
, 
Rodrigo Zamith
 
and
 
Tomás Dodds
A new book looks at how AI is rewiring the newsroom, for better and worse
AI is already helping reshape journalistic practices across five stages of news production: coming up with story ideas, sourcing information, verifying content, telling stories, and distributing news.
Joshua Benton
Is Americans’ declining trust in media driven by political messaging?
A massive analysis of every speech given on the floors of Congress between 1939 and 2023 finds that criticism of the news media is remarkably tied to specific partisan interests and historical moments.
Andrew Deck
A record-breaking eight Pulitzer awardees disclosed AI use this year
Five winners and three finalists detailed their AI adoption to the judging committee.

Subscribe

Twitter

Facebook

RSS

About

Contact

Archives

Help advance the Nieman Foundation’s mission “to promote and elevate the standards of journalism” 
by making a donation
.

To promote and elevate the standards of journalism

Covering thought leadership in journalism

Pushing to the future of journalism

Exploring the art and craft of story

© 2026 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
  /  
Some rights reserved

Harvard
 
Trademark
 
Privacy
 
Digital Accessibility

Walter Lippmann House
One Francis Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
617 495 2237

The Nieman Journalism Lab is a collaborative attempt to figure out how quality journalism can survive and thrive in the Internet age.

It’s a project of the 
Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard University
.

Follow us

Subscribe to our email

Follow us on Twitter

Like us on Facebook

Download our iPhone app

Subscribe via RSS

Subscribe to our work →

The basics

About us

Contact

Archives

Projects

Encyclo

Fuego

Tweet archive

About us →

Director

Joshua Benton

Staff writers

Justin Ellis

Caroline O’Donovan

© President and Fellows of Harvard College, unless otherwise noted. 
Some rights reserved.
