Featured Artists

        Argentine Tango with Viviana

        Buenos Aires, Argentina

        $575

        3 Days

        Japanese Calligraphy with Chikako

        Kyoto, Japan

        $700

        4 Days

        Street Art with Pum Pum

        Buenos Aires, Argentina

        $885

        3 Days

        Traditional Brass Bell Crafting with Yoshinori

        Takaoka, Toyama, Japan

        $3365

        3 Days

Browse all artists

A new way to travel
 
VAWAA is a mini-apprenticeship with a curated master artist or craftsman, tailored to your skill level.
 
How it Works

A lifelong souvenir
 
Whether it’s honing a passion or getting fresh inspiration, we see travel as an opportunity to grow. 
 
Read guest stories

A once in a lifetime opportunity. To experience a new country and culture through the eyes of a local persona and artist is an experience to be treasured forever.

        Katie's
        VAWAA with
        Chikako

        Japanese Calligraphy

       - 

        Kyoto, Japan

It's opening a completely new horizon about traveling. I was hooked by the new approach about moving and learning about human beings, their doings, expression and craftsmanship.

        Patricia's
        VAWAA with
        Thao

        Natural Dyeing

       - 

        Hanoi, Vietnam

I found myself in another rhythm. More relaxed, less worried about perfection and less judgmental about the things I do. It wasn’t just about ceramics!

        Cecilia's
        VAWAA with
        Katja

        Contemporary Ceramics

       - 

        Ljubljana, Slovenia

Stories from the road
 
Read Blog

What I learned in Gee's Bend
 
By VAWAA guest and author, Nicole CardozaOn quilt making, grief, and threading together the exper...
 
2026-05-22
 
My Year of Accidental Wandering
 
By VAWAA guest, Flo ChengFlo Cheng shares reflections from her VAWAA apprenticeship with land art...
 
2026-03-13
 
Lost and Found: The Light that Shines Through Endangered Crafts
 
Across the world, thousands of traditional crafts are disappearing as mass production replaces ha...
 
2026-03-11
 
Finding Balance: My First Solo Trip in Mallorca
 
By VAWAA guest, Katrina TalwarI had been thinking about traveling alone for years, but something ...
 
2025-11-14
 
Hot off the press
 
See All Press

The startup offers intimate, customized studio time with creatives around the world—a fresh take on finding local perspectives.
 
VAWAA is designed for the intellectual traveler who prefers rich cultural immersion to ordinary sun-seeking.
 
For the restless creative type who wants to learn a new skill while on holiday.

Rekindle your crush on the world. Book a VAWAA today.
 
Find an artist
