ValveSoftware

/

GameNetworkingSockets

Public

Notifications

You must be signed in to change notification settings

Fork
    
719

          Star

9.7k

Major P2P issues in Israel and possibly other middle east countries
 
#398
New issue
Copy link
New issue
Copy link
Open
Open
Major P2P issues in Israel and possibly other middle east countries
#398
Copy link
Description
boazazulay
opened 
on 
Mar 24, 2026
Issue body actions
I am not sure i am in the right place but we are all out of options here since we couldn't get any help from the game or steam support.

Since around the 13/03, there is a major systemic problem in every game that uses Steam Networking for P2P games.

For example, in the game Street Fighter 6, when playing with one Israeli or another with PC to PC the ping between players are ~120ms.

when playing with European players the ping is around 60-80ms which means it works well, it currently affects only Israeli players when playing PC to PC.

Since Street Fighter 6 supports cross-play we have tried playing PC to PS5 and the ping is a flawless 5-10ms.

It currently affects all players in Israel, we have a few dozens in our community with several ISPs, we have of course attempted speaking to our ISPs and port forwarding and we have found no network issues on their part. in other P2P games that don't use steam networking the issue is not existent(for example, Tekken 8).

We are currently don't know what we can do with this issue since nothing we have done have helped and 120ms is too high for it to be playable in any P2P game.

While I can't confirm but heard reports from players in other middle eastern countries like Egypt that they also report on this issue so it could be region-wide.
Reactions are currently unavailable
Metadata
Metadata
Assignees
No one assigned
Labels
No labels
No labels
Type
No type
Fields
Give feedback
No fields configured for issues without a type.
Projects
No projects
Milestone
No milestone
Relationships
None yet
Development
No branches or pull requests
Issue actions
