We Got This Wrong. And We Are Fixing It

News

Announcements

announcement

dlennox

                    July 5, 2026,  7:23pm

1

We made a mistake. Nothing matters more to us than the trust of our customers, and with our recent terms of service update we let you down. We are sorry about that. We will not move forward with the terms of service changes we communicated on July 1, 2026.

You control your data. This has always been our policy and will not change. I want to explain what we were trying to do, where we went wrong, and how we’ll do better from here to earn and keep your trust.

What we were trying to do

We know how important prospecting is for customers who need to build pipeline. For a long time, much of the market has treated outbound as a volume game, using generic lists and spray-and-pray campaigns. That approach has never created the best experience for buyers, and it’s only become less effective as inboxes have gotten noisier.

We see an opportunity for a better vision, one that puts trust and relevance at the center of prospecting in the same way we did with inbound marketing. As this idea evolved, we called it Trusted Prospecting: helping you reach the right people, at the right time, with data and signals that make outreach feel timely and useful – not like spam.

In that context, a continuously refining dataset can play a role by improving accuracy, deliverability, and outcomes for everyone. That was the motivation behind our original announcement — to move prospecting in this more reliable, trusted direction for HubSpot customers.

Where we went wrong

We did not meet the standard you expect from HubSpot when it comes to transparency. Even though our intent was to work with “business card–level” professional details in a shared enrichment dataset, the way we rolled this out made it feel like the relationship you have with your CRM (and with HubSpot) was changing underneath you. That’s on us and we are sorry.

We should have been clear about what we were proposing and how it would work. While we always intended for enrichment to remain strictly opt-in, we should have communicated better how that opt-in works, and importantly, how you as a customer could ensure you remain in control of that choice.

I also want to take this moment to clarify our commitment to customers that your CRM data – your contacts, notes, deals, call recordings, custom fields, and customer records – belongs to you. It should not be used without your permission, and never in ways you don’t expect.

How we’ll do better from here

First, we will not move forward with the terms of service changes we announced on July 1.

On the product side, we are reassessing how to make opting into contact enrichment clearer, more easily governable, and simpler to manage.

We commit to you that when we introduce new enrichment capabilities that make use of your data, they will be fully and transparently opt‑in. You will have clear, upfront control over whether you participate and how your data is used in this context.

We still believe that there is a better, more effective way to prospect than the status quo. But we have to earn your trust as we build it together.

We’ll take the time to do this the right way, and we’ll communicate early, clearly, and across multiple channels before any future changes that affect your data.

Thank you for the feedback, the pushback, and the honesty. We can and will do better.

37 Likes

July 1, 2026, Contact Discovery is Coming Soon + Legal Update

Clarification Needed: AI Model Training vs. Enrichment Data Sharing

Clarification Needed: AI Model Training vs. Enrichment Data Sharing

hammad

                    July 6, 2026,  3:15am

2

Thank you for accepting and taking a corrective measure.

1 Like

GiantFocal

                    July 6, 2026,  7:12am

3

Thank you for owning this and reverting the changes!

1 Like

Aakar

                    July 6, 2026, 10:20am

4

Thank you for reverting it.

romeonoi

                    July 6, 2026, 11:14am

5

@dlennox
  I love how fast you guys moved, and you actually recognized that. What I would recommend in the future is that you listen to your customers and your partners. For such decisions, you should make advisory councils, like the ones you have for partners and for customers.

If you would have listened, these mistakes would not have been made, because you would have a group of people dedicating their time and energy to building a better product and a better community, not only for the shareholders but also for all the people involved:

people that gave you trust

salespeople

marketing people

CFOS

CEOs

business owners

partners

What I suggest is that you really use those advisory councils for important decisions, not only for PR.

8 Likes

arjensegers

                    July 6, 2026,  1:18pm

6

Reverting completely in four days, because you listened, with a real apology and no hedging. Rare, and the harder path. Nicely handled.

2 Likes

abackus

                    July 6, 2026,  2:27pm

7

We specifically turned this feature off; yet, it was on. When we turned it off again, it was turned back on again. How are you ensuring to your customers that you are deleting all of the customer information that you obtained by turning on this feature and that it is not used in your “commercial dataset?”

4 Likes

Ryan_BlueOx

                    July 6, 2026,  6:22pm

8

With respect to the corrective action and the leadership who course-corrected quickly -

This is the most alarming series of events I can imagine from a CRM. For a company managing one of its most valuable assets …the customer book…I don’t see how “trust is our first priority” squares with this plan ever being greenlit.

I appreciate the positive response to the reversal, but my trust in HubSpot’s baseline commitment to protecting our data is permanently damaged. As a 10-year client, I’m not sure how we move forward together, and I’d like to hear more.

8 Likes

kkashiva616

                    July 7, 2026,  7:18am

9

@dlennox
 what worries me are the words used by your CSO 
@jondick
 in the update,

“HubSpot 
has always collected
 name, work email, and company domain from enriched records. Starting August 4, 
we’ll also include
 professional details like job title, role, seniority, business location, and professional profile URL”

With the rollback of the July 1 change, does that mean Hubspot is still collecting work emails from one customers’ Hubspot portal contacts to enrich others? Where can we see what 
HubSpot has always collected
 (and is still collecting) ?

2 Likes

cwunder

                    July 7, 2026, 12:40pm

10

Thank you, 
@dlennox

ShootTheMoon

                    July 7, 2026,  2:36pm

11

(post deleted by author)

    Related topics

Topic

Replies

Views

Activity

July 1, 2026, Contact Discovery is Coming Soon + Legal Update

HubSpot Legal Updates

0

2746

              June 25, 2026

July 2018 Revisions to the TOS and DPA

HubSpot Legal Updates

0

1977

              July 17, 2018

Legal Stuff Update September 18, 2024

HubSpot Legal Updates

0

6248

              September 18, 2024

HubSpotのエンリッチメント機能

Releases and Updates

0

122

              April 21, 2026

July 2017 Revisions to the TOS

HubSpot Legal Updates

0

3293

              July 3, 2017
