Picture an AI agent trying to book you a table on a restaurant’s website. Today, it works like a very patient, slightly confused intern. It loads the page, reads the raw HTML, tries to figure out which of the forty 
<div>
 elements is the date picker, guesses that the green button probably means “confirm,” clicks it, waits, and re-reads the whole screen to see if anything happened. Move that button next week and the agent breaks. Rename a CSS class and it breaks. Add a cookie banner on top and it clicks the wrong thing entirely.

This is how almost all “agents using websites” works right now: screen-scraping and hoping. It’s the automation equivalent of operating a computer by describing screenshots over the phone.

WebMCP
 proposes something much saner. Instead of the agent guessing what your site can do by staring at it, your site 
declares
 what it can do, as a set of clean, structured tools the agent can call directly. “Here’s a 
book_table
 tool. It takes a date, a time, and a party size. Call it.” No pixel-reading. No guessing. And the best part: it already runs in Chrome behind a trial, and adding your first tool takes about ten minutes.

Let me show you the whole thing.

The core shift: from scraping to declaring

The entire idea fits in one comparison. Same task, two worlds.

Today: the agent scrapes

1
Read the entire DOM

2
Guess which element is the date field

3
Simulate typing and clicking

4
Re-read the whole page to check

5
Break when the layout changes

WebMCP: the site declares

1
Page registers a 
book_table
 tool

2
Agent reads the tool's schema

3
Agent calls it with structured args

4
Tool runs your real JS, returns a result

5
Survives redesigns: the tool is the contract

The left column is brittle because the agent is reverse-engineering your UI every time. The right column is stable because you gave it a real interface. The layout can change freely underneath a tool whose name and schema stay the same.

If you’ve read my earlier post on 
MCP, the port that let AI touch the world
, this will feel familiar, and it should. MCP gave AI a standard way to call tools on a server. WebMCP brings that same idea into the browser: the web 
page itself
 becomes a place that offers tools, running in the tab you already have open, with the session you’re already logged into.

What it actually is

WebMCP is a proposed web standard, developed jointly by Google (Chrome) and Microsoft (Edge) in the W3C Web Machine Learning Community Group, that gives a web page a small JavaScript API to register tools that an AI agent can discover and call. Google describes it plainly in the Chrome docs: a way to “build and expose structured tools for AI agents,” where the site annotates its own features so agents “know exactly how to interact” with them. To be precise about maturity, it’s a Community Group 
draft
, not a finished W3C standard and not yet on the standards track, which is exactly why now is the moment to learn it and shape it.

Three things make it click into place:

Discovery.
 A standard way for a page to say “I offer these tools,” like 
checkout
 or 
filter_results
, so an agent can list them.

Schemas.
 Each tool declares its inputs and outputs as JSON Schema, so the agent knows exactly what to pass and there’s far less room to hallucinate or misread.

State.
 A shared understanding of what’s on the page right now, so the agent knows what it can actually act on.

Where it stands today

WebMCP is real and runnable, but early. It's available as a 
Chrome origin trial from Chrome 149
, and you can switch it on locally with the flag 
chrome://flags/#enable-webmcp-testing
. The proposal lives at 
github.com/webmachinelearning/webmcp
, Angular already has experimental support, and Chrome ships demo sites (a pizza maker, travel search, a restaurant booking). Google's own words: it's "under active discussion and subject to change." So this is a "try it and shape it" moment, not a "ship it to production" one, and that's exactly why it's worth learning now.

How a call actually flows

Here’s the whole loop, page to agent and back. Nothing exotic happens: the page registers tools, the agent lists them, picks one, calls it with structured arguments, and your own JavaScript does the work in the page.

page
Register tools
Your JS declares book_table, search, etc.

→

agent
Discover
Lists the page's tools and their schemas

→

agent
Call with args
Structured JSON matching the schema

→

page
execute() runs
Your real JS, in the logged-in page

→

agent
Gets result
A structured answer, visibly, in the tab

The tool's execute function runs inside your actual page, using your existing JavaScript, state, and the user's own logged-in session. It happens visibly in the tab, not in some invisible headless browser, so the user can watch it and trust it.

That “runs in the page you’re already logged into” detail is a big deal. The agent isn’t a separate bot logging in with stolen credentials somewhere. It’s calling a function in 
your
 open, authenticated tab, using the session you already have. The site keeps control of what it exposes, and the user can see it happen.

Watch one call happen

Concretely, when you ask an in-browser agent to do something on a WebMCP-enabled site, it looks like this: your request, the agent picking the declared tool, the tool running, the result.

you ›
 book a table for 4 tonight at 8

agent ›
 found tool 
book_table
 on this page

agent ›
 calling 
book_table
({ date: "today", time: "20:00", party: 4 })

page ›
 Booked. Table for 4 at 8:00 PM, confirmation #A17.

No DOM guessing anywhere in that exchange. The agent called a named function with typed arguments, and the page did the rest with its own code. This is the difference between an agent operating your site and an agent operating a photograph of your site.

The code is genuinely tiny

This is the part that makes people want to try it. Registering a tool is one call. Using the current imperative API from the Chrome docs, a to-do site adding an “add item” tool looks essentially like this:

register a WebMCP tool (imperative API)

await
 document.modelContext.
registerTool
({
  name: 
'add_todo'
,
  description: 
'Add an item to the to-do list'
,
  inputSchema: {
    type: 
'object'
,
    properties: { text: { type: 
'string'
 } },
    required: [
'text'
]
  },
  execute: 
async
 ({ text }) => {
    addTodoToPage(text);        
// your own existing function

return
 
`Added to-do: ${text}`
;
  }
});

That's the whole thing. You give the tool a name, a description, an input schema, and an execute function that calls code you already wrote. The agent discovers it with getTools(), and you can pull a tool back with an AbortController if it stops being relevant. There's also a declarative flavor where you annotate an HTML form instead of writing JS.

Notice what 
execute
 does: it calls 
addTodoToPage
, a function that already exists on your site. WebMCP isn’t asking you to rebuild anything. You’re wrapping the actions your site can already do in a thin, declared interface so an agent can reach them cleanly. That’s why the ten-minutes claim is real.

One accuracy note, because the API is young and moving: the current entry point is 
document.modelContext
, while earlier drafts used 
navigator.modelContext
, the move makes sense because tools really belong to a document, not the whole browser. If you follow an older tutorial showing 
navigator
, that’s why. A one-line shim (
const mc = document.modelContext || navigator.modelContext
) bridges both while the change rolls out. Expect a few more edges like this to shift; it’s a draft.

A real one, worked all the way through

The official WebMCP demos are all “call one tool and you’re done”, order a pizza, book a table. Useful, but they undersell the idea, because the interesting part of WebMCP isn’t one tool call. It’s an agent 
chaining
 tools to do real work, with a human gate on the part that matters. So instead of a toy, I built and deployed a real one to go with this post, and this section is the honest walk-through of it, because it teaches the whole model better than any abstract example.

Career Copilot
 is an experimental agentic career portal. You give it a resume; it reads real job descriptions from live company boards, scores your true fit, tells you your skill gaps, and prepares a batch of applications you approve in one click. Nothing is faked: the jobs are real, the matching is computed from real job-description text, and it applies nothing without your explicit OK.

Career Copilot, a live WebMCP career portal

Open it, tap "See it work instantly", and watch an agent run a full job-search mission over live data: read a resume, pull real openings from GitLab, Stripe and Databricks, read each job description, score your fit, surface your skill gaps, and propose a batch of applications for you to approve. It registers 
13 real WebMCP tools
 on the page.

Open the live demo →

Deployed and validated. With 
chrome://flags/#enable-webmcp-testing
 on, the page reports "WebMCP live, 13 tools registered" and they show up in the DevTools WebMCP panel. No flag needed to try it: one button runs the whole mission anyway. It never really submits an application, it prepares them and stops for you.

And this isn’t a diagram of what 
should
 happen, here’s the actual browser proving it. Turn the flag on, open DevTools, and Chrome grows a 
WebMCP
 panel that lists every tool the page registered, each with the same name and description the agent sees. This is the whole pitch made visible: the website 
declares
 its tools, and the browser reads them straight off the page.

The tools, straight from the page.
 Chrome's DevTools → Application → WebMCP panel. Every tool the page registered is listed with its real name and description, 
aggregate_openings
, 
compare_jobs
, 
draft_outreach
, 
explain_match
, exactly what an agent would discover.

Click one, see its contract.
 Selecting 
parse_resume
 opens a Details pane: name, full description, the frame it lives in, and an Origin that points right back at 
registerTools
 in the page's own source. No scraping, no guessing, the tool 
is
 the interface.

Real screenshots from the deployed demo. The left of the panel is the tool list an agent sees; the right is one tool's full contract. This is what "the website talks to the agent" actually looks like in the browser today.

The workflow: what the agent actually does

Here’s the real mission, step by step. Each row is a WebMCP tool the page exposes; the agent chains them. Notice the shape: a run phase, then a consequential act phase that stops for a human.

parse_resume
Reads 
any
 resume into a real profile: skills, seniority, focus area
read

aggregate_openings
Pulls live roles from three real company job boards
read

match_profile
Fetches each real 
job description
 and scores your true fit + gaps
read

find_gaps
Aggregates the gaps into a learning signal: "learn X to unlock more roles"
read

shortlist
Adds the strongest fits to your pipeline. Reversible
act

prepare_applications
Tailors a summary per role, ready to review
act

submit_batch
Opens a 
human approval
 panel: review the set, uncheck any, then apply
gate

The real agent loop. The first four tools are read-only, the agent gathers and reasons freely. Then shortlist and prepare change reversible state. Only the last one, applying in your name, is consequential, and it cannot happen without you clicking approve. That split is the entire safety model of WebMCP, made concrete.

The tools, grouped by what they can do

This grouping is worth internalizing, because it’s how you should design any WebMCP surface: separate what merely 
reads
 from what 
acts
, and put the human gate only where it’s truly needed.

Read (safe, no gate)

parse_resume

aggregate_openings

match_profile

find_gaps

explain_match

compare_jobs

pipeline_status

Act (reversible)

set_preferences

refine_search

shortlist

prepare_applications

draft_outreach

Consequential (human gate)

submit_batch

Just one. This is the only tool that does something in your name, so it's the only one that stops for approval.

13 tools, three tiers. WebMCP lets a tool flag itself with hints like 
readOnlyHint
, so the agent (and the browser) know which calls are safe to make freely and which need a human. Getting this taxonomy right is most of what makes an agentic surface trustworthy.

A real run, not a mockup

Here’s the actual tool-activity log from a validated run with a frontend engineer’s resume. Watch it read real descriptions and score honestly, no fake 99%s:

tool activity · real run

→ tool
parse_resume(…)

✓ result
Sam Patel, Senior Frontend Engineer · 11 skills · frontend focus

→ tool
aggregate_openings()

✓ result
75 live roles from GitLab, Stripe, Databricks

→ tool
match_profile()

✓ result
reading 24 real job descriptions…

✓ result
Design Engineer, Presence @ GitLab: 80%
, no gaps

✓ result
Senior Software Engineer, Fullstack @ Stripe: 57%, gaps: python

✓ result
AI Engineer @ GitLab: 54%, gaps: python, llm

→ tool
find_gaps()

✓ result
top gaps across matches: python, testing, api

→ tool
shortlist([4 roles])

→ tool
prepare_applications([4])

⏸ gate
awaiting your approval for 4 applications…

✓ result
applied to 3 (you unchecked 1) ✓

·
Mission complete.

A genuine run. The frontend resume's true best fit, a Design Engineer role at 80%, came from reading the real job description, not the title (the title never says "React"). The scores are honest and capped, the gaps are real, and the human approved 3 of 4 in the batch. Swap in a backend or data resume and the whole thing re-ranks to that person's real best matches. That's what a scraper fundamentally cannot do.

The one hard thing, and why the human gate is the right answer

Building this taught me the honest limit of “auto-apply”, and it’s worth stating plainly because it’s the real engineering lesson. Everything up to the apply button is easy to automate and genuinely useful: reading resumes, aggregating openings, matching, tailoring. The 
last mile
, actually submitting into a company’s application system, is the hard part. Those systems (Workday, Greenhouse and friends) are deliberately not open APIs, they sit behind logins and bot-detection, and automating submission usually violates their terms.

This is exactly the gap WebMCP is meant to close. If a careers site exposed a 
submit_application
 tool the way this demo does, an agent could apply cleanly, in your own authenticated session, with your approval. Until sites do that, the correct design isn’t to fake the last mile, it’s to 
automate everything up to it and keep a human on the submit.
 That’s not a compromise. An agent that silently applies to jobs in your name is a liability; one that does all the work and asks before it acts as you is a superpower. WebMCP’s consent model is what makes that line enforceable.

The full source is a single self-contained HTML file, and I wrote up the deeper product thinking, the candidate and employer sides, the phased build, the honest limits, as a design note in the repo.

The trust model, because this is the scary part

The obvious worry: if a page can hand tools to an agent, can a malicious page trick the agent into doing something awful? The design takes this seriously, and it’s worth knowing the guards.

It runs visibly, in the tab.
 No headless, background execution. A browsing context has to be open, so actions happen where the user can see them.

Same-origin only.
 Tool registration is gated by a 
tools
 Permissions Policy that defaults to 
self
, so a random cross-origin iframe can’t quietly register tools unless the top page explicitly allows it.

Sensitive actions can demand a human.
 For things like making a purchase, a tool can require an explicit user confirmation dialog before it proceeds. Human-in-the-loop is built into the pattern, not bolted on.

Untrusted content is flagged.
 Tools carry annotation hints like 
readOnlyHint
 and 
untrustedContentHint
, so the agent can treat a tool that returns third-party content with appropriate suspicion, which matters given everything we know about 
prompt injection
.

None of this makes it magically safe, the standard is young and the security model is still being worked out, but the shape is right: visible, same-origin, consent-gated, and honest about untrusted data.

Honest pros and cons

Why it's exciting

Structured tool calls instead of brittle DOM scraping

Runs in the user's real, logged-in session, no separate bot auth

The site stays in control of what it exposes

Survives redesigns: the tool contract outlives the layout

Reuses code you already have, tiny to adopt

A real standard direction, not one vendor's lock-in

Why it's early

Experimental: origin trial only, subject to change

Chrome-first today; broad browser support isn't here yet

Needs site adoption to matter; agents can't call tools that don't exist

Discoverability gap: a client must visit a site to learn its tools

Security model still maturing (malicious tools, injection)

Complex sites may need real refactoring to expose clean tools

The cons are almost all "it's early," not "it's wrong." That's the profile of a promising standard in its incubation window: the idea is sound, the ecosystem hasn't caught up yet.

Where it fits: use cases

The pattern shines anywhere an agent needs to 
do
 something on a site, not just read it.

E-commerce
Expose search_products, add_to_cart, checkout. An agent shops your store through real tools, not by clicking around.

Booking & travel
Multi-city, multi-passenger trips or restaurant tables, where the form is complex and scraping is painful.

SaaS dashboards
Let an agent run the actions your app already has: create a ticket, filter a report, update a record.

Form filling
Declare the form's fields and a submit tool; the agent maps data in cleanly instead of guessing inputs.

Accessibility
A declared, semantic tool surface is a gift for assistive agents, clearer intent than raw markup.

Internal tools
Wrap your admin panel's actions as tools so an internal assistant can drive them safely and visibly.

The through-line: any site that has "things you can do," not just "things you can read," is a candidate. The richer your site's actions, the more WebMCP gives you.

Where this is headed

Now the fun part, because the ceiling here is high.

The obvious next step is 
standardization across browsers.
 Right now it’s a Chrome trial; the destination is a web standard every browser implements, the way fetch or the clipboard API are everywhere. When that lands, “does this site have an agent interface?” becomes as normal a question as “is this site mobile-friendly?”

That direction just got a real push. On August 26, 2026, OpenAI announced it’s 
adding WebMCP support to the ChatGPT desktop app’s built-in browser
 (and to ChatGPT Sites): visit a WebMCP-enabled page and ChatGPT or Codex can automatically use the tools it declares to complete your task. That’s the interesting signal, it’s not just Google and Microsoft (who wrote the draft) anymore. When a second major AI vendor starts consuming page-declared tools, a proposal in its incubation window starts looking like a direction the ecosystem is actually moving in.

Then there’s the 
agentic web
 itself. Imagine sites shipping an agent interface alongside their visual one, on purpose, the way they ship a mobile layout today. Your site’s UI is for humans; its declared tools are for agents; both are first-class. A site that’s good at being operated by an agent gets used by more agents, which becomes a real reason to invest in the tool surface.

It gets more interesting when you 
combine WebMCP with remote MCP.
 WebMCP handles what lives in the browser (the page’s own actions, the user’s session), while remote MCP servers handle backend tools and data. An agent could fluidly use both: call a page’s 
add_to_cart
 tool via WebMCP, then hit a remote inventory MCP server for stock, stitching client and server tools into one task.

And further out: 
agent commerce.
 If a store exposes clean purchase tools and an agent can call them within the user’s authenticated, consenting session, you get a path to agents that actually complete transactions safely, with the human able to watch and confirm, rather than a scraper hammering a checkout flow. The same shape extends to booking, scheduling, support, anything transactional.

The big bet underneath all of it: the web was built for humans to read and click. The next version is built to 
also
 be operated by agents, cleanly and on the site’s own terms. WebMCP is one of the first serious attempts to make that a standard instead of a hack.

The takeaway, and go try it

Here’s the whole thing in a sentence: 
WebMCP lets your website hand an AI agent a clean set of tools instead of forcing it to reverse-engineer your buttons.
 That single shift, declare instead of scrape, makes agent interactions reliable, keeps the site in control, runs in the user’s real session, and survives your next redesign.

It’s early, it’s Chrome-first, and the standard will change. But the barrier to trying it is almost nothing: flip on 
chrome://flags/#enable-webmcp-testing
, add a 
registerTool
 call wrapping a function your site already has, and watch an agent call it. Ten minutes, and you’ll understand the agentic web better than most people reading about it. Then go read the proposal, poke the demos, and file the rough edges you hit, because right now, while it’s still being shaped, your feedback actually moves it.

References

Written from scratch after reading the official documentation. These are the primary, verified sources. Nothing here is copied from them; the code shape follows the documented API.

Chrome for Developers, WebMCP overview: 
https://developer.chrome.com/docs/ai/webmcp

Chrome for Developers, WebMCP imperative API: 
https://developer.chrome.com/docs/ai/webmcp/imperative-api

Chrome for Developers, WebMCP declarative API: 
https://developer.chrome.com/docs/ai/webmcp/declarative-api

WebMCP specification (Draft Community Group Report): 
https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webmcp/

WebMCP proposal, explainer, and source (W3C Web Machine Learning Community Group): 
https://github.com/webmachinelearning/webmcp

Chrome Platform Status, WebMCP feature: 
https://chromestatus.com/feature/5117755740913664

WebMCP demo sites (Google Chrome Labs): 
https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/webmcp-tools/tree/main/demos

Patrick Brosset (Microsoft Edge), WebMCP updates and clarifications: 
https://patrickbrosset.com/articles/2026-02-23-webmcp-updates-clarifications-and-next-steps/

OpenAI Developers, WebMCP support in the ChatGPT desktop browser (Aug 26, 2026): 
https://x.com/OpenAIDevs/status/2092344959248761263

Model Context Protocol (MCP), for the underlying protocol: 
https://modelcontextprotocol.io

Background reading: 
MCP: The Port That Let AI Finally Touch the World
 for the protocol WebMCP builds on, and 
LLM security
 for why the trust model here matters.

← Back to blog
