1: 'Liberty Leading the People' by Eugène Delacroix ca. 1830 | 
Wikimedia Commons
 // 2: Windows 98 Themes posted by /u/2ezyo | 
Reddit
 (edited by the Author)

A
 week ago, when I was 
working on my project
 for 
HTML Day 2026
 I stumbled upon this passage from 
an essay on 
blink
 and 
marquee
 tags
:

At the time, there was a new breed of web professionals proudly labeled “webmasters.” Part designer, part developer and part evangelist, webmasters held enough esoteric knowledge about the web to manage, edit and create websites, both large and small.

— Jay Hoffman (August 28th, 2017)

And that's when everything clicked for me.

Over the past year, I've written dozens of articles on the 
Independent Web
. 
Forty-two essays
 on principles, technical tutorials, accessibility, and advocacy.

And, in a way, it has all been leading to this manifesto. Only through months of research and getting to know many kind and talented people and building things myself have I finally understood the true power of the webmaster.

I think this will be the most important thing I'll ever write, and I wish to share it with you. With everyone.

Part One: THE PAST 

The earliest webmasters were unauthorized, self-taught, one-person operations. 
The first webmaster was a woman
, Stanford librarian Louise Addis.

i. ORIGINS (1993) 

It was a few years after Tim Berners-Lee christened the 
first web server
 at CERN at the end of 1990, and published the first website 
info.cern.ch
 on August 6th, 1991
[1]
.

The webmaster was first understood as the Internet's equivalent to the real-world postmaster.

"Other protocols have defacto standards for well known mailbox names, such as 
USENET@domain
 for NNTP (see [RFC977]), and 
WEBMASTER@domain
 for HTTP (see [HTTP])."

— RFC 2142, "Mailbox Names for Common Services, Roles and Functions," Dave Crocker, Internet Mail Consortium. (May 1997)

This RFC—alongside 
<POSTMASTER@domain>
 (required by RFC 822)—is what cemented "webmaster" as the canonical, protocol-level point-of-contact role for a website.

"The word “webmaster” comes from a similar role defined in the original specification for email called the postmaster, which in turn comes from the similarly named government position Postmaster General. You can think of the postmaster as an email administrator. The idea being that you can email postmater[sic] @ some domain, and always be connected directly to somebody that could fix a problem with the email. That remains a reserved name today on any email inbox. The webmaster served a pretty similar purpose on the web."

— Jay Hoffman, 
"What Happened to the Webmaster"
 (June 16, 2020)

And thus, 
webmaster@domain
 was already the de facto email inbox address tied to the HTTP protocol itself.

The label and title quickly grew into something far more than that, though.

"At first it referred to that frustrated techie who set up the rogue Web server without company authorization, coded HTML by hand in a text editor, FTP'd the files to the server, and in his spare time answered all the incoming corporate e-mails, usually also without company authorization."

— Brian Wold, 
"What Happened to the Webmaster? (And other misleading titles)"
 (May 12, 2006)

ii. GOLDEN AGE (1994-2001) 

The era that conjures "webmaster" most strongly began in the mid 90's, as Beverly Hills Internet was launched, now known as GeoCities.

"[T]he point about the web before social networks or before Web 2.0 is not that you had a profile on GeoCities, but that you had a chance to build your cyber home outside of it, you could exist and grow outside of a centralized service."

— Olia Lialina, quoted in 
Cybercultural
 by Richard MacManus (March 7, 2025)

A culture developed as people realized anybody could make their own website. 88x31 buttons, blinkies, .GIFs, web rings, visitor counters, guestbooks. All originate from this time.

"In 1996, the web was littered with black-and-yellow-striped animated .gifs reveling in metaphors of road construction... 'This site under construction' was the default home page disclaimer, until everyone realized that the inherent nature of the web was that it would be perpetually under construction."

— 
Fresher Styles for Web Designers
, O'Reilly (December 2008)

While GeoCities is fondly remembered now, it certainly had its problems and issues. Similarly, there were other platforms at the time as well, such as Tripod, Angelfire, and Homestead. It can be easy to revise history into an idealized monoculture.

"It was not a paradise for early web makers. It was not even a good web hosting service. It was free and not worse than others, that's why webmasters endured the pain of clumsy page builders, interventions from commercial scripts being injected into their pages, accidental file deletions, etc…"

— 
"GeoCities' Afterlife and Web History,"
 by Olia Lialin, One Terabyte of Kilobyte Age (July 30, 2019)

Over 38 million pages were deleted when Yahoo shut down the platform in 2009.

iii. THE DECLINE (2008-2020) 

As sites grew and the Internet evolved from the expectation of a handful of HTML files located in 
/var/www/html/
 into instead a complex beast of software and content management systems, the "one person does everything" model stopped being the default, and the title became a culture-war topic among web professionals.

Schisms grew from the complexity. The Internet became a vector for business, and then 
the
 way to make money as the dotcom bubble inflated. People needed to specialize, whether that was to design for the front-end, or program and administrate the server from the back-end. You needed usability specialists and network engineers and search engine optimizers.

Dammit Jim, I’m a Webmaster, not a Digital Government Web Content Communications and Application Development Knowledge Management Specialist! ...or am I?

Is the term webmaster an accurate description of the responsibilities of today’s web professional, or is that moniker just a quaint artifact from the simpler, earliest days of the web where someone akin to a similarly quaint notion of a Ringmaster juggled a circus of unwieldy text, spinning logos and blinking text?

— David Kitzmiller, FCC Webmaster, 
Mastering the Web: An Old-Fashioned Notion?
 (August 12, 2010)

Perhaps the clearest and most citable marker of the term's formal retirement from mainstream professional use is when Google rebranded "Google Webmasters" to "Google Search Central" in 2020. An institutional funeral.

"Merriam-Webster claims the first known use of the word 'webmaster' was in 1993, years before Google even existed. However, the term is becoming archaic, and according to the data found in books, its use is in sharp decline. A user experience study we ran revealed that very few web professionals identify themselves as webmasters anymore. They're more likely to call themselves Search Engine Optimizer (SEO), online marketer, blogger, web developer, or site owner, but very few 'webmasters.' In brainstorming our new name, we realized that there's not one term that perfectly summarizes the work people do on websites."

— 
Google Search Central Blog
 (Nov 12, 2020)

Part Two: NOW 

It is your innate human right to create.

All of the above was pretext for this: 
You can be a webmaster right now.
 You can create a website right now. Yes, you. Your website can look however you want it to, and function in any way you want. It can have whatever you want on it.

You can look up tutorials, and you can have your questions answered by humans just by joining 
forums
, 
IRC channels
, and 
independent platforms
. The act of creating and learning inherently places you in the community.

prelude: The Deception 

Generally speaking, we have been deceived into thinking many broad falsehoods:

Regarding the webmaster:

The Internet has become too complex for a single person to master all aspects of it.

You must use a certain tool or platform to properly be part of this movement.

Regarding the Internet:

Technology is inherently addictive, and brings us harm.

In order to stay connected to others online, we must use corporate social media platforms, become the product, and surrender our privacy.

The Internet is primarily falsehoods, misinformation, and meaningless spam content.

Regarding us:

Most of us are incapable of learning technical, scientific, mathematical concepts.

Those of us who are knowledgeable are reluctant to share information, and hostile to beginners.

When plainly laid out like this, it's easy to see how we've been conned into a cynical, pessimistic—even misanthropic view of things. Companies worth billions of dollars have a bottom line that depends on the general population to continue believing all of the above.

Our perspective on technology and other people has been greatly distorted into the negative. In reality, the Internet has terabytes of high-quality resources to learn from. There are thousands of people just like you looking for connection, hungry for a better vision of the future, wanting to cultivate nourishing hobbies. You are so capable.

The idea that one person cannot master all aspects of the web, as the webmaster was once known to, is demonstrably false.

Be optimistic about your capabilities and the willingness of others to help you. Be skeptical of anybody who attempts to divide or gatekeep, proclaiming the mandated use or superiority of a specific tool or platform.

Likewise, I want to note that searching for "return of the webmaster" in 2026 may lead you to discussions of the "agentic web" or "orchestration," a euphemism for somebody who employs generative AI to do the multidisciplinary work that comes with being a webmaster. Those who manage a stack of expensive large language models, those who are prompt engineers for static site generators, and those who neglect to take the time to learn for themselves, unwilling to put in the effort themselves (or thinking they're incapable to).

That's not what this is. My manifesto is not about becoming an orchestrator. Being a webmaster means 
becoming a sovereign creator.
 We are not reclaiming the title of "webmaster" only to then offload the work and art onto chatbots. We are reclaiming it because it is the only title that remains which still carries the weight of total, unapologetic human agency over our digital lives.

a. The Bare Minimum is All You Need 

To be a Webmaster, you need a computer, a text editor, and a way to host. That's it.

You don't need a degree in computer science. You don't need a $50/month subscription to a proprietary builder. You don't even need the money to buy a domain name if you don't have the cash.

Use 
https://freedns.afraid.org/
 to get a free domain.

Throw your files up on 
Neocities
 or 
Nekoweb
 or 
web 1.0 hosting
.

Write your HTML in Notepad. Edit your CSS in TextEdit.

If you don't have a computer or Internet yourself, you could be sitting in a public library on a recycled Chromium machine and still you have everything you need to become a Webmaster. There are not gatekeepers at the doors of the World Wide Web. Like many other things in life, the only lock is the one we put on our own ambitions.

A Webmaster is not just a developer. You are a UX/UI designer, you are a writer and editor, you are an accessibility specialist, and an advocate for others to reclaim their digital autonomy. You are a creator, rather than a consumer. And you are capable of all these things.

You will wrestle with semantic markup to make a page accessible. You will agonize over typeface kerning and colour palettes. You will write prose and publish your weird obsessions and link to your Internet neighbours. You will manage server logs, tweak the 
.htaccess
 file, and you will decide and design the architecture of your digital home.

This is not a career path, this is a craft. This is the last best multidisciplinary sandbox, both creative and technical, all rendered on an 
index.html
.

And 
there is no wrong answer.
 Serve your website 
over the Gemini protocol
. SSH into 
the Tildeverse
 and build a terminal-based homepage alongside strangers. 
Set up a homelab
 in your closet using the old, defunct family computer. There are a million ways to do this. The only wrong answer is sitting on the sidelines believing you don't belong in the arena with us.

b. The Last Public Square 

Corporate social media platforms we used to call the "new public square" have been astroturf'd, bulldozed, and sold to the highest-bidding fascist oligarch. Your existence is a rental, your voice is a throttled lottery. Your so-called "community" is at the mercy of a billionaire's whim.

Building your own website is an act of digital repatriation.

Creating your own corner of the Internet reclaims one of the only mediums where we retain freedom, creativity, and autonomy.

With the plethora of hosting options available, you can migrate if terms of service change to your disliking. There's no pay-to-play visibility. There's just you, text, and the open protocols of the web.

c. The Myth of Incompetence 

The most effective way the power structures of our age have oppressed us is by making us feel as though we are stupid, as though we are incapable of learning.

Many of us have been convinced coding is arcane magic, that servers are eldritch horrors, and that computer science is reserved for child prodigies and those who are privileged to just "naturally get it."

A user who is afraid of the machine and doubts their own capabilities is one that will surrender and pay for a solution.

You are not incapable. There is a lot to learn, yes. And the technologies are deep. But do not forget we are still living in the golden age of human knowledge—endless free resources, tutorials, wikis, and forums are available at your fingertips.

I will repeat myself and say the only barrier that exists is the one you construct in your mind.

You require grit, determination, and a "why." 
This is your why.
 The desire to express yourself. The hunger to build something truly of your own. The need to connect with other humans.

d. Universalism 

Let me be clear: this is not about "IndieWeb" specs, it isn't about the "Small Web" or "SmolWeb." It isn't a retro-revival nostalgia trip, pining for GeoCities and AOL dial-up tones.

Those are all labels, clubs, and memberships. Standards with elitism and in-group and cliques and gatekeeping as a result.

What I'm talking about is universal. It's not about specific mechanics, it's about a philosophy. It is a big tent.

It doesn't matter if you speak English. It doesn't matter if you don't know how to spell words right in your native tongue. It doesn't matter if you don't know a single line of JavaScript, either.

And it certainly doesn't matter if you think you have "nothing interesting to say." I promise you do. All humans have value, we have our hobbies, our frustrations, our obsessions and small thoughts. Putting this in writing on a page you build with your own hands means you're contributing to a richer, stranger, more wonderful ecosystem.

e. Those Who Came Before 

I stand on the shoulders of giants. I am not the first to write a web manifesto, nor the last. I myself am nobody special, nor anybody with authority. I am mere conduit for a message that desperately needs to be heard.

I give credit to Tantek Çelik, Amber Case, Aaron Parecki, Crystal Beasley, and Kevin Marks for founding 
IndieWebCamp
 in Portland, Oregon in 2011.

I give credit to Daniel Murray's 
melonking.net
 as a foundational "web revival" artifact.

"[The web revival] is a riff on the 20th century American folk music revival, and it implies that early personal sites, like those hosted on GeoCities, were culturally significant as digital folk art."

— Daniel Murray (Melonking), quoted in 
New_ Public
 (September 7, 2025)

I give credit to webmistress 
Sadness
, who has been sharing resources on web mastery for years, and was the founder of the now defunct 
Yesterweb
, served as many people's first experience of the indie-web-crafting scene.

"In the earlier iterations of this manifesto, I made the mistake of focusing too heavily on the creation of personal websites as the main method of fighting against the exploitative capitalist hellscape that has become our Internet... For example, we can work on transforming social relations online."

— Sadness, 
Internet manifesto
 (May 2023)

I give credit to 
James G.
, who has been blogging about the independent Internet for over six years, who hosts the podcast 
Wonders of Webweaving
, and who has recently founded the 
Web Writers' Collective
, which is open to anyone.

I give credit to 
Alexandra
 and 
Kaylee
 for the community and resources of 
32-bit Café
. I give credit to 
Adam Newbold
 for the community and services of 
omg.lol
.

There are hundreds of people who have dedicated thousands of hours in trying to make the web more human and joyous for all.

f. Saving the World 

We can create a more human web right now. The world is in dire straits, and I'm reminded of the words of Carl Sagan, coincidentally written at the dawn of the webmaster:

“In our obscurity, in all this vastness, there is no hint that help will come from elsewhere to save us from ourselves.”

— Carl Sagan, Pale Blue Dot (1994)

There are those who see the act of webmastery as "only" a hobby and pastime—and I say this is not mutually exclusive to world-saving. The personal is political. Our ability to maintain our joy and ourselves is, itself, resistance.

Here is another falsehood I want to emphasize: 
Our right to freely express ourselves is never a guarantee.
 The past thirty years of the Internet have been an explosive, chaotic experiment in the commons and the human condition. But the freedom of expression we've been granted is not a given or perpetual promise, and it is extremely foolish to think we will have this for the next ten years, let alone forever.

Start as you are, with what you have, while you still have time to do so.

Exercise your innate human right to create.

Be a developer. Be a designer. Be a writer. Be a systems administrator. Be a philosopher. Be a Webmaster.

It is the most punk rock, anti-establishment, liberating thing you can do in the 21st century. And yeah, it is fucking awesome.

Now, go build something.

FURTHER RESOURCES 

Getting Started 

Sadness' Webmastery Resources

32-bit Café Community Resources

IndieWeb: Getting Started
: The step-by-step guide to getting your own site on the IndieWeb, covering domains, hosting, and creating pages

IndieWebify.Me
: Step-by-step guidance and tools to test and validate your IndieWeb progress

MDN Web Docs: HTML Tutorial
: Mozilla's HTML documentation and tutorials

HTML Dog
: A classic starting point for HTML and CSS tutorials

W3Schools
: Free coding tutorials for HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and more

Zonelets
: A lightweight blogging engine letting you write posts directly in HTML

Neocities Template Tool
: A simple three-column template for Neocities and other simple site hosts

The Boilerplate
: Ransei's starter template with drag-and-drop upload instructions for Neocities

Stefan Bohacek: Making a free image gallery with Neocities.org
: Tutorials for creating image galleries with Neocities, including an 11ty version

Susam Pal: Writing First, Tooling Second
: A manifesto advocating for prioritizing content in simple HTML before complex tooling

Hosting 

Neocities
: Free, user-friendly hosting for handmade websites

Nekoweb
: Another free hosting option for personal sites

FreeDNS
: Get a free domain name

omg.lol
: Community and services from Adam Newbold and Neatnik

Bear Blog
: A minimalist, privacy-focused blogging platform

Micro.blog
: Indie microblogging with built-in cross-posting

Dreamwidth
: An open-source blogging and community platform

Codeberg Pages
: Free static site hosting directly from Codeberg repositories

Web Revival Communities 

MelonLand Wiki: Communities
: A directory of web revival communities, forums, and message boards including 32Bit Cafe, Pixel Joint, Basement Community, Comfybox, The Midnight Pub, Pixel Lounge, The Web Raft, and Reject Convenience

Sheezy.Art
: An art website recreating the highs of pre-2010 DeviantArt and SheezyArt

SpaceHey
: A retro social network focused on privacy and customizability; a MySpace experience

Bitview
: A video sharing site inspired by classic YouTube

Sudomemo
: A revival of Flipnote Hatena with community features

Ytoo.org
: A web revival community hub

Elpis.ws
: Another web revival space

Building 

Sadgrl's 88x31 Button Maker
: Create your own classic web button

Hekate's 88x31 Button Maker
: Another excellent button generator

IndieWeb's 88x31 page
: More generators plus how to hand-code your own buttons

Dither It
: Make dithered images for a retro aesthetic

JS Paint
: Classic MS Paint in your browser

JummBox
: Chiptune-style music program for the browser

Online Color Picker
: Tools for choosing and testing color palettes

Josh W. Comeau: CSS Interactive Guide to Grid
: An excellent interactive CSS Grid tutorial

Webrings & Directories 

Archive Team: Webring Directory
: A list of live niche webrings

Brisray's Webring List
: A hand-verified list of currently working webrings

32-Bit Cafe Webring Directory
: Active webrings created by 32-Bit Cafe members

MelonLand Surf Club
: An active webring with over 1,500 sites

The Smallweb Subway
: A subway-style network of webrings mapping themed communities

XXIIVV Webring
: An open-source initiative fostering independent personal websites

Fediring
: A webring for the Fediverse

A11y Webring
: A webring focused on accessibility

Low Tech Webring Directory
: A directory of low-tech webrings

Fandom Webring
: A general fandom webring

Transing the Internet
: A trans webring with a small Discord community

HandCraftedWeb.eu
: A curated, decentralized directory and webring for the "Human Web"

Manifestos 

Yesterweb's Collection of Web Manifestos
: An excellent collection of manifestos written by others.

The Yesterweb Zine
: collaborative zine that ran from Aug 2021 to Jan 2023

Issue 00, "The Old Web"

Issue 02, "Websites as an Act of Creativity"

IndieWeb's "Why" page
: Another list of personal-site manifestos from 1997 to 2026

Melonking's Manifesto

A Quiet Manifesto
: On text, tech, caring, the importance of existing, and cave paintings

Tracy Durnell: Guiding principles for my website
: Principles including being friendly, respecting privacy, prioritizing connection over reach, and practicing imperfection

New_Public: The Handmade Internet Is Making a Comeback
: A 2025 article on the web revival movement

Archives 

Wayback Machine
: The Internet Archive's indispensable tool for viewing historical versions of websites

Wayback Machine Downloader
: Download an entire website from the Wayback Machine

Flashpoint Archive
: Preserves games and animations from the web

Escargot
: A service that makes old versions of MSN Messenger and Windows Live Messenger work again

Neonaut's Cyber Mausoleum
: On leaving a digital tombstone

Searching 

Wiby
: A search engine for the classic web, prioritizing non-commercial content

Marginalia Search
: A search engine that prioritizes non-commercial content and personal websites

Smallweb.cc
: A curated collection of websites

Cloudhiker
: Another selection of websites

History 

The History of the Web
: An excellent collection of essays that inspired this post.

Web Design Museum
: A timeline of milestones in the history of web design from 1990 to the present.

SLAC's archive of the first U.S. website
 built by Addis and Paul Kunz, December 1991

My Other IndieWeb Essays 

Over the past year I've written 
forty-two essays
 on this subject. Here are the ones I think are most worth a beginner's time.

Starting Out 

What I Have Learned Being on the IndieWeb for a Month
: Small technical joys that turned solitude into dialogue, and treating the Internet like a personal playground and lab.

Resources for the Personal Web: A Follow-Up Guide
: Blogging platforms, search engines that prioritize small sites, and directories for finding like-minded creators.

Softcore First, Hardcore Eventually: A Ladder for the IndieWeb
: Why you should climb the rungs progressively instead of choosing between easy platforms and full technical independence on day one.

The 1% Rule: An Open Letter to Everyone Who Doesn't Post Anything Online
: A call to action for the 99% of internet users who consume but never create.

You Don't Have to Blog
: Your website can be shrines, art, or anything else. You don't need to write a single word to belong here.

Community and Connection 

Won't You Be My Neighbour?
: On mycorrhizal networks, Indra's Net, and the importance of building intentional connections between independent websites.

Yes, Buy Them a Coffee: Support and Mutual Aid on the IndieWeb
: Asking for support isn't commodification, it's mutual aid.

The Internet Needs More Cross-Pollinators
: We need people who move between different online subcultures to seed ideas and build bridges.

The IndieWeb is Wonderfully Dionysian
: A plea to write your own comments, from the heart, instead of letting genAI do it for you.

Building It Yourself 

Building an IndieAuth Comment System for Your Static Site
: How to build a comment system for your static site using IndieAuth and Netlify Functions.

How Webmentions Work on brennan.day
: A tutorial and walkthrough of implementing webmentions, from setup to display.

Why Make Your Website Accessible, Anyways?
: Web accessibility isn't compliance theatre, it's about designing for everyone.

Phoneblogging
: Why the IndieWeb must prioritize accessible, simple ways to blog from a phone.

The Bigger Picture 

Building the Good Web
: What do we owe each other, and what's the distance between knowing something is wrong and doing something about it?

Trust and Faith in Our Web
: What is trust in an AI-saturated internet, and how do we make independent web spaces more accessible?

Good, Standard Work: Creating the Commons
: From Garrett Hardin's tragedy of the commons to Elinor Ostrom's refutation, the commons was never inevitable to fail. It was always a choice.

How Are We Preparing for the Long Web?
: Digital preservation, link rot, and building for the Internet decades from now.

Free Speech and the IndieWeb
: Not all harm is equal, and where we draw the lines in the sand for what's acceptable.

You will find claims that "webmaster" originated from CERN itself across 
SEO and marketing blogs
, but this is mere folk etymology I couldn't independently verify. Multiple independent lexicographic sources mark 1993 as the first attested year of the webmaster, such as the 
OED
 and 
Etymonline
. 
↩︎
