blog
 - 
git
 - 
desktop
 - 
contact

What was nice about the UI of Windows 2000

2026-06-16

I liked the UIs of the entire era from 3.0 to 2000, really. I'm mostly
using Windows 2000 as an example here because it runs so well in
QEMU/KVM and that allows me to easily take screenshots.

Some of the following will sound absolutely trivial, but I think it's
worth pointing out.

On the first successful boot of Windows 2000, you get to see this:

(Yes, I have the German version. It doesn't matter much for the sake of
this blog post.)

We will talk more about that dialog later, but for now, here's what we
have:

A non-distracting clean solid background color.

Some labelled icons on the desktop.

The taskbar with the "Start" button, some quicklaunch icons, some
    systray icons, and the clock.

Clear, crisp font rendering. (This looked a lot smoother on a CRT
    monitor but it was still pretty good.)

Since that button down there is called "Start", it implies that you can
probably do something with it, maybe start programs? Click and you'll
see the Start Menu:

Notice how the Start button now changed its representation: It's
"sunken" now, just like pressing a real button. This indicates that it's
activated. A button is something that you've most certainly come across
in real life before, like the button for turning on the PC, so you are
very familiar with that concept.

Notice how the little arrows tell you that some menu items are probably
different. Hovering over them opens another menu (you 
can
 click, but
you don't 
need
 to). Hovering over items without such an arrow shows a
tooltip, a little help text that tells you what this does.

Notice how the display of the Start menu visually represents its tree
structure. It's not like some parts open 
in place
, which would force
you to 
remember
 where you came from. Instead, the path to the current
item is shown clearly.

The icons are colored and quite different from one another. And, yes,
there 
are
 icons. Icons are a shortcut for your brain: Reading text is
harder than grasping the rough shape and color of an icon, so they help
you find the item you're looking for.

Open the Windows Explorer:

Okay, I'm not a big fan of this default view. (While we're at it: Hiding
filename extensions was one of the capital sins in computer history, if
you ask me.) At least you could change it to this:

A tidy table on the right showing directories first, then files. The
icons indicate the file type and this is consistent across the OS. The
tree on the left allows for quick and easy navigation -- it's 
mostly

clean and not cluttered with "Libraries" or "Places" or other virtual
folders that don't really exist. The Explorer of Windows 95 was a little
better in this regard, though, see below.

Let's take a look at a random application of the base system, like
WordPad:

Notice how (almost) everything that you can interact with is clearly
identified: It's either shown as some kind of 
button
 or 
handle
, or
it uses 
white background
 (or 
blue
 if it's already selected), which
sets it apart from the slightly orange tinted gray of the rest of the
window. This isn't immediately clear (why and how would some colors
behave differently?), but as soon as you found it out, you'll remember
it and this pattern is 
everywhere
.

And notice that these colors are not just some shades away from each
other. They are 
clearly
 different. At the same time, the whole color
scheme is

very well balanced
:
It's not glaringly white, it's not pitch black, the colors aren't too
close to each other -- it's just the right amount of contrast.

WordPad is essentially the same as in Windows 95, though. If this was a
program made for Windows 2000, it would look a little different.

Let's open some other random thing, like the desktop settings:

Again, the same consistent UI style, the same consistent visual clues.
For example, the tabs at the top of this dialog also have that 3D relief
effect, so it's safe to assume that you can click on them as well.

In all the screenshots above, notice how scrollbars are always visible
if an area is scrollable. For example:

Every scrollbar is always visible -- they don't get hidden to "safe
space" (even at a time when 800x600 screens were still pretty normal).
And that's how you always knew: "Aha, I can scroll here!"

See that area in the middle? This one:

If there was no scrollbar, you might rightfully assume that this is the
entire content of that pane. Nope, it can scroll, and there's no doubt
about it -- you can immediately see that without having to hover or click
anywhere:

Global program options followed a predictable pattern -- you get a new
window with tabs:

Notice how, even inside of one tab, options that belong together are
grouped in a "frame" and that's immediately clear to the user:

Compare that to contemporary settings dialogs which look more like this
-- you can only tell which options belong together by comparing font
sizes:

Let's look at the performance real quick:

It's a little bit sluggish, isn't it? And takes quite a bit of time to
boot, right? It's certainly usable, though, not worse than your average
website these days. I intend to use this setup for next Advent of Code.

But here's the kicker: This is Windows 2000 SP4 running on a Pentium 133
with 64 MB of RAM and a spinning harddisk, because that just happens to
be the only "old" PC that I still have -- and these are quite literally

the minimum requirements
:

Run this on a Pentium 2 or 3 (the latter hit the market in 1999), and it
flies. The Pentium 133

was already around 4-5 years old

when Windows 2000 was released -- and that was a 
really
 long time in
that era.

Of course, getting good performance on slow systems means

taking a close look and sometimes making sacrifices
.

Windows 2000 also predates

Product Activation
:
It runs entirely offline and you can still use it today, no questions
asked. 
If
 we're resorting to using proprietary software, then this is
the only acceptable way.

So, what we have is a pretty fast OS with an NT kernel, a pretty clear
and concise UI, and it's a product that you 
bought
 (not a
subscription).

Since this era, we saw a steady change in UI style. You can see the
first signs of it in the "Welcome" dialog we saw at the beginning:

Notice how "Jetzt registrieren" ("Register now") or "Windows entdecken"
("Discover Windows") do 
not
 use 3D reliefs? It's just text? Notice how
"Beenden" ("Close") is not really a button, it's already flat? In
retrospect, these are clear signs of "The New Style". You can only tell
that "Jetzt registrieren" is probably interactive because of the
underlined "J", which usually indicates an accelerator hotkey and those
only exist on interactive elements.

Or compare the toolbar of the Explorer from Windows 2000 with that from
Windows 95:

In Windows 95, those toolbar icons were still actual buttons. In Windows
2000, they are recognizable as a button 
when activated
, but in their
default state they're not and you have to hover over them:

This trend of slowly removing visual clues continued and, today, you
have no idea anymore which elements on the screen might be interactive.

I had this conversation a while ago:

Me: "I don't like smartphone UIs. Everything is flat, nothing
    indicates where you can touch or not. I have to randomly try
    everything on the screen."

Response by non-tech person: "Well, yeah, of course you have to try
    everything? How else would this work?"

The entire 
idea
 of having clear, consistent visual clues is lost.
Nobody but old tech people even expects that anymore.

I wish we wouldn't shy away so much from bevels, reliefs, lines, and
frames, just because those "scream Windows 95".

Imitating 
real
 objects is good, too -- I don't have a single one of
Android's "sliders" anywhere in my house, for example, so why don't you
make this a checkbox, because writing down a check mark ✔️ on paper is
something that I actually do:

And there are lots of buttons and knobs near me. Real, physical ones, so
they would be great to use as a UI metaphor.
