Nvidia doesn’t support NVLink on consumer GPUs anymore.
The last one that had it available was the RTX 3090.

Right now in April 2026, NVLink bridges are pretty expensive,
$200-$400 depending on the exact size and whether you’re able to snipe
one at retail. Since I have two 3090s, I wanted to test how much benefit
NVLink actually provides for AI workloads.

The Tests

I ran a few tests to measure the effect that adding NVLink would have
on AI-related workloads:

Model Inference
 with layer split and tensor
parallelism. I used llama-bench with 
Llama
3.3 70B
 and 
Gemma 4
31B
. Layer split does very little inter-GPU communication, while
tensor parallel inference must sync at every layer.

Model Training
 using DDP for 
TinyLlama
1.1B
 and FSDP for 
Qwen2.5 3B
. DDP only
syncs once to compute gradients at each step, while FSDP requires
constant data transfers.

With these, I felt I had a good mix of tests that would be affected
to different degrees by inter-GPU bandwidth.

Hardware

CPU

AMD Epyc 7532 (32 Cores, 128 PCIe lanes)

Motherboard

Supermicro H12SSL-i, 5 PCIe 4.0 x16 Slots

RAM

8 Channels, 32GB DDR4-3200, 256GB total

GPU

2x EVGA RTX 3090, installed directly in slots 3 & 6, both
running at full x16 bandwidth.

OS

Ubuntu 24.04, Nvidia driver 595

Initial Results

The performance on all layer split tests was unaffected. For model
inference with tensor parallelism, NVLink boosted prompt processing by
about 30%, while token generation speed was exactly the same.

Token generation speed being the same on tensor parallel runs was
unexpected. I thought there would be a large difference since it needs
to sync activations frequently. Although token generation speed is
usually the headline number, I still care a lot about prompt processing
speed since most of my usage patterns, such as coding agents, use very
long context windows.

The uplift for FSDP training is huge, a nearly 3x improvement. DDP
training was not affected at all.

However, I consider this data to be somewhat misleading, as the
non-NVLink tests were not actually measuring GPU data transfer over PCIe
like I initially thought.

In all of my subsequent test configurations, inference with layer
split, tensor parallel token generation, and DDP training were
completely unaffected (within 3%/noise). 
I will omit any more
charts/data for those tests and show only tensor parallel prompt
processing and FSDP training
. All data available 
here
.

Pitfalls With
Disabling NVLink For Tests

In my first test, I used 
NCCL_P2P_DISABLE=1
 for my
non-NVLink test. I had also set 
NCCL_DEBUG=INFO
 so I could
verify that the GPUs were using the channel I expected. I noticed lines
at test startup like this:

gpu:11419:11419 [0] NCCL INFO Channel 03 : 0[0] -> 1[1] via SHM/direct/direct

This means that instead of using P2P (Peer-to-Peer over PCIe), the
GPUs were falling back to SHM (Shared Host Memory), which is a full
round trip to main memory and incurs a higher performance penalty.

It’s not actually possible to specifically disable NVLink while it’s
installed and force the GPUs to use P2P. 
NCCL_P2P_DISABLE=1

disables P2P over PCIe as well and transfers go over SHM.

I reran the tests by physically unplugging the NVLink bridge.

SHM vs P2P, Nvidia’s
Restrictions

Even after unplugging the NVLink bridge, NCCL was still logging that
it was using SHM. Nvidia disables P2P entirely on consumer GPUs,
presumably for product segmentation. This is an artificial restriction
by Nvidia at the driver level; the RTX 3090 and other consumer GPUs are
capable of doing it. Some clever people have figured out how to bypass
this restriction by patching the drivers, and the solution is pretty
easy to install: 
open-gpu-kernel-modules
.

I installed the patch and tested it again. I confirmed the NCCL log
messages indicating that it was using P2P this time:

gpu:11090:11152 [1] NCCL INFO Channel 00/0 : 1[1] -> 0[0] via P2P/direct pointer

Results Using Actual P2P
Communication

Enabling P2P almost entirely makes up the difference between SHM and
NVLink. Prompt processing speeds are basically identical and FSDP
training reaches over 90% of the performance of NVLink.

So why would anyone drop $300 on an NVLink
bridge?

Consumer Platforms

NVLink doesn’t really have much of a benefit for my specific setup. I
already have a server CPU & motherboard (Epyc 7532 + Supermicro
H12SSL-i), which comes with multiple full PCIe Gen4 x16 slots. I can
install multiple GPUs and each of them gets full x16 bandwidth. However,
the average consumer is probably not using a server platform at
home.

Consumer CPUs don’t have support for a lot of PCIe lanes. As a
result, the motherboards for these CPUs don’t have many x16 slots. Some
motherboards advertise 2 x16 slots, but what they actually mean is that
they have two x16 
sized
 slots, but only one of them has full
x16 bandwidth. Furthermore, there’s a caveat that if you install a card
into the second x16 sized slot, it will actually bifurcate the bandwidth
from the main x16 slot and they will both run at x8/x8.

The two most expensive consumer motherboards I could find state in
their specs that they, in fact, only have 1 full x16-bandwidth slot and
that using the second one will result in an x8/x8 configuration.

MSI
MEG X870E GODLIKE X EDITION

Gigabyte
Z890 AORUS XTREME AI TOP

$1300

$1000 ($1500-1800 retail)

These products are hilariously named/marketed (
EXTREME AI

and 
GODLIKE EDITION
), but alas, consumer CPU limitations mean
they cannot take full advantage of multiple GPUs, which is often the
main way to upgrade an AI workflow. They have the exact same PCIe
capabilities as much cheaper motherboards. For example the 
Asus
ProArt B650 Creator
 retails for ~$230 and also supports x16 and
x8/x8 modes on its 2 PCIe x16 slots.

In all of these cases, an NVLink bridge completely bypasses PCIe slot
limitations and allows the GPUs to communicate at their maximum
bandwidth.

I went into my BIOS and throttled my PCIe slots to x4 and again to x8
to simulate what would happen in a more common consumer setup.

Performance with PCIe x8 and
x4

For tensor parallel inference, P2P sees a ~5% and ~15% drop at x8 and
x4, respectively. The NVLink-based runs perform the same in all
configurations and the SHM tests are much slower than both of the
others.

Reducing PCIe lanes has a much more dramatic effect on FSDP training.
Even the P2P driver patch starts to lose efficacy as it becomes
restricted by PCIe bandwidth. With the P2P driver, if you were running
on x8/x8, NVLink is about 50% faster and it doubles the training speed
if the GPUs are on x4 bandwidth.

SHM Bottleneck

One interesting observation is that the SHM results don’t degrade as
sharply as the P2P results. The x8 and x16 results were identical in all
tests, with only a ~5% penalty at x4 in both prompt processing and
training. This would indicate that the bottleneck for SHM is not PCIe
lanes, but something else on the path to main memory.

Measuring GPU ↔︎ GPU
Bandwidth Directly

To confirm each configuration while I was testing, I ran 
p2pBandwidthLatencyTest
.

The reason for the results we saw is illustrated clearly here. NVLink
provides the same 100GB/s bandwidth regardless of the underlying PCIe
configuration. P2P over PCIe scales linearly with PCIe lanes, and SHM
seems to bottleneck well below the available PCIe bandwidth.

Conclusion

NVLink is worth it in certain cases for people running dual GPUs at
home. My setup, coincidentally, is one of the narrow exceptions where it
isn’t.

NVLink makes sense if all of these are true

You’re not running Linux OR not willing to apply the third-party P2P
driver patch (I couldn’t find a Windows equivalent)

You’re on a consumer platform where multiple GPUs drop PCIe to x8/x8
or lower

Your workload is FSDP training or, to a lesser degree,
tensor-parallel prompt processing

Bandwidth between GPUs doesn’t affect all workloads evenly. FSDP
training saw the largest gains in my tests, especially at lower PCIe
lane widths, while tensor-parallel prompt processing saw moderate
improvements.

It’s worth noting that my initial result with P2P disabled at the
driver level is the experience most buyers would have out of the box.
The patch is unofficial and Linux-only, so if you can’t or won’t apply
it, an NVLink bridge becomes the only way to get the full benefit of
multiple GPUs.

NVLink bridges are not cheap. Do the math: instead of buying an
NVLink bridge, you may be able to buy into a workstation (like
Threadripper) or server (like Epyc/Xeon) platform that gives you full
x16 lanes natively.
