Researchers observed bearded capuchins in Brazil eating birds (shown here), lizards, rodents, opossums, snakes and other small vertebrates.
              
Luciano Candisani, CC-BY 4.0

The bearded capuchin monkeys of northeastern Brazil eat a mostly plant-based diet, chowing down on palm nuts and other fruits. But when plant foods are scarce, the primates consume a surprisingly diverse smorgasbord of small animals, including snakes, opossums, iguanas, bats, rodents and bird eggs and nestlings, researchers report in a study published on August 26 in the journal 
PLOS One
.

The findings reveal new details about the diet and behavior of these highly adaptable, long-lived monkeys. But they could also shed light on the evolution of human diets, including our ancestors’ shift toward eating more meat.

Hunting small prey seems to help capuchins cope with seasonal fluctuations in plant food availability—and “this may have also been the case for hominins,” study co-author 
Susana Carvalho
, a primatologist at Gorongosa National Park in Mozambique, tells 
Science News
’ Jake Buehler.

      Capuchins were observed eating birds (top left), marsupials (top right), lizards (bottom left) and snakes (bottom right).

S. Carvalho et al., 
PLOS One
, 2026 under CC-BY 4.0

When the researchers started studying wild capuchins in the privately owned area of Fazenda Boa Vista roughly two decades ago, they primarily wanted to investigate the monkeys’ tool use and other complex behaviors. But while following two groups of the primates, scientists noticed that they were actively hunting and consuming small backbone-bearing creatures, or vertebrates—an intriguing behavior for a species that usually eats fruit. So, the researchers began making detailed notes whenever they saw the monkeys going after animals.

They ended up with more than 5,000 hours of observations between May 2006 and December 2010, recording 446 instances of capuchins eating animals. The team also looked at factors that may have affected the animals’ diets, including the age and sex of the individual monkeys that were chowing down on vertebrates, rainfall, temperature, humidity and the relative abundance of fruits and insects at the time.

The overlaps revealed some clear patterns. When plant foods became scarcer due to seasonal fluctuations, the monkeys seemed to hunt more. Lizards and rodents made up most of their prey, but the monkeys hunted a wide variety of animals. Scientists spotted males and females of all ages feasting on small vertebrates, but the behavior was more common among adult and juvenile males.

And when their hunts were successful, the monkeys seemed to go for the brains and guts first, before eating the rest of the body.

“This may allow them to obtain energy-rich fats and other nutrients quickly, which could be especially advantageous when prey is likely to be taken by another group member,” says study co-author 
Noemi Spagnoletti
, a conservation biologist at Sapienza University of Rome, in an 
interview
 shared by the journal.

Did you know? Tool use

Among primatologists, 
bearded capuchins
 are famous for using stone tools to obtain food. They’ve been observed placing palm nuts on a hard surface and smashing them with rocks to reveal the tasty kernels inside. Wild females have also been seen using sticks or blades of grass to pick their noses and eat any boogers they extract.

Chimpanzees often get the limelight for eating vertebrates, but a range of nonhuman primates also engage in the behavior, 
Margaret Bryer
, a biological anthropologist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison who was not involved in the study, tells 
Science News
.

But while chimpanzees are some of our closest living relatives, bearded capuchins and humans are only distant cousins, and the creatures are not considered a direct model for our ancestors. However, the monkeys share enough similarities with humans that they might offer some clues about the evolution of early hominin behavior.

Humans are the only primates around today that regularly hunt animals larger than themselves—but how and why our ancestors evolved this behavior remains largely a mystery.

One hypothesis posits that our ancestors started eating smaller prey in times of seasonal plant food scarcity, before eventually leveling up to bigger game.

“As late Pliocene and early Pleistocene eastern African hominin environments became increasingly seasonally arid, the availability of plant-source foods that are key to many primates’ diet in forest habitats would have only been available intermittently, whereas animal resources would have remained accessible throughout the year,” the researchers write in the paper. “This may have selected for a higher frequency of predatory behaviors in our lineage.”

The new findings seem to support this possible explanation, suggesting that hunting small animals might have been a “stepping stone to the exploitation of larger prey” for humans, Carvalho says in a 
statement
.

“The fossil record now needs re-analyzing to look at evidence of small vertebrate predation” by early humans, she adds.

You Might Also Like

Do Monkeys Keep Pets? Study Finds Widespread Primate Interactions With Other Animal Species, From Mice to Deer

August 18, 2026

Human Evolution Traded Fur for Sweat Glands—and Now, Our Wounds Take Longer to Heal Than Those of Other Mammals

April 30, 2025

Why Don’t Humans Have Tails? An Old Genetic Mutation Could Explain Why Monkeys, but Not Apes, Have the Extra Appendage

March 6, 2024

Female Chimps More Likely Than Males to Hunt With Tools

April 15, 2015

Gibraltar's Famous Monkeys Are Eating Dirt, Likely to Alleviate Stomach Aches From Munching on Tourists' Junk Food

April 23, 2026

Sarah Kuta

 is a writer and editor based in Longmont, Colorado. She covers history, science, travel, food and beverage, sustainability, economics and other topics.

Get the latest stories in your inbox every weekday.
