Email

Bluesky

Facebook

LinkedIn

Reddit

Whatsapp

X

A woman receives chemotherapy.
Credit: Ricky Carioti/The Washington Post/Getty
Researchers around the world are grappling with a vexing problem: why are so many 
young people developing cancers
 once considered the purview of old age?
The question was prominent at two of the world’s largest cancer meetings this year, and hypotheses abounded. 
Ultra-processed foods
, 
obesity
, 
microbial toxins
 and agricultural chemicals were all considered. But a clear answer remained elusive.
Landmark cancer trial shows success against ‘undruggable’ cancer — raising hopes for future treatments
“Multiple cancers are increasing in incidence globally among individuals under the age of 50,” oncologist Kimmie Ng told the audience at the American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting in Chicago, Illinois, last week. “The vast majority are considered sporadic, with unknown cause.”
Worldwide, more than 9,000 cases of cancer are diagnosed in adults under the age of 50 each day, epidemiologist Hyuna Sung told the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) annual meeting in San Diego, California, in April. But lumping these diagnoses together could obscure clues as to their cause, she cautioned. “Rising incidence of cancers among young adults does not reflect a single story,” said Sung, who works at the American Cancer Society in Atlanta, Georgia.
Disparate causes
Clues to each story lie in the data. If 
diagnoses of a particular cancer
 increase suddenly and across all age groups, for example, the culprit might be a change in how that cancer is detected or classified. In the early 2010s, for example, the definition of 
pancreatic cancer
 was expanded to include pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours, which form in the pancreas’s insulin-making regions. Pancreatic cancer diagnoses had been slowly rising in the years before that change, but after it, the increase accelerated, including in people under the age of 50.
Putting early cancer detection to the test
The classification change probably does not fully explain the rise in early-onset pancreatic cancer, says Sung, but it probably accounts for much of it.
For other cancers, however, the increase in diagnoses in young people reflects a worrying change in the rate at which those cancers occur. 
Colorectal cancer is one of the clearest examples
: in the United States, 
the incidence of advanced colorectal cancer
 has increased by about 3% each year since around 2010 in people between the ages of 20 and 49. In 2023, colorectal cancer became the leading cause of cancer death in this age group.
Uterine cancer and liver cancer diagnoses and deaths are rising in young women, says Sung. In these cancers, the surge in diagnoses appears to be a ‘birth cohort effect’, meaning that people born in a particular period are at higher risk than are those who are born before that period.
Environmental exposures
Even with these numbers, cancer deaths in people under the age of 50 remain a small percentage of overall cancer mortality. But the higher risk of certain cancers in this generation compared with previous ones could persist into older ages, when overall cancer risk becomes much higher. “This increasing trend of cancer among young adults really signals what comes next in 20 and 30 years, when they become middle-aged and elderly,” says Sung.
What happened to put this generation at risk? One culprit immediately stands out, says Andrew Chan, a gastroenterologist at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. He points to exposure to an environment that encourages 
metabolic disease and obesity
. “People are getting exposed to these factors at a younger age,” he says.
Colorectal cancer and uterine cancer, for example, have known links to obesity. But obesity itself does not fully account for the rise, said Ng, who is a founding director of the Young-Onset Colorectal Cancer Center at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. “Many of us in this room have taken care of young patients with cancer, and many of them are not obese,” she said at the clinical oncology conference. “It’s really important to start investigating novel exposures.”

                Enjoying our latest content? 

                Log in or create an account to continue

Access the most recent journalism from Nature's award-winning team

Explore the latest features & opinion covering groundbreaking research

Access through your institution

or

Sign in or create an account

Continue with Google

Continue with ORCiD

doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-026-01780-6

References
Wang, C. 
et al. JAMA Oncol. 
12
, 49–57 (2026).
Article

PubMed

                    Google Scholar

Maas, S. C. E. 
et al. 
Nature Med. 
32
, 1827–1837 (2026).
Article

PubMed

                    Google Scholar

Díaz-Gay, M. 
et al. Nature
 
643
, 230–240 (2025).
Article

PubMed

                    Google Scholar

Alexandrov, L. B., Brennan, P. & Stratton, M. R. 
Cancer Discov
. 
16
, 644–646 (2026).
Article

PubMed

                    Google Scholar

Download references

Reprints and permissions

Related Articles

                        Does the PSA test for prostate cancer save lives? New data reverse gold-standard findings

                        Long-lived immune cells show promise against cancer in world-first trial

                        Why are so many young people getting cancer? What the data say

                        Early-onset cancer fuels calls for wider screening — but at what cost?

                        Alcohol and cancer risk: what you need to know

Subjects

Cancer

Public health

Epidemiology

Latest on:

Cancer

Public health

Epidemiology

Targeting Cancer-Specific Mutations with RNA-Triggered Chromatin Shredding

Article
 
08 JUN 26

Acquired genetic and cell-state changes in IDH-mutant glioma progression

Article
 
03 JUN 26

Spermine is an endogenous iron chelator that inhibits ferroptosis

Article
 
03 JUN 26

Electric vehicles cut pollution in China – and prevent 260,000 premature deaths

News
 
05 JUN 26

Babies’ birth weight improves with help of payments to parents

Research Highlight
 
04 JUN 26

Better diagnostics could have limited this Ebola outbreak

World View
 
02 JUN 26

What it will take to stop the spiralling Ebola outbreak

News Explainer
 
29 MAY 26

Global lung cancer burden shifting to middle-income countries

Outlook
 
27 MAY 26

Does the PSA test for prostate cancer save lives? Gold-standard findings show surprising shift

News
 
14 MAY 26

Jobs

Associate or Senior Editor, Nature Catalysis

Title: Associate or Senior Editor, Nature Catalysis Locations: Shanghai, Beijing, Milan and Pune – hybrid working model Application Deadline: July ...

Shanghai, Beijing, Milan and Pune – hybrid working model

Springer Nature Ltd

Postdoctral Researcher

This postdoctoral researcher position focuses on research on the development of polymer biomaterials for medical applications. Specifi...

Tsukuba, Ibaraki (JP)

National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS)

Seeking Global Talents at All Levels - SIAT

We find Distinguished PIs, Senior PIs, Junior PIs, Senior Engineer, Junior Engineer, Post-doctoral fellow, Assistant research fellow.

1068 Xueyuan Avenue, Shenzhen 518055 P. R. China

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences（CAS)

Global Recruitment of Outstanding Young Talents

We are seeking exceptional candidates who qualify for the National Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars (Overseas)

1068 Xueyuan Avenue, Shenzhen 518055 P. R. China

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences（CAS)

Global Recruitment for Faculty, Postdocs, and Specialists at Hangzhou Institute of Medicine, CAS

Seeking exceptional Senior/Junior PIs, Postdocs, and Core Specialists globally year-round

Hangzhou, China

Hangzhou Institute of Medicine Chinese Academy of Sciences (HIMCAS)
