https://p.dw.com/p/5GfAA
Many immigrants are frustrated with German bureaucracy
Image: Bernd Weißbrod/dpa/picture alliance
Advertisement
"Anyone who wants to shape immigration successfully must also understand emigration," Laura Gossner, a researcher in 
migration
 and international labor studies with the Institute for Employment Research (IAB), said at a press conference in Berlin.

The IAB conducted an online survey of people aged 18 to 65 who had 
immigrated to Germany
 before April 2025 and then chose not to stay, asking them what factors influenced their decision to leave the country again.

The researchers found that emigration is not driven by any single factor. Family-related reasons, in particular, play a major role. Experiences of discrimination were also cited.

Many of the contributing factors, such as bureaucracy, housing and language acquisition, can be influenced by public policy.

Labor shortage forces Germany to accept more qualifications
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video

Who is most likely to leave Germany again?

"On average, emigrants are younger," said Theresa Koch, who works as a researcher in migration and the international labor market at IAB. "They have spent less time in Germany and are more likely to have partners and children living abroad. They are also less likely to be proficient in German but more likely to have a good command of English."

About 60% of emigrants return to their home countries; 40% move on to destinations such as Spain, Switzerland, Italy and Croatia.

"We are competing with other European countries for skilled workers," said Yuliya Kosyakova, the head of the research department for migration and the international labor market at the 
IAB
.

Bureaucracy a main driver of emigration

Emigrants criticize well-known things about Germany, especially the lengthy processing times for 
naturalization applications
, residence permits, visas and the recognition of foreign qualifications. They often face long waits for responses from the authorities. High administrative fees are another common source of frustration. A further point of criticism is the lack of support for career development, whether from job centers, local authorities or employers.

All of this makes long-term planning, access to employment and a sense of belonging in Germany more difficult, Gossner said. Administrative procedures influence "how immigrants assess their future in Germany. When procedures are perceived as lengthy, confusing or difficult to access, this can affect people's prospects of staying," she added. "We find that immigrants who view such procedures more negatively, on average, are less likely to feel welcome in Germany."
Brains, beauty and barriers: the global job market
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video

German language is key in German market

Tilman Frank, the chairman of the BVIFG federal association to recruit skilled labor (
Bundesverband internationale Fachkräftegewinnung e.V.
) is also the managing director of TalentOrange GmbH, a company that has recruited and supported thousands of health care and child care workers in Germany. Frank told DW that the imperative to learn German is one reason why many people decide to pack their bags again after only a short time in the country.

"It becomes problematic when the path to Germany is flawed from the outset: when language acquisition is not adequately supported," Frank said. "If these elements are not in place, the likelihood that these people will return home is relatively high. However, for people who are sufficiently prepared for life in Germany, retention rates are very high."

Care workers for elderly still in demand

Frank said people from Kenya, India and Vietnam had made noteworthy efforts to establish themselves in Germany. Kenya's Labor Ministry actively encourages young unemployed people to seek opportunities abroad. In India and Vietnam, many parents see vocational training opportunities in Germany as highly attractive for their children. Demand for skilled labor from abroad remains especially strong in 
care for the elderly
.

The government should support 
German-language instruction
 in migrants' countries of origin, Frank said. "Attempts to come to Germany without any knowledge of German are not sustainable in the long run," he said. "International degree programs taught in English are a good example: People hope this will enable them to work in Germany — but it doesn't."

One reason for emigration may also be that immigrants are not employed in roles that match 
their qualifications
: "For example, people trained in acute hospital care in their home countries may end up working in nursing homes providing basic care in Germany, without this having been clearly communicated to them in advance," Frank said.

Berlin initiative helps immigrant moms find their feet
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video

A new approach: 'Work and Stay'

Frank said policymakers now also recognized that international skilled workers must not only come to Germany, but stay as well. His conclusion is that Germany offers a mix of strengths and shortcomings.

"The Federal Employment Agency has introduced a centralized system that is faster and more reliable," Frank said. "The state of Hesse is establishing a central immigration authority, and there are also plans to create a federal 'Work and Stay' agency."

"Operationally, however, staff shortages at public authorities continue to make many aspects of the system more difficult," Frank said. "We are making progress with digitalization, but only slowly and through piecemeal initiatives by individual states and municipalities. What is still lacking is a comprehensive nationwide solution."

This article was originally written in German.

Advertisement
