I wanted Win+V on GNOME, so I built it

        WinV keeps a compact, searchable history of clipboard text and images.
        It also includes offline emoji and Unicode symbol pickers, keyboard
        navigation, pinning, editing, private mode, and an optional Super+V
        shortcut.

        This is the version I use myself, and for me it is already just fine.
        I am sharing it because it may be useful to somebody else—not because
        it is trying to become a giant clipboard product.

How it works

        The extension listens for clipboard ownership changes through GNOME
        Shell instead of polling. Ordinary history stays in memory and vanishes
        when Shell ends. Only pinned items are saved locally, in a file restricted
        to your user account. Selecting an item restores it to the clipboard and
        can optionally ask Mutter to send Ctrl+V to the previously focused app.

Text plus PNG, JPEG, and WebP history

Search, arrow keys, Enter to paste, Delete to remove

Pinning, multiline text editing, and bounded history

Best-effort filtering for protected password-manager formats

No network code and no ordinary clipboard history written to disk

Install and try it

git clone https://github.com/leo98ml/win-v.git
cd win-v
make check
make install
make enable
make configure-shortcut

        A first installation may require logging out and back in before GNOME
        Shell discovers the extension. The supported target is Ubuntu 26.04,
        GNOME Shell 50, and Wayland.

Fork it, change it, make it yours

        Feel free to fork WinV, add whatever you find useful, simplify things,
        update it for your setup, fix rough edges, or send a pull request. There
        is no grand product roadmap to protect. The only strong preference is
        that changes keep clipboard data local and treat it as sensitive.

        Bug reports and documentation improvements are welcome too. If your
        version goes in a different direction, that is exactly what forks are for.
