Wind and solar overtake fossil fuels in Germany for the first time ever

                        Carbon Brief's analysis of Energy Institute data shows renewables generated 225 TWh in 2025 against 217 TWh from fossil fuels — a milestone Germany shares with the EU as a whole, even as it leans harder on renewables than neighbours to compensate for its nuclear phaseout.                                                    / bne IntelliNews                                            

By bne IntelliNews

August 1, 2026

More of Germany's electricity came from wind and solar power than from fossil fuels for the first time ever in 2025, according to Carbon Brief's analysis of Energy Institute Statistical Review of World Energy data. Wind and solar together generated 225 terawatt hours (TWh) of electricity, 44% of the total, against 217 TWh (43%) from fossil fuels – a milestone Germany shares with the EU as a whole, which also saw wind and solar overtake fossil-fuel generation for the first time in 2025.

Wind and solar generated more electricity than fossil fuels in Germany for the first time ever in 2025. Source: Energy Institute Statistical Review of World Energy, 2026 / Carbon Brief.

The shift reflects two decades of rapid growth in solar and onshore wind under Germany's "Energiewende" strategy, as the country transitions away from both coal and nuclear power. Germany aims to install 115 gigawatts (GW) of onshore wind by 2030, and approved a record 20.8 GW of new capacity in 2025 alone. Official targets require economy-wide net-zero emissions by 2045, an 80% renewables share of electricity consumption by 2030, and a "largely climate neutral" power system by 2035.

Germany has to lean on renewables harder than neighbours such as France and the UK to hit those goals, precisely because of its nuclear phaseout – a core plank of the Energiewende that remains politically settled despite recent pushback. Centre-right Chancellor Friedrich Merz described the phaseout as a "strategic mistake" earlier this year, but his government has ruled out returning to conventional nuclear power. Coal remains the bigger near-term challenge: Germany still relies on it far more than most other European countries, with an official phaseout deadline of "no later than" 2038, though experts believe the country is on track to eliminate coal from its power supply years ahead of that date despite pressure during the recent energy crisis to slow the transition.

Renewables now face a different kind of opposition, however: mounting resistance from the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD), even as the current coalition simultaneously pursues new gas-fired power plants of its own – legislated as a bridge technology, with the plants intended to convert to run on green hydrogen by 2045 to stay consistent with the climate-neutrality target. Very few voices outside the AfD are calling to scrap the coal phaseout altogether, but the government is due to publish a review of its timelines in August, which will be the next test of how firmly Berlin intends to hold the line.

        Don’t just follow the news—understand it.

        The IntelliNews PRO service includes access to reports, exclusive market data, and more news that decision-makers care about. Stay ahead of the market with 
IntelliNews PRO
.

        Sign Up Now

#REM

#renewables

#climatecrisis

#ESG

#bneGreen

#EU

Read in IntelliNews Pro

Get IntelliNews Pro

Related Content

Europe's worst wildfire season in years flags a global El Nino already moving commodity markets

Ukraine less births than Kyrgyzstan this year as Central Europe's demographic crisis deepens

Morocco names Tiznit-Dakhla expressway after Trump, confirming US president's claim

Europe's worst wildfire season in years flags a global El Nino already moving commodity markets

Ukraine less births than Kyrgyzstan this year as Central Europe's demographic crisis deepens

Morocco names Tiznit-Dakhla expressway after Trump, confirming US president's claim

bneGREEN

Water shortages leave 40 villages in Iraq's Diyala facing severe drought

More than 40 villages south of Bahraz in Iraq's Diyala province face acute water shortages, forcing residents to rely on wells, as authorities push to dredge the Khrisan river before the next irrigation season.

Sunken Nazi warships resurface on Danube as Serbia's drought deepens

Dozens of Nazi-era warships, deliberately sunk in the Danube in 1944 to stop them falling into Red Army hands, have resurfaced near Prahovo in eastern Serbia as a summer drought pushes the river to some of its lowest levels on record.

China's stalling car market masks a record global EV surge - IEA 

Global electric car sales rebounded sharply in the second quarter of 2026, rising 35% quarter-on-quarter to record levels in 50 countries, even as overall car sales fell around 5% y/y in the first half of the year on weaker demand in China and the US

Europe's worst wildfire season in years flags a global El Nino already moving commodity markets

Several European countries are having their worst wildfire year in more than a decade and worst than last year’s record wildfires that burnt over one million hectares, according to data from the EU's Global Wildfire Information System.

Europe enters the Pyrocene age of fire that makes its own weather

"The Pyrocene is here," climate researcher Peter Dynes wrote on X on July 28, as wildfires near Bordeaux began generating huge pyrocumulus clouds intense enough to create their own weather. 

Water shortages leave 40 villages in Iraq's Diyala facing severe drought

                                    3 hours ago                                    

Sunken Nazi warships resurface on Danube as Serbia's drought deepens

                                    7 hours ago                                    

China's stalling car market masks a record global EV surge - IEA 

                                    8 hours ago                                    

Europe's worst wildfire season in years flags a global El Nino already moving commodity markets

                                    1 day ago                                    

Europe enters the Pyrocene age of fire that makes its own weather

                                    3 days ago                                    

Follow Us On

Most Read

Day

This week

This month

bne
                IntelliNews Editor's Picks

Uzbek Invest
                Editor's Picks

NRG
		Oil & Gas Editor's Picks

                Berlin Energy Forum Editor's Picks

Reports

Poland Outlook Report  -  2026

Kenya Outlook Report   -  2026

Nigeria Outlook Report   -  2026

South Africa Outlook Report  -  2026

Russia Outlook Report  -  2026

More
                        Reports 

Cookies on the bne IntelliNews                            website

						This site uses cookies - small text files that are placed on your machine to help the site provide a better user experience. In general, cookies are used to retain user preferences, store information for things like shopping carts, and provide anonymised tracking data to third party applications like Google Analytics.
						As a rule, cookies will make your browsing experience better. However, you may prefer to disable cookies on this site and on others. The most effective way to do this is to disable cookies in your browser. We suggest consulting the Help section of your browser or taking a look at the 
About Cookies
 website which offers guidance for all modern browsers.

Close

                        We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best
                        experience on our website. If you continue we'll assume
                        that you are happy to receive all cookies from this
                        website.
                        
Accept
  
View Cookie
                            Policy

Dismiss 

×

Thank you

Please complete your registration by confirming your
                            email address.

A confirmation email has been sent to the email
                            address you provided.

Close

×

Recover password

A confirmation email has been sent to the email
                            address you provided.

Close

×

Recovery token has
                            expired or doesn't exist.

Access recovery request has expired, or you are using
                            the wrong recovery token. Please, try again.

Close

×

Complete registration
                            process

To continue viewing our content you need to complete
                            the registration process.

Please look for an email that was sent to 

                            with the subject line
                            "Confirmation bne IntelliNews                            access". This email will have
                            instructions on how to complete registration
                            process. Please check in your "Junk" folder in
                            case this communication was misdirected in your
                            email system.

If you have any questions please contact us at 
[email protected]

Close

×

Subscribe to bne
                            IntelliNews website and magazine

Sorry, but you have used all your free articles fro
                            this month for bne IntelliNews. Subscribe
                            to continue reading for only $119 per year.

Your subscription includes:

Full access to the bne daily content on the bne
                                website

Digital subscription to our monthly
                                
bne IntelliNews flagship
                                    magazine
, delivered to your inbox

Digital subscription to the
                                
"editor's
                                    picks" emails
 three times a week
                                highlighting our best articles

Full access to 10 years of bne archived
                                articles

bne IntelliNews
$119 per year

BUY NOW

For the meantime we are also offering a free
                            subscription to
                            
bne's
                                digital weekly newspaper
 to subscribers to
                            the online package.

Click here for more subscription options,
                                    including to the print version of our
                                    flagship monthly magazine:

More subscription
                                        options

Take a trial to our premium daily news
                                    service aimed at professional investors that
                                    covers the 30 countries of emerging
                                    Europe:

Get
                                        IntelliNews PRO

For any other enquiries about our
                            products or corporate discounts please
                            contact us at
                            
[email protected]

If you no longer wish to receive
                            our emails,
                            
unsubscribe here
.

Close

×

Subscribe to bne IntelliNews
                            products

Magazine annual
                                    electronic subscription

Get for FREE

Website & Archive
                                    annual subscription 

Buy

Take a trial to our premium daily news service
                                aimed at professional investors that
                                covers the 30 countries of emerging Europe:

Get IntelliNews
                                    PRO

For any other enquiries about our
                            products or corporate discounts please
                            contact us at
                            
[email protected]

Close
