Naiara Galarraga Gortázar
São Paulo - 
Jul 10, 2026 - 10:22
CEST
Share on Whatsapp
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Desplegar Redes Sociales
Prefer EL PAÍS on Google
Compartir:
Whatsapp
Facebook
Twitter
Bluesky
Linkedin
Copy link
We’ll call her Maria, the most common female name in Brazil, because authorities have not disclosed her real name in order to protect her identity. Maria, who was sent to work as a live-in domestic servant for a family at the age of seven, has just been rescued at 62 in the northeastern city of Fortaleza by Brazil’s Labor Prosecutor’s Office after spending more than half a century in slave-like conditions — with no pay, no vacation and never having learned to read or write.
The domestic worker was exploited by three generations of the same family, 
an unusual but not unique case
. She was still waking up at 4:30 a.m. to prepare breakfast and get children ready for school. Although the family has agreed to compensate her, Maria, who lived in near-total isolation and without contact with her relatives, will remain with her employers, while authorities try to locate her family.
Statistics suggest that Maria was undoubtedly poor and, most likely, Black. That is the profile of the more than six million Brazilian women who care for children, cook, wash, iron, and 
clean in households
 other than their own. They only won full labor rights a little more than a decade ago.
Maria did not handle money, had no bank account, and no friends. She had never gone to the beach by herself. “She lived in a kind of prison,” Maria Neuzeli, a prosecutor specializing in the eradication of domestic slave labor, told local media. “She didn’t know how to get around the city, she was afraid of the violence outside. And because she was given clothes, food, and shelter, she felt she was being paid for her work.”
Specialists explain that because the exploitation begins in childhood, victims are often unaware of the seriousness of the abuse. Moreover, they know no world beyond that household. Maria’s mother had also worked for the same family.
The family accused of keeping her in conditions of slavery is white and has the surname Brasil — a detail loaded with symbolism for a form of exploitation that specialists regard as a legacy of slavery, which was abolished in Brazil in 1888.
The current employers, the third generation of the Brasil family, have reached an agreement with labor prosecutors under which they will purchase an apartment worth $30,000 for the victim, “fully furnished and equipped with household appliances,” according to a statement from the Labor Prosecutor’s Office. They will also pay her an additional $10,000 in compensation.
“The signing of this agreement does not rule out the possibility that the worker may pursue individual claims through the courts,” the statement added.
Maria was exploited for 55 years by three couples spanning three generations: first two retirees, then a lawyer and a civil servant, and finally a veterinarian and another civil servant. According to the news outlet 
G1
, they are also suspected of fraud. Prosecutors believe that, in addition to denying her wages for her domestic work, they appropriated the roughly $115 a month that Maria received through Bolsa Família, 
Brazil’s flagship anti-poverty program
.
The Brasil family “categorically denies the allegations, which do not reflect the relationship of coexistence, care, and affection built over decades with the woman involved,” according to a statement released through a law firm.
Maria entered their lives around 1971 — the year Henry Kissinger visited China, John Lennon wrote 
Imagine
, and Mexico hosted the first Women’s World Cup.
The management office of the Campinas domestic workers’ association, in 1962, in a photograph on display at the Instituto Moreira Salles in São Paulo.
Colección del Sindicato de Trabajadoras Domésticas de Campinas
The shock generated by the case has been compounded by controversy over the authorities’ decision to allow Maria, for now, to remain with the family that enslaved her for 55 years.
Luciano Aragão Santos, the national coordinator for the eradication of slave labor, says that rescues in domestic settings are “even more complex” because victims are often stripped of their autonomy, cut off from family ties, and denied access to healthcare and education. For that reason, leaving such situations “requires a genuine effort toward the victim’s social reintegration, the restoration of family connections, and the construction of an independent and dignified life,” he said.
The concern is that Maria’s dependence on the exploiting family is so extreme that removing her abruptly, without a structured support network, could do more harm than good.
Maria is now at an age when wealthier Brazilians are already retired and, whether rich or poor, enjoy priority treatment in queues and when boarding airplanes.
The traditional maid’s room is gradually disappearing in Brazil, but buildings with 
separate social and service elevators
 — for domestic workers, visiting technicians, neighbors with dogs, or residents carrying groceries — remain commonplace.
This case of severe human-rights violations came to light thanks to an anonymous tip, something that is becoming increasingly common as public awareness grows and witnesses become more willing to report abuses.
Every so often, Brazil is shaken by the rescue of a domestic worker who has spent decades in slavery-like conditions in the home of an outwardly respectable family. The stories follow a familiar pattern, differing mainly in the details.
The turning point was 
the case of Madalena Gordiano,
 whose rescue in 2021 attracted enormous attention. After receiving compensation from the affluent family that had enslaved her, she gained her independence. She started a new life, made new friends, enjoyed swims in the ocean, and took Zumba classes, sharing her newfound freedom on social media.
Sign up for 
our weekly newsletter
 to get more English-language news coverage from EL PAÍS USA Edition
Archived In
America
