Announcing WoofWare.PawPrint, a deterministic .NET runtime
I just released an early version of 
WoofWare.PawPrint
 to 
NuGet
.
PawPrint is a deterministic .NET runtime - think 
CHESS
.
It runs the 
BCL
 of .NET 10.
It interprets IL, shimming out only the BCL’s JIT intrinsics and native code: there are no shortcuts.
Enough is implemented that it can do:
Console.Writeline
async void Main(string[] args) {...}
Task.Run
A whole load of reflection
Many of the low-level synchronisation primitives like 
Monitor
It uses a variant of 
Probabilistic Concurrency Testing
 when scheduling threads, in an attempt to maximise the exploration of “interesting” thread orderings.
How I decided it was ready
I’ve taken six 
standard race conditions
 and 
tested that we can deterministically identify them
.
More concretely, inspired by 
Deadlock Empire
, these tests are of the form “demonstrate that some interleaving of threads results in some known bad condition happening” (like a deadlock or an exception being thrown).
Every test I tried, the test harness found the bug immediately, often taking only a couple of trial seeds.
What it’s not ready for
Well, I expect that if you use it, it will blow up almost immediately.
The BCL contains very large amounts of native code, and 
it must be explicitly modelled
 in PawPrint for it to execute.
An upcoming piece of work will be to allow the user to plug in their own implementations so that they aren’t blocked on the built-in incompleteness.
Overall design
PawPrint is ultimately intended to allow time-travel debugging and control over history.
To that end, it maintains an extremely rich internal model of the IL machine.
Everything is provenance-tracked; every pointer 
knows what object/field/method/whatever it’s pointing to
, and 
every byte array knows
 whether it’s e.g. “a projection of object Foo into raw bytes” vs “just a bunch of bytes the user gave me”.
All 
arithmetic results know
 whether they are “a sum of raw integers” or “a difference of pointers within the same array” or whatever.
The use of LLMs
Original design is my own, and I started writing it by hand.
Sonnet 4.6 came out at some point during this process, and I started using it for reference information about .NET.
I also used Gemini 2 Pro to perform fuzzy search through the ECMA-335 spec.
Then in 2026 I got the same LLM psychosis everyone else has, and used Claude Opus 4.6/7 and GPT-5.5 to “complete” it.
This was a 
massive
 accelerator, and I believe it shaved literally years off the project, at the cost of making the code Claude-shaped in the small.
This project is particularly LLM-suited because there is a reference implementation (.NET 10 itself) and a spec (ECMA-335).
Errors the bots made
Sadly it was still necessary for me to maintain architectural direction during this project.
There was only one place where I completely abdicated a complex architectural decision to GPT-5.5 because I was too lazy to decide myself, and that was a disaster which I ended up completely rewriting by hand.
That decision was about the handling of the fact that native code and some unsafe casts require genuine byte arrays to compute a result, and there’s a bunch of 
Unsafe.As
 calls in the BCL which make make it hard to avoid laundering provenance-tracked pointers through flat bytes.
I religiously track provenance in PawPrint.
GPT-5.5 chose to represent arrays as being located in specific locations in memory, by assigning them fake addresses in a certain range.
This got more and more unwieldy over time, and arithmetic operations on them became annoying because we lost their provenance as soon as we decided there was a genuine integer representing their location.
Eventually I tore that out and replaced those integers with synthetic “I am the address of heap object Foo” markers; arithmetic on such objects will generally crash PawPrint, but that’s fine because the resulting integer values are generally undefined by .NET anyway.
(There is specific support for performing arithmetic on pointers known to be within the same array.)
