Welcome to LWN.net

The following subscription-only content has been made available to you 
by an LWN subscriber.  Thousands of subscribers depend on LWN for the 
best news from the Linux and free software communities.  If you enjoy this 
article, please consider 
subscribing to LWN
.  Thank you
for visiting LWN.net!

           By 
Joe Brockmeier
June 29, 2026

The 
xsnow

application, which generates an animated snowfall effect (and other
pleasant diversions) for X11 desktops, does not seem like an obvious
channel for political statements. Nevertheless, xsnow's maintainer
seems to have included a political protest in the program: an
Easter egg that is triggered when the program's language is set to Russia
("ru"). One user has complained that this functionality should be
removed from the Debian 
xsnow
package
, but Debian does not seem to have any rules that forbid
such a feature outright.

The complaint

On June 14, Alexander Ivanov sent a 
message
 to Debian's
development list to complain that if a user's language settings were
set to Russian, it would trigger "
a disguised visual element
(Ukrainian flags labeled as 'EXTRATREE') with a significantly higher
probability
". The code is found in the 
src/scenery.c

file beginning on line 326 in xsnow 3.8.3, the version packaged for
Debian 13 ("trixie") and in 3.8.6, which is in unstable:

    #ifdef USE_EXTRATREE
          if (global.Language && !strcmp(global.Language,"ru") && drand48() < 0.3)
	     tt = MAXTREETYPE;
          if (drand48() < 0.02)
	     tt = MAXTREETYPE;
    #endif

Xsnow is more likely to display Ukrainian flags (
src/Pixmaps/extratree.xpm
)
if the language is set to Russian. Xsnow allows users to pick from one
of several languages; when the application was set to English, I did
not see any Ukrainian flags but they should pop up about 2% of the
time. I did see the expected decorations such as a moon, snow, trees,
polar bears, birds, and Santa with his sleigh. After I changed the
language setting to Russian, xsnow immediately placed several
flags on the desktop along with the other decorations. The screenshot
below shows what this looks like on Debian 13.

DFSG violation

Ivanov claimed that the behavior violated the 
Debian Free
Software Guidelines
 (DFSG) that are part of the project's 
Social
Contract
. Specifically, he said that the "
targeted
behavior
" violated the principles of no discrimination against
persons or groups (DFSG #5) and no discrimination against fields of
endeavor (DFSG #6).

Ivanov had not filed a bug, but was, instead reporting the problem
to "
the wider Debian development community
". He said he took
that route because the maintainer of the Debian package, Willem
Vermin, is also the maintainer of the xsnow project and had been the
one to introduce the change in the first place.

Chris Hofstaedtler 
replied

that Ivanov was mistaken; the DFSG does not require that the

software
 is non-discriminatory, but that the license for the
software is. "
The licenses in use do not appear to violate the
DFSG's points 5 or 6. Please read the DFSG carefully next
time.
" Xsnow is primarily licensed under the GPLv3, though some
files carry other Debian-approved licenses.

Russ Allbery 
agreed

that the DFSG was not relevant; he also warned that citing the Social
Contract and DFSG "
turns the conversation into rules lawyering
without addressing the actual issue
". However, even though xsnow
is DFSG-compliant, he did say that the flag display may be something
Debian does not want in its archives:

I would, in general, say that software that behaves in deceptive ways,
which includes hidden behavior changes based on usernames, locales, or
other local settings or information that no user would reasonably
expect to change behavior in this way is probably not something that
we want to have in Debian. It's a very slippery slope and also likely
to create a lot of drama to very little benefit.

Ivanov 
said

that he understood the point that xsnow did not violate the DFSG. But,
he asked, shouldn't its hidden functionality be treated as a bug or
behavior that should be patched out "
to restore the application's neutral and
intended functionality for all users equally?
" Bill Allombert 
suggested

that he open a bug report, since the Debian development list was not
the correct venue for the complaint.

Forecast calls for no xsnow changes

To date, Ivanov has not opened a bug report, and the conversation
seems to have run its course. I have emailed Vermin to ask if
he was aware of the complaint, and if he would be willing to roll back
the Ukrainian flag display if a bug were filed. So far, I have not
received a response.

Even though Vermin may not want to change xsnow's behavior, Debian
package maintainers have been required to make changes for technical
reasons—or have had packages removed from the archive for
offensive content. In August 2025, 
two "offensive" fortune
packages
 were removed ahead of the trixie release following a
lengthy discussion. In October 2025, Debian's Technical Committee

decided that an upstream
systemd change would need to be reverted
 because the new behavior
broke a number of programs that depended on a world-writable

/run/lock
 directory. In each case, there was a fair bit of
discussion and deliberation before the maintainers were overridden.

This is not to argue one way or the other whether xsnow's Easter egg
should be removed; it is simply worth pointing out that it is not futile
to file a bug against a package even if it's likely that the
maintainer will disagree. As a project, Debian gives its developers a
wide latitude in how they manage their packages, but a packager's
decisions can be overridden on the rare occasions when the project
deems it necessary. Convincing the project to do so, however, requires
the petitioner to put in the work. Merely complaining on the mailing
list is unlikely to achieve any results.
