Solving the "Zork" mystery 

19 May 2026 - ...and finishing the game while at it.

        It's been two years since my 
        
last Zork adventure

        and I finally got time to finish it. But before I restored my last save, I checked
        my blog notes and there was one "opened issue" which I wanted 
        to address.

        I glossed over problematic trivia about Zork which says, that "zork" 
        was a jargon word for unfinished program in MIT Dynamic Modeling Group back in 70's. I also pointed out, that 
        Wikipedia does not provide source to this information, to which one reader messaged me
        that I am wrong. And I was! 

Source 1: 
 Article "The History of Zork - First in a series" in The New Zork Times, from 1985. 
(Link)

        Tim Anderson says: We tended to name our programs with the word "zork" until they were ready to be 
        installed on the system. Lebling and Blank, two other creators of the game are titled as a "Suspected Editor" 
        and "Editorial Editor" respectively in this publication.

        For some reason I remembered that this 
        information wasn't right.
        So I spent some time abusing the Wikipedia API and mining in edit history and I found that 
        this information appeared for the first time in the 
        
2001 edit
 
        without any source. It stayed like that until the
        
October 2014 edit
 (13 years later!)
        when it got the source number 1 quoted above. Since then, there were 41 different edits, of which the most interesting one was 
        
December 2016 edit

        in which the information got 4 different sources of which 3 didn't say anything about "zork"
        being used for work in progress stuff, only as general nonsense word.

Source 15: 
 Article "Masters of the Game" in The Boston Globe Magazine from May 1984. 
(Link)

          Marc Blank says: Actually, it's just a nonsense word. There are all kinds of words like that that 
          hackers tend to use -- words like 'frob.' Frob means thingamajig, and it can be used as any part of 
          speech. It's a generic noun and verb.

Source 18:
 Article "History of the Zork" in special edition of IEEE Computer magazine from 1979. 
(Link)

          Authors of the game say: ...the [game] name was chosen because it was a widely used nonsense 
          word, like "foobar".

Source 19: 
 Infocoms publication "Down From the Top of Its Game: The Story of Infocom" from 2000. 
        
(Link)
 
        directly quotes the interview from source 15. And then there is the Tim Andersons' version in 
source 1
.

        I did remembered this contradiction of sources 18 and 1, and lack of information from sources 15 and 19, 
        and this time I wouldn't let it slide. I searched for other Zork related documents and found one more 
        material not exactly in line with Tims' version.

        Article "A Zork By Any Other Name" in The New Zork Times Vol.3 No.1 1984 
(Link)

        ...authors Marc Blank and Tim Anderson were at a complete loss in thinking up a good name for 
        their new game. Since they wanted people to play it, and since you can't run a nameless program, 
        they needed something quick. Blank chose Zork, a nonsense word commonly used at the MIT Lab 
        for Computer Science as an all-purpose interjection.

        No author is named under the article or from the redaction but it's the same Infocom owned medium, which 
        will one year later published Tim Andersons' version. 

        Then I found this excelent article by Nick Monfort, Post Position A Note on the Word “Zork” 
        
(Link)
. 
        He focused on the etimology of the word and searched/speculated how the authors could 
        came up with it. There were 4 major hits one including the most well known "zorch" MIT semi-jargon 
        word for burning stuff. I don't want to spoil the rest of the article as it's one of the 
        better reading materials on the net, but I will include one quick teaser in a form of a picture.

          a zork pterodactyl chopper... 
          
          you can't make this shit up

        Let's focus. I tried to get the first hand testimony now. Lebling, Anderson, Blank, Daniels, 
the implementors
,
        were unreachable to me, so I wrote to only two people I knew, that were on MIT in 1970's. The Last true hacker 
        Richard M. Stallman and Good-news-bad-news Richard P. Gabriel. I don't want to take out any content of 
        our correspondence without their allowence, but none of them heard the word "zork" in the 
        context of unfinished program.

        You can find a lot of stuff online about the word itself, but only one quote mentions that there was some kind of habit 
        of naming unfinished code a "zork". Why do I care? To me it just seems weird how could game with such an impact on
        home computing world not carry over this jargon to this day. Especially considering the fate of other jargon words
        of the era like "hack" or sooner mentioned "foobar", which didn't got boost from any commercial company behind them. 

        I would love to get a clear proof that it was a real jargon word, not case of Chandler 
        Bing's one-person slang, so computing history could include this term proudly among other 
        computer babble.        
        Anyway, my call from last time stands. 
        If there is anybody who can confirm that it was general habbit to name your unfinished code a "zork", 
        please write me an email.
        I will either propose the Wikipedia edit or message to ESR to add it into the hackers' jargon file.

        In a meantime, I am editing my
        
Let's play Zork

        blog to fluently continue with the rest of my playtrough, so in few days (maybe weeks) you can 
        check out how I struggled with 
the
 mirror room and other stuff. As much as I 
        felt let down after my first run, I enjoyed this one good. I am definetly going to pick the sequel 
        next time.

Update

18 Jun 2026 -  Finally! 

        After almost a month without any proof nor reaction from the authors I proposed the Wikipedia edit in the articles
        
talk section
. I am 
        happy to announce that 
        
correction

        was made and the article finally informs reader that there was 
        no general habbit of naming unfinished software a Zork and that it's only Tim Andersons claim.      

        In other news, I still didn't updated the Zork I article with the rest of the gameplay because I got stuck in Zork II 
        which currently eats all my time. Sorry about that.

          * The beautiful title picture is courtesy of Gino D'Achille, 1980, which I found in 
          
this cool blog
.
