Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



/?/. /OSf.C// 



> 



HARVARD COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



ROM THI fUrO CV 

FREDEBICX ATTiEARN LANE 
orNiwYoaK 



I BIBLIOGRAPHY OF 



MARK TWAIN 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF 
MARK TWAIN 



Tbis edition is limited to five hundred 
copies for sale, each copy being signed by 
tbe Compiler and tbe Publisbers. 

Tbis copy is No. /^/ 



I 



(£> 



A BIBLIOGRAPHY 

OF THE WORK OF 

MARK TWAII^/ 

; ^ SAMUEL LANGHORNE CLEMENS 

r 

A LIST OF FIRST EDITIONS IN 
BOOK FORM AND OF FIRST 
PRINTINGS IN PERIODICALS AND 
OCCASIONAL PUBLICATIONS OF 
HIS VARIED LITERARY ACTIVITIES 



COMPILED BY 

MERLE JOHNSON 




HARPER 6f BROTHERS PUBLISHERS 

NEW YORK AND LONDON 
MCM X 



^L/c ^■:,ii/^ 



^ 



I 









J 



i 



t<-^ 



Copyright, 1910, by Hari-bk ft Bkotmbbs 

Publiiihed November, tgia 
Frimtt4im tht VnittdStmUi ^ Atmtrtcm 



CONTENTS 



PAGB 

Introductory v 

Books i 

Spbbchbs 109 

Letters 127 

Anecdotes 137 

Notes 149 

Index 167 



INTRODUCTORY 

SAMUEL LANGHORNE CLEMENS, who Uved 
and wrote under the pseudonym ' * Mark Twain , * * 
was bom in Florida, Missouri, November 30, 1835, 
and died in Redding, Connecticut, April 21, 19 10. 

This bibliography of his printed work is not the 
place for an extended r^sum^ of the literary value 
of his output; it is rather a catalogue to facilitate 
the researches of the many, present and future, 
interested in his writings. Little attempt will be 
made to distinguish between the individual char- 
acteristics of the various books or articles with 
regard to the quality of humor, moral teaching, 
interest, or probable value. Mark Twain has been 
variously regarded as merely an entertaining 
humorist, and as a great and profound philosopher ; 
his own point of view probably changed with the 
years as his mental horizon changed and widened. 
A preface to one of his early works states: "I am 
not offering this work to the reader as either law 
or gospeU upon any point, principle, or subject; 
but only as a trifle to occupy himself with when 
he has nothing to do and does not wish to whistle.'' 

v 



INTRODUCTORY 

Yet most of his very latest work was controversial 
and philosophical, and just before his death he 
wrote: **I like myself best when I am serious." 

Personally, I regard most of his better-known 
works as Americana of the greatest value, as impos- 
sible to duplicate as the paintings of Remington 
depicting an age that has vanished; those books 
portray the making of the nineteenth - century 
American, his whimsical humor and exaggeration, 
his roughness, his fineness, his ready sympathy, 
his strength, his weakness, from boyhood to old 
age: they are history, as the Dickens books are 
history, in the best sense of all. 

Mark Twain's literary production covered a 
period of practically five decades. His range of 
activities included newspaper, magazine, book, and 
speech. He lived in a dozen places, from Hono- 
lulu to Vienna. Europe, Canada, and the United 
States vied for the first publication of his work. 
These things, together with the immense volume 
of publication, render it practically impossible to 
make these lists technically complete. Yet the 
T^^ain-lover will find here sufficient exact data 
for the broad founding of his collection. Such 
additional information and correction as may be 
necessary will but add zest to his pursuit. 

In these pages, after the usual fashion of bibliog- 
raphies, most importance is given to the first 
printings in book form. No attempt will be made 

vi 



INTRODUCTORY 

to be didactic or arbitrary. Facts will be stated 
as far as obtainable, but some conclusions must 
necessarily remain matters of opinion. In search 
of information I have examined almost every 
available source: libraries, private collections, 
and have interviewed numbers of publishers, 
printers, and book dealers. 

It must be taken into accotmt that the bulk of 
Mark Twain's work was published before the date 
of international copyright, and his popularity 
made him the victim of ** pirates'' of every degree. 
Whatever the author's feelings on the subject may 
have been, these "pirated" works are of as much 
importance to the collector as those regularly 
copyrighted. Naturally, the printing dates of 
these pirated works can be fotmd in no such regu- 
lar channels as government records. Even the 
government reports of the copyright editions have 
been incomplete. Many books filed in govern- 
ment offices at time of printing have been lost. 
Of some of the early books, publishers, printers, 
binders, illustrators, all lie in their graves, and 
Mr. Clemens himself never had the collector's in- 
terest in remarking the fine differences between 
editions so necessary to state exactly in a bibliog- 
raphy. Neither author nor publishers felt the im- 
portance of preserving the first copies from the 
press. Often it has been the cataloguer's only 
recourse to search for a presentation volume, con- 

vu 



INTRODUCTORY 

taining a written date within a few days of the 
presumable first printing, and then compare page 
by page, with an acknowledged second edition in 
the same form, to discover and tabulate variances. 
It will be only by accident, or by most unremitting 
search, that the exact dates of printing of many 
pirated editions in Canada and England will be- 
come known. 

No arbitrary rules have been attempted in this 
bibliography for the acceptance or rejection of 
** freak" publications, no fine distinctions drawn 
between cloth, leather, or paper bound books, 
pamphlets, annuals, etc. Each publication is 
listed for its own worth, and the "distinctions" 
must remain somewhat a matter of personal 
opinion. 

The largest point at issue for the collector who 
does not wish to be omnivorous in his purchases, 
lies between the English and American editions. 
(In most cases the Canadian publications can be 
eliminated as '* Firsts" because the English editions 
preceded them.) 

Many bibliophiles claim with authority that the 
collector should choose for a preferential set those 
books published in the author's own country, even 
if some of the items have been previously issued 
in another country. In the Twain case nearly all 
the books were first issued in England, some 
pirated, but most by arrangement for purposes of 

■ • ♦ 

vin 



INTRODUCTORY 

copyright protection before the pass^e of the 
present act. 

Twain's first book, The Jumping Frog, was 
published in authorized form by Routledge in 
England, some months after the American appear- 
ance. One John Camden Hotten, seeing possi- 
bilities in the new author, not only reprinted that 
material, but potmced upon Innocents Abroad, 
and had it upon the English market long before 
the Routledge authorized edition. Next the 
voracious Mr. Hotten seized the "Memoranda" 
from the Galaxy magazine, and put it into book 
form. It is probable that the author had been 
most concerned with the work of production, and 
the returns from the home market kept the wolf 
far from the door; but word from across the sea 
made him take notice of the increasing circulation 
of his work there without corresponding gain to 
himself. Here is his own accotmt of the steps he 
took for self -protection : 



<i I 



The English courts have held that under certain 
circumstances prior publication in Great Britain will 
give an author copyright in England, whatever his 
nationality may be.' You are an American. ... If 
you want to copyright a book here at home, what 

must you do? This: you must get your title-page I 

printed on a piece of paper; enclose it to the Librarian j 

of Congress; apply to him in writing for a copyright; 
send him a cash fee. That is what you, personally, 
have to do; the rest is with your publisher. What 

ix 



INTRODUCTORY 

do you have to do to get the same book copyrighted 
in England? You are hampered by no bothers, no 
details of any kind whatever. When you send your 
manuscript to your English publisher, you tell him 
the date appointed for the book to issue here, and 
trust him to bring it out there a day ahead. Isn't 
that simple enough? No letter to any official; no 
title-page to any official; no fee to anybody; and 
yet that book has a copyright on it which the Charles- 
ton earthquake couldn't unsettle. 'Previous publi- 
cation ' in Great Britain of an American book secures 
perfect copyright." 

Whether his awakening to the value of the 
English market was due to his trip to England in 
1872, or his trip was due to his awakening, is un- 
certain; the latter is indicated by newly written 
prefaces, dated Hartford, July, 1872, to an au- 
thorized edition of Innocents Abroad, printed in 
London. In this he states: 

"Any American likes to see the work of his hands 
achieve a friendly reception in the mother-country, 
and it is but natural — ^natural, too, that he should 
prize its kindly reception there above the same com- 
pliment extended by any other people than his own. 
Our kindred blood and our common language, our 
kindred religion and political liberty, make us feel 
nearer to England than to other nations, and render 
us more desirous of standing well there than with 
foreign nationalities that are foreign to us in all 
particulars. So, without any false modesty, or con- 
sciousness of impropriety, I confess to a desire that 
Englishmen should read my book." 



INTRODUCTORY 

Something a little less altruistic than the above 
seems to have been actuating him, however, for 
the device of ''previous publication" was invoked 
to protect the just-written Roughing It, And a 
wordy war took place between Twain and Hotten 
through the columns of the Spectator, and soon 
Hotten ceased to be a factor in the printing of 
new material. 

This practice of ** previous publication" forces 
the collector who does not wish parallel sets to a 
choice between the actual first printings from 
abroad, and the American first printings (with the 
addition, of course, of the items not printed in 
America). Many American collectors up to the 
present date have thought necessary to include 
in their sets London copies of The Prince and the 
Pauper and Huckleberry Finn because of the pre- 
dating of those items, not having the informa- 
tion that those selected books were merely on 
a par with twenty other books published a few 
days previous to the American issue for copyright 
reasons, and not a whit more important to the 
collection. 

It is almost impossible to draw the line between 
the permanent and the fugitive, the valuable and 
the trivial, in the immense volume of written, 
spoken, and anecdotal Twain material. Most 
authors sit them down in their studies to produce 
any work of value; it has to be considered, 

xi 



INTRODUCTORY 

written, and rewritten, and is then given to the 
public in so-called permanent form. Much of 
Mark Twain's work, of course, was in the carefully 
wrought form; yet his literary product was an 
inborn method of thought, a point of view, a 
philosophy of life, which was just as apt to flash 
at full v^ue in a hasty note to an acquaintance 
as in the most studied production. Several of 
his speeches are included in his collected works; 
most of his shorter pieces were contributions to 
newspapers. Therefore, it is the intention in 
this bibliography to list all books containing 
speeches, letters, or anecdotes of any literary in- 
terest. I cannot guarantee the authorship of all 
this material attributed to Twain, but if there is 
a doubt as to authenticity, I shall endeavor to 
voice it. Mr. Clemens has set his stamp of ap- 
proval on such writings as appear in his collected 
works — the rest is Twainiana, to be put to such 
tests as any one may be able to apply. 

It may be stated here, for the benefit of the pro- 
spective collector, that his search for definite first 
editions of Mark Twain is apt to be far more diffi- 
cult, and therefore far more attractive, than has 
popularly been supposed. It is true that even 
the early publication of the Twain books in the 
first form and first years of printing reached great 
numbers. But the old-time printers did not run 

off large editions from duplicate plates on many 

•• 

Xll 



INTRODUCTORY 

presses. A single press worked slowly. After a 
few hiindred were printed the sheets were in- 
spected for errors and changes made in the plates. 
It may safely be asserted that no first printing 
by the American Publishing Company ever ran 
more than a few thousand copies without some 
change in the text or pictures. Often the change 
was made after the printing of a very few copies. 
Allowing for loss and mutilation, it is certain that 
almost all definite first editions now exist to the 
number of only four or five hundred. Some of 
them, such as Tom Sawyer and A Tramp Abroad, 
must be reckoned in tens, not hundreds. 

The mechanics of bibliographical presention for 
this author's works have been altered slightly 
from the usual en masse style by the great volume 
and varied character of his output. I have 
previously mentioned the real literary value 
of w'hat might, in another author, be merely 
fugitive — namely, speeches, letters, anecdotes. 
Therefore I have divided, as justly as possible, 
the lists of books into four divisions. First, as 
most important, will be given those books and 
pamphlets of which Mr. Clemens is either author- 
in-chief or a signed contributor; next will be given 
those containing one or more speeches ; then those 
containing letters; and, lastly, as least authentic, 
the anecdotal books. 

As stated before, **book form," for the purposes 

« • • 

Xlll 



INTRODUCTORY 

of this bibliography, makes no distinctions as to 
cloth, leather, or paper botind books — pamphlets, 
and even a one-sheet publication, being included. 
Original covers are described wherever possible, 
and in deference to the prevalent taste of col- 
lectors the cloth or paper cover is given the 
preference over the leather. In this connection 
it must be admitted that the descriptions given 
of the covers and styles of the earlier English 
editions cannot be complete ; a residence in Eng- 
land and a study for years of the subject there 
would be necessary to give all the variations, and 
that has been denied me. 

Each separate list is given in chronological 
order, although in deference to a preference for 
American editions, those are described first, ex- 
cept where the English editions antedate them 
more than the usual few days. Some few Cana- 
dian editions are given, but most of them remain 
undescribed for reasons previously given. 

I must state here my indebtedness to Mr. 
Luther Livingston, the bibliographical expert, for 
personal assistance and the examples set by his 
work. I can do no better than adapt here a 
passage from his bibliography of Longfellow, the 
method of which I have followed in great measure : 

" Page numbers included within parentheses indicate 
only that pages are unnumbered. Especially in the 
case of text pages, generally all are numbered ex- 

XIV 



INTRODUCTORY 

cepting only the first. Where the first and the last of 
the series are in parentheses there are often numbered 
pages between. Blank pages, it will be noticed, are, 
with occasionally an exception, not mentioned. But 
having at hand a copy of the book described, it will 
be easy to discover whether or not it is perfect, and 
that is the use and end of a collation.'' 

I may add that the wording of title-pages and 
covers as given here is standardized — that is, the 
t3^pographical aspect of the originals is so varied 
as to the use of **caps" and ** lower case" that 
they are repeated here uniformly in '* lower case," 
capitalizing only the important words. 

If possible, blank leaves belonging to signatures 
at front of books are listed and accotmted in im- 
plied page-numbering, but single blank pages are 
not noted separately. Periods are sometimes 
added to finish quotations or collations when 
those periods do not actually exist in the original 
text. 

Perhaps explanation of the use of parentheses is 
in order. When the words within the parentheses 
are capitalized (the first letters of the main words) 
it indicates that the parentheses and the words 
exist on the original page ; when the words within 
the parentheses are entirely in ** lower case," it 
indicates that I am describing some feature in 
my own words — as, **(rule)" or "(ornament)." 
Similar distinctions as to capitalized first letters 

XV 



INTRODUCTORY 

of words hold good in other cases; for instance, 
** title, Contents, List of Illustrations, introduc- 
tor^^" indicates that "title" and ** introductory" 
are my own words used to describe a page not 
actually so headed, and *' Contents" and **List 
of Illustrations" are literally transcribed; yet, 
after the colon following ** Collation," I capital- 
ize the first word without regard to the foregoing 
rule. 

I am also indebted for assistance to Mr. James 
Tufts, Mr. Peter Cadley, Mrs. Ralph W. Ashcroft, 
and many other individuals, not to mention al- 
most the entire ** rare-book" profession in the 
United States. 



BOOKS 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF 
MARK TWAIN 

1867 

The I Celebrated Jtunping Frog | of | Cala- ^ 
veras County, | and other Sketches. | By 
Mark Twain. | Edited by John Paul. | New 
York: | C. H. Webb, Publisher, 119 & 121 
Nassau St. | American News Co., Agents. | 
1867. 

i6mo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1867) and 
imprint, dedication, Advertisement, Contents, pp. 
(i-v); text, pp. [7]-i98. One leaf publisher's list 
on yellow paper bound in before title. Size of leaf, 
trimmed, 6f by 4^. 

Issued in blue, green or red cloth, front cover 
stamped in gilt: "The Celebrated | Jumping Frog | 
By Mark Twain. " Also gilt vignette of frog. On back : 
•'The I Jumping | Frog | (rule) | Twain " | (publisher's 
monogram) . Frog vignette on back cover, uncolored. 

Copyrighted, April 15, 1867; copy filed in the Dis- 
trict Court of New York, May 14, 1867. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Contents: The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Cala- 
veras County. — Aurelia's Unfortunate Young Man. — 
A Complaint About Correspondents, dated in San 
Francisco. — ^Answers to Correspondents. — Among the 
Fenians.— The Story of the Bad Little Boy Who 
Didn't Come to Grief. — Curing a Cold. — ^An Inquiry 
About Insurances. — Literature in the Dry Diggings. — 
"After*' Jenkins. — Lucretia Smith's Soldier. — The 
Killing of Julius Caesar " Localized." — ^An Item which 
the Editor Himself Could Not Understand. — ^Among 
the Spirits. — Brief Biographical Sketch of George 
Washington. — A Touching Story of George Wash- 
ington's Boyhood. — ^A Page from a Califomian Al- 
manac. — Information for the Million. — ^The Launch 
of the Steamer Capital, — Origin of Illustrious Men. — 
Advice for Good Little Girls. — Concerning Chamber- 
maids. — Remarkable Instances of Presence of Mind. 
— ^Honored as a Curiosity in Honolulu. — ^The Steed 
"Oahu." — A Strange Dream. — Short and Singular 
Rations. 

First printing in book form for all items. This book went 
to press more than once in the year 1867, as authentic first 
copies differ from later copies on the last (198) page of text, 
where the letter "i" in "this" is perfect in the first and 
badly split in the latter. This piece of type persists in im- 
perfect state through the z868 and 1869 editions. 

While I list the book as issued in various colored coverSp 
it may be of interest to note that a copy bearing a written 
date of May 10, 1867, is in the blue doth, and a confirmation 
might be drawn from the following extract from "Chapters 
from My Autobiography": 

"When Artemus Waotl passed through California on a 
lecturing totn*, in 1865 or z866, 1 told him ' The Jumping Prog* 
story, in San Francisco, and he asked me to write it out and 
send it to his publisher, Carleton, in New York, to be used 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

in padding out a small book which Artemus had prepared 
for the press, and which needed some more stuffing to make 
it big enough for the price which was to be charged for it. 

'' It reached Carleton in time, but he didn't think much of 
it, and was not willing to go to the typesetting expense of 
adding it to the book. He did not put it in the waste-basket, 
but made Henry Clapp a present of it, and Clapp used it to 
help out the funeral of his d3ring literary journal, The Satur- 
day Press. ' The Jumping Prog' appeared in the last number 
of that paper, was the most joyous feattire of the obsequies, and 
was at once copied in the newspapers of America and England. 

"I reported my adventure to Webb, and he bravely said 
that not all the Carletons in the universe should defeat that 
book; he would publish it himself on a ten per cent, royalty. 
And so he did. He brought it out in blue and gold, and 
made a very pretty little book of it. I think he named it 
The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County, and Other 
Sketches, price $1.25. He made the plates and printed and 
bound the book through a job-printing house, and published 
it through the American News Company." 

This book is said to come also in paper cover, but I have 
never seen such a copy. 

It has been claimed that the Jumping Prog story was first 
written by one Samuel Seabough, who printed it in the 
Stockton, California, Independent for December zx, 1858, and 
that Twain's adaptation appeared in the San Prandsco 
Alia some six or seven years later. Whoever first told 
that yam, it is the Twain telling that made it immortal, as 
in the case of the plays put in lasting form by one Shakes- 
peare-Bacon. 

The English edition of The Jumping Frog was published 
by Routledge, 1867, during the week ending September a, 
according to the Publishers* Circular, nearly four months 
after the American issue. 

1868 

The Public to Mark Twain. 

This was a " dodger" one-sheet announcement for 
Mark Twain's first lecture in California, later reprinted 
in Buyer's Manual, 187a, in its entirety, with the 

3 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

lengthened title, "The Public to Mark Twain — His 
Reply." The original measures 13I by sf . 

1869 

The I Innocents Abroad, ( or, | The New Pil- 
grims' Progress; ( Being Some Accotint of 
the Steamship Quaker City's Pleasure | Ex- 
cursion to Europe and the Holy Land; 
with I Descriptions of Q)xmtries, Nations, | 
Incidents and Adventures, | as they Ap- 
peared I to the I Author. | With Two Hun- 
dred and Thirty-four Illustrations. | By 
Mark Twain, | (Samuel L. Clemens.) 
(Issued by Subscription only, and not for sale 
in the Book-stores. Residents of any State 
desiring | a Copy shotdd address the Pub- 
lishers, and an Agent will caU upon them.) | 
(rule) I Hartford, Conn.: | American Pub- 
lishing Company. | Bliss & Co., Newark, 
N. J.; R. W. Bliss & Co., Toledo, Ohio. | 
F. G. Gihnan& Co., Chicago, 111.; Nettle- 
ton & Co., Cincinnati, Ohio. | F. A. Hutch- 
inson & Co., St. Louis, Mo. I H. H. Bancroft 
and Company, San Francisco, Cal. | 1869. 

8vo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1869), dedi- 
cation, Preface, List of Illustrations, Contents, pp. 

4 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

(i)-xviii; text, pp. (i9)-6si; publishers' lists, pp. 
(652-656). 

Frontispiece, ''Illuminated title-page" and four- 
teen full-page cuts separately printed, and numerous 
illustrations in text. Size of leaf trimmed, 8f by sf . 

Issued in black cloth and various leathers. Cloth 
copies have engraved pictorial caption in gilt, ''The | 
Innocents Abroad | or the | New | Pilgrim's Prog- 
ress." on the front cover, while back reads, in gilt, 
"The I Innocents Abroad | or the | New | Pilgrim's 
Progress | by | Mark Twain. | (rule) | Illustrated. | 
(ornament)." Below is "American | Publishing | 
Company." in black on gilt shield, and at top and 
bottom ornamental niles in gilt. Last page of cover 
bears stamp with publisher's monogram, and both 
front and rear covers have ruled border with orna- 
ments in comers, without color. 

(Copyrighted, July a8, 1869. Publication date is 
lacking, which may have been immediate upon copy- 
right, but certainly not later than September 5th, of 
which date there exist presentation copies. 

In the first printing, on pages xvii and xviii of "Con- 
tents," the numerals at the right of the page are missing. 
They were supplied in later impressions of the same year, as 
was the word ''Conclusion" at the foot of page xviii. Also 
there is no cut on page 129, the large vacancy there being 
subsequently filled with a portrait of Napoleon III. "Chap- 
ter XLI'* p. (643) was later corrected to "Chapter LXI." 

Innocents Abroad was reprinted in England, without per- 
mission, by Hotten, in two parts, The Innocents Abroad and 
The New Pilgrtms* Progress, Each volume carries the pub- 
lisher's lists of 1870, and is listed by the Spectator May 14, 
1870. The two volumes were later made one under the title 
Marh Twain*s Pleasure Trip on the Continent, also bearing the 
poblisher's lists for 1870. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

The following from Chapters from My Autobiography will 
be of interest here: 

" In June I sailed in the Quaker City excursion. I returned 
in November, and in Washington found a letter from Elisha 
Bliss, of the American Publishing Company of Hartford, 
offering me five per cent, royalty on a book which should 
recount the adventures of the excursion. In lieu of the 
royalty, I was offered the alternative of ten thousand dollars 
cash upon delivery of the manuscript. I consulted A. D. 
Richardson, and he said, ' Take the royalty.' I followed his 
advice and closed with Bliss. By my contract I was to 
deliver the manuscript in July of 1868. I wrote the book in 
San Francisco, and delivered the manuscript in contract time. 
Bliss provided a multitude of illustrations for the book, and 
then stopped work on it. The contract date for the issue 
went by, and there was no explanation of this. ... At 
last, toward the end of JtUy (1869, I think), I lost pa- 
tience, and telegraphed Bliss. . . . Then the canvassing began 
and went briskly forward. In nine months the book ad- 
vanced the American Book Company's stock from twenty* 
five to two hundred, and left seventy thousand dollars profit 
to the good." 

The Routledge author's edition of Innocents Abroad follows 
the Hotten style of issue in two volumes, with titles The 
Innocents Abroad and The New Pilgrims* Progress, but was 
not published until 187a, if one takes the date of the pref- 
ace. This preface is the important feature of the books, 
being specially written for the English authorised edi- 
tion, and divided between the two books. It reads, in 
part: "At the request of Messrs. George Routledge & 
Sons I have made a patient and conscientious revision of 
this book for republication in England, and have weeded 
out of it nearly, if not quite, all of the most palpable 
and inexcusable of its blemishes. At the same time I 
have wrought into almost every chapter additions which 
cannot fail to augment the attractions of the book, or 
diminish them." It is probable that the "patient and con- 
scientious revision" referred to above meant merely the 
alteration of a few passages with a view to more complete 
copyright protection; I leave it to the more persistent col- 
lector to collate the volumes word for word. 

6 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1870 

The I Piccadilly Annual | of [.Entertaining 
Literature | Restrospective and Contem- 
porary. I Charles Dickens, W. M. Thackeray, 
I Longfellow, Albert Smith, | Theodore Tay- 
lor, Bret Harte, | J. Russell Lowell, Or- 
pheus C. Kerr, | Dudley CosteUo, Blanchard 
Jerrold, | Mark Twain, Robert Brough. 
(vignette, with title) | With Pictures by 
W. M. Thackeray, Holman Himt, G. Du 
Maurier, J. Morten, Lawless, Eltze, | Mes- 
sonier, H. G. Hine, Lawson. | London: | 
John Camden Hotten, 74 & 75, Piccadilly. 

8vo. Collation: Frontispiece, title, imprint, pp. (ii- 
iv) ; text, pp. (s)-96. One leaf of advertisements be- 
fore frontispiece, also two leaves of same separately 
printed and pasted in; similar set of advertising 
leaves after text. Frontispiece and title on two 
leaves before "B" signature. Size, trimmed, 7 by 
9f. "Preliminary" paster between pp. (iv) and (5). 
Issued in cream paper covers, printed in colors. 
Above the line border on the front of cover is printed 
in red, "Price One Shilling.*' Inside the border is a 
tint-block, on which is "The Piccadilly | Annual | 
(colored landscape scene) | With Numerous Illustra- 
tions." Below the border is, again in red, "London. 
John Camden Hotten, Piccadilly." Front cover 

7 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

carries advertisements inside, and rear cover carries 
advertisements both inside and out. Back carries 
line, "The Piccadilly Annual— Price One Shilling." 

"Preliminary" paster referred to above carries 
date "December, 1870." 

Mark Twain is represented by "Story of the Good Little 
Boy." p. 25; "Wit-Inspirations of the ' Two- Year-Olds/ " 
p. a6; "The Late Benjamin Franklin," p. aS; "Higgins," 
p. 57; "Hogwash (A Touching Incident)," p. 81. All first 
printings in book form, mainly taken, without permisston, 
from the Galaxy magazine. 

1871 

Mark Twain's | (Burlesque) | Autobiography | 
and I First Romance. | (vignette) | New 
York: | Sheldon & Company, [677 Broad- 
way, I Under the Grand Central Hotel. 

(The above title, in border, is on the first page, 
which is practically the front cover of the copies not 
bound in cloth.) 

Collation: Title, copyright and imprint, pp. (i-ii); 
Burlesque Autobiography, pp. (3)-i8; cut, p. 19; 
sub-title, p. (21); Awful, Terrible Medieval Romance, 
pp. (23)-46; cut, p. 47. Each page in border. Size 
of leaf trimmed, 7^ by 5. (In the cloth bound copies 
leaf is trimmed i closer.) Galaxy Magazine ad. on 
last (48) page. 

Issued without cover, and also in green or maroon 
cloth. *'Mark Twain's | Autobiography | and | 
First Romance" stamped in gilt on front cover of 

8 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

cloth-bound copies. Stamped borders without color 
on first and last pages of cover. 

Copyrighted, February lo, 187 1; published, Feb- 
ruary 18, 1871. 

The first edition may be distinguished by the reverse of 
title, on which page the copyright notice was put at the bot- 
tom of the page in later printings, and an advertisement of 
Ball, Black & Co. inserted. 

To the English unauthorised edition of this book, pub- 
lished by Hotten. is added the story *'On Children," which 
Mark Twain disclaimed. This edition carries publishers' 
lists for 187 1, but I cannot give its escact date. The Rout- 
ledge authorized edition is listed by the Publishers* Circular 
for May 16, 1871. 

1871 

Mark Twain's | Memoranda. | From the Gal- 
axy I (monogram) | Toronto : | C. A. Backas, 
Publisher. | 1871. 

Collation: Title, imprint, pp. (i-ii); text, pp. (3)- 
142; blank. Size of leaf, trimmed, 8^ by 5}. 

Issued in buff-colored paper covers. First page 
of cover carries engraved caption, "Mark Twain's | 
(portrait of Mark Twain with name beneath) | 
Memoranda | C. A. Backas, (final word torn off bibliog- 
raphy copy) . Last page of cover carries magazine ad. 

Contents: Introductory. — ^The Pacts in the Case 
of the (jreat Beef Contract. — About Smells. — Dis- 
graceful Persecution of a Boy. — The Story of the 
(jood Little Boy Who Did Not Prosper. — A Couple 
of Sad Experiences (The Petrified Man), — My Pa- 

9 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

mous "Bloody Massacre.*' — The Judge's "Spirited 
Woman . " — " Hogwash . ' ' — A Touching Incident . — 
Post-Mortem Poetry. — ^Wit- Inspirations of the "Two- 
Year-Olds." — How I Edited an Agricultural Paper 
Once. — The "Tournament" in a.d. 1870. — Enig- 
ma. — Unburlesquable Things. — The Late Benjamin 
Franklin. — ^The Editorial Office Bore. — A Daring At- 
tempt at a Solution of It. — ^To Correspondents. — A 
Memory. — ^The Story of a Gallant Deed. — ^Political 
Economy. — John Chinaman in New York. — ^The 
Noble Red Man. — A Royal Compliment. — ^The Ap- 
proaching Epidemic. — Favors from Correspondents. — 
The Reception at the President's. — Goldsmith's 
Friend Abroad Again (Letters I, II, III, IV). — Curious 
Relic for Sale. — Science vs. Luck. — Favors from Cor- 
respondents. — Lines. — Mark Twain's Map of Paris. — 
To the Reader. — Official Commendations. — Riley, 
Newspaper Correspondent. — Goldsmith's Friend 
Abroad Again (Continued, Letters V, VI). — A Remi- 
niscence of the Back Settlements. — A General Reply. 
— Favors from Correspondents. — Lines. — An Enter- 
taining Article. — "History Repeats Itself." — Dog- 
berry in Washington. — ^My Watch. — An Instructive 
Little Tale. — ^Favors from Correspondents. — ^The Com- 
ing Man. — A Book Review. — ^The Tone- Imparting 
Committee. — ^The Danger of Lying in Bed. — One of 
Mankind's Bores. — A Falsehood. — ^The Indignity Put 
Upon the Remains of (Jeorge Holland by the Rev. 
Mr. Sabine. — The Portrait. — Commendations of the 
Portrait. — The Facts in the Case of George Fisher, 
Deceased . — Doggerel . — Goldsmith 's Friend Abroad 
Again (Letter VI). — ^Mean People. — A Sad, Sad Busi* 

10 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

ness. — Concerning a Rumor. — Answer to an Inquiry 
from the Coming Man. — Running for Governor. — 
The "Present" Nuisance. 

There are alao uncaptioned paragraphs scattered through, 
which may be listed as follows: "Coal Mine," "Sunday- 
School," "Cain and Abel: or. Poor Human Nature," "Lady 
Franklin," "Curious Incident," "Higgins; or, Breaking It 
Gently," "Dan Murphy; or. The Widow's Protest," "How 
is This for High?" "Johnny Greer," "Ministers," "Praise," 
" Forty-Niner, and the Miner's Lament," "Obituary Poetry." 
There is also another Canadian Memoranda issued in cloth by 
Beltord, bearing on the front cover in gilt the portrait of 
William III. from the January (187 1) Galaxy, almost identical 
with the cover oi Choice Humorous Works (1873). Unfortu- 
nately, I did not give the volume the attention it deserved, 
because from a superficial examination I became convinced 
that it was of later printing than the Backas edition here 
collated. 

Memoranda is the great volume of mystery for the Twain 
collector. Not only is it very rare, but since it is a "pi- 
rated" book, the date of its printing has gone unrecorded 
and may never be certified. It contains, with half a dozen 
exceptions, the series of paragraphs contributed by Mark 
Twain to the Galaxy magazine in 1 870-1. Practically the 
same material, with a few more omissions of the Galaxy 
material, and the addition of the "Mediaeval Romance'* 
appears in Screamers and Eye Openers, companion volumes 
published in August, 1871, by Hotten in London. None 
of the three contains the Galaxy contributions for April, 
1871, and all of them contain articles from February, 187 1. 
This is the third and last output of paragraphic material from 
Twain's pen, the first being in the Pacific Coast newspapers, 
selected items collected later in The Jumping Frog, 1867. 
The next output was in the Buffalo Express. These small- 
and -hasty effusions did not seem to appeal to their author 
as proper book material, until the activity of the "pirates" 
caused the production of an ** authorized " Sketches by 
Rotttledge in London. Even then no regular publication 
was attempted in the United States until 1874-5 in Sketches 

II 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

No. I, and Sketches New and Old, which contain only a 
selected residuum of this large amount of fugitive material. 
The Piccadilly Annual, of course, pre-dates Memoranda for 
its short selection of the GaUixy articles, but there is nothing 
by which to actually determine as between Memoranda and 
the contemporary Screamers and Eye Openers, yet, for con- 
venience sake, I place Memoranda before the other two. 

1871 

Eye Openers | Good Things, | Immensely 
Funny Sayings & Stories | That Will 
Bring a Smile | Upon the Gruffest Counte- 
nance, I (vignette) | by | Mark Twain, | 
Author of ** Pleasure Trip on the Con- 
tinent " (*' The Innocents Abroad" and 

"The New Pilgrims' Progress"); "The 
Jumping Frog;" | ** Screamers, a Gathering 
of Delicious Bits." | London: | John Cam- 
den Hotten, 74, Piccadilly. | (All Rights 
Reserved.) 

i6mo. Collation: Publishers' list (pasted on cover), 
four pages publishers* lists, vignette and jokelet, title, 
pp. (ii-viii) — these on short signature of four leaves; 
text, pp. (9)~i73; publishers' list on back of last 
page of text; and there are sixteen pages of pub- 
lishers* lists, dated 1871. Size of leaf, 6\ by 4, 
trimmed. 

Issued in cloth and in light-yellow paper covers, 
printed in black. Paper-covered copy has on front 

la 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

cover, in rule border, " Eye Openers | (vignette) | by | 
Mark Twain. | London: John Camden Hotten, 74 & 
75, Piccadilly." Above border, "Price 1/ — In Cloth 
a/6." Last page of cover has pill advertisement. 
Back has " Eye Openers.— Mark Twain, i/." Pub- 
lishers' lists inside both covers. 

Listed by the Spectator for the week of August a6, 
1871. 

Contents: Mark Twain's Autobiography. — ^Journal- 
ism in Tennessee. — ^Memoranda. — ^The Pacts in the 
Case of the Great Beef Contract. — ^The Petrified Man. 
— My Famous "Bloody Massacre." — ^The Judge's 
" Spirited Woman." — Higgins. — Hogwash. — Johnny 
Greer. — A Daring Attempt at a Solution of It. — ^To 
Correspondents. — A Memory. — Political Economy. — 
John Chinaman in New York. — An Epidemic. — Fav- 
ours from Correspondents. — Reception at the Presi- 
dent's. — Goldsmith's Friend Abroad (Letters I, II, 
III, IV). — Curious Relic for Sale. — Science vs. Luck. 
— •• How is This for High ?"— Mark Twain's Map of 
Paris. — To the Reader. — OfScial Commendations. 
— Riley, Newspaper Correspondent. — The Story of 
Joseph. — Mark Twain's Last. — ^Mediaeval Romance. 

First edition (Memoranda considered) for "Journalism in 
Tennessee." 

1871 

Screamers | A Gathering of | Scraps of 
Humour, | Delicious Bits, & Short Stories. | 
(vignette with script quotation) | by | Mark 
2 13 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Twain, | Author of " Pleasure Trip on the 
Continent " (" The Innocents Abroad " | and 
"The New Pilgrims' Progress"); "The 
Jumping Prog;" | "Eye Openers, A Col- 
lection of Good Things." | London: John 
Camden Hotten, 74, Piccadilly. | (All Rights 
Reserved.) 

i6mo. Collation: Two leaves publishers' lists, vig- 
nette, title, pp. (i-vii) — ^these on four-leaf signature; 
text, pp. (9)~i73; publisher's list dated 1871, 18 pages 
after text. Size of leaf, trimmed, 6| by 4. 

Issued in cloth and in yellow paper covers. Paper- 
covered copy has on front cover, printed in black, 
"Screamers | (vignette) | by | Mark Twain. | London: 
John Camden Hotten, 74 & 75, Piccadilly" inside rule 
border. Above border, "Price 1/ — In Cloth a/6." 
Back has line, "Screamers. Mark Twain i/." Pub- 
lishers' lists inside both covers. 

Contents: Holiday Literature. — Baker's Cat. — 
The Story of the Good Little Boy Who Did Not 
Prosper. — Story of the Bad Little Boy. — ^The Sun- 
day-School. — Poor Human Nature. — Wit-Inspira- 
tions of the "Two- Year-Olds."— Dan Murphy.— 
Soda- Water. — How I Edited an Agricultural Paper 
Once. — ^Enigma. — An Unburlesquable Thing. — ^The 
Late Benjamin Franklin. — The Undertaker's Story. 
— A General Reply. — An Entertaining Article. — "His- 
tory Repeats Itself." — Running for Governor. — ^The 
Poor Editor. — An Instructive Little Tale. — Favours 
from Correspondents. — A Sandwich Island Editor. — 

14 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

The Portrait. — Commendations of the Portrait. — 
Doggerel. — ^Mean People. — ^Answer to an Inquiry from 
the Coming Man. — ^The Danger of Lying in Bed. — 
Almost Incredible: True Story of Chicago. — A Trav- 
elling Show. — On Children (How to Train Up a 
Child). — ^Train Up a Child and Away He Goes. — 
About Barbers. — Vengeance. 

First edition (allowing M^ntoranda as first) for "Holi- 
day Literature/' " Baker's Cat." " Soda-Watcr." "The Under- 
Uker's Stwy." "A TravelUng Show." and "About Barbers." 
Mark Twain disclaims the following stories: "Almost In- 
credible: True Story of Chicago." "On Children," "Train 
Up a Child and Away He Goes." and "Vengeance." for letter 
oonoenung which see Lectures of Bret Harte, 1909. 

1872 

Nast's I Illustrated | Almanac | (picttire of 
"merry-go-round") | 1872 | Published by | 
Harper & Brothers | Franklin Square. | 
New York. 

lamo. Issued in paper covers, title on cover, with 
"Price Thirty Cents" above; 64 pages of text, plus 
ads., and contains "The Late Benjamin Franklin," 
pp. 26-27. This is the first American appearance, 
that article having been previously published in the 
Piccadilly Annual in England. 

Copyrighted, September 8, 187 1; published Oc- 
tober 10, 1871. 

1872 

Roughing | It | by | Mark Twain. | (Samuel L. 
Clemens.) | Fully Illustrated by Eminent 

IS 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Artists. I (Issued by Subscription only, and 
not for sale in Book stores.) | (ResidentS'of 
any State desiring a Copy shotdd address 
the Publishers as below.) | (rule) | Hartford, 
Conn.: | American Publishing Company. | 
F. G. Oilman & Co., Chicago, 111.; W. E. 
Bliss, Toledo, Ohio; | Nettleton & Co., Cin- 
cinnati, Ohio; D. Ashmead, Philadelphia, 
Penn.; | George M. Smith & Co., Boston, 
Mass. ; | A. Roman & Company, San Fran- 
cisco, Cal. I 1872. 

8vo Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1872), dedica- 
tion, Prefatory, List of Illustrations, Contents, pp. 
(i)-xviii; text, pp. (i9)'57o; appendices, (subtitle and 
text) A-B-C, pp. (s7i)-S9i; publishers' ad. p. (592.) 

Frontispiece, plate facing frontispiece, and seven 
other plates separately printed. Numerous illus- 
trations in text. Size of leaf, trimmed, Sf by sf- 

Issued in black cloth and various leathers. Front 
cover bears gilt-stamped vignette and rear cover a 
plain-stamped publishers' monogram. Back reads, 
in gilt letters, " Roughing | It | by | Mark Twain. | 
(rule) I Illustrated." Below is gilt shield, with letter- 
ing in cover color, "American | Publishing | Company,) 
Hartford, | Conn." Ornamental rules in gilt above 
and below. 

Copyrighted, December 6, 1871. Copy filed in Wash- 
ington February 19, 1872. 

16 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

In later impressions of this book the capital *'M" in first 
line of Contents, p. (xi), and the letter "y** in the word ''My, " 
first word of Chapter I, p. (19), are broken, while in the first 
impressions they are perfect. 

1872 

•• Roughing It/' | by | Mark Twain, | (Samuel 
L. Clemens.) | Author of "The Celebrated 
Jumping Frog." | Copyright Edition. | Lon- 
don: I George Routledge and Sons, | The 
Broadway, Ludgate. 

z6mo. Collation: Half-title; title, imprint. Prefa- 
tory, Contents, pp. (i)-xii; text, pp. (i)-244. Front 
and back fly-leaves, also inside both covers, bear 
publishers' Usts, and first two leaves of publishers' 
list are printed on the first signature. Size of leaf, 
trimmed, 6^ by 4. 

Issued in cloth, paper, and pictorial boards. Latter 
copy has on front cover vignette in black on yellow 
field down the centre; in black on yellow, above, 
"Roughing It."; in black on red down the left-hand 
side, "Showing | How a | Three Months' | Pleasure 
Trip I was I extended to | a Term | of | Seven Years."; 
down the right-hand side, " With a Relation | of many | 
Humorous | and Instructive | Incidents | Connected 
with I the Education | of an | Innocent."; in black on 
yellow below, "By Mark Twain." Back reads in 
black, " Roughing It, by Mark Twain." Fourth page 
of cover carries publishers' list, ending in No. 5, The 
Hoosier Schoolmaster. 

Listed by the Spectator for the week ending Feb- 
ruary ID, 1872. 

17 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1872 

The I Innocents at Home. | by | Mark Twain, 
Author of * * The Celebrated Jumping Frog." 
Copjrright Edition. | London : | George Rout- 
ledge and Sons, | The Broadway, Ludgate. 

i6ino. Collation: Title, imprint, Contents, pp. (i)- 
vi; text, pp. (7)-224. One leaf publishers' lists before 
title and one leaf after text. Publishers' lists inside 
both covers. Size of leaf, trimmed, 6f by 4. 

Issued in cloth, boards, and yellow paper covers. 
Latter copy has on front cover, in black letters, rules 
in red, red and black border and vignette, "A Sequel 
to Roughing It." above border; in border, "The | 
(rule) I Innocents at Home | (rule) | by Mark Twain. | 
(double rule) London: | George Routledge & Sons." 
Back carries line in black, "The Innocents at Home." 
Last page of cover carries publishers' list, ending in 
No. 5, The Hoosier Schooltnasier. 

Published February xo, 1872. 

This 18 the second half of the work entitled Roughing It, 
as published in the United States, and this English pubHca- 
tion seems to antedate the American issue by about a week. 

1872 

A I Curious Dream; | and | Other Sketches. | 
by I Mark Twain, | Author of "The Cele- 
brated Jumping Frog." | Selected and Re- 
vised by the Author. | Copyright. | London: 

18 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

I George Routledge and Sons, | The Broad- 
way, Ludgate. 

i2mo. Collation: Title, imprint, Contents, pp. (i-iii) ; 
text, pp. (5)-i5o; two leaves of publishers' lists. Size 
of leaf, trimmed, 6f by 4. 

Issued in pictorial boards, red and black over yel- 
low. Front cover carries, **Mark Twain's | Curious 
Dream | (large picture of Old Mr. Bones in medita- 
tion) I London: George Routledge & Sons." Back 
has line, "Mark Twain's Curious Dream." Last page 
of cover has advertisement of Routledge's American 
Library up to No. 7, Innocents at Home. 

Listed by Spectator in week ending May 25, 1872. 

Contents: A Curious Dream. — A New Beecher 
Church. — My Late Senatorial Secretaryship. — ^The 
Facts in the Case of George Fisher, Deceased. — ^The 
New Crime. — Lionizing Murderers. — ^Mental Photo- 
graphs, — ^A Deception. — The Facts Concerning the 
Recent Resignation. — Back from "Yurrup." — More 
Distinction. — The Legend of the Capitoline Venus. 
— Personal Habits of the Siamese Twins. — Rev. 
Henry Ward Beecher's Farm. — A Mysterious Visit. 

First edition for all items except "Facts in the Case of 
GeH>rge Fisher, Deceased." 

1872 

Mark Twain's | Sketches. | (rule) | Selected 
and Revised by the Author. | (rule) | Copy- 

19 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

right Edition. | London : | George Routledge 
& Sons. I 1872. 

i6mo. Collation: Title, imprint, Author's advertise- 
ment, Prefatory, Contents, pp. (i-ix); text, pp. 
(ii)-36o; two publishers' lists at back, first of six 
numbered pages, second of ten numbered pages. 
Front and back fly-leaves and inside covers bear pub- 
lishers' lists. Size of leaf, trimmed, 6^ by 4. 

Issued in pictorial boards. Front cover has: 
"Author's Edition | Mark Twain's | Sketches | (vig- 
nette of frog) I Selected and Revised | by the Author | 
(rule) I London: (jeorge Routledge & Sons." Orna- 
mental back reading: "Mark | Twain's | Sketches | 
price I Two | Shillings." Last page of cover bears 
publishers' list, black on yellow, of Routledge's 
American Library, up to No. 7, The Innocents ai 
Hotne, 

Listed in the Spectator for the week ending June i, 
1872. 

Contents: Memoranda. — ^The Jumping Frog. — How 
I Edited an Agricultural Paper. — A New Beecher 
Church.— The Bad Little Boy.— The Good Little 
Boy. — Danger of Lying in Bed. — ^About Barbers. — 
Human Nature. — ^Johnny Greer's Way. — Breaking 
It Gently.— The Judge's "Spirited Woman."— My 
Late Senatorial Secretaryship. — Facts in the Case of 
George Fisher, Deceased. — The Great Beef Contract. 
— The Poor Editor. — "After" Jenkins. — Answer to 
Inquiry from Coming Man. — Concerning Chamber- 
maids. — Burlesque Autobiography (of Mark Twain). 
—The Undertaker's Chat.— The Petrified Man.— Mar- 

20 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

vellous "Bloody Massacre/* — ^Journalism in Tennes- 
see. — ^The New Crime. — Lionizing Murderers. — ^Mental 
Photographs. — ^A Deception. — Califomian Almanac. 
— My Watch. — ^An Instructive Page from a Little 
Tale. — ^An Entertaining Article. — ^Map of Paris. — 
A General Reply. — ^The Late Benjamin Franklin. — 
Fashion Item. — ^Answers to Correspondents. — Lucre- 
tia Smith's Soldier. — Scriptural Panoramist. — An 
Unburlesquable Thing. — Riley, Newspaper Corre- 
spondent. — ^The Facts Concerning the Recent Resig- 
nation. — A Daring Attempt at a Solution of It. — A 
Memory. — Science vs. Luck. — Aurelia's Unfortunate 
Young Man. — Mediaeval Romance. — ^Misplaced Confi- 
dence. — ^The Widow's Protest. — Political Economy. — 
The Killing of Julius Caesar Localized. — ^An Item 
Which the Editor Himself Could Not Understand. — 
Back from " Yurrup." — More Distinction. — ^A Legend 
of the Capitoline Venus. — Enigma. — ^Wit-Inspirations 
of the " Two- Year-Olds. "—Personal Habits of the 
Siamese Twins. — A Curious Dream. — Inquiry About 
Insurances. — ^Advice for Good Little Girls. — Cannibal- 
ism in the Cars. — Curing a Cold. — Rev. Henry Ward 
Beecher's Farm. — Running for Governor. — Literature 
in the Dry Diggings. — ^A Mysterious Visit. 



Pint printing in book foim for "Author's Advertisement/ 
PreCatory/' and " Cannibalism in the Cars." 



1872 

Practical Jokes | with | Artemus Ward | In- 
cluding the Story of | The Man Who Fought 



21 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Cats I (vignette) | By Mark Twain | and 
Other Htimourists. | London | John Camden 
Hotten, 74, Piccadilly | (All Rights Re- 
served). 

i6mo. Collation: Publishers' lists, That Reminds 
Me, title, Preliminary, Introduction, pp. (i)-xvi; 
text, pp. (17)-! 76; publishers' lists, eight leaves. 
Size of leaf, trimmed, 6^ by 4}. 

Issued in yellow paper covers, printed in blue. 
Front cover has: "Practical Jokes | Artemus Ward | 
(picture of man and cats) | Mark Twain." Picture 
has red tint used in addition to the blue, and the 
lettering is m cover-color in solid blue field. Back is 
missing in my copy, but last page of cover carries 
medicine advertisement. Publishers' lists inside both 
covers. 

Listed in Spectator for week ending August 34, 1873. 

Contents: Preliminary. — Introduction. — Mark 
Twain and the Highwaymen. — Mark Twain's First 
Interview with Artemus Ward. — A " Goak/' by Arte- 
mus Ward. — Artemus Ward. — ^The Man Who Fought 
Cats. — Mark Twain at Niagara Falls. — Rigging the 
Market. — Sending Them Through. — Mark Twain's 
Literary Venture. — How Mark Twain was Sold in 
Newark. — Mark Twain's OflSce Bore. — About That 
Dog. — Results of Kindness to a Cockroach. — A Book 
Review. — Advice to Young Men. — ^That Book Agent. 
— ^The Miners and the "Heathen Chinee." — ^Mark 
Twain on Letter- Writing. — An Enoch Arden Mormon. 
—Dr. MuUigrub's Bitters.— Mark Twain's Fine Old 

22 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Man. — ^Mark Twain's Tone-Imparting Committee. — 
Extraordinary Fishing. — A Whopper. — ^Mark Twain's 
Remarkable Stranger. — A Perfect Cure. — ^To Raise 
Poultry. — ^Mark Twain's Califomian Experience. — 
"Call a Man."— Editorial Skits.— A Melting Story.— 
Buying a Comer Lot. — "The Union — Right or 
Wrong?" — ^A California Crow Story. — ^The Unsophis- 
ticated Infant. — Mark Twain's Disgraceful Persecu- 
tion of a Boy. — ^Just One More. 

The "Other Humourists" line on the title-page makes this 
a puzsler. Most of the contents are authentically Mark 
Twain, hut, personally, I should question the following: 
"Dr. MulKgrub's Bitters." "CaU a Man," "A Melting Story," 
"Buying a Comer Lot," "The Unsophisticated Infant," 
"Just One More," and "The Man Who Fought Cats." "A 
'Goak,' by Artemus Ward," and "Artemus Ward" are not 
by Twain. The book is first printing for all items except 
"How Mark Twain was Sold in Newark," "Mark Twain's 
Remarkable Stranger," "To Raise Poultry," "Mark Twain's 
Califomian Experience," "Mark Twain's Disgraceful Perse- 
cution of a Boy," and "Mark Twain's Tone- Imparting 
Committee." 

"Introduction" and "Mark Twain and the Highwaymen" 
are anecdotes only. 

1872 

The I Buyers' Manual | and | Business Guide ; | 
Being a Description of the | Leading Busi- 
ness Houses I Manufactories, Inventions, 
Etc. I of the Pacific Coast, | Together with 
Copious and Readable Selections, | chiefly 
from California Writers. | (rule) | Compiled 

23 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

by J. Price and C. S. Haley. | (rule) | San 
Francisco: | Francis & Valentine, Steam 
Book and Job Printing Establishment, j 
No. 517 Clay Street, and 510 to 516 Com- 
mercial Street. | 1872. 

8vo. Collation: Advertisement, advertisement, title, 
Preface, Table of Contents, Alphabetical List of Ad- 
vertisers, Classified Business List of Advertisers, pp. 
(i)-(viii) ; (two leaves of advertisements inserted) ; text, 
pp. (i)-i85; song, pp. 186-189; ads. pp. 190-192; more 
ads. pp. (i)'i6. Size of leaf, trimmed, 8^ by 5^. 

Issued in different colored cloths (black, blue, 
brown). On first page of cover, stamped in gilt, 
within gilt border, "Tales, | Sketches, Poetry | and 
Music. •' 

This not being a registered book, it may or may not have 
been issued before Practical Jok€s. If first published, it is 
the first edition for " Mark Twain's First Interview with Arte- 
mus Ward.*' If later issued, it is first American edition of 
the story named, as for " Entertaining History of the Scripttiral 
Panoramist." " The Public to Bfark Twain— His Reply " was 
first printed as a "dodger" for the lecture therein advertised. 

1873 

Tom Hood's | Comic Annual | for 1 1873. | With 
twenty-three Pages of Illustrations | by the 
Brothers Dalziel. | (seal) | London: | Pub- 
lished at the Fun Office, | 80 Fleet Street, 
E. C. In border. 

24 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

8vo. Collation: "Pun" ad., frontispiece, title, rum 

ad.. Preface, restaurant ad.. Contents, jeweller's ad., 

pp. (i-x); text, pp. (ii)-ii3; ads., 14 pages. Size 

of leaf, trimmed, 8^ by 6^. 

Issued in paper cover, printed in purple. Front 

cover has pictorial design containing "1873 | Fifth 

Year | Tom Hood's | Comic Annual. | 80 Fleet Street." 

At top of cover is line, "Price One Shilling." Back 

has line, "(ornament) Tom Hood's Comic Annual. 

One Shilling, (ornament)." (}ocoa ad. on last page 

of cover, and ads. inside both covers. 

*' How I Escaped Being KsOed in a Dud," by Mark Twain, 
pp. 90-91. 

1873 

A Book for an Hour, | Containing | Choice 
Reading | and | Character Sketches. | (rule | 
A Curious Dream, | and | Other Sketches, | 
Revised and Selected for this Work by the 
Author I Mark Twain. | (rule) | Also, Ex- 
amples of I Miscroscopic Printing, | Being 
the Smallest Type Matter ever Printed — 
reducing the Contents | of a Newspaper 
Sheet to less than a Single Sheet of this 
Book. I (rule) | New York: | Published at 
65 Liberty Street. | (rule) | 1873. 

8vo. Collation: Title, comic illustration with cap- 
tion, pp. (i)-3; text, pp. 3-63; Contents, p. (64). 
Size of leaf, trimmed, 8| by 6^. 

as 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Issued in yellow paper covers, printed in black. 
Front cover carries, in border, *' Fun, Pact and Fancy | 
A Collection of | Original Comic Sketches; | and 
Choice Selections of Wit and Humor | (vignette with 
caption) | (rule) | A Curious Dream, and Other 
Sketches, | Revised and Selected by the Author | 
Mark Twain. | (rule) | Also, Examples of Microscopic 
Printing. | (rule) | Price lo Cents. | (rule) | Office, 65 
Liberty Street, New York." 

Copyright (dated 1873) imder border. 

Back cover has ice-pitcher advertisement. 

Sketches by Mark Twain fill pages 3-16, as follows: 
A Curious Dream. — ^My Late Senatorial Secretary- 
ship. — ^The New Crime. — Back from "Yurrup." — 
More Distinction. — A Self-Made Man. 

First edition for "A Self-Made Man," and first 
American edition for all other items. 

Copyrighted, April 15, 1873; ^^^ ^ Washington, 
May 26, 1873. 

1873 

Nast's I Illustrated | Almanac | (picture of 
"merry-go-round") | 1873 | Published by 
Harper & Brothers | Franklin Square. 
New York. 

lamo. Issued in paper cover, title on cover, with 
"Price Twenty- five Cents*' above; 48 pages of text, 
plus ads., and contains "The Story of the Good Little 
Boy Who Did Not Prosper." This is the first Amer- 

26 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

ican appearance for that story, it having previously 
been printed in the Piccadilly Annual in England. 

Copyrighted, October 2, 1872; published October 
XX, X873. 

1873 

The Choice | Hximorous Works | of | Mark 
Twain. | Now First Collected. | (vignette) | 
with I Extra Passages to the ''Innocents 
Abroad," now | first Reprinted, and a Life of 
the Author. | Illustrations by Mark Twain 
and other Artists; | also Portrait of the 
Author. I London: | John Camden Hotten, 
74 & 75 Piccadilly. 

xamo. Collation: Half-title, Contents, pp. (i)-vi; 
Mark Twain, a Sketch of His Life, pp. (vii)-xxxix; 
text, pp. 17-599; publishers' lists, 16 pages, dated 
X873. Frontispiece portrait and title separately 
printed on heavy paper, and bound in as two leaves 
after half-title. Size of leaf, untrimmed, 7^ by 4}. 

Issued in red cloth, stamped in gilt. Front cover 
has vignette of William III., with caption, and back 
carries " (rule) | Choice Works | of | Mark Twain. | 
(rules) I (vignette) | Portrait | & | Illustrations. | John 
Ckunden Hotten. | (rules)." 

Listed in the Publishers* Circular for the week of 
April X7, 1873. 

(Contents: Memoir of Samuel L. Gemens (Mark 
Twain): Part I. The Innocents Abroad; Part 11. 

27 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

The New Pilgrims' Progress; Part III. Humorous 
Stories and Sketches : The Jumping Frog of Calaveras 
County. — British Festivities. — The Income Tax Man. 
— Answer to an Inquiry from the Coming Man. — 
Danger of Lying in Bed. — George Washington, Brief 
Biographical Sketch of. — A Travelling Show. — A 
Complaint About Correspondents. — Advice to Good 
Little Girls. — ^Mark Twain's Map of Paris. — ^About 
Barbers. — Aurelia's Unfortunate Young Man. — ^Ar- 
temus Ward, First Interview with. — Curing a Cold. 
— The Siamese Twins. — ^A Visit to Niagara. — Rigging 
the Market. — Sending Him Through. — Answers to 
Correspondents. — ^To Raise Poultry. — Califomian Ex- 
perience. — "The Union — Right or Wrong?" — Dis- 
graceful Persecution of a Boy. — Information Wanted. 
— Mental Photographs. — My First Literary Venture. 
— How Mark Twain was Sold in Newark. — ^The Office 
Bore. — Among the Fenians. — ^A Book Review. — ^The 
Case of George Fischer. — On Letter-Writing. — Litera- 
ture in the Dry Diggings. — How I Secured a Berth. — 
The Facts in the Case of the Great Beef Contract. — 
The Petrified Man. — My Famous "Bloody Massacre." 
— The Judge's "Spirited Woman." — Hogwash. — 
Johnny Greer. — A Daring Attempt at a Solution 
of It. — ^To Correspondents. — ^An Inquiry About In- 
surances. — Lionising Murderers. — A Memory. — Po- 
litical Economy. — John Chinaman in New York. 
— ^A Nabob's Visit to New York. — Higgins. — Among 
the Spirits. — When I Was a Secretary. — A Fine 
Old Man. — The Tone-Imparting Committee. — A Re- 
markable Stranger. — An Item Which the Editor 
Himself Could Not Understand. — Mark Twain's Au- 

38 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

tobiography. — ^Journalism in Tennessee. — ^An Epi- 
demic. — Favours from Correspondents. — Curious Relic 
for Sale. — Science vs. Luck. — " How Is This for High ?" 
— ^The Reception at the President's. — Goldsmith's 
Friend Abroad Again. — ^The Killing of Julius Caesar 
"Localized." — ^The Facts Concerning the Recent 
Resignation. — Mark Twain as George Washington. — 
"After" Jenkins. — Riley, Newspaper Correspondent. 
— ^The Story of Joseph. — Mark Twain's Last. — A 
Mediaeval Romance. — Lucretia Smith's Soldier. — 
Baker's Cat.— Story of the Good Little Boy Who Did 
Not Prosper. — Story of the Bad Little Boy. — ^The 
Sunday-School. — Poor Htunan Nature. — A Touching 
Story of George Washington's Boyhood. — Enigma. — 
Wit - Inspirations of the "Two- Year -Olds."— Dan 
Murphy. — How I Edited an Agricultural Paper. — 
Mark in Mormonland. — ^An Unburlesquable Thing. — 
A Page from a Califomian Almanac. — ^The Under- 
taker's Story. — A General Reply. — ^An Entertaining 
Article. — "History Repeats Itself." — Origin of Illustri- 
ous Men. — ^The Late Benjamin Franklin. — Information 
for the Million. — Rtmning for Governor. — ^The Poor 
Editor. — ^My Watch. — ^An Instructive Little Tale. — 
Favours from Correspondents. — A Sandwich Island 
Editor. — ^The Portrait. — Short and Singular Rations. 
— Honored as a Curiosity in Honolulu. — "Doggerel." 
— ^Mean People. — Remarkable Instances of Presence 
of Mind.— The Steed "Oahu."— A Strange Dream.— 
Concerning Chambermaids. 

This seems to be the first printing in book form for " Infor- 
mation Wanted/' "How I Secured a Berth/' and *'Mark 
Twain as George Washington." 

^ 29 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



1873 
One Hundred | Choice Selections | No. 6. 

(Uniform with the Series.) Being | A Re- 
pository of Literary Gems | Eloquent, 
Pathetic, Serious and Amusing. | Adapted 
to the use of Lyceimis, Temperance Socie- 
ties, Public I Readers, Exhibition-Rooms, 
Anniversaries, Family | Firesides, Schools, 
Etc., Etc. I (rule) | Compiled and Arranged 
by I Phineas Garrett, | Author of "100 
Choice Selections, Nos. 2, 3, 4, and 5,*' 
and I " Excelsior Dialogues." | (rule) | Pub- 
lished by I P. Garrett & Co., | 708 Chestnut 
Street, Philadelphia, Pa., and | 116 E. 
Randolph Street, Chicago, 111. | 1873. 

X 2mo, paper covers. Contains in pp. 1 18-1 20, *' Mark 
Twain on Juvenile Pugilists." I have not seen this 
elsewhere, but it is in Twain's earlier manner, ap- 
parently. 

1874 

Nast's I Illustrated | Almanac | (picture of 
*' merry-go-round.") | 1874 | published by | 
Harper & Brothers | Franklin Square. | 
New York. 

i2mo. Issued in paper covers, title on cover, with 
"Price Twenty-five Cents" above; 48 pages of text, 
plus ads., and contains "A Deception," pp. 30-31. 

30 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

This is the first American appearance for that story, 
it having a previous appearance in A Curious 
Dream in England. The article was later headed 
"How the Author was Sold in Newark." 

Copyrighted, September i8, 1873; published Octo- 
ber II, 1873. 

1873-74 

The I Gilded Age | A Tale of To-day | by | 
Mark Twain | (Samuel L. Clemens) | 
Author of '' Innocents Abroad," " Roughing 
It," Etc. I and | Charles Dudley Warner | 
Author of "My Summer in a Garden," 
'• Back Log Studies," Etc. | Fully Illustrated 
from New Designs | by Hoppin, Stephens, 
Williams, White, Etc., Etc. | (rule) | Sold by 
Subscription Only. | (rule) | Hartford: Amer- 
ican Publishing Company. ( 1874. 

Other title-pages printed in the same form at the 
same time bear name of another firm under " Amer- 
ican Publishing Company," and are dated " 1873/' 
The original sheets were bound up with these various 
title-pages, and published in December, 1873. 

8vo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1873) and 
electrotyper*s imprint, Chinese characters, Preface, 
Contents, List of Illustrations, pp. (i)-xvi; text, pp. 17- 
574; sub-title, Appendix, pp. (575-76). Frontispiece 
and 18 plates separately printed, numerous other il- 
lustrations in text. Size of leaf, trimmed, 8} by 5f. 

31 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Issued in black cloth and various leathers. Front 
cover has gilt ring in centre enclosing ''The | (orna- 
ment) I Gilded | Age | (ornament) | A Tale of To-day." 
Back has in gilt, "The | Gilded Age | A Tale | of | 
To Day | by | Mark Twain | & | Chas. Dudley Warner | 
(short rule) | Illustrated." and in cover-color on gilt 
shield, ''American | Publishing | Company, | Hart- 
ford, I Conn." Ornamental rules above and below 
in gilt, and "homs-of-plenty" and ornaments about 
"To Day." First and last pages of cover have 
stamped borders without color, and last page has 
publishers' monogram seal, also without color. 

Copyrighted, April 23, 1873 ; copy filed in Washing- 
ton, January 6, 1874. However, I have a copy with 
presentation inscription of December 24, 1873, and 
the American Publishing Company books show the 
actual publication some days before that time. 

Much conftision has been injected into the first -edition 
question on this book by the existence of a title-page bearing 
"American Publishing Company, 1873." It is almost cer- 
tain that this was printed separately by a firm desiring to 
evade subscription restrictions, and substituted for the 
original page. It lacks the name of one of the illustrators. 
White, and on the reverse the electrotyper is omitted, and 
is in different faced type from other printings. Mr. Bliss, 
of the American Publishing Company, certifies that no such 
fonts of type were in the possession of his company. Added 
certainty is given to the restriction-evading theory by the 
fact that numerous other copies esust with a rectangular 
slit at the bottom of the page where a firm name has been 
cut out, to enable them to sell at a reduction to the "trade** 
without detection. 

The real test of the first edition of the Gilded Age may be 
found on page 403. No illustration is to be found there in 
the first printing, yet "Philip Leaving Laura. Tail Piece" 

32 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

is called for by the List of Illustrations. This cut was after- 
ward supplied, even in some copies dated 1873. 

Later copies generally have two leaves of publishers* lists 
after text. 

An entry on the publishers' books shows that the first sixty 
copies from the bindery were sent out stitched without covers 
for review. The copy for the Boston Transcript shows on 
the title-page "American Publishing Company. 1874** and 
lacks cut p. 403. I have seen no correct copy in 1874 bearing 
more than one firm name on title. All copies seen in 1873 
have more than one firm name. 

The name **£sch61 Sellers," for one of the principal char- 
acters of the book, runs through more than one edition. On 
the protest of an actual owner of the name it was changed 
to ** Beriah Sellers, " but, as stated above, this has no bearing 
on the actual first printing. 

I have not been able to secure the English edition or to 
determine its date. The English catalogue lists it as three 
volumes, 1873-74. Possibly that means that the three vol- 
umes were not issued together. It is listed in the Publishers' 
Ctrcular for June x6, 1874. 

{From ih$ Evening Mail, May 5, 19 10) 

Haw Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner Came to Write 

'*Tke Gilded Age*' 



By £. J. Edwards 

Thb late Stephen A. Hubbard, who was for many years 
the managing editor and one of the owners of the Hartford 
(Conn.) Courant, when Joseph R. Hawley was editor and 
Charies Dudley Warner, the author and humorist, co-editor, 
told me this, the real story of the manner in which Mark 
Twain and Mr. Warner came to write The Gilded Age, which 
was published in 1873. 

*' After Mark Twain came to Hartford to live,*' said Mr. 
Hubbard, "he early made the acquaintance of Mr. Warner, 
being especially attracted to him because of the success of 
the deliciously humorous book. My Summer Garden, which * 
gained Mr. Warner national fame, and which was the first of 
his separate writings. The acqtiaintance ripened into in- 

33 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

timacy, and the families of the two men were frequently 
together. 

" It happened that one evening, when the Twains had the 
Warners at a family dinner, something was said about the 
success of Innocents Abroad. Thereupon both Mrs. Clemens 
and Mrs. Warner began to twit Mark Twain; they made all 
manner of good-natured fun of his book, called it an acci- 
dental hit, and finally ended up by defying him to write 
another work like it. 

"In high good-humor Mark Twain turned to Mr. Warner. 
'You and I wiU show these ladies that their laughter is un- 
seemly and a cracking of thorns under a pot,' he cried. 
'We'll get together and write a story, chapter by chapter 
every morning, and we will so interweave our work that these 
wives of ours will not be able to say which part has been 
written by Mark Twain and which by Charles D. Warner; 
for once a week we will gather in my library and read the 
story to them as it has progressed under our pens.' 

"What was spoken in jest was acted upon in the spirit of 
jest, Mr. Warner agreeing to meet Mark Twain every morning 
for an hour or two so that together they could write a new 
story somewhat on the lines of Innocents Abroad, After they 
had been at work on their little joke for a little while they 
became thoroughly interested in it, and then Mark Twain 
f proposed to introduce the character of Colonel Sellers in the 
story; both he and Mr. Warner grew actually enthusiastic 
over it, and their wives confessed their deep interest in it 
as it was read to them as the writing progressed. 

" So the jest was carried on until the story was about half 
finished, if I remember correctly, when it suddenly occurred 
to Mark Twain that it might be worth publishing; if it in- 
terested the wives of the authors, it ought to interest the 
public. Therefore, Twain approached his publishers and 
told them that he and Mr. Warner were jointly writing a 
book and he wondered whether he could make arrangements 
with them to publish it. They jumped at the proposition. 
The book was published under the title of The Gilded Age, it 
sold beyond all expectation for a while, and then, suddenly, 
the sales dropped. . . . The book returned some profit to the 
joint authors and the publishers. (Copyright, 19x0, by £. J. 
Edwards.) 

34 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Later on the book was dramatised with Raymond Hi t ch - 
oeck in the title r61e. The play was a great success for a 
number of years until Mr. IKIlIiumH withdrew, owing to a 
difference of opinion between him and Mr. Clemens. After 
that it failed to attract the public. 

Another interesting point concerning the Gilded Age is with 
reference to the mottoes in various languages used as chapter 
headings. They were furnished by James Hammond Trum- 
bull, Librarian of the Wadsworth Library, in Hartford, Conn., 
and the translations may be found in the American Publishing 
Company's Uniform Edition of the book. 



1874 

Number One. | (rule) | Mark Twain's | (vig- 
nette) I Sketches. | Authorised Edition, 
(rule) I With Illustrations by R. T. Sperry 
(rule) I American News Company, ( New 
York. 

8vo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1874) and 
imprint, pp. (i-ii); text, pp. (3)-3a. Size of leaf, 
trimmed, 9^ by 6. 

Issued in light-green paper covers, printed in dark 
green and black. At top of front cover is: "No. I. 
Price 25 Cents. No. I." In pictorial and ornamental 
design is '*Mark Twain's | Sketches. | Oarge picture of 
frog) I Authorised Edition. | Contents of No. 1. 1 (table 
of contents, 13 items, as given below) | American 
News Company, | New York." Below border is 
'* Entered According to Act of Congress, in the Year 
1874, by Samuel L. Qemens, in the Office of the 
Librarian of Congress, at Washington." 

35 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Copyrighted, May 9, 1874; copy filed in Washing- 
ton, June 4, 1874. 

Contents: A Memorable Midnight Experience. — 
The Jumping Prog. — Rogers. — ^Breaking It Gently. — 
Back from '* Yurrup." — ^The Pacts in the Case of the 
Great Beef Contract. — ^Aurelia's Unfortunate Young 
Man. — ^The Widow's Protest. — ^Map of Paris. — Prop- 
erty in London. — The Undertaker's Chat. — ^Misplaced 
Confidence. — Concerning Chambermaids. 

First edition for "A Memorable Midnight Ex- 
perience/' "Rogers," and first American edition for 
most of the other stories. 

The first issue shows a clean last page of cover. An ^tna 
Life Insurance advertisement, dated 1877, on that cover 
denotes a later issue. 

1875 

Lotos Leaves. | Original | Stories, Essays, and 
Poems, I by | Whitelaw Reid, Wilkie Col- 
lins, Mark Twain, John Hay, John Brough- 
am, Noah I Brooks, P. V. Nasby, I. H. 
Bromley, John Elderkin, Thomas W. Knox, 
W. J. I Florence, Chandos Fulton, J. Henry 
Hagar, Champion Bissell, J. B. | Bouton, 
W. S. Andrews, Gilbert Burling, Chas. I. 
Pardee, M. D., | C. McK. Loeser, Hon. R. B. 
Roosevelt, William F. Gill, C. Flo- | rio, 
C. E. L. Holmes, Charles Gayler, James 

36 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



Pech, Mus. I Doc., H. S. Olcott, Edward 
Greey, J. Brander | Matthews, and Alfred 
Tennyson. | Edited by | John Brougham 
and John Elderkin. | Illustrated. | Boston :| 
William F. Gill and Company, | Late Shep- 
ard and Gill, | 151 Washington Street, 
(rule) I 1875. 



Square 8vo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1874) 
and imprint, dedication, facsimile. Preface, Contents, 
List of Illustrations, half-title, sub-title, pp. (i)-(xix) ; 
ttxtf pp. (a)-4ii. Frontispiece, engraved half-title, 
and 17 plates, separately printed. Size of leaf, gilt 
edges, 9 J by 6 J. 

Copyrighted, December la, 1874; copy filed in 
Washington, January 33, 1875. 

Mark Twain contributes *'An Encounter with an 
Interviewer," pp. (a7)-3a. 

Issued in maroon doth, front cover bearing black 
and gilt geometrical design. Stamped in black on 
gilt are the words "Lotos | Leaves." The back has a 
similar stamp, and at the bottom, " William P. Gill & 
Co." Last page of cover has design and *' Lotos | 
Leaves " without color. 

First bound in maroon cloth for the " Club " edition ; 
then on thinner paper and bound in green cloth, for 
the "trade," both with 1875 on title. 

Issued in England by Chatto & Windus, square 
8vo, green cloth, but I cannot give the date of pub- 
lication with regard to priority. 

37 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Mark Twain's Sketches, | New and Old. | (rule) | 
Now First Published in Complete Form, 
(rule) I Sold only by Subscription. | (rule) 
The American Publishing Company. | Hart- 
ford, Conn., and Chicago, 111. | 1875. 



Square 8vo. Collation: Frontispiece, title, copyright 
(dated 1875), Preface, Index, pp. (ii-viii). These are 
printed on a short signature of four leaves. Text, 
numbered from 17-320, implies page numbers dear 
out to yellow fly-leaf; that might be a ''selling" trick, 
to make the customer think he was getting more pages 
for his money. Frontispiece and many illustrations 
printed with the text. Size of leaf, trimmed, 8} 
by 6f 

Issued in blue cloth and various leathers. Front 
cover of cloth copy stamped in black and gold orna- 
mental design, with the word "Sketches" in cover- 
color on gilt field, and "By | Mark Twain." in gilt. 
Back has black design, "Sketches | Old and | New" 
in cover-color on gilt field, as are the words "By Mark 
Twain." below. Last page of cover has design and 
publishers' monogram in black. 

Published July 21, 1875. 

Contents: My Watch; an Instructive Little Tale. — 
Political Economy. — ^The Jumping Frog. — ^Journalism 
in Tennessee. — Story of the Bad Little Boy. — Story 
of the Good Little Boy. — ^Two Poems, by Moore and 

38 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Twain. — ^A Visit to Niagara. — Answers to Corre- 
spondents. — To Raise Poultry. — ^The Experiences of 
the McWilliamses with Membraneous Croup. — My 
First Literary Venture. — How the Author was Sold 
in Newark. — ^The Office Bore. — ^Johnny Greer. — The 
Facts in the Case of the Great Beef Contract. — The 
Facts in the Case of George Fisher, Deceased. — Dis- 
graceful Persecution of a Boy. — ^The Judge's " Spirited 
Wonuui." — Information Wanted. — Some Fables for 
Good Old Boys and Girls: Part First, Part Second, 
Part Third. — The Facts Concerning the Late Sen- 
atorial Secretaryship. — A Fashion Item. — Riley, 
Newspaper Correspondent. — A Fine Old Man. — 
Science vs. Luck. — The Killing of Julius Caesar Local- 
ized. — An Item Which the Editor Himself Could Not 
Understand. — The Widow's Protest. — A Mediaeval 
Romance. — Petition Concerning Copyright. — After- 
Dinner Speech. — Lionizing Murderers. — ^A New Crime. 
— ^A Curious Dream. — A True Story Just As I Heard 
It. — Personal Habits of the Siamese Twins. — Speech 
at the Scottish Banquet at London. — A Ghost Story. 
— Legend of the Capitoline Venus. — Speech on Acci- 
dent Insurance. — ^John Chinaman in New York. — 
How I Once Edited an Agricultural Paper. — The 
Petrified Man. — My Bloody Massacre. — ^The Under- 
taker's Chat. — Concerning Chambermaids. — "After" 
Jenkins. — ^Aurelia's Unfortunate Young Man. — ^About 
Barbers. — "Party Cries" in Ireland. — The Facts Con- 
cerning the Recent Resignation. — History Repeats 
Itself. — Honored as a Curiosity. — The Late Benjamin 
Franklin. — ^The "Blind Letter" Department, London 
P. O. — First Interview with Artemus Ward. — Canni- 

39 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

balism in the Cars. — ^The Scripttiral Panoramist. — 
Prom "Hospital Days." — Curing a Cold. — A Curious 
Pleasure Excursion. — Running for Governor. — ^A Mys- 
terious Visit. 

First edition for "Two Poems, by Moore and Twain," 
"The Experiences of the McWilliamses with Membrane- 
ous Croup/' "Some Fables for Good Old Boys and Girls; 
Part First, Part Second, Part Third," " Petition Concerning 
Copyright," " After-Diimer Speech," "A True Story Just As 
I Heard It," " Speech at the Scottish Banquet at London," 
" A Ghost Story," " Party Cries in Ireland," " The ' Blind Let- 
ter' Department, London P. O.," "From 'Hospital Days,' " 
"A Curious Pleasure Excursion." Many other stories are 
first American printing in book form. 

The first printing is marked by the paragraph "From 
' Hospital Days,' " page 299. An " Erratum" sdip was pasted 
in at that page, which reads: " By an error of the publishers 
the above sketch, * From " Hospital Days," ' was inserted in 
this book. It should not have been, as Mark Twain is not 
the author of it. It will not appear in any future edition." 
Curiously enough, the "copy" for this skit exists entirely in 
the writing of Mr. Clemens, and the crossing out by him of 
the name thereon of "Jane Stuart Woolsey" in sending it 
to the printer does not entirely set at rest the suspicion that 
Samuel and not any Jane was the guilty person. Perhaps 
Mr. Clemens really intended it to go in, and it was an oflSdous 
printer who took it out on his own responsibility! 

The first issue also has a duplicated "Note," pp. 1x9 and 
lao. 

1876 

Old Times | on | the Mississippi. | by Mark 

Twain, | Author of ** Innocents Abroad," 

•• Roughing It/' etc., etc. | (publishers' seal) | 

Toronto: | Belford Brothers; | Publishers | 

1876. 

40 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

lamo. Collation: Blank, half-title, title, Contents, 
pp. (i-viii); "Old Times on the Mississippi/' pp. (9)- 
145; sub-title, p. 147; "A Literary Nightmare," pp. 
149-157; publishers' list, one leaf. Size of leaf, 
trimmed, 7 by 4}. 

Issued in maroon cloth, stcmiped in black *' (vignette) 
I Old Times | On the Mississippi | by| Mark Twain | 
(vignette) .'* " Old Times on the Mississippi " on back, 
in gilt, and an ornament without color on fourth page 
of cover. This was probably issued in paper also. 

First printing in book form for both items. "Old Times 
on the Mississippi" was later incorporated in "Life on the 
Mississippi/* 1883, and "A Literary Nightmare'* was re> 
printed under the title "Punch, Brothers, Punch!" (1878). 
"Old Times on the Mississippi" was also printed in England, 
and it is barely possible that it preceded the Canadian issue; 
I cannot give the English date. 

Later issues in the same year of the Canadian book contain 
mention of Tom Sawyer on the title-page as one of the author's 
works, as well as an ad. of same book on reverse of half-title. 



1876 

Information Wanted | and Other Sketches 
by I Mark Twain | (two-line authorization, 
signed) | London | George Routledge and 
Sons I The Broadway, Ludgate. 

i6ino. Collation: Half-title, title, imprint, contents, 
pp. (i-vii); text, pp. (8)-i43; publishers' lists, 18 
pages. Size of leaf, trimmed, 6} by 4. 

Issued in yellow boards, front cover having red 
tint-block with cover color spaces in which is printed 

41 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

in black, "Information | Wanted | by | Mark Twain. | 
(ornament) | London: | George Routledge & Sons. | 
The Broadway, Ludgate." Back carries line in black, 
"Information Wanted. Mark Twain.'' Last page of 
cover carries shutter ad. Publishers* lists inside both 
covers. 

I cannot give the exact date of publication, but I 
have seen a presentation copy dated June 4, 1876. 

Contents: Information Wanted. — *Two Poems, 
by Moore and Twain. — A Visit to Niagara. — ^To Raise 
Poultry. — *The Experiences of the McWilliamses 
with Membranous Croup. — How the Author was Spld 
in Newark. — ^The Office Bore. — Disgraceful Persecu- 
tion of a Boy. — ^The Judge's "Spirited Woman." — 
Some Fables for Good Old Boys and Girls: Part First. 
— Some Fables for Good Old Boys and Girls: Part 
Second. — Some Fables for Good Old Boys and Girls: 
Part Third.— A Fine Old Man.— * After-Dinner 
Speech. — * A True Story Just as I Heard It. — 
* Speech at the Scottish Banquet in London. — * A 
Ghost Story. — Speech on Accident Insurance. — ^John 
Chinaman in New York. — My Massacre. — "Party 
Cries" in Ireland. — History Repeats Itself. — Honored 
as a Curiosity. — First Interview with Artemus Ward. 
— * A Curious Pleasure Excursion. 

First edition for those marked with *. 

1876 

The I Adventures of Tom Sawyer | by | Mark 

Twain | (ornament) | London | Chatto and 

4a 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Windus, PiccadiUy | 1876. | (AU Rights Re- 
served) 

i2mo. Collation: Publishers' list, half-title, imprint, 
title, Preface, pp. (i-viii); text, pp. (i)~34o; Con- 
clusion, p. 341; ornament, p. (343). Size of leaf, top 
untrimmed, 7^ by 6^. Short signature of four leaves 
before text. 

Issued in red cloth. First page of cover, border 
and ornaments stamped in black; lettering, "Tom 
Sawyer | by | Mark Twain." in gilt. Back, ornaments 
in black, "Tom | Sawyer | by | Mark Twain | Chatto & 
Windus" in gilt. 

Published June 9, 1876, over six months before the Ameri- 
can issue. It is claimed that a certain Canadian pirated 
edition, set up from proof-sheets stolen day by day by a 
printer at the American Publishing Company, was the first 
issue, but it could hardly be previous to this English edition. 



1876 

History of | The Big Bonanza : | An Authentic 
Account of the Discovery, History, and 
Working of the | World Renowned | Com- 
stock Silver Lode of Nevada | Including the | 
Present Condition of the Various Mines sit- 
uated thereon ; | Sketches of the most Prom- 
inent Men interested in | them; Incidents 
and Adventures Connected with | Mining, 

43 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

the Indians, and the Country; | Amusing 
Stories, Experiences, | Anecdotes, &c., &c.| 
And a Full | Exposition of the Production of 
Pure Silver | by | Dan De Quille. | (William 
Wright.) I Profusely Illustrated. | (rule) | 
Sold by Subscription only. | (rule) | Hart- 
ford, Conn.: | American Publishing Com- 
pany, I San Francisco, Cal.: | A. L. Ban- 
croft & Co. I 1876. 

Collation: Title, copjrright (dated 1876), Introduc- 
tory, dedication. Preface, List of Illustrations, Con- 
tents, pp. (i)-xvi; text, pp. 17-566; Appendix, pp. 
567-569. Size of leaf, trimmed, 8f by 5}. Frontis- 
piece, plate facing frontispiece, and ntmierous other 
plates separately printed; a few text illustrations. 

Issued in brownish-gray cloth and various leathers. 
Front cover stamped in black design, gilt medallion 
in centre, leaving name of book, "The | Big Bonanza." 
in raised letters color of cloth. Back has design and 
rules stamped in black, with gilt lettering, "The | 
Big I Bonanza | by | Dan De Quille | Illustrated | 
Am. Pub. Co." 

Copyrighted, July 12, 1876; copy filed in Washing- 
ton. September ao, 1876. 

One-page "Introductory'* is by Mark Twain. This book 
is very desirable to the admirer of Twain, as it was written 
by a fellow-worker on the Virginia Ciiy Enterprise, of Nevada, 
who figured as one of the characters of Roughing It, and is a 
most readable supplement and commentary on same. 

44 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1876 

The Adventures | of | Tom Sawyer | by | Mark 
Twain. | (rule) | The American Publishing 
Company, | Hartford, Conn.: Chicago, 111.: 
Cincinnati, Ohio. | A. Roman & Co., San 
Francisco, Cal. | 1876. 

Square 8vo. Collation: Half-title, frontispiece, title, 
copyright (dated 1875), dedication, Preface, Contents, 
Illustrations, pp. (i)-xvi; text, pp. (i7)-274; Con- 
clusion, p. (375); publishers' lists, two leaves. Size 
of leaf, trimmed, 8| by 6^. 

Issued in blue cloth and several leathers. Cloth- 
bound copy has, on front cover, "Adventures" in 
cover-color on gilt band, and in gilt lettering below, 
"Of I Tom Sawyer.", all included in black and gilt 
ornamental design. Back has black and gilt design, 
and on gilt field in cover-color, "Adventures | of Tom 
Sawyer;" and in gilt lettering below, "By | Mark 
Twain. | Am. Pub. Co." Design in black, including 
publishers' monogram, on last page of cover. 

Copyrighted, July 21, 1875 ; copies filed in Washing- 
ton, January a, 1877. Probably on the market during 
the last week of 1876. 

Tom Sawyer was first printed on a good quality calendered 
paper, and changed during the same year to much heavier, 
cheaper paper. In the first issue there are two blank un- 
numbered pages, one before and one after the Preface. This 
latter feature, however, was repeated in some issues in later 
years. Early in the first year an indent or "gouge" was 
made in the bottom line on the first page of text, which 
persists through all later imprints from Uie same plates. 

4 45 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1877 

Vol. III. Whole Number, 10. | (rule) | The 
Quarterly Elocutionist. | Readings, Recita- 
tions, Declamations and | Dialogues, for 
School, Parlor, and | Platform. | Edited and 
Published by | Mrs. Anna Randall-Diehl, | 
(Formerly Anna T. Randall,) | Author of 
"Reading and Elocution," ** Choice Read- 
ings," Etc. I Issued I January, April, July 
and October. | (rule) \ April, 1877. | l|S=*For 
Contents, see next page. | (double rule) | Sub- 
scription • • • • One Dollar per Year. | Single 
Copies, 30 cents. | All orders sent to Anna 
Randall-Diehl, 35 Union Square, New York. 
In double-rule border, with "Copyright, 
Mrs. Anna Randall-Diehl, 1875." below. 

z amo. Issued in paper covers, the above title printed 
on first page of cover. 148 pages of text, with Mark 
Twain's "Literary Nightmare,'* pp. 130-136. This 
is the first American printing in book form (allowing 
this to be a '•book") of this story, later entitled 
"Punch, Brothers, Punch!" 

The poem around which the sketch was written was issued 
as a song set to music, (1876). Did Mark Twain write the 
poem? 

46 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1877 

A True Story, | and the | Recent Carnival of 
Crime. | by | Mark Twain. | Illustrated. | 
(vignette) | Boston : | James R. Osgood and 
Company, | Late Ticknor and Fields, and 
Fields, Osgood, & Co. | 1877. 

33mo. Collation: Frontispiece, title, copyright (dated 
1877) and imprint, Contents, ornament. Illustrations, 
ornament, sub-title, ornament, pp. (ii-x); "A True 
Story," pp. (ii)-29; vignette, ornament, sub- title, 
pp. (30-33); "Facts Concerning the Recent Carnival 
of Crime in Connecticut," pp. (33)-9a; publishers' 
lists, two leaves. Size of leaf, trimmed, 4f by 3^. 

Issued in maroon or green cloth, gilt letters, black 
border on front cover, and black letters on back. 
Two lines on front cover, "A True Story | Mark 
Twain," and "A True Story: Mark Twain," down 
the back. Inside front cover and first fly-leaf, also 
last fly-leaf and inside rear cover bear publishers' 
lists. Back cover bears stamp. 

Copyrighted, September 17, 1877; copy filed in 
Washington, September 19, 1877. 

1878 

Punch, Brothers, Punch! | and | Other 
Sketches. | by | Mark Twain. | (rule) | New 
York: | Slote. Woodman & Co. 

47 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

i6mo. Collation: Title, copjrright (dated 1878) and 
imprint, Contents, pp. (i-iv); text, pp. (5)-! 40; Cer- 
tificate, scrap-book ad., blank, pp. (141-44). Size of 
leaf, trimmed, sJ by 4 J. Cloth-bound copy may be 
i deeper. 

Issued in red paper covers, printed in black and gilt, 
and in green or blue cloth. Paper cover bears on 
front, "Punch. | Brothers. Punch! | • and • | Other 
Sketches | by | Mark Twain. | —New York— | Slote. 
Woodman & Co.," surrounded by vignettes and bor- 
der, and on page four of cover, vignette ad. of scrap- 
book. On the back is "Mark Twain's Sketches, 
price 25 Cents." On the back of the cloth copies is 
"Punch I Brothers | Punch | and | other | Sketches | 
by I Mark | Twain." Front cover of cloth copies 
bears the same lettering as the paper copies, stamped 
in black (lacking the firm name), but in different type 
and design. Cloth copy bears vignette scrap-book 
ad. inside instead of outside rear cover. 

Contents: Punch, Brothers, Punch! — Speech on the 
Weather at the New England Society's Seventy-first 
Annual Dinner. — Rogers. — Map of Paris (with Map). 
— Random Notes of An Idle Excursion. — Speech at a 
Dinner of the Knights of St. Patrick. — An Encounter 
with an Interviewer. — ^The Loves of Alonzo Fitz 
Clarence, etc. — ^The Canvasser's Tale. 

First edition for "Random Notes of an Idle Ex- 
cursion," "Speech at a Dinner of the Knights of St. 
Patrick," "The Loves of Alonzo Fitz Clarence," and 
"The Canvasser's Tale." 

Copyrighted and filed in Washington, March 14, 
1878. 

48 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

The title-page of the first issue bears the name 
"Mark Twain'' in Roman "caps/* while the later 
title-page gives the name in facsimile script. Later 
printings also contain an enlarged advertisement on 
rear cover of "Mark Twain's Scrap-Book," which 
includes a letter from the inventor. The smaller ad. 
in the first issue does not include this letter, which 
appears in a small pamphlet concerning the "Scrap- 
Book" issued by Slote, Woodman & Co., as follows: 

Mark Twain's | Patent Scrap Book | (vignette por- 
trait of Twain, with signature) | For Sale by | (dealer's 
name and address). Engraved ornamental lettering 
and border. Eight-page folder, having on last page 
same letter as appears on third page of cover, second 
edition of Punch, Brothers, Punch/ S by 3^. 

The English edition was published by Chatto & Windus, 
lamo., 3x0 pages of text, under the title, "An Idle Excur- 
sion," listed by the Spectator for the week ending March 30, 
1878. Another firm published Mark Twain's Nightmare, 
and in Scotland appeared Punch, Brothers, Punch I Canada 
contributed during the same period An Idle Excursion and 
Rcmtbling Notes of an Idle Excursion. One of these may have 
been issued previous to the American publication, but as 
most of them were pirated, there is little hope of obtaining 
the exact dates except by accident. 



1879 

One Hundred | Choice Selections | No. 17. | 
A Rare Collection of | Oratory, Sentiment, 
Eloquence and Humor, | — for — | Public 
Readings, | Winter Gatherings, | Social 
Entertainments, | Elocutionary Exercises, 

49 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Temperance Societies, | Exhibitions, Ly- 
ceums, &c. I Designed to Accompany the 
Preceding Ntimbers. | (rule) | Published 
by I P. Garrett & Co., | 708 Chestnut Street, 
Philadelphia, Pa., and | 116 E. Randolph 
Street, Chicago, 111. 

1 2mo, paper covers. Above title was not taken from 
the first printing, so I do not attempt to collate fully. 
It contains, pp. 172-74, "Jim Wolfe and the Cats." 
The story is undoubtedly Twain's, but the phrasing 
and spelling indicate a probability of its being a lecture 
report, and not a direct contribution. 

In one of his Chapters from My Autobiography, 
Mark Twain states that during his stay in England, 
about 1873, the story entitled "Jim Wolfe & the 
Cats" was sold without warrant to "Tom Hood" by 
a certain young man. "How I Escaped Being 
Killed in a Duel" appeared in Tom Hood's Annual 
for 1873, but I have not seen the issues for the en- 
suing years. 

1880 

A Tramp Abroad; | Illustrated by W. Fr. 
Brown, True Williams, B. Day and other | 
Artists — With also Three or Four Pictures 
made by | the Author of this Book, without 
Outside Help ; | in All | Three Htmdred and 
Twenty-eight Illustrations. | by | Mark 
Twain, | (Samuel L. Clemens.) | (Sold by 

so 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Subscription only.) | Hartford, Conn.: | 
American Publishing Company. | Chatto & 
Windus, London. I 1880. 



8vo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1879), Illus- 
trations, Contents, pp. (i)-xvi; text, pp. 17-580; ap- 
pendices, title and text, A to F, pp. (s8i)-63i. 
Reverse of last leaf carries publishers' ad. of Intuh 
cents Abroad, Size of leaf, trimmed, 8^ by sf. 

Portrait frontispiece and 34 plates separately 
printed, also numerous illustrations in the text. 

Issued in black cloth, stamped in gilt on front 
cover. *• A Tramp Abroad | by | Mark | Twain." Figure 
with umbrella and alpenstock drawn through the 
lettering. Back has "A Tramp | Abroad | by | Mark 
Twain. | (rule) | Illustrated | American | Publishing | 
Company. | Hartford | Conn." Third and last five lines 
in cover-color on gilt field, balance of lettering, rules, 
and figure at top in gilt. Last page of cover has 
publishers' monogram without color, and both first 
and last pages carry border without color. 

Published March 13, 1880. 

The engraved frontispiece of Mark Twain in this book showed 
" spots '* during its first printing. It was therefore re-engraved 
for further use. The original plate shows the fine underlying 
lines vertical, while on the remade plate they are oblique. 

The caption for the pictorial frontispiece was originally 
"Moses," and later changed to "Titian's Moses." Abroad, 
in cover-color on gilt. Gilt rules. 

1880 

A Tramp Abroad | by | Mark Twain | Author 
of I 'The Innocents Abroad* 'The New 

51 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Pilgrims' Progress ' etc. | (ornament) | In 
Two Volumes. | Vol. I. (Vol. II), London | 
Chatto & Windus, Piccadilly] | 1880 | All 
Rights Reserved. 

i2mo. Collation: Half-title, publishers* list, title, 
imprint, pp. (i-iv); text, pp. (i)-328. Vol. II: Half- 
title, publishers' list, title, imprint, pp. (i-iv); text, 
pp. (i)-234; appendices A-B-C-D-E-F, pp. (235)- 
304. Added are 32 pages of publishers' lists, dated 
(in the only copy I have seen) February, 1880. Size 
of leaf, trimmed, 7f by 4}. 

Issued in brown cloth. First page of cover stamped 
in black, ** (rules) | A Tramp Abroad | (niles and orna- 
ments) I Mark Twain | (rules)." Back with lettering 
stamped in gilt, ornaments and rules in black, "(rules) 
A I Tramp | Abroad | Mark | Twain | Vol. I (II) | 
(ornaments and rules) | Chatto & Windus | (niles)." 
Last page of cover has monogram in black. 

1882 

The I Prince and the Pauper | a Tale | for 
Young People of all Ages | by | Mark 
Twain | with one Hundred and Ninety-two 
Illustrations | Boston | James R. Osgood 
and (Company | 1882 

Square 8vo. (Collation: Facsimile MSS., transcrip- 
tion of same, seals, title, copyright (dated 1881) 
and imprint, dedication, quotation from Shakespeare, 
pp. (ii-ix); Contents, List of Illustrations, preface. 

S2 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

sub-title, pp. ii-(2i); text» pp. 23-401; Notes, pp. 
403-411. Size of leaf, trimmed, 8f by 6^. Illustra- 
tions printed with text. 

Issued in green cloth and several leathers. Front 
cover of cloth copy is stamped in gilt, ''The Prince | 
and I The Pauper | Mark Twain.'* Also has crown, 
shield, etc., in gilt, and other ornaments in black. 
Back has "The | Prince | and the | Pauper" in cover- 
color on gilt field; "Mark Twain | James R. Osgood | 
& Co." in gilt; ornaments and rules in black. This 
collation is of the regularly published edition. There 
was a specially printed number (variously stated to 
be from 6 to 30) on China or India paper for Mr. 
Qemens personally, a copy of which I have not had 
opportunity to inspect. 

Copyrighted, October 13, 1881 ; filed in Washington, 
December 12, 1881. 

1881 

The Prince and The Pauper | A Tale for 
Young People of all Ages | by | Mark 
Twain | (Samuel L. Clemens) | (ornament) | 
With One Hundred and Ninety Illustra- 
tions I London | Chatto & Windus, Picca- 
dilly I 1881 I (All Rights Reserved) 

z2mo. Collation: Publishers' list, facsimile MSS., 
transcription of same, seals, title, dedication, preface. 
Contents, List of Illustrations, quotation, pictorial 
half-title, pp. (i)-xvii; text, pp. (i)-38i; "Notes," 

S3 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

sub-title and text, pp. (383)-39i; publishers' lists, 3a 
numbered pages, dated November, 1881. Size of leaf, 
top untrimmed, 7 J by 4 J. 

Issued in red cloth. Front cover is stamped in gilt 
and black. Border at top in black; "The Prince | 
and the | Pauper/' in gilt; vignettes in black; as also are 
"Mark | Twain'* and the bottom border. Back has 
black border at top, "The Prince | and | the Pauper | 
Mark | Twain " in gilt, vignette in black, " Illustrated" 
in gilt, black border, "Chatto & Windus" in gilt. 
Publishers' seal in black on last page of cover. Fig- 
ured end-papers. 

Published December i, i88z, almost two weeks before the 
American issue. 

1882 

The I Stolen White Elephant | etc. | By Mark 
Twain | (publishers' seal) | Boston | James 
R. Osgood and Company | 1882 

i6mo. Collation: Half-title, title, copyright (dated 
1882) and imprint. Contents, pp. (i-v); text, pp. (7)- 
306; publishers* lists, pp. (i)-i2; blank. Size of leaf, 
trimmed, 6^ by 4^. 

Issued in tan cloth, front cover stamped with orna- 
mental border and design in brown, including ele- 
phant's head, and the words "The | Stolen | White | 
Elephant | &c. | Mark | Twain." The last two words, 
as well as the background for the elephant, are gilt. 
Back is lettered, in brown. "The | Stolen | White | 
Elephant | (ornament) | Mark Twain." Above and 

54 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

below are designs in brown, and below is publishers' 
monogram in gilt. 

Copyrighted, April 29, 1882; copies filed at Wash- 
ington, June 12, 1882. 

Contents: ♦The Stolen White Elephant. — Some 
Rambling Notes of an Idle Excursion. — ^The Facts 
Concerning the Recent Carnival of Crime in Connect- 
icut. — ^* About Magnanimous-Incident Literature. — 
Punch, Brothers, Punch! — ♦A Curious Experience. — 
♦ The Great Revolution in Pitcaim. — * Mrs. Mc Will- 
iams and the Lightning. — * On the Decay of the Art 
of Lying. — ^The Canvasser's Tale. — ^An Encounter 
with an Interviewer. — ^* Paris Notes. — ^♦Legend of 
Sagenfeld, in Germany. — Speech on the Babies. — 
Speech on the Weather. — Concerning the American 
Language. — Rogers. — ^The Loves of Alonzo Fitz 
Clarence and Rosannah Ethelton. 

First edition for those marked with ^. 



1882 

The I Stolen White Elephant | etc. | By | Mark 
Twain | (Samuel L. Clemens) | (ornament) 
London | Chatto & Windus, Piccadilly 
1882 I (All Rights Reserved) 

i2mo. Collation: Blank, half-title, publishers' list, 
title, imprint, Contents, pp. (i-v) on short signature of 
four leaves; text, pp. (i)-28s; vignette, p. (287); 
publishers' lists, dated May, 1 88a, 32 numbered pages, 
added. Size of leaf, top untrimmed, 7} by 4|. 

Issued in red cloth. Front cover has pictorial 

SS 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

elephant design in black, and in border, "The Stolen | 
White Elephant" in gilt. Back has in gilt, ''The | 
Stolen I White | Elephant | etc. | Mark | Twain | Chatto 
& Windus," with picture in black above the last line. 
Last page of cover carries publishers' monogram in 
black. 

Contents identical with American edition. 

Published June lo, 1883, a day or so previous to the 
American issue. 

1882 

Date 1 60 1. I Conversation, as it was by the 
Social Fireside, | in the Time of the Tudors. | 
Mem. (in brackets, eight lines.) 

Collation: Title, p. (I), text, pp. (i)-xi. Imprint, 
p. xi, reads " Done att | Ye Acadamie Presse, | 
MDCXX: LXXX II." Size of leaf, trimmed, lof by yf 
Issued stitched, without cover. 

This has been privately printed in small editions several 
times, but the copy described above is presumably the first 
edition, as it came direct from Stormfield to me. It is, how- 
ever, just possible that some borrower of the original MSS. 
may have surreptitiously put it in type before i88a. Witness 
the following extracts from letters from John Hay to one 
Gunn, of Cleveland, dated in 1880: "Here it is. It was 
written by Mark Twain in a serious effort to bring back our 
literature and philosophy to the sober and chaste Elizabethan 
standard. . . . The proposition which you make to pull a 
few proofs of the niasterpiece is highly attractive, and, of 
course, highly immoral. I cannot properly consent to it, and 
I am afraid the great man would think I was taking an 
unfair advantage of his confidence. Please send back the 
document as soon as you can, and if, in spite of my prohibit 
tion, you take these proofs, save me one** 

The italics are mine. 

56 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1883 

Life on the Mississippi | by | Mark Twain | Au- 
thor of "The Innocents Abroad," ''Rough- 
ing It/' I "The Prince and the Pauper/' 
etc. I With more than Three Hundred Illus- 
trations I (vignette with caption) | (Sold by 
Subscription only.) | Boston | James R. Os- 
good and Company | 1883. 

8vo. Collation: Frontispiece, title, copyright (dated 
1883) and imprint, page quotation from Harper's 
Magazine, pp. (ii-v); Contents, pp. (7)-i4; List of 
Illustrations, pp. (i 5)^20: text, pp. (3i)'593; appen- 
dices A, B, C, and D, pp. (595)^624. Size of leaf, 
trimmed, 8f by 5}. 

Issued in brown cloth and various leathers. Front 
cover of cloth copy reads, "Life | on the | Mississippi | 
Mark Twain | .Illustrated." First two lines are in 
black, and the last three in cover-color on black strips; 
whole enclosed in ornamental bordering, and bearing 
gilt-stamped scene with "roustabout" in upper left- 
hand comer. Back has "(niles) | Life | on the | 
(rules) I (scene in pilot-house) | (rules) | Mississippi | 
by I Mark Twain | Illustrated | James R. Osgood & 
Co. I (rules).*' Letters in gilt, rules in black. 

Copyrighted, January 18, 1883; copy filed in Wash- 
ington, May 17, 1883. 

The first copies contained a plate, page 441, showing Mark 
Twain in flames, which was omitted, at the request of Mrs. 
Clemens, in further printings of same title-page date. 

57 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1883 

Life on the Mississippi | by | Mark Twain | 
Author of • A Tramp Abroad ' ' The Inno- 
cents Abroad' | 'The Prince and the 
Pauper' Etc. | (vignette, with caption) | 
With over 300 Illustrations | London | 
Chatto & Windus, Piccadilly | 1883 | (All 
Rights Reserved). 

i2mo. Collation: Blank, half-title, publishers' list, 
frontispiece, title. Trade (S. L. Clemens), Mark and 
imprint, page quotation, Contents, List of Illustra- 
tions, pp. (i)-xxv; text, pp. (i)-S33; appendices 
A, B, C, D, pp. 535-561; ornament, p. (563); pub- 
lishers' lists (dated March, 1883), 32 numbered pages. 
Size of leaf, top untrimmed, 7 1 by 4 J. 

Issued in red cloth. Front cover stamped with 
picture in black, and lettering in gilt, " Life | on the | 
Mississippi." Back is stamped in gilt, "Life | on 
the I Mississippi | Mark | Twain | Illustrated | Chatto 
& Windus." Vignette in black after "Twain." On 
last page of cover is publishers' seal in black. Figured 
paper inside covers. 

Published May 13, 1883, some days before the American 
issue. 

1883 

The New Guide | of the ( Conversation | in 

Portuguese and English | in Two Parts | by | 

58 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



Pedro Caroline | First American Edition, 
Reprinted Verbatim et Literatim | with an 
Introduction | by Mark Twain. | Boston | 
James R. Osgood and Company | (rule) | 
1883 

24mo. Collation: Blank, half-title, title, copyright 
(dated 1883) and imprint, "Observajao," pp. (i-v); 
Introduction to the Osgood edition . by Mark Twain, 
pp. (vii)-xi; preface, pp. (xiii)-xiv; text, pp. (i)-i82; 
one leaf blank. Size of leaf, trimmed, 5I by 4}. 

Issued in various colored cloths, dark yellow, light 
and dark brown. Front cover stamped in black, 
" The I New . Guide | of the | Conversation | in Portu- 
guese I and I ' . ' English * . ' | with Preface by | Mark 
Twain | (ornament)." Issued also in light orange- 
colored paper, with printed front cover same as title. 

The only copy printed in England I have seen was issued 
by Routledge, and bore the date of 1884. 

Two articles captioned ** Portuguese English " appeared in 
the Calif Of nian magazine in 1864, commenting upon this 
same work by Pedro Carolino (Jose de Ponseca). The com- 
ments give no evidence of having been written by Mark 
Twain, but it is highly probable that in his capacity as as- 
sistant editor of the magazine he obtained the book and was 
moved to write his later effusion. 

1885 

Adventures | of | Huckleberry Finn | (Tom 
Sawyer's Comrade) . | Scene : The Mississippi 
Valley. | Time : Forty to Fifty Years Ago. | 

59 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

By I Mark Twain. | With One Hundred and 
Seventy-four Illustrations. | New York: | 
Charles L. Webster and Company. | 1885. 

Square 8vo. Collation : Half-title, frontispiece, copy- 
right (dated 1884) and imprint, Notice, Explanatory, 
pp. (i-vii); Contents, Illustrations, pp. (9)-! 5; text, 
PP- (i 7)^366; blank, one leaf. Frontispiece seems 
to be printed with the text, but is split off from first 
signature and inner edge pasted to fly-leaf. Between 
frontispiece and title is an inserted plate of a Mark 
Twain bust. This plate exists in two states, which 
being first printed I cannot avow. Size of leaf, trim- 
med, 8} by 6f. 

Issued in green and blue cloth. Front cover is 
stamped in black and gilt, "Adventures of | Huckle- 
berry I Finn. | (Tom Sawyer's Comrade) | by | Mark 
Twain. | (ornament) | Illustrated." "Mark Twain" 
and the "H" and "P" at the beginning of the 
•'Huckleberry Finn" are in gilt, balance in black. 
Lower left-hand portion of the cover is occupied by 
a drawing of "Huck," part of background in gilt. 
Back has ''Adventures | of | Huckleberry | J^ Finn." 
in black on gilt field. Below, separated by an orna- 
ment, is "By I Mark Twain. | Charles . L. Webster | & 
Co." Assorted black rules above and below. 

An edition of 30,000 was printed and a number of copies 
for agents were bound up when the illustration on page 383 
disclosed a defect of such nature that it became necessary 
to correct the plate and substitute a new sheet for that page. 
The copies in the agents' hands were recalled as far as pos- 
sible, and destroyed. However, it is said that a few of the 
original copies still exist. 

60 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



1884 
The Adventures | of | Huckleberry Finn | (Tom 
Sawyer's Comrade) | Scene : The Mississippi 
Valley | Time: Forty to Fifty Years Ago | 
by I Mark Twain | (Samuel L. Clemens) | 
(ornament) | With 174 Illustrations ( Lon- 
don I Chatto & Windus, Piccadilly | 1884 | 
(All Rights Reserved.) 

i2mo. Collation: Half-title, publishers' list, frontis- 
piece, title, imprint, Notice, Explanatory, Contents, 
List of Illustrations, pp. (i)-xvi; text, pp. (i)-438; 
vignette, p. (439); publishers' lists, 32 numbered 
pages (dated October, 1884). Size of leaf, top im- 
trimmed, 7^ by 4 J. 

Issued in red cloth. Front cover pictorially stamp- 
ed in black, with lettering in gilt, "The Adventures | 
of I Huckleberry | Finn." Back has letters in gilt, 
"The Adventures | of | Huckleberry | Finn | Mark | 
Twain | Illustrated | Chatto & Windus," with vig- 
nette in black under "Twain." Publishers' seal on 
last page of cover. Figured end-papers. 

Published December lo, 1884, three days before an Amer- 
ican copy was received at Washington. 

1885 

Phunny Phellows — Funniest Bcx)k of all. 

i2mo, paper covers. 

My copy lacks the title-page, so I cannot give much correct 
information about the book. It was published by Rhodes 

5 61 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

& McClure, Chicago, April 7, 1885. The Mark Twain items 
are: "Mr. Beecher's Farm," pp. i-iii, and "Mark Twain's 
Remarkable Gold Mines," page 6. The first item appeared 
in " Curious Dream," London, 187a, but the latter I hiave not 
found elsewhere. 

1887 

English I as | She • is • Taught | Being Genuine 
Answers to Examination Questions | in our 
Public Schools Collected by \ Caroline B. 
Le Row I with a Commentary Thereon | by | 
Mark Twain. | London | T. Fisher Unwin | 
26, Paternoster Square | 1887. 

i6mo. Collation: Half-title, quotation, title, pub- 
lisher's seal, quotation. Preface, Contents, ornament, 
pp. (i)-(x); review by Mark Twain, pp. xi-xli; text 
(by Mrs. Le Row), pp. 1-109; imprint, p. (no). 
Size of leaf, untrimmed, 6^ by 4|. 

Issued in imitation alligator-skin cloth. Front 
cover is stamped, in black, " English | as | She • is • 
Taught I With a Commentary | by | Mark Twain.'* 
The back reads "English as She is Taught," with 
publisher's monogram and rules. 

The American book published under the same title in 1887 
has Cassell & Co.'s imprint, and carries only the five- line 
quotation from Mark Twain referred to above. The entire 
Mark Twain article was first published in book form in the 
United States in 1900, but without the Le Row compilation. 

1888 

Mark Twain's | Library of Hvimor | (rule) | 

Illustrated by E. W. Kemble | (rule) | New 

63 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

York I Charles L. Webster & Company | 
1888 

8vo, brown doth. 

This book coosists entirely of reprints from previous books, 
with the exception of the "Compiler's Apology," page (v), and 
" Warm Hair," page 7. This latter paragraph is attributed to 
Mark Twain in the first printing, but the author's name was 
later omitted from the page. First editions of 1888 had the 
Table of Contents in page numerical order, later corrected 
to alphabetical order. A slightly darker cloth was also used 
in the binding of later issues. 

Under this same general title. Harpers issued, in 1906, 
"Men and Things." "Women and Things." "The Primrose 
Way," and "A Little Nonsense," all being equally barren of 
first-edition material — for Mark Twain, at least. 



1889 

A Connecticut Yankee | in | King Arthur's 
Court. I by | Mark Twain. | New York: | 
Charles L. Webster & Company. | 1889. 

Square Svo. Collation : Frontispiece, title, copyright 
(dated 1889) and imprint, Contents, List of Illustra- 
tions, Preface, pp. (ii)-(xv) ; A Word of Explanation, 
pp. 17-23; sub-title, p. 25; text, pp. 27-575; leaf 
of publishers' lists and blank on two-leaf signature. 
Size of leaf, trimmed, S\ by 6^. 

Issued in green cloth. Front cover bears in gilt, 
"A Yankee | in | King Arthur's Court | Mark Twain." 
Above the "Mark Twain." in the centre of the cover, 
is an ornamental, armorial design of the "Yankee" 
in black, gilt, and slate-colored " plate." Back carries 

63 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

"(double rule) | A | Yankee | in | King | Arthur's | 
Court I (double rule) | (armorial design) | Mark 
Twain | Charles • L. Webster | & Co./' all in gilt. 

Copyrighted, August 7, 1889 ; copy filed in Washing- 
ton, December 5, 1889. The English edition is zamo, 
red cloth, 525 pages of text, issued by Chatto & 
Windus, and published December 6, 1889. 



1890 

Charles Dickens | By Pen and Pencil | Includ- 
ing Anecdotes and Reminiscences Collected | 
from his Friends and Contemporaries | by 
Frederic G. Kitton | (portrait vignettes of 
Dickens) | (quotation, two lines) | Illus- 
trated with Engravings | London | Frank 
T. Sabin 3 Garrick Street | John F. Dexter 
16 Minford Gardens West Kensington | 
MDCCCXC. 

Polio, in paper-covered parts. Contains on pp. 157-158 a 
fine letter contributed by Twain, evidently written for pub- 
lication, therefore here listed and not among " Letters." 

1892 

Merry Tales | by | Mark Twain | New York | 
Charles L. Webster & Co. | 1892. 

x6mo. Collation: Half-title and edition title, pub- 
lishers' list, copyright (dated 1892) and imprint, 

64 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Editor's Note, Contents, pp. (i-vii); text, pp. 9-209; 
three leaves of publishers' lists and two blank. Size 
of leaf, trimmed, 7 by 4|. 

Issued in blue-gray cloth. Front cover stamped 
in gilt, "Merry Tales | Mark | Twain." In orna- 
mental border below are the words, "Fiction Fact | 
and I Fancy Series," stamped in dark blue. Back is 
stamped in gilt, "Merry | Tales | (ornament) | Mark 
Twain." Below in dark blue and in ornamental bor- 
der, "Fiction | Fact | and | Fancy | Series." Then 
again in gilt, "Charles L. Webster | and Company." 

Copyrighted, February 23, 1892; filed in Washing- 
ton, March 28, 1892. 

Contents : The Private History of a Campaign that 
Failed.— The Invalid's Story.— Luck.— The Captain's 
Story. — A Curious Experience. — ^Mrs. McWilliams 
and the Lightning. — ^Meisterschaft. 

First edition for the first, second, third, and last items. 

This book was first bound up with figured end-papers. 
Subsequently, plain end-papers were used, and a portrait 
frontispiece of Mark Twain added. 



1892 

Mark Twain | His Life and Work | A Bio- 
graphical Sketch I by | Will M. Clemens | 
(rule) I 1892 I The Clemens Publishing Com- 
pany I San Francisco 

i6mo. Collation: Blank, title, cop3rright (dated 
1891) and imprint, Contents, pp. (i~v); Preface, pp. 

6S 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

(7)-i2; text, pp. 13-21 1. Size of leaf, trimmed, 6f 
by 4} (cloth copy 6i by 4^). 

Issued in paper and cloth. Paper-boimd copy has 
on front cover, "Pacific Library, Price 50 Cents. | 
Published Qtiarteriy. No. i, July, 1892. Sub- 
scription, 1 2 per Year. | (double rule) | Mark Twain | 
The Story of His Life and Work | (portrait of Twain) | 
By Will M. Clemens | 1892 | The Clemens Publishing 
Company | San Francisco." Back carries longi- 
tudinal line, "Mark Twain— His Life and Work." 
Rear cover has publishers' ad. "Mark Twain" on 
front cover is printed in red, balance is in black. 
Cloth-bound copy is stamped in gilt, "The Life of 
Mark Twain. | By Will M. Qemens." with black 
rules above and below. Back has in gilt, "The | 
Life I of I Mark | Twain | (rule) | Qemens | (rule)." 

This material was run in twelve parts in the Library and 
Studio, from June, 1891, to June, 189a; the book was pub- 
lished May 2$, 189a, the first issue being less than 1000 
copies. It contains many Mark Twain letters, speeches, 
anecdotes, and other literary and personal items. Until the 
authorised Life by Albert Bigelow Paine is published it will 
remain the most complete presentation for the period it pur- 
ports to cover. 

1892 

The I American Claimant | by | Mark Twain | 
New York | Charles L. Webster & Co. | 
1892 

xamo. Collation: Blank, half-title, frontispiece, title, 
copyright (dated 1892) and imprint. Explanatory, the 
Weather in this Book, Contents, List of Illustrations, 

66 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

pp. (i)-xv; text, pp. 17-273; appendix, pp. 275-277; 
publishers' lists, pp. (279-284); one leaf blank. Size 
of leaf, trimmed, 8 by 5^. 

Issued in blue-gray and tan-colored cloths. Front 
cover stamped with pictorial design in black, and the 
lettering in gilt, "The American | -Claimant | Mark 
Twain." The back carries in gilt, "The | American | 
Claimant | (rule) | Mark Twain | Illustrated. | Chas. 
L. Webster | & Ck)/' Above and below are gilt rules, 
and under the author's name is a vignette in black. 

Published in various newspapers by the McClure Syndicate, 
and also appeared as a serial in the Idler magazine in twelve 
numbers, from January, 1893, to January, 1893. Copy- 
righted in 1 89 1 and 1893 for the newspaper and magazine 
appearances, but no record in Washington for the book 
publication. 

The English edition is lamo, red cloth, 258 pages of text, 
issued by Chatto & Windus, carries publishers' lists dated 
May, 1872, and was published May 2, 1892. Hal Hurst's 
illustrations from the serial publication in the Idler are added 
to those by Dan Beard. The absence of data in the Library 
of Congress at Washington concerning the date of publication 
in America prevents determining priority of issue. 

1893 

The I £1,000,000 Bank-Note | and | Other 
New Stories | by | Mark Twain | New York | 
Charles L. Webster & Company | 1893 

lamo. Collation: Blank, half-title, title, copyright 
(dated 1893), Contents, pp. (i-vii); text, pp. 9-260; 
blank, publishers' lists, pp. (i)-9. Frontispiece sepa- 
rately printed. Size of leaf, trimmed, 7f by 5}. 

67 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Issued in tan-colored cloth. Front cover is let- 
tered, " The £1000000. 1 Banknote. | ♦ Mark | Twain ♦ ." 
Of the first two lines, '';£ioooooo." is in gilt, balance 
in brown. " * Mark Twain ♦ '' is in black, enclosed in 
a brown-and-black wreath. At top of page is a car- 
toon in brown, black, and gilt. Back is lettered in 
gilt, "The I £1000000. 1 Banknote | Mark ♦ | Twain ♦ | 
Chas. L. Webster | & Co." 

Copyrighted and published February 25, 1893. 

The English edition is lamo, red cloth, issued by Chatto 
& Windus, 311 pages of text. I cannot give the exact date 
of issue, beyond the fact that the book was reviewed in the 
Spectator in the week ending June 94, 1893, and the book 
itself carries publishers' lists for March, 1893. 

1893 

The Niagara Book | A Complete Souvenir of 
Niagara Falls | Containing Sketches, Stories 
and Essays — Descrip- | tive, Humorous, 
Historical and Scientific, | Written Ex- 
clusively for this Book. | by ( W. D. How- 
ells, Mark Twain, | Prof. Nathaniel S. 
Shaler, and Others. | Fully Illustrated by 
Harry Fenn | Buffalo | Underbill and Nichols | 
1893. 

i6mo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1893) 
and imprint. Preface, Contents, Illustrations, pp. 
(i-vi); text, pp. (i)-22S. Frontispiece separately 
printed, and from title to page 2 of text on short 

68 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

signature of four leaves. Size of leaf, trimmed, 6f 

by4f. 

Issued in paper covers and in green cloth. The 

front cover is stamped in silver with border and 
pictorial design containing, in red, "The | Niagara | 
Book I Illustrated | • W. D. Howells • | • Mark • Twain • | 
• And • Others • " Back has in red, " The | Niagara j 
Book I Illustrated | W. D. Howells | Mark • Twain | 
And • Others | Underhill | and | Nichols." This is 
separated by five ornaments in silver. This is a 
description of the doth cover, as I have yet to see 
a paper-covered copy that conforms strictly to first- 
edition specifications. 
Published June 27, 1893. 

The fourth story in the table of contents is given, "The 
Pint Authentic Mention of Niagara Falls by Mark Twain." 
page 93. Turning to page 93, there is a drawn heading, ** The 
Earliest Authentic Mention of Niagara Palls . . . Extracts 
from Adam's Diary Translated from the Original MS. by 
Mark Twain." pp. (93)~i09. 

First edition carries no advertisements, and does not have 
the word "Advertisements" printed on the back of the final 
page of text, as later copies do. On copyright page later 
copies add " In the United States and Canada " to " All Rights 
Reserved." It is probable that some early copies had figured 
end-papers. 

1893 

Pudd'nhead | Wilson's | Calendar for | 1894. 
(vignettes above and below.) 

(Yellow printed paper cover carries title.) 

48mo. Collation: Title (on cover), adv. Century 
Magazine (second page of cover) ; text, pp. 1-14; &dv. 

69 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

serial publication of Pudd'nhead, pp. 15-16; portrait 
of Mark Twain, third page of cover; and on last page 
of cover a " fake" printer's ad. Size of leaf, trimmed, 
3 by 2 j. 

This book was distributed to both old and prospective 
subscribers of the Century Magasine just before the com- 
xnenoexnent of the new volume, November, 1893. This 
would place the date of publication about September, 1893. 
The "Calendar" later appeared as chapter headings in the 
periodical and book publication of Pudd^nhicd* 



1893 

The First Book | of the Authors Qub | (orna- 
ment) I Liber Scriptorum | (two-line quota- 
tion, with credit) | (ornament) | New York | 
Published by the Authors Club | M DCCC 
XCIII. 

** Liber Scriptorum " and " Published by the Au- 
thors Club " in red, balance in black. 

Large 4to. Collation: Blank, 3 leaves (first pasted 
on end-paper); Title, copyright, and edition no.» 
Preface, Contents, half-title, pp. (i)-(xvi) ; text, pp. 
(i)-(S9o); quotation, imprint, pp. (591-592). Front 
signature is la pages, 4 extra, and the blank leaves 
are not taken in account in the page numbers. Size 
of leaf, gilt top, otherwise untrimmed, 12^ by 8|. 

Issued in full leather, front cover stamped in gilt, 
"Liber | Scriptorum," in black and gilt ornamental 
border. Back stamped in gilt, ** Liber | Scriptorum | 

70 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Authors I Qub " in black ornamental border. Black 
ornamental border on last page of cover. Figured 
end-papers. 

Copyrighted, October 31, 2893; probably published 
same date. 

"The Califomian's Tale/* by Samuel L. Clemens, occupies 
pp. (i 54)-i6 1. Mark Twain was one of one hundred and four 
contrihutorSy every article in every copy of the book being 
signed by its author in ink. There were originally two hun- 
dred and fifty-one copies of the book, but over thirty were 
split up into their component articles and so destroyed. 



1894 

Tom Sawyer Abroad | by Huck Finn | edited 
by I Mark Twain | with Illustrations by | 
Dan Beard | New York | Charles L. Webster 
& Company | 1894 

lamo. Collation: Blank, half-title (on short signa- 
tore of two leaves), frontispiece, title, copyright (dated 
1894), and imprint, pp. (ii-iv); (Contents, pp. (s)-6; 
Illustrations, pp. (7-8); text, pp. (9)-2i9; publishers' 
lists, pp. (221-224). Size of leaf, trimmed, 7} by 5}. 
Issued in gray cloth, front cover stamped in gilt» 
"Tom Sawyer | Abroad | by | Mark | Twain." and 
after the second line a large design in red and black of 
••Tom*' and "Huck" being chased by a lion. Back 
is lettered in gilt, "Tom | Sawyer | Abroad | Mark | 
Twain," and in red and black a vignette of "Huck's" 
escape from the lion. Below in gilt is "Webster." 
Frontispiece, illustrations, and text printed together. 

71 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Copyrighted, January 25, 1894, and copy filed in 
Washington, April z8, 1894. 

Ran as serial in St, Nicholas^ November, 1893, to April, 
1894. 

1894 

Tom Sawyer Abroad | by | Mark Twain | 
(Samuel L. Clemens) | (ornament) | With 
26 Illustrations by Dan • Beard | London | 
Chatto & Windus, Piccadilly | 1894 

lamo. Collation: Half-title, publishers' list, frontis- 
piece, title, imprint. List of Illustrations, pp. (i)-viii; 
text, pp. (i)-2o8; publishers' lists, 32 pages (dated 
February, 1894). Size of leaf, top and side un- 
trimmed, 7i by 5. 

Issued in red cloth. First page of cover is pictorial- 
ly stamped* in black, with the words, "Tom Sawyer | 
Abroad." Back is stamped, "Tom | Sawyer | Abroad 
I Mark | Twain" in gilt, and vignette and "Chatto 
& Windus" in black. Last page of cover carries 
publishers' seal in black. 

This book was announced by Chatto & Windus for April 
16, 1894. I can find no confirmation for the actual issue, 
but if the publishers kept their word the book appeared two 
days before the filing of an American copy in Washington. 



1894 

The Tragedy of | Pudd'nhead Wilson | And 

the Comedy | Those Extraordinary Twins 

72 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

by I Mark Twain | (Samuel L. Clemens) | 
with Marginal Illustrations. | (ornament) | 
1894 I Hartford, 0>nn. | American Publish- 
ing Company. 

Second and eighth lines in red, balance in black. 

8vo. Collation: Blank, title, copyright (dated 1894), 
sub-title, sub-cop)rright, pp. (i-vi) ; A Whisper to the 
Reader, pp. 15-16; Pudd'nhead Wilson, pp. 17- 
303; sub-title, p. (305); sub-copyright, p. (306); sub- 
frontispiece, p. (308); Those Extraordinary Twins, 
pp. 309-431; Pinal Remarks, p. 432. 

Frontispiece portrait separately printed; each page 
of text with marginal illustrations. Book begins with 
short signature of four leaves, and the implied page 
numbering seems to include not only the fly-leaf but 
the tissue leaf over the frontispiece. Size of leaf, 
sprinkled edges, trinmied, 8| by sf. 

Issued in maroon cloth and various leathers. Front 
cover of cloth copy stamped with black ornamental 
design enclosing lettering in gilt, "Pudd'nhead Wil- 
son. I Mark Twain | Those Extraordinary | Twins." 
And on back, also in gilt, with black containing de- 
sign, "Pudd'nhead | Wilson | Mark Twain | Those | 
Extraordinary | Twins | American | (ornament) | Pub- 
lishing Company | (rule) | Hartford, C^nn." 

Copyrighted, November 10, 1894; published Novem- 
ber 38, and filed in Washington, November 30, 1894. 

"Pudd'nhead Wilson" appeared as a serial in the Century 
Magazine from December, 1893, to June, 1894. That publi- 
cation did not include "Those Extraordinary Twins.'* 

73 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1894 

Pudd'nhead Wilson | a Tale | by | Mark 
Twain | (Samuel L. Clemens) | (ornament) | 
with a Portrait of the Author by James 
Mapes Dodge | and six Illustrations by 
Louis Loeb | London | Chatto & Windus, 
Piccadilly | 1894 

z2mo. Collation: half-title, publishers' list, title, 
Whisper to the Reader, Illustrations, pp. (i)'(xi). 
Frontispiece and title are printed on sheet of heavy 
paper, folded in tivo leaves, and bound in with the 
short signature of four leaves. Text, pp. (i)-246; 
ornament, p. (247); publishers' lists, 32 pages, dated 
September, 1894. Frontispiece and six plates sepa- 
rately printed. Size of leaf, 7i by 4 J. 

Issued in red cloth. Front cover is stamped in 
black, showing three characters from the book, and 
"Pudd'nhead | Wilson" in box border. On the back 
is "Pudd'n | head | Wilson | Mark Twain" in gUt, and 
a character from the book and "Chatto & Windus" 
in black. Last page of cover has publishers' seal in 
black. 

Listed by the Spectator for the week ending November 34, 
1894, at least four days before the American issue. 

1896 

Personal Recollections | of | Joan of Arc | by | 
\ The Sieur Louis de Conte | (Her Page and 

74 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Secretary) | Freely translated | out of the 
ancient French into Modem English | From 
the original Unpublished Manuscript | in the 
National Archives of France | by | Jean 
Fran9ois Alden | Illustrated | from original 
Drawings by | F. V. Du Mond | and from Re- 
productions of I old Paintings and Statues | 
(seal) I New York ( Harper & Brothers Pub- 
lishers I 1896 

lamo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1896), quo- 
tation, list of authorities, Translator's Preface, trans- 
lator's comment, Contents, Illustrations, half-title, 
PP- (i)-(xv); text, pp. (i)-46i; one leaf of publishers' 
lists. Size of leaf, trimmed, 7} by 5 J. Frontispiece, 
Contents, and 35 plates separately printed. Blank 
page before title, being part of short signature of four 
leaves at beginning of book. 

Issued in red cloth. Front cover stamped in gilt 
and silver ornamental design carrying lettering: " Per- 
sonal I Recollections | of | Joan | of | Arc | Mark 
Twain." Back also stamped with ornamental design 
in gilt and silver carrying the same words in the same 
order, with " • Harpers • " at the foot. 

Copyrighted, March i8, 1896; copy filed in Wash- 
ington, May I, 1896. 

The English edition was published May i simultaneously 
with the American issue. It is a z a mo, bound in blue cloth, 
issued by Chatto & Windus, and carries publishers' list dated 
March, 1896. 

IS 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1896 

Tom Sawyer Abroad | Tom Sawyer, Detec- 
tive I and other Stories | Etc., Etc. | By 
Mark Twain | Illustrated | (seal) | New 
York I Harper & Brothers Publishers | 1896 

x2mo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1896), Con- 
tents, Illustrations, half-title, pp. (i-ix); text, pp. 
(z)~iio; one-leaf publishers' lists. Frontispiece, 45 
plates and map separately printed. Size of leaf, 
trimmed, 7} by si- Short signature of four leaves 
up to half-title. 

Issued in red cloth. "MT" monogram stamped in 
gilt on front cover, and without color on last page of 
cover. Back stamped in gilt, "Mark Twain | (rule) | 
Tom Sawyer | Abroad | Tom Sawyer | Detective | and | 
Other Stories | Illustrated | • Harpers." 

Copyrighted, August 25, 1896; published November 
17, 1896. 

Contents: Tom Sawyer Abroad. — ^Tom Sawyer, 
Detective. — The Stolen White Elephant. — Some 
Rambling Notes of an Idle Excursion. — Facts Con- 
cerning the Recent (Carnival of Crime in Connecticut. 
— About Magnanimous Incident Literature. — Punch, 
Brothers, Punch! — The Great Revolution in Pitcaim. 
— On the Decay of the Art of Lying. — ^The C!anvasser's 
Tale. — An Encounter with an Interviewer. — Paris 
Notes. — Legend of Sagenfeld. — Speech on the Babies. 
— Speech on the Weather. — 0)nceming the American 
Language. — Rogers. — The Loves of Alonzo Fitz- 

76 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Clarence and Rosannah Ethelton. — Map of Paris. — 
Letter Read at a Dinner. 
First edition for "Tom Sawyer, Detective." 

1897 

Tom Sawyer, Detective | as Told by Huck 
Finn | and Other Tales | by | Mark Twain | 
(S. L. Clemens) | (ornament) | With a 
Portrait | London | Chatto & Windus | 
1897 

i2mo. Collation: Half-title, publishers' list, title, 
imprint, Contents, sub-title, pp. (i-vii) on short sig- 
nature of four leaves; text, pp. 1-246; ornament, p. 
(347)! publishers' lists, 32 numbered pages, dated 
November, 1896. Frontispiece portrait separately 
printed. Size of leaf, untrimmed, 7^ by 5. 

Issued in blue cloth. Front cover has small 
stamped border design, without color, containing 
"Tom I Sawyer | Detective" stamped in gilt. Back 
is stamped in gilt: "Tom | Sawyer | Detective | &c. | 
Mark | Twain | Chatto & Windus." Rules, without 
color, at top and bottom, and ornamental bars in 
gilt. 

Published December 8, 1896. 

Contents: Tom Sawyer, Detective. — ^The Calif or- 

nian's Tale. — Adam's Diary. — How to Tell a Story. — 

Mental Telegraphy Again.*— What Paul Bourget 

Thinks of Us. — A Little Note to M. Paul Bourget. 

First printing for the last four items. 
6 77 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



1897 
How to Tell a Story | and Other Essays | by | 
Mark Twain | (publishers' seal) | New York | 
Harper & Brothers Publishers | 1897 

z2mo. Collation: Blank, title, publishers' list and 
copyright (dated 1897), Note, Contents, half-title, 
pp. (i-ix) ; text, pp. (3)-233 ; one leaf of publishers' 
lists. Size of leaf, gilt top, untrimmed edges, 7^ by 5. 
Short signature of four leaves before half-title. 

Issued in red cloth. Front cover has gilt orna- 
mental border, containing lettering in black, "How 
to Tell a Story | and Other Essays | Mark Twain." 
Back has ornamental gilt borders, " How to Tell | a 
Story I and | Other Essays" in black, "Mark | Twain" 
in gilt, and "Harpers" in black. Last page of cover 
has monogram in gilt. 

Copyrighted, March 8, 1897 ; Harper date of publica- 
tion, March 9, 1897; copy filed in Washington, April 
9, 1897. 

Contents : How to Tell a Story. — In Defence of Har- 
riet Shelley. — Fenimore Cooper's Literary Offences. — 
Travelling with a Reformer. — Private History of the 
"Jumping Frog" Story. — Mental Telegraphy Again. 
—What Paul Bourget Thinks of Us.— A Little Note 
to M. Paul Bourget. 

First edition for the second, third, fourth, and fifth 
items; first American edition for the balance. 

1897 

Following I the Equator | A Journey Around 

the World | by | Mark Twain | Samuel L. 

78 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAl 

Clemens | (vignette) | Hartford, Conne 
icut I The American Publishing Compan 
MDCCCXCVII 

( Enclosed in double rule border, cross-rules bi 
ing in vignette, and filled with tint.) 

8vo. Collation: Title, copyright {dated 1897), dt 
cation, sub-title, pp. (i-v) ; Contents, pp. 7-7 
Frontispiece separately printed, other illustratii 
on same as text. Size of leaf, trimmed, 9 by s(. 

Issued in blue cloth and several leathers. Pn 
cover of cloth copy bears rectangular pictorial des 
in colors showing elephant. Back is stamped in | 
with ornamental bordering, including the letteri 
"Following I the [ Equator | Mark Twain | 111 
trated | American Publishing Company | Hartfi 
Conn." 

Copyrighted, September 10, 1897; copy filed 
Washington, November 13, 1897. 

Only one printing waa made of the large illustrated editi 
But two hundred and fifty seti of sheets, firat from the pr 
were ■« aside. A number of copies were then bound up n 
a title-page bearing the imprint of the American Publish 
Co. Ttie remainder were put out with the combined impi 
of the American Publishing Co. and the Doubleday & McCl 
Co, Finally a few copies were bound up of the original 1 
hundred and fifty sheets above mentioned, signed by M 
Twain and issued as a large paper edition "de Luxe": 
full number of copies were not bound up for sale becau» 
fancied conflict with the projected "Autograph" edition 
the collected works. This limited edition was bound up Is 
than the initial marketing of the other two imprints. A v 
mixed procedure. 

79 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1897 

More Tramps Abroad | by | Mark Twain | 
(ornament) | London | Chatto & Windus | 
1897 

lamo. Collation: Half-title, publishers' list, title, 
copyright (dated 1897) and typewriter's imprint, dedi- 
cation, Pudd'nhead Maxims, pp. (i-vii) ; text, pp. i- 
486; ornament, p. (487); publishers' lists, 33 pages 
(dated September, 1897). Size of leaf, top gilt, other- 
wise untrinmied, 7^ by 5. 

Issued in maroon cloth, gilt stamped on front cover, 
"More I Tramps | Abroad | Mark | Twain." Back is 
stamped in gilt, "More | Tramps | Abroad | Mark | 
Twain | Chatto & Windus." Figured end-papers. 

Published November 19, 1897, one day before the filing of 
the American issue, under the title " Following the Equator'* 
in Washington. It is probable, however, that the publica- 
tion of the two books was simultaneous, the extra day for 
the American book being lost in the mails from Hartfwd to 
Washington. 

1897 

Sixty and Six | Chips | from | Literary ( Work- 
shops I edited by | Will M. Qemens | Author 
of ''The Life of Mark Twain," ** Famous 
Funny | Fellows," "Songs of To-Morrow," 
Etc., Etc. I New Amsterdam Book Com- 
pany I 156 : Fifth : Avenue : New : York. 

All in line border, first, seventh, and tenth lines in 
red, balance in black. 

80 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

G>llation: Blank, title, copyright (dated 1897), Con- 
tents, pp. (i-iv); text, pp. (1-89) ; blank, three leaves. 
None of the pages are numbered, and title and con- 
tents are separately printed. Size of leaf, untrimmed, 
6 by 4|. 

Issued in pictorial cloth, green and red on yellow. 
Front and last pages of cover both read in black, 
"Sixty I and Six." Back reads, "66 Sixty and 
Six 66.'* Published November 17, 1897. 

Contains, as article $2 (the book being unpaged), "The 
Panama Railroad," by Mark Twain. This is a small portion 
of an article once contributed to a Chicago newspaper. 

1897 

Queen | Victoria's | Jubilee | (ornaments) | 
The Great Procession of June 22, 1897, | in 
the Queen's Honor, Reported both | in the 
light of History, and as a | Spectacle, by 

Mark Twain J (ornament) | Privately 

Printed | for Private Distribution only. 

Svo. Collation: Title, edition number, pp. (i-ii) ; text, 
pp. (x)~22; blank, pp. (23-34). Frontispiece, and leaf 
with illustrations between pp. 3-4, separately printed. 
Size of leaf, trimmed, 9^ by 6^. 

Issued in light-cream boards, cloth back. Front 
cover is printed in black, in double rule border, 
"Queen | Victoria's | Jubilee | (portrait bust, with 
ornament below) | Anno 1897 Domini | (ornament).'* 

Originally contributed to the New York JoHmal, June ai 

8x 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

and 23, 1897. Date of issue of the book is uncertain, but at 
least previous to 1908. Edition limited to one hundred and 
ninety-five copies. 

1900 

How to Tell a Story | and | Other Essays | by | 
Mark Twain | (Samuel L. Clemens) | (pub- 
lishers* seal) I Hartford Conn. | The Ameri- 
can Publishing Company | 1900. 

8vo. Collation: Edition title, edition number, title, 
copyright (dated 1900), Illustrations, G>ntents, pub- 
lic acknowledgment. This is printed on a short 
signature of four leaves, but the last page of this 
short signature is numbered **vi," not "viii." Half- 
title, p. (vii); and text, pp. 7-333. Frontispiece por- 
trait, engraved title and three other plates separately 
printed. Size of leaf, untrimmed, 8} by 5f . 

Issued in various leathers. Half-leather copy is 
stamped in gilt on back, ''Mark Twain's | Works | 
Volume xxii | How To Tell | a Story | Etc." Inter- 
spersed are various ornaments and rules. 

Contents: How to Tell a Story. — In Defence of 
Harriet Shelley. — Fenimore Cooper's Literary Of- 
fences. — ^Travelling with a Reformer. — ^Private His- 
tory of the "Jumping Frog" Story.— Mental Teleg- 
raphy Again. — ^What Paul Bourget Thinks of Us. — 
A Little Note to M. Paul Bourget.— The Invalid's 
Story. — ^The Captain's Story. — Stirring Times in 
Austria. — Concerning the Jews. — From the London 
Times of 1904. — ^At the Appetite Cure. — In Memoriam. 
—Mark Twain: A Biographical Sketch. 

82 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Copyrighted, April 9, 1900; filed in Washington, 
May XI, 1900. 

The last article was not written by Mr. Clemens; the five 
preceding articles are first appearance in book form. The 
same plates were used in printing several editions, but the 
book collated above, in the " Autograph " limited edition, 
went first to press. 

1900 

The Man that | Corrupted Hadleyburg | and 
Other Stories and Essays | By Mark Twain 
Illustrated | (publishers' seal) | Harper & 
Brothers Publishers | New York and Lon- 
don I 1900 

xamo. Collation: Blank, half-title, publishers' list, 
title, copyright (dated 1900), G>ntents» Illustrations, 
half-title, circular type-freaks, pp. (i~xii) ; all this on 
six leaves before the first signature, beginning, text, 
pp. x-398; publishers' list, pp. (399-340). Size of 
leaf, trimmed, 7I by s|. 

Issued in red cloth, front cover stamped in gilt with 
"MT" monogram, and last page of cover with same 
monogram without color. Back has, in gilt, ''Mark 
Twain | (rule) | The Man | That Corrupted | Hadley- 
burg I and | Other Stories and | Essays | Illustrated | 
• Harpers • ** 

Copyrighted, April 30, 1900; published June 11, 
1900. 

* Contents : ♦ The Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg. 
— * My D^ut as a Literary Person. — Prom the Lon- 

83 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

don Times of 1904. — ^At the Appetite Cure. — ^ My 
First Lie and How I Got Out of It. — ^ Is He Living 
or Is He Dead ? — * The Esquimau Maiden's Ro- 
mance. — ^How to Tell a Story. — ^ About Play-Act- 
ing. — Concerning the Jews. — Stirring Times in Aus- 
tria. — ^ The Austrian Bdison Keeping School Again. 
— ^Travelling with a Reformer. — Private History of 
the "Jumping Frog" Story. — * My Boyhood Dreams. 

First edition for those marked with *. 

The publishers of this book changed the quality of the 
paper from heavy to light while still running off sheets bear- 
ing the 1900 date. The earlier issues may be told by the 
greater thickness of the volume, the gilt-letter title on the 
back having free space in the first case, and in the later style 
reaching dear to the sides. 

The English edition of HadUyburg is lamo, orange cloth, 
four hundred and fourteen pages of text, issued by Chatto 
& Windus. I have not the exact date of publication, but it 
bears the ads. of June, 1900, and was presumably simul- 
taneous with the American issue. 



1900 

The Man that Corrupted | Hadleyburg | and | 
Other Stories and Sketches | by | Mark 
Twain. | Copjrright Edition. | In Two Vol- 
tunes. I Vol. I (II) | Leipzig | Bemhard 

Tauchnitz | 1900. 

x6mo. Issued in paper CO vers. Size of leaf, untrimmed. 
6} by 4^. I cannot give collation for this work, as 
my copy was incomplete. 
Contents: Vol I. The Man that Corrupted Hadley- 

84 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

burg.— My First Lie, and How I Got Out of It.— The 
Esquimau Maiden's Romance. — Christian Science, 
and the Book of Mrs. Eddy. — Is He Living or Is He 
Dead? — My Ddbut as a Literary Person. — At the 
Appetite Cure. Vol. II. Concerning the Jews. — From 
the London Times of 1904. — ^About Play -Acting. — 
Travelling with a Reformer. — ^Diplomatic Pay and 
Clothes. — Luck. — The Captain's Story. — Stirring 
Times in Austria. — ^Private History of the "Jumping 
Frog" Story. — ^My Military Campaign. — ^Meister- 
schaft. — ^My Boyhood Dreams. — In Memoriam. 

First printing in book form for "Christian Science, and the 
Book of Mrs. Eddy*' and "Diplomatic Pay and Clothes." 

1900 

Eccentricities | of Genius | Memories of | 
Famous Men | and Women of | the Plat- 
form I and Stage | by | Major J. B. Pond | 
G. W. Dillingham Company | Publishers 
New York. All in black borders, various 
rule and circle borders within, lettering 
in red, except *' by '* and *' Publishers New 
York." 

8vo, cloth (first issue red, second issue maroon). 
Published November 19, 1900. Mark Twain's lecture 
tour across the continent, under management of Pond, 
is detailed, pp. 197-333, including many Mark Twain 
letters and anecdotes. That journey was the one 
undertaken to clear ofE the Webster debts, and was 

8S 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

continued on around the world, as related in " Follow- 
ing the Equator/' 1897. Two speeches are given, 
"Introducing Nye and Riley," pp. 347-49, and "In- 
troducing Henry M. Stanley," pp. 265-67. 

19CX) 

English as | She is Taught | by | Mark Twain. | 
With I Biographical Sketch | of Author | 
by I Matthew Irving Lans. ( (ornament) | 
Mutual Book Company, | Boston, Mass. 

x6mo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1900), 
Biographical Sketch, Works of Mark Twain, pp. 
(i-vi); English as She is Taught, pp. (7)-28; pub- 
lishers' lists, blank, pp. (39-32). Size of leaf, un- 
trimmed, 7 by 4}. Issued in dark gray paper cover, 
with border, reading, "English | as She is | Taught | 
(double rule) | by | Mark Twain | With Biographical 
Sketch I of Author." Main caption is in red, and the 
balance in black. The cloth copy is similar in typog- 
raphy, and duplicates the front cover on the rear. 

This material was first printed in book form in London, 
1887; therefore this 1900 publication is first American issue 
only. It contains none of the Le Row compilation. 

I9OI 

To the Person | Sitting | in Darkness | (rule) | 
— by — I Mark Twain | (rule) | Reprinted by 
permission from the North American | Re- 
view, February, 1901 

86 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Collation: Title, p. (i); text, pp. 2-(i6). Last 
page (i6) also carries two-line ad. Anti-Imperialist 
League. Size of leaf, trimmed, 6| by 4^. Issued 
without cover. 

If, as was claimed by the secretary of the Anti-Imperialist 
League, 195,000 of this pamphlet were distributed during 
the "campaign** of 1901 as political propaganda, there must 
have been more than one printing of the item. It is now so 
scarce that I can give no hint of any distinctions. 

Dan Beard, illustrator of A Yankee in King Arthur* s 
Court, tells of meeting Mr. Clemens on the street; said the 
author: '* By the way, I have just written something that 
you*U like. It is called 'To the Person Sitting in Darkness.' 
I read it to Howells, and Howells said I ought to have that 
published. . . . Howells also said that I must go hang myself 
first, and when I asked him what I should do that for, he 
said to save the public the trouble, because when that story 
appeared in print they would surely hang me." Iconoclastic 
as the article referred to may have been, Mr. Clemens lived 
to meet his end peacefully at home. "Holding back'* was 
not Mr. Clemens's forte. 



1 901 

Edmund Burke on | Croker & | Tammany 
I (double rule) | By Mark Twain | a Mem- 
ber of the I Order of Acorns | (double rule) 
I (seal of Order of Acorns) . In border. 

This title is on front cover. Page i of text repeats 
the above in the form of a heading, adding the Acorn 
address, 350 Broadway, N. Y., and the Acorn motto: 
"Tall Oaks from little Acorns grow." Then follows 
this note, p. I : **This article, delivered as an address 
before the Organization Committee of the Acorns, 

87 



/ 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

at the Waldorf-Astoria, Thursday evening, October 
17, was originally prepared for the North American 
Review, Col. G. B. M. Harvey, publisher of the 
Review, seeing its great force, agreed that the article 
should first appear as an address, in order that it 
reach the citizens of New York before the publication 
of the November issue of the North American Review,'* 

Collation: Text, pp. 1-8; Acorn announcement, pp. 
(9)-(i3); Mark Twain's membership application, p. 
(15). Size of leaf, trimmed, 10 by 8. 

Issued in dark gray printed paper cover. Page i 
of cover carries title as described above, and page 4 
carries printer's line. 

1902 

A Double I Barrelled | Detective | Story | by | 
Mark Twain | Author of | •'Huckleberry 
Finn'' "Life on the Mississippi" | '*A 
Yankee in King Arthur's Court " etc. | Il- 
lustrated by I Lucius Hitchcock | (publish- 
ers' seal) I New York and London | Harper 
& Brothers | Publishers MCMIL In red 
border, first four lines in red, first three 
lines underscored in red, balance in black. 

lamo. Collation: Blank, two leaves, title, cop3rright 
(dated 1902), Illustrations, pp. (i-vii) on short signa- 
ture of four leaves; half-title with sub-title, and text, 
pp. (i)-i79; two leaves blank. Separately printed 

88 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

frontispieoe and six plates. Gilt top, otherwise un- 
trimmed. Size of leai, 7} by s|. 

Issued in red doth, front cover reading in cover- 
color on gilt field, " A Double | Barrelled | Detective | 
Story." Two-line quotation, signed, in gilt letters, 
at foot. All in gilt line border. Back has in gilt, 
"(rule) I (ornament) | (rule) | A | Double | Barrelled | 
Detective | Story | (rule) | (ornament) | Mark | Twain | 
Harpers | (rule)." Pictorial end-papers. 

G>pyrighted, February 21, 1902; published by 
Harpers, April 8, 1902; filed in Washington, April xo, 
1902. 

The English edition is lamo, blue cloth, one hundred and 
seventy-nine pages of text, issued by Chatto & Windus, and 
bears the publishers' lists for March, 190a. I cannot give 
the date of publication, but it was probably simultaneous 
with the American issue. 

1902 

A Double-Barrelled | Detective Story | Etc. | 
by I Mark | Twain | Copyright Edition | 
Leipzig I Bemhard Tauchnitz | 1902. 

i6mo. G>llation: Tauchnitz volume no. (3591) and 
half-title, publishers* list, title, Contents, sub-title, 
pp. (i-vii); text, pp. (7)-a47; imprint, p. (248); 
publishers' lists, 3 a pages. Size of leaf, untrimmed, 
64 by 4f 

Issued in light-yellow paper wrappers, printed in 
black. In border on front cover is as follows: "Col- 
lection I of I British Authors | Tauchnitz Edition. | 
(rule) I Vol. 3591. I A Double-Barrelled Detective 

89 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Story, Etc. | by | Mark Twain. | In one Volume. | 
Leipzig: Bemhard Tauchnitz. | Paris: Librairie C. 
Reinwald, 1 5 Rue des Saints-p^res. | Paris : the Galig- 
nani Library, 224, Rue de Rivoli, | and at Nice, 8, 
Avenue Mass^na." Above border is: "Each Volume 
sold Separately," and below border: **This Collec- 
tion I is Published with Copyright for Continental 
Circulation, but | all Purchasers are earnestly Re- 
quested not to Introduce the | Volume into England 
or into any British Colony." Second, third, and 
fourth pages of cover carry publishers' lists for July, 
1902. Back has: "(rules) | British | Authors | Tauch- 
nitz I Edition | (rules) | Vol. 3591. | (rules) | Twain | 
30. I (rules) I A Double- | Barrelled | Detective | 
Story, I Etc. | (rules) | Price | M. 1.60. | (rules).*' 

Contents: A Double-Barrelled Detective Story. — 
Two Little Tales.— The Death-Disk.— A Defence of 
General Punston. 

First printing in book form for all but the title story, and 
only printing in book form for "A Defence of General Pun- 
ston." 

1903 

My D^but I As a I Literary Person | with | 
Other Essays and Stories | by | Mark Twain 
(Samuel L. Clemens) | (publishers' seal) 
Hartford, Conn. | The American Publishing 
Company | 1903. 

8vo. Collation: Edition title, edition no., title, copy- 
right (dated 1903) and imprint, Illustrations, G>n- 

90 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

tents, acknowledgment, half-title, pp. (i)-(ix); text, 
pp. (ii)-367. Gilt top, otherwise untrimmed. Size 
of leaf, 8} by sf . Frontispiece, engraved title, and 
illustrations separately printed. 

Uniform in binding and style with How to Tell a 
Story ^ 1900, this being Vol. xxiii, and that Vol. xxii, 
of the limited (512 copies) "Autograph" edition. 

Issued in various leathers. Back of half-leather 
copy is stamped in gilt, "Mark Twain's | Works | 
Volume xxiii | My DAut | as a | Literary Person," 
separated by various ornaments and rules. 

Filed in Washington, April 28, 1903. 

Contents: My DAut as a Literary Person. — The 
Esqtiimau Maiden's Romance. — The Man That Cor- 
rupted Hadleyburg. — ^My First Lie and How I Got 
Out of It. — ^The Belated Russian Passport. — ^Two 
Little Tales. — About Play-Acting. — Diplomatic Pay 
and Clothes. — Is He Living or Is He Dead? — My 
Boyhood Dreams. — The Austrian Edison Keeping 
School Again. — Extracts from Adam's Diary. — ^The 
Death-Disk. — A Double-Barrelled Detective Story. 

First appearance in book form for "The Belated Russian 
Passport/' and first American edition for "Two Little Tales/* 
"Diplomatic Pay and Gothes/' and "The Death -Disk." 
The three latter stories had previously appeared in Hadiey* 
burg (Tauchnitz) and DoubU-Barrelled Detective Story (Tauch- 
nitz). 

1903 

Masterpieces of | Wit and Hiimor | with 
Stories and an Introduction by | Rob- 
ert J. Burdette | the World - renowned 

91 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Preacher Htunorist | (half-tone cartoon 
with caption) | Containing all that is 
Best in the Literature | of Laughter 
of all Nations | With Illustrations by 
Frederick Opper, John T. McCutcheon, 
Robert L. | Dickey, Charles Lederer, Ike 
Morgan, R. C. Bowman, G. W. Rehse, 
Bryan | Walker, Hugh von Hafsten, Chas. 
Nelan and other famous Cartoonists. | 
Copyright, 1902, by E. J. Long. One-line 
quotation at top, and various box and rule 
borders. 

8vo, cloth. Contains two Mark Twain sketches, 
"New Ideas on Fanning/* pp. 55-56, and "Did Not 
Hurt the Mule," pp. 412-413. These I have not seen 
in magazine or newspaper, and while of course Mark 
Twain did not contribute directly to this book, both 
articles seem authentic as resembling his early work. 

This bears date 1903 on the title-page as given above, but 
no record is had of it in Washington before October, 1903. 



1903 

The Jumping Frog | In English, then in 
French, then | Clawed Back into a Civilized | 
Language Once More by | Patient, Unre- 
munerated Toil | by Mark Twain | Illus- 
trated by I P. Strothmann | (publishers' 

92 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

seal) I New York and London | Harper & 
Brothers I Publishers : : MCMIIL 



x2mo. Collation: title, copyright (dated 1903) ; Illus- 
trations, pp. (i-iii), on two leaves before the first signa- 
ture: text, pp. i-(66) ; blank. Size of leaf, trimmed, 8 
by sh Frontispiece and 11 plates separately printed. 
Issued in red cloth, front cover stamped in white, 
••The Jumping Frog | (rule) | Mark Twain." Below, 
on front cover, is froggie in green, black, and white. 
Back reads, in white, '* The | Jumping | Frog | Mark | 
Twain | Harpers." 

This book contains the original "Jumping Prog" story 
with all of its later addenda, but is the first printing for 
"Note,'* pp. 64-66. Published November 18, 1903. 



1903 

••A Dog's Tale" | (double rule) | Reprinted 
by permission from | Harper's Magazine | 
Christmas Number, 1903 | (double rule) | 
by Mark Twain | (rule) | Printed for the | 
National Anti - vivisection Society. In 
double-nde border. 

Collation: Blank, half-title, pp. (i-iii); text, pp. (1-9); 
adv. Nat. Anti-vivisection Soc., p. (10) ; blank. Size 
of leaf, trimmed, 9} by 6f . 

Issued in yellow printed paper covers, page one 
carr3ring title as above. (In border.) Final page of 
cover carries list of same society's officials, also in 

7 93 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

border. This issue is illustrated by four pictures, 
by Smedley, printed in text, but there is no frontis- 
piece. 

This story originally appeared in Harper's Magazine for 
December, 1893. The edition described above was printed 
from the magazine type, with the omission of the page num- 
bers, and limited to less than fifty copies, the exact number 
being in doubt. 

On the rear cover is printed a list of officers of the National 
Anti- vivisection Society, apparently all of Great Britain, and 
it is understood that practically this entire edition was dis- 
tributed among the officials so mentioned, possibly with the 
object of obtaining letters for use in advertising the trade 
edition. It is probable that this small edition was printed 
soon after the appearance of the story in magazine form, 
and before the close of 1903. 

The title-page of the "trade" edition is as follows: 

A Dog's Tale | by | Mark Twain | Illustrated by | 
W. T. Smedley | (publishers' seal) | New York and 
London | Harper & Brothers | Publishers .*. 1904. 
Enclosed in black ruled border, with inner orna- 
mental border of brown. 

The book is lamo, red doth, thirty-six pages of text, with 
four separately printed illustrations in colors, and was pub- 
lished September 15, 1904. The English edition is identical, 
with the exception of ''London and New York" on title, and 
"Printed in the United States of America" on copyright 
page, and it was presumably issued simultaneously. 



1904 

Extracts | from Adam's Diary | Translated 
from the Original MS. | by Mark Twain | 
Illustrated by | F. Strothmann | (publishers* 

94 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

seal) I New York and London | Harper & 
Brothers | Publishers : : MCMIV. 

iimo, red cloth, eighty-nine pages of text. Pub- 
lished, April 6, 1904, and is first edition for the fol- 
lowing note: 

'* I translated a portion of this diary some years ago, and a 
friend of mine printed a few copies in an incomplete form, 
but the public never got them. Since then I have deciphered 
some more of Adam's hieroglyphics, and think he has now 
become sufficiently important as a public character to justify 
this publication. — M. T." 

Otherwise, the text is the same, line for line, as the story 
contributed to the Niagara Book, 1893, without additions, 
and with the omission of about three lines (pp. 97-98, Niagara 
Book), and the Niagara Book was certainly public property. 

I90S 

King Leopold's | Soliloquy | A Defense of his 
Congo Rule | by | Mark Twain | (rule) | The 
P. R. Warren Co. | Boston, Mass. | 1905. 

i2mo. Collation: Half-title, quotation, title, copy- 
right (dated 1905), pp. (i-iv); text, pp. 3-40; quota- 
tion, p. (41); sub-title, ''Supplementary," and text 
(quotation from Stead), pp. (43-50). Size of leaf, 
trimmed, 7i by 4f. Frontispiece and five plates 
separately printed; other illustrations in text. 

Issued in paper covers, printed in green. The 
green-printed tint covers the entire outside of the 
book, with the lettering and design showing through 
in white stencil effect on the front cover, with the 
addition of a yellow circular field for the knife and 

95 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

crucifix on same cover. In chain border on front 
cover is "King | Leopold's | Soliloquy | by | Mark 
Twain | (skull, knife, and crucifix design) | '' By This 
Sign We Prosper.*' " Last line is on solid green rib- 
bon, and knife and crucifix are green. Above border 
is " Price Twenty-five Cents." 
Copyrighted and published September 28, 1905. 

The second issue may be determined by the change of cover 
tint to black from green. The issue with " Second Edition " 
(in reality the third printing) is first printing for " Supple- 
mentary," pp. 45-(4<)0 

1906 

Their Husbands' Wives | Harper's Novelettes 
(underscored) | Edited by | William Dean 
Howells I and | Henry Mills Alden | (pub- 
lishers' seal) I Harper & Brothers Pub- 
lishers I New York and London | 1906. 
Enclosed in orange border, first line and 
publishers' name in orange, balance in 
black. 

i6ino. Collation: Blank, stub-leaf, contents, pp. (i- 
v) ; text, pp. (i)-i8i ; two leaves blank. Title, copy- 
right (dated 1906), Introduction, on sheet folded in 
two leaves pasted on stub -leaf as given above. 
Size of leaf, top trimmed, 6f by 4}. 

Published March 15, 1906. 

"Eve's Diary," by Mark Twain, fills pages (i)-^;. 

Issued in green cloth. Front cover stamped with 
architectural border in silver, carrying above, " Their 

96 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Husbands' | Wives/' and below "(seal) Harper's 
Novelettes | edited by | W. D. Howells & H. M. Al- 
den/' lettering in gilt, seal in silver. Back carries 
** (ornamental rules) | Their | Husbands' | Wives | (or- 
namental rules) I Harpers | (ornamental rule)." Rules 
are in silver, lettering in gilt. 

This antedates by four months the separate illustrated 
edition of Eve*s Diary, 

1906 

What is Man? | New York | Printed at the 
De Vinne Press | 1906. In rule border, first 
line in red, balance in black. 

8vo. Collation : Number of copies printed (six lines), 
half-title, title, copyright (1906), preface, half-title, 
pp. (i-ix) ; text, pp. (3)-! 40. Size of leaf, untrimmed, 
9i by 6i. 

Issued in gray boards, gilt-stamped paster at top 
of back, lettered, "What | is | Man?" With double 
rules above and below, and enclosed in rule box. 

Published August 20, 1906. 

Published anonymously and limited to two hundred and 
fifty numbered copies. A book with serious intent, contain- 
ing Mark Twain's philosophy of life. According to its pref- 
ace, studies for the book were begun as far back as 1880, and 
it was actually written in 1898. Copies were distributed to 
his personal friends only, and public acknowledgment of his 
authorship was withheld until after his death. While fear 
of being misunderstood deterred him from publicly publishing 
his views in 1906, in 1910 the faith that was in him was so 
strong that an article in Harper's Bazar for February, 19 10, 
"The Turning Point of My Life/' contains an almost com- 
plete exposition of that same philosophy. 

97 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1906 

The $30,000 Bequest | and Other Stories | by | 

Mark Twain | Illustrated | (seal) | New 

York and Lrondon | Harper & Brothers 

Publishers | 1906. 

i2mo. Collation: Title, publishers' list and copy- 
right (dated 1903), publication date September, 1906, 
Contents, Illustrations, half-title, pp. (i)-vii; text, 
pp. (i-S^3)- Frontispiece portrait and seven plates 
separately printed, other illustrations and facsimiles 
in the text. Size of leaf, trimmed, 7f by 5}. 

Issued in red cloth, "MT" monogram stamped in 
gilt on front cover, and without color on last page of 
cover. Back is stamped in gilt, ''Mark Twain | (rule) 
I The I $30,000 I Bequest | Illustrated | • Harpers." 

Copyrighted, August 17, 1906; copy filed Septem- 
ber 27, 1906. 

Contents: ♦ The $30,000 Bequest. — A Dog's Tale. 
— * Was It Heaven ? or Hell.— The Califomian's Tale. 
— ♦ A Helpless Situation. — * A Telephonic Conver- 
sation. — * Edward Mills and George Benton: a Tale. 
— ♦ Saint Joan of Arc. — ♦ The Five Boons of Life. — 
♦ The First Writing Machines. — ♦ Italian Without 
a Master. — ♦ Italian with Grammar. — A Burlesque 
Biography. — ♦ General Washington's Negro Servant. 
—Wit-Inspirations of the "Two-Year-Olds."— * An 
Entertaining Article. — ♦ A Letter to the Secretary of 
the Treasury. — ♦ Amended Obituaries. — ♦ A Monu- 
ment to Adam. — * A Humane Word from Satan. — 
Introduction to "The New Guide to the Conversa- 

98 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

tion in Portuguese and English." — ^Advice to Little 
Girls. — Post-Mortem Poetry. — ^A Deception. — ^The 
Danger of Lying in Bed. — Portrait of King William 
III. — ♦ Does the Race of Man Love a Lord? — Eve's 
Diary. — ^The Invalid's Story. — ^The Captain's Story. — 
Mark Twain: A Biographical Sketch. — In Memoriam. 
— ^The Belated Russian Passport. — Two Little Tales. 
— Diplomatic Pay and Clothes. — ^Extract from Adam's 
Diary.— The Death - Disk.— A Double -Barrelled De- 
tective Story. 

Pint edition for those marked with *. 

English edition same sheets, simultaneously issued, with 
stamp at foot of copyright page, " Printed in U. S. of America." 

1906 

A Horse's Tale. 

As was the case with the " Dog's Tale," a few copies of this 
story were first printed from the magasine type, bound in 
wrappers, and privately distributed, it is said, principally to 
persons connected with the Society ifor Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals. 

I have yet to see a copy of this issue, but the same person 
is the authority for its actuality who informed me of the 
similar printing of the *' Dog's Tale" and who afterward fur- 
nished me a copy of same, so I cannot doubt his word; 
especially since he was an employee of the publishers, and was 
concerned with the actual printing and handling of the books. 

The story originally appeared in Harper's Magasine for 
August and September, 1906, and the pamphlet listed above 
was probably printed in the same year. 

The title*page of the "trade" edition is as follows* 

A Horse's Tale | by | Mark Twain | Illustrated by | 
Lucius Hitchcock | (publishers' seal) | New York and 
London | Harper & Brothers | Publishers:: | MCMVIL 

99 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

The book is xamo, red doth, one hundred and fifty-three 
pages of text, with five separately printed illustrations, and 
was published October 94, 1907. The English edition is 
identical, with the exception of "London and New York" on 
the title, and "Printed in the United States of America" on 
oop3rright page. 

,1907 

Christian Science | with Notes Containing ( 
Corrections to Date | by | Mark Twain | Il- 
lustrated I (publishers' seal) ( New York 
and London | Harper & Brothers Publishers! 
1907. 

i2mo. Collation: Title, publishers' list and copy- 
right (dated ipo;)^ Illustrations, Preface, sub-title, 
pp. (i-vii); text, pp. (3)-362. Frontispiece portrait 
separately printed. Size of leaf, trimmed, 7f by 5}^. 

Issued in red cloth, front cover stamped in gilt with 
"MT" monogram. Back reads, in gilt, ''Mark 
Twain | (rule) | Christian | Science | Illustrated | • Har- 
pers." Last page of cover has "MT" monogram 
without color. 

Copyrighted, January 22, 1907 ; published February 

7. 1907- 

English edition simultaneously published, and identical, 
with the exception of " London and New York" on title-page, 
and " Printed in the United States of America" on copyright 
page. 

1907 

The Wit and Hiimor | of America | Edited 

by I Kate Milner Rabb ( Volume V | In- 

100 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



dianapolis | The Bobbs-Merrill Company 
Publishers, 

8vo, doth. Identical sheets bound variously in four 
or five volumes. The last volume contains sketches 
by Mark Twain as follows: Under the general heading, 
"Nevada Sketches," pp. 1805-20, the following: "In 
Carson City," "City Marshal Perry," "A Sunday in 
Carson," "Advice to the Unreliable on Church- 
going," "The Unreliable," "Ye Sentimental Law 
Student," "The Great Prize Fight" occupy pp. 1903- 

12, and "The Evidence in the Case of Smith vs. 
Jones," pp. 1918-26. 

These are selections from contributions to Nevada and San 
Francisco newspapers in the middle '608. They are contem- 
porary with the sketches included in The Jumping Frog, 1867, 
and, therefore, evidently not of enough literary merit for 
their author to include in his collected works. However, 
they are very interesting as showing average specimens of 
Mark Twain's earliest literary effort, especially since prac- 
tically the only available files of those early newspapers have 
since been destroyed by the. great San Francisco fire. 

*'Wit and Htunor of America" was published September 

13, 1907. 

1907 

The Savage Club | a Medley of History | Anec- 
dote and Reminiscence | by | Aaron Wat- 
son I with a Chapter by | Mark Twain | 
London | T. Fisher Unwin | Adelphi Terrace] 
1907. First, fifth, seventh and ninth lines 
in red, balance in black. 

8vo. Half-title, publishers' list and imprint, title 
(All Rights Reserved), dedication. Preface, Contents, 

xoi 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

List of Illustrations, pp. (i)-xii; text and index, pp. 
1-327. First signature seems to have but six leaves, 
second signature commencing at text. Frontispiece 
and many plates separately printed. Gilt top, edges 
untrimmed. Size of leaf, 9 by sf. 

Issued in white boards and maroon doth. Front 
cover of copy in boards is printed in red, "The | 
Savage | Qub | by | Aaron Watson,*' enclosed in gilt 
and red ornamental border, credited in comer to 
"Jas. D. Linton, R. I." Back is stamped in gilt, 
••(rule) I The | Savage | Club | by | Aaron Watson | 
(seal) I T. Fisher Unwin | (rule).'* 

Chapter XII, comprising pages 131 -135, is con- 
tributed by Mark Twain. Chapter XI contains some 
anecdotes and notes of speeches under the heading 
•• Artemus Ward and Mark Twain." 

1909 

Is Shakespeare | Dead? | From My Auto- 
biography I Mark Twain | (publishers' seal) 
Harper & Brothers Publishers | New York 
and London | MCMIX. Enclosed in double 
rule border. 

i2mo. Collation: Title, publishers' list and copy- 
right (dated 1909), Publishers' Note, half-title, pp. 
(i-v); text, pp. i-(i49). Facing frontispieces of 
Shakespeare and Bacon. Gilt top, otherwise un- 
trimmed. Size of leaf, 8^ by si- 
Issued in green cloth, front cover lettered in gilt, 
" Is Shakespeare | Dead ? ? ? ? | (rule) | Mark"^— ^- " 

loa 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Back also in gilt, ** Is Shake- | speare | Dead | ? |Mark | 
Twain | Harpers." 
Copyrighted, April 5, 1909; published April 8, 1909. 

The London edition is identical with the New York issue, 
with the addition of "Printed in the U. S. of America" 
stamped at foot of copyright page. However, most of the 
copies for Etigland were recalled, and after the final leaf of 
text there was inserted, "tipped in," an extra leaf of adver- 
tisements of " The Shakespeare Problem Restated," by George 
G. Greenwood, M.P., and "In re Shakespeare Problem," by 
the same author. This was to obviate an action by John 
Lane, the publishers, alleging want of credit for the quota- 
tions by Twain from Greenwood. 

1909 

The Lectures of | Bret Harte | Compiled from 
Various Sources | To Which is Added | "The 
Piracy of Bret Harte's Fables" | by | Charles 
Meeker Kozlay | (ornament) | Printed and 
Published by | Charles Meeker Kozlay | 
Brookl3ni-New York | 1909. Enclosed in 
double rule border. 

x2mo, limp leather, first printing 100 numbered 
copies. Contains Mark Twain letter, pp. 48-51, con- 
tributed to the Spectator, concerning Hotten's pirated 
English editions. This letter was for the public and 
so included here, and not in ** Letters." 

1909 

Extract from | Captain Stormfield's | Visit to 

Heaven | by | Mark Twain | (publishers* 

103 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

seal) I New York and London | Harper & 
Brothers | M-C-M-I-X. 

lamo. Collation: Blank, title, copyright (dated 
1909), half-title, pp. (i-v) ; text, pp. i-(i2i). Frontis- 
piece separately printed. Size of leaf , trimmed, 8 by 5^. 

Issued in red cloth. Front cover stamped in 
white ''Extract from | Captain Stormfield's | Visit to 
Heaven | (vignette in blue and white).*' Back is 
stamped in white ''Extract | from | (Captain | Storm- 
field's I Visit I to I Heaven | Mark | Twain | Harpers." 

Copyrighted and published, October 14, 1909. 

English edition identical, plus stamp on copyright page, 
"Printed in the United States." 



[N. D.] 

Laughing Gas | A | Repository j of | Fun, Wit 
and Hiunor, (rule) | by | Dr. J. J. Villers, 
the Celebrated American Humorist. | (rule) 
(six-line motto) | (rule) | New York: | J. S. 
Ogilvie & Company, | 3 1 Rose Street. 

8vo. Illustrated paper cover, bordered. Front cover 
reads, ** Laugh and Grow Fat, | Laughing | Gas, | or | 
Mirth for the Million. | by | Dr. J. J. Villers, | The 
Celebrated American Humorist. | (rule) New York: | 
J. S. Ogilvie & Company, 31 Rose Street." Front 
cover also carries pictorial feature, and rear cover 
has publishers' advertisement. 

The book seems to be in two parts, numbered separately, 
" Laughing Gas," pp. (3) -33. and " Salt, Pepper and Mustard, 

104 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

or Mirth for the Million/' pp. (3)*a4. The book was evidently 
issued in the '708, but 1 cannot vouch for its exact original 
form. 

None of the articles are signed by Mark Twain, but " Put- 
ting Up Stoves," p. 18, has been signed by him when pub- 
lished in the H€piasoph magasine. From the style of several 
other stories therein, I am inclined to think they are some 
of Mark Twain's early writings for California newspapers, 
notably, "The Legal Way," "Seafaring," "Sewing on a But- 
ton," "Salt, Pepper and Mustard," "A Mysterious Box," 
" Late News from England." 



SPEECHES 



SPEECHES 

Mr. Clemens has made hundreds of speeches on all 
manner of occasions. His lecture-tours have covered 
continents, and his after-dinner efforts would have 
brought him fame had he never written a line. Most 
of his speeches have been carefully prepared literary 
efforts — some have been included in his books; others 
have been wholly impromptu, and, in general, wholly 
delightful. The main objection to listing these 
speeches in this very serious bibliography we find to 
be not in the original matter of the speeches, but in 
the manner of their reporting. We have these 
speeches (with a few grateful exceptions) only through 
the medium of newspapers and their reporters. A 
reporter is not always a stenographer, and even if so, 
his report is apt to be altered and trimmed to suit 
the taste of an editor or the exigencies of space. If 
the speech is reported from memory or by " longhand," 
then the fine shades of expression used in the speech 
are almost stire to be lost, and only the blunter of 
points made are set down, and then much altered by 
the recorder. Some even seize the occasion to foist 
on the innocent public some of their own jokes as 
original Twain. I remember on one occasion listening 
to a speech which to my mind contained one particu- 
lar bright scintillating gem of humor and keenness. 
8 X09 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

With curiosity I opened the papers next morning, and 
not one report of that speech contained that particular 
gem, which had taken some minutes in the telling! 

The list is necessarily far from complete, and can 
be indefinitely extended by earnest searchers through 
newspaper files in this and other countries, with per- 
haps some slight aid through the Chronology given in 
the "Notes" for this book. 

The following books, given in chronological order, 
contain Mark Twain speeches without other Mark 
Twain material. A full collation is given for only 
the climax item, ''Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910, 
which reprints almost all of the speeches given in the 
previous books, with the addition of over 80 others. 

Edmund Burke on Tammany and Croker is listed 
elsewhere, as it was not primarily intended for an 
address. Other books listed elsewhere containing 
speeches are: Eccentricities of Genius, Mark Twain, 
His Life and Work, and Extracts from the Minutes 
and Report of the Robert FuUon Monument Association, 
The Bulletin of the Society of American Authors for 
December, 1900, which contains a speech, can hardly 
be called a book. It is said that Mark Twain's Pre- 
toria speech in 1896 was printed in book form, but I 
have not seen it. 

[N. D.] 

Mark Twain's | Speech | on | Accident Insur- 
ance. 

One leaf, folded, making four pages about 4 by 3. 
First page carries title, with insurance company seal 

no 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

at top, and the next two pages carry the speech as 
later reprinted in Sketches New and Old, 1875, with a 
few additional lines descriptive of the banquet to 
Mr. Walford. Last page carries list of insurance 
company o£Scers. 

[N. D.] 

The Fun Library | is a | Collection | of | Hu- 
morous Stories, Ludicrous | Incidents of 
Travel, | Anecdotes, and | Pun Items, | from | 
Brightest Sources of Current Wit and Hu- 
mor. I (ornament) | Boston: | J. H. & A. L. 
Brigham, | 1 79 Milk Street. 

8vo, paper cover. Otherwise "Gripsack Glean- 
ings/' No. 4. On page 54 is printed ''Opening re- 
marks of Mark Twain's Lectures/' and on page 61 
"Mark Twain's Wooing/' This latter anecdote is of 
no importance here, as it has been printed so many 
times elsewhere. 

Address Before The Ancient and Honorable 
Artillery Company. 

8vo. Boston, 1875. 

I have not inspected this item personally. 

1876 

Seventy-First | Anniversary Celebration | 

of the I (vignette) | New-England Society 

III 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

in the City of New York | at | Delmonico's | 
Dec. 22, 1876. All in border, carrying va- 
rious vignettes, with captions. 

8vo, paper covers. Contains Mark Twain's reply tx> 
the toast, "The Oldest Inhabitant, New England 
Weather," pp. 50-54. This is generally quoted as 
"Speech on the Weather." 

1879 

Report of the Proceedings | of the | Society | 
of the I Army of the Tennessee, | at the | 
Thirteenth Annual Meeting, | held at | Chi- 
cago, Illinois, I November 12 and 13, 1879. I 
(rule) I Cincinnati : | Printed by F. W. Free- 
man, S. W. Cor. Third & Wakiut Sts. | 1879. 

8vo. Issued in printed blue paper covers. Front 
cover is same as title, in border. 

This book contains a short Mark Twain speech, p. 
50, and a longer one, "The Babies," pp. 154-57. 

1881 

Reunion of the Army of the Potomac. N. Y. 

8vo. Address by Clemens. 
I have not inspected this item peraonally. 

1881 

First Annual Festival | of the | New England 
Society | of Pennsylvania | at the | Conti- 

113 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

nental Hotel, Philadelphia, | December 22, 
1881. 

8vo. Issued in gray paper covers, printed in black 
same as title, on front cover. Mark Twain's address 
appears pp. 54-59, and has been later entitled, " Plym- 
outh Rock and the Pilgrims/* 

1882 

Seventy-seventh | Anniversary Celebration | 
of the I (vignette) | New-England Society ( 
in the City of New York | at | Delmonico's, | 
Dec. 22, 1882. All in border, carrying va- 
rious vignettes, with captions. 

8vo, paper covers. Mark Twain's address fills pp. 
39-42. Other remarks by him are on p. 75. 

1884 

Life of I Oliver Wendell Holmes | by E. E. 
Brown | Author of 'Xife of Garfield," "Life 
of Washington," "From | Night to Light," 
etc., etc. I Boston | D. Lothrop and Com- 
pany I Franklin Street. 

xamo, doth. Published March 31, 1884. Pp. 162-^5 
contain the Mark Twain speech at the "Holmes 
Breakfast," August 29, 1879, ^^ter captioned "Uncon- 
scious Plagiarism." 

"3 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1886 

International Cop3rright. | (rule) | Statements 
Made Before the Committee on Patents of | 
the United States Senate Relating to the 
Bill I (S. No. I 191) to Establish an Inter- 
national Copyright, and the | Bill (S. 11 78) 
to Amend Title 60, Chapter 3, of the Re- | 
vised Statutes of the United States. 

Above is at top of p. (I) of text. At top of p. (i) 
is as follows: 

*' Forty-ninth Congress, ist Session. Senate. Re- 
port No. 1 188. I (double rule) | in the Senate of the 
United States. | (rule) | May 21, 1886.— ordered to be 
printed." 

8vo, sewed, paper covers. Mr. Clemens* statement 
is given pp. 15-17. 

1888 

Werner's | Readings and Recitations | No. 
30 I (rule) I Elocutionary Studies | (nde) | 
(Compiled and Arranged by | Anna Randall= 
Diehl I (publishers' seal) | New York | 
Edgar S. Werner Publishing & Supply Co. 
(Inc.) I (rule) | Copyright, 1888, by Edgar 
S. Werner. 

1 3mo, paper covers. Mark Twain's speech, *' General 
Grant's English." appears p. 74. 

114 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



1890 

Wise, Witty, Eloquent | Kings | of the | Plat- 
form and Pulpit | by | Melville D. Landon | 
Biographies, Reminiscences and Lectures 
of I (five lines of three names each) | and 
the Master Lectures of | (five lines of three 
names each) | and | Personal Reminiscences 
and Anecdotes of | noted Americans | (rule) 
Profusely Illustrated | (rule) | Chicago 
the Wabash Publishing House | 1890. 

8vo, cloth and various leathers. Mark Twain anec- 
dotes and speeches fill pp. 348-359. Of these, the 
Papyrus Club, Boston, reply to the toast, "The 
Ladies,'* is first printing in book form. This speech 
is not the one listed under the same title in Sketches 
New and Old. 1875. 

Published September 35, 1890. 

1891 

Werner's | Readings and Recitations. | No. 5. ( 
American Classics. | Compiled and Arranged 
by I Sara Sigoumey Rice. | (monogram) | 
New York: | Edgar S. Werner • 1891. 

Vol. II, June, 1 89 1, 
lamo, paper covers. On pp. 91-99 is printed "A 
Ghost Story " by Mark Twain. This is the tale known 

"5 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

as "The Golden Arm/' used by Mark Twain in his 
early lectures, and retold in How to Tell a Story, 

189s 

A Brief History | of | The Lotos Club. | by | 
John Elderkin. | (rule) | Club House, | 556 
and 558 Fifth Avenue, ( New York. 

i2mo, doth, privately printed and distributed. 
Those first bound up carry list of Lotos Qub members 
at back. Two Mark Twain speeches are quoted in 
part, pp. 15 and 114-17. 

1900 

Masterpieces | of (ornaments) | American | Elo- 
quence I (Christian Herald Selection) | . • . 
with Introduction by ... | Julia Ward 
Howe I New York | The Christian Herald | 
Louis Klopsch, Proprietor 1 1900. Line bor- 
dering, rule boxes, ornaments, and " Ameri- 
can Eloquence" in red, balance in black. 

Square 8vo, cloth. Mark Twain speeches, "The Dis- 
counts of an Author," pp. 428-30, and '* An Author's 
Soldiering/' pp. 438-40. First was an address at a 
banquet of ex-Confederate and Union soldiers in New 
York City, October 12, 1890, and the second an ad- 
dress at a banquet of the Union veterans in Baltimore. 

116 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1901 

Modem | Eloquence | Editor- | Thomas B. 
Reed | Justin McCarthy •Rossiter Johnson | 
Albert EUery Bergh | Associate Editors | 
Vol. 1 1 After-Dinner | Speeches | A-D | The 
University Society | New York. In en- 
graved border, printed in tints. 

8vo, red morocco, 10 vols., limited to 500 copies, 
signed by Reed. Published June 99, 1901. 

Vol. I contains Mark Twain's speech, "A 'Littery* 
Episode," pp. 214-18. This speech was delivered at 
the " Whittier Birthday Dinner'' at the Hotel Bruns- 
wick, Boston, Mass., December 17, 1877. 

Vol. IV contains Mark Twain's lecture (delivered 
during 1877), "The Sandwich Islands," sometimes 
known as "Hawaii," pp. (3S3)~59* 

Vol. V contains Mark Twain's remarks introducing 
Charles Kingsley, Boston, February 17, 1874, pp. 
691-^3. 

1901 

Speeches at the | Lotos Club | Arranged by | 
John Elderkin | Chester S. Lord Horatio N. 
Eraser | (Lotos Club seal) | New York | 
Privately Printed | MCMI. 

8vo. It announces, "Of this book there have been 
printed from type, in the month of March, nineteen 

117 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

hundred and one, nine hundred copies on specially 
made paper and one hundred copies on Van Gelder 
hand-made paper." I have not seen one of the zoo 
numbered copies. 

On pp. 374-79 appears Mark Twain's speech at the 
dinner in his honor on November 10, 1900. 



1902 

Mark | Twain's | Birthday | (ornament) | 
Report of the | Celebration of | the Sixty- 
seventh I thereof at the | Metropolitan | 
Club, New York | November 28th | 1902. 
Enclosed in black ruled border. 

8vo, red boards, in case. Privately printed and dis- 
tributed, probably 300 copies issued. Mark Twain's 
speech occupies pp. 41-49. 

190S 

Mark Twain's | (ornament) 70th Birthday 
(ornament) | Souvenir of its Celebration | 
(portrait bust with caption " Mark Twain '*). 
Top three lines in t3rpe line box, between 
which and portrait is copyright line, " Copy- 
right, 1905, by Harper & Brothers." 

Without covers, given as supplement to Harper's 
Weekly for December «3, 1905. 

118 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Copyrighted, December 13, 1905; published Decem- 
ber 19, 1905. Mark Twain's speech is given pp. (3-4). 



1906 

Cop3aight Hearings, December 7 to 11, 1906. 
(rule) I Arguments | before the | Committee 
on Patents | of the | Senate and House of 
Representatives, Conjointly, | on the Bills | 
S. 6330 and H. R. 19853. | to Amend and 
Consolidate the Acts | respecting Copy- 
right. I (rule) | December 7, 8, 10, and 11, 
1906. I (rule) I Washington: | Government 
Printing Office. | 1906. 

8vo. Paper covers. Mr. Clemens' argimient is found 
pp. 116-iai. 

1906 

Mark Twain on Simplified Spelling | (A Speech 
at the Annual Dinner of the Associated 
Press held | in New York, September 19, 
1906, Revised Expressly for the | Simplified 
Spelling Board. 

Above is title-heading on p. I of text. Upper right- 
hand comer p. I has ''Simplified Spelling Board | 
Circular No. 9, Nov. 10, 1906." 

Issued without covers, single sheet folded once, 
making four pages of text. 

119 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1907 

The American Society in London. | (rule) | 
Report of the Speeches | at the Independ- 
ence Day Banquet, | July 4th, 1907, | Held 
at the Hotel Cecil, London. | (rule). 

Oblong 8vo, red boards, privately printed and dis- 
tributed. Mark Twain's speech appears pp. 14-18. 

1908 

Dinner in Honor of | the Honorable Whitelaw 
Reid I American Ambassador to the Court 
of Saint James | by the Pilgrims of the 
United States | on Wednesday, the Nine- 
teenth of February | One Thousand, Nine 
Hundred and Eight | at Delmonico's, New 
York. Large vignette above. 

lamo, paper covers, with above title on front cover, 
privately printed and distributed. Mark Twain's 
speech appears pp. 30-35. 

1910 

Mark Twain's | Speeches | With an Introduc- 
tion by I William Dean Howells | (pub- 
lishers' seal) I New York and London | Har- 
per & Brothers Publishers | 19 10. 

I30 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

i3mo. Collation: Title, copyright (dated 1910), Con- 
tents, Introduction, Preface, half-title, pp. (i-xi); 
text, pp. i-(434) ; blank, one leaf. Frontispiece por- 
trait separately printed. Size of leaf, trimmed, 5^ 
by 7|. Published June 31, 1910. 

Issued in red doth. "MT" monogram stamped in 
gilt on the front cover, and without color on the rear. 
Back reads, in gilt, "Mark Twain | (rule) | Mark | 
Twain's | Speeches | Portrait | . Harpers ." 

(Contents: Introduction. — Preface. — ^The Story of a 
Speech. — Plymouth Rock and the Pilgrims.^-Compli- 
ments and Degrees. — Books, Authors and Hats. — 
Dedication Speech. — Die Schrecken der Deutschen 
Sprache. — ^The Horrors of the German Language. — 
German for the Hungarians. — ^A New German Word. 
— ^Unconscious Plagiarism. — ^The Weather. — ^The Ba- 
bies. — Our Children and Great Discoveries. — ^Educat- 
ing Theatre-goers. — ^The Educational Theatre. — ^Poets 
as Policemen. — Pudd'nhead Wilson Dramatized. — 
Daly Theatre. — ^The Dress of Civilized Woman. — 
Dr^s Reform and 0>pyright. — College Girls.— Girls. 
— ^The Ladies. — ^Woman's Press Club. — Votes for 
Women. — ^Woman — An Opinion. — ^Advice to Girls. — 
Taxes and Morals. — ^Tammany and Croker Municipal 
Corruption. — ^Municipal Government. — China and the 
Philippines. — ^Theoretical and Practical Morals. — 
Layman's Sermon. — ^University Settlement Society. — 
Public Education Association. — Education and Citi- 
zenship.^-Courage. — ^The Dinner to Mr. (}hoate.— On 
Stanley and Livingstone. — ^Henry M. Stanley. — Din- 
ner to Mr. Jerome. — ^Henry Irving. — ^Dinner to Hamil- 
ton W. Mabie. — Introducing Nye and Riley. — ^Dinner 

121 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

to Whitelaw Reid. — Rogers and Railroads. — The 
Old-fashioned Printer. — Society of American Authors. 
— Reading Room Opening. — Literature. — Disappear- 
ance of Literature. — ^The New York Press Club Din- 
ner. — The Alphabet and Simplified Spelling. — Spelling 
and Pictures. — Books and Burglars. — Authors' Club. 
— Booksellers. — "Mark Twain's First Appearance." — 
Morals and Memory. — Queen Victoria. — ^Joan of Arc. 
— Accident Insurance, etc. — Osteopathy. — Water- 
Supply. — Mistaken Identity. — Cats and Candy. — 
Obituary Poetry. — Cigars and Tobacco. — Billiards. — 
The Union ; Right or Wrong ? — An Ideal French Ad- 
dress. — Statistics. — Galveston Orphan Bazaar. — San 
Francisco Earthquake. — Charity and Actors. — Rus- 
sian Republic. — Russian Sufferers. — Watterson and 
Twain as Rebels. — Robert Fulton Fund. — Pulton 
Day. — ^Jamestown. — Lotos Club Dinner in Honor of 
Mark Twain. — Copyright. — In Aid of the Blind. — 
Dr. Mark Twain, Farmeopath. — Missouri University 
Speech. — Business. — Carnegie, the Benefactor. — On 
Poetry, Veracity, and Suicide. — Welcome Home. — An 
Undelivered Speech. — Sixty-seventh Birthday. — ^To 
the Whitefriars.— The Ascot Gold Cup.— The Savage 
Club Dinner. — General Miles and the Dog. — ^When in 
Doubt, Tell the Truth.— The Day We Celebrate.— 
Independence Day. — ^Americans and the English. — 
About London. — Princeton. — The St. Louis Harbor- 
boat, "Mark Twain." — Seventieth Birthday. 

First edition for all items except "Whittier Birth- 
day" (in "The Story of a Speech"), "Unconscious 
Plagiarism," "The Weather," "The Babies," "The 
Dress of CiviUzed Woman," "The Ladies," "Henry 

123 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

M. Stanley," "Introducing Nye and Riley/' "Dinner 
to Whitelaw Reid," "The Union; Right or Wrong?" 
"Accident Insurance,'* "Mistaken Identity," "Lotos 
Qub Dinner." "Copyright," "Welcome Home," 
* * Sixty-seventh Birthday, " " Independence Day, ' ' 
"'Americans and the English," and "Seventieth 
Birthday." 



LETTERS 



LETTERS 

Some of us become greatly miffed if our old letters 
are made public. Literary people are not so sensi- 
tive, and the following extract from ** Chapters from 
My Autobiography " in the Narih American Review y^ 
of September 21, 1906, gives Mr. Clemens* personal 
attitude on the question: 

"This is from this morning's paper: 

•• MARK TWAIN LETTER SOLD." 

Written to Thomas Nast, it Proposed a Joint Tour. 

'"A Mark Twain autograph letter brought $43.00 yester- 
day at the auction by the Merwin-Clajrton Company of the 
library and correspondence of the late Thomas Nast, the 
cartoonist. The letter is nine pages note paper, is dated 
Hartford, November 12, 1877, and is addressed to Nast. It 
reads in part as follows: * 

"This is as it should be. This is worthy of all praise. I 
say it myself lest other competent persons should forget to 
do it. It appears that four of my ancient letters were sold 
at auction, three of them at twenty-seven dollars, twenty- 
eight dollars and twenty-nine dollars respectively, and the 
one above mentioned at forty-three dollars. There is one 
very gratifying circumstance about this, to wit; that my 
literattire has more than held its own as regards money value 
through this stretch of thirty-six years. I judge that the 
forty-three-dollar letter must have gone at about ten cents 
a word, whereas if I had written it to-day its market rate 

127 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

would be thirty cents — so I have increased in value two or 
three hundred per cent. I note another gratifying circum- 
stance — that a letter of General Grant's sold at something 
short of eighteen dollars. I can't rise to General Grant's 
lofty place in the estimation, but it is a deep happiness to 
me to know that when it comes to epistolary literature he 
can't sit in the front seat along with me. 

" Nine years ago, when we were living in Tedwirth Square, 
London, a report was cabled to the American journals that I 
was dying. I was not the one. It was another Clemens, a 
cousin of mine. The London representatives of the American 
papers began to flock in, with American cables in their hands, 
to inquire into my condition 

"The next man was also an Irishman. He had his New 
York cablegram in his hand. It said : ' If Mark Twain dying, 
send five hundred words. If dead, send a thousand.' 

"Now that old letter of mine sold yesterday for forty- 
three dollars. When I am dead it will be worth eighty-six." 



1877 

Seventy-second | Anniversary Celebration | 
of the I (vignette) | New-England Society | 
in the City of New York | at | Delmonico*s | 
Dec. 22, 1877. All in border, carrying va- 
rious vignettes, with captions. 

8vo, paper covers. Lietter of regret from Mark Twain, 
p. 84. 

1880 

The Reception | given to | Thurlow Weed | 

on his I Eighty-third Birthday | by the | 

New York Press Club. | (rule) | (for Private 

128 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Distribution.) | (rule) | Albany; | Weed, 
Parsons and Company, Printers. | 1880. 

8vo, paper covers. A three-line letter of no impor- 
tance is given, p. 23. 

1880 

Some Funny Things; | a careful Selection of 
Funny Sketches, | from the Pens of such 
well I known Writers as | The Detroit Free 
Press Man, The | Burlington Hawkeye Man, 
The I Danbury News Man, The | Norristown 
Her- I aid Man, | and a Ntunber of other 
Funny Men. | (rule) | New York: | Frank 
Harrison & Co., | 206 and 208 Broadway. 

i6nio, paper covers. An anecdote, ''Starting a 
Paper," including a Mark Twain letter, is on pp. 

49-52- 

1889 

Camden's Compliment | to | Walt Whitman 
May 31, 1889 I Notes, Addresses, Letters, 
Telegrams | Edited by | Horace L. Traubel 
Philadelphia | David McKay, Publisher 
23 South Ninth Street | 1889. 

8vo, doth. An open letter from Mark Twain is 
printed pp. 64-65. It is not in his happiest vein. 

129 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1891 

Portraits | and | Autographs: | an Albtim for 
The People. | Edited by W. T. Stead | The 
Review of Reviews. | A Sixpenny Monthly | 
London: | Mowbray House, Norfolk St. | 
Strand. W. C. | (rule) | 1891. 

Facsimile letter from Clemens to Stead, p. 63. 

1894 

The I Diversions | of an | Autograph-Hunter. | 
by IJ. H. I (rule) | London: | Elliot Stock, 
62, Paternoster Row, E. C. | 1894. 

lamo, cloth. The frontispiece is a facsimile of a 
Mark Twain letter, and the history of the letter is 
given, pp. 61-63. 

1904 

Cat Stories | Retold from St. Nicholas | Edited 
by I M. H. Carter | Department of Science 
of the I New York Training School for 
Teachers | (vignette) | New York | The 
Century Co. | 1904. In border. 

i2mo, cloth. On page four is a letter from Mark 
Twain about his cats, reprinted from St. Nicholas, 
where it was addressed to one Edwin Wildman. 

130 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1904 

Th. Nast I His Period and his Pictures | by | 
Albert Bigelow Paine | New York | The 
MacmiUan Company | London: Macmillan 
& Co., Ltd. I 1904 I All Rights Reserved. 

8vo, cloth. Letters from Mark Twain are printed, 
pp. 263, 367-68, and sxji one of them concerning a 
joint lecture tour projected by Twain and Nast. 



Special Performance | of | Haensel and Gretel 
I by the | Conried | Metropolitan Opera 
Company | for the Benefit | of the | Legal 
Aid Society | at the | Metropolitan Opera 
House I Thursday Evening | March 15th | 
1906. In pictorial border. 

8vo, paper wrappers. Contains Mark Twain letter, 
pp. 34-26. 

1906 

History | of the Ohio Society | of New York 
1885-1905 I Prepared and Compiled under 
the direction of | Henry L. Burnett | War- 
ren Higley | Leander H. Crall | Committee 
on Publication | by | James H. Kennedy | 
Historian of the Society | (seal of the Ohio 

131 



/ 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Society) I The Grafton Press | New York 

MCMVI. First three lines and seal in red, 

balance in black. 

8vo, cloth. Short and unimportant Mark Twain 
letter, p. 341. 

1907 

Extracts from the | Minutes and Report | of 
the Robert Fulton | Monument Association | 
From its inception, for Pre- | sentation at 
the annual | Meeting held in the State | 
Room at the Waldorf Asto- | ria on Nov- 
ember 14, 1907, at I 3.30 P.M. 

34mo, paper covers. Mark Twain speech, pp. 49-50; 
Mark Twain letters, pp. 75 and 87. 

1908 

The Life of | Thomas Bailey Aldrich | by | 
Ferris Greenslet | (publishers' seal) | Cam- 
bridge I Printed at The Riverside Press | 
MDCXXJCVIII. First two lines and •* Cam- 
bridge" in red, balance in black. 

8vo, cloth. Large paper edition of soo copies. Pp. 
95-99 contain several letters from Twain to Aldrich. 

1909 

Letters and Opinions of "Letters of a Japa- 
nese Schoolboy" 

13^ 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

This is not a title-page as given, but my own cap- 
tion for a pamphlet announcement of Mr. Wallace 
Irwin's book, published by Doubleday, Page & Com- 
pany, 1909. The pamphlet is 8vo, 8 pages, and on 
the second page carries a letter of appreciation from 
Mark Twain. 

1910 

Stories of Authors | British and American | 
by I Edwin Watts Chubb | Professor of 
English Literature | In the Ohio Univer- 
sity. I Illustrated | New York | Sturgis & 
Walton I Company | 1910 | All Rights Re- 
served. 

lamo. Qoth, 369 pages of text. ''The Story of 
Mark Twain's Debts" fills pp. 349-357, and contains 
a portion of a letter, together with a small amount of 
anecdotal material. 

Books listed elsewhere containing Mark Twain 
letters are: Mark Twain, His Life and Work; Eccen- 
tricities of Genius: and Charles Dickens by Pen and 
PencU. 

The following periodicals contain Mark Twain 
letters: CaUfomia Mail Bag, May, 1873; Harper's 
Magazine, May, 1896; Ladies' Home Journal, October, 
1898; Ainslee's, August, 1900; Army and Navy Jour- 
nal, March, 1901; Papyrus, March, 1905; Harper's 
Weekly, August 25, 1905, October 21, 1905, December 
15, 1905, March 24, 1906, May 36, 1906, March 37, 1909; 

133 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

CoUier*s Weekly, September 22, 1906, July 6, 1908, 
August 8, 1908. 

The following New York newspapers ppnt Mark 
Twain letters: Times, March 12, 1898; Journal, 
June 2$, 1900; World, January 24, 1901; Journal, 
August 19, 1902; Tribune, March 31, 1903; Herald, 
August 16, 1903; World, October 22, 1903; Herald, 
January 14, 1904; Times, May 15, 1905; Times, 
November 5, 1906; American, December 21, 1907; 
Sun, January 22, 2908; Times, March 30, 1908; 
Tribune, June 9, 1908; American, August 4, 1909. 

Catalogues containing Mark Twain letters are as 
follows: 

Geo. D. Smith's Catalogue of Autographs, 1903. 
Mark Twain letters, pp. 21 and 23. 

Anderson Auction Co.'s Catalogue for December 3, 

1907. Mark Twain inscription, p. 26. 

Anderson Auction Co.'s Catalogue for January 20- 
21, X908. Mark Twain Presentation inscription, p. 20. 

Anderson Auction Co.*s Catalogue for March 17, 

1908. Mark Twain letters, p. 8. 

Anderson Auction Co.'s Catalogue for May 15, 1908. 
Mark Twain letters, p. 8. 

Anderson Auction Co.'s Catalogue for December 
9~io, 1909. Mark Twain letter, p. 18. 

Germantown Hospital Book Sale Catalogue for 
2906. Mark Twain facsimile inscription, plate after 
p. (22). Mark Twain inscriptions, pp. $0-^1, 

134 



ANECDOTES 



ANECDOTES 

In this section is given the anecdotal Twain ma- 
terial that has achieved the importance of book 
production. In each age the foremost story-teller 
is credited with numerous tales he never fathered: 
the relators of these spurious efforts seeking to gain 
a hearing by attributing them to the master-creation. 
" As Lincoln once said " was followed by " Mark Twain 
tells this one.'' 

The one anecdotal book that is important, certified, 
and certain, is My Mark Twain, 1910, by Twain's 
close literary friend of forty-four years, William Dean 
Howells. 

1882 



Famous | Funny Fellows | Brief Biographical 

Sketches of American Humorists | by 

Will M. Clemens | Qeveland. Ohio | William 

W. Williams | i88a. 

i2mo. Issued in cloth and paper covers, and con- 
tains short sketch of Mark Twain, including a few 
letters, etc., pp. 11-23, but most of the material 
therein is repeated and expanded to much better 
effect in the author's later book, Mark Twain, His 
Life and Work, 1892. 

137 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



1883 

Wit and Hiunor | of the Age. | Comprising ( 
Wit, Humor, Pathos, Ridicule, | Satires, 
Dialects, Puns, | Conundrums, Riddles, 
Charades, ( Jokes and Magic, | (rule) | by | 
Mark Twain, Robt. J. Burdette, | Josh 
Bfllings, Alex. Sweet, | Eli Perkins. | With 
The philosophy of Wit and Humor, | by 
Melville D. Landon, A. M. | (rule) | Illus- 
trated I (rule) I Chicago: | Western Pub- 
lishing House. I (rule) | 1883. Other rules 
and ornaments at top. 

8vo, cloth. Pp. 194-95-96 contain story alleged to 
have been related by Mark Twain about his fast horse, 
same as found in Gripsack Gleanings^ No. 3. In 
justice to Mr. Clemens it must be stated that Mr. 
Landon had a free habit of trading on his brother 
humorists, without sufficient accuracy of quotation, 
and in one book, Eli Perkins at Large, even went so 
far as to include a long article headed, "How Eli 
Perkins Lectured at Pottsville, by Mark Twain,** 
which he (Landon) admitted writing himself in its 
entirety. 

1889 

The People | I've Smiled with | Recollections 
of a Merry | Little Life | by | Marshall P. 

138 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Wilder | (rule) | Cassell & Company, 
Limited, | 104 & 106 Fourth Avenue, New 
York. 

xamo, doth and paper covers. One short anecdote, 
"Chestnuts," is given, p. 137, and one about Augustin 
Daly's dog, pp. 194-98, purports to be the report of 
a speech at the looth night dinner of ''The Taming 
of the Shrew," in New York. This last was retold by 
Mark Twain in Following the Equator, 1897, pp. 415- 

1891 

Eli Perkins | Thirty Years of Wit | and | 
Reminiscences of Witty, Wise | and Elo- 
quent Men I by | Melville D. Landon ( (Eli 
Perkins) | (rule) | New York | Cassell Pub- 
lishing Company, | 104 & 106 Fourth Ave- 
nue, New York. 

xamo, cloth and paper covers. Mark Twain anec- 
dotes on pp. 12, 13, 86, 87, 88. 

1900 

Five Famous Missourians. | Authenticated 
Biographical | Sketches of | Samuel L. 
Clemens, Richard P. Bland, | Champ Clark, 
James M. Greenwood, | and Joseph (). 
Shelby. | by | WUfred R. Hollister and 

»39 



y 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Harry Norman. | with Introductories by ( 
Walter Williams, Hon. Champ Clark, Hon. 
Joseph W. Bailey, | Professor John R. Kirk, 
and Mrs. T. J. Henry. | (rule) | Kansas 
City, Mo.: | Hudson-Kimberly Publish- 
ing Co., I 1900. 

lamo, cloth. The sketch of Mark Twain fills pp. 
7-86. It contains but little literary material, and is 
far less important than the Will M. Clemens book. 

1902 

Two Hundred | After Dinner Stories | as told 
by I many American Htimorists. | (rule) | 
Copyright, 1902, by J. S. Ogilvie Publish- 
ing Company. | (rule) | New York: | J. S. 
Ogilvie Publishing Company. | 57 Rose 
Street. 

xamo, paper covers. Mark Twain anecdotes, pp. 6. 
iS» 58* xi3» 116. 143. 179. 2". 247. and 294. 

1902 

The I ''Man in the Street" | Stories. | from 

'•The New York Times." | Containing 

over Six Htmdred Humorous After-dinner 

Stories | about Prominent Persons. | With 

140 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



an Introduction by | Chatincey M. Depew. 
(rule) I Copyright, 1902, by J. S. Qgilvie 
Publishing Company. | (rule) | New York: | 
J. S. Ogilvie Publishing Company, 57 Rose 
Street. 

i2mo, cloth. Contains Mark Twain anecdotes, pp. 
58, 113. 116, 143. 179. 21*. 247» and 294. 



1902 

Authors of our Day | in their Homes | (double 
rule) I Personal Descriptions & Interviews 
(double rule) | Edited with Additions by 
Francis Whiting Halsey | Seventeen Illus- 
trations I (publishers' seal) | (double rule) | 
New York | James Pott & Company | 
MCMII. First two lines, seal, and pub- 
lisher in red, balance in black. 

xamo, cloth. Pp. 33-35 contain "Mark Twain in 
Riverdale-on-the-Hudson, and in Hartford, Conn." 
This has small amount of literary and anecdotal 
material. 

1904 

After-Dinner | Stories | Compiled and Edited 
by I C. M. DoUiver | Comprising | The 
Latest and Best Stories of Americans | 
10 141 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Brightest Wits | (ten lines of speakers* 
names) | J. S. Ogilvie Publishing Co., | 57 
Rose Street, New York. | (rule) | (Copy- 
right, 1904, by Will Rossiter.) Enclosed in 
three-ruled box borders. 

24mo, paper covers. On pp. 8-9 are three anecdotes 
of Mark Twain. 

1904 

Autobiography | Memories and Experiences | 
of I Moncure Daniel Conway | In Two 
Volumes | Vol. I (Vol. II) | (publisher's 
seal) I Boston and New York | Houghton, 
MifBin and Company | The Riverside Press, 
Cambridge | 1904. 

Two vols., 8vo, cloth. First printing limited to 100 
copies and signed by the author. Mark Twain anec- 
dotes, pp. 142-46, Vol. II. 

After I Dinner | Stories | (vignette) | Compiled 
by I E. C. Lewis | The Mutual Book Co. | 
Publishers I Boston. Mass. 



lamo, limp leather. Mark Twain anecdotes, pp. 7, 
12, 14, x8, and 20. 

142 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



1907 
In Lighter Vein | a Collection of | Anecdotes, 
Witty Sayings | Bon Mots, Bright Repartees 
I Eccentricities and | Reminiscences of | 
Well-known Men and Women | Who are or 
have been | Prominent in the | Public 
Eye I Collected, Edited | and Presented 
to the Public | by | John De Morgan | 
Author of I "Literary Side of the Presi- 
dents" I "Homes and Haimts of British 
Authors" I "Heroes of the Cromwellian 
Era" I Etc. | (ornament) | Paul Elder & 
Company | San Francisco and New York. 
In border. 

xamo, cloth. Mark Twain anecdotes, pp. 144, 145, 
146. 

1908 

Reminiscences of | Senator William M. Stew- 
art I of Nevada | edited by | George Roth- 
well Brown | (ornament) | New York and 
Washington | The Neale Publishing Com- 
pany I 1908. 

8vo, cloth. On pp. 219-24 is an alleged account of 
the writing of Innocents Abroad, as remembered by 
Senator Stewart. He writes with an apparent bias 
that will not please the admirer of Twain. 

143 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

1908 

Authentic and Brilliant | After Dinner Stories 
I and Repartee | (two ornaments) | Glean- 
ings from I The Most Gifted After Dinner 
Speakers | of the Day | (one ornament) | 
The Arthur Westbrook Company | Cleve- 
land, U. S. A. 

341x10, paper covers. Mark Twain anecdote, p. 48. 

1908 

A Bunch I of Lemons | Collected, Condemned | 
and Cussed | by | A. Phew Lemons | (vig- 
nette by Opper) | H. M. Caldwell Co. | New 
York Boston. In rule and box borders. 

34mo, cloth. Mark Twain anecdote, p. 59. 

1910 

My Mark Twain | Reminiscences and Criti- 
cisms I by I W. D. Howells | Illustrated | 
(publishers' seal) | Harper & Brothers Pub- 
lishers I New York and London | 19 10. 

xamo, green cloth. Published September xo, 1910. 

The high quality and importance of this anecdotal 

book is no more than could be expected of Mark 

144 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Twain's closest and oldest literary friend. The " Rem- 
iniscences" were written after Mr. Clemens' death, 
and published in three numbers of Harper's Maga- 
zine from July, 19 lo; the "Criticisms" are collected 
reviews of Mark Twain books from magazines of 
different periods. For one who wishes a grasp of 
Mark Twain's personality, it will form a necessary 
supplement to Will M. Clemens' incomplete Life; and 
may even have a nearer personal touch than Mr. 
Albert Bigelow Paine's Biography, though, of course, 
not in any way so comprehensive as the latter work 
will be. 

[N. D.] 

The Fun Library | is a | Collection | of | Hu- 
morous Stories, Ludicrous | Incidents of 
Travel, | Anecdotes, and | Fun Items, | 
from I Brightest Sources of Current Wit 
and Humor. | (ornament) | Boston: | J. H. 
& A. L. Brigham, | 179 Milk Street. 

Otherwise "Gripsack Gleanings, No. 3." 8vo, 
paper cover. On page 7 is an anecdote, "Mr. Mark 
Twain. He tells about a very fast horse he once 
drove." The same anecdote is given in Wit and 
Humor of the Age. 



NOTES 



NOTES 

Those who value Mr. Clemens' speeches and fugitive 
efforts will find use for the appended Chronology of 
his various residences and travels as an aid for search 
in newspaper files and other local sources. 

x86x-64» in Nevada; in summer of 1864 to San 
Francisco; 1865, in California; in x866, a trip to 
Hawaii, then back to San Francisco; 1867, across the 
isthmus to New York, thence to Washington, back 
to New York, sailing in June on Qu^jker City trip to 
the Orient; 1868, in Washington, thence in March to 
San Francisco, and back in September to New York; 
in fall of 1869, to Buffalo, balancing between Buffalo 
and Elmira until the fall of 1870, removing to Hart- 
ford; in July, 1871, to England; most of 1872 and 1873 
between London and Hartford; 1874 to 1877 in Hart- 
ford, with summers in Elmira; winter of 1877-78 in 
Chicago, then to Europe; 1879, in England, France, 
and Germany, until September, then back to U. S.; 
x88o, until 1890, mainly in Hartford, with sununer 
changes, mostly to Elmira, home of Mrs. Gemens; 
most of 1891-92-93-94 in Europe, wintering in 
Aix-les-Bains, Berlin, Florence, and Paris in turn; 
1895, to Europe, then back for lecture tour of U. S.; 
leaving Vancouver in August for 'round-the-world 

149 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

trip, reaching England in August, thence to Vienna 
in September; early part of 1897, in London, in July, 
to Switzerland, thence to Vienna; 1898 and 1899, 
mainly in Europe, first in Austria, then in England, 
with summer of '99 in Sweden; 1900, in New York, 
with trip to London, then back to New York; 1901, 
in Riverdale-on-the-Hudson, Saranac in the sunmier; 
1903, in Riverdale, trip to Missouri in May, June, and 
York Harbor, Maine, in the fall; 1903, Riverdale, 
leaving in October for Italy; 1904, in Florence, Italy, 
until June, thence to Lee, Mass., and in the winter 
to New York City; 1905, New York City, Dublin, 
N. H., in fall; New York City in 1906, winter trip 
to Bermuda; returns from Bermuda in spring to 
Tuxedo, then in July to England, then back to Tuxedo 
and New York; 1908, early months in Bermuda, 
thence to New York, and on June 18, to Redding, 
Conn. ; 1909, in Redding, on November 18, to Bermuda, 
returning on December 18; 1910, on January 5, to 
Bermuda, returning to end his career in Redding, on 
April 21. There are, no doubt, other exctirsions of 
which I have no record. 



Twain's first article in the Enterprise was a bur- 
lesque on a lecture by Chief Justice George Turner, 
in Carson City, the latter part of 1861. Turner was 
very much of an egotist, and Twain called his skit 
"The Lecture of Mr. Personal Pronoun." His first 
letters from Esmeralda to the Enterprise were signed 
"Josh," and were only three or four in number; he 

150 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

went to work regularly on the Enterprise in the fall 

of 1862. 

* * * 

Mr. John Camden Hotten, the English publisher, 
justified the inclusion of several sketches in his edi- 
tions which Mark Twain repudiated, by claiming that 
Mark wrote for the Buffalo Express over the nom de 
plume ''Carl Byng." 

* * * 

A book to be listed by the future bibliographer of 
Twain is Albert Bigelow Paine's Biography of Mark 
Twain, which is first to take serial form in the North 
American Review. Mr. Howells proposes to publish 
a volume of letters from Mr. Clemens to himself, and 
another compilation of Twain letters in general is 

possible. 

* * * 

It is claimed that Mr. Clemens wrote a certain skit 
of exaggerated tendencies entitled '' A Poet's Epistle 
to the Society of the Mammoth Cod." I cannot 

vouch for it. 

* * * 

''Sketches Old and New" on the cover, and 
"Sketches New and Old" on the title-page. That's 

a twister. 

* * * 

The following items generally credited to Mark 
Twain have nothing of first-edition interest: "The 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Travelling Innocents/' ''Mark Twain's Pleasure Trip 
on the Continent," "Men and Things," "Women and 
Things," "A Littie Nonsense," "The Primrose Way," 
"An Unexpected Acquaintance," "Yankee Droller- 
ies," "Idle Notes of an Idle Exctirsion," "English as 
She is Instructed," "Mark Twain's Nightmare," 
Choice Bits," and "Mark Twain's Birthday Book." 
Mark Twain's Scrap Book" is a patented pasting 
device, not a literary production. "The Literary 
Guillotine " was not written or collaborated in by Mr. 
Qemens. " An Unexpected Acquaintance " is merely 
an excerpt from "The Tramp Abroad." 






" To My Guests Greeting and Salutation and Pros- 
perity I" was the heading of a printed letter given each 
visitor to Mark Twain's home in Stormfield; it was 
an appeal for aid to the Redding Public Library. 



Beadle's Dime Dialogues, No. xo, contains "Mrs. 
Mark Twain's Shoe," a four-page dialogue. I cannot 
think Mark Twain wrote it. 



Mr. Clemens has been interviewed countless times 
by newspaper and magazine writers. His refreshing 
and original views always made good reading for the 
public. He could be grave or gay as suited the 
topic. It became so the custom in New York for 
the editors to send reporters to him on any and all 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

occasions, that he was forced to draw the line, limit- 
ing them to the day of his departure for some distant 
point, and the day of his return. The same ques- 
tions arise in regard to interviews as with speeches, 
chiefly as to accuracy of reporting. I once saw a 
scrap-book containing newspaper interviews which 
had been submitted to Mr. Clemens by some ardent 
admirer, and the author had margined it with his 
comments. Some had merely a confirmatory " O.K," 
others had more extended comments, and but one 
was denied in toto; surely Mr. Qemens found a far 
less percentage of "Mendacious Journalism'' than 
others of our public men. On the one interview 
which he did not choose to remember giving to the 
press, which purported to be a reply to a society 
leader's previous article, he margined, in effect, ''I 

would be as apt to discuss this with Mrs. A as 

with the cat." 

Here is Mark Twain's own idea of the interview as 
he has met it: 

"I have, in my time, succeeded in writing some very 
poor stuff, which I have put in pigeon-holes until I realized 
how bad it was, and then destroyed it. But I think the very 
poorest article I ever wrote and destroyed was better worth 
reading than any interview with me that was ever pub- 
lished. I would like just once to interview myself in order 
to show the possibilities of the interview.'* 

For those who wish to pursue the question of inter- 
views a short and t)rpical list is given below, alto- 
gether from New York newspapers: 

lifOQ^Wortd, June i6; World, October 14: Hirald, October 
16; World, October ai. i^i—Htraid, January ao; Journal, 

153 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

March 14; Journal, October 9; Herald, October 14. 1903 — 
Herald, June 15; World, September 7. 1903 — Herald, June 
15. 1905 — American, August 30; Herald, November 13; 
American, November 36 and 38; World, December 3. 1906 — 
Herald, January 30; Herald, March 11; American, March 18; 
American, December 7; World, December 16. 1907 — Amer- 
ican, May 5; Press, May 9; American, May 36; Times, May 
13; American, June 8; Sun, June 19; American, June 33; 
Times, June 30; World, July 13; Times, American, World, 
Tribune, July 33; World, August 35. X908 — Journal, Feb- 
ruary 33; American, April 14; Journal, September 37. 1909 
— World, October 7. 19 10 — Journal, December 30. 



Here is a short list of periodicals containing the 
more important articles, not by Twain, but inter- 
views, collections of anecdotes, and the like: 

Idler, February, 1893; Califomian, July, 1893; Harper* s 
Magazine, May, 1896; McClure, January, 1898; Ainslee*s, 
August, 1900; Review of Reviews, January, 1901; Criterion, 
August, 1 901: Sketch, March 30, 1904; Metropolitan, March, 
1904; Gunter's, April, 1905; Outing, October, 1907; Black and 
White, January 39, 1908; Pacific Monthly, Marcli, 1908; Coun^ 
try Life in America, April, 1909; Harper's Magazine, May, 
1909; Bookman, June, 19 10. 



Mr. Howells, in My Mark Twain, 19x0, gives the 
story of the dramatization of The Gilded Age, the play 
being known as "Mulberry Sellers," or "Colonel 
Sellers." It seems that the original play was the 
work of an unknown dramatist, who adapted from 
Mark Twain's book. Twain and Howells undertook 
to write a continuation of that play. It was staged 
for one week. Other dramatizations from Twain 
books have been "Pudd'nhead Wilson," and "The 
Prince and the Pauper." I believe one E. H. House 

154 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

had to do with the dramatization of the latter, but 
cannot give further facts, or tell whether actual col- 
laboration was done by Mr. Clemens; and I have 
vainly searched for any printed copies of those plays. 
Belford's Magatdne for December, 1890, gives a small 
portion of the Prince and the Pauper in dramatic 

form. 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

Mark Twain is said to have contributed several 
stories to some publication advertising a certain 
western railroad at an early period of his career. I 
cannot confirm this. 



"Good Things," "Gatherings of Scraps," "Side 
Splitters," and "Funniest Fiction" have all been 
wrongly listed as books; they are merely sub-captions 
for Screamers and Eye-Openers. 



The original outside paper wrapper of Mark Twain's 
Speeches, 19 10, set forth as one of the items in the 
book, "The address delivered at the Aldrich Me- 
morial meeting." That particular speech had been 
omitted from the contents, as no good report of it 

could be found. 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

The Boston Transcript for November 27, 1872, 
prints two interesting Mark Twain items. It seems 
that the steamer Batavia, on which the humorist was 

^S5 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

returning from England, chanced to pick up some 
shipwrecked mariners. The passengers of the Ba- 
tavia wished to memorialize the Royal Humane 
Society in behalf of the heroic rescuers, and also de- 
sired to express their commendations directly to the 
officers of the ship, and in both cases Mark Twain 
was persuaded to compose the documents. 



Once upon a time Elinor Glyn, she of the Weeks, 
enjoyed a little talk with Mr. Qemens. She straight- 
way sent to the printer her recollections of what 
Mr. Clemens had said, distributing the pamphlet so 
produced among her friends. Through carelessness 
on her part (or her press agent's), one of said pam- 
phlets turned up in a newspaper office, and was sent 
out for the world to read, greatly to the annoyance 
and objurgation of its purported relator, who in 
haste and with vehemence denounced the publica- 
tion as a garbled and unauthentic affair. 



When I list in the index a story, say, "An Advent- 
ure of Huckleberry Finn," and refer to the book in 
which it later appears. The Adventures of Huckleberry 
Finn, pages such-and-such, I do not guarantee that 
the story is included word for word in the book 
exactly as it appeared in the magazine. Naturally 
the stories were edited, and in many cases quite con- 
siderable changes made before book publication. 

Some Mark Twain stories appeared in newspapers, 

156 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

and in changed and edited form were included in 

one of his books, as InnocetUs Abroad or Roughing It. 

Later, some one has lifted the story verbatim from 

the original newspaper, in dodging the copyright law, 

thereby making a differently worded book edition 

from the authorized version. I have listed no such 

publications. 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

Here is a contributed note which I have not had 
opportunity to follow up: 

"Years agone a murderer by the name of Ruloff was con- 
demned to be hung in New York. He was an eminent 
scholar, a professor of something or other, and his was a 
celebrated case. Just before his execution, Mark Twain 
wrote a letter to the Tribune which dwelt upon the condemned 
man's extraordinary learning, set forth how great a loss to 
humanity his putting away would be, and with an air of 
sincerity offered to take his place on the gallows, being 
actuated from altruistic motives. It is said the generous 
offer was not seriously considered in official circles." 

Another note from a correspondent, this time con- 
cerning the Toronto edition of An Idle Excursion: 

" On page i6 a sentence has been left out at the end of the 
fourth line from the last, marring the climax of chapter I ; it 
shottkl read: 'Could not fail of the performance! The Chro- 
nometer of God never errs.' " 

This may prove of considerable interest if it should 
ever be discovered that An Idle Excursion antedated 
Punchy Brothers, Punch! 



One of my collector-friends has a volume edited 
by or for Eugene Field, with title of "The Stag- 

11 157 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Party." A pencil note over one of the stories in- 
cluded anonymously, attributes it to Mark Twain. 
A mere perusal of the story, however, is almost a com- 
plete refutation of such a claim. 



Mark Twain lapsed but seldom into poetry. **A 
Memory/' in the Galaxy^ August, 1870, gives his first 
youthftil effort as a parody on "Hiawatha." "The 
Miner's Lament" also appeared in the Galaxy, "The 
Aged Pilot Man," in Roughing It, is a parody on 
"The Ancient Mariner," and "The Mysterious China- 
man," which has never been dignified by book or 
magazine printing, was adapted from Poe's " Lenore." 
" In Memoriam," written in 1897, is a serious and dig- 
nified tribute to his daughter Susan. 



Hot Stuff is merely one of the countless collec- 
tions of Wit and Humor, and the Choaie Story Book 
was edited by Will M. Clemens, not Samuel L. 
Clemens; both have been credited to Mark Twain in 

certain check-lists. 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

Ward, Locke & Company's editions of Mark Twain, 
some of them in what was termed "Beeton's Li- 
brary," are invariably reprints of earlier English 

issues. 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

In his preface to Innocents Abroad, Mark Twain 
refers to letters written to Daily Alia California, 

158 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

New York Tribune, and the New York Herald, 
which he afterward incorporated in the book above 
mentioned. Most of these letters appeared in 1867 
in the journals named, but I have not had the op- 
porttmity to obtain the exact dates. Several news- 
paper articles, notably in the Buffalo Express, were 
incorporated in Roughing It, and it is said that the 
New York Sun printed letters later used in A Tramp 

Abroad. 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

Mr. Clemens' attitude toward illustrators and col- 
lege-men was typical of newspaper editors of his time; 
since then employers have learned to recognize and 
even stimulate merit in those unfortunate classes. 
Dan Beard contributed the following to the New 
York American concerning his first meeting with 
Mark Twain to discuss the illustration of a book. 
Mr. Beard endeavors to give in type a representation 
of Mark's peculiar drawl : 

"'Mr. Beard, I — do — not — want — to — inflict — any — men- 
tal — agony — upon — you nor subject you— to— any — undue 
suffering, but — I — do wish — you'd read — the — book before 
— you make the — pictures.' 

"I assured him that I had already read the manuscripts 
thoroughly three times, and he replied by opening a promi- 
nent magaxine at his elbow, to a very beautiful picture of an 
old gentleman with a smooth face, which the text described 
as having a flowing white beard, remarking, as he did so: 

** * From — a — casual — reference — to— the current — maga- 
zines — I — did not — suppose — that — was — the usual — custom 
— with — illustrators. Now, Mr. Beard, you — know — my — 
character — of — the — Yankee. He^is^a — common, uned- 
ucated — man. He's a good — telegraph— operator; he^can 
— make — a — Colt's — revolver— or — a — Remington — gun, but 
— he's — a — perfect — ignoramus. He's — a — good — foreman — 

159 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

for — a — manufacturer, can survey — land — and — run — a— 
locomotive; in other— words, he — has — neither — the — ^re- 
finement — nor — the — weakness — of — a— college— education. 
In — conclusion — I — want — to — say, that — I — have — en- 
deavored — to — put — in — an — the — coarseness — and — vul- 
garity — into — the — Yankee — in — King — Arthur's — Court — 
that is— necessary, and — rely — upon — jrou — for — all — that^— 
refinement — and delicacy — of — humor — which — your— facile 
— pen — can — depict. Glad to have met you, Mr. Beard.* " 



Everything that Mark Twain wrote did not come 
to the public. The temptation for an author of as- 
sured success to get real money for inferior stuff must 
be great, but Mark Twain laid aside a chest full of 
manuscripts as unworthy, and no doubt destroyed 
many others. An instance in point is given by Dan 
Beard : 

"It was before Webster & Company failed that Ward 
McAllister's book {Society as J have Found It) appeared, and 
when he sauntered into my studio one day, I said: 

*' 'Mr. Clemens, have you read Ward McAllister's book?' 

" 'Yes; have you?' he replied. 

'* ' Indeed, I have. I have read it through several times, 
and intend to read it again. It is one of the most humorous 
books I ever read.' 

" 'That's so,' said Mark, 'that's so. Now, I will tell you 
something. I spent three months writing a satire on that 
book of Ward McAllister's, and when I got through, I again 
read McAllister's book, and then my satire, and then tore the 
blamed thing up. Some things are complete in themselves 
and cannot be improved upon, and I take off my hat to Mr. 
McAllister.' " 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

To show Mark Twain's relation to the physical ap- 
pearance of his books, letters from his illustrators are 
of interest. Says Lucius Wolcott Hitchcock: 

1 60 



i 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

"I went to Mr. Clemens' house to see about the Horse's 
Tak. He had a little, old photograph of one of his children, 
who had died when a child, and he wanted me to work 'that 
Uttle face' into the picture of the little girl in the story. I 
asked him if there was any further suggestion he wanted to 
make about what scenes of the story to take, etc., but he 
said: 'No, it's just this way about that. I find the artist 
ImofTB more about what will make a good picture than I do. 
What I thought a good subject for a picture isn't worth a 
hang, and something I should not have thought of at all 
makes a very good one, so I will leave all that with you.' 
At the same time he gave me a photo of the cats he wanted 
me to use in the drawing of the old general. 

"When the Horse* s Tak drawings were finished, I took 
them down for him to see. He came into his study in a bath- 
gown and pipe. There was no place to put the drawings 
where they could be seen but on the floor. So the old man 
dropped down on the floor like a child to look them over. 
He was pleased with them all far beyond their merits. He 
thought the drawing of the child looked like the original, and 
of the 'moonlight' he said, 'A very eloquent horsel'" 

Dan Beard writes: 

"I would rather work for Mark Twain than any man I 
ever met. First, because his writings are so full of imagina- 
tion, so full of ideas, that each paragraph would make a good 
subject for a picture, a cartoon, or an illustration; second, 
because Mark Twain himself had a quicker perception and 
a keener appreciation of thoughtful, earnest work than any 
author for whom I have worked or met; third, because he 
was never niggardly with his praise, never waited for one to 
ask htm how he liked the illustration, but of his own volition, 
and without suggestion from the artist, he would take time 
to sit down and write a personal letter of commendation for 
the work which pleased him; fourth, because he did not try 
to draw the pictures for the illustrator himself, as do most 
authors and publishers. Said he: 'Dan — If-a-man-comes-to- 
me-an'-says-Mr.-Clemens-I-want-you-to-write-me-a-book, I'll 
write it for him, but-if-he-comes-to-me and says-he-wants- 
me-to-write*a-book-'n'-then-tells-me-what-to*write, I '11-say- 
Dang-3rou, go-hire-a-type-writer.' 

i6x 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

**Wheii I had finished the ilhistratioiis for the now rare 
Webster Edition of The Yankee in King Arthur* s Court, Mark 
sent me a dignified, courtly letter of encouragement and 
commendation. When I finished the book, he wrote : ' There 
are hundreds of artists who could illustrate my other books, 
but there is but one who could illustrate this one. What a 
lucky day I went netting for lightning-bugs and caught a 
meteor. Live for ever. Mark.'" 

Mr. Clemens had ideas of his own on the proper illus- 
tration of certain books, and insisted on their being 
carried out. The contract for pictures to accompany 
the separate edition of Eve*s Diary had actually been 
let to a certain artist whose work had hitherto given 
great satisfaction, when Mark interposed with a de- 
mand for a different style of work for that particular 
book. It was with considerable effort that the exact 
style of decorative and allegorical pictures he de- 
sired was obtained. 

Then again, for Joan of Arc he wished nothing hu- 
morous, but suggested that the pictures convey the 
sense of mysticism and allegory which he claimed was 

lacking, or only partially indicated in his text. 

« ♦ ♦ 

Claims have been made that the Montreal, 1881, edition 
of The Prince and the Pauper was the first printing. The 
Toronto, 1882, edition of the same title relates in a preface 
the history of the Montreal edition. This preface states that 
Mr. Gemens resided two weeks in Canada previous to the 
Montreal appearance, and demanded copyright protection as 
a Canadian for his book. The courts denied the validity of 
this procedure, and the author fell back on the plea of 
previous publication in England, This would seem to establish 
the priority of the English issue. 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

All Mark Twain collectors have noted the pecu- 
liar and distinctive form taken by the books bearing 

162 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

his name, beginning with the Innocents Abroad^ and 
continuing through the larger and more important 
works. 

This was due to the more or less accidental entering 
by Mark Twain of the "Subscription book" field, not 
usually invaded by the better authors in those days. 
Nowadays the " book-agent *' commonly offers a " set " 
of your favorite author. In those times, before the 
era of cheap processes of engraving and printing, the 
agent offered a single book, destined to repose in state 
upon the parlor table, which was apt to depend more 
upon the then plenteous number of its engravings and 
the splendor of its binding than upon any great liter- 
ary merit within. In fact, most of these books were of 
the "instructive" order — travel, history, and the like. 

The American Publishing Company, to whom the 
Innocents Abroad was offered, had made a specialty 
of these subscription books. Mr. Elisha Bliss, the 
head of the firm, signed a contract to produce Mark 
Twain's work, but, on seeking the approval of his 
board of directors, met with opposition. The direc- 
tors fancied that the humorous qualities of Mark 
Twain's style would interfere with the sale of the work 
as a book of travel, and it was only at Mr. Bliss's 
avowal of faith in the author and a personal offer to 
take over the company's contract that the work 
proceeded. 

The American Publishing Company had just made 
a successful campaign with Mr. Richardson's Beyond 
the Mississippi, Naturally the new book took the 
form of the previous success, with similar typo- 
graphical features and scheme of illustration. 

163 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

'' People in those days would not pay for blank paper 
and wide margins," says Mr. Frank Bliss, who was as- 
sociated with his father in the production of the books. 
"They wanted everything filled up with type or 
pictures. When we saw after the first issue of a book 
a space of several inches at the end of a chapter left 
blank, we generally supplied a cut to fill it in. 

"Mark Twain had nothing at all to do with the 
matter except the furnishing of some photographs 
and to smile and approve of the drawings that he 
happened to see. He was thoroughly well pleased — 
and expressed himself so many times — with the illus- 
trating of his books. 

"Elisha Bliss, Jr., was a man of fine literary and 
artistic perceptions, who thoroughly appreciated and 
enjoyed Mr. Clemens' htmior and writings, and so was 
able to give many valuable directions in the making of 
the pictures. 

"The artist, Mr. True W. Williams, with the help 
of an occasional other artist, made the drawings as 
far down as PuddCnhead Wilson. He could put Mr. 
Clemens' ideas into a picture perfectly; he could 
make serious and lovely pictures as well as comic. 
He was a well-read and pleasant fellow, whose con- 
vivial habits frequently led him astray, but these were 
overcome in the latter years of his life, I am happy to 
say, causing Mr. Clemens to declare that he was the 
greatest combination of hog and angel he ever saw." 

Following the evident trail of form and illustration 
from the Richardson book on through The Innocents 
Abroad, we find the same firm of engravers employed. 
Pay & Cox. This firm had as its principal artist 

164 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Mr. True Williams, referred to above. After a time 
the American Publishing Company disregarded the 
engraving firm, dealt with Williams direct, took him 
down to Hartford and kept him steadily employed 
for a number of years. He made most of the illus- 
trations for the Gilded Age, and illustrated Sketches 
New and Old and Adifentures of Tom Sawyer in their 
entirety. 

After the Webster interregnum, when the American 
Publishing Company came back into the Mark Twain 
field, Mr. Prank Bliss took charge of the production 
of the books. Mr. Clemens was not in America in 
1894, when Pudd*nhead Wilson appeared, or in 1897, 
when Following the Equator was put on the market. 
Therefore, Mr. Bliss alone determined the form of 
those books; he originated the idea of the marginal 
illustrations for Pudd'nhead, and hired the various 
artists who contributed to Following the Equator; 
practically all the latter set of artists being retained 
to contribute pictures for the "Autograph" edition. 



In Nevada, Twain wrote for the Virginia City 
Enterprise; in California, for the San Francisco Call, 
the Daily AUa, the Sacramento Union newspapers, and 
the Calif ornian and Overland magazines; in Buffalo, 
for the Express; and his last salaried literary labor 
was for the Galaxy magazine in 1871. 



INTRODUCTION TO INDEX 



Many Mark Twain titles have been altered several times 
by their various editors. The attempt is made here to give 
each story with its tirst-edition history under the original 
title. Changed titles are in each case referred back to the 
original title, though perhaps not noting the book in which 
the variorum was used. Several paragraphs from the Galaxy 
Magannt were not separately captioned in that periodical, 
titles being supplied by later editors; these paragraphs are 
listed by these supplied titles (some I have captioned my- 
self), but the searcher must not expect to find the articles 
in the Galaxy, or in "Memoranda" under those exact captions. 

Printings in periodicals and newspapers appear with the 
month or day of printing appended (Nevada Enter prist ex- 
cepted), and in italics, the book-printings having the year- 
date only. If only one book-printing be given, that may be 
either American or foreign issue; reference to the title quoted 
must determine that. If more than one book-printing be 
given, the first is invariably foreign (the first actual book- 
printing), and the second American (the first American book- 
printing). In each case I endeavor to give the first American 
edition, even if it has been issued elsewhere previously, but 
1 do not give the foreign printing at all if the American is 
the real first. 

"The Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg" and "The Cele- 
brated Jumping Prog" are shortened for convenience to 
"Hadleyburg" and "Jumping Prog." 

I have endeavored to cross-file thoroughly in order to cover 
every existing variation, so that the intent of the searcher 
may not be thwarted by introductory prepositions, and the 
like. Book-titles have page-references, but story-titles must 
first be referred to the book indicated. Stories which have 

167 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

no book reference appended have never been printed in book 
form, to my knowledge. Speeches are listed with the date of 
delivery. This index is for the titles of stories and books 
written by Mark Twain, or the titles of books containing Mark 
Twain material; other persona or things touched upon in the 
Bibliography are not listed. 



INDEX 



Abblakd and Hbloisb — Reprinted from "Innocents 
Abroad,*' pp. 140-147. 

About All Kinds op Ships — "£1,000,000 Banknote,** 1803. 

About a Rbmarkablb Strangbr— (ro/oxy, April, 187 1. In- 
cluded in "Roughing It," 187a, ch. Invii, p. 551. 

About Assurancbs — Same as Inquiry About Insubancb, 
q.v. 

About Barbbrs — Galaxy, August, 187 1; "Screamers," 187 1; 
''Sketches New and Old,'^ 1875. 

About London — Speech, London, September a8, 1872; 
**Mark Twain's Speeches." 1910. 

About Magnanimous Incidbnt Litbraturb — Atlantic, May, 
1878: "Stolen White Elephant." x88a. 

About Play- Acting — Forum, October, 1898; "Hadley- 
burg," 1900. 

About Smblls — Galaxy, May, 1870; "Memoranda," 1871. 

About That Doo — "Practical Jokes," 187a. 

AcciDBNT Insurancb — See Mark Twain's Spbbch on Acci- 
dbnt Insurancb. 

Acting — See About Play-Actino. 

Actors — See Charity and Actors. 

Adam — See Monument to Adam. 

Adam's Diary — See Extracts prom Adam's Diary. 

Addrbss Bbporb thb Ancibnt and Honorablb Artillbry 
Company — Book, see p. iix. 

Advbnturb op Hucrlbbbrry Finn {an)— Century, Decem- 
ber, 1884; "Huckleberry Finn," 1885, pp. 130-158. 

Advbnturbs in Hayti — See Around thb world. 

Advbnturbs op Hucklbbbrry Finn — Book, see pp. 59-61. 

Advbnturbs op Tom Sawybr — Book, see pp. 4a, 45. 

Advicb por Good Littlb Girls (Advice to Good Little 
Girb)—" Tumping Frog." 1867. 

Advicb to Girls — Speech, Catonsville, Maryland, June 10, 
1909; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Advicb to Littlb Girls — See Advicb por Good Littlb Girls. 

169 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Advicb to thb Unreuablb on Church-Goino — Nevada 
Enterprise (date missing) ; "Wit and Humor of America,*' 
1907. 

Aptbr-Dinnbr Spbbch — "Sketches New and Old," 1875; 
same as Ambricans and thb English, 9.1;. 

Aptbr-Dinnbr Storibs — Book, see pp. 141, 14a, 144. 

"Aftbr" Jbnkins — "Jumping Frog," 1867. 

Agricultural Papbr — See How I Editbd an Agricultural 
Papbr. 

Aldrich, Lipb op Thomas Bailby — Book, see p. 13a. 

Almanac — See Pagb prom a Calipornian Almanac. 

Almost Incrbdiblb — Trub Story op Chicago — "Scream- 
ers," 1871 (Mark Twain disclaims this). 

Alphabbt and Simplipibd Spelling (The) — Speech, New 
York, December 9, 1907; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 

Ambndbd Obituaribs — "130,000 Bequest," 1906. 

Ambrican Authors and British Piratbs — Princeton Re- 
view, January, 1888. 

Ambrican Claimant — Idier, January, February, March, April, 
May, June, July, August, September, October, Novemoer, 
December, 189a; January, 1893; Book, see p. 66. 

Ambrican Languagb — See Concbrning thb Ambrican 
Languagb. 

Ambricans and thb English — Speech, July 4, 187a, London; 
as Aptbr-Dinnbr Spbbch, Sketches N. and O., 1875. 

Ambrican Society in London — Book, see p. loa. 

Among thb Fbnians — "Jumping Frog," 1867. 

Among thb Spirits — "Jumping Frog," 1867. 

Answbr to an Inquiry prom thb Coming Man — Galaxy, 
January, 1871; "Memoranda," 1871. 

Answers to (>>rrbspondbnt8 — "Jumping Frog,*' 1867. 

Appbtitb Curb — See At the Appetite Curb. 

Approaching Epidemic (The) — Galaxy, September, 1870; 
"Memoranda." 

Around the World — Buffalo Express: i. The Dead Sea, 
October 16, 1869; a. Adventures in Hayti, October, 30, 
i860; 3. California, More Climate, November 13, 1869; 
4. (California, The Early Days, December 11, 1869; 5. 
California, Pocket Mining, December 18, 1869; 6. Early 
Days in Nevada, Silver Land Nabobs, January 8, 1870; 
7. Pacific 0>ast, January a a, 1870; 8. Dining with a 
Cannibal, January 39, 1870; 9. The Pacific, February la, 
1870; 10. Japan, March k, 1870. 

Art — See Instructions in Art, unbiased Art Criticism. 

Artillery Company — See Address Beporb, etc. 

Art op Lying — See On the Decay op the Art op Lying. 

Ascot Gold Cup (The); Speech, London, July, 1907; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

170 



INDEX 

AssuRANCBS — See About Assurancbs. 

At tbb Appbtitb Curb — Cosmopolitan, August, 189S; "How 

to Tell a Story," 1900. 
AuBBLiA*8 Unportunatb Youno Man — " Jumping Frog," 

1867. 
Austria — See Stirring Timbs in Austria. 
Austrian Edison Kbbping School Again (The) CttUury, 

August, 1898; "Hadleybuig," 1000. 
Author — See Discounts op an Author, An Author's 

SoLDiBRiNG, Books, Authors, and Hats, Ambrican 

Authors and British Piratbs. 
Authors' Club — Speech, London, June, 1899; **Mark 

Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Authors op Our Day in Thbir Hombs — Book, see p. 141. 
Author's Soldibring (An) — Speech, Baltimore; "Master- 
pieces of American Eloquence," 1900. 
Autobiography — See Burlbsqub Autobiography, Prom 

My Unpublishbd Autobiography, Prom My Auto* 

biography. 
Autograph Huntbr — See Diversions op an Autograph 

HUNTBR. 

Awpul, Tbrriblb MBDiiBVAL RoMANCB — Buffalo ExfresSf 
January i, 1870, "Mark Twain's (Burlesque) Auto- 
biography," 1871. 

B 

Babibs, Thb — As Thby Comport Us in Our Sorrows, Lbt 
Us Not Porgbt Thbm in Our Pbstivitibs — Speech, 
Chicago, November i, 1879; "Army of Tennessee Pro- 
ceedings," 1879. 

Back prom *'Yurrup" — See Browsing Around — Back 

PROM "YURRUP." 

Back Sbttlbmbnt — See Rbminiscbncb op thb Back 

Sbttlbmbnt. 
Bad Littlb Boy — See Story op thb Bad Littlb Boy. 
Bakbr's Cat — See Dick Bakbr's Cat. 
Ballads — See John Hay and thb Ballads. 
Banknotb — See ;Ci, 000,000 Banknote. 
Barbbrs — See About Barbers. 
Bbd — See Dangbr op Lying in Bbd. 
Bbbcher — See Rbv. Henry Ward Bebchbr's Parm, A 

New Beecher Church, Rev. Henry Ward Beeciier. 
Beep Contract — See Facts in the Case op the Great 

Beep Contract. 
Belated Russian Passport (The) — Harper's Weekly, 

December 6, 190a; '*My D6but as a Literary Person," 

1903. 
Bbnbpactor — See Carnegie the Benepactor. 

171 



•t 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Bbnton — See Edward Mills and Gborgb Benton. 

Bbqubst — See $30,000 Bbqubst. 

Big Bonanza (Tne) — Boole, see p. 43. 

Bio Thing (A) — Buffalo Express^ March la, 1870. 

Billiards — Speech, New York, April 24, 1906; "Mark 

Twain's Speeches," 191 o. 
Bills — See Two Pobms. 
Biographical Sketch op Gborgb Washington — See Bribf 

Biographical Sketch op Gborgb Washington. 
Birthday — See Mark Twain's Birthday. 
Birthday Book — See Mark Twain's Birthday Book. 
Blind — See In Aid op thb Blind. 

'* Bloody Massacrb '* — See My Famous " Bloody Massacre." 
Blub- JAYS — Reorinted from "A Tramp Abroad," pp. 33-42. 
Blubs — See A Curb por the Blubs. 
Body-Servant — See General Washington's Negro Body- 
Servant. 
Bonanza — See Big Bonanza. 
Book Agent — See That Book Agent. 
Book por an Hour — See Fun, Fact and Fancy. 
Book Review (A) — Galaxy^ February, 187 1; "Memoranda, 

1871. 
"Blind Letter" Department, London Post-oppicb— 

"Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Books and Burglars — Speech, Redding, Connecticut, 

October a8, 1908; "Mark Twain's Speecnes," 1910. 
Books, Authors, and Hats — Speeoi, Pilgrims* Qub 

Luncheon, London, June 25, 1907; "Mark Twain's 

Speeches," 10 10. 
Booksellers — Speech, New York, May 30, 1908; "Mark 

Twain's Speecnes," 1910. 
Boons op Lipe — See Five Boons op Lipb. 
Bore — See Editorial Oppice Borb, One op Mankind's 

Bores. 
BouRGET — See Little Note to Paul Bourgbt, What Paul 

BouRGET Thinks op Us. 
Boy — See Story op the Good Little Boy, Story op thb 

Bad Little Boy, Disgracepul Persecution op a Boy, 

Some Fables por Good Old Boys and Girls. 
Boyhood Dreams — See My Boyhood Dreams. 
Breakpast at a Station — Reprinted from "Routing It." 
Breaking It Gently — Memoranda, June, 1870; Piccadilly 

Annual, 1870 (as "Higgins"); Sketches No. i, 1874. 
Bribf Biographical Sketch op George Washington — 

"Jumping Frog," 1867. 
Brief History op the Lotos Club — Book, see p. 1 16. 
British Festivities and same as A Visit to Niagara, 

English Festivities, q,v. 

172 



INDEX 

British Piratbs — See Axbricajc Authors axd British 

PiRATBS. 

Browsing Aroumd — i. Getting My Parttme Told, Bufialo 
Exprtss^ November 27, 1S69; a. Back from **Yurrup," 
Buffalo Express, December 4, 1869; '^dnioas Dream," 
1872: ••Pun, Pact, and Pancy/* 1873. 

Buck Panshaw's Pcxbrju. — Reprinted from "Roughing 

It,'* pp. 329-33»- , 
Bunch op Lemons — Booic, see p. 144. 

Burglars — See Books and Burglars. 

BuRKB — See Edmund Burjle on Crokrr aitd Tammant. 

BuRLBSQUB AuTOBioGRAPHT (Aj — See Mark Twain's • Bur- 
lesque) Autobiography. 

Business — Speech, New York, March 30, 1901; '*Mai1c 
Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 

BuTBRs' Manual and Business Guide — Book, see p. 23. 

By Rail Through Prance — Overland, July, 1868; "Inno- 
cents Abroad,*' 1869, pp. 105- 11 a. 



CiCSAR — See Killing op Julius C^sar Hocaficed). 
Cain and Abel— ^jiajc>, M-ay, 1870; "Memoranda," 1871. 
Calendar — See Pudd nhead Wilson's Calendar. 
California — See Around the World. 
Californian Abroad (A;; A Few Parisian Types— -Ourr- 
land, August, 1868, "Innocenu Abroad," 1869, pp. 130- 

Californian Abroad f\)\ Three Italian Cities — Oi<t- 
land, September, 1868. "Innocents Abroad/' 1869, pp. 
171-178. 

Californian Almanac — See Pagb prom a Caupornian 
Almanac. 

Caupornian Expbrience i\) — Same as Porty-niner, q.v. 

Calipornian's Tale ^The; — "Liber Scriptorum," 1893. 

Call a Man — "Practical Jokes," 1872. 

Camden s Compuments to Walt Whitman — Book, see p. 
199. 

Campaign that pAiLEo^See Private History of a Cam- 
paign THAT Pailed. 

Candy — See Cats and Candy. 

Cannibal — See Around the World: Dining with a Can- 
nibal. 

Cannibalism in the Cars — "Sketches/* 187a: "Sketches 
New and Old/' 1875. 

Canvasser's Tale — Atlantic, December, 1876. "Punch, 
Brothers. Punch f" 1878; same as Tbb Echo that Didn't 
Answer. 

12 173 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Capable Humorist (A) — Harper* s Weekly, February ao, 
1909. 

Capital — See Launch of thb Stbambr Capital. 

Capitolinb Vbnus (The) — "Sketches New and Old/' 1875. 

Captain Stormfibld's Visit to Hbavbn — See Extract 
FROM Captain Stormfibld's Visit to Hbavbn. 

Captain's Story (The) — Extracts reprinted from Somb Ram- 
bling NOTBS OF AN IdLB EXCURSION. 

Carl Schurz, Pilot — Harper's Weekly, May a6. 1906. 
Carnbgib Spelling Reform (The) — Harper's Weekly, April 

7. 1906- 
Carnbgib the Benefactor — Speech, New York, March 17, 

1909; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Carnival of Crime in Connecticut — See Facts Concern- 
ing THE Rbcent Carnival of Crime in Connecticut. 

Carson — See In Carson City, A Sunday in Carson. 

Carson Footprints (The) — San Franciscan, February 16, 
1884. Also lecture title. 

Case of George Fisher — Same as Facts in the Case op 
George Fisher. 

Cat; Cats — See Dick Baker's Cat, Jim Wolfe and thb 
Cats, Man Who Fought Cats. 

Cats and Candy — Same as Jim Wolfe and the Cats, q.v. 

Cat Stories — Book, see p. 130. 

Cayote (The) — Reprinted from "Roughing It," pp. 48-53. 

Cblebratbd Jumping Frog of Calaveras County (The) — 
Book, see pp. i, 93. 

Chambermaids — See Concerning Chambermaids. 

Chapters from My Autobiography — North American Re^ 
view, September 7, ai; October 5, 19; November 2, 16; 
December 7, 21, 1906; January 4, 18; February i, 15; 
March i. 15; April 5, 19; May 3, 17; June 7, July 5, Au- 
gust 2, September, October, November, December, 1907. 

Charity and Actors — Speech, New York, May 6, 1907; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," ipio. 

Charles Dickens by Pen and Pencil — Book, see p. 64. 

Chicago — See German Chicago. 

Child: Children — See Marjorie Fleming, The Wonder 
Child, Train Up a Child and Away He Gobs, On 
Children, Our Children and Great Discoveries. 

China and the Philippines — Speech, New York, December, 
1900: "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 

Chinaman in New York — See John Chinaman in New 
York. 

Choate — See Dinner to Mr. Choatb. 

Choice Bits — Book, see p. 159. 

Choice Humorous Works of Mark Twain — Book, see 
p. 27. 

174 



INDEX 

Christian Scibncb (I, II, III) — North American Review^ 

December, 1903. January, February, 1903; "Christian 

Science," 1907. Book, see p. 100. 
Christian Scibncb and thb Book op Mrs. Eddy — Cos- 

mopolitan, October, 1889; "Hadleyburg" (Tauchnitz), 

1900; ** Christian Science," 1907. 
Crurcr-goino — See Advicb to trb Unrbliablb on Church- 

GOING. 

Cigars and Tobacco — Speech; "Mark Twain's Speeches,** 

1910. 
CiTizBNSHip — See Education and Citizbnship. 
City Marshal Pbrry — Nevada Enterpriu (date missing); 

** Wit and Humor of America," 1907. 
Claimant — See Ambrican Claimant. 
Clbrgymbn — See Important Corrbspondbncb, etc. 
Climatb — See Around thb World, Morb Climatb. 
Coal Minb — Galaxy^ May, 1870; "Memoranda,** 1871. 
Cold — See Curing a Cold. 
CoLLBGB Girls — Speech, Woman's University Club, New 

York, April 3, 1906; *'Mark Twain's Speecn^" 19x0. 
CoLONBL Sbllbrs AT HoMB — Reprinted from "The Gilded 

Age," pp. 78-921 108-113. 
Coming Man (The) — (xotoxy, February, 1871; "Memoranda," 

1871. 
Complaint About Corrbspondbnts (A), Datbd in San 

Francisco — "Jumping Frog," 1867. 
CoMPLiMBNT — See Royal Complimbnt. 
CoMPLiMBNTs AND Dbgrbbs — Speech, Lotos Club. New York, 

January 11, 1908: **Mark Twain's Speeches, 1910. 
CoNCBRNiNG A RuMOR — Golaxy, January, 187 1; "Memo- 
randa," 1 87 1. 
CoNCBRNiNO UHAMBBRMAiDS — "Jumping Frog,** 1867. 
CoNCBRNiNG COPYRIGHT — North American Review, January, 

1905. 
Concerning thb Ambrican Languagb — "Stolen White 

Elephant," 1882. 
Concerning thb Answbr to that Conundrum — Cali- 

fornian, October 8, 1864. 
CONCBRNING THB Jews — Harper* s Magazine, September, 

1899; "How to Tell a Story," 1900. 

CONNBCTICUT YaNKBB IN KiNG ArTHUR'S COURT (A) — 

Century t November, 1889; Book, see p. 63. 
Conscibncb's Littlb Bill — Later title for Concerning 

THE Recent Carnival op Crimb in Connecticut, q.v. 
Contraband, Reliable — Packard* s Monthly, July, 1869. 
Contract — See Facts in the Case op the ureat Beep 

Contract. 
Conundrum — See A Notable Conundrum, Concerning 

175 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

THB AnSWBR to that CONUNDRUM, StILL PuRTBBR 
CONCBRNING THAT CONUNDRUM. 

Conversation as It Was by thb Pirbsidb — See 1601. 

Conway — Autobiography, Memories, and Experiences of 
Moncure Daniel — Book, see p. 142. 

Coopbr — See Pbnimorb Coopbr's Ljtbrary Oppbncbs. 

Copyright — See Concbrning Copyright, Petition Con- 
cerning Copyright, Dress Rbporm and Copyright, 
International Copyright, Copyright Hearings. 

Copyright Hearings — Book, see p. 119. 

Correspondence — See Important Correspondence, etc., 
Purther of Mr. Mark Twain*s, etc. 

Correspondent — See Riley, Newspaper Correspondent. 

Correspondents — See To Correspondents and Answers 
TO Correspondents and Payors from Correspond- 
ents and Complaints about Correspondents. 

Couple of Poems (A) — Same as Two Poems, q.v. 

Couple of Sad Experiences (A) — Galaxy, June, 1870; 
"Memoranda," 1871. 

Courage — Speech, Cartoonists* Dinner, April 18, 1908; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 

Courier — See Playing Courier. 

Crime — See New Crime and Pacts Concerning thb 
Recent Carnival of Crime in Connecticut. 

Croker — See Edmund Burke on Crokbr and Tammany. 

Cuban Patriot (Ye) — Buffalo Express, December 25, 1869. 

Cure — See A Perfect Cure. 

Curb for the Blues (A) — ";Ci, 000,000 Banknote," 1893. 

Curing a Cold — "Tumping Prog," 1867. 

Curious Dream (A) — Buffalo Express, April 30, May 7. 
1870; "Curious Dream," 1872; Pun, Pact, and Pancy, 
1873; Book, see p. 18. 

Curious Experience (A) — Century, November, i88i; 
"Stolen White Elephant," 1882. 

Curious Incident — Galaxy, June, 1870; "Memoranda," 1871. 

Curious Pleasure Excursion (A) — "Sketches New and 
Old." 1875. 

Curious Relic for Salb — Galaxy, October, 1870; "Memo- 
randa," 1 87 1. 

Czar's Soliloquy — North American Review, March, 1905. 



Daly Theatre — Speech, New York; "Mark Twain's 

Speeches," 1910. 
Dangbr of Lying in Bbd (The) — Galaxy, Pebruary, 1871; 

"Memoranda," 1871. 
Daniel in thb Lion's Den — Californian, November 5, 1864. 

176 



INDEX 

Dan Murphy — Same as Thb Widow's Protest; Galaxy^ 

June, 1870; 'Memoranda," 1871; "Sketches No. i/* 1874. 
Daring Attbmpt at a Solution op It {A)—Gai€txy^ July. 

1870: ''Memoranda,*' 1871. 
Day at Niagara (A) — Later title A Visit to Niagara; 

Mark Twain at Niagara Falls; Buffalo Express, Aug- 
ust at. 1869; "Practical Jokes.*' 187a; "Sketches New 

and Old," 1875. 
Day's Work (A)— Reprinted from "Tom Sawyer," pp. 

26-31. 
Day Wb Cblbbratb — Speech, London, July 4, 1899; "Mark 

Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Dbad Sba (Tne) — See Around tbb World. 
Dbath-disk (The) — Harper's Magazine, December, 1901; 

" Double - Barrelled Detective Storv" (TauchniU). 190a; 

"My D6but as a Literary Person,' 1903. 
Dbbut as a Litbrary Pbrson — See My Dbbut as a Litb- 

RARY Pbrson. 
Dbg at op thb Art op Lying — See On thb Dbg ay op thb 

Art op Lying. 
Dbcbption (A) — Same as How thb Author was Sold in 

Nbwark; "Curious Dream," 187a; "Nast's Almanac" 

for 1874. 
Dbdication Spbbgh — Speech, Collie of the City of New 

York, May 14, 1908; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Dbpbncb op Gbnbral Funston — North American Review, 

May, 190a; "Double-Barrelled Detective Story" (Tauch- 

nitz), 190a. 
Dbpbncb op Harribt Shbllby — See In Dbpbncb op Har- 

RiBT Shbllby. 
Dbgrbbs — See Authors and Dbgrbbs. 
Dbtbgtivb Story — See Doublb-Barrbllbd Dbtbctivb 

Story. 
Diary — See Extracts prom Adam's Diary and Evb's 

Diary. 
DicR Bakbr's Cat— " Screamers," 1871; "Roughing It," 

187a. pp. 439-443. 
Dickbns — See Charlbs Digkbns by Pbn and Pbncil. 
Dibt — See Europban Dibt. 

Dining with a Cannibal — See Around thb World. 
DiNNBR IN Honor op thb Hon. Whitblaw Rbid— See 

Rbid Dinnbr. 
DiNNBR to Mr. Choatb — Speech, New York Lotos Club, 

November 34, 1901; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Dinnbr to Mr. Jbromb — Speech, New York, May 7, 1909; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches/' 19 10. 
Dinnbr to Hamilton W. Mabib — Speech, April 39, ig^t', 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 

177 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Dinner to Whitblaw Rbid — See Rbid Dinner. 

Diplomatic Pay and Clothes — Forum, March, 1899; 
'*Hadleybunr" (Tauchnitz), 1900; "My D^but as a Lite- 
rary Person, ' 1903. 

Disappearance of Literature — Speech, New York, No- 
vember ao, 1900; ''Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 

Discounts op an Author (The) — Speech, New York City, 
October 19, 1890; " Masterpiece of American Eloquence," 
1900. 

Discoveries — See Our Children and Great Discoveries. 

Disgraceful Persecution of a Bor — Galaxy , May, 1870; 
"Memoranda," 1871; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 

Diversions of an Autograph Hunter — Book, see p. 130. 

Doctor Mulligrub's Bitters — "Practical Jokes," 187a. 

Dodge — See Nicodemus Dodge. 

Dobs the Race of Man Love a Lord? — North American 
/^mra;, -April, 1Q02; "$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 

Dog — Sec About that Dog, A Dog's Tale. 

Dogberry in Washington — Galaxy, December, 1870; 
* ' Memoranda, " 1 8 7 1 . 

DooGBiiEL — Galaxy, JsLnuaiy, 187 1; "Memoranda," 1871. 

Dog in Church (A) — Repnnted from "Tom Sawyer," pp. 

55-52: 
Dog's Tale (A) — Harper* s Maganne, December, 1903; 

Book, see p. 93. 
Dose of Pain- Killer (A) — Reprinted from "Tom Sawyer," 

pp. io8~iii. 
Double-Barrbllbd Detective Story (A), (I, II) — Harper^s 

Magazine, January, February, 1002; Book, see p. 88. 
Dream — See Curious Dream, My Boyhood Dreams, 

Strangb Dream. 
Dr. MarIc Twain, Parmbopath — Speech, New York, Jan- 
uary 21, 1909; "Mark Twain's Speeches," loxo. 
Dress OF Civilized Women — "Mark Twain's Speecnes," 1910. 
Dress Reform and Copyright — Interview, Washington, 

December, 1908; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19x0. 
Duel — See How I Escaped Being Killed in a Duel, 

Recent Great French Duel. 

E 

Earthquakb — See San Francisco Earthquake. 

Eccentricities of Genius — Book, see p. 85. 

Echo that Didn't Answer — Same as The Canvasser's 

Tale. q.v. 
Eddy — See Mrs. Eddy in Error. 
Editor — See Poor Editor, Sandwich Island Editor, 

Item which the Editor Himself Couldn't Understand. 

178 



INDEX 

Editorial Oppicb Borb (The) — Galaxy, JnXy, 1870; '*Memo» 

randa/* 1871; "Sketches New and Old, 1875.. 
Bditorial Wild Oats — Book, see p. 152. 
Edmund Burkb on Crokbr and Tammany — Speech, Wal- 
dorf-Astoria, New York, October 17, 1901; Book, see 

p. 87. 
Education — See Public Education Association. 
Educatino Thbatrb-Gobrs — Speech, Educational Alliance. 

New York, April 14, 1907; ''Mark Twain's Speeches, 

1910. 
Educational Thbatrb — Speech, Educational Theatre, New 

York, November 19, 1907; *'Mark Twain's Speeches," 

1910. 
Education and Citizbnship — Speech, New York, May 14, 

1908; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Edward Mills and Gborob Bbnton: A Talb — Atlantic, 

August, 1880; "$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 
Elbphant — See Stolbn Whitb Elbphant. 
Eli Pbrkins' Thirty Ybars op Wit — Book, see p. 139; also 

see Pbrkins. 
Encountbr with an Intbrvibwbr (An) — "Lotos Leaves," 

Enbmt Conqubrbd (the), or Lovb Triumphant — "£f,ooo,- 

000 Banknote," 1893. 
English — See Ambricans and trb English. 
Engush as Shb is Taught — Same as English as Shb Is 

Instructbd; Century, April, 1887; Book, see pp. 6a, 86. 
English Pbstivitibs — A Day at Niagara (concluded), 9.1;.; 

Buffalo Express, August 28, 1869. 
Enigma — Galaxy. July, 1870; "Memoranda," 1871. 
Enoch Ardbn mormon (An) — "Practical Jokes/ 187a. 
Entbrtaining Articlb (An) — Galaxy, December, 1870; 

"Memoranda," 187 1. 
Entbrtaining History op thb Scriptural Panoramist — 

See Scriptural Panoramist. 
Epidbmic — See Approaching Epidbmic. 
Equator — See Following thb Equator. 
Esquimau Maiden's Romancb (The) — Cosmopolitan, No- 
vember, 1893: " Hadleyburg," 1900. 
Ethblton — See Lovbs op Alonzo Fitz Clarbncb and 

Rosannah Ethblton. 
EuROPBAN DiBT — Reprinted from "A Tramp Abroad," pp. 

57®"575' 
EuROPBAN War (The) — Buffalo Express, July 2$, 1870. 

Evb's Diary — Harper's Magazine, Uecember, 1905; "Their 

Husband's Wives," 1906. 
EvtDBNCB IN THB Casb OP Smith VS. JoNES — '*Wit and 

Humor of America." 1907. 

179 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Excursion — See Curious Plbasurb Excursion, An Idlb 

Excursion. 
ExpBRiBNCB — See Curious Expbribncb and Couplb op Sad 

EXPBRIBNCBS, CaLIPORNIAN ExPBRIBNCB. 
EXPBRIBNCBS OP THB McWiLLIAMSBS (The) WITH MbM- 

branous Croup — "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Extract prom Captain Stormfibld's Visit to Hbavbn — 

Harder* 5 Magazine, December, 1907, January, 1908; 

Book, see p. 103. 
Extracts from Adam's Diart — "Niagara Book," 1893; 

Book, see p. 04. 
Extraordinary Fishing — "Practical Jokes," 1872. 
Eyb Opbnbrs — Book, see p. la. 



Pablbs for Good Old Boys and Girls — See Somb Pablbs 

FOR Good Old Boys and Girls. 
Pacts Concbrning thb Latb Senatorial Sbcretaryship — 

Galaxy, May, 1868; "Curious Dream," 1872; "Fun. 

Pact, and Fancy," 1873. 
Pacts Concbrning thb Rbcbnt (The) Carnival op Crimb in 

Connecticut — i4fZan/»c, Tune, 1876; "A True Story," 1877, 
Pacts Concerning the Recent Resignation (The) — 

"Curious Dream," 187a; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Pacts in thb Case (The) of George Pisher, Deceased — 

Memoranda," 1871; "Sketches 



Galaxy, January, 1871; " 
New and Old,'^ 1875. 
cts in the Case (Tlie) of 



Pacts in the Case (Tlie) of the Grbat Beef Contract — 
Galaxy, May, 1870; "Memoranda," 1871; "Sketches 
No. 1," 1874. 

Pacts in thb Great Land Slide Casb — Buffalo Express, 
April 9, 1870. 

Falsehood (A) — G^o/o^r^, February, 187 1 ; "Memoranda," 187 1 . 

Famous Funny Fellows — Book, see p. 137. 

Fanshaw — See Buck Panshaw's Funeral. 

Farmbopath — See Dr. Mark Twain, Farmbopath. 

Fashion Item (A) — Same as A Reception at thb Prbsi- 
dbnt's, q.v. 

Favors prom (^orrbspondbnts — Galaxy, September to De- 
cember, 1870. 

Fenians — See Among the Fenians. 

Fenimorb Cooper's Literary Offences — North American 
Review, July, 1805; "How to Tell a Story," 1897. 

Festivities — See English Festivities. 

Few Parisian Types (A) — See A Californian Abroad. 

Fine Old Man (A)—" Practical Jokes," 187a; "Sketches 
New and Old,^' 1875. 

180 



INDEX 

Finn — See Advbnturbs op Hucklbbbrry Finn. 

First Appbarancb — See Mark Twain's First Appbarancb. 

First Book op thb Authors' Club — See Libbr Scrip- 

TORUM. 

First Intbrvibw with Artbmus Wari>^" Buyers' Manual," 

1879. 
First Lib — See My First Lib. 
First Litbrary Vbnturb — See My First Litbrary Vbnt- 

URB. 

First Romancb — See Awpul, Tbrriblb Mbdijbval Ro- 

MANCB. 

First Writing Machinbs (The) — Same as From My Un- 

PUBLISHBD Autobiography, q.v. 
FiSHBR — See Facts in thb Casb of Gborob Fisrbr. 
Fishing — See Extraordinary Fishing. 
FisHwiFB — See Talb op a Fishwipb. 
Fits Clarbncb — See Lovbs op Alonzo Fitz Clarbncb. 
FivB Boons op Lipb (X^e) — Harper's Weekly, July 5, 1903; 

*' $30,000 Bequest, 1906. 
FivB Famous Missouri ans — Book, see p* 139* 
Flbming — See Marjorib Flbming, Thb Wondbr Child. 
Following thb Equator — Book, see p. 78. 
Footprints — See Carson Footprints. 
Forty-Ninbr (A): "Thb Minbr's Lambnt" — Same as A 

Calipornian Expbribncb, Gaieucy, January, 187 1; 

** Memoranda," 187 1< 
FoRTY-THRBB Days IN AN Opbn Boat — Reprinted partially as 

Short and Curious Rations, also My Dbbut as a Litb- 
rary Pbrson, q.v,; Harper's Magazine , December, 1866. 
Fossil — See Majbstic Litbrary Fossil. 
Franklin — See Latb Bbnjamin Franklin. 
Franklin, Lady — Galaxy. ]\xn^ 1870; "Memoranda," 187 1. 
Frbnch — See An Idbal Prbnch Addrbss. 
Frbnch Dubl — See Rbcbnt Grbat Frbnch Dubl. 
Frog — See Cblbbratbd Tumping Frog. 
From "Hospital Days"^^ — See discussion under Skbtchbs 

Nbw and Old, 1875. 
From India to South Aprica — McClure's, November, 1897; 

"Following the Equator," 1897, pp. 609-643. 
From My Unpublishbd Autobiography — Same as Thb 

First Writing Machinbs; Harper's Weekly, March 18, 

1905; ** $30,000 Bequest," 1906. 
From thb London " Timbs " op 1904— Century, November, 

1898; " How to Tell a Story," 1900. 
Full and Rbliablb Account op thb Extraordinary 

Mbtboric Showbrs — Calif ornian, November 19, 1864. 
Fulton Day, Jambstown — Speech, Jamestown, Virginia, 

September 23, 1907; "Mark Twain s Speeches," 1910. 

181 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Pulton Monumbnt Socibty — Book, see p. 132. 

Fun, Fact, and Fancy — Book, see p. ajj. 

FuNSTON — See Dbfbncb of Gbnbral funston. 

Furthbr op Mr. Mark Twain's Important Correspond- 

BNCB — Calif arnian, May 13, 1865. 
FuTURB OF Nbvada — Lecture title. 



Gallant Dbbi>— See Story op a Gallant Dbbd. 
Galvbston Orphan Bazaar — Speech, New York, October, 

1900; •"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Gbnbral Milbs and thb Dog — Speech, New York, Decem- 
ber aa, 1907; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1907. 
Gbnbral Rbply (A) — Galaxy, November, 1870; "Memo- 
randa," 187 1. 
Gbnbral Washington's Nbgro Body-Sbrvant — Galaxy, 

Pebniaiy, 1868: "$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 
Gbnuinb Mbxican Plug (A) — Reprinted from "Roughing 

It," pp. 178-184. 
Gborob WAKBMAN — Galaxy, May, 1870. 
Gborgb Washington's Boyhood — See A Touching Story 

op Gborgb Washington's Boyhood. 
Gbrman — See A Nbw Gbrman Word, Horrors op thb 

Gbrman Languagb. 
Gbrman Chicago (The) — ";£i,ooo,ooo Banknote," 1803. 
Gbrman for thb Hungarians — Speech, Budapest, March 

a6, 1899; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Ghost Story (A) — Buffalo Express, January 15, 1870; 

"Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Ghost Story (A) — Same as Thb Goldbn Arm, q.v., but not 

same story as listed above. 
Gift prom India (A) — Critic, April 35, 1896. 
Gildbd Agb (The) — Book, seep. 31. 
Girls — See Advicb to Good Littlb Girls, Somb Fablbs 

FOR Good Old Boys and Girls, Advicb to Girls, Col- 

LBGB Girls, Lucbrnb Girls. 
Girls — "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Goldbn Arm (The) — See How to Tbll a Story; A Ghost 

Story; Werner's Readings, No. 5. 
Goldsmith's Pribnd Abroad Again — Galaxy, October, 1870, 

November, 1870, January, 1871: "Memoranda," 1871. 
Gold Minbs — See Mark Twain's Rbmarkablb Gold Minbs. 
Good Littlb Boy — See Story op thb Good Littlb Boy. 
GovBRNOR — See Running for Govbrnor. 
Gracb Cathbdral — See Important Corrbspondbncb, etc. 
Grbat North American Pib-Bitbr — Reputed article by 

Twain. 

182 



INDEX 

GftBAT Prizb Pioht (The)—" Wit and Humor of America." 

1907. 
Grbat Rbvolution in Pitcairn (The) — Atianttc^ March, 

1879: "Stolen White Elephant," 1883. 
Grbbr — See Johnny Grbbr. 
Gripsack Glbaninos — Book, see p. 145. 
GuiDB — See Our Italian Guidb. 

H 

Habits of thb Siambsb Twins — See Pbrsonal Habits of 

THB Siambsb Twins. 
HADLBYBURO—See Man that Corruptbd Hadlbybvro. 
Habnsbl and Grbtbl — Book, see p. 131. 
Harbor Boat — See St. Louis Harbor Boat. 
Hartb — See Lbcturbs of Brbt Hartb. 
Hats — See Books. Authors, and Hats. 
Hawaii — See Sandwich Islands. 
Hay — See John Hay and thb Ballads. 
Hayti — See Around thb World, Advbnturbs in Hatti. 
Hbavbn — See Was It Hbavbn ? or Hbll? ; Captain Storm- 

fibld's Visit to Hbavbn. 
Hb Donb His Lbvbl Bbst — See Answbrs to Corrbspond* 

bnts. 
Hbll — See Was It Hbavbn? or Hbll? 
Hblplbss Situation (A) — Harper's Bomot, November, 1905; 

"$30,000 Bequest." 1906. 
HiGOiNs — Same as Brbakino It Gbntly: Galaxy^ June, 

1870: Piccadilly Annual. 1870: "Sketches No. i." 1874. 
History of a Campaign that Pailbo — See Privatb History 

OF A Campaign that Pailbd. 
History of thb Big Bonanza — See Bio Bonanza. 
History of thb ** Jumping Prog" Story — See Privatb 

History of thb Jumping Prog Story. 
History Rbpbats Itsblf — Galaxy, December, 1870; "Memo- 
randa." 1871; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
"Hoowash" — Galaxy, June, 1870; Piccadilly Annual, 

1870. 
Holiday Litbraturb — "Screamers," 1871; (Mark Twain 

disclaims this.) 
Holland— See Indignity Put Upon thb Rbmains of 

Gborob Holland by thb Rbvbrbnd Mr. Sabinb. 
HoLMBS, LiFB OF Olivbr Wbndbll — Book, see p. 113. 
HoMB — See Wblcomb Homb. 
HoNORBD AS a Curiosity IN HONOLULU — "Jumping Prog," 

1867. 
Hood— See Tom Hood's Comic Annual. 
Horrors of thb Gbrman Languagb (The) — Speech, Vienna 

183 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Press Club, November 21, 1897; "Mark Twain's 

Speeches," 10 10. 
Horse's Tale (I, II) — Harper's Magazine, August, Septem- 
ber. 1906; Book, see p. 99. 
Hospital Days — See From Hospital Days. 
How Eli Perkins Lectured at Pottsville — "Eli Perkins 

(At Large)," 1875. Eli Perkins says this is not by Twain. 
HowELLS — See William Dean Howblls. 
How I Edited an Agricultural Paper Once — Galaxy, 

July, 1870; "Memoranda," 1871; "Sketches New and 

Old." 1875. 
How I Escaped Being Killed in a Duel — "Tom Hood's 

Comic Annual for 1873." 
How I Secured a Berth — Galaxy, August, 1871; "Choice 

Humorous Works," 1873. 
"How Is This for High ?" — Galaxy, October, 1870; "Memo- 
randa," 187 1. 
How THE Author Was Sold in Newark — Same as A 

Deception, q.v. 
How TO Tell a Story — Youth's Companion, October 3, 1895 : 

Book, see pp. 78, 82. 
Huckleberry Finn — See Adventures op Huckleberry 

Finn. 
Humane Word from Satan (A) — "$^0,000 Bequest," 1906. 
Human Nature — See Poor Human Nature. 
Humorist — See A Capable Humorist. 
Hunting the Deceitful Turkey — Harper*s Magazine, 

December, 1906. 
Husbands — See Their Husbands' Wives. 



Ideal French Address (An) — Same as From Paris Notes. 

Idle Excursion — See Some Random Notes of an Idle 
Excursion; Book, see p. 15a. 

Illustrious Men — See Origin of Illustrious Men. 

Important Correspondence Between Mark Twain and 
Various Clergymen Relating to the Occupancy of 
Grace Cathedral — Calif ornian. May 6, 1865. 

In Aid of the Blind — Speech, New York, March 25, 1906; 
' ' Mark Twain' s Speeches, " 1 9 1 o. 

In Carson City — Nevada Enterprise (date missing); "Wit 
and Humor of America," 1907. 

Income Tax Man (The) — Same as A Mysterious Visit, ^.1;. 

In Defence of Harriet Shelley (I, II, III) — North Ameri- 
can Review, July, 1894; "How to Tell a Story," 1897. 

Independence Day — Speech, London, July 4, 1907; "Amer- 
ican Society," London, 1907. 

184 



INDEX 



India to South Africa — See Prom India to South Africa. 
Indignity Put Ufon the Remains of George Holland 

BY the Reverend Mr. Sabine — "Memoranda/' 187 1. 
Infant — See The Unsophisticated Infant. 
Information for the Million — "Jumping Prog," 1867. 
Information Wanted — "Choice Humorous Works," 1873; 

"Sketches New and Old," 1875; Book, see p. 41. 
In Lighter Vein — Book, see p. 143. 
In Memoriam — "How to Tell a Story," 1900. 
Innocents Abroad— Book, see p. 4. 
Innocents at Home — Book, see p. 18. 
Inquiry about Insurance (An) — "Jumping Prog," 1867. 
Instructions in Art — Metropolitan Magazine, April, May, 

1903. 
Insurance — See Inquiry About Insurance, Accident 

Insurance. 
International Copyright — Book, see p. 114; see also What 

American Authors Think, etc. 
Interview — See Pirst Interview with Artbmus Ward. 
Interviewer — See Encounter with an Interviewer. 
Introducing Charles Kingsley — Speech, Boston, Peb- 

ruary 17, 1874; "Modem Eloquence," 1901. 
Introducing Henry M. Stanley — Speech, Boston, 1886; 

' ' Eccentricities of Genius, ' ' 1 000 . 
Introducing Nye and Riley — Speech, Boston, 1888; "Ec- 
centricities of Genius," 1900. 
Invalid's Story (The) — "Merry Tales," 1892. 
Ireland — See Party Cries in Ireland. 
Irving (Henry) — Speech, London, June 9, 1900; "Mark 

Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Is He Living or Is He Dead? — Cosmopolitan, September, 

1893; "Hadleyburg," 1900. 
Is Shakespeare Dead? — Book, see p. 1909. 
Italian Cities — See A Californian Abroad. 
Italian Guide — See Our Italian Guide. 
Italian with Grammar — Harper* s Magazine, August, 1904; 

"$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 
Italian Without a Master — Harper* s Weekly, January ai, 

1904; "$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 
Item Which the Editor Himself Couldn't Understand 

(An) — Same as Mr. Bloke's Item and Mr. Skae's Item; 

"Jumping Prog," 1867. 

J 

Tames Hammond Trumbull — Century, November, 1897. 
APAN — See Around the World. 
BROME — See Dinner to Mr. Jbromb. 
Bws — See Concerning the Jews. 

i8S 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Jim's Invbstmbnts, and King Sollbrmun — Centufy, Jan- 
uary, 1885; "Hucklebeny Finn," 1886, pp. 71-73, 109- 

1X3. 

Jim Wolpb and thb Cats — New York Sunday Mercury, 1867; 

Garrett's "100 Choice Selections, No. 17, 1879. 
Joan op Arc — Speech, New York, December 22, 1905; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Joan op Arc — See Pbrsonal Rbcollbctions op Joan op 

Arc, Saint Joan op Arc. 
John Chinaman in New York — Galaxy , September, 1870; 

"Memoranda," 187 1; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
John Hay and thb Ballads — Harper* s Weekly^ October, 

1905- 
Johnny Grbbr — Galaxy. July, 1870; "Memoranda," 1871; 

"Sketches New and Old," 1875 
ToNBS — See Evidencb in thb C:asb op Smith vs. Jonbs. 
JosBPH — See Story op Josbph. 
Journalism in Tbnnbssbb — Buffalo Express, September 4, 

1869; "Eye Openers," 1871; "Sketches New and Old," 

1875- 
Judgb's "Spirited Woman (The)" — Galaxy, June, 1870; 

"Memoranda," 1871; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 

Jumping Frog — See Celebrated Jumping Frog. 

K 

Killing op Julius CiBSAR " Localized (The) " — Caltfamittn, 

November 12, 1864; "Jumping Frc^," 1867. 
Kindness — See Results op Kindness. 
King Leopold's Soliloquy — Book, see p. 95. 
Kingslby — See Introducing Charles Kingsley. 
Kings op the Platporm and Pulpit — Book, see p. 115. 



Ladies (The) — Speech; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Land Slide — See Facts in the Great Land Slide Case. 
Language — See Concerning the American Language. 
Last Words op Great Men — Buffalo Express, September 

4, 1869. 
Late Benjamin Franklin (The) — Galaxy, July, 1870; 

Piccadilly Annual, 1870; "Nast's Almanac" for 1872. 
Laughing Gas — Book, see p. 104. 
Launch op the Steamer Capital (The) — "Jimiping Frog," 

1867. 
Law Student — See Sentimental Law Student. 
Layman's Sermon — Speech, New York, March 4. 1006; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

186 



INDEX 

Lbcturb of Mr. Pbrsonal Pronoun — Nevada Enterprise^ 
1861. 

Lbcturbs of Brbt Harts — Book, see p. lox, . 

Lbobnd of Sagbnfblo, In Germany — Stolen White 
Elephant." 1882. 

Lbgbnd of thb Capitolinb Vbnus — Buffalo Express, Oc- 
tober 23, 1869; "Curious Dream," 1872; "Sketches New 
and Old," 1875. 

Lbopold — See King Lbopold's Soliloquy. 



Lbttbr to Commooorb Vandbrbilt — See Opbn Lbttbr to 
CoMMODORB Vandbrbilt. 

Lbttbr Rbad at a Dinnbr of thb Knights of St. Patrick 
— "Punch, Brothers, Punchl" 1878. 

Lbttbr to thb Sbcrbtary of thb Trbasury (A) — "$30,000 
Bequest," 1906. 

Lbttbr Writing — See On Lbttbr Writing. 

Lbttbrs of a Japanbsb School-boy (Advbrtisbmbnt) — 
Book, see p. 132. 

Libbr Scriptorum — Book, see p. 70. 

Lib — See My First Lie. 

Lipb on thb Mississippi — Book, see pp. 57-58. 

Lightning — See Mrs. McWilliams and thb Lightning. 

Lionizing Murdbrbrs — "Ctmous Dream," 1872; "Sketches 
New and Old," 1875. 

Literary — See Pbnimorb Cooper's Literary Offences 
and Majestic Literary Fossil, My DiftsuT as a Lite- 
rary Person, My First Literary Venturb. 

Literary Nightmare (A) — Same as Punch, Brothers, 
Punch I q.v.\ Atlantic Monthly, February, 1876; "Old 
Times on the Mississippi," 1876; "Quarterly Elocution- 
ist," April, 1877; Book, see p. 49. 

Literary "Old Offender" (A)---Galaxy, June, 1870. 

Literature — Speech, London, May 4, 1900; "Mark Twain's 
Speeches," 19 10. 

Literature — S^ Holiday Literature, Disappearance 
OF Literature. 

Literature in the Dry Diggings — "Jumping Frog," 1867. 

"Littery" Episodb (A) — Speech, Wnittier BirthdUiy, Bos- 
ton, December 17, 1877; Atlantic Monthly Supplement, 
February, 1880; "Modem Eloquence," 190 1. 

Little Nonsense (A) — Book, see p. 63. 

Little Note to Paul Bourget (A) — "Tom Sawyer De- 
tective," 1896; "How to Tell a Story," 1897. 

London — See Property in Opulent London, About Lon- 
don, From the London "Times" op 1904. 

Lord — See Dobs the Race of Man Lovb a Lord ? 

Lost in the Snow — Reprinted from "Roughing It," pp. 
228-239. 

187 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

LfOTos Club — See Bribp History of thb Lotos Club, 

Spbbchbs at thb Lotos Club. 
Lotos Lbavbs — Book, see p. 36. 
Lotos Club Dinnbr in Honor of Mark Twain — Speech, 

New York, November 11, 1893; "History of the Lotos 

Club," 1895. 
Loves Bakbry — See Whbrbas (Loves Bakery). 
LovBs OF Alonzo Pitz Clarbncb (The) and Rosannah 

Ethblton — AtlatUic, March, 1878; "Punch, Brothers, 

Punch!" 1878. 
Love Triumphant — See Enemy Conqubrbo. 
Lucerne Girl (The) — Lecture title. 
Luck — Harper*s Magazine ^ August, 1891; "Merry Tales," 

189a; see also Science vs. Luck (not same story). 
LucRETiA Smith's Soldier — Califomian, December 3, 1864; 

"Jumping Prog," 1867. 
Lunatic — See Our Precious Lunatic. 
Lying — See On the Decay of the Art of Lying. 
Lying in Bed — See Danger of Lying in Bed. 

M 

Mabib — See Dinner to Hamilton W. Mabib. 

McWilliamsbs — See Experiences of the McWilliamses 
with Membranous Croup and Mrs. Mc Williams and 
THE Lightning. 

Magnanimous Incident Literature — See About Mag- 
nanimous Incident Literature. 

Majestic Literary Possil (A) — Harper's Magazine, Peb- 
ruary, 1890; "jfi, 000,000 Banknote," 1893. 

Man in the Street — Book, see p. 140. 

Man that Corrupted Hadlbyburo (The) — Harper's Mag- 
azine , December, 1899; Book, see p. 83. 

Man Who Pought Cats (The)—" Practical Jokes," 1872. 

Map of Paris — Includes To the Reader and Official 
Commendations; Galaxy, November, 1870; "Eye 
Openers," 187 1; "Sketches No. i," 1874. 

Marjorie Fleming : The Wonder Child — Harper's Bazar, 
December, 1909. 

Mark in Mormon Land— -With some differences from 
"Roughing It," pp. 120-126. 

Mark Twain — See My Mark Twain. 

Mark Twain and thb Highwayman — "Practical Jokes," 
1872. 

Mark Twain as George Washington — "Choice Humor- 
ous Works," 1873. 

Mark Twain at Niagara — See A Day at Niagara Palls. 

Mark Twain: His Life and His Work — Book, see p. 65. 

188 



INDEX 

Mark Twain in Nbw York — Buyers' Manual, 187a. 

Mark Twain on Lbttbr Writing — Same as Onb op Man- 
kind's BoRBS, q.v, 

Mark Twain on Simpufibd Spbllinq — See Simpufibd 
Spelling. 

Mark Twain's Birthday — See Mark Twain's Sixty- 
Sbvbnth Birthday; Mark Twain's Sbvbntibth Birth- 
day. 

Mark Twain's Birthday Book — Book, see p. 152. 

Mark Twain's (Burlbsqub) Autobiography — Book, see p. 8. 

Mark Twain's Californian Expbribncb — See (Jalifor- 
NiAN Expbribncb. 

Mark Twain's Disgracbful Pbrsbcution of a Boy — See 
Disgraceful Pbrsbcution of a Boy. 

Mark Twain's Pinb Old Mam — See A Pinb Old Man. 

Mark Twain's First Appbarancb — Speech, Norfolk, Con- 
necticut, October 5, 1906; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 
1910. 

Mark Twain's First Intbrvibw with Artbmus Ward — 
See First Intbrvibw with Artbmus Ward. 

Mark Twain's Last — Same as A Rbcbption at thb Presi- 
dent's, q.v, 

Mark Twain's Library of Humor — Book, see p. 6a. 

Mark Twain's Map of Paris — See Map of Paris. 

Mark Twain's Memoranda— >See Memoranda. 

Mark Twain's Patent Scrap Book — Book, see p. 40. 

Mark Twain's Pleasurb Trip on the Continent — Book, 
see p. 5 

Mark Twain's Remarkable Gold Mines — "Phunny 
Phellows," 1885. 

Mark Twain's Remarkable Stranger — See About a 
Remarkable Stranger. 

Mark Twain's Seventieth Birthday — Book, see p. 118. 

Mark Twain's Sixty-Seventh Birthday — Book, see p. iz8. 

Mark Twain's Sketches — Book, see p. 19. 

Mark Twain's Sketches New and Old-— Book, see p. 38. 

Mark Twain's Sketches No. z — Book, see p. 35. 

Mark Twain's Speech on Accident Insurance — Book, 
see p. no. 

Mark Twain's Speeches — Book, see p. lao. 

Mark Twain's Tone-Imparting Committbb — See Tonb- 
Imparting Committee. 

Massacre — See My Famous "Bloody Massacre." 

Masterpieces of American Eloqubncb — Book, see p. ri6. 

Mastbrpibces of Wit and Humor — Book, see p. 91. 

Mean People — <7atoxy, January, 1871; "Memoranda," 187 1. 

Meistbrschaft. In Thrbb Acts — Century, January, 1888; 
" Merry Tales," 189a. 

13 189 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Mbmoranda — Galaxy Magasine, May, June, July, August, 
September, October, November, December, 1870; Jan- 
uary, Pebruary, April, 187 1; Book, Me p. 9. 

Mbmorablb Midnight Expbribncb (A) — "Sketches No. i/' 
1874. 

Mbmoriam — See In Mbmoriam. 

Mbmory — See Morals and Mbmory. 

Mbmory (A) — Galaxy, August, 1870; "Memoranda," 187 1. 

Mbn and Things — Book, see p. 63. 

Mbntal Photographs — Buffuo Express, October 9, 1869; 
"Curious Dream,*' 187a. 

Mbntal Tblbgrapbt — Harper's Maganne, December, 1891 ; 
' ,£1,000,000 Banknote,'* 189^. 

— Hi 



Mbntal Tblboraphy Again — Harper's MagaMtne, Septem- 
ber, 1895; "Tom Sawyer, Detective," 1896; "How to 
Tell a Story. '^1897. 

p. 
Mbtboric Showbrs — See Pull and Rbliablb Account of 



Mbrry Talbs — Book, see p. 64. 



i: 



thb Extraordinary Mbtboric Showbrs. 

Mbthusblah — Lecture title. 

Mbxican Plug — See Gbnuinb Mexican Plug. 

Midnight Expbribncb — See Mbmorablb Midnight Ex- 
pbribncb. 

Mills — See Edward Mills and Gborgb Bbnton. 

MiNB, Mining — See Around thb World: Pockbt Mining. 
Richest Silver Mine, Mark Twain's Remarkable 
Gold Minbs. 

"Minbr's Lament (The)" — See A Porty-Ninbr. 

Misplaced Confidence — Same as Sunday School, q.v. 

Missionary Critics — See To My Missionary Critics. 

Mississippi — See Old Times on the Mississippi, Lifb on 
THE Mississippi. 

Missouri University Speech — Speech, Columbia, Missouri, 
June 4, 190a; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19x0. 

MissouRiANs — See Pive Pamous Missourians. 

Mistaken Idbntity — Speech, Papyrus Qub, Boston, Feb- 
ruary 34, 1 881; "Kmgs of the Platform and Pulpit," 
1890. 

Modern Eloqubncb — Book, see p. X17. 

Monument to Adam (A) — Harper's Weekly, July 15, 1905; 
"$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 

Moral Purposb (A) — Harper's Weekly, December 15, 1906. 

Morals — See Theoretical and Practical Morals, Taxbs 
AND Morals. 

Morals and Mbmory — Speech, New York, March 7, 1906; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 

More Climate — See Around the World. 

More Distinction — Same as To Raisb Poultry; Buffalo 

190 



INDEX 

Expnss^ lime 4, 1S70; "Oirioiis Dream,** iSjt; **Pun« 

Pact, and Fancy," 1S73. 
MoRB TitAMPS Abkoai>— Book, see p. 80. 
Mr. Blokb's Itbm — See An Itbm which thb Editor Him* 

SBLP Could Not Undbrstand; **Mr. Skab*s Itbm.** 
Mrs. Eddy in Error — North Amiricam Rfvitw, April, tgoj; 

"Christiaii Science,'* 1907. 
Mrs. McWiluams and thb Liohtninq — "Stolen White 

Elephant/' i88a. 
Municipal Corruption — Speech, New York, City Chib, 

January 4, 1901; "Mark Twain's Speeches," loio. 
Municipal Govbrnmbnt — Speech, New York, St. Nicholas 

Society, December 6, 1900; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 

1 9 10. 
MuRDBRBRs — See Lionizing Murdbrbrs. 
Murphy — See Dan Murphy. 
My Boyhood Drbams — McC/nrr's, January, 1900; "Hadley^ 

burg," 1900. 
My DAbut as a Litbrary Pbrson — Quoting "Forty-Three 

Days in an Open Boat," ^.t;.; Century, uiecember, 1899; 

"Hadleybuxg, 1900; Book, see p. 90. 
My Famous "Bloody Massacrb" — (7a/ajvy, June, 1870; 

"Memoranda," 1871: "Sketches New and Old," 1895. 
My First Lib and How I Got Out op It — New York H <irW, 

December 10, 1890; "Hadleyburg," 1900. 
My First Litbrary Vbnturb— <7atory, April, 1871; "Prac* 

tical Jokes," 187a; "Sketches New and Old/' 1875. 
My Latb Sbnatorial Sbcrbtaryship — See Facts Concbrn* 

I NO, etc. 
My Mark Twain — Book, see p. 144. 
My Missionary Critics — See To My Missionary CatTim. 
Mystbrious Visit (A) — Buffalo Express, March to. 1870; 

"Curious Dream,^' 1872; "Sketches New and Old. 1875. 
Mystbry Clbarbd Up — Wood*s MagoMtne, Octol>er, 1869. ' 
My Watch: An Instructivb Littlb Talb — Galaxv, Decf^nx* 

ber, 1870; "Memoranda," 187 1; "Sketches New and 

Old." 1875. 

N 

NABOBs^See Nbvada Nabobs in Nbw York, Around tmn 

World, Silvbr Land Nabobs. 
Nast Almanacs, 1871-73-74 — Book, sec pp. i<, ift, ^o; 



i7*-73-74— ooolc, see pp. i<, 
Pbriod and His Picturr^; 1^ 



Nast, Tb., His Pbriod and His Picturr^; HckiIc, ikh* 

p. 131. 
Nboro Body-Sbrvant — See Gbnbral Washinoton's Nromh 

Body-Sbrvant. 
Nevada: Thb Puturb op Nbvada, Around tnr WoMr.n, 

Early Days in Nevada. 

191 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Nbvada Nabobs in Nbw York — Reprinted from '* Roughing 

It," pp. 335-328- 
Nbvada Skbtchbs — "Wit and Humor of America/' 1907. 
Nbwark — See Dbcbption. 
Nbw Bbbchbr Church (A) — "Curious Dream/' 187a; 

"Phunny Phellows," 1885. 
Nbw Crimb (A) — Buffalo Express, April 16, 1870; "Curious 

Dream," 187a; "Fun, Fact, and Fancy," 1873. 
Nbw England Socibty op Nbw York, 1876, 1877, i88a; 

Nbw England Socibty op Pbnnsylvania, 188 z — Book, 

see op. Ill, iia, 113, ia8. 
Nbw Gbrman Word — Speech, Vienna, March 10, 1889; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Nbw Guidb op thb Convbrsation — Book, see p. 58. 
Nbw Pilgrims' Proorbss (The) — Book, see p. 5. 
Nbw Planbt (The) — Harper's Weekly, January 30, 1909. 
Nbwspapbr Corrbspondbnt — See Iulby, Nbwspapbr Cor* 

RBSPONDBNT. 

Nbw York Prbss Club Dinnbr (The) — Speech, New York, 
November i^, 1900; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19x0. 

Niagara — See A Day at Niagara. 

Niagara Book — Book, see p. 68. 

NicoDBMUS Dodgb, Printbr — Reprinted from "A Tramp 
Abroad," pp. a 34-339. 

NlGHTMARB — See LiTBRART NiOHTMARB. 

NoBLB Rbd Man (The) — Galaxy, September, 1870; "Memo- 
randa," 187 1. 
NoNSBNSB, A LiTTLB — Book, See p. 63. 
NoTABLB (Conundrum (A) — Califamian, October i, 1864. 
NoTBs — See Sou b Random Notbs op an Idlb Excursion. 
Notorious Jumping Frog — See Cblbbratbd Jumping Prog. 
NuiSANCB — See Prbsbnt Nuisancb. 
Nyb — See Introducing Nyb and Rilby. 

O 

"Oahu"— See Stbbd "Oahu." 

Obituaribs — See Ambndbd Obituaribs. 

Obituary Pobtry — Speech, Philadelphia, 1895; "Mark 

Twain's Speeches,' 19 10. Also implied caption for 

"Memoranda" paragraph. 
Oppicb Borb (The) — Same as Editorial Oppicb Borb, q.v. 
Oppicial Commbndation — See Map op Paris. 
Ohio Socibty, History op thb — Book, see p. 131. 
Old Man — See Finb Old Man. 
"Old Oppbndbr" — See Litbrary "Old Oppbndbr." 
Oldbst Inhabitant (The): Nbw England Wbatbbr — 

Speech, New England Society of New York, December 

192 



INDEX 



99, 1876; "New En^and Society of New York," 

1876. 
Old-I'ashionbd Phintbr (The) — Speech, New York, Jan- 

ttary 18, 1886; **Mark Twain's Si>eeches," 1910. 
Old Timbs on tbb Mississippi — AtlatUic, January, February, 

March, April, May, June, August, 1875; Book, see p. 40. 
On Cbildrbn — "Screamers," 187 1. (Disclaimed by Mark 

Twain.) 
Onb Hundrbd Choicb Sblbctions — See Book, pp. 30, 40. 
£1,000,000 Banknotb (The) — Century, January, 1893; Book, 

see p. 67. 
Onb of Mankind's Borbs — Same as On Lbttbr Writing; 

Galaxy, February, 1871; ''Memoranda," 187 1; "Sketches 

New and Old." 1875. 
On Training Cbildrbn — Christian Union (date missing), 

1855. 
On Lbttbr Writing — Same as Onb of Mankind's Borbs, 

9.1/. 
On tbb Dbcay of thb Art of Lying — "Stolen White Ele- 
phant," 1889. 
Opbn Boat — See Forty-Thrbb Days in an Opbn Boat. 
Opbn Lbttbr to Commodorb Vandbrbilt — Packard's 

Monthly t March, 1869. 
Origin of Illustrious Mbn — "Jumping Frog," 1867. 
Orphan Baeaar — See Galvbston Orphan Bazaar. 
OsTBOPATHV — Speech, Albany, New York, February 97, 1901 ; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Our Cbildrbn and Grbat Discovbribs — Speech, Authors' 

Club; "Kings of the Platform." 1800. 
Our Italian Guidb — Reprinted from Innocents Abroad," 

pp. 987-^94. 
Our Prbcious Lunatic — Buffalo Express, May 14, 1870. 



Pacific and Pacific Coast — See Around thb World. 
Pagb from a Californian Almanac (A) — "Jumping Frog," 

1867. 
Panoramist — See Scriptural Panoramist. 
Parisian Typbs — See A Californian Abroad. 
Paris — See Map of Paris. 
Paris Notbs—" Stolen White Elephant," i88a. 
"Party Cribs" in Ireland^" Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Passport — See Bblatbd Russian Passport. 
Pboplb Tvb Smilbd With — Book, see p. 138. 
Pbrfbct Curb (A)—" Practical Jokes." 187a. 
Pbrkins — See How Eli Pbrrins Lbcturbd at Pottsvillb; 

Eli Pbrkins (At Largb), also Wit and Humor of thb 

1 93 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Aob; Kings of thb Platform and Pulpit; £u Pbrkins' 

Thirty Ybars of Wit. 
Pbrry — See City Marshal Pbrrt. 
Pbrsbcution of a Boy — See Disgracbful Pbrsbcutions of 

A Boy. 
Pbrsonal Habits of thb Siambsb Twins — Packard's Monih- 

ly, August, 1869; "Curious Dream/' 187a; "Sketches 

New and Old." 1875. 
Pbrsonal Rbcollbctions of Joan of Arc — Harfer*s Magct^ 

Btnt, April to December, 1895; January to April, 1896; 

Book, see p. 74. 
Pbrson Sitting in Darknbss — See To thb Pbrson Sitting 

IN Darknbss. 
Pbtition Concbrning Copyright — "Sketches New and 

Old," 1875. 
Petition to thb Qubbn of England (A) — "£1,000,000 

Banknote," 1893. 
Pbtrifibd Man (The) — Gakixy.lvtne, 1870; "Memoranda/* 

1871; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Philippines — See China and thb Philippinbs. 
Phunny Phbllows — Book, see p. 61. 
Piccadilly Annual — Book, see p. 7. 
PiCTURBs — See Spelling and Picturbs. 
PiB-BiTBR — See Grbat North American Pib-Bitbr. 
Pilgrims — See Plymouth Rock and thb Pilgrims. 
Pilot — See Mississippi Pilot; Carl Schurz, Pilot. 
PiONBBR Ball — Saturday Press, December 93, i86c. 
PiRATBS — See American Authors and British Pirates. 
Pitcairn — See Great Revolution in Pitcairn. 
Plagiarism — See Unconscious Plagiarism. 
Planet, The New — Harper's Weekly, January 30, 1909. 
Play-Actino — See About Play- Acting. 
Playing Courier — "£1,000,000 Banknote," 1893. 
Pleasure Excursion — See Curious Pleasure Excur- 
sion. 
Pleasure Trip — See Mark Twain's Pleasure Trip. 
Plug — See Genuine Mexican Plug. 
Plymouth Rock and the Pilgrims — Speech, New England 

Society, Philadelphia, December 99, 1881; " New England 

Society, Pennsylvania," 1881. 
Pocket Mining — See Around thb World. 
Poems — See Two Poems. 
Poetry, Veracity, and Suicide (On) — Speech, New York, 

February 7, 1906; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Poetry — See Post-Mortem Poetry, Obituary Poetry. 
Poets as Policemen — Speech, Lotos Club, New York, March 

34, 1900; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Poets — See Talb for Struggung Young Posts. 

194 



INDEX 

PoucBMBN — See Pobts as Poucbmbn. 

PouTicAL Ecosoui^-GcUaxy, September, 1870; "Memo* 

randa/' 187 1; "Sketches New and Old/' 1875. 
Poor Editor (The) — Same as Thb Prbsbnt Nuisancb, q.v. 
Poor Human Naturb/— Galaxy, May, 1870; "Memoranda," 

1871. 
Portrait op King William III. (The) — Includes Commenda- 
tions OP THB Portrait; 6^a/a«y, January, 1871; " Memo* 

randa," 1871; "$30,000 Bequest, 1906. 
PosT-MoRTBM PoBTRY — Galoxy, June, 1870; "Memoranda," 

1871. 
Potomac — See Rbunion of thb Army op thb Potomac. 
Poultry — See To Raisb Poultry. 
Practical Jokes — Book, see p. az. 
Prbsbncb op Mind — See Rbmarkablb Instances of Prbs- 

BNCB OF Mind. 
"Present" Nuisance (The) — Galaxy, December, 1870; 

"Memoranda," 187 1. 
President — See Reception at the Prbsidbnt's. 
pRBSS Club — See New York Press Club Dinner, Woman's 

pRBSs Club. 
Primrose Way — Book, see p. 63. 
Prince and the Pauper (Ijie) — Book, see p. 5a. 
Princeton — Spjeech, Princeton, New Jersey, May, 1901; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," xoio. 
Printer — See Old-Pashioned Printer. 
Private History op a Campaign that Failed (The) — Cen-^ 

fury, December, 1885; "Merry Tales," 189a. 
Private History of the "Jumping Frog" Story — North 

American Review, April, 1894; "How to Tell a Story," 

1897. 
Prize Fight — See The Great Prize Fight. 
Pronoun — See Lecture op Mr. Personal Pronoun. 
Property in Opulent London — "Sketches No. 1," 1874. 
Protest — See Widow s Protest. 

Pubuc Education Association — Speech, New York, No- 
vember aj, 1900; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Pubuc to Mark Twain: His Reply — Book, see p. 1. 
Pudd'nhbad Wilson — Century, December, 1891; January. 

February, March, April, May, June, 1894; Tragedy of 

Pudd'nhead Wilson,*' 1894. 
Pudd'nhbad Wilson Dramatized — Speech, New York, 1895; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Puddn'head Wilson's Calendar — Book, see p. 69. 
Punch, Brothers, Punch! — See A Literary Nightmare: 

Book, 86e p. 47. 
Putting Up stoves — Heptasoph, JsLtkuary, 1874; "Laughing 

Gas," N. D. 

19s 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 



Q 

8UARTBRLY Blocutionist (The) — Book, see p. 46. 
UBBN OP Bnoland — See Petition to thb Qubbn op 
Bnoland. 
Qubbn Victoria — Speech, New York, May 2$, 1908; "Mark 

Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Qubbn Victoria's Jubilbb — New York Jattmal, June 21, 
>3t 1^7! Book, see p. 81. 



Railroads — See Rogers and Railroads. 
Raisb Poultry — See To Raisb Poultry. 
Rambling Notes of an Idle Excursion — See Some Random 

Notbs of an Idle Excursion. 
Random Notes op an Idle Excursion — See Somb Random 

Notes of an Idle Excursion. 
Rbading-Room Opening — Speech, London, October 13, 

1900; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Rebels — See Wattbrson and Twain as Rbbels. 
Recent Great French Duel (The) — Atlataic, February, 

1879; "Ttamp Abroad," 1888, pp. 6o-8a. 
Reception at thb President's (The) — dame as A Fashion 

Item and Mark Twain's Last; Galaxy, October, 1870; 

"Memoranda," 187 1; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Rbd Man — See Noble Red Man. 
Reformer — See Travelling with a Reformer. 
Reid Dinner — Book, seep. 130. 

"Reliable Contraband' — Packard's Monthly ^ July, 1869. 
Relic — See Curious Relic for Sale. 
Rbmarxable Instances of Presence of Mind — "Jumping 

Frog." 1867. 
Remarkable Stranger — See About a Remarkable 

Stranger. 
Reminiscence of the Back Settlement (A) — Galaxy, 

November, 1870; "Memoranda," 187 1. 
Reply — See General Reply. 
Republic — See Russian Republic. 

Resignation — See Facts Concerning the Recent Resig- 
nation. 
Restless Night (A) — From "A Tramp Abroad," pp. 114- 

lai. 
Results of Kindness to a Cockroach — "Practical Jokes," 

1873. 
Reunion of the Army of the Potomac — Book, see p. tia. 
Rev. Henry Ward Bebchbr — Buffalo Express, September 

as, 1869. 

196 



INDEX 

Rbv. Hbnkt Ward Bbbchbr's Farm— ** Curious Dream/* 

1873; "Phunny Phellows/' 1885. 
Rbvolution in Pitcairn — See Great Rbvolution in Pit- 

CAIRN. 

RiCHBST Silver Mine in the World in Kentucky — Buffalo 
Exprtss, March, 1870. 

Rigging the Market — "Practical Jokes/' 187a. 

Riley — See Introducing Nye and Riley. 

Riley, Newspaper Correspondent — Galaxy, November, 
1870; "Memoranda," 1871; "Sketches New and Old," 
1875. 

Robert Fulton Fund — Speech, New York, April 19, 1906; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Rogers — "Sketches No. i," 1874. 

Rogers and Railroads — Speecn, Norfolk, Virginia, April 3, 
1909; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Roughing It — Book, see p. 15. 

Royal CoMPUiiBNT (A)^^alaxy, September, 1870; "Memo- 
randa," 187 1. 

Royalty on the Mississippi — Century, Pebruarv. i88c; 
"Huckleberry Finn," 1886, pp. 159-250 (with aaaitions). 

Rumor — See Concerning a Rumor. 

Running FOR Governor — Galaxy, December, 1870; "Memo- 
randa," 1871; "Sketches New and Old/' 1875. 

Russian Passport — See Belated Russian Passport, 

Russian Republic — Speech, New York, April 11, 1906: 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Russian Sufferers — Speech, New York, December 18, 1905; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 



Sabinb — See Indignity Put Upon the Remains of Georgb 
Holland by tbb Reverend Mr. Sabine. 

Sad Experiences — See Couple of Sad Experiences. 

Sad, Sad Business (A) — Galaxy, January, 187 1; "Memo- 
randa," 1 87 1. 

Sagenfeld — See Legend of Sagenpbld. 

Saint Joan op Arc — Harper* s Magawine, December, 1904; 
'* $30,000 Bequest," 1906. 

St. Louis Harbor-Boat Mark Twain — Speech. St. LouIm. 
Missouri, June 6, 1909; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

St. Patrick — See Letter Read at a Dinner. 

Sandwich Islands — Lecture title (same as Hawaii); "Mod- 
em Eloquence," 1901. 

Sandwich Island Editor (A) — "Screamers" 1871. 

San Francisco Earthquakb — Interview, New York, Juno 
16, 1906: "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

197 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Satan — See Humane Word prom Satan. 

Savaob Club (The) — Book, see p. loi. 

Savagb Club Dinnbr — Speech, London, July 6, 1907; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 
Sawybr — See Tom Sawybr, Dbtbctivb; Advbnturbs of 

Tom Sawybr; Tom Sawybr Abroad. 
ScHURz — See Carl Schurz, Pilot. 
SciBNCB vs. Luck — Galaxy, October, 1870; "Memoranda," 

1871; "Sketches New and Old," 1875. 
Scottish Banqubt — See Spbbch at thb Scottish Ban- 

QUBT. 

ScRBAMBRS — Book, See p. 13. 

Scriptural Panoramist (The) — Same as A Travblling 

Show, q.v.; "Screamers," 1871; Buyers' Manual, 187a. 
Sbcrbtaryship — See Facts Concbrning thb Latb Sena- 
torial Sbcrbtaryship. 
Sblf-Madb Man (A) — "Pun, Fact, and Fancy," 1873. 
Senatorial Sbcrbtaryship — See Facts Concerning the 

Late Senatorial Secretaryship. 
Sending Him Through — "Practical Jokes," 187a. 
Sentimental Law Student (Ye) — Nevada Enterprise (date 

missing) ; "Wit and Humor of America," 1907. 
Sermon — See Layman's Sermon. 
Shakespeare — See Is Shakespeare Dead? 
Shelley — See In Defence op Harriet Shelley. 
Ships — See About All Kinds of Ships. 
Short and Singular Rations — See Forty-Three Days in 

AN Open Boat, relating same story somewhat differently; 

"Jumping Frog," 1867. 
Show — See Travelling Show. 
Siambsb Twins (The) — See The Personal Habits of thb 

Siamese Twins. 
Silver Mine — See Richest Silver Mine. 
Simplified Spelling — Speech, New York, September 19, 

1906; Putnam's, November, 1906; Book, seep. 119. 
1 60 1 — Book, see p. 56. 
Sixty and Six — OBook, see p. 80. 
Sketches — See Nevada Sketches; Sketches New and Old; 

Sketches No. i ; Mark Twain's Sketchbs. 
Sketches New and Old — See Mark Twain's Sketches 

New and Old. 
Sketches No. i — See Mark Twain's Sketches No. i. 
Slippers — See A Wonderful Pair of Slippers. 
Smells — See About Smells. 
Smith — See Lucretia Smith's Soldier, Evidence in the 

Case of Smith vs. Jones. 
Society of the Army of the Tennessee — Report of the 

Proceedings for 1879; Book, see p. 11 a. 

198 



INDEX 

Soda Watbr — "Screamers," 187 1 (possibly not authentic). 

SOLDIBR, SOLDIBRING See LUCRBTIA SmITH'S SOLDIBR, An 

Author's Soldibring. 

Soliloquy — See Czar's Soliloquy. 

SoMB Pablbs for Good Old Boys and Girls (Parts I, II, 
III)~" Sketches New and Old/' 1875. 

SoMB Funny Things — Book, see p. lao. 

SoicB Random Notbs op an Idlb Excursion — Atlantic 
Monthly t October, November, and December, 1877; 
"Punch, Brothers. Pimchl" 1878. 

South Africa — See From India to South Africa. 

Spbbcr — See Thb Story op a Spbbch, An Undblivbrbd 
Spbbch, Aptbr-Dinnbr Spbbch, Spbbch at thb Scot- 
tish Banqubt, Spbbch at a Dinnbr op thb Knights 
OF St. Patrick. 

Spbbch at a Dinnbr of thb Knights of St. Patrick — 
"Punch, Brothers, Punch I" 1878. 

Spbbch at thb Scottish Banqubt at London — "Sketches 
New and Old," 1875. 

Spbbchbs at thb Lotos Club — Book, see p. 1x7. 

Spblling and Picturbs — See Simplipibd Spblling. 

Spblling Rbform — See Carnbgib Spblling Rbform and 
Simplipibd Spblling. 

Spiritbd Woman — See Judgb's Spirited Woman. 

Spirits — See Among thb Spirits. 

Stanlby and Livingstonb (On) — Speech, White£riars' Club, 
London, August 6, 187a; Mark Twain's Speeches, 1910. 

Stanlby, Hbnry M. — See Introducing Iibnry M. Stan- 
lby. 

Statistics — From "History of the Savage Club," q.v, 

Stbambr Capital — See Launch of thb Stbambr Capital. 

Stbbd "Oahu" (The)— "Jumping Frc«," 1867. 

Stbwart, Rbminiscbncbs of Sbnator Wm. M. — Book, see 

p. 143- 
Still Furthbr Concbrning That Conundrum — Califarnian, 

October 15, 1864. 

Stirring Timbs in Austria — Harper* s Magazine, March, 
1898; "How to Tell a Story," 1000. 

Stolbn Whitb Elbphant (The) — Book, see p. 55. 

Storibs of Authors — Book, see p. 133. 

Stormfibld — See Captain Stormpibld's Visit to Hbavbn. 

Story op a Gallant Dbbd (The) — Included in "A Memory," 
q.v. 

Story of a Spbbch (The) — '* Chapters from My Autobiog- 
raphy" in North American Review. "Mark Twain s 
Speeches," 1910. 

Story of Haunting Horror (A) — Same as A Litbrary 
Nightmarb, q.v. 

199 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Story op Joseph (The) — Reprinted from ''Innocents 

Abroad/' pp. 492-4. 
Story op thb Bad Littlb Boy Who Didn't Comb to Gribp 

(The)— "Jumping Prog," 1867. 
Story op thb Good Littlb Boy Who Did Not Prospbr (The) 

—Galaxy, May, 1870; Piccadilly Annual, 1870; Nast's 

Almanac, 1873. 
Strangb Drbam (A) — "Jumping Prog/' 1867. 
Stranobr — See About a Rbmarkablb Strangbr. 
SupPBRBRs — See Russian Suppbrbrs. 
Suicide — See Poetry, Veracity, and Suicide. 
Sunday in Carson (A) — Nevada Enterprise (date missing) ; 

"Wit and Humor of America," 1907. 
Sunday School (Th^— ^ojox^, May, 1870; "Memoranda," 

187 1 ; "Sketches No. i/' 1874. 



Talb por Struggling Young Pobts — Basaar BuUeiin (Buf- 
falo), November, 1880; " Mark Twain, His Life and Work," 
189a. 

Talb op a Pishwipb — Lecture title. 

Tammany — See Edmund Burke on Crokbr and Tam- 
many. 

Taxes and Morals — Speech, New York, January aa, 1906; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Telegraphy — See Mental Telegraphy. 

Telephonic Conversation (A) — Atlantic, June, 1880; 
"$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 

Tennessee — See Journalism in Tennessee; Society op 
THB Army op the Tennessee. 

That Book Agent — "Practical Jokes," 187a. 

Their Husbands' Wives — Book, see p. 96. 

Thboretical and Practical Morals — Speech, London, 
Vagabonds' Club, July 8, 1899; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 
1910. 

$30,000 Bequest (The) — Harper* s Weekly, December 10, 
1904; Book, see p. 98. 

Those Annual Bills — Same as Two Poems, q.v. 

Thosb Extraordinary Twins — Tragedy of Pudd'nhead 
Wilson," 1894. 

Three Italian Cities — See A Calipornian Abroad. 

Times — See From the London " Times " op 1904. 

Tobacco— See Cigars and Tobacco. 

To Correspondents — Galaxy, July, 1870; "Memoranda," 
1871. 

Tomb op Adam (The) — Reprinted from " Innocents Abroad/' 

PP- 565-567. 



200 



>t 



INDEX 

Tom Hood's Comic Annual — Book, see p. 94. 
Tom's Aunt — Reprinted from "Tom Sawyer/ 
Tom Sawybr Abroad— 5f. Nicholas, November, 1893, to 

April, 1894; Book, see p. 7a. 
Tom Sawybr Abroad; Tom Sawybr, Dbtbctivb — Book, 

see p. 76. 
Tom Sawybr, Dbtbctivb (I), (II) — Harper's Magazine, 

August, September, 1896; "Tom Sawyer Abroad; Tom 

Sawyer, Detective," 1896; Book, see p. 77. 
To My Gubsts — See p. 152. 
To My Missionary CTritics — North American Review, April, 

1901. 
Tonb-Impartino CoMMiTTBB (The) — Galaxy, February, 1871; 

"Memoranda," 187 1. 
To Raisb Poultry — Same as Morb Distinction, q,v. 
To THB Pbrson Sitting in Darknbss — North American 

Review, Februarv, 1901; Book, see p. 86. 
To THB Rbadbr — See Map op Paris. 
To THB Whitbpriars — Speech, London, June ao, 1899; 

"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Touching Incidbnt — See " Hogwash." 
Touching Story op Gborob Washington's Boyhood (A) 

— Caltfornian, October 29, 1864 ; " Jumping Frog," 

1867. 
TouRNAMBNT IN A. D. 1870 (The) — Galaxy, July, 1870; 

"Memoranda," 1871. 
Traobdy op Pudo'nhbad Wilson — Same as Pudd'nhbad 

Wilson; Book, see pp. 72-74. 
Train Up a Child and Away Hb Gobs — "Screamers," 187 1; 

(Disclaimed by Mark Twain.) 
Tramp Abroad (A) — Book, see p. co. 
Travbllino Show (A) — Same as Scriptural Panoramist, 

q,v, 
Travblling with a Rbpormbr — Cosmopolitan, December, 

1893; *'^o^ ^ Tell a Story," 1807. 
Trub Story, Rbpbatbd Word por Word as I Hbard It (A) 

— Atlantic, November, 1874; "Sketches New and Old," 

1875; Book, see p. 47. 
Trumbull — See Jambs Hammond Trumbull. 
Truth — See Whbn in Doubt, Tbll thb Truth. 
Turkby — See Hunting thb Dbcbitpul Turkby. 
Turning Point op My Lipb (The) — Harper's Bazar, Febru- 
ary, 1 010. 
Twins — See Thosb Extraordinary Twins. 
Two Hundrbd Aptbr-Dinnbr Storibs — Book, see p. 140. 
Two Littlb Talbs — Century, November, 1901; Double- 

Barrelled Detective Story," 1902 (Tauchnits); "My D^ 

but as a Literary Person," 1903. 

201 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Two PoBics — By Moorb and Twain — "Sketches New and 

Old," 1875. 
Two-Ybar-Olds — See Wit Inspirations of tbb Two-Ybar- 

Olds. 

U 

Unbiasbd Art Criticism (An) — CtUtfamiaHf March 18, 1865. 

Unburlbsquablb Things — Galaxy, July, 1870; "Memo- 
randa/' 1871. 

Unconscious Plagiarism — Speech, Holmes Breakfast, Bos- 
ton, December, 1879; "Lite of Oliver Wendell Holmes," 
1886. 

Undblivbrbd Spbbch — "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Undbrtakbr's Chat (The) — "Screamers, 187 1; "Sketches 
No. I," 1874. 

Unbxpbctbd Acquaintancb (An) — Reprinted from "A 
Tramp Abroad," pp. 241-957. 

Union (The) Right or Wrong — Speech, " Practical Jokes," 
187a; "Mark Twain's Speeches,'^ 1910. 

University Sbttlbmbnt Socibtt — Speech, New York, Feb- 
ruary 3, 1901; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Unrbliablb (The) — Nevada EnUrprise; "Wit and Humor 
of America," 1907; also, see Advicb to thb Unrbliablb 
ON Church-Going. 

Unsophisticatbd Infant (The) — "Practical Jokes," 1873. 



Vandbrbilt — See Opbn Lbttbr to (^ommodorb Vandbr- 

BILT. 

Vbnobancb — "Screamers," 187 1. (Mark Twain disclaims 

this.) 
Vbnicb — Lecture title. 

Vbnus — See Lbobno op thb Capitolinb Vbnus. 
Vbracity — See Pobtry, Vbracity, and Suicidb. 
Victoria — See Qubbn Victoria; Qubbn Victoria's Ju- 

BILBB. 

Visit — See Mystbrious Visit. 
Visit to Niagara — See A Day at Niagara. 
VoTBS FOR WoMBN — Speech, New York, January so, 1901; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

W 

Wakbman — See Gborgb Wakbman. 

War — See Thb Europban War. 

Ward— See First Intbrvibw with Artbmus Ward. 

Washington — See Brief Biographical Sketch of Gborgb 

202 



INDEX 

Washington; Gbnbral Washington's Nbgro Body- 

Servant; Touching Story op Gborgb Washington's 

Boyhood; Dogbbrry in Washington. 
Was It Hbavbn ? or Hbll ? — Harper* s Magazine, December, 

190a; "$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 
Watch — See My Watch. 
Watbr-Supply — Speech, Albany, N. Y., February 27 or a 8, 

1901; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 
Wattbrson and Twain as Rbbbls — Speech, New York, 

Pelmiary zi, 1901; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1901. 
Wbathbr — See Thb Oldbst Inhabitant, Nbw England 

Wbathbr. 
Wbbd, Rbcbption Givbn to Thurlow — Book, see p. ia8. 
Wblcomb Homb — Speech, New York, November 10, 1900; 

"Speeches at the Lotos Club," 1901. 
Wbrnbr's Rbadings and Rbcitations — Book, see pp. 114, 

Wbstuinstbr Abbby — Lecture title. 

What Am brig an Authors Think About Copyright — Cent- 
ury, February, 1886; book not listed. 

What Is Man — -Book, see p. 97. 

What Paul Bourgbt Thinks op Us — North American Re- 
view, January, 1895; "Tom Sawyer, Detective," 1896; 
"How to Tell a Story," 1897. 

Whbn in Doubt, Tbll thb Truth — Speech, New York, 
March 9, 1906; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

Whbn I Was a Sbcrbtary — Same as Facts Concbrning 
THB Latb Sbnatorial Sbcrbtaryship. a.v. 

Whbrbas (Lovbs Bakbry) — Californian, October aa, 1864. 

Whitb Elbphant — See Stolbn Whitb Elephant. 

Whittibr Birthday — See A Littery Episode. 

Whopper (A)—" Practical Jokes," 1872. 

Why Not Abolish It? — Harper's Weekly, July 5, 190a. 

Widow's Protest (The) — Same as Dan I^urphy, g.v. 

Wild Man Intbrvibwbd (The) — Buffalo Express, September 
x8, i860. 

William Dean Howblls — Harper's Magazine, July, 1906. 

Wilson — See Pudd'nhbad Wilson. 

Wise, Witty, Eloqubnt — See Kings of the Platform 
AND Pulpit. 

Wit and Humor of the Age — Book, see p. 138. 

Wit and Humor of America — Book, see p. 100. 

Wit Inspirations of the Two-Ybar-Olds — Galaxy, Jtme, 
1870; Piccadilly Annual, 1870; "$30,000 Bequest," 1906. 

Wives— See Their Husbands' Wives. 

Wolfe and the Cats — See Jim Wolfe and the Cats. 

Woman — an Opinion — Speech, Washington Correspondents' 
(Hub; "Mark Twain's Speeches," 1910. 

203 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MARK TWAIN 

Woman, God Blbss Hbr — Speech, New England Society of 
New York, December 32, z88a; see Nbw England 
SociBTY OP Nbw York, i88a. 

Woman's Prbss Club — Speech, New York, October 37, 1900; 
"Mark Twain's Speeches," 19 10. 

WoMBN — See VoTBs for Wombn; Drbss op Civiusbd 

WOMBN. 

Wombn and Things — Book, see p. 63. 

Wonobr Child — See Marjorib Plbming, Thb Wondbr 
Child. 

Wondbrpul Pair op Slippbrs (A) — St NickoUis, Pebruary, 
1890. 

Writing Machinbs — See Prom My Unpublishbd Auto- 
biography. 

Y 

Yankbb in King Arthur's Court; Yankbb at thb Court 
op King Arthur — See A Connbcticut Yankbb in King 
Arthur's Court. 

Yankbb Story (A) — Same as Jim Wolpb and thb Cats. 
qA), 



THB END 



c^ rf o -^ r 
•^^ O t^ O i> 



fr 



3 2044 019 999 796 





