​
TWAIN, MARK
, the 
nom de plume
 of 
Samuel Langhorne Clemens
 (1835-1910), American author, who was born on the 30th of November 1835, at Florida, Missouri.
His father was a country merchant from Tennessee, who moved
soon after his son's birth to Hannibal, Missouri, a little town
on the Mississippi. When the boy was only twelve his father
died, and thereafter he had to get his education as best he
could. Of actual schooling he had little. He learned how to
set type, and as a journeyman printer he wandered widely,
going even as far east as New York. At seventeen he went
back to the Mississippi, determined to become a pilot on a
river-steamboat. In his 
Life on the Mississippi
 he has recorded
graphically his experiences while “learning the river.” But
in 1861 the war broke out, and the pilot's occupation was gone.
After a brief period of uncertainty the young man started
West with his brother, who had been appointed lieutenant-governor
of Nevada. He went to the mines for a season,
and there he began to write in the local newspapers, adopting
the pen name of “Mark Twain,” from a call used in taking
soundings on the Mississippi steamboats. He drifted in time
to San Francisco, and it was a newspaper of that city which in
1867 supplied the money for him to join a party going on a
chartered steamboat to the Mediterranean ports. The letters
which he wrote during this voyage were gathered in 1869 into
a volume, 
The Innocents Abroad
, and the book immediately
won a wide and enduring popularity. This popularity was of
service to him when he appeared on the platform with a lecture
or rather with an apparently informal talk, rich in admirably
delivered anecdote. He edited a daily newspaper in Buffalo
for a few months, and in 1870 he married Miss Olivia L.
Langdon (d. 1904), removing a year later to Hartford, where he
established his home. 
Roughing It
 was published in 1872,
and in 1874 he collaborated with Charles Dudley Warner
in 
The Gilded Age
, from which he made a play, acted many
hundred times with John T. Raymond as “Colonel Sellers.” In
1875 he published 
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer
, the sequel
to which, 
Huckleberry Finn
, did not appear until 1884. The
result of a second visit to Europe was humorously recorded in

A Tramp Abroad
 (1880), followed in 1882 by a more or less
historical romance, 
The Prince and the Pauper
; and a year
later came 
Life on the Mississippi
. 
The Adventures of Huckleberry

Finn
, the next of his books, was published (in 1884)
by a New York firm in which the author was chief partner.
This firm prospered for a while, and issued in 1889 Mark Twain's
own comic romance, 
A Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur's

Court
, and in 1892 a less successful novel, 
The American Claimant
.
But after a severe struggle the publishing house failed,
leaving the author charged with its very heavy debts. After this
disaster he issued a third Mississippi Valley novel, 
The Tragedy of

Pudd'nhead Wilson
, in 1894, and in 1896 another historical
romance, 
Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc
, wherein the
maid is treated with the utmost sympathy and reverence.
He went on a tour round the world, partly to make money
by lecturing and partly to get material for another book of
travels, published in 1897, and called in America 
Following

the Equator
, and in England 
More Tramps Abroad
. From
time to time he had collected into volumes his scattered sketches;
of these the first, 
The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras

County
, appeared in 1867, and the latest, 
The Man that

Corrupted Hadleyburg
, in 1900. To be recorded also is a volume
of essays and literary criticisms, 
How to Tell a Story
 (1897).
A complete edition of his works was published in twenty-two
volumes in 1890-1900 by the American Publishing Company of
Hartford. And in this last year, having paid off all the debts
of his old firm, he returned to America. By the time he died
his books had brought him a considerable fortune. In later
years he published a few minor volumes of fiction, and a series
of severe and also amusing criticisms of Christian Science
(published
as a book in 1907), and in 1906 he began an autobiography
in the 
North American Review
. He had a great reception
in England in 1907, when he went over to receive from Oxford
the degree of Doctor of Literature. He died at Redding,
Connecticut, on the 21st of April 1910. Of his four daughters
only one, who married the Russian pianist Gabrilowitch,
survived him. Mark Twain was an outstanding figure for many
years as a popular American personality in the world of letters.
He is commonly considered as a humorist, and no doubt he is a
humorist of a remarkable comic force and of a refreshing fertility.
But the books in which his humour is broadly displayed, the
travels and the sketches, are not really so significant of his
power as the three novels of the Mississippi, 
Tom Sawyer
,

Huckleberry Finn
 and 
Pudd'nhead Wilson
, wherein we have
preserved a vanished civilization, peopled with typical figures,
and presented with inexorable veracity. There is no lack
of humour in them, and there is never a hint of affectation
in the writing; indeed, the author, doing spontaneously
the work nearest to his hand, was very likely unconscious
that he was making a contribution to history. But such

Huckleberry Finn
 is, beyond all question; it is a story of very
varied interest, now comic, now almost tragic, frequently
poetic, unfailingly truthful, although not always sustained
at its highest level. And in these three works of fiction there
are not only humour and pathos, character and truth, there
is also the largeness of outlook on life such as we find only
in the works of the masters. Beneath his fun-making we can
discern a man who is fundamentally serious, and whose ethical
standards are ever lofty. Like Cervantes at times, Mark
Twain reveals a depth of melancholy beneath his playful
humour, and like Molière always, he has a deep scorn and a
burning detestation of all sorts of sham and pretence, a scorching
hatred of humbug and hypocrisy. Like Cervantes and like
Molière, he is always sincere and direct.

After Mark Twain's death, his intimate friend, W. D. Howells, published in 1910 a series of personal recollections in 
Harper's
 
Magazine
.

(
B. M.
)
