​

CLEMENS, Samuel Langhorne
, author (better
known under his pen-name, 
Mark Twain
), b.
in Florida, Monroe co., Mo., 30 Nov., 1835. He
was educated only in the village school at Hannibal,
Mo., was apprenticed to a printer at the age of
thirteen, and worked at his trade in St. Louis,
Cincinnati, Philadelphia, and New York. In 1851 he
became a pilot on Mississippi river steamboats, and
in 1861 went to Nevada as private secretary to his
brother, who had been appointed secretary of the
territory. Afterward he undertook mining in
Nevada, and became in 1862 city editor of the
Virginia City “Enterprise.” In reporting legislative
proceedings from Carson he signed his letters “Mark
Twain,” a name suggested by the technical phraseology
of Mississippi navigation, where, in sounding
a depth of two fathoms, the leadsman calls out to
“mark twain!” In 1865 he went to San Francisco,
and was for five months a reporter on the “Morning
Call,” then tried gold-mining in the placers
of Calaveras county, and, having no success,
returned to San Francisco and resumed newspaper
work. He spent six months in the Hawaiian islands
in 1866. After his
return he delivered
humorous lectures
in California and
Nevada, and then
returned to the
east and published
“The Jumping
Frog, and other
Sketches” (New
York, 1867). The
same year he went
with a party of
tourists to the
Mediterranean, Egypt,
and Palestine, and
on his return
published an amusing
journal of the
excursion, entitled
“The Innocents
Abroad” (Hartford,
1869), of
which 125,000 copies were sold in three years.
He next edited the Buffalo, N. Y., “Express.”
After his marriage he settled in Hartford, Conn.
He delivered witty lectures in various cities,
contributed sketches to the “Galaxy” and other
magazines, and in 1872 went to England on a lecturing
trip. While he was there, a London
publisher issued an unauthorized collection of his
writings in four volumes, in which were included
papers attributed to him that he never wrote. The
same year appeared in Hartford, Conn., “Roughing
It,” containing sketches of Nevada, Utah,
California, and the Sandwich islands; and in 1873,
in conjunction with Charles Dudley Warner, a
story entitled “The Gilded Age,” which was dramatized
and produced in New York in 1874. This
comedy, with John T. Raymond in the leading
part, Col. Mulberry Sellers, had an extraordinary
success. Mr. Clemens subsequently published
“Sketches, Old and New”; “Adventures of Tom
Sawyer,” a story of boy-life in Missouri (1876);
“Punch, Brothers, Punch” (1878); “A Tramp
Abroad” (Hartford, 1880); “The Stolen White
Elephant” (Boston, 1882); “The Prince and the 
​
Pauper" (1882); and "Life on the Mississippi" (1883). In 1884 he established in New York the publishing-house of C. L. Webster & Co., which issued in 1885 a new story entitled "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," a sequel to "Tom Sawyer," and brought out in that and the following year Gen. U. S. Grant's "Memoirs," the share in the
profits accruing to Mrs. Grant from which publication, under a contract signed with Gen. Grant before his death, amounted, in October, 1886, to $350,000, which was paid to her in two checks, of $200,000 and $150,000. Mark Twain's works have been republished in England, and translations of the principal ones in Germany.
