For other versions of this work, see 
The Encyclopedia Americana
.

SCHOOL OF ATHENS

The fresco of “Philosophy” in the Camera della Segnatura, Vatican Palace, Rome.
Height to arched top 16 feet; width 26 feet 8 inches

This splendid fresco was painted by Raphael in 1511 to represent the “Triumph of Science,” as
a companion painting to the Dispute of the Sacrament, representing the “Triumph of Religion.”
Philosophy, implying an encyclopedic knowledge of the whole sphere of scientific learning and
intellectual culture, is here symbolised. A vast portico is pictured, the arches of which are pierced
with statue-filled niches; the facing statues are Apollo and Minerva. The central figures are
Plato and Aristotle. Grouped about them are all the philosophers, sages, and elders of antiquity
discussing the problem of life. Diogenes is prone on the steps; Aristippus passes him talking to
Protagoras; to the left, on the steps, Alcibiades, Xenophon and others are listening to Socrates.
Below them are Pythagoras, with his wife Theano, his son Telauges, and his pupil Archytas;
Anaxagoras is standing; Heraclitus sits alone, Democritus and Epicurus at the base of the pillar.
To the right, on the steps are Pyrrho, Arcesilaus and others; below them Archimedes (a portrait of
Bramante) teaches geometry, and Ptolemy and Zoroaster stand beside Raphael, Il Sodoma, and
Perugino. Vasari says the fresco represents the union of Theology and Philosophy through
Astronomy, and points out Saint Matthew as Pythagoras. It has also been said to represent Saint
Paul preaching at Athena, and in 1560 Giorgio Mantovano engraved it as Saint Paul disputing with
the Stoics and Epicureans.

Volumes

Preface

I: A - Annuals

II: Annuity - Azzubeydi

III: B - Bird's foot

IV: Birds of Paradise - Bulfinch

V: Bulgaria - Castaños

VI: Caste - Civil law

VII: Civil list - Coronium

VIII: Corot - Deseronto

IX: Desert - Egre

X: Egusquiza - Falsetto

XI: Falstaff - Francken

XII: Franco - Goethals

XIII: Goethe - Haw

XIV: Hawaii - Index of refraction

XV: India - Jeffers

XVI: Jefferson - Latin

XVII: Latin America - Lytton

XVIII: M - Mexico

XIX: Meyer - Naval Academy

XX: Naval Observatory - Orleans

XXI: Orley - Photoengraving

XXII: Photography - Pumpkin

XXIII: Pumps - Russellville

XXIV: Russia - Silius

XXV: Silk - Sulphovinic Acid

XXVI: Sulphur - Tramways

XXVII: Trance - Venial sin

XXVIII: Venice - Wasmann

XXIX: Wasps - Zymotic disease

XXX: Classified Index

This work is in the 
public domain
 in the 
United States
 because it was published before January 1, 1931.

This work may be in the 
public domain
 in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the 
rule of the shorter term
 to 
foreign works
.

Public domain
Public domain
false
false
