CLEMENS, Samuel Langhorne
 (
Mark Twain
),
an American humorist, born at Florida, Monroe
co., Missouri, Nov. 30, 1835. He attended
a common school until 13 years of age, when
he became an apprentice in the printing office
of the “Courier” at Hannibal, Mo., and afterward
worked at his trade in St. Louis, Cincinnati,
Philadelphia, and New York. In 1855 he
went to New Orleans, intending to take
passage for Pará, to explore the Amazon, and to
engage in the cacao trade; but the fact that
there was no ship from New Orleans to Pará
prevented the fulfilment of his plan. On his
way down the Mississippi he had made friends
with the pilots, and learned to steer the boat,
and for the consideration of $500 they engaged
to make him a St. Louis and New Orleans
pilot. He went up and down the river steering
and studying the 1,275 miles of the route,
and after a time received his license, and
secured a situation as a pilot at $250 a month.
In 1861 his brother was appointed secretary of
the territory of Nevada, and Samuel accompanied
him as his private secretary. He
worked in the mines for about a year, and
says in his “Roughing It” that he was really
worth a million dollars for just 10 days, and
lost it through his own heedlessness. He then
shovelled quartz in a silver mill for $10 a
week, for one week only. In the mean time
he had written occasional letters to the
Virginia City “Enterprise,” and in the winter of
1862 he became city editor of that journal,
and held the position for three years. Part of
the time he reported legislative proceedings
from Carson, summing up results in weekly
letters to the “Enterprise,” which he signed
“Mark Twain.” The name was a reminiscence
of his steamboat days on the Mississippi, where
it is the leadman's term to signify a depth of
two fathoms of water. From Virginia City he
went to San Francisco, and for five months
was a reporter for the “Morning Call”
newspaper. He then went to Calaveras county,
and worked in the surface gold diggings for
three months without result. Returning to
San Francisco, he supported himself by
newspaper work for several months. In 1866 he
went to the Hawaiian Islands, remaining six
months, and coming back with a high reputation,
which he turned to account as a lecturer
in San Francisco and through California and
Nevada. He then went to the east and
published “The Jumping Frog and other Sketches”
(New York, 1867), which was republished
in London. In the same year he embarked
with a large party of travellers in the steamer
Quaker City on a pleasure excursion up the
Mediterranean to Egypt and the Holy Land.
Of this excursion he gave a humorous account
in “The Innocents Abroad” (8vo, Hartford,
1869), of which 125,000 copies were sold in
three years. He was for some time editor of
a daily newspaper in Buffalo, but afterward
resumed lecturing, and visited England in 1872
and 1873. His residence is at Hartford. In
1872 he published “Roughing It” (8vo,
Hartford), which reached a sale of 91,000 copies in
nine months. A London publisher has
gathered all his sketches, many of which have not
been collected in America (adding, however,
many papers not written by Mark Twain), and
has issued them in 4 vols. “Roughing It” and
“The Innocents Abroad” have also been
republished in London. Editions of all his works,
in English and German, are now (1873) in
course of publication in Leipsic.
