Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



//•/ 




THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 




SELLERS INTRODUCES RALLY TO 
LORD BERKELEY 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

AND 

OTHER STORIES AND SKETCHES 



BY 

MARK TWAIN 



QJentCfi^^ 6iirif\vie/ A/^ h^ \i c rnC 



ILLUSTRATED 




HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS 

NEW YORK AND LONDON 



Books bt 
MARK TWAIN 

8T. JOAN OF ARC 

THE INNOCENTS ABROAD 

ROOGHING IT 

THE GILDED AGE 

A TRAMP ABROAD 

FOLLOWING THE EQUATOR 

PUDD'NHEAD WILSON 

SKETCHES NEW AND OLD 

THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 

A CONNECTICUT YANKEE AT THE COURT OP 

KING ARTHUR 
THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN 
PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS OF JOAN OF ARC 
LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI 
THE MAN THAT CORRUPTED HADLEYBURO 
THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER 
THE $30,000 BEQUEST 
THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYES 
TOM SAWYER ABROAD 
WHAT IS MAN? 
THE MYSTERIOUS STRANGER 

ADAM'S DIARY 

A DOG'S TALE 

A DOUBLE-BARRELED DETECTIVE STORY 

EDITORIAL WILD OATS 

EVE'S DIARY 

IN DEFENSE OF HARRIET SHELLEY AND 

OTHER ESSAYS 
IS SHAKESPEARE DEAD? 
CAPT. STORMFIELD'S VISIT TO HEAVEN 
A HORSE'S TALE 
THE JUMPING FROG 
THE £1^)00,000 BANK-NOXB 
O^AS^IP AT HOME 
T^VJM IN HISTORY 

MARK TWAIN'S LETTERB 
MARK TWAIN'S SPEECHES 



HARPER A BROTHERS, NEW TORS 
{jBnAMuammo 1817] 

Ths Ambucan Claimant 

Copyright, 189a. by Sam uel L, Clemens 

Copyright, 1892. by Charle s L. Webster 8c Co. 

Copyright. 1893. by Sam uel L. Clemens 

Copyright, 1896 and 1 899. by Harper & Brothers 

Oopyxlght, 1917. by Mark Twaik Comjiaiw 

Printed in the United Statee of America 

L-v 






CONTENTS 

PA6S 

The American Claimant i 

MERRY TALES 

The Private History of a Campaign that Failed . . 255 

Luck 283 

A Curious Experience 290 

Mrs. McWilliams and the Lightning 330 

Meisterschaft: In Three Acts 341 

Playing Courier 376 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

Sally Introduced to Lord Berkeley FronHspiece 

"And I AS Usurper — a Nameless Pauper, a Tramp" Pacing p. 4 
Finally There Was a Quiet Wedding at the 

Towers •' 246 

*'What Is the Matter Here?" ** 338 



EXPLANATORY 

Thb Colonel Mulberry Sellers here reintroduced 
to the public is the same person who appeared as 
Eschol Sellers in the first edition of the tale entitled 
The Gilded Age, years ago, and as Beriah Sellers in 
the subsequent editions of the same book, and final- 
ly as Mulberry Sellers in the drama played afterward 
by John T. Raymond. 

The name was changed from Eschol to Beriah .to 
accommodate an Eschcd Sellers who rose up out of 
the vasty deeps of imcharted space and preferred 
his request — ^backed by threat of a libel suit — ^then 
went his way appeased, and came no more. In the 
play Beriah had to be dropped to satisfy another 
member of the race, and Mulberry was substituted 
in the hope that the objectors would be tired by 
that time and let it pass unchallenged. So far it 
has occupied the field in peace ; therefore we chance 
it again, feeling reasonably safe, this time, under 
shelter of the statute of limitations. 

Mark Twain. 

Hartford, 1891. 



THE WEATHER IN THIS BOOK 

No weather will be found in this book. This is an 
attempt to pull a book through without weather. It 
being the first attempt of the kind in fictitious litera- 
ture, it may prove a failure, but it seemed worth the 
while of some dare-devil person to try it, and the 
author was in just the mood. 

Many a reader who wanted to read a tale through 
was not able to do it because of delays on account of 
the weather. Nothing breaks up an author's progress 
like having to stop every few pages to fuss-up the 
weather. Thus it is plain that persistent intrusions 
of weather are bad for both reader and author. 

Of course weather is necessary to a narrative of 
human experience. That is conceded. But it ought 
to be put where it will not be in the way; where it will 
not interrupt the flow of the narrative. And it ought 
to be the ablest weather that can be had, not igno- 
rant, poor-quality, amateur weather. Weather is a 
literary specialty, and no tmtrained hand can turn 
out a good article of it. The present author can do 
only a few trifling ordinary kinds of weather, and 
he cannot do those very good. So it has seemed 
wisest to borrow such weather as is necessary for 
the book from qualified and recognized experts — 
giving credit, of course. This weather will be foimd 
over in the back part of the book, out of the way. 
See Appendix. The reader is requested to turn 
over and help himself from time to time as he goes 
along. 



EXPLANATORY 

Thb Colonel Mtilberry Sellers here redntroducecl 
to the public is the same person who appeared as 
Eschol Sellers in the first edition of the tale entitled 
The Gilded Age, years ago, and as Beriah Sellers in 
the subsequent editions of the same book, and final- 
ly as Mulberry Sellers in the drama played afterward 
by John T. Raymond. 

The name was changed from Eschol to Beriah to 
accommodate an Eschol Sellers who rose up out d[ 
the vasty deeps of tmcharted space and preferred 
his request — backed by threat of a libel suit — ^then 
went his way appeased, and came no more. In the 
play Beriah had to be dropped to satisfy another 
member of the race, and Mulberry was substituted 
in the hope that the objectors would be tired by 
that time and let it pass unchallenged. So far it 
has occupied the field in peace; therefore we chance 
it agaia, feeling reasonably safe, this time, under 
shelter of the statute of limitations. 

Mark Twain. 

Hastfobo, 1891. 



THE WEATHER IN THIS BOOK 

No weather will be foand in this book. This is an 
atte mp t to poll a book throng^ without weather. It 
being the first attenq>t of the land in fictitioas Htraa- 
tore, it majr prove afaihxre, but it seesned worth the 
while of some dare-devil person to try it, and the 
author was in just the mood. 

Many a reader who wanted to lead a tale throns^ 
was not able to do it becanse of delays on accomxt of 
the weather. Nothing breaks up an author's progr^s 
Kke having to stop every few pages to fus5-ig> the 
weather. Thus it is plain that persistent intrusioos 
ci weather are bad ior both reader and author. 

Of course weather is ncyessary to a narrative of 
httman experience. Hiat is conceded. But it Ofu^st 
tobeput whea^it willnotbein theway; where it will 
not interrupt the flow of the narrative. And it Ofu^st 
to be the ablest weather that can be had, iK>t igno- 
rant, ixx>r-quality, amateur weatha-. Weather is a 
literary ^^edalty, and no untrained hand can turn 
out a good artide erf it. The }>resent author can do 
only a few trifling ordinary kinds of weather, and 
he cannot do those very good. So it has seemed 
wisest to borrow sudi weather as is necessary for 
the bode from qualified and recognized experts — 



giving credit, erf course. This weather will be found 
over in the back part erf the book, out of the way. 
See Appendix. The readra- is requested to turn 
over and help himsdf from tin>e to time as he goes 



THE 

AMERICAN CLAIMANT 



CHAPTER I 

IT is a matchless morning in rural England. On a 
fair hill we see a majestic pile, the ivied walls and 
towers of Cholmonddey Castle, huge relic and wit- 
ness of the baronial grandexirs of the Middle Ages. 
This is one of the seats of the Earl of Rossmore, 
K.G., G.C.B., K.C.M.G., etc., etc., etc., etc., etc., 
who possesses twenty-two thousand acres of English 
land, owns a parish in London with two thousand 
houses on its lease-roll, and struggles comfortably 
along on an income of two hundred thousand pounds 
a year. The father and foimder of this proud old 
line was William the Conqueror his very self; the 
mother of it was not inventoried in history by name, 
she being merely a random episode and inconsequen- 
tial, like the tanner's daughter of Falaise. 

In a breakfast-room of the castle on this breezy 
fine morning there are two persons and the cooling 
remains of a deserted meal. One of these persons is 
the old lord, tall, erect, square-shouldered, white- 
haired, stem-browed, a man who shows character 



MARK TWAIN 

in every feature, attitude, and movement, and carries 
his seventy years as easily as most men carry fifty. 
The other person is his only son and heir, a dreamy- 
eyed yoimg fellow, who looks about twenty-six but 
is nearer thirty. Candor, kindliness, honesty, sin- 
cerity, simplicity, modesty — ^it is easy to see that 
these are cardinal traits of his character; and so 
when you have clothed him in the formidable com- 
ponents of his name, you somehow seem to be con- 
templating a lamb in armor; his name and style 
being the Honorable Kirkcudbright Llanover Mar- 
joribanks Sellers Viscount Berkeley of Cholmondeley 
Castle, Warwickshire. (Pronoimced K'koobry Thla- 
nover Marshbanks Sellers Vycoimt Barkly of Chum- 
ly Castle, Warrikshr.) He is standing by a great 
window, in an attitude suggestive of respectful atten- 
tion to what his father is sajdng and equally respect- 
ful dissent from the positions and arguments offered. 
The father walks the floor as he talks, and his talk 
shows that his temper is away up toward summer 
heat. 

*' Soft-spirited as you are, Berkeley, I am quite 
aware that when you have once made up yoiu: mind 
to do a thing which your ideas of honor and justice 
require you to do, argiunent and reason are (for the 
time being) wasted upon you — yes, and ridicule, 
persuasion, supplication, and command as well. To 
mymind — " 

*' Father, if you will look at it without prejudice, 
without passion, you must concede that I am not 
doing a rash thing, a thoughtless, wilful thing, with 
nothing substantial behind it to justify it. I did not 



THE AMERICAN CI/AIMANT 

cr^te the American daimant to the eoxldom of 
Rossmore; I did not hunt for him, did not find him, 
did not obtrude him upon your notice. He founji 
himself, he injected himself into our lives—'* 

"And has made mine a purgatory for ten years 
with his tiresome letters, his wordy reascmings, his 
acres of tedious evidence-^" 

"Which you would never read; would never con- 
sent to read Yet in common fairness he was entitled 
to a hearings That hearing would either prove he 
was the right^f ul earl — ^in which case our cotirse would 
be plain — or it would prove that he wasn't — in which 
case our course would be equally plain. I h^ve read 
his evidences, my lord. I have conned them well^ 
studied} them patiently and thcMTOughly, The chain 
seems tp be complete, no impoi:tant link wanting^ 
I believe he is the rightful earl."' 

"And I a usurper-^-a nameless pauper, a tramp! 
Consider what you are saying, sir." 

"Father,^ if he is the rightftd earl, would you, could 
you — ^tja^'t f^ being established — consent to keep 
his titles and his propei^t^ from him a day, an hour, 
a minute?'* 

"You ar^ talking nons^se — nonsense — lurid 
idiocy! Now listaa to me. % will make a confession 
— ^if you wish to call it by tha^t na^e. I did not read 
those evidences because I had no occasion to — ^I was 
made familiar with them in the time of this claimant's 
father and of my own father forty years ago. This 
fellow's predecessors have kept mine more or less 
familiar with them for close upon a hundred and fifty 
yqa^. The truth is, the rightful heir did go to 

3 



MARK TWAIN 

America, with the Fairfax heir or about the same 
time — but disappeared somewhere in the wilds of 
Virginia, got married, and began to breed savages for 
the Claimant market; wrote no letters home; was 
supposed to be dead; his younger brother softly took 
Ix)ssession; presently the American did die, and 
straightway his eldest product put in his daim — by 
letter — letter still in existence — and died before the 
unde in possession found time — or maybe inclination 
— to answer. The infant son of that eldest product 
grew up — ^long interval, you see — and he took to 
writing letters and furnishing evidences. Well, suc- 
cessor after successor has done the same, down to the 
present idiot. It was a succession of paupers; not 
one of them was ever able to pay his passage to Eng- 
land or institute suit. The Fairfaxes kept their lord- 
ship alive, and so they have never lost it to this day, 
although they live in Maryland; their friend lost his 
by his own neglect. You perceive now that the facts 
in this case bring us to predsely this result : morally 
the American tramp is rightful earl of Rossmore; 
legally he has no more right than his dog. There 
now — are you satisfied?'* 

There was a pause; then the son glanced at the 
crest carved in the great oaken mantd, and said, with 
a regretful note in his voice : 

*' Since the introduction of heraldic symbols, the 
motto of this house has been Suum cuique — ^to every 
man his own. By your own intrepidly frank con- 
fession, my lord, it is become a sarcasm. If Simon 
Lathers — " 

"Keep that exasperating name to yourself! For 

4 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

ten years it has pestered my eye and tortured my 
ear; till at last my very footfalls time themselves to 
the brain-racking rhjrthm of Simon Lathers I — Simon 
Lathers! — Simon Lathers! And now, to make its 
presence in my soul eternal, immortal, imperishable, 
you have resolved to — ^to — ^what is it you have re- 
solved to do?*' 

"To go to Simon Lathers in America and change 
places with him." 

' ' What ? Deliver the reversion of the earldom into 
his hands?" 

"That is my purpose." 

"Make this tremendous sturender without even 
trying the fantastic case in the Lords?" 

"Ye-s — " with hesitation and some embarrass- 
ment. 

* * By all that is amazing, I believe you are insane, 
my son. See here — ^have you been training with that 
ass again — ^that radical, if you prefer the term, 
though the words are synonymous — Lord Tanzy of 
Tollmache?" 

The son did not reply, and the old lord continued : 

"Yes, you confess. That puppy, that shame to 
his birth and caste, who holds all hereditary lordships 
and privile|3[e to be usurpation, all nobility a tinsel 
sham, all aristocratic institutions a fraud, all ine- 
qualities in rank a legalized crime and an infamy, and 
no bread honest bread that a man doesn't earn by 
his own work — work, pah!" — and the old patrician 
brushed imaginary labor-dirt from his white hands. 
"You have come to hold just those opinions yourself, 
I suppose," he added, with a sneer. 

5 



MARK TWAIN 

A faint flush in the yoting man's c^eek tdd thai tbe 
shot had hit and hurt, but he answered with dignity: 

''I have. I say it without shame — ^I feel nooe. 
And now nry reason for resolving to renounce my 
heirship without resistance is explained. I wish to 
retire from what to me is a false existence» a f atee 
position, and begin my life over again — begin it li^aJk 
— begin it on the level of nxere manhood, unassisted 
by factitious aids, and succeed or fail by pure meiit 
or the want of it* I will go to America, where all 
men are equal and all have an equal chance; I wilt 
live or die, sink or swim, win or lose as just a man — 
that alone, and not a single helping gaud or fiction 
back of it." 

''Hear, hearr' The two men looked eadd other 
steadily in the ^e a moment or two; then the elder 
one added, musingly, "Ab-so-lutely cra-zy — ab-so- 
Kitelyl'' After another silence, he said, as one who* 
Umg troubled by douds,^ detects a ray of sunshine^ 
'' Wdil, there will be one satisfaction — Simon Lathers 
will come here to enter into his own, and I will drown 
him in the horse-pond. The poor devil — always so 
humble in his letters, so pitiful* so deferential; so 
stepped in reverence for our great Une and lofty 
station; so anxious to placate, us, so prayerful for 
recognition as a relative, a bearer in his veins of our 
sacred blood — and withal so poor, so needy, so 
threadbare and paux)er-shod as to rainaent, so de- 
spised, so laughed at for his silly daimantship by the 
lewd American scum around him — adi, the vulgar, 
crawling, insufferable tramp! To read one of his 
cringing, nauseating letters — Well?" 

6 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

This to a splendid flunky, all in inflamed plush and 
buttons and knee-breeches as to his trunk, and a 
glinting white frost-work of ground-glass paste as to 
his head, who stood with his heels together and the 
upper half of him bent forward, a salver in his hands. 

"The letters, my lord." 

My lord took them, and the servant disappeared. 

"Among the rest, an American letter. From the 
tramp, of course. Jove, but here's a change! No 
brown-paper envelope this time, filched from a shop 
and carrying the shop's advertisement in the comer. 
Oh no; a proper enough envelope — with a most 
ostentatiously broad mourning border — ^for his cat, 
perhaps, since he was a bachelor — and fastened with 
red wax — sl batch of it as big as a half-crown— and 
— and — our crest for a seal)-— motto and all. And 
the ignorant, sprawling hand is gone; he sports a 
secretary, evidently — a secretary with a most confi- 
dent swing and flourish to his pen. Oh, indeed, our 
fortunes are improving over there — our meek tramp 
has undergone a metamorphosis.'* 

"Read it, my lord, please." 

"Yes, this time I will. For the sake of the cat: 

14,042 Sixteenth Street, 
Washington, May 2. 
My Lord — 

It is my painful duty to announce to you that the head of 
our illustrious house is no more — ^The Right Honorable, The 
Most Noble, The Most Puissant Simon Lathers Lord Rossmore 
having departed this life ("Gone at last — ^this is unspeakably 
precious news, my son ") at his seat in the environs of the hamlet 
of Duffy's Comers in the grand old State of Arkansas— and his 
twin brother with him, both being crushed by a log at a smoke- 

7 



MARK TWAIN 

house raising, owing to carelessness on the part of all present, 
referable to over-confidence and gaiety induced by overplus of 
sour-mash — ("Extolled be sour-mash, whatever that may be, 
eh, Berkeley?") five days ago, with no scion of our ancient race 
present to close his eyes and inter him with the honors due his 
historic name and lofty rank — in fact, he is on the ice yet, him 
and his brother — ^friends took up a collection for it. But I 
shall take immediate occasion to have their noble remains 
shipped to you ("Great heavens I") for interment,[with due cere- 
monies and solemnities, in the family vault or mausoleum of our 
house. Meantime I shall put up a pair of hatchments on my 
house-front, and you will of course do the same at your several 
seats. 

I have also to remind you that by this sad disaster I, as sole 
heir, inherit and become seized of all the titles, honors, lands, 
and goods of our lamented relative, and must of necessity, 
painful as the duty is, shortly require at the bar of the Lords 
restitution of these dignities and properties now illegally enjoyed 
by your titular lordship. 

With assurance of my distinguished consideration and warm 
cousinly regard, I remain 

Your titular lordship's 

Most obedient servant, 

Mulberry Sellers Earl Rossmore. 

"Im-mense! Come, this one's Interesting. Why, 
Berkeley, his breezy impudence is — ^is — why, it's 
colossal, it's sublime." 
"No, this one doesn't seem to cringe much." 
"Cringe — ^why, he doesn't know the meaning of 
the word. Hatchments I To commemorate that 
sniveling tramp and his fraternal duplicate. And he 
is going to send me the remains. The late Claimant 
was a fool, but plainly this new one's a maniac. 
What a name! Mulberry Sellers — ^there's music for 
you. Simon Lathers — Mulberry Sellers — Mulberry 
Sellers — Simon Lathers. Soimds like machinery 

8 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

working and churning. Simon Lathers, Mulberry 
Sd — Are you going?" 

"If I have yotu- leave, father." 

The old gentleman stood musing some time after 
his son was gone. This was his thought : 

"He is a good boy, and lovable. Let him take his 
own course — as it would profit nothing to oppose him 
—make things worse, in fact. My arguments and 
his atmt's persuasions have failed; let us see what 
America can do for us. Let us see what equality and 
hard times can effect for the mental health of a brain- 
sick young British lord. Going to renounce his lord- 
ship and be a man! YasT' 



CHAPTER II 

COLONEL MULBERRY SELLERS— this was 
some days before he wrote his letter to Lord 
Rossmore — ^was seated in his "library," which was 
also his *' drawing-room," and was also his "picture- 
gallery," and likewise his "workshop." Sometimes 
he called it by one of these names, sometimes by 
another, according to occasion and circtimstance. He 
was constructing what seemed to be some kind of a 
frail mechanical toy, and was apparently very much 
interested in his work. He was a white-headed man 
now, but otherwise he was as young, alert, buoyant, 
visionary, and enterprising as ever. His loving old 
wife sat near by, contentedly knitting and thinking, 
with a cat asleep in her lap. The room was large, 
light, and had a comfortable look, in fact, a homelike 
look, though the furniture was of a humble sort and 
not over-abimdant, and the knickknacks and things 
that go to adorn a living-room not plenty and not 
costly. But there were natxiral flowers, and there 
was an abstract and imdassifiable something about 
the place which betrayed the piasence in the house of 
somebody with a happy taste and an effective touch. 
Even the deadly chromos on the walls were some- 
how without ofifense; in fact, they seemed to belong 
there and to add an attraction to the room — a fasd- 

lO 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 



nation, anyway; for whoever gqt his eye oa oat of 
them was like to gaze and suffer till he di e d y ou 
have seen that kind of pictores. Some of tiieK ter- 
rors were landscapes, and some fibded tiie sea, some 
were ostensible portraits, all were crimes. All the 
portraits were recognizaUe as dead Americans of dis- 
tinction, and yet, through lahdiiig added bjr a daring 
hand, they were all doing duty here as ''Earis of 
Rossmore.'^ The newest one had kft the works as 
Andrew Jackson, but was doing its best now as 
''Simon Lathers Lord Rossmore, Present EaxL'' On 
one wall was a cheap cAA railroad map of Warwick- 
shire. This had been newly labded ""The Rossmore 
Estates." On the opposite wall was another map, 
and this was the most impowng decoratiofi of the 
establishment and the first to catch a stxangier's 
attrition, because of its great size. It had once 
borne simply the title Sibbria: but now the wofd 
''Puturb" had been written in front of that word. 
There were other additions in red ink — many dtaes, 
with great populations set down, scattered over the 
vast cotmtry at points where neither cities nor 
populations exist to-day. One of these cities, with 
population placed at 1,500,000, bore the name 
* ' Libertyorloff skoizalinski , ' ' and there was a still 
more populous one, centrally located and mariced 
"Capital," which bore the name "Freedomolov- 
naivanovich.'' 

The '^mansion" — the Colonel's usual name for the 
house — ^was a rickety old two-story frame of consid- 
erable size, which had been painted, some time or 
other, but had nearly forgotten it. It was away out 

II 



MARK TWAIN 

in the ragged edge of Washington, and had once been 
somebody's country place. It had a neglected yard 
around it, with paling fence that needed straighten- 
ing up in places, and a gate that would stay shut. 
By the door-post were several modest tin signs. 
"Col. Mulberry Sellers, Attorney at Law and Claim 
Agent," was the principal one. One learned from the 
others that the Colonel was a Materializer, a Hypno- 
tizer, a Mind-Cxire dabbler, and so on. For he was 
a man who could always find things to do. 

A white-headed negro man, with spectacles and 
damaged white-cotton gloves, appeared in the pres- 
ence, made a stately obeisance, and annoimced: 

**Marse Washington Hawkins, suh.*' 

*' Great Scott! Show him in Dan'l, show him in.*' 

The Colonel and his wife were on their feet in a 
moment, and the next moment were 5o3rfully wringing 
the hands of a stoutish, discouraged-looking man 
whose general aspect suggested that he was fifty 
years old, but whose hair swore to a hundred. 

"Well, well, well, Washington, my boy, it is good 
to look at you again. Sit down, sit down, and make 
yourself at home. There, now — ^why, you look per- 
fectly natural; aging a little, just a little, but you'd 
have known him anywhere, wouldn't you, Polly?" 

"Oh yes. Berry, he's just like his pa would have 
looked if he'd Uved. Dear, dear, where have you 
dropped from? Let me see, how long is it since — " 

"I should say it's all of fifteen years, Mrs. Sel- 
lers." 

"Weil, well, how time does get away with us. Yes, 
and oh, the changes that — " 

12 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

There was a sudden catch of her voice and a trem- 
bling of the lip, the men waiting reverently for her to 
get command of herself and go on; but after a little 
struggle she turned away, with her apron to her eyes, 
and softly disappeared. 

"Seeing you made her think of the children, poor 
thing — dear, dear, they're all dead but the youngest. 
But banish care, it's no time for it now — on with the 
dance, let joy be unconfined is my motto, whether 
there's any dance to dance, or any joy to imconfine — 
you'll be the healthier for it every time — every time, 
Washington — ^it's my experience, and I've seen a 
good deal of this world. Come — ^where have you 
disappeared to all these years, and are you from there 
now, or where are you from?" 

"I don't quite think you would ever guess. Colonel. 
Cherokee Strip." 

'*Myland!" 

**Sure as you live." 

'*You can't mean it. Actually living out there?" 

**Well, yes, if a body may call it that; though it's 
a pretty strong term for 'dobies and jackass rab- 
bits, boiled beans and slapjacks, depression, withered 
hopes, poverty in all its varieties — " 

* * Louise out there ?" 

"Yes, and the children." 

"Out there now?" 
Yes, I couldn't afford to bring them with me." 
Oh, I see; you had to come — claim against the 
government. Make yourself perfectly easy — I'll take 
care of that." 

"But it isn't a claim against the government." 

13 



It 



MARK TWAIN 

"No? Want to be postmaster? That^s all ri^^t. 
Leave it to me. I'll fix it." 
"But it isn't postmaster — ^you're all astray yet/* 
"Well, good gradous, Washington, why don't you 
come out and tell me what it is? What do you want 
to be so reserved and distrustful with an old 
friend like me for? Don't you reckon I can keep 
a- " 



"There's no secret about it — you merely don't give 
me a chance to — ** 

"Now look here, old friend, I know the human 
race; and I know that when a man comes to Wash- 
ington, I don't care if it's from heaven, let alone 
Cherokee Strip, it's because he wants something. 
And I know that as a rule he's not going to get it; 
that he'll stay and try for another thing and won't 
get that; the same luck with the next and the next 
and the next; and keeps on till he strikes bottom, 
and is too poor and ashamed to go back, even to 
Cherokee Strip ; and at last his heart breaks and they 
take up a collection and btuy him. There — don't 
interrupt me, I know what I'm talking about. Happy 
and prosperous in the Far West, wasn't I? You 
know that. Principal citizen of Hawkeye, looked up 
to by everybody, kind of an autocrat — actually a 
kind of an autocrat, Washington. Well, nothing 
would do but I must go Minister to St. James, the 
Governor and everybody insisting, you know, and so 
at last I consented — no getting out of it, had to do it, 
so here I came. A day too late, Washington. Think 
of that — ^what little things change the world's history 
— ^yes, ar, the place had been filled. Well, there I 

14 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

was, you see. I oEfered to compromise and go to 
P^ The President was very sorry and all that, 
but that iJace, you see, didn't belong to the West, 
so there I was again. There was no help for it, so 
I had to stoop a little — ^we all reach the day some 
time or other when we've got to do that,Washington, 
and it's not a bad thing for us, either, take it by and 
large and all arotmd — ^I had to stoop a little and offer 
to take Constantinople. Washington, consider this — 
for it's perfectly true — ^within a month I asked for 
China; within another month I begged for Japan ; one 
year later I was away down, down, down, supplicat- 
ing with tears and anguish for the bottom office in the 
gift of the Government of the United States — Plint- 
Hcker in the cellars of the War Department. And, 
by George, I didn't get it!*' 

"Plint-Picker?" 

"Yes. Office established in the time of the Revolu- 
tion, last century. The musket-flints for the military 
posts were suppUed from the capital. They do it yet ; 
for although the flint-arm has gone out and the forts 
have tumbled down, the decree hasn't been repealed 
—been overlooked and forgotten, you see — ^and so 
the vacancies where old Ticonderoga and others used 
to stand still get their six quarts of gim-flints a year 
just the same." 

Washington said, musingly, after a pause: 

"How strange it seems — to start for Minister to 
England at twenty thousand a year and fail for Flint- 
Picker at—" 

"Three dollars a week. It's human life, Washing- 
ton—just an epitome of human ambition, and strug- 

2 IS 



MARK TWAIN 

gle, and the outcome ; you aim for the palace and get 
drowned in the sewer." 

There was another meditative silence. Then 
Washington said, with earnest compassion in his 
voice: 

"And so, after coming here, against your inclina- 
tion, to satisfy yotu- sense of patriotic duty and ap- 
pease a selfish public clamor, you get absolutely noth- 
ing for it." 

* * Nothing ?" The Colonel had to get up and stand 
to get room for his amazement to expand. '* Nothings 
Washington? I ask you this: to be a Perpetual 
Member and the only Perpetual Member of a Diplo- 
matic Body accredited to the greatest coimtry on 
earth — do you call that nothing?" 

It was Washington's turn to be amazed. He was 
stricken dumb ; but the wide-eyed wonder, the rever- 
ent admiration expressed in his face were more elo- 
quent than any words could have been. The Colonel's 
wounded spirit was healed, and he resumed his seat 
pleased and content. He leaned forward and said, 
impressively : 

**What was due to a man who had become forever 
conspicuous by an experience without precedent in 
the history of the world ? — a, man made permanently 
and diplomatically sacred, so to speak, by having 
been connected, temporarily, through solicitation, 
with every single diplomatic post in the roster of this 
government, from Envoy Extraordinary and Minister 
Plenipotentiary to the Court of St. James, all the 
way down to Consul to a guano rock in the Strait of 
Simda — salary payable in guano — ^which disappeared 

16 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

by volcanic convulsion the day before they got down 
to my name in the list of applicants. Certainly 
something august enough to be answerable to the size 
of this unique and memorable experience was my 
due^ and I got it. By the common voice of this com- 
mimity, by acclamation of the people^ that mighty 
utterance which brushes aside laws and legislation, 
and from whose decrees there is no appeal, I was 
named Perpetual Member of the Diplomatic Body 
representing the multifarious sovereignties and civili- 
zations of the globe near the republican cotirt of the 
United States of America. And they brought me 
home with a torchlight procession." 

"It is wonderftd. Colonel, simply wonderftd." 

"It's the loftiest oflSdal position in the whole 
earth.'* 

"I should think so — and the most commanding." 

"You have named the word. Think of it. I frown, 
and there is war; I smile, and contending nations lay 
down their arms." 

It is awful. The responsibility, I mean." 
It is nothing. Responsibility is no burden to me; 
I am used to it; have always been used to it." 

"And the work— the work! Do you have to at- 
tend all the sittings?" 

"Who, I ? Does the Emperor of Russia attend the 
conclaves of the governors of the provinces? He sits 
at home and indicates his pleasure." 

Washington was silent a moment, then a deep sigh 
escaped him. 

"How proud I was an hour ago; how paltry seems 
my little promotion now ! Colonel, the reason I came 

17 






MARK TWAIN 

to Washington is — ^I am Congressional Delegate from 
Cherokee Strip!'' 

The Colonel sprang to his feet, and broke cut, 
with prodigious enthusiasm: 

"Give me your hand, my boy — ^this is immense 
news! I congrattilate you with all my heart. My 
prophecies stand confirmed. I always said it was 
in you. I always said you were bom for high dis- 
tinction and would achieve it. You ask Polly if I 
didn't." 

l^ashington was dazed by this most tmexpected 
demonstration. 

"Why, Colonel, there's nothing to it. That littlfe, 
narrow, desolate, unpeopled, oblong streak of grass 
and gravel, lost in the remote wastes of the vast con- 
tinent — ^why, it's like representing a billiard-table — a 
discarded one." 

"Tut-tut, it's a great, it's a staving preferment, 
and just opulent with influence here." 

"Shucks, Colonel, I haven't even a vote." 

"That's nothing; you can make speeches." 

"No, I can't. The population's only two htm- 
dred— " 

"That's all right, that's all right—" 

"And they hadn't any right to elect me; we're not 
even a Territory, there's no Organic Act, the govern- 
ment hasn't any official knowledge of us whatever." 

"Never mind about that; I'll fix that. I'll rush 
the thing through; I'll get you organized in no 
time." 

"WVfl you, Colonel? — it's too good of you; but 
it's just your old sterling self, the same old ever- 

i8 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

faithful friend," and the grateful tears welled up in 
Washington's eyes. 

"It's just as good as done, my boy, just as good as 
done. Shake hands. We'll hitch teams together, 
you and I, and we'll make things htun!" 



CHAPTER III 

MRS. SELLERS returned now with her com- 
. posttre restored, and began to ask after 
Hawkins's wife, and about his children, and the 
number of them, and so on, and her examination of 
the witness resulted in a circtmistantial history of 
the family's ups and downs and driftings to and fro 
in the Far West during the previous fifteen years. 
There was a message now from out back, and Colonel 
Sellers went out there in answer to it. Hawkins took 
this opporttmity to ask how the world had been 
using the Colonel during the past half -generation. 

**0h, it's been using him just the same; it couldn't 
change its way of using him if it wanted to, for he 
wouldn't let it." 

'*I can easily believe that, Mrs, Sellers." 

"Yes, you see, he doesn't change, himself — ^not the 
least little bit in the world; he's always Mtilberry 
Sellers." 

"I can see that plain enough." 

'*Just the same old scheming, generous, good- 
hearted, moonshiny, hopeful, no-account failure he 
always was, and still everybody likes him just as 
well as if he was the shiningest success." 

''They always did; and it was natural, because he 
was so obliging and accommodating, and had some- 

20 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

thing about him that made it kind of easy to ask 
help of him, or favors — ^you didn't feel shy, you 
know, or have that wish-you-didn't-have-to-try feel- 
ing that you have with other people." 

"It's just so yet; and a body wonders at it, too, 
because he's been shamefully treated, many times, 
by people that had tised him for a ladder to climb up 
by, and then kicked him down when they didn't need 
him any more. For a time you can see he's hurt, 
his pride's woimded, because he shrinks away from 
that thing and don't want to talk about it — ^and so 
I used to think now he's learned something and he'll 
be more careftd hereafter — but laws! in a couple of 
weeks he's forgotten all about it, and any selfish 
tramp out of nobody knows where can come and put 
up a poor mouth and walk right into his heart with 
his boots on." 

"It must try your patience pretty sharply some- 
times." 

"Oh no, I'm used to it; and I'd rather have him 
so than the other way. When I call him a failtu-e, 
I mean to the world he's a failure; he isn't to me. I 
don't know as I want him different — ^much different, 
anyway. I have to scold him some, snarl at him, 
you might even call it, but I reckon I'd do that just 
the same if he was different — ^it's my make. But 
I'm a good deal less snarly and more contented when 
he's a failtu-e than I am when he isn't." 

"Then he isn't always a failure," said Hawkins, 
brightening. 

"Him? Oh, bless you, no. He makes a strike, 
as he calls it, from time to time. Then's my time 

21 



MARK TWAIN 

to fret and fuss. For the money just flies — iirst 
come first served. Straight off, he loads up the 
house with cripples and idiots and stray cats and all 
the different kinds of poor wrecks that other people 
don't want and he does^ and then when the poverty 
comes again I've got to clear the most of them out 
or we'd starve; and that distresses him, and me the 
same, of course. Here's old Dan'l and old Jinny, 
that the sheriff sold South one of the times that we 
got bankrupted before the war — ^they came wander- 
ing back after the peace, worn out and used up on 
the cotton plantations, helpless, and not another lick 
of work left in their old hides for the rest of this 
earthly pilgrimage — and we so pinched, oh^ so 
pinched for the very crumbs to keep life in us, and 
he just flung the door wide, and the way he received 
them you'd have thought they had come straight 
down from heaven in answer to prayer. I took 
him one side and said, 'Mulberry, we can't have 
them — ^we've nothing for ourselves — ^we can't feed 
them.' He looked at me kind of htirt, and said, 
'Turn them out? — and they've come to me just 
as confident and trusting as — as — ^why, Polly, I must 
have bought that confidence some time or other 
a long time ago, and given my note, so to speak 
— ^you don't get such things as a gift — and how 
am I going to go back on a debt Uke that? And 
you see, they're so poor, and old, and friendless, 
and — ' But I was ashamed by that time, and shut 
him off, and somehow felt a new courage in me, and 
so I said, softly, 'We'll keep them — ^the Lord will 
provide,' He was glad, and started to blurt out onQ 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

erf those over-confident speeches of his, but checked 
himself in time, and said, htmibly, '/ will, anyway/ 
It was years and years and years ago. Well, you 
see those old wrecks are here yet.'* 

"But don't they do your housework?'* 

''Laws! The idea. They wotild if they cotild, 
poor old things, and perhaps they think they do do 
some of it. But it's a superstition. Dan'l waits on 
the- front door, and sometimes goes on an errand; 
and sometimes youll see one or both of them letting 
on to dust around in here — but that's because there's 
something they want to hear about and mix their 
gabble into. And they're always aroimd at meals, 
for the same reason. But the fact is, we have to 
keep a yotmg negro girl just to take care of them^ and 
a negro woman to do the housework and help take 
care of them." 

"Well, they ought to be tolerably happy, I should 
think." 

"It's no name for it. They quarrel together 
pretty much all the time — 'most always about re- 
ligion, because Dan'l's a Dunker Baptist and Jinny's 
a shouting Methodist, and Jinny believes in special 
Providences and Dan'l don't, because he thinks he's 
a kind of a free-thinker — and they play and sing 
plantation hymns together, and talk and chatter just 
eternally and forever, and are sincerely fond of each 
other and think the world of Mulberry, and he puts 
up patiently with all their spoiled ways and foolish- 
ness, and so — ah, well, they're happy enough, if it 
comes to that. And I don't mind — I've got used 
to it. I can get used to anything, with Mtilberry tQ 

a3 



MARK TWAIN 

help ; and the fact is, I don't much care what happens, 
so long as he's spared to me." 

**Well, here's to him, and hoping hell make an- 
other strike soon." 

"And rake in the lame, the halt, and the blind, 
and turn the house into a hospital again ? It's what 
he would do. I've seen a plenty of that and more. 
No, Washington, I want his strikes to be mighty 
moderate ones the rest of the way down the vale." 

** Well, then, big strike or little strike, or no strike 
at all, here's hoping he'll never lack for friends — 
and I don't reckon he ever will while there's people 
around who know enough to — " 

"Him lack for friends!'* and she tilted her head 
up with a frank pride — "why, Washington, you can't 
name a man that's anybody that isn't fond of him. 
I'll tell you privately that I've had Satan's own 
time to keep them from appointing him to some 
office or other. They knew he'd no business with an 
office, just as well as I did, but he's the hardest man 
to refuse anything to a body you ever saw. Mul- 
berry Sellers with an oflSce ! laws goodness, you know 
what that would be like. Why, they'd come from 
the ends of the earth to see a circus like that. I'd 
just as lieves be married to Niagara Palls, and done 
with it." • After a reflective pause she added — shaving 
wandered back, in the interval, to the remark that 
had been her text: "Friends? — oh, indeed, no man 
ever had more; and such friends: Grant, Shennan, 
Sheridan, Johnston, Longstreet, Lee — many's the 
time they've sat in that chair you're sitting in — '* 
Hawkins was out of it instantly, and contemplating 

24 






THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

it with a reverential surprise, and with the awed 
sense of having trodden shod upon holy ground : 
They I ^^ he said. 
Oh, indeed, yes, a many and a many a time." 

He continued to gaze at the chair, fascinated, 
magnetized ; and for once in his life that continental 
stretch of dry prairie which stood for his imagination 
was afire, and across it was marching a slanting 
flame-front that joined its wide horizons together and 
smothered the skies with smoke. He was experi- 
encing what one or another drowsing, geographical- 
ly ignorant aUen experiences every day in the year 
when he turns a dull and indifferent eye out of the 
car window and it falls upon a certain station-sign 
which reads, "Stratford-on-Avon"! Mrs. Sellers went 
gossiping comfortably along: 

"Oh, they like to hear him talk, especially if their 
load is getting rather heavy on one shoulder and 
they want to shift it. He's all. air, you know — 
breeze, you may say — and he freshens them up; it's 
a trip to the coimtry, they say. Many a time he's 
made General Grant laugh — ^and that's a tidy job, 
I can tell you; and as for Sheridan, his eye lights 
up and he Kstens to Mulberry Sellers the same as 
if he was artillery. You see, the charm about Mul- 
berry is, he is so catholic and unprejudiced that he 
fits in anywhere and everywhere. It makes him 
powerful good company, and as popular as scandal. 
You go to the White House when the President's 
holding a general reception — some time when Mul- 
berry's there. Why, dear me, you can't tell which of 
them it is that's holding that reception." 

25 



MARK TWAIN 



*'Well, he certainly is a remarkable man — and he 
always was. Is he religious?'* 

" Clear to his marrow — does more thinking and 
reading on that subject than any other, except 
Russia and Siberia ; thrashes around over the whole 
field, too; nothing bigoted about him," 

" What is his religion?" 

"He — " She stopped, and was lost for a moment 
or two in thinking; then she said, with simplicity, 
"I think he was a Mohammedan or something last 
week." 

Washington started down-town now to bring his 
tnmk, for the hospitable Sellerses would listen to no 
excuses; their house must be his home dturing the 
session. The Colonel returned presently and re- 
sumed work upon his plaything. It was finished 
when Washington got back. 

"There it is," said the Colonel, "all finished." 

"What is it for, Colonel?" 

"Oh, it's just a trifle. Toy to amuse the children." 

Washington examined it. 

"It seems to be a puzzle." 

"Yes, that's what it is. I call it Pigs in the Clover. 
Put them in — see if you can put them in the pen." 

After many failures Washington succeeded, and 
was as pleased as a child. 

"It's wonderfully ingenious, Colonel — ^it's ever so 
clever. And interesting — ^why, I could play with it 
all day. What are you going to do with it?" 

"Oh, nothing. Patent it and throw it aside." 

"Don't you do anjrthing of the kind. There's 
money in that thing." 

26 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

A compassionate look traveled over the Colonel's 
countenance, and he said: 

** Money — ^yes; pin money; a couple of himdred 
thousand, perhaps. Not more." 

Washington's eyes blazed. 

"A couple of himdred thousand dollars! Do you 
call that pin money?" 

The Colonel rose and tiptoed his way across the 
room, closed a door that was slightly ajar, tiptoed 
his way to his seat again, and said, under his 
breath : 

''You can keep a secret?" 

Washington nodded his affirmative; he was too 
awed to speak. 

*'You have heard of materialization — ^materializa- 
tion of departed spirits?" 

Washington had heard of it. 

"And probably didn't believe in it; and quite 
right, too. The thing as practised by ignorant 
charlatans is unworthy of attention or respect — 
where there's a dim light and a dark cabinet, and a 
parcel of sentimental gulls gathered together, with 
their faith and their shudders and their tears all 
ready, and one and the same fatty degeneration of 
protoplasm and humbug comes out and materializes 
himself into anybody you want, grandmother, grand- 
child, brother-in-law, Witch of Endor, John Milton, 
Siamese Twins, Peter the Great, and all such frantic 
nonsense — ^no, that is all foolish and pitiftd. But 
when a man that is competent brings the vast powers 
of science to bear, it's a different matter — a totally 
different matter, you see. The specter that answers 

37 



MARK TWAIN 

that call has come to stay. Do you note the com- 
mercial value of that detail?" 

**Well, I— the— the truth is, that I don't quite 
know that I do. Do you mean that such, being 
permanent, not transitory, would give more general 
satisfaction, and so enhance the price of tickets to 
the show — " 

"Show ? Folly — Glisten to me; and get a good grip 
on your breath, for you are going to need it. Within 
three days I shall have completed my method, and 
then — ^let the world stand aghast, for it shall see 
marvels. Washington, within three days — ^ten at 
the outside — ^you shall see me call the dead of any 
century, and they will arise and walk. . Walk? — ^they 
shall walk forever, and never die again. Walk with 
all the muscle and spring of their pristine vigor." 

' * Colonel I Indeed, it does take one's breath away, ' ' 
^Now do you see the money that's in it?'* 
I'm — ^well, I'm — ^not really sure that I do." 
Great Scott, look here ! I shall have a monopoly ; 
they'll all belong to me, won't they? Two thousand 
policemen in the city of New York. Wages, four 
dollars a day. I'll replace them with dead ones at 
half the money." 

"Oh, prodigious! I never thought of that. 
F-o-u-r thousand dollars a day. Now I do begin to 
see! But will dead policemen answer?'* 

"Haven't they — up to this time?" 

"Well, if you put it that way—" 

"Put it any way you want to. Modify it to suit 
yourself, and my lads shall still be superior. They 
won't eat, they won't drink — don't need those 

28 



it 
it, 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

things; they w«m't wink for cash at gambling-dens 
and unlicensed rum-holes; they won't spark the 
scullery maids; and, moreover, the bands of toughs 
that ambuscadf/i them on lonely beats and cowardly 
shoot and knife them will only damage the tmiforms, 
and not live long enough to get more than a mo- 
mentary satis:7action out of that." 

"Why, Col'/ttiel, if you can furnish pohcemen, then 
of course — " 

"Certainly — ^I can furnish any line of goods that's 
wanted. Take the army, for instance — now twenty- 
five thousand men; expense, twenty-two millions a 
year. I will dig up the Romans, I will resurrect the 
Greeks, I will furnish the government, for ten mill- 
ions a year, ten thousand veterans drawn from the 
victorious legions of all the ages — soldiers that will 
chase Indians year in and year out on materialized 
horses, and cost never a cent for rations or repairs. 
The armies of Europe cost two billions a year now — 
I will replace them all for a billion. I will dig up the 
trained statesmen of all ages and all climes, and 
fiunish this country with a Congress that knows 
enough to come in out of the rain — a thing that's 
never happened yet since the Declaration of Inde- 
pendence, and never will happen till these practi- 
cally dead people are replaced with the genuine 
article. I will restock the thrones of Europe with 
the best brains and the best morals that all the royal 
sepulchers of all the centuries can furnish — ^which 
isn't promising very much — and I'll divide the wages 
and the civil list, fair and square, merely taking my 
half and—" 

29 



MARK TWAIN 

'* Colonel, if the half of this is true, there's millions 
in it — ^millions." 

** Billions in it — ^billions; that's what you mean. 
Why, look here; the thing is so close at hand, so 
imminent, so absolutely immediate, that if a man 
were to come to me now and say. Colonel, I am a 
little short, and if you could lend me a couple of 
billion dollars for — Come in!" 

This in answer to a knock. An energetic-looking 
man bustled in with a big pocket-book in his hand, 
took a paper from it and presented it, with the curt 
remark: 

** Seventeenth and last call — ^you want to out with 
that three dollars and forty cents this time without 
fail, Colonel Mulberry Sellers." 

The Colonel began to slap this pocket and that 
one, and feel here and there and everywhere, mut- 
tering: 

''What have I done with that wallet? — ^let me see 
— um — ^not here, not there — oh, I must have left it 
in the kitchen; I'll just run and — ** 

**No, you won't — ^you'll stay right where you are. 
And you're going to disgorge, too — this time." 

Washington innocently offered to go and look. 
When he was gone the Colonel said: 

'*The fact is, I've got to throw myself on your 
indulgence just this once more, Suggs; you see, the 
remittances I was expecting — " 

**Hang the remittances — ^it's too stale — ^it won't 
answer. Come!" 

The Colonel glanced about him in despair. Then 
his face lighted ; he ran to the wall and began to dust 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

oflf a peculiarly atrocious chromo with his handker- 
chief. Then he brought it reverently, offered it to 
the collector, averted his face, and said: 

"Take it, but don't let me see it go. It's the sole 
remaining Rembrandt that — " 

''Rembrandt be damned; it's a chromo.'* 

*'0h, don't speak of it so, I beg you. It's the 
only really great original, the only supreme example, 
of that mighty school of art which — " 

*'Art! It's the sickest-looldng thing I — " 

The Colonel was already bringing another horror 
and tenderly dusting it. 

"Take this one too — ^the gem of my collection — 
the only genuine Fra Angelico that — " 

"Illuminated liver-pad, that's what it is. Give it 
here — good day — ^people will think I've robbed a 
nigger barber-shop." 

As he slammed the door behind him the Colonel 
shouted, with an anguished accent : 

"Do please cover them up — don't let the damp 
get at them. The delicate tints in the Angelico — " 

But the man was gone. 

Washington reappeared, and said he had looked 
ever3n?irhere, and so had Mrs. Sellers and the servants, 
but in vain; and went on to say he wished he could 
get his eye on a certain man about this time — ^no 
need to hunt up that pocket-book then. The 
Colonel's interest was awake at once. 

"What man?" 

"One-armed Pete they call him out there — out in 
the Cherokee cotmtry, I mean. Robbed the bank 
in Tahlequah." 

3 IX 



MARK TWAIN 



it 



Do they have banks in Tahlequah?" 
'Yes — a bank, anyway. He was suspected of 
robbing it. Whoever did it got away with more 
than twenty thousand dollars. They offered a re- 
ward of five thousand. I believe I saw that very 
man on my way east." 

"No— is that so?" 

*'I certainly saw a man on the train the first day 
I struck the railroad that answered the description 
pretty exactly — at least, as to cjothes and a lacking 
arm." 

'*Why didn't you get him arrested and claim the 
reward?" 

'*I couldn't. I had to get a requisition, of course. 
But I meant to stay by him till I got my 
chance." 

"Well?" 

"Well, he left the train during the night some 
time." 

"Oh, hang it, that's too bad!" 
'Not so very bad, either." 
Why?" 

"Because he came down to Baltimore in the very 
train I was in, though I didn't know it in time. 
As we moved out of the station I saw him going 
toward the iron gate with a satchel in his hand." 

"Good; we'll catch him. Let's lay a plan." 

"Send description to the Baltimore police?" 

* ' Why, what are you talking about ? No. Do you 
want them to get the reward?" 

"What shall we do, then?" 

The Colonel reflected. 



it 

if 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 



<<T»1 



I'll tell you. Put a personal in the Baltimore 
Sun. Word it like this: 



A. 



DROP ME A LINE, PETE— 



"Hold on. Which arm has he lost?" 
"The right." 
"Good. Now then: 

A DROP ME A LINE, PETE, EVEN IP YOU HAVE TO 
• write with your left hand. Address X. Y. Z., General 
Post-office, Washington. From YOU KNOW WHO. 

There— that '11 fetch him." 

"But he won*t know who — ^will he?" 
"No, but he'll want to know, won't he?" 
"Why, certainly— I didn't think of that. What 

made you think of it?" 

"Knowledge of human curiosity. Strong trait, 

very strong trait." 

"Now I'll go to my room and write it out and 

inclose a dollar and tell them to print it to the 

worth of that." 



CHAPTER IV 

THE day wore itself out. After dinner the two 
friends put in a long and harassing evening 
trying to decide what to do with the five thousand 
dollars reward which th^ were going to get when 
they should find One-Armed Pete, and catch him, and 
prove him to be the right person, and extradite him, 
and ship him to Tahlequah in the Indian Territory. 
But there were so many dazzling openings for ready 
cash that they found it impossible to make up their 
minds and keep them made up. Finally, Mrs. Selleis 
grew very weary of it all, and said: 

''What is the sense in cooking a rabbit before 
It's caught?" 

Then the matter was dropped for the time being, 
and all went to bed. Next morning, being per- 
suaded by Hawkins, the Colonel made drawings and 
specifications, and went down and applied for a 
patent for his toy puzzle, and Hawkins took the toy 
itself and started out to see what chance there might 
be to do something with it commercially. He did 
not have to go far. In a small old wooden shanty 
which had once been occupied as a dwelling by some 
humble negro family he f otmd a keen-eyed Yankee 
engaged in repairing cheap chairs and other second- 
haxid ftututure. This man examined the toy in- 

34 



it' 



tf 
tf 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

differently; attempted to do the ptizzle; found it not 
so easy as he had expected; grew more interested, 
and finally emphatically so; achieved a success at 
last, and asked: 
Is it patented?" 
'Patent applied for," 

"That will answer. What do you want for it?" 

•'What will it retail for?" 

**WeIl, twenty-five cents, I should think." 
'What will you give for the exclusive right?" 
1 couldn't give twenty dollars if I had to pay 
cash down; but I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll make 
it and market it, and pay you five cents royalty on 
each one." 

Washington sighed. Another dream disappeared; 
no money in the thing. So he said: 

"All right; take it at that. Draw me a paper." 

He went his way with the paper, and dropped the 
matter out of his mind — dropped it out to make 
room for further attempts to think out the most 
promising way to invest his half of the reward in 
case a partnership investment satisfactory to both 
beneficiaries could not be hit upon. 

He had not been very long at home when Sellers 
arrived sodden with grief and booming with glad 
excitement — working both these emotions success- 
fully, sometimes separately, sometimes together. 
He fell on Hawkins's neck sobbing, and said: 

"Oh, mourn with me, my fritod, mourn for my 
desolate house; death has smitten my last kinsman, 
and I am Earl of Rossmore — congratulate me!" 

He turned to his wife, who had entered while this 

3S 



tt 



MARK TWAIN 

was going on, put his arms about her, and said: 
*' You will bear up, for my saJke, my lady — it had to 
happen, it was decreed" 

She bore up very well, and said: 

"It's no great loss. Simon Lathers was a poor, 
well-meaning, useless thing and no account, and his 
brother never was worth shucks." 

The rightful earl continued: 

**I am too much prostrated by these conflicting 
griefs and joys to be able to concentrate my mind 
upon affairs; I will ask our good friend here to break 
the news by wire or post to the Lady Gwendolen, and 
instruct her to — " 

What Lady Gwendolen?" 

Oiu: poor daughter, who, alas! — " 

"Sally Sellers? Mulberry Sellers, are you losing 
your mind?" 

"There — please do not forget who you are, and 
who I am; remember your own dignity, be con- 
siderate also of mine. It were best to cease from 
using my family name now. Lady Rossmore." 

"Goodness gracious! well, I neverl What am I 
to call you, then?" 

"In private, the ordinary terms of endearment 
will still be admissible, to some degree; but in pub- 
lic it will be more becoming if your ladyship will 
speak to me as my lord, or yoiu- lordship, and of me 
as Rossmore, or the Earl, or his Lordship, and — " 

"Oh, scat! I can't ever do it. Berry." 

"But, indeed, you must, my love — ^we must live 
up to our altered position, and submit with what 
grace we may to its requirements," 

36 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

**Well, all right, have it your own way; I've never 
set my wishes against your commands yet, Mul**— 
my lord, and it's late to begin now, though to my 
mind it's the rottenest foolishness that ever was." 

''Spoken like my own true wifel There, kiss and 
be friends again." 

"But — Gwendolen I I don't know how I am ever 
going to stand that name. Why, a body wouldn't 
know Sally Sellers in it. It's too large for her; kind 
of like a cherub in an tilster, and it's a most out- 
landish sort of a name anyway, to my mind." 

**You11 not hear her find fault with it, my lady." 

''That's a true word. She takes to any kind of 
romantic rubbish like she was bom to iU She never 
got it from me, that's sure. And sending her to 
that silly college hasn't helped the matter any — just 
the other way." 

"Now hear her, Hawkins! Rowena-Ivanhoe Col- 
lege is the selectest and most aristocratic seat of 
leaming for young ladies in our countiy. Under no 
circumstances can a girl get in there unless she is 
either very rich and fashionable or can prove four 
generations of what may be called American nobility. 
Castellated college - buildings — towers and turrets 
and an imitation moat — and everything about the 
place named out of Sir Walter Scott's books and 
redolent of royalty and state and style; and all the 
richest girls keep phaetons, and coachmen in livery, 
and riding-horses, with English grooms in plug hats 
and tight-buttoned coats, and top-boots, and a whip- 
handle without any whip to it, to ride sixty-three feet 
behind them — " 

,^7 



MARK TWAIN 

''And they don't learn a blessed thing, Washington 
Hawkins, not a jingle blessed thing but showy rub- 
bish and un-American pretentiousness. But send 
for the Lady Gwendolen — do; for I reckon the peer- 
age regulations require that she must come home and 
let on to go into seclusion and mourn for those 
Arkansas blatherskites she's lost." 

*'My darling! Blatherskites? Remember— fk>- 
blesse oblige.** 

''There, there — ^talk to me in your own tongue, 
Ross — ^you don't know any other, and you only 
botch it when you try. Oh, don't stare — it was a 
slip, and no crime; customs of a lifetime can't be 
dropped in a second. Rossmore — ^there now, be 
appeased, and go along with you and attend to 
Gwendolen. Are you going to write, Washington? 
— or telegraph?" 

"He will telegraph, dear." 

"I thought as much," my lady muttered, as she 
left the room. "Wants it so the address will have 
to appear on the envelope. It will just nmke a 
fool of that child. Shell get it, of course, for if 
there are any other Sellerses there they'll not be 
able to claim it. And just leave her alone to show 
it around and make the most of it. . . . Well, maybe 
she's forgivable for that. She's so poor and they're 
so rich, of course she's had her share of snubs from 
the livery-flunky sort, and I reckon it's only human 
to Nrant to get even." 

Unde Danl was sent with the telegram; for al- 
though a conspicuous object in a comer of the 
drawing-room was a telephone hanging on a trans- 

38 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

fnitter, Washington found all attempts to raise the 
central office vain. The Colonel grumbled some- 
thing about its being **always out of order when 
youVe got particular and especial use for it," but 
he didn't explain that one of tiie reasons for this was 
that the thing was only a dtumny and hadn't any 
wire attached to it. And yet the Colonel often 
used it — ^when visitors were present — and seemed 
to get messages through it. Mourning-paper and a 
seal were ordered; then the friends took a rest. 

Next afternoon, while Hawkins, by request, 
drai)ed Andrew Jackson's portrait with crape, the 
rightful earl wrote off the family bereavement to the 
usurper in England — a letter which we have already 
read. He also, by letter to the village authorities 
at Duffy's Comers, Arkansas, gave order that the 
remains of the late twins be embalmed by some 
St. Louis expert and shipped at once to the usurper 
— with bill. Then he drafted out the Rossmore 
arms and motto on a great sheet of brown paper, and 
he and Hawkins took it to Hawkins's Yankee furni- 
ture-mender, and at the end of an hour came back 
with a couple of stunning hatchments, which they 
nailed up on the front of the house — ^attractions 
calculated to draw, and they did; for it was mainly 
an idle and shiftless negro neighborhood, with 
plenty of ragged children and indolent dogs to 
spare for a point of interest like that, and keep on 
sparing them for it, days and days together. 

The new earl found — ^without surprise — ^this so- 
ciety item in the evening paper, and cut it out and 
scrap-booked it: 

39 



MARK TWAIN 

By a recent bereavement our esteemed fellow-dtizen, Cdlonel 
Mulberry Sellers, Perpetual Member-at-lai^e of the Diplomatic 
Body, succeeds, as rightful lord, to the great earldom of Ross- 
more, third by order of precedence in the earldoms of Great 
Britain, and will take early measures, by suit in the House c^ 
Lords, to wrest the title and estates from the present usurping 
holder of them. Until the season of mourning is past, the 
usual Thursday evening receptions at Rossmore Towers will be 
discontinued. 

Lady Rossmore's comment — ^to herselt; 

' * Receptions ! People v^ho don't rightly know him 
may think he is commonplace, but to my mind he 
is one of the most unusual men I ever saw. As for 
suddenness and capacity in imagining things, his 
beat don't exist, I reckon. As like as not it wouldn't 
have occurred to anybody else to name this poor old 
rat-trap Rossmore Towers, but it just comes natural 
to him. Well, no doubt it's a blessed thing to have 
an imagination that can always make you satisfied, , 
no matter how you are fixed. Uncle Dave Hopkins 
used to always say, 'Turn me into John Calvin, and 
I want to know which place I'm going to; turn me 
into Mulberry Sellers, and I don't care.*" 

The rightful earl's comment — ^to himself: 

"It's a beautiftil name, beautiftd. Pity I didn't 
think of it before I wrote the ustirper. But I'll be 
ready for him when he answers." 



CHAPTER V 

NO answer to that telegram ; no arriving daughter. 
Yet nobody showed any uneasiness or seemed 
surprised; that is, nobody but Washington. After 
three days of waiting he asked Lady Rossmore what 
she sui>posed the trouble was. She answered tran- 
quilly: 

*'0h, it's some notion of hers; you never can tell. 
She's a Sellers all through — ^at least, in some of her 
ways: and a Sellers can't tell you beforehand what 
he's going to do, because he don't know himself till 
he's done it. She's all right; no occasion to worry 
about her. When she's ready she'll come or she'll 
write, and you can't tell which till it's happened." 

It turned out to be a letter. It was handed in at 
that moment, and was received by the mother with- 
out trembling hands or feverish eagerness, or any 
other of the manifestations common in the case of 
long-delayed answers to imperative telegrams. She 
polished her glasses with tranquillity and thor- 
oughness, pleasantly gossiping along the while, then 
opened the letter and began to read aloud : 

Kenilworth Keep, Redgauntlet Hall, 
rowena-ivanhoe college, thursday. 

Dear Precious Mamma Rossmore: 

Oh, the joy of it! — ^you can't think. They had always turned 
Up their noses at our pretensions, you know; and I had fought 

41 



MARK TWAIN 

bade as well as I could by turning up mine at theirs. They 
always said it might be something great and fine to be the 
rightful Shadow ci an earldom, but to merely be shadow of a 
shadow, and two or three times removed at that— pooh-pooh! 
And I always retorted that not to be able to show four generations 
of American-Colonial-Dutch-Peddler-and-Salt-Cod-McAllister 
Nobility might be endurable, but to have to confess such an ori- 
gin — pfew-fewl Well, the tdegram, it was just a cyclone! The 
messenger came right into the great Rob Roy Hall of Audience, 
as excited as he could be, singing out, "Despatch for Lady 
Gwendolen Sellers!" and you ought to have seen that simpering 
chattering assemblage of pinchbeck aristocrats turn to stone! 
I was off in the comer, of course, by myself — it's where Cinderella 
belongs. I took the tel^;ram and read it, and tried to faint — 
and I could have done it if I had had any preparation, but it 
was all so sudden, you know — but no matter, I did the next best 
thing: I put my handkerchief to my eyes and fied sobbing to 
my room, dropping the telegram as I started. I released one 
comer of my eye a moment — just enough to see the herd swarm 
for the telegram — and then continued my broken-hearted flight 
just as happy as a bird. 

Then the visits of condolence began, and I had to accept the 
loan of Miss Augusta-Templeton-Ashmore Hamilton's quarters 
because the press was so great and there isn't room for three and 
a cat in mine. And I've been holding a Lodge of Sorrow ever 
since and defending myself against people's attempts to claim 
kin. And do you know, the very first girl to fetch her tears and 
sympathy to my market was that foolish Skimperton girl who 
has always snubbed me so shamefully and claimed lordship and 
precedence of the whole college because some ancestor of herst 
some time or other, was a McAllister. Why, it was like the 
bottom bird in the menagerie putting on airs because its head 
ancestor was a pterodactyl. 

But the ger-reatest triumph of all was — guess. But youll 
never. This is it. That little fool and two others have always 
been fussing and fretting over which was entitled to precedence 
— ^by rank, you know. They've nearly starved themselves at 
it; for each claimed the right to take precedence of all the 
college in leaving the table, and so neither of them ever finished 
her dinner, but broke ofiE in the middle and tried to get out 
ahead of the others. Well, after my first day's grief and seclusion 

43 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

was fixing up a mourning dress, you see — I appeared at the 
public table again, and then—what do you think? Those three 
fluffy goslings sat there contentedly, and squared up the long 
fiunbie — lapped and lapped, munched and munched, ate and 
ate, till the gravy appeared in their eyes — humbly waiting for the 
Lady Gwendolen to take precedence and move out first, you seel 

Oh, yes, I've been having a darling good time. And do you 
know, not one of these collegians has had the cruelty to ask 
me how I came by my new name. With some, this is due to 
diaiity, but with the others it isn't. They refrain, not from 
native kindness but from educated discretion. I educated them. 

Well, as soon as I shall have settled up what's left of the old 
scores and snuffed up a few more of those pleasantly intoxicating 
doods of incense, I shall pack and depart homeward. Tell 
pi^ I am as fond of him as I am of my new name. I couldn't 
put it stronger than that. What an inspiration it wasi But 
in^nrations come easy to him. 

These, from your loving daughter, 

Gwendolen. 

Hawkins reached for the letter and glanced over it. 

"Good hand," he said, "and ftdl of confidence and 
animation, and goes racing right along. She's bright 
— that's plain." 

"Oh, tiiey're all bright — ^the Sellerses. Anyway, 
they would be, if there were any. Even those poor 
LaHierses would have been bright if they had been 
Sellerses; I mean full blood. Of course they had a 
Sellers strain in them — a big strain of it, too — but 
being a Bland dollar don't make it a dollar just the 



same." 



The seventh day after the date of the telegram 
Washington came dreaming down to breakfast and 
was set wide awake by an electrical spasm of pleasure. 
Here was the most beautiful young creature he had 
ever seen in bis life. It was Sally Sellers Lady 

43 



MARK TWAIN 

Gwendolen; she had come in the night. And it 
seemed to him that her clothes were the prettiest and 
the daintiest he had ever looked upon, and the most 
exquisitely contrived and fashioned and combined, 
as to decorative trimmings, and fixings, and melting 
harmonies of color. It was only a morning dress, 
and inexpensive, but he confessed to himself, in the 
English common to Cherokee Strip, that it was a 
"corker." And now, as he perceived, the reason 
why the Sellers household poverties and sterilities 
had been made to blossom like the rose, and charm 
the eye and satisfy the spirit, stood explained; here 
was the magician; here in the midst of her works, 
and furnishing in her own person the proper accent 
and climaxing finish of the whole. 

"My daughter. Major Hawkins — come home to 
mourn; flown home at the call of affliction to help the 
authors of her being bear the burden of bereavement. 
She was very fond of the late earl — ^idolized him, sir, 
idolized him — *' 

"Why, father, IVe never seen him." 

"True — she's right, I was thinking of another— 
er — of her mother — " 

"7 idolized that smoked haddock? — ^that senti- 
mental, spiritless — " 

"I was thinking of myself! Poor noble fellow, 
we were inseparable com — '* 

' ' Hear the man ! Mulberry Sel — Mtd — ^Rossmore ! 
— ^hang the troublesome name, I can never — ^if I've 
heard you say once I've heard you say a thousand 
times that if that poor sheep — " 

"I was thinking of — of — I don't know who I was 

44 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

thinking of, and it doesn't make any difference any- 
way; somebody idolized him, I recollect it as if it 
were yesterday; and — " 

*' Father, I am going to shake hands with Major 
Hawkins, and let the introduction work along and 
catch up at its leisure. I remember you very well, 
indeed. Major Hawkins, although I was a little child 
when I saw you last; and I am \ery, very glad, 
indeed, to see you again and ha\e you in our house 
as one of us *'; and beaming in his lace she finished 
her cordial shake with the hope that he had not 
forgotten her. 

He was prodigiously pleased by her outspoken 
heartiness, and wanted to repay her by assuring her 
that he remembered her, and not only that but 
better even than he remembered his own children, 
but the facts would not quite warrant this; still, he 
stumbled through a tangled sentence which answered 
just as well, since the purport of it was an awkward 
and tmintentional confession that her extraordinary 
beauty had so stupefied him that he hadn't got back 
to his bearings yet, and therefore couldn't be certain 
as to whether he remembered her at all or not. The 
speech made him her friend ; it couldn't well help it. 

In truth, the beauty of this fair creature was of a 
rare type, and may well excuse a moment of our time 
spent in its consideration. It did not consist in the 
fact that she had eyes, nose, mouth, chin, hair, ears ; 
it consisted in their arrangement. In true beauty, 
more depends upon right location and judicious 
distribution of feature than upon multiplicity of 
them. So also as regards color. The very comWi- 

45 



MARK TWAIN 

nation of colors which in a volcanic irruption would 
add beauty to a landscape might detach it £rom a 
girl. Such was Gwendolen Sellers. 

The family circle being completed by Gwendolen's 
arrival, it was decreed that the official mourning 
should now begin; that it should begin at six o'clock 
every evening (the dinner hour) and end with the 
dinner. 

"It's a grand old line, Major, a sublime old line, 
and deserves to be mourned for almost royally; al- 
most imperially, I may say. Er — Lady Gwendolen 
— but she's gone; never mind; I wanted my Peerage; 
I'll fetch it myself, presently, and show you a thing 
or two that will give you a realizing idea of what 
our house is. I've been glancing through Burke, and 
I find that of William the Conqueror's sixty-four 
natural ch — My dear, would you mind getting me 
that book? It's on the escritoire in our boudoir. 
Yes, as I was sajring, there's only St. Albans, Buc- 
deuch, and Grafton ahead of us on the list — all the 
rest of the British nobility are in procession behind 
us. Ah, thanks, my lady. Now then, we turn to 
William, and we find — ^letter for XYZ ? Oh, splendid 
— ^when'd you get it?'* 

*'Last night; but I was asleep before you came, 
you were out so late ; and when I came to breakfast 
Miss Gwendolen — ^well, she knocked everything out 
of me, you know — '* . 

*' Wonderful girl, wonderful; her great origin is 
detectable in her step, her carriage, her feattures — 
but what does he say? Come, this is exciting.*' 

"I haven't readit — er — ^Rossm — Mr. Rossm— ^*-' — *' 

46 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

*'Mlord! Just cut it short like that. It*s the 
English way. I'll open it. Ah, now let's see. 



A 



TO YOU KNOW WHO. Think I know you. Wait ten 
• days. Gaming to Washington. 



The excitement died out of both men's faces. 
There was a brooding silence for a while; then the 
younger one said, with a sigh: 

"Why, we can't wait ten days for the money." 

"No— the man's unreasonable; we are down to 
fhe bed rock, financially speaking." 

"If we could explain to him in some way that we 
are so situated that time is of the utmost importance 
tous— " 

"Yes-yes, that's it — and so if it would be as con- 
venient for him to come at once it would be a great 
accommodation to us, and one which we — ^which we 
— which we — ^wh — ^well, which we should sincerely 
appreciate—" 

"That's it — and most gladly reciprocate — " 

"Certainly — ^that 'U fetch him. Worded right, if 
he's a man — got any of the feelings of a man, sympo 
ikies and aU that, he'll be here inside of twenty- 
four hours. Pen and paper — come, well get right 
at it." 

Between them they firamed twenty-two different 
advertisements, but none was satisfactory. A main 
fault in all of them was urgency. That feature was 
very troublesome: if made prominent, it was calcu- 
lated to excite Pete's suspicion; if modified below the 
suspicion-point it was flat and meaxungless. Finally 
the Colonel resigned, and said: 

4 47 



MARK TWAIN 

"I have noticed, in such literary experiences as I 
have had, that one of the most taking things to do 
is to conceal your meaning when you are trying to 
conceal it. Whereas, if you go at literatiu^ with a 
free conscience and nothing to conceal, you can turn 
out a book, every time, that the very elect can't 
understand. They all do." 

Then Hawkins resigned also, and the two agreed 
that they must manage to wait the ten days some- 
how or other. Next, they caught a ray of cheer; 
since they had something definite to go upon now 
they could probably borrow money on the reward — 
enough, at any rate, to tide them over till they got 
it; and meantime the materializing recipe would be 
perfected, and then good -by to trouble for good 
and all. 

The next day. May the loth, a couple of things 
happened — among others. ' The remains of the noble 
Arkansas twins left our shores for England, con- 
signed to Lord Rossmore, and Lord Rossmore's son, 
Kirkcudbright Llanover Marjoribanks Sellers Vis- 
coimt Berkeley, sailed from Liverpool for America 
to place the reversion of the earldom in the hands 
of the rightful peer. Mulberry Sellers, of Rossmose 
Towers in the District of Columbia, U. S. A. 

These two impressive shipments would meet and 
part in mid-Atlantic five days later, and give no sigQ. 



CHAPTER VI 

IN the course of time the twins arrived and were 
delivered to their great kinsman. To try to 
describe the rage of that old man would profit noth- 
ing, the attempt would fall so far short of the 
purpose. However, when he had worn himself out 
and got quiet again, he looked the matter over and 
decided that the twins had some moral rights, al- 
though they had no legal ones; they were of his blood, 
and it could not be decorous to treat them as common 
clay. So he laid them with their majestic kin in the 
Cholmondeley church, with imposing state and 
ceremony, and added the supreme touch by offi- 
ciating as chief mourner himself. But he drew the 
line at hatchments. 

Our friends in Washington watched the weary 
days go by while they waited for Pete and covered 
his name with reproaches because of his calamitous 
procrastinations. Meantime, Sally Sellers, who was 
as practical and democratic as the Lady Gwendolen 
Sellers was romantic and aristocratic, was leading a 
life of intense interest and activity, and getting the 
most she could out of her double personality. All 
day long in the privacy of her work-room Sally Sel- 
lers earned bread for the Sellers family, and all 
the evening Lady Gwendolen Sellers supported the 

49 



MARK TWAIN 

Roflsmore dignity. All day she was American, prac- 
tically, and proud of the work of her head and hands 
and its commercial result; all the evening she took 
holiday and dwelt in a rich shadowland peopled with 
titled and coroneted fictions. By day, to her, the 
place was a plain, unaffected, ramshackle old trap 
— just that, and nothing more; by night it was Ross- 
more Towers. At college she had learned a trade 
without knowing it. The girls had found out that 
she was the designer of her own gowns. She had 
no idle moments after that, and wanted none; for 
the exercise of an extraordinary gift is the supremest 
pleasure in Ef e, and it was manifest that Sally Sellers 
possessed a gift of that sort in the matter c^ costume 
designing. Within three days after reaching home 
she had htmted up some work; before Pete was yet 
due in Washington, and before the twins were fairly 
asleep in Engli^ soil, she was already nearly swamped 
with work, and the sacrificing of the family chromos 
for debt had got an effective check. 

*'She*s a brick," said Rossmore to the Major; 
"just her father all over; prompt to labor with head 
or hands, and not ashamed of it; capable, always 
capable, let the enterprise be what it may; success* 
f ul by nature — don't know what defeat is ; thus, in- 
tensely and practically American by inhaled nation^ 
alism, and at the same time intensely and aristo^ 
craticaUy European by inherited nobility of blood. 
Just me, exactly; Mulberry Sellers in matter of 
finance and invention; after office hours, what do 
you find ? The same clothes, yes, but what's in them ? 
Rossmore of the peerage." 

so 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

The two friends had haunted the general post- 
office daily. At last they had their reward. Toward 
enrening on the 20th of May they got a letter for 
XYZ. It bore the Washington postmark; the note 
itself was not dated. It said: 

Ash banrel back of lamp post Black horse Alley. If you are 
playing square go and set on. it to-morrow morning 2zst 10.32 
not sooner not later wait till I come. 

The friends cogitated over the note profoundly. 
Presently the earl said: 

'* Don't you reckon he's afraid we are a sheriff with 
a requisition?" 

"Why, mlord?" 

''Because that's no place for a s6ance. Nothing 
friendly, nothing sociable about it. And at the 
same time, a body that wanted to know who was 
roosting on that ash-barrel without exposing him- 
self by going near it, or seeming to be interested in 
it, could just stand on the street comer and take a 
glance down the alley and satisfy himself, don't you 
see?" 

*'Yes, his idea is plain now. He seems to be a 
man that can't be candid and straightforward. He 
acts as if he thought we — shucks, I wish he had 
come out like a man and told us what hotel he — " 

"Now you've struck it! you've struck it sure, 
Washington; he has told us." 

"Has he?" 

"Yes, he has; but he didn't mean to. That alley 
is a lonesome little pocket that runs along one side 
of the New Gadsby. That's his hotel." 

SI 



MARK TWAIN 

"What makes you think that?" 

"Why, I just know it. He's got a room that's 
just across from that lamp-post. He's going to sit 
there perfectly comfortable behind his shutters at 
I0.22 to-morrow, and when he sees us sitting on the 
ash-barrel, he'll say to himself, *I saw one of those 
fellows on the train' — ^and then he'll pack his satchel 
in half a minute and ship for the ends of the earth." 

Hawkins turned sick with disappointment. 

*'0h, dear, it's all up, Colonel — it's exactly what 
he'll do." 

'indeed, he won't!" 

"Won't he? Why?" 

"Because you won't be holding the ash-barrel 
down; it '11 be me. You'll be coming in with an 
oflScer and a requisition in plain clothes — ^the officer, 
I mean — ^the minute you see him arrive and open up 
a talk with me." 

"Well, what a head you have got. Colonel Sellers! 
I never should have thought of that in the world." 

"Neither would any earl of Rossmore, betwixt 
William's contribution and Mulberry — as earl; but 
it's office hours now, you see, and the earl in me 
sleeps. Come — ^I'll show you his very room." 

They reached the neighborhood of the New Gadsby 
about nine in the evening, and passed down the 
alley to the lamp-post. 

"There you are," said the Colonel, tritmiphantly^ 
with a wave of his hand which took in the whole side 
of the hotel. "There it is— what did I tell you?" 

"Well, but — why, Colonel, it's six stories high. 
I don't quite make out which window you — " 

52 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

*'A11 the windows, all of them. Let him have his 
choice — ^I'm indifferent now that I have located him. 
You go and stand on the comer and wait; I'll pros- 
pect the hotel." 

The earl drifted here and there through the swarm- 
ing lobby, and finally took a waiting position in the 
neighborhood of the elevator. During an hour 
crowds went up and crowds came down; and all 
complete as to limbs; but at last the watcher got a 
glimpse of a figure that was satisfactory — got a 
glimpse of the back of it, though he had missed his 
chance at the face through waning alertness. The 
glimpse revealed a cowboy hat and below it a plaided 
sack of rather loud pattern, and an empty sleeve 
pinned up to the shoulder. Then the elevator 
snatched the vision aloft, and the watcher fled 
away in joyftd excitement and rejoined the fellow- 
conspirator. 

"We've got him. Major — ^got him sure! I've 
seen him — seen him good; and I don't care where 
or when that man approaches me backwards, I'll 
recognize him every time. We're all right. Now for 
the requisition." 

They got it, after the delays usual in such cases. 
By half -past eleven they were at home and happy, 
and went to bed full of dreams of the morrow's 
great promise. 

Among the elevator load which had the suspect 
for fellow-passenger was a yotmg kinsman of Mul- 
berry Sellers, but Mulberry was not aware of it and 
didn't see him. It was Viscount Berkeley. 



CHAPTER Vn 

ARRIVED in his room Lord Berkeley made prep- 
Jy, arations for that first and last and all-the- 
time duty of the visiting Englishman — ^the jotting 
down in his diary of his "impressions" to date. His 
preparations consisted in ransacking his "box" for 
a pen. There was a plenty of steel pens on his 
table with the ink-bottle, but he was English. The 
English people manufacture steel pens for nineteen- 
twentieths of the globe, but they never use any 
themselves. They use exclusively the prehistoric 
quill. My lord not only f oimd a quill pen, but the 
best one he had seen in several years — and after 
writing diligently for some time, closed with the 
following entry : 

But in one thing I have made an immense mistake. I ought 
to have sunk my title and changed my name before I started. 

He sat admiring that pen awhile, and then went on: 

All attempts to mingle with the common people and become 
permanently one of them are going to fail, unless I can get rid 
of it, disappear from it, and reappear with the solid protection 
of a new name. I am astonished and pained to see how eager 
the most of these Americans are to get acquainted with a lord, 
and how diligent they are in pushing attentions upon him. 
They lack English servility, it is true — ^but they could acquire 
it, with practice. My quality travels ahead of me in the most 

S4 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

mybterious way. I write my family name without additions, 
on the r^;ister of this hotel, and imagine that I am going to 
pass for an obscure and unknown wanderer, but the clerk 
promptly calls out, ''Front! show his lordship to four-eighty- 
twoi'' and before I can get to the lift there is a reporter trying 
to interview me, as they call it. This sort of thing shall cease 
at once. I will hunt up the American Claimant the first thing 
in the morning, accomplish my mission, then change my lodging 
and vanish from scrutiny under a fictitious name. 

He left his diary on the table, where it would be 
handy in case any new "impressions" shotild wake 
him up in the night, then he went to bed and pres- 
ently fell asleep. An hour or two passed, and then 
he came slowly to consciousness with a confusion of 
mysterious and augmenting sotmds hammering at 
the gates of his brain for admission; the next moment 
he was sharply awake, and those sotmds burst with 
the rush and roar and boom of an undammed freshet 
into his ears. Banging and slamming of shutters; 
smashing of windows and the ringing dash of falling 
glass; clatter of flying feet along the halls; shrieks, 
supplications, dtunb moanings of despair within, 
hoarse shouts of command outside; cracklings and 
snappings, and the windy roar of victorious flames! 

Bang, bang, bang! on the door, and a cry: 

"Turn out — ^the house is on fire!" 

The cry passed on, and the banging. Lord 
Berkeley sprang out of bed and moved with all pos- 
sible speed toward the clothes-press in the darkness 
and the gathering smoke, but fell over a chair and 
lost his bearings. He groped desperately about on 
his hands, and presently struck his head against the 
table and was deeply grateful, for it gave him his 

55 



MARK TWAIN 

bearings again, since it stood close by the door. He 
seized his most precious possession, his joumaled 
Impressions of America, and darted from the room. 

He ran down the deserted hall toward the red 
lamp which he knew indicated the place of a fire- 
escape. The door of the room beside it was open. 
In the room the gas was burning full head; on a chair 
was a pile of clothing. He ran to the window, could 
not get it up, but smashed it with a chair, and 
stepped out on the landing of the fire-escape; below 
him was a crowd of men, with a sprinkling of women 
and youth, massed in a ruddy light. Must he go 
down in his spectral night-dress? No — ^this side of 
the house was not yet on fire except at the farther 
end; he would snatch on those clothes. Which he 
did. They fitted well enough, though a trifle loosely, 
and they were just a shade loud as to pattern. 
Also as to hat — ^which was of a new breed to him, 
Buflfalo Bill not having been to England yet. One 
side of the coat went on, but the other side refused; 
one of its sleeves was turned up and stitched to 
the shoulder. He started down without waiting to 
get it loose, made the trip successfully, and was 
promptly hustled outside the limit -rope by the 
police. 

The cowboy hat and the coat but half on made 
him too much of a center of attraction for comfort, 
although nothing could be more profoundly respect- 
ful, not to say deferential, than was the manner of 
the crowd toward him. In his mind he framed a 
discouraged remark for early entry in his diary : * * It 
is of no use; they know a lord through any disguise, 

S6 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

and show awe of him — even something very like fear, 
indeed." 

Presently one of the gaping and adoring half-circle 
of boys ventured a timid question. My lord an- 
swered it. The boy^ glanced wonderingly at each 
other, and from somewhere fell the comment: 

** English cowboy! Well, if that ain't curious/* 

Another mental note to be preserved for the diary: 
"Cowboy. Now what might a cowboy be? Per- 
haps — " But the viscount perceived that some more 
questions were about to be asked; so he worked his 
way out of the crowd, released the sleeve, put on the 
coat, and wandered away to seek a humble and 
obscure lodging. He foimd it, and went to bed and 
was soon asleep. 

In the morning he examined his clothes. They 
were rather assertive, it seemed to him, but they 
were new and clean, at any rate. There was con- 
siderable property in the pockets. Item, five one- 
htmdred-dollar bills. Item, near fifty dollars in 
small bills and silver. Plug of tobacco. H3nim- 
book, which refuses to open; foimd to contain 
whisky. Memorandum - book bearing no name. 
Scattering entries in it, recording in a sprawling, 
ignorant hand, appointments, bets, horse-trades, and 
so on, with people of strange, hyphenated name — 
Six-Fingered Jake, Young-Man-Afraid-of-his-Shad- 
ow, and the like. No letters, no doctiments. 

The young man muses — ^maps out his course. His 
letter of credit is burned; he will borrow the small 
bills and the silver in these pockets, apply part of it 
to advertising for the owner, and use the rest for 

57 



MARK TWAIN 

sustenance^while he seeks work. He sends out for 
the morning paper next, and proceeds to read about 
the fire. The biggest line in the display-head an- 
nounces his own death! The body of the account 
furnishes all the particulars; and tells how, with the 
inherited heroism of his caste, he went on saving 
women and children until escape for himself was 
impossible; then with the eyes of weeping multitudes 
upon him, he stood with folded arms and sternly 
awaited the approach of the devouring fiend; ''and 
so standing, amid a tossing sea of flame and on- 
rushing billows of smoke, tiie noble young heir of 
the great house of Rossmore was caught up in a 
whirlwind of fiery glory, and disappeared forever 
from the vision of men." 

The thing was so fine and generous and knightly 
that it brought the moisture to his eyes. Presently 
he said to himself: ''What to do is as plain as day 
now. My Lord Berkeley is dead — let him stay so. 
Died creditably, too; that will make the calamity the 
easier for my father. And I don't have to report 
to the American Claimant now. Yes, nothing could 
be better than the way matters have ttuned out. I 
have only to furnish myself with a new name, and 
take my new start in life totally tmtranmieled. Now 
I breathe my first breath of real freedom; and how 
fresh and breezy and inspiring it is ! At last I am a 
man! a man on equal terms with my neighbor; and 
by my manhood, and by it alone, I shall rise and be 
seen of the world, or I shall sink from sight and 
deserve it. This is the gladdest day, and the 
proudest, that ever poured its sun upon my head!" 

S8 



CHAPTER VIII 



« 



G 



OD bless my soul, Hawkins!*' 

The morning paper dropped from the Col- 
onel's nerveless grasp. 

•'What is it?'* 

*'He's gone! — ^the bright, the young, the gifted, 
the noblest of his illustrious race — gone! gone up in 
flames and unimaginable glory!" 

*'Who?" 

*'My precious, precious young kinsman — ^Kirk- 
cudbright Llanover Marjoribanks Sellers Viscount 
Berkeley, son and heir of usurping Rossmore." 

*'No!'' 

"It's true — ^too true." 

"When?" 

"Last night." 

"Where?" 

"Right here in Washington, where he arrived from 
England last night, the papers say." 

"You don't say!" 

"Hotel burned down." 

"What hotel?" 

"TheNewGadsby!" 

"Oh, my goodness! And have we lost both of 
them?" 

'*Both whor 

59 



MARK TWAIN 

"One-Arm Pete." 

"Oh, great guns! I forgot all about him. Oh, I 
hope not!" 

"Hope! Well, I should say! Oh, we can't spare 
himt We can better afford to lose a million viscotmts 
than our only support and stay." 

They searched the paper diligently, and were 
appalled to find that a one-armed man had been seen 
fl3ring along one of the halls of the hotel in his under- 
clothing and apparently out of his head with fright, 
and as he wotdd listen to no one and persisted in 
making for a stairway which would carry him to 
certain death, his case was given over as a hopeless 
one. 

"Poor fellow," sighed Hawkins; "and he had 
friends so near. I wish we hadn't come away from 
there — maybe we could have saved him." 

The earl looked up and said, calmly : 

"His being dead doesn't matter. He was tm- 
certain before. We've got him sture, this time." 

"Got him? How?" 

"I will materialize him." 

"Rossmore, don't — don't trifle with me. Do you 
mean that? Can you do it?" 

"I can do it, just as sure as you are sitting there. 
And I will.'* 

"Give me your hand, and let me have the comfort 
of shaking it. I was perishing, and you have put 
new life into me. Get at it, oh, get at it right away." 

"It will take a little time, Hawkins, but there's 
no hurry, none in the world — ^in the circumstances. 
And of course certain duties have devolved upon 

60 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

me now which necessarily claim my first attention. 
This poor young nobleman — " 

"Why, yes, I am sorry for my heartlessness, and 
you smitten with this new family affliction. Of 
course you must materialize him first — ^I quite un- 
derstand that." 

"I — ^I — well, I wasn't meaning just that, but — 
why, what am I thinking of! Of course I must 
materialize him. Oh, Hawkins, selfishness is the 
bottom trait in human nature; I was only thinking 
that now, with the usurper's heir out of the way — 
But you'll forgive that momentary weakness, and 
forget it. Don't ever remember it against me that 
Mulberry Sellers was once mean enough to think the 
thought that I was thinking. I'll materialize him — 
I will, on my honor — and I'd do it were he a thousand 
heirs jammed into one and stretching in a solid rank 
from here to the stolen estates of Rossmore, and 
barring the road forever to the rightftd earl!" 

**There spoke the real Sellers — ^the other had a 
false ring, old friend." 

** Hawkins, my boy, it just occxirs to me — a thing 
I keep forgetting to mention — a matter that we've got 
to be mighty careful about." 

*'Whatisthat?" 

"We must keep absolutely still about these ma- 
terializations. Mind, not a hint of them must es- 
cape — not a hint. To say nothing of how my wife 
and daughter-high-strung, sensitive organizations- 
might fed about them, the negroes wouldn't stay on 
the place a minute." 

"That's true, they wouldn't. It's well you spoke, 

6z 



MARK TWAIN 

for I'm not naturally discreet with my tongue when 
I'm not warned." 

Sellers reached out and touched a bell button in 
the wall, set his eye upon the rear door and waited; 
touched it again and waited; and just as Hawkins 
was remarking admiringly that the Colonel was the 
most progressive and most alert man he had ever 
seen, in the matter of impressing into his service 
every modem convenience the moment it was in- 
vented, and always keeping breast to breast with the 
drum-major in the great work of material civiliza- 
tion, he forsook the button (which hadn't any wire 
attached to it), rang a vast dinner-bell which stood 
on the table, and remarked that he had tried that 
new-fangled dry battery now to his entire satisfac- 
tion, and had got enough of it; and added: 

''Nothing wotdd do Graham Bell but I mtist try 
it ; said the mere fact of my trying it would secure 
public confidence, and get it a chance to show what 
it cotdd do. I told him that in theory a dry battery 
was just a curled darling and no mistake, but when 
it come to practice, sho ! — and here's the result. Was 
I right ? What should yau say, Washington Hawkins? 
You've seen me try that button twice. Was I right? 
— ^that's the idea. Did I know what I was talking 
about, or didn't I?" 

"Well, you know how I feel about you, Colonel 
Sellers, and always have felt. It seems to me that 
you always know everything about everyMang. If 
that man had known you as I know you he would 
have taken your judgment at the start, and dropped 
his dry battery where it was." 

6a 






it 
<< 
it 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

**Did you ring, Marse Sellers?*' 
No, Marse Sellers didn't/' 
Den it was you, Marse Washington. I's heah, 
suh." 

'No, it wasn't Marse Washington, either." 
De good Ian'! who did ring her, den?" 
Lord Rossmore rang it!" 

The old negro flung up his hands and exclaimed: 

"Blame my skin if I hain't gone en forgit dat name 
agin! Come heah, Jinny — ^nm heah, honey." 

Jinny arrived. 

"You take dish-yer order de lord gwine to give you. 
I's gwine down suller and study dat name tell I git 
it." 

"I take de order! Who's yo' nigger las' year? 
De bell nmg for you.*' 

"Dat don't make no diflfunce. When a bell ring 
for anybody, en old marster tell me to — " 

"Clear out, and settle it in the kitchen!" 

The noise of the quarreling presently sank to a 
murmur in the distance, and the earl added : "That's 
a trouble with old house-servants that were your 
slaves once and have been your personal friends 
always." 

"Yes, and members of the family." 

"Members of the family is just what they become 
— the members of the family, in fact. And sometimes 
master and mistress of the household. These two are 
nighty good and loving and faithful and honest, but, 
hang it, they do just about as they please, they drip 
into a conversation whenever they want to, and the 
plain fact is they ought to be killed." 
f 6| 



MARK TWAIN 

It was a random remark, but it gave him an idea^- 
however, nothing could happen without that result. 

"What I wanted, Hawkins, was to send for the 
family and break the news to them." 

' * Oh, never mind bothering with the servants, then. 
I will go and bring them down." 

While he was gone the earl worked his idea. 

*'Yes," he said to himself, "when I've got the 
materializing down to a certainty, I will get Hawkins 
to kill them, and after that they will be under better 
control. Without doubt a materialized negro could 
easily be hypnotized into a state resembling silence. 
And this could be made permanent — yes, and also 
modifiable, at will — sometimes very silent, sometimes 
turn on more talk, more action, more emotion, ac- 
cording to what you want. It's a prime good idea. 
Make it adjustable — ^with a screw or something." 

The two ladies entered now with Hawkins, and the 
two negroes followed, uninvited, and fell to brushing 
and dusting aroimd, for they perceived that there 
was matter of interest to the fore, and were willing 
to find out what it was. 

Sellers broke the news with stateliness and cere- 
mony, first warning the ladies, with gentle art, that 
a pang of peculiar sharpness was about to be inflicted 
upon their hearts — ^hearts stiU sore from a like hurt, 
still lamenting a like loss — ^then he took tiie pai)er« 
and with trembling lips and with tears in his voice 
he gave them that heroic death-picture. 

The result was a very gentiine outbreak of sorrow 
and sjrmpathy from all the hearers. The elder lady 
cried, thinking how proud that great-hearted young 

6a, 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 



S -■! 



hero's mother would be, if she were living, and how 
unappeasable her grief; and the two old servants 
cried with her, and spoke out their applauses and 
their pitjring lamentations with the eloquent sincerity 
and simphcity native to their race. Gwendolen was 
touched, and the romantic side of her nature was 
strongly wrought upon. She said that such a nature 
as that young man's was rarely and truly noble, and 
nearly perfect ; and that with nobility of birth added 
it was entirely perfect. For such a man she could 
endure all things, suffer all things, even to the sacri- 
ficing of her life. She wished she could have seen 
him; the slightest, the most momentary contact with 
such a spirit would have ennobled her whole char- 
acter, and made ignoble thoughts and ignoble acts 
thereafter impossible to her forever. 

"Have they found the body, Rossmore?" asked 
the wife. 

"Yes; that is, they've fotmd several. It must be 
one of them, but none of them are recognizable." 
'What are you going to do?" 
I am going down there and identify one of them, 
and send it home to the stricken father." 

But, papa, did you ever see the young man?" 
No, Gwendolen — ^why?" 
'How will you identify it?" 
I — ^well, you know, it says none of them are 
recognizable. I'll send his father one of them — 
there's probably no choice." 

Gwendolen knew it was not worth while to argue 
the matter further, since her father's mind was made 
up, and there was a chance for him to appear upon 

65 






it 
i< 
it 
It' 



MARK TWAIN 

that sad scene down yonder in an authentic and 
official way. So she said no more — ^till he asked for 
a basket. 

*'A basket, papa? What for?" 

''It might be ashes." 



it 



iti 



CHAPTER IX 

THE earl and Washington started on the sorrowful 
errand, talking as they walked. 

*'And as usual T* 

•'What, Colonel?" 

*'Seven of them in that hotel. Actresses. And 
all burnt out, of course." 
Any of them biunt up f 

Oh, no, they escaped; they always do; but 
there's never a one of them that knows enough to 
fetch out her jewelry with her." 

'.That's strange." 

'JStrange — it's the most unaccountable thing in 
the world. Experience teaches them nothing; they 
can't seem to learn anjrthing except out of a book. 
In some cases there's manifestly a fatality about it. 
For instance, take What's-her-name, that plays those 
sensational thtmder-and-lightning parts. She's got 
a perfectly immense reputation — draws like a dog- 
fight — and it all came from getting burnt out in 
hotels." 

"Why, how cotdd that give her a reputation as 
an actress?" 

**It didn't — it only made her name familiar. 
People want to see her play because her name is 
familiar, but they don't know what made it familiar, 

6j 



MARK TWAIN 

because they don't remember. First, she was at 
the bottom of the ladder and absolutely obscure — 
wages thirteen dollars a week and find her own 
pads." 

"Pads?" 

**Yes — ^things to fat up her spindles with so as to 
be plump and attractive. Well, she got burnt out 
in a hotel and lost $30,000 worth of diamonds — " 

•'She? Where'd she get them?" 

"Goodness knows — ^given to her, no doubt, by 
spoony young flats and sappy old baldheads in the 
front row. All the papers were full of it. She 
struck for higher pay and got it. Well, she got 
biunt out again and lost all her diamonds, and it 
gave her such a lift that she went starring." 

"Well, if hotel fires are all she's got to depend, on 
to keep up her name, it's a pretty precarious kind of 
a reputation, I shotdd think." 

* ' Not with her. No, anything but that. Because 
she's so lucky; bom lucky, I reckon. Every time 
there's a hotel fire she's in it. She's always there — 
and if she can't be there herself, her diamonds are. 
Now you can't make anything out of that but just 
sheer luck." 

"I never heard of such a thing. She must have 
lost quarts of diamonds." 

"Quarts! she's lost bushels of them. It's got so 
that the hotels are superstitious about her. They 
won't let her in. They think there will be a fire; 
and, besides, if she's there it cancels the insurance. 
She's been waning a little lately, but this fire will set 
her up. She lost $60,000 worth last night." 

68 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

•'I think she's a fool. If I had $60,000 worth of 
diamonds I wouldn't trust them in a hotel." 

"I wotddn't either; but you can't teach an actress 
that. This one's been burnt out thirty-five times. 
And yet if there's a hotel fire in San Francisco 
to-night she's got to bleed again, you mark my words. 
Perfect ass; they say she's got diamonds in every 
hotel in the cotintry." 

When they arrived at the scene of the fire the 
IX)or old earl took one glimpse at the melancholy 
morgue and turned away his face, overcome by the 
spectacle. He said : 

**It is too true, Hawkins — ^recognition is impossi- 
ble; not one of the five could be identified by its 
nearest friend. Yon make the selection; I can't 
bear it." 

''Which one had I better—" 

"Oh, take any of them. Pick out the best one." 

However, the officers assured the earl — ^for they 
knew him, everybody in Washington knew him — 
that the position in which these bodies were found 
made it impossible that any one of them cotdd be 
that of his noble young kinsman. They pointed out 
the spot where, if the newspaper account was correct, 
he must have sunk down to destruction; and at a 
wide distance from this spot they showed him where 
the young man must have gone down in case he was 
suffocated in his room; and they showed still a third 
place, quite remote, where he might possibly have 
found his death if perchance he tried to escape by 
the side exit toward the rear. The old Colonel 
brushed away a tear, and said to Hawkins : 

69 



MARK TWAIN 



If 



As it ttims out, there was something prophetic 
in my fears. Yes, it's a matter of ashes. Will you 
kindly step to a grocery and fetch a couple more 
baskets?'* 

Reverently they got a basket of ashes from each 
of those now hallowed spots, and carried them 
home to consult as to the best manner of forwarding 
them to England, and also to give them an oppor- 
tunity to "lie in state" — sl mark of respect which 
the Colonel deemed obligatory, considering the high 
rank of the deceased. 

They set the baskets on the table in what was 
formerly the library, drawing-room, and work-shop — 
now the Hall of Audience — and went up-stairs to the 
lumber-room to see if they could find a British flag 
to use as a part of the outfit proper to the Ijdng in 
state. A moment later Lady Rossmore came in 
from the street and caught sight of the baskets just 
as old Jinny crossed her field of vision. She quite 
lost her patience, and said: 

"Well, what will you do next? What in the world 
possessed you to dutter up the parlor table with 
these baskets of ashes?" 

"Ashes?" And she came to look. She put up her 
hands in pathetic astonishment. "Well, I never see 
de like!" 

"Didn't you do it?" 

' * Who ? me ? Clah to goodness it's de fust time I've 
sot eyes on 'em, Miss Polly. Dat's Dan'l. Dat ole 
moke is losin' his mine." 

But it wasn't Dan'l, for he was called, and de- 
it. 

70 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

**Dey ain't no way to 'splain dat. Wen hit's one 
er dese-yer common 'currences, a body kin reckon 
maybe de cat — " 

*'0h!" and a shudder shook Lady Rossmore to 
her foundations. "I see it all. Keep away from 
them — ^they're his.** 

''His, m'lady?" 

"Yes — ^your young Marse Sellers from England 
that's burnt up." 

She was alone with the ashes — ^alone before she 
cotdd take half a breath. Then she went after 
Mulberry Sellers, purposing to make short work of 
his programme, whatever it might be; "for," said 
she, "when his sentimentals are up he's a numskull, 
and there's no knowing what extravagance he'll con- 
trive if you let him alone." Shefotmdhim. He had 
fotmd the flag and was bringing it. When she heard 
that his idea was to have the remains "lie in state, 
and invite the government and the public," she 
broke it up. She said: 

"Your intentions are all right — ^they always are — 
you want to do honor to the remains, and surely 
nobody can find any fault with that, for he was your 
kin; but you are going the wrong way about it, and 
you will see it yotu-self if you stop and think. You 
can't file around a basket of ashes trjdng to look sorry 
for it and make a sight that is really solenm, because 
the solemner it is, the more it isn't — anybody can 
see that. It would be so with one basket; it would 
be three times so with three. Well, it stands to 
reason that if it wouldn't be solemn with one mourner, 
it wouldn't be with a procession — and there would be 

7JC 



MARK TWAIN 

five thousand people here. I don't know but it 
would be pretty near ridiculous; I think it would. 
No, Mtdberry, they can't lie in state — it would be 
a mistake. Give that up and think of something 
dse." 

So he gave it up ; and not reluctantly, when he had 
thought it over and realized how right her instinct 
was. He concluded to merely sit up with the 
remains — just himself and Hawkins. Even this 
seemed a doubtful attention, to his wife, but she 
offered no objection, for it was plain that he had a 
quite honest and simple-hearted desire to do the 
friendly and honorable thing by these forlorn poor 
relics which could conmiand no hospitality in this 
far-off land of strangers but his. He draped the 
flag about the baskets, put some crape on the door- 
knob, and said, with satisfaction: 

** There — he is as comfortable now as we can make 
him in the circtunstances. Except — yes, we must 
strain a point there — one must do as one would 
wish to be done by — he must have it." 

**Have what, dear?" 

*'Hatchment." 

The wife felt that the house-front was standing 
about all it could well stand in that way; the prospect 
of another stimning decoration of that nature dis- 
tressed her, and she wished the thing had not 
occurred to him. She said, hesitatingly: 

''But I thought such an honor as that wasn't 
allowed to any but very, very near relations, who — " 

*' Right, you are quite right, my lady, perfectly 
right; but there aren't any nearer relatives than 

72 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

relatives by usurpation. We cannot avoid it ; we are 
slaves of aristocratic custom, and must submit. '* 

The hatchments were imnecessarily generous, each 
being as large as a blanket, and they were unneces- 
sarily volcanic, too, as to variety and violence of 
color, but they pleased the earl's barbaric eye, and 
they satisfied his taste for symmetry and complete- 
ness, too, for they left no waste room to speak of on 
the house-front. 

Lady Rossmore and her daughter assisted at the 
sitting-up till near midnight, and helped the gentle- 
men to consider what ought to be done next with the 
remains. Rossmore thought they ought to be sent 
home — with a committee and resolutions — ^at once. 
But the wife was doubtful. She said: 

"Would you send all of the baskets?'* 

*'0h, yes, all." 

"All at once?" 

"To his father? Oh, no — ^by no means. Think 
of the shock. No — one at a time; break it to him 
by degrees." 

"Would that have that effect, father?" 

"Yes, my daughter. Remember, you are young 
and elastic, but he is old. To send him the whole at 
once might well be more than he could bear. But 
mitigated — one basket at a time, with restful inter- 
vals between, he would be used to it by the time he. 
got all of him. And sending him in three ships is 
safer anjrway. On account of wrecks and storms." 

"I don't like the idea, father. If I were his father 
it would be dreadful to have him coming in that — 
in that—" 

n 



MARK TWAIN 

''On the instalment plan," suggested Hawkins, 
gravely, and proud of being able to help. 

"Yes — dreadful to have him coming in that incx)- 
herent way. There would be the strain of suspense 
upon me all the time. To have so depressing a 
thing as a funeral impending, delayed, waiting, im- 
accomplished — ' ' 

**0h, no, my child/* said the earl, reasstiringly, 
"there would be nothing of that kind; so old a 
gentleman could not endure a long-drawn suspense 
like that. There will be three ftmerals." 

Lady Rossmore looked up surprised, and said : 

"How is that going to make it easier for him? It's 
a total mistake, to my mind. He ought to be buried 
all at once; I'm sxire of it." 

"I should think so, too," said Hawkins. 

"And certainly I should," said the daughter. 

"You are all wrong," said the earl. "You will see 
it yourselves if you think. Only one of these baskets 
has got him in it." 

"Very well, then," said Lady Rossmore, "the 
thing is perfectly simple — ^bury ^t one." 

"Certainly," said Lady Gwendolen. 

"But it is not simple," said the earl, "because we 
do not know which basket he is in. We know he is 
in one of them, but that is all we (fo know. You see 
now, I reckon, that I was right; it takes three fu- 
nerals, there is no other way." 

* 'And three graves and three monuments and three 
inscriptions?" asked the daughter. 

"Well — ^yes — ^to do it right. That is what I 
should do." 

74 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

''It could not be done so, father. Each of the in- 
scriptions would give the same name and the same 
facts and say he was under each and all of these 
monuments, and that would not answer at all.'* 

The earl nestled tmcomf ortably in his chair. 

"No/* he said, **that is an objection. That is a 
serious objection. I see no way out." 

There was a general silence for a while. Then 
Hawkins said: 

"It seems to me that if we mixed the three rami- 
fications together — " 

The earl grasped him by the hand and shook it 
gratefully. 

"It solves the whole problem," he said. "One 
ship, one funeral, one grave, one monument — it is 
admirably conceived. It does you honor. Major 
Hawkins, it has refieved me of a most painful em- 
barrassment and distress, and it will save that poor 
stricken old father much suffering. Yes, he shall go 
over in one basket." 

"When?" asked the wife. 
To-morrow — immediately, of course." 
I would wait, Mulberry." 

"Wait? Why?" 

" You don't want to break that childless old man's 
heart." 

"God knows I don't." 

"Then wait till he sends for his son's remains. If 
you do that you will never have to give him the last 
and sharpest pain a parent can know — ^I mean, the 
certainty that his son is dead. For he will never 
send." 

IS 



It 



MARK TWAIN 

*'Why won't her 

"Because to send — and find out the truth — would 
rob him of the one precious thing left him: ttieuncer- 
tainty, the dim hope that maybe, after all, his boy 
escaped, and he will see him again some day." 

*' Why, Polly, he'll know by the papers that he was 
burnt up." 

"He won't let himself believe the papers; he'll 
argue against anything and everjrthing that proves 
his son is dead; and he will keep that up and live on 
it, and on nothing else till he dies. But if the remains 
should actually come, and be put before that poor old 
dim-hoping soul — " 

"Oh, my God, they never shall! Polly, you've 
saved me from a crime, and I'll bless you for it 
always. Now we know what to do. We'll place 
them reverently away, and he shall never know." 



CHAPTER X 

THE young Lord Berkeley, with the fresh air ol 
freedom in his nostrils, was feeling invincibly 
strong for his new career; and yet — and yet — if the 
fight should prove a very hard one at first, very dis- 
couraging, very taxing on untoughened moral sinews, 
he might in some weak moment want to retreat. Not 
likely, of course, but possibly that might happen. 
And so, on the whole, it might be pardonable caution 
to bum his bridges behind him. Oh, without doubt* 
He must not stop with advertising for the owner ol 
that money, but must put it where he could not 
borrow from it himself, meantime, imder stress ol 
drctimstances. So he went down-town and put in his 
advertisement, then went to a bank and handed in 
$500 for deposit. 

''What name?" 

He hesitated and colored a Uttle; he had forgotten 
to make a selection. He now brought out the first 
one that suggested itself : 

"Howard Tracy." 

When he was gone, the clerks, marveling, said: 

*'The cowboy blushed." 

The first step was accomplished. The money was 
still tmder his command and at his disposal, but the 
next step would dispose of that difficulty. He went to 

77 



MARK TWAIN 

another bank and drew upon the first bank for the 
$500 by check. The money was collected and de- 
posited a second time to the credit of Howard Tracy. 
He was asked to leave a few samples of his signature, 
which he did. Then he went away, once more proud 
and of perfect courage, sajdng: 

*'No help for me now, for henceforth I cotildn't 
draw that money without identification, and that is 
become legally impossible. No resources to fall back 
on. It is work or starve from now to the end. I am 
ready — ^and not afraid!" 

Then he sent this cablegram to his father: 

Escaped unhurt from btuning hotel. Have taken fictitious 
name. Good-by. 

During the evening, while he was wandering about 
in one of the outlying districts of the dty, he came 
across a small brick diurch, with a bill posted there 
with these words printed on it: ** Mechanics' Club 
Deb ATS. All Invited." He saw people, apparently 
mainly of the working class, entering the place, and 
he followed and took his seat. It was a humble lit- 
tle church, quite bare as to ornamentation. It had 
painted pews without cushions, and no pulpit, prop- 
erly speaking, but it had a platform. On the plat- 
form sat the chairman, and by his side sat a man "who 
held a manuscript in his hand and had the waiting 
look of one who is going to perform the principal 
part. The church was soon filled with a quiet and 
orderly congregation of decently dressed and modest 
people. This is what the chairman said: 

''The essayist for this evening is aa old membeip of 

78 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

our dub whom you all know, Mr. Parker, assistant 
editor of the Daily Democrat. The subject of his 
essay is the American Press, and he will use as his 
text a couple of paragraphs taken from Mr. Matthew 
Arnold's new book. He asks me to read these texts 
for him. The first is as follows : 

"*Goethe says somewhere that " the thrill of awe," that is to 
say, REVERENCE, is the best thing humanity has.' 

**Mr. Arnold's other paragraph is as follows: 

** * I should say that if one were searching for the best means 
to efface and kill in a whole nation the discipline of respect, one 
could not do better than take the American newspapers.' " 

Mr. Parker rose and bowed, and was received with 
warm applause. He then began to read in a good, 
round, resonant voice, with dear enunciation and 
careful attention to his pauses and emphases. His 
points were received with approval as he went on. 

The essayist took the position that the most im- 
portant fimction of a public journal in any country 
was the propagating of national feeUng and pride 
in the national name— the keeping the people "in 
love with their country and its institutions, and 
shielded from the allurements of alien and inimical 
systems." He sketched the manner in which the 
reverent Turkish or Russian journalist fulfilled this 
fimction — the one assisted by the prevalent "dis- 
cipline of respect'* for the bastinado, the other for 
Siberia. Continuing, he said: 

The chief fimction of an English journal is that of all other 
journals the world over: it must keep the public eye fixed ad" 

6 79 



MARK TWAIN 

miringly upon certain things, and keep it diligently diverted 
from certain others. For instance, it must keep the public eye 
fixed admiringly upon the glories of England, a processional 
splendor stretching its receding line down the hazy vistas of 
time, with the mellowed lights of a thousand years glinting from 
its banners; and it must keep it diligently diverted from the fact 
that all these glories were for the enrichment and aggrandizement 
of the petted and privileged few, at cost of the blood and sweat 
and poverty of the unconsidered masses who achieved them, but 
might not enter in and partake of them. It must keep the 
public eye fixed in loving and awful reverence upon the throne 
as a sacred thing, and diligently divert it from the fact that 
no throne was ever set up by tilie tmhampered vote of a ma- 
jority of any nation; and that hence no throne exists that has a 
right to exist, and no symbol of it, flying from any flagstaff, is 
righteously entitled to wear any device but the skull and cross- 
bones of that kindred industry which differs from royalty only 
business-wise — ^merely as retail differs from wholesale. It must 
keep the citizen's eye fixed in reverent docility upon that curious 
invention of machine politics, an Established Church, and upon 
that bald contradiction of common justice, a hereditary nobility; 
and diligently divert it from the fact that the one damns him if 
he doesn't wear its collar, and robs him tmder the gentle name 
of taxation whether he wears it or not, and the other gets all 
the honors while he does all the woik. 

The essayist thought that Mr. Arnold, with his 
trained eye and intelligent observation, ought to 
have perceived that the very qtiality which he so 
regretfully missed from our press — ^respectfulness, 
reverence — ^was exactly the thing which would make 
our press useless to us if it had it — rob it of the very 
thing which differentiates it from all other journalism 
in the world and makes it distinctively and preciously 
American, its frank and cheerful irreverence being by 
all odds the most valuable of all its qualities. "For 
its mission — overlooked by Mr. Arnold — ^is to stand 
guard over a nation's liberties, not its humbugs and 

80 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

shams." He thought that if during fifty years the 
institutions of the old worid could be exposed to the 
fire of a flouting and scoffing press like ours, "mon- 
archy and its attendant crimes would disappear from 
Christendom. ' ' Monarchists might doubt this ; then 
"why not persuade the Czar to give it a trial in 
Russia ?' ' Concluding, he said : 

Well, the charge is, that our press has but little of that old- 
world quality, reverence. Let us be candidly grateful .that it 
is so. With its limited reverence it at least reveres the things 
which this nation reveres, as a rule, and that is sufficient; what 
other people revere is fairly and properly matter of light im- 
portance to us. Our press does not reverence kings, it does not 
reverence so-called nobilities; it does not reverence established 
ecclesiastical slaveries, it does not reverence laws which rob a 
younger son to fatten an elder one, it does not reverence any 
fraud or sham or infamy, howsoever old or rotten or holy, which 
sets one citizen above his neighbor by accident of birth; it does 
not reverence any law or custom, howsoever old or decayed or 
sacred, which shuts against the best man in the land the best 
place in the land and the divine right to prove property and 
go up and occupy it. In the sense of the poet Goethe — ^that 
meek idolater of provincial three-carat royalty and nobility — 
our press is certainly bankrupt in the "thrill of awe" — otherwise 
reverence; reverence for nickel plate and brummagem. Let us 
sincerely hope that this fact will remain a fact forever; for to 
my mind a discriminating irreverence is the creator and pro- 
tector of human liberty — even as the other thing is the creator, 
niu-se, and steadfast proteqtor of all forms of human slavery, 
bodily and mental. 

Tracy said to himself, almost shouted to himself, 
**I'm glad I came to this country. I was right. I 
was right to seek out a land where such healthy prin- 
ciples and theories are in men's hearts and minds. 
Think of the inntimerable slaveries imposed by mis- 
placed reverence! How well he brought that out, 

8z 



MARK TWAIN 

and how true it is. There's manifestly prodigious 
force in reverence. If you can get a man to reverence 
your ideals, he's your slave. Oh, yes ; in all the ages 
the peoples of Europe have been diligently taught to 
avoid reasoning about the shams of monarchy and 
nobiUty, been taught to avoid examining them, been 
taught to reverence them; and now, as a natural 
result, to reverence them is a second nature. In 
order to shock them it is sufficient to inject a thought 
of the opposite kind into their dull minds. For ages, 
any expression of so-called irreverence from their 
Ups has been sin and crime. The sham and swindle 
of all this is apparent the moment one reflects that 
he is himself the only legitimately qualified judge of 
what is entitled to reverence and what is not. Come, 
I hadn't thought of that before, but it is true, abso- 
lutely true. What right has Goethe, what right has 
Arnold, what right has any dictionary, to define the 
word Irreverence for me? What their ideals are is 
nothing to me. So long as I reverence my own ideals 
my whole duty is done, and I commit no profanation 
if I laugh at theirs. I may scoflE at other people's 
ideals as much as I want to. It is my right and my 
privilege. No man has any right to deny it," 

Tracy was expecting to hear the essay debated, but 
this did not happen. The chairman said, by way 
of explanation : 

* * I would say, for the information of the strangers 
present here, that in accordance with our custom the 
subject of this meeting will be debated at the next 
meeting of the club. This is in order to enable our 
members to prepare what they may wish to say 

82 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

upon the subject with pen and paper, for we are 
mainly mechanics and unaccustomed to speaking. 
We are obliged to write down what we desire to say." 
Many brief papers were now read, and several 
oflEhand speeches made in discussion of the essay 
read at the last meeting of the club, which had been 
a laudation, by some visiting professor, of college 
culture, and the grand results flowing from it to the 
nation. One of the papers was read by a man 
approaching middle age, who said he hadn't had a 
college education, that he had got his education in a 
printing-office, and had graduated from there into 
the patent-office, where he had been a derk now 
for a great many years. Then he continued to this 
effect: 

The essa3rist contrasted the America of to-day with the 
America of bygone times, and certainly the result is the exhibi- 
tion of a mighty progress. But I think he a little overrated the 
college-culture share in the production of that result. It can no 
doubt be easily shown that the colleges have contributed the 
intellectual part of this progress, and that that part is vast; but 
that the material progress has been immeasurably vaster I 
think you will concede. Now I have been looking over a list of 
inventors — ^the creators of this amazing material development 
— and I find that they were not college-bred men. Of course 
there are exceptions — like Professor Henry of Princeton, the 
inventor of Mr. Morse's system of telegraphy — ^but these excep- 
tions are few. It is not overstatement to say that the imagina* 
tion-stimning material development of this century, the only 
century worth living in since time itself was invented, is the 
creation of men not coUege-bred. We think we see what these 
inventors have done; no, we see only the visible vast frontage of 
their work; behind it is their far vaster work, and it is invisible 
to the careless glance. They have reconstructed this nation 
— made it over, that is — and, metaphorically speaking, have 
multiplied its numbers almost beyond the power of figures to 

83 



MARK TWAIN 

express. I will explain what I mean. What constitutes the 
population of a land? Merely the numberable packages of meat 
and bones in it called by courtesy men and women? Shall a 
million ounces of brass and a million ounces of gold be held to 
be of the same value? Take a truer standard: the measure of a 
man's contributing capacity to his time and his people — ^the work 
he can do — and then number the population of this coimtry 
to-day, as multiplied by what a man can now do more than his 
grandfather could do. By this standard of measurement, this 
nation, two or three generations ago, consisted of mere cripples, 
paralytics, dead men, as compared with the men of to-day. In 
1840 our poptdation was 17,000,000. By the way of rude but 
striking illustration, let us consider, for argument's sake, that 
four of these millions consisted of aged people, little children, 
and other incapables, and that the remaining 13,000,000 were 
divided and employed as follows: 

2,000,000 as ginners of cotton. 

6,000,000 (women) as stoddng-knitters. 

2,000,000 (women) as thread-spinners. 

500,000 as screw-makers. 

400,000 as reapers, binders, etc. 

1,000,000 as com-shellers. 

40,000 as weavers. 

1,000 as stitchers of shoe soles. 
Now the deductions which I am going to append to these 
figures may sound extravagant, but they are not. I take them 
from Miscellaneous Documents No. 50, second session 45th 
Congress, and they are official and trustworthy. To-day the 
work of those 2,000,000 cotton-ginners is done by 2,000 men; 
that of the 6,000,000 stocking-knitters is done by 3,000 boys; 
that of the 2,000,000 thread-spinners is done by 1,000 girls; that 
of the 500,000 screw-makers is done by 500 girls; that of the 
400,000 reapers, binders, etc., is done by 4,000 boys; that of the 
1,000,000 com-shellers is done by 7,500 men; that of the 40,000 
weavers is done by 1,200 men; and that of the 1,000 stitchers of 
shoe soles is done by 6 men. To bunch the figures, 17,000 
persons to-day do the above work, whereas fifty years ago it 
would have taken thirteen millions of persons to do it. Now 
then, how many of that ignorant race — our fathers and grand- 
fathers — ^with their ignorant methods, wotdd it take to do our 
work to-day? It would take forty thousand millions — a hundred 

84 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

times the swanning population of China — ^twenty times the 
present population of the globe. You look around you and you 
see a nation of sixty millions — apparently; but secreted in their 
hands and brains, and invisible to your eyes, is the true popu- 
lation of this Republic, and it numbers forty billions! It is the 
stupendous creation of those humble, tmlettered, im-college-bred 
inventors — all honor to their name. 

"How grand that is!" said Tracy, as he wended 
homeward. * * What a civilization it is, and what pro- 
digious results these are! and brought about almost 
wholly by common men; not by Oxford-trained 
aristocrats, but men who stand shoulder to shoulder 
in the humble ranks of life and earn the bread that 
they eat. Again I'm glad I came. I have found a 
country at last where one may start fair, and, breast 
to breast with his fellow-man, rise by his own efforts, 
and be something in the world and be proud of that 
something; not be something created by an ancestor 
three himdred years ago." 



CHAPTER XI 

DURING the first few days he kept the fact 
diligently before his mind that he was in a land 
where there was "work and bread for all." In fact, 
for convenience' sake he fitted it to a little tune and 
hummed it to himself; but as time wore on the fact 
itself began to take on a doubtful look, and next 
the time got fatigued and presently ran down and 
stopped. His first effort was to get an upper clerk- 
ship in one of the departments, where his Oxford 
education could come into play and do him service. 
But he stood no chance whatever. There compe- 
tency was no recommendation; political backing, 
without competency, was worth six of it. He was 
glaringly English, and that was necessarily against 
him in the political center of a nation where both 
parties prayed for the Irish cause on the house-top 
and blasphemed it in the cellar. By his dress he was 
a cowboy; that won him respect — ^when his back was 
not turned — ^but it couldn't get a clerkship for him. 
But he had said, in a rash moment, that he would 
wear those clothes till the owner or the owner's 
friends caught sight of them and asked for that 
money, and his conscience would not let him retire 
from that engagement now. 
At the end of a week things were beginning tQ 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

wear rather a startling look. He had hunted every- 
where for work, descending gradually the scale of 
quality, until apparently he had sued for all the 
various kinds of work a man without a special calling 
might hope to be able to do, except ditching and the 
other coarse manual sorts — ^and had got neither work 
nor the promise of it. 

He was mechanically turning over the leaves of his 
diary meanwhile, and now his eye fell upon the first 
record made after he was burnt out: 

I myself did not doubt my stamina before; nobody could 
doubt it now, if they cotdd see how I am housed, and reaHze that 
I feel absolutely no disgust with these quarters, but am as 
serenely content with them as any dog would be in a similar 
kennel. Terms, twenty-five dollars a week. I said I would 
start at the bottom. I have kept my word. 

A shudder went quaking through him, and he ex- 
claimed: 

' ' What have I been thinking of f This the bottom I 
Mooning along a whole week, and these terrific ex- 
penses climbing and climbing all the time! I must 
end this folly straightway.'* 

He settled up at once and went forth to find less 
stmiptuous lodgings. He had to wander far and 
seek with diligence, but he succeeded. They made 
him pay in advance — four dollars and a half; this 
secured both bed and food for a week. The good- 
natured, hard-worked landlady took him up three 
flights of narrow, imcarpeted stairs and delivered 
him into his room. There were two double bed- 
steads in it and one single one. He would be allowed 
tQ sleep alone in one of the double beds wtU SQwe 

87 



MARK TWAIN 

new boarder should come, but he wouldn't be charged 
extra. 

So he would presently be required to sleep with 
some stranger! The thought of it made him sick. 
Mrs. Marsh, the landlady, was very friendly, and 
hoped he would like her house — ^they all liked it, 
she said. 

**And they're a very nice set of boys. They carry 
on a good deal, but that's their fun. You see, this 
room opens right into this back one, and sometimes 
they're all in one and sometimes in the other; and 
hot nights they all sleep on the roof when it don't 
rain. They get out there the minute it's hot enough. 
The season's so early that they've already had a 
night or two up there. K you'd like to go up and 
pick out a place, you can. You'll find chalk in the 
side of the chimney where there's a brick wanting. 
You just take the chalk and — ^but, of course, you've 
done it before." 

"Oh, no, I haven't." 

**Why, of course, you haven't — ^what am I think- 
ing of? Plenty of room on the Plains without 
chalking, I'll be bound. Well, you just chalk out a 
place the size of a blanket anjrwhere on the tin that 
ain't already marked off, you know, and that's your 
property. You and your bed-mate take turn-about 
canying up the blanket and pillows and fetching 
them down again; or one carries them up and the 
other fetches them down; you fix it the way you like, 
you know. You'll like the boys; they're everlasting 
sociable — except the printer. He's the one that 
sleeps in that single bed — the strangest creature; 

88 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

why, I don't believe you cotild get that man to sleep 
with another man, not if the house was afire. Mind 
you, I'm not just talking, I know. The bojrs tried 
him to see. They took his bed out one night, and 
so when he got home about three in the morning — 
he was on a morning paper then, but he's on an eve- 
ning one now — there wasn't any place for him but 
with the iron-molder; and if you'll believe me, he 
just set up the rest of the night — ^he did, honest. 
They say he's cracked, but it ain't so, he's English — 
they're awful particular. You won't mind my sa3dng 
that. You — ^you're English?" 

''Yes." 

"I thought so. I could tell it by the way you 
mispronounce the words that's got a's in them, you 
know; such as saying loff when you mean laff — ^but 
you'll get over that. He's a right down good fellow, 
and a little sociable with the photographer's boy and 
the caulker and the blacksmith that work in the navy- 
yard, but not so much with the others. The fact 
is, though it's private, and the others don't know it, 
he's a kind of an aristocrat, his father being a doctor, 
and you know what style that is — ^in England, I mean, 
because in this cotmtry a doctor ain't so very much, 
even if he's that. But over there, of course, it's 
different. So this chap had a falling out with his 
father, and was pretty high strung, and just cut for 
this country, and the first he knew he had to get 
to work or starve. Well, he'd been to college, you 
see, and so he judged he was all right — did you say 
anything?" 

"No— I only sighed." 

89 






MARK TWAIN 

*'And there's where he was mistaken. Why, he 
mighty near starved. And I reckon he wotdd have 
starved sure enough if some jour' printer or other 
hadn't took pity on him and got him a place as 
apprentice. So he learned the trade, and then he 
was all right — ^but it was a dose call. Once he 
thought he had got to haul in his pride and holler for 
his father, and — why, you're sighing again. Is any- 
thing the matter with you? — does my clatter — " 
Oh, dear-no. Pray go on — ^I like it." 
Yes, you see, he's been over here ten years; he's 
twenty-eight now, and he ain't pretty well satisfied 
in his mind, because he can't get reconciled to being 
a mechanic and associating with mechanics, he being, 
as he says to me, a gentleman, which is a pretty plain 
letting-on that the boys ain't, but of coiu-se I know 
enough not to let that cat out of the bag." 

*'Why — ^would there be any harm in it?" 

**Harm in it? They'd lick him, wouldn't they? 
Wouldn't you? Of course you would. Don't you 
ever let a man say you ain't a gentleman in this 
country. But laws, what am I thinking about? I 
reckon a body would think twice before he said a 
cowboy wasn't a gentleman." 

A trim, active, slender, and very pretty girl of 
about eighteen walked into the room now, in the 
most satisfied and tmembarrassed way. She was 
cheaply but smartly and gracefully dressed, and the 
mother's quick glance at the stranger's face as he 
rose was of the kind which inquires what effect has 
been produced, and expects to find indications of 
surprise and admiration. 

90 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

"This is my daughter Hattie — ^we call her Puss. 
It's the new boarder, Puss.*' This without rising. 

The young Englishman made the awkward bow 
common to his nationality and time of life in circum- 
stances of delicacy and difficulty, and these were of 
that sort; for, being taken by surprise, his natural, 
lifelong self sprang to the front, and that self, of 
course, would not know just how to act when intro- 
duced to a chambermaid, or to the heiress of a me- 
chanics' boarding-house. His other self — the self 
which recognized the equality of all men — ^would 
have managed the thing better if it hadn't been 
caught off guard and robbed of its chance. The 
yoimg girl paid no attention to the bow, but put 
out her hand frankly and gave the stranger a friendly 
shake, and said: 

*'How do you do?'* 

Then she marched to the one washstand in the 
room, tilted her head this way and that before the 
wreck of a cheap mirror that hung above it, damp- 
ened her fingers with her tongue, perfected the circle 
of a little lock of hair that was pasted against 
her forehead, then began to busy herself with the 
'slops. 

* ' Well, I must be going — it's getting toward supper- 
time. Make yourself at home, Mr. Tracy; you'll 
hear the bell when it's ready." 

The landlady took her tranquil departure without 
commanding either of the young people to vacate the 
room. The young man wondered a little that a 
mother who seemed so honest and respectable should 
be so thoughtless, and was reaching for his hat, in* 

9x 



MARK TWAIN 

tending to disembarrass the girl of his presence; but 
she said.: 

*'Where are you going?" 

*' Well — ^nowhere in particular, but as I am only in 
the way here — " 

* * Why, who said you were in the way ? Sit down— 
I'll move you when you are in the way." 

She was making the beds now. He sat down and 
watched her deft and diligent performance. 

**What gave you that notion? Do you reckon I 
need a whole room just to make up a bed or two in?" 

**Well, no, it wasn't that, exactly. We are away 
up here in an empty hotise, and your mother being 
gone — '* 

The girl interrupted him with an amused laugh, 
and said : 

"Nobody to protect me? Bless you, I don't need 
it. I'm not afraid. I might be if I was alone, because 
I do hate ghosts, and I don't deny it. Not that I 
believe in them, for I don't. I'm only just afraid of 
them.'* 

**How can you be afraid of them if you don't 
believe in them?" 

*0h, I don't know the how of it — ^that's too many 
for me; I only know it's so. It's the same with Mag- 
gie Lee." 

"Who is that?" 

"One of the boarders; yoimg lady that works in 
the fact'ry." 

"She works in a factory?" 

"Yes. Shoe fact'ry." 

"In a shoe factory; and you call her a yotmg lady?" 

92 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 



"Why, she's only twenty-two; what shotild you 
caU her?" 

'*! wasn't thinking of her age; I was thinking of 
the title. The fact is, I came away from England to 
get away from artificial forms — ^for artificial forms 
stiit artificial people only — ^and here you've got them, 
too. I'm sorry. I hoped you had only men and 
women; everybody equal; no differences in rank.'* 

The girl stopped with a pillow in her teeth and the 
case spread open below it, contemplating him from 
under her brows with a slightly puzzled expression. 
She released the pillow, and said : 

* ' Why, they are all equal. Where's any difference 
in rank?" 

**If you call a factory girl a yoimg lady, what do 
you call the President's wife?" 

**Call her an old one." 

*'0h, you make age the only distinction?" 

' * There ain't any other to make as far as I can see." 

*'Then all women are ladies?" 

"Certainly they are. All the respectable ones.'* 

"Well, that puts a better face on it. Certainly 
there is no harm in a title when it is given to every- 
body. It is only an offense and a wrong when it is 
restricted to a favored few. But, Miss — er — " 

"Hattie." 

"Miss Hattie, be frank; confess that that title 
isn't accorded by everybody to everybody. The rich 
American doesn't call her cook a lady — isn't that 
so?" 

"Yes, ifsso. What of it?" 

He was surprised and a little disappointed to see 

93 



MARK TWAIN 

that his admirable shot had produced no perceptible 
effect. 

''What oj it?" he said. *'Why, this: equality is 
not conceded here, after all, and the Americans are 
no better off than the English. In fact, there's no 
difference." 

*'Now what an idea. There's nothing in a title 
except what is put into it — you Ve said that yourself. 
Suppose the title is clean, instead of lady. You get 
that?" 

*'I believe so. Instead of speaking of a woman as 
a lady, you substitute clean and say she's a dean 
person." 

* ' That's it. In England the swell folks don't speak 
of the working people as gentlemen and ladies?" 

"Oh, no." . 

"And the working people don't call themselves 
gentlemen and ladies?" 
Certainly not." 

So if you used the other word there wouldn't be 
any change. The swell people wouldn't call anybody 
but themselves 'clean,* and those others would drop 
sort of meekly into their way of talking and they 
wouldn't call themselves dean. We don't do that 
way here. Everybody calls himself a lady or gentle- 
man, and thinks he is, and don't care what anybody 
dse thinks him, so long as he don't say it out loud. 
You think there's no difference. You knuckle down 
and we don't. Ain't that a difference?" 

"It is a difference I hadn't thought of; I admit 
that. Still — calling one's self a lady doesn't — er — " 

"I wouldn't go on if I were you." 

94 






THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

Howard Tracy turned his head to see who it might 
be that had introduced this remark. It was a short 
man about forty years old, with sandy hair, no 
beard, and a pleasant face badly freckled but alive 
and intelligent, and he wore slop-shop clothing which 
was neat but showed wear. He had come from the 
front room beyond the hall, where he had left his 
hat, and he had a chipped and cracked white wash- 
bowl in his hand. The girl came and took the bowL 

**I'll get it for you. You go right ahead and give 
it to him, Mr. Barrow. He's the new boarder — ^Mr. 
T*:acy — ^and I'd just got to where it was getting too 
deep for me." 

**Much obliged if you will, Hattie. I was coming 
to borrow of the boys." He sat down at his ease on 
an old trunk, and said, **IVe been listening and got 
interested; and as I was saying, I wouldn't go on if I 
were you. You see where you are coming to, don't 
you? Ca/Kngyourself a lady doesn't elect you; that 
is what you were going to say; and you saw that if 
you said it you were going to run right up against 
another difference that you hadn't thought of : to wit, 
Whose right is it to do the electing? Over there, 
twenty thousand people in a million elect themselves 
gentlemen and ladies, and the nine himdred and 
eighty thousand accept that decree and swallow the 
affront which it puts upon them. Why, if they didn't 
accept it it wouldn't be an election; it would be a 
dead letter, and have no force at all. Over here the 
twenty thousand would-be exclusives come up to the 
polls and vote themselves to be ladies and gentlemen. 
But the thing doesn't stop there. The nine hxmdred 
7 95 



MARK TWAIN 

and eighty thousand come and vote themselves to be 
ladies and gentlemen too^ and that elects the whole 
nation. Since the whole million vote themselves 
ladies and gentlemen, there is no question about that 
election. It does make absolute eqxiality, and there 
is no fiction about it; while over yonder the in- 
equality (by decree of the infinitely feeble, and con- 
sent of the infinitely strong) is also absolute — as real 
and absolute as our equality." 

Tracy had shrunk promptly into his English shell 
when this speech began, notwithstanding he had now 
been in severe training several weeks for contact and 
intercourse with the common herd on the common 
herd's terms; but he lost no time in pulhng himself 
out again, and so by the time the speech was finished 
his valves were open once more, and he was forcing 
himself to accept withojiit resentment the common 
herd's frank fashion of dropping sociably into other 
people's conversations tmembarrassed and iminvited. 
The process was not very difficult this time, for the 
man's smile and voice and manner were persuasive 
and winning, Tracy would even have liked him on 
the spot but for the fact — ^fact which he was not 
really aware of — that the equality of men was not 
yet a reality to him; it was only a theory; the mind 
perceived, but the man failed to feel it. It was 
Hattie's ghost over again, merely turned around. 
Theoretically Barrow was his equal, but it was dis- 
tinctly distasteful to see him exhibit it. He presently 
said: 

**I hope in all sincerity that what you have said is 
true as regards the Americans, for doubts have crept 

96 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT , 

into my mind several times. It seemed that the 
equality must be ungenuine where the sign-names of 
castes were still in vogue; but those sign-names have 
certainly lost their offense and are wholly neutralized, 
nullified, and harmless if they are the tmdisputed 
property of every individual in the nation. I think 
I realize that caste does not exist and cannot exist 
except by common consent of the masses outside of 
its limits. I thought caste created itself and per- 
petuated itself; but it seems qtiite true that it only 
creates itself, and is perpetuated by the people whom 
it despises, and who can dissolve it at any time by 
asstiming its mere sign-names themselves." 

*'It's what I think. There isn't any power on 
earth that can prevent England's thirty millions from 
electing themselves dukes and duchesses to-morrow 
and calling themselves so. And within six months all 
the former dukes and duchesses would have retired 
from the business. I wish they'd try that. Royalty 
itself couldn't survive such a process. A handful of 
f rowners against thirty million laughers in a state of 
eruption: Why, it's Herculaneum against Vesuvius; 
it would take another eighteen centuries to find that 
Herculaneum after the cataclysm. What's a Colonel 
in our South? He's a nobody; because they're all 
colonels down there. No, Tracy" (shudder from 
Tracy), "nobody in England would call you a gentle- 
man, and you wouldn't call yourself one; and I tell 
you it's a state of things that makes a man put him- 
self into most unbecoming attitudes sometimes — 
the broad and general recognition and acceptance of 
caste as caste does, I mean. Makes him do it imcon- 

97 



MARK TWAIN 

sciously — being bred in him, you see, and never 
thought over and reasoned out. You couldn't con- 
ceive of the Matterhom being flattered by the notice 
of one of your comely little English hills, could 
your 

*'Why, no/' 

*'Well, then, let a man in his right mind try to con- 
ceive of Darwin feeling flattered by the notice of a 
princess. It's so grotesque that it — ^well, it paralyzes 
the imagination. Yet that Memnon was flattered by 
the notice of that statuette; he says so — says so him- 
self. The system that can make a god disown his 
godship and profane it — oh, well, it's all wrong, it's 
all wrong and ought to be abolished, I should say." 

The mention of Darwin brought on a Uterary dis- 
cussion, and this topic roused such enthusiasm in 
Barrow that he took off his coat and made himself the 
more free and comfortable for it, and detained him so 
long that he was still at it when the noisy proprietors 
of the room came shouting and skylarking in, and 
began to romp, scuffle, wash, and otherwise entertain 
themselves. He lingered yet a little longer to offer 
the hospitalities of his room and his bookshelf to 
IVacy, and ask him a personal question or two: 
What is yottr trade?" 

'They — well, they call me a cowboy, but that is a 
fancy; I'm not that. I haven't any trade." 

*'What do you work at for yottr living?" 

*'0h, anything — I mean I would work at anything 
I could get to do, but thus far I haven't been able to 
find an occupation." 

*' Maybe I can help you; I'd like to try." 

98 






THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

"I shall be very glad. I've tried, myself, to 
weariness." 

''Well, of course, where a man hasn't a regular 
trade he's pretty bad off in this world. What you 
needed, I reckon, was less book-learning and more 
bread-and-butter-learning. I don't know what your 
father could have been thinking of. You ought to 
have had a trade, you ought to have had a trade, by 
all means. But never mind about that; we'll stir 
up something to do, I guess. And don't you get 
homesick; that's a bad business. We'll talk the 
thing over and look around a little. You'll come out 
all right. Wait for me — ^I'U go down to supper with 
you." 

By this time Tracy had achieved a very friendly 
feeling for Barrow, and would have called him a 
friend, maybe, if not taken too suddenly on a 
straight-out requirement to realize on his theories. 
He was glad of his society, anyway, and was feeling 
lighter-hearted than before. Also he was pretty 
curious to know what vocation it might be which had 
furnished Barrow such a large acquaintanceship with 
books and allowed him so much time to read* 



CHAPTER XII 

PRESENTLY the supper-bell began to ring in the 
depths of the house, and the sound proceeded 
steadily upward, growing in intensity all the way up 
toward the upper floors. The higher it came the 
more maddening was the noise, until at last what it 
lacked of being absolutely deafening was made up of 
the sudden crash and clatter of an avalanche of 
boarders down the uncarpeted stairway. The peer- 
age did not go to meals in this fashion; Tracy's train- 
ing had not fitted him to enjoy this hilarious zoologi- 
cal clamor and enthusiasm. He had to confess that 
there was something about this extraordinary out- 
pouring of animal spirits which he would have to 
get inured to before he could accept it. No doubt in 
time he would prefer it; but he wished the process 
might be modified and made just a little more 
gradual, and not quite so pronounced and violent. 
Barrow and Tracy followed the avalanche down 
through an ever-increasing and ever more and more 
aggressive stench of bygone cabbage and kindred 
smells; smells which are to be found nowhere but in 
a cheap private boarding-house; smells which once 
encotmtered can never be forgotten; smells which 
encoimtered generations later are instantly recog- 
nizable, but never recognizable with pleasure. To 

lOO 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

Tracy these odors were suffocating, horrible, almost 
unendurable ; but he held his peace and said nothing. 
Arrived in the basement, they entered a large dining- 
room where thirty-five or forty people sat at a long 
table. They took their places. The feast had al- 
ready begim, and the conversation was going on in 
the liveliest way from one end of the table to the 
other. The tablecloth was of very coarse material, 
and was liberally spotted with coffee-stains and 
grease. The knives and forks were iron, with bone 
handles. The spoons appeared to be iron or sheet 
iron, or something of the sort. The tea and coffee 
cups were of the commonest and heaviest and most 
durable stoneware. All the furniture of the table 
was of the commonest and cheapest sort. There was 
a single large, thick slice of bread by each boarder's 
plate, and it was observable that he economized it 
as if he were not expecting it to be duplicated. 
Dishes of butter were distributed along the table 
within reach of people's arms, if they had long ones, 
but there were no private butter-plates. The butter 
was perhaps good enough, and was quiet and well 
behaved; but it had more bouquet than was neces- 
sary, though nobody commented upon that fact or 
seemed in any way disturbed by it. The main fea- 
ture of the feast was a piping-hot Irish stew made of 
the potatoes and meat left over from a procession of 
previous meals. Everybody was liberally supplied 
with this dish. On the table were a couple of great 
dishes of sliced ham, and there were some other 
eatables of minor importance — ^preserves and New 
Orleans molasses and such things. There was also 

lOI 



MARK TWAIN 

plenty of tea and coffee of an infernal sort, with brown 
sugar and condensed milk, but. the milk and sugar 
supply was not left at the discretion of the boarders, 
but was rationed out at headquarters — one spoon- 
ful of sugar and one of condensed milk to each cup, 
and no more. The table was waited upon by two 
stalwart negro women who raced back and forth 
from the bases of supplies with splendid dash and 
clatter and energy. Their labors were supple- 
mented after a fashion by the yotmg girl Puss. She 
carried coflEee and tea back and forth among the 
boarders, but she made pleasure excursions rather 
than business ones in this way, to speak strictly. She 
made jokes with various people. She chaffed the 
young men pleasantly — ^and wittily, as she supposed, 
and as the rest also supposed, apparently, judging by 
the applause and laughter which she got by her 
efforts. Manifestly she was a favorite with most of 
the young fellows and sweetheart of the rest of them. 
Where she conferred notice she conferred happinesst 
as was seen by the face of the recipient ; and at the 
same time she conferred unhappiness — one could see 
it fall and dim the faces of the other young fellows 
like a shadow. She never '* Mistered" these friends 
of hers, but called them "Billy,'* "Tom," "John," 
and they called her "Puss" or "Hattie." 

Mr. Marsh sat at the head of the table, his wife 
sat at the foot. Marsh was a man of sixty, and was 
an American; but if he had been bom a month 
earlier he would have been a Spaniard. He was 
plenty good enough Spaniard as it was ; his face was 
very dark, his hair very black, and his eyes were not 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

only exceedingly black, but were very intense, and 
there was something about them that indicated that 
they could bum with passion upon occasion. He was 
stoop-shouldered and lean-faced, and the general 
aspect of him was disagreeable; he was evidently not 
a very companionable person. If looks went for 
anything, he was the very opposite of his wife, who 
was all motherliness and charity, good-will and good- 
nature. All the young men and the women called 
her Atmt Rachel, which was another sign. Tracy's 
wandering and interested eye presently fell upon one 
boarder who had been overlooked in the distribution 
of the stew. He was very pale, and looked as if he 
had but lately come out of a sick-bed, and also as if 
he ought to get back into it again as soon as possi- 
ble. His face was very melancholy. The waves of 
laughter and conversation broke upon it without 
affecting it any more than if it had been a rock in 
the sea, and the words and the laughter veritable 
waters. He held his head down and looked ashamed. 
Some of the women cast glances of pity toward him 
from time to time in a furtive and half -afraid way, 
and some of the youngest of the men plainly had 
compassion on the yotmg fellow — a compassion ex- 
hibited in their faces, but not in any more active or 
compromising way. But the great majority of the 
people present showed entire indifference to the 
youth and his sorrows. Marsh sat with his head 
down, but one could catch the malicious gleam of his 
eyes through his shaggy brows. He was watching 
that young fellow with evident relish. He had not 
neglected him through carelessness, and apparently 

J03 



MARK TWAIN 

the table understood that fact. The spectacle was 
making Mrs. Marsh very uncomfortable. She had 
the look of one who hopes against hope that the 
impossible may happen; but as the impossible did 
not happen, she finally ventured to speak up and 
remind her husband that Nat Brady hadn't been 
helped to the Irish stew. 

Marsh lifted his head and gasped out, with mock 
courtliness, "Oh, he hasn't, hasn't he? What a pity 
that is. I don't know how I came to overlook him. 
Ah, he must pardon me. You must, indeed, Mr. — 
er — ^Baxter — ^Barker, you must pardon me. I — er 
— ^my attention was directed to some other matter, 
I don't know what. The thing that grieves, me 
mainly is that it happens every meal now. But you 
must try to overlook these little things, Mr. Bunker, 
these little neglects on my part. They're always 
likely to happen with me in any case, and they are 
especially likely to happen where a person has — er — 
well, where a person is, say, about three weeks in arrears 
for his board. You get my meaning? — you get my 
idea ? Here is yoxir Irish stew, and — er — it gives me the 
greatest pleasure to send it to you, and I hope that you 
will enjoy the charity as much as I enjoy conferring it . " 

A blush rose in Brady's white cheeks and flowed 
slowly backward to his ears and upward toward his 
forehead, but he said nothing and began to eat his 
food under the embarrassment of a general silence 
and the sense that all eyes were fastened upon him. 
Barrow whispered to Tracy : 

**The old man's been waiting for that. He 
wouldn't have missed that chance for anything." 

104 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

**It*s a brutal business," said Tracy/ Then he said 
to himself, purposing to set the thought down in his 
diary later: 

"Well, here in this very house is a republic where 
all are free and equal, if men are free and equal any- 
where in the earth; therefore I have arrived at the 
place I started to find, and I am a man among men, 
and on the strictest equality possible to men, no 
doubt. Yet here on the threshold I find an in- 
equality. There are people at this table who are 
looked up to for some reason or another, and here 
is a poor devil of a boy who is looked down upon, 
treated with indiflEerence and shamed by htmiilia- 
tions, when he has committed no crime but that 
common one of being poor. Equality ought to 
make men noble-minded. In fact, I had supposed 
it did do that." 

After supper Barrow proposed a walk, and they 
started. Barrow had a purpose. He wanted Tracy 
to get rid of that cowboy hat. He didn't see his way 
to finding mechanical or manual employment for a 
person rigged in that fashion. Barrow presently said : 
'As I understand it, you're not a cowboy." 
No, I'm not." 

**Well, now, if you wiU not think me too curious, 
how did you come to mount that hat? Where'd you 
get it?" 

Tracy didn't know quite how to reply to this, but 
presently said: 

** Well, without going into particulars, I exchanged 
clothes with a stranger under stress of weather, and 
I would like to find him and re-exchange." 






MARK TWAIN 

"Well, why don't you find him? Where is he?'* 

**I don't know. I supposed the best way to find 
him would be to continue to wear his clothes, which, 
are conspicuous enough to attract his attention if I 
should meet him on the street." 

*'0h, very well," said Barrow; *'the rest of the 
outfit is well enough, and while it's not too con- 
spicuous, it isn't quite like the clothes that anybody 
else wears. Suppress the hat. When you meet your 
man he'll recognize the rest of his suit. That's a 
mighty embarrassing hat, you know, in a center of 
civilization like this. I don't believe an angel could 
get employment in Washington in a halo like 
that." 

Tracy agreed to replace the hat with something of 
a modester form, and they stepped aboard a crowded 
car and stood with others on the rear platform. Pres- 
ently, as the car moved swiftly along the rails, two 
men crossing the street caught sight of the backs of 
Barrow and Tracy, and both exclaimed at once, 
''There he is!" It was Sellers and Hawkins. Both 
were so paralyzed with joy that before they could 
pull themselves together and make an effort to stop 
the car it was gone too far, and they decided to wait 
for the next one. They waited awhile; then it oc- 
curred to Washington that there could be no use 
in chasing one horse-car with another, and he wanted 
to hxmt up a hack. But the Colonel said: 

** When you come to think of it, there's no occasion 
for that at all. Now that I've got him materialized, 
I can conunand his motions. I'll have him at the 
house by the time we get there." 

io6 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

Then they hurried off home in a state of great and 
joyful excitement. 

The hat exchange accompKshed, the two new 
friends started to walk back leisurely to the boarding- 
house. Barrow's mind was full of curiosity about 
this yoimg fellow. He said: 

** You've never been to the Rocky Motmtains?" 

'*No." 

** You've never been out on the plains?" 

''No." 

**How long have you been in this coxmtry?" 

**Only a few days." 

"You've never been in America before?" 

''No." 

Then Barrow communed with himself. "Now 
what odd shapes the notions of romantic people take. 
Here's a fellow who's read in England about cowboys 
and adventures on the plains. He comes here and 
buys a cowboy's suit. Thinks he can play himself 
on folks for a cowboy, all inexperienced as he is. 
Now the minute he's caught in this poor little game, 
he's ashamed of it and ready to retire from it. It is 
that exchange that he has put up as an explanation. 
It's rather thin, too thin altogether. Well, he's 
yoimg, never been anywhere, knows nothing about 
the world, sentimental, no doubt. Perhaps it was 
the natural thing for him to do, but it was a most 
singular choice, ctuious freak, altogether." 

Both men were busy with their thoughts for a 
time; then Tracy heaved a sigh and said: 

"Mr. Barrow, the case of that young fellow 
troubles me." 

107 



MARK TWAIN 

"You mean Nat Brady?" 

"Yes, Brady, or Baxter, or whatever It was. The 
old landlord called him by several different names." 

"Oh, yes, he has been very liberal with names 
for Brady, since Brady fell into arrears for his board. 
Well, that's one of his sarcasms — ^the old man thinks 
he's great on sarcasm." 

"Well, what is Brady's difficulty? What is 
Brady — ^who is he?" 

"Brady is a tinner. He's a yotmg journeyman 
tinner who was getting along all right till he fell sick 
and lost his job. He was very popular before he lost 
his job; everybody in the house liked Brady. The 
old man was rather especially fond of him, but you 
know that when a man loses his job and loses his 
abiUty to support himself and to pay his way as he 
goes, it makes a great difference in the way people 
look at him and feel about him." 

"Is that so! J^itso?" 

Barrow looked at Tracy in a puzzled way. "Why, 
of course it's so. Wouldn't you know that, naturally ? 
Don't you know that the wounded deer is always 
attacked and killed by its companions and friends?" 

Tracy said to himself, while a chilly and boding 
discomfort spread itself through his system, "In a 
republic of deer and men, where all are free and 
equal, misfortune is a crime, and the prosperous gore 
the imfortimate to death." Then he said aloud, 
"Here in the boarding-house, if one wotdd have 
friends and be popular, instead of having the cold 
shoulder turned upon him, he must be prosperous." 

"Yes," Barrow said, "that is so. It's their 

1 08 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

human nature. They do turn against Brady, now 
that he's unfortunate, and they don't like him as 
well as they did before; but it isn't because of any 
lack in Brady — ^he's just as he was before, has the 
same nature and the same impulses, but they — ^well, 
Brady is a thorn in their conscience, you see. They 
know they ought to help him and they're too stingy 
to do it, and they're ashamed of themselves for that, 
and they ought also to hate themselves on that 
account, but instead of that they hate Brady because 
he makes them ashamed of themselves. I say that's 
himian nature; that occurs everywhere; this board- 
ing-house is merely the world in httle; it's the case 
all over — ^they're all alike. In prosperity we are 
poptdar; popularity comes easy in that case, but 
when the other thing comes oxir friends are pretty 
likely to tiun against us." 

Tracy's noble theories and high purposes were 
beginning to feel pretty damp and clammy. He won- 
dered if by any possibility he had made a mistake in 
throwing his own prosperity to the winds and taking 
up the cross of other people's unprosperity. But he 
wouldn't listen to that sort of thing; he cast it out of 
his mind, and resolved to go ahead resolutely along 
the course he had mapped out for himself. 

Extracts from his diary: 

Have now spent several days in this singular hive. I don't 
know quite what to make out of these people. They have 
merits and virtues, but they have some other qualities, and some 
ways that are hard to get along with. I can't enjoy them. 
The moment I appeared in a hat of the period I noticed a 
change. The respect which had been paid me before pasS'ed 
suddenly away, and the people became friendly— more than that, 

log 



MARK TWAIN 

they became familiar, and Tm not used to familiarity, and can't 
take to it right ofE; I find that out. These people's familiarity 
amotmts to impudence, sometimes. I suppose it's all right; no 
doubt I can get used to it, but it's not a satisfactory process at 
all. I have accomplished my dearest wish; I am a man among 
men, on an equal footing with Tom, Dick, and Harry, and yet 
it isn't just exactly what I thought it was going to be. I — I miss 
home. Am obliged to say I am homesick. Another thing — and 
this is a confession — a reluctant one, but I will make it: The 
thing I miss most, and most severely, is the respect, the defer- 
ence, with which I was treated all my life in England, and which 
seems to be somehow necessary to me. I get along very well 
without the luxtuy and the wealth and the sort of society I'vo 
been accustomed to, but I do miss the respect, and can't seem to 
get reconciled to the absence of it. There is respect, there is 
deference here, but it doesn't fall to my share. It is lavished on 
two men. One of them is a portly man of middle age who is a 
retired plumber. Everybody is pleased to have that man's 
notice. He's full of pomp and circtunstance and self-com- 
placency and bad grammar, and at table he is Sir Oracle, and 
when he opens his mouth not any dog in the kennel barks. The 
other person is a policeman at tiie Capitol building. He repre- 
sents the government. The deference paid to these two men is 
not so very far short of that paid to an earl in England, though 
the method of it differs. Not so much courtliness, but the 
deference is all there. 

Yes, and there is obsequiousness, too. 

It does rather look as if in a republic where all are free and 
equal prosperity and position constitute rank. 



CHAPTER XIII 

THE days drifted by, and they grew ever more 
dreary. For Barrow's eflforts to find work for 
Tracy were unavailing. Always the first questioa 
asked was, "What union do you belong to?" 

Tracy was obliged to reply that he didn't belong to 
any trade-union. 

''Very well, then, it's impossible to employ yoa. 
My men wouldn't stay with me if I should employ a 
'scab,' or 'rat,'" or whatever the phrase was. 

Finally, Tracy had a happy thought. He said, 
"Why, the thing for me to do, of course, is to join a 
trade-tmion." 

"Yes," Barrow said; "that is the thing for you to 
do — ^if you can." 

"If I caw? Is it difficult?" 

"Well, yes," Barrow said, "it's sometimes difficult 
— in fact, very difficult. But you can try, and of 
course it will be best to try." 

Therefore Tracy tried; but he did not sucoeed. He 
was refused admission with a good deal of prompt- 
ness, and was advised to go back home, where he 
belonged, not come here taking honest men's bread 
out of their mouths. Ttacy began to realize that the 
situation was desperate, and the thought made him 
cold to the marrow* He said to himself, "So there is 

8 III 



MARK TWAIN 

an aristocracy of position here, and an aristocracy of 
prosperity, and apparently there is also an aristocracy 
of the ins as opposed to the outs, and I am with the 
outs. So the ranks grow daily here. Plainly there 
are all kinds of castes here, and only one that I 
belong to — the outcasts." But he couldn't even 
smile at his small joke, although he was obliged to 
confess that he had a rather good opinion of it. 
He was feeling so defeated and miserable by this 
time that he could no longer look with philosophi- 
cal complacency on the horse-play of the young 
fellows in the upper rooms at night. At first it 
had been pleasant to see them tmbend and have 
a good time after having sO well earned it by the 
labors of the day, but now it all rasped upon his 
feelings and his dignity. He lost patience with the 
spectacle. When they were feeling good they shouted, 
they scuffled, they sang songs, they romped about the 
place like cattle, and they generally wotmd up with a 
pillow-fight, in which they banged each other over 
the head, and threw the pUlows in all directions, and 
every now and then he got a buffet himself; and they 
were always inviting him to join in. They called 
him "Johnny Bull," and invited him with excessive 
familiarity to take a hand. At first he had endured 
all this with good-nature, but latterly he had shown 
by his manner that it was distinctly distasteful to 
him, and very soon he saw a change in the manner of 
these young people toward him. They were souring 
on him, as they would have expressed it in their 
language. He had never been what might be called 
popular. That was hardly the phrase for it ; he had 

112 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

merely been liked, but now dislike for him was grow^ 
ing. His case was not helped by the fact that he was 
out of luck, couldn't get work, didn't belong to a 
union, and couldn't gain admission to one. He got a 
good many slights of that small, ill-defined sort that 
you can't quite put your finger on, and it was mani- 
fest that there was only one thing which protected 
him from open insult, and that was his muscle. 
These young people had seen him exercising morn- 
ings, after his cold sponge bath, and they had per- 
ceived by his performance and the build of his body 
that he was athletic, and also versed in boxing. He 
felt pretty naked now, recognizing that he was shorn 
of all respect except respect for his fists. One night 
when he entered his room he fotmd about a dozen 
of the yotmg fellows there carrying on a very lively 
conversation punctuated with horse-laughter. The 
talking ceased instantly, and the frank affront of a 
dead silence followed. He said : 

**Good evening, gentlemen," and sat down. 

There was no response. He flushed to the temples, 
but forced himself to maintain silence. He sat there 
in this tmcomfortable stillness some time, then got 
up and went out. 

The moment he had disappeared he heard a pro- 
digious shout of laughter break forth. He saw that 
their plain purpose had been to insult him. He 
ascended to the flat roof, hoping to be able to cool 
down his spirit there and get back his tranquillity. 
He found the young tinner up there, alone and brood- 
ing, and entered into conversation with him. They 
were pretty fairly matched now in unpopularity and 

"3 



MARK TWAIN 

general ill-luck and misery, and they had no trouble 
in meeting upon this common grotmd with advantage 
and something of comfort to both. But Tracy's 
movements had been watched, and in a few minutes 
the tormentors came straggling one after another to 
the roof, where they began to stroll up and down in 
an apparently purposeless way. But presently they 
fell to dropping remarks that were evidently aimed at 
Tracy, and some of them at the tinner. The ring- 
leader of this little mob was a short-haired bully and 
amatexir prize-fighter named Allen, who was accus- 
tomed to lording it over the upper floor, and had 
more than once shown a disposition to make trouble 
with Tracy. Now there was an occasional cat-call, 
and hootings, and whistlings, and finally the diver- 
sion of an exchange of connected remarks was intro- 
duced : 

How many does it take to make a pair?" 
Well, two generally makes a pair, but sometimes 
there ain't stuff enough in them to make a whole 
pair." General laugh. 

**What were you saying about the English awhile 
ago?" 

'*0h, nothing; the English are all right, only — 
I—" 

"What was it you said about them?' 

"Oh, I only said they swallow well. 

"Swallow better than other people?" 

* ' Oh, yes ; the English swallow a good deal better 
than other people." 

"What is it they swallow best?" 

*'0h, insults/' Another general laugh, 

IJ4 



if 






THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

•'Pretty hard to make 'em fight, ain't it?" 

**No, 'tain't hard to make 'em fight." 

''Ain't it, reaUy?" 

"No, 'tain't hard. It's impossible." Another 
laugh. 

"This one's kind of spiritless, that's certain." 

*' Couldn't be the other way — in his case." 

"Why?" 

"Don't you know the secret of his birth?" 

"No! Has he got a secret of his birth?" 

"You bet he has." 

"What is it?" 

"His father was a wax-figger." 

Allen came strolling by where the pair were sitting, 
stopped, and said to the tinner: 

"How are you off for friends these days?" 

"Well enough off." 

"Got a good many?" 

"Well, as many as I need." 

"A friend is valuable, sometimes — ^as a protector, 
you know. What do you reckon would happen if I 
was to snatch your cap off and slap you in the face 
with it?" 

"Please don't trouble me, Mr. Allen, I ain't doing 
anything to you." 

"You answer me! What do you reckon wotdd 
happen?" 

"Well, I don't know." i 

Tracy spoke up with a good deal of deliberation, 
and said: 

"Don't trouble the yoimg fellow. I can tell you 
what would happen." 

"5 



MARK TWAIN 

**0h, you can, can you? Boys, Johnny Bull can 
tell us what would happen if I was to snatch this 
chump's cap off and slap him in the face with it. 
Now you'll see." 

He snatched the cap and struck the youth in the 
face, and before he could inquire what was going to 
happen it had already happened, and he was warming 
the tin with the broad of his back. Instantly there 
was a rush, and shouts of **A ring! a ring! make a 
ring! Fair play all round ! Johnny's grit; give him 
a chance." 

The ring was quickly chalked on the tin, and Tracy 
f oimd himself as eager to begin as he could have been 
if his antagonist had been a prince instead of a 
mechanic. At bottom he was a little surprised at this, 
because although his theories had been all in that 
direction for some time, he was not prepared to find 
himself actually eager to measure strength with quite 
so common a man as this ruflBan. In a moment all 
the windows in the neighborhood were filled with 
people, and the roofs also. The men squared oflE, and 
the fight began. But Allen stood no chance whatever 
against the yotmg Enghshman. Neither in muscle 
nor in science was he his equal. He measured his 
length on the tin time and again ; in fact, as fast as 
he could get up he went down again, and the applause 
was kept up in liberal fashion from all the neighbor- 
hood around. Finally, Allen had to be helped up. 
Then Tracy declined to ptmish him further and the 
fight was at an end. Allen was carried off by some 
of his friends in a very much humbled condition, his 
face black-and-blue and bleeding, and Tracy was at 

ii6 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

once surrounded by the young fellows, who congratu- 
lated him, and told him that he had done the whole 
house a service, and that from this out Mr. Allen 
wotdd be a little more particular about how he 
handed slights and insults and maltreatment around 
among the boarders. 

Tracy was a hero now, and exceedingly popular. 
Perhaps nobody had ever been quite so popular on 
that upper floor before. But if being discountenanced 
by these young fellows had been hard to bear, their 
lavish commendations and approval and hero-wor- 
ship were harder still to endure. He felt degraded, 
but he did not allow himself to analyze the reasons 
why too closely. He was content to satisfy himself 
with the suggestion that he looked upon himself as 
degraded by the public spectacle which he had made 
of himself, fighting on a tin roof for the delectation of 
everybody a block or two around. But he wasn't 
entirely satisfied with that explanation of it. Once 
he went a little too far, and wrote in his diary that his 
case was worse than that of the prodigal son. He 
said the prodigal son merely fed swine; he didn't 
have to chum with them. But he struck that out, 
and said, "All men are equal. I will not dis- 
own my principles. These men are as good as 
lam.'' 

Tracy was become popular on the lower floors also. 
Everybody was grateful for Allen's reduction to the 
ranks, and for his transformation from a doer of out- 
rages to a mere threatener of them. The yoimg girls, 
of whom there were half a dozen, showed many atten- 
tions to Tracy, particularly that boarding-house pet 

117 



MARK TWAIN 

Hattie, the landlady's daughter. She said to h\m^ 
very sweetly : 

*'I think you're ever so nice." 

And when he said, "I'm glad you think so, Miss 
Hattie," she said, still more sweetly: 

''Don't call me Miss Hattie — call me Puss." 

Ah, here was promotion ! He had struck the sum- 
mit. There were no higher heights to climb in that 
boarding-house. His popularity was complete. 

In the presence of people Tracy showed a tranquil 
outside, but his heart was being eaten out of him by 
distress and despair. 

In a little while he should be out of money, and 
then what should he do? He wished now that he 
had borrowed a little more liberally from that 
stranger's store. He fotmd it impossible to sleep, 
A single torturing, terrifying thought went racking 
rotmd and rotmd in his head, wearing a groove in his 
brain: What should he do — ^what was to become of 
him? And along with it began to intrude a some- 
thing presently which was veiy like a wish that he 
had not joined the great and noble ranks of martyr- 
dom, but had stayed at home and been content to be 
merely an earl and nothing better, with nothing more 
to do in this world of a useful sort than an earl finds 
to do. But he smothered that part of his thought 
as well as he could; he made every effort to drive it 
away, and with fair success, but he couldn't keep it 
from intruding a little now and then, and when it 
intruded it came suddenly and nipped him Uke a 
bite, a sting, a bum. He recognized that thought 
by the peculiar sharpness of its pang. The others 

1x8 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

were painful enough, but that one cut to the quick 
when it came. Night after night he lay tossing to 
the music of the hideous snoring of the honest bread- 
winners tmtil two and three o'clock in the morning, 
then got up and took refuge on the roof, where he 
sometimes got a nap and sometimes failed entirely. 
His appetite was leaving him, and the zest of Kf e was 
going along with it. Finally, one day, being near the 
imminent verge of total discouragement, he said to 
himself — ^and took occasion to blush privately when 
he said it, '*If my father knew what my American 
name is — ^he — ^well, my duty to my father rather 
requires that I furnish him my name. I have no 
right to make his days and nights tmhappy, I can do 
enough unhappiness for the family all by myself. 
Really he ought to know what my American name 
is." He thought over it awhile, and framed a cable- 
gram in his mind to this effect : 

'*My American name is Howard Tracy." 
That wouldn't be suggesting anything. His father 
could tmderstand that as he chose, and doubtless he 
would understand it as it was meant, as a dutiful and 
affectionate desire on the part of a son to make his old 
father happy for a moment. Continuing his train of 
thought, Tracy said to himself, "Ah, but if he should 
cable me to come home! I — ^I — couldn't do that — 
I mustn't do that. I've started out on a mission, and 
I mustn't turn my back on it in cowardice. No, no, 
I couldn't go home, at — ^at — ^least I shouldn't want to 
go home." After a reflective pause: "Well, maybe 
— ^perhaps — ^it would be my duty to go in the circum- 
stances; he's very old, and he does need me by him 

1^9 



MARK TWAIN 

to stay his footsteps down the long hill that inclines 
westward toward the sunset of his life. WeU, 111 
think about that. Yes, of coturse it wouldn't be 
right to stay here. I — ^if I — ^well* perhaps I could just 
drop him a line and put it off a little while and satisfy 
him in that way. It would be — ^well, it would mar 
everything to have him require me to come in- 
stantly." Another reflective pause — ^then: "And yet 
if he diould do that I don't know but — oh, dear me — 
home! how good it sotmds ! and a body is excusable 
for wanting to see his home again, now and then, 
anjrway." 

He went to one of the telegraph offices in the ave* 
nue and got the first end of what Barrow called the 
*' usual Washington courtesy," where "they treat you 
as a tramp until they find out you're a Congressman, 
and then they slobber all over you." There was a 
boy of seventeen on duty there, tying his shoe. He 
had his foot on a chair and his back turned toward 
the wicket. He glanced over his shoulder, took 
Tracy's measure, turned back, and went on tying his 
shoe. Tracy finished writing his telegram and waited, 
still waited, and still waited for that performance to 
finish, but there didn't seem to be any finish to it; 
so finally Tracy said : 

"Can't you take my telegram?" 

The youth looked over his shoulder and said, by his 
manner, not his words: 

' * Don't you think you could wait a minute if you 
tried?" 

However, he got the shoe tied at last, and came and 
took the telegram, glanced over it, then looked up 

J20 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

surprised at Tracy. There was something in his 
look that bordered upon respect, almost reverence, it 
seemed to Tracy, although he had been so long with- 
out anything of this kind he was not sure that he 
knew the signs of it. 

The boy read the address aloud with pleased ex- 
pression in face and voice. 

''The Earl of Rossmore! Cracky! Do you know 
him?" 

"Yes." 

''Is that so? Does he know you?" 

"Well— yes." 

"Well, I swear! Will he answer you?" 

"I think he will." 

"Will he, though? Where'll you have it sent?" 

"Oh, nowhere. 1*11 call here and get it. When 
shall I call?" 

"Oh, I don't know — I'll send it to you. Where 
shall I send it? Give me your address; I'll send it 
to you soon's it comes." 

But Tracy didn't propose to do this. He had 
acquired the boy's admiration and deferential re- 
spect, and he wasn't wijjiing to throw these precious 
things away, a result sure to follow if he should give 
the address of that boarding-house. So he said 
again that he would call and get the telegram, and 
went his way. 

He idled along, reflecting. He said to himself, 
' ' There is something pleasant about being respected. 
I have acquired the respect of Mr. Allen and some of 
those others, and almost the deference of some of 
them on piu:e merit, for having thrashed Allen. 

121 



MARK TWAIN 

While their respect and their deference — if it is 
deference — is pleasant, a deference based upon a 
sham, a shadow, does really seem pleasanter still. 
It's no real merit to be in correspondence with an 
earl, and yet, after all, that boy makes me feel as 
if there was." 

The cablegram was actually gone home I The 
thought of it gave him an immense uplift. He 
walked with a lighter tread. His heart was full of 
happiness. He threw aside all hesitancies, and con- 
fessed to himself that he was glad through and 
through that he was going to give up this experiment 
and go back to his home again. His eagerness to 
get his father's answer began to grow now, and it 
grew with marvelous celerity after it began. He 
waited an hour, walking about, putting in his time 
as well as he could, but interested in nothing that 
came tmder his eye, and at last he presented himself 
at the office again and asked if any answer had 
come yet. The boy said : 

*'No, no answer yet"; then glanced at the dock 
and added, **I don't think it's likely you'll get one 
to-day." 

''Why not?" 

"Well, you see it's getting pretty late. You can't 
always tell where'bouts a man is when he's on the 
other side, and you can't always find him just the 
minute you want him, and you see it's getting about 
six o'clock now, and over there it 's pretty late at night . " 

"Why, yes," said Tracy, "Ihadn't thought of that." 

"Yes, pretty late now — ^half-past ten or eleven. 
Oh, yes, you probably won't get any answer to-night." 

122 



CHAPTER XIV 

SO Tracy went home to supper. The odors in that 
supper-room seemed more strenuous and more 
horrible than ever before, and he was happy in the 
thought that he was so soon to be free from them 
again. When the supper was over he hardly knew 
whether he had eaten any of it or not, and he cer- 
tainly hadn't heard any of the conversation. His 
heart had been dancing all the time, his thoughts had 
been far away from these things, and in the visions 
of his mind the stunptuous appointments of his 
father's castle had risen before him without rebuke. 
Even the plushed flunky, that walking symbol of a 
sham inequality, had not been unpleasant to his 
dreaming view. After the meal Barrow said: 

"Come with me. I'll give you a jolly evening. 

*'Very good. Where axe you going? 

"To my dub. 

"What dub is that?" 

"Mechanics' Debating Club. 

Tracy shuddered slightly. He didn't say any- 
thing about having visited that place himself. 
Somehow he didn't quite relish the memory of that 
time. The sentiments which had made his former 
visit there so enjoyable, and filled him with such 
enthusiasm, had undergone a gradual change, and 

123 



f» 



MARK TWAIN 

they had rotted away to such a degree that he 
couldn't contemplate another visit there with any- 
thing strongly resembling delight; in fact, he was a 
little ashamed to go. He didn't want to go there 
and find out by the rude impact of the thought of 
those people upon his reorganized condition of mind, 
how sharp the change had been. He would have 
preferred to stay away. He expected that now he 
should hear nothing except sentiments which would 
be a reproach to him in his changed mental attitude, 
and he rather wished he might be excused. And yet 
he didn't quite want to say that; he didn't want to 
show how he did feel, or show any disinclination to 
go ; and so he forced himself to go along with Barrow, 
privately purposing to take an early opporttmity to 
get away. 

After the essayist of the evening had read his 
paper, the chairman announced that the debate 
would now be upon the subject of the previous meet- 
ing, "The American Press." It saddened the back- 
sliding disciple to hear this announcement. It 
brought up too many reminiscences. He wished he 
had happened upon some other subject. But the 
debate began, and he sat still and listened. 

In the course of the discussion one of the speakers 
— a blacksmith named Tompkins — arraigned all 
monarchs and all lords on the earth for their cold 
selfishness in retaining their unearned dignities. He 
said that no monarch and no son of a monarch, no 
lord and no son of a lord, ought to be able to look 
his fellow-man in the face without shame. Shame 
for consenting to keep his unearned titles, property. 

124 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

and privileges at the expense of other people; shame 
for consenting to remain, on any terms, in dishonor- 
able possession of these things, which represented 
bygone robberies and wrongs inflicted upon the 
general people of the nation. He said: **If there 
were a lord or the son of a lord here I would like 
to reason with him, and try to show him how unfair 
and how selfish his position is. I would try to per- 
suade him to relinquish it, take Hs place among men 
on equal terms, earn the bread he eats, and hold of 
slight value all deference paid him because of arti- 
ficial position, all reverence not the just due of his 
own personal merits." 

Tracy seemed to be listening to utterances of his 
own made in talks with his radical friends in England. 
It was as if some eavesdropping phonograph had 
treasured up his words and brought them across the 
Atlantic to accuse him with them in the hoiur of his 
defection and retreat. Every word spoken by this 
stranger seemed to leave a blister on Tracy's con- 
science, and by the time the speech was finished he 
felt that he was all conscience and one blister. This 
man's deep compassion for the enslaved and op- 
pressed millions in Europe who had to bear with the 
contempt of that small class above them, throned 
upon shining heights whose paths were shut against 
them, was the very thing he had often uttered him- 
self. The pity in this man's voice and words was 
the very twin of the pity that used to reside In his 
own heart and come from his own lips when he 
thought of these oppressed peoples. 

The homeward tramp was accomplished in brood- 

125 



MARK TWAIN 

ing silence. It was a silence most grateful to 
Tracy's feelings. He wouldn't have broken it for 
anything; for he was ashamed of himself all the way 
through to his spine. He kept saying to himself: 

*'How imanswerable it all is — ^how absolutely im- 
answerable ! It is basely, degradingly selfish to keep 
those imeamed honors, and — ^and — oh, hang it, 
nobody but a cur — " 

*'What an idiotic damned speech that Tompkins 
made!" 

This outburst was from Barrow. It flooded 
Tracy's demoralized soul with waters of refreshment. 
These were the darlingest words the poor vacillating 
yoimg apostate had ever heard — ^for they white- 
washed his shame for him, and that is a good service 
to have when you can't get the best of all verdicts: 
self-acqtiittal. 

*'Come up to my room and smoke a pipe, Tracy/' 

Tracy had been expecting this invitation, and had 
had his declination all ready ; but he was glad enough 
to accept now. Was it possible that a reasonable 
argument could be made against that man's deso- 
lating speech? He was burning to hear Barrow try 
it. He knew how to start him and keep him going; 
it was to seem to combat his positions — a process 
effective with most people. 

*'What is it you object to in Tompkins's speech, 
Barrow?" 

* ' Oh, the leaving out of the factor of htmian nature ; 
reqtiiring another man to do what you wouldn't do 
yourself." 

*'Do you mean — " 

126 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

*'Why, here's what I mean; it's very simple. 
Tompkins is a blacksmith; has a family; works for 
wages; and hard, too — ^fooling aroimd won't furnish 
the bread. Suppose it should turn out that by the 
death of somebody in England he is suddenly an 
earl — ^income, half a million dollars a year. What 
would he do?" 

"Well, I — I suppose he would have to decline to — " , 

*'Man, he would grab it in a second!" 

*'Do you really think he would?" 

** Think? — I don't think anything about it, I 
know it." 

"Why?" 

* ' Why ? Because he's not a fool. ' ' 

"So you think that if he were a fool, he — " 

"No, I don't. Fool or no fool, he would grab it. 
Anybody would. Anybody that's alive. And I've 
seen dead people that would get up and go for it. I 
would myself." 

This was balm, this was healing, this was rest and 
peace and comfort. 

"But I thought you were opposed to nobilities?" 

"Transmissible ones, yes. But that's nothing. 
I'm opposed to millionaires, but it would be danger- 
ous to offer me the position." 

"You'd take it?" 

"I would leave the funeral of my dearest enemy to 
go and assimie its burdens and responsibilities." 

Tracy thought awhile, then said: 

' ' I don't know that I quite get the bearings of your 
position. You say you are opposed to hereditary 
nobilities, and yet if you had the chance you would — " 
9 127 



MARK TWAIN 

•'Take one? In a minute I would. And there 
isn't a mechanic in that entire dub that wouldn't. 
There isn't a lawyer, doctor, editor, author, tinker, 
loafer, railroad president, saint — land, there isn't a 
human being in Uie United States that wouldn't jump 
at the chancel" 

''Except me," said Tracy, softly. 

' ' Except you 1" Barrow could hardly get the words 
out, his scorn so choked him. And he couldn't get 
any further than that form of words; it seemed to 
dam his flow utterly. He got up and came and 
glared upon Tracy in a kind of outraged and tmap- 
peasable way, and said again, "Except youT He 
walked aroimd him — ^inspecting him from one point 
of view and then another, and relieving his soul now 
and then by exploding that formula at him: "Ex- 
cept you /" Finally he slumped down into his chair 
with the air of one who gives it up, and said: 

"He's straining his viscera and he's breaking his 
heart trjring to get some low-down job that a good 
dog wouldn't have, and yet wants to let on that if he 
had a chance to scoop an earldom he wouldn't do 
it. Tracy, don't put this kind of a strain on me. 
Lately I'm not as strong as I was." 

"Well, I wasn't meaning to put a strain on you, 
Barrow; I was only meaning to intimate that if an 
earldom ever does fall in my way — " 

"There — ^I wouldn't give myself any worry about 
that if I was you. And, besides, I can settle what you 
would do. Are you any diflEerent from me?" 

"Well— no." 

"Are you any better than me?" 

zaS 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

"Oh — er — ^why, certainly not.*' 

**Are you as good f Come!" 

*' Indeed, I — the fact is you take me so sud- 
denly—" 

''Suddenly? What is there sudden about it? It 
isn't a difficult question, is it? Or doubtful? Just 
meastue us on the only fair lines — the lines of merit 
— ^and of course you'll admit that a journeyman chair- 
maker that earns his twenty dollars a week, and has 
had the good and genuine culture of contact with 
men, and care, and hardship, and failure, and suc- 
cess, and downs and ups and ups and downs, is just 
a trifle the superior of a young fellow like you, who 
doesn't know how to do anything that's valuable, 
can't earn his living in any secure and steady way, 
hasn't had any experience of life and its seriousness, 
hasn't any culture but the artificial culture of books, 
which adorns but doesn't really educate — come! if 
/ wouldn't scorn an earldom, what the devil right 
hsiveyou to doit?" 

Tracy dissembled his joy, though he wanted to 
thank the chair-maker for that last remark. Pres- 
ently a thought struck him, and he spoke up briskly 
and said: 

"But look here, I really can't quite get the hang of 
your notions — ^your principles, if they are principles. 
You are inconsistent. You are opposed to aristocra- 
cies, yet you'd take an earldom if you could. Am 1 
to understand that you don't blame an earl for being 
and remaining an earl?" 

"I certainly don't." 

*'And you wouldn't blame Tompkins, or yourself, 

129 



MARK TWAIN 

or me, or anybody, for accepting an earldom if it was 
offered?" 

"Indeed, I wouldn't." 

"Well, then, whom would you blame?" 

"The whole nation — any bulk and mass of popu- 
lation anywhere, in any country, that will put up 
with the infamy, the outrage, the insult of a heredi- 
tary aristocracy which they can't enter — and on 
absolutely free and equal terms." 

"Come, aren't you beclouding yourself with dis- 
tinctions that are not differences?" 

"Indeed, I am not. I am entirely clear-headed 
about this thing. If I cotild extirpate an aristocratic 
system by declining its honors, then I should be a 
rascal to accept them. And if enough of the mass 
would join me to make the extirpation possible, then 
I should be a rascal to do otherwise than help in the 
attempt." 

"I believe I imderstand — yes, I think I get the 
idea. You have no blame for the lucky few who nat- 
urally decline to vacate the pleasant nest they were 
bom into ; you only despise the all-powerful and stupid 
mass of the nation for allowing the nest to exist." 

"That's it, that's itl You can get a simple thing 
through your head if you work at it long enough," 

"Thanks." 

"Don't mention it. And I'll give you some sound 
advice: when you go back, if you find your nation 
up and ready to abolish that hoary affront, lend a 
hand; but if that isn't the state of things and you 
get a chance at an earldom, don't you be a fool — 
you take it." 

130 



THE AMERICAN i.CLAIMANT 



u 



Tracy responded with earnestness and enthusiasm : 

*'AsIKve, rUdoitr 

Barrow laughed. 

' ' I never saw such a fellow, I begin to think you've 
got a good deal of imagination. With you, the idlest 
fancy freezes into a reaUty at a breath. Why, you 
looked, then, as if it wouldn't astonish you if you did 
tumble into an earldom." Tracy blushed. Barrow 
added: "Earldom! Oh, yes, take it if it offers; but 
meantime we'll go on looking arotmd, in a modest 
way, and if you get a chance to superintend a sausage- 
stuffer at six or eight dollars a week, you just trade 
off the earldom for a last year's almanac and stick 
to the sausage-stuflfing." 



CHAPTER XV 

TRACY went to bed happy once more, at rest in 
his mind once more. He had started out on a 
high emprise — ^that was to his credit, he argued; he 
had fought the best fight he could, considering the 
odds against him — ^that was to his credit; he had 
been defeated — certainly there was nothing discredit- 
able in that. Being defeated, he had, a right to 
retire with the honors of war and go back without 
prejudice to the position in the world's society to 
which he had been bom. Why not? Even the rabid 
republican chair-maker would do that. Yes, his con- 
science was comfortable once more. 

He woke refreshed, happy, and eager for his cable- 
gram. He had been bom an aristocrat, he had been a 
democrat for a time, he was now an aristocrat again. 
He marveled to find that this final change was not 
merely intellectual, it had invaded his feeling; and he 
also marveled to note that this feeling seemed a good 
deal less artificial than any he had entertained in his 
system for a long time. He could also have noted, if 
he had thought of it, that his bearing had stiffened 
overnight, and that his chin had lifted itself a shade. 
Arrived in the basement, he was about to enter the 
breakfast-room when he saw old Marsh in the dim 
light of a comer of the haU, beckoning him with his 

132^ 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

finger to approach. The blood welled slowly up in 
Tracy's cheek, and he said, with a grade of injured 
dignity almost ducal : 

'*Is that for me?'* 

*'Yes." 

'*What is the purpose of it?" 

**I want to speak to you — ^in private." 

This spot is private enough for me." 

Marsh was surprised ; and not particularly pleased. 
He approached and said : 

'*0h, in public, then, if you prefer. Though it 
hasn't been my way." 

The boarders gathered to the spot, interested. 

* * Speak out, ' ' said Tracy. * * What is it you want ?* ' 

"Well, haven't you — er — ^forgot something?" 

*'I? I'm not aware of it." 

**0h, you're not? Now you stop and think a 
minute." # 

*'I refuse to stop and think. It doesn't interest 
me. If it interests you, speak out." 

*'Well, then," said Marsh, raising his voice to a 
slightly angry pitch, **you fcwrgot to pay your board 
yesterday — ^if you're bound to have it public." 

Oh, yes; this heir to an annual million or so had 
been dreaming and soaring, and had forgotten that 
pitiful three or four dollars. For penalty he must 
have it coarsely flung in his face in the presence of 
these people — ^people in whose countenances was 
already begiiming to dawn an imcharitable enjoy- 
ment of the situation. 

''Is that all! Take your money and give your 
terrors a rest." 

133 



MARK TWAIN 

Tracy's hand went down into his pocket with angry 
decision. But — ^it didn't come out. The color began 
to ebb out of his face. The countenances about birn 
showed a growing interest; and some of them a 
heightened satisfaction. There was an imcomf ortable 
pause ; then he forced out, with difficulty, the words : 

"IVe— been robbed!" 

Old Marsh's eyes flamed up with Spanish fire, and 
he exclaimed : 

"Robbed, is it? Thafs your tune? It's too old — 
been played in this house too often; everybody plays 
it that can't get work when he wants it, and won't 
work when he can get it. Trot out Mr. Allen, some- 
body, and let him take a toot at it. It's his turn next ; 
he forgot, too, last night. I'm laying for him." 

One of the negro women came scrambling down 
stairs as pale as a sorrel horse with consternation and 
excitement : 

"Misto Marsh. Misto Allen's skipped out!" 

"What!" 

"Yes-sah, and cleaned out his room clean; tuck 
bofe towels en de soap!" 

"You lie, you hussy!" 

"It's jes' so, jes' as I tells you — en Misto Sumner's 
socks is gone, en Misto Naylor's yuther shirt." 

Mr. Marsh was at boiling-point by this time. He 
turned upon Tracy. 

"Answer up now — ^when'are you going to settle?" 

"To-day — since you seem to be in a hurry." 

*' To-day, is it? Stmday — and you out of work? 
I like that. Come — ^where are you going to get the 
money?" 

134 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

Tracy's spirit was rising again. He proposed to 
impress these people. 

"I am expecting a cablegram from home/' 

Old Marsh was caught out, with the surprise of it. 
The idea was so immense, so extravagant, that he 
couldn't get his breath at first. When he did get it, 
it came rancid with sarcasm. 

**A cablegram — ^think of it, ladies and gents, he's 
expecting a cablegram! He*s expecting a cablegram 
— this duffer, this scrub, this bilk ! From his father — 
eh? Yes — ^without a doubt. A dollar or two a word 
' — oh, that's nothing — they don't mind a little thing 
like that — this kind's fathers don't. Now his father 
is — er — ^well, I reckon his father — '* 

**My father is an English earl!'* 

The crowd fell back aghast — ^aghast at the sublim- 
ity of the young loafer's ** cheek." Then they burst 
into a laugh that made the windows rattle. Tracy 
was too angry to realize that he had done a foolish 
thing. He said : 

* ' Stand aside, please. I — ' * 

*'Wait a minute, your lordship," said Marsh, bow*.^># V 
ing low; ''where is yotu- lordship going?" \rV^!i^r- 

' * For the cablegram. Let me pass. " ■ ^ 

** Excuse me, your lordship, you'll stay right where 
you are." 

"What do you mean by that?" 

* ' I mean that I didn't begin to keep boarding-house 
yesterday. It means that I am not the kind that can 
be taken in by every hack-driver's son that comes 
loafing over here because he can't bum a living at 
hom^. It means that you can't skip out on any such — •' ' 



MARK TWAIN 

Tracy made a step toward the old man, but Mrs. 
Marsh sprang between, and said: 

"Don't, Mr. Tracy, please." She tiimed to her 
husband and said, ' ' Do bridle your tongue. What has 
he done to be treated so ? Can't you see he has lost his 
mindwith trouble and distress? He's not responsible." 

"Thank your kind heart, madam, but I've not lost 
my mind; and if I can have the mere privilege of 
stepping to the telegraph-office — " 

"Well, you can't!" cried Marsh. 

" — or sending — " 

* * Sending ! That beats everjrthing. If there's any- 
body that's fool enough to go on such a chudde- 
headed errand — " 

"Here comes Mr. Barrow — ^he will go for me. 
Barrow — " 

A brisk fire of exclamation broke out: 

"Say, Barrow, he's expecting a cablegram!" 
Cablegram from his father, you know!" 
Yes — cablegram from the wax-figger!" 
And say, Barrow, this fellow's an earl — ^take oflE 
your hat, pull down your vest!" 

"Yes, he's come oflE and forgot his crown that he 
wears Sundays. He's cabled over to his poppy to 
send it." 

"You step out and get that cablegram, Barrow; 
his majesty's a little lame to-day." 

"Oh, stop," cried Barrow; "give the man a 
chance." He turned, and said with some severity: 
"Tracy, what's the matter with you? What kind of 
foolishness is this you've been talking ? You ought to 
have more sense." 

1^6 






it 
It' 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

"I've not been talking foolishness; and if you'll go 
to the telegraph-oflSce — " 

* ' Oh, don't talk so. I'm your friend in trouble and 
out of it, before your face and behind your back, for 
anything in reason: but you've lost your head, you 
see, and this moonshine about a cablegram — " 
/'// go there and ask for it!" 
Thank you from the bottom of my heart, Brady. 
Here, I'll give you a written order for it. Fly now 
and fetch it. We'll soon see!" 

Brady flew. Immediately the sort of quiet began 
to steal over the crowd which means dawning doubt, 
misgiving; and might be translated into the words, 
'* Maybe he is expecting a cablegram — ^maybe he has 
got a father somewhere — ^maybe we've been just a 
Uttle too fresh, just a shade too 'previous'!" Loud 
talk ceased; then the mutterings and low murmur- 
ings and whisperings died out. The crowd began to 
crtmible apart. By ones and twos the fragments 
drifted to the breakfast-table. Barrow tried to bring 
Tracy in ; but he said : 

*'Not yet, Barrow — ^presently." 

Mrs. Marsh and Hattie tried, offering gentle and 
kindly persuasions ; but he said : 

"I would rather wait— till he comes." 

Even old Marsh began to have suspicions that 
maybe he had been a trifle too ** brash," as he called 
it in the privacy of his soul, and he pulled himself 
together and started toward Tracy with invitation 
in his eyes ; but Tracy warned him off with a gesture 
which was quite positive and eloquent. Then fcd- 
lowed the stillest quarter of an hour which had ever 

137 



MARK TWAIN 

been known in that house at that time of day. It 
was so still, and so solemn withal, that when some- 
body's cup slipped from his fingers and landed in his 
plate the shock made people start, and the sharp 
sound seemed as indecorous there and as out of place 
as if a coffin and mourners were imminent and being 
waited for. And at last when Brady's feet came clat- 
tering down the stairs the sacrilege seemed unbear- 
able. Everybody rose softly and turned toward the 
door, where stood Tracy; then, with a common im- 
pulse, moved a step or two in that direction, and 
stopped. While they gazed yoimg Brady arrived, 
panting, and put into Tracy's hand — sure enough — 
an envelope. Tracy fastened a bland, victorious eye 
upon the gazers, and kept it there till one by one 
they dropped their eyes, vanquished and embar- 
rassed. Then he tore open the telegram and glanced 
at its message. The yellow paper fell from his 
fingers and fluttered to the floor, and his face 
ttimed white. There was nothing there but one 
word : 

''Thanks:' 

The htunorist of the house, the tall, raw-boned 
Billy Nash, caulker from the navy yard, was standing 
in the rear of the erowd. In the midst of the pathetic 
silence that was now brooding over the place and 
moving some few hearts there toward compassion, 
he began to whimper, then he put his handkerchief to 
his eyes and buried his face in the neck of the bashf ul- 
est yoimg fellow in the company, a navy-yard black- 
smith, shrieked, "Oh, pappy, how could you!" and 
began to bawl like a teething baby, if one may 

138 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

imagine a baby with the energy and the devastating 
voice of a jackass. 

So perfect was the imitation of a child's cry, and so 
vast the scale of it, and so ridiculous the aspect of 
the performer, that all gravity was swept from the 
place as if by a hurricane, and almost everybody 
there joined in the crash of laughter provoked by the 
exhibition. Then the small mob began to take its 
revenge — ^revenge for the discomfort and apprehen- 
sion it had brought upon itself by its own too rash 
freshness of a little while before. It guyed its poor 
victim, baited him, worried him, as dogs do with a 
cornered cat. The victim answered back with defi- 
ances and challenges which included everybody, and 
which only gave the sport new spirit and variety; 
but when he changed his tactics and began to ^ngjie 
out individuals and invite them by name, the fun 
lost its ftmniness and the interest of the show died 
out, along with the noise. 

Finally Marsh was about to take an innings, but 
Barrow said : 

"Never mind now — Cleave him alone. You've no 
accoimt with him but a money account. 1*11 talce 
care of that myself." 

The distressed and worried landlady gave Barrow a 
fervently grateful look for his championship of the 
abused stranger; and the pet of the house, a very. 
prism in her cheap but ravishing Sunday rig, blew 
him a kiss from the tips of her fingers and said, with 
the darlingest smile and a sweet little toss of her head: 

"You're the only man here, and I*m going to set 
my cap for you, you dear old thing!" 

139 



MARK TWAIN 

"For shame, Puss! How you talk! I never saw 
such a child!" 

It took a good deal of argument and persuasion — 
that is to say, petting, under these disguises — to get 
Tracy to entertain the idea of breakfast. He at first 
said he would never eat again in that house; and 
added that he had enough firmness of character, he 
trusted, to enable him to starve like a man when the 
alternative was to eat insult with his bread. 

When he had finished his breakfast, Barrowtook him 
to his room, furnished him a pipe, and said, cheerily : 

**NoWf old fellow, take in your battle-flag out of 
the wet; you're not in the hostile camp any more. 
You're a little upset by your troubles, and that's 
nattu-al enough, but don't let your mind run on them 
any more than you can help; drag your thoughts 
away from yotu- troubles — ^by the ears, by the heels^ 
or any other way, so you manage it; it's the healthi- 
est thing a body can do; dwelling on troubles is 
deadly, just deadly — ^and that's the softest name 
there is for it. You must keep your mind amused — 
you must, indeed." 

**0h, miserable me!" 

*^ Don't! There's just pure heart-break in that 
tone. It's just as I say; you've got to get right down 
to it and amuse your mind, as if it was salvation." 

"They're easy words to say, Barrow, but how am 
I going to amuse, entertain, divert a mind that finds 
itself suddenly assaulted and overwhelmed by disas- 
ter of a sort not dreamed of and not provided for? 
No-no, the bare idea of amusement is repulsive to my 
feelings. Let us talk of deaths and funerals," 

140 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

* * No — ^not yet. That woiild be giving up the ship. 
We'll not give up the ship yet. I'm going to amtise 
you; I sent Brady out for the wherewithal before you 
finished breakfast." 

''You did? What is it?" 

"Come, this is a good sign — curiosity. Qh, there's 
hope for you yet." 



CHAPTER XVI 

BRADY arrived with a box, and departed, after 
saying: 

''They're finishing one up, but they'll be along as 
soon as it's done." 

Barrow took a frameless oil portrait a foot square 
from the box, set it up in a good light, without cxwn- 
ment, and reached for another, taking a fugitive 
glance at Tracy meantime. The stony solemnity in 
Tracy's face remained as it was, and gave out no sign 
of interest. Barrow placed the second portrait beside 
the first, and stole another glance while reaching for 
a third. The stone image softened a shade. No. 3 
forced the ghost of a smile. No. 4 swept indifference 
wholly away, and No. 5 started a laugh which was 
still in good and hearty condition when No. 14 took 
its place in the row. 

"Oh, you're all right yet,'* said Barrow. "Yoti 
see, you're not past amusement." 

The pictures were fearful as to color, and atrocious 
as to drawing and expression ; but the feature which 
squelched animosity and made them ftmny was a 
feature which could not achieve its full force in a 
single picture, but required the wonder-working as- 
sistance of repetition. One loudly dressed mechanic 
in stately attitude, with his hand on a cannon, ashore, 

142 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

and a ship riding at anchor in the oflBng — ^this is 
merely odd; but when one sees the same cannon and 
the same ship in fourteen pictttres in a row, and a 
different mechanic standing watch in each, the thing 
gets to be fimny. 

"Explain — explain these aberrations," said Tracy, 
"Well, they are not the achievement of a single 
intellect, a single talent — ^it takes two to do these 
miracles. They are collaborations; the one artist 
does the figure, the other the accessories. The 
figure-artist is a German shoemaker with an untaught 
passion for art, the other is a simple-hearted old 
Yankee sailor-man whose possibilities are strictly 
limited to his ship, his cannon, and his patch of 
petrified sea. They work these things up from twen- 
ty-five cent tint3rpes; they get six dollars apiece for 
them, and they can grind out a couple a day when they 
strike what they call a boost — ^that is, an inspiration." 
"People actually pay money for these calimmies?*' 
"They actually do — ^and quite willingly, too. And 
these abortionists could double their trade and work 
the women in if Captain Saltmarsh could whirl a 
horse in, or a piano, or a guitar, in place of his 
cannon. The fact is, he fatigues the market with 
that caimon. Even the male market, I mean. These 
fotirteen in the procession are not all satisfied. One 
is an old "independent" fireman, and he wants an 
engine in place of the caimon; another is a mate of a 
tug, and wants a tug in place of the ship — ^and so on, 
and so on. But the captain can't make a tug that is 
deceptive, and a fire-engine is many flights beyond 
his power." 

lo 143 



MARK TWAIN 

"This is a most extraordinary form of robbery. I 
never have heard of anything like it. It's interest- 
mg.- 

*'Yes, and so are the artists. They are perfectly 
honest men, and sincere. And the old sailor-man is 
ftill of sound religion, and is as devoted a student of 
the Bible and misquoter of it as you can find any- 
where. I don't know a better man or kinder-hearted 
old soul than Saltmarsh, although he does swear a 
little sometimes." 

**He seems to be perfect. I want to know him, 
Barrow." 

* ' You'll have tne chance. I guess I hear them com- 
ing now. We'll draw them out on their art, if you like. 

The artists arrived and shook hands with great 
heartiness. The German was forty and a little 
fleshy, with a shiny bald head and a kindly face and 
deferential manner. Captain Saltmarsh was sixty, 
tall, erect, powerfully built, with coal-black hair and 
whiskers, and he had a well-tanned complexion, and 
a gait and cotmtenance that were full of command, 
confidence, and decision. His homy hands and wrists 
were covered with tattoo-marks, and when his lips 
parted his teeth showed up white and blemishless. 
His voice was the effortless deep bass of a chttrch 
organ, and would disttirb the tranquillity of a gas 
flame fifty yards away. 

"They're wonderful picttires," said Barrow. 
"We've been examining them." 

**It is very bleasant dot you like dem," said Han- 
del, the German, greatly pleased. "Und you, Herr 
Tracy, you haf peen bleased mit dem, too, alretty? 

144 



•f 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

**I can honestly say I have never seen anything 
just Kke them before." 

*'Sch6n!" cried the German, deUghted. "You 
hear, Gaptain ? Here is a chentleman, yes, vot abbre- 
ciate unser aart." 

The Captain was charmed, and said: 

"Well, sir, we're thankful for a compliment yet, 
though they're not as scarce now as they used to be 
before we made a reputation." 

"Getting the reputation is the uphill time in most 
things. Captain." 

"It's so. It ain't enough to know how to reef a 
gasket, you got to make the mate know you know it. 
That's reputation. The good word, said at the right 
time, that's the word that makes us; and evil be to 
him that evil thinks, as Isaiah says." 

"It's very relevant, and hits the point exactly," 
said Tracy. "Where did you study art. Captain?" 

"I haven't studied; it's a nattiral gift." 

"He is bom mit dose cannon in him. He tondt 
haf to do noding, his chenius do all de vork. Of he is 
asleep, und take a pencil in his hand, out come a 
cannon. Py crashus, of he could do a clavier, of he 
could do a guitar, of he could do a vash-tub, it is a 
fortune; heiliger Yohanniss, it is yoost a fortune!" 

"Well, it is an immense pity that the business is 
hindered and limited in this unfortunate way." 

The Captain grew a trifle excited himself now. 

"You've said it, Mr. Tracy! Hindered? well, I 
should say so. Why, look here. This fellow here. 
No. II, he's a hackman — a, flourishing hackman, I 
may say. He wants his hack in this picture. Wants 

145 



MARK TWAIN 

it where the cannon is. I got around that diffictdty 
by telling him the cannon's otir trade-mark, so to 
speak — ^proves that the picture's our work, and I was 
afraid if we left it out people wouldn't know for 
certain if it was a Saltmarsh-Handd — now you 
wouldn't yourself — " 

* * What, Captain ? You wrong yourself, indeed you 
do. Any one who has once seen a genuine Saltmarsh- 
Handd is safe from imposture forever. Strip it, flay 
it, skin it out of every detail but the bare color and 
expression, and that man will still recognize it, still 
stop to worship — " 

"Oh, how it makes me fed to hear dose expres- 
sions!" 

— "still say to himself again, as he had said a hun- 
dred times before, the art of the Saltmarsh-Handd is 
an art apart ; there is nothing in the heavens above or 
in the earth beneath that resembles it — '* 

"Py chiminy, nur hSren Sie dnmal! In my life day 
haf I never heard so bredous worts.'* 

"So I talked him out of the hack, Mr. Tracy, and 
he let up on that, and said put in a hearse, then — 
because he's chief mate of a hearse, but don't own 
it — stands a watch for wages, you know. But I can't 
do a hearse any more than I can a hade; so here we 
are — becalmed, you see. And it's the same with 
women and such. They come and th^ want a little 
johnry picture — " 

"It's the accessories that make it a genre ?** 

"Yes — cannon, or cat, or any Kttle thing like that, 
that you heave in to whoop up the eflfect. We could 
do a prodigious trade with the women if we could 

146 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

foreground the things they like, but they don't give 
a damn for artillery. Mine's the lack, ' ' continued the 
Captain, with a sigh. "Andy's end of the business is 
all right — I tell you, he's an artist from way back!" 

"Yoost hear dot old man! He always talk 'poud 
me like dot," purred she pleased German. 

' * Look at his work yourself ! Fourteen portraits in 
a row. And no two of them alike." 

"Now that you speak of it, it is true; I hadn't 
noticed it before. It is very remarkable. Unique, I 
suppose." 

"I should say so. That's the very thing about 
Andy — ^he discriminates. Discrimination's the thief 
of time — ^forty-ninth Psalm; but that ain't any mat- 
ter; it's the honest thing, and it pays in the end." 

"Yes, he certainly is great in that feature, one is 
obliged to admit it; but — ^now mind, I'm not really 
criticizing — don't you think he is just a trifle over- 
strong in technique?" 

The Captain's face was knocked expressionless by 
this remark. It remained quite vacant while he 
muttered to himself: "Technique— technique— poly- 
technique — p3rrotechnique; that's it, likely — fire- 
works — ^too much color." Then he spoke up with 
serenity and confidence, and said: 

"Well, yes, he does pile it on pretty loud; but they 
aU like it, you know — ^fact is, it's the life of the busi- 
ness. Take that No. 9 there — ^Evans the butcher. 
He drops into the stoodio as sober-colored as any- 
thing you ever see; now look at him. You can't tell 
him from scarlet-fever. Well, it pleases that butcher 
to death. I'm making a study of a sausage-wreath to 

147 



MARK TWAIN 

hang on the cannon, and I don't really reckon I can 
do it right; but if I can, we can break the butcher/' 

"Unquestionably your confederate — I mean your 
— ^your fellow-craftsman — is a great colorist — " 

"Oh, dankeschSn!— " 

— "in fact, a quite extraordinary colorist; a color- 
ist, I make bold to say, without imitator here or 
abroad — ^and with a most bold and effective touch, a 
touch like a battering-ram, and a manner so peculiar 
and romantic and extraneous and ad libitum and 
heart-searching that — ^that — ^he — ^he is an impression- 
ist, I prestune?" 

"No," said the Captain, simply, "he is a Presby- 
terian." 

"It accounts for it all — all — ^there's something 
divine about his art — soulful, imsatisfactory, yearn- 
ing, dim-hearkening on the void horizon, vague- 
murmuring, to the spirit out of ultra-marine dis- 
tances and far-sounding cataclysms of tmcreated 
space — oh, if he — ^if he — ^has he ever tried distemper?** 

The Captain answered up, with energy : 

' * Not if he knows himself ! But his dog has, and — ^** 

"Oh, no, it vas not my dog." 

"Why, you said it was your dog." 

"Oh, no. Captain, I—" 

"It was a white dog, wasn't it, with his tail docked, 
and one ear gone, and — " 

"Dot's him, dot's him! — der fery dog. Wy, py 
Chorge, dot dog he vould eat baint yoost de same 
like—" 

"Well, never mind that now — 'vast heaving — I 
never saw such a man. You start him on that dog 

14S 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

and hell dispute a year. Blamed if I haven^t seen 
him keep it up a level two hours and a half." 

''Why, Captain!" said Barrow. "I guess that 
must be hearsay." 

"No, sir, no hearsay about it — ^he disputed with 



me. 



**I don't see how you stood it." 

'*0h, you've got to — ^if you run with Andy. But 
it's the only fault he's got." 

''Ain't you afraid of acquiring it?" 

"Oh, no," said the Captain, tranquilly; "no 
danger of that, I reckon." 

The artists presently took their leave. Then Bar- 
row put his hands on Tracy's shoulders and said : 

"Look me in the eye, my boy. Stead}", steady. 
There — it's just as I thought — hoped, anyway; 
youWe all right, thank goodness. Nothing the matter 
with your mind. But don't do that again — even for 
fim. It isn't wise. They wouldn't have believed 
you if you'd been an earl's son. Why, they couldn't — 
don't you know that? What ever possessed you to 
take such a freak? But never mind about that ; let's 
not talk of it. It was a mistake; you see that your* 
self." 

"Yes — ^it was a mistake." 

"Well, just drop it out of your mind; it's no harm; 
we all make them. Pull your courage together, and 
don't brood, and don't give up. I'm at your back, 
and we'll pull through, don't you be afraid." 

When he was gone, Barrow walked the floor a good 
while, uneasy in his mind. He said to himself, "I'm 
troubled about him. He never would have made a 

149 



MARK TWAIN 

break like that if he hadn't been a little off his bal- 
ance. But I know what being out of work and no 
prospect ahead can do for a man. First it knocks the 
pluck out of him and drags his pride in the dirt; 
worry does the rest, and his mind gets shaky. I 
must talk to these people. No — if there's any hu- 
manity in them — and there is, at bottom — ^they'll be 
easier on him if they think his troubles have disturbed 
his reason. But I've got to find him some work; 
work's the only medicine for his disease. Poor devil I 
away off here, and not a friend." 



CHAPTER XVII 

THE moment Tracy was alone his spirits vanished 
away, and all the misery of his situation was 
manifest to him. To be moneyless and an object of 
the chair-maker's charity — ^this was bad enough ; but 
his folly in proclaiming himself an earl's son to that 
scoffing and unbelieving crew, and, on top of that, the 
himiiliating result — ^the recollection of these things 
was a sharper torture still. He made up his mind that 
he would never play earl's son again before a doubtful 
audience. 

His father's answer was a blow he could not under- 
stand. At times he thought his father imagined he 
could get work to do in America without any trouble, 
and was minded to let him try it and cure himself of 
his radicalism by hard, cold, disenchanting experi- 
ence. That seemed the most plausible theory, yet 
he could not content himself with it. A theory that 
pleased him better was that this cablegram would 
be followed by another, of a gentler sort, requiring 
him to come home. Should he write and strike his 
flag and ask for a ticket home? Oh, no; that he 
couldn't ever do — at least, not yet. That cablegram 
would come, it certainly would. So he went from 
one telegraph-oflSce to another every day for nearly 
a week, and asked if there was a cablegram for How- 

xsx 



MARK TWAIN 

ard Tracy. No, there wasn't any. So they answered 
him at first. Later, they said it before he had a 
diance to ask. Later still they merely shook their 
heads impatiently as soon as he came in sight. After 
that he was ashamed to go any more. 

He was down in the lowest depths of despair now, 
for the harder Barrow tried to find work for him the 
more hopeless the f)ossibilities seemed to grow. At 
last he said to Barrow: 

''Look here. I want to make a confession. I have 
got down now to where I am not only willing to 
acknowledge to myself chat I am a shabby creature 
and full of false pride, but am willing to acknowledge 
it to you. Well, I've been allowing you to wear 
yourself out hunting for work for me when there's 
been a chance open to me all the time. Forgive my 
pride — ^what was left of it. It is all gone now, and 
I've come to confess that if those ghastly artists want 
another confederate I'm their man — ^for at last I am 
dead to shame." 

'*No? Really, can you paint?" 

**Not as badly as they. No, I don't claim that, for 
I am not a genius; in fact, I am a very indiifferent 
amateur, a slouchy dabster, a mere artistic sarcasm; 
but drunk or asleep I can beat those buccaneers." 

**Shake! I want to shout! Oh, I tell you, I am 
immensely delighted and relieved. Oh, just to work 
— ^that is life ! No matter what the work is — ^that's 
of no consequence. Just work itself is bliss when a 
man's been starving for it. I've been there! Come 
right along, we'll hunt the old boys up. Don't you 
feel good? I tell you /do." 

152 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

The freebooters were not at home. But their 
"works" were — displayed in profusion all about the 
little ratty studio. Cannon to the right of them, 
cannon to the left of them, cannon in front — it was 
Balaklava come again. 

''Here's the uncontented hackman, Tracy. Budde 
to — deepen the sea-green to turf, turn the ship into a 
hearse. Let the boys have a taste of your quality.*' 

The artists arrived just as the last touch was put 
on. They stood transfixed with admiration. 

"My souls, but she's a sttmner, that hearse! The 
hackman will just go all to pieces when he sees that — 
won't he, Andy?" 

' ' Oh, it is sphlennid, sphlennid ! Herr Tracy, why 
haf you not said you vas a so sublime aartist? Lob' 
Gott, of you had lif 'd in Paris you would be a Pree de 
Rome, dot's vot's de matter!" 

The arrangements were soon made. Tracy was 
taken into full and equal partnership, and he went 
straight to work, with dash and energy, to recon- 
structing gems of art whose accessories had failed to 
satisfy. Under his hand, on that and succeeding 
days, artillery disappeared and the emblems of peace 
and commerce took its place — cats, hacks, sausages, 
tugs, fire-engines, pianos, guitars, rocks, gardens, 
flower-pots, landscapes — ^whatever was wanted, he 
flung it in; and the more out of place and absurd the 
required object was, the more joy he got out of 
fabricating it. The pirates were delighted, the cus- 
tomers applauded, the sex began to flock in, great was 
the prosperity of the firm. Tracy was obliged to 
confess to himself that there was something about 

153 



MARK TWAIN 

work — even such grotesque and humble work as this 
— ^which most pleasantly satisfied a something in his 
nature which had never been satisfied before, and 
also gave him a strange new dignity in his own private 
view of himself. 

The Unqualified Member from Cherokee Strip was 
in a state of deep dejection. For a good while now 
he had been leading a sort of life which was calculated 
to kill; for it had consisted in regularly alternating 
days of brilliant hope and black disappointment. The 
brilliant hopes were created by the magician Sellers^ 
and they always promised that tww he had got the 
trick sure, and would effectively influence that mate- 
rialized cowboy to call at the Towers before night. 
The black disappointments consisted in the persist- 
ent and monotonous failure of these prophecies. 

At the date which this history has now reached. 
Sellers was appalled to find that the usual remedy 
was inoperative, and that Hawkins's low spirits re- 
fused absolutely to lift. Something must be done, 
he reflected; it was heart-breaking, this woe, this 
smileless misery, this dull despair that looked out 
from his poor friend's face. Yes, he must be cheered 
up. He mused awhile, then he saw his way. He 
said, in his most conspicuously casual vein : 

**Er-uh — ^by the way, Hawkins, we are feeling 
disappointed about this thing — ^the way the mate- 
rializee is acting, I mean — ^we are disappointed; you 
concede that?" 

"Concede it? Why, yes, if you like the term." 

** Very well; so far, so good. Now for the basis of 

1 54 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

the feeling. It is not that your heart, your affections 
are concerned ; that is to say, it is not that you want 
the materializee Itself. You concede that?'* 

*'Yes, I concede that, too — cordially." 

"Very well, again; we are making progress. To 
stim up : The feeling, it is conceded, is not engendered 
by the mere conduct of the materializee; it is con- 
ceded that it does not arise from any pang which the 
personality of the materializee could assuage. Now, 
then,'* said the earl, with the light of tritunph in his 
eye, **the inexorable logic of the situation narrows 
us down to this: our feeling has its source in the 
money-loss involved. Come — ^isn't that so?" 

* ' Goodness knows I concede that with all my heart." 

"Very well. When you've found out the source of 
a disease, you've also foimd out what remedy is re- 
quired — ^just as in this case. In this case money is 
required. And only money." 

The old, old seduction was in that airy, confident 
tone and those significant words — ^usually called preg- 
nant words in books. The old answering signs of 
faith and hope showed up in Hawkins's countenance, 
and he said : 

' * Only money ? Do you mean that you know a way 
to—" 

"Washington, have you the impression that I have 
no resources but those I allow the public and my inti- 
mate friends to know about?" 

"Well, I--er— " 

"Is it likely, do you think, that a man moved by 
nature and taught by experience to keep his affairs to 
himself, and a cautious and reluctant tongue in bis 



MARK TWAIN 

head, wouldn't be thoughtftil enough to keep a few 
resources in reserve for a rainy day, when he's got as 
many as I have to select from?" 

''Oh, you make me feel so much better already, 
Colonel!" 

''Have you ever been in my laboratory?" 

*'Why, no." 

"That's it. You see, you didn't even know that I 
had one. Come along. I've got a little trick there 
that I want to show you. I've kept it perfectly quiet » 
not fifty people know anything about it. But that's 
my way, always been my way. Wait till you're 
ready, that's the idea; and when you're ready, ZBipl 
— ^let her go!" 

*'Well, Colonel, I've never seen a man that I've 
had such unboimded confidence in as you. When 
you say a thing right out, I always fed as if that 
ends it ; as if that is evidence, and proof, and every- 
thing else." 

The old earl was profoundly pleased and touched. 

"I'm glad you believe in me, Washington; not 
everybody is so just." 

' ' I always have believed in you ; and I always shall 
as long as I live." 

"Thank you, my boy. You sha'n't repent it. And 
you can'V Arrived in the "laboratory," the earl 
continued, ' ' Now, cast your eye around this room — 
what do you see? Apparently a junk-shop; appar- 
ently a hospital connected with a patent-ofiice — in 
reality^ the mines of Golconda in disguise ! Look at 
that thing there. Now what would you take that 
thing to be?" 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

"I don't beKeve I could ever imagine." 

"Of course you couldn't. It's my grand adapta- 
tion of the phonograph to the marine service. You 
store up profanity in it for use at sea. You know that 
sailors don't fly around worth a cent tmless you 
swear at them — so the mate that can do the best 
job of swearing is the most valuable man. In great 
emergencies his talent saves the ship. But a ship is 
a large thing, and he can't be everywhere at once; 
so there have been times when one mate has lost a 
ship which could have been saved if they had had 
a himdred. Prodigious storms, you know. Well, a 
ship can't afford a hundred mates; but she can 
afford a. himdred Cursing Phonographs, and distrib- 
ute them all over the vessel — and there, you see, she's 
armed at every point. Imagine a big storm, and 
a himdred of my machines all cursing away at once 
— ^splendid spectacle, splendid! — ^you couldn't hear 
yourself think. Ship goes through that storm per- 
fectly serene — she's just as safe as she'd be on shore.** 

**It's a wonderful idea. How do you prepare the 
thing?" 

**Load it — simply load it." 

"How?" 

**Why, you just stand over it and swear into it." 

"That loads it, does it?" 

"Yes; because every word it collars it keeps — 
keeps it forever. Never wears out. Any time you 
turn the crank, out it 'U come. In times of great peril 
you can reverse it, and it '11 swear backwards. That 
makes a sailor htmip himself!" 

"Oh, I see. Who loads them? — ^the mate?" 

IS7 



MARK TWAIN 

'* Yes, if he chooses. Or I'll furnish them already 
loaded. I can hire an expert for seventy-five dollars a 
month who will load a hundred and fifty phonographs 
in one hundred and fifty hours, and do it easy. And 
an expert can furnish a stronger article, of course, 
than the mere average tmcultivated mate could. 
Then, you see, all the ships of the world will buy them 
ready loaded — ^for I shall have them loaded in any 
language a customer wants. Hawkins, it will work 
the grandest moral reform of the nineteenth century. 
Five years from now all the swearing will be done by 
machinery — ^you won't ever hear a profane word come 
from hmnan lips on a ship. Millions of dollars have 
been spent by the churches in the effort to abolish 
profanity in the commercial marine. Think of it — 
my name will live forever in the affections of good 
men as the man who, solitary and alone, accomplished 
this noble and elevating reform." 

**0h, it is grand and beneficent and beautiful. 
How did you ever come to think of it ? You have a 
wonderful mind. How did you say you loaded the 
machine?" 

**0h, it's no trouble — perfectly simple. If you 
want to load it up loud and strong, you stand right 
over it and shout. But if you leave it open and all 
set, it '11 eavesdrop, so to speak — ^that is to say, it will 
load itself up with any soimds that are made within 
six feet of it. Now I'll show you how it works. I 
had an expert come and load this one up yesterday. 
Hello, it's been left open — it's too bad — still I reckon it 
hasn't had much chance to collect irrelevant stuflE. 
All you do is to press this button in the floor — so." 

158 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

The phonograph began to sing in a plaintive voice: 

There is a boarding-house far far away. 

Where they have ham and eggs three times a day. 

**Hang it, that ain't it. Somebody's been singing 
around here." 

The plaintive song began again, mingled with a 
low, gradually rising wail of cats slowly warming up 
toward a fight : 

Oh, how the boarders yell. 

When they hear that dinner-bell — 

They give that landlord 

(momentary outbiu'st of terrific cat -fight which 
drowns out one word) 

Three times a day. 

(Renewal of furious cat-fight for a moment. The 
plaintive voice on a high, fierce key, **Scatf you 
devils!" and a racket as of flying missiles.) 

*'Well, never mind — ^let it go, I've got some sailor 
profanity down in there somewhere, if I could get to 
it. But it isn't any matter; you see how the machine 
works." 

Hawkins responded, with enthusiasm : 

**0h, it works admirably! I know there's a him-* 
dred fortimes in it." 

**And mind, the Hawkins family get their share, 
Washington." 

**0h, thanks, thanks; you are just as generous as 
ever. Ah, it's the grandest invention of the age!" 

*'Ah, well, we live in wonderful times. The ele- 
" IS9 



MARK TWAIN 

ments are crowded full of beneficent forces — always 
have been — and ours is the first generation to turn 
them to account and make them work for us. Why, 
Hawkins, everylhing is useful — nothing ought ever to 
be wasted. Now look at sewer-gas, for instance. 
Sewer-gas has always been wasted heretofore; no- 
body tried to save up sewer-gas — ^you can't name me 
a man. Ain't that so? You know perfectly well it's 
so. 

"Yes, it is so — ^but I never — er — ^I don't quite see 
why a body — " 

"Should want to save it up? Well, I'll tell you. 
Do you see this little invention here? — it's a decom- 
poser — I call it a decomposer. I give you my word 
of honor that if you show me a house that produces a 
given quantity of sewer-gas in a day, I'll engage to set 
up my decomposer there and make that house pro- 
duce a hundred times that quantity of sewer-gas in 
less than half an hour." 

"Dear me, but why should you want to?" 

''Want to? Listen, and you'll see. My boy, for 
illuminating purposes and economy combined, there's 
nothing in the world that begins with sewer-gas. 
And really it don't cost a cent. You put in a good 
inferior article of plumbing — such as you find every- 
where — and add my decomposer, and there you are. 
Just use the ordinary gas -pipes — and there your 
expense ends. Think of it. Why, Major, in five 
years from now you won't see a house lighted with 
anything but sewer-gas. Every physician I talk to 
recommends it, and every pltunber." 

"But isn't it dangerous?" 

i6o 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

"Oh, yes, more or fess, but everything is — coal- 
gas, candles, electricity — ^there isn't anything that 
ain't." 

"It lights up well, does it?'* 

* ' Oh, magnificently. ' ' 

"Have you given it a good trial?" 

"Well, no, not a first-rate one. Polly's prejudiced, 
and she won't let me put it in here; but I'm playing 
my cards to get it adopted in the President's house, 
and then it '11 go — don't you doubt it. I shall not 
need this one for the present, Washington; you may 
take it down to some boarding-house and give it a 
trial if you like." 



CHAPTER XVm 

WASHINGTON shuddered slightly at the sug- 
gestion; then his face took on a dreamy look 
and he dropped into a tianoe of thought. After a 
little Sellers asked him what he was grinding in his 
mental mill. 

*'Well, this. Have you got some secret project in 
your head which requires a Bank of England back of 
it to m;vke it succeed?" 
The Colonel showed lively astonishment, and said : 
"Why, Hawkins, are you a mind-reader?'* 
*'I? I never thought of such a thing." 
**Well. then, how did you happen to drop on to 
that idea in this curious fashion? It*s just mind* 
reading — that's what it is, though you may not know 
it. Because I have got a private project that requires 
a Bank of England at its back. How could you 
dix-ine that? What was the process? This is inter- 
esting." 

''There wasn't any process. A thought like this 
happened to slip through my head by accident: 
How much would make you or me comfortable? A 
hundred thousand. Yet you are expecting two or 
three of these inventions of yours to turn out some 
billions of money — and you are wanting them to do 
that. If you wanted ten millions, I could understand 

169 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

that — it's inside the human limits. But billions! 
That's clear outside the limits. There must be a 
definite project back of that somewhere." 

The earl's interest and siuprise augmented with 
every word, and when Hawkins finished he said, with 
strong admiration : 

*'It's wonderfully reasoned out, Washington, it 
certainly is. It shows what I think is quite extraor- 
dinary penetration. For you've hit it ; you've dri- 
ven the center, you've plugged the bull's-eye of my 
dream. Now I'll tell you the whole thing, and you'll 
understand it. I don't need to ask you to keep it to 
yourself, because you'll see that the project will pros- 
per all the better for being kept in the background 
till the right time. Have you noticed how many 
pamphlets and books I've got Ijring around relating 
to Russia?" 

"Yes, I think most anybody would notice that — 
anybody who wasn't dead." 

**Well, I've been posting myself a good while. 
That's a great and splendid nation, and deserves to 
be set free." He paused; then added, in a quite 
matter-of-fact way, ''When I get this money I'm 
going to set it free." 

*' Great guns!" 

*'Why, what makes you jump like that?" 

**Dear me, when you are going to drop a remark 
tmder a man's chair that is likely to blow him out 
through the roof, why don't you put some expression, 
some force, some noise into it that will prepare him ? 
You shouldn't flip out such a gigantic thing as this in 
that colorless kind of a way. You do jolt a person up 

163 



MARK TWAIN 

so. Go on now, I'm all right again. Tell me all about 
it. I'm all interest — yes, and sympathy, too/* 

"Well, I've looked the ground over, and concluded 
that the methods of the Russian patriots, while good 
enough, considering the way the boys are hampered, 
are nbt the best — at least, not the quickest. They 
are trying to revolutionize Russia from within; that's 
pretty slow, you know, and liable to interruption all 
the time, and is full of perils for the workers. Do you 
know how Peter the Great started his army? He 
didn't start it on the family premises imder the noses 
of the Strelitzes; no, he started it away oiBf yonder, 
privately — only just one regiment, you know, and he 
built to that. The first thing the Strelitzes knew, the 
regiment was an army, their position was turned, and 
they had to take a walk. Just that little idea made 
the biggest and worst of all the despotisms the world 
has seen. The same idea can unmake it. I'm going 
to prove it. I'm going to get out to one side and 
work my scheme the way Peter did." 

* * This is mighty interesting, Rossmore. What is it 
you are going to do?" 

"I am going to buy Siberia and start a republic." 

"There — ^bang you go again without giving any 
notice! Going to buy it?" 

"Yes, as soon as I get the money. I don't care 
what the price is, I shall take it. I can afford it, and 
I will. Now, then, consider this — and you've never 
thought of it, I'll warrant. Where is the place where 
there is twenty-five times more manhood, pluck, true 
heroism, unselfishness, devotion to high and noble 
ideals, adoration of liberty, wide education, and 

164 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

brains, per thousand of population, than any other 
domain in the whole world can show?" 

''Siberia!" 

*'Right." 

"It is true; it certainly is true, but I never thought 
of it before." 

"Nobody ever thinks of it. But it's so, just the 
same. In those mines and prisons are gathered to- 
gether the very finest and noblest and capablest 
multitude of human beings that God is able to 
create. Now if you had that kind of a population 
to sell, would you offer it to a despotism? No, the 
despotism has no use for it ; you would lose money. 
A despotism has no use for anything but human cat- 
tle. But suppose you want to start a repubKc?" 

"Yes, I see. It's just the material for it." 

"Well, I should say so! There's Siberia, with just 
the very finest and choicest material on the globe 
for a republic, and more coming — ^more coming all 
the time, don't you see! It is being daily, weekly, 
monthly recruited by the most perfectly devised 
system that has ever been invented perhaps. By 
this system the whole of the hundred millions of 
Russia are being constantly and patiently sifted, 
sifted, sifted by mjoiads of trained experts, spies 
appointed by the emperor personally; and whenever 
they catch a man, woman, or child that has got any 
brains or education or character they ship that person 
straight to Siberia. It is admirable, it is wonderful. 
It is so searching and so effective that it keeps the 
general level of Russian intellect and education down 
to that of the Czar." 

165 



MARK TWAIN 

"Come, that sounds like exaggeratioiL" 

"Well, it's what they say, anyway. But I think, 
myself, it's a lie. And it doesn't seem right to 
slander a whole nation that way, anyhow. Now, 
then, you see what the material is, there in Siberia, 
for a republic." He paused, and his breast b^;an to 
heave and his eye to btim imder the impulse of strong 
emotion. Then his words b^^an to stream forth 
with constantly increasing energy and fire, and he 
rose to his feet as if to give himself larger freedom. 
''The minute I organize that republic, the light of 
liberty, intelligence, justice, humanity, bursting 
from it, flooding from it, flaming from it, will con- 
centrate the gaze of the whole astonished world as 
upon the miracle of a new sim; Russia's countless 
multitudes of slaves will rise up and march, march! 
— eastward, with that great light transfiguring their 
faces as they come, and far back of them you will 
see — ^what will you see? — a vacant throne in an 
empty land! It can be done, and by God I will 
doitr 

He stood a moment bereft of earthly conscious- 
ness by his exaltation; then consciousness returned, 
bringing him a slight shock, and he said, with grave 
earnestness : 

"I must ask you to pardon me. Major Hawkins. 
I have never used that expression before, and I beg 
you will forgive it this time." 

Hawkins was quite willing. 

''You see, Washington, it is an error which I am 
by nature not liable to. Only excitable people, im- 
pulsive people, are exposed to it. But the drcvwi- 

l6^ 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

stances of the present case — ^I being a democrat by 
birth and preference, and an aristocrat by inheri- 
tance and relish — " 

The earl stopped suddenly, his frame stiflfened, and 
he began to stare speechless through the curtainless 
window. Then he pointed, and gasped out a single 
rapturous word: 

"Lookr 

"What is it, Colond?" 

"Nor 

"Sure as you're bom. Keep perfectly still. Ill 
apply the influence — ^I'll Uxm on all my force. I've 
brought It thus far — ^I'll fetch It right into the 
house. You'll see. ' ' 

He was making all sorts of passes in the air with 
his hands. 

"There! Look at that. I've made It smile! 
See?" 

Quite true. Tracy, out for an afternoon stroll, 
had come unexpectedly upon his family arms dis- 
played upon this shabby house-front. The hatch- 
ments made him smile; which was nothing — ^they 
had made the neighborhood cats do that. 

"Look, Hawkins, look! I'm drawing It over!" 

"You're drawing It sure, Rossmore. If I ever had 
any doubts about materialization, they're gone nowy 
and gone for good. Oh, this is a joyful day!'* 

Tracy was sauntering over to read the door-plate. 
Before he was half-way over he was saying to 
himself, "Why, manifestly these are the American 
Claimant's quarters." 

167 



MARK TWAIN 

' ' It's coming — coming right along. Ill slide down 

and pull It in. You follow after me." 

Sellers, pale and a good deal agitated, opened the 
door and confronted Tracy. The old man could 
not at once get his voice; then he pumped out a 
scattering and hardly coherent salutation, and fol- 
lowed it with : 

'•Walk in, walk right in, Mr.— a—" 

"Tracy— Howard Tracy." 

— "Tracy — ^thanks — walk right in, you're ex- 
pected." 

Tracy entered, considerably puzzled, and said: 

* * Expected ? I think there must be some mistake. ' * 

"Oh, I judge not," said Sellers, who, noticing that 
Hawkins had anived, gave him a sidewise glance 
intended to call his dose attention to a dramatic 
effect which he was proposing to produce by his next 
remark. Then he said, slowly and impressively: "I 
am — You Know Who,'* 

To the astonishment of both conspirators the re- 
mark produced no dramatic effect at all; for the 
new-comer responded, with a quite innooent and 
unembarrassed air: 

"No, pardon me. I don't ktww who you are, I 
only suppose — ^but no doubt correctly — ^that you are 
the gentleman whose title is on the door-plate." 

"Right, quite right — sit down, pray sit down." 
The earl was rattled, thrown off his bearings, his head 
was in a whirl. Then he noticed Hawkins standing 
apart and staring idiotically at what to him was the 
apparition of a defunct man, and a new idea was 
bom to him. He said to Tracy, briskly : 

x68 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

**But a thousand pardons, dear sir; I am forgetting 
courtesies due to a guest and stranger. Let me in- 
troduce my friend General Hawkins — General Haw- 
kins, our new Senator — Senator from the latest and 
grandest addition to the radiant galaxy of sovereign 
States, Cherokee Strip" — (to himself, ''that name 
will shrivel him up!*' — ^but it didn't in the least, and 
the Colonel restmied the introduction piteously dis- 
heartened and amazed) — ''Senator Hawkins, Mr. 
Howard Tracy, of — er — " 

"England." 

"England!— Why, that's im— " 

"England, yes, native of England." 
Recently from there?" 
'Yes, quite recently." 

Said the Colonel to himself, "This phantom lies 
like an expert. Purifying this kind by fire don't 
work. I'll soimd him a little further, give him 
another chance or two to work his gift." Then 
aloud, with deep irony: 

"Visiting our great country for recreation and 
amusement, no doubt. I suppose you find that 
traveling in the majestic expanses of our Far West 






is—" 



"I haven't been West, and haven't been devoting 
myself to amusement with any sort of exclusiveness, 
I assure you. In fact, to merely live, an artist has 
got to work, not play." 

"Artist!" said Hawkins to himself, thinking of the 
rifled bank; "that is a name for it!" 

"Are you an artist?" asked the Colonel. And 
added to himself, *'Now I'm going to catch him." 

169 



MARK TWAIN 

"In a humble way, yes." 

"What line?" pursued the sly veteran. 

"OUs." 

"I've got him!" said Sellers to himself. Then 
aloud, "This is fortunate. Could I engage you 
to restore some of my paintings that need that 
attention?" 

"I shall be very glad. Pray let me see them." 

No shuffling, no evasion, no embarrassment, even 
under this crucial test. The Colonel was nonplussed. 
He led Tracy to a chromo which had suffered damage 
in a former owner's hands through bemg used as a 
lamp-mat, and said, with a flourish of his hand 
toward the picture : 

"This del Sarto— " 

"Is that SL del Sarto?" 

The Colonel bent a look of reproach upon Tracy, 
allowed it to sink home, then resumed as if th^e 
had been no interruption: 

"This del Sarto is perhaps the only original of that 
sublime master in our country. You see, yourself, 
that the work is of such exceeding delicacy that the 
risk — could — er — ^would you mind giving me a littlo 
example of what you can do before we — " 

"Cheerfully, cheerfully. I will copy one of these 
marvds." 

Water-color materials — relics of Miss Sally's coll^;e 
life — were brought. Tracy said he was better in oils, 
but would take a chance with these. So he was left 
alone. He began his work, but the attractions of 
the place were too strong for him, and he got up and 
went drifting about, fascinated; also amazed. 

170 



CHAPTER XIX 

MEANTIME the earl and Hawkins were holding 
a troubled and anxious private consultation. 
The earl said : 

**The mystery that bothers me is, Where did It 
get its other arm?" 

*'Yes; it worries me, too. And another thing 
troubles me — ^the apparition is English. How do 
you account for that, Colonel?" 

''Honestly, I don't know, Hawkins, I don't really 
know. It is very confusing and awful." 

*' Don't you tiiink maybe we've waked up the 
wrong one?" 

"The wrong one? How do you account for the 
clothes?" 

"The clothes are right, there's no getting around 
it. What are we going to do? We can't collect, as 
I see. The reward is for a one-armed American. 
This is a two-armed Englishman." 

"Well, it may be that that is not objectionable. 
You see, it isn't less than is called for; it is more^ and 
so — 

But he saw that this argument was weak, and 
dropped it. The friends sat brooding over their per- 
plexities some time in silence. Finally the earl's face 
began to glow with an inspiration, and he said, 

impressively: 

171 



MARK TWAIN 

^'Hawkins, this materializatioii is a grander and 
nobler science than we have dreamed of. We have 
little imagined what a solemn, and stupendous thing 
we have done. The whole secret is perfectly dear 
to me now, dear as day. Every man is made up of 
heredities, long-descended atoms and particles of his 
ancestors. This present materialization is incom- 
plete. We have only brought it down to perhaps 
the beginning of this century." 

"What do you mean, Colond?" cried Hawkins, 
filled with vague alarms by the old man's awe- 
compelling words and manner. 

"This: We've materialized thisburgiar's ancestor r* 

"Oh, don't— don't say that. It's hideous." 

"But it's true, Hawkins; I know it. Look at the 
facts. This apparition is distinctly English — note 
that. It uses good grammar — note that. It is an 
artist — note that. It has the manners and carriage 
of a gentleman — note that. Where's your cowboy? 
Answer me that." 

"Rossmore, this is dreadful— it's too dreadful to 
think of 1" 

"Never resurrected a rag of that burglar but the 
clothes, not a solitary rag of him but the clothes." 

"Colonel, do you really mean — " 

The Colonel brought his fist down with emjihasis. 
and said : 

"I mean exactly this: This materialization was 
immature, the burglar has evaded us ; this is nothing 
but a damned ancestor!" 

He rose and walked the floor in great excitement* 
Hawkins said, plaintively : 

172 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

**It*s a bitter disappointment — ^bitter." 

*'I know it. I know it, Senator; I feel it as deeply 
as anybody could. But we've got to submit — on 
moral grounds. I need money, but God knows I am 
not poor enough or shabby enough to be an accessory 
to the ptmishing of a man's ancestor for crimes com- 
mitted by that ancestor's posterity." 

*'But, Colonel!" implored Hawkins, "stop and 
think; don't be rash; you know it's the only chsxice 
we've got to get the money; and, besides, the Bible 
itself sajrs posterity to the fourth generation shall 
be ptmished for the sins and crimes committed by 
ancestors four generations back that hadn't any- 
thing to do with them; and so it's only fair to turn 
the rule around and make it work both ways." 

The Colonel was struck with the strong logic of 
this position. He strode up and down, and thought 
it painfully over. Finally he said : 

*' There's reason in it; yes, there's reason in it. 
And so, although it seems a piteous thing to sweat 
this poor ancient devil for a burglary he hadn't the 
least hand in, still if duty commands I suppose we 
must give him up to the authorities." 

*'I would," said Hawkins, cheered and relieved; 
'*I*d give him up if he was a thousand ancestors 
compacted into one." 

**Lord bless me, that's just what he is!" said 
Sellers, with something like a groan; **it's exactly 
what he is ; there's a contribution in him from every 
ancestor he ever had. In him there's atoms of 
priests, soldiers, crusaders, poets, and sweet and 
gracious women — all kinds and conditions of folk 

173 



MARK TWAIN 

who trod this earth in old, old centuries, and vanished 
out of it ages ago, and now by act of ours they are 
stunmoned from their holy peace to answer for gut- 
ting a one-horse bank away out on the borders of 
Cherokee Strip, and it's just a howling outrage I" 

"Oh, don't talk like that, Colonel; it takes the 
heart all out of me, and makes me ashamed of the 
part I am proposing to — " 

••Wait— I've got it!" 

'•A saving hope? Shout it out, I am perishing." 

"It's perfectly simple; a child would have thought 
of it. He is all right, not a flaw in him, as far as I 
have carried the work. If I've been able to bring 
him as far as the beginning of this century, what's 
to stop me now? I'll go on and materialize him 
down to date." 

••Land, I never thought of that I" said Hawkins, 
all ablaze with joy again. ''It's the very thing. 
What a brain you have got! And will he shed the 
superfluous arm?" 

"He will." 

"And lose his English accent?" 

"It will wholly disappear. He will speak Cherokee 
Strip — and other forms of profanity.'* 

"Colonel, maybe he'll confess!" 

"Confess? Merely that bank robbery?" 

"Merely? Yes, but why 'merely'?" 

The Colonel said, in his most impressive manner; 

"Hawkins, he will be wholly imder my command. 
I will make him confess every crime he ever com- 
mitted. There must be a thousand. Do you get the 
idea?" 

174 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

*'Well— not quite." 

**The rewards will cx)me to us/' 

"Prodigious conception! I never saw such a head 
for seeing with a lightning glance all the outlying 
ramifications and possibilities of a central idea." 

"It is nothing; it comes natural to me. When his 
time is out in one jail he goes to the next and the 
next, and we shall have nothing to do but collect the 
rewards as he goes along. It is a perfectly steady 
income as long as we live, Hawkins. And much 
better than other kinds of investments, because he 
is indestructible." 

"It looks — ^it really does look the way you say; 
it does, indeed." 

"Look? — why, it is. It will not be denied that I 
have had a pretty wide and comprehensive financial 
experience, and I do not hesitate to say that I con- 
sider this one of the most valuable properties I have 
ever controlled." 

"Do you really think so?" 

"I do, indeed." 

"Oh, Colonel, the wasting grind and grief of 
poverty ! If we could realize immediately. I don't 
mean sell it all, but sell part — enough, you know, 
to—" 

"See how you tremble with excitement. That 
comes of lack of experience*. My boy, when you 
have been familiar with vast operations as long as 
I have you'll be diBferent. Look at me. Is my eye 
dilated? Do you notice a quiver anywhere? Feel 
my pulse: plunk — ^plunk — plunk — same as if I were 
asleep. And yet, what is passing through my calm, 

" X7S 



it- 



MARK TWAIN 

cold mind? A procession of fi^^ures which would 
make a financial novice drunk — just the sight of 
them. Now it is by keeping cool» and looking at a 
thing all around, that a nian sees what's really in it, 
and saves himself from the novice's unfailing mistake 
— the one you've just suggested — eagerness to realize. 
Listen to me. Your idea is to sell a part of him for 
ready cash. Now mine is — guess." 

"I haven't an idea. What is it?" 

*'Stock him — of course." 
'Well, I should never have thou^^t of that." 
'Because you are not a financier. Say he has 
committed a thousand crimes. Certainty that's a 
low estimate. By the look of him, even in his un- 
finished condition, he has committed all of a mill- 
ion. But call it only a thousand to be perfectly 
safe; five thousand reward, multiplied by a thousand, 
gives us a dead sure cash basis of — what? Five 
million dollars!" 

"Wait — ^let me get my breath." 

*'And the property indestructible. Perpetually 
fruitful — perpetually; for a property with his dis- 
position will go on committing crimes and winning 
rewards." 

"You daze me, you make my head whirl!" 

"Let it whirl, it won't do any harm. Now that 
matter is all fixed — Cleave it alone. I'll get up the 
company and issue the stock, all in good time. Just 
leave it in my hands. I judge you don't doubt my 
ability to work it up for all it is worth." 

"Indeed, I don't. I can say that with truth." 

"All right, then. That's disposed of. Every- 

176 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

thing in its turn. We old operators go by order and 
system — no helter-skelter business with us. What's 
the next thing on the docket? The carrying on of 
the materialization — ^the bringing it down to date. 
I will begin on that at once. I think — " 

"Look here, Rossmore. You didn't lock It in. A 
hundred to one It has escaped!" 

"Calm yourself as to that; don't give yourself any 
uneasiness." 

"But why shouldn't It escape?" 

"Let It, if It wants to. What of it?" 

"Well, I should consider it a pretty serious 
calamity." 

"Why, my dear boy, once in my power, always 
in my power. It may go and come freely. I can 
produce It here whenever I want It, just by the 
exercise of my will." 

"Well, I am truly glad to hear that, I do assure 
you." 

"Yes, I shall give It all the painting It wants to 
do, and we and the family will make It as comfortable 
and contented as we can. No occasion to restrain 
Its movements. I hope to persuade It to remain 
pretty quiet, though, because a materialization which 
is in a state of arrested development must of neces- 
sity be pretty soft and flabby and substanceless, and 
— er — by the way, I wonder where Jt comes from?" 

"How? What do you mean?"/ 

The earl pointed significantly — and interrogatively 
— ^toward the sky. Hawkins started; then settled 
into deep reflection; finally shook his head sorrow- 
fully and pointed downward. 

177 



MARK TWAIN 



ti' 

it' 



'What makes you think so, Washington?" 
'Well, I hardly know, but really you can see 
yourself that he doesn't seem to be pining for his 
last place." 

"It's wen thought! Soundly deduced. We've 
done that Thing a favor. But I beUeve I will pump 
It a little, in a quiet way, and find out if we are 
right." 

"How long is it going to take to finish him off and 
fetch him down to date, Colonel?" 

"I wish I knew, but I don't. I am dear knocked 
out by this new detail — ^this tmf oreseen necessity of 
working a subject down gradually from his condition 
of ancestor to his ultimate result as posterity. But 
I'll make him hmnp himself, anyway." 

"Rossmore!" 

"Yes, dear. We're in the laboratory. Come — 
Hawkins is here. Mind now, Hawkins — he's a 
sound, living human being to all the family — donH 
forget that. Here she comes." 

"Keep your seats, I'm not coming in. I just 
wanted to ask, who is it that's painting down 
there?" 

' ' That ? Oh, that's a young artist ; young English- 
man named Tracy ; very promising — ^favorite pupil of 
Hans Christian Andersen or one of the other old 
masters — Andersen I'm pretty sure it is; he's going 
to half -sole some of our old Italian masterpieces. 
Been talking to him?" 

"Well, only a word. I stumbled right in on him 
without expecting anybody was there. I tried to 
be polite to him; offered him a snack" (Sellers de- 

178 






THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

Kvered a large wink to Hawkins from behind his 
hand), ''but he declined, and said he wasn't hungry 
(another sarcastic wink) ; "so I brought some apples 
(double wink), "and he ate a couple of — " 

"What!" And the Colonel sprang some yards 
toward the ceiling, and came down quaking with 
astonishment. 

Lady Rftssmore was smitten dumb with amaze- 
ment. She gazed at the sheepish relic of Cherokee 
Strip, then at her husband, and then at the guest 
again. Finally she said: 

"What is the matter with you, Mulberry?" 

He did not answer immediately. His back was 
turned; he was bending over his chair, feeling the seat 
erf it. But he answered next moment, and said: 

"Ah, there it is; it was a tack." 

The lady contemplated him doubtfully a moment, 
then said, pretty snappishly : 

*'A11 that for a tack! Praise goodness it wasn't a 
shingle nail ; it would have landed you in the Milky 
Way. I do hate to have my nerves shook up so." 
And she turned on her heel and went her way. 

As soon as she was s^ely out, the Colonel said in 
a suppressed voice : 

"Come — we must see for ourselves. It must be a 
mistake." 

They hurried softly down and peeped in. Sellers 
whispered, in a sort of despair: 

* * It is eating ! What a grisly spectacle ! Hawkins, 
it's horrible! Take me away — I can't stand it." 

They tottered back to the laboratory. 



CHAPTER XX 

TRACY made slow progress with his work, for 
his mind wandered a good deal. Many things 
were puzzling him. Finally a light burst upon him 
all of a sudden — seemed to, at any rate — and he said 
to himself, ''I've got the clue at last — ^this man's 
mind is off its balance; I don't know how much, but 
it's off a point or two, sure; off enough to explain this 
mess of perplexities, anyway. These dreadful chro* 
mos — ^which he takes for old masters; these villainous 
jxwtraits — which to his frantic mind represent Ross- 
mores; the hatchments; the pompous name of this 
ramshackle old crib — ^Rossmore Towers; and that 
odd assertion of his, that I was expected. How 
could I be expected? that is, Lord Berkeley. He 
knows by the papers that that person was burned 
up in the New Gadsby. Why, hang it, he really 
doesn't know whom he was expecting; for his talk 
showed that he was not expecting an Englishman, or 
yet an artist, yet I'answer his requirements notwith- 
standing. He seems sufficiently satisfied with ine. 
Yes, he is a little off; in fact, I am afraid he is a good 
deal off, poor old gentleman. But he's interesting— 
all people in about his condition are, I suppose. I 
hope he'll like my work; I would like to come every 
day and study him. And when I write my father — 

1 80 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

ah, that hurts! I mustn't get on that i^bject; it 
isn't good for my spirits. Somebody coming — ^I 
must get to work. It's the old gentleman again. 
He looks bothered. Maybe my clothes are such 
pidous; and they are-^for an artist. If my con- 
science would allow me to make a change — but that 
is out of the question. I wonder what he's making 
those passes in the air for with his hands. I seem to 
be the object of them. Can he be trying to mes- 
merize me? I don't quite like it- Tliere's some- 
thing uncanny about it." 

The Colonel muttered to himself, ''It has an effect 
on him, I can see it myself. That's enough for one 
time, 1 reckon. He's not very solid yet, I suppose, 
and 1 might disintegrate him. I'll just put a sly 
question or two at him now, and see if I can find out 
what his condition is and where he's from," 

He approached and said, affably: 

*' Don't let me disturb you, Mr. Tracy; I only 
want to take a little glimpse of your work. Ah, 
that's fine — ^that's very fine, indeed. You are doing 
it elegantly. My daughter will be charmed with 
this. May I sit down by you?" 

•'Oh, do; I shaU be glad." 

*'lt won't disturb you? I mean, won't dissipate 
your inspirations?" 

Tracy laughed and said they were not ethereal 
enough to be very easily discommoded. 

The Colonel asked a number of cautious and well- 
considered questions — questions which seemed pretty 
odd and flighty to Tracy — but the answers con- 
veyed the information desired apparently, for the 

i8i 



MARK TWAIN 

Colonel said to himself, with mixed pride and grat- 
ification: 

"It's a good job as far as I've got with it. He's 
solid. Solid, and going to last; solid as the real 
thing. It's wonderful — wonderful. I believe I could 
petrify him." 

After a Uttle he asked, warily: 

"Do you prefer being here, or — or there?'* 

"There? Where?" 

"Why — er — ^where you've been?" 

Tracy's thought flew to his boarding-house, and he 
answered with decision: 

"Oh, here, much!" 

The Colonel was startled, and said to hinoself, 
**There's no uncertain ring about that. It indicates 
where he's been to, poor f eJlow. Well, I am satisfied 
now. I'm glad I got him out." 

He sat thinking and thinking, and watching the 
brush go. At length he said to himself, "Yes, ifc 
certainly seems to account for the failure of my 
endeavors in poor Berkeley's case. He went in the 
other direction. Well, it's all right. He's better oflL" 

Sally Sellers entered from the street now, looking 
her divinest, and the artist was introduced to her. 
It was a violent case of mutual love at first sight, 
though neither party was entirely aware of the fact, 
perhaps. The Englishman made this irrelevant re- 
mark to himself: "Perhaps he is not insane, after 
all." Sally sat down and showed an interest in 
Tracy's work which greatly pleased him, and a 
benevolent forgiveness of it which convinced him 
that the girl's natiu^ was cast in a large mold. 

i8a 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

Sellers was anxious to report his discoveries to 
Hawkins ; so he took his leave, saying that if the two 
"young devotees of the colored Muse" thought they 
could manage without him, he would go and look 
after his affairs. The artist said to himself, "I 
think he is a little eccentric, perhaps, but that is 
all." He reproached himself for having injuriously 
judged a man without giving him any fair chance 
to show what he really was. 

Of course the stranger was very soon at his ease 
and chatting along comfortably. The average 
American girl possesses the valuable qualities of 
nsfturalness, honesty, and inoffensive straightfor- 
wardness; she is nearly barren of troublesome con- 
ventions and artificialities; consequently, her pres- 
ence and her ways are unembarrassing, and one is 
acquainted with her and on the pleasantest terms 
with her before he knows how it came about. This 
new acquaintanceship — friendship, indeed — pro- 
gressed swiftly; and the unusual swiftness of it and 
the thoroughness of it are sufficiently evidenced and 
established by one noteworthy fact — ^that within the 
first half -hour both parties had ceased to be con- 
scious of Tracy's clothes. Later this consciousness 
was reawakened ; it was then apparent to Gwendolen 
that she was almost reconciled to them, and it was 
apparent to Tracy that he wasn't. The reawakening 
was brought about by Gwendolen's inviting the ar- 
tist to stay to dinner. He had to decline because 
he wanted to live now — that is, now that there was 
something to live for — and he could not survive in 
those dothes at a gentleman's table. He thought be 

183 



MARK TWAIN 

knew that. But he went away happy, for he saw 
that Gwendolen was disappointed. 

And whither did he go? He went straight to a 
slop-shop and bought as neat and reasonably welt- 
fitting a suit of clothes as an Englishman could be 
persuaded to wear. He said — to himself, but at his 
conscience — *'I know it's wrong; but it would be 
wrong not to do it; and two wrongs do not make a 
right.'* 

This satisfied him, and made his heart li^t. 
Perhaps it will also satisfy the reader— if he can 
make out what it means. 

The old people were troubled about Gwendolen at 
dinner, because she was so distraught and silent. 
If they had noticed, they would have found that she 
was sufiiciently alert and interested whenever the 
talk stumbled upon the artist and his work; but they 
didn't notice, and so the chat would swap around to 
some other subject, and then somebody would pres- 
ently be privately worrying about Gwendolen again, 
and wondering if she were not well, or if something 
had gone wrong in the millinery line. Her mother 
offered her various reputable patent medicines and 
tonics with iron and other hardware in them, and 
her father even proposed to send out for wine, relent- 
less prohibitionist and head of the order in the 
District of Columbia as he was, but these kindnesses 
were all declined — thankfully, but with decision. 
At bedtime, when the family were breaking up for 
the night, she privately looted one of the brushes, 
saying to herself, * * It's the one he has used the most." 

The next morning Tracy went forth wearing hit 

184 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

new stilt, and equipped with a pink in his button- 
hole — a daily attention from Puss. His whole soul 
was full of Gwendolen Sellers, and this condition was 
an inspiration, art-wise. All the morning his brush 
pawed nimbly away at the canvases, almost without 
his awarity (awarity, in this sense, being the sense 
of being aware, though disputed by some authori* 
ties), turning out marvel upon marvel, in the way 
of decorative accessories to the portraits, with a 
felicity and celerity which amazed the veterans of 
the firm and fetched out of them continuous explo- 
sions of applause. 

Meantime Gwendolen was losing her morning and 
many dollars. She supposed Tracy was coming in 
the forenoon— a conclusion which she had jumped 
to without outside help. So she tripped down-stairs 
. every little while from her work-parlor to arrange 
the brushes and things over again and see if he had 
arrived. And when she was in her work-parlor it 
was not profitable, but just the other way — ^as she 
found out to her sorrow. She had put in her idle 
moments during the last little while back in designing 
a particularly rare and capable gown for herself, and 
this morning she set about making it up; but she was 
absent-minded, and made an irremediable botch of 
it. When she saw what she had done she knew the 
reason of it and the meaning of it, and she put her 
work away from her and said she would accept the 
sign. And from that time forth she came no more 
away from the Audience Chamber, but remained 
there and waited. After luncheon she waited again. 
A whole hour. Then a great joy welled up in her 

i8S 



MARK TWAIN 

heart, for she saw him coming. So she flew back 
upstairs thankftil, and could hardly wait for him to 
miss the principal brush, which she had mislaid down 
there, but knew where she had mislaid it. However, 
all in good time, the others were called in and 
couldn't find the brush, and then she was sent for, 
and she cotildn't find it herself for some little time; 
but then she fotmd it when the others had gone 
away to hunt in the kitchen and down cellar and in 
the woodshed, and all those other places where 
people look for things whose ways they are not 
familiar with. So she gave him the brush, and re- 
marked that she ought to have seen that everything 
was ready for him, but it hadn't seemed necessary, 
because it was so early that she wasn't expecting-^ 
but she stopped there, surprised at herself for what 
she was saying; and he felt caught and ashamed, and 
said to himself, **I knew my impatience would drag 
me here before I was expected and betray me, and 
that is just what it has done; she sees straight 
through me — and is laughing at me inside, of course." 

Gwendolen was very much pleased on one account, 
and a little the other way in another; pleased with 
the new clothes and the improvement which ihey had 
achieved; less pleased by the pink in the buttonhole. 
Yesterday's pink had hardly interested her; this one 
was just like it, but somehow it had got her imme- 
diate attention, and kept it. She wi^ed she could 
think of some way of getting at its history in a 
properly colorless and indifferent way. Presently 
she made a venttu^. She said: 

''Whatever a man's age may be, he can reduce it 

i86 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

several years by putting a bright-colored flower in 
his buttonhole. I have often noticed that. Is that 
your sex's reason for wearing a boutonnidre?" 

"I fancy not, but certainly that reason would be a 
suflSdent one. IVe never heard of the idea before." 

*'You seem to prefer pinks. Is it on accoimt of 
the color, or the form?" 

*'0h, no," he said, simply, "they are given to me. 
I don't think I have any preference." 

**They are given to him," she said to herself, "and 
she felt a coldness toward that pink. **I wonder 
who it is, and what she is like." The flower began 
to take up a good deal of room; it obtruded itself 
everjrwhere; it intercepted all views, and marred 
them; it was becoming exceedingly annoying and 
conspicuous for a little thing. ' * I wonder if he cares 
for her." That thought gave her a quite definite 
pain. 



CHAPTER XXI 

SHE had made everything comfortable for the 
artist ; there was no further pretext for stajdng. 
So she said she would go now, and asked liirn to 
summon the servants in case he should need any- 
thing. She went away unhappy, and she left un- 
happiness behind her; for she carried away all the 
simshine. The time dragged heavily for both now. 
He couldn't paint for thinking of her; she couldn't 
design or millinerize with any heart for thinking of 
him. Never before had painting seemed so empty 
to him, never before had miUinerizing seemed so void 
of interest to her. She had gone without repeating 
that dinner invitation — an almost unendurable dis- 
appointment to him. On her part — well, she was 
suffering, too; for she had found she couldn't invite 
him. It was not hard yesterday, but it was impossi- 
ble to-day. A thousand innocent privileges seemed 
to have been filched from her unawares in the past 
twenty-four hours. To-day she felt strangdy ham- 
pered, restrained of her Uberty. To-day she couldn't 
propose to herself to do anything or say anything 
concerning this young man without being instantly 
paralyzed into non-action by the fear that he might 
*'suspect." Invite him to dinner to-day? It mada 
her shiver to think of it. 

i88 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

And so her afternoon was one long fret — ^broken 
at intervals. Three times she had to go down-stairs 
on errands — ^that is, she thought she had to go down- 
stairs on errands. Thus, going and coming, she had 
six glimpses of him in the aggregate, without seeming 
to look in his direction ; and she tried to endure these 
electric ecstasies without showing any sign, but they 
fluttered her up a good deal, and she felt that the 
natturalness she was putting on was overdone and 
quite too frantically sober and hysterically calm to 
deceive. 

The painter had his share of the rapture; he had 
his six glimpses, and they smote him with waves of 
pleasture that assaulted him, beat upon him, washed 
over him deliriously, and drowned out all con- 
sdousness of what he was doing with his brush. So 
there were six places in his canvas which had to be 
done over again. 

At last Gwendolen got some peace of mind by 
sending word to the Thompsons, in the neighborhood, 
that she was coming there to dinner. She wouldn't 
be reminded, at that table, that there was an absentee 
who ought to be a presentee — a word which she 
meant to look' out in the dictionary at a calmer time. 

About this time the old earl dropped in for a chat 
with the artist, and invited him to stay to dinner. 
Tracy cramped down his joy and gratitude by a 
Budden and powerful exerrise of all his forces; and 
he felt that now that he was going to be dose to 
Gwendolen, and hear her voice and watch her face 
diuing several prerious hours, earth had nothing 
valuable to add to his life for the present. 

189 



MARK TWAIN 

The earl said to himself, ''This specter can eat 
apples, apparently. We shall find out now if that 
is a specialty. I think, myself, it's a specialty. 
Apples, without doubt, constitute the spectral limit. 
It was the case with our first parents. No, I am 
wrong — at least, only partly right. The line was 
drawn at apples, just as in the present case, but it 
was from the other direction." The new clothes 
gave him a thrill of pleastire and pride. He said to 
himself, "I've got part of him down to date, any- 
way." 

Sellers said he was pleased with Tracy's work; and 
he went on and engaged him to restore his old 
masters, and said he shotild also want him to paint 
his portrait and his wife's and possibly his daughter's. 
The tide of the artist's happiness was at flood now. 
The chat flowed pleasantly along while Tracy painted 
and Sellers carefully unpacked a picture which he 
had brought with him. It was a chromo; a new one, 
just out. It was the smirking, self-satisfied portrait 
of a man who was inundating the Union with adver- 
tisements inviting everybody to buy his specialty, 
which was a three-dollar shoe or a dress-suit or some- 
thing of that kind. The old gentleman rested the 
chromo flat upon his lap and gazed down tenderly 
upon it, and became silent and meditative. Pres- 
ently Tracy noticed that he was dripping tears on 
it. This touched the yotmg fellow's sympathetic 
nature, and at the same time gave him the painful 
sense of being an intruder upon a sacred privacy, an 
observer of emotions which a stranger ought not to 
witness. But this pity rose superior to other con- 

190 



it' 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

siderations, and compelled him to try to comfort the 
old motamer with kindly words and a show of 
friendly interest. He said: 

1 am very sorry — ^is it a friend whom — " 
'Ah, more than that, far more than that — a 
rdative, the dearest I had on earth, although I was 
never permitted to see him. Yes, it is young Lord 
Berkeley, who perished so heroically in the awful 
confla — "Why, what is the matter?'* 

*'0h, nothing, nothing. It was a little startling 
to be so suddenly brought face to face, so to speak, 
with a person one has heard so much talk about. 
Is it a good likeness?" 

"Without doubt, yes. I never saw him, but you 
can easily see the resemblance to his father," said 
Sellers, holding up the chromo, and glancing from it 
to the chromo misrepresenting the Usurping Earl, 
and back again with an approving eye. 

''Well, no — ^I am not sure that I make out the 
likeness. It is plain that the Usurping Earl there has 
a great deal of character and a long face like a 
horse's, whereas his heir here is smirky, moon-faced, 
and characterless." 

"We are all that way in the beginning — all the 
line," said Sellers, undisturbed. "We all start as 
moon-faced fools, then later we tadpole along into 
horse-faced marvels of intellect and character. It 
is by that sign and by that fact that I detect tho 
resemblance here, and know this portrait to be genuine 
and perfect. Yes, all our family are fools at first." 

"This yoimg man seems to meet the hereditary 
requirement, certainly." 



MARK TWAIN 

"Yes, yes, he was a fool, without any doubt. 
Examine the face, the shape of the head, the expres- 
sion. It's all fool, fool, fool, straight through." 

"Thanks," said Tracy, involuntarily, 

"Thanks?" 

"I mean for explaining it to me. Go on, please." 

"As I was saying, fool is printed all over the face. 
A body can even read the cfetails." 

"What do they say?" 

"Well, added up, he is a wobbler." 

"A which?" 

"Wobbler. A person that's alwajrs taldng a jBnn 
stand about something or other — kind of a Gibraltar 
stand, he thinks, for unshakable fidelity and ever- 
lastingness — and then, inside of a little while, he 
begins to wobble; no more Gibraltar there; no, sir, 
a mighty ordinary commonplace weakling wobbling 
around on stilts. That's Lord Berkeley to a dot, 
you can see it — look at that sheep! But — why are 
you blushing like sunset? Dear sir, have I un- 
wittingly offended in some way?" 

* * Oh, no indeed, no indeed. Far from it. But it 
always makes me blush to hear a man revile his 
own blood." He said to himself, * ' How strangely his 
vagrant and tmguided fancies have hit upon the 
truth. By accident he has described me. I am that 
contemptible thing. When I left England I thought 
I knew myself; I thought I was a very Frederick the 
Great for resolution and staying capacity; whereas 
in truth I am just a Wobbler, simply a Wobbler. 
Well — after all, it is at least creditable to have high 
ideals and give birth to lofty resolutions; I will allow 

192 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

myself that comfort." Then he said, aloud, "Could 
this sheep, as you call him, breed a great and self- 
sacrificing idea in his head, do you think ? Could he 
meditate such a thing, for instance, as the renuncia- 
tion of the earldom and its wealth and its glories, and 
voltmtary retirement to the ranks of the conynonalty, 
there to rise by his own merit or remain forever poor 
and obscure?" 

'^ Could he? Why, look at him — look at this 
simpering, self-righteous mug! There is your an- 
swer. It's the very thing he would think of. And 
he would start in to do it, too." 

"And then?" 

"He'd wobble." 

"And back down?" 
'Every time." 

Is that to happen with all my — ^I mean would 
that happen to all his high resolutions?" 

"Oh, certainly — certainly. It's the Rossmore 
of it." 

"Then this creature was fortunate to die! Sup- 
pose, for argument's sake, that I was a Rossmore, 
and—" 

"It can't be done." 
'Why?" 

Because it's not a supposable case. To be a 
Rossmore at your age you'd have to be a fool, and 
you're not a fool. And you'd have to be a Wobbler, 
whereas anybody that is an expert in reading char- 
acter can see at a glance that when you set your foot 
down once, it's there to stay; an earthquake can't 
wobble it." He added to himself, "That's enough 

193 






a- 



MARK TWAIN 

to say to him, but it isn't half strong enough for the 
facts. The more I observe him now the more re- 
markable I find him. It is the strongest face I have 
ever examined. There is almost superhuman firm- 
ness here, immovable purpose, iron steadfastness of 
will. A most extraordinary young man." 

He presently said, aloud: 

''Some time I want to ask your advice about a 
little matter, Mr. Tracy. You see, I've got that 
yotmg lord's remains — my goodness, how you jump !" 

*'0h, it's nothing, pray go on. You've got his 
remains?" 

''Yes." 

"Are you sure they are his, and not somebody 
else's?" 

"Oh, perfectly sure. Samples, I mean. Not all 
of him." 

"Samples?" 

"Yes — ^in baskets. Some time you will be going 
home; and if you wouldn't mind taking them 
along — " 

"Who? I?" 

"Yes — certainly. I don't mean now; but after a 
while; after — but look here, would you like to see 
them?" 

"No! Most certainly not. I don't want to see 
them." 

"Oh, very well. I only thought — Heyo, where 
are you going, dear?" 

"Out to dinner, papa." 

Tracy was aghast. The Colonel said, in a disap- 
pointed voice: 

194 



€*' 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT ' 

"Well, I'm sorry. Sho, I didn't know she was 
going out, Mr. Tracy." Gwendolen's face began to 
take on a sort of apprehensive What-have-I-done 
expression. ''Three old people to one young one — 
well, it isn*t a good team, that's a fact." Gwendolen's 
face betrayed a dawning hopefulness, and she said, 
with a tone of reluctance which hadn't the hall- 
mark on it: 

**If you prefer, I will send word to the Thompsons 
that I—" 

*'0h, is it the Thompsons? That simplifies it — 
sets everything right. We can fix it without spoil- 
ing your arrangements, my child. You've got your 
heart set on — " 

But, papa, I'd just as soon go there some other — " 
No, I won't have it. You are a good, hard-work- 
ing, darling child, and your father is not the man to 
disappoint you when you — " 
But, papa, I — " 

Go along, I won't hear a word. We'll get along, 
dear." 

Gwendolen was ready to cry with vexation. But 
there was nothing to do but start; which she was 
about to do when her father hit upon an idea which 
filled him with delight because it so deftly covered 
all the difficulties of the situation, and made things 
smooth and satisfactory: 

"I've got it, my love, so that you won't be robbed 
of your holiday, and at the same time we'U be 
pretty satisfactorily fixed for a good time here. 
You send Belle Thompson here — perfectly beautiful 
creature, Tracy, per-f ectly beautiful. I want you to 

I9S 



it 



MARK TWAIN 

see that girl; why, youTl just go mad — ^you'll go mad 
inside of a minute. Yes, you send her right along, 
Gwendolen, and tell her — Why, she's gone!" He 
turned — she was already passing out at the gate. 
He muttered, "I wonder what's the matter; I don't 
know what her mouth's doing, but I think her shoul- 
ders are swearing. Well," said Sellers, blithely, to 
Tracy, "I shall miss her — parents always miss the 
children as soon as they're out of sight; it's only a 
natural and wisely ordained partiality; but you'll be 
all right, because Miss Belle will supply the youthful 
element for you and to your entire content; and we 
old people will do our best, too. We shall have a 
good enough time. And you'll have a chance to get 
better acquainted with Admiral Hawkins. That's 
a rare character, Mr. Tracy — one of the rarest and 
most engaging characters the world has produced. 
You'll find him worth studying. I've studied him 
ever since he was a child, and have always found 
him developing. I really consider that one of the 
main things that have enabled me to master the dif- 
ficult science of character - reading was the vivid 
interest I always felt in that boy, and the baflSing 
inscrutabilities of his ways and inspirations.'* 

Tracy was not hearing a word. His spirits were 
gone, he was desolate. 

*'Yes, a most wonderful character. Concealment 
— ^that's the basis of it. Always the first thing you 
want to do is to find the keystone a man's character 
is built on — then you've got it. No misleading 
and apparently inconsistent peculiarities can fool you 
then. What do you read on the Senator's surface? 

io6 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 



Simplicity — a kind of rank and protuberant simplic- 
ity; whereas, in fact, that's one of the deepest minds 
in the world. A perfectly honest man — an abso- 
lutely honest and honorable man — and yet, without 
doubt, the profoundest master of dissimulation the 
world has ever seen." 

*'0h, it's devilish!" This was wrung from the 
unlistening Tracy by the anguished thought of what 
might have been if only the dinner arrangements 
hadn't got mixed. 

**No, I shouldn't call it that," said Sellers, who 
was now placidly walking up and down the room with 
his hands under his coat-tails and listening to him- 
self talk. "One could quite properly call it devilish 
in another man, but not in the Senator. Your term 
is right, perfectly right — I grant that; but the ap- 
plication is wrong. It makes a great difference. 
Yes, he is a marvelous character. I do not suppose 
that any other statesman ever had such a colossal 
sense of humor, combined with the ability to totally 
conceal it. I may except George Washington and 
Cromwell, and perhaps Robespierre, but I draw the 
line there. A person not an expert might be in Judge 
Hawkins's company a lifetime and never find out he 
had any more sense of humor than a cemetery." 

A deep-drawn, yard-long sigh from the distraught 
and dreaming artist, followed by a murmured 
** Miserable, oh, miserable!" 

"Well, no, I shouldn't say that about it, quite. 
On the contrary, I admire his ability to conceal his 
hxmior even more if possible than I admire the gift 
itself, stupendous as it is. Another thing — General 

197 



MARK TWAIN 

Hawkins is a thinker; a keen, logical, exhaustive, 
analytical thinker — perhaps the ablest of modem 
times. That is, of course, upon themes suited to 
his size, like the glacial period, and the correlation of 
forces, and the evolution of the Christian from the 
caterpillar — any of those things; give him a subject 
according to his size, and just stand back and watch 
him think! Why, you can see the place rock! Ah, 
yes, you must know him; you must get on the inside 
of him. Perhaps the most extraordinary mind since 
Aristotle." 

Dinner was kept waiting for a while for Miss 
Thompson, but as Gwendolen had not delivered the 
invitation to her the waiting did no good, and the 
household presently went to the meal without her. 
Poor old Sellers tried everything his hospitable soul 
could devise to make the occasion an enjojrable one 
for the guest, and the guest tried his honest best to 
be cheery and chatty and happy for the old gentle- 
man's sake; in fact, all hands worked hard in the 
interest of a mutual good time, but the thing was a 
failure from the start; Tracy's heart was lead in his 
bosom; there seemed to be only one prominent fea- 
ture in the landscape, and that was a vacant chair; 
he couldn't drag his mind away from Gwendolen and 
his hard luck; consequently, his distractions allowed 
deadly pauses to slip in every now and then when 
it was his turn to say something, and of course this 
disease spread to the rest of the conversation — 
wherefore, instead of having a breezy sail in sunny 
waters, as anticipated, everybody was bailing out and 
praying for land. What c(wW the matter b^? Tracy 

?Qi8 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT ^ 

alone could have told, the others couldn't even invent 
a theory. 

Meanwhile they were having a similarly dismal 
time at the Thompson house; in fact, a twin experi- 
ence. Gwendolen was ashamed of herself for allow- 
ing her disappointment to so depress her spirits, and 
make her so strangely and profotmdly miserable; but 
feeling ashamed of herself didn't improve the matter 
any; it only seemed to aggravate the suffering. She 
explained that she was not feeling very well, and 
everybody could see that this was true; so she got 
sincere sjnnpathy and commiseration; but that 
didn't help the case. Nothing helps that kind of a 
case. It is best to just stand off and let it fester. 
The moment the dinner was over the girl excused 
herself, and she hurried home, feeling unspeakably 
grateful to get away from that house and that intol- 
erable captivity and suffering. 

Will he be gone? The thought arose in her brain 
but took effect in her heels. She slipped into the 
house, threw off her things, and made straight for 
the dining-room. She stopped and listened. Her 
father's voice — with no life in it; presently her 
mother's — no life in that; a considerable vacancy, 
then a sterile remark from Washington Hawkins. 
Another silence; then, not Tracy's, but her father's 
voice again. 

"He's gone,'' she said to herself, despairingly, and 
listlessly opened the door and stepped within. 

"Why, my child," cried the mother, "how white 
you are ! Are you — has anything — ' ' 

'WWt§?" exclaimed Sellers. "It's gone like ft 



<<• 



MARK TWAIN 

flash; 'twasn't serious. Already she's as red as the 
soul of a watermelon! Sit down, dear, sit down- 
goodness knows you're welcome. Did you have a 
good time? WeVe had great times here — immense. 
Why didn c Miss Belle come? Mr. Tracy is not 
feeling well, and she'd have made him forget it." 

She was content now ; and out from her happy eyes 
there went a light that told a secret to another pair 
of eyes there and got a secret in return. In just that 
infinitely small fraction of a second those two great 
confessions were made, received, and perfectly under- 
stood. All anxiety, apprehension, uncertainty, van- 
ished out of these young people's hearts and left them 
filled with a great peace. 

Sellers had had the most confident faith that with 
the new reinforcement victory would be at this last 
moment snatched from the jaws of defeat, but it was 
an error. The talk was as stubbornly disjointed as 
ever. He was proud of Gwendolen, and liked to 
show her off, even against Miss Belle Thompson, and 
here had been a great opportimity, and what had she 
made of it ? He felt a good deal put out. It vexed 
him to think that this Englishman, with the traveling 
Briton's everlasting disposition to generalize whole 
mountain ranges from single sample-grains of sand, 
would jimip to the conclusion that American girls 
were as dumb as himself— generalizing the whole 
tribe from this single sample, and she at her poorest, 
there being nothing at that table to inspire her, give 
her a start, keep her from going to sleep. He made 
up his mind that for the honor of the country he 
would bring these two together again over the social 

poo 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

board before long. There would be a diflferent result 
another time, he judged. He said to himself, with 
a deep sense of injury, *' He'll put in his diary — ^they 
all keep diaries — she'll put in his 6iaxy that she was 
miraculously tminteresting — dear, dear, but wasnH 
she ! — ^I never saw the like — ^and yet looking as beau- 
tiful as Satan, too — ^and couldn't seem to do any- 
thing but paw bread-crumbs, and pick flowers to 
pieces, and look fidgety. And it isn't any better 
here in the Hall of Audience. I've had enough; I'll 
haul down my flag; the others may fight it out if 
they want to." 

He shook hands all aroimd and went off to do some 
work which he said was pressing. The idolaters were 
the width of the room apart, and apparently uncon- 
scious of each other's presence. The distance got 
shortened a Uttle now. Very soon the mother with- 
drew. The distance narrowed again. Tracy stood 
before a chromo of some Ohio politician which had 
been retouched and chain-mailed for a crusading 
Rossmore, and Gwendolen was sitting on the sofa 
not far from his elbow, artificially absorbed in exam- 
ining a photograph -album that hadn't any photo- 
graphs in it. 

The ** Senator" still lingered. He was sorry for 
the young people; it had been a dull evening for 
them. In the goodness of his heart he tried to make 
it pleasant for them now; tried to remove the ill 
impression necessarily left by the general defeat; 
tried to be chatty, even tried to be gay. But the 
responses were sickly, there was no starting any 
enthusiasm; he would give it up and quit — it was 

20I 



MARK TWAIN 

a day specially picked out and consecrated to fail- 
ures. 

But when Gwendolen rose up promptly and smiled 
a glad smile, and said, with thankfulness and blessing, 
'*Must you go?" it seemed cruel to desert, and he sat 
down again. 

He was about to begin a remark when — when he 
didn't. We have all been there. He didn't know 
how he knew his concluding to stay longer had been 
a mistake, he merely knew it; and knew it for dead 
certain, too. And so he bade good night and went 
mooning out, wondering what he could have done 
that changed the atmosphere that way. As the door 
closed behind him those two were standing side by 
side, looking at that door — looking at it in a waiting, 
second-counting, but deeply grateful kind of way. 
And the instant it closed they flung their arms about 
each other's necks, and there, heart to heart and lip 
to lip — 

''Oh, my God, she's kissing It!" 

Nobody heard this remark, because Hawkins, who 
bred it, only thought it ; he didn't utter it. He had 
turned the moment he had closed the door, and had 
pushed it open a little, intending to re-enter and 
ask what ill-advised thing he had done or said, and 
apologize for it. But he didn't re-enter; he stag- 
gered oflE sttumed, terrified, distressed. 



CHAPTER XXn 

FIVE minutes later he was sitting in his room, 
with his head bowed within the circle of his 
arms, on the table — final attitude of grief and 
despair. His tears were flowing fast, and now and 
then a sob broke upon the stillness. Presently he 
said: 

"I knew her when she was a little child and used to 
climb about my knees; I love her as I love my own, 
and now — oh, poor thing, poor thing, I cannot bear 
it! — she's gone and lost her heart to this mangy 
materializee! "Why didnH we see that that might 
happen? But how could we? Nobody could; nobody 
could ever have dreamed of such a thing. You 
couldn't expect a person would fall in love with a 
wax-work. And tiiis one doesn't even amount to 
that." 

He went on grieving to himself, and now and then 
giving voice to his lamentations. 

**It's done, oh, it's done, and there's no help for it, 
no tmdoing the miserable business. If I had the 
nerve, I would kill It. But that wouldn't do any 
good. She loves It; she thinks It's genuine and 
authentic. If she lost It she would grieve for It just 
as she would for a real person. And who's to break 
it to the family? Not I — ^I'U die first. Sellers is the 

303 



•»- 



MARK TWAIN 

best human being I ever knew, and I wouldn't any 
more think of — oh, dear, why, it '11 break his heart 
when he finds it out. And Polly's, too. This comes 
of meddling with such infernal matters! But for this 
the creature would still be roasting in Sheol, where 
It belongs. How is it that these people don't smell 
the brimstone? Sometimes I can't come into the 
same room with him without nearly suffocating." 

After a while he broke out again: 

"Well, there's one thing sure. The materializing 
has got to stop right where it is. If she's got to many 
a specter, let her marry a decent one out of the Mid- 
dle Ages, like this one — not a cowboy and a thief 
such as this protoplasmic tadpole's going to turn 
into if Sellers keeps on fussing at It. It costs five 
thousand dollars cash and shuts down on the incor- 
porated company to stop the works at this point, 
but Sally Sellers's happiness is worth more than 
that." 

He heard Sellers coming, and got himself to rights. 
Sellers took a seat, and said: 

*'Well, I've got to confess I'm a good deal puzzled. 
It did certainly eat, there's no getting around it. 
Not eat, exactly, either, but It nibbled; nibbled in 
an appetiteless way, but still It nibbled; and that's 
just a marvel. Now the question is. What does It 
do with those nibblings? That's it — what does It 
do with them? My idea is that we don't b^;in to 
know all there is to this stupendous discovery yet. 
But time will show — ^time and science — give us a 
chance, and don't get impatient." 

But he couldn't get Hawkins interested; couldn't 

904 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

make him talk to amount to anything ; couldn't drag 
him out of his depression. But at last he took a turn 
that arrested Hawkins's attention. 

**I'm coming to like him, Hawkins. He is a per- 
son of stupendous character — absolutely gigantic. 
Under that placid exterior is concealed the most 
dare-devil spirit that was ever put into a man; he's 
just a Clive over again. Yes, I'm all admiration for 
him on accoimt of his character, and liking naturally 
follows admiration, you know.. , I'm coming to like 
him immensely. Do you know', I haven't the heart 
to degrade such a character as that down to the 
burglar estate for money or for anjrthing else; and 
I've come to ask if you are willing to let the reward 
go and leave this poor fellow — " 
*'Whereheis?" 

*'Yes — ^not bring him down to date." 
*'0h, there's my hand; and my heart's in it, too!'* 
''I'll never forget you for this, Hawkins," said the 
old gentleman, in a voice which he found it hard to 
control. "You are making a great sacrifice for me, 
and one which you can ill afford, but I'll never 
forget yotu- generosity, and if I live you shall not 
suffer for it, be sure of that." 

Sally Sellers immediately and vividly realized that 
she was become a new being; a being of a far higher 
and worthier sort than she had been such a little 
while before; an earnest being, in place of a dreamer; 
and supplied with a reason for her presence in the 
world, where merely a wistful and troubled curiosity 
about it had existed before. So great and so com- 

205 



MARK TWAIN. 

prehensive was the change which had been wrought 
that she seemed to herself to be a real person who 
had lately been a shadow; a something, which had 
lately been a nothing; a ptirpose, which had lately 
been a fancy; a finished temple, with the altar-fires 
lit and the voice of worship ascending, where before 
had been but an architect's confusion of arid work- 
ing plans, unintelligible to the passing eye and 
prophesying nothing. 

**Lady" Gwendolen! The pleasantness of that 
sotmd was all gone; it was an offense to her ear now. 
She said : 

''There — ^that sham belongs to the past; I will not 
be called by it any more." 

**I may call you simply Gwendolen? You will 
allow me to drop the formalities straightway and 
name you by your dear first name without additions ?'* 

She was dethroning the pink and replacing it with 
a rosebud. 

''There — ^that is better. I hate pinks — some pinks. 
Indeed, yes, you are to call me by my first name with- 
out additions — ^that is — ^well, I don't mean without 
additions entirely, but — ** 

It was as far as she could'get. There was a pause; 
his intellect was struggling to comprehend; presently 
it did manage to catch the idea in time to save 
embajrassment all aroimd, and he said, gratefully: 

''Dear Gwendolen! I may say that?" 

"Yes — ^part of it. But — don't kiss me when I am 
talking; it makes me forget what I was going to say. 
You can call me Jby part of that form, but not the 
last part. Gwendolen is not my name." 

206 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

"Not your name?" This in a tone of wonder and 
surprise. 

The giri's soul was suddenly invaded by a creepy 
apprehension, a quite definite sense of suspicion and 
alarm. She put his arms away from her, looked 
searchingly in his eye, and said : 

"Answer me truly, on your honor. You are 
not seeking to marry me on account of my 
rank?'' 

The shot almost knocked him through the wall, 
he was so little prepared for it. There was some- 
thing so finely grotesque about the question and its 
parent suspicion that he stopped to wonder and 
admire, and thus was he saved from laughing. Then, 
without wasting precious time, he set about the task 
of convincing her that he had been lured by herself 
alone, and had fallen in love with her only, not her 
title and position; that he loved her with all his 
heart, and could not love her more if she were a 
duchess, or less if she were without home, name, or 
family. She watched his face wistfully, eagerly, 
hopefully, translating his words by its expression; 
and when he had finished there was gladness in her 
heart — a, tiunultuous gladness, indeed, though out- 
wardly she was calm, tranquil, even judicially aus- 
tere. She prepared a surprise for him now, calcu- 
lated to put a heavy strain upon those disinterested 
protestations of his ; and thus she delivered it, burn- 
ing it away word by word as the fuse bums down to 
a bombshell, and watching to see how far the explo- 
sion would lift him. 

"Listen — and do not doubt me — ^for I shall speat 
14 2a7 



MARK TWAIN 

the exact truth. Howard Tracy, I am no more an 
carl's chad than you are!" 

To her joy — and secret surprise also — ^it never 
phased him. He was ready this time, and saw his 
chance. He cried out, with enthusiasm, "Thank 
Heaven for that!" and gathered her to his anns. 

To express her happiness was ahnost beyond her 
gift of speech. 

** You make me the proudest girl in aU the earth," 
she said, with her head pillowed on his shoulder. "I 
thought it only natural that you should be dazzled 
by the title — ^maybe even unconsciously, you being 
English — ^and that you might be deceiving yourself 
in thinking you loved only me, and find you didn't 
love me when the deception was swept away; so 
it makes me proud that the revelation stands for 
nothing and that you do love just me, only me — oh, 
prouder than any words can tell!" 

* * It is only you, sweetheart ; I never gave one envy- 
ing glance toward your father's earldom. That is 
utterly true, dear Gwendolen." 

'* There — ^you mustn't call me that. I hate that 
false name. I told you it wasn't mine. My name 
is Sally Sellers — or Sarah, if you like. From this 
time I banish dreams, visions, imaginings, and will 
no more of them. I am going to be myself — my 
genuine self, my honest self, my natural self, dear 
and clean of sham and foUy and fraud, and worthy 
of you. There is no grain of social inequality be- 
tween us; I, like you, am poor; I, like you, am with- 
out position or distinction; you are a struggling 
artist; I am that, too, in my himibler way. CXu: 

208 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

bread is honest bread; we work for our living. Hand 
in hand we will walk hence to the grave, helping each 
other in all ways, living for each other, being and 
remaining one in heart and purpose, one in hope and 
aspiration, inseparable to the end. And though our 
place is low, judged by the world's eye, we will make 
it as high as the highest in the great essentials of 
honest work for what we eat and wear, and conduct 
above reproach. We live in a land, let us be thank- 
ftd, where this is all-sufficient, and no man is better 
than his neighbor by the grace of God, but only by 
his own merit." 

Tracy tried to break in, but she stopped him, and 
kept the floor herself. 

*'I am not through yet. I am going to purge 
myself of the last vestiges of artificiality and pre- 
tense, and then start fair on your own honest level, 
and be worthy mate to you thenceforth. My father 
honestly thinks he is an earl. Well, leave him his 
dream; it pleases him, and does no one any harm. 
It was the dream of his ancestors before him. It 
has made fools of the house of Sellers for generations, 
and it made something of a fool of me, but took no 
deep root. I am done with it now, and for good. 
Forty-eight hotirs ago I was privately proud of being 
the daughter of a pinchbeck earl, and thought the 
proper mate for me must be a man of like degree; 
but to-day — oh, how grateful I am for your love, 
which has healed my sick brain and restored my 
sanity! — I could make oath that no earl's son in all 
the world — " 

''Oh— weU, but— but— " 

20Q 



MARK TWAIN 

"Why, you look like a person in a panic. What 
is it? What is the matter?" 

* * Matter ? Oh, nothing — nothing. I was only go- 
ing to say" — but in his flurry nothing occurred to 
him to say for a moment; then by a lucky inspiration 
he thought of something entirely su£5cient for the 
occasion, and brought it out with eloquent force: 
"Oh, how beautiful you are! You take my breath 
away when you look like that." 

It was well conceived, well timed and cordially 
delivered — and it got its reward. 

"Let me see. Where was I? Yes, my father's 
earldom is pure moonshine. Look at those dreadful 
things on the wall. You have of course supposed 
them to be x>ortraits of his ancestors, earls of Ross- 
more. Well, they are not. They are chromos of 
distinguished Americans — all modems; but he has 
carried them back a thousand years by relabeling 
them. Andrew Jackson there is doing what he can 
to be the late American earl ; and the newest treasure 
in the collection is supposed to be the young English 
heir — I mean the idiot with the crape; but in truth 
it's a shoemaker, and not Lord Berkeley at all." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Why, of course I am. He wouldn't look like 
that." 

"Why?" 

"Because his conduct in his last moments, when 
the fire was sweeping around him, shows that he was 
a man. It shows that he was a fine, high-souled 
young creature." 

Tracy was ^strongly moved by these compliments, 

9IQ 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

and it seemed to him that the girl's lovely lips took 
on a new loveliness when they were delivering them. 
He said, softly : 

**It is a pity he could not know what a gracious 
impression his behavior was going to leave with the 
dearest and sweetest stranger in the land of — " 

"Oh, I almost loved him! Why, I think of him 
every day. He is always floating about in my mind. ' ' 

Tracy felt that this was a little more than was 
necessary. He was conscious of the sting of jealousy. 
He said: 

"It is quite right to think of him — at least, now 
and then — that is, at intervals — in perhaps an 
admiring way — ^but it seems to me that — " 

* * Howard Tracy, are you jealous of that dead man ?' ' 

He was ashamed — ^and at the same time not 
ashamed. He was jealous — ^and at the same time 
he was not jealous. In a sense the dead man was 
himself; in that case compliments and affection 
lavished upon that corpse went into his own till and 
were dear profit. But in another sense the dead 
man was not himself; and in that case all compli- 
ments and affection lavished there were wasted, and 
a sufficient basis for jealousy. A tiff was the result 
of the dispute between the two. Then they made it 
up, and were more loving than ever. As an afifec- 
tionate clincher of the reconciliation, Sally declared 
that she had now banished Lord Berkeley from her 
mind; and added, "And in order to make sure that 
he shall never make trouble between us again, I will 
teach myself to detest that name and all that have 
ever borne it or ever shall bear it." 

211 



MARK TWAIN 

This inflict^ another pang, and Tracy was 
minded to ask her to modify that a little — just 
on general principles, and as practice in not overdo- 
ing a good thing — ^but perhaps he might better leave 
things as they were and not risk bringing on an* 
other tiff. He got away from that particular^ and 
sought less tender grotmd for conversation. 

* ' I suppose you disapprove wholly of aristocracies 
and nobilities, now that you have renounced your 
title and your father's earldom?" 

''Real ones? Oh, dear, no; but IVe thrown aside 
our sham one for good.*' 

This answer fell just at the right time and just in 
the right place to save the poor, tmstable young man 
from changing his political complerion once more. 
He had been on the point of begiiming to totter 
again, but this prop shored him up and kept hirp 
from floimdering back into democracy and re- 
renoimcing aristocracy. So he went home glad that 
he had asked the f ortimate question. The girl would 
accept a little thing like a genuine earldom; she was 
merely prejudiced against the brummagem article. 
Yes, he could have his girl and have his earldom, 
too; that question was a f ortimate stroke. 

Sally went to bed happy, too; and remained 
happy, deliriously happy, for nearly two hours; but 
at last, just as she was sinking into a contented and 
luxurious tmconsciousness, the shady devil who lives 
and lurks and hides and watches inside of human 
beings and is always waiting for a chance to do the 
proprietor a malicious damage, whispered to her 
soul and said, **That question had a harmless look, 

212 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

but what was back of it? — ^what was the secret motive 
of it? — ^what suggested it?" 

The shady devil had knifed her, and could retire 
now and take a rest; the wound would attend to 
business for him. And it did. 

Why should Howard Tracy ask that question? If 
he was not trying to marry her for the sake of her 
rank, what should suggest that question to him? 
Didn't he plainly look gratified when she said her 
objections to aristocracy had their limitations? Ah, 
he is after that earldom, that gilded sham — ^it isn't 
poor me he wants. 

So she argued, in anguish and tears. Then she 
argued the opposite theory, but made a weak, poor 
business of it, and lost the case. She kept the 
arguing up, one side and then the other, the rest of 
the night, and at last fell asleep at dawn; fell in the 
fire at dawn, one may say; for that kind of sleep 
resembles fire, and one comes out of it with his brain 
baked and his physical forces fried out of him. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

TRACY wrote his father before he sought h/m h,d. 
He wrote a letter which he believed would s»et 
better treatment than his cablegram received, for it 
contained what ought to be welcome news : namely, 
that he had tried equality and working for a living; 
had made a fight which he could find no reason to 
be ashamed of, and in the matter of earning a living 
had proved that he was able to do it; but that on the 
whole he had arrived at the conclusion that he could 
not reform the world single-handed, and was willing 
to retire from the conflict with the fair degree of 
honor which he had gained, and was also willing to 
return home and restune his position and be content 
with it and thankful for it for the future, leaving 
further experiment of a missionary sort to other 
young people needing the chastening and quelling 
persuasions of experience, the only logic sure to 
convince a diseased imagination and restore it to 
rugged health. Then he approached the subject of 
marriage with the daughter of the American Claim- 
ant with a good deal of caution and much pains- 
taking art. He said praiseful and appreciative 
things about the girl, but didn't dwell upon that 
detail or make it prominent. The thing which he 
made prominent was the opportimity now so happily 



3T4. 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

afforded to reconcile York and Lancaster, graft the 
warring roses upon one stem, and end forever a 
crying injustice which had aheady lasted far too 
long. One could infer that he had thought this 
thing all out and chosen this way of making all things 
fair and right because it was sufficiently fair and 
considerably wiser than the renunciation scheme 
which he had brought with him from England. One 
could infer that, but he didn't say it. In fact, the 
more he read his letter over, the more he got to 
inferring it himself. 

When the old earl received that letter the first 
part of it filled him with a grim and snarly satisfac- 
tion ; but the rest of it brought a snort or two out of 
him that could be translated differently. He wasted 
no ink in this emergency, either in cablegrams or 
letters; he promptly took ship for America to look 
into the matter himself. He had stanchly held his 
grip all this long time, and given no sign of the 
himger at his heart to see his son ; hoping for the cure 
of his insane dream, and resolute that the process 
should go through all the necessary stages without 
assuaging telegrams or other nonsense from home, 
and here was victory at last — ^victory, but stupidly 
marred by this idiotic marriage project. Yes, he 
would step over and take a hand in this matter 
himself. 

During the first ten days following the mailing of 
the letter Tracy's spirits had no idle time; they were 
always climbing up into the clouds or sliding down 
into the earth as deep as the law of gravitation 
(j^ched. He was intensely happy or intensely 

^^5 



MARK TWAIN 

miserable by turns, according to Miss Sally's moods. 
He never could tell when the mood was going to 
change, and when it changed he couldn't tell what 
it was that had changed it. Sometimes she was so 
in love with him that her love was tropical, torrid, 
and she could find no language fervent enough for 
its expression; then suddenly, and without warning 
or any apparent reason, the weather would change, 
and the victim would find himself adrift among the 
icebergs and feeling as lonesome and friendless as the 
north pole. It sometimes seemed to him that a man 
might better be dead than exposed to these devas- 
tating varieties of climate. 

The case was simple. Sally wanted to believe that 
Tracy's preference was disinterested; so she was 
always appl3dng little tests of one sort or another, 
hoping and expecting that they would bring out 
evidence which would confirm or fortify her beKef . 
Poor Tracy did not know that these experiments 
were being made upon him, consequently he walked 
promptly into all the traps the girl set for hinou 
These traps consisted in apparently casual references 
to social distinction, aristocratic title and privilege, 
and such things. Often Tracy responded to these 
references heedlessly and not much caring what he 
said, provided it kept the talk going and prolonged 
the stance. He didn't suspect that the girl was 
watching his face and listening for his words as one 
who watches the judge's face and listens for the 
words which will restore him to home and friends and 
freedom, or shut him away from the sun and human 
rjompanionship forever. He didn't suspect that his 

2x6 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

careless words were beirig weighed, and so he often 
delivered sentence of death when it wotild have been 
just as handy and all the same to him to pronounce 
acquittal. Daily he broke the girl's heart, nightly 
he sent her to the rack for sleep. He couldn't under- 
stand it. 

Some people would have put this and that together 
and perceived that the weather never changed imtil 
one particular subject was introduced, and that then 
it always changed. And they would have looked 
further, and perceived that that subject was always 
introduced by the one party, never the other. They 
would have argued then that this was done for a 
purpose. If they could not find out what that pur- 
pose was in any simpler or easier way they would ask. 

But Tracy was not deep enough or suspicious 
enough to think of these things. He noticed only 
one particular: that the weather was always sunny 
when a visit began. No matter how much it might 
doud up later, it always began with a clear sky. 
He couldn't explain this curious fact to himself; he 
merely knew it to be a fact. The truth of the 
matter was that by the time Tracy had been out of 
Sally's sight six hours she was so famishing for a 
sight of him that her doubts and suspicions were all 
consumed away in the fire of that longing, and so 
always she came into his presence as stuprisingly 
radiant and joyous as she wasn't when she went 
out of it. 

In circumstances like these a growing portrait 
runs a good many risks. The portrait of Sellers, by 
Tracy, was fighting along day by day through this 

217 



MARK TWAIN 

mixed weather, and daily adding to itself ineradicable 
signs of the checkered life it was leading. It was the 
happiest portrait, in spots, that was ever seen; but 
in other spots a damned soul looked out from it; a 
soul that was suffering all the different kinds of dis- 
tress there are, from stomach-ache to rabies. But 
Sellers liked it. He said it was just himself all over 
— a portrait that sweated moods from every pore, 
and no two moods ahke. He said he had as many 
different kinds of emotions in him as a jug. 

It was a kind of a deadly work of art, maybe, but 
it was a starchy picture for show; for it was IrEe-sizey 
full length, and represented the American earl in a 
peer's scarlet robe, with the three ermine bars indic- 
ative of an earl's rank, and on the gray head an 
earl's coronet tilted just a wee bit to one side in a 
most gallus and winsome way. When Sally's weather 
was stmny the portrait made Tracy chuckle, but 
when her weather was overcast it disordered his 
mind and stopped the circulation of his blood. 

Late one night when the sweethearts had been 
having a flawless visit together, Sally's interior devil 
began to work his specialty, and soon the conver- 
sation was drifting toward the customary rock. 
Presently, in the midst of Tracy's serene flow of 
talk, he felt a shudder which he knew was not his 
shudder, but exterior to his breast although imme- 
diately against it. After the shudder came sobs: 
Sally was crying. 

"Oh, my darling, what have I done — ^what have 
I said? It has happened again! What have I done 
to woxmd you?" 

218 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

She disengaged herself from his arms and gave him 
a lcx)k of deep reproach. 

**What have you done? I will tell you what you 
have done. You have unwittingly revealed — oh, for 
the twentieth time, though I could not beheve it, 
would not believe it ! — that it is not me you love, but 
that foolish sham, my father's imitation earldom; 
and you have broken my heart!" 

''Oh, my child, what are you sa3ang? I never 
dreamed of such a thing!'' 

''Oh, Howard! Howard! the things you have ut- 
tered when you were forgetting to guard your tongue 
have betrayed you!'* 

** Things I have uttered when I was forgetting to 
guard my tongue? These are hard words. When 
have I remembered to guard it? Never in one 
instance. It has no office but to speak the truth. 
It needs no guarding for that." 

** Howard, I have noted your words and weighed 
them when you were not thinking of their significance 
— and they have told me more than you meant they 
should." 

**Do you mean to say you have answered the 
trust I had in you by using it as an ambuscade from 
which you could set snares for my unsuspecting 
tongue and be safe from detection while you did it? 
You have not done this — surely you have not done 
this thing. Oh, one's enemy could not do it!" 

This was an aspect of the girl's conduct which she 
had not clearly perceived before. Was it treachery ? 
Had she abused a trust? The thought crimsoned 

her eh^eks with shame and remQirse, 

9x9 



MARK TWAIN 

*'0h, forgive me/* she said; '*I did not knowwhat 
I was doing. I have been so tortured — you will for- 
give me, you must; I have suffered so much, and I 
am so sorry and so htmible; you do forgive me, donH 
you? Don't turn away, don't refuse me; it is only 
my love that is at fault, and you know I love you — 
love you with aU my heart ; I couldn't bear to — oh, 
dear, dear, I am so miserable, and I never meant 
any harm, and I didn't see where this insanity was 
carrying me, and how it was wronging and abusing 
the dearest heart in aU the world to me — and — and — 
oh, take me in your arms again; I have no other 
refuge, no other home and hope!" 

There was reconciliation again — immediate, per- 
fect, all-embracing — and with it utter happiness. 
This would have been a good time to adjourn. But 
no, now that the cloud-breeder was revealed at last, 
now that it was manifest that all the sour weather 
had come from this girl's dread that Tracy was lured 
by her rank and not herself, he resolved to lay that 
ghost immediately and permanently by furnishing 
the best possible proof that he couldnH have had back 
of him at any time the suspected motive. So he 
said: 

**Let me whisper a little secret in your ear — a 
secret which I have kept shut up in my breast all 
this time. Your rank couldn't ever have been an 
enticement. I am son and heir to an English earl!" 

The girl stared at him — one, two, three moments, 
maybe a dozen — ^then her lips parted. 

"You?" she said, and moved away from him, stQl 
gazing SL^ him in a kind of blank amazement. 

220 









THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

**Why — why, certainly I am. Why do you act 
Eke this? What have I done nowf 

"What have you done? You have certainly made 
a most strange statement. You must see that 
yourself." 

"Well," with a timid little laugh, "it may be a 
strange enough statement; but of what consequence 
is that if it is true?" 

'If it is true. You are already retiring from it." 
Oh, not for a moment! You should not say 
that. I have not deserved it. I have spoken the 
truth; why do you doubt it?" 

Her reply was prompt. 
Simply because you didn't speak it earlier." 
Oh!" It wasn't a groan exactly, but it was an 
intelligible enough expression of the fact that he 
saw the point and recognized that there was reason 
in it. 

"You have seemed to conceal nothing from me 
that I ought to know concerning yourself, and you 
were not privileged to keep back such a thing as this 
from me a moment after — ^after — ^well, after you had 
determined to pay your court to me." 

"It's true, it's true, I know it! But there were 
crrctimstances — in — in the way — circumstances 
which—" 

She waved the circumstances aside. 

"Well, you sefe," he said, pleadingly, "you seemed 
so bent on our traveling the proud path of honest 
labor and honorable poverty that I was terrified^ 
that is, I was afraid — of — of — ^well, you know how 
you talked." 

221 



MARK TWAIN 

** Yes, I know how I talked. And I also know that 
before the talk was finished you inquired how I stood 
as regards aristocracies, and my answer was calcu- 
lated to relieve your fears." 

He was silent awhile. Then he said, in a dis- 
couraged way : 

**I don't see any way out of it. It was a mistake. 
That is in truth all it was, just a mistake. No harm 
was meant, no harm in the world. I didn't see how 
it might some time look. It is my way. I don't 
seem to see fai\" 

The girl was almost disarmed for a moment. Then 
she flared up again. 

"An earl's son! Do earls' sons go about working 
in lowly callings for their bread and butter?" 

God knows they don't ! I have wished they did." 
Do earls' sons sink their degree in a country like 
this, and come sober and decent to sue for the hand 
of a bom child of poverty when they can go drunk, 
profane, and steeped in dishonorable debt and buy 
the pick and choice of the miUionaires' daughters of 
America? You an earl's son! Show me the signs." 

"I thank Grod I am not able — if those are the 
signs. But yet I am an earl's son and heir. It is 
all I can say. I wish you would believe me, but you 
will not. I know no way to persuade you." 

She was about to soften again, but his closing 
remark made her bring her foot down with smart 
vexation, and she cried out: 

"Oh, you drive all patience out of me! Would you 
have one believe that you haven't your proofs at 
hand, and yet are what you say you are? You do 

222 



it 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

not put your hand in your pocket now — ^f or you have 
nothing there. You make a claim like this, and then 
venture to travel without credentials. These are 
simply incredibilities. Don't you see that yourself?" 

He cast about in his mind for a defense of some 
kind or other — ^hesitated a little, and then said, with 
difficulty and diffidence: 

**I will tell you just the truth, foolish as it will 
seem to you — ^to anybody, I suppose — but it is the 
truth. I had an ideal — call it a dream, a folly, if 
you will — ^but I wanted to renounce the privileges 
and unfair advantages enjoyed by the nobility and 
wrung from the nation by force and fraud, and purge 
myself of my share of those crimes against right and 
reason by thenceforth comrading with the poor and 
humble on equal terms, earning with my own hands 
the bread I ate, and rising by my own merit if I rose 
at all." 

The yotmg girl scanned his face narrowly while he 
spoke; and there was something about his simplic- 
ity of manner and statement which touched her — 
touched her almost to the danger-point; but she set 
her grip on the yielding spirit and choked it to qui- 
escence; it could not be wise to surrender to com- 
passion or any kind of sentiment yet; she must ask 
one or two more questions. Tracy was reading her 
face; and what he read there lifted his drooping hopes, 
a little. 

"An earl's son to do that! Why, he were a man' 
A man to love! — oh, more, a man to worship!" 
Why, I—" 

'But he never lived! He is not bom, he will not 
15 223 



If 



MARK TWAIN 

be bom. The self-abn^;atiQn that could do that — 
even in utter folly, and hopeless of conveying benefit 
to any, beyond the mere example — could be mistaken 
for greatness; why, it would be greatness in this cold 
age of sordidideals ! Amoment — wait — let me finish; I 
have one question more. Your father is earl of what?" 

"Rossmore — and I am Viscotmt Berkeley/* 

The fat was in the fire again. The girl felt so out- 
raged that it was difiScult for her to speak. 

"How can you venttue such a brazen thing! You 
know that he is dead, and you know that I know it. 
Oh, to rob the living of name and honors for a selfish 
and temporary advantage is crime enough, but to rob 
the defenseless dead — ^why, it is more than crime: it 
degrades crime!" 

*'0h, listen to me — ^just a word — don't turn away 
like that. Don't go — don't leave me so — stay one 
moment. On my honor — " 

*'0h, on your honor!" 

"Onmy honor lam what I say! And I will prove 
it, and you will believe, I know you wilL I wiH 
bring you a message — a cablegram — " 

•'When?" 

*' To-morrow — ^next day — " 

''Signed 'Rossmore'?" 

*' Yes — signed ' Rossmore.' " 

•'What will that prove?" 

"What will it prove? What should it prove?" 

"If you force me to say it — possibly the presence 
of a confederate somewhere." 

This was a hard blow, and staggered him. He 
said, dejectedly: 

234 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

''It is true. I did not think of it. Oh, my God, 
I do not know any way to do ; I do everything wrong. 
You are going ? — and you won't say even good night — 
or good-by ? Ah, we have not parted like this before. * ' 

'*0h, I want to run and — ^no, go now." A pause — 
then she said, **You may bring the message when 
it comes." 

''Oh, may I? God bless you." 

He was gone; and none too soon; her lips were al- 
ready quivering, and now she broke down. Through 
her sobbings her words broke from time to time. 

**0h, he is gone. I have lost him, I shall never 
see him any more. And he didn't kiss me good-by; 
never even offered to force a kiss from me, and he 
knowing it was the very, very last, and I expecting 
he would, and never dreaming he would treat me so 
after all we have been to each other. Oh, oh, oh, 
oh, what shall I do, what shall I do ? He is a dear, 
poor, miserable, good-hearted, transparent liar and 
humbug, but oh, I do love him so !" After a little she 
broke into speech again. '*How dear he is! and I 
shall miss him so, I shall miss him so ! Why wonH he 
ever think to forge a message and fetch it? — ^but no, 
he never will, he never thinks of anything; he's so 
honest and simple it wouldn't ever occur to him. 
Oh, what did possess him to think he could succeed 
as a fraud — and he hasn't the first requisite except 
duplicity that I can see. Oh, dear, I'll go to bed 
and give it all up. Oh, I wish I had told him to 
come and teU me whenever he didn't get any tele- 
gram — ^and now it's all my own fault if I never see 
him again. How my eyes must look!" 

225 



CHAPTER XXIV 

NEXT day, sure enough, the cablegram didn't 
come. This was an immense disaster ; for Tracy 
couldn't go into the presence without that ticket, 
although it wasn't going to possess any value as 
evidence. But if the failure of the cablegram on that 
first day may be called an immense disaster, where is 
the dictionary that can turn out a phrase sizable 
enough to describe the tenth day's failure? Of 
course every day that the cablegram didn't come 
made Tracy all of twenty-four hours more ashamed 
of himself than he was the day before, and made 
Sally fully twenty-four hotu^ more certain than ever 
that he not only hadn't any father anywhere, but 
hadn't even a confederate — ^and so it followed that 
he was a double-dyed humbug, and couldn't be oth- 
erwise. 

These were hard days for Barrow and the art 
firm. All these had their hands full trying to com- 
fort Tracy. Barrow's task was particularly hard, 
because he was made a confidant in full, and there- 
fore had to himior Tracy's delusion that he had a 
father, and that the father was an earl, and that he 
was going to send a cablegram. Barrow early gave 
up the idea of trying to convince Tracy that he 
hadn't any father, because this bad such a bad effect 

226 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

on the patient, and worked up his temper to such an 
alarming degree. He had tried, as an experiment, 
letting Tracy think he had a father; the result was 
so good that he went further, with proper caution, 
and tried letting him think his father was an earl; 
this wrought so well that he grew bold, and tried 
letting him think he had two fathers, if he wanted to, 
but he didn't want to, so Barrow withdrew one of 
them and substituted letting him think he was go- 
ing to get a cablegram — which Barrow judged he 
wouldn't, and was right ; but Barrow worked the ca- 
blegram daily for all it was worth, and it was the 
one thing that kept Tracy alive; that was Barrow's 
opinion. 

And these were bitter, hard days for poor Sally, 
and mainly deUvered up to private crying. She kept 
her furniture pretty damp, and so caught cold, and 
the damjjness and the cold and the sorrow together 
undermined her appetite, and she was a pitiful 
enough object, poor thing! Her state was bad 
enough, as per statement of it above quoted; but all 
the forces of nature and circumstance seemed con- 
spiring to make it worse — ^and succeeding. For in- 
stance, the morning after her dismissal of Tracy, 
Hawkins and Sellers read in the Associated Press 
despatches that a toy puzzle called Pigs in the Clover 
had come into sudden favor within the past few 
weeks, and that from the Atlantic to the Pacific all 
the poptdations of all the States had knocked off 
work to play with it, and that the business of the 
country had now come to a standstill by conse- 
quence; that judges, lawyers, burglars, parsons, 

227 



MARK TWAIN 

thieves, merchants, mechanics, murderers, women, 
children, babies — everybody, indeed, could be seen 
from morning till midnight absorbed in one deep 
project and purpose, and only one: to pen those pigs, 
work out that puzzle successfully; that all gaiety, all 
cheerfulness, had departed from the nation, and in 
its place care, preoccupation, and anxiety sat upon 
every cotmtenance, and all faces were drawn, dis- 
tressed, and furrowed with the signs of age and 
trouble, and marked with the still sadder signs of 
mental decay and incipient madness; that factories 
were at v/ork night and day in eight cities, and yet 
to supply the demand for the puzzle was thus far 
impossible. Hawkins was wild with joy, but Sellers 
was calm. Small matters could not disturb his 
serenity. He said: 

"That's just the way things go. A man invents 
a thing which could revolutionize the arts, produce 
mountains of money, and bless the earth, and who 
will bother with it or show any interest in it? — and 
so you are just as poor as you were before. But you 
invent some worthless thing to amuse yourself with, 
and would throw it away if let alone, and all of a 
sudden the whole world makes a snatch for it and 
out crops a forttme. Himt up that Yankee and 
collect, Hawkins — ^half is yours, you know. Leave 
me to potter at my lecture." 

This was a temperance lecture. Sellers was head 
chief in the Temperance camp, and had lectured, 
now and then, in that interest, but had been dis- 
satisfied with his efforts ; wherefore he was now about 
to try a new plan. After much thought he had con- 

228 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

eluded that a main reason why his lectures lacked 
fire or something was that they were too transpar- 
ently amateurish ; that is to say, it was probably too 
plainly perceptible that the lecturer was trying to tell 
people about the horrid effects of liquor when he 
didn*t really know anything about those effects ex- 
cept from hearsay, since he had hardly ever tasted 
an intoxicant in his life. His scheme now was to 
prepare himself to speak from bitter experience. 
Hawkins was to stand by with the bottle, calculate 
the doses, watch the effects, make notes of results, 
and otherwise assist in the preparation. Time was 
short, for the ladies wotdd be along about noon — ^that 
is to say, the temperance organization called the 
Daughters of Siloam — ^and Sellers must be ready to 
head the procession. 

The time kept slipping along — ^Hawkins did not 
return — Sellers could not venture to wait longer; so 
he attacked the bottle himself, and proceeded to note 
the effects. Hawkins got back at last ; took one com- 
prehensive glance at the lectturer, and went down and 
headed off the procession. The ladies were grieved 
to hear that the champion had been taken suddenly 
ill and violently so, but glad to hear that it was hoped 
he would be out again in a few days. 

As it turned out, the old gentleman didn't turn 
over or show any signs of life worth speaking of for 
twenty-four hours. Then he asked after the pro- 
cession, and learned what had happened about it. 
He was sorry; said he had been ** fixed" for it. He 
remained abed several days, and his wife and 
daughter took turns in sitting with him and minis- 

229 



MARK TWAIN 

tering to his wants. Often he patted Sally's head 
and tried to comfort her. 

** Don't cry, my child, don't cry so; you know your 
old father did it by mistake, and didn't mean a bit 
of harm; you know he wouldn't intentionally do 
anything to make you ashamed for the world; you 
know he was trying to do good, and only made the 
mistake through ignorance, not knowing the right 
doses and Washington not there to help. Don't cry 
so, dear, it breaks my old heart to see you, and thinlc 
I've brought this himiiliation on you, and you so dear 
to me and so good. I won't ever do it again, indeed 
I won't; now be comforted, honey, that's a good 
child." 

But when she wasn't on duty at the bedp'de the 
crying went on just the same ; then the mother would 
try to comfort her, and say: 

''Don't cry, dear, he never meant any harm; it 
was all one of those happens that you can't guard 
against when you are trying experiments that way. 
You see, I don't cry. It's because I know him so 
well. I could never look anybody in the face again 
if he had got into such an amazing condition as that 
a-purpose; but, bless you, his intention was pure 
and high, and that makes the act pure, though it 
was higher than was necessary. We're not humili- 
ated, dear; he did it tmder a noble impulse, and we 
don't need to be ashamed. There, don't cry any 
more, honey." 

Thus the old gentleman was useful to Sally dining 
several days as an explanation of her tearfulness. 
§he felt thankful to him for the shelter b^ WftfJ 

230 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

affording her, but often said to herself, * ' It's a shame 
to let him see in my crying a reproach — ^as if he could 
ever do anything that could make me reproach him! 
But I can*t confess; IVe got to go on using him for a 
.pretext; he's the only one I've got in the world, and 
I do need one so much." 

As soon as Sellers was out again, and found that 
stacks of money had been placed in bank for him 
and Hawkins by the Yankee, he said, ''Now we'll 
soon see who's the Claimant and who's the Authentic. 
I'll just go over there and warm up that House of 
Lords." Diuing the next few days he and his wife 
were so busy with preparations for the voyage that 
Sally had all the privacy she needed, and all the 
chance to cry that was good for her. Then the old 
pair left for New York — and England. 

Sally had also had a chance to do another thing. 
That was, to make up her mind that life was not 
worth living upon the present terms. If she mtist 
give up her impostor and die, doubtless she must 
submit ; but might she not lay her whole case before 
some disinterested person first, and see if there wasn't 
perhaps some saving way out of the matter? She 
turned this idea over in her mind a good deal. In her 
first visit with Hawkins after her parents were gone, 
the talk fell upon Tracy, and she was impelled to set 
her case before the statesman and take his counsel. 
So she poured out her heart, and he listened with 
painful solicitude. She concluded, pleadingly, with: 

** Don't tell me he is an impostor. I suppose he is, 
but doesn't it look to you as if he isn't? You are 
gool, you know, and outside; and so, maybe it can 



MARK TWAIN 

look to you as if he isn't one, when it can't to me. 
Doesn't it look to you as if he isn't? Couldn't you — 
can't it look to you that way — for — for my sake?" 

The poor man was troubled, but he felt obliged to 
keep in the neighborhood of the truth. He fought 
around the present detail a httle while, then gave it 
up, and said he couldn't see his way to clearing Tracy. 

**No," he said; **the truth is, he's an impostor." 

**That is, you — ^you feel a Uttle certain, but not 
entirely — oh, not entirely, Mr. Hawkins!" 

*'It's a pity to have to say it — I do hate to say 
it — ^but I don't think anything about it, I know he's 
an impostor." 

**0h, now, Mr. Hawkins, you can't go that far. A 
body can't really know it, you know. It isn't proved 
that he's not what he says he is." 

Should he come out and make a clean breast of the 
whole wretched business? Yes — at least, the most 
of it — ^it ought to be done. So he set his teeth and 
went at the matter with determination, but purposmg 
to spare the girl one pain — ^that of knowing that 
Tracy was a criminal. 

**Now I am going to tell you a plain tale; one not 
pleasant for me to tell or for you to hear, but we've 
got to stand it. I know all about that fellow, and I 
know he is no earl's son." 

The girl's eyes flashed, and she said: 

**I don't care a snap for that — go on!" 

This was so wholly imexpected that it at once ob» 
structed the narrative; Hawkins was not even sure 
that he had heard aright. He said : 

* ' I don't know that I quite tmderstand. Do you 

232 



if 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

mean to say that if he was all right and proper 
otherwise, you*d be indifferent about the eari part 
of the business?** 
Absolutely." 

You*d be entirely satisfied with him, and wouldn't 
care for his not being an earVs son— that being an 
earPs son wouldn't add any value to him?" 

* * Not the least value that I wotdd care for. Why, 
Mr. Hawkins, I Ve gotten over all that day-dreaming 
about earldoms and aristocracies and all such non- 
sense, and am become just a plain ordinary nobody 
and content with it ; and it is to him 1 owe my ciu'e. 
And as to anything being able to add a value to him, 
nothing can do that. He is the whole world to me, 
just as he is ; he comprehends all the values there are 
— then how can you add one?" 

** She's pretty far gone." He said that to himself. 
He continued, still to himself, "I must change my 
plan again ; I can't seem to strike one that will stand 
the requirements of this most variegated emergency 
five minutes on a stretch. Without making this 
fellow a criminal, I believe I will invent a name and 
a character for him calculated to disenchant her. If 
it fails to do it, then I'll know that the next rightest 
thing to do wiU be to help her to her fate, poor thing, 
not hinder her." 

Then he said aloud : 

''Well, Gwendolen—" 

'*I want to be called Sally." 

' ' I'm glad of it ; I like it better myself. Well, then, 
I'll tell you about this man Snodgrass. 

*'Snodgrass! Is that his name?' 



ass," 



II 
it 



MARK TWAIN 

*• Yes — Sncxlgrass. The other's his nom de plume.*^ 

"It's hideous?" 

"I know it is, but we can't help our names." 

"And that is truly his real name — and not Howard 
Tracy?" ' 

Hawkins answered, regretf tilly : 

"Yes; it seems a pity." 

The girl sampled the name musingly once or twice : 

"Snodgrass! Snodgrass! No, I could not endure 
that. I could not get used to it. No, I should call 
him by his first name. What is his first name?" 
His — er — ^his initials are S. M." 
His initials? I don't care anything about his 
initials. I can't call him by his initials. What do 
they stand for?" 

"Well, you see, his father was a physician, and 
he — he — well, he was an idolator of his profession, 
and he — well, he was a very eccentric man, and — " 

' * What do they stand for ? What are you shufi^g 
about?" 

"They — well, they stand for Spinal Meningitis. 
His father being a phy — " 

' ' I never heard such an infamous name ! Nobody 
can ever call a person that — a, person they love. I 
wouldn't call an enemy by such a name. It sounds 
like an epithet." After a moment she added, with 
a kind of consternation, "Why, it would be my 
name! Letters would come with it on." 

"Yes — Mrs. Spinal Meningitis Snodgrass." 

' * Don't repeat it — don't ; I can't bear it. Was the 
father a lunatic?" 

"No, that is not charged." 

234 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

''I am glad of that, because that is transmissible. 
What do you think wa^ the matter with him, then?" 

**Well, I don't really know. The family used to 
run a good deal to idiots, and so, maybe — " 

"Oh, there isn't any maybe about it. This one 
was an idiot." 

'*Well, yes — ^he could have been. He was sus- 
pected." 

''Suspected!" said Sally, with irritation. ' Would 
one suspect there was going to be a dark time if he 
saw the constellations fall out of the sky? But that 
is enough about the idiot, I don't take any interest 
in idiots; tell me about the son." 

*'Very well, then; this one was the eldest, but not 
the favorite. His brother, Zylobalsamimi — " 

''Wait — ^give me a chance to realize that. It is 
perfectly stupefying. Zylo — ^what did you call it?" 

* ' Zylobalsamum. ' ' 

"I never heard such a name. It sounds like a 
disease. Is it a disease?" 

"No, I don't think it's a disease. It's either 
Scriptural or — " 

"Well, it's not Scriptural." 

"Then it's anatomical. I knew it was one or the 
other. Yes, I remember now; it is anatomical. It's 
a ganglion — a, nerve center — ^it is what is called the 
zylobalsamum process." 

"Well, go on; and if you come to any more of 
them, omit the names; they make one feel so uncom- 
fortable." 

"Very well, then. As I said, this one was not a 
favorite in the family, and so he was neglected in 

335 



MARK TWAIN 

every way — never sent to school, always allowed to 
associate with the worst and coarsest characters, and 
so of course he has grown up a rude, vulgar, ignorant, 
dissipated ruflSan, and — *' 

*'He? It's no such thing! You ought to be more 
generous than to make such a statement as that 
about a poor yotmg stranger who — ^who — ^why, he 
is the very opposite of that! He is considerate, 
courteous, obliging, modest, gentle, refined, culti- 
vated — oh, for shame! how can you say such things 
about him?" 

''I don't blame you, Sally — indeed, I haven't a 
word of blame for you for being blinded by your 
affection — ^blinded to these minor defects which are 
so manifest to others who — " 

' * Minor defects ? Do you call these minor defects ? 
What are murder and arson, pray?" 

* * It is a difficult question to answer straight off — 
and of course estimates of such things vary with 
environment. With us, out our way, they would not 
necessarily attract as much attention as with you, 
yet they are often regarded with disapproval — " 

''Murder and arson are regarded with disap- 
proval?" 

**0h, frequently." 

**With disapproval! Who are those Puritans you 
are talking about? But wait — ^how did you come to 
know so much about this family? Where did you 
get all this hearsay evidence?" 

** Sally, it isn't hearsay evidence. That is the 
serious part of it. I knew that family— personally." 

This was a surprise. 

236 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

"You? You actually knew them?" 

'*Ejiew Zylo, as we used to call him, and knew 
his father, Dr. Snodgrass. I didn't know your own 
Snodgrass, but have had glimpses of him from time 
to time, and I heard about him all the time. He was 
the common talk, you see, on accoimt of his — '* 

"On account of his not being a house-bumer or 
an assassin, I suppose. That would have made him 
commonplace. Where did you know these people?" 

"In Cherokee Strip." 

"Oh, how preposterous! There are not enough 
people in Cherokee Strip to give anybody a reputa- 
tion, good or bad. There isn't a quorum. Why, the 
whole population consists of a couple of wagon-loads 
of horse thieves." 

Hawkins answered, placidly : 

"Our friend was one of those wagon-loads." 

Sally's eyes burned, and her breath came quick and 
fast, but she kept a fairly good grip on her anger, 
and did not let it get the advantage of her tongue. 
The statesman sat still and waited for developments. 
He was content with his work. It was as handsome a 
piece of diplomatic art as he had ever turned out, he 
thought ; and now let the girl make her own choice. 
He judged she wotdd let her specter go; he hadn't a 
doubt of it, in fact; but an5rway let the choice be 
made, and he was ready to ratify it and offer no 
further hindrance. 

Meantime Sally had thought her case out and 
made up her mind. To the Major's disappointment 
the verdict was against him. Sally said: 

"He has no friend but me, and I will not desert 

237 



MARK TWAIN 

him now. I will not marry him if his moral char- 
acter is bad; but if he can prove that it isn't, I will 
— and he shall have the chance. To me he seems 
utterly good and dear; IVe never seen anything 
about him that looked otherwise — except, of course, 
his calling himself an earl's son. Maybe that is only 
vanity, and no real harm when you get to the bottom 
of it. I do not believe he is any such person as you 
have painted him. I want to see him. I want you 
to find him and send him to me. I will implore him 
to be honest with me, and tell me the whole truth, 
and not be afraid." 

**Very well; if that is your decision, I will do it. 
But, Sally, you know he's poor, and — " 

**0h, I don't care anything about that. That's 
neither here nor there. Will you bring him to me?" 

''I'll do it. When?" 

**0h, dear, it's getting toward dark now, and so 
you'll have to put it oflE till morning. But you will 
find him in the morning, won*t you? Promise." 

"I'll have him here by daylight." 

**0h, now you're your own old self again — and 
lovelier than ever!" 

**I couldn't ask fairer than that. Good-by, dear." 

Sally mused a moment alone ; then said, earnestly, 
'*I love him in spite of his name!" and went about 
her affairs with a light heart. 



CHAPTER XXV 

HAWKINS went straight to the telegraph-oflSce 
and disburdened his conscience. He said to 
himself, ** She's not going to give this galvanized 
cadaver up, that's plain. Wild horses can't pull her 
away from him. IVe done my share; it's for Sellers 
to take an innings now." So he sent this message 
to New York : 

Cotne back. Hire special train, She^s going to marry the 
materializee. 

Meantime a note came to Rossmore Towers to say 
that the Earl of Rossmore had just arrived from 
England, and would do himself the pleasure of calling 
in the evening. Sally said to herself, **It is a pity 
he didn't stop in New York; but it's no matter; he 
can go up to-morrow and see my father. He has 
come over here to tomahawk papa very likely, or 
buy out his claim. This thing would have excited 
me a while back, but it has only one interest for me 
now, and only one value. I can say to — ^to — Spine, 
Spiny, Spinal — I don't like any form of that name ! — 
I can say to him to-morrow, *Don*t try to keep it up 
any more, or I shall have to teU you whom I have 
been talking with last night, and then you will be 
embarrassed." 

i6 239 



MARK TWAIN 

Tracy couldn't know he was to be invited for the 
morrow, or he might have waited. As it was, he was 
too miserable to wait any longer; for his last hope — 
a letter — ^had failed him. It was fully due to-day; 
it had not come. Had his father really fltmg him 
away ? It looked so. It was not like his father, but 
it surely looked so. His father was a rather tough 
nut, in truth, but had never been so with his son — 
still, this implacable silence bad a calamitous look. 
Anjrway, Tracy would go to the Towers and — ^then 
what? He didn't know; his head was tired out with 
thinking — ^he wouldn't think about what he must do 
or say — ^let it all take care of itself. So that he saw 
Sally once more he would be satisfied, happen what 
might; he wouldn't care. 

He hardly knew how he got to the Towers, or 
when. He knew and cared for only one thing — he 
was alone with Sally. She was kind, she was gentle, 
there was moisture in her eyes, and a yearning some- 
thing in her face and manner which she could not 
wholly hide — but she kept her distance. They 
talked. By and by she said, watching his downcast 
coimtenance out of the comer of her eye: 

''It's so lonesome — with papa and mamma gone. 
I try to read, but I can't seem to get interested in 
any book. I try the newspapers, but they do put 
such rubbish in them! You take up a paper and 
start to read something you think's interesting, and 
it goes on and on and on about how somebody-^well. 
Dr. Snodgrass, for instance — " 

Not a movement from Tracy, not the quiver of 
a muscle. Sally was amazed — ^what command of 

2dO 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

himself he must have! Being disconcerted, she 
paused so long that Tracy presently looked up 
wearily and said: 

''Well?" 

"Oh, I thought you were not listening. Yes, it 
goes on and on about this Dr. Snodgrass till you 
are so tired, and then about his younger son — tite 
favorite son — ^Zylobalsamum Snodgrass — " 

Not a sign from Tracy, whose head was droop- 
ing again. What supernatural self-possession ! Sally 
fixed her eye on him and began again, resolved to 
blast him out of his serenity this time if she knew 
how to apply the dynamite that is concealed in 
certain forms of words when those words are prop- 
erly loaded with unexpected meanings. 

"And next it goes on and on and on about the 
eldest son — not the favorite, this one — and how he is 
neglected in his poor barren boyhood, and allowed to 
grow up unschooled, ignorant, coarse, vulgar, the 
comrade of the community's sctmi, and become in 
his completed manhood a rude, profane, dissipated 
ruffian — " 

That head still drooped ! Sally rose, moved softly 
and solemnly a step or two, and stood before Tracy 
— ^his head came slowly up, his meek eyes met her 
intense ones — ^then she finished, with deep impress- 



iveness: 



•named Spinal Meningitis Snodgrass!*' 
Tracy merely exhibited signs of increased fatigue. 
The girl was outraged by this iron indifference and 
callousness, and cried out : 
What are you made of?" 

241 



it' 



MARK TWAIN 



it 



I? Why?" 

Haven't you any sensitiveness? Don't these 
things touch any poor remnant of deUcate feeUng 
in you?" 

'*N-no," he said, wonderingly, **they don't seem 
to. Why should they?" 

* * Oh, dear me, how can you look so innocent, and 
foolish, and good, and empty, and gentle, and all 
that, right in the hearing of such things as those! 
Look me in the eye — straight in the eye. There, 
now then, answer me without a flinch. Isn't Dr. 
Snodgrass your father, and isn't Zylobalsamum yotu* 
brother " (here Hawkins was about to enter the room, 
but changed his mind upon hearing these words, and 
elected for a walk down-town, and so glided swiftly 
away), '*and isn't your name Spinal Meningitis, and 
isn't your father a doctor and an idiot, like all the 
family for generations, and doesn't he name all his 
children after poisons and pestilences and abnormal 
anatomical eccentricities of the human body? An- 
swer me, some way or somehow — ^and quick. Why 
do you sit there looking like an envelope without any 
address on it and see me going mad before your face 
with suspense?" 

**0h, I wish I could do — do — I wish I could do 
something, anything that would give you peace again 
and make you happy; but I know of nothing — ^I 
know of no way, I have never heard of these awful 
people before." 

''What? Say it again!" 

**I have never — ^never in my life till now." 

"Oh, you do look so honest when you say that! 

243 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

It must be true — surely you couldn't look that way, 
you wouldnH look that way if it were not true — 
would you?*' 

**I couldn't and wouldn't. It is true. Oh, let us 
end this suffering — take me back into your heart and 
confidence — " 

''Wait — one more thing. Tell me you told that 
falsehood out of mere vanity and are sorry for it; 
that you're not expecting to ever wear the coronet 
of an earl — " 

"Truly I am cured — cured this very day — I am 
not expecting it!" 

'*0h, now you are mine! I've got you back in the 
beauty and glory of your unsmirched poverty and 
your honorable obscurity, and nobody shall ever take 
you from me again but the grave! And if — " 
De Earl of Rossmore, fum Englan' !" 
My father!" The young man released the girl 
and htmg his head. 

The old gentleman stood surveying the couple — 
the one with a strongly complimentary right eye, the 
other with a mixed expression done with the left. 
This is difficult, and not often resorted to. Pres- 
ently his face relaxed into a kind of constructive 
gentleness, and he said to his son: 

** Don't you think you could embrace me, too?" 

The young man did it with alacrity. 

**Then you are the son of an earl, after all," said 
Sally, reproachfully. 

''Yes, I—" 

"Then I won't have you!" 

"Oh, but you know—" 

243 



it 



MARK TWAIN 

'*No, I will not. You've told me another fib." 

** She's right. Go away and leave us. I want to 
talk with her." 

Berkeley was obliged to go. But he did not go 
far. He remained on the premises. At midnight the 
conference between the old gentleman and the yotmg 
girl was still going blithely on, but it presently drew 
to a dose, and the former said: 

*'I came all the way over here to inspect you, my 
dear, with the general idea of breaking off this 
match if there were two fools of you, but as there's 
only one, you can have him if you'll take him." 

** Indeed, I will, then May I kiss you?" 

' * You may. Thank you. Now you shall have that 
privilege whenever you are good." 

Meantime Hawkins had long ago returned and 
slipped up into the laboratory. He was rather 
disconcerted to find his late invention, Snodgrass, 
there. The news was told him: that the English 
Rossmore was come, **and I'm his son, Viscount 
Berkeley, not Howard Tracy any more." 

Hawkins was aghasu. He said: 

**Good gracious, then you're dead!" 

"Dead?" 

'*Yes, you are — ^we've got yoiu* ashes." 

'*Hang those ashes, Im tired of them; 111 give 
them to my father." 

Slowly and pa'n'ully the statesman worked the 
truth into his head that this was really a flesh-and- 
blood yoimg man, and not the insubstantial resur- 
rection he and Sellers had so long supposed him to 
be. Then he said, with feeling : 

244 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

*'I'm so glad; so glad on Sally's account, poor 
thing. We took you for a departed materialized bank 
thief from Tahlequah. This will be a heavy blow to 
Sellers." Then he explained the whole matter to 
Berkeley, who said : 

' * Well, the Claimant must manage to stand the blow, 
severe as it is. But he'll get over the disappointment. * ' 

**Who — the Colonel? He'll get over it the minute 
he invents a new miracle to take its place. And 
he's already at it by this time. But look here — ^what 
do you suppose became of the man you've been 
representing all this time?" 

**I don't know. I saved his clothes — ^it was all I 
could do. I am afraid he lost his life." 

**WeU, you must have fotmd twenty or thirty 
thousand dollars in those clothes in money or cer- 
tificates of deposit." 

**No, I found only five htmdred and a trifle. I 
borrowed the trifle and banked the five hundred." 

"What 'U we do about it?" 

''Return it to the owner." 

**It's easy said, but not easy to manage. Let's 
leave it alone till we get SeUers's advice. And that 
reminds me. I've go': to rtm and meet Sellers and 
explain who you are not and who you are^ or he'll 
come thundering in here to stop his daughter from 
marrying a phantom. But — suppose your father 
came over here to break off the match?" 

** Well, isn't he down-stairs getting acquainted with 
Sally? That's all safe." 

So Hawkins departed to meet and prepare the 
SeUerses. 

345 



MARK TWAIN 

Rossmore Towers saw great times and late hours 
during the succeeding week. The two earls were such 
opposites in nature that they fraternized at once. 
Sellers said privately that Rossmore was the most 
extraordinary character he had ever met — a man just 
made out of the condensed milk of human kindness, 
yet with the ability to totally hide the fact from 
any but the most practised character-reader; a man 
i^rhose whole being was sweetness, patience, and 
charity, yet with a cunning so profound, an ability 
so marvelous in the acting of a double part, that 
many a person of considerable intelligence might 
live with him for centuries and never suspect the 
presence in him of these characteristics. 

Finally there was a quiet wedding at the Towers, 
instead of a big one at the British Embassy, with the 
militia and the fire brigades and the temperance 
organizations on hand in torchlight procession, as at 
first proposed by one of the earls. The art firm and 
Barrow were present at the wedding, and the tinner 
and Puss had been invited, but the tinner was ill 
and Puss was nursing him — for they were en- 
gaged. 

The Sellerses were to go to England with their new 
allies for a brief visit, but when it was time to take 
the train from Washington the Colonel was missing. 
Hawkins was going as far as New York with the 
party, and said he would explain the matter on the 
road. The explanation was in a letter left by the 
Colonel in Hawkins's hands. In it he promised to 
join Mrs. Sellers later in England, and then went 
pn to say : 

?4^ 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

The truth is, my dear Hawkins, a mighty idea has been bom 
to me within the hour, and I must not even stop to say good-by 
to my dear ones. A man's highest duty takes precedence of 
all minor ones, and must be attended to with his best prompt- 
ness and energy, at whatsoever cost to his affections or his 
convenience. And first of all a man's duties is his duty to his 
own honor — ^he must keep that spotless. Mine is threatened. 
When I was feeling sure of my imminent future solidity, I 
forwarded to the Czar of Russia — ^perhaps prematurely — an 
offer for the pvuxrhase of Siberia, naming a vast stun. Since then 
an episode has warned me that the method by which I was 
expecting to acquire this money — ^materialization upon a scale 
of limitless magnitude — ^is marred by a taint of temporary 
uncertainty. His imperial majesty may accept my offer at any 
moment. If this should occur now, I shotdd find myself pain- 
fully embarrassed — ^in fact, financially inadequate. I cotdd not 
take Siberia. This would become known, and my credit would 
suffer. 

Recently my private hours have been dark indeed, but the 
sun shines again now; I see my way; I shall be able to meet 
my obligation, and without having to ask an extension of the 
stipulated time, I think. This grand new idea of mine — ^the 
sublimest I have ever conceived — ^will save me whole, I am sure. 
I am leaving for San Francisco this moment to test it by the 
help of the great Lick telescope. Like all of my more notable 
discoveries and inventions, it is based upon hard, practical 
scientific laws; all other bases are unsoimd, and hence un- 
trustworthy. 

In brief, then, I have conceived the stupendous idea of re- 
organizing the climates of the earth according to the desire of 
the populations interested. That is to say, I will furnish 
climates to order, for cash or negotiable paper, taking the old 
climates in part payment, of course, at a fair discotmt, where 
they are in condition to be repaired at small cost and let out 
for hire to poor and remote communities not able to afford a 
good climate and not caring for an expensive one for mere 
display. My studies have convinced me that the regulation of 
climates and the breeding of new varieties at will from the old 
stock is a feasible thing; indeed, I am convinced that it has 
been done before, done in prehistoric times by now forgotten and 
unr^cQrd^ civilizations. Everywhere I find hoary evideooes q( 

«47 



MARK TWAIN 

artificial manipulation of climates in bygone times. Take the 
glacial period. Was that produced by accident? Not at all; 
it was done for money. I have a thousand proofs of it, and 
will some day reveal them. 

I will confide to you an outline of my idea. It is to utilize 
the spots on the sun — get control of them, you understand, and 
apply the stupendous energies which they wield to beneficent 
purposes in the reorganization of our climates. At present they 
merely make trouble and do harm in the evoking of cyclones 
and other kinds of electric storms; but once under humane and 
intelligent control this will cease, and they will become a boon 
toman. 

I have my plan all mapped out, whereby I hope and expect 
to acquire complete and perfect control of the sun-spots, also 
details of the method whereby I shall employ the same com- 
mercially; but I will not venture to go into particulars before the 
patents shall have been issued. I shall hope and expect to sell 
shop-rights to the minor countries at a reasonable figure, and 
supply a good business article of climate to the great empires 
at special rate, together with fancy brands for coronations, 
battles, and other great and particular occasions. There are 
billions of money in this enterprise, no expensive plant is re- 
quired, and I shall begin to realize in a few days-^-in a few 
weeks at furthest. I shall stand ready to pay cash for Siberia 
the moment it is delivered, and thtis save my honor and my 
credit. I am confident of this. 

I would like you to provide a proper outfit and start north 
as soon as I telegraph you, be it night or be it day. I wish 
you to take up all the country stretching away from the north 
pole on all sides for many degrees south, and buy Greenland and 
Iceland at the best figure you can get now while they are cheap. 
It is my intention to move one of the tropics up there and 
transfer the frigid zone to the equator. I will have the entire 
Arctic Circle in the market as a summer resort next year, and 
will use the surplusage of the old climate, over and above what 
can be utilized on the equator, to reduce the temperature of 
opposition resorts. But I have said enough to give you an idea 
of the prodigious nature of my scheme and the feasible and 
enormously profitable character of it. I shall join all you hap- 
py people in England as soon as I shall have sold out some of 
my principal climates and arranged with the Czar about Siberia* 

248 



THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

Meantime, watch for a sign from me. Eight days from now 
we shall be wide asimder; for I shall be on the border of the 
Pacific, and you far out on the Atlantic, approaching England. 
That day, if I am alive and my sublime discovery is proved and 
established, I will send you greeting, and my messenger shall 
deliver it where you are, in the solitudes of the sea; for I will 
waft a vast sun-spot across the disk like drifting smoke, and 
you will know it for my love-sign, and will say, "Mulberry Sellers 
throws us a kiss across the universe," 



APPENDIX 

WEATHER FOR USE IN THIS BOOK 

Selected from the best authorities 

A brief though violent thtinder-storm which had raged over 
the dty was passing away; but stlLl, though the rain had ceased 
more than an hour before, wild piles of dark and coppery clouds, 
in which a fierce and rayless glow was laboring, gigantically 
overhung the grotesque and huddled vista of dwarf houses, 
while in the distance, sheeting high over the low, misty con- 
fusion of gables and chimneys, spread a pall of dead, leprous 
blue, suffused with blotches of dull, glistening yellow, and with 
black plague-spots of vapor floating and faint lightnings crink- 
ling on its surface. Thimder, still muttering in the close and 
sultry air, kept the scared dwellers in the street within, behind 
their closed shutters; and all deserted, cowed, dejected, squalid, 
like poor, stupid, top-heavy things that had felt the wrath of 
the summer tempest, stood the drenched structures on either 
side of the narrow and crooked way, ghastly and picturesque 
imder the giant canopy. Rain dripped wretchedly in slow 
drops of melancholy sound from their projecting eaves upon 
the broken flagging, lay there in pools or trickled into the 
swollen drains, where the fallen torrent sullenly gurgled on its 
way to the river. — **The Brazen Android**: W. D. O'Connor. 

The fiery mid-March sun a moment himg 
Above the bleak Judean wilderness; 
Then darkness swept upon us, and 'twas night. 
—*' Easter-Eve at Kerak-Moab**: Clinton ScoUard. 

The quick-coming winter twilight was already at hand. Snow 
was again falling, sifting delicately down, incidentally as it 
were. — "Felicia**: Fanny N, D. Murfree. 

250 



APPENDIX 

Merciful heavens! The whole west, from right to left, blazes 
up with a fierce light, and next instant the earth reels and quivers 
with the awful shock of ten thousand batteries of artillery. It 
is the signal for the Fury to spring — ^for a thousand demons to 
scream and shriek — ^for inntmierable serpents of fire to writhe 
and light up the blackness. 

Now the rain falls — ^now the wind is let loose with a terrible 
shriek — now the lightning is so constant that the eyes bum, and 
the thtmderclaps merge into an awftd roar, as did the eight hun- 
dred cannon at Gettysburg. Crash! Crash! Crash! It is the 
cottonwood-trees falling to earth. Shriek! Shriek! Shriek! It is 
the Demon racing along the plain and uprooting even the blades 
of grass. Shock! Shock! Shock! It is the Fiuy flinging his fiery 
bolts into the bosom of the earth. — " The Demon and the Fury "; 
M. Quad, 

Away up the gorge all diiunal fancies trooped into the wide 
liberties of endless Ivuninous vistas of azure stmlit moimtains 
beneath the shining azure heavens. The sky, looking down in 
deep blue placidities, only here and there smote the water to 
azure emulations of its tint. — "/» the ^Stranger People* s^ Coun- 
try: ** Charles Egbert Craddock, 

There was every indication of a dust-storm, though the sun 
still shone brilliantly. The hot wind had become wild and 
rampant. It was whipping up the sandy coating of the plain 
in every direction. High in the air were seen whirling spires 
and cones of sand — a curious efiEect against the deep-blue sky. 
Below, puffs of sand were breaking out of the plain in every 
direction, as though the plain were alive with invisible horse- 
men. These sandy cloudlets were instantly dissipated by the 
wind; it was the larger clouds that were lifted whole into the 
air, and the larger clouds of sand were becoming more and more 
the rule. 

Alfred's eye, quickly scanning the horizon, descried the roof 
of the boimdary-rider's hut still gleaming in the sunlight. He 
remembered the hut well. It cotdd not be farther than fotir 
miles, if as much as that, from this point of the track. He also 
knew these dust-storms of old; Bindarra was notorious for 
them. Without thinking twice, Alfred put sptu^ to his horse 
and headed for the hut. Before he had ridden half the distance 

251 



MARK TWAIN 

the detached clouds of sand banded together in one dense whirl- 
wind, and it was only owing to his house's instinct that he did 
not ride wide of the hut altogether; for during the last half-mile 
he never saw the hut, until its outline loomed suddenly over 
his horse's ears; and by then the sun was invisible. — "A Bride 
from the Bush" 

And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights. 
— Genesis, 



MERRY TALES 



Acknowledgment should he made to the Century Company and to 
Messrs, Harper 6* Brothers for kind permission to reprint several 
of these stories from the *' Century" and "Harper's MagawineJ* 



THE PRIVATE HISTORY OF A 
CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

YOU have heard from a great many people who 
did something in the war ; is it not fair and right 
that you listen a little moment to one who started 
out to do something in it, but didn't? Thousands 
entered the war, got just a taste of it, and then 
stepped out again permanently. These, by their very 
numbers, are respectable, and are therefore entitled 
to a sort of voice — ^not a loud one, but a modest one ; 
not a boastful one, but an apologetic one. They 
ought not to be allowed much space among better 
people — ^people who did something. I grant that; 
but they ought at least to be allowed to state why 
they didn't do anything, and also to explain the 
process by which they didn't do anything. Surely 
this kind of light must have a sort of value. 

Out West there was a good deal of confusion in 
men's minds during the first months of the great 
trouble — a. good deal of unsettledness, of leaning first 
this way, then that, then the other way. It was 
hard for us to get our bearings. I call to mind an 
instance of this. I was piloting on the Mississippi 
when the news came that South Carolina had gone 
out of the Union on the 20th of December, i860. 
My pilot mate was a New-Yorker. He was strong 
17 255 



MARK TWAIN 

for the Union; so was I. But he would not listen to 
me with any patience; my loyalty was smirched, to 
his eye, because my father had owned slaves. I 
said, in palliation of this dark fact, that I had heard 
my father say, some years before he died, that 
slavery was a great wrong, and that he would free 
the solitary negro he then owned if he could think 
it right to give away the property of the family when 
he was so straitened in means. My mate retorted 
that a mere impulse was nothing — anybody could 
pretend to a good impulse; and went on decrying my 
Unionism and Ubeling my ancestry. A month later 
the secession atmosphere had considerably thickened 
on the Lower Mississippi, and I became a rebel; so 
did he. We were together in New Orleans the 26th 
of January, when Louisiana went out of the Union. 
He did his full share of the rebel shouting, but was 
bitterly opposed to letting me do mine. He said 
that I came of bad stock — of a father who had been 
willing to set slaves free. In the following stmuner 
he was piloting a Federal gunboat and shouting for 
the Union again, and I was in the C^ederate army. 
I held his note for some borrowed money. He was 
one of the most upright men I ever knew, but he 
repudiated that note without hesitation because I 
was a rebel and the son of a man who owned 
slaves. 

In that summer — of 1861 — ^the first wash of the 
wave of war broke upon the shores of Missouri. Our 
state was nvaded by :he Union forces. They took 
possession of St. Louis, Jefferson Barracks, and some 
other points. The Governor, Claib Jackson, issued 

256 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

his proclamation calling out fifty thousand mihtia to 
repel the invader. 

I was visiting in the small town where my boyhood 
had been spent — Hannibal, Marion County. Several 
of us got together in a secret place by night and 
formed ourselves into a military company. One 
Tom Lyman, a young fellow of a good deal of spirit 
but of no military experience, was made captain; I 
was made second lieutenant. We had no first Ueu- 
tenant ; I do not know why ; it was long ago. There 
were fifteen of us. By the advice of an innocent 
connected with the organization we called ourselves 
the Marion Rangers. I do not remember that any 
one found fault with the name. I did not ; I thought 
it sounded quite well. The yoimg fellow who pro->^ 
posed this title was perhaps a fair sample of the kind 
of stuff we were made of. He was young, ignorant, 
good-natured, well-meaning, trivial, full of romance, 
and given to reading chivalric novels and singing 
forlorn love-ditties. He had some pathetic little 
nickel-plated aristocratic instincts, and detested his 
name, which was DuiJap ; detested it, partly because ^ 
it was nearly as common in that region as Smith, 
but mainly because it had a plebeian sound to his 
ear. So he tried to ennoble it by writing it in this 
way : d ' Unlap. That contented his eye, but left his 
ear unsatisfied, for people gave the new name the 
same old pronunciation — emphasis on the front end 
of it. He then did the bravest thing that can be 
imagined — a thing to make one shiver when one re- 
members how the world is given to resenting shama 
and affectations; he began to write his name so'. 

257 



MARK TWAIN 

(TUn Lap. And he waited patiently through the 
long storm of mud that was flung at this work of art, 
and he had his reward at last; for he lived to see 
that name accepted, and the emphasis put where he 
wanted it by people who had known him all his life, 
and to whom the tribe of Dimlaps had been as fa- 
miliar as the rain and the sunshine for forty years. 
So sure of victory at last is the courage that can wait. 
He said he had fotmd, by consulting some ancient 
French chronicles, that the name was rightly and 
originally written d'Un Lap; and said that if it were 
translated into English it would mean Peterson : Lap, 
Latin or Greek, he said, for stone or rock, same as 
the French pierre, that is to say, Peter: d\ of or from; 
wn, a or one; hence, d*Un Lap, of or from a stone 
or a Peter; that is to say, one who is the son of a 
stone, the son of a Peter — Peterson. Our militia 
company were not learned, and the explanation con- 
fused them; so they called him Peterson Dunlap. 
He proved useful to tis in his way; he named our 
camps for us, and he generally struck a name that 
was "no slouch,** as the boys said. j^ J 

That is one sample of us. Another was Ed Stevens, 
son of the town jeweler-trim-built, handsome, gric^ 
f ul, neat as a cat ; bright, educated, but given over 
entirely to fun. There was nothing serious in life 
to him. As far as he was concerned, this military 
expedition of ours was simply a holiday. I should 
say that about half of us looked upon it in the same 
way; not consciously, perhaps, but unconsciously. 
We did not think ; we were not capable of it. As for 
myself, I was full of unreasoning joy to be done with 

258 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

turning out of bed at midnight and four in the morn- 
ing for a while; grateful to have a change, new 
scenes, new occupations, a new interest. In my 
thoughts that was as far as I went ; I did not go into 
the details; as a rule, one doesn't at twenty-four. 

Another sample wafe" Smith, the blacksn[iith*s ap- 
prentice. This vast donkey had some pluck, of a 
slow and sluggish nature, but a soft heart; at one 
time he would knock a horse down for some impro- 
priety, and at another he would get homesick and 
cry. However, he had one ultimate credit to his 
account which some of us hadn't; he stuck to the 
war, and was killed in battle at last. 
'^ ' Jo -Bowers, another sample, was a huge, good- 
natured, flax-headed lubber; lazy, sentimental, full 
of harmless brag, a grumbler by nature; an experi- 
enced, industrious, ambitious, and often quite pic- 
turesque Uar, and yet not a successful one, for he 
had had no intelKgent training, but was allowed to 
come up just any way. This life was serious enough 
to him, and seldom satisfactory. But he was a good 
fellow, anjrway, and the boys all liked him. He was 
made orderly sergeant; Stevens was made corporal. 

These samples will answer — and they are quite 
fair ones. Well, this herd of cattle started for the 
war. What coiild you expect of them? They did 
as well as they knew how; but, really, what was justly 
to be expected of them? Nothing, I should say. 
That is what they did. 

We waited for a dark night, for caution and se- 
crecy were necessary; then, toward midnight, we 
stole in couples and from various directions to the 

259 



MARK TWAIN 

Griffith place, beyond the town; from that point we 
set out together on foot. Hannibal lies at the ex- 
treme southeastern comer of Marion County, on the 
Mississippi River; our objective point was the hamlet 
of New London, ten miles away, in Ralls County. 

The first hour was all ftm, all idle nonsense and 
laughter. But that could not be kept up. The 
steady trudging came to be like work; the play had 
somehow oozed out of it; the stillness of the woods 
and the sombemess of the night began to throw a 
depressing influence over the spirits of the boys, and 
presently the talking died out and each person shut 
himself up in his own thoughts. During the last half 
of the second hour nobody said a word. 

Now we approached a log farm-house where, ac- 
cording to report, there was a guard of five Union 
soldiers Lyman called a halt; and there, in the 
deep gloom of the overhanging branches, he began to 
whisper a plan of assault upon that hotise, which 
made the gloom more depressing than it was before. 
It was a crucial moment; we realized, with a cold 
suddenness, that here was no jest — ^we were standing 
face to face with actual war. We were equal to the 
occasion. In our response there was no hesitation, 
no indecision: we said that if Ljonan wanted to 
meddle with those soldiers, he could go ahead and do 
it; but if he waited for us to follow him, he would 
wait a long time. 

Lyman urged, pleaded, tried to shame us, but it 
had no effect. Our course was plain, our minds were 
made up: we would flank the farm-house — go out 
around. And that was what we did. 

260 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

We struck into the wcx)ds and entered upon a 
rough time, stumbling over roots, getting tangled in 
vines, and torn by briers. At last we reached an 
open place in a safe region, and sat down, blown and 
hot, to cool off and nurse oiu- scratches and bruises. 
Lyman was annoyed, but the rest of us were cheerful ; 
we had flanked the farm-house, we had made our 
first military movement, and it was a success; we had 
nothing to fret about, we were feeling just the other 
way. Horse-play and laughing began again ; the ex- 
pedition was become a holiday frolic once more. 

Then we had two more hours of dull trudging and 
ultimate silence and depression; then, about dawn, 
we straggled into New London, soiled, heel-blistered, 
fagged with our little march, and all of us except 
Stevens in a sour and raspy humor and privately 
down on the war. We stacked our shabby old shot- 
guns in Colonel Ralls's bam, and then went in 
a body and breakfasted with that veteran of the 
Mexican War. Afterward he took us to a distant 
meadow, and there in the shade of a tree we listened 
to an old-fashioned speech from him, full of gun- 
powder and glory, full of that adjective-piling, mixed 
metaphor and windy declamation which were re- 
garded as eloquence in that ancient time and that 
remote region; and then he swore us on the Bible to 
be faithful to the State of Missouri and drive all 
invaders from her soil, no matter whence they might 
come or under what flag they might march. This 
mixed us considerably, and we could not make out 
just what service we were embarked in; but Colonel 
Ralls, the practised politician and phrase-juggler, 

261 



MARK TWAIN 

was not similarly in doubt; he knew quite clearly 
that he had invested us in the cause of the Southern 
Confederacy. He closed the solemnities by belting 
arotmd me the sword which his neighbor, Colonel 
Brown, had worn at Buena Vista and Molino del Rey ; 
and he accompanied this act with another impressive 
blast. 

Then we formed in line of battle and marched f our 
miles to a shady and pleasant piece of woods on the 
border of the far-reaching expanses of a flowery prai- 
rie. It was an enchanting region for war — our kind 
of war. 

We pierced the forest about half a mile, and took 
up a strong position, with some low, rocky, and 
wooded hills behind us, and a purling, limpid creek 
in front. Straightway half the command were in 
swimming and the other half fishing. The ass with 
the French name gave this position a romantic title, 
but it was too long, so the boys shortened and simpli- 
fied it to Camp Ralls. 

We occupied an old maple-sugar camp, whose half- 
rotted troughs were still propped against the trees. 
A long corn-crib served for sleeping-quarters for 
the battalion. On our left, half a mile away, were 
Mason's farm and house ; and he was a friend to the 
cause. Shortly after noon the farmers began to ar- 
rive from several directions, with mules and horses 
for our use, and these they lent us for as long as the 
war might last, which they judged would be about 
three months. The animals were of all sizes, all 
colors, and all breeds. They were mainly young and 
frisky, an<J npbody in the command could stay oa 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

them long at a time; for we were town boys, and 
ignorant of horsemanship. The creature that fell to 
my share was a very small mule, and yet so quick 
and active that it could throw me without difficulty ; 
and it did this whenever I got on it. Then it would 
bray — stretching its neck out, laying its ears back, 
and spreading its jaws till you could see down to its 
works. It was a disagreeable animal in every way. 
If I took it by the bridle and tried to lead it off the 
grounds, it would sit down and brace back, and no 
one could budge it. However, I was not entirely 
destitute of military resources, and I did presently 
manage to spoil this game; for I had seen many a 
steamboat aground in my time, and knew a trick or 
two which even a grounded mule would be obliged 
to respect. There was a well by the corn-crib; so 
I substituted thirty fathom of rope for the bridle, 
and fetched him home with the windlass. 

I will anticipate here sufficiently to say that we 
did learn to ride, after some days' practice, but never 
well. We could not learn to like our animals; they 
were not choice ones, and most of them had annoy- 
ing peculiarities of one kind or another. Stevens's 
horse would carry him, when he was not noticing, un- 
der the huge excrescences which form on the trunks 
of oak-trees, and wipe him out of the saddle; in 
this way Stevens got several bad hurts. Sergeant 
Bowers's horse was very large and tall, with slim, 
long legs, and looked like a railroad bridge. His size 
enabled him to reach all about, and as far as he 
wanted to. with his head; so he was always biting 
Bowers's legs. On the march, in the stm, Bowers 

263 



MARK TWAIN 

slept a good deal; and as soon as the horse recognized 
that he was asleep he wotild reach around and bite 
him on the leg. His legs were black and blue with 
bites. This was the only thing that could ever make 
him swear, but this always did; whenever his horse 
bit him he always swore, and of course Stevens, who 
laughed at everything, laughed at this, and would 
even get into such convulsions over it as to lose his 
balance and fall off his horse; and then Bowers, 
already irritated by the pain of the horse-bite, would 
resent the laughter with hard language, and there 
would be a quarrel; so that horse made no end of 
trouble and bad blood in the command. 

However, I will get back to where I was— our first 
afternoon in the sugar -camp. The sugar - troughs 
came very handy as horse-troughs, and we had plenty 
of com to fill them with. I ordered Sergeant Bowers 
to feed my mule; but he said that if I reckoned he 
went to war to be a dry-nurse to a mule it wouldn't 
take me very long to find out my mistake. I be- 
lieved that this was insubordination, but I was full 
of uncertainties about everything military, and so I 
let the thing pass, and went and ordered Smith, the 
blacksmith's apprentice, to feed the mule; but he 
merely gave me a large, cold, sarcastic grin, such as 
an ostensibly seven-year-old horse gives you when 
you lift his lip and find he is fourteen, and turned 
his back on me. I then went to the captain, and 
asked if it were not right and proper and military for 
me to have an orderly. He said it was, but as there 
was only one orderly in the corps, it was but right 
that he himself should have Bowers on his staff. 

264 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

Bowers said he wouldn't serve on anybody's staff; 
and if anybody thought he could make him, let him 
try it. So, of course, the thing had to be dropped; 
there was no other way. 

Next, nobody would cook; it was considered a 
degradation; so we had no dinner. We lazied the 
rest of the pleasant afternoon away, some dozing 
under the trees, some smoking cob-pipes and talking 
sweethearts and war, some playing games. By late 
supper-time all hands were famished; and to meet 
the difficulty all hands turned to, on an equal footing, 
and gathered wood, built fires, and cooked the meal. 
Afterward everything was smooth for a while ; then 
trouble broke out between the corporal and the 
sergeant, each claiming to rank the other. Nobody 
knew which was the higher office; so Lyman had to 
settle the matter by making the rank of both officers 
equal. The commander of an ignorant crew like 
that has many troubles and vexations which prob- 
ably do not occur in the regular army at all. How- 
ever, with the song-singing and yam-spinning around 
the camp-fire, everything presently became serene 
again; and by and by we raked the com down level 
in one end of the crib, and all went to bed on it, tjdng 
a horse to the door, so that he would neigh if any one 
tried to get in.^ 

^ It was always my impression that that was what the horse 
was there for, and I know that it was also the impression of at least 
one other of the command, for we talked about it at the time, and 
udmired the military ingenuity of the device; but when I was out 
West, three years ago, I was told by Mr. A. G. Fuqua, a member 
of our company, that the horse was his; that the leaving him tied at 
the door was a matter of mere forgetfulness, and that to attribute 
it to intelligent invention was to give him quite too much credit. In 

26s 



MARK TWAIN 

We had some horsemanship drill every forenoon; 
then, afternoons, we rode oflf here and there in 
squads a few miles, and visited the farmers' girls, and 
had a youthftil good time, and got an honest good 
dinner or supper, and then home again to camp, 
happy and content. 

For a time life was idly delicious, it was perfect; 
there was nothing to mar it. Then came some 
farmers with an alarm one day. They said it was 
rumored that the enemy were advancing in our 
direction from over Hyde's prairie. The result was 
a sharp stir among us, and general consternation. 
It was a rude awakening from our pleasant trance. 
The rumor was but a rumor — nothing definite about 
it ; so, in the confusion, we did not know which way 
to retreat. Lyman was for not retreating at all in 
these uncertain circtimstances ; but he fotmd that 
if he tried to maintain that attitude he would fare 
badly, for the command were in no hiunor to put 
up with insubordination. So he jdelded the point 
and called a council of war — ^to consist of himself and 
the three other officers; but the privates made such 
a fuss about being left out that we had to allow 
them to remain, for they were already present, and 
doing the most of the talking too. The question was, 
which way to retreat ; but all were so flurried that no- 
body seemed to have even a guess to oflEer. Except 
Lyman. He explained in a few calm words that, 
inasmuch as the enemy were approaching from over 

support of his position he called my attention to the suggestive fact 
that the artifice was not employed again. I had not thought of 
that before. 

266 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

Hyde's prairie, our course was simple : all we had to 
do was not to retreat toward him ; any other direction 
would answer otu* needs perfectly. Everybody saw 
in a moment how true this was, and how wise; so 
Lyman got a great many compliments. It was now 
decided that we should fall back on Mason's farm. 
It was after dark by this time, and as we could 
not know how soon the enemy might arrive, it did 
not seem best to try to take the horses and things 
with us; so we only took the guns and ammunition, 
and started at once. The route was very rough and 
hilly and rocky, and presently the night grew very 
black and rain began to fall ; so we had a troublesome 
time of it, struggling and sttimbling along in the dark; 
and soon some person slipped and fell, and then the 
next person behind stumbled over him and fell, and so 
did the rest, one after the other; and then Bowers 
came, with the keg of powder in his arms, while the 
command were all mixed together, arms and legs, on 
the muddy slope; and so he fell, of course, with the 
keg, and this started the whole detachment down 
the hill in a body, and they landed in the brook at 
the bottom in a pile, and each that was undermost 
pulling the hair and scratching and biting those that 
were on top of him; and those that were being 
scratched and bitten scratching and biting the rest 
in their turn, and all sa3dng they would die before 
they would ever go to war again if they ever got out 
of this brook this time, and the invader might rot 
for all. they cared, and the country along with him 
— and all such talk as that, which was dismal to hear 
and take part in, in such smothered, low voices, and 

267 



MARK TWAIN 

such a grisly dark place and so wet, and the enemy, 
maybe, coming any moment. 

The keg of powder was lost, and the guns, too; 
so the growling and complaining continued straight 
along while the brigade pawed around the pasty 
hillside and slopped around in the brook hunting for 
these things ; consequently we lost considerable time 
at this; and then we heard a sound, and held our 
breath and listened, and it seemed to be the enemy 
coming, though it could have been a cow, for it had 
a cough like a cow; but we did not wait, but left a 
couple of guns behind and struck out for Mason's 
again as briskly as we could scramble along in the 
dark. But we got lost presently among the rugged 
little ravines, and wasted a deal of time finding the 
way again, so it was after nine when we reached 
Mason's stile at last ; and then before we could open 
our mouths to give the cotmtersign several dogs 
came bound ng over the fence, with great riot and 
noise, and each of them took a soldier by the slack 
of his trousers and began to back away with him. 
We could not shoot the dogs without endangering 
the persons they were attached to; so we had to 
look on helpless at what was perhaps the most 
mortifying spectacle of the Civil War. There was 
light enough, and to spare, for the Masons had now 
run out on the porch with candles in their hands. 
The old man and his son came and undid the dogs 
without difficulty, all but Bowers's; but they couldn't 
undo his dog, they didn't know his combination; he 
was of the bull kind, and seemed to be set with a 
Yale time-lock; but they got him loose at last with 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

some scalding water, of which Bowers got his share 
and returned thanks. Peterson Dtinlap afterward 
made up a fine name for this engagement, and also 
for the night march which preceded it, but both have 
long ago faded out of my memory. 

We now went into the house, and they began to 
ask us a world of questions, whereby it presently 
came out that we did not know anything concerning 
who or what we were nmning from ; so the old gentle- 
man made himself very frank, and said we were a 
curious breed of soldiers, and guessed we could be 
depended on to end up the war in time, because no 
government could stand the expense of the shoe- 
leather we should cost it trying to follow us around. 
'* Marion Rangers! good name, b'gosh!** said he. 
And wanted to know why we hadn't had a picket- 
guard at the place where the road entered the prairie, 
and why we hadn't sent out a scouting party to 
spy out the enemy and bring us an account of his 
strength, and so on, before jumping up and stam- 
peding out of a strong position upon a mere vague 
nmior — ^and so on, and so forth, till he made us 
all feel shabbier than the dogs had done, not half 
so enthusiastically welcome. So we went to bed 
shamed and low-spirited; except Stevens. Soon 
Stevens began to deviise a garment for Bowers which 
could be made to automatically display his battle- 
scars to the grateful, or conceal them from the en- 
vious, according to his occasions; but Bowers was in 
no himior for this, so there was a fight, and when it 
was over Stevens had some battle-scars of his own 
to think about. 

260 



MARK TWAIN 

Then we got a little sleep. But after all we had 
gone through, our activities were not over for the 
night ; for about two o'clock in the morning we heard 
a shout of warning from down the lane, accompanied 
by a chorus from all the dogs, and in a moment 
everybody was up and flying around to find out what 
the alarm was about. The alannist was a horseman 
who gave notice that a detachment of Union soldiers 
was on its way from Hannibal with orders to capture 
and hang any bands like ours which it could find, 
and said we had no time to lose. Farmer Mason was 
in a flurry this time himself. He hturied us out of 
the house with all haste, and sent one of his negroes 
with us to show us where to hide ourselves and our 
telltale guns among the ravines half a mile away. 
It was raining heavily. 

We struck down the lane, then across some rocky 
pasture -land which offered good advantages for 
stumbling; consequently we were down in the mud 
most of the time, and every time a man went down 
he blackguarded the war, and the people that started 
it, and everybody connected with it, and gave him- 
self the master dose of all for being so foolish as to 
go into it. At last we reached the wooded mouth 
of a ravine, and there we huddled ourselves under 
the streaming trees, and sent the negro back home. 
It was a dismal and heart-breaking time. We were 
like to be drowned with the rain, deafened with the 
howling wind and the booming thunder, and blinded 
by the lightning. It was, indeed, a wild night. The 
drenching we were getting was misery enough, but a 
deeper misery still was the reflection that the halter 

270 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

might end us before we were a day older. A death 
of this shameful sort had not occurred to us as being 
among the possibilities of war. (jt took the romance 
all out of the campaign, and turned our dreams of 
glory into a repulsive nightmare.? As for doubting 
that so barbarous an order had been given, not one 
of us did that. 

The long night wore itself out at last, and then the 
negro came to us with the news that the alarm had 
manifestly been a false one, and that breakfast would 
soon be ready. Straightway we were light-hearted 
again, and the world was bright, and life as full of 
hope and promise as ever — ^for we were young then. 
How long ago that was ! Twenty-four years. 

The mongrel child of philology named the night's 
refuge Camp Devastation, and no soul objected. 
The Masons gave us a Missouri country breakfast, 
in Missourian abundance, and we needed it: hot 
biscuits; hot *' wheat bread,'* prettily criss-crossed in 
a lattice pattern on top ; hot corn-pone ; fried chick- 
en ; bacon, coffee, eggs, milk, buttermilk, etc. ; and the 
world may be confidently challenged to furnish the 
equal of such a breakfast, as it is cooked in the South. 

We stayed several days at Mason's; and after all 
these years the memory of the dullness, and stillness, 
and lifelessness of that slumberous farm-house still 
oppresses my spirit as with a sense of the presence of 
death and mourning. There was nothing to do, 
nothing to think about ; there was no interest in life. 
The male part of the household were away in the 
fields all day, the women were busy and out of our 
sight; there was no sound but the plaintive wailing 
i8 371 



MARK TWAIN 

of a spinning-wheel, forever moaning out from some 
distant room — ^the most lonesome sound in nature, 
a sound steeped and sodden with homesickness and 
the emptiness of life. The family went to bed about 
dark every night, and as we were not invited to in- 
trude any new customs we naturally followed theirs. 
Those nights were a htmdred years long to youths 
accustomed to being up till twelve. We lay awake 
and miserable till that hour every time, and grew 
old and decrepit waiting through the still eter- 
nities for the clock-strikes. This was no place for 
town boys. So at last it was with something very 
like joy that we received news that the enemy were 
on our track again. With a new birth of the old 
warrior spirit we sprang to our places in line of 
battle and fell back on Camp Ralls. 

Captain Lyman had taken a hint from Mason's 
talk, and he now gave orders that our camp should 
be guarded against surprise by the posting of pickets. 
I was ordered to place a picket at the forks of the 
road in Hyde's prairie. Night shut down black and 
threatening. I told Sergeant Bowers to go out to 
that place and stay till midnight; and, just as I was 
expecting, he said he wouldn't do it. I tried to get 
others to go, but all refused. Some excused them- 
selves on account of the weather; but the rest were 
frank enough to say they wouldn't go in any kind of 
weather. This kind of thing sounds odd now, and 
impossible, but there was no surprise in it at the 
time. On the contrary, it seemed a perfectly natural 
thing to do. There were scores of Uttle camps scat- 
tered over Missouri where the same thing was hap- 

272 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

pening. These camps were composed of yotmg men 
who had been bom and reared to a sttirdy inde- 
pendence, and who did not know what it meant to 
be ordered around by Tom, Dick, and Harry, whom 
they had known familiarly all their lives, in the 
village or on the farm. It is quite within the proba- 
bilities that this same thing was happening all over 
the South. James Redpath recognized the justice 
of this assumption, and furnished the following 
instance in support of it. During a short stay in 
East Tennessee he was in a citizen colonel's tent one 
day talking, when a big private appeared at the door, 
and, without salute or other circumlocution, said to 
the colonel : 

*'Say, Jim, I'm a-goin' home for a few days." 

''What for?" 

"Well, I hain't b'en there for a right smart while, 
and I'd like to see how things is comin' on." 

"How long are you going to be gone?" 

"'Bout two weeks." 

"Well, don't be gone longer than that; and get 
back sooner if you can." 

That was all, and the citizen officer restuned his 
conversation where the private had broken it off. 
This was in the first months of the war, of course. 
The camps in our part of Missouri were tmder 
Brigadier-General Thomas H. Harris. He was a 
townsman of ours, a first-rate fellow, and well liked; 
but we had all familiarly known him as the sole 
and modest-salaried operator in our telegraph-office, 
where he had to send about one despatch a week in 
ordinary times, and two when there was a rush of 

273 



MARK TWAIN 

business; consequently, when he appeared in our 
midst one day, on the wing, and delivered a military 
command of some sort, in a large military fashion, 
nobody was surprised at the response which he got 
from the assembled soldiery : 

"Oh, now, what '11 you take to donU, Tom Harris?" 
It was quite the natural thing. One might justly 
imagine that we were hopeless material for war. And 
so we seemed, in our ignorant state; but there were 
those among us who afterward learned the grim 
trade; learned to obey like machines; became valu- 
able soldiers; fought all through the war, and came 
out at the end with excellent records. One of the 
very boys who refused to go out on picket duty that 
night, and called me an ass for thinking he would 
expose himself to danger in such a foolhardy way, 
had become distinguished for intrepidity before he 
was a year older. 

I did secure my picket that night — ^not by au- 
thority, but by diplomacy. I got Bowers to go by 
agreeing to exchange ranks with him for the time 
being, and go along and stand the watch with him 
as his subordinate. We stayed out there a couple 
of dreary hours in the pitchy darkness and the rain, 
with nothing to modify the dreariness but Bowers's 
monotonous growlings at the war and the weather; 
then we began to nod, and presently fotmd it next 
to impossible to stay in the saddle; so we gave up 
the tedious job, and went back to the camp without 
waiting for the relief guard. We rode into camp 
without interruption or objection from anybody, and 
the enemy could have done the same, for there were 

i?74 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

no sentries. Everybody was asleep; at midnight 
there was nobody to send out another picket, so none 
was sent. We never tried to establish a watch at 
night again, as far as I remember, but we generally 
kept a picket out in the daytime. 

In that camp the whole command slept on the 
com in the big com-crib; and there was usually a 
general row before morning, for the place was full of 
rats, and they would scramble over the boys' bodies 
and faces, annoying and irritating everybody; and 
now and then they would bite some one's toe, and the 
person who owned the toe would start up and 
magnify his EngUsh and begin to throw com in the 
dark. The ears were half as heavy as bricks, and 
when they struck they hurt. The persons struck 
would respond, and inside of five minutes every man 
would be locked in a death-grip with his neighbor. 
There was a grievous deal of blood shed in the com- 
crib, but this was all that was spilt while I was in 
the war. No, that is not quite true. But for one 
circimistance it would have been all. I will come to 
that now. 

Our scares were frequent. Every few days rumors 
would come that the enemy were approaching. In 
these cases we always fell back on some other camp 
of ours; we never stayed where we were. But the 
rumors always ttimed out to be false ; so at last even 
we began to grow indifferent to them. One night a 
negro was sent to our com-crib with the same old 
warning: the enemy was hovering in otu* neighbor- 
hood. We all said let him hover. We resolved to 
stay still and be comfortable. It was a fine warlike 

275 



MARK TWAIN 

resolution, and no doubt we all felt the stir of it in 
our veins — ^for a moment. We had been having a 
very jolly time, that was full of horse-play and school- 
boy hilarity; but that cxx)led down now, and pres- 
ently the fast-waning fire of forced jokes and forced 
laughs died out altogether, and the company became 
silent. Silent and nervous. And soon uneasy — 
worried — apprehensive. We had said we would stay, 
and we were committed. We could have been per- 
suaded to go, but there was nobody brave enough to 
suggest it. An almost noiseless movement pres- 
ently began in the dark by a general but unvoiced 
impulse. When the movement was completed each 
man knew that he was not the only person who had 
crept to the front wall and had his eye at a crack 
between the logs. No, we were all there; all there 
with our hearts in our throats, and staring out 
toward the sugar-troughs where the forest footpath 
came through. It was late, and there was a deep 
woodsy stillness everywhere. There was a veiled 
moonlight, which was only just strong enough to 
enable us to mark the general shape of objects. 
Presently a muffled sound caught our ears, and we 
recognized it as the hoof -beats of a horse or horses. 
And right away a figure appeared in the forest path; 
it could have been made of smoke, its mass had so 
Uttle sharpness of outline. It was a man on horse- 
back, and it seemed to me that there were others 
behind him. I got hold of a gun in the dark, and 
pushed it through a crack between the logs, hardly 
knowing what I was doing, I was so dazed with 
fright. Somebody said * * Fire !" I pulled the trigger. 

276 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

I seemed to see a hundred flashes and hear a hundred 
reports; then I saw the man fall down out of the 
saddle. My first feeling was of surprised gratifica- 
tion ; my first impulse was an apprentice-sportsman's 
impulse to run and pick up his game. Somebody 
said, hardly audibly, **Good — ^weVe got him! — wait 
for the rest." But the rest did not come. We 
waited — Glistened — still no more came. There was 
not a sound, not the whisper of a leaf; just perfect 
stillness ; an uncanny kind of stillness, which was all 
the more uncanny on account of the damp, earthy, 
late-night smells now rising and pervading it. Then, 
wondering, we crept stealthily out, and approached 
the man. When we got to him the moon revealed 
him distinctly. He was lying on his back, with his 
arms abroad; his mouth was open and his chest 
heaving with long gasps, and his white shirt-front 
was all splashed with blood. The thought shot 
through me that I was a murderer ; that I had killed 
a man — a man who had never done me any harm. 
That was the coldest sensation that ever went 
through my marrow. I was down by him in a mo- 
ment, helplessly stroking his forehead; and I would 
have given anything then — ^my own life freely — ^to 
make him again what he had been five minutes 
before. And all the boys seemed to be feeling in the 
same way ; they hung over him, full of pitying inter- 
est, and tried all they could to help him, and said 
all sorts of regretful things. They had forgotten all 
about the enemy; they thought only of this one 
forlorn unit of the foe. Once my imagination per- 
suaded me that the dying man gave me a reproachful 



MARK TWAIN 

look out of his shadowy eyes, and it seemed to me 
that I could rather he had stabbed me than done 
that. He muttered and mumbled like a dreamer 
in his sleep about his wife and his child ; and I thought 
with a new despair, "This thing that I have done 
does not end with him ; it falls upon titem too, and they 
never did me any harm, any more than he." 

In a little while the man was dead. He was killed 
in war; killed in fair and legitimate war; killed in 
battle, as you may say; and yet^e was as sincerely 
mourned by the opposing force as if he had been 
their brother.} The boys stood there a half -horn- 
sorrowing over him, and recalling the details of the 
tragedy, and wondering who he might be, and if he 
were a spy, and saying that if it were to do over 
again they would not hurt him unless he attacked 
them first. It soon came out that mine was not the 
only shot fired ; there were five others — a division of 
the guilt which was a great relief to me, since it in 
some degree lightened and diminished the burden I 
was canying. There were six shots fired at once; 
but I was not in my right mind at the time, and 
my heated imagination had magnified my one shot 
into a volley. 

The man was not in tmiform, and was not armed. 
He was a stranger in the cotmtry; that was all we 
ever found out about him. The thought of him got 
to pre3ring upon me every night ; I could not get rid 
of it. I could not drive it away, the taking of that 
unoffending life seemed such a wanton thing. And 
it seemed an epitome of war; that all war must be 
just that — ^the killing of strangers against whom you 

278 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

feel no personal animosity; strangers whom, in other 
circtimstances, you would help if you found them in 
trouble, and who would help you if you needed it. 
My campaign was spoiled. It seemed to me that 
I was not rightly equipped for this awful business; 
that war was intended for men, and I for a child's 
nurse. I resolved to retire from this avocation of 
sham soldiership while I could save some remnant of 
my self-respect. These morbid thoughts cltmg to 
me against reason; for at bottom I did not believe 
I had touched that man. The law of probabilities 
decreed me guiltless of his blood ; for in all my small 
experience with guns I had never hit anything I had 
tried to hit, and I knew I had done my best to hit 
him. Yet there was no solace in the thought. 
Against a diseased imagination demonstration goes 
for nothing. 

The rest of my war experience was of a piece with 
what I have already told of it. We kept monoto- 
nously falling back upon one camp or another, and 
eating up the farmers and their families. They 
ought to have shot us; on the contrary, they were 
as hospitably kind and courteous to us as if we had 
deserved it. In one of these camps we fotmd Ab 
Grimes, an Upper Mississippi pilot, who afterward 
became famous as a dare-devil rebel spy, whose 
career bristled with desperate adventures. The look 
and style of his comrades suggested that they had 
not come into the war to play, and their deeds made 
good the conjecture later: They were fine horsemen 
and good revolver shots ; but their favorite arm was 
the lasso. Each had one at his pommel, and could 

a79 



MARK TWAIN 

snatch a man out of the saddle with it every time, 
on a ftill gallop, at any reasonable distance. 

In another camp the chief was a fierce and profane 
old blacksmith of sixty, and he had ftimished his 
twenty recruits with gigantic home-made bowie- 
knives, to be swtmg with two hands, like the machetes 
of the Isthmus. It was a grisly spectacle to see that 
earnest band practising their murderous cuts and 
slashes under the eye of that remorseless old fanatic. 

The last camp which we fell back upon was in a 
hollow near the village of Florida, where I was bom 
— ^in Monroe Cotmty. Here we were warned one 
day that a Union colonel was sweeping down on us 
with a whole regiment at his heel. This looked 
decidedly serious. Our boys went apart and con- 
sulted; then we went back and told the other com- 
panies present that the war was a disappointment to 
us, and we were going to disband. They were getting 
ready themselves to fall back on some place or other, 
and we were only waiting for General Tom Harris, 
who was expected to arrive at any moment; so they 
tried to persuade us to wait a little while, but the 
majority of us said no, we were accustomed to falling 
back, and didn't need any of Tom Harris's help; we 
could get along perfectly well without him — and save 
time, too. So about half of our fifteen, including 
myself, motmted and left on the instant; the others 
yielded to persuasion and stayed — stayed through 
the war. 

An hour later we met General Harris on the road, 
with two or three people in his company — his staff, 
probably, but we could not tell; none of them were 

28q 



A CAMPAIGN THAT FAILED 

in uniform; uniforms had not come into vogue 
among us yet. Harris ordered us back; but we told 
him there was a Union colonel coming with a whole 
regiment in his wake, and it looked as if there was 
going to be a disturbance; so we had concluded to 
go home. He raged a little, but it was of no use; our 
minds were made up. We had done our share; had 
killed one man, exterminated one army, such as it 
was ; let him go and kill the rest, and that would 
end the war. I did not see that brisk young general 
again untU last year; then he was wearing white hair 
and whiskers. 

In time I came to know that Union coionel whose 
coming frightened me out of the war and crippled 
the Southern cause to that extent — General Grant. 
I came within a few hours of seeing iS^^en he 
was as tmknown as I was myself; at a time when 
anybody could have said, ** Grant? — ^Ulysses S. 
Grant? I do not remember hearing the name be- 
fore." It seems difficult to realize that there was 
once a time when such a remark could be rationally 
made; but there was, and I was within a few miles 
of the place and the occasion, too, though proceeding 
in the other direction. 

The thoughtful will not throw this war paper of 
mine lightly aside as being valueless. It has this 
value: it is a not unfair picture of what went on in 
many and many a militia camp in the first months 
of the rebellion, when the green recruits were without 
discipline, without the steadying and heartening in- 
fluence of trained leaders; when all their circum- 
stances were new and strange, and charged with 

281 



MARK TWAIN 

exaggerated terrors, and before the invaluable ex- 
perience of actual collision in the field had turned 
them from rabbits into soldiers. If this side of the 
picture of that early day has not before been put 
into history, then history has been to that degree 
incomplete, for it had and has its rightful place there. 
There was more Bull Rtm material scattered through 
the early camps of this country than exhibited itself 
at Bull Run. And yet it learned its trade presently, 
and helped to fight the great battles later. I could 
have become a soldier myself if I had waited. I had 
got part of it learned ; I knew more about retreating 
than the man that invented retreating. 



LUCK* 

IT was at a banquet in London in honor of one of 
the two or three conspicuously illustrious English 
military names of this generation. For reasons which 
will presently appear, I will withhold his real name 
and titles and call him Lieutenant-General Lord Ar- 
thur Scoresby, Y.C., K.C.B., etc., etc., etc. What 
a fascination there is in a renowned name! There 
sat the man, in actual flesh, whom I had heard of 
so many thousands of times since that day, thirty 
years before, when his name shot suddenly to the 
zenith from a Crimean battlefield, to remain forever 
celebrated. It was food and drink to me to look, and 
look, and look at that demi-god; scanning, searching, 
noting: the quietness, the reserve, the noble gravity 
of his countenance ; the simple honesty that expressed 
itself all over him; the sweet unconsciousness of his 
greatness — ^unconsciousness of the hundreds of ad- 
miring eyes fastened upon him, unconsciousness of 
the deep, loving, sincere worship welling out ci the 
breasts of those people and flowing toward him. 

The clergyman at my left was an old acquaintance 
of mine — clergyman now, but had spent the first 
half of his life in the camp and field and as an in- 

^ This is not a fancy sketch. I got it from a clergyman who was 
an instructor at Woolwich forty years ago, and who vouched for 
iU truth— M. T, 

283 



MARK TWAIN 

structor in the military school at Woolwich. Just 
at the moment I have been talking about a veiled 
and singular light glimmered in his eyes and he 
leaned down and muttered confidentially to me — 
indicating the hero of the banquet with a gesture: 

"Privately — ^he*s an absolute fool." 

This verdict was a great surprise to me. If its 
subject had been Napoleon, or Socrates, or Solomon, 
my astonishment could not have been greater. Two 
things I was well aware of : that the Reverend was a 
man of strict veracity and that his judgment of men 
was good. Therefore I knew, beyond doubt or ques- 
tion, that the world was mistaken about this hero: 
he was a fool. So I meant to find out, at a con- 
venient moment, how the Reverend, all solitary and 
alone, had discovered the secret. 

Some days later the opporttmity came, and this 
is what the Reverend told me: 

About forty years ago I was an instructor in the 
military academy at Woolwich. I was present in 
one of the sections when young Scoresby underwent 
his preliminary examination. I was touched to the 
quick with pity, for the rest of the class answered up 
brightly and handsomely, while he — ^why, dear me, 
he didn't know anything, so to speak. He was evi- 
dently good, and sweet, and lovable, and guileless; 
and so it was exceedingly painful to see him stand 
there, as serene as a graven image, and deliver him- 
self of answers which were veritably miraculous for 
stupidity and ignorance. All the compassion in me 
was aroused in his behalf. I said to myself, when he 

284 



LUCK 

comes to be examined again he will be flung over, of 
course; so it will be simply a harmless act of charity 
to ease his fall as much as I can. I took him aside 
and fotmd that he knew a little of Caesar's history; 
and as he didn't know anything else, I went to work 
and drilled him like a galley-slave on a certain line 
of stock questions concerning Csesar which I knew 
would be used. If you'll believe me, he went 
through with flying colors on examination day ! He 
went through on that purely superficial **cram," and 
got compliments too, while others, who knew a 
thousand times more than he, got plucked. By 
some strangely lucky accident — an accident not like- 
ly to happen twice in a century — he was asked no 
question outside of the narrow limits of his drill. 

It was stupefying. Well, all through his course I 
stood by him, with something of the sentiment which 
a mother feels for a crippled child; and he always 
saved himself — ^just by miracle, apparently. 

Now, of course, the thing that would expose him 
and kill him at last was mathematics. I resolved to 
make his death as easy as I could; so I drilled him 
and crammed him, and crammed him and drilled him, 
just on the line of questions which the examiners 
would be most likely to use, and then latmched him 
on his fate. Well, sir, try to conceive of the re- 
sult: to my consternation, he took the first prize! 
And with it he got a perfect ovation in the way of 
compUments. 

Sleep ? There was no more sleep for me for a week. 
My conscience tortured me day and night. What 
I had done I had done purely through charity, and 

28s 



MARK TWAIN 

only to ease the poor youth's fall. I never had 
dreamed of any such preposterous results as the thing 
that had happened. I felt as guilty and miserable 
as Frankenstein. Here was a wooden-head whom I 
had put in the way of gUttering promotions and 
prodigious responsibilities, and but one thing could 
happen: he and his responsibilities would all go to 
ruin together at the first opportunity. 

The Crimean War had just broken out. Of course 
there had to be a war, I said to myself. We couldn't 
have peace and give this donkey a chance to die 
before he is fotmd out. I waited for the earthquake. 
It came. And it made me reel when it did come. 
He was actually gazetted to a captaincy in a march- 
ing regiment ! Better men grow old and gray in the 
service before they dimb to a sublimity like that. 
And who could ever have foreseen that they would 
go and put such a load of responsibility on such 
green and inadequate shoulders ? I could just barely 
have stood it if they had made him a comet; but a 
captain — ^think of it! I thought my hair would 
turn white. 

Consider what I did — I who so loved repose and 
inaction. I said to myself, I am responsible to the 
coimtry for this, and I must go along with him and 
protect the coimtry against him as far as I can. 
So I took my poor little capital that I had saved up 
through years of work and grinding economy, and 
went with a sigh and bought a cometcy in his 
regiment, and away we went to the field. 

And there — oh, dear, it was awful. Blunders? — 
why, he never did anything but blimder. But, you 

286 



LUCK 

see, nobody was in the fellow's secret. Everybody 
had him focused wrong, and necessarily misinter- 
preted his performance every time. Consequently 
they took his idiotic blunders for inspirations of 
genius. They did, honestly! His mildest blunders 
were enough to make a man in his right mind cry; 
and they did make me cry — and rage and rave, too, 
privately. And the thing that kept me always in a 
sweat of apprehension was the fact that every fresh 
blimder he made increased the luster of his repu- 
tation! I kept saying to myself, he'll get so high 
that when discovery does finally come it will be like 
the sim falling out of the sky. 

He went right along up, from grade to grade, over 
the dead bodies of his superiors, until at last, in the 

hottest moment of the battle of down went 

our colonel, and my heart jumped into my mouth, 
for Scoresby was next in rank! Now for it, said I; 
we'll all land in Sheol in ten minutes, sure. 

The battle was awfully hot ; the allies were steadily 
giving way all over the field. Our regiment occupied 
a position that was vital; a blimder now must be 
destruction. At this crucial moment, what does this 
immortal fool do but detach the regiment from 
its place and order a charge over a neighboring 
hill where there wasn't a suggestion of an enemy! 
**There you go!" I said to myself; **this is the end 
at last." 

And away we did go, and were over the shoulder 
of the hill before the insane movement could be dis- 
covered and stopped. And what did we find? An 
entire and imsuspected Russian army in reserve! 
19 287 



MARK TWAIN 

And what happened? We were eaten up? That is 
necessarily what would have happened in ninety-nine 
cases out of a hundred. But no; those Russians ar- 
gued that no single regiment would come browsing 
around there at such a time. It must be the entire 
English army, and that the sly Russian game was 
detected and blocked ; so they turned tail, and away 
they went, pell-meU, over the hill and down into the 
field, in wild confusion, and we after them; they 
themselves broke the solid Russian center in the 
field, and tore through, and in no time there was the 
most tremendous rout you ever saw, and the defeat 
of the allies was turned into a sweeping and splendid 
victory! Marshal Canrobert looked on, dizzy with 
astonishment, admiration, and delight ; and sent right 
off for Scoresby, and hugged him, and decorated him 
on the field in presence of all the armies ! 

And what was Scoresby *s bltmder that time? 
Merely the mistaking his right hand for his left — 
that was all. An order had come to him to fall back 
and support our right ; and, instead, he fell forward 
and went over the hill to the left. But the name he 
won that day as a marvelous military genius filled 
the world with his glory, and that glory will never 
fade while history books last. 

He is just as good and sweet and lovable and un- 
pretending as a man can be, but he doesn't know 
enough to come in when it rains. Now that is 
absolutely true. He is the supremest ass in the 
universe ; and until half an hour ago nobody knew it 
but himself and me. He has been pursued, day by 
day and year by year, by a most phenomenal and 

288 



LUCK 

astonishing luckiness. He has been a shining soldier 
in all our wars for a generation; he has littered his 
whole military life with blunders, and yet has never 
committed one that didn't make him a knight or a 
baronet or a lord or something. Look at his breast ; 
why, he is just clothed in domestic and foreign 
decorations. Well, sir, every one of them is the 
record of some shouting stupidity or other; and, 
taken together, they are proof that the very best 
thing in all this world that can befall a man is to be 
bom lucky. I say again, as I said at the banquet, 
Scoresby*s an absolute fool. 



T 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

HIS is the story which the Major told me, as 
nearly as I can recall it: 



In the winter of 1862-63 I was commandant of 
Fort Trumbull, at New London, Conn. Maybe oiir 
life there was not so brisk as life at ** the front ** ; still 
it was brisk enough, in its way-tone's brains didn't 
cake together there for lack of something to keep 
them stirring. For one thing, all the Northern 
atmosphere at that time was thick with mysterious 
rumors — ^rumors to the effect that rebel spies were 
flitting everywhere, and getting ready to blow up 
our Northern forts, bum our hotels, send infected 
clothing into our towns, and all that sort of thing. 
You remember it. All this had a tendency to keep 
us awake, and knock the traditional dullness out of 
garrison life. Besides, ours was a recruiting station 
— which is the same as saying we hadn't any tim# to 
waste in dozing, or dreaming, or fooling around. 
Why, with all our watchfulness, fifty per cent, of a 
day's recruits would leak out of our hands and give 
us the slip the same night. The bounties were so 
prodigious that a recruit could pay a sentinel three 
or four hundred dollars to let him escape, and still 
have enough of his boimty-money left to constitute 

29Q 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

a forttine for a pcx)r man. Yes, as I said before, 
our life was not drowsy. 

Well, one day I was in my quarters alone, doing 
some writing, when a pale and ragged lad of fourteen 
or fifteen entered, made a neat bow, and said: 

'*I believe recruits are received here?" 

"Yes." 

'*WiIl you please enlist me, sir?" 

"Dear me, no! You are too young, my boy, and 
too small." 

A disappointed look came into his face, and 
quickly deepened into an expression of despondency. 
He turned slowly away, as if to go; hesitated, then 
faced me again, and said, in a tone that went to my 
heart: 

"I have no home, and not a friend in the world. 
If you could only enlist me!" 

But of course the thing was out of the question, 
and I said so as gently as I could. Then I told him 
to sit down by the stove and warm himself, and 
added : 

' ' You shall have something to eat, presently. You 
are hungry?" 

He did not answer; he did not need to; the grati- 
tude in his big, soft eyes was more eloquent than 
any words could have been. He sat down by the 
stove, and I went on writing. Occasionally I took 
a furtive glance at him. I noticed that his clothes 
and shoes, although soiled and damaged, were of 
good style and material. This fact was suggestive. 
To it I added the facts that his voice was low and 
musical; his eyes deep and melancholy; his carriage 

291 



MARK TWAIN 

and address gentlemanly; evidently the poor chap 
was in trouble. As a result, I was interested. 

However, I became absorbed in my work by and 
by, and forgot all about the boy. I don't know how 
long this lasted; but at length I happened to look 
up. The boy's back was toward me, but his face 
was turned in such a way that I could see one of 
his cheeks — and down that cheek a rill of noiseless 
tears was flowing. 

"God bless my soul!" I said to myself; "I forgot 
the poor rat was starving." Then I made amends 
for my brutality by saying to him, "Come along, 
my lad; you shall dine with me; I am alone to- 
day." 

He gave me another of those grateful looks, and 
a happy light broke in his face. At the table he 
stood with his hand on his chair-back until I was 
seated, then seated himself. I took up my knife and 
fork and — well, I simply held them, and kept still; 
for the boy had inclined his head and was saying 
a silent grace. A thousand hallowed memories of 
home and my childhood poured in upon me, and 
I sighed to think how far I had drifted from religion 
and its balm for hurt minds, its comfort and solace 
and support. 

As our meal progressed I observed that young 
Wicklow — Robert Wicklow was his full name — knew 
what to do with his napkin; and— weU, in a word, I 
observed that he was a boy of good breeding; never 
mind the details. He had a simple frankness, too, 
which won upon me. We talked mainly about him- 
self, and I had no difficulty in getting his history out 

392 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

of him. When he spoke of his having been bom and 
reared in Louisiana, I warmed to him decidedly, for 
I had spent some time down there. I knew all the 
"coast" region of the Mississippi, and loved it, and 
had not been long enough away from it for my in- 
terest in it to begin to pale. The very names that 
fell from his lips sotmded good to me — so good that 
I steered the talk in directions that would bring them 
out: Baton Rouge, Plaquemine, Donaldsonville, 
Sixty-mile Point, Bonnet-Carr6, the Stock Landing, 
CarroUton, the Steamship Landing, the Steamboat 
Landing, New Orleans, Tchoupitoulas Street, the Es- 
planade, the Rue des Bons Enfants, the St. Charles 
Hotel, the Tivoli Circle, the Shell Road, Lake 
Pontchartrain ; and it was particularly delightful to 
me to hear once more of the R. E. Lee, the Natchez, 
the Eclipse, the General Quitman, the Duncan F. 
Kenner, and other old familiar steamboats. It was 
almost as good as being back there, these names 
so vividly reproduced in my mind the look of the 
things they stood for. Briefly, this was little Wick- 
low's history: 

When the war broke out, he and his invalid aunt 
and his father were living near Baton Rouge, on a 
great and rich plantation which had been in the 
family for fifty years. The father was a Union man. 
He was persecuted in all sorts of ways, but dtmg to 
his principles. At last one night masked men burned 
his mansion down, and the family had to fly for their 
lives. They were hunted from place to place, and 
learned all there was to know about poverty, hunger, 
and distress. The invalid aunt found relief at last: 

293 



MARK TWAIN 

misery and exposure killed her; she died in an open 
field, like a tramp, the rain beating upon her and the 
thunder booming overhead. Not long afterward the 
father was captured by an armed band; and while 
the son begged and pleaded, the victim was strung 
up before his face. [At this point a baleful light 
shone in the youth's eyes, and he said, with the 
manner of one who talks to himself: "If I cannot 
be enlisted, no matter — ^I shall find a way — I shall 
find a way."] As soon as the father was pronounced 
dead, the son was told that if he was not out of 
that region within twenty-four hours it would go 
hard with him. That night he crept to the riverside 
and hid himself near a plantation landing. By and 
by the Duncan F. Kenner stopped there, and he swam 
out and concealed himself in the yawl that was 
dragging at her stem. Before daylight the boat 
reached the Stock Landing and he slipped ashore. 
He walked the three miles which lay between that 
point and the house of an tmcle of his in Good- 
Children Street, in New Orleans, and then his trou- 
bles were over for the time being. But this unde 
was a Union man, too, and before very long he 
concluded that he had better leave the South. So 
he and young Wicklow slipped out of the country 
on board a sailing-vessel, and in due time reached 
New York. They put up at the Astor House. 
Young Wicklow had a good time of it for a while, 
strolling up and down Broadway, and observing the 
strange Northern sights; but in the end a change 
came — ^and not for the better. The uncle had been 
cheerful at first, but now he began to look troubled 

394 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

and despondent; moreover, he became moody and 
irritable ; talked of money giving out, and no way to 
get more — **not enough left for one, let alone two." 
Then, one morning, he was missing — did not come to 
breakfast. The boy inquired at the office, and was 
told that the uncle had paid his bill the night before 
and gone away — ^to Boston, the clerk believed, but 
was not certain. 

The lad was alone and friendless. He did not 
know what to do, but concluded he had better try to 
follow and find his tmcle. He went down to the 
steamboat landing: learned that the trifle of money 
in his pocket would not carry him to Boston; how- 
ever, it would carry him to New London ; so he took 
passage for that port, resolving to trust to Providence 
to furnish him means to travel the rest of the way. 
He had now been wandering about the streets of New 
London three days and nights, getting a bite and a 
nap here and there for charity's sake. But he had 
given up at last; courage and hope were both gone. 
If he could enlist, nobody could be more thankful; 
if he could not get in as a soldier, couldn't he be a 
drummer-boy ? Ah, he would work so hard to please, 
and would be so grateful! 

Well, there's the history of young Wicklow, just 
as he told it to me, barring details. I said: 

' * My boy, you are among friends now — don't you 
be troubled any more." How his eyes glistened! I 
called in Sergeant John Raybtim — he was from 
Hartford ; lives in Hartford yet ; maybe you know him 
— ^and said, **Raybum, quarter this boy with the 
musicians. I am going to enroll him as a drumm^- 

«95 



MARK TWAIN 

boy, and I want you to look after him and see that 
he is well treated." 

Well, of course, intercourse between the com- 
mandant of the post and the drummer-boy came to 
an end now; but the poor little friendless chap lay 
heavy on my heart just the same. I kept on the 
lookout, hoping to see him brighten up and begin to 
be cheery and gay; but no, the days went by, and 
there was no change. He associated with nobody; 
he was always absent-minded, always thinking ; his 
face was always sad. One morning Raybum asked 
leave to speak to me privately. Said he : 

"I hope I don't oflFend, sir; but the truth is, the 
musicians are in such a sweat it seems as if some- 
body's got to speak." 

''Why, what is the trouble?" 

"It's the Wicklow boy, sir. The musicians are 
down on him to an extent you can't imagine." 

Well, go on, go on. What has he been doing?" 

Prayin', sir." 

Praying!" 

"Yes, sir; the musicians haven't any peace of 
their life for that boy's prayin'. First thing in the 
niomin' he's at it ; noons he's at it ; and nights — well, 
nights he just lays into 'em like all possessed! Sleep? 
Bless you, they can't sleep : he's got the floor, as the 
sajdn' is, and then when he once gets his supplication- 
mill agoin' there just simply ain't any let-up to him. 
He starts in with the band-master, and he prays for 
him; next he takes the head bugler, and he prays for 
him; next the bass dnun, and he scoops him in; and 
so on, right straight through the band, givin' them 

295 






A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

all a show, and takin' that amount of interest in it 
which would make you think he thought he wam't 
but a little while for this world, and believed he 
couldn't be happy in heaven without he had a brass- 
band along, and wanted to pick 'em out for himself, 
so he could depend on 'em to do up the national tunes 
in a style suitin' to the place. Well, sir, heavin' boots 
at him don't have no effect; it's dark in there; and, 
besides, he don't pray fair, anyway, but kneels down 
behind the big drum ; so it don't make no difference 
if they rain boots at him, he don't give a dem — 
warbles right along, same as if it was applause. 
They sing out, 'Oh, dry up!' 'Give us a rest!' 
'Shoot him!' 'Oh, take a walk!' and all sorts of 
such things. But what of it? It don't faze him. 
He don't mind it." After a pause: "Kind of a good 
little fool, too; gits up in the momin' and carts all 
that stock of boots back, and sorts 'em out and sets 
each man's pair where they belong. And they've 
been throwed at him so much now that he knows 
every boot in the band — can sort 'em out with his 
eyes shut." 
After another pause, which I forbore to interrupt: 
"But the roughest thing about it is that when he's 
done prayin' — ^when he ever does get done — he pipes 
up and begins to sing. Well, you know what a honey 
kind of a voice he's got when he talks ; you know hor^ 
it would persuade a cast-iron dog to come down off 
of a door-step and lick his hand. Now if youll take 
my word for it, sir, it ain't a circumstance to his 
singin'! Flute music is harsh to that boy's singin*. 
Oh, he just gurgles it out so soft and sweet and low, 

297 



MARK TWAIN 

there in the dark, that it makes you think you are 

in heaven." 

''What is there 'rough' about that?" 
"Ah, that's just it, sir. You hear him sing 



u 



'Just as I am — poor, wretched, blind' — 



just you hear him sing that once, and see if you 
don't melt all up and the water come into your eyes! 
I don't care what he sings, it goes pltun straight 
home to you — ^it goes deep down to where you live — 
and it fetches you every time ! Just you hear him sing 



((( 



Child of sin and sorrow, filled with dismay, 
Wait not till to-morrow, yield thee to-day; 

Grieve not that love 

Which, from above' — 

and so on. It makes a body feel like the wickedest, 
imgratefulest brute that walks. And when he sings 
chem songs of his about home, and mother, and 
childhood, and old memories, and things that's 
vanished, and old friends dead and gone, it fetches 
everything before your face that you've ever loved 
and lost in all your Hfe — and it's just beautiful, it's 
just divine to listen to, sir — but, Lord, Lord, the 
heartbreak of it! The band — well, they all cry — 
every rascal of them blubbers, and don't try to hide 
it, either; and first you know, that very gang that's 
been slammin' boots at that boy will skip out of their 
bunks all of a sudden, and rush over in the dark and 
hug him ! Yes, they do — and slobber all over him, 
and call him pet names, and beg him to forgive 
them. And just at that time, if a regiment was to 

3c8 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

offer to hurt a hair of that cub's head, they'd go for 
that regiment, if it was a whole army corps!" 

Another pause. 

*'Is that all?" said I. 

*'Yes, sir." 

"Well, dear me, what is the complaint? What do 
they want done?" 

'*Done? Why, bless you, sir, they want you to 
stop him from singin\'' 

**What an idea! You said his music was divine." 

"That's just it. It's too divine. Mortal man 
can't stand it. It stirs a body up so; it turns a body 
inside out; it racks his feelin's all to rags; it makes 
him feel bad and wicked, and not fit for any place 
but perdition. It keeps a body in such an everlastin' 
state of repenting that nothin' don't taste good and 
there ain't no comfort in life. And then the cryin\ 
you see — every momin' they are ashamed to look 
one another in the face." 

"Well, this is an odd case, and a singular com- 
plaint. So they really want the singing stopped?" 

"Yes, sir, that is the idea. They don't wish to 
ask too much ; they would like powerful well to have 
the prayin' shut down on, or leastways trimmed off 
around the edges; but the main thing's the singin'. 
If they can only get the singin' choked off, they 
think they can stand the prayin', rough as it is to 
be bullyragged so much that way." 

I told the sergeant I would take the matter under 
consideration. That night I crept into the mu- 
sicians' quarters and listened. The sergeant had not 
overstated the case. I heard the praying voice 

299 



MARK TWAIN 

pleading in the dark; I heard the execrations of the 
harassed men ; I heard the rain of boots whiz through 
the air, and bang and thump around the big drum. 
The thing touched me, but it amused me, too. By 
and by, after an impressive silence, came the sing- 
ing. Lord, the pathos of it, the enchantment of it ! 
Nothing in the world was ever so sweet, so gracious, 
so tender, so holy, so moving. I made my stay very 
brief; I was beginning to experience emotions of a 
sort not proper to the commandant of a fortress. 

Next day I issued orders which stopped the prajring 
and singing. Then followed three or four days which 
were so full of bounty-jumping excitements and irri- 
tations that I never once thought of my drummer- 
boy. But now comes Sergeant Raybum, one morn- 
ing, and says : 

'*That new boy acts mighty strange, sir.** 

"How?'' 

'*Well, sir, he's all the time writin*.** 

''Writing? What does he write — letters?** 

**I don't know, sir; but whenever he's off duty, he 
is always pokin' and nosin* around the fort, all by 
himself — ^blest if I think there's a hole or comer in 
it he hasn't been into — and every little while he outs 
with pencil and paper and scribbles somethin* down.'* 

This gave me a most unpleasant sensation. I 
wanted to scoff at it, but it was not a time to scoff 
at anything that had the least suspicious tinge about 
it. Things were happening all around us in the 
North then that warned us to be always on the 
alert, and always suspecting. I recalled to mind the 
suggestive fact that this boy was from the South— 

300 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

the extreme South, Louisiana — and the thought was 
not of a reassuring nature, under the circumstances. 
Nevertheless, it cost me a pang to give the orders 
which I now gave to Raybum. I felt like a father 
who plots to expose his own child to shame and 
injury. I told Raybum to keep quiet, bide his time, 
and get me some of those writings whenever he could 
manage it without the boy's finding it out. And I 
charged him not to do anything which might let the 
boy discover that he was being watched. I also 
ordered that he allow the lad his usual liberties, but 
that he be followed at a distance when he went out 
into the town. 

During the next two days Raybum reported to 
me several times. No success. The boy was still 
writing, but he always pocketed his paper with a 
careless air whenever Raybum appeared in the 
vicinity. He had gone twice to an old deserted 
stable in the town, remained a minute or two, and 
come out again. One could not pooh-pooh these 
things — ^they had an evil look. I was obliged to 
confess to myself that I was getting uneasy. I went 
into my private quarters and sent for my second in 
command — an officer of intelligence and judgment, 
son of General James Watson Webb. He was sur- 
prised and troubled. We had a long talk over the 
matter, and came to the conclusion that it would be 
worth while to institute a secret search. I deter- 
mined to take charge of that myself. So I had my- 
self called at two in the morning; and pretty soon 
after I was in the musicians' quarters, crawling 
along the floor on my stomach among the snorers. 

30Z 



MARK TWAIN 

I reached my sltimbering waif's btink at last, without 
disturbing anybody, captured his clothes and kit, 
and crawled stealthily back again. When I got to 
my own quarters, I foimd Webb there, waiting and 
eager to know the result. We made search imme- 
diately. The clothes were a disappointment. In 
the pockets we found blank paper and a pencil; 
nothing else, except a jackknife and such queer odds 
and ends and useless trifles as boys hoard and value. 
We turned to the kit hopefully. Nothing there but 
a rebuke for us ! — a little Bible with this written on 
the fly-leaf: ''Stranger, be kind to my boy, for his 
mother's sake." 

I looked at Webb — ^he dropped his eyes ; he looked 
at me — J dropped mine. Neither spoke. I put the 
book reverently back in its place. Presently Webb 
got up and went away, without remark. After a 
little I nerved myself up to my unpalatable job, and 
took the plunder back to where it belonged, crawl- 
ing on my stomach as before. It seemed the 
peculiarly appropriate attitude for the business I 
was in. 

I was most honestly glad when it was over and 
done with. 

About noon next day Raybum came, as usual, to 
report. I cut him short. I said : 

*'Let this nonsense be dropped. We are making 
a bugaboo out of a poor little cub who has got no 
more harm in him than a hymn-book." 

The sergeant looked stuprised, and said: 

**Well, you know it was your orders, sir, and I've 
got some of the writin'." 

302 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

*'And what does it amount to? How did you 
get it?" 

''I peeped through the keyhole, and see him 
writin*. So, when I judged he was about done, I 
made a sort of a little cough, and I see him crumple 
it up and throw it in the fire, and look all around to 
see if anybody was comin'. Then he settled back 
as comfortable and careless as anything. Then I 
comes in, and passes the time of day pleasantly, and 
sends him on an errand. He never looked uneasy, 
but went right along. It was a coal fire and new 
built ; the writin* had gone over behind a chunk, out 
of sight; but I got it out; there it is; it ain't hardly 
scorched, you see." 

I glanced at the paper and took in a sentence or 
two. Then I dismissed the sergeant and told him 
to send Webb to me. Here is the paper in fuU: 

Fort Trumbull, the 8th. 

Colonel, — I was 'mistaken as to the caliber of the three 
guns I ended my list with. They are i8-poimders; all the rest 
of the armament is as I stated. The garrison remains as before 
reported, except that the two light infantry companies that 
were to be detached for service at the front are to stay here for 
the present — can't find out for how long, just now, but will 
soon. We are satisfied that, all things considered, matters had 
better be postponed im — 

There it broke oflf — ^there is where Raybum 
coughed and interrupted the writer. All my affec- 
tion for the boy, all my respect for him and charity 
for his forlorn condition, withered in a moment under 
the blight of this revelation of cold-blooded baseness. 

But never mind about that. Here was business— 
20 303 



MARK TWAIN 

business that reqtiired profound and immediate at- 
tention, too. Webb and I turned the subject over 
and over, and examined it all around. Webb said: 

"What a pity he was interrupted! Something is 
going to be postponed until — ^when? And what is 
the something? Possibly he would have mentioned 
it, the pious little reptile!" 

*'Yes," I said, "we have missed a trick. And 
who is ^we' in the letter? Is it conspirators inside 
the fort or outside?" 

That "we" was uncomfortably suggestive. How- 
ever, it was not worth while to be guessing around 
that, so we proceeded to matters more practical. 
In the first place, we decided to double the sentries 
and keep the strictest possible watch. Next, we 
thought of calling Wicldow in and making him di- 
vulge everything ; but that did not seem wisest until 
other methods should fail. We must have some more 
of the writings; so we began to plan to that end. 
And now we had an idea : Wicklow never went to the 
post-office — perhaps the deserted stable was his post- 
office. We sent for my confidential derk — a yoimg 
German named Sterne, who was a sort of natural 
detective — and told him all about the case, and 
ordered him to go to work on it. Within the hour 
we got word that Wicklow was writing again. 
Shortly afterward word came that he had asked 
leave to go out nto the town. He was detained 
awhile and meantime Sterne hurried off and con- 
cealed himself in the stable. By and by he saw 
Wicklow satmter in, look about him, then hide some- 
thing under some rubbish in a comer, and take 

304 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

leistirely leave again. Sterne pounced upon the 
hidden artide — a letter — ^and brought it to us. It 
had no superscription and no signature. It repeated 
what ^e had already read, and then went on to say : 

We think it best to poetpone till the two companies are 
gone. I mean the four inside think so; have not cx>mmunicated 
with the others — afraid of attracting attention. I say four 
because we have lost two; they had hardly enlisted'and got 
inside when they were shipped off to the fioat. It will be 
absolutely necessary to have two in their places. The two that 
went were the brothers from Thirty-mile Point. I have some- 
thing of the greatest importance to reveal, but must not trust it 
to this method of communication; will try the other. 

'*The little scoundrel!" said Webb; ''who could 
have supposed he was a spy ? However, never mind 
about that; let us add up our particulars, such as 
they are, and see how the case stands to date. First, 
we've got a rebel spy in our midst, whom we know; 
secondly, we've got three more in otu* midst whom 
we don't know; thirdly, these spies have been intro- 
duced among us through the simple and easy process 
of enlisting as soldiers in the Union army — and 
evidently two of them have got sold at it, and been 
shipped off to the front; fourthly, there are assistant 
spies 'outside' — ^number indefinite; fifthly, Wickiow 
has very important matter which he is afraid to 
commimicate by the 'present method' — ^will 'try the 
other.' That is the case, as it now stands. Shall 
we collar Wickiow and make him confess? Or shall 
we catch the person who removes the letters from the 
stable and make him tell? Or shall we keep still 
and find out more?" 

30s 



MARK TWAIN 

We decided upon the last course. We judged that 
we did not need to proceed to summary measures 
now, since it was evident that the conspirators were 
likely to wait till those two light infantry compa- 
nies were out of the way. We fortified Sterne with 
pretty ample powers, and told him to use his best 
endeavors to find out Wicldow's "other method" of 
commimication. We meant to play a bold game; 
and to this end we proposed to keep the spies in 
an unsuspecting state as long as possible. So we 
ordered Sterne to return to the stable immediately, 
and, if he f oimd the coast clear, to conceal Wicldow's 
letter where it was before, and leave it there for the 
conspirators to get. 

The night closed down without further event. It 
was cold and dark and sleety, with a raw wind 
blowing; still I turned out of my warm bed several 
times during the night, and went the rounds in per- 
son, to see that all was right and that every sentry 
was on the alert. I always found them wide awake 
and watchful; evidently whispers of mysterious 
dangers had been floating about, and the doubling 
of the guards had been a kind of indorsement of 
those rumors. Once, toward morning, I encountered 
Webb, breasting his way against the bitter wind, 
and learned then that he, also, had been the rounds 
several times to see that all was going right. 

Next day's events hurried things up somewhat. 
Wicklow wrote another letter; Sterne preceded him 
to the stable and saw him deposit it; captured it 
as soon as Wicklow was out of the way, then slipped 
out and followed the little spy at a distance, with a 

306 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

detective in plain clothes at his own heels, for we 
thought it judicious to have the law's assistance 
handy in case of need. Wicklow went to the railway 
station, and waited around till the train from New 
York came in, then stood scanning the faces of the 
crowd as they poured out of the cars. Presently an 
aged gentleman, with green goggles and a cane, 
came limping along, stopped in Wicklow's neighbor- 
hood, and began to look about him expectantly. In 
an instant Wicklow darted forward, thrust an en- 
velope into his hand, then glided away and disap- 
peared in the throng. The next instant Sterne had 
snatched the letter; and as he hurried past the 
detective, he said: ** Follow the old gentleman — 
don't lose sight of him." Then Sterne skurried 
out with the crowd, and came straight to the 
fort. 

We sat with closed doors, and instructed the guard 
outside to allow no interruption. 

First we opened the letter captured at the stable. 
It read as follows: 

Holy Alliance, — Found, in the usual gun, commands from 
the Master, left there last night, which set aside the instructions 
heretofore received from the subordinate quarter. Have left 
in the gun the usual indication that the commands reached the 
proper hand — 

Webb, interrupting: ''Isn't the boy under con^ 
stant surveillance now?" 

I said yes; he had been under strict surveillance 
ever since the capturing of his former letter. 

''Then how could he put anything into a gun, or 
take anything out of it, and not get caught?" 

307 



MARK TWAIN 

"Well," I said, ''I don't like the look of that very 
weU." 

"I don't either," said Webb. "It simply means 
that there are conspirators among the very sentinels. 
Without their connivance in some way or other, the 
thing couldn't have been done." 

I sent for Raybum, and ordered him to examine 
the batteries and see what he could find. The reading 
of the letter was then restuned : 

The new commands are peremptory, and reqtdre that the 
MMMM shall be FPPFF at 3 o'dodc to-morrow morning. 
Two hundred will arrive, in small parties, by train and other- 
wise, from various directions, and will be at appointed place at 
right time. I will distribute the sign to-day. Success is appar- 
ently sure, though something must have got out, for the sentries 
have been doubled, and the chiefs went the rounds last night 
several times. W. W. comes from southerly to-day and will 
receive secret orders — ^by the other method. All six of you must 
be in 166 at sharp 2 a.m. You will find B. B. there, who will 
give you detailed instructions. Password same as last time, 
only reversed — ^put first syllable last and last syllable first. 
Remember XXXX. Do not forget. Be of good heart; before 
the next sun rises you will be heroes; your fame will be perma- 
nent; you will have added a deathless page to history. Amen. 

"Thunder and Mars," said Webb, "but we are 
getting into mighty hot quarters, as I look at it I" 

I said there was no question but that things were 
beginning to wear a most serious aspect. Said I: 

"A desperate enterprise is on foot, that is plain 
enough. To-night is the time set for it — that, also, 
is plain. The exact nature of the enterprise — I mean 
the manner of it — ^is hidden away under those blind 
btmches of M's and F's, but the end and aim, I judge, 
is the surprise and capture of the post. We must 

308 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

move quick and sharp now. I think nothing can be 
gained by continuing our clandestine policy as re- 
gards Wicklow. We must know, and as soon as 
possible, too, where 'i66' is located, so that we can 
make a descent upon the gang there at 2 a.m. ; and 
doubtless the quickest way to get that information 
will be to force it out of that boy. But first of all, 
and before we make any important move, I must lay 
the facts before the War Department, and ask for 
plenary powers." 

The despatch was prepared in cipher to go over 
the wires; I read it, approved it, and sent it 
along. 

We presently finished discussing the letter which 
was under consideration, and then opened the one 
which had been snatched from the lame gentleman. 
It contained nothing but a couple of perfectly blank 
sheets of note-paper! It was a chilly check to our 
hot eagerness and expectancy. We felt as blank as 
the paper, for a moment, and twice as foolish. But 
it was for a moment only; for, of .course, we imme- 
diately afterward thought of ''sympathetic ink." 
We held the paper close to the fire and watched for 
the characters to come out, under the influence of the 
heat ; but nothing appeared but some faint tracings, 
which we could make nothing of. We then called 
in the surgeon, and sent him off with orders to apply 
every test he was acquainted with till he got the right 
one, and report the contents of the letter to me the 
instant he brought them to the surface. This check 
was a confoimded annoyance, and we naturally 
chafed tmder the delay ; for we had fully expected to 

300 



MARK TWAIN 

get out of that letter some of the most important 
secrets of the plot. 

Now appeared Sergeant Raybum, and drew from 
his pocket a piece of twine string about a foot long, 
with three knots tied in it, and held it up. 

''I got it out of a gun on the water-front/' said 
he. *'I took the tompions out of all the guns and 
examined close; this string was the only thing that 
was in any gun." 

So this bit of string was Wicklow's "sign" to 
signify that the "Master's" commands had not mis- 
carried. I ordered that every sentinel who had served 
near that gun during the past twenty-fotir hours be 
put in confinement at once and separately, and not 
allowed to commimicate with any one without my 
privity and consent. 

A telegram now came from the Secretary of War. • 
It read as follows: 

Susjpend habeas carpus. Put town under martial law. Make 
necessary arrests. Act with vigor and promptness. Keep the 
Department informed. 

We were now in shape to go to work. I sent out 
and had the lame gentleman quietly arrested and as 
quietly brought into the fort; I placed him under 
guard, and forbade speech to him or from him. He 
was inclined to bluster at first, but he soon dropped 
that. 

Next came word that Wicldow had been seen to 
give something to a couple of our new recruits; and 
that, as soon as his back was turned, these had 
been seized and confined. Upon each was found 

3X0 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 



a small bit of paper, bearing these words and signs 
in pencil: 



Eagle's Third Flight 

Remember xxxx 

i66 



In accordance with instructions, I telegraphed to 
the Department, in cipher, the progress made, and 
also described the above ticket. We seemed to be 
in a strong enough position now to venture to throw 
off the mask as regarded Wicklow ; so I sent for him. 
I also sent for and received back the letter written 
in sympathetic ink, the surgeon accompanying it 
with the information that thus far it had resisted his 
tests, but that there were others he could apply when 
I should be ready for him to do so. 

Presently Wicklow entered. He had a somewhat 
worn and anxious look, but he was composed and 
easy, and if he suspected anything it did not appear 
in his face or manner. I allowed him to stand there 
a moment or two; then I said, pleasantly: 

'*My boy, why do you go to that old stable so 
much?*' 

He answered, with simple demeanor and without 
embarrassment : 

''Well, I hardly know, sir; there isn't any particu- 
lar reason, except that I like to be alone, and I 
amuse myself there." 

''You amuse yourself there, do you?" 



MARK TWAIN 

"Yes, sir," he replied, as innocently and simply as 
before. 

''Is that all you do there?" 

**Yes, sir," he said, looking up with childlike 
wonderment in his big, soft eyes. 

"You are sure?** 

"Yes, sir, sure." 

After a pause I said : 

"Wicklow, why do you write so much?" 

"I? I do not write much, sir." 

"You don't?" 

' ' No, sir. Oh, if you mean scribbling, I do scribble 
some, for amusement." 

"What do you do with your scribblings?" 

"Nothing, sir — ^throw them away." 

"Never send them to anybody?" 

"No, sir." 

I suddenly thrust before him the letter to the 
"Colonel." He started slightly, but immediately 
composed himself. A slight tinge spread itself over 
his cheek. 

"How came you to send titis piece of scribbling, 
then?" 

"I nev — ^never meant any harm, sir!" 

"Never meant any harm! You betray the arma- 
ment and condition of the post, and mean no harm 
by it?" 

He htmg his head and was silent. 

* ' Come, speak up, and stop lying. Whom was this 
letter intended for?" 

He showed signs of distress now; but quickly col- 
lected himself, and replied, in a tone of deep earnestness : 

312 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

*'I will tell you the truth, sir — ^the whole truth. 
The letter was never intended for anybody at all. I 
wrote it only to amuse myself. I see the error and 
foolishness of it now; but it is the only offense, sir> 
upon my honor. ' ' 

'*Ah, I am glad of that. It is dangerous to be 
writing such letters. I hope you are sttre this is the 
only one you wrote?" 

*'Yes, sir, perfectly sure." 

His hardihood was stupefying. He told that lie 
with as sincere a cotmtenance as any creature ever 
wore. I waited a moment to soothe down my rising 
temper, and then said : 

''Wicklow, jog your memory now, and see if you 
can help me with two or three little matters which 
I wish to inquire about." 

I will do my very best, sir." 

Then, to begin with — ^who is Hhe Master'?" 

It betrayed him into darting a startled glance at 
our faces, but that was all. He was serene again in 
a moment, and tranquilly answered : 

'*I do not know, sir." 

**You do not know?" 

**I do not know." 

** You are sure you do not know?" 

He tried hard to keep his eyes on mine, but the 
strain was too great his chin sunk slowly toward 
his breast and he was silent ; he stood there nervously 
ftimbling with a button, an object to command one's 
pity, in spite of his base acts. Presently I broke the 
stillness with the question : 

*'Who are the 'Holy AUiance'?'' 

313 



<< 



MARK TWAIN 

His body shook visibly, and he made a slight 
random gesttire with his hands, which to me was like 
the appeal of a despairing creattire for compassion. 
But he made no sotmd. He continued to stand with 
his face bent toward the ground. As we sat gazing 
at him, waiting for him to speak, we saw the big 
tears begin to roll down his cheeks. But he remained 
silent. After a little, I said: 

"You must answer me, my boy, and you must tell 
me the truth. Who are the Holy Alliance?" 

He wept on in silence. Presently I said, some- 
what sharply : 

"Answer the question!" 

He struggled to get command of his voice; and 
then, looking up appealingly, forced the words out 
between his sobs : 

**0h, have pity on me, sir! I cannot answer it, 
for I do not know." 

"What!" 

"Indeed, sir, I am telling the truth. I never have 
heard of the Holy Alliance till this moment. On 
my honor, sir, this is so." 

m 

"Good heavens! Look at this second letter of 
yours; there, do you see those words, *Holy Alliance*? 
What do you say now?" 

He gazed up into my face with the hurt look of 
one upon whom a great wrong had been wrought, 
then said, feelingly : 

"This is some cruel joke, sir; and how could they 
play it upon me, who have tried all I could to do 
right, and have never done harm to anybody? 
Some one has coimterfeited my hand; I never 

3U 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

wrote a line of this; I have never seen this letter 
before!" 

**0h, you unspeakable liar! Here, what do you 
say to this?** — ^and I snatched the sjrmpathetic-ink 
letter from my pocket and thrust it before his eyes. 

His face turned white! — ^as white as a dead per- 
son's. He wavered slightly in his tracks, and put his 
hand against the wall to steady himself. After a 
moment he asked, in so faint a voice that it was 
hardly audible: 

''Have you — ^read it?" 

Our faces must have answered the truth before 
my lips could get out a false '*yes," for I distinctly 
saw the courage come back into that boy's eyes. I 
waited for him to say something, but he kept silent. 
So at last I said: 

' * Well, what have you to say as to the revelations 
in this letter?" 

He answered, with perfect composure : 

''Nothing, except that they are entirely harmless 
and innocent; they can hurt nobody." 

I was in something of a comer now, as I couldn't 
disprove his assertion. I did not know exactly how 
to proceed. However, an idea came to my relief, 
and I said: 

"You are stu-e you know nothing about the Master 
and the Holy Alliance, and did not write the letter 
which you say is a forgery?" 

"Yes, sir — sure." 

I slowly drew out the knotted twine string and 
held it up without speaking. He gazed at it in- 
differently, then looked at me inquiringly. My pa- 

315 



MARK TWAIN 

tience was sorely taxed. However, I kept my tem- 
per down, and said, in my usual voice: 

**Wicklow, do you see this?" 

''Yes, sir." 

•'What is it?" 

"It seems to be a piece of string." 

** Seems f It is a piece of string. Do you recog- 
nize it?" 

"No, sir," he replied, as calmly as the words 
could be uttered. 

His coolness was perfectly wonderful! I paused 
now for several seconds, in order that the silence 
might add impressiveness to what I was about to 
say; then I rose and laid my hand on his shoulder, 
and said, gravely : 

**It will do you no good, poor boy, none in the 
world. This sign to the 'Master,' this knotted 
string, found in one of the guns on the water- 
front—" 

"Found in the gun! Oh, no, no, no! do not say 
in the gun, but in a crack in the tompion! — it fnnst 
have been in the crack!" and down he went on his 
knees and clasped his hands and lifted up a face that 
was pitifid to see, so ashy it was, and wild with 
terror. 

"No, it was in the gun." 

"Oh, something has gone wrong! My God, I am 
lost!" and he sprang up and darted this way and 
that, dodging the hands that were put out to catch 
him, and doing his best to escape from the place. 
But of course escape was impossible. Then he flung 
himself on his knees again, crying with all his might, 

316 



(( 
(( 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

and clasped me arotind the legs; and so he dung to 
me and begged and pleaded, saying, * * Oh, have pity 
on me! Oh, be merciful to me! Do not betray me; 
they would not spare my life a moment! Protect 
me, save me. I will confess everything!" 

It took us some time to quiet him down and 
modify his fright, and get him into something like a 
rational frame of mind. Then I began to question 
him, he answering humbly, with downcast eyes, and 
from time to time swabbing away his constantly 
flowing tears : 

So you are at heart a rebel?" 
Yes, sir." 
"And a spy?" 
"Yes, sir." 

"And have been acting under distinct orders from 
outside?" 
Yes, sir." 
WilUngly?" 
Yes, sir." 
Gladly, perhaps?" 
"Yes, sir; it would do no good to deny it. The 
South is my country; my heart is Southern, and it 
is all in her cause." 

"Then the tale you told me of yotu* wrongs and 
the persecution of yotu* family was made up for 
the occasion?" 

"They — they told me to say it, sir." 
"And you would betray and destroy those who 
pitied and sheltered you. Do you comprehend how 
base you are, you poor misguided thing?" 
He replied with sobs only. 

317 



li 

ti 



MARK TWAIN 

"Well, let that pass. To business. Who is the 
'Colonel,' and where is he?" 

He began to cry hard, and tried to beg oflf frcnn 
answering. He said he would be killed if he told. 
I threatened to put him in the dark cell and lock 
him up if he did not come out with the information. 
At the same time I promised to protect him from all 
harm if he made a clean breast. For all answer, he 
closed his mouth firmly and put on a stubborn air 
which I could not bring him out of. At last I started 
with him; but a single glance into the dark ceU con- 
verted him. He broke into a passion of weeping and 
supplicating, and declared he would tell everything. 

So I brought him back, and he named the ''Colo- 
nel," and described him particularly. Said he would 
be found at the principal hotel in the town, in 
citizen's dress. I had to threaten him again, before 
he would describe and name the * * Master. ' ' Said the 
Master would be f otmd at No. i s Bond Street, New 
York, passing under the name of R. F. Gaylord. I 
telegraphed name and description to the chief of 
police of the metropolis, and asked that Gaylord be 
arrested and held till I could send for him. 

"Now," said I, "it seems that there are several 
of the conspirators 'outside,' presumably in New 
London. Name and describe them." 

He named and described three men and two 
women — ^all stopping at the principal hotel. I sent 
out quietly, and had them and the "Colonel" 
arrested and confined in the fort. 

"Next, I want to know all about your three 
fellow-conspirators who are here in the fort." 

318 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

He was about to dodge me with a falsehood, I 
thought ; but I produced the mysterious bits of paper 
which had been found upon two of them, and this had 
a salutary effect upon him. I said we had possession 
of two of the men, and he must point out the third. 
This frightened him badly, and he cried out : 

**0h, please don't make me; he would kill me on 
the spot!" 

I said that that was all nonsense; I would have 
somebody near by to protect him, and, besides, the 
men should be assembled without arms. I ordered 
all the raw recruits to be mustered, and then the poor, 
trembling little wretch went out and stepped along 
down the line, trying to look as indifferent as possible. 
Finally he spoke a single word to one of the men, 
and before he had gone five steps the man was tmder 
arrest. 

As soon as Wicklow was with us again, I had those 
three men brought in. I made one of them stand 
forward, and said: 

** Now, Wicklow, mind, not a shade's divergence 
from the exact truth. Who is this man, and what de 
you know about him?" 

Being **in for it," he cast consequences aside, 
fastened his eyes on the man's face, and spoke 
straight along without hesitation — ^to the following 
effect : 

**His real name is George Bristow. He is from 
New Orleans; was second mate of the coast-packet 
Capitol two years ago; is a desperate character, and 
has served two terms for manslaughter — one for 
killing a deck-hand named Hyde with a capstan-bar, 

21 319 






MARK TWAIN 

and one for killing a roustabout for refusing to heave 
the lead, which is no part of a roustabout's business. 
He is a spy, and was sent here by the Colonel to act 
in that capacity. He was third mate of the St. 
Nicholas when she blew up in the neighborhood of 
Memphis, in '58, and came near being lynched for 
robbing the dead and wounded while they were being 
taken ashore in an empty wood-boat." 

And so forth and so on — ^he gave the man's bi- 
ography in fuU. When he had finished, I said to 
the man : 

What have you to say to this?" 
Baxring your presence, sir, it is the infemalist lie 
that ever was spoke!" 

I sent him back into confinement, and called the 
others forward in turn. Same result. The boy gave 
a detailed history of each, without ever hesitating for 
a word or a fact; but all I could get out of either 
rascal was the indignant assertion that it was all a 
Ue. They would confess nothing. I returned them 
to captivity, and brought out the rest of my prisoners, 
one by one. Wicklow told all about them — what 
towns in the South they were from, and every detail 
of their connection with the conspiracy. 

But they all denied his facts, and not one of them 
confessed a thing. The men raged, the women cried. 
According to their stories, they were all iimocent 
people from out West, and loved the Union above 
all things in this world. I locked the gang up, in 
disgust, and fell to catechizing Wicklow once more. 

"Where is No. 166, and who is B. B.?" 

But there he was determined to draw the line. 

320 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

Neither coaxing nor threats had any effect upon him. 
Time was flying — ^it was necessary to institute sharp 
measures. So I tied him up a-tiptoe by the thumbs. 
As the pain increased, it wrung screams from him 
which were almost more than I could bear. But I 
held my groimd, and pretty soon he shrieked out : 
**0h, please let me down, and I will tell!" 
"No — ^you'll tell before I let you down.'* 
Every instant was agony to him now, so out it 



came: 



No. i66, Eagle Hotel!" — ^naming a wretched 
tavern down by the water, a resort of common 
laborers, longshoremen, and less reputable folk. 

So I released him, and then demanded to know the 
object of the conspiracy. 

*'To take the fort to-night," said he, doggedly and 
sobbing. 

**Have I got all the chiefs of the conspiracy?" 

*'No. You've got all except those that are to 
meet at i66." 

*'What does 'Remember XXXX' mean?" 

No reply. 

**What is the password to No. i66?" 

No reply. 

*'What do those bunches of letters mean — 
'FFFFP'and'MMMM'? Answer I or you will catch 
it again." 

**I never will answer! I will die first. Now do 
what you please." 

* * Think what you are saying, Wicklow. Is it final ?' * 

He answered steadily, and without a quiver in his 
voice : 

321 



MARK TWAIN 

"It is final. As sure as I love my wronged country 
and hate everything this Northern sun shines on, I 
will die before I will reveal those things." 

I tied him up by the thtunbs again. When the 
agony was fuU upon him it was heartbreaking to 
hear the poor thing's shrieks, but we got nothing else 
out of him. To every question he screamed the same 
reply: '*! can die, and I will die; but I will never tell." 

Well, we had to give it up. We were convinced 
that he certainly would die rather than confess. So 
we took him down, and imprisoned him tmder strict 
guard. 

Then for some hours we busied ourselves with 
sending telegrams to the War Department, and with 
making preparations for a descent upon No. i66. 

It was stirring times, that black and bitter night. 
Things' had leaked out, and the whole garrison was 
on the alert. The sentinels were trebled, and nobody 
could move, outside or in, without being brought to 
a stand with a musket leveled at his head. However, 
Webb and I were less concerned now than we had 
previously been, because of the fact that the con- 
spiracy must necessarily be in a pretty crippled con- 
dition, since so many of its principals were in our 
clutches. 

I determined to be at No. i66 in good season, 
capture and gag B. B., and be on hand for the rest 
when they arrived. At about a quarter past one in 
the morning I crept out of the fortress with half a 
dozen stalwart and gamy U. S. regulars at my heels, 
and the boy Wicklow, with his hands tied behind 
him. I told him we were going to No, i66, and that 

323 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

if I found he had lied again and was misleading us, 
he would have to show us the right place or suffer 
the consequences. 

We approached the tavern stealthily and recon- 
noitered. A light was burning in the small bar- 
room, the rest of the house was dark. I tried the 
front door; it yielded, and we softly entered, closing 
the door behind us. Then we removed our shoes, and 
I led the way to the barroom. The German landlord 
sat there, asleep in his chair. I woke him gently, and 
told him to take off his boots and precede us, warning 
him at the same time to utter no soimd. He obeyed 
without a murmur, but evidently he was badly 
frightened. I ordered him to lead the way to i66. 
We ascended two or three flights of stairs as softly 
as a file of cats; and then, having arrived near the 
farther end of a long hall, we came to a door through 
the glazed transom of which we could discern the 
glow of a dim light from within. The landlord felt 
for me in the dark and whispered me that that was 
i66. I tried the door — ^it was locked on the inside. 
I whispered an order to one of my biggest soldiers; 
we set our ample shoulders to the door, and with one 
heave we burst it from its hinges. I caught a half- 
glimpse of a figure in a bed — saw its head dart 
toward the candle; out went the light and we were 
in pitch darkness. With one big bound I lit on that 
bed and pinned its occupant down with my knees. 
My prisoner struggled fiercely, but I got a grip on 
his throat with my left hand, and that was a good 
assistance to my knees in holding him down. Then 
straightway I snatched out my revolver, cocked it,. 

323 



MARK TWAIN 

and laid the cold barrel wamingly against his 
cheek. 

"Now somebody strike a light !" said I. "IVe got 
him safe.'* 

It was done. The flame of the match burst up. 
I looked at my captive, and, by George, it was a 
young woman ! 

I let go and got off the bed, feeling pretty sheepish. 
Everybody stared stupidly at his neighbor. Nobody 
had any wit or sense left, so sudden and overwhelm- 
ing had been the stuprise. The young woman began 
to cry, and covered her face with the sheet. The 
landlord said, meekly : 

* * My daughter, she has been doing something that 
is not right, nicht wahrf 

**Your daughter? Is she your daughter?" 

"Oh, yes, she is my daughter. She is just to-night 
come home from Cincinnati a little bit sick." 

"Confotmd it, that boy has lied again. This is 
not the right i66; this is not B. B. Now, WicMow, 
you will find the correct i66 for us, or — heUoI where 
is that boy?" 

Gone, as sure as guns! And, what is more, we 
failed to find a trace of him. Here was an awful 
predicament. I cursed my stupidity in not tying him 
to one of the men; but it was of no use to bother 
about that now. What should I do in the present 
circumstances? — ^that was the question. That girl 
might be B. B., after all. I did not believe it, but 
still it would not answer to take tmbelief for proof. 
So I finally put my men in a vacant room across the 
hall from i66, and told them to capttu-e anybody and 

324 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

everybody that approached the girl's room, and to 
keep the landlord with them, and under strict watch, 
until further orders. Then I hurried back to the 
fort to see if all was right there yet. 

Yes, all was right. And all remained right. I 
stayed up all night to make sure of that. Nothing 
happened. I was unspeakably glad to see the dawn 
come again, and be able to telegraph the Department 
that the Stars and Stripes still floated over Fort 
Trumbull. 

An immense pressure was lifted from my breast. 
Still I did not relax vigilance, of course, nor eflEort, 
either; the case was too grave for that. I had up 
my prisoners, one by one, and harried them by the 
hour, trying to get them to confess, but it was a 
failure. They only gnashed their teeth and tore 
their hair, and revealed nothing. 

About noon came tidings of my missing boy. He 
had been seen on the road, tramping westward, 
some eight miles out, at six in the morning. I 
started a cavalry lieutenant and a private on his 
track at once. They came in sight of him twenty 
miles out. He had climbed a fence and was wearily 
dragging himself across a slushy field toward a large 
old-fashioned mansion in the edge of a village. They 
rode through a bit of woods, made a detour, and 
closed upon the house from the opposite side; then 
dismounted and skurried into the kitchen. Nobody 
there. They slipped into the next room, which was 
also tmoccupied; the door from that room into the 
front or sitting room was open. They were about 
to step through it when they heard a low voice; it 

32s 



MARK TWAIN 

was somebody praying. So they halted reverently, 
and the lieutenant put his head in and saw an old 
man and an old woman kneeling in a comer of that 
sitting-room. It was the old man that was praying, 
and just as he was finishing his prayer, the Wicklow 
boy opened the front door and stepped in. Both 
of those old people sprang at him and smothered hitri 
with embraces, shouting: 

''Our boy! our darling! God be praised. The 
lost is found! He that was dead is alive again!" 

Well, sir, what do you think! That young imp 
was bom and reared on that homestead, and had 
never been five miles away from it in all his life till 
the fortnight before he loafed into my quarters and 
gulled me with that maudlin yam of his! It's as 
true as gospel. That old man was his father — a 
learned old retired clergyman ; and that old lady was 
his mother. 

Let me throw in a word or two of explanation con- 
cerning that boy and his performances. It turned 
out that he was a ravenous devourer of dime novels 
and sensation-story papers — ^therefore, dark myster- 
ies and gaudy heroisms were just in his line. Then 
he had read newspaper reports of the stealthy goings 
and comings of rebel spies in our midst, and of their 
lurid purposes and their two or three startling 
achievements, till his imagination was all aflame on 
that subject. His constant comrade for some months 
had been a Yankee youth of much tongue and lively 
fancy, who had served for a couple of years as "mud 
clerk" (that is, subordinate purser) on certain of the 
packet-boats plying between New Orleans and points 

326 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

two or three hundred miles up the Mississippi — whence 
his easy facility in handling the names and other 
details pertaining to that region. Now I had spent 
two or three months in that part of the cotmtry 
before the war; and I knew just enough about it 
to be easily taken in by that boy, whereas a bom 
Louisianian would probably have caught him trip- 
ping before he had talked fifteen minutes. Do you 
know the reason he said he would rather die than 
explain certain of his treasonable enigmas? Simply 
because he couldn't explain them! — they had no 
meaning; he had fired them out of his imagination 
without forethought or afterthought; and so, upon 
sudden call, he wasn't able to invent an explanation 
of them. For instance, he couldn't reveal what was 
hidden in the ''sympathetic ink" letter, for the 
ample reason that there wasn't anything hidden in 
it ; it was blank paper only. He hadn't put anything 
into a gun, and had never intended to — ^for his letters 
were all written to imaginary persons, and when he 
hid one in the stable he always removed the one he 
had put there the day before; so he was not ac- 
quainted with that knotted string, since he was 
seeing it for the first time when I showed it to him; 
but as soon as I had let him find out where it came 
from, he straightway adopted it, in his romantic 
fashion, and got some fine effects out of it. He in- 
vented Mr. ''Gaylord"; there wasn't any 15 Bond 
Street, just then — ^it had been pulled down three 
months before. He invented the "Colonel"; he in- 
vented the glib histories of those unf orttinates whom 
I captured and confronted him with; he invented 

327 



MARK TWAIN 

**B. B."; he even invented No. i66, one may say, 
for he didn't know there was such a ntimber in the 
Eagle Hotel until we went there. He stood ready to 
invent anybody or anything whenever it was want- 
ed. If I called for "outside" spies, he promptly de- 
scribed strangers whom he had seen at the hotel, and 
whose names he had happened to hear. Ah, he 
lived in a gorgeous, mysterious, romantic world 
during those few stirring days, and I think it was 
real to him, and that he enjoyed it clear down to the 
bottom of his heart. 

But he made trouble enough for us, and just no 
end of humiliation. You see, on accoimt of him we 
had fifteen or twenty people imder arrest and con- 
finement in the fort, with sentinels before their doors. 
A lot of the captives were soldiers and such, and to 
them I didn't have to apologize; but the rest were 
first-class citizens, from all over the coimtry, and no 
amount of apologies was sufficient to satisfy them. 
They just fumed and raged and made no end of 
trouble! And those two ladies — one was an Ohio 
Congressman's wife, the other a Western bishop's 
sjster — ^well, the scorn and ridicule and angry tears 
they poured out on me made up a keepsake that was 
likely to make me remember them for a considerable 
time — ^and I shall. That old lame gentleman with 
the goggles was a college president from Philadelphia, 
who had come up to attend his nephew's funeral. 
He had never seen yoxmg Wicklow before, of course. 
Well, he not only missed the funeral, .and got jailed 
as a rebel spy, but Wicklow had stood up there in 
my quarters and coldly described him as a counter- 

328 



A CURIOUS EXPERIENCE 

feiter, nigger-trader, horse-thief, and firebug from the 
most notorious rascal-nest in Galveston; and this 
was a thing which that poor old gentleman couldn't 
seem to get over at all. 

And the War Department ! But, oh, my soul, let's 
draw the curtain over that part ! 

Note. — I showed my manuscript to the Major, and he said: 
"Your unfamiliarity with military matters has betrayed you into 
some little mistakes. Still, they are picturesque ones — ^let them 
go; military men will smile at them, the rest won't detect them. 
You have got the main facts of the history right, and have set them 
down just about as they occurred." — ^M. T, 



MRS. McWlLLIAMS AND THE 

LIGHTNING 

WELL, sir — continued Mr. McWilliams, for this 
was not the beginning of his talk — ^the fear of 
lightning is one of the most distressing infirmities a 
human being can be afflicted with. It is mostly 
confined to women ; but now and then you find it in a 
little dog, and sometimes in a man. It is a particu- 
larly distressing infirmity, for the reason that it takes 
the sand out of a person to an extent which no other 
fear can, and it can't be reasoned with, and neither 
can it be shamed out of a person. A woman who 
could face the very devil himself — or a mouse — loses 
her grip and goes all to pieces in front of a flash of 
lightning. Her fright is something pitiful to see. 

Well, as I was telling you, I woke up, with that 
smothered and unlocatable cry of "Mortimer I 
Mortimer!*' wailing in my ears; and as soon as I 
could scrape my faculties together I reached over in 
the dark and then said: 

"Evangeline, is that you calling? What is the 
matter? Where are you?" 

"Shut up in the boot-closet. You ought to be 
ashamed to lie there and sleep so, and such an awful 
storm going on." 

"Why, how can one be ashamed when he is asleep? 

330 



MRS. McWILLIAMS 

It IS unreasonable ; a man can't be ashamed when he 
is asleep, Evangeline." 

"You never try, Mortimer — ^you know very well 
you never try." 

I caught the soimd of muffled sobs. 

That soimd smote dead the sharp speech that was 
on my lips, and I changed it to — 

' * I'm sorry, dear — I'm truly sorry. I never meant 
to act so. Come back and — " 

** Mortimer!" 

** Heavens! what is the matter, my love?" 

"Do you mean to say you are in that bed yet?" 

"Why, of course." 

"Come out of it instantly. I should think you 
would take some Utile care of your life, for my sake 
and the children's, if you will not for your own." 

"But, my love—" 

"Don't talk to me, Mortimer. You know there is 
no place so dangerous as a bed in such a thimder- 
storm as this — all the books say that ; yet there you 
wotdd lie, and deliberately throw away your life — 
for goodness knows what, unless for the sake of 
arguing, and arguing, and — " 

"But, confound it, Evangeline, I'm not in the bed 
now, I'm — " 

[Sentence interrupted by a sudden glare of light- 
ning, followed by a terrified little scream from Mrs. 
McWilliams and a tremendous blast of thunder.] 

"There! You see the result. Oh, Mortimer, how 
can you be so profligate as to swear at such a time 
as this?" 

"I didnH swear. And that wasn*t a result of it, 

331 



MARK TWAIN 

anyway. It woald faa^e mmr, jnst the saoK, H I 
hadn't said a word; and yoa koow jtcrj wcQ, Evao* 
gefioe — at least, yoa oaglxt to know — that wfaea the 

atmosphere is charged with electricity — " 

"Ob, yes; now argue it, and argue it, and avgne 
it! — ^I don't see how yoa can act so, when yoa kmcm 
there is not a lig^itning-rod on the |dace, and yoar 
poor wife and children are absohtety at the mercy of 
Providence. What are yoa doing? — Hghting a matdi 
at sach a time as this ! Are yoa stark mad?** 

^'Hang it, woman, whereas the harm? The place is 
as dark as the inside of an infidri, and — '* 

**Pcit it oat ! pat it oat instantly! Are yoa deter- 
mined to sacrifice as all? Yoa fatoor there is nothing 
attracts li^tning Eke a h^it. [Fzt! — croA! boom — 
botcom-boom^foom! ] (%, jost hear it! Now yoa 
see wiiat yoa've doneT* 

'*No, I don't see irtiat Fve done. A matdi may 
attract Kg^tning, for all I know, bot it don't owsr 
^^tning — m go odds on that. And it didn't at- 
tract It worth a cent this time; for if that shot 
leveled at my match, it was blessed poor 
sh^> — aboat an average of none oat of a pnaahie 
nriTHnn, I shoald say. Why, at DoDymoant sadi 
maTksmanship as that — " 

''For shame, Mortimer! Here we are standing 
r^^ in the very presence of dfath, and yet in ao 
scdenm a moment yoa are capable of osing sadi 
langnage as that. If yoa have no desire to— 4kforti- 






Wen?" 



MRS. McWILLIAMS 

**I — I — ^meant to, but I got to trying to cipher out 
how much twelve times thirteen is, and — " 

[Fzi! — hoom-herroom-hooml humble -umhle hang- 

SMASH !] 

* * Oh, we are lost, beyond all help ! How could you 
neglect such a thing at such a time as this?" 

**But it wasn't *such a time as this.* There 
wasn't a cloud in the sky. How could I know there 
was going to be all this rumpus and pow-wow about 
a little slip like that? And I don't think it's just 
fair for you to make so much out of it, anyway, seeing 
it happens so seldom; I haven't missed before since 
I brought on that earthquake, four years ago." 

* * Mortimer ! How you talk ! Have you forgotten 
the yellow-fever?" 

' * My dear, you are always throwing up the yellow- 
fever to me, and I think it is perfectly unreasonable. 
You can't even send a telegraphic message as far as 
Memphis without relays, so how is a little devotional 
slip of mine going to carry so far? I'll stand the 
earthquake, because it was in the neighborhood ; but 
m be hanged if I'm going to be responsible for every 
blamed — " 

[Fztl — BOOM heroom-hooml boom. — ^BANG!] 

* * Oh, dear, dear, dear ! I know it struck something, 
Mortimer. We never shall see the light of another 
day; and if it will do you any good to remember, 
when we are gone, that your dreadful language — 
Mortimer r* 

'*Well! What now?" 

*'Your voice soimds as if — Mortimer, are you 
actually standing in front of that open fireplace?" 

333 






MARK TWAIN 

"That is the very crime I am committing.'' 

"Get away from it this moment! Ycu do seem 
determined to bring destruction on us all. Don't 
you know that there is no better conductor for light- 
ning than an open chimney? Now where have you 
got to?" 

"I'm here by the window." 

"Oh, for pity's sake! have you lost your mind? 
Clear out from there, this moment! The very chil- 
dren in arms know it is fatal to stand near a window 
in a thunder-storm. Dear, dear, I know I shall 
never see the light of another day! Mortimer I" 
Yes." 
What is that rustling?" 

"It's me." 

"What are you doing?" 

"Trying to find the upper end of my pantaloons.** 

"Quick! throw those things away! I do believe 
you would deliberately put on those clothes at such 
a time as this; yet you know perfectly well that aU 
authorities agree that woolen stuffs attract lightning. 
Oh, dear, dear, it isn't suflBcient that one's life must 
be in peril from natural causes, but you must do 
everything you can possibly think of to augment the 
danger. Oh, donH sing! What can you be think- 
ing of?" 

"Now Where's the harm in it?" 

"Mortimer, if I have told you once, I have told 
you a hundred times, that singing causes vibrations 
in the atmosphere which interrupt the flow of the 
electric fluid, and — What on earth are you opening 
that door for?" 

334 



MRS. McWILLIAMS 

** Goodness gracious, woman, is there any harm 
in that?'' 

''Harm? There's death in it. Anybody that has 
given this subject any attention knows that to create 
a draught is to invite the lightning. You haven't 
half shut it ; shut it tight — ^and do hurry, or we are all 
destroyed. Oh, it is an awful thmg to be shut up 
with a Itmatic at such a time as this. Mortimer, 
what are you doing?" 

* * Nothing. Just turning on the water. This room 
is smothering hot and close. I want to bathe my 
face and hands." 

**You have certainly parted with the remnant of 
your mind! Where lightning strikes any other sub- 
stance once, it strikes water fifty times. Do turn 
it off. Oh, dear, I am sure that nothing in this 
world can save us. It does seem to me that — 
Mortimer, what was that?" 

**It was a da — ^it was a picture. Knocked it 
down." 

**Then you are close to the wall! I never heard 
of such imprudence! Don't you know that there's 
no better conductor for lightning than a wall ? Come 
away from there ! And you came as near as anjrthing 
to swearing, too. Oh, how can you be so desper- 
ately wicked, and your family in such peril? Mor- 
timer, did you order a feather bed, as I asked you 
to do?" 

''No. Forgot it." 

** Forgot it! It may cost you your life. If you 
had a feather bed now, and could spread it in the 
middle of the room and lie on it, you would be per- 

22 335 



MARK TWAIN 



fscUy safe. Come in hue oome lyork, htton you 
have a chaiMy to cnminit saniy moce f rani it 



I tried, bsit the little doeet woold not bold m 
both with the door dmt, unless we ooold be oonteot 
to smother. I gasped awhile, then foroed ngr waj 
out. My wife called out: 

"Mortimer, something must be done for your 
p re se t va tion. Give me that Gennan book that is 
on the end of the mant^iiece. and a candle; but 
don't liglit it ; give me a match ; I will 1^^ it in here^ 
That book has some directions in it." 

I got the book — at cost of a vase and some other 
brittle things; and the madam shut hersdf iq> with 
her candle. I had a moment's peace; then she 
called out: 

'Mortimer, idiat was that?^ 
'Nothing bet the cat." 

The cat! Oh, destntfrtaon! Catdi faer, and simt 
hertipinthewashstand. Do be quick, love; cats aie 
fmU oi dectririiy. I just know nqr hair will torn 
wiute with this ni^t's awftd perils." 

I heard the muiSed sobbii^ again. Botfortfaat, 
I diould laot have moved hand or foot in such a 
wild enterprise in the dark. 

However, I went at my task — over chairs, and 
against all sorts of obstructions, all of them hard 
ones, too, and most of them with sharp edges — and 
at last I got IdttT cooped up in the commode, at an 
eaqiense of over four hundred dollars in broken fumi- 
tu|e and shins. Then these muflkd words came fram 
the doset: 






MRS. McWILLIAMS 

"It says the safest thing is to stand on a chair 
in the middle of the room, Mortimer; and the legs 
of the chair must be insulated with non-conductors. 
That is, you must set the legs of the chair in glass 
tumblers. [Fzt! — boom — bangi — smashl] Oh, hear 
that! Do hurry, Mortimer, before you are struck." 

I managed to find and secure the ttmiblers. I got 
the last four — ^broke all the rest. I insulated the 
chair legs, and called for further instructions. 

"Mortimer, it says, 'Wahrend eines Gewitters 
entfeme man Metalle, wie z. B., Ringe, Uhren, 
Schlussel, etc., von sidi tmd halte sich auch nicht 
an solchen Stellen auf , wo viele Metalle bei einander 
liegen, oder mit andem K6rpem verbimden sind, wie 
an Herden, Oefen, Eisengittem u. dgl.* What does 
that mean, Mortimer? Does it mean that you 
must keep metals about you, or keep them away 
from you?" 

"Well, I hardly know. It appears to be a little 
mixed. All German advice is more or less mixed. 
However, I think that that sentence is mostly in the 
dative case, with a little genitive and accusative 
sifted in, here and there, for luck; so I reckon it 
means that you must keep some metals about you." 

"Yes, that must be it. It stands to reason that 
it is. They are in the nature of lightning-rods, you 
know. Put on your fireman's helmet, Mortimer; 
that is mostly metal." 

I got it, and put it on — a very heavy and cltimsy 
and imcomfortable thing on a hot night in a close 
room. Even my night-dress seemed to be more 
clothing than I strictly needed. 

337 



MARK TWAIN 

^'Mortimer, I think your middle ought to be pro^ 
tected. Won't you buckle on your militia saber, 
please?" 

I complied. 

''Now, Mortimer, you ought to have some way to 
protect your feet. Do please put on your spurs." 

I did it — ^in silence — and kept my temper as weill 
as I could. 

"Mortimer, it says, 'Das Gewitter l&uten ist sehr 
gefahrlich, weil die Glocke selbst, sowie der durch 
das L3,uten veranlasste Luftzug tmd die H6he des 
Thurmes den Blitz anziehen kdnnten.' Mortimer, 
does that mean that it is dangerous not to ring the 
church bells during a thimder-storm?" 

"Yes, it seems to mean that — ^if that is the past 
participle of the nominative case singular, and I 
reckon it is. Yes, I think it means that on account 
of the height of the church tower and the absence of 
Luftzug it would be very dangerous {sehr gefdhrlidi^ 
not to ring the bells in time of a storm ; and, moreover^ 
don't you see, the very wording — " 

"Never mind that, Mortimer; don't waste the 
precious time in talk. Get the large dinner-bell; it 
it right there in the hall. Quick, Mortimer, dear; 
we are almost safe. Oh, dear, I do believe we are 
going to be saved, at last!" 

Our little sunmier establishment stands on top 
of a high range of hills, overlooking a valley. Several 
farm-houses are in our neighborhood — ^the nearest 
some three or four hundred yards away. 

When I, mounted on the chair, had been clanging 
that dreadful bell a matter of seven or eight minutes, 

338 



MRS. McWILLIAMS 

our shutters were suddenly torn open from without, 
and a brilliant bull's-eye lantern was thrust in at the 
window, followed by a hoarse inquiry: 

"What in the nation is the matter here?" 

The window was full of men's heads, and the heads 
were full of eyes that stared wildly at my night-dress 
and my warlike accoutrements. 

I dropped the bell, skipped down from the chair 
in confusion, and said: 

** There is nothing the matter, friends — only a 
little discomfort on accoimt of the thimder-storm. I 
was trying to keep off the lightning." 

"Thunder-storm? Lightning? Why, Mr. Mc- 
Williams, have you lost your mind ? It is a beautiful 
starlight night; there has been no storm." 

I looked out, and I was so astonished I could 
hardly speak for a while. Then I said: 

"I do not tmderstand this. We distinctly saw the 
glow of the flashes through the curtains and shutters, 
and heard the thunder." 

One after another of those people lay down on the 
ground to laugh — and two of them died. One of the 
survivors remarked: 

"Pity you didn't think to open your blinds and 
look over to the top of the high hill yonder. What 
you heard was cannon; what you saw was the flash. 
You see, the telegraph brought some news, just at 
midnight; Garfield's nominated — ^and that's what's 
the matter!" 

Yes, Mr. Twain, as I was saying in the beginning 
(said Mr. McWilliams), the rules for preserving 
people against lightning are so excellent and so 

339 



MARK TWAIN 

innumerable that the most incomprehensible thing 
in the world to me is how anybody ever manages to 
get struck. 

So saying, he gathered up his satchel and umbreUa, 
and departed; for the train had reached his town. 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS» 

DRAMATIS PERSONiE 

Mr. Stephenson Margaret Stephenson 

George Franklin Annie Stephenson 

William Jackson Mrs. Blumenthal, the Wirthin. 

Gretchen, Kellnerin 

ACT I 
scene I 

Scene of the play, the parlor of a small private dwelling in 
a village. 

(Margaret discovered crocheting — ^has a pamphlet.) 

MARGARET. (Solus.) Dear, dear! it's dreary 
I enough, to have to study this impossible 
German tongue: to be exiled from home and all 
human society except a body's sister in order to do 
it is just simply abscheulich. Here's only three 

(^Explanatory. I regard the idea of this play as a valuable 
invention. I call it the Patent Universally-Applicable Auto- 
matically-Adjustable Language Drama. This indicates that it is 
adjustable to any tongue, and performable in any tongue. The 
English portions of the play are to remain just as they are, perma- 
nently; but you change the foreign portions to any language you 
please, at will. Do you see? You at once have the same old play 
in a new tongue. And you can keep on changing it from language 
to language, until your private-theatrical pupils have become glib 
and at home in the speech of all nations. Zum Beispid, suppose wa 

341 



MARK TWAIN 

weeks of the three months gone and it seems like three 
years. I don't believe I can live through it, and I'm 
sure Annie can't. {Refers to her hook, and rattles 
through, several times, like one memorizing:) Ent- 
schuldigen Sie, mein Herr, k6nnen Sie mir vielleicht 
sagen, um wie viel Uhr der erste Zug nach Dresden 
abgeht ? {Makes mistakes and corrects them,) I jtist 
hate Meisterschaf t ! We may see people; we can 
have society; yes, on condition that the conversation 
shall be in German, and in German only — every 



wish to adjust the play to the French tongue. First, we give Mrs. 
Blumenthal and Gretchen French names. Next, we knock the 
German Meisterschaft sentences out of the first scene, and replace 
them with sentences from the French Meisterschaft — ^like this, for 
instance: "Je voudrais faire des emplettes ce matin; voulez-vous 
avoir Tobligeance de venir avec moi chez le tailleur fran^ais?" And 
so on. Wherever you find German, replace it with French, leaving 
the English parts tmdisturbed. When you come to the long con- 
versation in the second act, turn to any pamphlet of your French 
Meisterschaft, and shovel in as much French talk on any subject 
as will fill up the gaps left by the expunged German. Example — 
page 423, French Meisterschaft: 

On dirait qu'il va faire chaud. 

J'ai chaud. 

J'ai extrfimement chaud. 

Ah! qu'il fait chaud! 

n fait tme chaleur dtoufiEante! 

L'air est briilant. 

Je meurs de chaleur. 

II est presque impossible de supporter la chaleur. 

Cela vous fait transpirer. 

Mettons nous k Tombre. 

II fait du vent. 

II fait tm vent froid. 

II fait un temps tr^-agr6able pour se promener aujourd'huL 

And so on, all the way through. It is very easy to adjust the 
play to any desired language. Anybody can do it.] 

34a 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

single word of it! Very kind — oh, very! when 
neither Annie nor I can put two words together, ex- 
cept as they are put together for us in Meisterschaf t 
or that idiotic Ollendorfif! {Refers to hook, and 
memorizes: Mein Bruder hat Ihren Herrn Voter nicht 
gesehen, als er gestern in dem Laden des deutschen 
Kaufmannes war.) Yes, we can have society, pro- 
vided we talk German. What would such a con- 
versation be like! If you should stick to Meister- 
schaft, it would change the subject every two min- 
utes; and if you stuck to Ollendorfif, it would be all 
about your sister's mother's good stocking of thread, 
or your grandfather's aunt's good hammer of the 
carpenter, and who's got it, and there an end. You 
couldn't keep up your interest in such topics. {Mem- 
orizing: Wenn irgend moglich — mochte ich noch heute 
Vormittag dort ankommen, da es mir sehr daran gelegen 
ist, einen meiner Geschdftsfreunde zu treffen.) My 
mind is made up to one thing: I will be an exile, in 
spirit and in truth; I will see no one during these 
three months. Father is very ingenious — oh, very! 
thinks he is, anyway. Thinks he has invented a way 
to force us to learn to speak German. He is a dear 
good soul, and all that; but invention isn't his fash'. 
He will see. {With eloquent energy,) Why, nothing 
in the world shall — ^Bitte, konnen Sie mir vielleicht 
sagen, ob Herr Schmidt mit diesem Zuge ange- 
kommen ist? Oh, dear, dear George — three weeks! 
It seems a whole century since I saw him. I wonder 
if he suspects that I — that I — care for him — ^j-just a 
wee, wee bit ? I believe he does. And I believe Will 
suspects that Annie cares for him a little, that I do, 

343 



MARK TWAIN 

And I know perfectly well that they care for us. 
They agree with all our opinions, no matter what 
they are; and if they have a prejudice, they change 
it, as soon as they see how foolish it is. Dear George ! 
at first he ust couldn't abide cats; but now, why, now 
he's just all for cats ; he fairly welters in cats. I never 
saw such a reform. And it's just so with all his 
principles: he hasn't got one that he had before. 
Ah, if all men were like him, this world would — 
(Memorizing. Im Gegentheil, mein Herr, dieser Stoff 
ist sehr billig. Bitte, sehen Sie sich nur die Qualitfit 
an.) Yes, and what did they go to studying German 
for, if it wasn't an inspiration of the highest and 
purest sympathy ? Any other explanation is nonsense 
— ^why, they'd as soon have thought of studying 
American history. (Turns her back^ buries herself in 
her pamphlety first memorizing aloud, until Annie 
enters, then to herself, rocking to and fro, and rapidly 
moving her lips, without uttering a sound.) 

(Enter Annie, absorbed in her pamphlet — does not at first see 
Margaret.) 

Annie. (Memorizing.) Er liess mich gestem frOh 
ruf en, und sagte mir dass er einen sehr unangenehmen 
Brief von Ihrem Lehrer erhalten hatte. Repeats twice 
aloud, then to herself, briskly moving her lips. 

M. (Still not seeing her sister.) Wie geht es Ihrem 
Herm Schwiegervater? Es freut mich sehr dass 
Ihre Frau Mutter wieder wohl ist. (Repeats. Then 
mouths in silence.) 

A. (Repeats her sentence a couple of times aloud; 
then looks up, working her lips, and discovers Mar- 

344 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

garet.) Oh, you here? {Running to her.) Oh, 
lovey-dovey, dovey-lovey, I've got the gr-reatest 
news ! Guess, guess, guess ! You'll never guess in a 
htmdred thousand million years — ^and more! 

M. Oh, tell me, tell me, dearie; don't keep me in 
agony. 

A. Well, I will. What — do — ^you think? They're 
here! 

M. Wh-a-t! Who? When? Which? Speak! 

A. Will and George I 

M. Annie Alexandra Victoria Stephenson, what 
do you mean ? 

A. As sure as guns ! 

M. (Spasmodically unarming and kissing her.) 
'Sh! don't use such language. Oh, darling, say it 
again! 

A. As sure as guns! 

M. I don't mean that ! Tell me again, that — 

A. {Springing up and waltzing about the room.) 
They're here — in this very village — ^to learn German 
— ^f or three months ! Es sollte mich sehr f reuen wenn 
Sie — 

M. {Joining in the dance.) Oh, it's just too lovely 
for anything! {Unconsciously memorizing:) Es ware 
mir lieb wenn Sie morgen mit mir in die Kirche gehen 
konnten, aber ich kann selbst nicht gehen, weil ich 
Sonntags gewohnlich krank bin. Juckhe! 

A. {Finishing some unconscious memorizing.) — 
morgen Mittag bei mir speisen kdnnten. Juckhe! 
Sit down and I'll tell you all I've heard. {They sit.) 
They're here, and imder that same odious law that 
fetters us — our tongues, I mean; the metaphor's 

345 



MARK TWAIN 

faulty, but no matter. They can go out, and see 
people, only on condition that they hear and speak 
German, and German only. 

M. Isn't — ^that — ^too lovely! 

A. And they're coming to see us! 

M. Darling! {Kissing her.) But are you sure? 

A. Sure as guns — Gatling guns! 

M. 'Sh! don't, child, it's schrecklich! Darling — 
you aren't mistaken? 

A. As sure as g — ^batteries! 

(They jump up and dance a moment — ^then — ) 

M. {With distress.) But, Annie dear! — we can't 
talk German — ^and neither can they ! 

A. {Sorrowfully.) I didn't think of that. 

M. How cruel it is! What can we do? 

A. {After a reflective pause, resolutely.) Margaret 
— we've got to. 

M. Got to what ? 

A. Speak German. 

M. Why, how, child? 

A. {Contemplating her pamphlet with earnestness.) 
I can tell you one thing. Just give me the blessed 
privilege: just hinsetzen Will Jackson here in front 
of me, and I'll talk German to him as long as this 
Meisterschaf t holds out to bum, 

M. {Joyously.) Oh, what an elegant idea! You 
certainly have got a mind that's a mine of resources, 
if ever anybody had one. 

A. I'll skin this Meisterschaft to the last sentence 
in it! 

M. {With a happy idea.) Why, Annie, it's the 

346 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

greatest thing in the world. I've been all this time 
struggling and despairing over these few Httle 
Meisterschaft primers; but as sure as you live, 1*11 
have the whole fifteen by heart before this time day 
after to-morrow. See if I don't. 

A. And so will I; and I'll trowel in a layer of 
Ollendorff mush between every couple of courses of 
Meisterschaft bricks. Juckhe ! 

M. Hoch ! hoch ! hoch ! 

A. Stoss an! 

M. Juckhe! Wir werden gleich gute deutsche 
Schulerinnen werden! Juck — 

A. —he! 

M. Annie, when are they coming to see us? 
To-night? 

A. No. 

M. No? Why not? When are they coming? 
What are they waiting for? The idea! I never 
heard of such a thing! What do you — 

A. {Breaking in.) Wait, wait, wait! give a body 
a chance. They have their reasons. 

M. Reasons? What reasons? 

A. Well, now, when you stop and think, they're 
royal good ones. They've got to talk German when 
they come, haven't they? Of course. Well, they 
don't know any German but Wie befinden Sie sich, 
and Haben Sie gut geschlafen, and unser Vater, and 
Ich trinke lieber Bier als Wasser, and a few little 
parlor things like that ; but when it comes to talking, 
why, they don't know a htmdred and fifty German 
words, put them all together. 

M, Oh, I see. 

347 



MARK TWAIN 

A. So they're going neither to eat, sleep, smoke, 
nor speak the truth till they've crammed home the 
whole fifteen Meisterschafts auswendig! 

M. Noble hearts! 

A. They're given themselves till day after to- 
morrow, half -past 7 p.m., and then they'll arrive here 
loaded. 

M. Oh, how lovely, how gorgeous, how beautiful! 
Some think this world is made of mud; I think it's 
made of rainbows. (Memorizing.) Wenn irgend 
moglich, so mochte ich noch heute Vormittag dort 
ankommen, da es mir sehr daran gelegen ist — 
Annie, I can learn it just like nothing! 

A. So can I. Meisterschaft's mere fim — ^I don't 
see how it ever could have seemed difficult. Come! 
We can't be disturbed here; let's give orders that we 
don't want anything to eat for two days; and are 
absent to friends, dead to strangers, and not at home 
even to nougat peddlers — 

M. Schon! and we'll lock ourselves into our rooms, 
and at the end of two days, whosoever may ask us 
a Meisterschaft question shall get a Meisterscfaaft 
answer — ^and hot from the bat ! 

Both. (Reciting in unison.) Ich habe einen Hut 
fur meinen Sohn, ein Paar Handschuhe fur meinen 
Bruder, und einen Kamm fur mich selbst gekauft. 

(Exeunt.) 
(Enter Mrs. Blumenthal, the Wirthin.) 

WiRTHiN. (Solus.) Ach, die armen Madchen, sie 
hassen die deutsche Sprache, drum ist es ganz und 
gar unmoglich dass sie sie je lemen konnen. Es 

348 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

bricht mir ja mein Herz ihre Kiimmer uber die 
Studien anzusehen. . . . Warum haben sie den 
Entschluss gef asst in ihren Zimmem ein Paar Tage 
zu bleiben? . . . Ja — ^gewiss — das versteht sich; sie 
sind entmuthigt — arme Kinder! 
{A knock at the door,) Herein! 

(Enter Gretchen with card.) 

Gr. Er ist schon wieder da, und sagt dass er nur 
Sie sehen will. {Hands the card.) Auch — 

WiRTHiN. Gott im Himmel — der Vater der Mad- 
chen! {Puts the card in her pocket,) Er wunscht die 
Tochter nicht zu treffen? Ganz recht; also, Du 
schweigst. 

Gr. Zu Befehl. 

WiRTHiN. Lass ihn hereinkommen. 

Gr. Ja, Frau Wirthin ! 

(Exit Gretchen.) 

Wirthin. {Solus.) Ah — ^jetzt muss ich ihm die 
Wahrheit offenbaren. 

(Enter Mr. Stephenson.) 

Stephenson. Good morning, Mrs. Blumenthal — 
keep your seat, keep your seat, please. I'm only 
here for a moment — ^merely to get your report, you 
know. {Seating himself,) Don't want to see the 
girls — ^poor things, they'd want to go home with me. 
I'm afraid I couldn't have the heart to say no. 
How's the German getting along? 

Wirthin. N-not very weU ; I was afraid you wotdd 
ask me that. You see, they hate it, they don't take 
the least interest in it, and there isn't anything to 

349 



MARK TWAIN 

incite them to an interest, you see. And so they 
can't talk at all. 

S. M-m. That's bad. I had an idea that they'd 
get lonesome, and have to seek society ; and then, of 
course, my plan would work, considering the cast- 
iron conditions of it. 

WiRTHiN. But it hasn't so far. IVe thrown nice 
company in their way — I've done my very best, in 
every way I could think of — ^but it's no use; they 
won't go out, and they won't receive anybody. And 
a body can't blame them; they'd be tongue-tied — 
couldn't do anything with a German conversation. 
Now, when I started to learn German — such poor 
German as I know — the case was very different; my 
intended was a German. I was to live among Ger- 
mans the rest of my life; and so I had to learn. 
Why, bless my heart! I nearly lost the man the 
first time he asked me — I thought he was talking 
about the measles. They were very prevalent at the 
time. Told him I didn't want any in mine. But I 
found out the mistake, and I was fixed for him next 
time. . . . Oh, yes, Mr. Stephenson, a sweetheart's 
a prime incentive! 

S. (Aside.) Good soul! she doesn't suspect that 
my plan is a double scheme — ^includes a speaking 
knowledge of German, which I am bound they shall 
have, and the keeping them away from those two 
young fellows — though if I had known that those 
boys were going off for a year's foreign travel, I — 
however, the girls would never learn that language at 
home; they're here, and I won't relent — ^they've got 
to stick the three months out. (Alotid,) So they 

3 so 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

are making poor progress ? Now tell me — will they 
learn it — ^after a sort of fashion, I mean — ^in three 
months ? 

WiRTHiN. Well, now, I'll tell you the only chance 
I see. Do what I will, they won't answer my Ger- 
man with anything but English; if that goes on, 
they'll stand stock still. Now I'm willing to do 
this : I'll straighten everything up, get matters 
in smooth running order, and day after to-mor- 
row I'll got to bed sick, and stay sick three 
weeks. 

S. Good! You are an angel ! I see your idea. The 
servant girl — 

WiRTHiN. That's it; that's my project. She 
doesn't know a word of English. And Gretchen's a 
real good soul, and can talk the slates off a roof. 
Her tongue's just a flutter-mill. I'll keep my room 
— ^just ailing a little — ^and they'll never see my face 
except when they pay their little duty-visits to me, 
and then I'll say English disorders my mind. They'll 
be shut up with Gretchen's windmill, and she'll just 
grind them to powder. Oh, they'll get a start in the 
language — sort of a one, sure's you live. You come 
back in three weeks. 

S. Bless you, my Retterin ! I'll be here to the day ! 

Get ye to your sick-room — you shall have treble pay, 

{Looking at watch.) Good ! I can just catch my train. 

Leben Sie wohl ! 

(Exit.) 

WiRTHiN. Leben Sie wohl! mein Herri 
«3 3SI 



MARK TWAIN 

ACT II 

SCENE I 

Time, a oouple of days later. The girls discovered with their 
work and primers. 

Annie. Was felt der Wirthin? 

Margaret. Das weiss ich nicht. Sie ist schon vor 
zwei Tagen ins Bett gegangen — 

A. My! how fliessend you speak! 

M. Danke schon — ^und sagte dass sie nicht wohl 
sd. 

A. Good? Oh, no, I don't mean that! no — only 
lucky for us — glucklich, you know I mean because 
it *11 be so much nicer to have them all to ourselves. 

M. Oh, naturlich! Ja! Dass ziehe ich durchaus 
vor. Do you believe your Meisterschaft will stay 
with you, Annie? 

A. Well, I know it is with me — every last sentence 
of it; and a couple of hods of Ollendorff, too, for 
emergencies. Maybe they'll refuse to deliver — right 
off — ^at first, you know — der Verlegenheit wegen — 
aber ich wiU sie spater herausholen — ^when I get my 
hand in — ^und vergisst Du das nicht ! 

M. Sei nicht grob, Liebste. What shall we talk 
about first — ^when they come? 

A Well — ^let me see. There's shopping — and — 
all that about the trains, you know — and going to 
church — ^and — ^buying tickets to London, and Berlin, 
and all aroimd — and all that subjunctive stuff about 
the battle in Afghanistan, and where the American 
was said to be bom, and so on — and — ^and ah — oh, 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

there's so many things — ^I don't think a body can 
choose beforehand, because you know the circum- 
stances and the atmosphere always have so much to 
do in directing a conversation, especially a German 
conversation, which is only a kind of an insurrection, 
anjrway. I believe it's best to just depend on 
Prov — {Glancing at watch and gc^ping.) — half 
past — seven ! 

M. Oh, dear, I'm all of a tremble ! Let*s get some- 
thing ready, Annie ! 

{Both fall nervously to reciting) : Entschuldigen Sie, 

mein Herr, konnen Sie mir vielleicht sagen wie ich 

nach dem norddeutschen Bahnhof gehe? {They 

repeat it several times^ losing their grip and mixing ii 

all up.) 

(A kaock.) 

Both. Herein! Oh, dear! der heilige — 
(Enter Gretchen.) 

• 

Gretchen. {Ruffled and indignant.) Entschuldigen 
Sie, meine gnadigsten Fraulein, es sind zwei junge 
rasende Herren draussen, die herein wollen, aber ich 
habe ihnen geschworen dass — {Handing the cards.) 

M. Du Hebe Zeit, they're here! And of course 
down goes my back hair! Stay and receive them, 
dear, while I — {Leaving.) 

A. I — ^alone? I won't! I'll go with you! {To 
Gr.) Lassen Sie die Herren naher treten; imd sagen 
Sie ihnen dass wir gleich zuruckkommen werden> 
{Exit,) 

Gr. (Solus.) Was! Sie freuen sich daruber? Und 
ich soUte wirklich diese Blodsinnigen, dies grobe 



MARK TWAIN 

Rindvieh hereinlassen ? In den hfilflosen UmstSnden 
meiner gn&digen jungen Damen? — ^Unsinn! (Pause — 
thinking.) Wohlan! Ich werde sie mal beschutzen! 
Sollte man nicht glauben, dass sie einen Sparren zu 
viel hatten? {Tapping her skull significantly,) Was 
sie mir doch Alles gesagt haben! Der Eine: "Guten 
Morgen! wie geht es Hirem Herm Schwiegervater?'* 
Du Hebe Zeit! Wie sollte ich einen Schwiegervater 
haben konnen! Und der Andere: "Es thut mir sehr 
leid dass Hirer Herr Vater meinen Bruder nicht 
gesehen hat, als er doch gestem in dem Laden des 
deutschen Kaufmannes war!" Potztausendhimmels- 
donnerwetter ! Oh, ich war ganz rasend! Wie ich 
aber rief : "Meine Herren, ich kenne Sie nicht, und 
Sie kennen meinen Vater nicht, wissen Sie, denn er 
ist schon lange durchgebrannt, imd geht nicht beim 
Tage in einen Laden hinein, wissen Sie — ^und ich 
habe keinen Schwiegervater, Gott sei Dank, werde 
auch nie einen kriegen, werde ueberhaupt, wissen 
Sie, ein solches Ding nie haben, nie dulden, nie 
ausstehen: warum greifen Sie ein M&dchen an, das 
niir Unschidd kennt, das Hmen nie Etwas zu Leide 
gethan hat ?" Dann haben sie sich beide die Finger 
in die Ohren gesteckt und gebetet: "Allmachtigcr 
Gott! Erbarme Dich tmser!" (Pause.) Nun, ich 
werde schon diesen Schurken Einlass gdnnen, aber 
ich werde ein Auge mit ihnen haben, damit sie sich 
nicht wie reine Teufel geberden sollen. 
(Exit, grumbling and shaking her head.) 

(Enter William and George.) 

W. My land, what a girl! and what an incredible 

3S4 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

gift of gabble! — ^kind of patent climate-proof, com- 
pensation - balance, self - acting, automatic Meister- 
schaft — ^touch her button, and br-r-r! away she goes! 

Geo. Never heard anything like it; tongue jour- 
naled on ball-bearings! I wonder what she said; 
seemed to be swearing, mainly. 

W. {After mumbling Meisterschaft awhile.) Look 
here, George, this is awful — come to think — ^this 
project : we can't talk this frantic language. 

Geo. I know it. Will, and it is awful ; but I can't 
live without seeing Margaret — I've endured it as 
long as I can. I should die if I tried to hold out 
longer — ^and even German is preferable to death. 

W. {Hesitatingly.) Well, I don't know; it's a 
matter of opinion. 

Geo. {Irritably.) It isn't a matter of opinion, 
either. German is preferable to death. 

W. {Reflectively.) Well, I don't know — ^the prob- 
lem is so sudden — ^but I think you may be right: 
some kinds of death. It is more than likely that a 
slow, lingering — ^well, now, there in Canada in the 
early times a couple of centuries ago, the Indians 
woidd take a missionary and skin him, and get some 
hot ashes and boiling water and one thing and 
another, and by and by that missionary— well, yes, 
I can see that, by and by, talking German could be 
a pleasant thing for him. 

Geo. Why, of course. Das versteht sich ; but you 
have to always think a thing out, or you're not satis- 
Bed. But let's not go to bothering about thinking 
out this present business; we're here, we're in for it; 
you are as moribund to see Annie as I am to see 

«5 



MARK TWAIN 

Margaret; you known the terms: we've got to 
speak German. Now stop your mooning and get 
at your Meisterschaf t ; we've got nothing else in 
the world. 

W. Do you think that 'U see us through?" 

Geo. Why, it's got to. Suppose we wandered out 
of it and took a chance at the language on our own 
responsibility, where the nation would we be? Up a 
stump, that's where. Our only safety is in sticking 
like wax to the text. 

W. But what can we talk about? 

Geo. Why, anything that Meisterschaft talks 
about. It ain't our affair. 

W. I know; but Meisterschaft talks about every- 
thing. 

Geo. And yet don't talk about anything long 
enough for it to get embarrassing. Meisterschaft is 
just splendid for general conversation. 

W. Yes, that's so; but it's so blamed general! 
Won't it sound foolish? 

Geo. Foolish? Why, of course; all Gennan sounds 
foolish. 

W. Well, that is true; I didn't think of that, 

Geo. Now, don't fool arotmd any more. Load up; 
load up; get ready. Fix up some sentences; youll 
need them in two minutes now. 

{They walk up and down, moving their lips in dumh^ 
show memorizing,) 

W. Look here — ^when we've said all that's in the 
book on a topic, and want to change the subject, 
how can we say so? — ^how would a German say it? 

Geo. Well, I don't know. But you know when 

3S6 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

they mean ''Change cars" they say Untsteigen. 
Don't you reckon that will answer? 

W. Tip-top! It's short and goes xigjit to the 
point: and it's got a business whang to it that's 
almost American. Umsteigen! — change subject! — 
why, it's the very thing. 

Geo. All right, then, you umsteigen — for I hear 
them coming. 

(Enter the girls.j 

A. to W. {With solemnity,) Guten Morgen, mein 
Herr, es freut mich sehr, Sie zu sehen. 

W. Guten Morgen, mein Fraulein, es freut mich 
sehr, Sie zu sehen. 

{Margaret and George repeat the same sentences. 
Then, after an embarrassing silence^ Margaret refers to 
her book and says): 

M. Bitte, meine Herm, setzen Sie sich. 

The Gentlemen. Danke schon. {The four seat 
themselves in couples, the width of the stage apart, and 
the two conversations begin. The talk is not flowing — 
at any rate at first; there are painful silences all along. 
Each couple worry out a remark and a reply: there is 
a pause of silent thinking, and then the other couple 
deliver themselves,) 

W. Haben Sie meinen Vater in dem Laden meines 
Bruders nicht gesehen? 

A. Nein, mein Herr, ich habe Ihren Herm Vater 
in dem Laden Ihres Herm Bruders nicht gese- 
hen. 

Geo. Waren Sie gestem Abend im Koncert, oder 
im Theater? 



MARK TWAIN 

M. Nein, ich war gestem Abend nicht im Koncert, 
noch im Theater, ich war gestem Abend zu Hause. 

(General break-down — ^long pause.) 

W. Ich st6re doch nicht etwa? 

A. Sie st6ren mich durchaus nicht. 

Geo. Bitte, lassen Sie sich nicht von mir storen. 

M. Aber ich bitte Sie, Sie stdren mich durchaus 
nicht. 

W. {To both girls.) Wenn wir Sie st6ren so gehen 
wir gleich wieder. 

A. O, nein! Gewiss, nein! 

M. Im Gegentheil, es freut ims sehr, Sie zu sehen 
— alle beide. 

W. Schon! 

Geo. Gott sei dank! 

M. {Aside,) It's just lovely! 

A. {Aside.) It's like a poem. 

(Pause.) 

W. tJmsteigen! 

M. Um — ^welches? 

W. Umsteigen. 

Geo. Auf English, change cars — oder subject. 

Both Girls. Wie schon! 

W. Wir haben ims die Freiheit genommen, bei 
Ihnen vorzusprechen. 

A. Sie sind sehr gutig. 

Geo. Wir wollten ims erkundigen, wie Sie sich 
befanden. 

M. Ich bin Ihnen sehr verbimden — ^meine Schwes- 
ter auch. 

W. Meine Frau lasst sich Ihnen bestens empf ehlen. 

3S8 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

A. Ihxe Frau? 

W. {Examining his book.) Vielleicht habe ich mich 
geirrt. (Shows the place.) Nein, gerade so sagt das 
Buch. 

A. (Satisfied.) Ganz recht. Aber — 

W. Bitte, empfehlen Sie mich Ihrem Herm Bruder. 

A. Ah, das ist viel besser — ^viel besser. (Aside.) 
Wenigstens es ware viel besser wenn ich einen Bruder 
hatte. 

Geo. Wie ist es Ihnen gegangen, seitdem ich das 
Vergnugen hatte, Sie anderswo zu sehen? 

M. Danke bestens, ich befiiide mich gewohnUch 
ziemlich wohl. 

(Gretchen slips in with a gun, and listens.) 

Geo. (Still to Margaret.) Befindet sich Ihre Frau 
Gemahlia wohl ? 

Gr. (Raising hands and eyes.) Frau Gemahlin — 
heiliger Gott! (Is like to betray herself with her 
smothered laughter, and glides out.) 

M. Danke sehr, meine Prau ist ganz wohl. 

(Pause.) 

W. Durfen wir vielleicht — ^umsteigen? 

The Others. Gut! 

Geo. (Aside,) I feel better now. I'm beginning 
to catch on. (Aloud.) Ich mochte gem morgen fruh 
einige Einkauf e machen tmd wurde Ihnen sehr ver- 
bunden sein, wenn Sie mir den Gefallen thaten, mir 
die Namen der besten hiesigen Firmen aufzu- 
schreiben. 

Mt (Aside.) How sweet! 

3S9 



MARK TWAIN 

W. (Aside.) Hang it, I was going to say that! 
That's one of the noblest things in the book. 

A. Ich mochte Ihnen gem begleiten, aber es ist mir 
wirklich heute Morgen ganz unmOglich auszugehen. 
(Aside.) It's getting as easy as 9 times 7 is 46. 

M. Sagen Sie dem Brief tSger, wenn's gef SUig ist, er 
mdchte Ihnen den eingeschreibenen Brief geben lassen. 

W. Ich wtirde Ihnen sehr verbunden sern, wenn 
Sie diese Schachtel fur mich nach der Post tragen 
wurden, da mir sehr daran liegt einen meiner Ge- 
schaftsfretinde in dem Laden des deutscben Kauf* 
manns heute Abend treffen zu kdnnen. (Aside.) 
All down but nine; set 'm up on the other alley. 

A. Aber Herr Jackson! Sie haben die S&tze ge- 
mischt. Es ist tmbegreiflich wie Sie das haben thtm 
konnen. Zwischen Ihrem ersten Theil und Ihrem 
letzten Theil haben Sie ganze funfzig Seiten uberge- 
schlagen! Jetzt bin ich ganz verioren. Wie kann 
man reden, wenn man seinen Platz durchaus nicfat 
wieder finden kann? 

W. Oh, bitte, verzeihen Sie; ich habe das wirklich 
nicht beabsichtigt. 

A. (Mollified.) Sehr wohl, lassen Sie gut sein, 
Aber thtm Sie es nicht wieder. Sie miissen ja doch 
einraimien, dass solche Dinge tmertrSgliche Verwir- 
rung mit sich fuhren. 

(Gretchen slips in again with her gun.) 

W. Unzweifelhaft haben Sie Recht, meine hold- 
selige Landsmannin. . . . Umsteigen! 

(As George gets fairly into the following, Gretchen drawa a 
bead on him, and lets drive at the close, but the gun snape.) 

360 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

Geo. Glauben Sie das ich ein hubsches Wohn- 
zimmer fur mich selbst tind ein kleines Schlafzimmer 
fflr meinen-Sohn in diesem Hotel fur funfzehn Mark 
die Woche bekommen kann, oder wurden Sie mir 
rathen, in einer Privatwohnting Logis zu nehmen? 
(Aside.) That's a daisy ! 

Or. (Aside.) Schade! {She draws her charge and 
reloads.) 

M. Glauben Sie nicht Sie werden besser thun bei 
diesem Wetter zu Hause zu bleiben? 

A. Freilich glaube ich, Herr Franklin, Sie werden 
sich erkalten, wenn Sie bei diesem tmbestandigen 
Wetter ohne Ueberrock ausgehen. 

Gr. (Relieved — aside.) So? Man redet von Aus- 
gehen. Das klingt schon besser. (Sits,) 

W. (To A.) Wie theuer haben Sie das gekauft? 
(Indicating a part of her dress.) 

A. Das hat achtzehn Mark gekostet. 

W. Das ist sehr theuer. 

Geo. Ja, obgleich dieser Stoff wunderschon ist 
und das Muster sehr geschmackvoll und auch das 
VorzugUchste dass es in dieser Art gibt, so ist es doch 
furchtbar theuer fur einen solchen Artikel. 

M. (Aside.) How sweet is this commtmiqn of soul 
with soul! 

A. Im Gegentheil, mein Herr, das ist sehr billig. 
Sehen Sie sich nur die Qualitat an. 

(They all examine it.) 

Geo. Moglicherweise ist es das allemeuste das man 
in diesem Stoff hat ; aber das Muster gef allt mir nicht. 

(Pause.) 
361 



MARK TWAIN 

W. Umsteigen! 

A. Welchen Hiind haben Sie? Haben Sie den 
hubschen Htind des Kaufmanns, oder den hasslichen 
Hund der Urgrossmutter des Lehrlings des bogen- 
beinigen Zimmermanns? 

W. (Aside.) Oh, come, she's ringing in a cold deck 
on us: that's Ollendorff. 

Geo. Ich habe nicht den Hiind des — des — (Aside.) 
Stuck! That's no Meisterschaf t ; they don't play 
fair. (Aloud.) Ich habe nicht den Himd des — des — 
In unserem Buche leider, gibt es keinen Hund; daher, 
ob ich auch gem von solchen Thieren sprechen 
mochte, ist es mir doch unmogUch, weil ich nicht 
vorbereitet bin. Entschuldigen Sie, meine Damen. 

Gr. (Aside.) Beim Teufel, sie sind alle blddsinnig 
geworden. In meinem Leben habe ich nie eii?. 
so narrisches, verfluchtes, verdammtes Gesprach 
gehort. 

W. Bitte, umsteigen. 

(Run the following rapidly through.) 

M. (Aside.) Oh, I've flushed an easy batch t 
(Aloud.) Wurden Sie mir erlauben meine Reise- 
tasche hier hinzustellen ? 

Gr. (Aside.) Wo ist seine Reisetasche? Ich sehe 
keine. 

W. Bitte sehr. 

Geo. Ist meine Reisetasche Ihnen im Wege? 

Gr. (Aside.) Und wo ist seine Reisetasche? 

A. Erlauben Sie mir Sie von meiner Reisetascha 
zu befreien. 

Gr. (Aside) DuEsel! 

362 



MEISTERSCHAPT: IN THREE ACTS 

W. Ganz und gar nicht. {To Geo.) Es ist sehr 
schwul in diesem Coup6. 

Gr. {Aside,) Coup6. 

Geo. Sie haben Recht. Erlauben Sie mir, ge- 
falligst, dais Fenster zu offnen. Ein wenig Luft 
wurde uns gut thtrn. 

M. Wir fahren sehr rasch. 

A. Haben Sie den Namen jener Station ge- 
hort? 

W. Wie lange halten wir auf dieser Station an? 

Geo. Ich reise nach Dresden, Schaffner. Wo muss 
ich umsteigen ? 

A. Sie steigen nicht um, Sie bleiben sitzen. 

Gr. {Aside.) Sie sind ja alle ganz und gar ver- 
ruckt! Man denke sich sie glauben dass sie auf der 
Eisenbahn reisen. 

Geo. {Aside, to William.) Now brace up; pull 
all your confidence together, my boy, and we'll try 
that lovely good-by business a flutter. I think it's 
about the gaudiest thing in the book, if you boom it 
right along and don't get left on a base. It '11 im- 
press the girls. {Aloud.) Lassen Sie tms gehen: es 
ist schon sehr spat, und ich muss Morgen ganz fruh 
aufstehen. 

Gr. {Aside — grateful.) Gott sei Dank dass sie 
endlich gehen. {Sets her gun aside.) 

W. {To Geo.) Ich danke Ihnen hoflichst fur die 
Ehre die sie mir erweisen, aber ich kann nicht langer 
bleiben. 

Geo. {To W.) Entschuldigen Sie mich gutigst, 
aber ich kann wirklich nicht langer bleiben. 

(Gretchen looks oa stupefied.) 

363 



MARK TWAIN 

W. {To Geo.) Ich habe schon eine Einladtmg 
ange nommen; ich kann wirldich nicht Ifinger 
bleiben. 

(Gretchen fingers her gun again.) 

Geo. {To W.) Ich muss gehen. 

W. {To Geo.) Wie! Sie wollen schon wieder 
gehen? Sie sind ja eben erst gekommen. 

M. {Aside.) It's just music ! 

A. {Aside.) Oh, how lovely they do it! 

Geo. {To W.) Also denken sie doch noch nicht 
an's Gehen. 

W. {To Geo.) Es thut mir imendlich leid, aber ich 
muss nach Hause. Meine Frau wird sich wundem, 
was aus mir geworden ist. 

Geo. {To W.) Meine Frau hat keine Ahnung wo 
ich bin: ich muss wirkUch jetzt fort. 

W. {To Geo.) Dann will ich Sie nicht iSnger auf- 
halten ; ich bedaure sehr dass Sie ims einen so kurzen 
Besuch gemacht haben. 

Geo. {To W.) Adieu — ^auf recht baldiges Wieder- 
sehen. 

W. Umsteigen! 

(Great hand-clapping from the girls.) 

M. {Aside.) Oh, how perfect! how elegant! 

A. {Aside.) Per-fectly enchanting! 

Joyous Chorus. {All.) Ich habe gehabt, du hast 
gehabt, er hat gehabt, wir haben gehabt, ihr habt 
gehabt, sie haben gehabt. 

(Gretchen faints, and tumbles from her chair, and the gun 
goes off with a crash. Each girl, frightened, seizes the protecting 
hand of her sweetheart. Gretchen scrambles up. Tableau.) 

364 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE AQTS 

W. {Takes out some money — beckons Gretchen to 
him. George adds money to the pile.) Hubsches 
M&dchen (giving her some of the coins), hast Du 
etwas gesehen? 

Gr. (Courtesy — aside.) Der Engel! (Aloud — im- 
pressively.) Ich habe nichts gesehen. 

W. (More money.) Hast Du etwas gehort ? 

Gr. Ich habe nichts gehort. 

W. (More money.) Und Morgen? 

Gr. Morgen — ^ware es nothig — ^bin ich taub und 
blind. 

W. Unvergleichbares Madchen! Und (giving the 
rest of the money) damach ? 

Gr. (Deep courtesy — aside.) Erzengel! (Aloud.) 
Damach, mein gnadgister, betrachten Sie mich also 
taub — blind — todt! 

All. (In chorus — with reverent joy.) Ich habe 
gehabt, du hast gehabt, er hat gehabt, wir haben 
gehabt, ihr habt gehabt, sie haben gehabt! 



ACT III 
Three weeks later 

SCENE I 

(Enter Gretchen, and puts her shawl on a chair. Brushing 
around with the traditional feather duster of the drama. 
Smartly dressed, for she is prosperous.) 

Gr. Wie hatte man sich das vorstellen konnen! 
In nur drei Wochen bin ich schon reich geworden! 
(Gets out oj her pocket handful after handful of silver, 
which she piles on the table, and proceeds to repile and 



MARK TWAIN 

count, occasionally ringing or biting a piece to try its 
quality.) Oh, dass {with a sigh) die Frau Wirthin 
nur ewig krank bUebe! . . . Diese edlen jungen 
Manner — sie sind ja so Uebenswurdig ! Und so 
fleissig! — ^und so treu! Jeden Morgen kommen sie 
gerade um drei Viertel auf neun; und plaudem tind 
schwatzen, und plappem, und schnattem, die jungen 
Damen audi ; um Schlage zwolf nehmen sie Abschied ; 
um Schlage eins kommen sie schon wieder, und plau- 
dem imd schwatzen und plappem imd schnattem; 
gerade um sechs Uhr nehmen sie wiederum Abschied ; 
um halb acht kehren sie noche'mal ziu^ck, tmd 
plaudem und schwatzen tmd plappem tmd schnat- 
tem bis zehn Uhr, oder vielleicht ein Viertel nach, 
falls ihre Uhren nach gehen (und stets gehen sie 
nach am Ende des Besuchs, aber stets vor Beginn 
desselben) , und zuweilen unterhalten sich die jungen 
Leute beim Spazierengehen ; und jeden Sonntag gehen 
sie dreimal in die Kirche; und immer plaudem sie, 
und schwatzen und plappem und schnattem bis 
ihnen die Zahne aus dem Munde fallen. Und ichf 
Durch Mangel an Uebung, ist mir die Zunge mit 
Moos belegt worden! Freilich ist's mir eine dumme 
Zeit gewesen. Aber — ^um Gotteswillen, was geht das 
mir an? Was soil ich daraus machen? Taglich 
sagt die Frau Wirthin *'Gretchen" {dumb-show of 
paying a piece of money into her hand), '*du bist eine 
der besten Sprach-Lehrerinnen der Welt!" Ach, 
Gott! Und taglich sagen die edlen jimgen Manner, 
**Gretchen, liebes Kind" {money-paying again in 
dumb-show — three coins), "bleib' taub — ^blind — ^todt!*' 
imd so bleibe ich. . . . Jetzt wird es ung^ahr neun 

366 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

Uhr sein ; bald kommen sie vom Spaziergehen ziiruck. 

Also, es ware gut dass ich meinem eigenen Schatz 

einen Besuch abstatte und spazieren gehe. (Dons 

her shawl.) 

(Exit L.) 

(Enter Wirthin. R.) 

WiRTHiN. That was Mr. Stephenson's train thAt 
just came in. Evidently the girls are out walking 
with Gretchen; — can't find them, and she doesn't 
seem to be around. (A ring at the door.) That's him. 
I'll go see. 

(Exit. R.) 

(Enter Stephenson and Wirthin. R.) 

S. Well, how does sickness seem to agree with you? 

Wirthin. So well that I've never been out of my 
room since, till I heard your train come in. 

S. Thou miracle of fidelity! Now I argue from 
that, that the new plan is working. 

Wirthin. Working? Mr. Stephenson, you never 
saw anything like it in the whole course of your 
life. It's absolutely wonderful the way it works. 

S. Succeeds? No — ^you don't mean it. 

Wirthin. Indeed, I do mean it. I tell you, Mr. 
Stephenson, that plan was just an inspiration — 
that's what it was. You could teach a cat (jerman 
by it. 

S. Dear me, this is noble news ! Tell me about it. 

Wirthin. Well, it's all Gretchen — ev-ery bit of it. 

I told you she was a jewel. And then the sagacity 

of that child — ^why, I never dreamed it was in her. 

Sh-she, ''Never you ask the young ladies a question 

24 367 



MARK TWAIN 

— never let on — ^just keep mum — leave the whole 
thing to me," sh-she. 

S. Good! And she justified, did she? 

WiRTHiN. Well, sir, the amount of German gabble 
that that child crammed into those two girls inside 
the next forty-eight hours — ^well, I was satisfied! 
So I've never asked a question — ^never wanted to ask 
any. I've just lain curled up there, happy. The 
little dears! they've flitted in to see me a moment, 
every morning and noon and supper-time; and as 
sure as I'm sitting here, inside of six days they were 
clattering German to me like a house afire ! 

S. Sp-lendid, splendid! 

WiRTHiN. Of course it ain't grammatical — ^the in- 
ventor of the language can't talk grammatical ; if the 
dative didn't fetch him the accusative would; but 
it's German all the same, and don't you forget it! 

S. Go on — go on — ^this is delicious news — 

WiRTHiN. Gretchen, she says to me at the start, 
"Never you mind about company for 'em," sh-she 
— "I'm company enough." And I says, "All right — 
fix it your own way, child"; and that she was right 
is shown by the fact that to this day they don't care 
a straw for any company but hers. 

S. Dear me; why, it's admirable! 

WiRTHiN. Well, I should think so ! They just dote 
on that hussy — can't seem to get enough of her. 
Gretchen tells me so herself. And the care she takes 
of them! She tells me that every time there's a 
moonlight night she coaxes them out for a walk; and 
if a body can believe her, she actually bullies them 
oflf to church three times every Simday ! 

368 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

S. Why, the little dev — ^missionary! Really, she's 
a genius ! 

WiRTHiN. She's a bud, I teU you! Dear me, how 
she's brought those girls' health up! Cheeks? — ^just 
roses. Gait? — ^they walk on watch-springs! And 
happy? — ^by the bliss in their eyes, you'd think 
they're in Paradise! Ah, that Gretchen! Just you 
imagine our trjdng to achieve these marvels! 

S. You're right — every time. Those girls — ^why, 
all they'd have wanted to know was what we wanted 
done, and then they wouldn't have done it — ^the mis- 
chievous yotmg rascals ! 

WiRTHiN. Don't tell mef Bless you, I foimd that 
out early — ^when I was bossing. 

S. Well, I'm im-mensely pleased. Now fetch them 
down. I'm not afraid now. They won't want to go 
home. 

WiRTHiN. Home ! I don't believe you could drag 
them away from Gretchen with nine span of horses. 
But if you want to see them, put on your hat and 
come along; they're out somewhere trapesing along 
with Gretchen. {Going,) 

S. I'm with you — ^lead on. 

WiRTHiN. We'll go out the side door. It's toward 

the Anlage. 

(Exit both. L.) 

(Enter George and Margaret, R. Her head lies upon his 
shoulder, his arm is about her waist; they are steeped in senti- 
ment.) 

M. {Turning a Jond face up at him,) Du Engel! 
Geo. Liebste! {Kiss,) 

M. Oh, das Liedchen dass Du mir gewidmet hast 

369 



MARK TWAIN 



— es ist so schdn, so wunderschon. Wie habe ich je 
geahnt dass Du ein Poet warest! 

Geo. Mein Schatzchen ! — es ist mir lieb wenn Dir 
die Kleinigkeit gefallt. 

M. Ah, es ist mit der zartlichsten Musik gefullt 
— ^klingt ja so suss und seUg — ^wie das Flustem 
des Sommerwindes die Abenddammerung hindtirch. 
Wieder — ^Theuerste! — sag' es wieder. 

Geo. Du bist wie eine Blumel — 

So schon tind hold tind rein — 
Ich schau Dich an, und Wehmuth 

Schleicht mir ins Herz hinein, 
Mir ist als ob ich die H^de 

Aufs Haupt Dir legen sollt', 
Betend, dass Gott Dich erhalte, 

So rein und schdn und hold. 

M. A-ch! (Dumb-show sentimentalisms.) Georgie — 

Geo. Kindchen! 

M. Warum kommen sie nicht? 

Geo. Das weiss ich gar nicht. Sie waren — 

M. Es wird spat. Wir mussen sie antreiben. 

Komm! 

Geo. Ich glaube sie werden recht bald ankommen, 

aber — 

(Exit both. L.) 

(Enter Gretchen, R., in a state of mind. Slumps into a chair 
limp with despair.) 

Gr. Ach ! was wird jetzt aus mir werden ! Zuf Sllig 

habe ich in der Feme den verdammten Papa gesehen ! 

— ^und die Frau Wirthin auch! Oh, diese Erschei- 

niing — die hat mir beinahe das Leben genommen. 
Sie suchen die jungen Damen— das weiss ich wenn 

370 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

sie diese iind die jiingen Herren zusammen fanden 
— du heiliger Gott ! Wenn das gescheiht, waren wir 
Alle ganz und gar verloren! Ich muss sie gleich 
finden, und ihr eine Wamung geben! 

(Exit. L.) 

(Enter Annie and Will, R., posed like the fonner couple and 
sentimental.) 

A. Ich liebe Dich schon so sehr — Deiner edlen 
Natur wegen. Dass du dazu auch ein Dichter bist ! 
— ach, main Leben ist ubermassig reich geworden! 
Wer hatte sich doch einbilden konnen dass ich einen 
Mann zu einem so wunderschonen Gedicht hatte 
begeistem konnen? 

W. Liebste! Es ist nur eine Kleinigkeit. 

A. Nein, nein, es ist ein echtes Wimder ! Sage es 
noch einmal — ^ich flehe Dich an. 

W. Du bist wie eine Blume! — 

So schon und hold imd rein — 
Ich schau Dich an, imd Wehmuth 

Schleicht mir ins Herz hinein. 
Mir ist als ob ich die Hande 

Aufs Haupt Dir legen sollt*, 
Betend, dass Gott Dich erhalte 

So rein und schon und hold. 

A. Ach, es ist himmlisch — einfach himmlisch, 
(Kiss.) Schreibt auch George Gedichte? 

W. Oh, ja — zuweilen. 

A. Wie schon! 

W. (Aside,) Smouches 'em, same as I do! It waF 
a noble good idea to play that little thing on her 
(jeorge wouldn't ever think of that — somehow he 
never had any invention. 

371 



MARK TWAIN 

A. (Arranging chairs.) Jetzt will ich bei Dir sitzen 
bleiben, und Du — 

W. {They sit.) Ja — ^und ich — 

A. Du wirst mir die alte Geschichte, die immer 
neu bleibt, noch wieder erzahlen. 

W. Zum Beispiel, dass ich Dich liebe! 

A. Wieder! 

W. Ich — sie kommen ! 

(Enter George and Margaret.) 

A. Das macht nichts. Fortan ! 

(George tinties M.'s bonnet. She reties his cravat — inter- 
spersings of love-pats, etc., and dumb-show of love-quanelings.) 

W. Ich Uebe Dich. 

A. Ach ! Noch einmal ! 

W. Ich habe Dich vom Herzen Ueb. 

A. Ach! Abermals! 

W. Bist Du denn noch nicht satt? 

A. Nein. {The other couple sit down, and Margaret 
begins a retying of the cravat. Enter the Wirihin and 
Stephenson, he imposing silence with a sign.) Mich 
hungert sehr, ich verhungrel 

W. Oh, Du armes Kind! {Lays her head on his 
shoulder. Dumb-show between Stephenson and Wir- 
thin.) Und htingert es nicht mich? Du hast mir 
nicht einmal gesagt — 

A. Dass ich Dich liebe? Mein Eigener! {Frau 
Wirihin threatens to faint — is supported by Stephen- 
son.) Hore mich nur an: Ich liebe Dich, ich liebe 
Dich— 

(Enter Gretchen.) 

Gr. {Tears her hair.) Oh, dassichinderHolleware! 

372 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 

M. Ich liebe Dich, ich liebe Dich ! Ah, ich bin so 
glficklich dass ich nicht schlafen kann, nicht lesen 
kann, nicht reden kann, nicht — 

A. Und ich! Ich bin auch so glucklich dass ich 
nicht speisen kann, nicht studieren, arbeiten, denken, 
schreiben — 

S. {To Wirthin — aside.) Oh, there isn't any mis- 
take about it — Gretchen's just a rattling teacher! 

Wirthin. {To Stephenson — aside.) I'll skin her 
alive when I get my hands on her ! 

M. Komm, alle Verliebte! {They jump up, join 
hands, and sing in chorus): 

Du, Du, wie ich Dich liebe, 
Du, Du, liebst auch michl 
Die, die zartlichsten Triebe — 

S. {Stepping forward.) Well! 

(The girls throw themselves upon his neck with enthusiasm.) 

The Girls. Why, father! 
S. My darlings! 

(The young men hesitate a moment, then they add theif 
embrace, flinging themselves on Stephenson's neck, along with 
the girls.) 

The Young Men. Why, father! 

S. {Struggling.) Oh, come, this is too thin! — ^too 
quick, I mean. Let go, you rascals! 

Geo. We'll never let go till you put us on the 
family list. 

M. Right! hold to him! 

A. Cling to him. Will! 

(Gretchen rushes in and joins the general embrace, but is 
snatched away by the Wirthin, crushed up against the wall, and 
threatened with destruction.) 

373 



MARK TWAIN 

S. (Suffocating.) All right, all right — ^have it your 
own way, you quartet of swindlers! 

W. He's a darling! Three cheers for papa! 

Everybody. (Except Stephenson^ who bows with 
hand on heart.) Hip — ^hip — ^hip: hurrah, hurrah, 
hurrah! 

Gr. Der Tiger— ah-h-h! 

WiRTHiN. Sei ruhig, you hussy! 

S. Well, I've lost a couple of precious daughters, 
but IVe gained a couple of precious scamps to fill 
up the gap with; so it's all right. I'm satisfied, 
and everybody's forgiven — (With mock threats at 
Gretchen,) 

W. Oh, wir werden fur Dich sorgen — du herrliches 
Gretchen ! 

Gr. Danke schon ! 

M. (To Wirthin.) Und ffir Sie auch; denn wenn 
Sie nicht so freundlich gewesen waren, krank zu 
werden, wie waren wir je so glucklich geworden wie 
jetzt ? 

Wirthin. Well, dear, I was kind, but I didn't 

mean it. But I ain't sorry — ^not one bit — ^that I 

ain't. 

(Tableau.) 

S. Come, now, the situation is full of hope, and 
grace, and tender sentiment. If I had in the least 
the poetic gift, I know I could improvise under such 
iin inspiration (each girl nudges her sweetheart) some- 
thing worthy to — to — Is there no poet among us? 

(Each youth turns solemnly his back upon the other, and 
raises his hands in benediction over his sweetheart's bowed head.) 

a74 



MEISTERSCHAFT: IN THREE ACTS 
Both Youths at Once: 

Mir ist als ob ich die Hkade 
Aus Haupt Dir legen sollt'— 

(They turn and look reproachfully at each other — ^the girls 
contemplate them with injured surprise.) 

S. (Reflectively.) I think I've heard that before 
somewhere. 

WiRTHiN. (Aside.) Why, the very cats in Ger- 
many know it ! 

(Curtain.) 



PLAYING COURIER 

A TIME wotild come when we must go from Aix- 
les-Bains to Geneva, and from thence, by a series 
of day-long and tangled jotimeys, to Bayreuth in 
Bavaria. I should have to have a courier, of 
course, to take care of so considerable a party as 
mine. 

But I procrastinated. The time slipped along, 
and at last I woke up one day to the fact that we 
were ready to move and had no courier. I then 
resolved upon what I felt was a foolhardy thing, but 
I was in the himior of it. I said I would make the 
first stage without help— I did it. 

I brought the party from Aix to Geneva by myself 
— ^four people. The distance was two hours and 
more, and there was one change of cars. There was 
not an accident of any kind, except leaving a valise 
and some other matters on the platform — a thing 
which can hardly be called an accident, it is so 
common. So I offered to conduct the party all the 
way to Bayreuth. 

This was a blunder, though it did not seem so at 
the time. There was more detail than I thought 
there would be : i , two persons whom we had left in 
a Genevan pension some weeks before must be col- 
lected and brought to the hotel; 2, I must notify the 

376 



PLAYING COURIER 

people on the Grand Quay who store trunks to bring 
seven of our stored trunks to the hotel and carry 
back seven which they would find piled in the lobby ; 
3 , 1 must find out what part of Europe Bayxeuth was 
in and buy seven railway tickets for that point ; 4, I 
must send a telegram to a friend in the Netherlands; 
5, it was now two in the afternoon, and we must look 
sharp and be ready for the first night train and make 
sure of sleeping-car tickets; 6, I must draw money 
at the bank. 

It seemed to me that the sleeping-car tickets must 
be the most important thing, so I went to the station 
myself to make sure; hotel messengers are not always 
brisk people. It was a hot day, and I ought to have 
driven, but it seemed better economy to walk. It 
did not turn out so, because I lost my way and 
trebled the distance. I applied for the tickets, and 
they asked me which route I wanted to go by, and 
that embarrassed me and made me lose my head, 
there were so many people standing around, and I 
not knowing anything about the routes and not 
supposing there were going to be two; so I judged 
it best to go back and map out the road and come 
again. 

I took a cab this time, but on my way up-stairs at 
the hotel I remembered that I was out of cigars, so 
I thought it would be well to get some while the 
matter was in my mind. It was only rotmd the 
comer, and I didn't need the cab. I asked the cab- 
man to wait where he was. Thinking of the tele- 
gram and trying to word it in my head, I forgot the 
cigars and the cab, and walked on indefinitely. I 

377 



MARK TWAIN 

was going to have the hotel people send the tdegram, 
but as I cotild not be far from the post-oflSce by this 
time, I thought I would do it myself. But it was 
further than I had supposed. I found the place at 
last and wrote the telegram and handed it in. The 
clerk was a severe-looking, fidgety man, and he began 
to fire French questions at me in such a liquid form 
that I could not detect the joints between his words, 
and this made me lose my head again. But an 
Englishman stepped up and said the derk wanted to 
know where he was to send the telegram. I could 
not tell him, because it was not my telegram, and I 
explained that I was merely sending it for a member 
of my party. But nothing would pacify the clerk 
but the address; so I said that if he was so particular 
I would go back and get it. 

However, I thought I would go and collect those 
lacking two persons first, for it would be best to do 
everything systematically and in order, and one 
detail at a time. Then I remembered the cab was 
eating up my substance down at the hotel yonder; 
so I called another cab and told the man to go down 
and fetch it to the post-office and wait till I came. 

I had a long, hot walk to collect those people^ and 
when I got there they couldn't come with me because 
they had heavy satchels and must have a cab. I 
went away to find one, but before I ran across any 
I noticed that I had reached the neighborhood of the 
Grand Quay — ^at least I thought I had — so I judged 
I could save time by stepping aroimd and arranging 
about the trimks. I stepped arotmd about a mile» 
and although I did not find the Grand Quay, I found 

378 



PLAYING COURIER 

a cigar shop, and remembered about the cigars. I 
said I was going to Bayreuth, and wanted enough for 
the journey. The man asked me which route I was 
going to take. I said I did not know. He said he 
would recommend me to go by Zurich and various 
other places which he named, and offered to sell me 
seven second-class through tickets for twenty-two 
dollars apiece, which would be throwing off the dis- 
count which the railroads allowed him. I was already 
tired of riding second-class on first-class tickets, so 
I took him up. 

By and by I fotmd Natural & Co.'s storage oflBce, 
and told them to send seven of ovuc trunks to the 
hotel and pile them up in the lobby. It seemed to 
me that I was not delivering the whole of the message, 
still it was all I could find in my head. 

Next I f oimd the bank and asked for some money, 
but I had left my letter of credit somewhere and was 
not able to draw. I remembered now that I must 
have left it lying on the table where I wrote my 
telegram; so I got a cab and drove to the post-oflSce 
and went up-stairs, and they said that a letter of 
credit had indeed been left on the table, but that it 
was now in the hands of the police authorities, and 
it would be necessary for me to go there and prove 
property. They sent a boy with me, and we went 
out the back way and walked a couple of miles and 
foimd the place; and then I remembered about my 
cabs, and asked the boy to send them to me when he 
got back to the post-office. It was nightfall now, 
and the Mayor had gone to dinner. I thought I 
would go to dinner myself, but the officer on duty 

379 



MARK TWAIN 

thought differently, and I stayed. The Mayor drop- 
ped in at half past ten, but said it was too late 
to do anything to-night — come at 9.30 in the 
morning. The officer wanted to keep me all night, 
and said I was a suspicious-looking person, and 
probably did not own the letter of credit, and didn't 
know what a letter of credit was, but merely saw the 
real owner leave it lying on the table, and wanted to 
get it because I was probably a person that would 
want anything he could get, whether it was valuable 
or not. But the Mayor said he saw nothing sus- 
picious about me, and that I seemed a harmless 
person and nothing the matter with me but a wan- 
dering mind, and not much of that. So I thanked him 
and he set me free, and I went home in my three cabs. 
As I was dog-tired and in no condition to answer 
questions with discretion, I thought I would not dis- 
turb the Expedition at that time of night, as there 
was a vacant room I knew of at the other end of the 
hall ; but I did not quite arrive there, as a watch had 
been set, the Expedition being anxious about me. 
I was placed in a galling situation. The Expedition 
sat stiff and forbidding on four chairs in a row, with 
shawls and things all on, satchels and guide-books in 
lap. They had been sitting like that for four hours, 
and the glass going down all the time. Yes, and 
they were waiting — waiting for me. It seemed to 
me that nothing but a sudden, happily contrived, and 
brilliant tour de force could break this iron front and 
make a diversion in my favor ; so I shied my hat into 
the arena and followed it with a skip and a jtimp, 
shouting blithely : 

380 



PLAYING COURIER 

"Ha, ha, here we all are, Mr. Merryman!" 

Nothing could be deeper or stiller than the absence 
of applause which followed. But I kept on; there 
seemed no other way, though my confidence, poor 
enough before, had got a deadly check and was in 
effect gone. 

I tried to be joctmd out of a heavy heart, I tried 
to touch the other hearts there and soften the bitter 
resentment in those faces by throwing oflE bright and 
airy ftm and making of the whole ghastly thing a 
joyously humorous incident, but this idea was not 
well conceived. It was not the right atmosphere for 
it. I got not one smile ; not one line in those offended 
faces relaxed; I thawed nothing of the winter that 
looked out of those frosty eyes. I started one more 
breezy, poor effort, but the head of the Expedition 
cut into the center of it and said : 

"Where have you been?'* 

I saw by the manner of this that the idea was to 
get down to cold business now. So I began my 
travels, but was cut short again. 

"Where are the two others? We have been in 
frightful anxiety about them." 

"Oh, they're all right. I was to fetch a cab. I 
will go straight off, and — " 

"Sit down! Don't you know it is eleven o'clock? 
Where did you leave them?" 

"At the pension." 

"Why didn't you bring them?" 

* * Because we couldn't carry the satchels. And so 
I thought—" 

"Thought! You should not try to think. One 

381 



MARK TWAIN 

cannot think without the proper machinery. It is 
two miles to that pension. EKd you go there with- 
out a cab?" 

**I — ^well, I didn't intend to; it only happened so." 

"How did it happen so?" 

"Because I was at the post-office and I remem- 
bered that I had left a cab waiting here, and so, to 
stop that expense, I sent another cab to — ^to — " 

"To what?" 

"Well, I don't remember now, but I think the new 
cab was to have the hotel pay the old cab, and send 
it away." 

"What good would that do?" 

"What good would it do? It would stop the 
expense, wouldn't it?" 

"By putting the new cab in its place to continue 
the expense?" 

I didn't say anything. 

"Why didn't you have the new cab come back for 
you?" 

" Oh, that is what I did. I remember now. Yes, 
that is what I did. Because I recollect that when I — " 

"Well, then, why didn't it come back for you?" 

"To the post-office? Why, it did." 

"Very well, then, how did you come to walk to the 
pension?" 

"I — I don't quite remember how that happened. 
Oh, yes, I do remember now. I wrote the despatch 
to send to the Netherlands, and — " 

"Oh, thank goodness, you did accomplish some- 
thing ! I wouldn't have had you fail to send — ^what 
makes you look like that ! You are trying to avoid 

382 



PLAYING COURIER 

my eye. That despatch is the most important thing 
that — You haven't sent that despatch!" 

"I haven't said I didn't send it." 

*'You don't need to. Oh, dear, I wouldn't have 
had that telegram fail for anything. Why didn't you 
send it?" 

"Well, you see, with so many things to do and 
think of, I — ^they're very particular there, and after 
I had written the telegram — " 

"Oh, never mind, let it go, explanations can't help 
the matter now — ^what will he think of us?" 

"Oh, that's all right, that's all right, he'll think 
we gave the telegram to the hotel people, and that 
they—" 

"Why, certainly! Why didn't you do that? 
There was no other rational way." 

"Yes, I know, but then I had it on my mind that 
I must be sure and get to the bank and draw some 
money — " 

"Well, you are entitled to some credit, after all, 
for thinking of that, and I don't wish to be too hard 
on you, though you must acknowledge yourself that 
you have cost us all a good deal of trouble, and some 
of it not necessary. How much did you draw?" 

"Well, I— I had an idea that— that— " 

"That what?" 

"That — ^well, it seems to me that in the circum- 
stances — so many of us, you know, and — and — " 

"What are you mooning about? Do turn your 
face this way and let me — ^why, you haven't drawn 
any money!" 

"WeU, the banker said—*' 
«5 383 



MARK TWAIN 

"Never mind what the banker said. You must 
have had a reason of your own. Not a reason, 
exactly, but something which — " 

"Well, then, the simple fact was that I hadn't my 
letter of credit." 

"Hadn't your letter of credit?" 

"Hadn't my letter of credit." 

"Don't repeat me like that. Where was it?" 

"At the post-oflBce." 

"What was it doing there?" 

"Well, I forgot it and left it there." 

"Upon my word, I've seen a good many couriers, 
but of all the couriers that ever I — " 

"I've done the best I could." 

"Well, so you have, poor thing, and I'm wrong to 
abuse you so when you've been working yourself to 
death while we've been sitting here only thinking of 
our vexations instead of feeling grateful for what you 
were trying to do for us. It will all come out right. 
We can take the 7.30 train in the morning just as 
well. You've bought the tickets?" 

"I have — ^and it's a bargain, too. Second class." 

"I'm glad of it. Everybody else travels second 
class, and we might just as well save that ruinous 
extra charge. What did you pay?" 

"Twenty -two dollars ^apiece — through to Bay- 
reuth." 

"Why, I didn't know you could buy through tick- 
ets anywhere but in London and Paris." 

"Some people can't, maybe; but some people can 
— of whom I am one of which, it appears." 

"It seems a rather high price." 

384 



PLAYING COURIER 

"On the contrary, the dealer knocked oflf his 



commission." 



''Dealer?" 

*'Yes — I bought them at a cigar shop." 

''That reminds me. We shall have to get up 
pretty early, and so there should be no packing to 
do. Your imibrella, your rubbers, your cigars — 
what is the matter?" 

"Hang it, I've left the cigars at the bank." 

' * Just think of it ! Well, your xunbrella ?" 

"I'll have that all right. There's no hurry." 

' What do you mean by that?" 

"Oh, that's all right; I'll take care of—" 

"Where is that umbrella?" 

"It's just the merest step — ^it won't take me — " 

"Where is it?" 

"Well, I think I left it at the cigar shop; but 
anyway — " 

"Take your feet out from under that thing. It's 
just as I expected! Where are your rubbers?" 

"They— weU— " 

"Where axe your rubbers?" 

' ' It's got so dry now — ^well, everybody says there's 
not going to be another drop of — " 

' ' Where — ^axe — ^your — ^rubbers ?' * 

"Wei , you see — ^well, it was this way. First, the 
officer said—" 

"What officer?" 

"Police officer but the Mayor, he — '• 

"What Mayor?" 

"Mayor of Geneva but I said — " 

"Wait. What is the matter with yoaV 

38s 



iff 



MARK TWAIN 

"Who, me? Nothing. They both tried to per- 
suade me to stay, and — " 

''Stay where?" 

"WeU, the fact is— '* 

"Where have you been? What's kept you out till 
half past ten at night?'' 

"Oh, you see, after I lost my letter of credit, I — " 

"You are beating aroimd the bush a good deal. 
Now, answer the question in just one straightforward 
word. Where are those rubbers?" 

"They — ^well, they're in the county jail." 

I started a placating smile, but it petrified. The 
climate was unsuitable. Spending three or four 
hours in jail did not seem to the Expedition htunor- 
ous Neither did it to me, at bottom. 

I had to explain the whole thing, and, of course, 
it came out then that we couldn't take the early 
train, because that would leave my letter of credit 
in hock still. It did look as if we had aU got to go 
to bed estranged and tmhapi^y, but by good luck 
that was prevented. There happened to be mention 
of the tnmks, and I was able to say I had attended 
to that feature. 

"There, you are just as good and thoughtful and 
painstaking and intelligent as you can be, and it's 
a shame to find so much fault with you, and there 
sha'n't be another word of it. You've done beauti- 
fully, admirably, and I'm sorry I ever said one im- 
grateful word to you." 

This hit deeper than some of the other things and 
made me uncomfortable, because I wasn't feeling as 

solid about that trunk errand a3 1 wanted to, There 

386 



PLAYING COURIER 

seemed somehow to be a defect about it somewhere, 
though I couldn't put my finger on it, and didn't like 
to stir the matter just now, it being late and maybe 
well enough to let well enough alone. 

Of course there was music in the morning, when it 
was foimd that we couldn't leave by the early train. 
But I had no time to wait; I got only the opening 
bars of the overture, and then started out to get my 
letter of credit. 

It seemed a good time to look into the trunk busi- 
ness and rectify it if it needed it, and I had a sus- 
picion that it did. I was too late. The concierge 
said he had shipped the trunks to Zurich the evening 
before. I asked him how he could do that without 
exhibiting passage tickets. 

''Not necessary in Switzerland. You pay for yowc 
trunks and send them where you please. Nothing 
goes free but your hand-baggage." 

"How much did you pay on them?'* 

"A hundred and forty francs." 

"Twenty-eight dollars. There's something wrong 
about that trunk business, siure." 

Next I met the porter. He said: 

"You have not slept well, is it not? You have the 
worn look. If you would like a courier, a good one 
has arrived last night, and is not engaged for five 
days akeady, by the name of Ludi. We recommend 
him; das heisst, the Grand H6tel Beau Rivage 
recommends him." 

I declined with coldness. My spirit was not 
broken yet. And I did not like having my condition 
taken notice of in this way. I was at the county jai^ 

j87 



MARK TWAIN 

by nine o'clock, hoping that the Mayor might chance 
to come before his regular hour; but he didn't. It 
was dull there. Every time I offered to touch any- 
thing, or look at anything, or do anything, or refrain 
iroin doing anything, the policeman said it was 
**cUfendu.** I thought I would practise my French 
on him, but he wouldn't have that either. It seemed 
to make him particularly bitter to hear his own 
tongue. 

The Mayor came at last, and then there was no 
trouble ; for the minute he had convened the Supreme 
Court — they always do whenever there is valuable 
property in dispute — ^and got everything shipshape 
and sentries posted, and had prayer by the chaplain, 
my unsealed letter was brought and opened, and 
there wasn't anything in it but some photographs; 
because, as I remembered now, I had taken out the 
letter of credit so as to make room for the photo- 
graphs, and had put the letter in my other pocket, 
which I proved to everybody's satisfaction by fetch- 
ing it out and showing it with a good deal of exulta- 
tion. So then the court looked at each other in a 
vacant kind of way, and then at me, and then at 
each other again, and finally let me go, but said it 
was imprudent for me to be at large, and asked me 
what my profession was. I said I was a courier. 
They lifted up their eyes in a kind of reverent way 
and said, *'Du lieber Gottr and I said a word of 
courteous thanks for their apparent admiration and 
hurried off to the bank. 

However, being a courier was already making me 
a great stickler for order and system and one thing 

388 



PLAYING COURIER 

at a time and each thing in its own proper turn; so 
I passed by the bank and branched oflE and started 
for the two lacking members of the Expedition. A 
cab lazied by, and I took it upon perstiasion. I 
gained no speed by this, but it was a reposeful turn- 
out and I Uked teposefulness. The week-long jubi- 
lations over the six hundredth anniversary of the 
birth of Swiss liberty and the Signing of the Compact 
was at flood-tide, and all the streets were clothed in 
fluttering flags. 

The horse and the driver had been dnmk three 
days and nights, and had known no stall nor bed 
mtpantime. They looked as I felt — dreamy and 
seedy. But we arrived in coiu'se of time. I went 
in and rang, and asked a housemaid to rush out the 
lacking members. She said something which I did 
not understand, and I returned to the chariot. The 
girl had probably told me that those people did not 
belong on her floor, and that it would be judicious 
for me to go higher, and ring from floor to floor till 
I found them ; for in those Swiss flats there does not 
seem to be any way to find the right family but to 
be patient and guess your way along up. I calcu- 
lated that I must wait fifteen minutes, there being 
three details inseparable from an occasion of this 
sort: I, put on hats and come down and climb in; 
2, return of one to get *'my other glove"; 3, pres- 
ently, return of the other one to fetch "my French 
Verbs at a Glance.'' 1 would muse during the fifteen 
minutes and take it easy. 

A very still and blank interval ensued, and then 
I felt a hand on my shoulder and started. The 

389 



MARK TWAIN 

intruder was a policeman. I glanced up and per- 
ceived that there was new scenery. There was a 
good deal of a crowd, and they had that pleased and 
interested look which such a crowd wears when they 
see that somebody is out of luck. The horse was 
asleep, and so was the driver, and some boys had 
hung them and me full of gaudy decorations stolen 
from the inntunerable banner-poles. It was a scan- 
dalous spectacle. The officer said : 

"I'm sorry, but we can't have you sleeping here 
all day." 

I was woimded, and said with dignity: 

"I beg your pardon, I was not sleeping; I was 
thinking." 

"Well, you can think if you want to, but youVe 
got to think to yourself; you disturb the whole 
neighborhood." 

It was a poor joke, and it made the crowd laugh. 
I snore at night sometimes, but it is not likely that 
I would do such a thing in the daytime and in such 
a place. The officer undecorated us, and seemed 
sorry for our friendlessness, and really tried to be 
humane, but he said we mustn't stop there any longer 
or he would have to charge us rent — ^it was the law, 
he said, and he went on to say in a sociable way that 
I was looking pretty moldy, and he wished he knew — 

I shut him oflE pretty austerely, and said I hoped 
one might celebrate a little these days, especially 
when one was personally concerned. 

"Personally?" he asked. "How?" 

"Because six hundred years ago an ancestor of 
mine signed the compact." 

390 



PLAYING COURIER 

He reflected a moment, then looked me over and 
said: 

"Ancestor! It's my opinion you signed it your- 
self. For of all the old ancient relics that ever I — 
but never mind about that. What is it you are 
waiting here for so long?'* 

I said: 

"I'm not waiting here so long at all. I'm waiting 
fifteen minutes till they forget a glove and a book 
and go back and get them." Then I told him who 
they were that I had come for. 

He was very obliging, and began to shout inquiries 
to the tiers of heads and shoulders projecting from 
the windows above us. Then a woman away up 
there sang out : 

"Oh, they? Why, I got them a cab and they left 
here long ago — ^half past eight, I should say." 

It was annoying. I glanced at my watch, but 
didn't say anything. The officer said: 

"It is a quarter of twelve, you see. You should 
have inquired better. You have been asleep three- 
quarters of an hour, and in such a sun as this. You 
are baked — baked black. It is wonderful. And you 
will miss your train, perhaps. You interest me 
greatly. What is your occupation?" 

I said I was a courier. It seemed to sttm him, and 
brfore he could come to we were gone. 

When I arrived in the third story of the hotel I 
found our quarters vacant. I was not surprised. 
The moment a courier takes his eye off his tribe they 
go shopping. The nearer it is to train-time the 
s\u'er they are to go. I sat down to try and think 

20Z 



MARK TWAIN 

out what I had best do next, but presently the hall* 
boy found me there, and said the Expedition had 
gone to the station half an hour before. It was the 
first time I had known them to do a rational things 
and it was very confusing. This is one of the things 
that make a courier's life so difficult and uncertain. 
Just as matters are going the smoothest, his people 
will strike a lucid interval, and down go all his 
arrangements to wreck and ruin. 

The train was to leave at twelve noon sharp. It 
was now ten minutes after twelve. I could be at 
the station in ten minutes. I saw I had no great 
amount of leeway, for this was the lightning express, 
and on the Continent the lightning expresses are 
pretty fastidious about getting away some time 
during the advertised day. My people were the 
only ones remaining in the waiting-room; everybody 
else had passed through and "mounted the train," 
as they say in those regions. They were ex- 
hausted with nervousness and fret, but I comforted 
them and heartened them up, and we made our 
rush. 

But no; we were out of luck again* The door- 
keeper was not satisfied with the tickets. He 
examined them cautiously, deliberatdy, suspiciously; 
then glared at me awhile, and after that he called 
another official. The two examined the tickets and 
called another official. These called others, and the 
convention discussed and discussed, and gesticulated 
and carried on, until I begged that they would 
consider how time was flying, and just pass a few 
resolutions and let us go. Then they said very 

392 



PLAYING COURIER 

courteously that there was a defect in the tickets, and 
asked me where I got them. 

I judged I saw what the trouble was now. You 
see, I had bought the tickets in a cigar shop, and, 
of course, the tobacco smell was on them; without 
doubt, the thing they were up to was to work 
the tickets through the Custom House and to col- 
lect duty on that smell. So I resolved to be 
perfectly frank; it is sometimes the best way, I 
said: 

"Gentlemen, I will not deceive you. These rail- 
way tickets — ^' 

"Ah, pardon, monsieur! These are not railway 
tickets." 

"Oh," I said, "is that the defect?" 

"Ah, truly yes, monsieur. These are lottery 
tickets, yes; and it is a lottery which has been drawn 
two years ago." 

I affected to be greatly amused; it is all one can 
do in such circumstances; it is all one can do, and 
yet there is no value in it; it deceives nobody, and 
you can see that everybody arotmd pities you and 
is ashamed of you. One of the hardest situations 
in life, I think, is to be full of grief and a sense of 
defeat and shabbiness that way, and yet have to 
put on an outside of archness and gaiety, while all 
the time you know that your own Expedition, the 
treasures of your heart, and whose love and reverence 
you are by the custom of our civilization entitled to, 
are being constuned with humiliation before strangers 
to see you earning and getting a compassion which 
is a stigma, a brand — a brand which certifies you to 

393 



MARK TWAIN 

be — oh, anything and everything which is fatal to 
human respect. 

I said, cheerily, it was all right, just one of those 
little accidents tiiat was likely to happen to anybody 
— ^I would have the right tid^ts in two minutes, and 
we would catch the train yet, and, moreover, have 
something to laugh about all through the journey. 
I did get the tickets in time, all stamped and com- 
plete, but then it turned out that I couldn't take 
them, because in taking so much pains about the 
two missing members I had skipped the bank and 
hadn't the money. So then the train left, and there 
didn't seem to be anything to do but go back to the 
hotel, which we did; but it was kind of melancholy 
and not much said. I tried to start a few subjects, 
like scenery and ti^ansubstantiation, and those sorts 
of things, but they didn't seem to hit the weather 
right. 

We had lost our good rooms, but we got some 
others which were pretty scattering, but would 
answer. I judged things would brighten now, but 
the Head of the Expedition said, ''Send up the 
trunks." It made me fed pretty cold. There was 
a doubtful something about that trunk business. I 
was almost sure of it. I was going to suggest — 

But a wave of the hand suffidently restrained me, 
and I was informed that we would now camp for 
three days and see if we could rest up. 

I said all right, never mind ringing; I would go 
down and attend to the trunks myself. I got a 
cab and went straight to Mr. Charles Natural's 
place, and asked what order it was I had left there. 

394 



PLAYING COURIER 

"To send seven trunks to the hotel." 

"And were you to bring any back?" 

"No." 

"You are sure I didn't tdl you to bring back seven 
that would be found piled in the lobby?" 

"Absolutely sure you didn't." 

"Then the whole fourteen are gone to Zurich or 
Jericho or somewhere, and there is going to be 
more debris around that hotel when the Expedi- 
tion—" 

I didn't finish, because my mind was getting to be 
in a good deal of a whirl, and when you are that 
way you think you have finished a sentence when 
you haven't, and you go mooning and dreaming 
away, and the first thing you know you get run over 
by a dray or a cow or something. 

I left the cab there — I forgot it — and on my way 
back I thought it all out and concluded to resign, 
because otherwise I should be nearly sure to be dis- 
charged. But I didn't believe it would be a good 
idea to resign in person; I could do it by message. 
So I sent for Mr. Ludi and explained that there was 
a courier going to resign on account of incompati- 
bility or fatigue or something, and as he had four or 
five vacant dajrs, I would like to insert him into 
that vacancy if he thought he could fill it. When 
everything was arranged I got him to go up and say 
to the Expedition that, owing to an error made by 
Mr. Natiual's people, we were out of trunks here, 
but wotdd have plenty in Ztuich, and we'd better 
take the first train, freight, gmvel, or construction, 
and move right along, 

395 



MARK TWAIN 

He attended to that and came down with an invi- 
tation for me to go up — ^yes, certainly; and, while 
we walked along over to the bank to get money, and, 
collect my cigars and tobacco, and to the cigar shop 
to trade back the lottery tickets and get my tim- 
brella, and to Mr. Natural's to pay that cab and send 
it away, and to the county jail to get my rubbers 
and leave p. p. c. cards for the Mayor and Supreme 
Court, he described the weather to me that was 
prevailing on the upper levels there with the Expe- 
dition, and I saw that I was doing very well where 
I was. 

I stayed out in the woods till 4 p.m., to let the 
weather moderate, and then turned up at the station 
just in time to take the three-o'clock express for 
Zurich along with the Expedition, now in the hands 
of Ludi, who conducted its complex affairs with 
little apparent effort or inconvenience. 

Well, I had worked like a slave while I was in 
office, and done the very best I knew how; yet all 
that these people dwelt upon or seemed to care to 
remember were the defects of my administration, not 
its creditable feattues. They would skip over a 
thousand creditable features to remark upon and 
reiterate and fuss about just one fact, till it seemed to 
me they would wear it out ; and not much of a fact, 
either, taken by itself — ^the fact that I elected myself 
courier in Geneva, and put in work enough to carry 
a circus to Jerusalem, and yet never even got my 
gang out of the town. I finally said I didn't wish 
to hear any more about the subject, it made me tired. 
And I told them to their faces that I would never 

39<5 



PLAYING COURIER 

be a courier again to save anybody's life. And if I 
live long enough I'll prove it. I think it's a difficult, 
brain-racking, overworked, and thoroughly ungrate- 
ful office, and the main bulk of its wages is a sort^ 
heart and a bruised spirit. 



THB END 



