Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



^rrcramm^^ 




1 LIBlURYV^^^Otlilt i 


-3 " M 


i 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

IN ' 

KING ARTHUR'S COURT 



BY 

MARK TWAIN 

S 



» r » 



/ 



» V 




HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS 

NEW YORK AND LONDON 



Books bt 
MARK TWAIN; 

or. JOAN OF ARC 

THE INNOCENTS ABBOAD 

ROUGHING IT 

THE GILDED AGE 

A TRAMP ABROAD 

FOLLOWING THE EQUATOB 

PUDD'NHEAD WILSON 

SKETCHES NEW AND OLD 

THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 

A CONNECTICUT YANEEE AT THE OOT7RT OF 
KING ARTHUR 

THE ADVENTURES OP HUCKLEBERRY FINN 

PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS OF JOAN OP ARC 

LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI 

THE MAN THAT CORRUPTED HADLEYBURQ 

THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER 

THE $30,000 BEQUEST 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER 

TOM SAWYER ABROAD 

WHAT IS MAN? 

THE MYSTERIOUS STRANGER 

ADAM'S DIARY 

A DOG'S TALE 

"A -DOUBLE-BARRELED DETECTIVE STORY 

EPITORIAL WILD OATS 

*KVE'S DIARY 

IN DEFENSE OF HARRIET SHELLEY AND 

OTHER ESSAYS 
IS SHAKESPEARE DEAD? 
CAPT. STORMFIELD'S VISIT TO HEAVEN 
A HORSE'S TALE 
THE JUMPING FROG 
THE £1,000.000 BANK-NOTB/ 
TRAVELS AT HOME 
TRAVELS IN HISTORY 

HARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 
MARK TWAIN'S SPEECHES 



.HARPER & BROTHERS. NEW YOBS 

(BSZABUSHBD 1817] 
A CONMBCTICUT YANKEE IN KiNG ARTHUR'S COUBT 



Copyright. 1889 and 1899. by Samusl L. 

Gonyright. X917. by Clara Gabrilowitsch 
Printed in the United States of America 

■^ F-B 



.*.* 



1 1 ['■] [ 




^^ 



CONTENTS 



Preface 

A Word of Explanation i 

L Camelot lo 

IL King Arthur's Court 13 

IIL Knights of the Table Round 21 

IV. Sir Dinadan the Humorist 29 

V. An Inspiration 34 

VL The Eclipse 42 

Vn. Merlin's Tower 51 

Vni. The Boss 60 

DL The Tournament • • • 68 

X. Beginnings of Civilization 76 

XI. The Yankee in Search of Adventures ... 82 
Xn. Slow Torture 93 

XIII. Freemen 99 

XIV. "Defend Thee, Lord!" no 

XV. Sandy's Tale 116 

XVI. Morgan le Fay 127 

XVII. A Royal Banquet 136 

XVIII. In the Queen's Dungeons 148 

XIX. Knight-errantry as a Trade 162 

XX. The Ogre's Castle 167 

XXI. The Pilgrims 177 

XXII. The Holy Fountain 194 

XXill. Restoration of the Fountain 208 

XXIV. A Rival Magician 219 

XXV. A Competitive Examination 233 

V 



Books bt 
MARK TWAIN. 

or. JOAN OF ARC 
THE INNOCENTS ABROAD 
ROUGHING IT 
THE GILDED AGE 
A TRAMP ABROAD 
FOLLOWING THE EQUATOB 
PUDD'NHEAD WILSON 
SEXTCHES NEW AND OLD 
THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT 
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 

A CONNECTICUT YANKEE AT THE OOURT OF 
KING ARTHUR 

THE ADVENTURES OP HUCKLEBERRY FINN 

PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS OF JOAN OP ARC 

LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI 

THE MAN THAT CORRUPTED HADLEYBURQ 

THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER 

THE $30,000 BEQUEST 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER 

TOM SAWYER ABROAD 

WHAT IS MAN? 

THE MYSTERIOUS STRANQEB 

ADAM'S DIARY 

A DOG'S TALE 

-A -DOUBLE-BARRELED DETECTIVE STORY 
EPITORIAL WILD OATS 

*KVE*S BIARY 

IN DEFENSE OF HARRIET SHELLEY AND 

OTHER ESSAYS 
IS SHAKESPEARE DEAD? 
CAPT. STORMFIELD'S VISIT TO HEAVEN 
A HORSE'S TALE 
THE JUMPING FROG 
THE £1.000.000 BANK-NOTB/ 
TRAVELS AT HOME 
TRAVELS IN HISTORY 

HARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 
MARK TWAIN'S SPEECHES 



BABFBR & BROTHERS. NEW YOBS 

(BSZABUSSBD 1817] 
A CONMBCTICUT YaNKBB IN KiNG ARTHUR'S COUBT 



Copyright. 1889 and iSqQi by Samusl L. 

Copyright. 1917. by Clara Gabrilowitsch 
Printed in the United States of America 

X F-B 



>.,. 



G - V ^ C C s - a - » C 

'"I '."I I 



^^ 







CONTENTS 



Preface 

A Word of Explanation i 

I. Camelot lo 

n. King Arthur's Court 13 

III. Knights of the Table Round 21 

I\^. Sir Dinadan the Humorist 29 

V. An Inspiration 34 

VL The Eclipse 42 

VII. Merlin's Tower 51 

VIII. The Boss 60 

IX. The Tournament 68 

X. Beginnings of Civilization 76 

XI. The Yankee in Search of Adventures ... 82 

XII. Slow Torture 93 

XIII. Freemen 99 

XIV. "Defend Thee, Lord!" no 

XV. Sandy's Tale 116 

XVI. Morgan le Fay 127 

XVII. A Royal Banquet 136 

XVIII. In the Queen's Dungeons 148 

XIX. Knight-errantry as a Trade 162 

XX. The Ogre's Castle 167 

XXI. The Pilgrims 177 

XXII. The Holy Fountain 194 

XXIII. Restoration of the Fountain 208 

XXIV. A Rival Magician 219 

XXV. A Competitive Examination 233 

V 



XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

XLI. 

XLII. 

XLIII. 

XLIV. 



CONTENTS 

wuem 

The First Newspaper -•«^. . . 249 

The Yankee and the Kisg Travel Incognito 263 

Drhxing the King 274 

The Smallpox Hut 280 

The Tragedy op the Manor-house • • • • 289 

Marco 303 

Dowley's Humiliation 313 

Sixth-century P<»,itical Economy .... 322 

The Yankee and the King Sold as Slaves . 338 

A Pitiful Incident 353 

An Encounter in the Dark 363 

An Awful Predicament 369 

Sir Launcelot and Knights to the Rescue . 379 

The Yankee's Fight with the Knights . . 383 

Three Years Later 397 

The Interdict 407 

War! 413 

The Battle of the Sand-belt 428 

A Postscript by Clarence 445 

Final P. S. by M. T 448 




ILLUSTRATIONS 

"I Saw He Meant Business" Fnmtispieu 

"There Was No Soap, No Matches, No Looking- 
glass" Facing p, 52 

Solid Comfort " 254 

"The Sun Struck the Sea of Armor and Set It 
All Aflash" " 432 



PREFACE 

THB ungentle laws and customs toudied upon in 
this tale are historical, and the episodes which 
are used to illustrate them are also historicaL It is 
not pretended that these laws and customs existed in 
England in the sixth century; no, it is only pretended 
that inasmuch as they existed in the English and 
other cirilizations of far later times, it is safe to 
consider that it is no libel upon the sixth century to 
suppose them to have been in practice in that day 
also. One is quite justified in inferring that what- 
ever one of these laws or customs was lacking in that 
remote time, its place was competently filled by a 
worse one. 

The question as to whether there is such a thing as 
divine right of kings is not settled in this book. It 
was found too diflScult. That the executive head of a 
nation should be a person of lofty character and 
extraordinary ability, was manifest and indisputable ; 
that none but the Deity could select that head unerr- 
ingly, was also manifest and indisputable; that the 
Deity ought to make that selection, then, was likewise 
manifest and indisputable; consequently, that He 
does make it, as claimed, was an unavoidable de- 
duction. I mean, until the author of this book en- 
countered the Pompadour, and Lady Castlemaine« 

• 

IX 



PREFACE 

and some other executive heads ci that kind; these 
were f otmd so difficult to work into the scheme, 
that it was judged better to take the other tack in 
this book (which must be issued this fall), and then 
go into training and settle the question in another 
book. It is, of course, a thing which ought to be 
settled, and I am not going to have anything partic- 
ular to do next winter anyway. 

Mark Twain. 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 
IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT 



A WORD OF EXPLANATION 

IT was in Warwick Castle that I came across the 
curious stranger whom I am going to talk about. 
He attracted me by three things: his candid sim- 
plicity, his marvelous familiarity with ancient armor, 
and the restf ulness of his company — ^f or he did all the 
talking. We fell together, as modest people will, in 
the tail of the herd that was being shown through, 
i he at once began to say things which interested 
me. As he talked along, softly, pleasantly, flowingly, 
he seemed to drift away imperceptibly out of this 
world and time, and into some remote era and old 
forgotten coimtry; and so he gradually wove such a 
spell about me that I seemed to move among the 
specters and shadows and dust and mold of a gray 
antiquity, holding speech with a relic of it ! Exactly 
as I would speak of my nearest personal friends or 
enemies, or my most familiar neighbors, he spoke of 
Sir Bedivere, Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Launcelot of the 
Lakte, Sir Galahad, and all the other great names of 

I 



MARK TWAIN 

the Table Round — and how old, old, unspeakably 
old and faded and dry and musty and ancient he 
came to look as he went on! Presently he turned 
to me and said, just as one might speak of the 
weather, or any other common matter — 

"You know about transmigration of souls; do you 
know about transposition of epochs — and bodies?" 

I said I had not heard of it. He was so little inter- 
ested — ^just as when people speak of the weatha: — 
that he did not notice whether I made him any an- 
swer or not. There was half a moment of silence, 
immediately interrupted by the droning voice of the 
salaried cicerone: 

''Ancient hauberk, date of the sixth century, time 
of King Arthur and the Roimd Table; said to have 
belonged to the knight Sir Sagramor le Desirous ; ob- 
serve the roimd hole through the chain-mail in the 
left breast; can't be accoimted for; supposed to have 
been done with a bullet since invention of firearms — 
perhaps maliciously by Cromwell's soldiers." 

My acquaintance smiled — not a modem smile, but 
one that must have gone out of general use many, 
many centuries ago — ^and muttered apparently to 
himself: 

** Wit ye well, I saw it done.'' Then, after a pause, 
added: ''I did it myself." 

By the time I had recovered from the electric sur- 
prise of this remark, he was gone. 

All that evening I sat by my fire at the Warwick 
Arms, steeped in a dream of the olden time, while the 
rain beat upon the windows, and the wind roared 
about the eaves and comers. Ptom time to time I 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

dipped into old Sir Thomas Malory's enchanting 
book, and fed at its rich feast of prodigies and 
adventures, breathed in the fragrance of its obsolete 
names, and dreamed again. Midnight being come 
at length, I read another tale, for a nightcap — ^this 
which here follows, to wit : 

HOW SIR LAUNCELOT SLEW TWO GIANTS, AND 

MADE A CASTLE FREE 

Anon withal came there upon him two great giants, well 
anned, all save the heads, with two horrible clubs in their hands. 
Sir Launcelct put his shield afore him, and put the stroke away 
of the one giant, and with his sword he clave his head asunder. 
When his fellow saw that, he ran away as he were wood,^ for 
fear of the horrible strokes, and Sir Latmcelot after him with 
an his might, and smote him on the shoulder, and clave him to 
the middle. Then Sir Laxmcelot went into the hall, and there 
came afore him threescore ladies and damsels, and all kneeled 
unto him, and thanked God and him of their deliverance. For, 
sir, said they, the most part of us have been here this seven year 
their prisoners, and we have wc^rked all manner of silk works 
for our meat, and we are all great gentlewomen bom, and 
blessed be the time, knight, that ever thou wert bom; for thou 
hast done the most worship that ever did knight in the world, 
that will we bear record, and we all pray you to tell us your name, 
that we may tell our friends who delivered us out of prison. 
Fair damsels, he said, my name is Sir Launcelot du Lake. And 
80 he departed from them and betaught them unto God. And 
then he mounted upon his horse, and rode into many strange 
and wild countries, and through many waters and valleys, and 
evil was he lodged. And at the last by fortune him happened 
against a night to come to a fair courtilage, and therein he found 
an old gentlewoman that lodged him with a good will, and there 
he had good cheer for him and his horse. And when time was, 
his host brought him into a fair garret over the gate to his 
bed. There Sir Launcelot unarmed him, and set his harness 
by him, and went to bed, and anon he fdl on sleep. So, soon 

1 Demented. 
2 1 



MARK TWAIN 

after there came one on horseback, and knocked at the gate in 
great haste. And when Sir Laimcelot heard this he rose up, 
and looked out at the window, and saw by the moonlight three 
knights come riding after that one man, and all three lashed 
on him at once with swords, and that one knight turned on them 
knightly again and defended him. Truly, said Sir Launcelot, 
yonder one knight shall I help, for it were shame for me to 
see three knights on one, and if he be slain I am partner oi his 
death. And therewith he took his harness and went out at a 
window by a sheet down to the four knights, and then Sir 
Latmcelot said on high, Turn you knights unto me, and leave 
your fighting with that knight. And then they all three left 
Sir Kay, and turned tmto Sir Latmcelot, and there b^an great 
battle, for they alight all three, and strake many strokes at 
Sir Latmcelot, and assailed him on every side. Then Sir Kay 
dressed him for to have holpen Sir Latmcelot. Nay, sir, said 
he, I will none of your help, therefore as ye will have my help 
let me alone with them. Sir Kay for the pleasure of the knight 
suffered him for to do his will, and so stood aside. And then 
anon within six strokes Sir Latmcelot had stricken them to the 
earth. 

And then they all three cried. Sir Knight, we yield us unto you 
as man of might matchless. As to that, said Sir Launcelot, I 
will not take yotu: yielding unto me, but so that ye yield you 
unto Sir Kay the seneschal, on that covenant I will save your 
lives and else not. Fair knight, said they, that were we loath 
to do; for as for Sir Kay we chased him hither, and had over- 
come him had ye not been; therefore, to yield us xmto him it 
were no reason. Well, as to that, said Sir Launcelot, advise 
you well, for ye may choose whether ye will die or live, for an 
ye be yielden, it shall be unto Sir Kay. Fair knight, then they 
said, in saving our lives we will do as thou commandest us. 
Then shall ye, said Sir Launcelot, on Whitsunday next coming 
go unto the court of Eling Arthur, and there shall ye yield you 
unto Queen Guenever, and put you all three in her grace and 
mercy, and say that Sir Kay sent you thither to be her prisoners. 
On the mom Sir Laxmcelot arose early, and left Sir Kay sleeping; 
and Sir Launcelot took Sir Kay's armor and his shield and 
armed him, and so he went to the stable and took his horse, 
and took his leave of his host, and so he departed. Then soon 
after arose Sir Kay and missed Sir Launcelot; and then he 

4 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

espied that he had his armor and his horse. Now by my faith 
I know well that he will grieve some of the court of King Arthur; 
for on him knights will be bold, and deem that it is I, and that 
will b^;uile them; and becatise of his armor and shield I am 
sure I shall ride in peace. And then soon after departed Sir 
Kay, and thanked his host. 

As I laid the book down there was a knock at the 
door, and my stranger came in. I gave him a pipe 
and a chair, and made him welcome. I also com- 
forted him with a hot Scotch whisky; gave him 
another one; then still another — ^hoping always for 
his story. After a fourth persuader, he drifted into 
it himself, in a quite simple and natural way: 

THE stranger's HISTORY 

I am an American. I was bom and reared in Hart- 
ford, in the state of Connecticut — ^anyway, just over 
the river, in the coimtry. So I am a Yankee of the 
Yankees — and practical; yes, and nearly barren of 
sentiment, I suppose — or poetry, in other words. My 
father was a blacksmith, my uncle was a horse-doc- 
tor, and I was both, along at first. Then I went over 
to the great arms factory and learned my real trade ; 
learned all there was to it; learned to make every- 
thing: guns, revolvers, cannon, boilers, engines, all 
sorts of labor-saving machinery. Why, I cotdd make 
anything a body wanted — anything in the world, it 
didn't make any difference what ; and if there wasn't 
any quick new-fangled way to make a thing, I could 
iavent one — and do it as easy as rolling off a log. I 
became head superintendent; had a couple oi thou- 
sand men under me. 

S 



MARK TWAIN 

Well, a man like that is a man that is full of fight — 
that goes without saying. With a couple of thousand 
rough men tinder one, one has plenty of that sort of 
amusement. I had, anjrway. At last I met my 
match, and I got my dose. It was during a misun- 
derstanding conducted with crowbars with a fellow 
we used to call Hercules. He laid me out with a 
crusher alongside the head that made ever3rthing 
crack, and seemed to spring every joint in my skull 
and made it overlap its neighbor. Then the world 
went out in darkness, and I didn't feel anything more, 
and didn't know anything at all — at least for a 
while. 

When I came to again, I was sitting imder an oak 
tree, on the grass, with a whole beautif td and broad 
coimtry landscape all to myself — ^nearly. Not en- 
tirely ; for there was a fellow on a horse, looking down 
at me — a fellow fresh out of a picture-book. He was 
in old-time iron annor from head to heel, with a 
helmet on his head the shape of a nail-keg with slits 
in it ; and he had a shield, and a sword, and a pro- 
digious spear; and his horse had armor on, too, and a 
steel horn projecting from his forehead, and gorgeous 
red and green silk trappings that hung down aU 
around him like a bedquilt, nearly to the groimd. 

*'Fair sir, will ye just?" said this fellow. 

''Will I which?" 

**Will ye try a passage of arms for land or lady or 
for—" 

**What are you giving me?" I said. **Get along 
back to yotu" circus, or I'll report you." 

Now what does this man do but fall back a couple 

6 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

of hundred yards and then come rusfaing at me as 
hard as he could tear, with his nail-keg bent down 
nearly to his horse's neck and his long spear pointed 
straight ahead. I saw he meant business, so I was 
up the tree when he arrived. 

He allowed that I was his property, the captive of 
his spear. There was argument on his side — and the 
bulk oi the advantage — so I judged it best to humor 
him. We fixed up an agreement whereby I was to go 
with him and he was not to hurt me. I came down, 
and we started away, I walking by the side of his 
horse. We marched comfortably along, through 
glades and over brooks which I could not remember 
to have seen before — ^which puzzled me and made me 
wonder — and yet we did not come to any circus or 
sign of a circus. So I gave up the idea of a circus, 
and concluded he was from an asylum. But we 
never came to an asylum — so I was up a stump, as 
you may say. I asked him how far we were from 
Hartford. He said he had never heard of the place ; 
which I took to be a lie, but allowed it to go at that. 
At the end of an hour we saw a far-away town sleep- 
iQg in a valley by a winding river ; and beyond it on a 
hill, a vast gray fortress, with towers and turrets, the 
first I had ever seen out of a picture. 

** Bridgeport?" said I, pointing. 

"Camelot," said he. 

My stranger had been showing signs of sleepiness. 
He caught himself nodding, now, and smiled one of 
those pathetic, obsolete smiles of his, and said : 

**I find I can't go on; but come with me, I'v« 

7 



MARK TWAIN 

got it all written out, and you can read it if you 
like." 

In his chamber, he said: ''First, I kept a journal; 
then by and by, after years, I took the journal and 
turned it into a book. How long ago that was!" 

He handed me his manuscript, and pointed out the 
place where I should begin: 

''Begin here — ^I've already told you what goes be- 
fore." He was steeped in drowsiness by this time. 
As I went out at his door I heard him murmur sleep- 
ily: "Give you good den, fair sir." 

I sat down by my fire and examined my treasure. 
The first part of it — ^the great bulk of it — ^was parch- 
ment, and yellow with age. I scanned a leaf particu- 
larly and saw that it was a palimpsest. Under the 
old dim writing of the Yankee historian appeared 
traces of a penmanship which was older and dimmer 
still — Latin words and sentences: fragments from 
old monkish legends, evidently. I tvimed to the 
place indicated by my stranger and began to read 
follows: 



CHAPTER I 

CAMELOT 

CAMELOT— Camdot," said I to myself. "I 
don't seem to remember hearing of it before. 
Name of the asylum, likely." 

It was a soft, reposeftil stmmier landscape, as love- 
ly as a dream, and as lonesome as Sunday. The air 
was full of the smell of flowers, and the buzzing of 
insects, and the twittering of birds, and there were 
no people, no wagons, there was no stir of life, noth- 
ing going on. The road was mainly a winding path 
with hoof -prints in it, and now and then a faint trace 
of wheels on either side in the grass — ^wheels that 
apparently had a tire as broad as one's hand. 

Presently a fair slip of a girl, about ten years cdd, 
with a cataract of golden hair streaming down over 
her shoulders, came along. Arotmd her head she 
wore a hoop of flame-red poppies. It was as sweet 
an outfit as ever I saw, what there was of it. She 
walked indolently along, with a mind at rest, its 
peace reflected in her innocent face. The circus 
man paid no attention to her; didn't even seem to 
see her. And she — she was no more startled at 
his fantastic make-up than if she was used to his 
like every day of her life. She was going by as 
indifferently as she might have gone by a couple of 

lO 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

cows; but when she happened to notice me, iken 
there was a change! Up went her hands, and she 
was turned to stone; her mouth dropped open, her 
eyes stared wide and timorously, she was the pic- 
ture of astonished curiosity touched with fear. And 
there she stood gazing, in a sort of stupefied fascina- 
tion, till we turned a comer of the wood and were 
lost to her view. That she should be startled at me 
instead of at the other man, was too many for me; 
I couldn't make head or tail of it. And that she 
should seem to consider me a spectacle, and totally 
overlook her own merits in that respect, was another 
puzzling thing, and a display of magnaninuty, too, 
that was surprising in one so yoimg. There was food 
for thought here. I moved along as one in a dream. 

As we approached the town, signs of life began to 
appear. At intervals we passed a wretched cabin, 
with a thatched roof, and about it small fields and 
garden patches in an indifferent state of cultivation. 
There were people, too; brawny men, with long, 
coarse, uncombed hair that hung down over their 
faces and made them look like animals. They and 
the women, as a rule, wore a coarse tow-linen robe 
that came well below the knee, and a rude sort of 
sandal, and many wore an iron collar. The small 
boys and girls were always naked; but nobody 
seemed to know it. All of these people stared at 
me, talked about me, ran into the huts and fetched 
oat their families to gape at me; but nobody ever 
noticed that other fellow, except to make him hum- 
ble salutation and get no response for their pains. 

In the town were some substantial windowkss 

II 



MARK TWAIN 

houses of stone scattered among a wilderness of 
thatched cabins; the streets were mere crooked 
alleys, and impaved; troops of dogs and nude chil- 
dren played in the stm and made life and noise ; hogs 
roamed and rooted contentedly about, and one of 
them lay in a reeking wallow in the middle of the 
main thoroughfare and suckled her family. Pres- 
ently there was a distant blare of military music; 
it came nearer, still nearer, and soon a noble caval- 
cade woimd into view, glorious with plumed helmets 
and flashing mail and flatmting banners and rich 
doublets and horse-cloths and gilded spearheads; 
and through the muck and swine, and naked brats, 
and joyous dogs, and shabby huts, it took its gal- 
lant way, and in its wake we followed. Followed 
through one winding alley and then another — and 
climbing, always cUmbing — till at last we gained the 
breezy height where the huge castle stood. There 
was an exchange of bugle-blasts ; then a parley from 
the walls, where men-at-arms, in hauberk and morion, 
marched back and forth with halberd at shoidder 
imder flapping banners with the rude figure of a 
dragon displayed upon them; and then the great 
gates were flimg open, the drawbridge was lowered, 
and the head of the cavalcade swept forward imder 
the frowning arches; and we, following, soon foimd 
ourselves in a great paved court, with towers and 
turrets stretching up into the blue air on all the four 
sides ; and all about us the dismotmt was going on, and 
much greeting and ceremony, and running to and fro, 
and a gay display of moving and intermingling colors, 
andanaltogetherpleasant stir andnoise and confusion. 

12 



CHAPTER II 



KING Arthur's court 



THE moment I got a chance I slipped aside pri- 
vately and toudied an ancient common-looking 
man on the shoulder and said, in an insinuating, 
confidential way: 

** Friend, do me a kindness. Do you belong to 
the asylum, or are you just here on a visit or some- 
thing like that?" 

He looked me over stupidly, and said: 

''Marry, fair sir, me seemeth — " 

"That will do," I said; **I reckon you are a 
patient." 

I moved away, cogitating, and at the same time 
keeping an eye out for any chance passenger in his 
right mind that might come along and give me some 
Ught. I judged I had found one, presently; so I 
drew him aside and said in his ear: 

**If I could see the head keeper a minute — oaly 
just a minute — " 

"Prithee do not let me." 

"Let you whatr 

*' Hinder me, then, if the word please thee bet- 
ter." Then he went on to say he was an imder-cook 
and could not stop to gossip, though he would like 
it another time; for it would con:ifort his very Uver 

13 



MARK TWAIN 

to know where I got my clothes. As he started 
away he pointed and said yonder was one who was 
idle enough for my purpose, and was seeking me be- 
sides, no doubt. This was an airy slim boy in 
shrimp-colored tights that made him look like a 
forked carrot; the rest of his gear was blue silk and 
dainty laces and ruffles; and he had long yellow 
curls, and wore a pltuned pink satin cap tilted com- 
plac^itly over his ear. By his look, he was good- 
natured; by his gait, he was satisfied with himself. 
He was pretty enough to frame. He arrived, looked 
me over with a smiling and impudent curiosity; said 
he had come for me, and informed me that he was 
a page. 

**Go 'long," I said; "you ain't more than a para- 
graph." : 

It wias pretty severe, but I was nettled. How- 
ever, it never fazed him; he didn't appear to know 
he was hurt. He began to talk and laugh, in happy, 
thoughtless, boyish fashion, as we walked along, and 
made himself old friends with me at once; asked 
me all sorts of questions about myself and about my 
clothes, but never waited for an answer — always 
chattered straight ahead, as if he didn't know he had 
asked a question and wasn't expecting any reply, 
until at last he happened to mention that he was 
bom in the beginning of the year 513. 

It made the cold chills ofeep over me! I stopped, 
and said, a little faintly: 

"Maybe I didn't hear you just right. Say it 
again — and say it slow. What year was it?'* 

14 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"513I You don't look it! Come, my boy, I am 
a stranger and friendless; be honest and honorable 
Tvith me. Are you in your right mind?'* 

He said he was. 

"Are these other people in their right minds?" 

He said they were. 

**And this isn't an asyltun? I mean, it isn't a 
place where they cure crazy people?" 

He said it wasn't. 

*'Well, tiien," I said, "either I am a lunatic, or 
something just as awful has happened. Now tell 
me, honest and true, where am I?" 

"In King Arthur's Court." 

I waited a minute, to let that idea shudder its way 
home, and then said: 

"And according to your notions, what year is it 



nowf 
It 



?'• 



528— nineteenth of June." 

I felt a mournful sinking at the heart, and mut- 
tered: "I shall never see my friends again — ^never, 
never again. They will not be bom for more than 
thirteen hundred years yet." 

I seemed to believe the boy, I didn't know why. 
Something in me seemed to believe him — ^my con- 
sciousness, as you may say; but my reason didn't. 
My reason straighway began to clamor; that was 
natural. I didn't know, how to go about satisfy- 
ing it, because I knew that the testimony of men 
wouldn't serve — my reason would say they were 
Itmatics, and throw out their evidence. But all of 
a sud^.en I stumbled on the very thing, just by luck. 
I kne^ that the only total eclipse of the sun in the 

15 



MARK TWAIN 

first half of the sixth centtiry occurred on the 21st 
of June, A.D. 538, O.S., and began at 3 minutes after 
12 noon. I also knew that no total eclipse of the 
sun was due in what to me was the present year — 
i,e,j 1879. So, if I could keep my anxiety and 
curiosity from eating the heart out of me for forty- 
eight hours, I should then find out for certain 
whether this boy was telling me the truth or not. 

Wherefore, being a practical Connecticut man, I 
now shoved this whole problem dear out of my mind 
tiU its appointed day and hour should come, in order 
that I might turn aU my attention to the circum- 
stances of the present moment, and be alert and 
ready to make the most out of them that could be 
made. One thing at a time, is my motto — and just 
play that thing for all it is worth, even if it's only 
two pair and a jack. I made up my mind to two 
things: if it was still the nineteenth century and I 
was among lunatics and couldn't get away, I would 
presently boss that asylum or know the reascm why; 
and if, on the other hand, it was really the sixth 
century, all right, I didn't want any softer thing: I 
would boss the whole cotmtry inside of three months ; 
for I judged I would have the start of the best- 
educated man in the kingdom by a matter of thirteen 
hundred years and upward. I'm not a man to 
waste time after my mind's made up and there's 
work on hand; so I said to the page : 

**Now, Clarence, my boy — ^if that might happen 
to be your name — I'll get you to post me up a little 
if you don't mind. What is the name of that ap- 
parition that brought me here?" 

16 



\ 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

' * My master and thine ? That is the good knight 
and great lord Sir Kay the Seneschal, foster-brother 
to our liege the king." 

"Very good; go on, teU me everything." 

He made a long story of it ; but the part that had 
immediate interest for me was this: He said I was 
Sir Kay's prisoner, and that in the due course of 
custom I would be flimg into a dtmgeon and left 
there on scant commons imtil my friends ransomed 
me — unless I chanced to rot, first. I saw that the 
last chance had the best show, but I didn't waste 
any bother about that ; time was too precious. The 
page said, further, that dinner was about ended in 
the great haU by this time, and that as soon as the 
sociability and the heavy drinking should begin, Sir 
Kay would have me in and exhibit me before King 
Arthur and his illustrious knights seated at the 
Table Roimd, and would brag about his exploit in 
capturing me, and would probably exaggerate the 
facts a little, but it wouldn't be good form for me 
to correct him, and not over-safe, either; and when 
I was done being exhibited, then ho for the dtmgeon; 
but he, Clarence, would find a way to come and see 
me every now and then, and cheer me up, and help 
me get word to my friends. 

Get word to my friends! I thanked him; I 
couldn't do less; and about this time a lackey came 
to say I was wanted; so Clarence led me in and took 
me off to one side and sat down by me. 

Well, it was a curious kind of spectacle, and in- 
teresting. It was an immense place, and rather 
naked — ^yes, and full of loud contrasts. It was very, 

17 



MARK TWAIN 

very lofty ; so lofty that the banners depending from 
the arched beams and girders away up there floated 
in a sort of twilight; there was a stone-railed gal- 
lery at each end, high up, with musicians in the one, 
and women, clothed in stunning colors, in the other. 
The floor was of big stone flags laid in black and 
white sqtiares, rather battered by age and use, and 
needing repair. As to ornament, there wasn't any, 
strictly speaking; though on the walls hung some 
huge tapestries which were jM-obably taxed as works 
of art; battle-pieces, they were, with horses shaped 
like those which children cut out of paper or create 
in gingerbread; with men on them in scale armor 
whose scales are represented by round holes — so that 
the man's coat looks as if it had been done with a 
biscuit-pimch. There was a fireplace big enough to 
camp in ; and its projecting sides and hood, of carved 
and pillared stonework, had the look of a cathedral 
door. Along the walls stood men-at-arms, in breast- 
plate and morion, with halberds for their only wea- 
pon — rigid as statues; and thatis what they lookedlike. 

In the middle of this groined and vaulted public 
square was an oaken table which they called the 
Table Rotmd. It was as large as a circus-ring ; and 
arotmd it sat a great company of men dressed in 
such various and splendid colors that it hurt one's 
eyes to look at them. They wore their plumed hats, 
right along, except that whenever one addressed 
himself directly to the king, he lifted his hat a trifle 
just as he was beginning his remark. 

Mainly they were drinking — ^from entire ox horns; 
but a few were still munching bread or gnawing beef 

i8 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

bones. There was about an average of two dogs to 
one man; and these sat in expectant attitudes till a 
spent bone was flung to them, and then they went 
for it by brigades and divisions, with a rush, and 
there ensued a fight which filled the prospect with 
a tumultuous chaos of pltmging heads and bodies 
and flashing tails, and the stonn of bowlings and 
barkings deafened all speech for the time; but that 
was no matter, for the dog-fight was always a bigger 
interest anjrway; the men rose, sometimes, to ob- 
serve it the better and bet on it, and the ladies and 
the musicians stretched themselves out over their 
balusters with the same object; and all broke into 
delighted ejaculations from time to time. In the 
end, the winning dog stretched himself out comfort- 
ably with his bone between his paws, and proceeded 
to growl over it, and gnaw it, and grease the floor 
with it, just as fifty others were already doing ; and 
the rest of the court resumed their previous indus- 
tries and entertainments. 

As a rule, the speech and behavior of these people 
were gracious and courtly; and I noticed that they 
were good and serious listeners when anybody was 
telling an3rthing — I mean in a dog-fightless interval. 
And plainly, too, they were a childlike and innocent 
lot ; telling lies of the stateliest pattern with a most 
gentle and winning naivet6, and ready and willing 
to listen to anybody else's lie, and believe it, too. 
It was hard to associate them with anything cruel 
or dreadful ; and yet they dealt in tales of blood and 
suffering with a guileless relish that made me almost 

forget to shudder. 
3 19 



MARK TWAIN 

I was not the only prisoner present. There were 
twenty or more. Poor devils, many of them were 
maimed, hacked, carved, in a frightful way; and 
their hair, their faces, their clothing, were caked 
with black and stiffened drenchings of blood. They 
were suffering sharp physical pain, of course; and 
weariness, and himger and thirst, no doubt; and at 
least none had given them the comfort of a wash, or 
even the poor charity of a lotion for their wounds j 
yet you never heard them utter a moan or a groan, 
or saw them show any siga of restlessness, or any 
disposition to complain J' The thought was forced 
upon me: "The rascaas — they have served other 
people so in their day ; it being their own turn, now, 
they were not expecting any better treatment than 
this; so their philosophical bearing is not an out- 
come of mental training, intellectual fortitude, rea- 
soning; it is mere animal training; they are white 
Indians." 



CHAPTER III 

KNIGHTS OP THE TABLE ROUND 

MAINLY the Roimd Table talk was monologues 
— narrative accounts of the adventures in 
which these prisoners were captured and their 
friends and backers lolled and stripped of their 
steeds and armor. As a general thing — as far as I 
could make out — ^these murderous adventures were 
not forays undertaken to avenge injuries, nor to 
settle old disputes or sudden fallings out; no, as a 
rule they were simply duels between strangers — 
duels between people who had never even been intro- 
duced to each other, and between whom existed no 
cause of offense whatever. Many a time I had seen 
a couple of boys, strangers, meet by chance, and say 
simultaneously, "I can lick you," and go at it on 
the spot; but I had always imagined until now that 
that sort of thing belonged to children only, and was 
a sign and mark of childhood; but here were these 
big boobies sticking to it and taking pride in it 
dear up into full age and beyond. Yet there was 
something very engaging about these great simple- 
hearted creatures, something attractive and lovable. 
There did not seem to be brains enough in the entire 
nursery, so to speak, to bait a fish-hook with; but 
you didn't seem to mind that, after a little, because 

21 



MARK TWAIN 

3rou soon saw that brains were not needed in a society 
like that, and indeed would have marred it, hindered 
it, spoiled its symmetry — perhaps rendered its ex- 
istence impossible. 

There was a fine manliness observable in almost 
every face; and in some a certain loftiness and sweet- 
ness that rebuked your belittling criticisms and 
stilled them. A most noble benignity and purity 
reposed in the countenance of him they called Sir 
Galahad, and likewise in the king's also; and there 
was majesty and greatness in the giant frame and 
high bearing of Sir Latmcelot of the Lake. 

There was presently an incident which centered 
the general interest upon this Sir Latmcelot. At a 
sign from a sort of master of ceremonies, six or eight 
of the prisoners rose and came forward in a body and 
knelt on the floor and lifted up their hands toward 
the ladies' gallery and begged the grace of a word 
with the queen. The most conspicuously situated 
lady in that massed flower-bed of feminine show and 
finery inclined her head by way of assent, and then 
the spokesman of the prisoners delivered himself and 
his fellows into her hands for free pardon, ransom, 
captivity, or death, as she in her good . pleasure 
might elect; and this, as he said, he was doing by 
command of Sir Kay the Seneschal, whose prisoners 
they were, he having vanquished them by his single 
might and prowess in stm*dy conflict in the field. 

Surprise and astonishment flashed from face to faoQ,. 
all over the house; the queen's gratified smile faded; 
out at the name of Sir Kay, and she looked disap^' 
pointed; and the page whispered in my ear with atf 

22 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

aooent and manner expressive of extravagant de- 
rision — 

"Sir Kay^ forsooth! Oh, call me pet names, dear- 
est, call me a marine! In twice a thousand years 
shaU the unholy invention of man labor at odds to 
beget the feUow to this majestic lie!" 

Every eye was fastened with severe inquiry upon 
Sir Kay. But he was equal to the occasion. He got 
up and played his hand like a major — ^and took every 
trick. He said he would state the case exactly 
according to the facts ;^ he would tell the simple 
straightforward tale, without comment of his own; 
**and then," said he, "if ye find glory and honor due, 
ye will give it unto him who is the mightiest man of 
his hands that ever bare shield or strake with sword 
in the ranks of Christian battle — even him that 
sitteth there !" and he pointed to Sir Launcelot. Ah, 
he fetched them; it was a rattling good stroke. 
Then he went on and told how Sir Laimcelot, seeking 
adventures, some brief time gone by, killed seven 
giants at one sweep of his sword, and set a hundred 
and forty-two captive maidens free; and then went 
further, still seeking adventures, and found him 
(Sir Kay) fighting a desperate fight against nine 
foreign knights, and straightway took the battle 
solely into his own hands, and conquered the nine; 
and that night Sir Launcelot rose quietly, and 
dressed him in Sir Kay's armor and took Sir Kay's 
horse and gat him away into distant lands, and 
vaxiqttished sixteen knights in one pitched battle and 
thirty-four in another; and all these and the former 
nine he made to swear that about Whitsuntide they 

23 



MARK TWAIN 

would ride to Arthur's court and yield them to Queen 
Guenever's hands as captives of Sir Kay the Sene- 
schal, spoil of his knightly prowess; and now here 
were these half-dozen, and the rest would be along 
as soon as they might be healed of their desperate 
wounds. 

Well, it was touching to see the queen bltish and 
smile, and look embarrassed, and happy, and fling 
furtive glances at Sir Launcelot that would have got 
him shot in Arkansas, to a dead certainty. 

Everybody praised the valor and magnanimity of 
Sir Launcelot; and as for me, I was perfectly amazed, 
that one man, aU by himself, should have been able 
to beat down and capture such battalions of prac- 
tised fighters. I said as much to Clarence ; but this 
mocking featherhead only said: 

"An Sir Kay had had time to get another skin 
of sour wine into him, ye had seen the accompt 
doubled." 

I looked at the boy in sorrow; and as I looked I 
saw the cloud of a deep despondency settle upon his 
countenance. I followed the direction of his eye, 
and saw that a very old and white-bearded man, 
clothed in a flowing black gown, had risen and was 
standing at the table upon unsteady legs, and feebly 
swaying his ancient head and surveying the company 
with his watery and wandering eye. The same 
suffering look that was in the page's face was ob- 
servable in all the faces aroimd — ^the look of dumb 
creatures who know that they must endure and 
make no moan. 

"Marry, we shall have it again," sighed the boy; 

24 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"that same old weary tale that he hath told a 
thousand times in the same words, and that he will 
tell till he dieth, every time he hath gotten his barrel 
full and feeleth his exaggeration-mill a-working. 
Would God I had died or I saw this day!" ^ 

"Who is it?" 

"Merlin, the mighty liar and magician, perdition 
singe him for the weariness he worketh with his one 
tale! But that men fear him for that he hath the 
storms and the lightnings and all the devils that be 
in hell at his beck and call, they would have dug his 
entrails out these many years ago to get at that tale 
and squelch it. He telleth it always in the third 
person, making believe he is too modest to glorify 
himself — ^maledictions light upon him, misfortune be 
his dole ! Good friend, prithee call me for evensong." 

The boy nestled himself upon my shoulder and 
pretended to go to sleep. The old man began his 
tale; and presently the lad was asleep in reality; so 
also were the dogs, and the court, the lackeys, and 
the files of men-at-arms. The droning voice droned 
on; a soft snoring arose on all sides and supported 
it like a deep and subdued accompaniment of wind 
instruments. Some heads were bowed upon folded 
arms, some lay back with open mouths that issued 
unconscious music; the flies buzzed and bit, un- 
molested, the rats swarmed softly out from a himdred 
holes, and pattered about, and made themselves at 
home everywhere; and one of them sat up like a 
squirrel on the king's head and held a bit of cheese 
in its hands and nibbled it, and dribbled the crumbs 
in the king's face with naive and impudent irrever- 

25 



MARK TWAIN 

ence. It was a tranquil scene, and restful to the 
weary eye and the jaded spirit. 
This was the old man's tale. He said: 
"Right so the king and Merlin departed, and 
went until an hermit that was a good man and a 
great leech. So the hermit searched all his wounds 
and gave him good salves; so the king was there 
three days, and then were his wotmds well amended 
that he might ride and go, and so departed. And 
as they rode, Arthur said, I have no sword. No 
force,^ said Merlin, hereby is a sword that shall be 
yours an I may. So they rode till they came to 
a lake, the which was a fair water and broad, and 
in the midst of the lake Arthur was ware of an arm 
clothed in white samite, that held a fair sword in 
that hand. Lo, said Merlin, yonder is that sword 
that I spake of. With that they saw a damsel going 
upon the lake. What damsel is that? said Arthur. 
That is the Lady of the lake, said Merlin; and within 
that lake is a rock, and therein is as fair a place as 
any on earth, and richly beseen, and this damsd 
will come to you anon, and then speak ye fair to her 
that she will give you that sword. Anon withal 
came the damsel tmto Arthur and saluted him, and 
he her again. Damsel, said Arthur, what sword is 
that, that yonder the arm holdeth above the water? 
I would it were mine, for I have no sword. Sir 
Arthur King, said the damsel, that sword is mine, 
and if ye will give me a gift when I ask it you, ye shall 
have it. By my faith, said Arthur, I will give you 
what gift ye will adc. Well, said the damsel, go ye 

> No matter. 

96 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

into yonder baxge and row yourself to the sword, 
and take it and the scabbard with you, and I will 
ask my gift when I see my time. So Sir Arthur and 
Merlin alight, and tied their horses to two trees, 
and so they went into the ship, and when they came 
to the sword that the hand held. Sir Arthur took it 
up by the handles, and took it with him. And the 
arm an3 the hand went under the water; and so 
they came tmto the land and rode forth. And then 
Sir Arthur saw a rich pavilion. What signifieth 
yonder pavilion? It is the knight's pavilion, said 
Merlin, that ye fought with last, Sir PeUinore, but 
he is out, he is not there ; he hath ado with a knight 
of yours, that hight Egglame, and they have fought 
together, but at the last Egglame fled, and else he 
had been dead, and he hath chased him even to 
Carlion, and we shall meet with him anon in the 
highway. That is well said, said Arthur, now have 
I a sword, now will I wage battle with him, and be 
avenged on him. Sir, ye shall not so, said Merlin, 
for the knight is weary of fighting and chasing, so 
that ye shall have no worship to have ado with him; 
also, he will not lightly be matched of one knight 
living; and therefore it is my cotmsel, let him pass, 
for he shall do you good service in short time, and 
his sons, after his days. Also ye shall see that day 
in short space ye shall be right glad to give him your 
sister to wed. When I see him, I will do as ye 
advise me, said Arthur. Then Sir Arthur looked on 
the sword, and liked it passing well. Whether 
liketh you better, said Merlin, the sword or the 
scabbard? Me liketh better the sword, said Arthur. 

27 



MARK TWAIN 

Ye are more unwise, said Merlin, for the scabbard 
is worth ten of the sword, for while ye have the scab- 
bard upon you ye shall never lose no blood, be ye 
never so sore wounded; therefore, keep well the 
scabbard always with you. So they rode into 
Carlion, and by the way they met with Sir PeUinore ; 
but Merlin had done such a craft that PeUinore saw 
not Arthur, and he passed by without any words. 
I marvel, said Arthur, that the knight would not 
speak. Sir, said Merlin, he saw you not; for an 
he had seen you ye had not hghtly departed. So 
they came imto Carlion, whereof his knights were 
passing glad. And when they heard of his adven- 
tures they marveled that he would jeopard his 
person so alone. But all men of worship said it was 
merry to be under such a chieftain that would put 
his person in adventure as other poor knights did.** 



CHAPTER IV 

SIR DINADAN THE HUMORIST 

IT seemed to me that this quaint Ke was most 
simply and beautifully told ; but then I had heard 
it only once, and that makes a difference; it was 
pleasant to the others when it was fresh, no doubt. 
Sir Dinadan the Humorist was the first to awake, 
and he soon roused the rest with a practical joke of 
a suflBdently poor quality. He tied some metal 
mugs to a dog's tail and turned him loose, and he 
tore annmd and around the place in a frenzy of 
fright, with all the other dogs bellowing after him 
and battering and crashing against everything that 
came in their way and making altogether a chaos of 
confusion and a most deafening din and turmoil; 
at which every man and woman of the multitude 
laughed till the tears flowed, and some fell out of 
their chairs and wallowed on the floor in ecstasy. It 
was just like so many children. Sir Dinadan was so 
proud of his exploit that he could not keep from 
telling over and over again, to weariness, how the 
immortal idea happened to occur to him; and as is 
the way with humorists of his breed, he was still 
laughing at it after everybody else had got through. 
He was so set up that he concluded to make a speech 
— of course a humorous speech. I think I never 

29 



MARK TWAIN 

heard so many old played-out jokes strung together 
in my life. He was worse than the minstrels, worse 
than the clown in the circus. It seemed peculiarly 
sad to sit here, thirteen hundred years before I was 
bom, and listen again to poor, flat, worm-eaten 
jokes that had given me the dry gripes when I was 
a boy thirteen hundred years afterward. It about 
convinced me that there isn't any such thing as a 
new joke possible. Everybody laughed at these 
antiquities — ^but then they always do; I had no- 
ticed that, centuries later. However, of course the 
scoffer didn't laugh — ^I mean the boy. No, he 
scoffed; there wasn't anything he wouldn't scoff at. 
He said the most of Sir Dinadan's jokes were rotten 
and the rest were petrified. I said "petrified" was 
good; as I believed, myself, that the only right way 
to classify the majestic ages of some of those jokes 
was by geologic periods. But that neat idea hit 
the boy in a blank place, for geology hadn't been in- 
vented yet. However, I made a note of the remark, 
and calculated to educate the commonwealth up to 
it if I pulled through. It is no use to throw a good 
thing away merely because the market isn't ripe 

yety- 

"iNfow Sir Kay arose and began to fire up on his 
history-mill with me for fuel. It was time for me 
to feel serious, and I did. Sir Kay told how he had 
encountered me in a far land of barbarians, who all 
wore the same ridiculous garb that I did — a, garb 
that was a work of enchantment, and intended to 
make the wearer secure from hurt by human hands. 
However, he had nullified the force of the enchant- 

30 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

ment by prayer, and had killed my thirteen knights 
in* a three hours' battle, and taken me prisoner, 
sparing my life in order that so strange a curiosity 
as I was might be exhibited to the wonder and ad- 
miration of the king and the cxnirt. He spoke of 
me all the time, in the blandest way, as **this pro- 
digious giant," and **this horrible sky-towering 
monster," and "this tusked and taloned man- 
devouring ogre," and everybody took in all this 
bosh in the naivest way, and never smiled or seemed 
to notice that there was any discrepancy between 
these watered statistics and me. He said that in 
trying to escape from him I sprang into the top of 
a tree two himdred cubits high at a single botmd, 
but he dislodged me with a stone the size of a cow, 
which **all-to brast" the most of my bones, and 
then swore me to appear at Arthtir's court for sen- 
tence. He ended by conden^iing me to die at 
noon on the 21st; and was so little concerned about 
it that he stopped to yawn before he named the 
date. # 

I was in a dismal state by this time; indeed, I 
was hardly enough in my right mind to keep the run 
of a dispute that sprung up as to how I had better 
be killed, the possibility of the killing being doubted 
by some, because of the enchantment in my clothes. 
And yet it was nothing but an ordinary suit of 
fifteen-dollar sl^-shops. Still, I was sane enough 
to notice this detail, to wit : many of the terms used 
in the most matter-of-fact way by this great assem- 
blage of the first ladies and gentlemen in the land 
would have made a Comanche blush. Indelicacy 

31 



MARK TWAIN 

is too mild a term to convey the idea. However, I 
had read Tom Jones, and Roderick Random, alid 
other books of that kind, and knew that the highest 
and first ladies and gentlemen in England had re- 
mained little or no cleaner in their talk, and in the 
morals and conduct which such talk implies, clear 
up to a hundred years ago; in fact clear into our 
own nineteenth century — ^in which century, broadly 
speaking, the earliest samples of the real lady and 
real gentleman discoverable in English history — or 
in European history, for that matter — may be said 
to have made their appearance. Suppose Sir Walter, 
instead of putting the conversations into the mouths 
of his characters, had allowed the characters to speak 
for themselves? We should have had talk from 
Rebecca and Ivanhoe and the soft lady Rowena 
which would embarrass a tramp in our day. How- 
ever, to the tmconsciously indelicate all things are 
delicate. King Arthur's people were not aware that 
they were indecent, and I had presence of mind 
enough not to mention it. 

They were so troubled about my enchanted 
clothes that they were mightily relieved, at last, 
when old Merlin swept the difficulty away for them 
with a common-sense hint. He asked them why 
they were so dull — ^why didn't it occur to them to 
strip me. In half a minute I was as naked as a pair 
of tongs ! And dear, dear, to think of it : I was the 
only embarrassed person there. Everybody dis- 
cussed me; and did it as tmconcemedly as if I had 
been a cabbage. Queen Guenever was as n^vely 
interested as the rest, and said she had never seea 

33 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

anybody with legs just like mine before. It was 
tj|f only compliment I got — if it was a compliment. 
A Finally I was carried off in one direction, and my 
perilous clothes in another. I was shoved into a 
dark and narrow cell in a dungeon, with some scant 
remnants for dinner, some moldy straw for a bed, 
and no end of rats for company. 



CHAPTER V 

AN INSPIRATION 

I WAS SO tired that even my fears were not able 
to keep me awake long. 

When I next came to myself, I seemed to have 
been asleep a very long time. My first thought was, 
**Well, what an astonishing dream I've had! I 
reckon I've waked only just in time to keep from 
being hanged or drowned or burned or something. 
. . . I'll nap again till the whistle blows, and then 
I'll go down to the arms factory and have it out with 
Hercules." 

But just then I heard the harsh music of rusty 
chains and bolts, a light flashed in my eyes, and that 
butterfly, Clarence, stood before me ! I gasped with 
surprise; my breath ahnost got away from me. 

"What!" I said, **you here yet? Go along with 
the rest of the dream! scatter!" 

But he only laughed, in his light-hearted way, and 
fell to making hxn of my sorry plight. 

"AH right," I said resignedly, "let the dream go 
on; I'm in no hurry." 

"Prithee what dream?" 

"What dream? Why, the dream that I am in 
Arthur's court — ^a person who never existed ; and that 

34 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

I am talking to you, who are nothing but a work of 
the imagination." 

""Oh, la, indeedl and is it a dream that you're to 
be burned to-morrow? Ho-ho — answer me that!" 

The shock that went through me was distressing. 
I now began to reason that my situation was in the 
last degree serious, dream or no dream; for I knew 
by past experience of the lifelike intensity of dreams, 
that to be btimed to death, even in a dream, would 
be very far from being a jest, and was a thing to be 
avoided, by any means, fair or foul, that I could 
contrive. So I said beseechingly: 

**Ah, Qarence, good boy, only friend IVe got — 
for you are my friend, aren't you? — don't fail me; 
help me to devise some way of escaping from this 
place!" 

"Now do but hear thyself! Escape? Why, man, 
the corridors are in guard and keep of men-at-arms." 

**No doubt, no doubt. But how many, Clarence? 
Not many, I hope?" 

*'Full a score. One may not hope to escape." 
After a pause — ^hesitatingly: '^and there be other 
reasons — and weightier." 

**Other ones? What are they?" 

"Well, th^ say — oh, but I daren't, indeed I 
daren't!" 

"Why, poor lad, what is the matter? Why do 
you bfcndi? Why do you tremble so?" 

"Oh, in sooth, there is need! I do want to tell 
you, but — " 

"Come, come, be brave, be a man— speak out, 
there's a good lad!" 

^ 35 



MARK TWAIN 

He hesitated, pulled one way by desire, the other 
way by fear; then he stole to the door and peeped 
out, listening; and finally crept close to me and put 
his mouth to my ear and told me his fearful news 
in a whisper, and with aU the cowering apprehension 
of one who was venttuing upon awful grotmd and 
speaking of things whose very mention might be 
freighted with death. 

** Merlin, in his malice, has woven a spell about 
this dungeon, and there bides not the man in these 
kingdoms that would be desperate enough to essay 
to cross its lines with you! Now God pity me, I 
have told it! Ah, be kind to me, be merciful to 
a poor boy who means thee well ; for an thou betray 
me I am lost!" 

I laughed the only really refreshing laugh I had had 
for some time ; and shouted : 

"Merlin has wrought a spell! Merlin, forsooth! 
That cheap old humbug, tlfiLt^ffiSCimdering' old' «S8? 
Bosh, pure bosh, the silliest bosh in the world ! Why, 
it does seem to me that of all the childish, idiotic, 
chuckle-headed, chicken-livered superstitions that 
ev — oh, ' dtEnuif ^ Menlfli ! 

But Clarence had slumped to his knees before I 
had half finished, and he was like to go out of his 
mind with fright. 

**0h, beware! These are awful words! Any 
moment these walls may crumble upon us if you. 
say such things. Oh call them back before it is toe 
late!" 

Now this strange exhibition gave me a good id 
and set me to thinking. If everybody about he 

36 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

was so honestly and sincerely afraid of Merlin's pre- 
tended magic as Clarence was, certainly a superior 
man like me ought to be shrewd enough to contrive 
some way to take advantage of such a state of things. 
I went on thinking, and worked out a plan. Then 
I said: 

"Get up. Pull yourself together; look me in the 
eye. Do you know why I laughed?" 

**No — ^but for our blessed Lady's sake, do it no 
more." 

"Well, I'll tell you why I laughed. Because I'm 
a magician myself." 

"Thou!" The boy recoiled a step, and caught 
his breath, for the thing hit him rather sudden; but 
the aspect which he took on was very, very respectful. 
I took quick note of that ; it indicated that a humbug 
didn't need to have a reputation in this asylum; 
people stood ready to take him at his word, without 
that. I resumed. 

"I've known Merlin seven himdred years, and 
he—" 

"Seven him—" 

"Don't interrupt me. He has died and come 
alive again thirteen times, and traveled tmder a new 
name every time: Smith, Jones, Robinson, Jackson, 
Peters, Haskins, Merlin — a. new alias every time he 
tiuTis up. I knew him in Egypt three himdred years 
ago; I knew him in India five hundred years ago — 
he is always blethering around in my way, every- 
where I go; he makes me tired. He don't amount 
to shucks, as a magician; knows some of the old 
common tricks, but has never got beyond the rudi- 

37 



MARK TWAIN 

ments, and never will. He is well enough for the 
provinces — one-night stands and that sort of thing, 
you know — but dear me, he oughtn't to set up for 
an expert — anyway not where there's a real artist. 
Now look here, Clarence, I am going to stand your 
friend, right along, and in return you must be 
mine. I want you to do me a favor. I want you 
to get word to the king that I am a magician myself 
— and the Supreme Grand High-yu-Muckamuck 
and head of the tribe, at that; and I want him to 
be made to understand that I am just quietly ar- 
ranging a little calamity here that will make the fur 
fly in these realms if Sir Kay's project is carried out 
and any harm comes to me. Will you get that to 
the king for me?" 

The poor boy was in such a state that he could 
hardly answer me. It was pitiful to see a creature 
so terrified, so unnerved, so demoralized. But he 
promised everjrthing; and on my side he made me 
promise over and over again that I would remain 
his friend, and never turn against him or cast any 
enchantments upon him. Then he worked his way 
out, staying himself with his hand along the wall, like 
a sick person. 

Presently this thought occurred to me : how heed* 
less I have been! When the boy gets calm, he will 
wonder why a great magician like me should have 
begged a boy like him to help me get out of this 
place; he will put this and that together, and will 
see that I am a humbug. 

I worried over that heedless bltmder for an hour, 
and called myself a great many hard names, mean- 

38 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

time. But finally it occurred to me all of a sudden 
that these animals didn't reason; that they never put 
this and that together; that all their talk showed that 
they didn't know a discrepancy when they saw it. 
I was at rest, then. 

But as soon as one is at rest, in this world, off he 
goes on something else to worry about. It occurred 
to me that I had made another bltinder: I had sent 
the boy off to alarm his betters with a threat — ^I 
intending to invent a calamity at my leisure; now 
the people who are the readiest and eagerest and 
willingest to swallow miracles are the very ones who 
are hungriest to see you p^orm them; suppose I 
should be called on for a sample? Suppose I shotdd 
be asked to name my calamity? Yes, I had made a 
bltmder; I ought to have invented my calamity first. 
**What shall I do? what can I say, to gain a little 
time?" I was in trouble again; in the deepest kind 
of trouble: . . . "There's a footstep! — ^they're com- 
ing. If I had only just a moment to think. . . . 
Good, I've got it. I'm all right." 

You see, it was the eclipse. It came into my 
mind, in the nick of time, how Columbus, or Cortez, 
or one of those people, played an eclipse as a saving 
trump once, on some savages, and I saw my chance. 
I could play it myself, now; and it woiddn't be any 
plagiarism, either, because I should get it in nearly 
a thousand years ahead of those parties. 

Clarence came in, subdued, distressed, and said: 

"I hasted the message to our Uege the king, and 
straightway he had me to his presence. He was 
frighted even to the marrow, and was minded to give 

39 



MARK TWAIN 

order for your instant enlargement, and that you be 
clothed in fine raiment and lodged as befitted one so 
great; but then came Merlin and spoiled all; for he 
persuaded the king that you are mad, and know not 
whereof you speak; and said your threat is but 
foolishness and idle vaporing. They disputed long, 
but in the end, Merlin, scoflBng, said, * Wherefore 
hath he not named his brave calamity ? Verily it is 
becatise he cannot/ This thrust did in a most 
sudden sort close the king's mouth, and he could 
offer naught to turn the argiunent ; and so, reluctant, 
and full loth to do you the discourtesy, he yet 
prayeth you to consider his perplexed case, as noting 
how the matter stands, and name the calamity — ^if 
so be you have determined the nature of it and the 
time of its coming. Oh, prithee delay not ; to delay 
at such a time were to double and treble the perils 
that already compass thee about. Oh, be thou wise 
— ^name the calamity!** 

I allowed silence to accumulate while I got my 
impressiveness together, and then said: 

"How long have I been shut up in this hole?" 

"Ye were shut up when yesterday was well spent. 
It is nine of the morning now." 

' * No ! Then I have slept well, sure enough. Nine 
in the morning now! And yet it is the very com- 
plexion of midnight, to a shade. This is the 2oth9 
then?" 

"The 2oth— yes." 

"And I am to be btuned alive to-morrow." The 
boy shuddered. 

"At what hour?" 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"At high noon/' 

**Now then, I will tell you what to say." I 
paused, and stood over that cowering lad a whole 
minute in awful silence ; then, in a voice deep, meas- 
ured, charged with doom, I began, and rose by 
dramatically graded stages to my colossal climax, 
which I delivered in as sublime and noble a way as 
ever I did such a thing in my life : * * Go back and tell 
the king that at that hour I will smother the whole 
worid in the dead blackness of midnight; I will blot 
out the Sim, and he shall never shine again; the fruits 
of the earth shall rot for lack of light and warmth, 
and the peoples of the earth shall famish and die, to 
the last man!" 

I had to carry the boy out myself, he sunk into 
such a collapse. I handed him over to the soldiers, 
and went back. 



CHAPTER VI 

THE ECLIPSE 

IN the stillness and the darkness, realization soon 
began to supplement knowledge. The mere 
knowledge of a fact is pale; but when you come to 
realize your fact, it takes on color. It is all the dif- 
ference between hearing of a man being stabbed to 
the heart, and seeing it done. In the stillness and 
the darkness, the knowledge that I was in deadly 
danger took to itself deeper and deeper meaning all 
the time; a something which was realization crept 
inch by inch through my veins and turned me cold. 
But it is a blessed provision of nature that at 
times like these, as soon as a man's mercury has got 
down to a certain point there comes a revulsion, and 
he rallies. Hope springs up, and cheerfulness along 
with it, and then he is in good shape to do something 
for himself, if anything can be done. When my 
rally came, it came with a botmd. I said to mjrself 
that my eclipse would be sure to save me, and make 
me the greatest man in the kingdom besides; and 
straightway my mercury went up to the top of the 
tube, and my solicitudes all vanished. I was 'as 
happy a man as there was in the world. I was even 
impatient for to-morrow to come, I so wanted to 
gather in that great triumph and be the center of 

42 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

all the nation's ^TTonder and reverence. Besides, in 
a business way it would be the making of me; I 
knew that. 

Meantime there was one thing which had got 
pushed into the backgrotmd of my mind. That was 
the half -conviction that when the nature of my pro- 
posed calamity should be reported to those super- 
stitious people, it would have aich an effect that they 
would want to compromise. rSo, by and by when I 
heard footsteps coming, that thought was recalled 
to me, and I said to myself, "As sure as anything, 
it's the compromise. Well, if it is good, all right, 
I will accept; but if it isn't, I mean to stand my 
ground and play my hand for all it is worth." 

The door opened, and some men-at^^arms ap- 
peared. The leader said: 

"The stake is ready. Come!" 

The stake! The strength went out of me, and I 
almost fell down. It is hard to get one's breath at 
such a time, such lumps come into one's throat, and 
such gaspings; but as soon as I cotdd speak, I said: 

"But this is a mistake— the execution is to- 
morrow." 

"Order changed; been set forward a day. Haste 
thee!" 

I was lost. There was no help for me. I was 
dazed, stupefied; I had no command over myself; 
I only wandered purposelessly about, like one out of 
hss mind^ so the soldiers took hold of me, and pulled 
me along with them, out of the cell and along the 
maze of underground oorridors, and finally into the 
fierce glare of daylight and the upper woiid. As we 

43 



MARK TWAIN 

stepped into the vast inclosed court of the castle I 
got a shock; for the first thing I saw was the stake, 
standing in the center, and near it the piled fagots 
and a monk. On all four sides of the court the 
seated multitudes rose rank above rank, forming 
sloping terraces that were rich with color. The king 
and the queen sat in their thronoi^, the most con- 
spicuous figures there, of course.-;^ 

To note all this, occupied but * second. The next 
second Clarence had slipped from some place erf 
concealment and was pouring news into my ear, his 
eyes beaming with triimiph and gladness. He said: 

"'Tis through me the change was wrought! And 
main hard have I worked to do it, too. But when I 
revealed to them the calamity in store, and saw how 
mighty was the terror it did engender, then saw I 
also that this was the time to strike! Wherefore I 
diligently pretended, imto this and that and the 
other one, that your power against the sim could not 
reach its full until the morrow; and so if any would 
save the sim and the world, you must be slain to-day, 
while your enchantments are but in the weaving and 
lack potency. Odsbodikins, it was but a dull lie, a 
most indifferent invention, but you should have seen 
them seize it and swallow it, in the frenzy of their 
fright, as it were salvation sent from heaven; and 
all the while was I laughing in my sleeve the one 
moment, to see them so cheaply deceived, and glori- 
fying God the next, that He was content to let the 
meanest of His creatures be His instrument to the 
saving of thy life. Ah, how happy has the matter 
sped! You will not need to do the sun a real hurt — 

44 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

ah, forget not that, on your soul forget it not! Only 
make a little darkness — only the littlest little dark- 
ness, mind, and cease with that. It will be sufficient. 
They will see that I spoke falsely — being ignorant, 
as they will fancy — and with the falling of the first 
shadow of that darkness you shall see them go mad 
with fear; and they will set you free and make you 
great ! Go to thy triimiph, now ! But remember — 
ah, good friend, I implore thee remember my sup- 
plication, and do the blessed sim no hurt. For my 
sake, thy true friend." 

I choked out some words through my grief and 
misery; as much as to say I would spare the sun; 
for which the lad's eyes paid me back with such deep 
and loving gratitude that I had not the heart to tell 
him^pjds good-hearted foolishness had ruined me and 
se|(t me to my death. 

*As the soldiers assisted me across the court the 
stillness was so profound that if I had been blind- 
fold I should have supposed I was in a solitude in- 
stead of walled in by four thousand people. There 
was not a movement perceptible in those masses 
of humanity; they were as rigid as stone images, 
and as pale ; and dread sat upon every coimtenance. 
This hush continued while I was being chained to 
the stake; it still continued while the fagots were 
careftdly and tediously piled about my ankles, my 
knees, my thighs, my body. Then there was a 
pause, and a deeper hush, if possible, and a man knelt 
down at my feet with a blazing torch; the multi- 
tude strained forward, gazing, and parting slightly 
from their seats without knowing it; the monk 

45 



MARK TWAIN 

raised his hands above my head, and his eyes toward 
the blue sky, and began some words in Latin; in 
this attitude he droned on and on, a little while, and 
then stopped. I waited two or three m(»nents; 
then looked up; he was standing there petrified. 
With a common impulse the multitude rose slowly 
up and stared into the sky. I followed their eyes; 
as sure as gims, there was my eclipse beginning! 
The life went boiling through my veins; I was a new 
man ! The rim of black spread slowly into the sun's 
disk, my heart beat higher and higher, and still the 
assemblage and the priest stared into the sky, mo- 
tionless. I knew that this gaze would be turned 
upon me, next. When it was, I was ready. I was 
in one of the most grand attitudes I ever struck, 
with my arm stretched up pointing to the sun. It 
was a noble effect. You could see the shudder swe^ 
the mass like a wave. Two shouts rang out, one 
close upon the heels of the other: 

''Apply the torch!" 

"I forbid itr 

The one was from Merlin, the otb^ from the king. 
Merlin started from his place — ^to apply the tordi 
himself, I judged. I said: 

"Stay where you are. If any man moves — even 
the king — before I give him leave, I will blast 

him with thimder, I will consume him with h^tAr 

* III 
nmgs! 

The multitude sank meekly into their seats, and I 
was just expecting they would. Merlin hesitated a 
moment or two, and I was on pins and needles dur- 
ing that little while. Then he sat down, and I took 

46 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

agood breath; for I knew I was master of the sittia- 
tion now. The king said: 

"Be merdfuli fair sir, and essay no further in this 
perilous matter, lest disaster follow. It was re- 
ported to us that your powers cx>uld not attain unto 
their full strength imtil the morrow; but — " 

"Your Majesty thinks the report may have been 
a fie? It tc;a5 a fie." 

That made an immense effect; up went appealing 
hands everywhere, and the king was assailed with a 
storm of suppfications that I might be bought off at 
any price, and the calamity stayed. The king was 
eager to comply. He said: 

"Name any terms, reverend sir, even to the halv- 
ing of my kingdom ; but banish this calamity, spare 
the sun!" 

My fortune was made, I would have taken him up 
in a minute, but / cotddn't stop an ecfipse; the thing 
was out of the question. So I asked time to con- 
sider. The king said : 

"How long — ^ah, how long, good sir? Be merci- 
ful; look, it groweth darker, moment by moment. 
Prithee how long?" 

"Not long. Half an hour — ^maybe an hour." 

There were a thousand pathetic protests, but I 
couldn't shorten up any, for I couldn't remember 
how long a total eclipse lasts. I was in a puzzled 
condition, anyway, and wanted to think. Some- 
thing was wrong about that ecUpse, and the fact was 
very unsettling. If this wasn't the one I was after, 
how was I to tell whether this was the sixth century, 
or nothing but a dream? Dear me, if I could only 

47 



.A 



MARK TWAIN 

prove it was the latter! Here was a glad new hope. 
If the boy was right about the date, and this was 
surely the 20th, it wasnH the sixth century. I 
reached for the monk's sleeve, in considerable ex- 
citement, and asked him what day of the month it 
was. 

Hang him, he said it was the twenty-first! It 
made me turn cold to hear him. I begged him not 
to make any mistake about it; but he was sure; he 
knew it was the 21st. So, that feather-headed boy 
had botched things again ! The time of the day was 
right for the eclipse; I had seen that for myself, in 
the beginning, by the dial that was near by. Yes, I 
was in King Arthur's court, and I might as well 
make the most of it I cotdd. 

The darkness was steadily growing, the people 
becoming more and more distressed. I now said: 

**I have reflected, Sir King. For a lesson, I will 
let this darkness proceed, and spread night in the 
world; but whether I blot out the sun for good, or 
restore it shall rest with you. These are the terms, 
to wit: You shall remain king over all your do- 
minions, and receive all the glories and honors that 
belong to the kingship; but you shall appoint me 
your perpetual minister and executive, and give me 
for my services one per cent, of such actual increase 
of revenue over and above its present amount as I 
may succeed in creating for the state. If I can't 
live on that, I sha'n't ask anybody to give me a lift. 
Is it satisfactory?" 

There was a prodigious roar of applause, and out 
of the midst of it the king's voice rose, saying: 

48 



N 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"Away with his bonds, and set him free! and do 
him homage, high and low, rich and poor, for he is 
become the king's right hand, is clothed with power 
and authority, and his seat is upon the highest step 
of the throne ! Now sweep away this creeping night, 
and bring the light and cheer again, that all the 
world may bless thee." 

But I said: 

**That a common man should be shamed before 
the world, is nothing; but it were dishonor to the 
king if any that saw his minister naked shotdd not 
also see him delivered from his shame. If I might 
ask that my clothes be brought again — " 

''They are not meet," the king broke in. ** Fetch 
raiment of another sort; clothe him like a prince!" 

My idea worked. I wanted to keep things as they 
were till the eclipse was total, otherwise they wotdd 
be tr3dng again to get me to dismiss the darkness, 
and of course I couldn't do it. Sending for the 
clothes gained some delay, but not enough. So I 
had to make another excuse. I said it wotdd be but 
natural if the king should change his mind and re- 
pent to some extent of what he had done under ex- 
citement; therefore I would let the darkness grow 
awhile, and if at the end of a reasonable time the 
king had kept his mind the same, the . darkness 
should be dismissed. Neither the king nor anybody 
else was satisfied with that arrangement, but I had 
to stick to my point. 

It grew darker and darker and blacker and blacker, 
while I struggled with those awkward sixth-century 
clothes. It got to be pitch-dark, at last, and the 

49 



MARK TWAIN 

multitude groaned with horror to feel the cold un- 
canny night breezes fan through the place and see 
the stars come out and twinkle in the sky. At last 
the edipse was total, and I was very glad of it, but 
everybody else was in misery; which was qtaite 
natural. I said: 

"The king, by his silence, still stands to the 
terms." Then I lifted up my hand — stood just so 
a moment — ^then I said, with the most awful solemn- 
ity: **Let the enchantment dissolve and pass harm* 
less awayf" 

There was no response, for a moment, in that deep 
darkness and that graveyard hush. But when the 
silver rim of the sun pushed itself out, a moment or 
two later, the assemblage broke loose with a vast 
shout and came pouring down Uke a deluge to 
smother me with blessings and gratitude; and Cblb> 
ence was not the last of the wash, to be sure. *' 



CHAPTER VII 
/■ merlin's tower 

« 

INASMUCH as I was now the second personage in 
the kingdom, as far as political power and author* 
ity weare concerned, much was mad© of me. My 
raiment was of siUcs and velvets and doth*of -gold, 
and by consequeaice was v^y showy^ also uncom- 
fiMrtable* But habit would soon reconcile me to my 
clothes; I was aware of that. I was given the 
choicest suite of apartments in the castle» after the 
ldt^'s« They were aglow with loud-colared silken 
hangings, but the stone floors had nothing but rushes 
on them for a carpet, and they were misfit rushes at 
that, being not all of one breed. As for conveni- 
ences, properly speaking, there weren't any. I mean 
litUe conveniences; it is the little conveniences that 
make the real comfort of life. The big oaken chairs, 
graced with rude cetrvings, were well enough, but 
that was the stopping-place* There was no soap, 
no matches, no looking-glass-^-except a metal one, 
about as powerful as a pail of water. And XK)t a 
chromo, I had been used to chromos for years, and 
I saw now that without my suspecting it a passiewi 
fca' art had got worked into the fabric of my being, 
^ and was become a part of me* It made me home- 
sick to look aiovuiid over this pcoud and gaudy but 

6 SI 



MARK TWAIN 

heartless barrenness and remember that in our house 
in East Hartford, all impretending as it was, you 
couldn't go into a room but you would find an 
insurance-chromo, or at least a three-color God- 
Bless-Our-Home over the door; and in the parlor 
we had nine. But here, even in my grand room of 
state, there wasn't anything in the nature of a 
picture except a thing the size of a bedquilt, which 
was either woven or knitted (it had darned places 
in it), and nothing in it was the right color or the 
right shape; and as for proportions, even Raphael 
himself cotddn't have botched them more formidably, 
after all his practice on those nightmares they call 
his ** celebrated Hampton Court cartoons." Ra- 
phael was a bird. We had several of his chromos; 
one was his ** Miraculous Draught of Fishes," where 
he puts in a miracle of his own — ^puts three men 
into a canoe which wouldn't have held a dog with- 
out upsetting. I always admired to study R.'s art, 
it was so fresh and unconventional. 

There wasn't even a bell or a speaking-tube in the 
castle. I had a great many servants, and those that 
were on duty lolled in the anteroom; and when I 
wanted one of them I had to go and call for him. 
There was no gas, there were no candles; a bronze 
dish half full of boarding-house butter with a blaz- 
ing rag floating in it was the thing that produced 
what was regarded as Ught. A lot of these hung 
along the walls and modified the dark, just toned 
it down enough to make it dismal. If you went out 
at night, your servants carried torches. There were 
no books, pens, paper or ink, and no glass in the 

52 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

openings they believed to be windows. It is a little 
thing — glass is — until it is absent, then it becomes a 
big thing. But i)erhaps the worst of all was, that 
there wasn't any sugar, coffee, tea, or tobacco. I 
saw that I was just another Robinson Crusoe cast 
away on an uninhabited island, with no society but 
some more or less tame animals, and if I wanted to 
make life bearable I must do as he did — ^invent, 
contrive, create, reorganize things; set brain and 
hand to work, and keep them busy. Well, that was 
in my line. 

One thing troubled me along at first — ^the immense 
interest which people took in me. Apparently the 
whole nation wanted a look at me. It soon trans- 
pired that the eclipse had scared the British world 
almost to death; that while it lasted the whole 
country, from one end to the other, was in a pitiable 
state of panic, and the churches, hermitages, and 
monkeries overflowed with praying and weeping 
poor creatures who thought the end of the world was 
come. Then had followed the news that the pro- 
ducer of this awful event was a stranger, a mighty 
magician at Arthur's court; that he could have 
blown out the sun like a candle, and was just going 
to do it when his mercy was purchased, and he then 
dissolved his enchantments, and was now recognized 
and honored as the man who had by his unaided 
might saved the globe from destruction and its 
peoples from extinction. Now if you consider that 
everybody believed that, and not only believed it, 
but never even dreamed of doubting it, you will 
easily tmderstand that there was not a person in all 

S3 



y 



MARK TWAIN 



>.* 



Britain that would not have walked AKy miles to 
get a sight of me. Of cotirse I was atb|k(& talk — all 
other subjects were dropped; even the king became 
suddenly a person of minor interest and notoriety. 
Within twenty-four hours the delegations began to 
arrive, and from that time onward for a fortnight 
they kept coming. The village was crowded, and 
all the country-side. I had to go out a dozen times 
a day and show myself to these reverent and awe- 
stricken multitudes. It came to be a great burden, 
as to time and trouble, but of course it was at the 
same time compensatingly agreeable to be so cele- 
brated and such a center of homage. It turned 
Brer Merlin green with envy and spite, which was 
a great satisfaction to me. But there was one thing 
I couldn't understand — nobody had asked for an 
autograph. I spoke to Clarence about it. By 
George ! I had to explain to him what it was. Then 
he said nobody in the country could read or write 
but a few dozen priests. Land! think of that. 

There was another thing that troubled me a little. 
Those multitudes presently began to agitate for 
another miracle. That was natural. To be able to 
carry back to their far homes the boast that they 
had seen the man who could command the sun, 
riding in the heavens, and be obeyed, would make 
them great in the eyes of their neighbors, and envied 
by them all; but to be able to also say they had 
seen him work a miracle themselves — ^why, people 
would come a distance to see them. The pressure got 
to be pretty strong. There was going to be aH 
eclipse of the moon, and I knew the date and houfij 

54 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

but it was too far away. Two years. I would have 
given a good deal for license to hurry it up and tise 
it now when there was a trig market for it. It seemed 
a great pity to have it wasted so, and come lagging 
along at a time when a body wouldn't have any use 
for it, as like as not. If it had been booked for only 
a month away, I could have sold it short; but, as 
matters stood, I couldn't seem to cipher out any 
way to make it do me any good, so I gave up trying. 
Next, Clarence found that old Merlin was making 
himself busy on the sly among those people. He 
was spreading a report that I was a htunbug, and 
that the reason I didn't accommodate the people 
with a miracle was because I couldn't. I saw that 
I must do something. I presently thought out a 
plan. 

By my authority as executive I threw Merlin into 
prison — ^the same cell I had occupied myself. Then 
I gave public notice by herald and trtimpet that I 
should be busy with affairs of state for a fortnight, 
but about the end of that time I would take a mo- 
ment's leisure and blow up MerUn's stone tower by 
fii^ from heaven; in the mean time, whoso listened 
to evil reports about me, let him beware. Further- 
more, I would perform but this one miracle at this 
time, and no more; if it failed to satisfy and any 
murmured, I wotdd turn the murmurers into horses, 
and make them useful. Qtiiet ensued. 

I took Clarence into my confidence, to a certain 
degree, and we went to work privately. I told him 
that this was a sort of miracle that required a trifle 
of preparation, and that it w€>uld be sudden death 

55 



MARK TWAIN 

to ever talk about these preparations to anybody. 
That made his mouth safe enough. Clandestinely 
we made a few bushels of first-rate blasting-powder, 
and I superintended my armorers while they con- 
structed a lightning-rod and some wires. This old 
stone tower was very massive — ^and rather ruinous, 
too, for it was Roman, and four hundred years old. 
Yes, and handsome, after a rude fashion, and clothed 
with ivy from base to summit, as with a shirt of scale 
nufcil. It stood on a lonely eminence, in good view 
from the castle, and about half a mile away. 

Working by night, we stowed the powder in the 
tower — dug stones out, on the inside, and buried the 
powder in the walls themselves, which were fifteen 
feet thick at the base. We put in a peck at a time, 
in a dozen places. We cotdd have blown up the 
Tower of London with these charges. When the 
thirteenth night was come we put up our Ughtning- 
rod, bedded it in one of the batches of powder, and 
ran wires from it to the other batches. Everybody 
had shimned that locality from the day of my 
proclamation, but on the morning of the fourteenth 
I thought best to warn the people, through the 
heralds, to keep clear away — sl quarter of a mile 
away. Then added, by command, that at some 
time during the twenty-four hours I would consum- 
mate the miracle, but would first give a brief notice; 
by flags on the castle towers if in the dajrtime, by 
torch-baskets in the same places if at night. 

Thunder-showers had been tolerably frequent of 
late, and I was not much afraid of a failure; still, I 
shouldn't have cared for a delay of a day or two; I 

S6 



a- 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

should have explained that I was busy with affairs 
of state yet, and the people must wait. 

Of course, we had a biasing sunny day — ^almost 
the first one without a cloud for three weeks ; things 
always happen so. I kept secluded, and watched the 
weather. Clarence dropped in from time to time 
and said the public excitement was growing and 
growing all the time, and the whole coimtry filling 
up with himian masses as far as one could see from 
the battlements. At last the wind sprang up and a 
cloud appeared — ^in the right quarter, too, and just 
at nightfall. For a little while I watched that 
distant cloud spread and blacken, then I judged it 
was time for me to appear. I ordered the torch- 
baskets to be lit, and Merlin liberated and sent to 
me. A quarter of an hour later I ascended the 
parapet and there foimd the king and the court 
assembled and gazing off in the darkness toward 
Merlin's Tower. Already the darkness was so heavy 
that one could not see far; these people and the old 
turrets, being partly in deep shadow and partly in 
the red glow from the great torch-baskets overhead, 
made a good deal of a picture. 

Merlin arrived in a gloomy mood. I said: 

''You wanted to bum me alive when I had not 
done you any harm, and latterly you have been 
trjdng to injiu-e my professional reputation. There- 
fore I am going to call down fire and blow up yoiu- 
tower, but it is only fair to give you a chance; now 
if you think you can break my enchantments and 
ward off the fires, step to the bat, it's your innings." 

"I can, fair sir, and I will. Doubt it not/* 

57 



MARK TWAIN 

He drew an imaginary circle on the stones of the 
roof, and burnt a pinch <rf powder in it, which sent 
up a small cloud of ar<»natic smoke, whereat every- 
body fell back and began to Gross themselves and 
get uncomfortable. Then he began to mutter and 
make passes in the air with his hands. He worked 
himself up slowly and gradually into a sort of frenzy, 
and got to thrashing around with his arms like the 
sails of a windmill. By this time the storm had 
about reached us ; the gusts of wind were flaring the 
torches and making the shadows swash about, the 
first heavy drops of rain were falling, the World 
abroad was black as pitch, the lightning began to 
wink fitfully. Of course, jny rod would be loading 
itself now. In fact, things were imminent. So I 
said : 

"You have had time enough. I have given you 
every advantage, and not interfered. It is plain your 
magic is weak. It is only fair that I begin now." 

I made about three passes in the air, and then 
there was an awful crash and that old tower leaped 
into the sky in chimks, along with a vast volcanic 
foimtain of fire that turned night to noonday, and 
showed a thousand acres of human beings groveling 
on the ground in a general collapse of consternation. 
Well, it rained mortar and masonry the rest of t 
week. This was the report; but probably the f 
would have modified it. 

It was an effective miracle. The great bother- 
some temporary population vanished. There were 
a good many thousand tracks in the mud the next 
morning, but they were all outward bound. If I had 

58 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

advertised another miracle I cotddn't have raised an 
audience with a sheriff. 

Merlin's stock was flat. The king wanted to stop 
his wages; he even wanted to banish him, but I 
interfered. I said he would be useful to work the 
weather, and atteild to small matters like that, and 
I would give him a lift now and then when his poor 
little parlor magic soured on him. There wasn't a 
rag erf his tower left, but I had the govemmait re- 
build it for him, and advised him to take boarders; 
but he was too high-toned for that. And as for 
being grateful, he never even said thank you. He 
was a rather hard lot, take him how you might; but 
then you couldn't fairly expect a man to be sweet 
that had been set back so. / 



CHAPTER VIII 

fl 

THE BOSS 

TO be vested with enormous authority is a fine 
thing; but to have the onlooking world con- 
sent to it is a finer. The tower episode solidified 
my power, and made it impregnable. If any were 
perchance disposed to be jealous and critical before 
that, they experienced a change of heart, now. 
There was not any one in the kingdom who would 
have considered it good judgment to meddle with 
my matters. 

I was fast getting adjusted to my situation and 
circumstances. For a time, I used to wake up, 
mornings, and smile at my ** dream,** and listen for 
the Colt's factory whistle; but that sort of thing 
played itself out, gradually, and at last I was fully 
able to reaUze that I was actually Uving in the sixth 
century, and in Arthur's court, not a lunatic asylum. 
After that, I was just as much at home in that cen- 
tury as I could have been in any other; and as for 
preference, I wouldn't have traded it for the twen- 
tieth. Look at the opportunities here for a man of 
knowledge, brains, pluck, and enterprise to sail in 
and grow up with the cotmtry. The grandest field 
that ever was; and all my own; not a competitor; 
not a man who wasn't a baby to me in acquirements 

6^ 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

and capacities ; whereas, what would I amount to in 
the twentieth century? I should be foreman of a 
factory, that is about all; and could drag a seine 
down-street any day and catch a htmdred better 
men than myself. 

What a jump I had made! I couldn't keep from 
thinking about it, and contemplating it, just as one 
does who has struck oil. There was nothing back 
of me that could approach it, unless it might be 
Joseph's case; and Joseph's only approached it, it 
didn't equal it, ^uite. For it stands to reason that 
as Joseph's splendid financial ingenuities advantaged 
nobody but the king, the general public must have 
regarded him with a good deal of disfavor, whereas 
I had done my entire public a kindness in sparing 
the sun, and was i)opular by reason of it. 

I was no shadow of a king; I was the substance; 
the king himself was the shadow. My power was 
colossal; and it was not a mere name, as such things 
have generally been, it was the genuine article. I 
stood here, at the very spring and source of the 
second great period of the world's history ; and could 
see the trickling stream of that history gather and 
deepen and broaden, and roll its mighty tides down 
the far centuries ; and I could note the upspringing 
of adventtu'ers like myself in the shelter, of its long 
array of thrones: De Montforts, Gavestons, Mor- 
timers, Villierses ; the war-making, campaign-direct- 
ing wantons of Prance, and Charles the Second's 
scepter- wielding drabs ; but nowhere in the pro- 
cession was my full-sized fellow visible. I was a 

Unique; and g^ to know that that fact could not 

6i 



MARK TWAIN 

be dislodged or diallenged for thirteen centuries 
and a half, for sure. 

Yes, in power I was equal. to the king. At the 
same time there was another power that was a trifle 
stronger than both of us jnit together. That was 
the Church. I do not wish to disguise that fact. 
I couldn't, if I wanted to. But never mind about 
that, now; it will show up, in its proper place, later 
on. It didn't cause me any trouble in the beginning 
— at least any of consequence. 

Well, it was a curious cotmtry, and full of inter- 
est. And the people ! They were the quaintest and 
simplest and trustingest race ; why, they were noth- 
ing but rabbits. It was jritiful for a person bom 
in a wholesome free atmosphere to listen to their 
humble and hearty outpomings of loyalty toward 
their long and Church and nobility; as if they had 
any more occasion to love and honor king and 
Church and noble than a slave has to love and honor 
the lash, or a dog has to love and honor the stranger 
that kicks him! Why, dear me, any kind of royalty, 
howsoever modified, any kind of aristocracy, howso- 
ever pruned, is rightly an insult ; but if you are bom 
and brought up tmder that sort of arrangement you 
probably never find it out for yourself, and don't 
believe it when scnnebody else tells you. It is 
enough to make a body ashamed of his race to think 
of the sort ci froth that has always occui>ied its 
throaes without shadow of right or reason, and the 
$eventh-rat6 people that have always figured as its 
aristocracies — a company of monaidis and nobles 
who^ as a rule, would have achieved only poinocty 

62 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

and obscurity if left, like their betters, to thdr 
own exertions. 

The most of King Arthur's British nation were 
slaves, ptire and simple, and bore that name, and 
wore the iron collar on their necks; and the rest 
were slaves in fact, but without the name; they 
imagined themselves men and freemen, and called 
themselves so. The truth was, the nation as a body 
was in the world for one object, and one only: to 
grovel before king and Church and noble; to slave 
for them, sweat blood for them, starve that they 
nright be fed, work that they might play, drink 
misery to the dregs that they might be happy, go 
naked that they might wear silks and jewels, pay 
taxes that they might be spared from paying them, 
be familiar all their lives with the degrading lan- 
guage and postures of adulation that they might 
walk in pride and think themselves the gods of this 
world. And for all this, the thanks they got were 
cuffs and contempt; and so poor-spirited were they 
that they took even this sort of attention as an 
honor. 

Inherited ideas are a curious thing, and interest- 
ing to observe and examine. I had mine, the king 
and his people had theirs. In both cases they flowed 
in ruts worn deep by time and habit, and the man 
who should have proposed to divert them by reason 
and argument wotild have had a long contract on 
his hands. For instance, those people had inherited 
the idea that all men without title and a long pedi- 
gree, whether they had great natural gifts and ac- 
quirements or hadn't, were creatures of no more 

63 



MARK TWAIN 

consideration than so many animals, bugs, insects; 
whereas I had inherited the idea that htiman daws 
who can consent to masquerade in the peacock 
shams of inherited dignities and imeamed titles, are 
of no good but to be laughed at. The way I was 
looked upon was odd, but it was nattiral. You 
know how the keeper and the pubUc regard the ele- 
phant in the menagerie: well, that is the idea. 
They are full of admiration of his vast bulk and his 
prodigious strength; they speak with pride of the 
fact that he can do a htmdred marvels which are 
far and away beyond their own powers; and they 
speak with the same pride of the fact that in his 
wrath he is able to drive a thousand men before 
him. But does that make him one of them? No; 
the raggedest tramp in the pit would smile at the 
idea. He couldn't comprehend it; couldn't take it 
in; couldn't in any remote way conceive of it. Well, 
to the king, the nobles, and all the nation, down to 
the very slaves and tramps, I was just that kind of 
an elephant, and nothing more. I was admired, also 
feared; but it was as an animal is admired and 
feared. The animal is not reverenced, neither was 
I ; I was not even respected. I had no pedigree, no 
inherited title; so in the king's and nobles' eyes I 
was mere dirt; the people regarded me with won- 
der and awe, but there was no reverence mixed with 
it; through the force of inherited ideas they were 
not able to conceive of anything being entitled to 
that except pedigree and lordship. There you see 
the hand of that awful power, the Roman Catholic 
Church. In two or three little centuries it had con- 

64 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

verted a nation of men to a nation of worms. Be- 
fore the day of the Church's supremacy in the world, 
men were men, and held their heads up, and had a 
man's pride and spirit and independence ; and what 
of greatness and position a i)erson got, he got main- 
ly by achievement, not by birth. But then the 
Church came to the front, with an ax to grind ; and 
she was wise, subtle, and knew more than one way 
to skin a cat — or a nation; she invented ** divine 
right of things," and propped it all around, brick by 
brick, with the Beatitudes — ^wrenching them from 
their good purpose to make them fortify an evil 
one; she preached (to the commoner) humility, 
obedience to superiors, the beauty of self-sacrifice; 
she preached (to the commoner) meekness under in- 
sult; preached (still to the commoner, always to the 
commoner) patience, meanness of spirit, non-re- 
sistance under oppression ; and she introduced heri- 
table ranks and aristocracies, and taught all the 
Christian populations of the earth to bow down to 
them and worship them. Even down to my birth- 
century that poison was still in the blood of Christen- 
dom, and the best of English commoners was still 
content to see his inferiors impudently continuing to 
hold a number of positions, such as lordships and the 
throne, to which the grotesque laws of his country 
did not allow him to aspire; in fact, he was not 
merely contented with this strange condition of 
things, he was even able to persuade himself that he 
was proud of it. It seems to show that there isn't 
anything you can't stand, if you are only bom and 
bred to it. Of course that taint, that reverence for 

6S 



I 



MARK TWAIN 

rank and title, had been in our American blood, too 
— ^I know that; but when I left America it had dis- 
appeared — at least to all intents and purposes. The 
reomant of it was restricted to the dudes and du- 
desses. When a disease has worked its way down to 
that level, it may fairly be said to be out of the system. 
But to return to my anomalous position in King 
Arthur's kingdom. Here I was, a giant among pyg- 
Qpies, a man among children, a master intelligence 
among intellectual moles; by all rational measure- 
ment the one and only actually great man in th^t 
trhole British world; and yet there and then, just 
as in the remote Gngland of my birth-time, the 
she^p-witted earl who could claim long descent from 
^ king's leman, acquired at second hand frcnn the 
^um;^ of I/)ndon, was a bett^ man than I was. 
Such a peorsonage was fawned upcm in Arthur's 
realm and reverently looked up to by everybody^ 
Qven though his dispositions were 9» mean as his 
intelligence, and his morals as base as his lineage. 
There were times when he could sit down in the 
Ipng'a preaence, but I couldn't* I OQuld have got 
ik title easily enough, and that would have raised 
me a large step in everybody's eyes; even in the 
king's, the giver of it. But I didn't ask for it; and 
I decUned it when it was offered, I couldn't have 
enjoyed such a thing with my notions; and it 
wouldn't have bean fair, anyway, because as far 
back as I could go» our tribe had always been short 
of the bar sioister. I couldn't have felt really and 
satisfactorily fine and proud and set-up over any 
title except one that should cone £r<»n tt^ oation 

66 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

itself, the only legitimate source; and such an one 
I hoped to win ; and in the course of years of honest 
and honorable endeavor, I did win it and did wear 
it with a high and clean pride. This title fell cas- 
ually from the lips of a blacksmith, one day, in a 
village, was caught up as a happy thought and 
tossed from mouth to mouth with a laugh and an 
aflfirmative vote; in ten days it had swept the king- 
dom, and was become as familiar as the king's name. 
I was never known by any other designation after- 
ward, whether in the nation's talk or in grave debate 
upon matters of state at the cotmcil-board of the 
sovereign. This title, translated into modem speech, 
would be THE BOSS. Elected by the nation. That 
suited me. And it was a pretty high title. There 
were very few the's, and I was one of them. If 
you spoke of the duke, or the earl, or the bishop, 
how could anybody tell which one you meant? 
But if you spoke of The King or The Queen or The 
Boss, it was different. ' 

Well, I liked the king, and as king I respected 
him — respected the office; at least respected it as 
much as I was capable of respecting any unearned 
supremacy; but as men I looked down upon him 
and his nobles — ^privately. And he and they liked 
me, and respected my oflfice; but as an animal, 
without birth or sham title, they looked down upon 
me — and were not partictdarly private about it, 
either. I didn't charge for my opinion about them, 
and they didn't charge for their opinion about me: 
the account was square, the book^ balanced, every- 
Ixxiy was satisfied, 

6 67 



■*, 



CHAPTER IX 

THE TOURNAMENT 

THEY were always having grand tournaments 
there at Camelot; and very stirring and pic- 
turesque and ridiculous human bull-fights they were, 
too, but just a little wearisome to the practical mind. 
However, I was generally on hand — ^for two reasons: 
a man must not hold himself aloof from the things 
which his friends and his commimity have at heart 
if he would be liked — especially as a statesman; and 
both as business man and statesman I wanted to 
study the tournament and see if I couldn't invent 
an improvement on it. That reminds me to remark, 
in passing, that the very first official thing I did, in 
my administration — ^and it was on the very first day 
of it, too — ^was to start a patent office; for I knew 
that a country without a patent office and good 
patent laws was just a crab, and couldn't travel any 
way but sideways or backways. 

Things ran along, a tournament nearly every 
week; and now and then the boys used to want me 
to take a hand — I mean Sir Latmcelot and the rest 
— ^but I said I would by and by: no hurry yet, and 
too much government machinery to oil up and set 
to rights and start a-going. 

We had one tournament which was continued 

68 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

from day to day during more than a week, and as 
many as five htmdred knights took part in it, from 
first to last. They were weeks gathering. They 
came on horseback from e verjrwhere ; from the very 
ends of the country, and even from beyond the sea; 
and many brought ladies, and all brought squires 
and troops of servaxrts. It was a most gaudy and 
gorgeous crowd, as to costumery, and very char- 
acteristic of the cotmtry and the time, in the way of 
high animal spirits, innocent indecencies of language, 
and happy-hearted indifference to morals. It was 
fight or look on, all day and every day; and sing, 
gamble, dance, carouse half the night every night. 
They had a most noble good time. You never saw 
such people. Those banks of beautiful ladies, 
shining in their barbaric splendors, would see a 
knight sprawl from his horse in the lists with a lance- 
shaft the thickness of your ankle clean through him 
and the blood spouting, and instead of fainting they 
wovdd dap their hands and crowd each other for a 
better view; only sometimes one would dive into 
her handkerchief, and look ostentatiously broken- 
hearted, and then you covdd lay two to one that 
there was a scandal there somewhere and she was 
afraid the public hadn't fotmd it out. 

The noise at night would have been annoying to 
me ordinarily, but I didn't mind it in the present 
circumstances, because it kept me from hearing the 
quacks detaching legs and arms from the day's 
cripples. They ruined an uncommon good old cross- 
cut saw for me, and broke the saw-buck, too, but I 
let it pass. And as for my ax — ^well, I made up 

69 



. * 



MARK TWAIN ^ 

my mind that the next time I lent an ax ^^ 
surgeon I would pick my century. ^ 

I not only watched this tournament from daj * 
day, but detailed an intelligent priest from my Depart- 
ment of Public Morals and Agriculttu'e, and ordered 
him to report it; for it was my purpose by and by, 
when I should have gotten the people along far 
enough, to start a newspaper. The first thing you 
want in a new country, is a patent office; then work 
up your school system; and after that, cut with your 
paper. A newspaper has its faults, and plenty of 
them, but no matter, it's hark from the tomb for a 
dead nation, and don't you forget it. You can't 
resurrect a dead nation without it ; there isn't any 
way. So I wanted to sample things, and be finding 
out what sort of reporter-material I might be able to 
rake together out of the sixth century when I should 
come to need it. 

Well, the priest did very well, considering. He 
got in all the details, and that is a good thing in a 
local item : you see, he had kept books for the under- 
taker department of his chtu-ch when he was younger, 
and there, you know, the money's in the details; the 
more details, the more swag : bearers, mutes, candles, 
prayers — everything counts; and if the bereaved 
don't buy prayers enough you mark up yotu* candles 
with a forked penal, and yotu- bill shows up all 
right. And he had a good knack at getting in the 
complimentary thing here and there about a knight 
that was likely to advertise — ^no, I mean a knight 
that had influence; and he also had a neat gift of 
exaggeration, for in his time he had kept door for a 

70 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

pjous hermit who lived in a sty and worked mir- 
acles. 

Of course this novice's report lacked whoop and 
crash and lurid description, and therefore wanted the 
true ring; but its antique wording was quaint and 
sweet and simple, and full of the fragrances and 
flavors of the time, and these little merits made up 
in a meastu^ for its more important lacks. Here is 
an extract from it: 

Then Sir Brian de les Isles and Gntmmore Grummorsumy 
knights c^ the castle, encountered with Sir Aglovale and Sir Tor, 
and Sir Tor smote down Sir Grummore Grummorsum to the 
earth. Then came Sir Carados of the dolorous tower, and Sir 
Turquine, knights of the castle, and there encountered with 
them Sir Perdvale de Galis and Sir Lamorak de Galis, that 
were two brethren, and there encountered Sir Perdvale and Sir 
Carados, and either brake their spears tmto their hands, and then 
Sir Turquine with Sir Lamorak, and either of them smote down 
other, horse and all, to the earth, and either parties rescued 
other and horsed them again. And Sir Arnold, and Sir Gauter, 
knights of the castle, encotmtered with Sir Brandiles and Sir 
Kay, and these four knights encountered mightily, and brake 
their spears to their hands. Then came Sir Pertolope from the 
castle, and there encoimtered with him Sir Lionel, and there Sir 
Pertolope the green knight smote down Sir Lionel, brother to 
Sir Launcelot. All this was marked by noble heralds, who bare 
him best, and their names. Then Sir Bleobaris brake his spear 
upon Sir Gareth, but of that stroke Sir Bleobaris fell to the 
earth. When Sir Galihodin saw that, he bad Sir Gareth keep 
him, and Sir Gareth smote him to the earth. Then Sir Galihud 
gat a spear to avenge his brother, and in the same wise Sir 
Gareth served him, and Sir Dinadan and his brother La Cote 
Male Taile, and Sir Sagramor le Desirous, and Sir Dodinas le 
Savage; all these he bare down with one spear. When King 
Agwisance of Ireland saw Sir Gareth fare so he marveled what 
he might be, that one time seemed green, and another time, at 
his again coming, he seemed blue. And thus at every course 

71 



MARK TWAIN 

that he rodefw and fro he changed his color, so that there 
might neithes^King nor knight have ready cognizance of him. 
Then Sir Agwisance the King of Ireland encoimtered with Sir 
Gareth, and there Sir Gareth smote him from his horse, saddle 
and alL And then came King Carados of Scotland, and Sir 
Gareth smote him down horse and man. And in the same wise 
he served King Uriens of the land of Gore. And then there 
came in Sir Bagdemagus, and Sir Gareth smote him down horse 
and man to the earth. And Bagdemagus's son Meliganus brake 
a spear upon Sir Gareth mightily and knightly. And then Sr 
Galahault the noble prince cried on high, Knight with the many 
colors, well hast thou justed; now make thee ready that I may 
just with thee. Sir Gareth heard him, and he gat a great spear^ 
and so they encoimtered together, and there the prince brake 
his spear; but Sir Gareth smote him upon the left side of the 
helm, that he reeled here and there, and he had fallen down had 
not his men recovered him. Truly, said King Arthur, that 
knight with the many colors is a good knight. Wherefore the 
king called unto him Sir Laimcelot, and prayed him to encounter 
with that knight. Sir, said Launcelot, I may as well find in 
my heart for to (otbear him at this time, for he hath had travail 
enough this day, and when a good knight doth so well upon 
some day, it is no good knight's part to let him of his worship, 
and, namely, when he seeth a knight hath done so great labor; 
for peradventure, said Sir Launcelot, his quarrel is here this day, 
and peradventure he is best beloved with this lady of all that 
be here, for I see well he paineth himself and enforceth him to 
do jgreat deeds, and therefore, said Sir Launcelot, as for me, 
this day he shall have the honor; though it lay in my power 
to put him from it, I would not. 

There was an unpleasant little episode that day, 
which for reasons of state I struck out of my priest's 
report. You will have noticed that Garry was 
doing some great fighfeig in the engagement. When 
I say Garry I mean Sir Gareth. Garry was my 
private pet name for him; it suggests that I had a 
deep affection for him, and that was the case. But 
it was a private pet name only, and never spoken 



72 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

aloud to any one, much less to him; bfkig a noble, 
he would not have endured a familiai^jjfjr like that 
from me. Well, to proceed : I sat in the private box 
set apart for me as the king's minister. While Sir 
Dinadan was waiting for his turn to enter the lists, 
he came in there and sat down and began to talk; 
for he was always making up to me, because I was 
a stranger and he liked to have a fresh market for 
his jokes, the most of them having reached that 
stage of wear where the teller has to do the laughing 
himself while the other person looks sick. I had 
alwaj^ responded to his efforts as well as I could, and 
felt a very deep and real kindness for him, too, for 
the reason that if by malice of fate he knew the 
one particular anecdote which I had heard oftenest 
and had most hated and most loathed all my life, 
he had at least spared it me. It was one which I 
had heard attributed to every htunorous person who 
had ever stood on American soil, from Columbus 
down to Artemus Ward. It was about a humorous 
lecturer who flooded an ignorant audience with the 
killingest jokes for an hour and never got a laugh; 
and then when he was leaving, some gray simpletons 
wnmg him gratefully by the hand and said it had 
been the funniest thing they had ever heard, and 
"it was all they could do to keep from laughin' right 
out in meetin'.'* That anecdote never saw the day 
that it was worth the tellin^;^ and yet I had sat 
under the telling of it himdreds and thousands and 
millions and billions of times, and cried and cursed 
all the way through. Then who can hope to know 
what my feelings were, to hear this armor-plated ass 

73 



MARK TWAIN 

start in on it again, in the murky twilight of 
tion, before the dawn of history, while even Lac- 
tantius might be referred to as "the late Lactantius," 
and the Crusades wouldn't be bom for five htmdred 
years yet? Just as he finished, the call-boy came; 
so, haw-hawing like a demon, he went rattling and 
clanking out like a crate of loose castings, and I 
knew nothing more. It was some minutes before I 
came to, and then I opened my eyes just in time to 
see Sir Gareth fetch him an awful welt, and I un- 
consciously out with the prayer, "I hope to gracious 
he's killed!" But by ill luck, before I had got half 
through with the words. Sir Gareth crashed into Sir 
Sagramor le Desirous and sent him thundering over 
his horse's crupper, and Sir Sagramor caught my 
remark and thought I meant it for him. 

Well, whenever one of those people got a thing 
into his head, there was no getting it out again. I 
knew that, so I saved my breath, and offered no 
explanations. As soon as Sir Sagramor got well, he 
notified me that there was a little accoimt to settle 
between us, and he named a day three or four years 
in the future ; place of settlement, the lists where the 
offense had been given. I said I would be ready 
when he got back. You see, he was going for the 
Holy Grail. The boys all took a flier at the Holy 
Grail now and then. It was a several years' cruise. 
They always put in the long absence snooping 
around, in the most conscientious way, though none 
of them had any idea where the Holy Grail really 
was, and I don't think any of them actually expected 
to find it, or would have known what to do with 

74 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

it if he had run across it. You see, it was just the 
Northwest Passage of that day, as you may say; 
that was aU. Every year expeditions went out holy 
grailing, and next year relief expeditions went out 
to hunt for them. There was worlds of reputation 
in it, but no money. Why, they actually wanted 
me to put in! Well, I should smile. 












CHAPTER X 

BEGINNINGS OF CIVILIZATION 

THE Round Table soon heard of the challenge, and 
of course it was a good deal discussed, for such 
things interested the boys. The king thought I 
ought now to set forth in quest of adventures, so 
that I might gain renown and be the more worthy 
to meet Sir Sagramor when the several years should 
have "rolled away. I excused myself for the present; 
I said it would take me three or four years yet to 
get things well fixed up and going smoothly; then I 
should be ready; all the chances were that at the 
end of that time Sir Sagramor would still be out 
grailing, so no valuable time would be lost by the 
postponement; I should then have been in o£5ce six 
or seven years, and I beUeved my system and ma- 
chinery would be so well developed that I could take 
a holiday without its working any harm. 

I was pretty well satisfied with what I had already 
accomplished. In various quiet nooks and comers 
I had the beginnings of all sorts of industries tmder 
way — nuclei of future vast factories, the iiAk^ and 
steel missionaries of my future civilizatiolfl^ In 
these were gathered together the brightest young 
minds I could find, and I kept agents out raking the 
country for more, all the time. I was training a 

76 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 



crowd of ignorant folk into experts — experts in every 
sort of handiwork and scientific calling. These 
nurseries of mine went smoothly and privately along 
undisturbed in their obscure country retreats, for 
nobody was allowed to come into their precincts with- 
out a special permit — ^for I was afraid of the Church, 
I had started a teacher-factory and a lot of 
Sunday-schools the first thing ; as a result, I now had 
an admirable system of graded schools in full blast 
in those places, and also a complete variety of 
Protestant congregations all in a prosperous and 
growing condition. Everybody could be any kind 
of a Christian he wanted to; there was perfect free- 
dom in that matter. But I confined public religious 
teaching to the churches and the Simday-schools, 
permitting nothing of it in my other educational 
buildings. I could have given my own sect the 
preference and made everybody a Presbyterian with- 
out any trouble, but that wotdd have been to affront 
a law of human nature : ispiritual wants and instincts 
are as various in the human family as are physical 
appetites, complexions, and features, and a man is 
only at his best, morally, when he is equipped with 
the religious garment whose color and shape and 
size most nicely accommodate themselves to the 
spiritual complexion, angularities, and stature of the 
individual who wears it; and, besides, I was afraid 
of a united Church; it makes a mighty power, the 
mightiest conceivable, and then when it by and by 
gets into selfish hands, as it is always botmd to do, 
it means death to human liberty and paralysis to 
human tfaoucfat. 

77 



MARK TWAIN 

All mines were royal property, and there were a 
good many of them. They had formerly been 
worked as savages always work mines — holes grubbed 
in the earth and the mineral brought up in sacks of 
hide by hand, at the rate of a ton a day; but I had 
begun to put the mining on a scientific basis as early 
as I could. 

Yes, I had made pretty handsome progress when 
Sir Sagramor's challenge struck me. 

Four years rolled by — and then ! Well, you would 
never imagine it in the world. Unlimited power is 
the ideal thing when it is in safe hands. The 
despotism of heaven is the one absolutely perfect 
government. An earthly despotism wotdd be the 
absolutely perfect earthly government, if the con- 
ditions were the same, namely, the despot the per- 
fectest individual of the human race, and his lease 
\ of life perpetual. But as a perishable perfect man 
must die, and leave his despotism in the hands of 
an imperfect successor, anearthly despotism is not 
merely a bad form of government, it is the worst 
form that is possible. 

My works showed what a despot could do with the 
resources of a kingdom at his command. Unsus- 
pected by this dark land, I had the dvilizaticm of 
the nineteenth century booming tmder its very noae! 
It was fenced away from the public view, but there 
it was, a gigantic and tmassailable fact — and to be 
heard from, yet, if I lived and had luck. There it 
was, as sure a fact and as substantial a fact as any 
serene volcano, standing innocent with its smokeless 
summit in the blue sky and giving no sign of the 

78 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

rising hell in its bowels. My sch(X)ls and churches 
were children four years before; they were grown up 
now; my shops of that day were vast factories now; 
where I had a dozen trained men then, I had a thou- 
sand now; where I had one brilliant expert then, I 
had fifty now. I stood with my hand on the cock, 
so to speak, ready to turn it on and flood the mid- 
night world with light at any moment. But I was 
not going to do the thing in that sudden way. It 
was not my policy. The people could not have 
stood it; and, moreover, I should have had the 
Established Roman Catholic Church on my back 
in a minute. 

No, I had been going cautiously all the while. I 
had had confidential agents trickling through the 
cotmtry some time, whose office was to undermine 
knighthood by imperceptible degrees, and to gnaw 
a little at this and that and the other superstition, 
and so prepare the way gradually for a better order 
of things. I was tumiiig on my light one candle- 
power at a time, and meant to continue to do so. 

I had scattered some branch schools secretly 
about the kingdom, and they were doing very well. 
I meant to work this racket more and more, as time 
wore on, if nothing occurred to frighten me. One 
of my deepest secrets was my West Point — ^my 
military academy. I kept that most jealously out 
of sight ; and I did the same with my naval academy 
which I had established at a remote seaport. Both 
were prospering to my satisfaction. 

Clarence was twenty-two now, and was my head 
executive, my right hand. He was a darling; he was 

79 



MARK TWAIN 

equal to anything; there wasn't anything he couldn't 
turn his hand to. Of late I had been training him 
for journalism, for the time seemed about right for 
a start in the newspaper line; nothing big, but just 
a small weekly for experimental circulation in my 
civilization-nurseries. He took to it like a duck; 
there was an editor concealed in him, sure. Already 
he had doubled himself in one way ; he talked sixth * 
centtuy and wrote nineteenth. His journalistic style 
was climbing, steadily; it was already up to the back 
settlement Alabama mark, and couldn't be told 
from the editorial output of that region either by 
matter or flavor. 

We had another large departure on hand, too. 
This was a telegraph and a telephone ; our first ven- 
ture in this line. These wires were for private service 
only, as yet, and must be kept private until a riper 
day should come. We had a gang of men on the 
road, working mainly by night. They were stringing 
grotmd- wires ; we were afraid to put up poles, for 
they would attract too much inquiry. Ground-wires 
were good enough, in both instances, for my wires 
were protected by an insulation of my own invention 
which was perfect. My men had orders to strike 
across country, avoiding roads, and establishing con- 
nection with any considerable towns whose lights 
betrayed their presence, and leaving experts in 
charge. Nobody could tell you how to find any 
place in the kingdom, for nobody ever went inten- 
tionally to any place, but only struck it by accident 
in his wanderings, and then generally left it without 
thinking to inquire what its name was. At one 

80 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

time and another we had sent out topographical 
expeditions to survey and map the kingdom, but the 
priests had always interfered and raised trouble. So 
we had given the thing up, for the present ; it would 
be poor wisdom to antagonize the Church. 

As for the general condition of the cotmtry, it was 
as it had been when I arrived in it, to all intents and 
purposes. I had made changes, but they were 
necessarily slight, and they were not noticeable. 
Thus far, I had not even meddled with taxation, 
outside of the taxes which provided the royal 
revenues. I had systematized those, and put the 
service on an effective and righteous basis. As a 
restdt, these revenues were already quadrupled, and 
yet the burden was so much more equably dis- 
tributed than before, that all the kingdom felt a 
sense of relief, and the praises of my administration 
were hearty and general. 

Personally, I struck an interruption, now, but I 
did not mind it, it could not have happened at a 
better time. Earlier it could have annoyed me, but 
now everything was in good hands and swimming 
right along. The king had reminded me several 
times, of late, that the postponement I had asked 
for, fotir years before, had about run out now. It 
was a hint that I ought to be starting out to seek 
adventtures and get up a reputation of a size to make 
me worthy of the honor of breaking a lance with Sir 
Sagramor, who was still out graiUng, but was being 
htmted far by various relief expeditions, and might 
be found any year, now. So you see I was expect- 
ing this interruption; it did not take me by stirprise. 

8i 



CHAPTER XI 

THE YANKEE IN SEARCH OP ADVENTURES 

THERE never was such a country for wandering 
liars ; and they were of both sexes. Hardly a 
month went by without one of these tramps arriv- 
ing; and generally loaded with a tale about some 
princess or other wanting help to get her out of 
some far-away castle where she was held in captivity 
by a lawless scoundrel, usually a giant. Now you 
would think that the first thing the king would do 
after listening to such a novelette from an entire 
stranger, would be to ask for credentials — ^yes, and 
a pointer or two as to locality of castle, best route to 
it, and so on. But nobody ever thought of so sim- 
ple and common-sense a thing as that. No, every- 
body swallowed these people's lies whole, and never 
asked a question of any sort or about anything. 
Well, one day when I was not arotmd, one of these 
people came along — ^it w i a she one, this time — 
and told a tale of the usual pattern. Her mistress 
was a captive in a vast and gloomy castle, along 
with forty-four other yotmg and beautiful giriSy 
pretty much all of them princesses; they had been 
languishing in that cruel captivity for twenty-six 
years; the masters of the castle were three stupen- 
dous brothers, each with four arms and one one-* 

82 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

the eye in the center of the forehead, and as big as 
a fruit. Sort of fruit not mentioned; their usual 
slovenliness in statistics. 

Would you believe it? The king and the whole 
Round Table were in raptures over this preposter- 
ous opportunity for adventure. Every knight of 
the Table jumped for the chance, and begged for 
it ; but to their vexation and chagrin the king 
conferred it upon me, who had not* asked for it 
at all. 

By an effort, I contained my joy when Clarence 
brought me the news. But he — ^he could not con- 
tain his. His mouth gushed delight and gratitude 
in a steady discharge — delight in my good fortime, 
gratitude to the king for this splendid mark of his 
favor for me. He could keep neither his legs nor 
his body still, but pirouetted about the place in an 
airy ecstasy of happiness. 

On my side, I could have cursed the kindness that 
conferred upon me this benefaction, but I kept my 
vexation under the stuf ace for policy's sake, and did 
what I could to let on to be glad. Indeed, I said I 
was glad. And in a way it was true; I was as glad 
as a i)erson is when he is^calped. 

Well, one must maket^jahe best of things, and not 
waste time with useless fretting, but get down to 
business and see what can be done. In all lies there 
is wheat among the chaflE; I must get at the wheat 
in this case: so I sent for the girl and she came. 
She was a comely enough creature, and soft and 
modest, but, if signs went for anything, she didn't 
know as much as a lady's watch. I said: 

7 83 



\ 



MARK TWAIN 

*'My dear, have you been questioned as to par- 
ticulars?" 

She said she hadn't. 

"Well, I didn't expect you had, but I thought I 
would ask, to make sure; it's the way I've been 
raised. Now you mustn't take it unkindly if I 
remind you that as we don't know you, we must go 
a little slow. You may be all right, of course, and 
we'll hope that you are; but to take it for granted 
isn't business. You tmderstand that. I'm obliged 
to ask you a few questions ; just answer up fair and 
sqtiare, and don't be afraid. Where do you Uve, 
when you are at home?" 

"In the land of Moder, fair sir." 

"Land of Moder. I don't remember hearing of it 
before. Parents living?" 

"As to that, I know not if they be yet on live, 
sith it is many years that I have lain shut up in the 
castle." 

"Your name, please?" 

' ' I hight the Demoiselle Alisande la Carteloise, an 
it please you." 

"Do you know anybody here who can identify 
you?" 

"That were not likely, fair lord, I being come 
hither now for the first time." 

"Have you brought any letters — any documents 
—any proofs that you are trustworthy and truthful ?" 

"Of a surety, no; and wherefore should I? Have 
I not a tongue, and cannot I say all that myself?" 

"But your saying it, you know, and somebody 
else's saying it, is different." 

84 



/ 

/ 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"Different? How might that be? I fear me I do 
not understand." 

"Don't understand? Land of — why, you see — 
you see — ^why, great Scx>tt, can't you understand a 
Kttle thing like that? Can't you tmderstand the 
difference between your — why do you look so inno- 
cent and idiotic!" 

"I? In truth I know not, but an it were the will 
of God." 

"Yes, yes, I reckon that's about the size of it. 
Don't mind my seeming excited; I'm not. Let us 
change the subject. Now as to this castle, with 
forty-five princesses in it, and three ogres at the head 
of it, tell me — ^where is this harem?" 

"Harem?" 

"The castle t you tmderstand; where is the castle?" 

"Oh, as to that, it is great, and strong, and well 
beseen, and lieth in a far country. Yes, it is many 
leagues." 

"How many?" 

"Ah, fair sir, it were wotmdily hard to tell, they 
are so many, and do so lap the one upon the other, 
and being made all in the same image and tincted 
with the same color, one may not know the one 
league from its fellow, nor how to count them except 
they be taken apart, and ye wit well it were God's 
work to do that, being not within man's capacity; 
for ye will note — " 

"Hold on, hold on, never mind about the dis- 
tance; whereabouts does the castle lie? What's the 
direction from here?" 

"Ah, please you sir, it hath no direction from 

85 



MARK TWAIN 

here; by reason that the road lieth not straight, 
but tumeth evermore; wherefore the direction of 
its place abideth not, but is some time under the 
one sky and anon under another, whereso if ye be 
minded that it is in the east, and wend thitherward, 
ye shall observe that the way of the road doth yet 
again turn upon itself by the space of half a circle, 
and this marvel happing again and yet again and still 
again, it will grieve you that you have thought by 
vanities of the mind to thwart and bring to naught 
the will of Him that giveth not a castle a direction 
from a place except it pleaseth Him, and if it please 
Him not, will the rather that even all castles and all 
directions thereimto vanish out of the earth, leaving 
the places wherein they tarried desolate and vacant, 
so warning His creatures that where He will He will, 
and where He will not He — " 

**0h, that's all right, that's all right, give us a 
rest; never mind about the direction, hang the di- 
rection — I beg pardon, I beg a thousand pardons, 
I am not well to-day; pay no attention when I 
soliloquize, it is an old habit, an old, bad habit, 
and hard to get rid of when one's digestion is all dis- 
ordered with eating food that was raised forever and 
ever before he was bom; good land! a man can't 
keep his ftmctions regular on spring chickens thir- 
teen htmdred years old. But come — never mind 
about that; let's — have you got such a thing as a 
map ol that region about you? Now a good 
map — " 

" Is it peradventure that manner of thing which of 
late the unbelievers have brought from over the 

86 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

great seas, which, being boiled in oil, and an onion 
and salt added thereto, doth — " 

"What, a map? What are you talking about? 
Don't you know what a map is? There, there, 
never mind, don't explain, I hate explanations; they 
fog a thing up so that you can't tell anjrthing about 
it. Run along, dear; good day; show her the way, 
Clarence." 

Oh, well, it was reasonably plain, now, why these 
donkeys didn't prospect these liars for details. It 
may be that this girl had a fact in her somewhere, 
but I don't believe you could have sluiced it out 
with a hydraulic ; nor got it with the earlier forms of 
blasting, even; it was a case for dynamite. Why, 
she was a perfect ass; and yet the king and his 
knights had listened to her as if she had been a leaf 
out of the gospel. It kind of sizes up the whole 
party. And think of the simple ways of this court : 
this wandering wench hadn't any more trouble to 
get access to the king in his palace than she would 
have had to get into the poorhouse in my day and 
country. In fact, he was glad to see her, glad to 
hear her tale: with that adventure of hers to offer, 
she was as welcome as a corpse is to a coroner. 

Just as I was ending up these reflections Clarence 
came back. I remarked upon the barren result of 
my efforts with the girl ; hadn't got hold of a single 
point that could help me to find the castle. The 
youth looked a little surprised, or puzzled, or some- 
thing, and intimated that he had been wondering 
to himself what I had wanted to ask the girl all those 
questions for. 

87 



MARK TWAIN 

"Why, great guns," I said, "don't I want to find 
the castle? And how else would I go about it?" 

"La, sweet your worship, one may lightly answer 
that, I ween. She will go with thee. They always 
do. She will ride with thee." 

"Ride with me? Nonsense!" 

"But of a truth she will. She will ride with thee. 
Thou shalt see." 

"What? She browse around the hills and scour 
the woods with me — alone — and I as good as en- 
gaged to be married ? Why, it's scandalous. Think 
how it would look." 

My, the dear face that rose before me! The boy 
was eager to know all about this tender matter. I 
swore him to secrecy and then whispered her name- 
"Puss Flanagan." He looked disappointed, and 
said he didn't remember the countess. How natural 
it was for the Uttle courtier to give her a rank. He 
asked me where she Uved. 

"In East Har — " I came to myself and stopped, 
a little confused; then I said, "Never mind, now; 
I'll tell you some time." 

And might he see her? Would I let him see her 
some day ? 

It was but a little thing to promise — ^thirteen hun- 
dred years or so — and he so eager; so I said Yes. 
But I sighed; I couldn't help it. And yet there was 
no sense in sighing, for she wasn't bom yet. But 
that is the way we are made : we don't reason, where 
we feel ; we just feel. 

My expedition was all the talk that day and that 
night, and the boys were very good to me, and made 

88 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

much of me, and seemed to have forgotten their 
vexation and disappointment, and come to be as 
anxious for me to hive those ogres and set those ripe 
old virgins loose as if it were themselves that had 
the contract. Well, they were good children — but 
just children, that is all. And they gave me no 
end of points about how to scout for giants, and how 
to scoop them in; and they told me aU sorts of 
charms against enchantments, and gave me salves 
and other rubbish to put on my woimds. But it 
never occurred to one of them to reflect that if I 
was such a wonderful necromancer as I was pretend- 
ing to be, I ought not to need salves or instructions, 
or charms against enchantments, and, least of all, 
arms and armor, on a foray of any kind — even 
against fire-spouting dragons, and devils hot from 
perdition, let alone such poor adversaries as these 
I was after, these commonplace ogres of the back 
settlements. 

I was to have an early breakfast, and start at dawn, 
for that was the usual way; but I had the demon^s 
own time with my armor, and this delayed me a 
little. It is troublesome to get into, and there is so 
much detail. First you wrap a layer or two of 
blanket around your body, for a sort of cushion and 
to keep off the cold iron ; then you put on your sleeves 
and shirt of chain mail — ^these are made of small steel 
links woven together, and they form a fabric so 
flexible that if you toss your shirt onto the floor, it 
sltunps into a pile like a peck of wet fish-net; it is 
very heavy and is nearly the uncomfortablest ma- 
t/maX in the world for a nightshirt, yet plenty used 

89 



^ 



MARK TWAIN 

it for that — ^tax-collectors, and reformers, and ooe- 
horse kings with a defective title, and those sorts of 
people; then you put on your shoes — ^flat-boats 
roofed over with interleaving bands of steel — and 
screw your clumsy spurs into the heels. Next you 
buckle your greaves on your legs, and your cuisses 
on your thighs ; then come your back-plate and your 
breast-plate, and you begin to feel crowded ; then you 
hitch onto the breast-plate the half-petticoat of 
broad overlapping bands of steel which hangs down 
in front but is scolloped out behind so you can sit 
down, and isn't any real improvement on an inverted 
coal-scuttle, either for looks or for wear, or to wipe 
your hands on; next you belt on your sword; then 
you put your stove-pipe joints onto your arms, your 
iron gatmtlets onto your hands, your iron rat-trap 
onto your head, with a rag of steel web hitched onto 
it to hang over the back of your neck — and there you 
are, snug as a candle in a candle-mold. This is no 
time to dance. Well, a man that is packed away 

I like that is a nut that isn't worth the cracking, there 
is so little of the meat, when you get down to it, by 

i comparison with the shell. 

The boys helped me, or I never could have got 
in. Just as we finished. Sir Bedivere happened in, 
and I saw that as like as not I hadn't chosen the 
most convenient outfit for a long trip. How stately 
he looked; and tall and broad and grand. He had 
on his head a conical steel casque that only came 
down to his ears, and for visor had only a narrow 
steel bar that extended down to his upper lip and 
protected his nose ; and all the rest of him, f r<»n neck 

90 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

to heel, was flexible chain mail, trousers and alL 
But pretty much all of him was hidden tmder his 
outside garment, which of course was of chain mail, 
as I said, and hung straight from his shoulders to his 
ankles; and from his middle to the bottom, both 
before and behind, was divided, so that he could ride 
and let the skirts hang down on each side. He was 
going grailing, and it was just the outfit for it, too. 
I would have given a good deal for that ulster, but 
it was too late now to be fooling aroimd. The sun 
was just up, the king and the court were all on hand 
to see me off and wish me luck; so it wouldn't be 
etiquette for me to tarry. You don't get on your 
horse yourself ; no, if you tried it you would get dis- 
appointed. They carry you out, just as they carry 
a sunstruck man to the drug store, and put you on, 
and help get you to rights, and fix your feet in the 
stirrups ; and all the while you do feel so strange and 
stuffy and like somebody else— Uke somebody that 
has been married on a sudden, or struck by lightning, 
or something like that, and hasn't quite fetched 
around yet, and is sort of numb, and can't just get 
his bearings. Then they stood up the mast they 
called a spear, in its socket by my left foot, and I 
gripped it with my hand ; lastly they himg my shield 
around my neck, and I was all complete and ready to 
up anchor and get to sea. Everybody was as good 
to me as they could be, and a maid of honor gave me 
the stirrup-cup her own self. There was nothing 
more to do now, but for that damsel to get up behind 
me on a pillion, which she did, and put an arm or so 
around me to hold on. 

91 



MARK TWAIN 

And so we started, and everybody gave us a good- 
by and waved their handkerchiefs or helmets. 
And everybody we met, going down the hill and 
through the village, was respectful to us, except some 
shabby little boys on the outskirts. They said: 

"Oh, what a guy!" And hove clods at us. 

In my experience boys are the same in all ages. 
They don't respect anything, they don't care for 
anything or anybody. They say ' ' Go up, baldhead " 
to the prophet going his unoffending way in the gray 
of antiquity; they sass me in the holy gloom of the 
Middle Ages; and I had seen them act the same way 
in Buchanan's administration; I remember, because 
I was there and helped. The prophet had his bears 
and settled with his boys ; and I wanted to get down 
and settle with mine, but it wouldn't answer, be- 
cause I couldn't have got up again. I hate a country 
without a derrick. 



CHAPTER XII 

SLOW TORTURE 

STRAIGHT off, we were in the country. It was 
most lovely and pleasant in those sylvan soli- 
tudes in the early cool morning in the first freshness 
of autumn. Prom hilltops we saw fair green valleys 
lying spread out below, with streams winding through 
them, and island groves of trees here and there, and 
huge lonely oaks scattered about and casting black 
blots of shade; and beyond the valleys we saw the 
ranges of hills, blue with haze, stretching away in 
billowy perspective to the horizon, with at wide 
intervals a dim fleck of white or gray on a wave- 
summit, which we knew was a castle. We crossed 
broad natural lawns sparkling with dew, and we 
moved like spirits, the cushioned turf giving out no 
sotmd of footfall; we dreamed along through glades 
in a mist of green light that got its tint from the sun- 
drenched roof of leaves overhead, and by our feet 
the clearest and coldest of runlets went frisking and 
gossiping over its reefs and making a sort of whisper- 
ing music, comfortable to hear; and at times we left 
the world behind and entered into the solemn great 
deeps and rich gloom of the forest, where furtive 
wild things whisked and scurried by and were gone 
before you could even get your eye on the place 

93 



\l 



MARK TWAIN 

where the noise was; and where only the earliest 
birds were tiiming out and getting to business with 
a song here and a quarrel yonder and a mysterious 
far-ofif hammering and drumming for worms on a 
tree -trunk away somewhere in the impenetrable 
remotenesses of the woods. And by and by out we 
would swing again into the glare. 

About the third or fourth or fifth time that we 
swung out into the glare — ^it was along there some- 
where, a couple of hours or so after sim-up — ^it 
wasn't as pleasant as it had been. It was beginning 
to get hot. This was quite noticeable. We had a 
very long pull, after that, without any shade. Now 
it is curious how progressively Uttle frets grow and 
multiply after they once get a start. Things which 
I didn't mind at all, at first, I began to mind now — 
and more and more, too, all the time. The first ten 
or fifteen times I wanted my handkerchief I didn't 
seem to care; I got along, and said never mind, it 
V, isn't any matter, and dropped it out of my mind. 
But now it was different ; I wanted it all the time ; it 
was nag, nag, nag, right along, and no rest ; I couldn't 
get it out of my mind; and so at last I lost my 
temper and said hang a man that would make a 
stiit of armor without any pockets in it. You see 
I had my handkerchief in my helmet ; and some other 
things; but it was that kind of a helmet that you 
can't take ofif by yourself. That hadn't occurred to 
me when I put it there; and in fact I didn't know it. 
I supposed it would be particularly convenient there. 
And so now, the thought of its being there, so handy 
and close by, and yet not get-at-able, made it all the 

94 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

worse and the harder to bear. Yes, the thing that 
you can't get is the thing that you want, mainly; 
every one has noticed that. Well, it took my mind 
off from everything else; took it clear off, and cen- 
tered it in my helmet; and mile after mile, there it 
stayed, imagining the handkerchief, picturing the 
handkerchief; and it was bitter and aggravating to 
have the salt sweat keep trickling down into my 
eyes, and I couldn't get at it. It seems like a little 
thing, on paper, but it was not a little thing at all; 
it was the most real kind of misery. I would not 
say it if it was not so. I made up my mind that I 
would carry along a reticule next time, let it look 
how it might, and people say what they would. Of 
course these iron dudes of the Round Table would 
think it was scandalous, and maybe raise Sheol 
about it, but as for me, give me comfort first, and 
style afterward. So we jogged along, and now 
and then we struck a stretch of dust, and it would 
tumble up in clouds and get into my nose and make 
me sneeze and cry; and of course I said things I 
oughtn't to have said, I don't deny that. I am not 
better than others. 

We couldn't seem to meet anybody in this lone- 
some Britain, not even an ogre; and, in the mood I 
was in then, it was well for the ogre ; that is, an ogre 
with a handkerchief. Most knights would have 
thought of nothing but getting his armor; but so I 
got his bandana, he could keep his hardware, for 
all of me. 

Meantime, it was getting hotter and hotter in 
there. You see, the sun was beating down and 

9S 



MARK TWAIN 

warming up the iron more and more all the time. 
Well, when you are hot, that way, every little thing 
irritates you. When I trotted, I rattled like a crate 
of dishes, and that annoyed me; and moreover I 
couldn't seem to stand that shield slatting and 
banging, now about my breast, now aroimd my back; 
and if I dropped into a walk my joints creaked and 
screeched in that wearisome way that a wheel- 
barrow does, and as we didn't create any breeze at 
that gait, I was like to get fried in that stove; and 
besides, the quieter you went the heavier the ircm 
settled down on you and the more and more tons 
you seemed to weigh every minute. And you had 
to be always changing hands, and passing your 
Spear over to the other foot, it got so irksome for 
one hand to hold it long at a time. 

WeU, you know, when you perspire that way, in 
rivers, there comes a time when you — ^when you— 
well, when you itch. You are inside, your hands 
are outside; so there you are; nothing but iron be- 
tween. It is not a light thing, let it sotmd as it 
may. First it is one place ; then another; then some 
more; and it goes on spreading and spreading, and 
at last the territory is all occupied, and nobody can 
imagine what you feel like, nor how tmpleasant it is. 
And when it had got to the worst, and it seemed to 
me that I could not stand anything more, a fly got 
in through the bars and settled on my nose, and the 
bars were stuck and wouldn't work, and I couldn't 
get the visor up; and I could only shake my head» 
which was baking hot by this time, and the fly- 
well, you know how a fly acts when he has got a 

q6 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

certainty — he only minded the shaking enough to 
change from nose to lip, and lip to ear, and buzz and 
buzz all aroimd in there, and keep on Ughting and 
biting, in a way that a person, already so distressed 
as I was, simply could not stand. So I gave in, and 
got Alisande to unship the helmet and reUeve me 
of it. Then she emptied the conveniences out of it 
and fetched it full of water, and I drank and then 
stood up, and she poured the rest down inside the 
armor. One cannot think how refreshing it was. 
She continued to fetch and pour imtil I was well 
soaked and thoroughly comfortable. 

It was good to have a rest — and peace. But 
nothing is quite perfect in this life, at any time. I 
had made a pipe awhile back, and also some pretty 
fair tobacco; not the real thing, but what some of 
the Indians use : the inside bark of the willow dried. 
These comforts had been in the helmet, and now I 
had them again, but no matches. 

Gradually, as the time wore along, one annoying 
fact was borne in upon my understanding — ^that we 
were weather-bound. An armed novice cannot 
mount his horse without help and plenty of it. 
Sandy was not enough ; not enough for me, anyway. 
We had to wait until somebody should come along. 
Waiting, in silence, would have been agreeable 
enough, for I was full of matter for reflection, and 
wanted to give it a chan^ to work. I wanted to 
try and think out how it was thkt rational or even 
half -rational men could ever have learned to wear 
armor, considering its inconveniences ; and how they 
had managed to keep up such a fashion for genera- 

97 



vl 



MARK TWAIN 

tions when it was plain that what I had suffered 
today they had had to suffer all the days of their 
lives. I wanted to think that out; and moreover 
I wanted to think out some way to reform this evil 
and persuade the people to let the foolish fashion 
die out ; but thinking was out of the question in the 
circumstances. You couldn't think, where Sandy 
was. 

She was a quite biddable creature and good- 
hearted, but she had a flow of talk that was as 
steady as a mill, and made your head sore like the 
drays and wagons in a city. If she had had a cork 
she would have been a comfort. But you can't 
cork that kind ; they would die. Her clack was go- 
ing all day, and you would think something would 
surely happen to her works, by and by; but no, 
they never got out of order; and she never had to 
slack up for words. She could grind, and pump, 
and chum, and buzz by the week, and never stop 
to oil up or blow out. And yet the result was just 
nothing but wind. She never had any ideas, any 
more than a fog has. She was a perfect blather- 
skite; I mean for jaw, jaw, jaw, talk, talk, talk, 
jabber, jabber, jabber; (^ but just as good as she 
could be.) I hadn't minded her mill that morning, 
on account of having that hornets' nest of other 
troubles; but more than once in the afternoon I 
had to say: 

"Take a rest, child; the way you are using up all 
the domestic air, the kingdom will have to go to 
importing it by to-morrow, and it's a low enougji 
treasury without that." 

98 



« 



CHAPTER XIII 

FREEMEN 

YES, it is strange how little a while at a time a 
person can be contented. Only a little while 
back, when I was riding and suffering, what a heaven 
this peace, this rest, this sweet serenity in this se- 
cluded shady nook by this purling stream would 
have seemed, where I could keep perfectly comfort- 
able all the time by pouring a dipper of water into 
my armor now and then; yet already I was getting 
dissatisfied; partly because I could not light my 
pipe — ^for, although I had long ago started a match 
factory, I had forgotten to bring matches with me — 
and partly because we had nothing to eat. Here 
was another illustration of the childlike improvi- 
dence of this age and people. A man in armor 
always trusted to chance for his food on a journey, 
and would have been scandalized at the idea of 
hanging a basket of sandwiches on his spear. There 
was probably not a knight of all the Roimd Table 
combination who would not rather have died than 
been caught carrying such a thing as that on his 
flagstaff. And yet there could not be anything, 
more sensible. It had been my intention to smug- 
gle a couple of sandwiches into my helmet, but 

I was interrupted in the act, and had to make 
8 99 



MARK TWAIN 

an excuse and lay them aside, and a dog got 
them. 

Night approached, and with it a storm. The dark- 
ness came on fast. We must camp, of course. I 
f otmd a good shelter for the demoiselle tmder a rock, 
and went ofif and foimd another for myself. But I 
was obliged to remain in my armor, because I could 
not get it off by myself and yet could not allow Ali- 
sande to help, because it would have seemed so like 
tmdressing before folk. It woulctneri have amounted 
to that in reality, because I had clothes on under- 
neath; but the prejudices of one's breeding are not 
gotten rid of just at a jump, and I knew that wBeS 
it came to stripping off that bobtailed iron petti- 
coat I should be embarrassed. 

With the storm came a change of weather; and 
the stronger the wind blew, and the wilder the rain 
lashed aroimd, the colder and colder it got. Pretty 
soon, various kinds of bugs and ants and worms 
and things began to flock in out of the wet and 
crawl down inside my armor to get warm; and while 
some of them behaved well enough, and snuggled 
up amongst my clothes and got quiet, the majority 
were of a restless, tmcomfortable sort, and never 
stayed still, but went on prowling and htmting for 
they did not know what ; especially the ants, which 
went tickling along in wearisome procession from 
one end of me to the other by the hour, and are a 
kind of creatures which I never wish to sleep with 
again. It would be my advice to persons situated 
in this way, to not roll or thrash aroimd, because this 
excites the interest of all the different sorts of am- 

ICX> 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

mals and makes every last one of them want to turn 
out and see what is going on, and this makes things 
worse than they were before, and of course makes 
you objurgate harder, too, if you can. Still, if one 
did not roll and thrash arotmd he would die; so 
perhaps it is as well to do one way as the other; 
there is no real choice. Even after I was frozen 
solid I could still distinguish that tickling, just as 
a corpse does when he is taking electric treatment. 
I said I would - ^vcr wear armor after this trip. 

All those trying hours whilst I was frozen and yet 
was in a living fire, as you may ^ay, on account of 
that swarm of crawlers, that same tmanswerable 
question kept circling and circling through my tired 
head: How do people stand this miserable armor? 
How have they managed to stand it all these genera- 
tions? How can they sleep at night for dreading 
the tortures of next day? 

When the morning came at last, I was in a bad 
enough plight : seedy, drowsy, fagged, from want of 
sleep; weary from thrashing around, famished from 
long fasting; pining for a bath, and to get rid of the 
animals; and crippled with rheumatism. And how 
had it fared with the nobly bom, the titled aristo- 
crat, the Demoiselle Alisande la Carteloise? Why^ 
she was as fresh as a squirrel; she had slept like the 
dead; and as for a bath, probably neither she nor 
any other noble in the land had ever had one, and 
so she was not missing it. Measured by modem 
standards, they were merely modified savages, those 
people. This noble lady showed no impatience to 
get to breakfast — and that smacks of the savage, 

lOI 



MARK TWAIN 

too. On their journeys those Britons were used to 
long fasts, and knew how to bear them; and also 
how to freight up against probable fasts before 
starting, after the style of the Indian and the ana- 
conda. As like as not, Sandy was loaded for a 
three-day stretch. 

We were off before sunrise, Sandy riding and I 
limping along behind. In half an hour we came 
upon a group of ragged poor creatures who had as- 
sembled to mend the thing which was regarded as 
a road. They were as humble as animals to me; 
and when I proposed to breakfast with them, they 
were so flattered, so overwhelmed by this extraor- 
dinary condescension of mine that at first they were 
not able to believe that I was in earnest. My lady 
put up her scornful lip and withdrew to one side; 
she said in their hearing that she would as soon 
think of eating with the other cattle — a remark 
which embarrassed these poor devils merely because 
it referred to them, and not because it insulted or 
offended them, for it didn't. And yet they were not 
slaves, not chattels. By a sarcasm of law and 
phrase they were freemen. Seven-tenths of the free 
population of the country were of just their class 
and degree: small "independent" farmers, artisans, 
etc. ; which is to say, they were the nation, the actual 
Nation; they were about all of it that was useful, 
or worth saving, or really respectworthy, and to 
subtract them would have been to subtract the 
Nation and leave behind some dregs, some refuse, 
in the shape of a king, nobility and gentry, idle, un- 
productive, acquainted mainly with the arts of 

I02 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

wasting and destroying, and of no sort of use or 
value in any rationally constructed world. And 
yet, by ingenious contrivance, this gilded minority, 
instead of being in the tail of the procession where 
it belonged, was marching head up and banners 
flying, at the other end of it; had elected itself to 
be the Nation, and these innumerable clams had per- 
mitted it so long that they had come at last to ac- 
cept it as a truth; and not only that, but to believe 
it right and as it should be. The priests had told 
their fathers and themselves that this ironical state 
of things was ordained of God ; and so, not reflecting 
upon how unlike God it would be to amuse himself 
with sarcasms, and especially such poor transparent 
ones as this, they had dropped the matter there and 
become respectfully quiet. 

The talk of these meek people had a strange 
enough sound in a formerly American ear. They 
were freemen, but they could not leave the estates 
of their lord or their bishop without his permission; 
they could not prepare their own bread, but must 
have their com ground and their bread baked at his 
mill and his bakery, and pay roimdly for the same; 
they could not sell a piece of their own property 
without paying him a handsome percentage of the 
proceeds, nor buy a piece of somebody else's without 
remembering him in cash for the privilege; they had 
to harvest his grain for him gratis, and be ready to 
come at a moment's notice, leaving their own crop 
to destruction by the threatened storm ; they had to 
let him plant fruit trees in their fields, and then 
keep their indignation to themselves when his heed- 

103 



V 



; 



MARK TWAIN 

less fniit-gatherers trampled the grain around the 
trees; they had to smother their anger when his 
hunting-parties galloped through their fields laying 
waste the result of their patient toil; they were not 
allowed to keep doves themselves, and when the 
swarms from my lord's dovecote settled on their 
crops they must not lose their temper and kill a 
bird, for awful would the penalty be; when the 
harvest was at last gathered, then came the pro- 
cession of robbers to levy their blackmail upon it: 
first the Church carted oflf its fat tenth, then the 
king's commissioner took his twentieth, then my 
lord's people made a mighty inroad upon the re- 
mainder; after which, the skinned freeman had 
liberty to bestow, the renmant in his bam, in case 
it was worth the trouble ; there were taxes, and taxes, 
and taxes, and more taxes, and taxes again, and yet 
other taxes — ^upon this free and independent pauper, 
but none upon his lord the baron or the bishop, none 
upon the wasteful nobility or the all-devouring 
Church; if the baron would sleep unvexed, the free- 
man mtist sit up all night^after his day's work and 
whip the ponds to keep the frogs quiet ; if the free- 
man's daughter — but no, that last infamy of mon- 
archical government is unprintable; and finally, if 
the freeman, grown desperate with his tortures, 
found his life unendurable under such conditions, and 
sacrificed it and fled to death for mercy and refuge, 
the gentle Church condemned him to eternal fire, 
the gentle law buried him at midnight at the cross- 
roads with a stake through his back, and his master 
the baron or the bishop oonfiiscated all his prop- 

X04 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

a 

erty and turned his widow and his orphans out of 
doors. 

And here were these freemen assembled in the 
early morning to work on their lord the bishop's road 
three days each — gratis; every head of a family, and 
every son of a family, three days each, gratis, and 
a day or so added for their servants. Why, it was 
like reading about Prance and the French, before the 
ever memorable and blessed Revolution, which swept 
a thousand years of such villany away in one swift 
tidal wave of blood — one: a settlement of that hoary 
debt in the proportion of half a drop of blood for 
each hogshead of it that had been pressed by slow 
tortures out of that people in the weary stretch of 
ten centuri^ of wrong and shaixie and misery the 
Hke of which was not to be mated but in hell. There 
were two * * Reigns rfTCTTOT," if we would but remem- 
ber it and^ considSrTt; the one wrought murder in 
hot passion, the other in heartless cold blood; the 
one lasted mere months, the other had lasted a f 

thousand years; the one inflicted death upon ten 
thousand persons, the other upon a hundred millions ; 
but our shudders are all for the ''horrors" of the 
minor Terror, the momentary Terror, so to speak; 
whereas, what is the horror of swift death by the 
ax compared with lifelong death from hunger, cold, : 
insult, cruelty, and heartbreak? What is swift 
death by lightning compared with death by slow fire 
at the stake? A city cemetery could contain the 
coffins filled by that brief Terror which we have all 
been so diligently taught to shiver at and mourn 
over; but all France could hardly contain the cofifins 

IDS 






MARK TWAIN 

filled by that older and real Terror — ^that unspeak- 
ably bitter and awful Terror which none of us has 
been taught to see in its vastness or pity as it deserves. 

These poor ostensible freemen who were sharing 
their breakfast and their talk with me, were as full 
of humble reverence for their king and Church and 
nobility as their worst enemy could desire. There 
was something pitifully ludicrous about it. I asked 
them if they supposed a nation of people ever existed, 
who, with a free vote in every man's hand, would 
elect that a single family and its descendants should 
reign over it forever, whether gifted or boobies, to 
the exclusion of all other families — ^including the 
voter's; and would also elect that a certain hundred 
famiUes should be raised to dizzy summits of rank, 
and clothed on with offensive transmissible glories 
and privileges to the exclusion of the rest of the 
nation's families — including his own. 

They all looked tmhit, and said they didn't know; 
that they had never thought about it before, and it 
hadn't ever occurred to them that a nation could be 
so situated that every man could have a say in the 
government. I said I had seen one — and that it 
would last until it had an Established Church. Again 
they were all imhit — at first. But presently one 
man looked up and asked me to state that proposition 
again; and state it slowly, so it could soak into his 
understanding. I did it ; and after a little he had the 
idea, and he brought his fist down and said he didn't 
believe a nation where every man had a vote would 
volimtarily get down in the mud and dirt in any 
such way ; and that to steal from a nation its will and 

io6 



A 



\ 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

preference mtist be a crime and the first of all 
crimes. I said to myself: 

"This one's a man. If I were backed by enough 
of his sort, I would make a strike for the welfare 
of this country, and try to prove myself its loyalest 
citizen by making a wholesome change in its system 
of government." 

You see my kind of loyalty was loyalty to one's ^ 
country, not to its institutions or its office-holders. 
The country is the real thing, the substantial thing, 
the eternal thing; it is the thing to watch over, and 
care for, and be loyal to ; institutions are extraneous, 
they are its .mere clothing, and clothing can wear <^- 
out, become ragged, cease to be comfortable, cease 
to protect the body from winter, disease, and death. , 
To be loyal to rags, to shout for rags, to worship 
rags, to die for rags — that is a loyalty of unreason, 
it is pure animal; it belongs to monarchy, was in- 
vented by monarchy; let monarchy keep it. I was 
from Connecticut, whose Constitution declares ''that 
all political power is inherent in the people, and all 
free governments are founded on their authority and 
instituted for their benefit ; and that they have at all 
times an undeniable and indefeasible right to alter 
their form of government in such a manner as they 
may think expedient/' 

Under that gospd, the citizen who thinks he sees 
that the commonwealth's political clothes are worn 
out, and yet holds his peace and does not agitate 
for a new suit, is disloyal; he is a traitor. That he 
may be the only one who thinks he sees this decay, 
does not excuse him ; it is his duty to agitate anywa.v. 

107 



MARK TWAIN 

and it Is the duty of the others to vote him down it 
they do not see the matter as he does. 

And now here I was, in a country where a right to 
say how the country should be governed was re- 
stricted to six persons in each thousand of its popu- 
lation. For the nine hundred and ninety-four to 
express dissatisfaction with the regnant system and 
propose to change itj would have made the whole 
six shudder as one man, it would have been so dis- 
loyal, so dishonorable, such putrid black treason. 
So to speak, I was become a stockholder in a cor- 
poration where nine hundred and ninety-four of the 
members furnished all the money and did all the 
work, and the other six elected themselves a perma- 
nent board of direction and took all the dividends. 
It seemed. to me that what the nine hundred and 
ninety-four dupes needed was a new deal. The 
thing that would have best suited the circus side of 
my nature wotild have been to resign the Boss-ship 
and get up an insurrection and turn it into a revo- 
lution; but I knew that the Jack Cade or the Wat 
Tyler who tries such a thing without first educating 
his materials up to revolution grade is almost abso- 
lutely certain to get left. I had never been accus- 
tomed to getting left, even if I do say it myself. 
Wherefore, the "deal" which had been fpr some 
time working into shape in my mind was of a qtdte 
different pattern from the Cade-Tyler sort. 

So I did not talk blood and insurrection to that 
man there who sat munching black bread with that 
abused and mistaught herd of htiman sheep, but 
lock him aside and talked matter of another sort to 

io8 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

him. After I had finished, I got him to lend me a 
little ink from his veins; and with this and a sliver 
I wrote on a piece of bark — 

Put him in the Man-factory — 

and gave it to him, and said: 

"Take it to the palace at Camelot and give it 
into the hands of Amyas le Potilet, whom I call 
Clarence, and he wiU understand." 

"He is a ijriest, then," said the man, and some of 
the enthusiasm went out of his face. 

"How — a priest? Didn't I tell you that no 
chattel of the Church, no bond-slave of pope or 
bishop can enter my Man-factory? Didn't I tell 
you that you couldn't enter unless your religion, 
whatever it might be, was your own free property?" 

"Marry, it is so, and for that I was glad; where- 
fore it liked me not, and bred in me a cold doubt, to 
hear of this priest being there.'* 

"But he isn't a iJriest, I tell you." 

The man looked far from satislSed. He said : 

"He is not a priest, and yet can read?" 

"He is not a priest and yet can readr-yes, and 
write, too, for that matter. I taught him myself." 
The man's face cleared. ''And it is the first thing 
that you yourself will be taught in that Factory — " 

"I? I would give blood oat of my heart to know 
that art. Why, I will be your slave, your — " 

"No you wan% you won't be anybody's slave. 
Take your fmanty and go along. Your lord the 
bishop will oooflacate 3^our small property, but no 
matter. Qmnoot mU fix you all right" 

Z09 



CHAPTER XIV 



** DEPEND THEE, LORD" 



I PAID three pennies for my breakfast, and a most 
extravagant price it was, too, seeing that one 
could have breakfasted a dozen persons for that 
money; but I was feeling good by this time, and I 
had always been a kind of spendthrift anyway; and 
then these people had wanted to give me the food for 
nothing, scant as their provision was, and so it was a 
grateful pleasure to emphasize my appreciation and 
sincere thankfulness with a good big financial lift 
where the money would do so much more good than 
it would in my helmet, where, these pennies being 
made of iron and not stinted in weight, my half- 
dollar's worth was a good deal of a burden to me. 
I spent money rather too freely in those days, it is 
true; but one reason for it was that I hadn't got the 
proportions of things entirely adjusted, even yet, 
after so long a sojourn in Britain — ^hadn't got along 
to where I was able to .absolutely realize that a 
penny in Arthur's land and a couple of dollars in 
Cotmecticut were about one and the same thing: just 
twins, as you may say, in purchasing-power. If my 
start from Camelot could have been delayed a very 
few days I could have paid these people in beautiful 
new coins from our own mint, and that would have 

no 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

pleased me; and them, too, not less. I had adopted 
the American values exclusively. In a week or two 
now, cents, nickels, dimes, quarters, and half-dollars, 
and also a trifle of gold, would be trickling in thin but 
steady streams all through the commercial veins of 
the kingdom, and I looked to see this new blood 
freshen up its life. 

The farmers were bound to throw in something, to 
sort of offset my liberality, whether I would or no ; so 
I let them give me a flint and steel; and as soon as 
they had comfortably bestowed Sandy and me on our 
horse, I lit my pipe. When the first blast of smoke 
shot out through the bars of my helmet, all those 
people broke for the woods, and Sandy went over 
backward and struck the ground with a dull thud. 
They thought I was one of those fire-belching dragons 
they had heard so much about from knights and other 
professional liars. I had infinite trouble to persuade 
those people to venture back within explaining dis- 
tance. Then I told them that this was only a bit of 
enchantment which would work harm to none but 
my enemies. And I promised, with my hand on my 
heart, that if all who felt no enmity toward me would 
come forward and pass before me they should see 
that only those who remained behind would be 
struck dead. The procession moved with a good deal 
of promptness. There were no casualties to report, 
for nobody had ctiriosity enough to remain behind 
to see what would happen. 

I lost some time, now, for these big children, their 
fears gone, became so ravished with wonder over my 
awe-compelling fireworks that I had to stay there and 

III 



MARK TWAIN 

smoke a couple of pipes out before they would let me 
go. Still the delay was not wholly unproductive, for 
it took all that time to get Sandy thoroughly wonted 
to the new thing, she being so close to it, you know. 
It plugged up her conversation-mill, too, for a consid- 
erable while, and that was a gain. But above all 
other benefits accruing, I had learned something. I 
was ready for any giant or any ogre that might come 
along, now. 

We tarried with a holy hermit, that night, and my 
opportunity came about the middle of the next after- 
noon. We were crossing a vast meadow by way of 
short cut, and I was musing absently, hearing noth- 
ing, seeing nothing, when Sandy suddenly interrupted 
a remark which she had begun that morning, with the 
cry: 

"Defend thee, lord! — ^peril of life is toward!" 
And she slipped down from the horse and ran a 
httle way and stood. I looked up and saw, far off in 
the shade of a tree, half a dozen armed knights and 
their squires; and straightway there was bustle 
among them and tightening of saddle-girths for the 
moimt. My pipe was ready and would have been 
lit, if I had not been lost in thinking about how to 
banish oppression from this land and restore to all 
its people their stolen rights and manhood without 
disobliging anybody. I lit up at once, and by the 
time I had got a good head of reserved steam on, 
here they came. All together, too; none of those 
chivalrous magnanimities which one reads so much 
about — one courtly rascal at a time, and the rest 
standing by to see fair play. No, they came in m 

112 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

body, they came with a whir and a rush, they came 
like a volley from a battery; came with heads low 
down, plimies streaming out behind, lances advanced 
at a level. It was a handsome sight, a beautiful sight 
— ^for a man up a tree. I laid my lance in rest and 
waited, with my heart beating, till the iron wave was 
just ready to break over me, then spouted a column 
of white smoke through the bars of my helmet. You 
should have seen the wave go to pieces and scatter! 
This was a finer sight than the other one. 

But these people stopped, two or three himdred 
yards away, and this troubled me. My satisfaction 
collapsed, and fear came; I judged I was a lost man. 
But Sandy was radiant ; and was going to be eloquent ; 
but I stopped her, and told her my magic had mis- 
carried, somehow or other, and she must moimt, with 
all despatch, and we must ride for life. No, she 
wouldn't. She said that my enchantment had dis- 
abled those knights; they were not riding on, be- 
cause they couldn't; wait, they would drop out of 
their saddles presently, and we would get their 
horses and harness. I could not deceive such trust- 
ing simplicity, so I said it was a mistake ; that when 
my fireworks killed at all, they killed instantly; no, 
the men would not die, there was something wrong 
about my apparatus, I couldn't tell what; but we 
must hurry and get away, for those people would 
attack us again, in a ntiinute. Sandy laughed, and 
said: 

**Lack-a-day, sir, they be not of that breed! Sir 
Launcelot will give battle to dragons, and will abide 
by them» and will assail them again, and yet again, 

"3 



MARK TWAIN 

and still again, until he do conquer and destroy tbem; 
and so likewise will Sir Pellinore and Sir Aglovale and 
Sir Carados, and mayhap others, but there be none 
else that wiU venture it, let the idle say what the 
idle will. And, la, as to yonder base rufflers, think 
ye they have not their fill, but yet desire more?" 

*'Well, then, what are they waiting for? Why 
don't they leave ? Nobody's hindering. Good land, 
I'm willing to let bygones be bygones, I'm stire.'* 

"Leave, is it? Oh, give thyself easement as to 
that. They dream not of it, no, not they. They 
wait to yield them." 

"Come — really, is that * sooth' — as you people 
say? If they want to, why don't they?" 

"It would like them much; but an ye wot how 
dragons are esteemed, ye would not hold them blam- 
able. They fear to come." 

' WeU, then, suppose I go to them instead, and — " 
Ah, wit ye well they wotild not abide your com- 
ing. I will go." 

And she did. She was a handy person to have 
along on a raid. I would have considered this a 
doubtful errand, myself. I presently saw the knights 
riding away, and Sandy coming back. That was a 
relief. I judged she had somehow failed to get the 
first innings — I mean in the conversation ; otherwise 
the interview wouldn't have been so short. But it 
turned out that she had managed the business well; 
in fact, admirably. She said that when she told 
those people I was The Boss, it hit them where they 
lived: "smote them sore with fear and dread" was 
her word; and then they were ready to put up with 

"4 



ti- 
ll 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

aaything she might require. So she swore them to 
appear at Arthur's court within two days and yield 
them, with horse and harness, and be my knights 
henceforth, and subject to my command. How 
much better she managed that thing than I should 
have done it myself! She was a daisy. 

9 



f 



CHAPTER XV 



Sandy's tale 



*' AND so I'm proprietor of some knights,'* said I, 
i\ as we rode off. *' Who would over have sup- 
posed that I shotild live to list up assets of that sort. 
I sha'n't know what to do with them; unless I raffle 
them off. How many of them are there, Sandy?'* 

"Seven, please you, sir, and their squires." 

**It is a good haul. Who are they? Where do 
they hang out?" 

"Where do they hang out?" 

**Yes, where do they live?" 

**Ah, I understood thee not. That will I tell 
eftsoons." Then she said musingly, and softly, turn- 
ing the words daintily over her tongue: "Hang they 
out — ^hang they out — ^where hang — ^wh^e do they 
hang out ; eh, right so ; where do they hang out. Of 
a truth the phrase hath a fair and winsome grace, and 
is prettily worded withal. I will repeat it anon and 
anon in mine idlesse, whereby I may peradventure 
learn it. Where do they hang out. Even so! al- 
ready it f alleth trippingly from my tongue, and foras- 
much as — " 

"Don't forget the cowboys, Sandy.'* 

"Cowboys?" 

"Yes; the knights, you know: You wer^ going to 

ii6 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

tell me about them. A while back, you remember. 
Figuratively speaking, game's called." 

''Game—" 

**Yes, yes, yes! Go to the bat. I mean, get to 
work on your statistics, and don't bum so much 
kindling getting your fire started. Tell me about the 
knights." 

"I will well, and lightly will begin. So they two 
departed and rode into a great forest. And — " 

''Great Scott!" 

You see, I recognized my mistake at once. (l had 
set her works a-going ;Nit was my own fault; she ^ 
would be thirty days getting down to those facts. 
And she generally began without a preface and 
finished without a result. If you interrupted her she 
would either go right along without noticing, or 
answer with a couple of words, and go back and say 
the sentence over again. So, interruptions only did 
harm; and yet I had to interrupt, and interrupt 
pretty frequently, too, in order to save my life; a 
person would die if he let her monotony drip on 
him right along all day. 

"Great Scott!" I said in my distress. She went 
right back and began over again: 

' ' So they two departed and rode into a great forest. 
And—" 

*' Which twor 

* ' Sir Gawaine and Sir Uwaine. And so they came 
)o an abbey of monks, and there were well lodged, 
on the mom they heard their masses in the abbey, 
ind so they rode forth till they came to a great forest ; 
[then was Sir Gawaine ware in a valley by a turret, of 

117 



MARK TWAIN 

twelve fair damsels, and two knights armed on great 
horses, and the damsels went to and fro by a tree. 
And then was Sir Gawaine ware how there hung a 
white shield on that tree, and ever as the damsels 
came by it they spit upon it, and some threw mire 
upon the shield — " 

"Now, if I hadn't seen the like myself in this 
coimtry, Sandy, I wouldn't believe it. But I Ve seen 
it, and I can just see those creatures now, parading 
before that shield and acting like that. The women 
here do certainly act like all possessed. Yes, and I 
mean your best, too, society's very choicest brands. 
The humblest hello-girl along ten thousand miles of 
wire could teach gentleness, patience, modesty, man- 
ners, to the highest duchess in Arthur's land." 

''Hello-girl?" 

'*Yes, but don't you ask me to explain; it's a new 
kind of a girl ; they don't have them here ; one often 
speaks sharply to them when they are not the least 
in fault, and he can't get over feeling sorry for it 
and ashamed of himself in thirteen himdred years, 
it's such shabby mean conduct and so improvoked; 
the fact is, no gentleman ever does it — ^though I — 
well, I myself, if I've got to confess — " \ 

* * Peradventure she — " 

''Never mind her; never mind her; I teU you I 
couldn't ever explain her so you would understand^" 

"Even so be it, sith ye are so minded. Then Sr 
Gawaine and Sir Uwaine went and saluted ther 
and asked them why they did that despite to thl 
shield. Sirs, said the damsels, we shall tell youi 
There is a knight in this country that owneth thi 

ii8 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

white shield, and he is a passing good man of his 
hands, but he hateth all ladies and gentlewomen, 
and therefore we do all this despite to the shield. I 
will say you, said Sir Gawaine, it beseemeth evil a 
good knight to despise all ladies and gentlewomen, 
and peradventure though he hate you he hath some 
cause, and i)eradventure he loveth in some other 
places ladies and gentlewomen, and to be loved 
again, and he such a man of prowess as ye speak 
of—" 

"Man of prowess — ^yes, that is the man to please 
them, Sandy. Man of brains — ^that is a thing they 
never think of. Tom Sayers — ^John Heenan — ^John 
L. Sullivan — pity but you could be here. You 
would have your legs imder the Round Table and a 
'Sir* in front of your names within the twenty-four 
hours; and you could bring about a new distribu- 
tion of the married princesses and duchesses of the 
Court in another twenty-four. The fact is, it is 
just a sort of polished-up court of Comanches, and 
there isn't a squaw in it who doesn't stand ready at 
the dropping of a hat to desert to the buck with the 
biggest string of scalps at his belt." 

— "and he be such a man of prowess as ye speak 
of, said Sir Gawaine. Now, what is his name ? Sir, 
said they, his name is Marhaus the king's son of 
Ireland." 

"Son of the king of Ireland, you mean; the other 
form doesn't mean anything. And look out and 
hold on tight, now, we must jtmip this gully. . . . 
There, we are all right now. This horse belongs in 
the circus; he is bom before his time," 

119 



MARK TWAIN 

''I know him well/' said Sir Uwaine, he is pass- 
ing good knight as any is on live." 

**0n live. If you've got a fault in the wocld, 
Sandy, it is that you are a shade too archaic Btct 
it isn't any matter." 

— '*for I saw him once proved at a justs where 
many knights were gathered, and that time these 
might no man withstand him. As, said Sir Gawaine, 
damsels, methinketh ye are to blame, for it is to 
suppose he that himg that shield there will not be 
long therefrom, and then may those knights match 
him on horseback, and that is more your worship 
than thus ; for I will abide no longer to see a knight's 
shield dishonored. And therewith Sir Uwaine and 
Sir Gawaine departed a little from them, and then 
were they ware where Sir Marhaus came riding oa 
a great horse straight toward them. And when the 
twelve damsels saw Sir Marhaus they fled into the 
turret as they were wild, so that some of them fdl 
by the way. Then the one of the knights of the 
tower dressed his shield, and said on high. Sir Mar- 
haus defend thee. And so they ran together that 
the knight brake his spear on Marhaus, and Sir 
Marhaus smote him so hard that he brake his neck 
and the horse's back — " 

"Well, that is just the trouble about this state of 
things, it ruins so many horses." 

*'That saw the other knight of the turret, and 
dressed him toward Marhaus, and they went so 
eagerly together, that the knight of the turret was 
soon smitten down, horse and man, stark dead — " 

''Anoilter horse gone; I tell you it is a custom 

I20 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

that ought to be broken up. I don't see how people 
with any feeling can applaud and support it/' 

"So these two knights came together with great 
random — " 

I saw that I had been asleep and missed a chapter, 
but I didn't say anything. I judged that the Irish 
knight was in trouble with the visitors by this time, 
and this turned out to be the case. 

— **that Sir Uwaine smote Sir Marhaus that his 
spear brast in pieces on the shield, and Sir Marhaus 
smote him so sore that horse and man he bare to 
the earth, and hurt Sir Uwaine on the left side — " 

**The truth is, Alisande, the archaics are a little 
too simple ; the vocabulary is too limited, and so, by 
consequence, descriptions sxiflfer in the matter of 
variety ; they run too much to level Saharas of fact, 
and not enough to picturesque detail; this throws 
about them a certain air oi the monotonous; in fact 
the fights are all alike: a couple of people come to- 
gether with great random — ^random is a good word, 
and so is exegesis, for that matter, and so is holocaust, 
and defalcation, and usufruct and a hundred others, 
but land ! a body ought to discriminate — they come 
together with great random, and a spear is brast, and 
one party brake his shield and the other one goes 
down, horse and man, over his horse-tail and brake 
his neck, and then the next candidate comes random* 
ing in, and brast his spear, and the other man brast 
his shield, and down he goes, horse and man, over 
his horse-tail, and brake his neck, and then there's 
another elected, and another and another and still 

121 



f 



MARK TWAIN 

another, till the material is all used up; and when 
you come to figure up results, you can't tell one 
fight from another, nor who whipped; and as a 
picture, of living, raging, roaring battle, sho! why, 
it's pale and noiseless — just ghosts scuffling in a fog. 
Dear me, what would this barren vocabulary get out 
of the mightiest spectacle? — ^the btiming of Rome 
in Nero's time, for instance? Why, it would merely 
y say, *Town burned down; no insurance; boy brast a 
window, fireman brake his neck!' Why, that ain't 
a picture!" 

It was a good deal of a lecture, I thought, but it 
didn't disturb Sandy, didn't turn a feather; her 
steam soared steadily up again, the minute I took 
off the lid : 

**Then Sir Marhaus turned his horse and rode 
toward Gawaine with his spear. And when Sir 
Gawaine saw that, he dressed his shield, and they 
aventred their spears, and they came together with 
all the might of their horses, that either knight smote 
other so hard in the midst of their shields, but Sir 
Gawaine's si)ear brake — " 

'*I knew it would." 

— * *but Sir Marhaus's spear held ; and therewith Sir 
Gawaine and his horse rushed down to the earth — " 

'*Just so — ^and brake his back." 

— **and lightly Sir Gawaine rose upon his feet 
and pulled out his sword, and dressed him toward 
Sir Marhaus on foot, and therewith either came imto 
other eagerly, and smote together with their swords, 
that their shields flew in cantels, and they bruised 
their helms and their hauberks, and woimded dthef 

122 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

other. But Sir Gawaine, fro it passed nine of the 
dock, waxed by the space of three hours ever 
stronger and stronger, and thrice his might was 
increased. All this espied Sir Marhaus, and had 
great wonder how his might increased, and so they 
wounded other passing sore; and then when it was 
come noon — " 

The pelting sing-song of it carried me forward to 
scenes and soimds of my boyhood days : 

' ' N-e-e-ew Haven ! ten minutes for refreshments — 
knductr '11 strike the gong-bell two minutes before 
train leaves — ^passengers for the Shore line please 
take seats in the rear k'yar, this k'yar don't go no 
furder — ahh-pls, aw-mjz, b'nanners, s-a-n-d^ches, 
p op'Com V* 

— '*and waxed past noon and drew toward even- 
song. Sir Gawaine's strength feebled and waxed 
passing faint, that imnethes he might dure any longer, 
and Sir Marhaus was then bigger and bigger — " 

*' Which strained his armor, of course; and yet 
little would one of these people mind a small thing 
like that." 

— "and so, Sir Knight, said Sir Marhaus, I have 
well felt that ye are a passing good knight, and a 
marvelous man of might as ever I felt any, while 
it lasteth, and our quarrels are not great, and there- 
fore it were a pity to do you hurt, for I feel you 
are passing feeble. Ah, said Sir Gawaine, gentle 
knight, ye say the word that I should say. And 
therewith they took off their helms and either kissed 
other, and there they swore together either to love 
other as brethren — " 

123 



MARK TWAIN 

But I lost the thread there, and dozed off to dnnh 
ber, thinking about what a pity it was that men witfa 
such superb strength — strength enabling them to 
stand up cased in cruelly burdensome iron and 
drenched with perspiration, and hack and batter and 
bang each other for six hours on a stretch — should 
not have been bom at a time when they could pot 
it to some tiseful purpose. Take a jackass, for 
instance: a jackass has that kind of strength, and 
puts it to a useful purpose, and is valuablie to this 
world because he is a jackass; but a nobleman is not 
valuable because he is a jackass. It is a mixture 
that is always ineff ecttial, and should never have been 
attempted in the first place. And yet, once joa 
start a mistake, the trouble is done and you never 
know what is going to come of it. 

When I came to myself again and began to listen, 
I perceived that I had lost another chapter, and 
that Alisande had wandered a long way off with her 
people. 

"And so they rode and came into a deep valley 
full of stones, and thereby they saw a fair stream c£ 
water; above thereby was the head of the stream, a 
fair fountain, and three damsels sitting thereby. In 
this country, said Sir Marhaus, came never knig^ 
since it was christened, but he found strange ad- 
ventures — " 

* * This is not good form, Alisande. Sir Marhaus the 
king's son of Ireland talks like all the rest ; j^u cm^tA 
to give him a brogue, or at least a characteristic 
expletive; by this means one would recognize him 
as soon as he spoke, without his ever being named. 

124 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

It is a common literary device with the great authors. 
You should make him say, *In this coimtry, be 
jabers, came never knight since it was christened, 
but he found strange adventures, be jabers.' You 
see how much better that soimds." 

" — came never knight but he foimd strange ad- 
ventures, be jabers. Of a truth it doth indeed, fair 
lord, albeit 'tis passing hard to say, though per- 
adventure that will not tarry but better speed with 
usage. And then they rode to the damsels, and 
either saluted other, and the eldest had a garland 
of gold about her head, and she was threescore 
winter of age or more — " 

"The damsel was?" 

"Even so, dear lord — and her hair was white 
under the garland — " 

"Celluloid teeth, nine dollars a set, as like as not 
— the loose-fit kind, that go up and down like a port- 
cullis when you eat, and fall out when you laugh." 

"The second damsel was of thirty winter of age, 
with a circlet of gold about her head. The third 
damsel was but fifteen year of age — " 

Billows of thought came rolling over my soul, and 
the voice faded out of my hearing! 

Fifteen! Break — ^my heart! oh, my lost darling! V- 
Just her age who was so gentle, and lovely, and all 
the world to me, and whom I shall never see again! 
How the thought of her carries me back over wide 
seas of memory to a vague dim time, a happy time, 
80 many, many centuries hence, when I used to wake 
m the soft stumner mornings, out of sweet dreams of 
her, and say "Hello, Central!" just to hear her dear 

125 



MARK TWAIN 

voice come melting back to me with a ' ' Hello, HankF* 
that was music of the spheres to my enchanted ear. 
She got three dollars a week, but she was worth it. 

I could not follow Alisande*s further explanation 
of who our captured knights were, now — I mean in 
case she should ever get to explaining who they 
were. My interest was gone, my thoughts were far 
away, and sad. By fitful glimpses of the drifting 
tale, caught here and there and now and then, I 
merely noted in a vague way that each of these 
three knights took one of these three damsels up 
behind him on his horse, and one rode north, another 
east, the other south, to seek adventures, and meet 
again and lie, after year and day. Year and day — 
and without baggage. It was of a piece with the 
general simplicity of the country. 

The sun was now setting. It was about three in 
the afternoon when Alisande had begim to tell me 
who the cowboys were ; so she had made pretty good 
progress with it — ^for her. She would arrive some 
time or other, no doubt, but she was not a person 
who could be hurried. 

We were approaching a castle which stood on high 

groimd; a huge, strong, venerable structure, whose 

gray towers and battlements were charmingly draped 

with ivy, and whose whole majestic mass was 

drenched with splendors flung from the sinking sun. 

It was the largest castle we had seen, and so I thought 

it might be the one we were after, but Sandy said no. 

She did not know who owned it; she said she had 

passed it without calling, when she went down to 

Camelot 

126 



CHAPTER XVI 

MORGAN LE PAY 

IP knignts errant were to be believed, not all ^ 
castles were desirable places to seek hospitality 
in. As a matter of fact, knights errant were not 
persons to be believed — that is, measured by modem T^^Tt 
standards of veracity; yet, measured by the stand- 
ards of their own time, and scaled accordingly, you 
got the truth. It was. very simple : you discounted'^ 
a statement ninety-seven per cent. ; the rest was fact. 
Now after making this allowance, the truth remained 
that if I could find out something about a castle 
before ringing the door-bell — I mean hailing the 
warders — ^it was the sensible thing to do. So I was 
pleased when I saw in the distance a horseman mak- 
ing the bottom turn of the road that woimd down 
from this castle. 

As we approached each other, I saw that he wore 
a plumed helmet, and seemed to be otherwise clothed 
in steel, but bore a curious addition also — a stiff 
square garment like a herald's tabard. However, I 
had to smile at my own forgetfulness when I got 
nearer and read this sign on his tabard : 
'* Persimmons^ s Soap — All the Prime-Donne Use It^ 

That was a little idea of my own, and had several 
wholesome purposes in view toward the civilizing and 

127 



MARK TWAIN 

uplifting of this nation. In the first place, it was a 
furtive, underhand blow at this nonsense of knight 
errantry, though nobody suspected that but me. I 
had started a number of these people out — ^the 
bravest knights I could get — each sandwiched be- 
tween bulletin-boards bearing one device or another, 
and I judged that by and by when they got to be 
numerous enough they would begin to look ridicu- 
lous; and then, even the steel-clad ass that hadn*t any 
board would himself begin to look ridiculous because 
he was out of the fashion. 

Secondly, these missionaries would gradually, and 
without creating suspicion or exciting alarm, intro- 
duce a rudimentary cleanliness among the nobility, 
and from them it would work down to the people, if 
the priests could be kept quiet. This would under- 
mine the Church. I mean would be a step toward 
that. Next, education — ^next, freedom — and then 
she would begin to cnmible. It being my conviction 
that any Established Church is an established crime, 
an established slave-pen, I had no scruples, but was 
willing to assail it in any way or with any weapon 
that promised to hurt it. Why, in my own former 
day — ^in remote centuries not yet stirring in the 
womb of time — there were old Englishmen who 
imagined that they had been bom in a free country: 
a **free" coimtry with the Corporation Act and the 
Test still in force in it — ^timbers propped against 
men's liberties and dishonored consciences to shore 
up an Established Anachronism with. 

My missionaries were taught to spell out the gilt 
signs on their tabards — ^the showy gilding was a neat 

128 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

idea, I could have got the king to wear a bulletin- 
board for the sake of that barbaric splendor — ^they 
were to spell out these signs and then explain to the 
tords and ladies what soap was; and if the lords and 
ladies were afraid of it, get them to try it on a dog. 
The missionary's next move was to get the family 
together and try it on himself; he was to stop at no 
experiment, however desperate, that could convince 
the nobility that soap was harmless; if any final 
doubt remained, he must catch a hermit — ^the woods 
were full of them ; saints they called themselves, and 
saints they were believed to be. They were unspeak- 
ably holy, and worked miracles, and everybody 
stood in awe of them. If a hermit could survive a 
wash, and that failed to convince a duke, give him 
up, let him alone. 

Whenever my missionaries overcame a knight 
errant on the road they washed him, and when he 
•got well they swore him to go and get a bulletin- 
board and disseminate soap and civilization the rest 
of his days. As a consequence the workers in the 
field were increasing by degrees, and the reform was 
Steadily spreading. My soap factory felt the strain 
early. At first I had only two hands; but before I 
had left home I was already employing fifteen, and 
running night and day; and the atmospheric result 
was getting so "pronounced that the king went sort 
of fainting and gasping around and said he did not 
believe he could stand it much longer, and Sir Latm- 
celot got so that he did hardly anything but walk up 
and down the roof and swear, although I told him 
it was worse up there than anywhere else, but he said 

129 






MARK TWAIN 

he wanted plenty of air; and he was always com- 
plaining that a palace was no place for a soap factory 
anyway, and said if a man was to start one in his 
house he would be damned if he wouldn't strangle 
him. There were ladies present, too, but much these 
people ever cared for that; they would swear before 
children, if the wind was their way when the factory 
was going. 

This missionary knight's name was La Cote Male 
Taile, and he said that this castle was the abode of 
Morgan le Fay, sister of King Arthur, and wife of 
King Uriens, monarch of a realm about as big as the 
District of Coltunbia — ^you could stand in the middle 
of it and throw bricks into the next kingdom. 
* 'Kings'* and "Kingdoms" were as thick in Britain 
as they had been in little Palestine in Joshua's time, 
when people had to sleep with their knees pulled up 
because they couldn't stretch out without a passport. 

La Cote was much depressed, for he had scored 
here the worst failure of his campaign. He had not 
worked oflf a cake; yet he had tried all the tricks of 
the trade, even to the washing of a hermit; but the 
hermit died. This was, indeed, a bad failure, for 
this animal would now be dubbed a martyr, and 
would take his place among the saints of the Roman 
calendar. Thus made he his moan, this poor Sir La 
Cote Male Taile, and sorrowed passing sore. And 
so my heart bled for him, and I was moved to com* 
fort and stay him. Wherefore I said : 

** Forbear to grieve, fair knight, for this is not 
defeat. We have brains, you and I; and for such 
as have brains there are no defeats, but only victories, 

130 



v-ri_ 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

Observe how we will turn this seeming disaster into 
an advertisement; an advertisement for our soap; 
and the biggest one, to draw, that was ever thought 
of ; an advertisement that will transform that Mount 
Washington defeat into a Matterhom victory. We 
will put on your bulletin-board, * Patronized by the 
Elect. ' How does that strike you ?'* 

''Verily, it is wonderly bethought!" 

/'Well, a body is boimd to admit that for just a 
modest little one-line ad., it*s a corker." 

So the poor colporteur's griefs vanished away. 
He was a brave fellow, and had done mighty feats 
of arms in his time. His chief celebrity rested upon 
the events of an excursion like this one of mine, which 
he had once made with a damsel named Maledisant, 
who was as handy with her tongue as was Sandy, 
though in a different way, for her tongue churned 
forth only railings and insult, whereas Sand^'-^s 
music was of a kindlier sort. I knew his story well, 
and so I knew how to interpret the compassion that 
was in his face when he bade me farewell. He 
supposed I was having a bitter hard time of it. 

Sandy and I discussed his story, as we rode along, 
and she said that La Cote's bad luck had begun with 
the very beginning of that trip; for the king's fool 
had overthrown him on the first day, and in such 
cases it was customary for the girl to desert to the 
conqueror, but Maledisant didn't do it; and also 
persisted afterward in sticking to him, after all his 
defeats. But, said I, suppose the victor should de- 
cline to accept his spoil ? She said that that wouldn't 
answer — he must. He couldn't decline; it wouldn't 
10 , 131 



1 



MARK TWAIN 

be regtilar. I made a note of that. If Sandy's 
music got to be too burdensome, some time, I wovHA 
let a knight defeat me» on the chance that she would 
desert to him. 

In due time we were challenged by the warders, 
from the castle walls, and after a parley admitted. 
I have nothing pleasant to tell about that visit. But 
it was not a disappointment, for I knew Mrs, to Pay 
by reputation, and was not expecting anything 
pleasant. She was held in awe by the whole realm, 
for she had made everybody believe she was a great 
sorceress. All her wajrs were wicked, all her instincts 
devilish. She was loaded to the eyelids with cold 
malice. All her history was black with crime; and 
among her crimes murder was common. I was 
most curious to see her; as curious as I could have 
been to see Satan. To my surprise she was beauti- 
ful ; black thoughts had failed to make her expression 
repulsive, age had failed to wrinkle her satin skin or 
mar its bloomy freshness. She could have passed 
for old Uriens* granddaughter, she could have been 
mistaken for sister to her own son. 

As soon as we were fairly within the castle gates 
we were ordered into her presence. King Uriens was 
there, a kind-faced old man with a subdued look; and 
also the son. Sir Uwaine le Blanchemains, in whom 
I was, of course, interested on account of the tradi- 
tion that he had once done battle with thirty knightSt 
and also on account of his trip with Sir Gawaine and 
Sir Marhaus, which Sandy had been aging me with. 
But Morgan was the main attraction, the conspicu- 
ous personality here; she was head chief of this 

133 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

household, that was plain. She caused us to be 
seated, and then she began, with all manner of pretty- 
graces and graciousnesses, to ask me questions. Dear 
me, it was like a bird or a flute, or something, talk- 
ing. I felt persuaded that this woman must have 
been misrepresented, lied about. She trilled along, 
and trilled along, and presently a handsome young 
page, clothed like the rainbow, and as easy and un- 
dulatory of movement as a wave, came with some- 
thing on a golden salver, and, kneeling to present it 
to her, overdid his graces and lost his balance, and 
so fell lightly against her knee. She slipped a dirk 
into him in as matter-of-course a way as another per- 
son would have harpooned a rat ! 

Poor child! he slumped to the floor, twisted his 
silken limbs in one great straining contortion of 
pain, and was dead. Out of the old king was wnmg 
an involuntary "O-h!" of compassion. The look he 
got, made him cut it suddenly short and not put 
any more hyphens in it. Sir Uwaine, at a sign from 
his mother, went to the anteroom and called some 
servants, and meanwhile madame went rippling 
sweetly along with her talk. 

I saw that she was a good housekeeper, for while 
she talked she kept a comer of her eye on the 
servants to see that they made no balks in handling 
the body and getting it out; when they came with 
fresh dean towels, she sent back for the other kind; 
and when they had finished wiping the floor and 
were going, she indicated a crimson fleck the size of 
a tear which their duller eyes had overlooked. It 
was plain to me that La Cote Male Taile had failed 

133 



MARK TWAIN 

to see the mistress of the house. Often, how louder 
and clearer than any tongue, does dtunb circum- 
stantial evidence speak. 

Morgan le Fay rippled along as musically as ever. 
Marvelous woman. And what a glance she had: 
when it fell in reproof upon those servants, they 
shrunk and quailed as^'fimid people do when the 
lightning flashes out of a cloud. I could have got 
the habit myself. It was the same with that poor 
old Brer Uriens; he was always on the ragged edge 
of apprehension; she could not even turn toward him 
but he winced. 

In the midst of the talk I tet drop a complimentary 
word about King Arthur, forgetting for the moment 
how this woman hated her brother. That one little 
compliment was enough. She clouded up like a 
storm; she called for her guards, and said: 

**Hale me these varlets to the dtmgeons." 

That struck cold on my ears, for her dimgeons had 
a reputation. Nothing occurred to me to say — or 
do. But not so with Sandy. As the guard laid a 
hand upon me, she piped up with the tranquilest 
confidence, and said: 

** God's wownds, dost thou covet destruction, thou 
maniac? It is The Boss !" 

Now what a happy idea that was! — and so simple; 
yet it would never have occurred to me. I was bom 
modest ; not all over, but in spots ; and this was one 
of the spots. 

The effect upon madame was electrical. It cleared 
her countenance and brought back her smiles and afi 
her persuasive graces and blandishments ; but nevep^. 

134 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

theiess she was not able to entirely cover up with 
them the fact that she was in a ghastly fright. She 
said: 

**La, but do list to thine handmaid! as if one 
gifted with powers like to mine might say the thing 
which I have said tmto one who has vanquished 
Merlin, and not be jesting.^ By mine enchantments 
I foresaw your coming, and by them I knew you 
when you entered here. I did but play this little 
jest with hope to sttrprise you into some display of 
your art, as not doubting you would blast the 
guards with occult fires, consuming them to ashes on 
the spot, a marvel mudi beyond mine own ability, 
yet one which I have long been childishly curious 
to see." 

The guards were less curious, and got out as soon 
as they got permission. 



CHAPTER XVII 

A ROYAL BANQUET 

MADAME, seeing me pacific and unresentful, 
no doubt judged that I was deceived by her 
excuse; for her fright dissolved away, and she was 
soon so importunate to have me give an exhibition 
and kill somebody, that the thing grew to be em- 
barrassing. However, to my relief she was presently 
interrupted by the call to prayers. I will say this 
much for the nobility: that, tyrannical, murderous, 
rapacious, and morally rotten as they were, they 
were deeply and enthusiastically religious. Nothing 
could divert them from the regular and faithful per- 
formance of the pieties enjoined by the Church. 
More than once I had seen a noble who had gotten 
his enemy at a disadvantage, stop to pray before 
cutting his throat; more than once I had seen a 
noble, after ambushing and despatching his enemy, 
retire to the nearest wayside shrine and htimbly give 
thanks, without even waiting to rob the body. 
There was to be nothing finer or sweeter in the life 
of even Benvenuto Cellini, that rough-hewn saint, 
ten centuries later. All the nobles of Britain, with 
their families, attended divine service morning and 
night daily, in their private chapels, and even the 
worst of them had family worship five or six times a 

136 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

day besides. The credit of this belonged entirely 
to the Church. Although I was no friend to that 
Catholic Church, I was obliged to admit this. And 
often, in spite of me, I found myself saying, **What f ,,> t^,,jt 
would this cotmtry be without the Church?" I -^^^^^.j^} 

After prayers we had dinner in a great banqueting- 
hall which was lighted by himdreds of grease-jets, and 
eversrthing was as fine and lavish and rudely splendid 
as might become the royal degree of the hosts. At 
the head of the hall, on a dais, was the table of the 
king, queen, and their son. Prince Uwaine. Stretch- 
ing down the hall from this, was the general table, 
on the floor. At this, above the salt, sat the visiting 
nobles and the grown members of their families, of 
both sexes — ^the resident Court, in eflEect — sixty-one 
persons; below the salt sat minor officers of the 
household, with their principal subordinates: alto- 
gether a himdred and eighteen persons sitting, and 
about as many liveried servants standing behind 
their chairs, or serving in one capacity or another. 
It was a very fine show. In a gallery a band with 
cymbals, horns, harps, and other horrors, opened 
the proceedings with what seemed to be the crude 
first-draft or original agony of the wail known to 
later centuries as **In the Sweet Bye and Bye." 
It was new, and ought to have been rehearsed a little 
more. For some reason or other the queen had the 
composer hanged, after dinner. 

After this music, the priest who stood behind the 
royal table said a noble long grace in ostensible 
Latin. Then the battalion of waiters broke away 
from their posts, and darted, rushed, flew, fetched 

137 



MARK TWAIN 

and carried, and the mighty feeding began; no wends 
anywhere, but absorbing attention to btisiiiess. 
The rows of chops opened and shut in vast tmison, 
and the sound of it was Uke to the muffled burr of 
subterranean machinery. 

The havoc continued an hour and a half, and un- 
imaginable was the destruction of substantiate. Of 
the chief feature of the feast — ^the huge wild boar 
that lay stretched out so portly and imposing at 
the start — nothing was left but the semblance of a 
hoop-skirt; and he was but the t3rpe and symbol of 
what had happened to all the other dishes. 

With the pastries and so on, the heavy drinking 
began — and the talk. Gallon after gallon of wine 
and mead disappeared, and everybody got oom* 
fortable, then happy, then sparklingly joyous — both 
sexes — and by and by pretty noisy. Men told 
anecdotes that were terrific to hear, but nobody 
blushed; and when the nub was sprung, the assem* 
blage let go with a horse-laugh that shook the 
fortress. Ladies answered back with historiettes 
that would almost have made Queen Margaret of 
Navarre or even the great Elizabeth of England hide 
behind a handkerchief, but nobody hid here, but only 
laughed — ^howled, you may say. In pretty much all 
of these dreadful stories, ecclesiastics were the hardy 
heroes, but that didn't worry the chaplain any, he 
had his laugh with the rest; more than that, upon 
invitation he roared out a song which was of as 
daring a sort as any that was stmg that night. 

By midnight everybody was fagged out, and sore 
with laughing; and, as a rule, drunk: some weep- 

138 



\ 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

ingly, some affectionately, some hilariously, some 
quarrelsomely, some dead and imder the table. Of 
the ladies, the worst spectacle was a lovely young 
duchess, whose wedding-eve this was; and indeed 
she was a spectacle, sure enough. Just as she was 
she could have sat in advance for the portrait of 
the young daughter of the Regent d'Orleans, at the 
famous dinner whence she was carried, foul-mouthed, 
intoxicated, and helpless, to her bed, in the lost and 
lamented days of the Ancient R6gime. 

Suddenly, even while the priest was lifting his 
hands, and all conscious heads were bowed in rever- 
ent expectation of the coming blessing, there ap- 
peared imder the arch of the far-off door at the 
bottom of the hall an old and bent and white-haired 
lady, leaning upon a crutch-stick; and she lifted the 
stick and pointed it toward the queen and cried out : 

**The wrath and curse of God fall upon you, 
woman without pity, who have slain mine innocent 
grandchild and made desolate this old heart that had 
nor chick, nor friend nor stay nor comfort in all this 
world but him!" 

Everybody crossed himself in a grisly fright, for 
a curse was an awful thing to those people; but the 
queen rose up majestic, with the death-light in her 
eye, and flung back this ruthless command : 

**Lay hands on her! To the stake with her!" 

The guards left their posts to obey. It was a 
shame; it was a cruel thing to see. What could 
be done? Sandy gave me a look; I knew she had 
another inspiration. I said : 

**Do what you choose." 

139 



MARK TWAIN 

She was up and facing toward the qtieen in a 
moment. She indicated me, and said : 

''Madame, he saith this may not be. Recall the 
commandment, or he will dissolve the castle and it 
shall vanish away like the instable fabric of a dream!" 

Confotmd it, what a crazy contract to pledge a 
person to ! What if the queen — 

But my consternation subsided there, and my 
panic passed off; for the queen, all in a collapse, 
made no show of resistance but gave a cotmter- 
manding sign and stmk into her seat. When she 
reached it she was sober. So were many of the 
others. The assemblage rose, whiffed ceremony to 
the winds, and rushed for the door like a mob ; over- 
turning chairs, smashing crockery, tugging, strug- 
gling, shouldering, crowding — ^anything to get out 
before I should change my mind and puff the castle 
into the measureless dim vacancies of space. Well, 
well, well, they were a superstitious lot. It is all a 
body can do to conceive of it. 

The poor queen was so scared and humbled that 
she was even afraid to hang the composer without 
first consulting me. I was very sorry for her — 
indeed, any one would have been, for she was really 
suffering; so I was willing to do anything that was 
reasonable, and had no desire to carry things to 
wanton extremities. I therefore considered the 
matter thoughtfully, and ended by having the 
musicians ordered into our presence to play that 
Sweet Bye and Bye again, which they did. Then I 
saw that she was right, and gave her permission to 
hang the whole band. This little relaxation of 

140 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

sternness had a good effect upon the queen. A 
statesman gains little by the arbitrary exercise of 
iron-clad authority upon all occasions that offer, for 
this wotmds the just pride of his subordinates, and 
thus tends to undermine his strength. A little con- 
cession, now and then, where it can do no harm, is 
the wiser policy. 

Now that the queen was at ease in her mind once 
more, and measurably happy, her wine naturally 
began to assert itself again, and it got a little the 
start of her. I mean it set her music going — ^her 
silver bell of a tongue. Dear me, she was a master 
talker. It would not become me to suggest that it 
was pretty late and that I was a tired man and very 
sleepy. I wished I had gone off to bed when I had 
the chance. Now I must stick it out ; there was no 
other way. So she tinkled along and along, in the 
otherwise prof oimd and ghostly hush of the sleeping 
castle, until by and by there came, as if from deep 
down tmder us, a far-away sotmd, as of a mtiffied 
shriek — ^with an expression of agony about it that 
made my flesh crawl. The queen stopped, and her 
eyes Ughted with pleasure; she tilted her graceful 
head as a bird does when it listens. The sotmd 
bored its way up through the stillness again. 

•'Wliatisitr Isaid. 

*'It is truly a stubborn soul, and endureth long. 
It is many hours now." 

"Endureth what?" 

''The rack. Come — ye shall see a blithe sight. 
An he yield not his secret now, ye shall see him 
torn astmder." 

141 



MARK TWAIN 

What a silky smooth hellion she was; and so com- 
posed and serene, when the cords all down my legs 
were htirting in sympathy with that man's pain. 
. Conducted by mailed guards bearing flaring torches, 
we tramped along echoing corridors, and down stone 
stairways dank and dripping, and smelling of mold 
and ai o£ imprisonr^ght^ chffl, m.oanny 
journey and a long one, and not made the shorter or 
the cheerier by the sorceress's talk, which was about 
this sufferer and his crime. He had been accused 
by an anonymous informer, of having killed a stag 
in the royal preserves. I said : 

''Anonymous testimony isn't just the right thing, 
your Highness. It were fairer to confront the 
accused with the accuser." 

"I had not thought of that, it being but of small 
consequence. But an I would, I could not, for that 
the accuser came masked by night, and told the 
forester, and straightway got him hence again, and 
so the forester knoweth him not." 

'*Then is this Unknown the only person who saw 
the stag killed?" 

** Marry, no man saw the killing, but this Unknown 
saw this hardy wretch near to the spot where the 
stag lay, and came with right loyal zeal and be- 
trayed him to the forester." 

"So the Unknown was near the dead stag, too? 
Isn't it just possible that he did the killing himself? 
His loyal zeal — ^in a mask — ^looks just a shade sus- 
picious. But what is your Highness's idea for 
racking the prisoner? Where is the profit?" 

"He will not confess, else; and then were his soul 

143 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

lost. Pot his crime his life is forfeited by the law 
— and of a stirety will I see that he payeth it! — but (. C ^^^ 
it were peril to my own sotd to let him die uncon- ) 
fessed and unabsolved. Nay, I were a fool to fling t ^"^^"^ 
me into hell for his accx)mmodation." 

'*But, your Highness, suppose he has nothing to 
confess?" 

**As to that, we shall see, anon. An I rack him 
to death and he confess not, it will peradventure 
show that he had indeed naught to confess — ye will 
grant that that is sooth? Then shall I not be 
damned for an imconf essed man that had naught to 
confess — ^wherefore, I shall be safe." 

It was the stubborn unreasoning of the time. It 
was useless to argue with her. Arguments have no 
chance against petrified training; they wear it as 
little as the waves wear a cliff. And her t^igmg 
was everybody's. The brightest intellect in the land 
would not have been able to see that her position 
was defective. 

As we entered the rack-cell I caught a picture that 
will not go from me; I wish it would. A native 
yotmg giant of thirty or thereabouts lay stretched 
upon the frame on his back, with his wrists and 
ankles tied to ropes which led over windlasses at 
either end. There was no color in him ; his features 
were contorted and set, and sweat-drops stood upon 
his forehead. A priest bent over him on each side; 
the executioner stood by; guards were on duty; 
smoking torches stood in sockets along the walls; 
in a comer crouched a poor young creature, her face 
drawn with anguish, a half-wild and hunted look in 

143 



MARK TWAIN 

her eyes, and in her lap lay a little child asleep. 
Just as we stepped across the threshold the execu- 
tioner gave his machine a slight turn, which wrung a 
cry from both the prisoner and the woman; but I 
shouted, and the executioner released the strain with- 
out waiting to see who spoke. I could not let this 
horror go on; it would have killed me to see it. I 
asked the queen to let me clear the place and speak 
to the prisoner privately; and when she was going 
to object I spoke in a low voice and said I did not 
want to make a scene before her servants, but I 
must have my way; for I was King Arthur's repre- 
sentative, and was speaking in his name. She saw 
she had to yield. I asked her to indorse me to these 
people, and then leave me. It was not pleasant for 
her, but she took the pill; and even went further 
than I was meaning to reqtiire. I only wanted the 
backing of her own authority; but she said: 

''Ye will do in all things as this lord shall command. 
It is The Boss." 

It was certainly a good word to conjure with : you 
could see it by the squirming of these rats. The 
queen's guards fell into line, and she and they 
marched away, with their torch-bearers, and woke 
the echoes of the cavernous tunnels with the meas- 
ured beat of their retreating footfalls. I had the 
prisoner taken from the rack and placed upon his 
bed, and medicaments applied to his hurts, and 
wine given him to drink. The woman crept near 
and looked on, eagerly, lovingly, but timorously — 
like one who fears a repulse; indeed, she tried ftu:- 
tively to totich the man's forehead, and jtunped 

X44 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

back» the pcture of fright, when I turned uncon- 
sciously toward her. It was pitiful to see. 

'*Lord/* I said, **stroke him, lass, if you want to. 
Do anything you're a mind to; don't mind me." 

Why, her eyes were as grateful as an animal's, 
when you do it a kindness that it understands. The 
baby was out of her way and she had her cheek 
against the man's in a minute, and her hands 
fondling his hair, and her happy tears running down. 
The man revived, and caressed his wife with his eyes, 
which was all he could do. I judged I might dear 
the den, now, and I did; cleared it of all but the 
family and myself. Then I said : 

**Now, my friend, tell me your side of this matter; 
I know the other side." 

The man moved his head in sign of refusal. But 
the woman looked pleased — ^as it seemed to me — 
pleased with my suggestion. I went on : 

**You know of me?" 

**Yes. All do, in Arthur's realms." 

**If my reputation has come to you right and 
straight, you should not be afraid to speak." 

The woman broke in, eagerly : 

**Ah, fair my lord, do thou persuade him! Thou 
canst an thou wilt. Ah, he suffereth so; and it is 
for me — ^f or me! And how can I bear it ? I would I 
might see him die — 2l sweet, swift death; oh, my 
Hugo, I cannot bear this one!" 

And she fell to sobbing and groveling about my 
feet, and still imploring. Imploring what? The 
man's death? I could not quite get the bearings of 
the thing. But Hugo interrupted her and said: 

145 



MARK TWAIN 

*'Peace! Ye wit not what ye ask. Shall I starve 
whom I love, to win a gentle death? I wend thou 
knewest me better." 

**Well," I said, **I can't quite make this out. It 
is a puzzle. Now — " 

'*Ah, dear my lord, an ye will but persuade him! 
Consider how these his tortures wotmd me ! Oh, and 
he will not speak! — ^whereas, the healing, the solace 
that lie in a blessed swift death — " 

**What are you maundering about? He's going 
out from here a free man and whole — he's not going 
to die." 

The man's white face lit up, and the woman fitmg 
herself at me in a most surprising explosion of joy, 
and cried out : 

**He is saved! — ^for it is the king's word by the 
mouth of the king's servant — ^Arthur, the king whose 
word is gold!" 

**Well, then you do believe I can be trusted, after 
all. Why didn't you before?" 

**Who doubted? Not I, indeed; and not she.** 

**Well, why wouldn't you tell me your story, 
then?" 

''Ye had made no promise; else had it been 
otherwise." 

'*I see, I see. . . . And yet I believe I don't 
quite see, after all. You stood the torture and 
refused to confess ; which shows plain enough to even 
the dtillest tmderstanding that you had nothing to 
confess — " 

**/, my lord? How so? It was I that killed the 
deer!" 

146 






A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"You did? Oh, dear, this is the most mixed-up 
biisiness that ever — " 

* * Dear lord, I begged him on my knees to confess, 
but—" 

* * You did! It gets thicker and thicker. What did 
you want him to do that for?" 

*'Sith it would bring him a quick death and save 
him all this cruel pain.*' ^ 

"Well — yes, there is reason in that. But he 3 

didn't want the quick death." 

"He? Why, of a surety he did.'* 

"Well, then, why in the world didn*i he confess?" 

"Ah, sweet sir, and leave my wife and chick with- 
out bread and shelter?" 

"Oh, heart of gold, now I see it! The bitter law 

takes the convicted man's estate and beggars his 

widow and his orphans. They could torture you to 

death, but without conviction or confession they 

could not rob your wife and baby. You stood by 

them like a man ; and you — ^true wife and true woman 

that you are — ^you would have bought him release 

from torture at cost to yourself of slow starvation 

and death — well, it humbles a body to think what 

your sex can do when it comes to self-sacrifice. I'll 

book you both for my colony; you'll Hke it there; 

it's a Factory where I'm going to turn groping and / 

grubbing automata into men.'^ 
11 



»o 



ti 



CHAPTER XVIII 

IN THE queen's DUNGEONS 

WELL, I arranged all that ; and I had the man 
sent to his iiome. I had a great desire to rack 
the executioner; not because he was a good, pains- 
taking and paingiving official — ^for surely it was not 
to his discredit that he performed his f imctions well 
— but to pay him back for wantonly cuffing and 
otherwise distressing that yoimg woman. The 
priests told me about this, and were generously hot 
to have him punished. Something of this disagree- 
able sort was turning up every now and then. I 
mean, episodes that showed that not all priests were 
frauds and self-seekers, but that many, even the 
great majority, of these that were down on the 
groimd among the common people, were sincere 
and right-hearted, and devoted to the alleviation of 
human troubles and sufferings. Well, it was a thing 
which could not be helped, so I seldom fretted about 
it, and never many minutes at a time; it has never 
been my way to bother much about things which you 
can't cure. But I did not like it, for it was just the 
sort of thing to keep people reconciled to an Estab- 
lished Church. We must have a religion — it goes 
without saying — ^but my idea is, to have it cut up 
into forty free sects, so that they will police each 

148 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

other, as had been the case in the United States in 
my time. Concentration of power in a political 
machine is bad; and an Established Church is only 
a political machine; it was invented for that; it is 
nursed, cradled, preserved for that; it is an enemy 
to human liberty, and does no good which it could 
not better do in a split-up and scattered condition. 
That wasn't law; it wasn't gospel: it was only an 
opinion — ^my opinion, and I was only a man, one 
man : so it wasn't worth any more than the pope's 
— or any less, for that matter. 

Well, I couldn't rack the executioner, neither 
would I overlook the just complaint of the priests. 
The man must be ptmished somehow or other, so I 
degraded him from his office and made him leader 
of the band — the new one that was to be started. 
He begged hard, and said he couldn't t)lay — a plausi- 
ble excuse, but too thin; there wasn't a musician in 
the country that could. 

The queen was a good deal outraged, next morn- 
ing, when she fotmd she was going to have neither 
Hugo's life nor his property. But I told her she must 
bear this cross; that while by law and custom she 
certainly was entitled to both the man's life and his 
property, there were extenuating circtunstances, and 
so in Arthur the king's name I had pardoned him. 
The deer was ravaging the man's fields, and he had 
killed it in sudden passion, and not for gain; and he 
had carried it into the royal forest in the hope that 
that might make detection of the misdoer impossible. 
Confotmd her, I couldn*t make her see that sudden 

passion is an extenuating drctunstance in the killing 

149 



y< 






MARK TWAIN 

cf venison — or of a person — so I gave it up and let 
her sulk it out. I did think I was gomg to make her 
see it by remarking that her own sudden passion in 
the case of the page modified that crime. 

"Crime!" she exclaimed, "How thou talkest! 
Crime, forsooth! Man, I am going to pay for him!" 

Oh, it was no use to waste sense on her. Training 
— ^training is evers^thing; training is all there is to a 

> person. We speak of nature; it is folly; there is no 
such thing as nature; what we call by that mislead- 
jing name is merely hgrgdky aiid training. We have 
no thoughts of our own, no opinions of our own; they 
are transmitted to us, trained into us. All that is 
original in us, and therefore fairly creditable or 
discreditable to us, can be covered up and hidden by 
the point of a cambric needle, all the rest being atoms 
contributed by, and inherited from, a procession of 
ancestors that stretches back a billion years to the 
Adam-clam or grasshopper or monkey from whom 
our race has been so tediously and ostentatiously 
and unprofitably developed. And as for me, all that 
I think about in this plodding sad pilgrimage, this 
pathetic drift between the eternities, is to look out 
and htimbly live a pure and high and blameless life, 
and save that one microscopic atom in me that is 
truly me: the rest may land in Sheol and welcome for 
all I care. 

No, confotmd her, her intellect was good, she had 
brains enough, but her training made her an ass — 
that is, from a many-centuries-later point of view. 
To Idll the page was no crime — ^it was her right; and 
upon her right she stood, serenely and imconsdous 

ISO 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

of offense. She was a result of generations of train- 
ing in the tmexamined and tinassailed belief that the 
law which permitted her to kill a subject when she 
chose was a perfectly right and righteous one. 

Well, we must give even Satan his due. She 
deserved a compliment for one thing; and I tried to 
pay it, but the words stuck in my throat. She had a 
right to kill the boy, but she was in no wise obliged 
to pay for him. That was law for some other peqple, 
but not for her. She knew quite well that she was 
doing a large and generous thing to pay for that lad, 
and that I ought in common fairness to come out 
with something handsome about it, but I cotddn't 
— my mouth refused. I cotddn't help seeing, in 
my fancy, that poor old grandma with the broken 
heart, and that fair young creature lying butchered, 
his little silken pomps and vanities laced with his 
golden blood. How could she pay for him! Whom 
cotdd she pay? And so, well knowing that this 
woman, trained as she had been, deserved praise, 
even adulation,. I was yet not able to utter it, trained 
as I had been. The best I could do was to fish up 
a compliment from outside, so to speak — and the 
pity of it was, that it was true: 
*' Madame, yotir i)eople will adore you for this." 
Quite true, but I meant to hang her for it some 
day, if I lived. Some of those laws were too bad, 
altogether too bad. A master might kill his slave 
for nothing: for mere spite, malice, or to pass the 
time — ^just as we have seen that the crowned head 
cotdd do it with his slave, that is to say, anybody. 
A gentleman could kill a free commoner, and pay for 

151 



MARK TWAIN 

him — cash or garden-truck. A noble could kill a 
noble without expense, as far as the law was con- 
cerned, but reprisals in kind were to be expected. 
Anybody could kill somebody^ except the commoner 
and the slave; these had no privileges. If they 
killed, it was murder, and the law wotddn't stand 
murder. It made short work of the experimenter — 
and of his family, too, if he murdered somebody 
who belonged up among the ornamental ranks. If 
a commoner gave a noble even so much as a Damiens- 
scratch which didn't Idll or even htirt, he got Da- 
miens' dose for it just the same; they ptdled him 
to rags and tatters with horses,' and all the world 
came to see the show, and crack jokes, and have a 
good time; and some of the performances of the 
best people present were as tough, and as properly 
tmprintable, as any that have been printed by the 
pleasant Casanova in his chapter about the dismem- 
berment of Louis XV. 's poor awkward enemy. 

I had had enough of this grisly place by this time, 
and wanted to leave, but I couldn't, because I had 
something on my mind that my conscience kept 
prodding me about, and wotddn't let me forget. If 
I had the remaking of man, he wouldn't have any 
conscience. It is one of the most disagreeable things 
connected with a person; and although it certainly 
does a great deal of good, it cannot be said to pay, 
in the long nm ; it would be much better to have less 
good and more comfort. Still, this is only my 
opinion, and I am only one man; others, with less 
experience, may think diflFerently. They have a 
right to their view. I only stand to this: I have 

IS2 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

noticed my conscience for many years, and I know 
it is more trouble and bother to me than anything 
else I started with. I suppose that in the beginning 
I prized it, because we prize anything that is ours; 
and yet how foolish it was to think so. If we look 
at it in another way, we see how absurd it is: if I 
had an anvil in me would I prize it? Of cotH-se not. 
And yet when you come to think, there is no real 
difference between a conscience and an anvil — ^I mean 
for comfort. I have noticed it a thousand times. 
And you could dissolve an anvil with adds, when 
you couldn't stand it any longer; but there isn't any 
way that you can work off a conscience — at least so 
it will stay worked off; not that I know of, anyway. 

There was something I wanted to do before 
leaving, but it was a disagreeable matter, and I 
hated to go at it. Well, it bothered me all the morn- 
ing. I could have mentioned it to the old king, but 
what would be the use? — ^he was but an extinct 
volcano; he had been active in his time, but his fire 
was out, this good while, he was only a stately ash- 
pile now; gentle enough, and kindly enough for my 
purpose, without doubt, but not usable. He was 
nothing, this so-called king: the queen was the only 
power there. And she was a Vesuvius. As a favor, 
she might consent to warm a flock of sparrows for 
you, but then she might take that very opporttmity 
to turn herself loose and bury a city. However, I 
reflected that as often as any other way, when you 
are expecting the worst, you get something that is 
not so bad, after all. 

So I braced up and placed my matter before her 

IS3 



i 



# MARK TWAIN 

royal Highness. I said I had been having a general 
jail-delivery ^t Camelo^ and among neighboring 
castles, and with her (permission I would like to 
examine her collection, ner bric-^-brac — ^that is to 
say, her prisoners/) She resisted; but I was expect- 
ing that. But she finally consented. I was expect- 
ing that, too, but not so soon. That about ended my 
discomfort. She called her guards and torches, and 

^ we went down into the dtmgeons. These were down 
under the castle's foimdations, and mainly were 
smaMfcells hollowed out of the living rock. Some of 

. these* cells had no light at all. In one of them was 
a Vomap, in fcful rags, who sat on the groimd, and 
would not answei; a question or speak a word, but 
only looked up at us onc^Dr twice, through a cob- 
web of tangled hair» as if to^ee what casual thing 
it • might be that was disturbing ^th sound and 
light the meaningless dull dream that was ]bf Qome 
her life; after that, she sat bowed, witli her dirt- 
caked fingers idly interlocked in her lap, and gave 
no ftirther sign. This jMDor rack of bones was a 
woman of middle age, apparently; but only appar- 
ently; she had been there nine years, and was 

* eighteen when she entered. She was a commoner, 
and had been sent here on her bridal night by Sir 
Breuse Sance Pit6, a neighboring lord whose vassal 
her father was, and to which said lord she had 
refused what has since been called le droit du seigneur; 
and, moreover, had opposed violence to violence and 
spilt half a gill of his almost sacred blood. The 
yotmg husband had interfered at that point, be- 
lieving the bride's life in danger, and had flung tho 

IS4 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE ^ 

noble out into the midst of the humble and trembling 
wedding guests, in the parlor, and left him there 
astonished at this strange treatment, and implacably- 
embittered against both bride and groom. The said 
lord being cramped for dungeon-room had asked the 
queen to accommodate his two criminals, and here in 
her bastile they had been ever since; hither, indeed, 
they had come before their crime was an l^ur old, ^ 
and had never seen each other since. Here they i 
were, kemeled like toads in the same rock; they had 
passed nine pitch - dark years within fif ty^ f €^ of 
each other, yet neither knew whether the other was * 
alive or not. All the first years, their only question 
had been — asked with beseeching^ >aad tears that 
might have moypd ston^, in time, perhaps, but 
hearts are not stQuest/'Is h^ alive?" "Is she 
alive?" But they had Aever got an answer; and at 
last th# qt^itstion was not asked any more — or any 
other. • * 

I wanted to see the man, after hearing all this. 
He was thirty-four years old, and looked sixty. He 
sat ui)on a squared block of stone, with his head 
bent down, his forearms resting on his knees, his long 
hair hanging like a fringe before his face, and he was ' 
muttering to himself. He raised his chin and looked 
us slowly over, in a listless dull way, blinking with 
the distress of the torchlight, then dropped his head 
and fell to muttering again and took no further 
notice of us. There were some pathetically sug- 
gestive dtunb witnesses present. On his wrists and 
ankles were cicatrices, old smooth scars, and fastened 
to the stone on which he sat was a chain with man- 



MARK TWAIN 

ades and fetters attached; but this apparatus lay 
idle on the ground, and was thick with rust. Chains 
cease to be needed after the spirit has gone out of a 
prisoner. 

I could not rouse the man; so I said we would take 
him to her, and see — ^to the bride who was the fairest 
thing in the earth to him, once — roses, pearls, and 
dew made flesh, for him ; a wonder-work, the master- 
work of nature: with eyes like no other eyes, and 
voice like no other voice, and a freshness, and lithe 
yotmg grace, and beauty, that belonged properly to 
the creatures of dreams — as he thought — and to no 
other. The sight of her would set his stagnant blood 
leaping; the sight of her — 

But it was a disapjxrintment. They sat together 
on the grotmd and looked dimly wondering into each 
other's faces awhile, with a sort of weak animal 
curiosity; then forgot each other's presence, and 
dropped their eyes, and you saw that they were 
away again and wandering in some far land of dreams 
and shadows that we know nothing about. 

I had them taken out and sent to their friends. 
The queen did not like it much. Not that she felt 
any {personal interest in the matter, but she thought 
it disrespectful to Sir Breuse Sance Pit6. However, 
I assured her that if he fotmd he couldn't stand it I 
wotild fix him so that he could. 

I set forty-seven i)risoners loose out of those awful 
rat-holes, and left only one in captivity. He was a 
lord, and had killed another lord, a sort of kinsman 
of the queen. That other lord had ambushed him 
to assassinate him, but this fellow had got the best 

is6 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

of him and cut his throat. However, it was not for 
that that I left him jailed, but for maliciously de- 
strojdng the only public well in one of his wretched 
villages. The queen was bound to hang him for 
killing her kinsman, but I would not allow it : it was 
no crime to kill an assassin. But I said I was willing 
to let her hang him for destroying the well; so she 
concluded to put up with that, as it was better than 
nothing. 

Dear me, for what trifling offenses the most of 
those forty-seven men and women were shut up 
there! Indeed, some were there for no distinct 
offense at all, but only to gratify somebody's spite; 
and not always the queen's by any means, but a 
friend's. The newest prisoner's crime was a mere 
remark which he had made. He said he believed 
that men were about all alike, and one man as good 
as another, barring clothes. He said he believed that 
if you were to strip the nation naked and send a 
stranger through the crowd, he couldn't tell the king 
from a quack doctor, nor a duke from a hotel clerk. 
Apparently, here was a man whose brains had not 
been reduced to an ineffectual mush by idiotic 
training. I set him loose and sent him to the 
Factory. 

Some of the cells carved in the living rock were 
just behind the face of the precipice, and in each of 
these an arrow-slit had been pierced outward to the 
daylight, and so the captive had a thin ray from the 
blessed sim for his comfort. The case of one of these 
poor fellows was particularly hard. Prom his dusky 
swallow's hole high up in that vast wall of native 

IS7 



1/ 



MARK TWAIN 

rock he could peer out through the arrow-slit and 
see his own home ofiE yonder in the valley; and for 
twenty-two years he had watched it, with heartache 
and longing, through that crack. He could see the 
lights shine there at night, and in the daytime he 
could see figures go in and come out — his wife and 
children, some of them, no doubt, though he could 
not make out at that distance. In the course of 
years he noted festivities there, and tried to rejoice, 
and wondered if they were weddings or what th^ 
might be. And he noted funerals; and they wrung 
his heart. He could make out the coffin, but he 
could not determine its size, and so could not tdl 
whether it was wife or child. He could see the pro- 
cession form, with priests and motuners, and move 
solemnly away, bearing the secret with them. He 
had left behind him five children and a wife; and in 
nineteen years he had seen five funerals issue, and 
none of them humble enough in pomp to denote a 
servant. So he had lost five of his treasures; there 
must still be one remaining — one now infinitely, un- 
speakably precious — ^but which one? wife, or child? 
That was the question that torttured him, by night 
and by day, asleep and awake. Well, to have an 
interest, of some sort, and half a ray of light, when 
you are in a dungeon, is a great support to the body 
and preserver of the intellect. This man was in 
pretty good condition yet. By the time he had 
finished telling me his distressful tale, I was in the 
same state of mind that you would have been in 
yourself, if you have got average human curiosity; 
that is to say, I was as burning up as he was to find 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

out which member of the family it was that was 
left. So I took him over home myself; and an 
amazing kind of a surprise party it was, too — 
typhoons and cyclones of frantic joy, and whole 
Niagaras of happy tears; and by George! we found 
the aforetime young matron graying toward the 
imminent verge of her half-century, and the babies 
all men and women, and some of them married and 
experimenting iaxnUywise themselves — ^f or not a soul 
of the tribe was dead! Conceive of the ingenious 
devilishness of that queen: she had a special hatred 
for this prisoner, and she had invented all those 
funerals herself, to scorch his heart with; and the 
sublimest stroke of genius of the whole thing was 
leaving the family invoice a funeral short, so as to 
let him wear his poor old sotd out guessing. 

But for me, he never would have got out. Morgan 
le Fay hated him with her whole heart, and she never 
would have softened toward him. And yet his crime 
was committed more in thoughtlessness than de- 
liberate depravity. He had said she had red hair. 
Well, she had; but that was no way to speak of it. 
When red-headed people are above a certain social 
grade their hair is auburn. 

Consider it : among these forty-seven captives there 
were five whose names, offenses, and dates of incar- 
ceration were no longer known! One woman and 
four men — all bent, and wrinkled, and mind-extin- 
guished patriarchs. They themselves had long ago 
forgotten these details; at any rate, they had mere 
vague theories about them, nothing definite and 
nothing that they repeated twice in the same way. 

1 59 



MARK TWAIN 

The succession of priests whose office it had been to 
pray daily with the captives and remind them that 
God had put them there, for some wise purpose or 
other, and teach them that patience, humbleness, and 
submission to oppression was what He loved to see 
in parties of a subordinate rank, had traditions about 
these poor old human ruins, but nothing more. 
These traditions went but little way, for they con- 
cerned the length of the incarceration only, and not 
the names of the offenses. And even by the help 
of tradition the only thing that could be proven was 
that none of the five had seen daylight for thirty- 
five years : how much longer this privation had lasted 
was not guessable. The king and the queen knew 
nothing about these poor creatures, except that they 
were heirlocmis, assets inherited, along with the 
throne, from the former firm. Nothing of their his- 
tory had been transmitted with their persons, and 
so the inheriting owners had considered them of no 
value, and had felt no interest in them. I said to 
the queen: 

"Then why in the world didn't you set them 
free?" 

The question was a puzzler. She didn't know 
why she hadn't; the thing had never come up in her 
mind. So here she was, forecasting the veritable 
history of future prisoners of the Castle d'K, with- 
out knowing it. It seemed plain to me now, that 
with her training, those inherited prisoners were 
merely property — nothing more, nothing less. Well, 
when we inherit property, it does not occur to us to 
throw it away, even when we do not value it. 

i6o 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

When I brought my procession of htiman bats up 
into the open world and the glare of the afternoon 
sun — ^previously blindfolding them, in charity for 
eyes so long tmtortured by light — ^they were a spec- 
tacle to look at. Skeletons, scarecrows, goblins, 
pathetic frights, every one; legitimatest possible 
children of Monarchy by the Grace of God and the 
Established Church. I muttered absently: 

"I wish I could photograph them!" 

You have seen that kind of people who will never 
let on that they don't know the meaning of a new 
big word. The more ignorant they are, the more 
pitifully certain they are to pretend you haven't shot 
over their heads. The queen was just one of that 
sort, and was always making the stupidest bltmders 
by reason of it. She hesitated a moment; then her 
face brightened up with sudden comprehension, and 
she said she would do it for me. 

I thought to myself: She? why what can she 
know about photography? But it was a poor time 
to be thinking. When I looked arotmd, she was 
moving on the procession with an ax ! 

Well, she certainly was a ciuious one, was Morgan 
le Fay. I have seen a good many kinds of women 
in my time, but she laid over them all for variety. 
And how sharply characteristic of her this episode 
was. She had no more idea than a horse of how to 
photograph a procession; but being in doubt, it was 
just like her to try to do it with an ax. 



CHAPTER XIX 

KNIGHT-ERRANTRY AS A TRADE 

SANDY and I were on the road again, next morn- 
ing, bright and early. It was so good to open 
up one's lungs and take in whole luscious barrelfuls 
of the blessed God's untainted, dew-fashioned, wood- 
la^jd-scented air once more, after suffocating body 
and mind for two days and nights in the moral and 
physical stenches of that intolerable old buzzard- 
roost! I mean, for me: of course the place was all 
right and agreeable enough for Sandy, for she had 
been used to high life all her days. 

Poor girl, her jaws had had a wearisome rest now 
for a while, and I was expecting to get the conse- 
quences. I was right ; but she had stood by me most 
helpfully in the castle, and had mightily supported 
and reinforced me with gigantic foolishnesses which 
were worth more for the occasion than wisdoms 
double their size ; so I thought she had earned a right 
to work her mill for a while, if she wanted to, and 
I felt not a pang when she started it up : 

**Now turn we tmto Sir Marhaus that rode witl 
the damsel of thirty winter of age southward — '* 

**Are you going to see if you can work up anot 
half -stretch on the trail of the cowboys, Sandy?" 
Even so, fair my lord." 

162 



<( 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

*'Go ahead, then. I won't interrupt this time, if 
I can help it. Begin over again ; start fair, and shake 
out all your reefs, and I will load my pipe and give 
good attention." 

"Now turn we unto Sir Marhaus that rode with 
the damsel of thirty winter of age southward. And 
so they came into a deep forest, and by fortune they 
were nighted, and rode along in a deep way, and at 
the last they came into a courtelage where abode 
the duke of South Marches, and there they asked 
harbor. And on the mom the duke sent tmto Sir 
Marhaus, and bad him make him ready. And so Sir 
Marhaus arose and armed him, and there was a mass 
stmg afore him, and he brake his fast, and so mounted 
on horseback in the court of the castle, there they 
should do the battle. So there was the duke already 
on horseback, clean-armed, and his six sons by him, 
and every each had a spear in his hand, and so they 
encountered, whereas the duke and his two sons 
brake their spears upon him, but Sir Marhaus held 
up his spear and touched none of them. Then came 
the four sons by couples, and two of them brake 
their spears, and so did the other two. And all this 
while Sir Marhaus touched them not. Then Sir 
Marhatis ran to the duke, and smote him with his 
spear that horse and man fell to the earth. And so 
he served his sons. And then Sir Marhaus aUgfat 
down, and bad the dtike yield him or else he would 
slay him. And then some of his sons recovered, 
and would have set upon Sir Marfiaus. Then Sir 
Marhaus said to the duke. Cease thy sons, or else 
I will do the uttermost to you all. When the duke 
12 163 



I 



MARK TWAIN / 

saw he might not escape the death, he cried to his 
sons, and charged them to yield them to Sir Marhaus. 
And they kneeled all down and put the pommels of 
their swords to the knight, and so he received them. 
And then they holp up their father, and so by their 
common assent promised unto Sir Marhaus never 
to be foes unto ICing Arthur, and thereupon at Whit- 
suntide after, to come he and his sons, and put them 
in the king's grace.^ 

* * Even so standeth the history, fair Sir Boss. Now 
ye shall wit that that very duke and his six sons are 
they whom but few days past you also did overcome 
and send to Arthur's court!" 

"Why, Sandy, you can't mean it!" 

'An I speak not sooth, let it be the worse 
for me." 

"Well, well, well — ^now who would ever have 
thought it ? One whole duke and six dukelets ; why, 
Sandy, it was an elegant haul. Knight-errantry is 
a most chuckle-headed trade, and it is tedious hard 
work, too, but I begin to see that there is money in 
it, after all, if you have luck. Not that I would 
ever engage in it as a business; for I wouldn't. No 
sound and legitimate business can be established on 
a basis of speculation. A successful whirl in the 
knight-errantry line— now what is it when you blc 
away the nonsense and come down to the cold facts? 
It's just a comer in pork, that's all, and you can!l 
make anything else out of it. You're rich — ^yeS— 
suddenly rich — ^for about a day, maybe a week ; then 

^ The story is borrowed, language and all, from the MorU d'Arikttfk 
— M. T. 

164 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

somebody comers the market on ycm, and down goes 
your bucketshop; ain't that so, Sandy?" 

"Whethersoever it be that my mind miscanieth, 
bewraying simple language in such sort that the 
words do seem to come endlong and overthwart — " 

"There's no use in beating about the bush and 
tr3dng to get around it that way, Sandy, it's so^ just 
as I say. I know it's so. And, moreover, when you 
come right down to the bed-rock, knight-errantry is 
worse than pork; for whatever happens, the pork's 
left, and so somebody's benefited anyway; but when 
the market breaks, in a knight-errantry whirl, and 
every knight in the pool passes in his checks, what 
have you got for assets? Just a rubbish-pile of 
battered corpses and a barrel or two of busted hard- 
ware. Can you call those assets? Give me pork, 
every time. Am I right?" 

"Ah, peradventure my head being distraught by 
the manifold matters whereunto the confusions of 
these but late adventured haps and forttmings 
whereby not I alone nor you alone, but every each 
of us, meseemeth — " 

"No, it's not your head, Sandy. Your head's all 
right, as far as it goes, but you don't know business ; 
that's where the trouble is. It unfits you to argue 
about business, and you're wrong to be always 
trying. However, that aside, it was a good haul, 
anyway, and will breed a handsome crop of reputa- 
tion in Arthur's court. And speaking of the cow- 
boys, what a curious country this is for women and 
men that never get old. Now there's Morgan le 
Fay, as fresh and young as a Vassar pullet, to all 

i6s 



MARK TWAIN 

appearances, and here is this old duke of the South 
Marches still slashing away with sword and lance 
at his time of life, after raising such a family as he 
has raised. As I understand it, Sir Gawaine killed 
seven of his sons, and still he had six left for Sir 
Marhaus and me to take into camp. And then 
there was that damsel of sixty winter of age still 
excursioning around in her frosty bloom — How old 
are you, Sandy?" 

It was the first time I ever struck a still place in 
her. The mill had shut down for repairs, or some* 
thing. 



CHAPTER XX 

THB ogre's CASTLB 

BETWEEN six and nine we made ten miles» 
which was plenty for a horse carrying triple — 
man, woman, and armor; then wet stopped for a long 
nooning under some trees by a limpid brook. 

Right so came by and by a knight riding; and as 
he drew near he made dolorous moan, and by the 
words of it I perceived that he was cursing and swear- 
ing; yet nevertheless was I glad of his coming, for 
that I saw he bore a bulletin-board whereon in 
letters all of shining gold was writ: 

**UsE Peterson's Prophylactic Tooth-Brush — 

All the Go." 

I was glad of his coming, for even by this token I 
knew him for knight of mine. It was Sir Madok de 
la Montaine, a burly great fellow whose chief dis- 
tinction was that he had come within an ace of send- 
ing Sir Laimcelot down over his horse-tail once. He 
was never long in a stranger's presence without find- 
ing some pretext or other to let out that great fact. 
But there was another fact of nearly the same size, 
idiich he never pushed upon anybody unasked, and 
yet never withheld when asked: that was, that the 
reason he didn't quite succeed was, that he was 

167 



MARK TWAIN 

interrupted and sent down over horse-tail himself. 
This innocent vast lubber did not see any particular 
difference between the two facts. I Uked him, for 
he was earnest in his work, and very valuable. And 
he was so fine to look at, with his broad mailed 
shoulders, and the grand leonine set of his plumed 
head, and his big shield with its quaint device of a 
gauntleted hand clutching a prophylactic tooth- 
brush, with motto: ''Try NoyoudontJ* This was a 
tooth-wash that I was introducing. 

He was aweary, he said, and indeed he looked it; 
but he would not alight. He said he was after the . 
stove-polish man ; and with this he broke out cursing 
and swearing anew. The bulletin-boarder referred 
to was Sir Ossaise of Surluse, a brave knight, and 
of considerable celebrity on account of his having 
tried conclusions in a tournament once, with no less 
a Mogul than Sir Gaheris himself — although not 
successfully. He was of a light and laughing dis* 
position, and to him nothing in this world was 
serious. It was for this reason that I had chosen him 
to work up a stove-polish sentiment. There were 
no stoves yet, and so there could be nothing serious 
about stove-polish. All that the agent needed to do 
was to deftly and by degrees prepare the public for 
the great change, and have them established in pred- 
ilections toward neatness against the time when the 
stove should appear upon the stage. 

Sir Madok was very bitter, and brake out anew 
with cursings. He said he had cursed his soul to 
rags ; and yet he would not get down from his horse, 
neither would he take any rest, or listen to any com- 

i68 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

fort, until he shotild have found Sir Ossaise and 
settled this account. It appeared, by what I cotild 
piece together of ^^.J^JJ^^Se^fo^gn^ats of his 
statement, that he had chanced upon Sir Ossaise at 
dawn of the morning, and been told that if he 
would make a short cut across the fields and swamps 
and broken hills and glades, he could head off a com- 
pany of travelers who would be rare customers for 
prophylactics and tooth-wash. With characteristic 
zeal Sir Madok had plunged away at once upon this 
quest, and after three hours of awful cross-lot riding 
had overhauled his game. And behold, it was the 
five patriarchs that had been released from the 
dungeons the evening before! Poor old creatures, 
it was all of twenty years since any one of them had 
known what it was to be equipped with any remain- 
ing snag or remnant of a tooth. 

"Blank-blank-blank him," said Sir Madok, "an I 
do not stove-polish him an I may find him, leave it 
to me; for never no knight that hight Ossaise or 
aught else may do me this disservice and bide on 
Kve, an I may find him, the which I have thereunto 
sworn a great oath this day." 

And with these words and others, he lightly took 
his spear and gat him thence. In the middle of the 
afternoon we came upon one of those very patriarchs 
ourselves, in the edge of a poor village. He was 
basking in the love of relatives and friends whom he 
had not seen for fifty years; and about him and 
caressing him were also descendants of his own body 
whom he had never seen at all till now; but to him 
these were all strangers, his memory was gone, his 

169 



MARK TWAIN 

nimd was stagnant. It seemed incredible that a man 
could outlast half a century shut up in a dai^ hole 
like a rat, but here were his old wife and some old 
comrades to testify to it. They could remember him 
as he was in the freshness and strength of his young 
manhood, when he kissed his child and delivered it 
to its mother's hands and went away into that long 
oUivion. The people at the castle could not tell 
within half a generation the length of time the man 
had been shut up there for his tmrecorded and for* 
gotten offense; but this old wife knew; and so did 
her old child, who stood there among her married 
sons and daughters trying to realize a father who had 
been to her a name, a thought, a formless image, a 
tradition, all her life, and now was suddenly ooncret* 
ed into actual flesh and blood and set before her face. 
It was a curious situation; yet it is not on that 
accotmt that I have made room for it here, but on 
account of a thing which seemed to me still mare 
curious. Tp wit, that this dreadful matter brought 
from these downtrodden people no outburst of rage 
against these oppressors. They had been heritors 
and subjects of cruelty and outrage so long that 
nothing could have startled them but a kindness. 
Yes, here was a curious revelation, indeed, of the 
depth to which this people had been sunk in slavery. 
Their entire being was reduced to a monotonous dead 
level of patience, resignation, dumb uncomplaining 
acceptance of whatever might befall them in this 
life. Their very imagination was dead. When yoa 
can say that of a man, he has struck bottom, I reckofi ; 
there is no lower deep for him. 

170 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

I rather wished I had gone some other road. This 
was not the sort of experience for a statesman to 
encoimter who was planning out a peaceful revolu- 
tion in his mind. For it could not help bringing up 
the unget-aroundable fact that, all gentle cant and 
philosophizing to the contrary notwithstandmgjjo^ 
I^eople in the world ever did achieve their freedom by 
goody-goody talk and moral suasion: it being im- 
mutable law that all revolutions that will succeed 
must begin in blood, whatever may answer afterward. 
If history teaches anything, it teaches that. What 
this folk needed, then, was a Reign of Terror and a 
guillotine, and I was the wrong man for them. 

Two days later, toward noon, Sandy began to 
show signs of excitement and feverish expectaxK:y. 
She said we were approaching the ogre's castle. I 
was surprised into an uncomfortable shock. The 
object of our quest had gradually dropped out of 
my mind; this sudden resurrection of it made it 
seem quite a real and startling thing for a moment, 
and roused up in me a smart interest. Sandy's 
excitement increased every moment; and so did 
mine, for that sort of thing is catching. My heart 
got to thumping. You can't reason with youar heart ; 
it has its own laws, and thumps about things which 
the intellect scorns. Presently, when Sandy slid 
from the horse, motioned me to stop, and went 
creeping stealthily, with her head bent nearly to her 
knees, toward a row of bushes that bordered a de- 
clivity, the thtmipings grew stronger and quicker. 
And they kept it up while she was gaining her am- 
bush and getting her glimpse over the dediyity ; and 

171 



MARK TWAIN 

also while I was creeping to her side on my knees. 
Her eyes were burning now, as she pointed with her 
finger, and said in a panting whisper: 

"The castle! The castle! Lo, where it looms!" 

What a welcome disappointment I experienced! 
I said: 

* * Castle ? It is nothing but a pigsty ; a pigsty with 
a wattled fence around it." 

She looked surprised and distressed. The anima- 
tion faded out of her face ; and during many moments 
she was lost in thought and silent. Then: 

"It was not enchanted aforetime," she said in a 
musing fashion, as if to herself. "And how strange 
is this marvel, and how awful — ^that to the one 
perception it is enchanted and dight in a base and 
shameful aspect; yet to the perception of the other 
it is not enchanted, hath suffered no change, but 
stands firm and stately still, girt with its moat and 
waving its banners in the blue air from its towers. 
And God shield us, how it pricks the heart to see 
again these gracious captives, and the sorrow deep- 
ened in their sweet faces! We have tarried along, 
and are to blame." 

I saw my cue. The castle was enchanted to w^, 
not to her. It would be wasted time to try to argue 
her out of her delusion, it couldn't be done; I must 
just humor it. So I said: 

"This is a common case — ^the enchanting of a 
thing to one eye and leaving it in its proper form to 
another. You have heard of it before, Sandy, 
though you haven't happened to experience it. But 
no harm is done. In fact, it is lucky the way it 

172 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

is. If these ladies were hogs to everybody and to 
themselves, it would be necessary to break the en- 
chantment, and that might be impossible if one 
failed to find out the particular process of the en- 
chantment. And hazardous, too; for in attempting 
a disenchantment without the true key, you are 
liable to err, and turn your hogs into dogs, and the 
dogs into cats, the cats into rats, and so on, and end 
by reducing your materials to nothing finally, or to 
an odorless gas which you can't follow — ^which, of 
course, amounts to the same thing. But here, by 
good luck, no one's eyes but mine are tmder the 
enchantment, and so it is of no consequence to 
dissolve it. These ladies remain ladies to you, and 
to themselves, and to everybody else; and at the 
same time they will suffer in no way from my de- 
lusion, for when I know that an ostensible hog is a 
lady, that is enough for me, I know how to treat her.'* 

"Thanks, oh, sweet my lord, thou talkest like an 
angel. And I know that thou wilt deliver them, for 
that thou art minded to great deeds and art as 
strong a knight of your hands and as brave to will 
and to do, as any that is on Uve." 

* * I will not leave a princess in the sty, Sandy. Are 
those three yonder that to my disordered eyes are 
starveling swineherds—" 

**The ogres? Are they changed also? It is most 
wonderful. Now am I fearful; for how canst thou 
•trike with sure aim when five of their nine cubits 
of stature are to thee invisible? Ah, go warily, fair 
sir; this is a mightier emprise than I wend." 

"You be easy, Sandy. All I need to know is, 

173 



MARK TWAIN 

how much of an ogre is invisible; then I know how 
to locate his vitals. Don't you be afraid, I wili 
make short work of these bxmcxxrteeiers. Stay 
where you are." 

I left Sandy kneeling there, oorpse-faoed bat 
plucky and hopeful, and rode down to the pigsty, 
and struck up a trade with the swindierds. I won 
their gratitude by buying out all the hogs at the 
lump sum of sixteen pennies, which was rather 
above latest quotations. I was just in time; for the 
Church, the lord of the manor, and the rest of the 
tax-gatherers would have been along next day and 
swept off pretty much all the stock, leaving the 
swineherds very short of hogs and Sandy out of 
princesses. But now the tax people could be paid 
in cash, and there would be a stake left besides. 
One of the men had ten children; and he said that 
last year when a priest c£Cme and of his ten pigs 
took the fattest one for tithes, the wife burst out 
upon him, and offered him a child and said: 

"Thou beast without bowels of mercy, why leave 
me my child, yet rob me of the wherewithal to 
feed it?" 

How curious. The same thing had hai^pened in 
the Wales of my day, tmder this same old Estab- 
lished Church, which was supposed by many to have 
changed its nature when it changed its disguise. 

I sent the three men away, and then opened the 
sty gate and beckoned Sandy to come — which she 
did; and not leisurely, but with the rush of a prairie 
fire. And when I saw her fling herself upon those 
hogs, with tears of joy running down her cheeks, and 

174 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

strain them to her heart, and kiss them, and caress 
them, and call them reverently by grand princely 
names, I was ashamed of her, ashamed of the human^ 
race. 

We had to drive those hogs home — ten miles; and 
no ladies were ever more fickle-minded or contrary. 
They would stay in no road, no path; they broke out 
through the brush on all sides, and flowed away in 
all directions, over rocks, and hills, and the roughest 
places they could find. And they must not be struck, 
or roughly accosted; Sandy could not bear to see 
them treated in ways xmbecoming their rank. The 
troublesomest old sow of the lot had to be called 
my Lady, and your Highness, like the rest. It is 
annoying and difiicult to scour around after hogs, in 
armor. There was one small countess, with an iron 
ring in her snout and hardly any hair on her back, 
that was the devil for perversity. She gave me a 
race of an hour, over all sorts of country, and then 
we were right where we had started from, having 
made not a rod of real progress. I seized her at last 
by the tail, and brought her along squealing. When 
I overtook Sandy she was horrified, and said it was 
in the last degree indeUcate to drag a cotmtess by 
her train. 

We got the hogs home just at dark — ^most of 
them. The princess Nerovens de Morganore . was 
missing, and two of her ladies in waiting: namely. 
Miss Angela Bohun, and the Demoiselle Elaine 
Courtemains, the former of these two being a young 
black sow with a white star in her forehead, and the 
latter a brown one with thin legs and a slight limp 

I7S 



MARK TWAIN 

in the forward shank on the starboard side — a 
couple of the tr3dngest blisters to drive that I ever 
saw. Also among the missing were several mere 
baronesses — and I wanted them to stay missing; 
but no, all that sausage-meat had to be found; so 
servants were sent out with torches to scour the 
woods and hills to that end. 

Of course, the whole drove was housed in the 
house, and, great guns ! — ^well, I never saw anything 
like it. Nor ever heard anjrthing like it And never 
smelt anything like it. It was like an insurrection in 
a gasometer. 



CHAPTER XXI 

f 

THE PILGRIMS 

WHEN I did get to bed at last I was unspeak- 
ably tired; the stretching-out, and the relax- 
ing of the long-tense muscles, how luxurious, how de- 
licious ! but that was as far as I could get — sleep was 
out of the question for the present. The ripping and 
tearing and squealing of the nobility up and down the 
haUs and coiridors was pandemoium come again. 
and kept me broad awake. Being awake, my 
thoughts were busy, of course; and mainly they 
busied themselves with Sandy's curious delusion. 
Here she was, as sane a person as the kingdom could 
produce; and yet, from my point of view she was 
acting like a crazy woman. My land, the power of 
training! of influence! of education! It can bring a 
body up to believe anything. I had to put myself 
in Sandy's place to realize that she was not a lunatic. 
Yes, and put her in mine, to demonstrate how easy 
it is to seem a Itmatic to a person who has not been 
taught as you have been taught. If I had told 
Sandy I had seen a wagon, uninfluenced by enchant- 
ment, spin along fifty miles an hour; had seen a man, 
unequipped with magic powers, get into a basket and 
soar out of sight among the clouds; and had listened, 
without any necromancer's help, to the conversation 

177 



MARK TWAIN 

of a person who was several hxindred miles away, 
Sandy would not merely have supposed me to be 
crazy, she would have thought she knew it. Every- 
body aroxmd her believed in enchantments; nobody 
had any doubts; to doubt that a castle could be 
turned into a sty, and its occupants into hogs, would 
have been the same as my doubting among Con- 
necticut people the actxiaUty of the telephone and its 
wonders — and in both cases would be absolute proof 
of a diseased mind, an unsettled reason. Yes, 
Sandy was sane; that mtast be admitted. If I also 
would be sane — ^to Sandy — ^I must keep my super- 
stitions about imenchanted and uximiraculous loco- 
motives, balloons, and telephones, to myself. Abo^ 
I believed that the world was not flat, and hadn't 
{Hilars under it to support it, nor a canopy over it 
to turn cS a universe of water that occupied all 
space above; but as I was the only person in the 
kingdom afflicted with such impious and criminal 
opinions, I recognized that it would be good wisdom 
to keep quiet about this matter, too, if I did not 
wish to be suddenly shimned and forsaken by 
everybody as a madman. 

The next morning Sandy assembled the swine in 
the dining-room and gave them their breakfast, 
waiting upon them personally and manifesting ia 
every way the deep reverence which the natives of 
her island, ancient and modem, have always £elt 
for rank, let its outward casket and the mental and 
moral contents be what they may. I oould have 
eaten with the hogs if I had had birth approaching 
my lofty official rank; but I hadn't, and so acocpbtd 

178 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

the unavoidable slight and made no complaint. 
Sandy and I had oiir breakfast at the second table. 
The family were not at home. I said : 

*'How many are in the family, Sandy, and ^ere 
do they keep themselves?*' 

''Family?" 

"Yes." 

"Which family, good my lord?" 

"Why, this family; your own family." 

"Sooth to say, I tmderstand you not. I have no 
family." 

' ' No family ? Why, Sandy, isn't this jwur home ?" 

"Now how indeed might that be? I have no 
home." 

"Well, then, whose house is this?" 

"Ah, wit you well I would tell you an I knew 
myself." 

"Come — ^you don't even know these people? 
Then who invited us here?" 

None invited us. We but came; that is all." 
Why, woman, this is a most extraordinary per- 
formance. The eflErontery of it is beyond admira- 
tion. We blandly march into a man's house, and 
cram it full of the only really valuable nobility the 
sun has yet discovered in the earth, and then it 
turns out that we don't even know the man's name. 
How did 3roa ever venture to take this extravagant 
liberty? I supposed, of course, it was 3rour home. 
What will the man say?'* 

"What wfll he say? Forsooth what can he say 
but give thanks?" 

"Thanks for what?" 

13 179 






MARK TWAIN 

Her £aoe was filled with a puzzled surprise: 

''Verily, thou troublest mine understanding with 
strange words. Do ye dream that one of his estate 
is like to have the h(mor twice in his life to entertain 
company such as we have brought to grace his 
house withal?" 

"Well, no — ^when you come to that. No, it's an 
even bet that this is the first time he has had a treat 
like this." 

''Then let him be thankful, and manifest the same 
by grateful speech and due humility; he were a dog, 
else, and the heir and ancestor of dogs." 

To my mind, the situation was uncomfortable. It 
might become more so. It might be a good idea to 
muster the hogs and move on. So I said: 

"The day is wasting, Sandy. It is time to get the 
nobility together and be moving." 

"Wherefore, fair sir and Boss?" 

"We want to take them to their home, don't we?" 

"La, but list to him! They be of all the regions 
of the earth! Each must hie to her own home; wend 
you we might do all these journeys in one so brief 
life as He hath appointed that created life, and 
thereto death likewise with help of Adam, "wbo by 
sin done through persuasion of his helpmeet, she 
being wrought upon and bewrayed by the beguile- 
ments of the great enemy of man, that serpent hig^ 
Satan, aforetime consecrated and set apart unto that 
ev«l work by overmastering spite and envy begotten 
in his heart through fell ambitions that did blight 
and mildew a nature erst so white and pure whenso 
it hove with the shining multitudes its brethren-bom 

1 80 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

in glade and shade of that fair heaven wherein all 
such as native be to that rich estate and — " 

**Great Scott!" 

"My lord?" 

"Well, you know we haven't got time for this sort 
of thing. Don*t you see, we could distribute these 
people around the earth in less time than it is going 
to take you to explain that we can't. We mustn't 
talk now, we must act. You want to be careful; you 
mustn't let yotir mill get the start of you that way, 
at a time like this. To business now — ^and sharp's 
the word. Who is to take the aristocracy home?" 

"Even their friends. These will come for tljem 
from the far parts of the earth." 

This was lightning from a clear sky, for unex- 
pectedness; and the relief of it was like pardon to a 
prisoner. She would remain to deliver the goods, of 
course. 

"Well, then, Sandy, as our enterprise is hand- 
somely and successfully ended, I will go home and 
report; and if ever another one — " 

"I also am ready; I will go with thee." 

This was recalling the pardon. 
How ? You will go with me ? Why should you ?" 
'Will I be traitor to my knight, dost think? 
That were dishonor. I may not part from thee until 
in knightly encounter in the field some overmatching 
champion shall fairly win and fairly wear me. I were 
to blame an I thought that that might ever hap." 

"Elected for the long term," I sighed to myself. 
"I may as well make the best of it," So then I 
spoke up and said: 

z8i 






MARK TWAIN 

"All right; let tis make a start." 

While she was gone to cry her farewells over the 
pork, I gave that whole peerage away to the servants. 
And I asked them to take a duster and dust around 
a Kttle where the nobilities had mainly lodged and 
promenaded ; but they considered that that would be 
hardly worth while, and would moreover be a rather 
grave departure from custom, and therefore likely 
to make talk. A departure from custom — ^that 
settled it ; it was a nation capable of committing any 
crime but that. The servants said they would fol- 
low the fashion, a fashion grown sacred through im- 
memorial observance; they would scatter fresh rushes 
in all the rooms and halls, and then the evidence of 
the aristocratic visitation would be no longer visible. 
It was a kind of satire on Nature : it was the scientific 
method, the geologic method ; it deposited the history 
of the family in a stratified record ; and the antiquary 
could dig through it and tell by the remains of each 
period what changes of diet the family had intro- 
duced successively for a hundred years. 

The first thing we struck that day was a pro- 
cession of pilgrims. It was not going our way, but 
we joined it, nevertheless; for it was hourly being 
borne in upon me now, that if I would govern this 
cotmtry wisely, I must be posted in the details of its 
life, and not at second hand, but by personal observa^ 
tion and scrutiny. 

This company of pilgrims resembled Chaucer's 
this : that it had in it a sample of about all the upper 
occupations and professions the cotintry could shovir, 
and a corresponding variety of costume, Th^!t 

182 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

were yotrng men and old men, young women and 
old women, Uvely folk and grave folk. They rode 
upon mules and horses, and there was not a side- 
saddle in the party; for this specialty was to remain 
unknown in England for nine htmdred years yet. 

It was a pleasant, friendly, sociable herd; pious, 
happy, merry and full of tmconscious coarsenesses 
and innocent indecencies. What they regarded as 
the merry tale went the continual round and caused 
no more embarrassment than it would have caused 
in the best English society twelve centuries later. 
Practical jokes worthy of the English wits of the first 
quarter of the far-off nineteenth century were sprung 
here and there and yonder along the line, and com- 
pelled the delightedest applause; and sometimes 
when a bright remark was made at one end of the 
procession and started on its travels toward the 
other, you could note its progress all the way by the 
sparkling spray of laughter it threw off from its bows 
as it plowed along; and also by the blushes of the 
mulesw in its wake. 

Sandy knew the goal and ptirpose of this pil- 
grimage, and she posted me. She said: 

*'They jotuney to the Valley of Holiness, for to 
be blessed of the godly hermits and drink of the 
miraculous waters and be cleansed from sin.'' 

"W-iere is this watering-place?" 

"It Ueth a two-day journey hence, by the borders 
of the land that hight the Cuckoo Kingdom." 

"Tell me about it. Is it^a celebrated place?" 

"Oh, of a truth, yes. There be none more so. 
Of old time there lived there an abbot and his 

183 



MARK TWAIN 

monks. Belike were none in the world more holy 
than these; for they gave themselves to study of 
pious books, and spoke not the one to the other, or 
indeed to any, and ate decayed herbs and naught 
thereto, and slept hard, and prayed much, and 
washed never; also they wore the same garment 
until it fell from their bodies through age and decay. 
Right so came they to be known of all the world 
by reason of these holy austerities, and visited by 
rich and poor, and reverenced." 

"Proceed." 

**But always there was lack of water there. 
Whereas, upon a time, the holy abbot prayed, and 
for answer a great stream of clear water burst forth 
by miracle in a desert place. Now were the fickle 
monks tempted of the Fiend, and they wrought with 
their abbot tmceasingly by beggings and beseechings 
that he would construct a bath; and when he was 
become aweary and might not resist more, he said 
have ye your will, then, and granted that they 
asked. Now mark thou what 'tis to forsake the 
ways of purity the which He loveth, and wanton with 
such as be worldly and an offense. These monks 
did enter into the bath and come thence washed as 
white as snow; and lo, in that moment His sign 
appeared, in miraculous rebuke! for His insulted 
waters ceased to flow, and utterly vanished slway." 

'*They fared mildly, Sandy, considering how that 
kind of crime is regarded in this cotmtry." 

'* Belike; but it was their first sin; and they had 
been of perfect life for long, and differing in naught 
from the angels. Prayers, tears, torturings of \t 

184 ) 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

flesh, all was vain to beguile that water to flow again. 
Even processions; even burnt offerings; even votive 
candles to the Virgin, did fail every each of them; 
and all in the land did marvel." 

''How odd to find that even this industry has its 
financial panics, and at times sees its assignats and 
greenbacks languish to zero, and everything come 
to a standstill. Go on, Sandy." 

"And so upon a time, after year and day, the 
good abbot made htunble surrender and destroyed 
the bath. And behold, His anger was in that mo- 
ment appeased, and the waters gushed richly forth 
again, and even imto this day they have not ceased 
to fiow in that generous measure." 

Then I take it nobody has washed since." 
He that would essay it could have his halter 
free; yes, and swiftly would he need it, too." 

**The commtmity has prospered since?" 

"Even from that very day. The fame of the 
miracle went abroad into all lands. Prom every land 
came monks to join; they came even as the fishes 
come, in shoals; and the monastery added building 
to building, and yet others to these, and so spread 
wide its arms and took them in. And nims came, 
also; and more again, and yet more; and built over 
against the monastery on the yon side of the vale, 
and added building to building, tmtil mighty was 
that nunnery. And these were friendly unto those, 
and they joined their loving labors together, and 
together they built a fair great foundling asyltun 
midway of the valley between." 

"You spoke of some hermits, Sandy." 

i8S 



Hi 



MARK TWAIN 

''These have gathered there from the ends of the 
earth. A hermit thriveth best where there be 
multitudes of pilgrims. Ye shall not find no henmt 
of no sort wanting. If any shall mention a henmt 
of a kind he thinketh new and not to be found but 
in some far strange land, let him but scratch amoog 
the holes and caves and swamps that line that 
Valley of Holiness, and whatsoever be his breed, it 
skills not, he shall find a sample of it there." 

I closed up alongside of a burly fellow with a fst 
good-htunored face, purposing to make noyself 
agreeable and pick up some further crumbs of fnct; 
but I had hardly more than scraped acquaintance 
with him when he began eagerly and awkwardly to 
lead up, in the immemorial way, to that same old 
anecdote — ^the one Sir Dinadan told me, what time 
I got into trouble with Sir Sagramor and was chal- 
lenged of him on accotmt of it. I excused myself 
and dropped to the rear of the procession, sad at 
heart, willing to go hence from this troubled life, 
this vale of tears, this brief day of broken rest, of 
cloud and storm, of weary struggle and monotonous 
defeat; and yet shrinking from the change, as re- 
membering how long eternity is, and how many have 
wended thither who know that anecdote. 

Early in the afternoon we overtook another pro- 
cession of pilgrims; but in this one was no meanA" 
ment, no jokes, no laughter, no playful wa3rs, nor 
any happy giddiness, whether of youth or i^. Yet 
both were here, both age and youth; gray old men 
and women, strong men and women of middle age, 
yotmg husbands, young wives, little boys and ghls, 

i86 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

and three babies at the breast. Even the children 
were smildess; there was not a face among all these 
half a hundred people but was cast down, and bore 
that set expression of hopelessness which is bred of 
long and hard trials and old acquaintance with de- 
spair. They were slaves. Chains led from their 
fettered feet and their manacled hands to a sole- 
leather belt about their waists; and all except the 
children were also linked together in a file, six feet 
apart, by a single chain which led from collar to 
collar all down the line. They were on foot, and 
had tramped three hundred miles in eighteen days, 
upon the cheapest odds and ends of food, and stingy 
rations of that. They had slept in these chains 
every night, bundled together like swine. They had 
upon their bodies some poor rags, but they could 
not be said to be clothed. Their irons had chafed 
the skin from their ankles and made sores which 
were ulcerated and wormy. Their naked feet were 
torn, and none walked without a limp. Originally 
there had been a hundred of these imfortimates, but 
about half had been sold on the trip. The trader in 
charge of them rode a horse and carried a whip with 
a short handle and a long heavy lash divided into 
several knotted tails at the end. With this whip he 
cut the shoulders of any that tottered from weari- 
ness and pain, and straightened them up. He did 
not speak ; the whip conveyed his desire without that. 
None of these poor creatures looked up as we rode 
along by; they showed no consciousness of our 
presence. And they made no sound but one; that 
was th^ dull and awftil clank of their chains from 

187 



MARK TWAIN 

end to end of the long file, as forty-three burdened 
feet rose and fell in tinison. The file moved in a 
cloud of its own making. 

All these faces were gray with a coating of dust. 
One has seen the like of this coating upon furniture 
in unoccupied houses, and has written his idle 
thought in it with his finger. I was reminded of this 
when I noticed the faces of some of those women, 
yoimg mothers carrying babes that were near to 
death and freedom, how a something in their hearts 
was written in the dust upon their faces, plain to see, 
and lord, how plain to read! for it was the track of 
tears. One of these yotmg mothers was but a girl, 
and it hurt me to the heart to read that writing, and 
reflect that it was come up out of the breast of such 
a child, a breast that ought not to know trouble yet, 
but only the gladness of the morning of life; and no 
doubt — 

She^reeled just then, giddy with fatigue, and down 
came the lash and flicked a flake of skin from her 
naked shoulder. It sttmg me as if I had been hit 
instead. The master halted the file and jumped 
from his horse. He stormed and swore at this girl, 
and said she had made annoyance enough with her 
laziness, and as this was the la^ chance he should 
have, he would settle the accoimt now. She 
dropped on her knees and put up her hands and 
began to beg, and cry, and implore, in a passion of 
terror, but the master gave no attention. I 
snatched the child from her, and then made tha 
men-slaves who were chained before and behind her 
throw her on the ground and hold her there and 

i88 



> 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

expose her body; and then he laid on with his lash 
like a madman till her back was flayed, she shrieking 
and struggling the while piteously. One of the men 
who was holding her turned away his face, and for 
this humanity he was reviled and flogged. 

All our pilgrims looked on and commented — on the 
expert way in which the whip was handled. They 
were too much hardened by lifelong every-day fa- 
miliarity with slavery to notice that there was any- 
thing else in the exhibition that invited comment. 
This was what slavery could do, in the way of 
ossifying what one may call the superior lobe of 
human feeling; for these pilgrims were kind-hearted 
people, and they would not have allowed that man 
to treat a horse like that. 

I wanted to stop the whole thing and set the slaves 
free, but that would not do. I must not interfere 
too much and get myself a name for riding over the 
country's laws and the citizen's rights rough-shod. 
If I lived and prospered I would be the death of 
slavery, that I was resolved upon; but I would try 
to fix it so that when I became its executioner it 
should be by command of the nation. 

Just here was the wayside shop of a smith; and 
now arrived a landed proprietor who had bought this 
girl a few miles back, deliverable here where her 
irons could be taken off. They were removed; then 
there was a squabble between the gentleman and 
the dealer as to which should pay the blacksmith. 
The moment the girl was delivered from her irons, 
she flung herself, all tears and frantic sobbings, into 
the arms of the slave who had turned away his face 

189 



MARK TWAIN 

when she was whipped. He strained her to his 
breast, and smothered her face and the child's with 
kisses, and washed them with the rain of his tears. 
I suspected. I inquired. Yes, I was right; it was 
husband and wife. They had to be torn apart by 
force; the girl had to be dragged away, and she 
struggled and fought and shrieked like one gone 
mad till a turn of the road hid her from sight; and 
even after that, we could still make out the fading 
plaint of those receding shrieks. And the husband 
and father, with his wife and child gone, never to 
be seen by him again in life? — ^well, the look of him 
one might not bear at all, and so I turned away; but 
I knew I should never get his picttire out of my 
mind again, and there it is to this day, to wring my 
heart-strings whenever I think of it. 

We put up at the inn in a village just at nightfall, 
and when I rose next morning and looked abroad, I 
was ware where a knight came riding in the golden 
glory of the new day, and recognized him for knight 
of mine — Sir Ozana le Cure Hardy. He was in the 
gentlemen's furnishing line, and his missionaiying 
specialty was plug-hats. He was clothed all in 
steel, in the beautifulest armor of the time — ^up to 
where his helmet ought to have been; but he hadn't 
any helmet, he wore a shiny stove-pipe hat, and was 
as ridiculous a spectacle as one might want to see. 
It was another of my surreptitious schemes f 
extinguishing knighthood by making it grotesq 
and absurd. Sir Ozana's saddle was htmg about with 
leather hat-boxes, and every time he overcame 
wandering knight he swore him into my service 

190 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

fitted him with a plug and made him wear it. I 
dressed and ran down to welcome Sir Ozana and 
get his news. 

**How is trade?" I asked. 

**Ye will note that I have but these four left; 
yet were they sixteen whenas I got me from Cam- 
elot." 

"Why, you have certainly done nobly, Sir Ozana. 
Where have you been foraging of late?" 

' * I am but now come from the Valley of HoEness, 
please you sir." 

"I am pointed for that place myself. Is there 
anything stirring in the monkery, more than com- 
mon?" 

* * By the mass ye may not question it ! . . . Give 
him good feed, boy, and stint it not, an thou valuest 
thy crown ; so get ye lightly to the stable and do even 
as I bid. . . . Sir, it is parlous news I bring, and — 
be these pilgrims? Then ye may not do better, 
good folk, than gather and hear the tale I have to 
tell, sith it concemeth you, forasmuch as ye go to 
find that ye will not find, and seek that ye will seek 
in vain, my Ufe being hostage for my word, and my 
word and message being these, namely: That a hap 
has happened whereof the like has not been seen no 
more but once this two hundred years, which was 
the first and last time that that said misfortune 
strake the holy valley in that form by commandment 
of the Most High whereto by reasons just and causes 
thereunto contributing, wherein the matter — " 

* ' The miraculous fount hath ceased to flow !" This 
shout burst from twenty pilgrim mouths at once. 

191 






MARK TWAIN 

'*Ye say well, good people. I was verging to it, 
even when ye spake." 

"Has somebody been washing again?" 

''Nay, it is suspected, but none believe it. It 
is thought to be some other sin, but none wit 
what." 

How are they feeling about the calamity?" 
None may describe it in words. The fount is 
these nine days dry. The prayers that did begin then, 
and the lamentations in sackcloth and ashes, and the 
holy processions, none of these have ceased nor night 
nor day; and so the monks and the nims and the 
foimdlings be all exhausted, and do hang up prayers 
writ upon parchment, sith that no strength is left 
in man to lift up voice. And at last they sent for 
thee. Sir Boss, to try magic and enchantment; and 
if you could not come, then was the messenger to 
fetch Merlin, and he is there these three days now, 
and saith he will fetch that water though he burst 
the globe and wreck its kingdoms to accomplish it; 
and right bravely doth he work his magic and call 
upon his hellions to hie them hither and help, but not 
a whiff of moisture hath he started yet, even so much 
as might qualify as mist upon a copper mirror an 
ye coimt not the barrel of sweat he sweateth betwixt 
stm and stm over the dire labors of his task; and 
ifye— " 

Breakfast was ready. As soon as it was over I 
showed to Sir Ozana these words which I had writ 
on the inside of his hat : Chemical Department, Labor-- 
atory extension. Section G. Pxxp, Send two of first 
size, two of No. 3, and six of No. 4, together with th§ 

192 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

proper complementary details — and two of my trained 
assistants.'' And I said: 

'*Now get you to Camelot as fast as you can fly, 
brave knight, and show the writing to Clarence, and 
tell him to have these required matters in the Valley 
of Holiness with all possible despatch." 

*'I will well. Sir Boss," and he was oflE. 



CHAPTER XXII 

THE HOLY FOUNTAIN 

THE pilgrims were human beings. Otherwise they 
would have acted differently. They had come a 
long and difficult journey, and now when the journey 
was nearly finished, and they learned that the main 
thing they had come for had ceased to exist, they 
didn't do as horses or cats or angle-worms would 
probably have done — ^tum back and get at something 
profitable — ^no, anxious as they had before been to 
see the miraculous foimtain, they were as much* as 
forty times as anxious now to see the place where it 
had used to be. There is no accounting for human 
beings. 

We made good time ; and a couple of hours before 
stmset we stood upon the high confines of the Valley 
of Holiness, and our eyes swept it from end to end 
and noted its features. That is, its large features. 
These were the three masses of buildings. They were 
distant and isolated temporalities shrunken to toy 
constructions in the lonely waste of what seemed a 
desert — and was. Such a scene is always mournful, 
it is so impressively still, and looks so steeped in 
death. But there was a soimd here which interrupted 
the stillness only to add to its moumf ulness ; this was 
the faint far sound of tolling bells which floated 

194 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

fitftilly to us on the passing breeze, and so faintly, so 
softly, that we hardly knew whether we heard it with 
our ears or with our spirits. 

We reached the monastery before dark, and there 
the males were given lodging, but the women were 
sent over to the nunnery. The bells were close at 
hand now, and their solemn booming smote upon the 
ear like a message of doom. A superstitious despair 
possessed the heart of every monk and published 
itself in his ghastly face. Everywhere, these black- 
robed, soft-sandaled, tallow-visaged specters ap- 
peared, flitted about and disappeared, noiseless as the 
creatures of a troubled dream, and as tmcanny. 

The old abbot's joy to see me was pathetic. Even 
to tears; but he did the shedding himself. He said: 

"Delay not, son, but get to thy saving work. An 
we bring not the water back again, and soon, we are 
ruined, and the good work of two hundred years must 
end. And see thou do it with enchantments that be 
holy, for the Church will not endure that work in her 
cause be done by devil's magic." 

"When I work. Father, be sure there will be no 
devil's work connected with it. I shall use no arts 
that come of the devil, and no elements not created 
by the hand of Gk>d. But is Merlin working strictly 
on pious lines?" 

"Ah, he said he would, my son, he said he would, 
and took oath to make his promise good." 

"Well, in that case, let him proceed." 

"But surely you will not sit idle by, but help?" 

"It will not answer to mix methods, Father, 
neither would it be professional courtesy. Two of a 

14 195 



MARK TWAIN 

trade must DOt underbid each other. We might as 
well cut rates and be done with it; it would arrive 
at that in the end. Merlin has the contract; no 
other magician can touch it till he thrown it up." 

''But I will take it from him; it is a terrible emer- 
gency and the act is thereby justified. And if it were 
not so, who will give law to the Church? The Church 
giveth law to all; and what she wills to do, that she 
may do, hurt whom it may. I will take it from him; 
you shall begin upon the moment." 

**It may not be, Father. No doubt, as you say, 
where power is supreme, one can do as one likes and 
suffer no injury; but we poor magicians are not so 
situated. Merlin is a very good magician in a small 
way, and has quite a neat provincial reputation. He 
is struggling along, doing the best he can, and it 
would not be etiquette for me to take his job until he 
himself abandons it." 

The abbot's face lighted. 

**Ah, that is simple. There are ways to persuade 
him to abandon it." 

"No-no, Father, it skills not, as these people say. 
K he were persuaded against his will, he would load 
that well with a malicious enchantment which would 
balk me until I found out its secret. It might take a 
month. I could set up a little enchantment of mine 
which I call the telephone, and he could not find out 
its secret in a hundred years. Yes, you perceive, he 
might block me for a month. Wotdd you like to 
risk a month in a dry time like this?" 

''A month! The mere thought of it maketh me 
to shudder. Have it thy way, my son. But tof 

296 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

heart is heavy with this disappointment. Leave me, 
and let me wear my spirit with weariness and wait- 
ing, even as I have done these ten long days, cotmter- 
feiting thus the thing that is called rest, the prone 
body making outward sign of repose where inwardly 
is none." 

Of course, it would have been best, all round, for 
Merlin to waive etiquette and quit and call it half a 
day, since he would never be able to start that water, 
for he was a true magician of the time; which is to 
say, the big miracles, the ones that gave him his 
reputation, always had the luck to be performed when 
nobody but Merlin was present ; he couldn't start this 
well with all this crowd around to see; a crowd was 
as bad for a magician's miracle in that day as it was 
for a spiritualist's miracle in mine; there was sure 
to be some skeptic on hand to turn up the gas at 
the crucial moment and spoil everything. But I did 
not want Merlin to retire from the job until I was 
ready to take hold of it effectively myself; and I 
could not do that tmtil I got my things from Camelot, 
and that would take two or three days. 

My presence gave the monks hope, and cheered 
them up a good deal; insomuch that they ate a 
square meal that night for the first time in ten days. 
As soon as their stomachs had been properly rein- 
forced with food, their spirits began to rise fast; 
when the mead began to go roimd they rose faster. 
By the time everybody was half -seas over, the holy 
commtmity was in good shape to make a night of it ; 
so we stayed by the board and put it through on 
that line. Matters got to be very jolly. Good old 

197 



MARK TWAIN 

questionable stories were told that made the tears 
run down and cavernous mouths stand wide and the 
round bellies shake with laughter; and questionable 
songs were bellowed out in a mighty chorus that 
drowned the boom of the tolling bells. 

At last I ventured a story myself; and vast was 
the success of it. Not right off, of cotu'se, for the 
native of those islands does not, as a rule, dissolve 
upon the early applications of a htunorotis thing; 
but the fifth time I told it, th^ began to crack in 
places; the eighth time I told it, they began to 
crumble; at the twelfth repetition they fell apart in 
chtmks; and at the fifteenth they disintegrated, and 
I got a broom and swept them up. This language is 
figurative. Those islanders — ^well, they are slow pay 
at first, in the matter of return for your investment 
of effort, but in the end they make the pay of all 
other nations poor and small by contrast 

I was at the well next day betimes. Merlin was 
there, enchanting away like a beaver, but not raising 
the moisture. He was not in a pleasant htunor; and 
every time I hinted that perhaps this contract was a 
shade too hefty for a novice he tmlimbered his 
tongue and cursed like a bishop — ^French bishop of 
the Regency days, I mean. 

Matters were about as I expected to find theoL 
The ''fountain" was an ordinary well, it had been dug 
in the ordinary way, and stoned up in the ordinary 
way. There was no miracle about it. Even the lie 
that had created its reputation was not miraculous; 
I cotild have told it myself, with one hand tied bdiind 
me. The well was in a dark chamber which stood in 

198 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

the center of a cut-stone chapel, whose walls were 
hung with pious pictures of a workmanship that 
would have made a chromo feel good; pictures his- 
torically commemorative of curative miracles which 
had been achieved by the waters when nobody was 
looking. That is, nobody but angels; they are always 
on deck when there is a miracle to the fore — so as to 
get put in the picture, perhaps. Angels are as fond 
of that as a fire company; look at the old masters. 

The well-chamber was dimly lighted by lamps; 
the water was drawn with a windlass and chain by 
monks, and poured into troughs which delivered it 
into stone reservoirs outside in the chapel — ^when 
there was water to draw, I mean — and none but 
monks could enter the well-chamber. I entered it, 
for I had temporary authority to do so, by courtesy 
of my professional brother and subordinate. But he 
hadn't entered it himself. He did everything by 
incantations; he never worked his intellect. If he 
had stepped in there and used his eyes, instead of his 
disordered mind, he could have cured the well by 
natural means, and then turned it into a miracle in 
the customary way; but no, he was an old numskull, 
a magician who believed in his own magic; and no 
magician can thrive who is handicapped with a super- 
stition like that. 

I had an idea that the well had spnmg a leak; that 
some of the wall stones near the bottom had fallen 
and exposed fissures that allowed the water to escape. 
I measured the chain — ninety-eight feet. Then I 
called in a couple of monks, locked the door, took a 
candle, and made them lower me in the bucket. 

199 



MARK TWAIN 

When the chain was all paid out, the candle coo- 
firmed my suspicion; a considerable section of the 
wall was gone» exposing a good big fissure. 

I almost regretted that my theory about the wdl's 
trouble was correct, because I had another one that 
had a showy point or two about it for a miracle. I 
remembered that in America, many centuries later, 
when an oil-well ceased to flow, they used to blast it 
out with a dynamite torpedo. If I should find this 
well dry and no explanation of it, I could astonish 
these people most nobly by having a person of no 
especial value drop a dynamite bomb into it. It was 
my idea to appoint Merlin. However, it was plain 
that there was no occasion for the bomb. One cannot 
have everything the way he would like it. A man 
has no bxisiness to be depressed by a disappointment, 
anyway ; he ought to make up his mind to get even. 
That is what I did. I said to myself, I am in no 
hurry, I can wait; that bomb will come good yet. 
And it did, too. 

When I was above grotmd again, I turned out the 
monks, and let down a fish-line; the well was a hun- 
dred and fifty feet deep, and there was forty-one feet 
of water in it! I called in a monk and asked: 
"How deep is the well?" 
"That, sir, I wit not, having never been told," 
"How does the water usually stand in it?'* 
"Near to the top, these two centuries, as the testi- 
mony goeth, brought down to us through our prede- 



cessors/* 



It was true — as to recent times at least — ^for thefe 
was witness to it, and better witness than a monk; 

200 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

cmly about twenty or thirty feet of the chain showed 
wear and use, the rest of it was unworn and rusty. 
What had happened when the well gave out that 
other time? Without doubt some practical person 
had come along and mended the leak, and then had 
come up and told the abbot he had discovered by 
divination that if the sinful bath were destroyed the 
well would flow again. The leak had befallen again 
now, and these children would have prayed, and pro- 
cessioned, and tolled their bells for heavenly succor 
till they all dried up and blew away, and no innocent 
of them all would ever have thought to drop a fish- 
line into the well or go down in it and find out what 
was really the matter. Old habit of mind is one of 
the toughest things to get away from in the world. 
It transmits itself like physical form and feature ; and 
for a man, in those days, to have had an idea that his 
ancestors hadn't had, would have brought him under 
su^icion of being illegitimate. I said to the monk : 
"It is a difficult miracle to restore water in a dry 
well, but we will try, if my brother Merlin fails. 
Brother Merlin is a very passable artist, but only in 
the parlor-magic line, and he may not succeed; in 
fact, is not likely to succeed. But that should be 
nothing to his discredit; the man that can do this 
kind of miracle knows enough to keep hotel." 
Hotel? I mind not to have heard — " 
Of hotel? It's what you call hostel. The man 
that can do this miracle can keep hostel. I can do 
this miracle; I shall do this miracle; yet I do not try 
to conceal from you that it is a miracle to tax the 
cxxnilt powers to the last strain." 

20I 



it 



MARK TWAIN 

''None knoweth that truth better than the brother- 
hood, indeed; for it is of record that aforetime it was 
parlous difficult and took a year. Natheless, God 
send you good success, and to that end will we pray.*' 

As a matter of business it was a good idea to get the 
notion around that the thing was difficult. Many a 
small thing has been made large by the right kind of 
advertising. That monk was filled up with the diffi- 
culty of this enterprise; he would fill up the others. 
In two days the solicitude would be booming. 

On my way home at noon, I met Sandy. She had 
been sampling the hermits. I said : 

'*I would like to do that myself. This is Wednes- 
day. Is there a matin6e?" 

**A which, please you, sir?" 

** Matinee. Do they keep open afternoons?" 

''Who?" 

"The hermits, of course." 

"Keep open?" 

"Yes, keep open. Isn't that plain enough? Do 
they knock off at noon?" 

"Knock off?" 

"Knock off? — ^yes, knock off. What is the matter 
with knock off? I never saw such a dimderhead; 
can't you tmderstand anything at all? In plain 
terms, do they shut up shop, draw the game, bank 
the fires — " 

"Shut up shop, draw — " 

"There, never mind, let it go; you make me tired. 
You can't seem to tmderstand the simplest thing.'* 

"I would I might please thee, sir, and it is to me 
dole and sorrow that I fail, albeit sith I am but a sim- 

202 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

pie damsel and taught of none, being from the cradle 
unbaptized in those deep waters of learning that do 
anoint with a sovereignty him that partaketh of that 
most noble sacrament, investing him with reverend 
state to the mental eye of the htmible mortal, who by 
bar and lack of that great consecration seeth in his 
own tmleamed estate but a symbol of that other sort 
of lack and loss which men do publish to the pitying 
eye with sackcloth trappings whereon the ashes of 
grief do lie bepowdered and bestrewn, and so, when 
such shall in the darkness of his mind encoimter these 
golden phrases of high mystery, these shut-up-shops, 
and draw-the-game, and bank-the-fires, it is but by 
the grace of God that he burst not for envy of the 
mind that can beget, and tongue that can deliver so 
great and mellow-sounding miracles of speech, and 
if there do ensue confusion in that humbler mind, 
and failure to divine the meanings of these wonders, 
then if to be this miscomprehension is not vain but 
sooth and true, .wit ye well it is the very substance 
of worshipful dear homage and may not lightly be 
misprized, nor had been, an ye had noted this com- 
plexion of mood and mind and tmderstood that that 
I would I could not, and that I could not I might not, 
nor yet nor might nor could, nor might-not nor could- 
not, might be by advantage turned to the desired 
would, and so I pray you mercy of my fault, and that 
ye will of your kindness and your charity forgive it, 
good my master and most dear lord." 

I couldn't make it all out — ^that is, the details — ^but 
I got the general idea; and enough of it, too, to be 
ashamed. It was not fair to spring those nineteenth- 

203 



MARK TWAIN 

century technicalities upon the untutored infant of 
the sixth and then rail at her because she couldn't 
get their drift ; and when she was making the honest 
best drive at it she could, too, and no fault of hers 
that she couldn't fetch the home plate; and so I 
apologized. Then we meandered pleasantly away 
toward the hermit holes in sociable converse together, 
and better friends than ever. 

I was gradually coming to have a mysterious and 
shuddery reverence for this girl; nowadays whenever 
she pulled out from the station and got her trainv 
fairly started on one of those horizonless transconti- 
nental sentences of hers, it was borne in upon me that 
I was standing in the awful presence of the Mother 
of the German Language. I was so impressed with 
this, that sometimes when she began to empty one of 
these sentences on me I tmconsciously took the very 
attitude of reverence, and stood uncovered; and if 
words had been water, I had been drowned, sure. 
She had exactly the German way; whatever was in 
her mind to be delivered, whether a mere remark, of 
a sermon, or a cyclopedia, or the history of a war, she 
would get it into a single sentence or die. IWhenever 
the literary German dives into a sentence, that is the 
last you are going to see of him till he emerges on the 
other side of his Atlantic with his verb in his mouthJJ 

We drifted from hermit to hermit all the afternoon. 
It was a most strange menagerie. The chief emula* 
tion among them seemed to be, to see which could 
manage to be the uncleanest and most prosperous 
with vermin. Their manner and attitudes were the 
last expression of complacent self -righteousness. It 

204 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

was one anchorite's pride to lie naked in the mud and 
let the insects trite him and blister him unmolested; 
it was another's to lean against a rock, all day long, 
conspicuous to the admiration of the throng of pil- 
grims and pray; it was another's to go naked and 
crawl around on all fours ; it was another's to dra^ 
about with him, year in and year out, eighty pounds 
of iron; it was another's to never lie down when he 
slept, but to stand among the thorn-bushes and snore 
when there were pilgrims aroimd to look; a woman, 
^who had the white hair of age, and no other apparel, 
was black from crown to heel with forty-seven years 
of holy abstinence from water. Groups of gazing pil- 
grims stood around all and every of these strange 
objects, lost in reverent wonder, and envious of the 
fleckless sanctity which these pious austerities had 
won for them from an exacting heaven. 

By and by we went to see one of the supremely 
great ones. He was a mighty celebrity ; his fame had 
penetrated all. Christendom; the noble and the re- 
nowned journeyed from the remotest lands on the 
globe to pay him reverence. His stand was in the 
center of the widest part of the valley; and it took all 
that space to hold his crowds. 

His stand was a pillar sixty feet high, with a broad 
platform on the top of it. He was now doing what he 
had been doing every day for twenty years up there — 
bowing his body ceaselessly and rapidly almost to 
his feet. It was his way of praying. I timed him with 
a stop-watch, and he made twelve hundred and forty- 
four revolutions in twenty-four minutes and forty- 
six seconds. It seemed a pity to have all this power 

205 



MARK TWAIN 

going to waste. It was one of the most useful mo* 
tions in mechanics, the pedal movement; so I made 
a note in my memorandum-book, purposing some day 
to apply a system of elastic cords to him and run a 
sewing-machine with it. I afterward carried out that 
scheme, and got five years' good service out of him; 
in which time he ttimed out upward of eighteen thou- 
sand first-rate tow-linen shirts, which was ten a day. 
I worked him Sundays and all; he was going, Sun- 
days, the same as week-days, and it was no use to 
waste the power. These shirts cost me nothing but 
just the mere trifle for the materials — ^I furnished 
those myself, it would not have been right to make 
him do that — and they sold like smoke to inlgrims 
at a dollar and a half apiece, which was the price of 
fifty cows or a blooded race-horse in Arthurdom. 
They were regarded as a perfect protection against 
sin, and advertised as such by my knights every- 
Vsrhere, with the paint-pot and stencil-plate; insomuch 
that there was not a cliff or a botilder or a dead wall in 
England but you cotild read on it at a mile distance: 

**Buy the only genuine St. Stylite; patronized by the 
Nobility. Patent applied for. * * 

There was more money in the business than one 
knew what to do with. As it extended, I brought out 
a line of goods suitable for kings, and a nobby thing 
for duchesses and that sort, with ruflfles down the fore- 
hatch and the running-gear clewed up with a feather- 
stitch to leeward and then hauled aft with a back- 
stay and triced up with a half-turn in the standing 
rigging forward of the weather-gaskets. Yes, it was 
a daisy. 

ao6 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

But about that time I noticed that the motive 
power had taken to standing on one leg, and I found 
that there was something the matter with the other 
one; so I stocked the business and unloaded, taking 
Sir Bors de Ganis into camp financially along with 
certain of his friends; for the works stopped within 
a year, and the good saint got him to his rest. But 
he had earned it. I can say that for him. 

When I saw him that first time — however, his per- 
sonal condition will not quite bear description here. 
You can read it in the Lives of the Saints.^ 

^ All the details concerning the hermits, in this chapter, are from 
Lecky — ^but greatly modified. This book not being a history but 
only a tale, the majority of the historian's frank details were tco 
strong for reproduction in it. — ^Editor. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

RESTORATION OP THE FOUNTAIN 

SATURDAY noon I went to the well and looked 
on awhile. Merlin was still burning smoke- 
powders, and pawing the air, and muttering gibberish 
as hard as ever, but looking pretty downhearted, for 
of course he had not started even a perspiration in 
that well yet. Finally I said : 

"How does the thing promise by this time, 
partner?" 

** Behold, I am even now busied with trial of the 
powerfulest enchantment known to the princes of 
the occult arts in the lands of the East; an it fail 
me, naught can avail. Peace, tmtil I finish." 

He raised a smoke this time that darkened all the 
region, and must have made matters uncomfortable 
for the hermits, for the wind was their way, and it 
rolled down over their dens in a dense and billowy 
fog. He poured out volumes of speech to match, and 
contorted his body and sawed the air with his hands 
in a most extraordinary way. At the end of twenty 
minutes he dropped down panting, and about ex- 
hausted. Now arrived the abbot and several himdred 
^ monks and ntms, and behind them a multitude of pil- 
grims and a couple of acres of fotmdlings, all drawn 
by the prodigious smoke, and all in a grand state of 

208 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

excitement. The abbot inqtdred anxiously for re- 
sults. Merlin said: 

* * If any labor of mortal might break the spell that 
binds these waters, this which I have but just essayed 
had done it. It has failed; whereby I do now know 
that that which I had feared is a truth established; 
the sign of this failure is, that the most potent spirit 
known to the magicians of the East, and whose n^me 
none may utter and live, has laid his spell upon this 
well. The mortal does not breathe, nor ever will, 
who can penetrate the secret of that spell, and with- 
out that secret none can break it. The water will 
flow no more forever, good Father. I have done 
what man could. Suffer me to go." 

Of course this threw the abbot into a good deal of 
a consternation. He tiuned to me with the signs 
of it in his face, and said: 

**Ye have heard him. Is it true?" 

'•Part of it is." 

"Not all, then, not all! What part is true?" 

"That that spirit with the Russian name has put 
his spell upon the well." 

"God's wownds, then are we ruined!" 

"Possibly." 

"But not certainly? Ye mean^ not certainly?" 

"That is it." 

"Wherefore, ye also mean that when he saith none 
can break the spell — " 

"Yes, when he says that, he says what isn't neces- 
sarily true. There are conditions under which an 
effort to break it may have some chance — ^that is, 
some small, some trifling chance — of success." 

209 



MARK TWAIN 

"The conditions—" 

''Oh, they are nothing difficult. Only these: I 
want the well and the surroundings for the space of 
half a mile, entirely to myself from stmset to-day tmtil 
I remove the ban — and nobody allowed to cross the 
grotmd but by my authority." 

''Are these all?" 

"Yes." 

"And you have no fear to try?" 

"Oh, none. One 'may fail, of course; and one 
may also succeed. One can try, and I am ready to 
chance it. I have my conditions?" 

"These and all others ye may name. I will issue 
commandment to that effect." 

"Wait," said Merlin, with an evil smile. "Ye 
wit that he that would break this speU must know 
that spirit's name?" 

"Yes, I know his name." 

"And wit you also that to know it skills not of 
itself, but ye must likewise pronounce it? Ha-ha! 
Knew ye that?" 

"Yes, I knew that, too." 

"You had that knowledge! Art a fool? Are ye 
minded to utter that name and die?" 

"Utter it? Why certainly. I would utter it if it 
was Welsh." 

"Ye are even a dead man, then; and I go to tell 
Arthur." 

"That's all right. Take your gripsack and girt 
along. The thing for you to do is to go home and 
work the weather, John W. Merlin." 

It was a home shot, and it made him wince; for 

3IO 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

he was the worst weather failure in the kingdom. 
Whenever he ordered up the danger-signals along the 
coast there was a week's dead calm, sure, and every 
time he prophesied fair weather it rained brickbats. 
But I kept him in the weather bureau right along, to 
undermine his reputation. However, that shot raised 
his bile, and instead of starting home to report my 
death, he said he would remain and enjoy it. 

My two experts arrived in the evening, and pretty 
well fagged, for they had traveled double tides. They 
had pack-mules along, and had brought everything I 
needed — ^tools, pump, lead pipe, Greek fire, sheaves 
of big rockets, roman candles, colored fire sprays, 
electric apparatus, and a lot of sundries — everything 
necessary for the stateliest kind of a miracle. They 
got their supper and a nap, and about midnight we 
sallied out through a solitude so wholly vacant and 
complete that it quite overpassed the required condi- 
tions. We took possession of the well and its sur- 
roimdings. My boys were experts in all sorts of 
things, from the stoning-up of a well to the con- 
structing of a mathematical instrument. An hour 
before stmrise we had that leak mended in shipshape 
fashion, and the water began to rise. Then we 
stowed our fireworks in the chapel, locked up the 
place, and went home to bed. 

Before the noon mass was over, we were at the 
well again ; for there was a deal to do yet, and I was 
determined to spring the miracle before midnight, for 
business reasons: for whereas a miracle worked for 
the Church on a week-day is worth a good deal, it 
is worth six times as much if you get it in on a Sun- 

15 azz 



MARK TWAIN 

day. In nine hours the water had risen to its custCK 
mary level; that is to say, it was within twenty-three 
feet of the top. We put in a little iron pump, one of 
the first turned out by my works near the capital; 
we bored into a stone reservoir which stood against 
the outer wall of the well-chamber and inserted a 
section of lead pipe that was long enough to reach to 
the door of the chapel and project beyond the thresh- 
old, where the gushing water would be visible to the 
two hundred and fifty acres of people I was intending 
should be present on the flat plain in front of this 
little holy hillock at the proper time. 

We knocked the head out of an empty hogshead 
and hoisted this hogshead to the flat roof of the 
chapel, where we clamped it down fast, poured in 
gunpowder till it lay loosely an inch deep on the bot- 
tom, then we stood up rockets in the hogshead as 
thick as they could loosely stand, all the different 
breeds of rockets there are; and they made a portly 
and imposing sheaf , I can tell you. We grounded the 
wire of a pocket electrical battery in that powder, we 
placed a whole magazine of Greek fire on each comer 
of the roof — ^blue on one comer, green on another, red 
on another, and ptuple on the last — and grounded a 
wire in each. 

About two hundred yards off, in the flat, we boilt 
a pen of scantlings, about four feet high, and laid 
planks on it, and so made a platform. We covered 
it with swell tapestries borrowed for the occasion, 
and topped it off with the abbot's own throne. Whea 
you are going to do a miracle for an ignorant race, 
you want to get in every detail that will count; yoa 

212 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

want to make all the properties impressive to the 
public eye; you want to make matters comfortable 
for your head guest; then you can turn yourself 
loose and play your effects for all they are worth. 
I know the value of these things, for I know human 
nature. You can't throw too much style into a mir- 
acle. It costs trouble, and work, and sometimes 
money; but it pays in the end. Well, we brought 
the wires to the ground at the chapel, and then 
brought them under the grotmd to the platform, and 
hid the batteries there. We put a rope fence a hun- 
dred feet square around the platform to keep oflF 
the common multitude, and that finished the work. 
My idea was, doors open at ten-thirty, performance 
to begin at eleven-twenty-five sharp. I wished I 
could charge admission, but of course that wouldn't 
answer. I instructed my boys to be in the chapel as 
early as ten, before anybody was arotmd, and be 
ready to man the pumps at the proper time, and make 
the fur fly. Then we went home to supper. 

The news of the disaster to the well had traveled 
far by this time; and now for two or three days a 
steady avalanche of people had been pouring into the 
valley. The lower end of the valley was become one 
huge camp; we should have a good house, no ques- 
tion about that. Criers went the rounds early in the 
evening and announced the coming attempt, which 
put ^very pulse up to fever-heat. They gave notice 
that the abbot and his official suite would move in 
state and occupy the platform at ten-thirty, up to 
which time all the region which was under my ban 
must be clear; the bells would then cease from toll- 

^13 



MARK TWAIN 

ing, and this sign should be permission to the multi- 
tudes to dose in and take their places. 

I was at the platform and all ready to do the hon- 
ors when the abbot's solemn procession hove in 
sight — which it did not do till it was nearly to the 
rope fence, because it was a starless black night and 
no torches permitted. With it came Merlin, and took 
a front seat on the platform; he was as good as his 
word for once. One could not see the multitudes 
banked together beyond the ban, but they were there, 
just the same. The moment the bells stopped, those 
banked masses broke and poured over the line like a 
vast black wave, and for as much as a half-hour it 
continued to flow, and then it solidified itself, and 
you cotild have walked upon a pavement of human 
heads to — ^well, miles. 

We had a solemn stage-wait, now, for about 
twenty minutes — a thing I had coimted on for effect; 
it is always good to let your audience have a chance 
to work up its expectancy. At length, out of the 
silence a noble Latin chant — ^men's voices — broke and 
swelled up and rolled away into the night, a majestic 
tide of melody. I had put that up, too, and it was 
one of the best effects I ever invented. When it was 
finished I stood up on the platform and extended my 
hands abroad, for two minutes, with my face up- 
lifted — ^that always produces a dead hush — ^and thea 
slowly pronounced this ghastly word with a kind of 
awfulness which caused hundreds to tremble, and 
many women to faint : 

'* epMstimtiii090llt«ii$€lKf«iaelMckipfeifeiimcbem 

214 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

Just as I was moaning out the closing hunks of that 
word, I touched off one of my electric connections, 
and all that murky world of people stood revealed in a 
hideous blue glare! It was immense — ^that effect! 
Lots of people shrieked, women curled up and quit 
in every direction, foundlings collapsed by platoons. 
The abbot and the monks crossed themselves nimbly 
and their lips fluttered with agitated prayers. Merlin 
held his grip, but he was astonished dear down to 
his corns; he had never seen anything to begin with 
that, before. Now was the time to pile in the effects. 
I lifted my hands and groaned out this word — as it 
were in agony: 

** niMii$teiidyii4timi)eateriuMd)eii$$tnt«9i^^ 
vtrsMdmiifleiir 

— and turned on the red fire ! You should have heard 
that Atlantic of people moan and howl when that 
crimson hell joined the blue! After sixty seconds I 
shouted: 

'' traMsvaaltnippemropeMtraMipoiin'diMpeltM^^ 
treibenramiMdstbraeMeMtrjidocdie !'' 

— ^and Ut up the green fire ! After waiting only forty 
seconds this time, I spread my arms abroad and 
thundered out the devastating syllables of this word 
of words: 

'' inekicdiiiii$elttianneniiia$$eniiienclH 
eninoerdermobreniiiumniiariiioriiionN* 
menkimidcberr' 

ax5 



MARK TWAIN 

— and whirled on the purple glare! There they were, 
all going at once, red, blue, green, purple! — ^four 
furious volcanoes pouring vast clouds of radiant 
smoke aloft, and spreading a blinding rainbowed 
noonday to the furthest confines of that valley. In 
the distance one could see that fellow on the pillar 
standing rigid against the background of sky, his see- 
saw stopped for the first time in twenty years. I 
knew the boys were at the pump now and ready. So 
I said to the abbot : 

"The time is come, Father. I am about to pro- 
noimce the dread name and command the spell to dis- 
solve. You want to brace up, and take hold of some- 
thing." Then I shouted to the people : ** Behold, in 
another minute the spell will be broken, or no mortal 
can break it. If it break, all will know it, for you will 
see the sacred water gush from the chapel door!" 

I stood a few moments, to let the hearers have a 
chance to spread my announcement to those who 
couldn't hear, and so convey it to the furthest ranks, 
then I made a grand exhibition of extra posturing 
and gesturing, and shouted: 

**Lo, I command the fell spirit that possesses the 
holy foimtain to now disgorge into the skies all the 
infernal fires that still remain in him, and straightway 
dissolve his spell and flee hence to the pit, there to Be 
boimd a thousand years. By his own dread name I 
command it— BGWJJILLIGKKK !" 

Then I touched off the hogshead of rockets, and a 
vast fountain of dazzling lances of fire vomited itself 
toward the zenith with a hissiiig rush, and burst in 
mid-sky into a storm of flashing jewels! One niight|^ 

216 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

groan oi terror started up from the massed people — 
then suddenly broke into a wild hosamiah of joy — 
for there, fair and plain in the uncanny glare, they 
saw the freed water leaping forth! The old abbot 
could not speak a word, for tears and the chokings in 
his throat; without utterance of any sort, he folded 
me in his arms and mashed me. It was more do- 
quent than speech. And harder to get over, too, in 
a country where there were really no doctors that 
were worth a damaged nickel. 

You should have seen those acres of people throw 
themselves down in that water and kiss it; kiss it, 
and pet it, and fondle it, and talk to it as if it were 
alive, and welcome it back with the dear names they 
gave their darlings, just as if it had been a friend 
who was long gone away and lost, and was come 
home again. Yes, it was pretty to see, and made me 
think more of them than I had done before. 

I sent Merlin home on a shutter. He had caved 
in and gone down like a landslide when I pronounced 
that fearful name, and had never come to since. He 
never had heard that name before — ^neither had I — 
but to him it was the right one. Any jumble would 
have been the right one. He admitted, afterward, 
that that spirit's own mother could not have pro- 
noimced that name better than I did. He never 
could understand how I survived it, and I didn't 
tell him. It is only young magicians that give away 
a secret like that. Merlin spent three months work- 
ing enchantments to try to find out the deep trick of 
how to pronoimce that name and outlive it. But he 
didn't arrive. 

217 



MARK TWAIN 

When I started to the chapel, the populace uncov- 
ered and fell back reverently to make a ^de way 
for me, as if I had been some kind of a superior 
being — and I was. I was aware of that. I took 
along a night shift of monks, and taught them the 
mystery of the ptmip, and set them to work, for it 
was plain that a good part of the people out there 
were going to sit up with the water all night, conse- 
quently it was but right that they should have all 
they wanted of it. To those monks that ptmip was a 
good deal of a miracle itself, and they were full of 
wonder over it ; and of admiration, too, of the^exceed- 
ing effectiveness of its performance. 

It was a great night, an immense night. There 
was reputation in it. I could hardly get to sleep for 
glorjdng over it. 



CHAPTER XXIV 

A RIVAL MAGICIAN 

MY influence in the Valley of Holiness was some- 
. thing prodigious now. It seemed worth while 
to try to turn it to some valuable accoimt. The 
thought came to me the next mornicig^nd was sug- 
gested by my seeing one of my kiiights who was in 
the soap line come riding in. According to history, 
the monks of this place two centuries before had been 
worldly-minded enough to want to wash. It might 
be that there was a leaven of this tmrighteousness 
still remaining. So I soimded a Brother: 

''Wouldn't you like a bath?" 

He shuddered at the thought — the thought of the 
peril of it to the well — ^but he said with feeling : 

' ' One needs not to ask that of a poor body who has 
not known that blessed refreshment sith that he was 
a boy. Would God I might wash me! but it may 
not be, fair sir, tempt me not; it is forbidden." 

And then he sighed in such a sorrowful way that I 
was resolved he should have at least one layer of his 
real estate removed, if it sized up my whole influence 
and bankrupted the pile. So I went to the abbot and 
asked for a permit for this Brother. ^ He blenched at 
the idea — I don't mean that you could see him blench, 
for of course you couldn't see it without you scraped 

219 



MARK TWAIN 

him, and I didn't care enough about it to scrape 
him, but I knew the blench was there, just the same, 
and within a book-<x)ver's thickness of the surface, 
too — ^blenched, and trembled. He said : 

''Ah, son, ask aught else thou wilt, and it is thine, 
and freely granted out of a grateful heart — ^but this, 
oh, this! Would you drive away the blessed water 
agam? 

*'No, Father, I will not drive it away. I have 
mysterious knowledge which teaches me that there 
was an error that other time when it was thought 
the institution of the bath banished the fotmtaitu" 
A large interest began to show up in the old man's 
face. ''My knowledge informs me that the bath was 
innocent of that misfortune, which was caused by 
quite another sort of sin." 

''These are brave words — but — but right welcome, 
if they be true." 

"They are true, indeed. Let me build the bath 
again, Father. Let me build it again, and the foun- 
tain shall flow forever." 

"You promise this? — you promise it? Say the 
word — say you promise it!" 

"I do promise it." 

"Then will I have the first bath myself! Go — 
get ye to your work. Tarry not, tarry not, but go." 

I and my boys were at work, straight oflE. The 
ruins of the old bath were there yet in the basement 
of the monastery, not a stone missing. They had 
been left just so, all these lifetimes, and avoided with 
a pious fear, as things accursed. In two days we 
had it all done and the water in — a spacious pod of 

220 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

dear pure water that a body could swim in. It was 
running water, too. It came in, and went out, through 
the ancient pipes. The old abbot kept his word, 
and was the first to try it. He went down black and 
shaky, leaving the whole black oommimity above 
troubled and worried and full of bodings; but he 
came back white and joyful, and the game was made ! 
another triumph scored. 

It was a good campaign that we made in that 
Valley of Holiness, and I was very well satisfied, and 
ready to move on now, but I struck a disappointment. 
I caught a heavy cold, and it started up an old lurk- 
ing rhetimatism of mine. Of cotu*se the rheumatism 
hunted up my weakest place and located itself there. 
This was the place where the abbot put his arms 
about me and mashed me, what time he was moved 
to testify his gratitude to me with an embrace. 

When at last I got out, I was a shadow. But every- 
body was full of attentions and kindnesses, and these 
brought cheer back into my life, and were the right 
medicine to help a convalescent swiftly up toward 
health and strength again; so I gained fast. 

Sandy was worn out with ntu*sing, so I made up 
my mind to turn out and go a cruise alone, leaving 
her at the ntmnery to rest up. My idea was to dis- 
guise myself as a freeman of peasant degree and 
wander through the country a week or two on foot. 
This would give me a chance to eat and lodge with 
the lowliest and poorest class of free citizens on equal 
terms. There was no other way to inform myself 
perfectly of their every-day life and tile operation of 
the laws upon it. If I went among tbmtk as a gentle- 

221 



MARK TWAIN 

man, there would be restraints and conventionalities 
which would shut me out from their private joys and 
troubles, and I should get no further than the outside 
shell. 

One morning I was out on a long walk to get up 
muscle for my trip, and had climbed the ridge which 
bordered the northern extremity of the valley, when 
I came upon an artificial opening in the face of a low 
precipice, and recognized it by its location as a 
hermitage which had often been pointed out to me 
from a distance as the den of a hermit of high renown 
for dirt and austerity. I knew he had lately been 
offered a situation in the Great Sahara, where lions 
and sandflies made the hermit life peculiarly attrac- 
tive and difficult, and had gone to Africa to take 
possession, so I thought I would look in and see how 
the atmosphere of this den agreed with its reputa« 
tion. 

My surprise was great : the place was newly swept 
and scoured. Then there was another surprise. Back 
in the gloom of the cavern I heard the dink of a 
little bell, and then this exclamation: 

'* Hello, Central! Is this you, Catnelotf — ^Behold, 
thou mayst glad thy heart an thou hast faith to 
believe the wonderful when that it cometh in xmexr 
pected guise and maketh itself manifest in impossible 
places — ^here standeth in the flesh his mightiness 
The Boss, and with thine own ears shall ye hear 
him speak!" 

Now what a radical reversal of things this was; 
what a jumbling together of extravagant incongrui- 
ties; what a fantastic conjunction of opposites and 

222 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

irreconcilables — ^the home of the bogus miracle be- 
come the home of a real one, the den of a medieval 
hermit turned into a telephone office ! 

The telephone clerk stepped into the light, and I 
recognized one of my young fellows. I said: 

"How long has this office been established here, 
Ulfius?" 

" But since midnight, fair Sir Boss, an it please you. 
We saw many lights in the valley, and so judged it 
well to make a station, for that where so many lights 
be needs must they indicate a town of goodly size." 

"Quite right. It isn't a town in the customary 
sense, but it's a good stand, anyway. Do you know 
where you are?" 

"Of that I have had no time to make inquiry; for 
when as my comradeship moved hence upon their 
labors, leaving me in charge, I got me to needed rest, 
purposing to inquire when I waked, and report the 
place's name to Camelot for record." 

"Well, this is the Valley of Holiness." 

It didn't take ; I mean, he didn't start at the name, 
as I had supposed he would. He merely said: 

"I will so report it." 

"Why, the siurounding regions are filled with the 
noise of late wonders that have happened here ! You 
didn't hear of them?" 

"Ah, ye will remember we move by night, and 
avoid speech with all. We learn naught but that we 
get by the telephone from Camelot." 

"Why they know all about this thing. Haven't 
they told you anything about the great miracle of 
the restoration of a holy fotmtain?" 

223 



MARK TWAIN 



*ii 



Oh, that? Indeed yes. But the name of Ms 
valley doth woundily difier from the name of Aat one; 
indeed to difiEer wider were not pos — " 

**What was that name, then?" 

"The Valley of HelUshness." 

' ' That explains it. Confound a telephone, an3rway. 
It is the very demon for conveying similarities of 
sound that are miracles of divergence from sixnilarity 
of sense. But no matter, you know the name of ibe 
place now. Call up Camelot." 

He did it, and had Clarence sent for. It was good 
to hear my boy's voice again. It was like being 
home. After some affectionate interchanges, and 
some accoimt of my late illness, I said : 

"What is new?" 

"The king and queen and many of the court do 
start even in this hour, to go to your valley to pay 
pious homage to the waters ye have restored, and 
cleanse themselves of sin, and see the place where the 
infernal spirit spouted true hell-flames to the clouds 
— ^an ye listen sharply ye may hear me wink and hear 
me likewise smile a smile, sith 'twas I that made se- 
lection of those flames from out our stock and sent 
them by your order." 

"Does the king know the way to this place?** 

"The king? — ^no, nor to any other in his realms, 
mayhap ; but the lads that help you with yowr mira- 
cle will be his guide and lead the way, and appoint 
the places for rests at noon and sleeps at night.** 

"This will bring them here — ^when?" 

"Mid-afternoon, or later, the third day.** 

"Anjrthing else in the way of news?** 

224 






A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"The king hath begun the raising of the standing 
army ye suggested to him; one regiment is complete 
and officered." 

"The mischief! I wanted a main hand in that my- 
self. There is only one body of men in the kingdom 
that are fitted to officer a regular army." 

"Yes — and now ye will marvel to know there's not 
so much as one West-Pointer in that regiment." 

"What are you talking about? Are you in 
earnest?" 

It is truly as I have said." 
Why, this makes me tmeasy. Who were chosen, 
and what was the method? Competitive examina- 
tion?" 

"Indeed, I know naught of the method. I but 
know this — ^these officers be all of noble family, and 
are bom — ^what is it you call it? — chudde-heads." 

"There's something wrong, Clarence." 

* ' Comfort yourself, then ; for two candidates for a 
lieutenancy do travel hence with the king — ^young 
nobles both — and if you but wait where you are you 
will hear them questioned." 

' ' That is news to the purpose. I will get one West- 
Pointer in, anyway. Mount a man and send him to 
that school with a message; let him kill horses, if 
necessary, but he must be there before sunset to- 
night and say — " 

"There is no need. I have laid a ground- wire to 
the schooL Prithee let me connect you with it." 

It sounded good! In this atmosphere of tele- 
phones and Ughtning communication with distant 
T^;ions, I was breathing the breath of life again after 

225 



MARK TWAIN 

long suffocation. I realized, then, what a creepy, 
dull, inanimate horror this land had been to me all 
these years, and how I had been in such a stifled 
condition of mind as to have grown used to it almost 
beyond the power to notice it, 

I gave my order to the superintendent of the Acad- 
emy personally. I also asked him to bring me some 
paper and a fountain-pen and a box or so of safety 
matches. I was getting tired of doing without these 
conveniences. I could have them now, as I wasn't 
going to wea^ armor any more at present, and there- 
fore could get at my pockets. 

When I got back to the monastery, I found a thing 
of interest going on. The abbot and his monks were 
assembled in the great hall, observing with childish 
wonder and faith the performances of a new magician, 
a fresh arrival. His dress was the extreme of the 
fantastic ; as showy and f ooUsh as the sort of thing an 
Indian medidne-man wears. He was mowing, and 
mumbling, and gestictilating, and drawing mystical 
figures in the air and on the floor — ^the regular thing, 
you know. He was a celebrity from Asia — so he 
said, and that was enough. That sort of evidence was 
as good as gold, and passed current everywhere. 

How easy and cheap it was to be a great magician 
on this fellow's terms. His specialty was to tell you 
what any individual on the face of the globe' was do- 
ing at the moment; and what he had done at any 
time in the past, and what he would do at any time in 
the future. He asked if any would like to know 
what the Emperor of the East was doing now? The 
sparkling eyes and the delighted rubbing of hanck 

226 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

made eloquent answer — ^this reverend crowd would 
like to know what that monarch was at, just at this 
moment. The fraud went through some more 
mummery, and then made grave annotmcement : 

"The high and mighty Emperor of the East doth 
at this moment put money in the palm of a holy 
begging friar — one, two, three pieces, and they be all 
of silver," 

A buzz of admiring exclamations broke out, all 
around: 

*'It is marvelous!". /'Wonderful!" *'What study, 
what labor, to have acquired a so amazing power as 
this!" 

Would they like to know what the Supreme Lord of 
Inde was doing? Yes. He told them what the 
Supreme Lord of Inde was doing. Then he told 
them what the Sultan of Egypt was at ; also what the 
King of the Remote Seas was about. And so on and 
so on ; ^d with each new marvel the astonishment at 
his accuracy rose higher and higher. They thought 
he must surely strike an uncertain place some time; 
but no, he never had to hesitate, he always knew, and 
always with unerring precision. I saw that if this 
thing went on I should lose my supremacy, this fellow 
would capture my following, I should be left out in 
the cold. I must put a cog in his wheel, and do it 
right away, too. I said: 

'*If I might ask, I should very greatly like to know 
what a certain person is doing." 

*'Speak, and freely. I will tell you." 

**It will be difficult— perhaps impossible." 

''My art knoweth not that word. The mora 

16 227 



MARK TWAIN 

difficult it is» the more oertainly will I leveol it to 

you.'' 

You see, I was working up the interest. It was 
getting pretty high, too; you could see that by the 
craning necks all around, and the halfnsuspended 
breathing. So now I climaxed it: 

"If you make no mistake — if you tdl me trtHj 
what I want to know — I will give you two hundred 
silver pennies." 

"The fortune is mine! I will tell you what you 
would know." 

"Then tell me what I am doing with my right 
hand." 

"Ah-h!" There was a general gasp of surprise. 
It had not occurred to anybody in the crowd — that 
simple trick of inquiring about somebody who wasn't 
ten thousand miles away. The magician was hit 
hard; it was an emergency that had never lutppened 
in his experience before, and it corked him; he didn't 
know how to meet it. He looked stunned, confused; 
he couldn't say a word. "Come," I said, "what are 
you waiting for? Is it possible you can answer up, 
right off, and tell what anybody on the other side of 
the earth is doing, and yet can't tell what a person is 
doing who isn't three yards from you? Persons be- 
hind me know what I am doing with my right hand 
— they will indorse you if you tell correctly.** He 
was still dumb. "Very well, I'll tell you why you 
don't speak up and tell ; it is because you don't know. 
You a magician ! Good friends, this tramp is a mere 
fraud and liar.'* 

This distressed the monks and terrified them. 

228 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

They were not used to hearing these awful beings 
called names, and they did not know what might be 
the consequence. There was a dead silence now; 
superstitious bodings were in every mind. The 
magician began to pull his wits together, and when 
he presently smiled an easy, nonchalant smile, it 
spread a mighty relief around; for it indicated that 
his mood was not destructive. He said : 

**It hath struck me speechless, the frivolity of this 
person's speech. Let all know, if perchance there be 
any who know it not, that enchanters of my degree 
deign not to concern themselves with the doings of 
any but kings, princes, emperors, them that be bom in 
the purple and them only. Had ye asked me what 
Arthur the great king is doing, it were another mat- 
ter, and I had told ye; but the doings of a subject 
interest me not." 

"Oh, I misunderstood you. I thought you said 
'anybody,' and so I supposed 'anybody' included-— 
well, anybody; that is, everybody." 

**It doth — ^anybody that is of lofty birth; and the 
better if he be royal." 

**That, it meseemeth, might well be," said the ab- 
bot, who saw his opportunity to smooth things and 
avert disaster, "for it were not likely that so wonder- 
ful a gift as this would be conferred for the revelation 
of the concerns of lesser beings than such as be bom 
near to the stmimits of greatness. Our Arthur the 
king—" 

"Would you know of him?'* broke in the en- 
chanter. 

"Most gladly, yea, and gratefully.** 

229 



MARK TWAIN 

Everybody was f tall of awe and interest again right 
away, the incxwrigible idiots. They watched the in- 
cantations absorbingly, and looked at me with a 
"There, now, what can you say to that?" air, when 
the announcement came: 

"The king is weary with the chase, and lieth in his 
palace these two hours sleeping a dreamless sleep. ** 

"God's benison upon him!" said the abbot, and 
crossed himself; "may that sleep be to the refresh- 
ment of his body and his soul." 

"And so it might be, if he were sleeping," I said, 
"but the king is not sleeping, the king rides." 

Here was trouble again — a conflict of authority. 
Nobody knew which of us to believe; I still had some 
reputation left. The magician's scorn was stirred, 
and he said: 

"Lo, I have seen many wonderftd soothsayers and 
prophets and magicians in my life days, but none be- 
fore that could sit idle and see to the heart of things 
with never an incantation to help." 

"You have lived in the woods, and lost much by it. 
I use incantations myself, as this good brotherhood 
are aware — ^but only on occasions of moment.'* 

When it comes to sarcasming, I reckon I know how 
to keep my end up. That jab made this fellow 
squirm. The abbot inquired after the queen and 
the court, and got this information: 

"They be all on sleep, being overcome by fatigue, 
like as to the king." 

I said: 

"That is merely another lie. Half of them are 
about their amusements, the queen and the other half 

230 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

are not sleeping, they ride. Now perhaps you can 
spread yourself a little, and tell us where the king and 
queen and all that are this moment riding with them 
are going?'' 

**They sleep now, as I said; but on the morrow 
they will ride, for they go a journey toward the sea." 

* * And where will they be the day after to-morrow at 
vespers?" 

"Par to the north of Camelot, and half their jour- 
ney will be done." 

"That is another lie, by the space of a hundred and 
fifty miles. Their journey will not be merely half 
done, it will be all done, and they will be here^ in this 
valley." 

That was a noble shot ! It set the abbot and the 
monks in a whirl of excitement, and it rocked the en- 
chanter to his base. I followed the thing right up : 

"If the king does not arrive, I will have myself 
ridden on a rail: if he does I will ride you on a rail 
instead." 

Next day I went up to the telephone office and 
found that the king had passed through two towns 
that were on the line. I spotted his progress on the 
succeeding day in the same way. I kept these mat- 
ters to myself. The third day's reports showed that 
if he kept up his gait he would arrive by four in the 
afternoon. There was still no sign anywhere of in- 
terest in his coming ; there seemed to be no prepara- 
tions making to receive him in state; a strange 
thing, truly. Only one thing could explain this: 
that other magician had been cutting under me, sure. 
This was true, I asked a friend of mine, a monk, 

231 



MARK TWAIN 

about it, and he said, yes, the magician had tried 
some further enchantments and found out that the 
court had concluded to make no jotimey at all, but 
stay at home. Think of that! Observe how much 
a reputation was worth in such a country. These 
people had seen me do the very showiest bit of magic 
in history, and the only one within their memory 
that had a positive value, and yet here they were, 
ready to take up with an adventurer who could oflfer 
no evidence of his powers but his mere unproven 
word. 

However, it was not good politics to let the king 
come without any fuss and feathers at all, so I went 
down and drummed up a procession of pilgrims and 
smoked out a batch of hermits and started them out 
at two o'clock to meet him. And that was the sort 
of state he arrived in. The abbot was helpless with 
rage and himuliation when I brought him out on a 
balcony and showed him the head of the state march- 
ing in and never a monk on hand to offer him wd- 
come, and no stir of life or clang of joy-bell to glad 
his spirit. He took one look and then flew to rouse 
out his forces. The next minute the bells were 
dinning furiously, and the various buildings were 
vomiting monks and nuns, who went swarming in a 
rush toward the coming procession; and with them 
went that magician — and he was on a rail, too, by the 
abbot's order; and his reputation was in the mud, 
and mine was in the sky again. Yes, a man can 
keep his trade-mark current in such a country, but 
he can't sit around and do it; he has got to be on 
deck and attending to business right along. 

232 



CHAPTER XXV 

A COMPETITIVE EXAMINATION 

WHEN the king traveled for change of air, or 
made a progress, or visited a distant noble 
whom he wished to bankrupt with the cost of his 
keep, part of the administration moved with him. 
It was a fashion of the time. The Commission 
charged with the examination of candidates for posts 
in the army came with the king to the Valley, where- 
as they could have transacted their business just as 
well at home. And although this expedition was 
strictly a holiday excursion for the king, he kept 
some of his business fimctions going just the same. 
He touched for the evil, as usual; he held court in 
the gate at sunrise and tried cases, for he was him- 
self Chief Justice of the King's Bench. 

He shone very well in this latter office. He was a 
wise and humane judge, and he clearly did his honest 
• best and fairest — ^according to his lights. That is a 
large reservation. His lights — I mean his rearing — 
often colored his decisions. Whenever there was a 
dispute between a noble or gentleman and a person of 
lower degree, the king's leanings and sympathies were 
for the former class always, whether he suspected it or 
not. It was impossible that this should be otherwise. 
The blunting effects of slavery upon the slaveholder's 

233 



MARK TWAIN 

moral perceptions are known and conceded, the world 
over; and a privileged class, an aristocracy, is but a 
band of slaveholders under another name. This has 
a harsh sound, and yet should not be offensive to any 
— even to the noble himself — ^unless the fact itself be 
an offense: for the statement simply formulates a 
fact. The repulsive feature of slavery is the things 
not its name. One needs but to hear an aristocrat 
speak of the classes that are below him to recognize — 
and in but indifferently modified measure — ^the very 
air and tone of the actual slaveholder; and behind 
these are the slaveholder's spirit, the slaveholder's 
blunted feeling. They are the result of the same 
cause in both cases: the possessor's old and inbred 
custom of regarding himself as a superior being. The 
king's judgments wrought frequent injustices, but it 
was merely the fault of his training, his natural and 
unalterable sympathies. He was as unfitted for a 
judgeship as would be the average mother for the 
position of milk-distributer to starving children in 
famine-time; her own children would fare a shade 
better than the rest. 

One very curious case came before the kiiig. A 
yotmg girl, an orphan, who had a considerable estate, 
married a fine yoimg fellow who had nothing. The 
girl's property was within a seigniory held by the 
Church. The bishop of the diocese, an arrogant 
sdon of the great nobility, claimed the girl's estate on 
the groimd that she had married privately, and thus 
had cheated the Church out of one of its rights as lord 
of the seigniory — ^the one heretofore referred to as 
le droit du seigneur. The penalty of refusal or 

234 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

avoidance was confiscation. The girl's defense was, 
that the lordship of the seigniory was vested in the 
bishop, and the partictilar right here involved was 
not transferable, but must be exercised by the lord 
himself or stand vacated ; and that an older law, of 
the Church itself, strictly barred the bishop from 
exercising it. It was a very odd case, indeed. 

It reminded me of something I had read in my 
youth about the ingenious way in which the alder- 
men of London raised the money that built the 
Mansion House. A person who had not taken the 
Sacrament according to the Anglican rite could not 
stand as a candidate for sheriflE of London. Thus 
Dissenters were ineligible; they cotdd not run if 
asked, they could not serve if elected. The alder- 
men, who without any question were Yankees in 
disguise, hit upon this neat device : they passed a by- 
law imposing a fine of £400 upon any one who shotdd 
refuse to be a candidate for sheriff, and a fine of 
£600 upon any person who, after being elected sheriff, 
refused to serve. Then they went to work and 
elected a lot of Dissenters, one after another, and 
kept it up tmtil they had collected £15,000 in fines; 
and there stands the stately Mansion House to this 
day, to keep the blushing citizen in mind of a long 
past and lamented day when a band of Yankees 
slipped into London and played games of the sort 
that has given their race a tmique and shady reputa- 
tion among all truly good and holy peoples that be 
in the earth. 

The girl's case seemed strong to me ; the bishop's 
case waa just as strong. I did not see how the king 

23 s 



MARK TWAIN 

was going to get out of this hole. But he got out. I 
append his decision: 

^'Truly I find small difficulty here, the matter be- 
ing even a child's affair for simpleness. An ibe 
young bride had conveyed notice, as in duty bound, 
to' her feudal lord and proper master and protectGr 
the bishop, she had suffered no loss, for the said 
bishop cotdd have got a dispensation making him, 
for temporary conveniency, eligible to the exercise 
of his said right, and thus would she have kept all 
she had. Whereas, failing in her first duty, she hath 
by that failure failed in all; for whoso, clinging to a 
rope, severeth it above his hands, must fall; it being 
no defense to claim that the rest of the rope is 
sound, neither any deliverance from his peril, as he 
shall find. Pardy, the woman's case is rotten at the 
source. It is the decree of the court that she forfeit 
to the said lord bishop all her goods, even to the last 
farthing that she doth possess, and be thereto 
mtdcted in the costs. Next!" 

Here was a tragic end to a beautiful honeymoon 
not yet three months old. Poor yoimg creatutes! 
They had lived these three months lapped to the lips 
in worldly comforts. These clothes and trinkets they 
were wearing were as fine and dainty as the shrewdest 
stretch of the sumptuary laws allowed to people of 
their degree; and in these pretty clothes, she aying 
on his shotdder, and he trying to comfort her with 
hopeful words set to the music of despair, they went 
from the judgment seat out into the world honieless, 
bedless, breadless; why, the very beggars by the 
roadsides were not so poor as they. 

236 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

Well, the king was out of the hole; and on terms 
satisfactory to the Church and the rest of the aristoc- 
racy, no doubt. Men write many fine and plausible 
arguments in support of monarchy, but the fact re- 
mains that where every man in a state has a vote, 
brutal laws are impossible. Arthur's people were of 
course poor material for a republic, because they had 
been debased so long by monarchy ; and yet even they 
would have been intelligent enough to make short 
work of that law which the king had just been ad- 
ministering if it had been submitted to their full and 
free vote. There is a phrase which has grown so com- 
mon in the world's mouth that it has come to seem 
to have sense and meaning — ^the sense and meaning 
implied when it is used ; that is the phrase which re- 
fers to this or that or the other nation as possibly 
being * * capable of self-government " ; and the implied 
sense of it is, that there has been a nation somewhere, 
some time or other, which wasn't capable of it — 
wasn't as able to govern itself as some self-appointed 
specialists were or would be to govern it. The 
master minds of all nations, in all ages, have sprung 
in affluent multitude from the mass of the nation, 
and from the mass of the nation only — ^not from its 
privileged classes; and so, no matter what the na- 
tion's intellectual grade was, whether high or low, 
the bulk of its ability was in the long ranks of its 
nameless and its poor, and so it never saw the day 
that it had not the material in abundance whereby 
to govern itself. Which is to assert an always self- 
proven fact: that even the best-governed and most 
free and most enlightened monarchy is still behind 

237 



MARK TWAIN 

the best condition attainable by its people; and that 
the same is true of kindred governments of lower 
grades, all the way down to the lowest. 

King Arthur had hurried up the army business 
altogether beyond my calculations. I had not sup- 
posed he would move in the matter while I was away; 
and so I had not mapped out a scheme for determin- 
ing the merits of officers ; I had only remarked that it 
would be wise to submit every candidate to a. sharp 
and searching examination; and privately I meant to 
put together a list of military qualifications that no- 
body cotdd answer to but my West-Pointers. That 
ought to have been attended to before I left ; for the 
king was so taken with the idea of a standing army 
that he couldn't wait but must get about it at once, 
and get up as good a scheme of examination as he 
could invent out of his own head. 

I was impatient to see what this was; and to show, 
too, how much more admirable was the one which I 
should display to the Examining Board. I intimated 
this, gently, to the king, and it fired his curiosity. 
When the Board was assembled, I followed him in, 
and behind us came the candidates. One of these 
candidates was a bright young West-Pointer of mine, 
and with him were a couple of my West Point 
professors. 

When I saw the Board, I did not know whether to 
cry or to laugh. The head of it was the officer known 
to later centuries as Norroy King-at-Arms ! The two 
other members were chiefs of bureaus in his depart- 
ment ; and all three were priests, of course ; all officiate 
who had to know how to read and write were priesti; 

238 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

My candidate was called first, out of courtesy to 
me, and the head of the Board opened on him with 
official solemnity: 

''Name?" 

"Mal-ease." 

"Son of?" 

"Webster." 

' * Webster — Webster. H'm — I — my memory 
faileth to recall the name. Condition?" 

"Weaver." 

' * Weaver ! — God keep us !" 

The king was staggered, from his summit to his 
foundations ; one clerk fainted, and the others came 
near it. The chairman pulled himself together, and 
said indignantly: 

" It is sufficient. Get you hence. " 

But I appealed to the king. I begged that my can- 
didate might be examined. The king was willing, but 
the Board, who were all well-bom folk, implored the 
king to spare them the indignity of examining the 
weaver's son. I knew they didn't know enough to 
examine him anyway, so I joined my prayers to theirs 
and the king turned the duty over to my professors, 
I had had a blackboard prepared, and it was put up 
now, and the circus began. It was beautiful to hear 
the lad lay out the science of war, and wallow in de- 
tails of battle and siege, of supply, transportation, 
mining and countermining, grand tactics, big strategy 
and little strategy, signal service, infantry, cavalry, 
artillery, and all about siege-gtms, field-gims, Gatling 
giuis, rifled guns, smooth bores, musket practice, 
revolver practice — and not a solitary word of it all 

239 



MARK TWAIN 

oould these catfish make head or tail of, you under- 
stand — and it was handsome to see him chalk oflf 
mathematical nightmares on the blackboard that 
would stump the angels themselves, and do it like 
nothing, too — ^all about ecUpses, and comets, and 
solstices, and constellations, and mean time, and 
sidereal time, and dinner-time, and bedtime, and 
every other imaginable thing above the clouds or 
tmder them that you could harry or bullyrag an 
enemy with and make him wish he hadn't come — 
and when the boy made his military salute and stood 
aside at last, I was proud enough to hug him, and 
all those other people were so dazed they looked 
partly petrified, partly dnmk, and wholly caught 
out and snowed imder. I judged that the cake was 
ours, and by a large majority. 

Education is a great thing. This was the same 
youth who had come to West Point so ignorant that 
when I asked him, '*If a general officer should have a 
horse shot imder him on the field of battle, what 
ought he to do?" answered up naively and said: 

**Get up and brush himself." 

One of the yotmg nobles was called up now. I 
thought I would question him a little myself. I said : 

*'Can your lordship read?" 

His face flushed indignantly, and he fired this 
me: 

"Takest me for a clerk? I trow I am not of 
blood that—" 

"Answer the question!" 

He crowded his wrath down and made out 
answer '*No." 

240 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

*'Can you write?" 

He wanted to resent this, too, but I said : 

*'You will confine yourself to the questions, and 
make no comments. You are not here to air your 
blood or your graces, and nothing of the sort will be 
permitted. Can you write ? ' * 

''No." 

"Do you know the multiplication table?" 

"I wit not what ye refer to." 

"How much is nine times six?" 

" It is a mystery that is hidden from me by reason 
that the emergency requiring the fathoming of it hath 
not in my life-days occurred, and so, not having no 
need to know this thing, I abide barren of the 
knowledge." 

"If A trade a barrel of onions to B, worth two- 
pence the bushel, in exchange for sheep worth four- 
pence and a dog worth a penny, and C kill the dog 
before delivery, because bitten by the same, who 
mistook him for D, what sum is still due to A from 
B, and which party pays for the dog, C or D, and 
who gets the money? If A, is the penny sufficient, 
or may he claim consequential damages in the form 
of additional money to represent the possible profit 
which might have inured from the dog, and classifi- 
able as earned increment, that is to say, usufruct?'* 

' ' Verily, in the all-wise and unknowable providence 
of God, who moveth in mysterious ways His wonders 
to perform, have I never heard the fellow to this 
question for confusion of the mind and congestion of 
the ducts of thought. Wherefore I beseech you let 
the dog and the onions and these people of the 

241 



MARK TWAIN 

strange and godless names work out their several 
salvations from their piteous and wonderful difficul- 
ties without help of mine, for indeed their trouble is 
sufficient as it is, whereas an I tried to help I should 
but damage their cause the more and yet mayhap 
not live myself to see the desolation wrought." 

*'What do you know of the laws of attraction and 
gravitation?" 

"If there be such, mayhap his grace the king did 
promulgate them whilst that I lay sick about the 
beginning of the ye^. and thereby failed to hear his 
proclamation." ^^^^ 

''What do you i ^ow of the science of optics?" 

"I know of governors of places, and seneschals of 
castles, and sheriffs of cotmties, and many like small 
offices and titles of honor, but him you call the 
Science of Optics I have not heard of before; perad- 
venture it is a new dignity." 

"Yes, in this cotmtry." 

Try to conceive of this moUusk gravely applying 
for an official position, of any kind tmder the stm! 
Why, he had aU the earmarks of a typewriter copyist, 
if you leave out the disposition to contribute unin- 
vited emendations of your grammar and punctuation. 
It was tmaccotmtable that he didn't attempt a little 
help of that sort out of his majestic supply of inca* 
parity for the job. But that didn't prove that he 
hadn't material in him for the disposition, it only 
proved that he wasn't a typewriter copyist yet. After 
nagging him a little more, I let the professors loose 
on him and they turned him inside out, on the lin^ 
of scientific war, and found him empty, of course. 

242 



it 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

He knew somewhat about the warfare of the time — 
bushwhacking arotmd for ogres, and bull-fights in the 
tournament ring, and such things — ^but otherwise he 
was empty and useless. Then we took the other 
young noble in hand, and he was the first one's twin, 
for ignorance and incapacity. I delivered them into 
the hands of the chairman of the Board with the 
comfortable consciousness that their cake was dough. 
They were examined in the previous order of prece- 
dence. 

Name, so please you?" 

Pertipole, son of Sir Pei ole, Baron of Barley 
Mash." 

"Grandfather?" . , ,, 

Also Sir Pertipole, Baron of Barley Mash." 
Great-grandfather ?" 
The same name and title." 
Great-great-grandfather ? ' ' 
We had none, worshipful sir. the line failing be- 
fore it had reached so far back." 

'*It mattereth not. It is a good four generations, 
and fulfilleth the requirements of the rule." 
* 'Fulfils what rule?" I asked. 
"The rule requiring four generations of nobility 
or else the candidate is not eligible." 

"A man not eligible for a Ueutenancy in the army 
unless he can prove four generations of noble de- 
scent?" 

' ' Even so ; neither lieutenant nor any other officer 
may be commissioned without that qualification." 

"Oh, come, this is an astonishing thing. What 
good is such a qualification as that?" 

17 243 



it 
if 



MARK TWAIN 

''What gcxxl? It is a hardy qtiestkm, fair sir and 
Boss, since it doth gp far to impugn the wisdom of 
even otir holy Mother Church hersdf." 

"As howr 

''For that she hath established the selfsame rule 
ri^;arding saints. By her law none may be canonized 
until he hath lain dead four generations." 

"I see, I see — it is the same thing. It is wonder- 
fuL In the one case a man Hes dead-alive four genera- 
tions — mummified in ignorance and sloth — and that 
qtiaUfies him to command five people, and take their 
weal and woe into his impotent hands; and in the 
other case, a man lies bedded with death and worms 
four generation^, and that qualifies him for oSce in 
the cdestial camp. Does the king's grace approve 
of this strange law?" 

The king said: 

"Why, truly I see naught about it that is strange. 
An places of honor and of profit do belong, by natural 
right, to them that be of noble blood, and so these 
dignities in the army are their property and would be 
so without this or any rule. The rule is but to mark a 
limit. Its purpose is to keep out too recent blood, 
which would bring into contempt these offices, and 
men of lofty Hneage would turn their backs and scorn 
to take them. I were to blame an I permitted this 
calamity. You can permit it an you are minded so 
to do, for you have the delegated authority, but 
that the king should do it were a most strange 
madness and not comprdiensible to any." 

"I yield. Proceed, sir Chief of the Herald's Col- 
lege." 

344 



^ 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

The chairman resumed as follows : 

"By what illustrious adiievement for the honor of 
the Throne and state did the founder of your great 
line lift himself to the sacred dignity of the British 
nobility?" 

"He built a brewery." 

' ' Sire, the Board finds this candidate perfect in all 
the requirements and qualifications for military com- 
mand, and doth hold his case open for decision after 
due examination of his competitor." 

The competitor came forward and proved exactly 
four generations of nobility himself. So there was a 
^tie in military qualifications that far. 

He stood aside a moment, and Sir Pertipole was 
questioned further: 

"Of what condition was the wife of the founder of 
your line?" 

"She came of the highest landed gentry, yet she 
was not noble; she was gracious and pm:e and chari- 
table, of a blameless life and character, insomuch 
that in these regards was she peer of the best lady 
in the land." 

"That will do. Stand down." He called up the 
competing lordling again, and asked : ' ' What was the 
rank and condition of the great-grandmother who 
conferred British nobihty upon your great house?" 

"She was a king's leman and did climb to that 
splendid eminence by her own imholpen merit from 
the sewer where she was bom." 

"Ah, this, indeed, is true nobility, this is the right 
and perfect intermixture. The lieutenancy is yours, 
fair lord. Hold it not in contempt ; it is the humble 

245 



MARK TWAIN 

step which will lead to grandeurs more worthy of the 
splendor of an origin like to thine." 

I was down in the bottomless pit of humiliation. I 
had promised myself an easy and zenith-scouring 
triumph, and this was the outcome ! 

I was almost ashamed to look my poor disap- 
pointed cadet in the face. I told him to go home and 
be patient, this wasn't the end. 

I had a private audience with the king, and made 
a proposition. I said it was quite right to officer that 
regiment with nobilities, and he couldn't have done 
a wiser thing. It would also be a good idea to add 
five hundred officers to it; in fact, add as many 
officers as there were nobles and relatives of nobles 
in the country, even if there should finally be five 
times as many officers as privates in it; and thus 
make it the crack regiment, the envied regiment, the 
King's Own regiment, and entitled to fight on its 
own hook and in its own way, and go whither it would 
and come when it pleased, in time of war, and be 
utterly swell and independent. This would make 
that regiment the heart's desire of all the nobility, 
and they would all be satisfied and happy. Then we 
would make up the rest of the standing army out of 
commonplace materials, and officer it with nobodies, 
as was proper — ^nobodies selected on a basis of mere 
efficiency — ^and we would make this regiment toe the 
line, allow it no aristocratic freedom from restraint, 
and force it to do all the work and persistent hammer- 
ing, to the end that whenever the King's Own was 
tired and wanted to go off for a change and rummage 
around amongst ogres and have a good time, it could 

246 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

go without tineasiness, knowing that matters were 
in safe hands behind it, and business going to be 
continued at the old stand, same as usual. The king 
was charmed with the idea. 

When I noticed that, it gave me a valuable notion. 
I thought I saw my way out of an old and stubborn 
difficulty at last. You see, the royalties of the Pen- 
dragon stock were a long-lived race and very fruitful. 
Whenever a child was bom to any of these — and it 
was pretty often — there was wild joy in the nation's 
mouth, and piteous sorrow in the nation's heart. 
The joy was questionable, but the grief was honest. 
Because the event meant another call for a Royal 
Grant. Long was the list of these royalties, and they 
were a heavy and steadily increasing burden upon 
the treasury and a menace to the crown. Yet Arthur 
could not believe this latter fact, and he wotdd not 
listen to any of my various projects for substituting 
something in the place of the royal grants. If I 
could have persuaded him to now and then provide 
a support for one of these outlying scions from his 
own pocket, I could have made a grand to-do over 
it, and it would have had a good effect with the 
nation; but no, he wouldn't hear of such a thing. 
He had something like a religious passion for royal 
grant ; he seemed to look upon it as a sort of sacred 
swag, and one could not irritate him in any way so 
quickly and so surely as by an attack upon that 
venerable institution. If I ventured to cautiously 
hint that there was not another respectable fam- 
ily in England that would hi^pible itself to hold 
out the hat — however, that is as far as I ever got; 

247 



MARK TWAIN 

he alwa3rs cut me short there, and peremptorily, 
too. 

But I believed I saw my chance at last. I would 
form this crack regiment out of officers alone — ^not 
a sin^e private. Half of it should consist of nobles, 
who should fill all the places up to Major-GeneraJ, 
and serve gratis and pay their own expenses; and 
they would be glad to do this when they should learn 
that the rest of the regiment would consist exdusivdiy 
of princes of the blood. These princes of the blood 
should range in rank from Lieutenant-General up 
to Field Marshal, and be gorgeously salaried and 
equipped and fed by the state. Moreover — and this 
was the master stroke — ^it should be decreed that 
these princely grandees should be always addressed 
by a stunningly gaudy and awe-compelling title 
which I would presently invent), and they and they 
only in all England shoidd be so addressed.. Finally, 
all princes of the blood should have free choice; 
join that regiment, get that great title, and renounce 
the royal grant, or stay out and receive a grant. 
Neatest touch of all: tmbom but imminent princes 
of the blood could be bom into the regiment, and 
start fair, with good wages and a permanent situa- 
tion, upon due notice from the parents. 

All the boys would join, I was sure of that; so, all 
existing grants would be relinquished ; that the newly 
bom would always join was equally certain. Within 
sixty days that quaint and bizarre anomaly, the 
Royal Grant, wotdd cease to be a living fact, and take 
its place among the curiosities of the past. 



248 



CHAPTER XXVI 

THE FIRST NEWSPAPER 

WHEN I told the king I was going out disgtiised 
as a petty freeman to scour the country and 
familiarize myself with the humbler life of the people, 
he was all afire with the novelty of the thing in a 
minute, and was botmd to take a chance in the adven- 
ture himself — ^nothing should stop him — he would 
drop everything and go along — ^it was the prettiest 
idea he had run across for many a day. He wanted 
to glide out the back way and start at once; but I 
showed him that that wouldn't answer. You see, he 
was billed for the king's-evil — ^to touch for it, I mean 
— ^and it wouldn't be right to disappoint the house; 
and it wouldn't make a delay worth considering, any- 
way, it was only a one-night stand. And I thought 
he ought to tell the queen he was going away. He 
clouded up at that and looked sad. I was sorry I 
had spoken, especially when he said mournfully: 

' ' Thou f orgettest that Latmcelot is here ; and where 
Latincelot is, she noteth not the going forth oi the 
king, nor what day he retumeth." 

Of course, I changed the subject. Yes, Guenever 
was beautiful, it is true, but take her all around she 
was pretty slack. I never meddled in these matters, 
they weren't my affair, but I did hate to see the way 

249 



MARK TWAIN 

things were going on, and I don't mind sa3dng that 
much. Many's the time she had asked me, **Sir 
Boss, hast seen Sir Laimcelot about?" but if ever she 
went fretting arotmd for the king I didn't happen to 
be around at the time. 

There was a very good lay-out for the king's-evil 
business — ^very tidy and creditable. The king sat 
under a canopy of state; about him were clustered a 
large body of the clergy in full canonicals. Conspicu- 
ous, both for location and personal outfit, stood 
Marinel, a hermit of the quack-doctor species, to 
introduce the sick. All abroad over the spacious 
floor, and clear down to the doors, in a thick jumble, 
lay or sat the scrofulous, under a strong light. It 
was as good as a tableau; in fact, it had all the look 
of being gotten up for that, though it wasn't. There 
were eight himdred sick people present. The work 
was slow; it lacked the interest of novelty for me, 
because I had seen the ceremonies before ; the thing 
soon became tedious, but the proprieties required me 
to stick it out. The doctor was there for the reason 
that in all such crowds there were many people who 
only imagined something was the matter with them» 
and many who were consciously sound but wanted 
the immortal honor of fleshly contact with a king, and 
yet others who pretended to illness in order to get 
the piece of coin that went with the touch. Up to 
this time this coin had been a wee little gold piece 
worth about a third of a dollar. When you consider 
how much that amount of money would buy, in that 
age and cotmtry, and how usual it was to be scrofu- 
lous, when not dead, you would tmderstand that the 

250 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

annual king's-evil appropriation was just the River 
and Harbor bill of that government for the grip it 
took on the treasury and the chance it afforded for 
skinning the surplus. So I had privately concluded 
to touch the treasury itself for the king's-evil. I 
covered six-sevenths of the appropriation into the 
treasiuy a week before starting from Camelot on my 
adventures, and ordered that the other seventh be 
inflated into five-cent nickels and delivered into the 
hands of the head clerk of the King's Evil Depart- 
ment; a nickel to take the place of each gold coin, 
you see, and do its work for it. It might strain the 
nickel some, but I judged it could stand it. As a 
rule, I do not approve of watering stock, but I con- 
sidered it square enough in this case, for it was just 
a gift, anjrway. Of course, you can water a gift as 
much as you want to; and I generally do. The old 
gold and silver coins of the coimtry were of ancient 
and unknown origin, as a rule, but some of them were 
Roman; they were ill-shapen, and seldom roimder 
than a moon that is a week past the full ; they were 
hammered, not minted, and they were so worn with 
use that the devices upon them were as illegible as 
blisters, and looked like them. I judged that a 
sharp, bright new nickel, with a first-rate likeness of 
the king on one side of it and Guenever on the other, 
and a blooming pious motto, would take the tuck 
out of scrofula as handy as a nobler coin and please 
the scrofulous fancy more; and I was right. This 
batch was the first it was tried on, and it worked 
to a charm. The saving in expense was a notable 
economy. You will see that by these figures: We 

251 



MARK TWAIN 

touched a trifle over seven hundred of the eight hun- 
dred patients; at former rates, this would have oost 
the government about two hundred and forty dollars; 
at the new rate we pulled through for about thirty- 
five dollars, thus saving upward of two hundred dol- 
lars at one swoop. To appreciate the f till magnitude 
of this stroke, consider these other figures : the annual 
expenses of a national government amount to the 
equivalent of a contribution of three days' average 
wages of every individual of the population, countjng 
every individual as i| he were a man. If you take a 
nation of sixty millions, where average wages are two 
dollars per day, three days' wages taken from eadi 
individual will provide three hundred and sixty mil- 
lion dollars and pay the government's expenses. In 
my day, in my own country, this money was collected 
from imposts, and the citizen imagined that the 
foreign importer paid it, and it made him comfortaUe 
to think so; whereas, in fact, it was paid by the 
American people, and was so equally and exactly dis- 
tributed among them that the annual cost to the one- 
hundred-millionaire and the annual cost to the suck- 
ing child of the day-laborer was precisely the same — 
each paid six dollars. Nothing could be equaler than 
that, I reckon. Well, Scotland and Ireland were 
tributary to Arthur, and the imited populations of the 
British Islands amounted to something less than one 
million. A mechanic's average wage was three cents 
a day, when he paid his own keep. By this rule the 
national government's expenses were ninety thousand 
dollars a year, or about two hundred and fifty doUais 
a day. Thus, by the substitution of nickels for gold 

252 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

on a king's-evil xiay, I not only injured no one, dis- 
satisfied no one, but pleased all concerned and saved 
four-fifths of that day's national expense into the bar- 
gain — a saving which would have been the equivalent 
of eight hundred thousand dollars in my day in 
America. In making this substitution I had drawn 
upon the wisdom of a very remote source — the wis- 
dom of my boyhood — ^for the true statesman does 
not despise any wisdom, howsoever lowly may be its 
origin : in my boyhood I had always saved my pennies 
and contributed buttons to the foreign missionary 
cause. The buttons would answer the ignorant sav- 
age as well as the coin, the coin would answer me 
better than the buttons; all hands were happy and 
nobody hurt. 

Marinel took the patients as they came. He ex- 
amined the candidate ; if he couldn't qualify he was 
warned off; if he could he was passed along to the 
king. A priest pronotmced the words, '*They shall 
lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover." 
Then the king stroked the ulcers, while the reading 
continued; finally, the patient graduated and got his 
nickel — the king hanging it around his neck himself — 
and was dismissed. Would you think that that 
would ciu'e? It certainly did. Any mummery will 
cure if the patient's faith is strong in it. Up by 
Astolat there was a chapel wh^re the Virgin had once 
appeared to a girl who used to herd geese around 
there — the girl said so herself — and they btiilt the 
chapel upon that spot and hung a picture in it repre- 
senting the occurrence — a picture which you would 
think it dangerous for a sick person to approach; 

2S3 



MARK TWAIN 

whereas, on the contrary, thousands of the lame and 
the sick came and f)rayed before it every year and 
went away whole and sound ; and even the well could 
look upon it and live. Of course, when I was told 
these things I did not believe them; but when I went 
there and saw them I had to succtunb. I saw the 
cures effected myself; and they were real cures and 
not questionable. I saw cripples whom I had seen 
around Camelot for years on crutches, arrive and 
pray before that picture, and put down their crutches 
and walk off without a limp. There were {ules of 
crutches there which had been left by such people as 
a testimony. 

In other places people operated on a patient's 
mind, without saying a word to him, and cured Mm. 
In others, experts assembled patients in a room and 
prayed over them, and appealed to their faith, and 
those patients went away cured. Wherever you find 
a king who can't cure the king's-evil you can be sure 
that the most valuable superstition that supports his 
throne — the subject's belief in the divine appoint- 
ment of his sovereign — ^has passed away. In my 
youth the monarchs of England had ceased to touch 
for the evil, but there was no occasion for this diflS- 
dence : they could have cured it forty-nine times in 
fifty. 

Well, when the priest had been droning for three 
hours, and the good king polishing the evidences, and 
the sick were still pressing forward as plenty as ever, 
I got to feeling intolerably bored. I was sitting by 
an open window not far from the canopy of state, 
^or the five htmdredth time a patient stood forward 

254 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

to have his reptilsivenesses stroked; again those 
words were being droned out: "they shall lay their 
hands on the sick " — ^when outside there rang dear as 
a clarion a note that enchanted my soul and tumbled 
thirteen worthless centuries about my ears: "Came- 
lot Weekly Hosannah and Literary Volcano! — ^latest 
irruption — only two cents — all about the big miracle 
in the Valley of Holiness!" One greater than kings 
had arrived — the newsboy. But I was the only per- 
son in all that throng who knew the meaning of this 
mighty birth, and what this imperial magician was 
come into the world to do. 

I dropped a nickel out of the window and got my 
paper; the Adam-newsboy of the world went around 
the comer to get my change; is around the comer 
yet. It was delicious to see a newspaper again, yet I 
was conscious of a secret shock when my eye fell 
upon the first batch of display head-lines. I had 
lived in a clammy atmosphere of reverence, resi)ect, 
deference, so long that they sent a quivery little cold 
wave through me: 

HIGH TIMES IN THE VALLEY 
OF HOLINESS! 



THE WATER-WORKS CORKED! 



BRER MERLIN WORKS HIS ArTS, ^UT GETS 

Left? 



But t he Boss scores on his first Innings! 



255 



/ 

/ 



MARK TWAIN 

Tke MiracuUus WeU Uncorked amid 
awffd atUbursis of 

INFERNAL FIRE AND SMOKE 
ANDTHUNDERl 



THE aUZZA£D-&OOST ASTONISHED! 



UNPARALLELED REJOIBINGS! 



— and so on, and so on. Yes, it was too loud. Qnoe 
I could have enjoyed it and seen nothing out of the 
way about it, but now its note was discordant. It 
was good Arkansas journalism, but this was not Ar- 
kansas. Moreover, the next to the last line was 
calculated to give offense to the hermits, and perhax)S 
lose us their advertising. Indeed, there was too light- 
some a tone of flippancy all through the paper. It 
was plain I had undergone a considerable change 
without noticing it. I found myself impleasantly 
affected by pert little irreverencies which would have 
seemed but proper and airy graces of speech at an 
earlier period of my life. There was an abtmdance 
of the following breed of items, and they discom- 
forted me : 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

Local Smoke and Cinders, 

Sir Launcqo) met vp with ok) King 
Vlgriinuice of Ireland unexpectedly lait 
veok over on the moor south of Sir 
Btlmoral le Meiveilleuse's hog dastnre. 
The widow has been notified. 

Expedition No. 3 will start adoot tbo 
first of mextjjmgnthjon a search iSr Sr 
Sagnunour le Desirous. It is in 00m- 
aiid of the renowned Knight of the Red 
Lawns, assissled by Sir Persant of ladey 
who is compete9t. intelligent, courte- 
ous, and in every M^y a brirk, and fur* 
tHer assisted by Sir Palamides the Sara* 
cen, who is no huckleberry hinself. 
This is no pic-nic, these boys mean 
business. 

The readers of the Hosannah will re- 
gret to learn that the hadndsome and 
popular Sir Charolais of Gaul, who dur- 
ing his four weeks* stay at the Bull and 
Halibut, thisfcity, has won every heart 
by his polished manners and el^^t 
cirnversation, will pull out to-day foe 
home. Give us another call, Charley I 

The bdsiness end of the funeral of 
the late Sir Dalliance the duke's son of 



257 



MARK TWAIN 

Connrally killed in an c nc ui intCT with 
<lie Giant of the Knotted Bhideeoo ]a« 
jjanetdij on the bofden of the Plain of 
Enehantment was in the bands of tbm 
ever afiable and egdent 'Mvmfaieb 
prince of im3ertakefS9 then iriioai dm* 
exists none hy whom it were a moitt 
satisfying pleasnie to have the hot sad 
ocic es pofutuieCb ' Give him a triaL 

The cosiia! ^tiianks of the HMannah 
ooKe are dney from editor down to 

t 

devil, to the ever ooorteoas and though- 
fal Lord High Stei^ of the Pahoe's 

Tlttid Anistant Ymt for several saa- 

ccts of ice oBam^a qnalitj ralmlatfid 

to make the ey%of the recipients ha- 

mid with grt ode; and it done IL 

VThen this Qadministration wants to 

chalk np a desirable najme for ea^ 

promotion, the Hosannah would like a 

chance to sadgest. 

The Demoiselle Irene Qewlap^ of 
Sooth Astolat, is visiting her uidey dia 
popular host of the Cattlemen's Boaid* 
ing HoScae, Liver Lane, this city. 

Young Barker Uie bellows-mender k 
hoMe again, and looks much imp wffed 
by his vacation roond-up among the )Bt« 
fying smithies, gjeehisad. 

258 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 



Of course it was good enough journalism for a 
beginning; I knew that quite well, and yet it was 
somehow disappointing. The ** Court Circular'* 
pleased me better; indeed, its simple and dignified 
respectfulness was a distinct refreshment to me after 
all those disgraceful familiarities. But even it could 
have been improved. Do what one may, there is no 
getting an air of variety into a court circular, I 
acknowledge that. There is n, prof oimd monotonous- 
ness about its facts that bafiies and defeats one's 
sincerest efforts to make them sparkle and enthuse. 
The best way to manage — ^in fact, the only sensible 
way — ^is to disguise repetitiousness of fact under 
variety of form : skin your fact each time and lay on 
a new cuticle of words. It deceives the eye; you 
think it is a new fact ; it gives you the idea that the 
court is carrying on like everything; this excites you, 
and you drain the whole column, with a good appe- 
tite, and perhaps never notice that it's a barrel of 
soup made out of a single bean. Clarence's way was 
good, it was simple, it was dignified, it was direct 
and businesslike; all I say is, it was not the best way: 

Court Circular. 

On Monday, the "^ing rode in the park. 
Tuesday, 
Wendesday 
Thursday 
Friday, 
Saturday 
Sunday, 

However, take the paper by and large, I was vastly 
pleased with it. Little crudities of a mechanical sort 
18 259 



MARK TWAIN 

were observable here and there, but there were not 
enough of them to amount to anything, and it was 
good enough Arkansas proof-reading, anyhow, and 
better than was needed in Arthtur's day and reahn. 
As a rule, the grammar was leaky and the construc- 
tion more or less lame ; but I did not much mind these 
things. They are common defects of my own, and 
one mustn't criticize other people on grounds where 
he can't stand perpendicular himself. 

I was htmgry enough for literature to want to take 
down the whole paper at this one meal, but I got 
only a few bites, and then had to postpone, because 
the monks arotmd me besieged me so with eager 
questions: What is this curious thing? What is it 
for? Is it a handkerchief? — saddle-blanket? — part 
of a shirt? What is it made of? How thin it is, and 
how dainty and frail; and how it rattles. Will it 
wear, do you think, and won't the rain injure it? Is 
it writing that appears on it, or is it only ornamenta- 
tion? They suspected it was writing, because those 
among them who knew how to read Latin and had a 
smattering of Greek, recognized some of the letters, 
but they could make nothing out of the restilt as a 
whole. I put my information in the simplest form I 
could: 

' ' It is a public journal ; I will explain what that is» 
another time. It is not cloth, it is made of paper; 
some time I will explain what paper is. The lines on 
it are reading-matter; and not written by hand, bat 
printed; by and by I will explain what printing is. 
A thousand of these sheets have been made, aU 
exactly like this, in every minute detail — ^they caa*ir 

260 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

be told apart." Then they all broke out with excla- 
mations of stirprise and admiration : 

'*A thousand! Verily a mighty work — a year's 
work for many men." 

**No — ^merely a day's work for a man and a boy." 

They crossed themselves, and whiffed out a pro- 
tective prayer or two. 

*'Ah-h — a, miracle, a wonder! Dark work of en- 
chantment." 

I let it go at that. Then I read in a low voice, to as 
many as could crowd their shaven heads within 
hearing distance, part of the account of the miracle 
of the restoration of the well, and was accompanied 
by astonished and reverent ejaculations all through: 
•*Ah-h-h!" ''How true!" ''Amazing, amazing!" 
"These be the very haps as they happened, in mar- 
velous exactness I" And might they take this strange 
thing in their hands, and feel of it and examine it ?— 
they would be very careful. Yes. So they took it, 
handling it as cautiously and devoutly as if it had 
been some holy thing come from some supernatural 
region; and gently felt of its texture, caressed its 
pleasant smooth surface with lingering touch, and 
scanned the mysterious characters with fascinated 
eyes. These grouped bent heads, these charmed faces, 
these speaking eyes — how beautiful to me! For 
was not this my darling, and was not all this mute 
wonder and interest and homage a most eloquent 
tribute and tmf orced compliment to it ? I knew, then, 
how a mother feels when women, whether strangers 
or friends, take her new baby, and close themselves 
about it with one eager imptilse, and bend their heads 

a6x 



MARK TWAIN 

over it in a tranced adoration that makes all the rest 
of the universe vanish out of their consciousness and 
be as if it were not, for that time. I knew how she 
feels, and that there is no other satisfied ambition, 
whether of king, conqueror, or poet, that ever reaches 
half-way to that serene far summit or jrields half 
so divine a contentment. 

Dining all the rest of the stance my paper traveled 
from group to group all up and down and about that 
huge hall, and my happy eye was upon it always, and 
I sat motionless, steeped in satisfaction, dnmk with 
enjoyment. Yes, this was heaven; I was tasting it 
once, if I might never taste it more. 



CHAPTER XXVII 

THE YANKEE AND THE KING TRAVEL INCOGNITO 

ABOUT bedtime I took the king to my private 
iV quarters to cut his hair and help him get the 
hang of the lowly raiment he was to wear. The high 
classes wore their hair banged across the forehead but 
hanging to the shoulders the rest of the way aroimd, 
whereas the lowest ranks of commoners were banged 
fore and aft both; the slaves were bangless, and 
allowed their hair free growth. So I inverted a bowl 
over his head and cut away all the locks that hung 
below it. I also trimmed his whiskers and mustache 
until they were only about a half-inch long ; and tried 
to do it inartistically, and succeeded. It was a vil- 
lainous disfigurement. When he got his lubberly 
sandals on, and his long robe of coarse brown linen 
cloth, which himg straight from his neck to his ankle- 
bones, he was no longer the comeliest man in his 
kingdom, but one of the unhandsomest and most 
commonplace and imattractive. We were dressed 
and barbered alike, and could pass for small fanners, 
or farm bailiflEs, or shepherds, or carters ; yes, or for 
village artisans, if we chose, our costume being in 
effect imiversal among the poor, because of its 
strength and cheapness. I don't mean that it was 
really cheap to a very poor person, but I do mean that 

263 



MARK TWAIN 

it was the cheapest material there was for male 
attire — ^manufactured material, you tmderstand. 

We slipped away an hour before dawn, and by 
broad sun-up had made eight or ten miles, and were 
in the midst of a sparsely settled coimtry. I had a 
pretty heavy knapsack; it was laden with provisions 
— ^provisions for the king to taper down on., till he 
could take to the coarse fare of the cotmtry without 
damage. 

I found a comfortable seat for the king by the road- 
side, and then gave him a morsel or two to stay his 
stomach with. Then I said I would find some water 
for him, and strolled away. Part of my project was 
to get out of sight and sit down and rest a little 
myself. It had always been my custom to stand 
when in his presence; even at the council board, 
except upon those rare occasions when the sitting was 
a very long one, extending over hours; then I had a 
trifling little backless thing which was like a reversed 
culvert and was as comfortable as the toothache. I 
didn't want to break him in suddenly, but do it by 
degrees. We should have to sit together now when 
in company, or people would notice; but it would 
not be good politics for me to be plajdng equality 
with him when there was no necessity for it. 

I found the water some three himdred yards away, 
and had been resting about twenty minutes, when 
I heard voices. That is all right, I thought — ^peasan 
going to work; nobody else likely to be stirring this 
early. But the next moment these comers jingled 
into sight around a turn of the road — smartly dad 
people of quaUty, with luggage-mules and servants in 

264 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

their train ! I was off like a shot, through the bushes 
by the shortest cut. For a while it did seem that 
these people would pass the king before I could get 
to him ; but desperation gives you wings, you know, 
and I canted my body forward, inflated my breast, 
and held my breath and flew. I arrived. And in 
plenty good enough time, too. 

''Pardon, my king, but it's no time for ceremony — 
jimip! Jump to your feet — some quality are com- 
ing!" 

"Is that a marvel? Let them come." 

**But my liege! You must not be seen sitting. 
Rise ! — ^and stand in humble posture while they pass. 
You are a peasant, you know." 

"True — I had forgot it, so lost was I in planning 
of a huge war with Gaul" — ^he was up by this time, 
but a farm could have got up quicker, if there was 
any kind of a boom in real estate — "and right-so a 
thought came randoming overthwart this majestic 
dream the which — " 

"A htmibler attitude, my lord the king — and 
quick! Duck your head! — ^more! — still more! — 
droop it!" 

He did his honest best, but lord, it was no great 
things. He looked as humble as the leaning tower at 
Pisa. It is the most you could say of it. Indeed, it 
was such a thundering poor success that it raised 
wondering scowls all along the line, and a gorgeous 
flimkey at the tail end of it raised his whip; but I 
jumped in time and was imder it when it fell; and 
under cover of the volley of coarse laughter which fol- 
lowed, I spoke up sharply and warned the king to 

365 



MARK TWAIN 

take no notice. He mastered himself for the moment, 
but it was a sore tax; he wanted to eat up the pro- 
cession. I said: 

*'It would end our adventtu'es at the very start; 
and we, being without weapons, could do nothing 
with that armed gang. If we are going to succeed in 
our emprise, we must not only look the peasant but 
act the peasant." 

"It is wisdom; none can gainsay it. Let us go 
on, Sir Boss. I will take note and learn, and do 
the best I may." 

He kept his word. He did the best he could, but 
I've seen better. If you have ever seen an active, 
heedless, enterprising child going diligently out of 
one mischief and into another all day long, and an 
anxious mother at its heels all the while, and just 
saving it by a hair from drowning itself or breaking 
its neck with each new experiment, you've seen 'the 
king and me. 

If I could have foreseen what the thing was going 
to be like, I should have said, No, if anybody wants 
to make his living exhibiting a king as a peasant, 
let him take the layout; I can do better witih a 
menagerie, and last longer. And yet, during the 
first three days I never allowed him to enter a hut 
or other dwelling. If he could pass muster anywhere 
during his early novitiate, it would be in small inns 
and on the road ; so to these places, we confined our- 
selves. Yes, he certainly did the best he cotild, but 
what of that ? He didn't improve a bit that I cookl 

He was always frightening me, always breaking out 

266 






A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

with fresh astonishers, in new and unexpected places. 
Toward evening on the second day, what does he do 
but blandly fetch out a dirk from inside his robe! 

** Great guns, my liege, where did you get that? 

"From a smuggler at the inn, yester eve. 

"What in the world possessed you to buy it? 

"We have escaped divers dangers by wit — ^thy 
wit — ^but I have bethought me that it were but pru- 
dence if I bore a weapon, too. Thine might fail thee 
in some pinch." 

"But people of our condition are not allowed to 
carry arms. What would a lord say — ^yes, or any 
other person of whatever condition — if he caught an 
upstart peasant with a dagger on his person?" 

It was a lucky thing for us that nobody came along 
just then. I persuaded him to throw the dirk away; 
and it was as easy as persuading a child to give up 
some bright fresh new way of killing itself. We 
walked along, silent and thinking. Finally the king 
said: 

"When ye know that I meditate a thing incon- 
venient, or that hath a peril in it, why do you not 
warn me to cease from that project?" 

It was a startling question, and a puzzler. I didn't 
quite know how to take hold of it, or what to say, 
and so, of course, I ended by sayinc: the natural 
thing : 

'But, sire, how can I know what yotu* thoughts 
are?" 

The king stopped dead in his tracks, and stared at 
me. 

"I believed thou wert greater than Merlin; and 

267 



MARK TWAIN 

truly in magic thou art. But prophecy is greater 
than magic. Merlin is a prophet." 

I saw I had made a blunder. I must get back my 
lost ground. After a deep reflection and careful 
planning, I said: 

''Sire, I have been mistmderstood. I will explain. 
There are two kinds of prophecy. One is the gift to 
foretell things that are but a little way off, the other 
is the gift to foretell things that are whole ages and 
centuries away. Which is the mightier gift, do you 
think?'* 

"Oh, the last, most surely!" 

"True. Does Merlin possess it?" 

"Partly, yes. He foretold mjrsteries about my 
birth and future kingship that were twenty years 
away." 

"Has he ever gone beyond that?" 

"He would not claim more, I think." 

" It is probably his limit. All prophets have tihidr 
Umit. The limit of some of the great prophets has 
been a hundred years." 

"These are few, I ween." 

"There have been two still greater ones, whose 
limit was fotir htmdred and six htmdred years, and 
one whose limit compassed even seven hundred and 
twenty." 

"Gramercy, it is marvelous!" 

"But what are these in comparison with meF 
They are nothing." 

"What? Canst thou truly look beyond even so 
vast a stretch of time as — " 

"Seven htmdred years? My liege, as dear as the 

268 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

vision of an eagle does my prophetic eye penetrate 
and lay bare the future of this world for nearly thir- 
teen centtiries and a half!" 

My land, you should have seen the king's eyes 
spread slowly open, and lift the earth's entire atmos- 
phere as much as an inch ! That settled Brer Merlin. 
One never had any occasion to prove his facts, with 
these people ; all he had to do was to state them. It 
never occurred to anybody to doubt the statement. 

**Now, then," I continued, **I could work both 
kinds of prophecy — ^the long and the short — ^if I 
chose to take the trouble to keep in practice; but I 
seldom exercise any but the long kind, because the 
other is beneath my dignity. It is properer to Mer- 
lin's sort — stump-tail prophets, as we call them in 
the profession. Of course, I whet up now and then 
and flirt out a minor prophecy, but not often — 
hardly ever, in fact. You will remember that there 
was great talk, when you reached the Valley of Holi- 
ness, about my having prophesied your coming and 
the very hour of your arrival, two or three days 
beforehand." 

'* Indeed, yes, I mind it now." 

** Well, I could have done it as much as forty times 
easier, and piled on a thousand times more detail 
into the bargain, if it had been five htmdred years 
away instead of two or three days." 

"How amazing that it should be so!" 

"Yes, a genuine expert can always foretell a thing 
that is five hundred years away easier than he can a 
thing that's only five himdred seconds off." 

"And yet in reason it should clearly be the other 

269 



MARK TWAIN 

way; it should be five hundiied times as easy to fore- 
tell the last as the first, for, indeed, it is so dose by 
that one uninspired might almost see it. In truth, the 
law of prophecy doth contradict the likelihoods, most 
strangely making the difficult easy, and the easy 
difficult." 

It was a wise head. A peasant's cap was no safe 
disguise for it; you could know it for a king's under 
a diving-bell, if you could hear it work its intellect. 

I had a new trade now, and plenty of business in it. 
The king was as hungry to find out eversrthing that 
was going to happen during the next thirteen cen- 
turies as if he werie expecting to live in them. Prom 
that time out, I prophesied myself bald-headed trying 
to supply the demand. I have done some indiscreet 
things in my day, but this thing of playing mysdf 
for a prophet was the worst. Still, it had its ameliora- 
tions. A prophet doesn't have to have any brains. 
They are good to have, of course, for the ordinary 
exigencies of life, but they are no use in professional 
work. It is the restfulest vocation there is. When 
the spirit of prophecy comes upon you, you metely 
cake your intellect and lay it off in a cool place for 
a rest, and unship your jaw and leave it alone; it 
will work itself: the result is prophecy. 

Every day a knight-errant or so came along, and 
the sight of them fired the king's martial spirit every- 
time. He would have forgotten himself, sure, and 
said something to them in a style a suspicious shade 
or so above his ostensible degree, and so I always got 
him well out of the road in time. Then he would 
stand and look with all his eyes; and a proud lis^t 

270 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

would flash from them, and his nostrils would inflate 
like a war-horse's, and I knew he was longing for a 
brush with them. But about noon of the third day 
I had stopped in the road to take a precaution which 
bad been suggested by the whip-stroke that had 
fallen to my share two days before; a precaution 
which I had afterward decided to leave untaken, I 
was so loath to institute it ; but now I had just had 
a fresh reminder: while striding heedlessly along, 
with jaw spread and intellect at rest, for I was prophe- 
S3ring, I stubbed my toe and fell sprawling. I was 
so pale I couldn't think for a moment; then I got 
softly and carefully up and unstrapped my knapsack. 
I had that dynamite bomb in it, done up in wool in a 
box. It was a good thing to have along; the time 
would come when I could do a valuable miracle with 
it, maybe, but it was a nervous thing to have about 
me, and I didn't like to ask the king to carry it. 
Yet I must either throw it away or think up some 
safe way to get along with its society. I got it out 
and slipped it into my scrip, and just then here came 
a couple of knights. The king stood, stately as a 
statue, gazing toward them — ^had forgotten himself 
again, of course — and before I could get a word of 
warning out, it was time for him to skip, and well 
that he did it, too. He supposed they would turn 
aside. Turn aside to avoid trampling peasant dirt 
imder foot ? When had he ever turned aside himself 
— or ever had the chance to do it, if a peasant saw 
him or any other noble knight in time to judiciously 
save him the trouble ? The knights paid no attention 
to the king at all ; it was his place to look out himself, 

271 



MARK TWAIN 

and if he hadn't skipped he would have been placidly 
ridden down, and laughed at besides. 

The king was in a flaming fury, and launched out 
his challenge and epithets with a most royal vigor. 
The knights were some little distance by now. They 
halted, greatly surprised, and turned in their saddles 
and looked back, as if wondering if it might be worth 
while to bother with such scum as we. Then they 
wheeled and started for us. Not a moment must be 
lost. I started for them. I passed them at a rattling 
gait, and as I went by I flimg out a hair-lifting soul- 
scorching thirteen-jointed insult which made the 
king's effort poor and cheap by comparison. I got 
it out of the nineteenth century where they know 
how. They had such headway that they were nearly 
to the king before they could check up; then, frantic 
with rage, they stood up their horses on their hind 
hoofs and whirled them arotmd, and the next 
moment here they came, breast to breast. I. was 
seventy yards off, then, and scrambling up a great 
boulder at the roadside. When they were within 
thirty yards of me they let their long lances droop 
to a level, depressed their mailed heads, and so, with 
their horse-hair plumes streaming straight out be- 
hind, most gallant to see, this lightning express 
came tearing for me ! When they were within fif- 
teen yards, I sent that bomb with a sure aim, and 
it struck the ground under the horses' noses. 

Yes, it was a neat thing, very neat and pretty 
to see. It resembled a steamboat explosion on the 
Mississippi ; and during the next fifteen minutes we 
stood imder a steady drizzle of microscopic fragments 

272 



1--V 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

of knights and hardware and horse-flesh. I say we, 
for the king joined the audience, of course, as soon 
as he had got his breath again. There was a hole 
there which would afford steady work for all the 
people in that region for some years to come-^n 
trying to explain it, I mean; as for filling it up, that 
service would be comparatively prompt, and would 
fall to the lot of a select few — peasants of that 
seigniory; and they wouldn't get anything for it, 
either. 

But I explained it to the king myself. I said it was 
done with a dynamite bomb. This information did 
him no damage, because it left him as intelligent as 
he was before. However, it was a noble miracle, in 
his eyes, and was another settler for Merlin. I 
thought it well enough to explain that this was a 
miracle of so rare a sort that it couldn't be done 
except when the atmospheric conditions were just 
right. Otherwise he would be encoring it every time 
we had a good subject, and that would be incon- 
venient, because I hadn't any more bombs along. 



CHAPTER XXVni 

DRILLING THE KING 

ON the morning of the fourth day, when it was 
just sunrise, and we had been tramping an hour 
in the chill dawn, I came to a resolution: the king 
must be drilled; things could not go on so, he must 
be taken in hand and deliberately and conscientiously 
drilled, or we couldn't ever venttu^ to enter a dwell- 
ing; the very cats would know this masquerader 
for a htimbug and no peasant. So I called a halt and 
said: 

''Sire, as between clothes and countenance, you 
are all right, there is no discrepancy; but as between 
your clothes and yoiar bearing, you are all wrong, 
there is a most noticeable discrepancy. Your scir 
dierly stride, your lordly port — ^these will not do. 
You stand too straight, your looks are too high, too 
confident. The cares of a kingdom do not stoop the 
shoulders, they do not droop the chin, they do not 
depress the high level of the eye-glance, they do not 
put doubt and fear in the heart and hang out the 
signs of them in slouching body and imsure step. It 
is the sordid cares of the lowly bom that do these 
things. You must learn the trick; you must imitate 
the trade-marks of poverty, misery, oppression, insult, 
and the other several and common inhumanities that 

274 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

sap the manliness out of a man and make him a loyal 
and proper and approved subject and a satisfaction 
to his masters, or the very infants will know you for 
better than yotar disguise, and we shall go to pieces at 
the first hut we stop at. Pray try to walk like this." 

The king took careful note, and then tried an 
imitation. 

** Pretty fair — pretty fair. Chin a little lower, 
please — ^there, very good. Eyes too high; pray don't 
look at the horizon, look at the ground, ten steps in 
front of you. Ah — ^that is better, that is very good. 
Wait, please ; you betray too much vigor, too much 
decision ; you want more of a shamble. Look at me, 
please — ^this is what I mean. . . . Now you are get- 
ting it ; that is the idea — ^at least, it sort of approaches 
it. . . . Yes, that is pretty fair. But! There is a 
great big something wanting, I don't quite know what 
it is. Please walk thirty yards, so that I can get 
a perspective on the thing. . . . Now, then — ^your 
head's right, speed's right, shoulders right, eyes right, 
chin right, gait, carriage, general style right — every- 
thing's right! And yet the fax^t remains the ag^- 
gate's wrong. The accoimt don't balance. Do it 
again, please . . . now I think I begin to see what it 
is. Yes, I've struck it. You see, the genuine spirit- 
lessness is wanting; that's what's the trouble. It's 
all amateur — mechanical details all right, almost to a 
hair; everything about the delusion perfect, except 
that it don't delude." 

"What, then, must one do, to prevail?" 

"Let me think. ... I can't seem to quite get at 
it. In fact, there isn't anything that can right the 
19 275 



MARK TWAIN 

matter but practice. This is a good place for it: 
loots and stony ground to break up your stately gait, 
a region not liable to interruption, only one field and 
one hut in sight, and they so far away that nobody 
could see us from there. It will be well to move a 
little off the road and put in the whole day drilling 
you, sire." 

After the drill had gone on a little while, I said : 

"Now, sire, imagine that we are at the door of the 
hut yonder, and the family are before us. Proceed, 
please — accost the head of the house." 

The king unconsciously straightened up like a 
montunent, and said, with frozen austerity: 

"'Varlet, bring a seat; and serve to me what dieer 
ye have." 

*'Ah, your grace, that is not well done." 

*'In what lacketh it?" 

** These people do not call each other varlets." 

*'Nay, is that true?" 

*'Yes; only those above them call them so." 

"Then must I try again. I will call him villein." 

**No-no; for he may be a freeman." 

"Ah — so. Then peradventure I should call him 
goodman." 

"That would answer, your grace, but it would be 
utill better if you said friend, or brother." 

"Brother!— to dkt like that?" 

"Ah, but we are pretending to be dirt like that, 
too." 

"It is even true. I will say it. Brother, bring a 
seat, and thereto what cheer ye have, withal. Nam 
'tis right." 

276 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"Not qtiite, not wholly right. You have asked for 
one, not us — ^for one, not both; food for one, a seat 
for one." 

The king looked puzzled — ^he wasn't a very heavy 
weight, intellectually. His head was an hour-glass; 
it could stow an idea, but it had to do it a grain at 
a time, not the whole idea at once. 

"Would you have a seat also — and sit?" 

"If I did not sit, the ipan would perceive that we 
were only pretending to be equals — ^and playing the 
deception pretty poorly, too." 

"It is well and truly said! How wonderftd is 
truth, come it in whatsoever unexpected form it 
may! Yes, he must bring out seats and food for 
both, and in serving us present not ewer and napkin 
with more show of respect to the one than to the 
other." 

"And there is even yet a detail that needs correct- 
ing. He must bring nothing outside ; we will go in — 
in among the dirt, and possibly other repulsive things 
— ^and take the food with the household, and after 
the fashion of the house, and all on equal terms, 
except the man be of the serf class ; and finally, there 
will be no ewer and no napkin, whether he be serf 
or free. Please walk again, my liege. There — it is 
better — ^it is the best yet; but not peTiecL The 
shoulders have known no ignobler btarden than iron 
mail, and they will not stoop." 

"Give me, then, the bag. I will learn the spirit 
that goeth with burdens that have not honor. It is 
the spirit that stoopeth the shoulders, I ween, and 
not the weight ; for armor is heavy, yet it is a proud 

377 



MARK TWAIN 

burden, and a man standeth straight in it. • . . Nay, 
but me no buts, offer me no objections. I win have 
the thing. Strap it upon my back." 

He was complete now with that knapsack on, and 
looked as little like a king as any man I had ever seen. 
But it was an obstinate pair of shoulders; they could 
not seem to leam the trick of stooping with any sort 
of deceptive naturalness. The drill went on. I 
prompting and correcting: 

' ' Now, make believe you are in debt, and eaten up 
by relentless creditors; you are out of work — ^which 
is horse-shoeing, let us say — and can get none; and 
your wife is sick, your children are crying because 
they are himgry — " 

And so on, and so on. I drilled him as represent- 
mg in tiuTi all sorts of people out of luck and suffering 
dire privations and misf orttmes. But lord, it was only 
just words, words — ^they meant nothing in the world 
to him, I might just as well have whistled. Words 
realize nothing, vivify nothing to you, unless you 
have suffered in your own person the thing which the 
words try to describe. There are wise people who 
talk ever so knowingly and complacently about **the 
working classes," and satisfy themselves that a day's 
hard intellectual work is very much harder than a 
day's hard manual toil, and is righteously entitled to 
much bigger pay. Why, they really think that, you 
know, because they know all about the one, but 
haven't tried the other. But I know all about both; 
and so far as I am concerned, there isn't money 
enough in the imiverse to hire me to swing a pickax 
thirty days, but I will do the hardest kind of int^ 

378 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

lectual work for just as near nothing as you can 
cipher it down — ^and I will be satisfied, too. 

Intellectual "work" is misnamed; it is a pleasure, 
a dissipation, and is its own. highest reward. The 
poorest paid architect, engineer, general, author, 
sculptor, painter, lecturer, advocate, legislator, actor, 
preacher, singer is constructively in heaven when 
he is at work ; and as for the musician with the fiddle- 
bow in his hand who sits in the midst of a great 
orchestra with the ebbing and flowing tides of divine 
sound washing over him — ^why, certainly, he is at 
work, if you wish to call it that, but lord, it's a sar- 
casm just the same. The law of work does seem 
utterly unfair — ^but there it is, and nothing can 
change it: the higher the pay in enjoyment the 
worker gets out of it, the higher shall be his pay in 
cash, also. And it's also the very law of those trans- 
parent swindles, transmissible nobility and kingship. 



CHAPTER XXIX 

THB SMALLPOX HUT 

WHEN we arrived at that hut at mid-aftemooOt 
we saw no signs of life about it. The field 
near by had been denuded of its crop some time be^ 
fore, and had a skinned look, so exhaustively had it 
been harvested and gleaned. Fences, sheds, every- 
thing had a mined look, and were eloquent of pov- 
erty. No animal was around anywhere, no living 
thing in sight. The stillness was awful, it was like the 
stillness of death. The cabin was a one-story one, 
whose thatch was black with age, and ragged from 
lack of repair. 

The door stood a trifle ajar. We approached it 
stealthily — on tiptoe and at half-breath — for that is 
the way one's feeling makes him do, at such a time. 
The king knocked. We waited. No answer. Knod^ 
again. No answer. I pushed the door softly open 
and looked in. I made out some dim forms, and a 
woman started up from the ground and stared at me, 
as one does who is wakened from sleep. Presently 
she foimd her voice: 

"Have mercy!" she pleaded. "All is taken, noth- 
ing is left." 

"I have not come to take anything, poor woman." 

"You are not a priest?" 

280 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

''No." 

**Nor come not from the lord of the manor?'* 

**No, I am a stranger." 

"Oh, then, for the fear of God, who visits with 
misery and death such as be harmless, tarry not here, 
but fly! This place is imder his curse — and his 
Church's." 

' * Let me come in and help you — ^y ou are sick and 
in trouble." 

I was better used to the dim light now. I could see 
her hollow eyes fixed upon me. I could see how 
emaciated she was. 

**I tell you the place is under the Church's ban. 
Save yourself — and go, before some straggler see thee 
here, and report it." 

**Give yourself no trouble about me; I don't care 
anything for the Church's curse. Let me help you." 

"Now all good spirits — if there be any such — 
bless thee for that word. Would God I had a sup of 
water! — ^but hold, hold, forget I said it, and fly; for 
there is that here that even he that f eareth not the 
Church must fear : this disease whereof we die. Leave 
us, thou brave, good stranger, and take with thee such 
whole and sincere blessing as them that be accursed 
can give." 

But before this I had picked up a wooden bowl and 
was rushing past the king on my way to the brook. 
It was ten yards away. When I got back and 
entered, the king was within, and was opening the 
shutter that closed the window-hole, to let in air and 
light. The place was full of a foul stench. I put the 
bowl to the woman's lips, and as she gripped it with 

281 



it 
n 



MARK TWAIN 

her eager talons the shutter came open axMl a 
strong light flooded her face. Smallpox! 

I sprang to the king, and said in his ear: 

**Out of the door on the instant, sire! the woman 
is dying of that disease that wasted the skirts of 
Camelot two years ago.** 

He did not budge. 

"Of a truth I shall remain — and likewise help." 

I whispered again: 
King, it must not be. You must go." 
Ye mean well, and ye speak not unwisely. But 
it were shame that a king should know fear, and 
shame that belted knight should withhold his hand 
where be such as need succor. Peace, I will not go. 
It is you who must go. The Church's ban is not upon 
me, but it forbiddeth you to be here, and she will 
deal with you with a heavy hand an word come to 
her of your trespass." 

It was a desperate place for him to be in, and 
might cost him his life, but it was no use to argue 
with him. If he considered his knightly honor at 
stake here, that was the end of argtunent; he would 
stay, and nothing could prevent it; I was aware of 
that. And so I dropped the subject. The woman 
spoke : 

' ' Fair sir, of your kindness will ye climb the ladder 
there, and bring me news of what ye find? Be not 
afraid to report, for times can come when even a 
mother's heart is past breaking — being already 
broke." 

"Abide," said the king, "and give the woman to 
eat. I will go." And he put down the knapsadc 

282 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

I turned to start, but the king had akeady started. 
He halted, and looked down upon a man who lay in a 
dim light, and had not noticed us thus far, or spoken. 

**Is it your husband?" the king asked. 

''Yes." 

**Is he asleep?" 

* * God be thanked for that one charity, yes — ^these 
three hours. Where shall I pay to the full, my grati- 
tude ! for my heart is bursting with it for that sleep 
he sleepeth now." 

I said: 

"We will be careful. We will not wake him." 

**Ah, no, that ye will not, for he is dead," 

''Dead?" 

"Yes, what triumph it is to know it! None can 
harm him, none insult him more. He is in heaven 
now, and happy ; or if not there, he bides in hell and 
is content ; for in that place he will find neither abbot 
nor yet bishop. We were boy and girl together; we 
were man and wife these five-and-twenty years, and 
never separated till this day. Think how long that is 
to love and suffer together. This morning was he out 
of his mind, and in his fancy we were boy and girl 
again and wandering in the happy fields; and so in 
that innocent glad converse wandered he far and 
farther, still Ughtly gossiping, and entered into those 
other fields we know not of, and was shut away from 
mortal sight. And so there was no parting, for in his 
fancy I went with him ; he knew not but I went with 
him, my hand in his — my young soft hand, not this 
withered claw. Ah, yes, to go, and know it not ; to 
separate and know it not; how could one go peace^ 

283 



< 



\ 



MARK TWAIN 

fuler than that? It was his reward for a cruel life 
patiently borne.'* 

There was a slight noise from the direction of the 
dim comer where the ladder was. It was the king 
descending. I could see that he was bearing some- 
thing in one arm, and assisting himself with the other. 
He came forward into the light ; upon his breast lay a 
slender girl of fifteen. She was but half conscious; 
she was dying of smallpox. Here was heroism at its 
/ last and loftiest possibility, its utmost summit; this 
was challenging death in the open field unarmed, with 
all the odds against the challenger, no reward set upon 
the contest, and no admiring world in silks and doth- 
of-gold to gaze and applaud; and yet the king's bear- 
/ ing was as serenely brave as it had always been in 

those cheaper contests where knight meets knight 
in equal fight and clothed in protecting steel. He 
was great now; sublimely great. The rude statues 
of his ancestors in his palace should have an addition 
— I would see to that; and it would not be a mailed 
king killing a giant or a dragon, like the rest, it would 
be a king in commoner's garb bearing death in his 
arms that a peasant mother might look her last upon 
her child and be comforted. 

He laid the girl down by her mother, who poured 
out endearments and caresses from an overflowing 
heart, and one could detect a flickering faint light of 
response in the child's eyes, but that was all. The 
mother hung over her, kissing her, petting her, and 
imploring her to speak, but the lips only moved and 
no sound came. I snatched my liquor flask from 
my knapsack, but the woman forbade me, and ^aid: 

284 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"No — she does not suffer; it is better so. It 
might bring her back to life. None that be so good 
and kind as ye are would do her that cruel hurt. For 
look you — ^what is left to live for? Her brothers are 
gone, her father is gone, her mother goeth, the 
Church's curse is upon her, and none may shelter or 
befriend her even though she lay perishing in the 
road. She is desolate. I have not asked you, good 
heart, if her sister be still on live, here overhead; I 
had no need ; ye had gone back, else, and not left the 
poor thing forsaken — " 

"She lieth at peace," interrupted the king, in a 
subdued voice. 

"I would not change it. How rich is this day in 
happiness ! Ah, my Annis, thou shalt join thy sister 
soon — thou'rt on thy way, and these be merdfttl 
friends that will not hinder." 

And so she fell to murmuring and cooing over the 
girl again, and softly stroking her face and hair, and 
kissing her and calling her by endearing names ; but 
there was scarcely sign of response now in the glazing 
eyes. I saw tears well from the king's eyes, and 
trickle down his face. The woman noticed them, too, 
and said : 

"Ah, I know that sign: thou'st a wife at home, 
poor soul, and you and she have gone hungry to bed, 
many's the time, that the little ones might have your 
crust; you know what poverty is, and the daily 
insults of yoiu- betters, and the heavy hand of the 
Church and the king." 

The king winced tmder this accidental home-shot, 
but kept still; he was learning his part; and he was 

28s 



MARK TWAIN 

playing it well, too, for a pretty dull b^^inner. I 
struck up a diversion. I offered the woman food and 
liquor, but she refused both. She would allow noth- 
ing to come between her and the release of death. 
Then I slipped away and brought the dead child from 
aloft, and laid it by her. This broke her down again, 
and there was another scene that was full of heart- 
break. By and by I made another diversion, and 
beguiled her to sketch her story. 

"Ye know it well yourselves, having suffered it — 
for truly hone of our condition in Britain escape it. 
It is the old, weary tale. We fought and struggled 
and succeeded; meaning by success, that we lived 
and did not die ; more than that is not to be claimed. 
No troubles came that we could not outlive, till this 
year brought them; then came they all at once, as 
one might say, and overwhelmed us. Years ago the 
lord of the manor planted certain fruit-trees on our 
farm; in the best part of it, too — a grievous wrong 
and shame — " 

**But it was his right," interrupted the king. 

* * None denieth that, indeed ; an the law mean any- 
thing, what is the lord's is his, and what is mine is 
his also. Our farm was otu^ by lease, therefore 'twas 
likewise his, to do with it as he would. Some little 
time ago, three of those trees were found hewn 
down. Oxir three grown sons ran frightened to 
report the crime. Well, in his lordship's dungeon 
there they lie, who saith there shall they lie and rat 
till they confess. They have naught to oonfesB* 
being innocent, wherefore there will they remaia 
until they die. Ye know that right well, I 

286 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

Think how this left us; a man, a woman, and two 
children, to gather a crop that was planted by so 
much greater force, yes, and protect it night and day 
from pigeons and prowling animals that be sacred 
and must not be hurt by any of our sort. When my 
lord's crop was nearly ready for the harvest, so also 
was otirs ; when his bell rang to call us to his fields to 
harvest his crop for nothing, he would not allow that 
I and my two girls should cotmt for our three captive 
sons, but for only two of them ; so, for the lacking one 
were we daily fined. All this time our own crop 
was perishing through neglect; and so both the 
priest and his lordship fined us because their shares 
of it were suffering through damage. In the end the 
fines ate up otu* crop — and they took it all; they 
took it all and made us harvest it for them, without 
pay or food, and we starving. Then the worst came 
when I, being out of my mind with hunger and loss 
of my boys, and grief to see my husband and my 
little maids in rags and misery and despair, uttered a 
deep blasphemy — oh! a thousand of them! — ^against 
the Church and the Church's ways. It was ten days 
ago. I had fallen sick with this disease, and it was 
to the priest I said the words, for he was come to 
chide me for lack of due htunility tmder the chasten- 
ing hand of God. He carried my trespass to his 
betters; I was stubborn; wherefore, presently upon 
my head and upon all heads that were dear to me, 
fell the curse of Rome. 

** Since that day we are avoided, shtmned with 
horror. None has come near this hut to know 
whether we live or not. The rest of us were taken 

287 



MARK TWAIN 

down. Then I roused me and got up, as wife and 
mother will. It was little they could have eaten 
in any case; it was less than little they had to eat. 
But there was water, and I gave them that. How 
they craved it! and how they blessed it! But the 
end came yesterday; my strength broke down. 
Yesterday was the last time I ever saw my husband 
and this youngest child alive. I have lain here all 
these hours — these ages, ye may say — Glistening, 
listening for any sound up there that — '* 

She gave a sharp qtdck glance at her eldest 
daughter, then cried out, **0h, my darling!" and 
feebly gathered the stiffening form to her sheltering 
arms. She had recognized the death-rattle. 



CHAPTER XXX 

THE TRAGEDY OP THE MANOR-HOUSE 

AT midnight all was over, and we sat in the 
21. presence of fotir corpses. We covered them 
with such rags as we could find, and started away, 
fastening the door behind us. Their home must be 
these people's grave, for they could not have Chris- 
tian burial, or be admitted to consecrated ground. 
They were as dogs, wild beasts, lepers, and no soul 
that valued its hope of eternal life would throw it 
away by meddling in any sort with these rebuked 
and smitten outcasts. 

We had not moved four steps when I caught a 
sound as of footsteps upon gravel. My heart flew 
to my throat. We must not be seen coming from 
that house. I plucked at the king's robe and we 
drew back and took shelter behind the comer of the 
cabin. 

*'Now we are safe," I said, *'but it was a close 
call — so to speak. If the night had been lighter he 
might have seen us, no doubt, he seemed to be 
so near." 

** Mayhap it is but a beast and not a man at all.'* 

**True. But man or beast, it will be wise to stay 
here a minute and let it get by and out of the way." 

' ' Hark ! It cometh hither. " 

289 



MARK TWAIN 

:» True again. The step was coining toward us — 
straight toward the hut. It must be a beast, then, 
and we might as well have saved our trepidation. 
I was going to step out, but the king laid his hand 
upon my arm. There was a moment of silence, then 
we heard a soft knock on the cabin door. It made me 
shiver. Presently the knock was repeated, and then 
we heard these words in a guarded voice: 

' * Mother ! Father ! Open — ^we have got free, and 
we bring news to pale your cheeks but glad your 
hearts; and we may not tarry, but must fly! And 
— ^but they answer not. Mother! father! — " 

I drew the king toward the other end of the hut 
aftid whispered : 

"Come — ^now we can get to the road." 

The king hesitated, was going to demur; but just 
then we heard the door give way, and knew that 
those desolate men were in the presence of their 
dead. 

**Come, my liege! in a moment they will strike a 
light, and then will follow that which it would t^reak 
your heart to hear." 

He did not hesitate this time. The moment we 
were in the road I ran ; and after a moment he threw 
dignity aside and followed. I did not want to think 
of what was happening in the hut — I couldn't bear 
it; I wanted to drive it out of my mind; so I struck 
into the first subject that lay under that one in my 
mind: 

**I have had the disease those people died of, and 
so have nothing to fear; but if you have not had it 
also—" 

290 



ill 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

He broke in upon me to say he was in trouble, and 
it was his conscience that was troubling him: 

** These young men have got free, they say — ^but 
howf It is not likely that their lord hath set them 

Oh, no, I make no doubt they escaped," 
That is my trouble; I have a fear that this is so, 
and your suspicion doth confirm it, you having the 
same fear." 

"I should not call it by that name though. I do 
suspect that they escaped, but if they did« I am not 
sorry, certainly." 

**I am not sorry, I think — but — " 

"What is it? What is there for one to be tnmbled 
about?" 

**// they did escape, then are we bound in duty to 
lay hands upon them and deliver them again to their 
lord; for it is not seemly that one of his quality 
shoidd suffer a so insolent and high-handed outrage 
from persons of their base degree." 

There it was again. He could see only one side 
of it. He was bom so, educated so, his veins were 
full of ancestral blood that was rotten with this sort 
of unconscious brutality, brought down by inherit- 
ance from a long procession of hearts that had each 
done its share toward poisoning the stream. To 
imprison these men without proof, and starve their 
kindred, was no harm, for they were merely peasants 
and subject to the will and pleasure of their lord, no 
matter what fearful form it mi^t take; but for 
these men to break out of unjust captivity was 
insult and outrage, and a thing not to be counte* 
20 291 



MARK TWAIN 

nanced by any conscientious person who knew Ins 
duty to his sacred caste. 

I worked more than half an hour before I got ^im 
to change the subject — and even then an outside 
matter did it for me. This was a something which 
caught our eyes as we struck the summit of a small 
hill — a red glow, a good way off. 

''That's a fire," said I. 

Fires interested me considerably, because I was 
getting a good deal of an insurance business started, 
and was also training some horses and building some 
steam fire-engines, with an eye to a paid fire depart- 
ment by and by. The priests opposed both my fire 
and life insurance, on the groimd that it was an 
insolent attempt to hinder the decrees of God; and 
if you pointed out that they did not hinder the de- 
crees in the least, but only modified the hard conse- 
quences of them if you took out policies and had luck, 
they retorted that that was gambling against the 
decrees of God, and was just as bad. So they man- 
aged to damage those industries more or less, but I 
got even on my Accident business. As a rule, a 
knight is a lummox, and sometimes even a labrick, 
and hence open to pretty poor argiunents when 
they come glibly from a superstition-monger, but 
even he could see the practical side of a thing once 
in a while; and so of late you couldn't dean up a 
tournament and pile the result without finding one 
of my accident-tickets in every helmet. 

We stood there awhile, in the thick darkness and 
stillness, looking toward the red blur in the dis- 
tance, and trying to make out the meaning of a £ar- 

292 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

away murmtir that rose and fell fitfully on the night. 
Sometimes it swelled up and for a moment seemed 
less remote; but when we were hopefully expecting 
it to betray its cause and nature, it dulled and sank 
again, canying its mystery with it. We started 
down the hill in its direction, and the winding road 
plunged us at once into almost solid darkness — dark- 
ness that was packed and crammed in between two 
tall forest walls. We groped along down for half a 
mile, perhaps, that murmur growing more and more 
distinct all the time, the coming storm threatening 
more and more, with now and then a little shiver of 
wind, a faint show of lightning, and dull grumblings 
of distant thimder. I was in the lead. I ran against 
something — a soft heavy something which gave, 
slightly, to the impulse of my weight; at the same 
moment the lightning glared out, and within a foot 
of my face was the writhing face of a man who was 
hanging from the limb of a tree ! That is, it seemed 
to be writhing, but it was not. It was a gruesome 
sight. Straightway there was an ear-splitting ex- 
plosion of thunder, and the bottom of heaven fell 
out ; the rain poured down in a deluge. No matter, 
we must try to cut this man down, on the chance 
that there might be life in him yet, mustn't we ? The 
Ughtning came quick and sharp now, and the place 
was alternately noonday and midnight. One mo- 
ment the man would be hanging before me in an 
intense light, and the next he was blotted out again 
in the darkness. I told the king we must cut him 
down. The king at once objected. 

''If he hanged himself, he was willing to lose him 

293 



MARK TWAIN 

property to his lord; so let him be. If others hanged 
him, belike they had the right — ^let him hang." 

"But—" 

"But me no buts, but even leave him as he is. 
And for yet another reason. When the lightning 
cometh again — ^there, look abroad." 

Two others hanging, within fifty yards of us ! 

"It is not weather meet for doing useless cota> 
tesies unto dead folk. They are past thanking you. 
Come — ^it is tmprofitable to tarry here.'* 

There was reason in what he said, so we moved 
on. Within the next mile wc 'Counted six more han^^ 
ing forms by the blaze of the lightning, and alto- 
gether it was a grisly excursion. That murmur was 
a murmur no longer, it was a roar; a roar of men's 
voices. A man came flying by now, dimly through 
the darkness, and other men chasing him. They dis- 
appeared. Presently another case of the kind oc- 
curred, and then another and another. Then a 
sudden turn of the road brought us in sight of that 
fire — ^it was a large manor-house, and little or noth- 
ing was left of it — and everjrwhere men were flying 
and other men raging after them in pursuit. 

I warned the king that this was not a safe place 
for strangers. We would better get away firom the 
Hght, imtil matters should improve. We stepped 
back a little, and hid in the edge of the wood. From 
this hiding-place we saw both men and women 
htmted bv the mob. The fearful work went on untS 
nearly dawn. Then, the fire being out and the 
storm spent, the voices and flying footsteps present^ 
ly ceased, and darkness and stillness reigned again. 

294 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

We ventured out, and hurried cautiously away; 
and although we were worn out and sleepy, we kept 
on until we had put this place some miles behind us. 
Then we asked hospitality at the hut of a charcoal- 
burner, and got what was to be had. A woman 
was up and about, but the man was still asleep, on a 
straw shake-down, on the clay floor. The woman 
seemed tmeasy tmtil I explained that we were 
travelers and had lost our way and been wandering 
in the woods all night. She became talkative, then, 
and asked if we had heard of the terrible goings-on 
at the manor-house . of ^Abblasoure. Yes, we had 
heard of them, but what we wanted now was rest 
and sleep. The king broke in: 

**Sell us the house and take yourselves away, for 
we be perilous company, being late come from people 
that died of the Spotted Death." 

It was good of him, but unnecessary. One of the 
commonest decorations of the nation was the waffle- 
iron face. I had early noticed that the woman and 
her husband were both so decorated. She made us 
entirely welcome, and had no fears; and plainly she 
was immensely impressed by the king's proposition; 
for, of course, it was a good deal of an event in her 
life to rtm across a person of the king's humble ap- 
pearance who was ready to buy a man's house for 
the sake of a night's lodging. It gave her a large 
respect for us, and she strained the lean possibilities 
erf her hovel to the utmost to make us comfortable. 

We slept till far into the afternoon, and then got 
up hungry enough to make cotter fare quite palat- 
able to the king, the more particularly as it wa<* 

29S 



MARK TWAIN 

scant in quantity. And also in variety ; it consisted 
solely of onions, salt, and the national black bread 
— ^made out of horse-feed. The woman told us 
about the affair of the evening before. At ten or 
eleven at night, when everybody was in bed, the 
manor-house burst into flames. The country-side 
swarmed to the rescue, and the family were saved, 
with one exception, the master. He did not appear. 
Everybody was frantic over this loss, and two brave 
yeomen sacrificed their lives in ransacking the 
burning house seeking that valuable personage. 
But after a while he was foimd — ^what was left of 
him — ^which was his corpse. It was in a copse three 
himdred yards away, bound, gagged, stabbed in a 
dozen places. 

Who had done this ? Suspicion fell upon a humble 
family in the neighborhood who had been lately 
treated with peculiar harshness by the baron; and 
from these people the suspicion easily extended itself 
to their relatives and familiars. A suspicion was 
enough; my lord's liveried retainers proclaimed an 
instant crusade against these people, and were 
promptly joined by the commimity in general. The 
woman's husband had been active with the mob, and 
had not rettuned home tmtil nearly dawn. He was 
gone now to find out what the general result had 
been. While we were still talking he came back 
from his quest. His report was revolting enough. 
Eighteen persons hanged or butchered, and two 
yeomen and thirteen prisoners lost in the fire. 

'*And how many prisoners were there altogether 
in the vaults?" 

296 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 



"Thirteen." 



Then every one of them was lost?" 

*'Yes, aU." 

*'But the people arrived in time to save the family; 
how is it they could save none of the prisoners?" 

The man looked puzzled, and said: 

** Would one unlock the vaults at such a time? 
Marry, some would have escaped." 

**Then you mean that nobody did unlock them?" 

**None went near them, either to lock or unlock. 
It standeth to reason that the bolts were fast; 
wherefore it was only needful to establish a watch, 
so that if any broke the bonds he might not escape, 
but be taken. None were taken." 

"Natheless, three did escape," said the king, 
**and ye will do well to publish it and set justice 
upon their track, for these murthered the baron and 
fired the house." 

I was just expecting he would come out with that. 
For a moment the man and his wife showed aa 
eager interest in this news and an impatience to go 
out and spread it; then a sudden something else be* 
trayed itself in their faces, and they began to ask 
questions. I answered the questions myself, and 
narrowly watched the effects produced. I was soon 
satisfied that the knowledge of who these three 
prisoners were had somehow changed the atmos- 
phere ; that our hosts' continued eagerness to go and 
spread the news was now only pretended and not 
real. The king did not notice the change, and I was 
glad of that. I worked the conversation around 
toward other details of the night's proceedings, and 

297 



MARK TWAIN 

noted that these people were relieved to have it take 
that direction. 

The painful thing observable about all this bua- 
ness was the alacrity with which this oppressed 
community had turned their cruel hands against 
their own class in the interest of the commoin op- 
pressor. This man and woman seemed to feel that 
in a quarrel between a person of their own dass and 
his lord, it was the natural and proper and rightful 
thing for that poor devil's whole caste to side with 
the master and fight his battle for him, without ever 
stopping to inquire into the rights or wrongs of the 
matter. This man had been out helping to hang his 
neighbors, and had done his work with zeal, and yet 
was aware that there was nothing against them but 
a mere suspicion, with nothing back of it describable 
as evidence, still neither he nor his wife seemed to 
see anything horrible about it. 

This was depressing — to a man with the dream of 
a republic in his head. It reminded me of a time 
thirteen centuries away, when the "poor whites*' of 
our South who were always despised and frequently 
insulted by the slave-lords around them, and who 
owed their base condition simply to the presence of 
slavery in their midst, were yet pusillanimously 
ready to side with the slave-lords in all political 
moves for the upholding and perpetuating of slavery, 
and did also finally shoulder their muskets and pour 
out their lives in an effort to prevent the destruction 
of that very institution which degraded them. And 
there was only one redeeming feature connected 'with 
that pitiful piece of history; and that was, tliak 

298 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

secretly the **poor white'* did detest the slave-lord, 
and did feel his own shame. That feeling was not 
brought to the surface, but the fact that it was there 
and could have been brought out, under favoring 
circumstances, was something — ^in fact, it was 
enough; for it showed that a man is at bottom a 
man, after all, even if it doesn't show on the outside. 

Well, as it turned out, this charcoal-burner was 
just the twin of the Southern **poor white" of the 
far future. The king presently showed impatience, 
and said: 

*'An ye prattle here all the day, justice will mis- 
carry. Think ye the criminals will abide in their 
father's house ? They are fleeing, they are not wait- 
ing. You should look to it that a party of horse 
be set upon their track." 

The woman paled slightly, but quite perceptibly, 
and the man looked flustered and irresolute. I said : 

*'Come, friend, I will walk a little way with you, 
and explain which direction I think they would try 
to take. If they were merely resisters of the gabelle 
or some kindred absurdity I would try to protect 
them from captin*e; but when men murder a person 
of high degree and likewise btun his house, that is 
another matter." 

The last remark was for the king — ^to quiet him. 
On the road the man pulled his resolution together, 
and began the march with a steady gait, but there 
was no eagerness in it. By and by I said: 

**What relation were these men to you — cousins?" 

He turned as white as his layer of charcoal would 
let him, and stopped, trembling. 

299 



f» 



MARK TWAIN 

"Ah, my God, how know ye that?" 

"I didn't know it; it was a chance guess.' 

''Poor lads, they are lost. And good lads they 
were, too." 

''Were you actually going yonder to tell on them?" 

He didn't quite know how to take that; but he 
said, hesitatingly: 

'*Ye-s." 

**Then I think you are a damned scoimdrel!" 

It made him as glad as if I had called him an 
angel. 

**Say the good words again, brother! for surely 
ye mean that ye would not betray me an I failed of 
my duty." 

'*Duty? There is no duty in the matter, except 
the duty to keep still and let those men get away. 
They've done a righteous deed." 

He looked pleased; pleased, and touched with 
apprehension at the same time. He looked up and 
down the road to see that no one was coming, and 
then said in a cautious voice: 

**From what land come you, brother, that you 
speak such perilous words, and seem not to be 
afraid?" 

'*They are not perilous words when spoken to one 
of my own caste, I take it. You would not teH 
anybody I said them?" 

"I? I would be drawn asunder by wild horses 
first." 

**Well, then, let me say my say. I have no fears 
of your repeating it. I think devil's work has been 
done last night upon those innocent poor people. 

300 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

That old baron got only what he deserved. If I 
had my way, all his kind should have the same luck/' 

Pear and depression vanished from the man's 
manner, and gratefidness and a brave animation 
took their place : 

"Even though you be a spy, and your words a 
trap for my undoing, yet are they such refreshment 
that to hear them again and others like to them, I 
would go to the gallows happy, as having had one 
good feast at least in a starved life. And I will say 
my say now, and ye may report it if ye be so minded. 
I helped to hang my neighbors for that it were peril 
to my own life to show lack of zeal in the master's 
cause; the others helped for none other reason. All 
rejoice to-day that he is dead, but all do go about 
seemingly sorrowing, and shedding the hypocrite's 
tear, for in that lies safety. I have said the words, 
I have said the words! the only ones that have ever 
tasted good in my mouth, and the reward of that 
taste is sufficient. Lead on, an ye will, be it even 
to the scaffold, for I am ready." 

There it was, you see. A man is sl man, at 
bottom. Whole ages of abuse and oppression can- 
not crush the manhood clear out of him. Whoever 
thinks it a mistake is himself mistaken. Yes, 
there is plenty good enough material for a republic 
in the most degraded people that ever existed — even 
the Russians; plenty of manhood in them — even in 
the Germans — ^if one could but force it out of its 
timid and suspicious privacy, to overthrow and 
trample in the mud any throne that ever was set up 
and any nobility that ever supported it. We should 

301 



MARK TWAIN 

see oertain things yet, let us hope and believe* First, 
a modified monarchy, till Arthur's days were doiie» 
then the destruction of the throne, nobility abol- 
ished, every member of it boimd out to some useful 
trade, universal suffrage instituted, and the whole 
government placed in the hands of the men and 
women of the nation there to remain. Yes, there 
was no occasion to give up my dream yet awhile. 



/ 
/ 



CHAPTER XXXI 

MARCO 

WE strolled along in a siifficiently indolent 
fashion now, and talked. We must dispose of 
about the amount of time it ought to take to go to the 
little hamlet of Abblasoure and put justice on the 
track of those murderers and get back home again. 
And meantime I had an auxiliary interest which had 
never paled yet, never lost its novelty for me since 
I had been in Arthiir's kingdom: the behavior — ^bom 
of nice and exact subdivisions of caste — of chance 
passers-by toward each other. Toward the shaven 
monk who trudged along with his cowl tilted back 
and the sweat washing down his fat jowls, the coal- 
burner was deeply reverent; to the gentleman he was 
abject ; with the small farmer and the free mechanic 
he was cordial and gossipy; and when a slave passed 
by with a countenance respectfully lowered, this 
chap's nose was in the air — ^he couldn't even see him. 
Well, there are times when one would like to hang 
the whole hirnian race and finish the farce. 

Presently we struck an incident. A small mob of 
half -naked boys and girls came tearing out of the 
woods, scared and shrieking. The eldest among 
them were not more than twelve or fourteen years 
old. They implored help, but they were so beside 

303 



MARK TWAIN 

themselves that we couldn't make out what the 
matter was. However, we plunged into the wood, 
they scurrying in the lead, and the trouble was 
quickly revealed: they had hanged a little fellow 
with a bark rope, and he was kicking and struggling, 
in the process of choking to death. We rescued him, 
and fetched him around. It was some more human 
natiire ; the admiring little folk imitating their elders; 
they were playing mob, and had achieved a success 
which promised to be a good deal more serious than 
they had bargained for. 

It was not a dull excursion for me. I managed to 
put in the time very well. I made various acquaint- 
anceships, and in my quality of stranger was able to 
ask as many questions as I wanted to. A thing which 
naturally interested me, as a statesman, was the 
matter of wages. I picked up what I could tmder 
that head during the afternoon. A man who hasn't 
had much experience, and doesn't think, is apt to 
measure a nation's prosperity or lack of prosperity by 
the mere size of the prevailing wages; if the wages 
be high, the nation is prosperous; if low, it isn't. 
Which is an error. It isn't what sum you get, it's 
how much you can buy with it, that's the important 
thing; and it's that that tells whether your wages are 
high in fact or only high in name. I could remember 
how it was in the time of our great civil war in the 
nineteenth century. In the North a carpenter got 
three dollars a day, gold valuation; in the South he 
got fifty — payable in Confederate shinplasters worth 
a dollar a bushel. In the North a suit of overalls co^ 
three dollars — a, day's wages; in the South it cost 

304 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

seventy-five — ^which was two days' wages. Other 
things were in proportion. Consequently, wages 
were twice as high in the North as they were in the 
South, because the one wage had that much more 
purchasing power than the other had. 

Yes, I made various acquaintances in the hamlet, 
and a thing that gratified me a good deal was to find 
our new coins in circulation — lots of milrays, lots of 
mills, lots of cents, a good many nickels, and some 
silver; all this among the artisans and commonalty 
generally; yes, and even some gold — ^but that was at 
the bank, that is to say, the goldsmith's. I dropped 
in there while Marco, the son of Marco, was haggling 
with a shopkeeper over a quarter of a pound of salt, 
and asked for change for a twenty-dollar gold piece. 
They furnished it — ^that is, after they had chewed the 
piece, and nmg it on the counter, and tried acid on 
it, and asked nle where I got it, and who I was, and 
where I was from, and where I was going to, and 
when I expected to get there, and perhaps a couple of 
hundred more questions; and when they got agroimd, 
I went right on and furnished them a lot of infor- 
mation voluntarily; told them I owned a dog, and 
his name was Watch, and my first wife was a Free 
Will Baptist, and her grandfather was a Prohibi- 
tionist, and I used to know a man who had two 
thumbs on each hand and a wart on the inside of his 
upper lip, and died in the hope of a glorious resurrec- 
tion, and so on, and so on, and so on, till even that 
hungry village questioner began to look satisfied, and 
also a shade put out ; but he had to respect a man of 
my financial strength, and so he didn't give me any 

30s 



MARK TWAIN 

Up, but I noticed he took it out of his underlings, 
which was a perfectly natural thing to do. Yes, they 
changed my twenty, but I judged it strained the bank 
a httle, which was a thing to be expected, for it was 
the same as walking into a paltry village store in the 
nineteenth century and requiring the boss of it to 
change a two-thousand-doUar bill for you all of a 
sudden. He could do it, maybe; but at the same 
time he would wonder how a small farmer happened 
to be carrying so much money around in his pocket; 
which was probably this goldsmith's thought, too; 
for he followed me to the door and stood there gating 
after me with reverent admiration. 

Our new money was not only handsomdy drcu* 
latiog, but its language was already g^bly in use; 
that is to say, people had dropped the names of the 
former moneys, and spoke of things as being worth 
so many dollars or cents or mills or milrays now. 
It was very gratifying. We were progressing, that 
was sure. 

I got to know several master mechanics, but about 
the most interesting fellow among them was the 
blacksmith, Dowley. He was a live man and a 
brisk talker, and had two journeymen and three 
apprentices, and was doing a raging business. In 
fact, he was getting rich, hand over fist, and was 
vastly respected. Marco was very proud of having 
such a man for a friend. He had taken me there os- 
tensibly to let me see the big establishment whidi 
bought so much of his charcoal, but really to let me 
see what easy and almost familiar terms he was oa 
with this great man. Dowley and I fratemissed at 

306 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

onoe; I had had jiist such picked men, splendid 
fellows, under me in the Colt Arms Factory. I was 
bound to see more of him, so I invited him to come 
out to Marco's Sunday, and dine with us. Marco 
was appalled, and held his breath; and when the 
grandee accepted, he was so grateful that he almost 
forgot to be astonished at the condescension. 

Marco's joy was exuberant — ^but only for a mo- 
ment ; then he grew thoughtful, then sad ; and when 
he heard me tell Dowley I should have Dickon, the 
boss mason, and Smug, the boss wheelwright, out 
there, too, the coal-dust on his face turned to chalk, 
and he lost his grip. But I knew what was the mat- 
ter with him; it was the expense. He saw ruin before 
him; he judged that his financial days were num- 
bered. However, on our way to invite the others, I 
said: 

**You must allow me to have these friends come; 
and you must also allow me to pay the costs." 

His face cleared, and he said with spirit: 

*'But not all of it, not all of it. Ye cannot well 
bear a burden like to this alone." 

I stopped him, and said: 

'*Now let's understand each other on the spot, 
old friend. I am only a farm bailiflf, it is true; but 
I am not poor, nevertheless. I have been very for- 
tunate this year — ^you would be astonished to know 
how I have thriven. I tell you the honest truth when 
I say I could squander away as many as a dozen 
feasts like this and never care that for the expense!'* 
and I snapped my fingers. I could see tnyseH rise a 
foot at a time in Marco's estimation, and when I 

21 307 



MARK TWAIN 

fetched out those last words I was become a very 
tower for style and altitude. "So you see, you must 
let me have my way. You can't contribute a cent to 
this orgy, that's settled" 

''It's grand and good of you — " 

'*No, it isn't. You've opened your house to Jones 
and me in the most generous way ; Jones was remark- 
ing upon it to-day, just before you came back from 
the village; for although he wouldn't be likely to say 
such a thing to you — ^because Jones isn't a talker, and 
is diffident in society — ^he has a good heart and a 
grateful, and knows how to appreciate it when he is 
well treated; yes, you and your wife have been very 
hospitable toward us — " 

**Ah, brother, 'tis nothing — such hospitality T* 

'*But it is something; the best a man has, freely 
given, is always something, and is as good as a prince 
can do, and ranks right along beside it — for even a 
prince can but do his best. And so we'll shop arotmd 
and get up this layout now, and don't you worry 
about the expense. I'm one of the worst spendthrifts 
that ever was bom. Why, do you know, sometimes 
in a single week I spend — ^but never mind about that 
— ^you'd never believe it anyway." 

And so we went gadding along, dropping in here 
and there, pricing things, and gossiping with the 
shopkeepers about the riot, and now and then run- 
ning across pathetic reminders of it, in the persons of 
shunned and tearful and houseless remnants of fami- 
lies whose homes had been taken from them and 
their parents butchered or hanged. The raiment of 
Marco and his wife was of coarse tow-linen and linsey* 

308 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

woolsey respectively, and resembled township maps, 
it being made up pretty exclusively of patches which 
had been added, township by township, in the course 
of five or six years, until hardly a hand's-breadth of 
the original garments was surviving and present. 
Now I wanted to fit these people out with new suits, 
on accoimt of that swell company, and I didn't know 
just how to get at it with delicacy, until at last it 
struck me that as I had already been liberal in 
inventing wordy gratitude for the king, it would be 
just the thing to back it up with evidence of a sub- 
stantial sort; so I said: 

''And Marco, there's another thing which you 
must permit — out of kindness for Jones — ^because you 
wouldn't want to offend him. He was very anxious 
to testify his appreciation in some way, but he is so 
diffident he couldn't venture it himself, and so he 
begged me to buy some little things and give them to 
you and Dame Phyllis and let him pay for them with- 
out your ever knowing they came from him — ^you 
know how a delicate person feels about that sort of 
thing — ^and so I said I would, and we would keep 
mum. Well, his idea was, a new outfit of clothes for 
you both — " 

'*0h, it is wastefulness! It may not be, brother, 
it may not be. Consider the vastness of the sum — " 

' * Hang the vastness of the sum ! Try to keep quiet 
for a moment, and see how it would seem; a body 
can't get in a word edgeways, you talk so much. You 
ought to cure that, Marco; it isn't good form, you 
know, and it will grow on you if you don't check it. 
Yes, we'll step in here now and piioe this man's stuff 

309 



MARK TWAIN 

— and don't forget to remember to not let on to Jones 
that you know he had anything to do with it. You 
can't think how curiously sensitive and proud he is. 
He's a farmer — pretty fairly well-to-do farmer — and 
I'm his bailiff; but — ^the imagination of that man! 
Why, sometimes when he forgets himself and gets to 
blowing off, you'd think he was one of the swells of 
the earth; and you might listen to him a hundred 
years and never take him for a farmer — especially if 
he talked agriculture. He thinks he's a Sheol of a 
farmer; thinks he's old Grayback from Wayback; 
but between you and me privately he don't know as 
much about farming as he does about running a king- 
dom — stm, whatever he talks about, you want to 
drop your under-jaw and listen, the same as if you 
had never heard such incredible wisdom in all your 
life before, and were afraid you might die before you 
got enough of it. That will please Jones." 

It tickled Marco to the marrow to hear about such 
an odd character; but it also prepared him for acci- 
dents ; and in my experience when you travel with a 
king who is letting on to be something else and can't 
remember it more than about half the time, you can't 
take too many precautions. 

This was the best store we had come across jret; 
it had everything in it, in small quantities, from 
anvils and dry-goods all the way down to fish and 
pinchbeck jewelry. I concluded I would bunch my 
whole invoice right here, and not go pricing around 
any more. So I got rid of Marco, by sending him 
off to invite the mason and the wheelwright, which 
left the field free to me. For I never care to do a 

310 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

thing in a qtiiet way; it's got to be theatrical or 1 
don't take any interest in it. I showed up money 
enough, in a careless way, to corral the shopkeeper's 
respect, and then I wrote down a list of the things I 
wanted, and handed it to him to see if he could read 
it. He could, and was proud to show that he could. 
He said he had been educated by a priest, and could 
both read and write. He ran it through, and re- 
marked with satisfaction that it was a pretty heavy 
bill. Well, and so it was, for a little concern like that. 
I was not only providing a swell dinner, but some 
odds and ends of extras. I ordered that the things 
be carted out and delivered at the dwelling of Marco, 
the son of Marco, by Saturday evening, and send me 
the bill at dinner-time Sunday. He said I could de- 
pend upon his promptness and exactitude, it was the 
rule of the house. He also observed that he would 
throw in a couple of miUer-gtms for the Marcos 
gratis — that everybody was using them now. He 
had a mighty opinion of that clever device. I 
said: 

* * And please fill them up to the middle mark, too ; 
and add that to the bill." 

He would, with pleasure. He filled them, and I 
took them with me. I couldn't venture to tell him 
that the miller-gim was a little invention of my own, 
and that I had officially ordered that every shop- 
keeper in the kingdom keep them on hand and sell 
them at government price — ^which was the merest 
trifle, and the shopkeeper got that, not the govern- 
ment. We furnished them for nothing. 

The king had hardly missed us when we got back 

3" 



MARK TWAIN 

at nightfall. He had early dropped again into his 
dream of a grand invasion of Gaul with the whole 
strength of his kingdom at his back, and the afternoon 
had slipped away without his ever coming to himself 
again. 



CHAPTER XXXII 
dowlky's humiliation 

WELL, when that cargo arrived toward sunset, 
Saturday afternoon, I had my hands full to 
keep the Marcos from fainting. They were sure 
Jones and I were ruined past help, and they blamed 
themselves as accessories to this bankruptcy. You 
see, in addition to the dinner materials, which called 
for a sufficiently roimd sum, I had bought a lot of 
extras for the future comfort of the family: for in- 
stance, a big lot of wheat, a delicacy as rare to the 
tables of their class as was ice-cream to a hermit's; 
also a sizable deal dinner-table; also two entire 
pounds of salt, which was another piece of extrava- 
gance in those people's eyes; also crockery, stools, 
the clothes, a small cask of beer, and so on. I in- 
structed the Marcos to keep quiet about this siunptu- 
ousness, so as to give me a chance to siuprise the 
guests and show off a little. Concerning the new 
clothes, the simple couple were like children; they 
were up and down, all night, to see if it wasn't nearly 
daylight, so that they could put them on, and they 
were into them at last as much as an hour before 
dawn was due. Then their pleasure — ^not to say 
deliriiun— was so fresh and novel and inspiring that 
the sight of it paid me well for the interruptions which 

313 



MARK TWAIN 

my sleep had suffered. The king had slept just as 
usual — ^like the dead. The Marcos could not thank 
him for their clothes, that being forbidden; but they 
tried every way they could think of to make him 
see how grateful they were. Which all went for 
nothing: he didn't notice any change. 

It turned out to be one of those rich and rare fall 
days which is just a Jime day toned down to a degree 
where it is heaven to be out of doors. Towaid noon 
the guests arrived, and we assembled under a great 
tree and were soon as sociable as old acquaintances. 
Even the king's reserve melted a little, though it was 
some little trouble to him to adjust himself to the 
name of Jones along at first. I had asked him to try 
to not forget that he was a farmer; but I had also 
considered it prudent to ask him to let the thing 
stand at that, and not elaborate it any. Because he 
was just the kind of person you could depend on to 
spoil a little thing like that if you didn't warn him, 
his tongue was so handy, and his spirit so willing, 
and his information so uncertain. 

Dowley was in fine feather, and I early got him 
started, and then adroitly worked him around onto 
his own history for a text and himself for a hero, and 
then it was good to sit there and hear him hum. 
Self-made man, you know. They know how to talk. 
Tliey do deserve more credit than any other breed of 
men, yes, that is true; and they are among the very 
first to find it out, too. He told how he had begun 
life an orphan lad without money and without friends 
able to help him; how he had lived as the slaves of 
the meanest master lived; how his day's work was 

314 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

from sixteen to eighteen hours long, and yielded him 
only enough black bread to keep him in a half -fed 
condition; how his faithful endeavors finally at- 
tracted the attention of a good blacksmith, who camq 
near knocking him dead with kindness by suddenly 
offering, when he was totally tinprepared, to take 
him as his bound apprentice for nine years and give 
him board and clothes and teach him the trade — or 
"mystery" as Dowley called it. That was his first 
great rise, his first gorgeous stroke of fortune; and 
you saw that he couldn't yet speak of it without a 
sort of eloquent wonder and delight that such a 
gilded promotion should have fallen to the lot of a 
common human being. He got no new clothing 
dtuing his apprenticeship, but on his graduation day 
his master tricked him out in spang-new tow-linens 
and made him feel unspeakably rich and fine. 

''I remember me of that day!" the wheelwright 
sang out, with enthusiasm. 

**And I likewise!" cried the mason. **I would not 
believe they were thine own; in faith I could not." 

"Nor other !" shouted Dowley, with sparkling eyes. 
**I was like to lose my character, the neighbors 
wending I had mayhap been stealing. It was a 
great day, a great day ; one f orgetteth not days like 
that." 

Yes, and his master was a fine man, and prosi)er- 
ous, and always had a great feast of meat twice in 
the year, and with it white bread, true wheaten 
bread; in fact, lived like a lord, so to speak. And 
in time Dowley succeeded to the business and mar- 
ried the daughter. 

31s 



MARK TWAIN 



l< 



'And now consider what is come to pass/' said 
he, impressively. **Two times in every month there 
is fresh meat upon my table." He made a pause 
here, to let that fact sink home, then added — "and 
eight times salt meat." 

"It is even true," said the wheelwright, with bated 
breath. 

**I know it of mine own knowledge," said the 
mason, in the same reverent fashion. 

* * On my table appeareth white bread every Sunday 
in the year," added the master smith, with solemnity. 
**I leave it to your own consciences, friends, if this is 
not also true?" 

"By my head, yes," cried the mason. 

"I can testify it — and I do," said the wheel* 
Wright. 

"And as to fiuniture, ye shall say yotu'selves what 
mine eqmpment is." He waved his hand in fine 
gesture of granting frank and tmhampered freedom 
of speech, and added: "Speak as ye are moved; 
speak as ye would speak an I were not here." 

"Ye have five stools, and of the sweetest work- 
manship at that, albeit yotu* family is but three/* 
said the wheelwright, with deep respect. 

"And six wooden goblets, and six platters of wood 
and two of pewter to eat and drink from withal," 
said the mason, impressively. "And I say it as know- 
ing God is my judge, and we tarry not here alway» 
but must answer at the last day for the things said 
in the body, be they false or be they sooth." 

"Now ye know what manner of man I am, brother 
Jones," said the smith, with a fine and friendly oon- 

316 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

descension, "and doubtless ye would look to find 
me a man jealous of his due of respect and but sparing 
of outgo to strangers till their rating and quality be 
assured, but trouble yourself not, as concerning that; 
wit ye well ye shall find me a man that regardeth not 
these matters but is willing to receive any he as his 
fellow and equal that carrieth a right heart in his 
body, be his worldly estate howsoever modest. And 
in token of it, here is my hand; and I say with my 
own mouth we are equals — equals" — and he smiled 
arotmd on the company with the satisfaction of a 
god who is doing the handsome and gracious thing 
and is quite well aware of it. 

The king took the hand with a poorly disguised 
reluctance, and let go of it as willingly as a lady lets 
go of a fish; all of which had a good effect, for it was 
mistaken for an embarrassment natural to one who 
was being beamed upon by greatness. 

The dame brought out the table now, and set it 
under the tree. It caused a visible stir of surprise, 
it being brand new and a sumptuous article of deal. 
But the surprise rose higher still when the dame, 
with a body oozing easy indifference at every pore, 
but eyes that gave it all away by absolutely flaming 
with vanity, slowly unfolded an actual simon-ptu-e 
table-cloth and spread it. That was a notch above 
even the blacksmith*s domestic grandeurs, and it hit 
him hard ; you could see it. But Marco was in Para- 
dise; you could see that, too. Then the dame 
brought two fine new stools — ^whewl that was a sen- 
sation; it was visible in the eyes of every guest. 
Then she brought two more — as calmly as she could. 

317 



MARK TWAIN 

Sensation again — ^with awed murmurs. Again she 
brought two — ^walking on air, she was so proud. The 
guests were petrified, and the mason muttered: 

''There is that about earthly pomps which doth 
ever move to reverence." 

As the dame turned away, Marco couldn^t help 
slapping on the climax while the thing was hot; so 
he said with what was meant for a languid composure 
but was a poor imitation of it : 

"These suflfice; leave the rest." 

So there were more yet! It was a fine effect. I 
couldn't have played the hand better myself. 

Prom this out, the madam piled up the surprises 
with a rush that fired the general astonishment up 
to a hundred and fifty in the shade, and at the same 
time paralyzed expression of it down to gasped 
**Oh's" and **Ah's," and mute upliftings of hands 
and eyes. She fetched crockery — ^new, and plenty 
of it; new wooden goblets and other table furniture; 
and beer, fish, chicken, a goose, eggs, roast beef, roast 
mutton, a ham, a small roast pig, and a wealth of 
genuine white wheaten bread. Take it by and large, 
that spread laid everything far and away in the shade 
that ever that crowd had seen before. And while 
they sat there just simply stupefied with wonder and 
awe, I sort of waved my hand as if by accident, and 
the storekeeper's son emerged from space and said 
he had come to collect. 

''That's all right," I said, indifferently. "Whatis 
the amount? Give us the items." 

Then he read off this bill, while those three ^^flffftd 
men listened, and serene waves of satisfaction rolkd 

318 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

over ciy soul and alternate waves of terror and admi- 
ration surged over Marco's : 

2 pounds salt soo 

8 dozen pints beer, in the wood 800 

3 bushelsv wheat 2,700 

2 poimdsifish 100 

3 hens 400 

I goose 400 

3 dozen eggs 150 

I roast of beef . 450 

I roast of mutton 400 

I ham 800 

1 sucking pig 500 

2 crockery dinner-sets 6,000 

2 men's suits and tmderweax 2,800 

I stuff and i linsey-woolsey gown and underwear . 1,600 

8 wooden goblets 800 

Various table furniture 10,000 

1 deal table 3,000 

8 stools 4,000 

2 miller-guns, loaded 3>ooo 

He ceased. There was a pale and awful silence. 
Not a limb stirred. Not a nostril betrayed the 
passage of breath. 

'*Is that all?" I asked, in a voice of the most per- 
fect calmness. 

'*A11, fair sir, save that certain matters of light 
moment are placed together under a head hight 
sundries. If it would Hke you, I will sepa — " 

**It is of no consequence," I said, accompanying 
the words with a gesture of the most utter indiffer- 
ence; ''give me the grand total, please." 

The clerk leaned against the tree to stay himself, 
and said: 

319 



if^E 



MARK TWAIN 

"Thirty-nine thousand one hundred and 6£iiy mil- 
rays 1" 

The wheelwright fell off his stool, the/ others 
grabbed the table to save themselves, and tjiere was 
a deep and general ejaculation of: / 

"God be with us in the day of disastem" 

The clerk hastened to say: / 

"My father chargeth me to say he ca^ot honor- 
ably require you to pay it all at this time, and there- 
fore only prayeth you — " J 

I paid no more heed than if it were/ the Idle breeze, 
but, with an air of indifference amoianting almost to 
weariness, got out my money and tossed four dollars 
onto the table. Ah, you should havJe seen them stare! 

The clerk was astonished and charmed. He asked 
me to retain one of the dollars as'security, until he 
could go to town and — I interrupted: 

"What, and fetch back nine cents? Nonsense! 
Take the whole. Keep the charge." 

There was an amaaed murmur to this effect: 

"Verily this being is made of money! He throweth 
it away even as it were dirt." 

The blacksmith was a crushed man. 

The clerk took his money and reeled away drunk 
with fortune. I said to Marco and his wife : 

"Good folk, here is a little trifle for you" — ^hand- 
ing the miller-guns as if it were a matter of no conse- 
quence, though each of them contained fifteen cents 
in solid cash; and while the poor creatures went to 
pieces with astonishment and gratitude, I turned to 
the others and said as calmly as one would ask the 
time of day: 

390 I 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"Well, if we are all ready, I judge the dinner is. 
Come, fall to." 

Ah, well, it was immense; yes, it was a daisy. I 
don't know that I ever put a situation together 
better, or got happier spectacular effects out of the 
materials available. The blacksmith — ^well, he was 
simply mashed. Land! I wouldn't have felt what 
that man was feeling, for anything in the worid. 
Here he had been blowing and bragging about his 
grand meat-feast twice a year, and his fresh meat 
twice a month, and his salt meat twice a week, and 
his whitfe bread every Simday the year roimd — ^all 
for a family of three; the entire cost for the year 
not above 69.2.6 (sixty-nine cents, two mills, and 
six milrays), and all of a sudden here comes along a 
man who slashes out nearly four dollars on a single 
blow-out; and not only that, but acts as if it made 
him tired to handle such small simis. Yes, Dowley 
was a good deal wilted, and shnmk up and collapsed ; 
he had the aspect of a bladder-balloon that's been 
stepped on by a cow. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

SIXTH-CENTURY POLITICAL ECONOICT 

HOWEVER, I made a dead set at him, and befora 
the first third of the dinner was reached, I had 
him happy again. It was easy to do — in a country 
of ranks and castes. You see, in a country where 
they have ranks and castes, a man isn't ever a man, 
he is only part of a man, he can't ever get his full 
growth. You prove your superiority over him in 
station, or rank, or fortune, and that's the end of it-^ 
he knuckles down. You can't insult him after that. 
No, I don't mean quite that ; of coiuse you can insult 
him, I only mean it's difiSicult ; and so, unless you've 
got a lot of useless time on your hands it doesn't pay 
to try. I had the smith's reverence now, because I 
was apparently immensely prosperous and rich; I 
could have had his adoration if I had had some 
little gimcrack title of nobility. And not only his, 
but any commoner's in the land, though he were the 
mightiest production of all the ages, in intellect, 
worth, and character, and I bankrupt in all three. 
This was to remain so, as long as England should 
exist in the earth. With the spirit of prophecy upon 
me, I could look into the future and see her erect 
statues and monuments to her imspeakable Georges 
and other royal and noble clothes-horses, and leave 

322 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

unhonored the creators of this world — after God — 
Gutenberg, Watt, Arkwright, Whitney, Morse, 
Stephenson, Bell. 

The king got his cargo aboard, and then, the talk 
not tiiming upon battle, conquest, or iron-dad duel, 
he dulled down to drowsiness and went off to take a 
nap. Mrs. Marco cleared the table, placed the beer- 
keg handy, and went away to eat her dinner of leav- 
ings in humble privacy, and the rest of us soon drifted 
into matters near and dear to the hearts of oiu* sort — 
business and wages, of course. At a first glance, 
things appeared to be exceeding prosperous in this 
little tributary kingdom — ^whose lord was King Bag- 
demagus — ^as compared with the state of things in 
my own region. They had the ** protection" system 
in full force here, whereas we were working along 
down toward free trade, by easy stages, and were 
now about half-way. Before long, Dowley and I were 
doing all the talking, the others hungrily Ustening. 
Dowley warmed to his work, snuffed an advantage in 
the air, and began to put questions which he con- 
sidered pretty awkward ones for me, and they did 
have something of that look : 

**In yoiu" country, brother, what is the wage of a 
master bailiff, master hind, carter, shepherd, swine- 
herd?" 

** Twenty-five milrays a day; that is to say, a 
quarter of a cent." 

The smith's face beamed with joy. He said: 

**With us they are allowed the double of it! And 
what may a mechanic get — carpenter, dauber, mason, 
painter, blacksmith, wheelwright, and the like?" 

22 323 



MARK TWAIN 

**C)n the average, fifty milrays; half a cent a day." 

"Ho-ho! With us they are allowed a htmdi^l 
With us any good mechanic is allowed a cent a day! 
I count out the tailor, but not the others — ^theyare 
all allowed a cent a day, and in driving times they get 
more — ^yes, up to a himdred and ten and even fifteen 
milrays a day. I've paid a hundred and fifteen my- 
self, within the week. 'Rah for protection — ^to Shedl 
with free trade!" 

And his face shone upon the company like a sun* 
burst. But I didn't scare at all. I rigged up my 
pile-driver, and allowed myself fifteen minutes to 
drive him into the earth — drive him cM in — drive 
him in till not even the curve of his skull should 
show above-groimd. Here is the way I started in on 
him. I asked: 

**What do you pay a pound for salt?" 

"A hundred milrays." 

*'We pay forty. What do you pay for beef and 
mutton — when you buy it?" That was a neat hit; 
it made the color come. 

*'It varieth somewhat, but not much; one may say 
seventy-five milrays the pound." 

* * We pay thirty-three. What do you pay for eggs V* 

** Fifty milrays the dozen." 

'*We pay twenty. What do you pay for beer?" 

* ' It costeth us eight and one-half milrajrs the pint," 

** We get it for four; twenty-five bottles for a cent; 
What do you pay for wheat?" 

**At the rate of nine hundred milrays the bushel." 

"We pay four himdred. What do you pay for a 
man's tow-linen suit?" 

324 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 



"Thirteen cents." 



We pay six. What do you pay for a stuff gown 
for the wife of the laborer or the mechanic?" 

'*We pay eight cents, four mills." 

"Well, observe the difference: you pay eight cents 
and four mills, we pay only four cents." I prepared 
now to sock it to him. I said: "Look here, dear 
friend, what's become of your high wages you were 
bragging so about a few minutes ago?'' — ^and I looked 
around on the company with placid satisfaction, for I 
had slipped up on him gradually and tied him hand 
and foot, you see, without his ever noticing that he 
was being tied at all. "What's become of those 
noble high wages of yours? — I seem to have 
knocked the stuffing all out of them, it appears 
to me." 

But if you will believe me, he merely looked sur- 
prised, that is all! He didn't grasp the situaition at 
all, didn't know he had walked into a trap, didn't 
discover that he was in a trap. I could have shot 
him, from sheer vexation. With cloudy eye and a 
struggling intellect he fetched this out: 

"Marry, I seem not to imderstand. It is proved 
that our wages be double thine; how then may it be 
that thou'st knocked therefrom the stuffing? — an I 
miscall not the wonderly word, this being the first 
time under grace and providence of God it hath been 
granted me to hear it." 

Well, I was stunned; partly with this unlooked-for 
stupidity on his part, and partly because his fellows 
so manifestly sided with him and were of his mind — 
if you flight call it mind. My position was simple 

32s 



MARK TWAIN 

enough, plain enough; how could it ever be simpli- 
fied more? However, I must try: 

*'Why, look here, brother Dowley, don*t you see? 
Your wages are merely higher than ours in namet not 
in/oc/." 

**Hear him! They are the double — ye have con- 
fessed it yourself." 

"Yes-yes, I don't deny that at all. But that's got 
nothing to do with it; the amount of the wages in 
mere coins, with meaningless names attached to them 
to know them by, has got nothing to do with it. The 
thing is, how much can you buy with your wages? — 
that's the idea. While it is true that with you a 
good mechanic is allowed about three dollars and a 
half a year, and with us only about a dollar and 
seventy-five — ' ' 

"There — ^ye're confessing it again, ye*re confess- 
ing it again!" 

"Confoimd it, I've never denied it, I tell you! 
What I say is this. With us half a dollar buys 
more than a dollar buys with you — and therefore it 
stands to reason and the commonest kind of 
sense, that our wages are higher than yours," 

He looked dazed, and said, despairingly: 

"Verily, I cannot make it out. YeVejust^aicJours 
the higher, and with the same breath ye take it back." 

"Oh, great Scott, isn't it possible to get such a 
simple thing through your head? Now look here — 
let me illustrate. We pay four cents for a woman's 
stuff gown, you pay eight cents four mills, which is 
four mills more than double. What do you allow a 
laboring- woman who works on a farm?" 

326 



viiiikif tji 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

"Two mills a day." 

"Very good; we allow but half as much; we pay 
her only a tenth of a cent a day; and — " 
** Again ye're conf — " 

"Wait! Now, you see, the thing is very simple; 
this time you'll understand it. For instance, it takes 
your woman forty-two days to earn her gown, at two 
mills a day — seven weeks' work; but ours earns hers 
in forty days — ^two days short of seven weeks. Your 
woman has a gown, and her whole seven weeks' 
wages are gone; ours has a gown, and two days' 
wages left, to buy something else with. There — now 
you understand it!" 

He looked — ^well, he merely looked dubious, it's 
the most I can say ; so did the others. I waited — to 
let the thing work. Dowley spoke at last — ^and be- 
trayed the fact that he actually hadn't gotten away 
from his rooted and groimded superstitions yet. He 
said, with a trifle of hesitancy : 

"But — ^but — ^ye cannot fail to grant that two mills 
a day is better than one." 

Shucks! Well, of course, I hated to give it up. 
So I chanced another flyer: 

"Let us suppose a case. Suppose one of your 
journeymen goes out and buys the following articles : 

"i pound of salt* 
I dozen eggs; 
I dozen pints of beer; 
I bushel of wheat ; 
I tow-linen suit ; 
S pounds of beef; 
5 pounds of mutton. 
327 



MARK TWAIN 

"The lot will cost him thirty-two cents. It takes 
him thirty-two working days to earn the money — 
five weeks and two days. Let him come to us and 
work thirty-two days at half the wages; he can buy 
all those things for a shade imder fourteen and a half 
cents ; they will cost him a shade under twenty-nine 
days' work, and he will have about half a week's 
wages over. Carry it through the year; he would 
save nearly a week's wages every two months, your 
man nothing; thus saving five or six weeks' wages 
in a year, your man not a cent. Now I reckon you 
understand that 'high wages' and *low wages' are 
phrases that don't mean anything in the world until 
you find out which of them will huy the most!'* 

It was a crusher. 

But, alas ! it didn't crush. No, I had to give it up. 
What those people valued was high wages; it didn't 
seem to be a matter of any consequence to them 
whether the high wages would buy anything or not. 
They stood for ** protection," and swore by it, which 
was reasonable enough, because interested parties had 
gulled them into the notion that it was protection 
which had created their high wages. I proved to 
them that in a quarter of a century their wages had 
advanced but thirty per cent., while the cost of living 
had gone up one himdred; and that with us, in a 
shorter time, wages had advanced forty per cent. 
while the cost of living had gone steadily down. But 
it didn't do any good. Nothing could unseat their 
strange beliefs. 

Well, I was smarting under a sense of defeat. Un- 
deserved defeat, but what of that? That didn't 

328 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

soften the smart any. And to think of the drciim- 
stances ! The first statesman of the age, the capablest 
man, the best-informed man in the entire world, the 
loftiest uncrowned head that had moved through the 
clouds of any political firmament for centuries, sit- 
ting here apparently defeated in argument by an 
ignorant country blacksmith! And I could see that 
those others were sorry for me! — ^which made me 
blush till I could smell my whiskers scorching. Put 
yourself in my place; feel as mean as I did, as 
ashamed as I felt — ^wouldn't you have struck below 
the belt to get even? Yes, you would; it is simply 
human nature. Well, that is what I did. I am not 
trying to justify it; I'm only saying that I was mad» 
and anybody would have done it. 

Well, when I make up my mind to hit a man, I 
don't plan out a love-tap; no, that isn't my way; as 
long as I'm going to hit him at all, I'm going to hit 
him a lifter. And I don't jimip at him all of a sudden, 
and risk making a blundering half-way business of 
it; no, I get away off yonder to one. side, and work 
up on him gradually, so that he never suspects that 
I'm going to hit him at all; and by and by, all in a 
flash, he's flat on his back, and he can't tell for the 
life of him how it all happened. That is the way I 
went for brother Dowley. I started to talking lazy 
and comfortable, as if I was just talking to pass 
the time; and ^he oldest man in the world couldn't 
have taken the bearings of my starting-place and 
guessed where I was going to fetch up: 

'*Boys, there's a good many curious things about 
law, and custom, and usage, and all that sort <^ 

329 



MARK TWAIN 

thing, when you oome to look at it; yes, and about 
the drift and progress of htunan opinion and move- 
ment, too. There are written laws — ^they perish; but 
there are also unwritten laws — ^^/t^ are eternal. Take 
the unwritten law of wages: it says they've got to 
advance, little by little, straight through the cen- 
turies. And notice how it works. We know what 
wages are now, here and there and yonder; we strike 
an average, and say that's the wages of to-day. We 
know what the wages were a hundred years ago, and 
what they were two hundred years ago; that's as far 
back as we can get, but it suffices to give us the law 
of progress, the measure and rate of the periodical 
augmentation; and so, without a document to hdp 
us, we can come pretty dose to determining what the 
wages were three and four and five hundred years 
ago. Good, so far. Do we stop there? No. We 
stop looking backward; we face around and apply 
the law to the future. My friends, I can tell you 
what people's wages are going to be at any date in 
the future you want to know, for hundreds and hun- 
dreds of years." 

"What, goodman, what!" 

"Yes. In seven hundred years wages wiH have 
risen to six times what they are now, here in your 
region, and farm-hands will be allowed three cents 
a day, and mechanics six." 

"I would I might die now and live then!" inter- 
rupted Smug, the wheelwright, with a fine avaricious 
glow in his eye. 

"And that isn't all; they'll get their board besides 
— such as it is: it won't bloat them. Two hundred 

330 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

and fifty years later — pay attention now — a me- 
chanic's wages will be — mind you, this is law, not 
guesswork; a mechanic's wages will then be twenty 
cents a day!" 

There was a general gasp of awed astonishment. 
Dickon the mason murmured, with raised eyes and 
hands: 

"More than three weeks' pay for one day's work!" 

"Riches! — of a truth, yes, riches!" muttered 
Marco, his breath coming quick and short, with ex- 
citement. 

* ' Wages will keep on rising, little by little, little by 
little, as steadily as a tree grows, and at the end of 
three hundred and forty years more there'll be at 
least one coimtry where the mechanic's average wage 
will be two hundred cents a day!" 

It knocked them absolutely dtmib ! Not a man of 
them could get his breath for upward of two min- 
utes. Then the coal-burner said, prayerfully: 

"Might I but live to see it!" 

"It is the income of an earl!" said Smug. 

"An earl, say ye?" said Dowley; "ye could say 
more than that and speak no lie; there's no earl in 
the realm of Bagdemagus that hath an income like to 
that. Income of an earl — ^mf ! it's the income of an 
angel!" 

"Now, then, that is what is going to happen as 
regards wages. In that remote day, that man will 
earn, with one week's work, that bill of goods which 
it takes you upward ot fifty weeks to earn now. Some 
other pretty surprising things are going to happen, 
too. Brother Dowley, who is it that determines, 

331 



MARK TWAIN 

every spring, what the particular wage of each kind of 
mechanic, laborer, and servant shall be for that year?" 

''Sometimes the courts, sometimes the town coun- 
cil ; but most of all, the magistrate. Ye may say, in 
general terms, it is the magistrate that fixes the 
wages." 

' * Doesn't ask any of those poor devils to help him 
fix their wages for them, does he?" 

**Hm! That were an idea! The master that's to 
pay him the 'in-./^j^^ ',. the one that's rightly con- 
cerned in that matter, .ye will notice." 

"Yes — ^but I.. thought the other man might have 
riome Uttle trifle at stake in it, too; and even his wife 
and children, poor lOreaitures. The masters are these : 
nobles, rich men, the prosperous generally. These 
few, who do no work, determine what pay the vast 
hive shall have who do work. You see? They're a 
'combine' — ^a trade-imion, to coin a new phrase — 
who band themselves together to force their lowly 
brother to take what they choose to give. Thirteen 
htmdred years hence — so says the imwritten law — 
the 'combine' will be the other way, and then how 
these fine people's posterity will fume and fret and 
grit their teeth over the insolent tyranny of trade- 
unions! Yes, indeed! the magistrate will tranquilly 
arrange the wages from now clear away down into 
the nineteenth century ; and then all of a sudden the 
wage-earner will consider that a couple of thousand 
years or so is enough of this one-sided sort of thing; 
and he will rise up and take a hand in fixing his wages 
himself. Ah, he will have a long and bitter account 
of wrong and htmiiHation to settle," 

332 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

*'Do ye believe — " 

*'That he actually will help to fix his own wages? 
Yes, indeed. And he will be strong and able, then." 

** Brave times, brave times, of a truth!" sneered 
the prosperous smith. 

**0h — and there's another detail. In that day, a 
master may hire a man for only just one day, or one 
week, or one month at a time, if he wants to." 

*'What?" 

"It's true. Moreover, a niag^steraw won't be able 
to force a man to work for a master a whole year oi^ a 
stretch whether the man wants to or not." 

"Will there be no law or sense in that day?" 

"Both of them, Dowley. In that day a man will 
be his own property, not the property of magistrate 
and master. And he can leave town whenever he 
wants to, if the wages don't suit him! — ^and they 
can't put him in the pillory for it." 

"Perdition catch such an age!" shouted Dowley, 
in strong indignation. "An age of dogs, an age bar- 
ren of reverence for superiors and respect for author- 
ity! The pillory— " 

"Oh, wait, brother; say no good word for that 
institution. I think the pillory ought to be abol- 
ished." 

"A most strange idea. Why?" 

"Well, I'll tell you why. Is a man ever put in the 
pillory for a capital crime?" 

"No." 

"Is it right to condemn a man to a sUght punish- 
ment for a small offense and then kill him?" 

There was no answer. I had scored my first 

333 



MARK TWAIN 

point! For the first time» the smith wasn't up and 
ready. The company noticed it. Good effect. 

"You don't answer, brother. You were about to 
glorify the pillory a while ago, and shed some pity on 
a future age that isn't going to use it. I think the 
pillory ought to be abolished. What usually happens 
when a poor fellow is put in the pillory for some little 
offense that didn't amount to anything in the world? 
The mob try to have some fun with him, don't 
they?" 

''Yes." 

**They begin by clodding him; and they laug^ 
themselves to pieces to see him try to dodge one dod 
and get hit with another?" 

''Yes." 

"Then they throw dead cats at him, don't they?'* 

"Yes." 

"Well, then, suppose he has a few personal ene- 
mies in that mob — ^and here and there a man or a 
woman with a secret grudge against him — and sup- 
pose especially that he is tmpopular in the commu* 
nity, for his pride, or his prosperity, or one thing or 
another — stones and bricks take the place of dods 
and cats presently, don't they?" 

"There is no doubt of it." 

"As a rule he is crippled for life, isn't he? — jaws 
broken, teeth smashed out ? — or legs mutilated, gan- 
grened, presently cut off? — or an eye knodced out» 
maybe both eyes?" 

"It is true, God knoweth it." 

"And if he is tmpopular he can depend on dyings 
right there in the stocks, can't he?" 

334 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

**He siirely can! One may not deny it." 

"I take it none of you are unpoptalar — ^by reason 
of pride or insolence, or conspicuous prosperity, or 
any of those things that excite envy and malice 
among the base scum of a village? You wouldn't 
think it much of a risk to take a chance in the 
stocks?" 

Dowley winced, visibly. I judged he was hit. 
But he didn't betray it by any spoken word. As for 
the others, they spoke out plainly, and with strong 
feeling. They said they had seen enough of the 
stocks to know what a man's chance in them 
was, and they would never consent to enter them 
if they could compromise on a quick death by 
hanging. 

"Well, to change the subject — ^for I think I*ve 
established my point that the stocks ought to be 
abolished. I think some of our laws are pretty unfair. 
For instance, if I do a thing which ought to deliver 
me to the stocks, and you know I did it and yet 
keep still and don't report me, you will get the stocks 
if anybody informs on you." 

"Ah, but that would serve you but right," said 
Dowley, "for you must inform. So saith the law." 

The others coincided. 

"Well, all right, let it go, since you vote me down. 
But there's one thing which certainly isn't fair. The 
magistrate fixes a mechanic's wage at one cent a day, 
for instance. The law says that if any master shall 
venture, even imder utmost press of business, to pay 
anything over that cent a day, even for a single day, 
he shall be both fined and pilloried for it ; and who- 

335 



MARK TWAIN 

ever knows he did it and doesn't inform, they also 
shall be fined and pilloried. Now it seems to me 
tinfair, Dowley, and a deadly peril to all of us, that 
because you thoughtlessly confessed, a while agq 
that within a week you have paid a cent and fifte«o 
mil—" 

Oh, I tell you it was a smasher! You ought to 
have seen them go to pieces, the whole gang. I had 
just slipped up on poor smiling and complacent Dow- 
ley so nice and easy and softly, that he never sus- 
pected anything was going to happen till the blow 
came crashing down and knocked him all to rags. 

A fine effect. In fact, as fine as any I ever pro- 
duced, with so httle time to work it up in. 

But I saw in a moment that I had overdone the 
thing a Uttle. I was expecting to scare them, but I 
wasn't expecting to scare them to death. They were 
mighty near it, though. You see they had been a 
whole lifetime learning to appreciate the pillory; and 
to have that thing staring them in the face, and every 
one of them distinctly at the mercy of me, a stranger, 
if I chose to go and report — ^well, it was awful, and 
they couldn't seem to recover from the shock, they 
couldn't seem to pull themselves together. Pale, 
shaky, durr^ pitiful? Why, they weren't any better 
than so many dead men. It was very tmoomfortable. 
Of cotu-se, I thought they would appeal to me to keep 
mum, and then we woidd shake hands, and take a 
drink all rotmd, and lalugh it off, and there an end. 
But no; you see I was an tmknown person, among a 
cruelly oppressed and suspicious people, a people 
always accustomed to having advantage taken oB 

33<5 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

their helplessness, and never expecting just or kind 
treatment from any but their own families and very 
closest intimates. Appeal to w^ to be gentle, to be 
fair, to be generous? Of course, they wanted to, 
but they couldn't dare. 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

THB TANKBB AND THB RING SOLD AS SLAYBS 

WELL, what had I better do? Nothing in a 
hurry, sure. I must get up a diversion ; any- 
thing to employ me while I could think, and while 
these poor fellows could have a chance to come to 
life again. There sat Marco, petrified in the act 
of trying to get the hang of his miller-gun — ^turned 
to stone, just in the attitude he was in when my 
pile-driver fell, the toy still gripped in his uncon- 
scious fingers. So I took it from him and x>roposed 
to explain its mystery. Mystery I a simple little 
thing like that; and yet it was mysterious enough, 
for that race and that age. 

I never saw such an awkward people, with ma- 
chinery; you see, they were totally unused to it. 
The miller-gim was a little double-barreled tube of 
toughened glass, with a neat little trick of a spring 
to it, which upon pressure would let a shot escape. 
But the shot wouldn't hurt anybody, it would only 
drop into your hand. In the gun were two sizes — 
wee mustard-seed shot, and another sort that we 
several times larger. They were money. T 
mustard-seed shot represented milrays, the lai^ 
ones mills. So the gun was a ptu-se ; and very handy, 
too; you could pay out money in the dark with it| 

338 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

with accuracy; and you could carry it in your 
mouth; or in your vest pocket, if you had one. I 
made them of several sizes — one size so large that 
it would carry the equivalent of a dollar. Using 
shot for money was a good thing for the govern- 
ment; the metal cost lothing, and the money 
couldn't be coimterfeited, for I was the only person 
in the kingdom who knew how to manage a shot- 
tower. ''Paying the shot" soon came to be a com- 
mon phrase. Yes, and I knew it would still be 
passing men's lips, away down in the nineteenth 
century, yet none would suspect how and when it 
originated. 

The king joined us, about this time, mightily 
refreshed by his nap, and feeling good. Anything 
could make me nervous now, I was so tmeasy — ^for 
our lives were in danger; and so it worried me to 
detect a complacent something in the king's eye 
which seemed to indicate that he had been loading 
himself up for a performance of some kind or other; 
confound it, why must he go and choose such a 
time as this? 

I was right. He began, straight off, in the most 
innocently artful, and transparent, and lubberly 
way, to lead up to the subject of agriculttu-e. The 
cold sweat broke out all over me. I wanted to 
whisper in his ear, "Man, we are in awful danger! 
every moment is worth a principality till we get 
back these men's confidence; donH waste any of this 
golden time." But of course I couldn't do it. 
Whisper to him? It would look as if we were con- 
spiring. So I had to sit there and look calm and 
23 339 



I 
MARK trWAIN 

pleasant while the king stood over that dynambb 
mine and mooned along alxmt his damned ooioos 
and things. At first the tuinult of my own fhoughts, 
summoned by the danger-signal and swarming to 
the rescue from every quarter of my skull, kept uf 
such a hurrah and confusion and fifing and dram- 
ming that I couldn't take in a word; but presently 
when my mob of gathering plans began to oystaHise 
and fall into position and form line of battle, a aort 
of order and quiet ensuecl and I caught the boom 
of the king's batteries, as if out of remote dis- 
tance: 

— "'were not the best way, methinks, albeit it is 
not to be denied that authorities differ as conoem- 
ing this point, some contending that the onion is 
but an unwholesome beny when stricken eaxly from 
the tree — " 

The audience showed signs of life, and sought eadi 
other's eyes in a surprised and troubled way. 

— "whileas others do yet maintain, with modi 
show of reason, that this is not of necessity the caat, 
instancing that plums and other like cereals do be 
always dug in the unripe state — " 

The audience exhibited distinct distress; yes. and 
also fear. 

— "yet are they clearly wholesome, the more 
especially when one doth assuage the asperities of 
their nattire by admixture of the tranquiliring jtdoe 
of the wayward cabbage — " 

The wild light of terror began to gh>w in these 
men's eyes, and one of them muttered, ''These be 
errors, every one — God hath surely smitten the 

340 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

mind of this farmer." I was in miserable appre- 
hension; I sat upon thoms. 

— " and further instancing the known truth that 
in the case of animals, the young, which may be 
called the green fruit of the creature, is the better, 
all confessing that when a goat is ripe, his fur doth 
heat and sore engame his flesh, the which defect, 
taken in connection with his several rancid habits, 
and fulsome appetites, and godless attitudes of 
mind, and bilious quality of morals — " 

They rose and went for him ! With a fierce shout, 
"The one would betray us, the other is mad! Kill 
them! Eall them!'* they flung themselves upon us. 
What joy flamed up in the king's eye! He might be 
lame in agriculture, but this kind of thing was just 
in his line. He had been fasting long, he was hungry 
for a fight. He hit the blacksmith a crack under the 
jaw that lifted him clear off his feet and stretched 
him fiat on his back. "St. George for Britain!" and 
he downed the wheelwright. The mason was big, 
but I laid him out like nothing. The three gathered 
themselves up and came again; went down again; 
came again; and kept on repeating this, with native 
British pluck, until they were battered to jelly, 
reeling with exhaustion, and so blind that they 
couldn't tell us from each other; and yet they kept 
right on, hanmiering away with what might was 
left in them. Hammering each other — ^for we 
stepped aside and looked on while they rolled, and 
struggled, and gouged, and poimded, and bit, with 
the strict and wordless attention to business of so 
many bulldogs. We looked on without apprehcn- 

341 



MARK TWAIN 

sion, for they were fast getting past ability to go for 
help against us, and the arena was far enough from 
the public road to be safe from intrusion. 

Well, while they were gradually pla3nng out, it 
suddenly occurred to me to wonder what had become 
of Marco. I looked aroimd; he was nowhere to be 
seen. Oh, but this was ominous! I pulled the 
king's sleeve, and we glided away and rushed for 
the hut. No Marco there, no Phyllis there! They 
had gone to the road for help, sure. I told the king 
to give his heels wings, and I would explain later. 
We made good time across the open ground, and as 
we darted into the shelter of the wood I glanced 
back and saw a mob of excited peasants swarm into 
view, with Marco and his wife at their head. They 
were making a world of noise, but tnat couldn't hurt 
anybody; the wood was dense, and as soon as we 
were well into its depths we would take to a tree and 
let them whistle. Ah, but then came another sound 
— dogs! Yes, that was quite another matter. It 
magnified our contract — we must find running water. 

We tore along at a good gait, and soon left the 
soimds far behind and modified to a murmur. We 
struck a stream and darted into it. We waded 
swiftly down it, in the dim forest light, for as much 
as three hundred yards, and then came across an 
oak with a great bough sticking out over the water. 
We climbed up on this bough, and began to work 
our way along it to the body of the tree; now we 
began to hear those sounds more plainly ; so the mob 
had struck our trail. For a while the sotmds ap- 
proached pretty fast. And then for another "wbOt^ 

342 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

they didn't. No doubt the dogs had found the 
place where we had entered the stream, and were 
now waltzing up and down the shores trying to pick 
up the trail again. 

When we were snugly lodged in the tree and cur- 
tained with foliage, the king was satisfied, but I was 
doubtful. I believed we could crawl along a branch 
and get into the next tree, and I judged it worth 
while to try. We tried it, and made a success of it, 
though the king slipped, at the jimction, and came 
near failing to connect. We got comfortable lodg- 
ment and satisfactory concealment among the foliage, 
and then we had nothing to do but listen to the hunt. 

Presently we heard it coming — and coming on the 
jimap, too; yes, and down both sides of the stream. 
Louder — louder — next minute it swelled swiftly up 
into a roar of shoutings, barkings, tramplings, and 
swept by like a cyclone. 

'*I was afraid that the overhanging branch would 
suggest something to them," said I, *'but I don't 
mind the disappointment. Come, my Uege, it were 
well that we make good use of our time. We've 
flanked them. Dark is coming on, presently. If we 
can cross the stream and get a good start, and 
borrow a couple of horses from somebody's pasture 
to use for a few hoiu^, we shall be safe enough." 

We started down, and got nearly to the lowest 
limb, when we seemed to hear the htmt returning. 
We stopped to listen. 

"Yes," said I, "they're baffled, they've given it 
up, they're on their way home. We will dimb back 
to otir roost again, and let them go by." 

343 



MARK TWAIN 

So we climbed back. The king listened a moment 
and said: 

"They still search — I wit the sign. We did best 
to abide." 

He was right. He knew more about hunting than 
I did. The noise approached steadily, but not with 
a rush. The king said : 

**They reason that we were advantaged by no 
parious start of them, and being on foot are as yet 
no mighty way from where we took the water." 

"Yes, sire, that is about it, I am afraid, though I 
was hoping better things." 

The noise drew nearer and nearer, and soon the 
van was drifting imder us, on both sides of the water. 
A voice called a halt from the other bank, and said: 

"An they were so minded, they could get to yon 
tree by this branch that overhangs, and yet not 
touch groimd. Ye will do well to send a man up it." 

"Marry, that we will do!" 

I was obliged to admire my cuteness in foreseeing 
this very thing and swapping trees to beat it. But, 
don't you know, there are some things that can beat 
smartness and foresight? Awkwardness and stu- 
pidity can. The best swordsman in the world 
doesn't need to fear the second best swordsman in 
the world; no, the person for him to be afraid of is 
some ignorant antagonist who has never had a 
sword in his hand before; he doesn't do the thing he 
ought to do, and so the expert isn't prepared for 
him; he does the thing he ought not to do; and often 
it catches the expert out and ends him on the spot. 
Well, how coidd I, with all my gifts, make any 

344 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

valtiable preparation against a near-sighted, cross- 
eyed, pudding-headed clown who woidd aim himself 
at the wrong tree and hit the right one? And that 
is what he did. He went for the wrong tree, which 
was, of course, the right one by mistake, and up he 
started. 

Matters were serious now. We remained still, 
and awaited developments. The peasant toiled his 
difficult way up. The king raised himself up and 
stood; he made a leg ready, and when the comer's 
head arrived in reach of it there was a dull thud, 
and down went the man floimdering t6 the groimd. 
There was a wild outbreak of anger below, and the 
mob swarmed in from all aroimd, and there we were 
treed, and prisonei^. Another man started up; the 
bridging bough was detected, and a volimteer started 
up the tree that furnished the bridge. The king 
ordered me to play Horatius and keep the bridge. 
For a while the enemy came thick and fast; but no 
matter, the head man of each procession always got 
a btiffet that dislodged him as soon as he came in 
reach. The king's spirits rose, his joy was limitless. 
He said that if nothing occurred to mar the prospect 
we should have a beautiful night, for on this line of 
tactics we could hold the tree against the whole 
country-side. 

However, the mob soon came to that conclusion 
themselves ; wherefore they called off the assault and 
began to debate other plans. They had no weapons, 
but there were plenty of stones, and stones might 
answer. We had no objections. A stone might 
possibly penetrate to us once in a while, but it 

345 



MARK TWAIN 

wasn't very likely; we were well protected by boughs 
and foliage, and were not visible from any good 
aiming-point. If they would but waste half an 
hour in stone-throwing, the dark would come to 
our help. We were feeling very well satisfied. We 
could smile; almost laugh. 

But we didn't; which was just as well, for we 
shoidd have been interrupted. Before the stones 
had been raging through the leaves and bouncing 
from the boughs fifteen minutes, we began to notice 
a smell. A couple of sniffs of it was enough of an 
explanation: it was smoke! Our game was up at 
last. We recognized that. When smoke invites 
you, you have to come. They raised their pile of 
dry brush and damp weeds higher and higher, and 
when they saw the thick cloud begin to roll up and 
smother the tree, they broke out in a storm of joy- 
clamors. I got enough breath to say: 

"Proceed, my liege; after you is manners.** 

The king gasped : 

"Follow me down, and then back thyself against 
one side of the tnmk, and leave me the other. 
Then will we fight. Let each pile his dead accord- 
ing to his own fashion and taste." 

Then he descended, barking and coughing, and I 
followed. I struck the groimd an instant after 
him; we sprang to our appointed places, and began 
to give and take with all our might. The powwow 
and racket were prodigious ; it was a tempest of riot 
and confusion and thick-falling blows. Suddenly 
some horsemen tore into the midst of the crowd, and 
a voice shouted: 

346 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

**Hold — or ye are dead men!" 

How good it soiinded! The owner of the voice 
bore all the marks of a gentleman: picturesque and 
costly raiment, the aspect of command, a hard 
countenance, with complexion and features marred 
by dissipation. The mob fell humbly back, like so 
many spaniels. The gentleman inspected us criti- 
cally, then said sharply to the peasants: 

"What are ye doing to these people?" 

"They be madmen, worshipful sir, that have come 
wandering we know not whence, and — " 

"Ye know not whence? Do ye pretend ye know 
them not?" 

"Most honored sir, we speak but the truth. 
They are strangers and tmknown to any in this 
region; and they be the most violent and blood- 
thirsty madmen that ever — " 

"Peace! Ye know not what ye say. They are 
not mad. Who are ye? And whence are ye? 
Explain." 

We are but peaceful strangers, sir/* I said, 
and traveling upon our own concerns. We are 
from a far coimtry, and unacquainted here. We 
have purposed no harm; and yet but for your brave 
interference and protection these people woidd have 
killed us. As you have divined, sir, we are not 
mad; neither are we violent or bloodthirsty." 

The gentleman tinned to his retinue and said 
calmly : 

*'Lash me these animals to their kennels!" 

The mob vanished in an instant; and after them 
plunged the horsemen, laying about them with their 

347 



it 



MARK TWAIN 

whips and pitilessly riding down such as were witless 
enough to keep the road instead of taking to the 
bush. The shrieks and supplications presently died 
away in the distance, and soon the horsemen b^;aD 
to straggle back. Meantime the gentleman had 
been questioning us more closely, but had dug no 
particulars out of us. We were lavish of recognition 
of the service he was doing us, but we revealed 
nothing more than that we were friendless strangers 
from a far coimtry. When the escort were all re- 
turned, the gentleman said to one of his servants: 

"Bring the led-horses and mount these people." 

"Yes, my lord." 

We were placed toward the rear, among the 
servants. We traveled pretty fast, and finally drew 
rein some time after dark at a roadside inn some ten 
or twelve miles from the scene of our troubles. My 
lord went immediately to his room, after ordering 
his supper, and we saw no more of him. At dawn in 
the morning we breakfasted and made ready to start. 

My lord's chief attendant saimtered forwaixl at 
that moment with indolent grace, and said: 

"Ye have said ye shotdd continue upon this road, 
which is our direction likewise; wherefore my lord^ 
the earl Grip, hath given commandment that ye 
retain the horses and ride, and that certain of us ride 
with ye a twenty mile to a fair town that hight 
Cambenet, whenso ye shall be out of peril." 

We could do nothing less than express our thanks 
and accept the offer. We jogged along, six in the 
party, at a moderate and comfortable gait, and in 
conversation learned that my lord Grip was a veiy 

348 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

great personage in his own region, which lay a day's 
journey beyond Cambenet. We loitered to such a 
degree that it was near the middle of the forenoon 
when we entered the market-square of the town. 
We dismounted, and left our thanks once more for 
tny lord, and then approached a crowd assembled 
in the center of the square, to see what might be 
the object of interest. It was the remnant of that 
old peregrinating band of slaves ! So they had been 
dragging their chains about, all this weary time. 
That poor husband was gone, and also many others; 
and some few purchases had been added to the gang. 
The king was not interested, and wanted to move 
along, but I was absorbed, and full of pity. I could 
not take my eyes away from these worn and wasted 
wrecks of humanity. There they sat, grouped upon 
the ground, silent, uncomplaining, with bowed heads, 
a pathetic sight. And by hideous contrast, a re- 
dimdant orator was making a speech to another 
gathering not thirty steps away, in fulsome laudation 
of **our glorious British Uberties!" 

I was boiling. I had forgotten I was a plebeian, 
I was remembering I was a man. Cost what it 
might, I would moimt that rostrtma and — 

Click! the king and I were handcuflfed together! 
Our companions, those servants, had done it; my 
lord Grip stood looking on. The king burst out in 
a fury, and said: 

**What meaneth this ill-mannered jest?" 

My lord merely said to his head miscreant, coolly: 

**Put up the slaves and sell them!" 

Slaves! The word had a new sound — ^and how 

349 



MARK TWAIN 

unspeakably awful! The king lifted his manskr^^ 
and brought them down with a deadly force; but 
my lord was out of the way when they arrived. 
A dozen of the rascal's servants sprang forward, and 
in a moment we were helpless, with our hands bound 
behind us. We so loudly and so earnestly pro- 
claimed ourselves freemen, that we got the inter- 
ested attention ot that liberty-mouthing orator and 
his patriotic crowd, and they gathered about us and 
asstimed a very determined attitude. The orator 
said: 

**If, indeed, ye are freemen, ye have naught to 
fear — the God-given liberties of Britain are about ye 
for your shield and shelter! [Applause.] Ye shall 
soon see. Bring forth your proofs." 

"What proofs?" 

''Proof that ye are freemen." 

Ah — I remembered! I came to myself; I said 
nothing. But the king stormed out : 

"Thou'rt insane, man. It were better, and more 
in reason, that this thief and scotmdrel here prove 
that we are not freemen." 

You see, he knew his own laws just as other people 
so often know the laws; by words, not by effects. 
They take a meaning, and get to be very vivid, when 
you come to apply them to yourself. 

All hands shook their heads and looked disap- 
pointed; some turned away, no longer interested. 
The orator said — ^and this time in the tones of 
business, not of sentiment : 

"An ye do not know your coimtry's laws, it were 
time ye learned them. Ye are strangers to us; ye 

3 so 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

will not deny that. Ye may be freemen, we do not 
deny that; but also ye may be slaves. The law is 
clear: it doth not require the claimant to prove ye 
are slaves, it requireth you to prove ye are not.'* 

I said: 

"Dear sir, give us only time to send to Astolat; 
or give us only time to send to the Valley of 
Holiness — " 

**Peace, good man, these are extraordinary re- 
quests, and you may not hope to have them grant- 
ed. It would cost much time, and woidd tmwar- 
rantably inconvenience your master — " 

*' Master, idiot!" stormed the king. ''I have no 
master, I myself am the m — " 

'* Silence, for God's sake!" 

I got the words out in time to stop the king. 
We were in trouble enough already; it could not 
help us any to give these people the notion that we 
were limatics. 

There is no use in stringing out the details. The 
earl put us up and sold us at auction. This same 
infernal law had existed in our own South in my 
own time, more than thirteen hundred years later, 
and under it himdreds of freemen who could not 
prove that they were freemen had been sold into 
life-long slavery without the drcimistance making 
any particular impression upon me; but the minute 
law and the auction block came into my personal 
experience, a thing which had been merely improper 
before became suddenly hellish. Well, that's the 
way we are made. 

Yes, we were sold at auction, like swine. In a 

351 



MARK TWAIN 

big town and an active market we should have 
brought a good price; but this place was utterly 
stagnant and so we sold at a figure which makes me 
ashamed, every time I think of it. The King of 
England brought seven dollars, and his prime min- 
ister nine ; whereas the king was easily worth twelve 
dollars and I as easily worth fifteen. But that is the 
way things always go; if you force a sale on a dull 
market, I don't care what the property is, you are 
going to make a poor business of it, and you can 
make up yotn: mind to it. If the earl had had wit 
enough to — 

However, there is no occasion for my working 
my sympathies up on his account. Let him go, for 
the present ; I took his number, so to speak. 

The slave-dealer bought us both, and hitched us 
onto that long chain of his, and we constituted the 
rear of. his procession. We took up our line of 
march and passed out of Cambenet at noon; and it 
seemed to me unaccotmtably strange and odd that 
the King of England and his chief minister, march- 
ing manacled and fettered and yoked, in a slave 
convoy, could move by all manner of idle men and 
women, and under windows where sat the sweet and 
the lovely, and yet never attract a curious eye, never 
provoke a single remark. Dear, dear, it only shows 
that there is nothing diviner about a king than there. 
is about a tramp, after all. He is just a cheap and' 
hollow artificiality when you don't know he is ft< 
king. But reveal his quality, and dear me it takeil 
your very breath away to look at him. I reckon 
are all fools. Bom so, no doubt. 

352 



CHAPTER XXXV 

A PITIFUL INCIDENT 

IT'S a world of surprises. The king brooded; this 
was natural. What would he brood about, should 
you say? Why, about the prodigious nature of 
his fall, of course — from the loftiest place in the 
world to the lowest ; from the most illustrious station 
in the world to the obscurest; from the grandest 
vocation among men to the basest. No, I take my 
oath that the thing that graveled him most, to start 
with, was not this, but the price he had fetched ! He 
couldn't seem to get over that seven dollars. . Well, 
it stunned me so, when I first foimd it out, that I 
couldn't believe it; it didn't seem natural. But as 
soon as my mental sight cleared and I got a right 
focus on it, I saw I was mistaken; it was naturaL 
For this reason : a king is a mere artificiality, and so 
a king's feelings, like the impulses of an automatic 
doll, are mere artificialities; but as a man, he is a 
reality, and his feelings, as a man, are real, not 
phantoms. It shames the average man to be 
valued below his own estimate of his worth; and the 
king certainly wasn't anything more than an average 
man, if he was up that high. 

Confound him, he wearied me with arguments to 
show that in anything like a fair market he would 

353 



MARK TWAIN 

have fetched twenty-five dollars, sure — a, thing which 
was plainly nonsense, and full of the baldest conceit; 
I wasn't worth it myself. But it was tender ground 
for me to argue on. In fact, I had to simply shirk 
argument and do the diplomatic instead. I had to 
throw conscience aside, and brazenly concede that 
he ought to have brought twenty-five dollars; 
whereas I wsEs quite well aware that in all the ages, 
the world had never seen a king that was worth half 
the money, and during the next thirteen centuries 
wotddn't see one that was worth the fourth of it. 
Yes, he tired me. If he began to talk about the 
crops; or about the recent weather; or about the 
condition of politics; or about dogs, or cats, or mor* 
als, or theology — ^no matter what — ^I sighed, for I 
knew what was coming; he was going to get out of 
it a palliation of that tiresome seven-dollar sale. 
Wherever we halted where there was a crowd, he 
would give me a look which said plainly: **K that 
thing could be tried over again now, with this kind 
of folk, you woidd see a different result." Well, 
when he was first sold, it secretly tickled me to see 
him go for seven dollars; but before he was done 
with his sweating and wonying I wished he had 
fetched a htmdred. The thing never got a chance 
to die, for every day, at one place or another, ix)6SLb]e 
purchasers looked us over, and, as often as axiy 
other way, their comment on the king was some- 
thing like this : 

''Here's a two-dollar-and-a-half chtunp with a 
thirty-dollar style. Pity but style was marketable.*' 

At last this sort of remark produced an evil result. 

354 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

Our owner was a practical person and he perceived 
that this defect must be mended if he hoped to find 
a purchaser for the king. So he went to work to 
take the style out of his sacred majesty. I could 
have given the man some valuable advice, but I 
didn't; you mustn't volimteer advice to a slave- 
driver tmless you want to damage the cause you are 
arguing for. I had foimd it a sufficiently difficult 
job to reduce the king's style to a peasant's style, 
even when he was a willing and anxious pupil; now 
then, to undertake to reduce the king's style to a 
slave's style — ^and by force — go to! it was a stately 
contract. Never mind the details — it will save me 
trouble to let you imagine them. I will only remark 
that at the end of a week there was plenty of evidence 
that lash and club and fist had done their work well; 
the king's body was a sight to see — ^and to weep over; 
but his spirit? — why, it wasn't even phased. Even 
that dull clod of a slave-driver was able to see that 
there can be such a thing as a slave who will remain 
a man till he dies; whose bones you can break, but 
whose manhood you can't. This man fotmd that 
from his first eflEort down to his latest, he couldn't 
ever come within reach of the king, but the king 
was ready to plimge for him, and did it. So he 
gave up at last, and left the king in ix>ssession of his 
style imimpaired. The fact is, the king was a good 
deal more than a king, he was a man; and when a 
man is a man, you can't knock it out of him. 

We had a rough time for a month, tramping to 
and fro in the earth, and suffering. And what Eng- 
lishman was the most interested in the slavery 

24 355 



MARK TWAIN 

question by that time? His grace the king! Yes; 
from being the most indifferent, he was become the 
most interested. He was become the bitterest hatef 
of the institution I had ever heard talk. And so I 
ventured to ask once more a question which I had 
asked years before and had gotten such a sharp 
answer that I had not thought it prudent to meddle 
in the matter further. Would he abolish slavery? 

His answer was as sharp as before, but it was 
music this time; I shouldn't ever wish to hear 
pleasanter, though the profanity was not good, being 
awkwardly put together, and with the crash-word 
almost in the middle instead of at the end, where, 
of course, it ought to have been. 

I was ready and willing to get free now; I hadn't 
wanted to get free any sooner. No, I cannot quite 
say that. I had wanted to, but I had not been 
willing to take desperate chances, and had always 
dissuaded the king from them. But now — ah, it 
was a new atmosphere! Liberty would be worth 
any cost that might be put upon it now. I set about 
a plan, and was straightway charmed with it. It 
would require time, yes, and patience, too, a great 
deal of both. One could invent quicker ways, and 
fully as sure ones; but none that would be as pic- 
turesque as this; none that could be made so drar 
matic. And so I was not going to give this one up. 
It might delay us months, but no matter, I would 
carry it out or break something. 

Now and then we had an adventure. One night 
we were overtaken by a snow-storm while still a 
mile from the village we were making for. Almost 

356 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

instantly we were shut up as in a fog, the driving 
snow was so thick. You couldn't see a thing, and 
we were soon lost. The slave-driver lashed us des- 
perately, for he saw ruin before him, but his lashings 
only made matters worse, for they drove us further 
from the road and from likelihood of succor. So we 
had to stop at last and slump down in the snow 
where we were. The storm continued imtil toward 
midnight, then ceased. By this time two of our 
feebler men and three of our women were dead, and 
others past moving and threatened with death. Our 
master was nearly beside himself. He stirred up 
the living, and made us stand, jump, slap ourselves, 
to restore our circulation, and he helped as well 
as he could with his whip. 

Now came a diversion. We heard shrieks and 
yells, and soon a woman came running and crying; 
and seeing our group, she flimg herself into our 
midst and begged for protection. A mob of people 
came tearing after her, some with torches, and they 
said she was a witch who had caused several cows to 
die by a strange disease, and practised her arts by 
help of a devil in the form of a black cat. This poor 
woman had been stoned imtil she hardly looked 
human, she was so battered and bloody. The mob 
wanted to bum her. 

Well, now, what do you suppose our master did? 
When we closed aroimd this poor creature to shelter 
her, he saw his chance. He said, bum her here, or 
they shouldn't have her at all. Imagine that! 
They were willing. They fastened her to a post; 
they brought wood and piled it about her; they 

357 



MARK TWAIN 

applied the torch while she shrieked and pleaded 
and strained her two young daughters to her breast; 
and our brute, with a heart solely for business, lashed 
us into position about the stake and warmed us into 
life and commercial value by the same fire which 
took away the innocent life of that poor harmless 
mother. That was the sort of master we had. I 
took his ntimber. That snow-storm cost him nine 
of his flock; and he was more brutal to us than ever» 
after that, for many days together, he was so en- 
raged over his loss. 

We had adventures all along. One day we ran 
into a procession. And such a procession! All the 
riffraff of the kingdom seemed to be comprehended 
in it; and all dnmk at that. In the van was a cart 
with a coffin in it, and on the coffin sat a comely 
yoimg girl of about eighteen suckling a baby, which 
she squeezed to her breast in a passion of love every 
little while, and every little while wiped from its 
face the tears which her eyes rained down upon it; 
and always the foolish little thing smiled up at her, 
happy and content, kneading her breast with its 
dimpled fat hand, which she patted and fondled 
right over her breaking heart. 

Men and women, boys and girls, trotted along 
beside or after the cart, hooting, shouting profane 
and ribald remarks, singing snatches of fotd song^ 
skipping, dancing — a, very holiday of hellions, a sidc- 
ening sight. We had struck a subturb of Londoou 
outside the walls, and this was a sample of one sort 
of London society. Our master secured a good 
place for us near the gallows. A priest was in attend- 

358 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

ance» and he helped the girl dimb up, and said 
comforting words to her, and made the tmder-sheriff 
provide a stool for her. Then he stood there by her 
on the gallows, and for a moment looked down upon 
the mass of upturned faces at his feet, then out over 
the solid pavement of heads that stretched away on 
every side occupying the vacancies far and near, and 
then began to tell the story of the case. And there 
was pity in his voice — ^how seldom a sotmd that was 
in that ignorant and savage land! I remember 
every detail of what he said, except the words he 
said it in; and so I change it into my own words: 

* * Law is intended to mete out justice. Sometimes 
it fails. This cannot be helped. We can only grieve, 
and be resigned, and pray for the soul of him who 
falls imfairly by the arm of the law, and that his 
fellows may be few. A law sends this poor yoimg 
thing to death — ^and it is right. But another law 
had placed her where she must commit her crime 
or starve with her child — and before God that law is 
responsible for both her crime and her ignominious 
death ! 

"A little while ago this yotmg thing, this child of 
eighteen years, was as happy a wife and mother as 
any in England ; and her lips were blithe with song, 
which is the native speech of glad and innocent 
hearts. Her young husband was as happy as she; 
for he was doing his whole duty, he worked early and 
late at his handicraft, his bread was honest bread 
well and fairly earned, he was prospering, he was 
furnishing shelter and sustenance to his family, he 
was adding his mite to the wealth of the nation. By 

359 



MARK TWAIN 

consent of a treacherous law, instant destruction feD 
upon this holy home and swept it away ! That young 
husband was waylaid and impressed, and sent to sea. 
The wife knew nothing of it. She sought him every- 
where, she moved the hardest hearts with the sup- 
plications of her tears, the broken eloquence of her 
despair. Weeks dragged by, she watching, waiting, 
hoping, her mind going slowly to wreck under the 
burden of her misery. Little by little all her small 
IX)ssessions went for food. When she could no 
longer pay her rent, they turned her out of doors. 
She begged, while she had strength; when she was 
starving at last, and her milk failing, she stole a piece 
of linen cloth of the value of a fourth part of a 
cent, thinking to sell it and save her child. But 
she was seen by the owner of the doth. She was 
put in jail and brought to trial. The man testified 
to the facts. A plea was made for her, and her 
sorrowful story was told in her behalf. She spoke, 
too, by permission, and said she did steal the doth, 
but that her mind was so disordered of late by 
trouble that when she was overborne with hunger 
all acts, criminal or other, swam meaningless through 
her brain and she knew nothing rightly, except that 
she was so htmgry ! For a moment all were touched, 
and there was disposition to deal mercifully with her, 
seeing that she was so yotmg and friendless, and her 
case so piteous, and the law that robbed her of hec 
support to blame as being the first and only causa 
of her transgression; but the prosecuting officer 
replied that whereas these things were all true, and 
most pitiful as well, still there was much small theft 

360 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

in these days, and mistimed mercy here would be a 
danger to property — oh, my God, is there no property 
in ruined homes, and orphaned babes, and broken 
hearts that British law holds precious! — and so he 
must require sentence. 

"When the judge put on his black cap, the owner 
of the stolen linen rose trembling up, his lip quiver- 
ing, his face as gray as ashes; and when the awful 
words came, he cried out, *0h, -poor child, poor 
child, I did not know it was death!' and fell as a 
tree falls. When they lifted him up his reason was 
gone; before the stm was set, he had taken his own 
life. A kindly man; a man whose heart was right, 
at bottom ; add his murder to this that is to be now 
done here ; and charge them both where they belong 
— ^to the rulers and the bitter laws of Britain. The 
time is come, my duld; let me pray over thee — ^not 
for thee, dear abused poor heart and innocent, but 
for them that be guilty of thy ruin and death, who 
need it more." 

After his prayer they put the noose arotmd the 
young girl's neck, and they had great trouble to 
adjust the knot tmder her ear, because she was 
devouring the baby all the time, wildly kissing it, 
and snatching it to her face and her breast, and 
drenching it with tears, and half moaning, half 
shrieking all the while, and the baby crowing, and 
laughing, and kicking its feet with delight over what 
it took for romp and play. Even the hangman 
couldn't stand it, but turned away. When all was 
ready the priest gently pulled and tugged and forced 
the child out of the mother's arms, and stepped 

361 



MARK TWAIN 

quickly out of her reach; but she clasped her hands, 
and made a wild spring toward him, with a shriek; 
but the rope — and the imder-sheriff — held her short. 
Then she went on her knees and stretched out her 
hands and cried: 

"One more kiss — oh, my God, one more, one 
more — it is the dying that begs it!'* 

She got it; she almost smothered the little thing. 
And when they got it away again, she cried out: 

"Oh, my child, my darling, it will die! It has no 
home, it has no father, no friend, no mother — " 

"It has them all!" said that good priest. "All 
these will I be to it till I die." 

You should have seen her face then! Gratitude? 
Lord, what do you want with words to express 
that? Words are only painted fire; a look is the 
fire itself. She gave that look, and carried it away 
to the treasury of heaven, where all things that are 
divine belong. 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

AN ENCOUNTER IN THE DARK 

LONDON — to a slave — ^was a suflficiently interest- 
^ ing place. It was merely a great big village; 
and mainly mud and thatch. The streets were 
muddy, crooked, unpaved. The populace was an 
ever flocking and drifting swarm of rags, and splen- 
dors, of nodding plumes and shining armor. The 
king had a palace there; he saw the outside of it. 
It made him sigh; yes, and swear a little, in a poor 
juvenile sixth-century way. We saw knights and 
grandees whom we knew, but they didn't know us 
in our rags and dirt and raw welts and bruises, and 
wouldn't have recognized us if we had hailed them, 
nor stopped to answer, either, it being unlawful to 
speak with slaves on a chain. Sandy passed within 
ten yards of me on a mule — himting for me, I 
imagined. But , the thing which clean broke my 
heart was something which happened in front of 
our old barrack in a square, while we were enduring 
the spectacle of a man being boiled to death in oil 
for coimterfeiting pennies. It was the sight of a 
newsboy — and I couldn't get at him! Still, I had 
one comfort; here was proof that Clarence was still 
alive and banging away. I meant to be with him 
before long; the thought was fvill of cheer. 

363 



MARK TWAIN 

I had one little glimpse of another thing, one day, 
^hich gave me a great uplift. It was a wire stretch- 
ing from housetop to housetop. Telegraph or tele- 
phone, sure. I did very much wish I had a little 
piece of it. It was just what I needed, in order to 
cany out my project of escape. My idea was to 
get loose some night, along with the king, then gag 
and bind our master, change clothes with him, batter 
him into the aspect of a stranger, hitch him to the 
slave-chain, asstmie possession of the property^ mardi 
to Camdot, and — 

But you get my idea; you see what a stunning 
dramatic surprise I would wind up with at the 
palace. It was all feasible, if I cotild only get hold 
of a slender piece of iron which I could shape into 
a lock-pick. I cotdd then undo the lumbering pad- 
locks with which our chains were fastened, whenever 
I might choose. But I never had any luck; no such 
thing ever happened to fall in my way. However, 
my chance came at last. A gentleman who had come 
twice before to dicker for me, without result^ or 
indeed any approach to a result, came again. I was 
far from expecting ever to belong to him, for the 
price asked for me from the time I was first enslaved 
was exorbitant, and always provoked either anger or 
derision, yet my master stuck stubbornly to it — 
twenty-two dollars. He wouldn't bate a cent. The 
king was greatly admired, because of his grand 
physique, but his kingly style was against him, and 
he wasn't salable; nobody wanted that kind of a 
slave. I considered myself safe from parting from 
him because of my extravagant price. No, I was 

364 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

not expecting to ever belong to this gentleman whom 
1 have spoken of, but he had something which I 
expected would belong to me eventually, if he wottld 
but visit tis often enough. It was a steel thing with 
a long pin to it, with which his long doth outside 
garment was fastened together in front. There were 
three of them. He had disappointed me twice, 
because he did not come quite close enough to me 
to make my project entirely safe; but this time I 
succeeded; I captured the lower clasp of the three, 
and when he missed it he thought he had lost it 
on the way. 

I had a chance to be glad about a minute, then 
straightway a chance to be sad again. For when 
the purchase was about to fail, as usual, the master 
suddenly spoke up and said what would be worded 
thus — ^in modem English : 

"I'll tell you what I'U do. I'm tired supportii^ 
these two for no good. Give me twenty-two dollars 
for this one, and I'll throw the other one in." 

The king couldn't get his breath, he was in such 
a fury. He began to choke and gag, and meantime 
the master and the gentleman moved away dis* 
cussing. 

'*An ye will keep the oflEer open — " 

**'Tis open till the morrow at this hour." 

"Then I will answer you at that time,'* said the 
gentleman, and disappeared, the master following 
him. 

I had a time of it to cool the king down, but I 
managed it. I whispered in his ear, to this effect: 

"Your grace vuill go for nothing, but after another 

36s 



MARK TWAIN 

fashion. And so shall I. To-night we shall both 
be free." 

"Ah! How is that?" 

"With this thing which I have stolen, I will unlock 
these locks and cast off these chains to-night. 
When he comes about nine-thirty to inspect us for the 
night, we will seize him, gag him, batter him, and 
early in the morning we will march out of this 
town, proprietors of this caravan of slaves." 

That was as far as I went, but the king was 
charmed and satisfied. That evening we waited 
patiently for our fellow-slaves to get to sleep and 
signify it by the usual sign, for you must not take 
many chances on those poor fellows if you can avoid 
it. It is best to keep yom* own secrets. No doubt 
they fidgeted only about as usual, but it didn't 
seem so to me. It seemed to me that they were 
going to be forever getting down to their regular 
snoring. As the time dragged on I got nervously 
afraid we shouldn't have enough of it left for our 
needs; so I made several premature attempts, and 
merely delayed things by it; for I couldn't seem to 
touch a padlock, there in the dark, without starting 
a rattle out of it which interrupted somebody's sleep 
and made him turn over and wake some more of 
the gang. 

But finally I did get my last iron off, and was a 
free man once more. I took a good breath of relief^ 
and reached for the king's irons. Too late ! in comes 
the master, with a light in one hand and his heavy 
walking-staff in the other. I snuggled close among 
the wallow of snorers, to conceal as nearly as possible 

.^66 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

that I was naked of irons; and I kept a sharp lookout 
and prepared to spring for my man the moment he 
should bend over me. 

But he didn't approach. He stopped, gazed ab- 
sently toward our dusky mass a minute, evidently 
thinking about something else; then set down his 
light, moved musingly toward the door, and before 
a body could imagine what he was going to do, he 
was out of the door and had closed it behind him. 
''Quick!'' said the king. 'Tetch him back!" 
Of course, it was the thing to do, and I was up and 
out in a moment. But, dear me, there were no 
lamps in those days, and it was a dark night. But 
I glimpsed a dim figure a few steps away. I darted 
for it, threw myself upon it, and then there was a 
state of things and Uvely! We fought and scuffled 
and struggled, and drew a crowd in no time. They 
took an immense interest in the fight and encouraged 
us all they could, and, in fact, couldn't have been 
pleasanter or more cordial if it had been their own 
fight. Then a tremendous row broke out behind us, 
and as much as half of our audience left us, with a 
rush, to invest some sympathy in that. Lanterns 
began to swing in all directions; it was the watch 
gathering from far and near. Presently a halberd 
fell across my back, as a reminder, and I knew what 
it meant. I was in custody. So was my adversary. 
We were marched off toward prison, one on each side 
of the watchman. Here was disaster, here was a 
fine scheme gone to sudden destruction! I tried to 
imagine what would happen when the master should 
discover that it was I who had been fighting him; 

367 



^ 



f 



MARK TWAIN 



and what wotdd happen if they jailed us togethdir in 
the general apartment for brawlers and petty law- 
breakers, as was the custom; and what might — 

Just then my antagonist .turned his face around 
in my direction, the freckled Hght from the watch- 
man's tin lantern feU on it, and by George, he was 
the wrong man! 



CHAPTER XXXVII 

AN AWFUL PREDICAMENT 

SLEEP? It was impossible. It would naturally 
have been impossible in that noisome cavern of 
a jail, with its mangy crowd of drunken, quarrelsome, 
and song-singing rapscaUions. But the thing that 
made sleep all the more a thing not to be dreamed 
of, was my racking impatience to get out of this 
place and find out the whole size of what might have 
happened yonder in the slave-quarters in conse- 
quence of that intolerable miscarriage of mine. 

It was a long night, but the morning got around at 
last. I made a full and frank explanation to the 
court. I said I was a slave, the property of the 
great Earl Grip, who had arrived just after dark 
at the Tabard inn in the village on the other side 
of the water, and had stopped there overnight, by 
compulsion, he being taken deadly sick with a 
strange and sudden disorder. I had been ordered to 
cross to the city in all haste and bring the best 
physician; I was doing my best; naturally I was 
running with all my might; the night was dark, I 
ran against this common person here, who seized me 
by the throat and began to pummel me, although I 
told him my errand, and implored him, for the sake 
of the great earl my master's mortal peril — 

369 



^ 



MARK TWAIN 

The common person interrupted and said it was 
a lie; and was going to explain how I rushed upon 
him and attacked him without a word-^ 

"Silence, sirrah!" from the court. "Take him 
hence and give him a few stripes whereby to teach 
him how to treat the servant of a nobleman after a 
different fashion another time. Go!'* 

Then the court begged my pardon, and hoped I 
would not fail to tell his lordship it was in no wise the 
court's fault that this high-handed thing had hap- 
pened. I said I would make it all right, and so took 
my leave. Took it just in time, too; he was starting 
to ask me why I didn't fetch out these facts the 
moment I was arrested. I said I would if I had 
thought of it — ^which was true — ^but that I was so 
battered by that man that all my wit was knocked 
out of me — and so forth and so on, and got mjrself 
away, still mimibling. 

I didn't wait for breakfast. No grass grew under 
my feet. I was soon at the slave quarters. Empty — 
everybody gone! That is, everybody except one 
body — the slave-master's. It lay there all battered 
to pulp ; and all about were the evidences of a ter- 
rific fight. There was a rude board coflSn on a cart 
at the door, and workmen, assisted by the police, were 
thinning a road through the gaping crowd in order 
that they might bring it in. 

I picked out a man humble enough in life to 
condescend to talk with one so shabby as I» and got 
his accotmt of the matter. 

* * There were sixteen slaves here. They rose agaixigt 
their master in the night, and thou seest how it ended.'* 

370 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

••Yes. How did it begin?" 

** There was no witness but the slaves. They said 
the slave that was most valuable got free of his bonds 
and escaped in some strange way — ^by magic arts 
'twas thought, by reason that he had no key, and the 
locks were neither broke nor in any wise injured. 
When the master discovered his loss, he was mad 
with despair, and threw himself upon his people 
with his heavy stick, who resisted and brake his back 
and in other and divers ways did give him hurts that 
brought him swiftly to his end." 

** This is dreadftil. It will go hard with the slaves, 
no doubt, upon the trial." 

"Marry, the trial is over." 

"Over!" 

"Would they be a week, think you — and the mat- 
ter so simple ? They were not the half of a quarter of 
an hour at it." 

"Why, I don't see how they could determine which 
were the guilty ones in so short a time." 

''Which ones? Indeed, they considered not par- 
ticulars like to that. They condemned them in a 
body. Wit ye not the law? — ^which men say the 
Romans left behind them here when they went — ^that 
if one slave killeth his master all the slaves of that 
man must die for it." 

* * True. I had forgotten. And when will these die ?" 

"Belike within a four and twenty hours; albeit 
some say they will wait a pair of days more, if perad- 
venture they may find the missing one meantime." 

The missing one ! It made me fed tmcomf ortable. 

"Is it likely they will find him?" 
25 371 



MARK TWAIN 

"Before the day is spent — ^yes. They seek h^m 
everywhere. They staad at the gates of the town, 
with certain of the slaves who will discover him to 
them if he cometh, and none can pass out but he wiU 
be first examined." 

"Might one see the place where the rest are coq>- 
fined?" 

**The outside of it — yes. The inside of it — but 
ye will not want to see that." 

I took the address of that prison for future refer- 
ence and then satmtered off. At the fij^t second-hand 
clothing shop I came to, up a back street, I got a 
rough rig stiitable for a common seaman who might be 
going on a cold voyage, and bound up my face with a 
Uberal bandage, saying I had a toothache. This con- 
cealed my worst bruises. It was a transformation. I 
no longer resembled my former self. Then I struck 
out for that wire, found it and followed it to its den. 
It was a Kttle room over a butcher's shop — which 
meant that business wasn't very brisk in the tele- 
graphic line. The young chap in charge was drowsing 
at his table. I locked the door and put the vast key 
in my bosom. This alarmed the yotmg fellow, and he 
was going to make a noise; but I said: 

"Save your wind; if you open yom- mouth you 
are dead, siu"e. Tackle your instrument. Lively. 
now! Call Camelot." 

"This doth amaze me! How should such as you 
know aught of such matters as — " 

"Call Camelot! I am a desperate man. Call 
Camelot, or get away from the instrument and I will 
do it myself." 

372 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

**What— you?" 

"Yes — certainly. Stop gabbling. Call the palace/' 

He made the call. 

"Now, then, call Clarence/* 

"Clarence who?** 

' * Never mind Clarence who. Say you want Clar- 
ence; you'll get an answer." 

He did so. We waited five nerve-straining minutes 
— ^ten minutes — ^how long it did seem! — ^and then 
came a click that was as f amiUar to me as a human 
voice ; for Clarence had been my own pupil. 

"Now, my lad, vacate! They would have known 
my touch, maybe, and so your call was surest; but 
I'm all right now." 

He vacated the place and cocked his ear to listen — 
but it didn't win. i I used a cipher. I didn't waste 
any time in sociabilities with Clarence, but squared 
away for business, straight-off — ^thus : 

"The king is here and in danger. We were cap- 
tured and brought here as slaves. We should not be 
able to prove our identity — and the fact is, I am not 
in a position to try. Send a telegram for the palace 
here which will carry conviction with it." 

His answer came straight back: 

"They don't know anything about the telegraph; 
they haven't had any experience yet, the line to Lon- 
don is so new. Better not venture that. They might 
hang you. Think up something else." 

Might hang us ! Little he knew how closely he was 
crowding the facts. I couldn't think up anything for 
the moment. Then an idea struck me, and I started 
it along: 

373 



MARK TWAIN 

"Send five hundred picked knights with Launcelot 
in the lead; and send them on the jump. Let them 
enter by the southwest gate, and look out for the man 
with a white cloth around his right arm." 

The answer was prompt : 

"They shall start in half an hour." 

"AH right, Clarence; now tell this lad here that 
I'm a friend of yours and a dead-head; and that he 
must be discreet and say nothing about this visit of 
mine." 

The instrument began to talk to the youth and I 
hurried away. I fell to ciphering. In half an hour it 
would be nine o'clock. Knights and horses in heavy 
armor couldn't travel very fast. These would make 
the best time they could, and now that the ground 
was in good condition, and no snow or mud, they 
would probably make a seven-mile gait ; they would 
have to change horses a couple of times ; they would 
arrive about six, or a little after; it would still be 
plenty light enough ; they would see the white doth 
which I should tie around my right arm, and I would 
take command. We would surrotmd that prison and 
have the king out in no time. It would be showy and 
picturesque enough, all things considered, thou|^ I 
would have preferred noonday, on accotmt of the 
more theatrical aspect the thing would have. 

Now, then, in order to increase the strings to my 
bow, I thought I would look up some of those people 
whom I had formerly recognized, and make myscK 
known. That would help us out of our scrape, witfar 
out the knights. But I must proceed cautiously, for 
it was a risky business. I must get into sumptuous 

374 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

raiment, and it wouldn't do to run and jump into it. 
No, I must work up to it by degrees, buying stiit after 
suit of clothes, in shops wide apart, and getting a 
little finer article with each change, until I should 
finally reach silk and velvet, and be ready for my 
project. So I started. 

But the scheme fell through like scat! The first 
comer I turned, I came plump upon one of our slaves, 
snooping arotmd with a watchman. I coughed at the 
moment, and he gave me a sudden look that bit right 
into my marrow. I judge he thought he had heard 
that cough before. I turned immediately into a shop 
and worked along down the cotmter, pricing things 
and watching out of the comer of my eye. Those 
people had stopped, and were talking together and 
looking in at the door. I made up my mind to get 
out the back way, if there was a back way, and I 
asked the shopwoman if I could step out there and 
look for the escaped slave, who was believed to be in 
hiding back there somewhere, and said I was an 
officer in disguise, and my pard was yonder at the 
door with one of the murderers in charge, and would 
she be good enough to step there and tell him he 
needn't wait, but had better go at once to the further 
end of the back alley and be ready to head him off 
when I rousted him out. 

She was blazing with eagerness to see one of those 
already celebrated murderers, and she started on the 
errand at once. I slipped out the back way, locked 
the door behind me, put the key in my pocket and 
started off, chuckling to myself and comfortable. 

Well, I had gone and spoiled it again, made another 

375 



MARK TWAIN 

mistake. A double one, in fact. There were pknty 
of ways to get rid of that officer by some simple and 
plausible device, but no, I must pick out a incturesque 
one ; it is the oying defect of my character. And then, 
I had ordered my procedure upon what the officer, 
being htunan, would naturally do ; whereas when you 
are least expecting it, a man will now and then go 
and do the very thing which it's not natural for him 
to do. The natural thing for the officer to do, in this 
case, was to follow straight on my heels; he would 
find a stout oaken door, securely locked, between 
him and me; before he could break it down, I should 
be far away and engaged in slipping into a succestaon 
of baffling disguises which would soon get me into 
a sort of raiment which was a surer protection from 
meddling law-dogs in Britain than any amount of 
mere innocence and purity of character. But instead 
of doing the natural thing, the officer took me at my 
word, and followed my instructions. And so, as I 
came trotting out of that cul de sac, full of satisfaction 
with my own cleverness, he turned the comer and I 
walked right into his handcuffs. If I had known it 
was a cul de sac — ^however, there isn't any excusing 
a bltmder like that, let it go. Charge it up to profit 
and loss. 

Of course, I was indignant, and swore I had just 
come ashore from a long voyage, and all that sort of 
thing — ^just to see, you know, if it would deceive that 
slave. But it didn't. He knew me. Then I 
proached him for betraying me. He was more 
prised than hurt. He stretched his eyes wide, 
said: 

376 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

* 

**What, jrtxitdst have me let thee, of all men, 
escape aaa not hang with us, when thouVt. the very 
cause of otir hangii^? Go to?" 

"Go to" was their way of sa3ring, "I should smile!'* 
CM* **I like that!" Queer talkers, those people. 

Well, there was a sort of bastard justice in his view 
ci the case, and so I dropped the matter. When you 
can't cure a disaster by argument, what is the use to 
argue ? It isn't my way. So I only said : 

"You're not going to be hanged. None of us are." 

Both men laughed, and the slave said : 

"Ye have not ranked as a fool— before. You 
might better keep your reputation, seeing the strain 
wotdd not be for long." 

"It will stand it, I reckon. Before to-morrow we 
shall be out of prison, and free to go where we will, 
besides." 

The witty officer lifted at his left ear with his 
thumb, made a rasping noise in his throat, and said : 

"Out of prison — ^yes — ^ye say true. And free like- 
wise to go where ye will, so ye wander not out of 
his grace the Devirs sultry realm." 

I kept my temper, and said, indiflFerently: 

"Now I suppose you really think we are going to 
hang within a day or two." 

"I thought it not many minutes ago, for so the 
thing was decided and proclaimed." 

"Ah, then you've changed your mind, is that it?" 

"Even that. I only thought, then; I know, now." 

I felt sarcastical, so I said: 

"Oh, sapient servant of the law, condescend to tell 
us, then, what you know.** 

377 



MARK TWAIN 



''That ye will all be hanged to-day^ at mid-after- 
noon! Oho! that shot hit home! Lean upon me." 

The fact is I did need to lean upon somebody. My 
knights couldn't arrive in time. They would be as 
much as three hours too late. Nothing in the world 
could save the King of England; nor me, which was 
more important. More important, not merely to mei 
but to the nation — ^the only nation on earth standing 
ready to blossom into civilization. I was sick. I said 
no more, there wasn't anything to say. I knew what 
the man meant; that, if the missing slave was found» 
the postponement would be revoked, the execution 
take place to-day. Well, the missing slave was found. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII 

SIR LAUNCBLOT AND KNIGHTS TO THB RBSCUB 

N EARING four in the afternoon. The scene was 
just outside the walls of London. A cool, com- 
fortable, superb day, with a brilliant sun; the kind 
of day to make one want to live, not die. The 
multitude was prodigious and far-reaching; and yet 
we fifteen poor devils hadn't a friend in it. There 
was something painful in that thought, look at it 
how you might. There we sat, on our tall scaffold, 
the butt of the hate and mockery of all those enemies. 
We were being made a holiday spectacle. They had 
built a sort of grand -stand for the nobility and 
gentry, and these were there in full force, with their 
ladies. We recognized a good many of them. 

The crowd got a brief and unexpected dash of 
diversion out of the king. The moment we were 
freed of our bonds he sprang up, in his fantastic 
rags, with face bruised out of all recognition, and 
proclaimed himself Arthur, King of Britain, and de- 
noimced the awful penalties of treason upon every 
soul there present if hair of his sacred head were 
touched. It startled and surprised him to hear them 
break into a vast roar of laughter. It wounded his 
dignity, and he locked himself up in silence, then, 
although the crowd begged him to go on, and 

379 



MARK TWAIN 

tried to provoke him to it by catcalls, jeers, and 
shouts of: 

"Let him speak! The king! The king! his hum- 
ble subjects hunger and thirst for words of wisdom 
out of the mouth of their master his Serene and 
Sacred Raggedness!" 

But it went for nothing. He put on all his 
majesty and sat under this rain of contempt and 
insult tmmoved. He certainly was great in his way. 
Absently, I had taken off my white bandage and 
wound it about my right arm. When the crowd 
noticed this, they began upon me. They said: 

' ' Doubtless this sailor-man is his minister— observe 
his costly badge of office!" 

I let them go on until they got tired, and then 
I said: 

"Yes, I am his minister, The Boss; and to-morrow 
you will hear that from Camelot which — " 

I got no further. They drowned me out with 
joyous derision. But presently there was sileooe; 
for the sheriffs of London, in their official robes, with 
their subordinates, began to make a stir which indi- 
cated that business was about to begin. In the hush 
which followed, our crime was recited, the death* 
warrant read, then everybody uncovered while a 
priest uttered a prayer. 

Then a slave was blindfolded; the hangman tm^ 
slung his rope. There lay the smooth road below 
us, we upon one side of it, the banked multitude 
walling its other side — 3, good clear road, and kept 
free by the police — ^how good it would be to SBHa 
my five htmdred horsemen come tearing down itk 

380 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

But no, it was out of the possibilities.?^ I followed its 
receding thread out into the distanq^not a horse- 
man on it, or sign of one. ;f 

There was a jerk, and the slave |mng dangling; 
dangling and hideously squirming^ fS&r his limbs 
were not tied. 

A second rope was unslung, in a moment another 
slave was dangling. 

In a minute a third slave was struggling in the air. 
It was dreadful. I turned away my head a mo- 
ment, and when I turned back I missed the king! 
They were blindfolding him! I was paralyzed; I 
couldn't move, I was choking, my tongue was petri- 
fied. They finished blindfolding him, they led him 
under the rope. I couldn't shake off that clinging 
impotence. But when I saw them put the noode 
around his neck, then everything let go in me and 
I made a spring to the rescue — ^and as I made it I 
shot one more glance abroad — ^by George ! here they 
came, a-tilting! — ^five hundred mailed and belted 
knights on bicycles! 

The grandest sight that ever was seen. Lord, how 
the plumes streamed, how the sun flamed and 
flashed from the endless procession of webby wheels! 

I waved my right arm as Laimcelot swept in — ^he 
recognized my rag — I tore away noose and bandage, 
and shouted : 

**0n your knees, every rascal of you, and salute 
the king! Who fails shall sup in hell to-night!" 

I always use that high style when I'm climaxing 
an effect. Well, it was noble to see Launcelot and 
the boys swarm up onto that scaflfold and heave 

381 



MARK TWAIN 

sheriffs and such overboard. And it was fine to see 
that astonished multitude go down on their knees 
and beg their lives of the king they had just been 
deriding and insulting. And as he stood apart there, 
receiving this homage in rags, I thought to myself, 
well, really there is something peculiarly grand about 
the gait and bearing of a king, after all. 

I was immensely satisfied. Take the whole situa- 
tion all arotmd, it was one of the gaudiest effects I 
ever instigated. 

And presently up comes Clarence, his own self! 
and winks, and says, very modemly: 

**Good deal of a stirprise, wasn't it? I knew 
jrou'd like it. I've had the boys practising this long 
time, privately; and just hungry for a chance to 
show off." 



CHAPTER XXXIX 

THE Yankee's fight with the knights 

HOME again, at Camelot. A morning or two later 
I found the paper, damp from the press, by my 
plate at the breakfast-table. I turned to the ad- 
vertising columns, knowing I should find something 
of personal interest to me there. It was this : 

OE PAH LB B£^ 

j^Dow that tbe great locd and Aha* 
txiooa Kiii8ht» SIR SAgRAMOR LB 
DESI>[OUS Having ooodeaooded to 
mcii tLe King*a Minister, Hank Mdfw 
gan, the which la snrnamed The BcMa* 
for satis! getkm of ollcnoe anciently givcot 
these wilL cngi^ In, the lista hf 
Camdoi about the tonrth hour of the 
morning of the abteenth day of thia 
nest ancceecHng montlu The btttle 
ht; 4 1 outiaiioey sidi die said oicnot 
ol m deadlly aoitp w^hMng ol bo 

SB PAR LEhQK 



383 



MARK TWAIN 



Clarence's editorial reference to this affair was to 
this effect : 



thdrew. | It will be obterred, by a glTnoe at our 



Work maintained 

there since, soon 

lastic have witq 

oked interest 

upon the CA^- 

vebeen iD^d 

by the an^ns, 

ent out ch^y by 

f terian BMrni^ and 

c some :^tfng men 

of our under the 

I guidance of ths 

i%f aid in a^known 

bi great enterpnae 

o« making pure; 

ejen) 

ouwement had its 

cnigin in preven 

lyfi ever been a 

sk>n>idocir 

CD the i^u- 

otheroDc 

e 

Tbe 

tb»«anie 

Ooientesent 

Ized thirty of 

Oeeds and hear- 

wfaich,|{yxars age ! 

•Mcesgn was osgan- 

ing, the missions) 

«M) that both had 

lo withdraw' and 

mach to their 

grief, 



advertising oolnmnst that the commn- 
nity is to be favored iiith a treat of un- 
usual interest in the tournament line. 
The names of the artists are warrant of 
good enterrvmment. The box-office 
will be open at noon of the Ijth; ad- 
mission 3 cents, reserve^/ seats 5; pro- 
ceeds to go to the haq)ital fund j^e 
royal pair and all tHe Ooort will be pres- 
ent. With these c»eptions» and the 
press and the clergy, tbc fkee list is strict- 
ly suslTended. Parties are hereby warn- 
ed against buying tickets of ipeculatois; 
they will not be good at the door. 
Everybody knows and liket The Boss, 
everybody knows and likes Sir Sag.; 
come, let us give tne lads a good send- 
ofF. ReMember, tne proceeds go to a 
great and free charity, and cue irfiose 
broad begevolence stretches ool Its hdp- 
ing hand, warm with the blood ol a lov- 
ing heart, to all that suj^er, tegjndless of 
race, creed, condition or 
only charity yet established in txie earth 
which has no polltioo-ieligioai stop- 
cock on its compassion, but says Here 
flows Jthe stream, let aU come and 
drink I turnout, aU hands! fetcl along 
your dou3hnuts and your gam- drops 
and have a good time. F!e for sale on 
the gromuft, and rocks to crack it with; 
also ciRcus-lemonade— three dnpe of 
lime juice to a barrel of water. 

N. B. This it Ae first tommamim 
under the new hw, ttfMidk allam tack 
combatant to use any weapon he ma i pre- 
fer. Yott want to make a note of *7>qi 



our disappoMCnf 
(iromptly aiid-( 
two of their felc 
erlain, and otlis 

ers havcQalieadf 

spoken, yoa |p 

fumisnedfoc 

their use^m 

makeaod 

theipnd 

leticw 



01 intiod 
dttctioo iHd 
Hdkj are mill 

ingfricDdstoiw 
ried, andlecvs tfk* 
thotjkind WQidiiN 
which yoa n^ |0f> 
hind; and itist 
home matter ol k 
it isourdmp 
dhrect tbemto 
nowmidertho 
g fieldf « 



are warm-hess4ii( 
azprl, legioosb^ 
not to *< build • 
ond,'( and th* 
der instrucd 
onsof our 
another 
fbonhali's 
odety, ^MA 
They go ibi- 
say tost "*i&r 
ionaries to 
say sdndiog 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

Up to the day set, there was no talk in all Britain 
of anything but this combat. All other topics sank 
into insignificance and passed out of men's thoughts 
and interest. It was not because a tournament was 
a great matter; it was not because Sir Sagramor had 
found the Holy Grail, for he had not, but had 
failed; it was not because the second (official) per- 
sonage in the kingdom was one of the duelists; no, 
all these features were commonplace. Yet there 
was abundant reason for the extraordinary interest 
which this coming fight was creating. It was bom 
of the fact that all the nation knew that this was 
not to be a duel between mere men, so to speak, but 
a duel between two mighty magicians; a duel not of 
muscle but of mind, not of human skill but of super* 
human art and craft; a final struggle for supremacy 
between the two master enchanters of the age. It 
was realized that the most prodigious achievements 
of the most renowned knights could not be worthy 
of comparison with a spectacle like this; they could 
be but child's play, contrasted with this mysterious 
and awful battle of the gods. Yes, all the world 
knew it was going to be in reality a duel between 
Merlin and me, a measuring of his magic powers 
against mine. It was known that Merlin had been 
busy whole days and nights together, imbuing Sir 
Sagramor's arms and armor with supernal powers of 
offense and defense, and that he had prociured for him 
from the spirits of the air a fleecy veil which would 
render the wearer invisible to his antagonist while 
still visible to other men. Against Sir Sagramor, so 
weaponed and protected, a thousand knights could 

38s 



MARK TWAIN 

accomplish nothing; against him no known enchant- 
ments could prevail. These facts were sure; regard- 
ing them there was no doubt, no reason for doubt 
There was but one question: might there be still 
other enchantments, unknown to Merlin, whidi 
could render Sir Sagramor's veil transparent to me, 
and make his enchanted mail vulnerable to my 
weapons? This was the one thing to be decided in 
the lists. Until then the world must remain in 
suspense. 

^ So the world thought there was a vast matter at 
stake here, and the world was right, but it was not 
the one they had in their minds. No, a far vaster 
one was upon the cast of this die: the life of knight- 
errantry. I was a champion, it was true, but not the 
champion of the frivolous black arts, I was the 
champion of hard unsentimental common sense and 
reason. I was entering the lists to either destroy 
knight-errantry or be its victim. 

Vast as the show-grounds were, there were no 
vacant spaces in them outside of the lists, at ten 
o'clock on the morning of the i6th. The mammoth 
grand-stand was clothed in flags, streamers, and rich 
tapestries, and packed with several acres of small-fry 
tributary kings, their suites, and the British aris- 
tocracy ; with our own royal gang in the chief place, 
and each and every individual a flashing prism cf 
gaudy silks and velvets — ^well, I never saw anything 
to begin with it but a fight between an Upper Mis* 
sissippi sunset and the aurora boreaKs. The hugo 
camp of beflagged and gay-colored tents at one end 
of the lists, with a stiff-standing sentinel at every 

386 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

door and a shining shield hanging by him for chal- 
lenge, was another fine sight. You see, every knight 
was there who had any ambition or any caste feel- 
ing; for my feeling toward their order was not much 
of a secret, and so here was their chance. If I won 
my fight with Sir Sagramor, others would have 
the right to call me out as long as I might be willing 
to respond. 

Down at our end there were but two tents ; one for 
me, and another for my servants. At the appointed 
hour the king made a sign, and the heralds, in their 
tabards, appeared and made proclamation, naming 
the combatants and stating the cause of quarrel. 
There was a pause, then a ringing bugle-blast, which 
was the signal for us to come forth. All the multi- 
tude caught their breath, and an eager curiosity 
flashed into every face. 

Out from his tent rode great Sir Sagramor, an 
imposing tower of iron, stately and rigid, his huge 
spear standing upright in its socket and grasped in 
his strong hand, his grand horse's face and breast 
cased in steel, his body clothed in rich trappings that 
almost dragged the grotind — oh, a most noble pic- 
ture. A great shout went up, of welcome and 
admiration. 

And then out I came. But I didn't get any 
shout. There was a wondering and eloquent silence 
for a moment, then a great wave of laughter began 
to sweep .along that human sea, but a warning bugle- 
blast cut its career short. I was in the simplest and 
comfortablest of gymnast costumes — ^flesh-colored 
tights from neck to heel, with blue silk pufSngs about 

26 387 



MARK TWAIN 

my loins, and bareheaded. My horse was not above 
medium size, but he was alert, slender-limbed, 
muscled with watch-springs, and just a greyhound to 
go. He was a beauty, glossy as silk, and naked as 
he was when he was bom, except for bridle and 
ranger-saddle. 

The iron tower and the gorgeous bed-quilt came 
cumbrously but gracefully pirouetting down the 
lists, and we tripped lightly up to meet them. We 
halted; the tower saluted, I responded; then we 
wheeled and rode side by side to the grand-stand 
and faced our king and queen, to whom we made 
obeisance. The queen exclaimed: 

"Alack, Sir Boss, wilt fight naked, and without 
lance or sword or — " 

But the king checked her and made her understand, 
\\^th a polite phrase or two, that this was none of her 
business. The bugles rang again; and we separated 
and rode to the ends of the lists, and took position. 
Now old Merlin stepped into view and cast a dainty 
web of gossamer threads over Sir Sagramor which 
turned him into Hamlet's ghost; the king made a 
sign, the bugles blew. Sir Sagramor laid his great 
lance in rest, and the next moment here he came 
thundering down the course with his veil flying out 
behind, and I went whistling through the air like an 
arrow to meet him — cocking my ear the while, as if 
noting the invisible knight's position and progress by 
hearing, not sight. A chorus of encouraging shouts 
burst out for him, and one brave voice flung out a 
heartening word for me — said; 

''Go it, slim Jim!" 

388 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

It was an even bet that Clarence had procured that 
favor for me — ^and ftimished the language, too. When 
that formidable lance-point was within a yard and a 
half of my breast I twitched my horse aside without 
an effort, and the big knight swept by, scoring a 
blank. I got plenty of applause that time. We 
turned, braced up, and down we came again. An- 
other blank for the knight, a roar of applause for me. 
This same thing was repeated once more; and it 
fetched such a whirlwind of applause that Sir Sagra- 
mor lost his temper, and at once changed his tactics 
and set himself the task of chasing me down. Why, 
he hadn't any show in the world at that; it was a 
game of tag, with all the advantage on my side; I 
whirled out of his path with ease whenever I chose, 
and once I slapped him on the back as I went to the 
rear. Finally I took the chase into my own hands; 
and after that, turn, or twist, or do what he would, he 
was never able to get behind me again; he found 
himself always in front at the end of his manceuver. 
So he gave up that business and retired to his end of 
the lists. His temper was clear gone now, and he 
forgot himself and flimg an insult at me which dis- 
posed of mine. I slipped my lasso from the horn of 
my saddle, and grasped the coil in my right hand. 
This time you should have seen him come ! — it was a 
business trip, sure; by his gait there was blood in 
his eye. I was sitting my horse at ease, and swinging 
the great loop of my lasso in wide circles about my 
head; the moment he was tmder way, I started for 
him; when the space between us had narrowed to 
forty feet, I sent the snaky spirals of the rope 

389 



MARK TWAIN 

a-cleaving through the air, then darted aside and 
faced about and brought my trained animal to a 
halt with all his feet braced under him for a surge. 
The next moment the rope sprang taut and yanked 
Sir Sagramor out of the saddle! Great Scott, but 
there was a sensation ! 

Unquestionably, the popular thing in this world is 
novelty. These i)eople had never seen anything of 
that cowboy business before, and it carried them 
clear off their feet with delight. From all around and 
everywhere, the shout, w^t up: 

"Encore! encore!" , i . 

I wondered where tiiey got the word, but there was 
no time to cipher en i:^.wjlc,];ical matters, because the 
whole knight-errantry hive was just humming now, 
and my prospect for trade couldn't have been better. 
The moment my lasso was released and Sir Sagramor 
had been assisted to his tent, I hauled in the slack, 
took my station and began to swing my loop aiound 
my head again. I was sure to have use for it as soon 
as they could elect a successor for Sir Sagramor, and 
that couldn't take long where there were so many 
himgry candidates. Indeed, they elected one straight 
off — Sir Hervis de Revel. 

Bzz! Here he came, like a house afire; I dodged: 
he passed like a flash, with my horse-hair coils settling 
around his neck; a second or so later, fst! his saddle 
was empty, 

I got another encore; and another, and another, 
and still another. When I had snaked five men out, 
things began to look serious to the ironclads, and they 
stopped and consulted together. As a result, they 

390 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

decided that it was time to waive etiquette and send 
their greatest and best against me. To the astonish- 
ment of that little world, I lassoed Sir Lamorak de 
Galis, and after him Sir Galahad. So you see there 
was simply nothing to be done now, but play their 
right bower — ^bring out the superbest of the superb, 
the mightiest of the mighty, the great Sir Launcelot 
himself ! 

A proud moment for me*^ "^ should think so. 
Yonder was Arthur, King of Britain; yonder was 
Guinever ; yes, and whole tribes of little provincial 
kings and kinglets; and in ^he tented camp yonder, 
renowned knights from man' l?nds; and likewise the 
selectest body known to vJii /airy ,Hhe Knights of the 
Table Roimd, the most illustrious in Christendom; 
and biggest fact of all, the very sun of their shining 
system was yotider couching his lance, the focal point 
of forty thousand adoring eyes; and all by myself, 
here was I laying for him. Across my mind flitted 
the dear image of a certain hello-girl of West Hart- 
ford, and I wished she could see me now. In that 
moment, down came the Invincible, with the rush of 
a whirlwind — the courtly world rose to its feet and 
bent forward — the fateful coils went circling through 
the air, and before you could wink I was towing Sir 
Launcelot across the field on his back, and kissing my 
hand to the storm of waving kerchiefs and the thim- 
der-crash of applause that greeted me! 

Said I to myself, as I coiled my lariat and himg 
it on my saddle-horn, and sat there drunk with 
glory, **The victory is perfect — ^no other will venture 
against me — ^knight-errantry is dead." Now imagine 

3pi 



"v 



^^ MARK TWAIN 



my astonishment — and everybody else's, too — to 
hear the peculiar bugle-call which announces that 
another competitor is about to enter the listsl There 
was a mystery here; I couldn't account for this 
thing. Next, I noticed Merlin gliding away &om me; 
and then I noticed that my lasso was gone! The old 
sleight-of-hand expert had stolen it, sure, and slipped 
it imder his robe. 

The bugle blew again. I looked, and down came 
Sagramor riding again, with his dust brushed off and 
his veil nicely rearranged. I trotted up to meet him, 
and pretended to find him by the sound of his horse's 
hoofs. He said: 

"Thou'rt quick of ear, but it will not save thee 
from this!" and he touched the hilt of his great 
sword. "An ye are not able to see it, because of the 
influence of the veil, know that it is no cumbrous 
lance, but a sword — and I ween ye will not be able 
to avoid it." 

His visor was up ; there was death in his smile. I 
should never be able to dodge his sword, that was 
plain. Somebody was going to die this time. If he 
got the drop on me, I could name the corpse. We 
rode forward together, and saluted the royalties. 
This time the king was disturbed. He said: 
Where is thy strange weapon?" 
It is stolen, sire." 
Hast another at hand?" 

**No, sire, I brought only the one." 

Then Merlin mixed in: 

* * He brought but the one because there waslrat tbe 
one to bring. There exists none other but that 

392 



it 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

It belongeth to the king of the Demons of the Sea. 
This man is a pretender, and ignorant; else he had 
known that that weapon can be used in but eight 
bouts only, and then it vanisheth away to its home 
imder the sea." 

"Then is he weaponless,** said the king. "Sir 
Sagramor, ye will grant him leave to borrow." 

"And I will lend!** said Sir Launcelot, limping 
up. "He is as brave a knight of his hands as any 
that be on live, and he shall have mine.*' 

He put his hand on his sword to draw it, but Sir 
Sagramor said : 

"Stay, it may not be. He shall fight with his 
own weapons; it was his privilege to choose them and 
bring them. If he has erred, on his head be it.** 

"Knight!** said the king. "Thou*rt overwrought 
with passion; it disorders thy mind. Wouldst kill a 
naked man?*' 

"An he do it, he shall answer it to me," said Sir 
Laimcelot. 

"I will answer it to any he that desireth!" retorted 
Sir Sagramor hotly. 

Merlin broke in, rubbing his hands and smiling 
his low-downest smile of malicious gratification: 

"*Tis well said, right well said! And 'tis enough 
of parleying, let my lord the king deliver the battle 
signal.'* 

The king had to yield. The bugle made proclama- 
tion, and we ttuned apart and rode to our stations. 
There we stood, a hundred yards apart, facing each 
other, rigid and motionless, like horsed statues. And 
so. we remained, in a soundless hush, as much as a 

393 



MARK TWAIN 

full minute, everybody gazing, nobody stirring. It 
seemed as if the king could not take heart to give 
the signal. But at last he lifted his hand, the clear 
note of a bugle followed. Sir Sagramor's long blade 
described a flashing curve in the air, and it was 
superb to see him come. I sat still. On he came* 
I did not move. People got so excited that they 
shouted to me : 

' * Fly, fly ! Save thyself ! This is murther !" 

I never budged so much as an inch tiU that 
thundering apparition had got within fifteen paces 
of me; then I snatched a dragoon revolver out of 
my holster, there was a flash and a roar, and the 
revolver was back in the holster before anybody, 
could tell what had happened. 

Here was a rideriess horse plunging by, and 
yonder lay Sir Sagramor, stone dead. 

The people that ran to him were stricken dumb 
to find that the life was actually gone out of the man 
and no reason for it visible, no hurt upon his body, 
nothing like a wound. There was a hole through 
the breast of his chain-mail, but they attached no 
importance to a little thing like that; and as a ' 
bullet-wotmd there produces but little blood, none 
came in sight because of the clothing and swaddlings 
imder the armor. The body was dragged over to 
let the king and the swells look down upon it. They 
were stupefied with astonishment natiu"ally. I wa^ 
requested to come and explain the miracle. But I 
remained in my tracks, like a statue, and said: 

** If it is a command, I will come, but my lord 
the king knows that I am where the laws of combat 

394 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

require me to remain while any desire to come 

against me." 

- I waited. Nobody challenged. Then I said : 

'*If there are any who doubt that this field is 
well and fairly won, I do not wait for them to 
challenge me, I challenge them." 

''It is a gallant offer," said the king, "and well 
beseems you. Whom will you name first?" 

* ' I name none, I challenge all ! Here I stand, and 
dare the chivalry of England to come against me — 
not by individuals, but in niass!" 

**What!" shouted a score of knights. 

*'You have heard the challenge. Take it, or I 
proclaim you recreant knights and vanquished, 
every one!" 

It was a "bluff" you know. At such a time it is 
sound judgment to put on a bold face and play your 
hand for a hundred times what it is worth ; forty-nine 
times out of fifty nobody dares to "call," and you 
rake in the chips. But just this once — ^well, things 
looked squally! In just no time, five hundred 
knights were scrambling into their saddles, and 
before you could wink a widely scattering drove were 
under way and clattering down upon me. I snatched 
both revolvers from the holsters and began to 
measure distances and calculate chances. 

Bang! One saddle empty. Bang! another one. 
Bang — ^bang, and I bagged two. Well, it was nip 
and tuck with us, and I knew it. If I spent the 
eleventh shot without convincing these people, the 
twelfth man would kill me, sure. And so I never did 
feel so happy as I did when my ninth downed its 

395 



MARK TWAIN 

man and I detected the wavering in the crowd 
which is premonitory of panic. An instant lost now 
could knock out my last chance. But I didn't lose 
it. I raised both revolvers and pointed them — ^the 
halted host stood their ground just about one good 
square moment, then broke and fled. 

The day was mine. Knight-errantry was a 
doomed institution. The march of civilization was 
begun. How did I fed? Ah, you never oould 
imagine it. 

And Brer Merlin? His stock was flat again. 
Somehow, every time the magic of fol-de-rd tried 
conclusions with the magic of science, the magic of 
f ol-de-rol got left. 



CHAPTER XL 

THREE YEARS LATER 

WHEN I broke the back of knight-errantry 
that time, I no longer felt obliged to work in 
secret. So, the very next day I exposed my hidden 
schools, my mines, and my vast system of clandes- 
tine factories and workshops to an astonished world. 
That is to say, I exposed the nineteenth century to 
the inspection of the sixth. 

Well, it is always a good plan to follow up an 
advantage promptly. The knights were tempo- 
rarily down, but if I would keep them so I must just 
simply paralyze them — ^nothing short of that would 
answer. You see, I was ''bluffing" that last time 
in the field; it would be natural for them to work 
aroimd to that conclusion, if I gave them a chance. 
So I must not give them time; and I didn't. 

I renewed my challenge, engraved it on brass, 
posted it up where any priest could read it to them, 
and also kept it standing in the advertising columns 
of the paper. 

I not only renewed it, but added to its propor- 
tions. I said, name the day, and I would take fifty 
assistants and stand up against the massed chivalry 
of the whole earth and destroy it. 

I was not bluffing this time. I meant what I 

397 



MARK TWAIN 

said; I could do what I promised. There wasn't any 
way to misunderstand the language of that chal- 
lenge. Even the dtdlest of the chivalry perceived 
that this was a plain case of "put up, or shut up.'' 
They were wise and did the latter. In all the next 
three years they gave me no trouble worth men- 
tioning. 

Consider the three years sped. Now look around 
on England. A happy and prosperous country, and 
strangely altered. Schools everywhere, and several 
colleges; a number of pretty good newspapers. 
Even authorship was taking a start ; Sir Dinadan the 
Humorist was first in the field, with a voltune of 
gray-headed jokes which I had been familiar with 
during thirteen centiuies. If he had left out that 
old rancid one about the lecttu'er I wouldn't have 
said anything; but I couldn't stand that one. I 
suroressed theJ)ook andjianged th e author . 
^Slavery was dead and gone; all men were equal 
before the law; taxation had been equalized. The 
telegraph, the telephone, the phonograph, the type- 
writer, the sewing-machine, and all the thousand 
willing and handy servants of steam and electricity 
were working their way into favor. We had a 
steamboat or two on the Thames, we had steam 
war-ships, and the beginnings of a steam commercial 
marine ; I was getting ready to send out an expeditioQ 
to discover America. 

We were building several lines of railway, and our 
line from Camelot to London was already finished 
and in operation. I was shrewd enough to make all 
oflBces connected with the passenger service places 

398 



■; ■ 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

of high and distinguished honor. My idea was to 
attract the chivahy and nobility, and make them 
useful and keep them out of mischief. The plan, 
worked very well, the competition for the places 
was hot. The conductor of the 4.33 express was a 
duke ; there wasn't a passenger conductor on the line 
below the degree of earl. They were good men, 
every one, but they had two defects which I couldn't 
cure, and so had to wink at : they wouldn't lay aside 
their armor, and they would ** knock down" fare — 
I mean rob the company. 

There was hardly a knight in all the land who 
wasn't in some useful employment. They were 
going from end to end of the country in all manner 
of useful missionary capacities; their penchant for 
wandering, and their experience in it, made them 
altogether the most effective spreaders of civilization 
we had. They went clothed in steel and equipped^ 
with sword and lance and battle-ax, and if they 
couldn't persuade a person to try a sewing-machine 
on the instalment plan, or a melodeon, or a barbed- 
wire fence, or a prohibition jotunal, or any of the 
other thousand and one things they canvassed for, 
they removed him and passed on. 

I was very happy. Things were working steadily 
toward a secretly longed-for point. You see, I had 
two schemes in my head which were the vastest of 
all my projects. The one was to overthrow the 
Catholic Church and set up the Protestant faith on 
its ruins — ^not as an Established Church, but a go-as- 
you-please one; and the other project was to get a 
decree issued by and by, commanding that upon 

399 



t 
\ 



MARK TWAIN 

Arthur's death tinlimited suffrage should be intro- 
duced, and given to men and women alike — at any 
rate to all men, wise or unwise, and to all mothets 
who at middle age should be found to know nearly 
as much as their sons at twenty-one. Arthur was 
good for thirty years yet, he being about my own 
age — that is to say, forty — and I believed that in that 
time I could easily have the active part of the popula- 
tion of that day ready and eager for an event which 
should be the first of its kind in the history of the 
world — a roimded and complete governmental revolu- 
tion without bloodshed. The result to be a republic. 
Well, I may as well confess, though I do feel ashamed 
when I think of it : I was beginning to have a base 
hankering to be its first president myself. Yes, 
there was more or less human nattire in me; I found 
that out. 

Clarence was with me as concerned the revolution, 
but in a modified way. His idea was a republic, with- 
out privileged orders, but with a hereditary nxyal 
family at the head of it instead of an elective chief 
magistrate. He beUeved that no nation that had 
ever known the joy of worshiping a royal family could 
ever be robbed of it and not fade away and die of 
melancholy. I urged that kings were dangerous. He 
said, then have cats. He was stu-e that a royal family 
of cats would answer every purpose. They would be 
as useful as any other royal family, they wotdd know 
as much, they would have the same virtues and the 
same treacheries, the same disposition to get up shin- 
dies with other royal cats, they would be laughably 
vain and absurd and never know it, they would 

400 



A CONNECTICaX YANKEE 

be wholly inexpensive; finally, they wotild have as 
sound a divine right as any other royal house, and 
"Tom VII., or Tom XI., or Tom XIV. by the grace 
of God King," would sound as well as it would when 
appUed to the ordinary royal tom-cat with tights on. 
"And as a rule," said he, in his neat modem English, 
"the character of these cats would be considerably 
above the character of the average king, and this 
would be an immense moral advantage to the nation, 
for the reason that a nation always models its morals 
after its monarch's. The worship of royalty being 
foimded in unreason, these graceful and harmless cats 
would easily become as sacred as any other royalties, 
and indeed more so, because it would presently be 
noticed that they hanged nobody, beheaded nobody, 
imprisoned nobody, inflicted no cruelties or injustices 
of any sort, and so must be worthy of a deeper love 
and reverence than the customary human king, and 
would certainly get it. The eyes of the whole harried 
world would soon be fixed upon this himiane and 
gentle system, and royal butchers would presently 
begin to disappear; their subjects would fill the 
vacancies with catlings from otu- own royal house; we 
should become a factory; we should supply the 
thrones of the world ; within forty years all Europe 
would be governed by cats, and we should ftmiish the 
cats. The reign of imiversal peace would begin then, 
to end no more forever. • . . Me-e-e-yow-cw-ouhow — 
Jzt! — wow!'* 

Hang him, I supposed he was in earnest, and was 
beginning to be persuaded by him, tmtil he exploded 
that cat-howl and startled me almost out of my 

401 



i 



MARK TWAIN 

clothes. But he never could be in earnest. He didn't 
know what it was. He had pictured a distinct and 
perfectly rational and feasible improvement upon 
constitutional monarchy, but he was too feather- 
headed to know it, or care anything about it, either. 
I was going to give him a scolding, but Sandy came 
flying in at that moment, wild with terror, and so 
choked with sobs that for a minute she could not get 
her voice. I ran and took her in my arms, and 
lavished caresses upon her and said^ beseechingly : 

'* Speak, darling, speak! What is it?" 

Her head fell limp upon my bosom, and she gasped, 
almost inaudibly: 

* ' Hello-Central !' ' 

''Quick!" I shouted to Clarence; ** telephone the 
king's homeopath to come!" 

In two minutes I was kneeling by the child's crib, 
and Sandy was despatching servants here, there, and 
everywhere, all over the palace. I took in the situa- 
tion almost at a glance — ^membranous croup ! I bent 
down and whispered: 

**Wake up, sweetheart! Hello-Central!" 

She opened her soft eyes languidly, and made out 
to say: 

'Tapa." 

That was a comfort. She was far from dead yet. 
I sent for preparations of sulphur, I rousted out the 
croup-kettle myself; for I don't sit down and wait 
for doctors when Sandy or the child is sick. I knew 
how to nurse both of them, and had had experience. 
This little chap had lived in my arms a good part of 
its small life, and often I could soothe away its trou- 

402 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

bles and get it to laugh through the tear-dews on its 
eyelashes when even its mother couldn't. 

Sir Launcelot, in his richest armor, came striding 
along the great hall now on his way to the stock- 
board ; he was president of the stock-board, and occu- 
pied the Siege Perilous, which he had bought of Sir 
Galahad ; for the stock-board consisted of the Knights 
of the Roimd Table, and they used the Rotmd Table 
for business purposes now. Seats at it were worth — 
well, you would jiever believe the figiu*e, so it is no 
use to state it. Sir Launcelot was a bear, and he had 
put up a comer in one of the new lines, and was just 
getting ready to squeeze the shorts to-day ; but what 
of that? He was the same old Latmcelot, and when 
he glanced in as he was passing the door and found 
out that his pet was sick, that was enough for him; 
bulls and bears might fight it out their own way for 
all him, he would come right in here and stand by 
little Hello-Central for all he was worth. And that 
was what he did. He shied his helmet into the cor- 
ner, and in half a minute he had a new wick in the 
alcohol lamp and was firing up on the croup-kettle. 
By this time Sandy had built a blanket canopy over 
the crib, and everything was ready. 

Sir Latmcelot got up steam, he and I loaded up the 
kettle with unslaked lime and carbolic add, with a 
touch of lactic add added thereto, then filled the 
thing up with water and inserted the steam-spout 
under the canopy. Everything was shipshape now, 
and we sat down on dther side of the crib to stand 
our watch. Sandy was so grateful and so comforted 
that she charged a couple of church-wardens with 

27 403 



X 



MARK TWAIN 

willow-bark and sumach-tobacco for tis, and told us 
to smoke as much as we pleased, it couldn't get under 
the canopy, and she was used to smoke, being the 
first lady in the land who had ever seen a doud 
blown. Well, there couldn't be a more contented or 
comfortable sight than Sir Launcelot in his noble 
armor sitting in gracious serenity at the end of a yard 
of snowy church-warden. He was a beautiful man, 
a lovely man, and was just intended to make a wife 
and children happy. But, of course, Guenever — how- 
ever, it's no use to cry over what's done and can't be 
helped. 

Well, he stood watch-and-watch with me, right 
straight through, for three days and nights, till the 
child was out of danger; then he took her up in his 
great arms and kissed her, with his plumes falling 
about her golden head, then laid her softly in Sandy's 
lap again and took his stately way down the vast 
hall, between the ranks of admiring men-at-arms and 
menials, and so disappeared. And no instinct warned 
me that I should never look upon him again in this 
world ! Lord, what a world of heartbreak it is. 

The doctors said we must take the child away, if 
we would coax her back to health and strength again. 
And she must have sea-air. So we took a man-of- 
war, and a suite of two htmdred and sixty i)ersons, and 
went cruising about, and after a fortnight of this we 
stepped ashore on the French coast, and the doctors 
thought it would be a good idea to make something 
of a stay there. The little king of that region offered 
us his hospitalities, and we were glad to accept. K he 
In ad had as many conveniences as he lacked, we 

404 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

should have been plenty comfortable enough ; even as 
it was, we made out very well, in his queer old castle, 
by the help of comforts and luxuries from the ship. 

At the end of a month I sent the vessel home for 
fresh supplies, and for news. We expected her back 
in three or four days. She would bring me, along 
with other news, the result of a certain experiment 
which I had been starting. It was a project of mine 
to replace the tournament with something which 
might furnish an escape for the extra steam of the 
chivalry, keep those bucks entertained and out of 
mischief, and at the same time preserve the best 
thing in them, which was their hardy spirit of 
emulation. I had had a choice band of them in 
private training for some time, and the date was 
now arriving for their fibrst public eflFort. 

This experiment was baseball. In order to give 
the thing vogue from the start, and place it out of 
the reach of criticism, I chose my nines by rank, not 
capacity. There wasn't a knight in either team 
who wasn't a sceptered sovereign. As for material 
of this sort, there was a glut of it always around 
Arthur. You couldn't throw a brick in any direction 
and not cripple a king. Of course, I couldn't get 
these people to leave off their armor; they wouldn't 
do that when they bathed. They consented to 
differentiate the armor so that a body could tell one 
team from the other, but that was the most they 
would do. So, one of the teams wore chain-mail 
ulsters, and the other wore plate armor made of 
my new Bessemer steel. Their practice in the field 
was the most fantastic thing I ever saw. Being 

405 



MARK TWAIN 



ball-proof, they never skipped out of the way, but 
stood still and took the restdt ; when a Bessemer was 
at the bat and a ball hit him, it would botind a 
hundred and fifty yards sometimes. And when a 
man was nmning, and threw himself on his stomach 
to slide to his base, it was like an ironclad coming 
into port. At first I appointed men of no rank to 
act as umpires, but I had to discontinue that. 
These people were no easier to please than other 
nines. The imipire's first decision was usually his 
last; they broke him in two with a bat, and his 
friends toted him home on a shutter. When it 
was noticed that no umpire ever survived a game, 
umpiring got to be impopular. So I was obliged to 
appoint somebody whose rank and lofty position 
imder the government would protect him. 
Here are the names of the nines: 



BESSEMERS 

King Arthur. 

King Lot of Lothian. 

King of Northgaus. 

King Marsil. 

King of Little Britain. 

King Labor. 

King Pellam of Listengese. 

King Bagdemagus. 

King Tolleme la Feintes. 



ULSTERS 

Emperor Lucms. 

King Logris. 

King Marhalt of Ireland. 

King Morganore. 

King Mark of Cornwall. 

King Nentres of Garlot. 

King Meliodas of Liones. 

King of the Lake. 

The Sowdan of Syria. 



Umpire — Clarence. 

The first public game would certainly draw fifty 
thousand people; and for solid fim would be worth 
going around the world to see. Everything would be 
favorable ; it was balmy and beautiful spring weather 
now, and Nature was d31 tailored out in her new clothes. 

406 



CHAPTER XLI 

THE INTERDICT 

HOWEVER, my attention was suddenly snatched 
from such matters; our child began to lose 
ground again, and we had to go to sitting up with 
her, her case became so serious. We couldn't bear 
to allow anybody to help in this service, so we two 
stood watch-and-watch, day in and day out. Ah, 
Sandy, what a right heart she had, how simple, and 
genuine, and good she was ! She was a flawless wife 
and mother; and yet I had married her for no 
other particular reasons, except that by the customs 
of chivalry she was my property tmtil some knight 
should win her from me in the field. She had hunted 
Britain over for me; had foimd me at the hanging- 
bout outside of London, and had straightway re- 
sumed her old place at my side in the placidest way 
and as of right. I was a New-Englander, and in 
my opinion this sort of partnership would com- 
promise her, sooner or later. She cotddn't see how, 
but I cut argtiment short and we had a wedding. 

Now I didn't know I was drawing a prize, yet that 
was what I did draw. Withiil the twelvemonth I 
became her worshiper ; and ours was the dearest and 
perfectest comradeship that ever was. People talk 
about beautiful friendships between two persons of 

407 



.*'.* »** 



MARK TWAIN 

the same sex. What is the best of that sort, as 
compared with the friendship of man and wife, where 
the best impulses and highest ideals of both are the 
same? There is no place for comparison between the 
two friendships ; the one is earthly, the other divine. 

In my dreams, along at fibrst, I still wandered 
thirteen centuries away, and my unsatisfied spirit 
went calling and harking all up and down the un- 
replying vacancies of a vanished world. Many a 
time Sandy heard that imploring cry come from my 
lips in my sleep. With a grand magnanimity she 
saddled that cry of mine upon our child, conceiving 
it to be the name of some lost darling of mine. It 
touched me to tears, and it also nearly knocked me 
off my feet, too, when she smiled up in my face for 
an earned reward, and played her quaint and pretty 
surprise upon me: 

**The name of one who was dear to thee is here 
preserved, here made holy, and the music of it will 
abide always in our ears. Now thou'lt kiss me, as 
knowing the name I have given the child." 

But I didn't know it, all the same. I hadn't an 
idea in the world; but it would have been cruel to 
confess it and spoil her pretty game; so I never let 
on, but said: 

'*Yes, I know, sweetheart — ^how dear and good it 
is of you, too! But I want to hear these lips o£ 
yours, which are also mine, utter it first — ^then its 
music will be perfect." 

Pleased to the marrow, she murmured: 

* ' Hello-Central !' ' 

I didn't laugh — I am always thankful for that — but 

do8 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

the strain ruptured every cartilage in me, and for 
weeks afterward I could hear my bones clack when 
I walked. She never found out her mistake. The 
first time she heard that form of salute used at the 
telephone she was surprised, and not pleased; but I 
told her I had given order for it : that henceforth and 
forever the telephone must always be invoked with 
that reverent formality, in perpetual honor and 
remembrance of my lost friend and her small name- 
sake. This was not true. But it answered. 

Well, during two weeks and a half we watched by 
the crib, and in our deep solicitude we were uncon- 
scious of any world outside of that sick-room. Then 
our reward came: the center of the imiverse turned 
the comer ajwi began to mend. Grateful ? It isn't the 
term. Thdjjte isn'/ any term for it. You know that 
yourself, if you've watched your child through the 
Valley of the Shadow and seen it come back to life 
and sweep night out of the earth with one all- 
illuminating smile that you cotdd cover with your 
hand. 

Why, we were back in this world in one instant! 
Then we looked the same startled thought into each 
other's eyes at the same moment; more than two 
weeks gone, and that ship not back yet! 

In another minute I appeared in the presence of 
my train. They had been steeped in troubled 
bodings all this time — their faces showed it. I 
called an escort and we galloped five miles to a hill- 
top overlooking the sea. Whiere was my great^^^om- 
merce that so lately had made these glistening 
expanses populous asid beautiftil with its white- 

409 



» • 



MARK TWAIN 

winged flocks? Vanished, every one! Not a sail, 
from verge to verge, not a smoke-bank — ^just a dead 
and empty solitude, in place of all that brisk and 
breezy life. 

I went swiftly back, saying not a word to any- 
body. I told Sandy this ghastly news. We could 
imagine no explanation that would begin to explain. 
Had there been an invasion? an earthquake? a 
pestilence? Had the nation been swept out of 
existence? But guessing was profitless. I must go 
— at once. I borrowed the king's navy — a "ship" 
no bigger than a steam-latmch — and was soon ready. 

The parting — ^ah, yes, that was hard. As I was 
devoiuing the child with last kisses, it brisked up 
and jabbered out its vocabulary! — ^the first time in 
more than two weeks, and it made fools of us for 
joy. The darling misprontmciations of childhood! 
— dear me, there's no music that can touch it; and 
how one grieves when it wastes away and dissolves 
into correctness, knowing it will never visit his 
bereaved ear again. Well, how good it was to be 
able to carry that gracious memory away with me! 

I approached England the next morning, with the 
wide highway of salt-water all to myself. There 
were ships in the harbor, at Dover, but they were 
naked as to sails, and there was no sign of life about 
them. It was Sunday ; yet at Canterbury the streets 
were empty; strangest of all, there was not even a 
priest in sight, and no stroke of a bell fell upon my 
ear. The moumfulness of death was everywhere. 
I couldn't understand it. At last, in the further 
edge of that town I saw a small funeral procession 

410 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

— ^just a family and a few friends following a coffin 
-r-no priest; a funeral without bell, book, or candle; 
there was a church there close at hand, but they 
passed it by weeping, and did not enter it ; I glanced 
up at the belfry, and there hung the bell, shrouded 
in black, and its tongue tied back. Now I knew! 
Now I understood the stupendous calamity that had 
overtaken England. Invasion? Invasion is a triv- 
iaUty to it. It was the Interdict! 

I asked no questions; I didn't need to ask any. 
The Church had struck; the thing for me to do was 
to get into a disguise, and go warily. One of my 
servants gave me a suit of clothes, and when we 
were safe beyond the town I put them on, and from 
that time I traveled alone; I could not risk the 
embarrassment of company. 

A miserable journey. A desolate silence every- 
where. Even in London itself. TraflSc had ceased; 
men did not talk or laugh, or go in groups, or even 
in couples; they moved aimlessly about, each man 
by himself, with his head down, and woe and terror 
at his heart. The Tower showed recent war-scars. 
Verily, much had been happening. 

Of cotu-se, I meant to take the train for Camelot. 
Train! Why, the station was as vacant as a cavern. 
I moved on. The journey to Camelot was a repeti- 
tion of what I had already seen. The Monday and 
the Tuesday differed in no way from the Sunday. I 
arrived far in the night. From being the best electric- 
lighted town in the kingdom and the most like a 
recumbent sun of anything you ever saw, it was be- 
come simply a blot — a blot upon darkness — ^that is 

411 



MARK TWAIN 

to say, it was darker and solider than the rest of the 
darkness, and so you could see it a little better; it 
made me feel as if maybe it was symbolical — a sort of 
sign that the Church was going to keep the upper 
hand now, and snuff out all my beautiful civilization 
just like that. I found no life stirring in the somber 
streets. I groped my way with a heavy heart. The 
vast castle loomed black upon the hilltop, not a spark 
visible about it. The drawbridge was down, the 
great gate stood wide, I entered without challenge, 
my own heels making the only sotmd I heard — and 
it was septdchral enough, in those huge vacant courts. 



CHAPTER XLH 
war! 

I FOUND Clarence alone in his qtiarters, drowned 
in melancholy ; and in place of the electric light, 
he had reinstituted the ancient rag-lamp, and sat 
there in a grisly twihght with aU curtains drawn tight. 
He sprang up and rushed for me eagerly, saying: 

'*0h, it's worth a billion milrays to look upon a 
live person again!" 

He knew me as easily as if I hadn't been disguised 
at all. Which frightened me; one may easily believe 
that. 

''Quick, now, tell me the meaning of this fearful 
disaster," I said. *'How did it come about?" 

''Well, if there hadn't been any Queen Guenever, 
it wouldn't have come so early; but it would have 
come, anyway. It would have come on your own 
account by and by ; by luck, it happened to come on 
the queen's." 

''And Sir Launcelot's?" 

"Just so." 

"Give me the details." 

"I reckon you will grant that during some years 
there has been only one pair of eyes in these king- 
doms that has not been looking steadily askance at 
the queen and Sir Launcelot — '* 

418 



MARK TWAIN 

•'Yes, King Arthur's." 

— "andonlyoneheartthatwas without suspicion — ** 

"Yes — ^the king's; a heart that isn't capable of 
thinking evil of a friend." 

"Well, the king might have gone on, still happy 
and unsuspecting, to the end of his days, but for one 
of your modem improvements — ^the stock-board. 
When you left, three miles of the London, Canterbury 
and Dover were ready for the rails, and also ready 
and ripe for manipulation in the stock-market. It 
was wildcat, and everybody knew it. The stock was 
for sale at a give-away. What does Sir Latincelot do, 
but—" 

"Yes, I know; he quietly picked up nearly all of 
it for a song; then he bought about twice as much 
more, deliverable upon call; and he was about to 
call when I left." 

"Very well, he did call. The boys couldn't de- 
liver. Oh, he had them — ^and he just settled his grip 
and squeezed them. They were laughing in their 
sleeves over their smartness in selling stock to him 
at fifteen and sixteen and along there that wasn't 
worth ten. Well, when they had laughed long enough 
on that side of their mouths, they rested up that side 
by shifting the laugh to the other side. That was 
when they compromised with the Invincible at iwo 
hundred and eighty-three!" 

"Good land!" 

"He skinned them alive, and they deserved it — 
anyway, the whole kingdom rejoiced. Well, among 
the flayed were Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, 
nephews to the king. End of the first act. Act 

414 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

second, scene first, an apartment in Carlisle castle, 
where the court had gone for a few days' hunting. 
Persons present, the whole tribe of the king's 
nephews. Mordred and Agravaine propose to call 
the guileless Arthur's attention to Guenever and Sir 
Launcelot. Sir Gawaine, Sir Gareth, and Sir Gaheris 
will have nothing to do with it. A dispute ensues, 
with loud talk; in the midst of it enter the king. 
Mordred and Agravaine spring their devastating tale 
upon him. Tableau. A trap is laid for Launcelot, 
by the king's command, and Sir Latmcelot walks into 
it. He made it suflBciently imcomfortable for the am- 
bushed witnesses — ^to wit, Mordred, Agravaine, and 
twelve knights of lesser rank, for he killed every one 
of them but Mordred; but of course that couldn't 
straighten matters between Launcelot and the king, 
and didn't." 

*'0h, dear, only one thing cotdd result — ^I see that. 
War, and the knights of the realm divided into a 
king's party and a Sir Launcelot *s party." 

'* Yes — that was the way of it. The king sent the 
queen to the stake, proposing to purify her with fire. 
Launcelot and his knights rescued her, and in doing 
it slew certain good old friends of yours and mine — 
in fact, some of the best we ever had; to wit, Sir 
Belias le Orgulous, Sir Segwarides, Sir Griflet le Fils 
de Dieu, Sir Brandiles, Sir Aglovale — " 

*'0h, you tear out my heartstrings." 

— '*wait, I'm not done yet — Sir Tor, Sir Gauter, 
Sir Gillimer— " 

*'The very best man in my subordinate nine. 
What a handy right-fielder he was!" 

41S 



MARK TWAIN 

— "Sir Reynold's three brothers, Sir Damus, Sir 
Priamus, Sir ICay the Stranger — " 

"My peerless short-stop! I've seen l^itn catch a 
daisy-cutter in his teeth. Come, I can't stand this!" 

— **Sir Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Herminde, Sir 
Pertiloi)e, Sir Perimones, and — ^whom do you think?'* 

''Rush! Goon." 

''Sir Gaheris, and Sir Gareth— both 1" 

"Oh, incredible! Their love for Launcelot was 
indestructible. * ' 

"Well, it was an accident. They were simply on- 
lookers ; they were tmarmed, and were merely there 
to witness the queen's pimishment. Sir Launcelot 
smote down whoever came in the way of his blind 
fury, and he killed these without noticing who they 
were. Here is an instantaneous photograph one of 
our boys got of the battle ; it's for sale on every news- 
stand. There — the figures nearest the queen are Sir 
Latmcelot with his sword up, and Sir Gareth gasping 
his latest breath. You can catch the agony in the 
queen's face through the curling smoke. It*s a rat- 
tling battle-picture." 

"Indeed, it is. We must take good care of it; 
its historical value is incalctilable. Go on." 

"Well, the rest of the tale is just war, pure and 
simple. Launcelot retreated to his town and castle 
of Joyous Gard, and gathered there a great following 
of knights. The king, with a great host, went there, 
and there was desperate fighting during several days, 
and, as a result, all the plain aroimd was paved with 
corpses and cast-iron. Then the Church patched xtp 
a peace between Arthiu: and Latmcelot and the queea 

416 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

and everybody — everybody but Sir Gawaine. He 
was bitter about the slaying of his brothers, Gareth 
and Gaheris, and would not be appeased. He 
notified Launcelot to get him thence, and make swift 
preparation, and look to be soon attacked. So 
Launcelot sailed to his Duchy of Guienne with his 
following, and Gawaine soon followed with an army, 
and he beguiled Arthur to go with him. Arthtu* left 
the kingdom in Sir Mordred's hands until you 
should return — " 

**Ah — a king's customary wisdom!" 

**Yes. Sir Mordred set himself at once to work 
to make his kingship permanent. He was going to 
marry Guenever, as a first move; but she fled and 
shut herself up in the Tower of London. Mordred 
attacked; the Bishop of Canterbury dropped down 
on him with the Interdict. The king rettimed; 
Mordred fought him at Dover, at Canterbury, and 
again at Barham Down. Then there was talk of 
peace and a composition. Terms, Mordred to have 
Cornwall and Kent during Arthur's life, and the 
whole kingdom afterward." 

*'Well, upon my word! My dream of a republic 
to be a dream, and so remain." 

**Yes. The two armies lay near Salisbury. Ga- 
waine — Gawaine's head is at Dover Castle, he fell 
in the fight there — Gawaine appeared to Arthtu* in 
a dream, at least his ghost did, and warned him to 
refrain from conflict for a month, let the delay cost 
what it might. But battle was precipitated by an 
accident. Arthur had given order that if a sword 
was raised dtuing the consultation over the proposed 

417 



MARK TWAIN 

treaty with Mordred, sotind the trumpet and fall 
on ! for he had no confidence in Mordred. Mordred 
had given a similar order to his people. Well, by 
and by an adder bit a knight's heel; the knight forgot 
all about the order, and made a slash at the adder 
with his sword. Inside of half a minute those two 
prodigious hosts came together with a crash ! They 
butchered away all day. Then the king — however, 
we have started something fresh since you left — our 
paper has." 

'*No? What is that?" 

* ' War correspondence !' ' 

"Why, that's good." 

'*Yes, the paper was booming right along, for the 
Interdict made no impression, got no grip, while the 
war lasted. I had war correspondents with both 
armies. I will finish that battle by reading you what 
one of the boys says : 

Then the king looked about him, and then was he ware of all 
his host and of all his good knights were left no more on Hve but 
two knights, that was Sir Lucan de Butlere, and his bn3ther 
Sir Bedivere: and they were fuU sore wounded. Jestt mercy, 
said the king, where are all my noble knights becomen? Alas 
that ever I should see this doleful day. For now, said Arthur, 
I am come to mine end. But would to God that I wist where 
were that traitor Sir Mordred, that hath caused all this mis- 
chief. Then was King Arthtir ware where Sir Mordred leaiied 
upon his sword among a great heap of dead men. Now give 
me my spear, said Arthur unto Sir Lucan, for yonder I have 
espied the traitor that all this woe hath wrought. Sur, kt 
him be, said Sir Lucan, for he is unhappy; and if ye pass this 
unhappy day, ye shall be right well revenged upon him. Good 
lord, remember ye of your night's dream, and what the spirit 
of Sir Gawaine told you this night, yet God of his great goodncM 
bath preserved you hitherto. Therefore, for God's sakei my 

418 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

lord, leave off by this. For blessed be God ye have won ihe 
field: for here we be three on live, and with Sir Mordred is noot 
on live. And if ye leave off now, this wicked day of destiny is 
past. Tide me death, betide me life, saith the king, now I see 
him yonder alone, he shall never escape mine hands, for at a 
better avail shall I never have him. God speed you well, said Sir 
Bedivere. Then the king gat his spear in both his hands, and 
ran toward Sir Mordred crying. Traitor, now is thy death day 
come. And when Sir Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran until 
him with his sword drawn in his hand. And then King Arthur 
smote Sir Mordred under the shield, with a foin of his spear 
throughout the body more than a fathom. And when Sir Mor- 
dred felt that he had his death's wound, he thrust himself, with 
the might that he had, up to the butt of King Arthur's spear. 
And right so he smote his father Arthur with his sword holden 
in both his hands, on the side of the head, that the sword pierced 
the helmet and the brain-pan, and therewithal Sir Mordred fell 
stark dead to the earth. And the noble Arthur fell in a swoon 
to the earth, and there he swooned ofttimes, 

''That is a good piece of war correspondence, 
Clarence; you are a first-rate newspaper man. Well 
the king all right r Did he get well ?" 
Poor soul, no. He is dead." 

I was utterly sttinned; it had not seemed to me 
that any wound could be mortal to him. 

"And the queen, Clarence?" 

*'She is a ntm, in Almesbury." 

"'What changes! and in such a short while. It is 
inconceivable. What next, I wonder?" 

*'I can tell you what next." 

•'Well?" 

''Stake our lives and stand by them!" 

*'What do you mean by that?" 

"The Church is master now. The Interdict in- 
cluded you with Mordred; it is not to be removed 

28 419 



€i 



MARK TWAIN 

while you lemain alive. The dans are 
The Church has gathered aU the knights that are 
left alive, and as soon as you are discovered we shall 
have business on our hands.'* 

"Stuff 1 With our deadly scientific war material; 
'fdth our hosts of trained — " 

* ' Save your breath — we haven't sixty faithful left !" 

"What are you saying? Our schools, our col- 
leges, otu: vast workshops, our — " 

"When those knights come, those establishments 
will empty themselves and go over to the enemy. 
Did you think you had educated the superstition out 
of those people?" 

"I certainly did think it." 

"Well, then, you may unthink it. They stood 
every strain easily — ^until the Interdict. Since then, 
they merely put cm a bold outside — at heart they 
are qtiaking. Make up yotu: mind to it — when the 
armies come, the mask will fall." 

"It's hard news. We are lost. They will turn 
our own science against us." 

"No they won't." 

"Why?" 

"Because I and a handful of the faithful have 
blocked that game. I'll tell you what I've done, 
and what moved me to it. Smart as you are, the 
Chtu'ch was smarter. It was the Church that sent 
you cruising — ^through her servants, the doctors." 

"Clarence!" 

" It is the truth. I know it. Every officer of yottf 
ship was the Church's picked servant, and 80 was 
every man of the crew." 

420 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

•'Oh. come!" 

''It is just as I tell yxm. I did not find out these 
things at once, but I found them out finally. Did jrou 
send me verbal information, by the commander of the 
ship, to the effect that upon his retmn to you, with 
supplies, you were going to leave Cadiz — " 

"Cadiz! I haven't been at Cadiz at all!" 

— ''going to leave Cadiz and cruise in distant seas 
indefinitely, for the health of your family ? Did ycm 
send me that word?" 

"Of course not, I would have written, wouldn't 

ir 

"Naturally. I was troubled and suspicious. When 
the commander sailed again I managed to ship a spy 
with him. I have never heard of vessel or spy since. 
I gave myself two weeks to hear from you in. Then 
I resolved to send a ship to Cadiz. There was a 
reason why I didn't." 

"What was that?" 

"Our navy had suddenly and mysteriously disap- 
peared! Also, as suddenly and as mysteriously, the 
railway and telegraph and telephone service ceased, 
the men all deserted, poles were cut down, the Church 
laid a ban upon the electric light! I had to be up 
and doing — ^and straight off. Your life was safe — 
nobody in these kingdoms but Merlin would venture 
to touch such a magician as you without ten thousand 
mien at his back — I had nothing to think of but how 
to put preparations in the best trim against your 
coming. I felt safe myself — ^nobody would be anxious 
to touch a pet of yoiu«. So this is what I did. From 
our various works I selected all the men — boys I 

421 



MARK TWAIN 

mean — ^whose faithfulness under whatsoever prassure 
I could swear to» and I called them together secretly 
and gave them their instructions. There are fifty- 
two of them; none younger than fourteen, and none 
above seventeen years old." 

"Why did you select boys?'' 

' ' Because all the others were bom tn an atmosphere 
of superstition and reared, in it. It is in their blood 
and bones. We imagined we had educated it out of 
them; they thought so, too; the Interdict woke them 
up like a thunderclap! It revealed them to them- 
selves, and it revealed them to me, too. With boys 
it was different. Such as have been tmder our train- 
ing from seven to ten years have had no acquaintance 
with the Church's terrors, and it was among these 
that I fotmd my fifty-two. As a next move, I paid 
a private visit to that old cave of Merlin's — not the 
small one — ^the big one — " 

''Yes, the one where we secretly established our 
first great electric plant when I was projecting a 
miracle." 

"Just so. And as that miracle hadn't become 
necessary then, I thought it might be a good idea to 
utilize the plant now. I've provisioned the cave far 



a siege 



If 



"A good idea, a first-rate idea." 

''I think so. I placed four of my boys there as a 
guard — ^inside, and out of sight. Nobody was to be 
htut — ^while outside; but any attempt to enter — 
well, we said just let anybody try it! Then I went 
out into the hills and uncovered and cut the secret 
wires which connected your bedroom with the 

4aa 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

that go to the dynamite deposits under all our 
vast factories, nulls, workshops, magazines, etc., and 
about midnight I and my boys ttuned out and con* 
nected that wire with the cave, and nobody but you 
and I suspects where the other end of it goes to. We 
laid it under ground, of course, and it was all finished 
in a couple of hours or so. We sha'n't have to leave 
ottr fortress now when we want to blow up our 
civilization.'* 

''It was the right move — and the natural one; a 
military necessity, in the changed condition of things. 
Well, what changes have come! We expected to be 
besieged in the palace some time or other, but — ^how- 
ever, go on." 

*'Next, we built a wire fence." 

"Wire fence?" 

* * Yes. You dropi)ed the hint of it yourself, two or 
three years ago." 

'*0h, I remember — ^the time the Chttrch tried her 
strength against us the first time, and presently 
thought it wise to wait for a hopef uler season. Well, 
how have you arranged the fence?" 

"I start twelve inunensely strong wires — naked, 
not insulated — ^from a big dynamo in the cave — 
dynamo with no brushes except a positive and a nega- 
tive one — " 

Yes, that's right." 

The wires go out from the cave and fence in a 
circle of level ground a hundred yards in diameter; 
they make twelve independent fences, ten feet apart— 
that is to say, twelve circles within circles — and their 
ends come into the cave again.** 

423 



Hi 



MARK TWAIN 



"Right; goon." 

* ' The fences are fastened to heavy oaken posts only 
three feet apart, and these posts are sunk five feet in 
the ground." 

*'That is good and strong." 

** Yes. The wires have no ground-connectiofi out- 
side of the cave. They go out from the positive hrush 
of the dynamo; there is a ground-connection throu^^ 
the negative brush ; the other ends of the wire return 
to the cave, and each is grounded independently." 

"No-no, that won't do!" 

"Why?" 

"It's too expensive — uses up force for nothing. 
You don't want any groimd-connection except the 
one through the negative brush. The other end of 
every wire must be brought back into the cave and 
fastened independently, and without any ground-con- 
nection. Now, then, observe the economy of it. A 
cavalry charge hurls itself against the fence; 3rou are 
using no power, you are spending no money, for there 
is only one ground-coimection till those horses come 
against the wire; the moment they touch it tfaey 
form a connection with the negative brush through 
the ground, and drop dead. Don't you see? — jrou are 
using no energy until it is needed; your lightning is 
there, and ready, like the load in a gun; but it isn't 
costing you a cent till you touch it off. Oh, yes, the 
single ground-coimection — " 

"Of course! I don't know how I overlooked that. 
It's not only cheaper, but it's more effectual than the 
other way, for if wires break or get tangled, no harm 
is done." 

434 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

'*No, especially if we have a telltale in the cave 
and disconnect the broken wire. Well, go on. The 
Gatlings?" 

** Yes — ^that's arranged. In the center of the inner 
circle, on a spacious platform six feet high, I've 
grouped a battery of thirteen Gatling guns, and pro- 
vided plenty of ammunition." 

"That's it. They command every approach, and 
when the Church's knights arrive, there's going to be 
music. The brow of the precipice over the cave — " 

"I've got a wire fence there, and a Gatling. They 
won't drop any rocks down on us.'* 

**Well, and the glass-cylinder dynamite torpe- 
does?" 

* * That's attended to. It's the prettiest garden that 
was ever planted. It's a belt forty feet wide, and goes 
around the outer fence — distance between it and the 
fence one himdred yards — ^kind of neutral ground 
that space is. There isn't a single square yard of 
that whole belt but is equipped with a torpedo. 
We laid them on the surface of the groimd, and 
sprinkled a layer of sand over them. It's an inno- 
cent-looking garden, but you let a man start in to 
hoe it once, and you'll see." 

**You tested the torpedoes? 

"Well, I was going to, but — 

"But what? Why, it's an immense oversight not 
to apply a — " 

"Test? Yes, I know; but they*re all right; I laid 
a few in the public road beyond our line and they've 
been tested." 

"Oh, that alters the case. Who did it?" 

425 



\9f 
9t 



MARK TWAIN 

"A CJhurch committee.*' 

•'Howkindr 

''Yes. They came to command us to make sub* 
mission. You see they didn't really come to test 
the torpedoes; that was merely an incident." 

''Did the committee make a report?" 

"Yes, they made one. You could have heard it 
a mile." 

"Unanimous?" 

"That was the nature of it. After that I put up 
some signs, for the protection of future committees, 
and we have had no intruders since." 

' * Clarence, you've done a world of work, and done 
it perfectly." 

"We had plenty of time for it; there wasn't any 
occasion for hurry." 

We sat silent awhile, thinking. Then my mind 
was made up, and I said : 

"Yes, everything is ready; everything is ship- 
shape, no detail is wanting. I know what to do now. " 

"So do I; sit down and wait." 

"No, sir! rise up and striker* 

"Do you mean it?" 

"Yes, indeed! The ctefensive isn't in my line, and 
the ofiensive is. That is, when I hold a fair hand — 
two-thirds as good a hand as the enemy. Oh, yes, 
we'll rise up and strike; that's our game." 

"A himdred to one you are right. When does thf 
performance begin?" 

''Now! We'll proclaim the Republic." 

"Well, that will precipitate things, sure enough I" 

"It will make them buzz, / tell you! En^^and 

426 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

will be a hornets' nest before noon to-morrow, if the 
Church's hand hasn't lost its cunning — and we 
know it hasn't. Now you write and I'll dictate thus : 

"PROCLAMATION 



"BE IT KNOWN UNTO ALL. Whereas the king having 
died and left no heir, it becomes my duty to continue the execu- 
tive authority vested in me, until a government shall have 
been created and set in motion. The monarchy has lapsed, it 
no longer exists. By consequence, all political power has re- 
verted to its original source, the people of the nation. With 
the monarchy, its several adjuncts died also; wherefore there is 
no longer a nobility, no longer a privileged class, no longer an 
Established Church; all men are become exactly equal; they are 
upon one common level, and religion is free. A Republic is 
hereby proclaimed, as being the natural estate of a nation when 
other authority has ceased. It is the duty of the British people 
to meet together immediately, and by their votes elect repre- 
sentatives and deliver into their hands the government." 

I signed it '*The Boss," and dated it from Merlin's 
Cave. Clarence said: 

"Why, that tells where we are, and invites them 
to call right away." 

'*That is the idea. We strike — ^by the Proclama- 
tion — then it's their innings. Now have the thing 
set up and printed and posted, right off; that is, 
give the order; then, if you've got a couple of bi- 
cycles handy at the foot of the hill, ho for Merlin's 
Cave!" 

''I shall be ready in ten minutes. What a cyclone 
there is going to be to-morrow when this piece of 
paper gets to work! . . . It's a pleasant old palace, 
this is ; I wonder if ^we shall ever again — but never 
mind about that." 

d2f 



CHAPTER XLIII 

THB BATTLB OF THB SAND-BBLT 

IN Merlin's Cave — Clarence and I and fifty-two 
fresh, bright, well-educated, clean-minded youx^ 
British boys. At dawn I sent an order to the fac- 
tories and to all our great works to stop operations 
and remove all life to a safe distance, as everything 
was going to be blown up by secret mines, **and no 
telling at what moment — therefore^ vacate at once** 
These people knew me, and had confidence in my 
word. They would clear out without waiting to part 
their hair, and I could take my own time about dat- 
ing the explosion. You couldn't hire one of them 
to go back during the century, if the explosion was 
still impending. 

We had a week of waiting. It was not dull for 
me, because I was writing all the time. During the 
first three days, I finished tiuning my old diary into 
this narrative form; it only required a chapter or 
so to bring it down to date. The rest of the week I 
took up in writing letters to my wife. It was always 
my habit to write to Sandy every day, whenever we 
were separate, and now I kept up the habit for love 
of it, and of her, though I couldn't do anything with 
the letters, of course, after I had written them. 
But it put in the time, you see, and was almost like 

448 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

talking; it was almost as if I was sa3ring, ''Sandy, if 
you and Hello-Central were here in the cave, instead 
of only your photographs, what good times we oould 
have!'* And then, you know, I could imagine the 
baby goo-gooing something out in reply, with its 
fists in its mouth and itself stretched across its 
mother's lap on its back, and she a-laughing and 
admiring and worshiping, and now and then tickling 
under the baby's chin to set it cackling, and then. 
maybe throwing in a word of answer to me herself 
— ^and so on and so on — ^well, don't you know, I 
could sit there in the cave with my pen, and keep it 
up, that way, by the hour with them. Why, it was 
almost like having us all together again. 

I had spies out every night, of cotirse, to get news. 
Every report made things look more and more im- 
pressive. The hosts were gathering, gathering; 
down all the roads and paths of England the knights 
were riding, and priests rode with them, to hearten 
these original Crusaders, this being the Church's 
war. All the nobilities, big and little, were on their 
way, and all the gentry. This was all as was ex- 
pected. We should thin out this sort of folk to 
such a degree that the people would have nothing 
to do but just step to the front with their republic 
and — 

Ah, what a donkey I was! Toward the end of the 
week I began to get this large and disenchanting fact 
through my head: that the mass of the nation had 
swimg their caps and shouted for the republic for 
about one da5% and there an end! The Church, the 
nobles, and the gentry then turned one grand, all- 

429 



MARK TWAIN 



disapproving £iown upon ihem and shriveled them 
into sheep! Prom that moment the sheep had b^gun 
to gather to the fold — ^that is to say, the camps — and 
offer their valueless lives and their valuable wool to 
the "righteous cause." Why, even the very men 
who had lately been slaves were in the "righteous 
cause," and glorifsdng it, prajring for it, sentimentally 
slabbering over it, just Uke aU the other commoners. 
Imagine such human muck as this; conceive of this 
folly! 

Yes, it was now "Death to the Republic!" every- 
where — not a dissenting voice. All England was 
marching against us! Truly, this was more than I 
had bargained for. 

I watched my fifty-two boys narrowly; watched 
their faces, their walk, their tmconsdous attitudes: 
for all these are a language — a language given us 
pmposely that it may betray us in times of emer- 
gency, when we have secrets which we want to keep. 
I knew that that thought would keep saying itself 
over and over again in their minds and hearts, AU 
England is marching against us! and ever more 
strenuously imploring attention with each repetition^ 
ever more sharply realizing itself to their imagina- 
tions, until even in their sleep they would find no 
rest from it, but hear the vague and flitting creatures 
of the dreams say, AU England — ^all England! — is 
marching against youl I knew all this wotild happen; 
I knew that ultimately the pressure would become 
so great that it would compel utterance; therefore^ 
I must be ready with an answer at that time — tti 
answer well chosen and tranquilizing. 

430 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

I was right. The time came. They had to speak: 
Poor lads, it was pitiftil to see, they were so pale, so 
worn, so troubled. At first their spokesman cotild 
hardly find voice or words ; but he presently got both. 
This is what he said — and he put it in the neat 
modem English taught him in my schools: 

'*We have tried to forget what we are — ^English 
boys! We have tried to put reason before senti- 
ment, duty before love; our minds approve, but our 
hearts reproach us. While apparently it was only 
the nobility, only the gentry, only the twenty-five or 
thirty thousand knights left alive out of the late 
wars, we were of one mind, and undisturbed by any 
troubling doubt; each and every one of these fifty- 
two lads who stand here before you, said, 'They have 
chosen — it is their affair.' But think.' — ^the matter is 
altered — all England is marching against us! Oh, 
sir, consider! — ^reflect! — ^these people are our people, 
they are bone of our bone, flesh of our flesh, we love 
them — do not ask us to destroy our nation!'* 

Well, it shows the value of looking ahead, and being 
ready for a thing when it happens. If I hadn't fore- 
seen this thing and been fixed, that boy would have 
had me! — I couldn't have said a word. But I was 
fixed. I said: 

*'My boys, your hearts are in the right place, you 
have thought the worthy thought, you have done the 
worthy thing. You are English boys, you will remain 
English boys, and you will keep that name tm- 
smirched. Give yourselves no further concern, let 
your minds be at peace. Consider this: while all 
England is marching against us, who i& in the van? 

431 



MARK TWAIN 

Who, by the commonest rules of war, will march in 
the front? Answer me." 

"The mounted host of mailed knights.'* 

"True. They are thirty thousand strong. Acres 
deep they will march. Now, observe: none but Ihey 
will ever strike the sand-belt I Then there will be an 
episode! Immediately after, the civilian multitude 
in the rear will retire, to meet business engagements 
elsewhere. None but nobles and gentry are knights, 
and none but these will remain to dance to our music 
after that episode. It is absolutely true that we shall 
have to fight nobody but these thirty thousand 
knights. Now speak, and it shall be as you decide. 
Shall we avoid the battle, retire from the field?" 

"NO! ! !" 

The shout was unanimous and hearty. 

"Are you — ^are you — ^well, afraid of these thirty 
thousand knights?" 

That joke brought out a good laugh, the boys' 
troubles vanished away, and they went gaily to their 
posts. Ah, they were a darling fifty-two! As pretty 
as girls, too. 

I was ready for the enemy now. Let the approach- 
ing big day come along — ^it would find us on deck. 

The big day arrived on time. At dawn the sentry 
on watch in the corral came into the cave and re- 
ported a moving black mass imder the horizon, and 
a faint sound which he thought to be military music. 
Breakfast was just ready; we sat down and ate it. 

This over, I made the boys a little speech, and then 
sent out a detail to man the battery, with Qarenoe 
in command of it. 

43 i 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

The stin rose presently and sent its unobstructed 
splendors over the land, and we saw a prodigious host 
moving slowly toward us, with the steady drift and 
aligned front of a wave of the sea. Nearer and nearer 
it came, and more and more sublimely imposing 
became its aspect ; yes, all England was there, appar- 
ently. Soon we could see the innumerable banners 
fluttering, and then the sim struck the sea of armor 
and set it all aflash. Yes, it was a fine sight ; I hadn't 
ever seen anything to beat it. 

At last we could make out details. All the front 
ranks, no telling how many acres deep, were horse- 
men — ^plimied knights in armor. Suddenly we heard 
the blare of trumpets ; the slow walk btu^t into a 
gallop, and then — ^well, it was wonderful to see! 
Down swept that vast horse-shoe wave — it ap- 
proached the sand-belt — ^my breath stood still; 
nearer, nearer — the strip of green turf beyond the 
yellow belt grew narrow — ^narrower still — ^became a 
mere ribbon in front of the horses — then disappeared 
under their hoofs. Great Scott! Why, the whole 
front of that host shot into the sky with a thunder- 
crash, and became a whirling tempest of rags and 
fragments ; and along the ground lay a thick wall of 
smoke that hid what was left of the multitude from 
our sight. 

Time for the second step in the plan of campaign! 
I touched a button, and shook the bones of England 
loose from her spine 1 

In that explosion all our noble civilization-factories 
went up in the air and disappeared from the earth. It 
was a pity, but it was necessary. We could not 

433 



MARK TWAIN 

affotd to let the enemy turn our ownweapoosagaii 
us* 

Now ensued one of the dullest quarter-houxs I had 
ever' endured. We waited in a silent solitude i 
closed by our circles of wire, and by a circle of h< 7 
smoke outside of these. We couldn't see over the 
wall of smoke, and we couldn't see through it. But 
at last it began to shred away lazily, and by the end 
of another quarter-hour the land was dear and our 
curiosity was enabled to satisfy itself. No living 
creattire was in sight! We now percdved that adc 
tions had been made to our defenses. The dynamite 
had dug a ditch more than a hundred feet wide, all 
around us, and cast up an embankment some twenty- 
five feet high on both borders of it. As to destructioa 
of life, it was amazing. Moreover^ it was beyond 
estimate. Of course, we could not count the dead, 
because they did not exist as individuals, but merely 
as homogeneous protoplasm, with alloys of iron and 
buttons. 

No life was in sight, but necessarily there must 
have been some wounded in the rear ranks, who were 
carried off the field tmder cover of the wall of smoke; 
there would be sickness among the others — there 
always is, after an episode like that. But there would 
be no reinforcements; this was the last stand of the 
chivalry of England; it was all that was left of the 
order, after the recent annihilating wars. So I felt 
quite safe in believing that the utmost force that 
could for the future be brought against us would be 
but small ; that is, of knights. I therefore issued a coO" 
gratulatory proclamation to my army in these words: 

434 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

Soldiers, Champions of Human Liberty and Equality: 
Your General congratulates you! In the pride of his strength 
and the vanity of his renown, an arrogant enemy came against 
you. You were ready. The conflict was brief; on your side, 
glorious. This mighty victory, having been achieved utterly 
without loss, stands without example in history. So long as 
the planets shall continue to move in their orbits, the Battle of 
THE Sand-Belt will not perish out of the memories of men. 

The Boss. 

I read it well, and the applaiise I got was very 
gratifjring to me. I then wound up with these 
remarks : 

"The war with the English nation, as a nation, is at 
an end. The nation has retired from the iBeld and 
the war. Before it can be persuaded to return, war 
will have ceased. This campaign is the only one 
that is going to be fought. It will be brief — the 
briefest in history. Also the most destructive to life, 
considered from the standpoint of proportion of 
casualties to numbers engaged. We are done with 
the nation ; henceforth we deal only with the knights. 
English knights can be killed, but they cannot be 
conquered. We know what is before us. While one 
of these men remains alive, oiu" task is not finished, 
the war is not ended. We will kill them all." [Loud 
and long-continued applause.] 

I picketed the great embankments thrown up 
around our lines by the dynamite explosion — ^merely 
a lookout of a couple of boys to announce the enemy 
when he should appear again. 

* Next, I sent an engineer and forty men to a point 
just beyond our lines on the south, to turn a mountain 
brook that was there, and bring it within our lines 
29 435 



MARK TWAIN 

and under our oommand, arranging it in such a w^y 
that I could make instant use of it in an emergency. 
The forty men were divided into two shifts of twenty 
each, and were to relieve each other every tvso 
hours. In ten hours the work was accomplished. 

It was nightfall now, and I withdrew my pickets. 
The one who had had the northern outlook reported 
a camp in sight, but visible with the glass only. 
He also reported that a few knights had been feeling 
their way toward us, and had driven some cattle 
across our lines, but that the knights themselves had 
not come very near. That was what I had been 
expecting. They were feeling us, you see; they 
wanted to know if we were going to play that red 
terror on them again. They would grow bolder in 
the night, perhaps. I believed I knew what project 
they would attempt, becatise it was plainly the thing 
I would attempt myself if I were in their places and 
as ignorant as they were. I mentioned it to Clarence. 

**I think you are right," said he; "it is the obvious 
thing for them to try." 

''Well, then," I said, "if they do it they are 
doomed." 

"Certainly." 

' * They won't have the slightest show in the world." 

*'0f cotirse they won't." 

"It's dreadful, Clarence. It seems an awful 
pity." 

The thing disturbed me so that I couldn't get any 
peace of mind for thinking of it and worrying over 
it. So, at last, to quiet my conscience, I framed this 
message to the knights : 

436 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

To THE Honorable the Coioiaiidbk or the iKsuxoEirr 
Chivalry of England: You fight in vain. We know your 
strength — ^if one may call it by that name. We know that at 
the utmost you cannot bring against us above five-and-twenty 
thousand Imights. Therefore, you have no dmnoe — none 
whatever. Reflect: we are well eqtdpped, well fortified, we 
ntmiber 54. Fifty-four what? Men? No, minds — the capa- 
blest in the world; a force against which mere animal might 
may no more hope to prevail than may the idle waves of the eea 
hope to prevail against the granite barriers of Bngland. Be 
advised. We offer you your lives; for the sake of your families, 
do not reject the gift. We offer you this chance, and it is the 
last: throw down your arms; surrender unconditionally to the 

Republic, and all will be forgiven. 

(Signed) Tbe Boss. 

I read it to Clarence, and said I proposed to send 
it by a flag of truce. He laughed the sarcastic lati^ 
he was bom with, and said : 

** Somehow it seems impossible for you to ever 
fully realize what these nobilities are. Now let us 
save a little time and trouble. Consider me the 
commander of the knights yonder. Now, then, you 
are the flag of truce ; approach and deliver me your 
message, and I vdll give you your answer/* 

I humored the idea. I came forward under an 
imaginary guard of the enemy's soldiers, produced 
my paper, and read it through. For answer, Clarence 
struck the paper out of my hand, pursed up a scorn- 
ful lip and said with lofty disdain: 

** Dismember me this animal, and return him in 
a basket to the base-bom knave who sent him; other 
answer have I none!" 

How empty is theory in presence of fact ! And this 
was just fact, and nothing else. It was the thing 
that wotild have happened, there was no getting 

437 



MARK TWAIN 

around that. I tore up the paper and granted my 
mistimed sentimentalities a permanent rest. 

Then, to business. I tested the electric signals 
from the Gatling platform to the cave, and made sure 
that they were all right ; I tested and retested those 
which commanded the fences — ^these were signals 
whereby I could break and renew the electric current 
in each fence independently of the others at wilL I 
placed the brook-connection under the guard and 
authority of three of my best boys, who would alter- 
nate in two-hom- watches all night and promptly obey 
my signal, if I should have occasion to give it — ^three 
revolver-shots in quick succession. Sentry duty was 
discarded for the night, and the corral left empty of 
life ; I ordered that quiet be maintained in the cave, 
and the electric lights tinned down to a glimmer. 

As soon as it was good and dark, I shut ofiE the 
current from all the fences, and then groped my way 
out to the embankment bordering our side of the 
great dynamite ditch. I crept to the top of it and 
lay there on the slant of the muck to watch. But it 
was too dark to see anything. As for sounds, there 
were none. The stillness was deathlike. True, there 
were the usual night sotmds of the country — ^the 
whir of night birds, the buzzing of insects, the bark- 
ing of distant dogs, the mellow lowing of far-off kine 
— ^but these didn't seem to break the stillness, they 
only intensified it, and added a gruesome melan- 
choly to it into the bargain. 

I presently gave up looking, the night shut down 
so black, but I kept my ears strained to catch the 
least suspicious sound, for I judged I had only to 

438 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

wait, and I shouldn't be disappointed. However, 
I had to wait a long time. At last I caught what 
you may call indistinct glimpses of sotmd — dulled 
metallic sotmd. I pricked up my ears, then, and 
held my breath, for this was the sort of thing I had 
been waiting for. This sound thickened, and ap- 
proached — ^from toward the north. Presently, I 
heard it at my own level — ^the ridge-top of the oppo- 
site embankment, a hundred feet or more away. 
Then I seemed to see a row of black dots appear along 
that ridge — ^htmian heads? I couldn't tell; it 
mightn't be anything at all; you can't depend on 
your eyes when your imagination is out of focus. 
However, the question was soon settled. I heard 
that metallic noise descending into the great ditch. 
It augmented fast, it spread all along, and it un- 
mistakably furnished me this fact: an armed host 
was taking up its quarters in the ditch. Yes, these 
people were arranging a little surprise party for us. 
We could expect entertainment about dawn, possibly 
earlier. 

I groped my way back to the corral now; I had 
seen enough. I went to the platform and signaled 
to turn the current on to the two inner fences. 
Then I went into the cave, land found everything 
satisfactory, there — ^nobody awake but the working- 
watch. I woke Clarence and told him the great 
ditch was filling up with men, and that I believed all 
the knights were coming for us in a body. It was 
my notion that as soon as dawn approached we 
could expect the ditch's ambuscaded thousands to 
swarm up over the embankment and make an assault, 

439 



MARK TWAIN 

and be followed immediately by the test of their 
anny. 

Clarence said: 

''They win be wanting to send a sooat or two in 
the dark to make preliminary observations. Wby 
not take the lightning off the outer f enceSt and 
give them a chance?" 

"I've already done it» Clarence. Did you ever 
know me to be inhospitable?'' 

*'No, you are a good heart. I want to go and — ** 

"Be a reception committee? I will go, too." 

We crossed the corral and lay down together be- 
tween the two inside fences. Even the dim light of 
the cave had disordered our eyesight somewhat, but 
the focus straightway began to regulate itself and 
soon it was adjusted for present circumstances. We 
had had to feel otu* way before, but we could make 
out to see the fence-posts now. We started a whis- 
pered conversation, but suddenly Qarenoe broke off 
and said: 

"What is that?" 

"What is what?" 

"That thing yonder." 

"What thing— where?" 

"There beyond you a little piece — a dark some- 
thing — 3, dull shape of some kind — against the seoood 
fence." 

I gazed and he gazed. I said : 

"Could it be a man, Clarence?" 

"No, I think not. If you notice, it looks a lit — 
why, it 15 a man! — ^leaning on the fence." 

"I certainly believe it is; let us go and see.** 

440 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

We crept along on our hands and knees until we 
were pretty close, and then looked up. Yes, it was 
a man — sl dim great figure in armor, standing erect, 
with both hands on the upper wire — and, of course, 
there was a smell of burning flesh. Poor feUow, 
dead as a door-nail, and never knew what hurt him. 
He stood there like a statue — no motion about him, 
except that his plumes swished about a Uttle in the 
night wind. We rose up and looked in through the 
bars of his visor, but couldn't make out whether we 
knew him or not — ^features too dim and shadowed. 

We heard muffled sotmds approaching, and we 
sank down to the grotmd where we were. We 
made out another knight vaguely; he was coming 
very stealthily, and feeling his way. He was near 
enough now for us to see him put out a hand, find 
an upper wire, then bend and step under it and over 
the lower one. Now he arrived at the first knight — 
and started slightly when he discovered him. He 
stood a moment — ^no doubt wondering why the other 
one didn't move on; then he said, in a low voice, 
**Why dreamest thou here, good Sir Mar — " then 
he laid his hand on the corpse's shoulder — and just 
uttered a little soft moan and sunk down dead. 
Killed by a dead man, you see — skilled by a dead 
friend, in fact. There was something awful about it. 

These early birds came scattering along after each 
other, about one every five minutes in our vicinity, 
during half an hour. They brought no armor of 
offense but their swords; as a rule, they carried the 
sword ready in the hand, and put it forward and 
found the wires with it. We would now and then 

441 



MARK TWAIN 

see a blue spark when the knight that caused it was 
so far away as to be invisible to us; but we knew 
what had happened, all the same; ixx)r fellow, he 
had touched a charged wire with his sword and been 
elected. We had brief intervals of grim stillness, 
interrupted with piteous regularity by the dash made 
by the falling of an ironclad; and this sort of thing 
was going on, right along, and was very creepy there 
in the dark and lonesomeness. 

We concluded to make a toiu* between the inner 
fences. We elected to walk upright, for conveni- 
ence' sake; we argued that if discerned, we should 
be taken for friends rather than enemies, and in any 
case we should be out of reach of swords, and these 
gentry did not seem to have any spears along. 
Well, it was a curious trip. Everjrwhere dead men 
were lying outside the second fence — not plainly 
visible, but still visible; and we cotmted fifteen of 
those pathetic statues — dead knights standing with 
their hands on the upper wire. 

One thing seemed to be sufficiently demonstrated: 
our current was so tremendous that it lolled before 
the victim could cry out. Pretty soon we detected 
a muffled and heavy sotmd, and next moment we 
guessed what it was. It was a siuprise in foroe 
coming! I whispered Clarence to go and wake the. 
army, and notify it to wait in silence in the cave 
for further orders. He was soon back, and we stood 
by the inner fence and watched the silent lightning 
do its awful work upon that swarming host. One 
could make out but little of detail ; but he could note 
that a black mass was piling itself up beyond the 

442 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

second fence. That swelling bulk was dead men! 
Our camp was inclosed with a solid wall of the dead 
— a bulwark, a breastwork, of corpses, you may say. 
One terrible thing about this thing was the absence 
of human voices ; there were no cheers, no war-cries ; 
being intent upon a surprise, these men moved as 
noiselessly as they could ; and always when the front 
rank was near enough to their goal to make it proper 
for them to begin to get a shout ready, of course 
they struck the fatal line and went down without 
testifying. 

I sent a current through the third fence now; and 
almost immediately through the fourth and fifth, so 
quickly were the gaps filled up. I believed the time 
was come now for my climax; I believed that that 
whole army was in oiu" trap. Anyway, it was high 
time to find out. So I touched a button and set fifty 
electric suns aflame on the top of our precipice. 

Land, what a sight! We were inclosed in three 
walls of dead men ! All the other fences were pretty 
nearly filled with the living, who were stealthily 
working their way forward through the wires. The 
sudden glare paralyzed this host, petrified them, you 
may say, with astonishment; there was just one 
instant for me to utilize their immobility in, and I 
didn't lose the chance. You see, in another instant 
they would have recovered their faculties, then they'd 
have burst into a cheer and made a rush, and my 
wires would have gone down before it ; but that lost 
instant lost them their opporttinity forever; while 
even that slight fragment of time was still tmspent, 
I shot the current through all the fences and struck 

443 



MARK "TWAIN 

the whole host dead m their tracks! There was a 
groan you cotild heart It voiced the death-pang of 
eleven thousand men. It swelled out on the night 
with awful pathos. 

A glance showed that the rest of the enemy — per- 
haps ten thousand strong — ^were between us and the 
encircling ditch, and pressing forward to the assault. 
Consequently we had them all! and had them past 
help. Time for the last act of the tragedy. I fired 
the three appointed revolver-shots — ^whicfa meant r 

"Turn on the water!" 

There was a sudden rush and roar, and in a minute 
the motmtain brook was raging through the big 
ditch and creating a river a hundred feet wide and 
twenty-five deep. 

"Stand to your guns, men! Open fire!" 

The thirteen Catlings began to vomit death into 
the fated ten thousand. They halted, they stood 
their ground a moment against that withering deluge 
of fire, then they broke, faced about and swept 
toward the ditch like chaff before a gale. A full 
fourth part of their force never reached the top of the 
lofty embankment ; the three-fourths reached it and 
plunged over — to death by drowning. 

Within ten short minutes after we had opened fire, 
armed resistance was totally annihilated, the cam- 
paign was ended, we fifty-four were masters of Eng- 
land ! Twenty-five thousand men lay dead around us. 

But how treacherous is fortune ! In a little while-^ 
say an hour — ^happened a thing, by my own fault. 
which — ^but I have no heart to write that. Let th6 
record end here. 

444 



CHAPTER XUV 

A POSTSCRIPT BY CLARBNCB 

I CLARENCE, must write it for him. He pro- 
^ posed that we two go out and see if any help 
could be accorded the wounded. I was strenuous 
against the project. I said that if there were many, 
we could do but little for them ; and it would not be 
wise for us to trust ourselves among them, anyway. 
But he could seldom be turned from a purpose once 
formed; so we shut off the electric current from the 
fences, took an escort along, climbed over the inclos- 
ing ramparts of dead knights, and moved out upon 
the field. The first wounded man who appealed for 
help was sitting with his back against a dead com- 
rade. When The Boss bent over him and spoke to 
him, the man recognized him and stabbed him. 
That knight was Sir Meliagratmce, as I fotmd out by 
tearing off his helmet. He will not ask for help any 
more. 

We carried The Boss to the cave and gave his 
wound, which was not very serious, the best care we 
could. In this service we had the help of Merlin, 
though we did not know it. He was disgtiised as a 
woman, and appeared to be a simple old peasant 
goodwife. In this disguise, with brown-stained face 
and smooth-shaven, he had appeared a few days 

44S 



MARK TWAIN 

after The Boss was hurt, and offered to cook for us, 
saying her people had gone off to join certain new 
camps which the enemy were forming, and that she 
was starving. The Boss had been getting along very 
well, and had amused himself with finishing up his 
record. 

We were glad to have this woman, for we were 
short-handed. We were in a trap, you see — a trap 
of our own maJdng. If we stayed where we were, 
our dead would kill us; if we moved out of our de- 
fenses, we should no longer be invincible. We had 
conquered; in turn we were conquered. The Boss 
recognized this; we all recognized it. If we could 
go to one of those new camps and patch up some kind 
of terms with the enemy — ^yes, but The Boss could 
not go, and neither could I, for I was among the first 
that were made sick by the poisonous air bred by 
those dead thousands. Others were taken down, and 
still others. To-morrow — 

To-morrow, It is here. And with it the end. 
About midnight I awoke, and saw that hag making 
curious passes in the air about The Boss's head and 
face, and wondered what it meant. Everybody but 
the dynamo-watch lay steeped in sleep; there was no 
sotmd. The woman ceased from her mysterious fool- 
ery, and started tiptoeing toward the door. I called 
out: 

''Stop! What have you been doing?" 

She halted, and said with an accent of malicious 
satisfaction : 

"Ye were conquerors; ye are conquered? These 
others are perishing — ^you also. Ye shall all die in 

446 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

this place — every one — except him. He sleepeth 
now — ^and shall sleep thirteen centuries. I am 
Merlin!" 

Then such a delirium of silly laughter overtook him 
that he reeled about like a dnmken man, and pres- 
ently fetched up against one of our wires. His mouth 
is spread open yet ; apparently he is still laughing. I 
suppose the face will retain that petrified laugh imtil 
the corpse turns to dust. 

The Boss has never stirred — sleeps like a stone. If 
he does not wake to-day we shall tmderstand what 
kind of a sleep it is, and his body will then be borne 
to a place in one of the remote recesses of the cave 
where none will ever find it to desecrate it. As for 
the rest of us — ^well, it is agreed that if any one of us 
ever escapes aUve from this place, he will write the 
fact here, and loyally hide this Manuscript with The 
Boss, our dear good chief, whose property it is, be he 
alive or dead. 



THB END OF MANUSCRIPT 



Pinal P. S. by M. T. 

THE dawn was come when I laid the Manuacripd 
aside. The rain had ahnost ceased, the worid 
was gray and sad, the exhausted storm was sighing 
and sobbing itself to rest. I went to the stranger's 
room, and listened at his door, which was slightly 
ajar. I could hear his voice, and so I knocked. 
There was no answer, but I still heard the voiee. I 
peeped in. The man lay on his back in bed, talking 
brokenly but with spirit, and punctuating with his 
arms, which he thrashed about, restlessly, as sick 
people do in delirium. I slipped in softly and bent 
over him. His mutterings and ejactdations went on. 
I spoke — ^merely a word, to call his attention. His 
glassy eyes and his ashy face were alight in an instant 
with pleasure, gratitude, gladness, welcome: 

"Oh, Sandy, you are come at last — ^how I have 
longed for you ! Sit by me — do not leave me — ^never 
leave me again, Sandy, never again. Where is your 
hand? — give it me, dear, let me hold it — ^there — now 
all is well, all is peace, and I am happy again — um 
are happy again, isn't it so, Sandy ? You are so dim, 
so vague, you are but a mist, a cloud, but you are 
here, and that is blessedness sufficient; and I have 
your hand ; don't take it away — ^it is for only a little 
while, I shall not require it long. . . . Was that the 

443 



A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

child? . . . Hello-Central! . . . She doesn't answer. 
Asleep, perhaps? Bring her when she wakes, and 
let me touch her hands, her face, her hair, and 
tell her good-by. . . . Sandy! . . . Yes, you are 
there. I lost myself a moment, and I thought you 
were gone. . . . Have I been sick long? It must be 
so ; it seems months to me. And such dreams ! such 
strange and awful dreams, Sandy! Dreams that 
were as real as reality — deliritun, of cotirse, but so 
real ! Why, I thought the king was dead, I thought 
you were in Gaul and couldn't get home, I thought 
there was a revolution; in the fantastic frenzy of 
these dreams, I thought that Clarence and I and a 
handful of my cadets fought and exterminated the 
whole chivalry of England! But even that was not 
the strangest. I seemed to be a creature out of a 
remote unborn age, centuries hence, and even titat 
was as real as the rest ! Yes, I seemed to have flown 
back out of that age into this of ours, and then for- 
ward to it again, and was set down, a stranger and 
forlorn in that strange England, with an abyss of 
thirteen centuries yawnmg between me and you! 
between me and my home and my friends! between 
me and all that is dear to me, all that could make 
life worth the living! It was awful — ^awfuler than 
you can ever imagine, Sandy. Ah, watch by me, 
Sandy — stay by me every moment — don't let me go 
out of my mind again; death is nothing, let it come, 
but not with those dreams, not with the tortiu*e of 
those hideous dreams — I cannot endure that again. 
. . . Sandy? . . ,** 

He lay muttering incoherently some little time; 

449 



