Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 


Usage guidelines 


Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 


About Google Book Search 


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
ai[http: //books . google. com/| 


UNIVERSITY OF 
CALIFORNIA 


EEE IEEE EEE EEE EE EEE 


— <a, a a 


THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


eine Oc 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
MEW YORK - BOSTON - CHICAGO - DALLAS 
ATLANTA ° SAN FRANCISCO 


MACMILLAN & CO., Luo«rrzep 
LONDON « BOMBAY + CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 


THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Lr. 
TORONTO 


THE 
AMERICAN NOVEL 


BY 
CARL VAN DOREN 


yew Pork 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
1922 


AQ rights reserved 


LOAN STACK 


OoPYRIGHT, 1921, 
By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


Set up and dectrotyped. Published June, 1921 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERIOA 


/3 
V246 


Qt7) 


' TO 


IRITA VAN DOREN 


$96 


PREFACE 


This book is meant to serve as a chapter in the history 
of the American imagination. Consequently it undertakes 
to do more than to recount and criticize the work of 
eminent novelists, or of novelists whether eminent or 
mediocre; so far as space permits, it is a record of the 
national imagination as exhibited in the progress of native 
fiction. In Fenimore Cooper’s generation the expanding 
mood of the new republic, heretofore represented in almost 
no fiction whatever, was met by an energetic school of 
romancers. Their fashion passed about the middle of the 
nineteenth century, and there followed a relaxed interreg- 
num of sentimentalism, during which, however, Hawthorne 
sounded his clear, profound, original note. After the 
Civil War the process which knit together all the sections 
of the country as they had not before been knit, encouraged 
the dominant mode of local color, which prevailed until 
about 1900. While the novel tended in this period to 
leave the field to the short story, it was nevertheless the 
period of Mark Twain, easily chief among those who have 
worked with native materials in native ways; of Henry 
James, the spokesman par excellence of those Americans 
whose imagination turns to Europe for its most affec- 
tionate exercise; and of William Dean Howells, mediator 
between the two extremes and principal American exponent 


of the doctrines of realism. At the end of the century, 
vii 


vill PREFACE 


about coincident with the imperialistic excitement of the 
Spanish War, came a brief reaction toward romance — 
rococo and prolific. During those same years there like- 
wise began the discontent with romance and reticence from 
which springs the tendency of naturalism now current. 

Aiming to be a history rather than a partizan docu- 
ment, the account here offered does not take sides with 
any of the modes of fiction which have existed, or which 
exist, in the United States. To this lack of partizanship 
may be ascribed a disinclination to define the term “ novel ” 
too exactly. A different critical disposition might have 
denied the name to certain allegories, romances, and hu- 
morous autobiographies admitted to the record apparently 
without question. As a matter of fact, they have all been 
questioned closely, with the resulting conviction that to 
classify and exclude them would be vain, since the effect 
of invented narrative is much the same no matter what 
the technical subdivision into which any specific book may 
fall. A fuller history of the American imagination would 
indeed have to take into account poems and plays and 
short stories as well, with all the national myths and 
legends and traditions and aspirations. This particular 
study, however, has had to be limited to long prose narra- 
tives in which the element of fact is on the whole less than 
the element of fiction. 

The unpartizan and historical character of the book 
accounts also for the proportions assigned to exposition 
and criticism. It had to be borne in mind that, though 
there are useful critical studies of particular American 
novelists, no extended study of the American novel, in its 
various phases, has heretofore been made. Criticism has 


PREFACE ix 


therefore had to wait a little on exposition. Finally, 
novelists still living appear in this record only to the 
extent needful for an indication of the general tendencies 
of recent fiction. To write about contemporaries calls 
for a scale and method of treatment essentially different 
from that employed with writers whose work is done. 
Discussion of the American novel of the twentieth century 
is reserved for a further volume, already planned and in 
part executed. 

In its general outlines the present study follows the 
chapters on fiction which the same author contributed to 
The Cambridge History of American Literature published 
by G. P. Putnam’s Sons, with whose courteous permission 
this much larger version is considerably indebted to those 
chapters. Acknowledgments are due as well to The Nation 
for the use of materials which have appeared in its pages. 

Cart Van Doren. 

February, 1921. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 
PREFACE . 


I Tue Breainninas or Fiction 


1. Arguments and Experiments . . 
2. The Three Matters of American Romance . 


II James FENimMorRE Cooper . 


III Romances or ADVENTURE 
1. Materials and Men 
2. Herman Melville . 


IV NatHaniet HawTHorRNE 
V Btoop anp TEars 


VI Howe.ts anp REALIsM 


1. New Frontiers and Old Settlements . 


2. William Dean Howells 
VII Marx Twain 
VIII Henry James 


IX Tue Eieutizs anp THerr KIN 
1. Varied Types . 
2. Francis Marion Crawford 


X Reaction anp PRoGREss 


1. Toward the Right: Rococo Romance 
2. Toward the Left: Naturalism 


BisuioGrRaPHicaL Nores 


InpErx 


e 109 


- 125 
- 132 


- 157 
- 188 


- 221 
. 288 


- 246 
. 256 


. 272 
- 281 


LOAN STACK 


OCoPYERIGHT, 1921, 
By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


Set up and edlectrotyped. Published June, 1921 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


/3 
V246 


Qrr) 


' TO 


IRITA VAN DOREN 


$96 


2 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


and Philadelphia in spite of the coldness of utilitarians and 
Puritans. Probably the Southern and Middle colonies 
read more novels than New England. William Byrd of 
Virginia, owner of one of the largest private libraries in 
America, possessed novels by Defoe, Fielding, Smollett, 
Le Sage, and Cervantes (who as satirist and moralist was 
widely admired), as well as more trivial performances. 
There was at least one copy of Joseph Andrews in Phil- 
adelphia in 1744, for. Dr. Alexander Hamilton of Mary- 
Jand, then on a leisurely vacation, read it there and thought 
it the best work of the kind he had ever seen. And New 
England was by no means innocent of novels. Jonathan 
Edwards himself, conspicuous among the saints, read Sir 
Charles Grandison, and with such interest that he resolved 
to correct his own hitherto neglected style upon the ex- 
ample.of Richardson; while Stephen Burroughs, as con- 
spicuous among the sinners, later charged many of his 
offenses to his early reading of such books as Guy, Earl of 
Warwick, which he read about the time of the Revolution. 

In part this apathy to fiction was due to the common 
colonial tendency to lag behind in matters of taste and 
culture. Pope in poetry and Addison in prose long suf- 
ficed for models among the Americans, and theological and 
political discussion proceeded with little reference to pre- 
vailing modes in imaginative literature. But even more 
important than mere apathy was the positive antipathy 
which showed itself when, soon after the Revolution, novel 
reading began to increase with great rapidity, and native 
novelists appeared in respectable numbers. ‘The moralists 
were aroused and exclaimed against the change — their 
cries appearing in the magazines of the day side by side 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 3 


with moral tales. Nearly every grade of sophistication 
applied itself to the problem. The dullest critics con- 
tended that novels were lies; the pious, that they served 
no virtuous purpose; the strenuous, that they softened 
sturdy minds; the utilitarian, that they crowded out more 
useful books ; the realistic, that they painted adventure too 
romantic and love too vehement; the patriotic, that, deal- 
ing with European manners, they tended to confuse and 
dissatisfy republican youth. In the face of such censure 
American novelists came forward late and apologetically, 
armed for the most part with the plea that they told the 
truth, pointed to heaven, or devoutly believed in the new 
republic. Before 1800 the sweeping abuse of the older 
school had been forced to share the field of criticism with 
occasional efforts to distinguish good novels from bad. 
The relative merits of Fielding and Smollett were discussed 
almost as frequently as, fifty years later, were those of 
Dickens and Thackeray, and in much the same confusion 
of ethical and xsthetic considerations. Fielding was of 
course preferred by the enlightened, Smollett by the ro- 
bustious, Sterne by the “ sensible,” and Richardson, most 
popular of all it will be seen, by the domestic and senti- 
mental. Indeed, to the influence of Richardson, with 
something from Sterne, must be credited the first regular 
American novel, The Power of Sympathy, a poor and 
stilted narrative in epistolary form which was published 
by Sarah Wentworth Morton at Boston in 1789. 
Political allegory, however, had already begun to pre- 
pare the way for invented narratives. The eighteenth 
century would have been less than itself had it brought 
forth in America only sentimental romances. Franklin 


4 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


is but one of many evidences that humor and satire were 
not silent. Francis Hopkinson, also of Philadelphia, pro- 
duced an allegory which lies nearly as close to fiction as 
to history. In A Pretty Story (1774) he set forth, after 
the fashion earlier established by Dr. Arbuthnot, the his- 
tory of a certain nobleman (the king) who had an old 
farm (England) and a new farm (the colonies) in the 
management of which his wife. (Parliament) and his 
steward (the ministry) constantly interfered to the an- 
noyance of his sons (the colonists) and to the great 
derangement of his own affairs. The story breaks off 
abruptly with Jack (Boston) shut up in his farm and 
turning for help to his brothers. The satire was with- 
out much bitterness or indignation, and perhaps for that 
reason all the more effective through its shrewd and amus- 


ing narrative. Jeremy Belknap, the learned historian | 


of New Hampshire, likewise tried his hand at allegory in 
The Foresters (1792, enlarged 1796). His foresters are 
the colonists, whose career he follows in a mild comic his- 
tory, consistently allegorized, from the days of settle- 
ment, through the colonial wars, the Revolution, the 
Confederation, the Constitution, the establishment of the 
Republic, and the polemic episode of Citizen Genét. 
Neither Hopkinson nor Belknap is to be compared, for 
comic force and satirical point and power of observation, 
to the Pennsylvanian Hugh Henry Brackenridge (1748-— 
1816), who between 1792 and 1805 published the various 
parts of his satirical novel Modern Chivalry. It is indica- 
tive of the changing taste of his time that he began his book 
in 1787 in the meter of Hudibras, recently employed with 
such success in Trumbull’s McFingal, but later changed 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 5 


to prose. By his own confession, he followed the style 
of Hume, Swift, and Fielding — like Swift in A Tale of a 
Tub alternating chapters of narrative with ironical essays 
on all manner of subjects. Captain Farrago, the hero, 
is a new Don Quixote, who whimsically takes it into his 
head to leave his farm in western Pennsylvania “ and ride 
about the world a little, with his man Teague at his heels, 
to see how things were going on here and there, and to 
observe human nature.” As a description of manners in 
the early days of the Republic the book is unapproached 
by any other. Races, elections, rural conjurors, village 
*‘ philosophers ” or pseudo-scientists, inns, duels and chal- 
lenges, treaties with Indians, the Society of the Cincinnati, 
hedge parsons, brothels, colleges, Congress, Quakers, law- 
yers, theaters, law courts, Presidential levees, dancing 
masters, excise officers, tar and feathers, insurrections — 
all these are displayed in the first part of the book with 
obvious verisimilitude and unflagging spirit. Much of 
the action of this part is furnished by the doings of 
Teague, a grotesque and witless Sancho Panza, whose im- 
pudent ambition survives the most ludicrous and painful 
misadventures. Brackenridge regards him as typical of 
the political upstarts of the period, and his triumphs as 
an accusation properly to be brought against the public 
which followed such sorry leaders. In Part II Captain 
Farrago, after a brief hiatus spent on his farm, resumes 
his travels, which at first do not take him beyond the 
limits of the nearest village, with its newspaper, academy, 
lunatic asylum, and fair, but which eventually bring him to 
a settlement in the back country of which he becomes gov- 
ernor. The remainder of the book, ostensibly a chronicle 


6 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


of the new settlement, is practically a burlesque of the 
history of civilization in America. The settlers war with 
the Indians and make a constitution. They legislate like 
madmen, under the guidance of a visionary from Washing- 
ton who holds that beasts should have the vote as well 
as men, and actually persuades his fellows to commission a 
monkey clerk and admit a hound to the bar. Bracken- 
ridge aimed his satire primarily at doctrinaires and dema- 
gogues, but he whipped as well almost all the current 
follies and affectations, revising his book from time to 
time to keep pace with new absurdities. For half a cen- 
tury Modern Chivalry was widely popular, and nowhere 
more so than along the very frontier which it satirized 
and which read it as more or less a true history. It was 
among the earliest books printed west of the Alleghanies. 
Satire had to be helped by sentiment, howevtr, before 
fiction could win the largest audience. Indeed, until Scott 
had definitely established a new mode of fiction for the 
world, the potent influence in American fiction was Rich- 
ardson. The amiable ladies who produced most of the 
early sentimental novels commonly held, like Mrs. Row- 
son, that their knowledge of life had been “ simply gleaned 
from pure nature,” because they dealt with facts which 
had come under their own observation; but like other 
amateurs they saw in nature what art had assured them 
would be there. Nature and Richardson they found the 
_ same. Whatever bias they gave this Richardsonian uni- 
verse was due to a pervading consciousness that their 
narratives would be followed chiefly by women. The re- 
sult was a highly domestic world, limited in outlook, where 
the talk was of careless husbands, of grief for dead chil- 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 7 


dren, of the peril of many childbirths, of the sentiment 
and the religion without which it used to be thought women 
could not endure their sex’s destiny. Over all hangs the 
unceasing menace of the seducer, who appears in such 
multitudes that modern readers might think that age one 
of the most illicit on record if they did not understand 
that Richardson’s Lovelace is merely being repeated in 
different colors and proportions. It is true, however, 
that the two most important novels of this sort, as well 
as The Power of Sympathy, were based on actual happen- 
ings. Hannah Webster Foster’s The Coquette (1797) 
recorded the tragic and widely known career of Elizabeth 
Whitman of Hartford, who, having coquetted with the 
Reverend Joseph Buckminster, was seduced by a mys- 
terious rake generally identified with Jonathan Edwards’s 
son Pierrepont, and died in misery at the Old Bell Tavern 
in Danvers, Massachusetts, in 1788. The Coquette saw 
thirty editions in forty years, and was known in almost 
every household of the Connecticut Valley. It has not 
survived as has Susannah Haswell Rowson’s Charlotte 
(1794), one of the most popular novels ever published in 
the United States. Mrs. Rowson, an American only by 
immigration, had probably written the novel in England 
(where it seems to have been published in 1790), but 
Charlotte Temple, to call it by its later title, was thor- 
oughly naturalized and has had its largest circulation 
here. It has persuaded an increasingly naive underworld 
of fiction readers — housemaids and shopgirls — to buy 
more than a hundred editions and has built up a legend 
about a not too authentic tomb in Trinity Churchyard, 
New York, which at least since about 1845 has borne 


8 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


the name “ Charlotte Temple ” in concession to the legend 
but which probably contains the ashes of a certain Char- 
lotte Stanley whom a British officer named Montrésor 
seduced from her home in England and deserted in New 
York, much as in the novel. This simple story Mrs. Row- 
son embroidered with every device known to the romancer 
— sentimentalism, bathos, easy tears, high-flymg lan- 
guage, melodrama, moralizings without stint or number ; 
and yet something universal in the theme has kept it, in its 
way, still alive without the concurrence of critics or his- 
torians of literature. 

The tradition that Abigail Stanley, mother of Eliza- 
beth Whitman, was a cousin of Charlotte, serves to illus- 
trate the process by which Charlotte Temple and The 
Coquette won a hearing from a community which winced 
at fiction: like sagas they stole upon their readers in the 
company of facts. A similar companionship appears in 
Royall Tyler’s The Algerine Captive (1797). The hero, 
Updike Underhill, after an account of his youth and edu- 
cation in the backwoods of New England, and of his ex- 
periences as a schoolmaster there, goes on to Boston, 
begins the practice of medicine, proceeds to Philadelphia, 
where he meets Franklin, and to Virginia, where he is 
shocked at encountering a figure quite unknown to New 
England, a sporting parson; later he goes to sea, visits 
London, tells of Tom Paine, observes the horrors of a 
slave ship, and is captured by the Algerines, among whom 
he spends the six years recounted in the second volume. 
The value of the book lies largely in its report of facts, 
which it gives clearly and freshly. That Tyler thought 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 9 


of the traveler and the novelist as about equally his 
models appears from his preface, upon which the fame 
of The Algerine Captive principally depends. In 1787, it 
should be remembered, he had produced our earliest com- 
edy, The Contrast, opposing to foreign affectations the 
rustic worth of the first “ stage Yankee.” Now ten years 
later he renewed his demand for nativism, while pointing 
out that the status of fiction had greatly changed in the 
interim. Formerly, he says, “books of Biography, 
Travels, Novels, and modern Romances, were confined to 
our sea ports; or, if known in the country, were read only 
in the families of Clergymen, Physicians, and Lawyers; 
while certain funeral discourses, the last words and dying 
speeches of Bryan Shakeen, and Levi Ames, and some 
dreary somebody’s Day of Doom, formed the most divert- 
ing part of the farmer’s library.” But “no sooner was 
a taste for amusing literature diffused than all orders 
of country life, with one accord, forsook the sober ser- 
mons and Practical Pieties of the fathers, for the gay 
stories and splendid impieties of the Traveller and the 
Novelist. The worthy farmer no longer fatigued him- 
self with Bunyan’s Pilgrim up the ‘hill of difficulty’ or 
through the ‘ slough of despond’; but quaffed wine with 
Brydone in the hermitage of Vesuvius, sported with Bruce 
on the fairy land of Abyssinia: while Dolly, the diary [ sic ] 
maid, and Jonathan, the hired man, threw aside the ballad 
of the cruel stepmother, over which they had so often 
wept in concert, and now amused themselves into so agree- 
able a terrour, with the haunted houses and hobgoblins 
of Mrs. Ratcliffe [sic], that they were both afraid to 


10 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


} 


sleep alone.” Such addiction to romance, Tyler argued, 
was too exciting for plain Americans; their novels like 
their clothes ought to be homespun. 

It was in the very year of Royall Tyler’s preface that 
the first American to make authorship his sole profession 
decided upon fiction as the form he should undertake. 
Charles Brockden Brown (1770-1810) of Philadelphia as 
a schoolboy aspired to be an epic poet, and contemplated 
epics on Columbus, Pizarro, and Cortez, possibly desir- 
ing to rival Timothy Dwight, whose Conquest of Canaan 
appeared in 1785, or Joel Barlow, whose Vision of Colum- 
bus followed two years later. But after reading William 
Godwin’s Caleb Williams (1794) Brown acquired a new 
ambition. He would patriotically try for reality as some 
others were trying; and of course he would lay stress 
on the moral tendency of his performances, as all had 
done. In addition he hoped “ to enchain the attention 
and ravish-the souls of those who study and reflect.” At 
the same time, he was too good a democrat to write for 
geniuses alone, and he believed that while they were being 
stirred by the ideas of a novel the plain people could 
be captured by its plot. 

Brown’s important books were written in a few vivid 
months, spent mostly in New York. His specific indebt- 
edness to Godwin appears chiefly in a fondness for the 
central situation of Caleb Williams: an innocent and some- 
what helpless youth in the grasp of a patron turned 
enemy. The parallel is exact in Arthur Mervyn (1799- 
1800), which brings a young man of that name to Phila- 
delphia, makes him blunder into the secret of a murder, 
and subjects him to elaborate persecutions from the mur- 


ae ee ee eee 


ee 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 11 


derer. A surviving fragment of the lost Sky-Walk (writ- 
ten in 1797) shows that Brown there varied the Godwin 
situation by making the patron a woman. In Ormond 
(1799) by still another variation a woman is the victim, 
Constantia Dudley, purswed by the enthusiast and revolu- 
tionary Ormond until in self-defense she is obliged to kill 
him. Constantia won the passionate regard of a greater 
among Godwin’s disciples, Shelley, to whom she was the 
type of virtuous humanity oppressed by evil custom. But 
Brown’s victims do not have to undergo the cumulative 
agony of Godwin’s, for the reason that Brown worked 
too violently to be able to organize a scheme of circum- 
stances all converging upon any single victim. And more 
than his vehement methods of work handicapped him 
in his rivalry with Godwin: to be a master of the art of 
calm and deliberate narrative he must have had Godwin’s 
cold and consistent philosophy of life. As a matter of 
fact, while the leaven of revolutionary rationalism stirs 
in his work, it does not, as with Godwin’s, pervade the 
mass. 

The Godwinian elements in Brown now seem less im- 
pressive than certain effects which he was able to produce 
by the use of native material. In 1793 he had fled with 
his family to the country to escape the epidemic of yellow 
fever which then visited Philadelphia; five years later he 
had gone through a similar invasion of the plague at New 
York. His letters show how deeply he was moved by the 
only personal contact he ever had with such affairs of 
danger and terror as he chose to write about. Composing 
Ormond almost before the pestilence had receded, Brown 
transferred his impressions from the New York of 1798 


12 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


to the Philadelphia of 1793, as he did in Arthur Mervyn, 
perhaps for some gain in perspective ; but in both he wrote 
with an eye on the fact as nowhere else in his books. 
With unsparing, not to say sickening, veracity, he repro- 
duced the physical horrors of the plague — its loathsome 
symptoms and its fearful stenches; he was even more 
veracious in his account of the mental and spiritual hor- 
rors which accompanied it: the superstitious dread and 
foolhardy courage which sprang in different people from 
the current ignorance with regard to infection; the pusil- 
lanimous flight of many who were deeply needed; the 
brutal callousness of certain wretches who stayed to nurse 
the sick and then neglected them; the general moral col- 
lapse. Less successful than these experiments was that in 
Edgar Huntly (1799), wherein he turned to the material 
which beyond any other was to be celebrated in American 
fiction for half a century: frontier adventure. Brown 
claimed for this book the merit “ of calling forth the pas- 
sions and engaging the sympathy of the reader by means 
hitherto unemployed by preceding authors. Puerile su- 
perstition and exploded manners, Gothic castles and 
chimeras, are the materials usually employed for this end. 
The incidents of Indian hostility, and the perils of the 
Western wilderness, are far more suitable; and for a 
native of America to overlook these would admit of no 
apology.” As far as his knowledge and his preposses- 
sions allowed him, Brown succeeded in his experiment. 
But he knew little of the frontier, either its scenery or its 
customs, and no more of the Indians than he could have 
picked up from books or casual meetings in the towns. 
What he did was to substitute new devices for calling forth 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 13 


much the same passions and sympathies as had been ad- 
dressed by the older Gothic romances. His wild regions 
and his wild adventures are all seen through an intensely 
romantic temperament with only occasional intervals for 
realism. As in his handling of the yellow fever, Brown 
shows power to set forth grisly details of blood and suffer- 
ing, and he treats his Indians without the glamor with 
which they were already invested by certain sentimentalists. 
But so far as reality of impression 1s concerned, the visible 
Indians are none of them so memorable as the old woman 
called Queen Mab, who never appears in person and who 
exists chiefly as a symbol of a race vanquished and yet still 
clinging to its old domains with a tenacity that is poetic. 
Vivid, too, is the impression of the feverish, nocturnal 
wanderings, without much aim or sequence, to which 
Huntly devotes his time. Here again Brown’s shambling 
narrative methods dull the edge of his story: like most 
of the romancers of his age, he moved forward through 
a cloud. 

As a rationalist he tried to solve the mystery of the 
cloud about Edgar Huntly by explaining that both Cli- 
thero, the suspected villain who is really innocent, and 
Huntly are addicted to sleep-walking, a subject which 
was just then, as contemporary journals show, under dis- 
cussion and much debated. Also illustrative of Brown’s 
attempt to fuse mystery with science, and in itself more 
effective than this sleep-walking, is the ventriloquism which 
plays a prominent part in his best — that is, his most com- 
pact, most psychological, and most powerful — novel, 
Wieland (1798). Its plot was primarily founded upon 
the deed of an actual religious fanatic of Tomhannock, New 


14 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


York, who in a mad vision had heard himself commanded 
to destroy all his idols, and had murdered his wife and 
children with ferocious brutality. With this theme 
Brown involved the story of Carwin, the “ biloquist,” to 
make the “ voices ” seem less incredible than in the orig- 
inal. It may be assumed that ventriloquism did not seem 
a pinchbeck solution in 1798, when it was a trick little 
known or practised; and Brown, too much an artist 
to make his ventriloquist a mere instigator to murder, 
makes him out a hero-villain whose tragedy it is that he 
has to sin, not as the old morality had it, because of mere 
wickedness, but because of the driving power of the spirit 
of evil which no man can resist and from which only the 
weak are immune. Yet though Carwin by his irrespons- 
ible acts of ventriloquism in and out of season actually 
sets going in Theodore Wieland’s mind the train of thought 
which terminates in the crimes, he does no more than to 
arouse from unsuspected depths a frenzy already sleep- 
ing in Wieland’s nature. These were cases of speculative 
pathology which Brown had met in his Godwinian twi- 
lights, beings who had for him the reality he knew best, 
that of dream and passion; from them comes the fever 
in the climate which gives the book its shuddering power. 
To a notable extent Wieland fulfills the rules Brown had 
laid down in his announcement of Sky-Walk. Ventrilo- 
quism, religious murder, and a case of spontaneous com- 
bustion make up the “ contexture of facts capable of sus- 
pending the faculties of every soul in curiosity.” These 
were for the unlearned. The apparent scene of action is 
laid upon the banks of the Schuylkill; this was patriotic 
realism. But for those of his readers who might have 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 15 


“ soaring passions and intellectual energy,” as Brown had, 
the absorbing thing was the clash of mighty forces, the 
din of good and evil, which resound through the story, 
and which in spite of awkward narrative, strained proba- 
bilities, and a premature solution, lift it above the ephem- 
eral — the earliest American romance of distinction. 


2. Toe Turee Matrers or AmMEeRIcAN RoMANCE 


Except for the work of Irving, who deliberately chose 
short stories to avoid any rivalry with Scott, the first 
twenty years of the nineteenth century produced no mem- 
orable fiction whatever in the United States. Even the 
example of Scott, who was immensely popular, at first 
failed to arouse imitators. Indeed, the brilliance of his 
achievement served to discourage his warmest admirers. 
Such learning, such experience, such humor, such abund- 
ance as the “ Author of Waverley ” displayed — who 
dared match his powers against them? Moreover, the ele- 
ments which gave Scott his vogue, and which for a time 
seemed the essential elements of fiction, were not easily 
transportable to another soil. The attitude of Americans 
in the matter was well set forth by John Bristed in his book 
on The Resources of the United States in 1818: % Of 
native novels we have no great stock, and none good; our 
democratic institutions placing all the people on a dead 
level of political equality; and the pretty equal diffusion 
of property throughout the country affords but little room 
for varieties, and contrasts of character; nor is there 
much scope for fiction, as the country is quite new, and 
all that. has happened from the first settlement to the 


16 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


present hour, respecting it, is known to every one. There 
is, to be sure, some traditionary romance about the In- 
dians; but a novel describing these miserable barbarians, 
their squaws, and papooses, would not be very interesting 
_to the present race of American readers.” To Bristed, as 
to most contemporaries, it seemed impossible for the novel 
to flourish in a country which had no aristocracy, no dis- 
tinct classes of society, no wide range of poverty and 
wealth, no legendary and semi-legendary lore like that of 
the English-Scottish border. A genuine task challenged 
the American imagination before any considerable body 
of fiction could be achieved. Whatever man of genius 
might appear, there was still the problem of reaching a 
public taught that fiction belonged to the Old World, 
fact to the New; taught to look for the pleasures of the 
imagination on the soil where they had long existed and to 
which even the most self-conscious and politically inde- 
pendent American had been accustomed to look back with 
admiration, with some vague nostalgia ‘of the spirit. Yet 
at the very moment when Bristed wrote, national passions 
were awake which within a half-dozen years had not 
only elicited a great romancer but had shown a popular 
imagination unexpectedly prepared for him. Out of such 
emotions come, in the proper ages, ballads and epic lays. 
In the United States, though prose fiction was the form 
at hand, the narratives were all romantic, and the literary 
process but repeated the processes of romantic ages. As 
in medieval France there were three “ matters” of ro- 
mance, 


De France, et de Bretagne, et de Rome la grant, 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 17 


so in the United States there were also three: the Revolu- 
tion, the Settlement, and the Frontier. 

The Revolutionary generation had been an age of myth- 
making. Washington, for instance, to his very face was 
apotheosized by his followers with a passion of language 
which notoriously embarrassed him. Almost before his 
bones were cold appeared Parson Weems’s astounding 
tract, miscalled a biography, to catch the popular fancy 
at once and to establish the absurd legend of Washing- 
ton’s superhuman virtues. ‘“ Private life,” Weems 
avowed, “is real life”; and though, lacking first-hand 
knowledge, he was obliged to invent, he seemed intimate 
and credible to an audience somewhat overwhelmed by the 
heavy splendor of the more official orations and odes and 
sermons called forth by Washington’s death. Thereafter 
the legend grew unchecked, until the pious Catherine Maria 
Sedgwick, in 1835, apologizing for the introduction of the 
hero in her novel The Linwoods, could write “ in extenua- 
tion of what may seem presumption, that whenever the 
writer has mentioned Washington, she has felt a sentiment 
resembling the awe of the pious Israelite when he ap- 
proached the ark of the Lord.” The legends of Arthur 
and Charlemagne grew no more rapidly in the most legend- 
breeding age — indeed, did not grow so rapidly as this. 
And around Washington, as around Arthur his knights 
and around Charlemagne his peers, were speedily grouped 
such minor heroes as Francis Marion, whose life was also 
written by Weems, Israel Putnam, whom David Humphreys 
celebrated, Patrick Henry, whose biographer was no less 
a person than William Wirt, Attorney-General of the 
United States, Ethan Allen, who wrote his own record, and 


18 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


others whose fame or infamy (as in the case of Benedict 
Arnold) depended less specifically upon books. As all 
these heroes were consistently whitened by their biograph- 
ers, so was the cause for which they fought; until the 
second generation after the Revolution had hardly a 
chance to suspect — at least so far as popular literature 
was concerned — that the Revolution had been anything 
but a melodrama victoriously waged by stainless Conti- 
nental heroes against atrocious villains in British scarlet, 
followed by a victory without ugly revenges and crowned 
by a reconstruction culminating in the divinely-inspired 
Constitution. George Bancroft himself, a scholar of large 
attainments, could write as late as 1860 such words as 
these concerning the Declaration of Independence: “ This 
immortal state paper, which for ¥ts composer was the 
aurora of enduring fame, was ‘ the genuine effusion of the 
soul of the country at that time,’ the revelation of its 
mind, when in its youth, its enthusiasm, its sublime con- 
fronting of danger, it rose to the highest creative powers 
of which man is capable. The bill of rights which it 
promulgates, is of rights that are older than human insti- 
tutions, and spring from the eternal justice that is anterior 
to the state. Two political theories divided the world; 
one founded the commonwealth on the reason of state, 
the policy of expediency ; the other on the immutable prin- 
ciples of morals: the new republic, as it took its place 
among the powers of the world, proclaimed its faith in . 
the truth and reality and unchangeableness of freedom, 
virtue, and right. The heart of Jefferson in writing the 
declaration, and of congress in adopting it, beat for all 
humanity ; the assertion of right was made for the entire 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 19 


world of mankind and all coming generations, without any 
exception whatever; for the proposition which admits of 
exceptions can never be self-evident. As it was put forth 
in the name of the ascendent people of that time, it was sure 
to make the circuit of the world, passing everywhere 
through the despotic countries of Europe; and the aston- 
ished nations as they read that all men are created equal, 
started out of their lethargy, like those who have been 
exiles from childhood, when they suddenly hear the dimly 
remembered accents of their mother tongue.” This, the 
most patriotic American must now admit, is the language 
of romance. 

The deeds and personages of the Revolution, steadily 
growing in the popular imagination under the stimulus 
of an exultant and hopeful independence, were naturally 
first expressed and most highly regarded of the new na- 
tional themes. But side by side with them, in part aroused 
and drawn along by the Revolution, went the matter of 
the Settlement, consisting of the tales told in every state 
about its colonial days. Here again Parson Weems took 
a hand and wrote folk-books about William Penn and 
Benjamin Franklin. Weems, himself a Virginian, in his 
choice of these Pennsylvania worthies as subjects for his 
art illustrates the national feeling which gradually super- 
seded the old colonial memories and prejudices. The new 
states no sooner pooled their national resources than they 
_ began unconsciously to pool their resources of tradition, 
of legend, of local poetry: Their wealth was as unequal 
in this respect as in any other, and widely different in 
quality. Certain themes from the first assumed a promi- 
nence that attracted to them the national imagination as it 


20 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


was attracted to no others. The landing of the Pilgrims, 
the witchcraft mania at Salem, Connecticut and its Charter 
Oak, the Dutch on the Hudson, Penn’s liberality and 
tolerance, the settlement at Jamestown, Pocahontas and 
her career, Bacon’s Rebellion, John Locke’s schemes for 
the Carolinas, the debtors in Georgia, and, somewhat later, 
the siege of Louisburg and Braddock’s defeat: each of 
these early became the center of an increasing legend. 
Particularly important was a theme which in some form or 
other belonged to every colony — the warfare with the In- 
dians for undisturbed possession of the soil from which 
they had been driven. So long as the natives had been 
dangerous to the invaders there had existed that bitter- 
ness of race-hatred which goes along with race-menace, 
and which kept out of the records of the old Indian wars, 
from Maine to Florida, any real magnanimity or sympathy 
for the dispossessed owners of the land. They were as 
paynims to Christian knights, as the sons and daughters 
of Amalek to the invaders of Canaan. King Philip’s War 
in New England having begotten better books than any 
other, it lived in the popular memory more vividly than 
did the equally bitter and important but unrecorded 
Tuscarora ‘and Yemassee wars in the Carolinas, for in- 
stance. The Deerfield raid, in large measure because of 
the Rev. John Williams’s narrative of his captivity, be- 
came classic while similar episodes elsewhere were forgot- 
ten. Toward the end of the eighteenth century, however, 
when the Indian was no longer in any way a menace, he 
had begun to be sentimentalized by admirers of the natural 
man, with whom he was commonly identified by Europeans 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 21 


and not infrequently by the descendants of the very Ameri- 
cans who had hated him so bitterly a century before. 

The Indian was a link connecting the matter of the Set- 
tlement with the matter of the Frontier, the only one which 
had a contemporary aspect. It was the frontier not as 
remembered from the beginnings but as reported from the 
more distant territories where it still lay in the early years 
of the new century. Even before the Revolution not a few 
imaginations had turned inland. The settlement of Ken- 
tucky had excited the seaboard, and Daniel Boone, though 
not the greatest of the pioneers, before 1800 was already 
beginning to be the most famous of all of them, a true 
folk-hero. Literature unquestionably did him this service, 
in the person of the eccentric schoolmaster John Fil- 
son, who wrote for Boone his Adventures in 1784. Later 
the Louisiana Purchase drew still more eyes to the 
West, while the government expedition conducted by. Lewis 
and Clark, rather less through its reports than through 
busy rumor, had an influence upon the popular imagina- 
tion perhaps larger than that ever produced by any other 
American exploring venture. As contrasted with the tra- 
dition of the Settlement or of the Revolution, the reports 
concerning the contemporary frontier came as news, but 
there was still about them the haze of distance — distance 
in miles if not in years. The Great Lakes, the prairies, 
the plains and mountains beyond, the fever lands of the 
lower Mississippi, and especially the broad rivers and blue- 
grass of Kentucky, all of these constituted a sort of hinter- 
land for the national imagination which writers of fiction 
were not slow to take advantage of. Nor did the frontier 


22 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


hie entirely inland. The sea also was a frontier. From 
every port of the New England coast, and to a less degree 
from the Atlantic coast generally, ships went out to every 
corner of the world, particularly to the mysterious 
Pacific, with its strange calms and rich pastures for fisher- 
men, and to the exotic countries beyond, but also to the 
crowded Mediterranean, the banks of Newfoundland, the 
neighborly West Indies. ‘The new nation was setting out 
in every direction to become acquainted with its own im- 
mense domain and to establish communications between 
it and all the rest of the world, real or imaginative. 

Such potentialities, of course, still ran a long way 
before the facts at the time Bristed made his unhopeful 
prophecy. What he said of existing American fiction 
suited its recent examples accurately enough. John 
Davis, a visiting Englishman, had taken a fancy to the 
Pocahontas legend and had dealt with it in three versions 
in his Travels (1803), Captain Smith and Princess Poca- 
hontas (1805), and The First Settlers of Virginia (1806). 
Preposterous as they all are, they are interesting as the 
first treatment of one of the most persistent of American 
legends. A rollicking anti-romance, Female Quérotism 
(1808?) by Tabitha Tenney, which made very good fun 
of the novels of the day by showing into how many follies 
its heroine could blunder by taking the manners of such 
novels for her guide, was: far less popular than the ab- 
surdly sentimental performance, probably by Isaac 
Mitchell, The Asylum (1811), which achieved at least a 
score of editic-is and exhibits the worst qualities of Mrs. 
Radcliffe to an extent which now makes it incredibly amus- 
ing. The nadir of the old-fashioned, sensational, senti- 


THE BEGINNINGS OF FICTION 23 


mental romance was reached, however, in Samuel Wood- 
worth’s The Champions of Freedom (1816), written to 
order to celebrate the second war with England. Pom- 
pous language (Ossian mixed with Sterne and Cicero), a 
ghost that walks like a man, shrieking patriotism, and 
ineffable sentimentality are all it has to commend it. No 
wonder that from such monstrosities the public turned 
with delight to a story-teller by comparison so natural, 
so rational, so critical, so sensible as Fenimore Cooper. 


CHAPTER II 
JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 


Tue task of becoming the principal romancer of the 
new nation might have weighed heavily upon Cooper had 
he entered his career as a novelist in any self-conscious 
way. Instead, he fell almost accidentally into authorship. 
Unlike the bookish Brown, Cooper had been trained in the 
world of action and adventure. Born at Burlington, 
‘New Jersey, in 1789, the son of Judge William Cooper 
and Susan Fenimore, Cooper had been taken when a baby 
to Cooperstown, the raw central village of a pioneer set- 
tlement recently established by his father on Otsego Lake, 
New York. Here the boy saw at first hand the varied 
life of the border, observed its shifts and contrivances, 
and learned to feel the mystery of the dark forest which 
lay beyond the cleared circle of his own life — a mystery 
which must be taken into account in any attempt to under- 
stand the American character in its frontier aspects. 
Judge Cooper, less a typical backwoodsman than a kind 
of warden of the New York marches, like Judge Temple- 
ton in The Pioneers, did not keep his son in the woods but 
sent him first to the rector of St. Peter’s in Albany, who 
grounded him in Latin and Anglican theology, and then 
to Yale, where he wore his college duties so lightly as to 
be dismissed in his third year. Thinking the navy might 
furnish better discipline than Yale, Judge Cooper shipped 

24 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 25 


his son before the mast on a merchant vessel to learn the 
art of seamanship which there was then no naval academy 
to teach. On his first voyage the ship was chased by 
pirates and stopped by British searching parties, inci- 
dents which Cooper never forgot. Commissioned in 1808 
as midshipman, he first served on the Atlantic and later in 
the same year was sent with a party to Lake Ontario to 
build a brig for service against the British on inland 
waters. He visited Niagara, served for a time on Lake 
Champlain, and in 1809 was ordered back to the ocean. 
In the natural order of events he would have fought in the 
War of 1812, but having been married in 1811 to Susan 
Augusta DeLancey, he resigned his commission, gave up 
all hope of a naval career, and began the quiet life of a 
country proprietor. 

During the nine years that followed there is no evidence 
that Cooper ever thought of authorship, even as an amuse- 
ment, much less as a profession. Except for three years 
at Cooperstown, where he stood more less as heir to the 
manor, he lived in his wife’s native county of Westchester. 
Perhaps nowhere else in the United States could Cooper 
have led an existence so nearly resembling that of an 
-eighteenth-century English squire. Westchester had been 
favored by the country gentry in colonial days and 
still cherished aristocratic traditions. Here Caoper was 
further confirmed in his theological opinions, which were 
orthodox and grew steadily stronger, not to say more 
intolerant, during his entire life; in his political dactrines, 
by which he belonged with few reservations to the idealis- 
tic, irascible, somewhat crude, and considerably aristo- 
cratic older democracy which had achieved the Revolution ; 


26 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


and in his social prejudices, which were all that might have 
been expected from a man of his theology and politics. 
He believed in a propertied governing class, the subordi- 
nation of the lower orders, and clear-cut caste distinctions. 
Rank, according to his opinions, naturally demanded of 
the men who possessed it a proper dignity, magnanimity, 
courage, knowledge, public service, and chivalry toward 
women; women of rank he expected to be less positive 
but to unite to domestic competence and loyalty a certain 
elaborate yet timid decorum. Toward the less fortunately 
placed classes Cooper believed he had the feelings of a 
good American democrat. As a matter of fact, he was 
full of that “‘ condescension ” which the eighteenth century 
mistook for a virtue. He tended to admit humbler per- 
sonages to his fiction for the diversity they brought and 
to admire them preéminently for their devotion to their 
superiors. Even his greatest characters drawn from the 
people, Harvey Birch, Natty Bumppo, and Long Tom 
Coffin, have about them each some touch of the faithful 
body-servant, though they are saved by a larger element 
of loyalty to a cause, Birch to the Revolution, Bumppo 
to the life of unspoiled nature, and Coffin to the deep 
sea. Besides the typical opinions of his class, Cooper 
had also its typical information. He read the accepted 
classics, interested rather in modern than in ancient liter- 
ature, and concerned more with history and biography 
than with poetry, philosphy, or science. He knew little 
of the fine arts. Later something of a traveler in Eu- 
rope, during his formative years he saw, except upon his 
ocean voyages, only America, and little besides New York, 
its cities and its frontier. American history generally 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 27 


—and particularly that of New York, including its 
sparse antiquities and its topography — Cooper knew 
unusually well, though here again his knowledge came 
generally from the commoner sources. As a true New 
Yorker of the old breed, he had, of course, a tender and 
intimate acquaintance with the British peerage. Of the 
European continent he had no very wide knowledge, and 
like the average American of Federalist sympathies, he dis- 
trusted the French. In seamanship, his actual profession, 
he was better grounded than any man, English or Ameri- 
can, who had ever used the ocean as the scene of a novel. 

The accident which threw Cooper, thus equipped by 
1820, into fiction was a challenge which his wife made 
him to write a better novel than one which he had been 
reading with great disgust. He accepted the challenge, 
wrote an unimportant domestic-sentimental romance, Pre- 
tautton (1820), and found himself so much attracted by 
authorship that within three years he had written three 
of his best novels, each of them in one of the types he later 
clung to, and had completed his experimental stage. In 
The Spy (1821) American fiction may be said to have 
come of age with a tale of the recent Revolution. Love 
of country is its theme, and its hero a spy who had served 
John Jay against the British, as Jay himself had told 
Cooper, with singular purity of motive. The share of 
historical fact in it, indeed, is not large, but the action 
takes place so near to gréat events that the characters 
are all invested with something of the dusky light of 
heroes, while the figure of Washington, disguised as Mr. 
Harper and yet always looming gigantically through his 
disguise, moves among the other personages like a half- 


28 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


suspected god. Such a quality in the novel might have 
gone with impossible partiality for the Americans had not 
Cooper’s wife belonged to a family which had been loyal- 
ist during the struggle for independence. As it was, 
Cooper made his loyalists not necessarily knaves and fools, 
and so secured a fairness of tone which, aside from the 
mere question of justice, has a large effect upon the art 
of the narrative. It is clear the British are enemies worth 
fighting. Perhaps by chance, Cooper here hit upon a 
type of plot at which he excelled, a struggle between con- 
tending forces, not badly matched, arranged as a pursuit 
in which the pursued are, as a rule, favored by author 
and reader. In the management of such a device Cooper’s 
invention, which was naturally great and now was thor- 
oughly aroused, worked easily, and the flights of Birch 
from friend and foe alike exhibit a power to carry on 
plots with sustained sweep which belongs to none but the 
masters of narration. To rapid movement Cooper added 
the virtue of a very real setting. He knew Westchester, 
where his scene was laid, the “ Neutral Ground” of the 
Revolution, as Scott knew his own border; the topography 
of The Spy is drawn with a firm and accurate hand. In 
the characters Cooper was not so successful — by strict 
canons of realism was not successful at all. Cherishing 
already an aristocratic and traditional conception of 
women, he accepted for his narrative the romantic ideals 
of the day, the ideals of Scott and Byron. Writing of 
violent events in which, of necessity, ladies could play but 
a small part, he cast his heroines into the straightest 
mold of helplessness and propriety. With the less shel- 
tered classes, such as were represented by Betty Flanagan 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 29 


the sutler, Cooper could be more veracious. Of the men 
who appear in The Spy, most are mere gentlemen, mere 
heroes, although Captain Lawton, the Virginia dragoon, 
is drawn with spirit and truth, and here and there among 
the inferior soldiers and the slaves appear a few individual 
characteristics. Harvey Birch, however, peddler and 
patriot, outwardly no hero at all and yet surpassingly 
heroic of soul as he prowls about on his subtle errands, is 
memorable and arresting. The skill with which he is pre- 
sented, gaunt, weather-beaten, canny, mysterious, should 
not conceal the fact that his patriotism is actually as 
supernatural as are the demonic impulses of Brown’s 
characters. Patriotism drives Birch relentlessly to his 
destiny, at once wrecking and honoring him. This same 
romantic fate condemns him to be sad and lonely, a dedi- 
cated soul who captures attention by his secrecy and 
holds it by his magnificent adventures. All this is pure 
romance, but it is romance extraordinarily realized. 
Cooper’s imagination, having worked first upon Revolu- 
tionary material and having succeeded with an historical 
romance which won the loudest applause, was approved 
on the American stage, and promptly reached European 
readers, now turned with characteristic energy in another 
direction, to the matter of the Frontier. The Pioneers, 
with a bumptious, challenging preface, was published early 
in 1823. Technically this book made no advance upon 
The Spy. Cooper had only the method of improvisation, 
then or later. With a few characters and the outlines of 
a situation in mind, he began composition, perhaps not 
even aware what the outcome would be, and then found 
himself swept forward with impetuous haste. In one 


EN ree ee es oe 


30 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


respect The Pioneers falls behind its predecessors in in- 
terest: it has no definite scheme of pursuit and flight, 
and consequently, though it has certain thrilling moments, 
no general suspense. But in another respect it was a 
more important experiment than The Spy: now for the 
first time Cooper had set himself to the realistic repre- 
sentation of American manners. Dealing as he did with 
the Otsego settlement where his boyhood had been spent, 
and with a time (1793) partly within his memory, he 
could write largely with his eye upon the fact. What- 
ever romance there is in the story lies less in its plot, 
which is a conventional story of a worthy line for the 
moment dispossessed but eventually to be restored again ; 
or in its characters, which are, for the most part, studied 
under a dry light with a good deal of caustic judgment — 
less in these things than in the essential wonder of a 
pioneer life. In its costumes and gestures the novel is 
not as heroic as The Spy. Indian John, the last of his 
proud race, is old and broken, corrupted by the settle- 
ments; only his death dignifies him. Natty Bumppo, a 
composite from many Cooperstown suggestions but in his 
main outlines undoubtedly suggested by Daniel Boone, is 
nobler than Indian John because he has not yielded but 
carries into the deeper forest his virtues, which even in 
Cooper’s boyhood were becoming archaic along the New 
York frontier, and now in 1823 had become a legend. 
Natty stands as a protest, on behalf of simplicity and 
perfect freedom, against encroaching law and order. In 
The Pioneers he is not of the proportions which he later 
assumed, and only at the end, when he withdraws from 
the field of his defeat by civilization, does he make his full 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 31 


appeal; but he is of the tribe of heroes to which Harvey 
Birch had belonged, Jowly men of lofty virtues. 

At the time Cooper seems to have seen no larger possi- 
bilities in his pioneer than in his spy. He was still ex- 
perimenting. The Pilot, later in 1823, took him to an- 
other region of the frontier which he knew — the sea. 
The instigating motive was his desire to surpass Scott’s 
Pirate in seamanship, but his imagination caught fire no 
less remarkably than when he had decided to write a purely 
American tale of heroism or to make a record of his — 
youthful environment. Like The Spy, his new novel made _ 
use of the Revolutionary matter; like The Pioneers, it was 
full of realistic detail from his own experience. “Not only 

—@id he outdo Scott in sheer accuracy, but he created a 
new literary type, the tale of adventure on the sea, in 
which, though he was to have many followers in almost 
every modern language, he has not been seriously sur- 
passed for vigor and swift rush of narrative. Smollett 
had already discovered the racy humors of seamen, but it 
remained for Cooper to capture for fiction the mystery 
and beauty, the shock and thrill of the sea. Experts say 
that his technical knowledge was sound; what is more 
important, he wrote, in The Pilot, a story about sailing 
vessels which convinces landsmen even in days of steam. 
The novel has, of course, its conventional element: its 
hero, John Paul Jones, who is always dark and secret, 
always Byronic, always brooding upon a dark past and a 
darker fate. As in the earlier stories, much is made of 
chase and escape, complicated by the fact that: here ships, 
not merely men or horses, must be manwuvered, in a time 
of bitter war, among the rocks and storms of the Scottish 


32 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


coast. And once more, too, the central personage is a 
democratic hero, Long Tom Coffin, of Nantucket, who lives 
and dies by the sea which has made him, as love of country 
made Harvey Birch and love of the forest made Natty 
Bumppo. Long Tom is as real as an oak; he is also 
as romantic as storms and tides. Thus at the outset of 
his career Cooper made clear his conviction — one of the 
most important of all the convictions which lie back of 
his work—that character is shaped by occupation. 
Aristocratic though he might be in his own prejudices, he 
understood the rich diversities which may be brought into 
fiction by the representation of men drawn from different 
callings, which, more than different ages or landscapes, 
produce differences among men. 

These three successes made Cooper a national figure, 
though New England, where criticism was solemn, still 
condescended to him. He founded the Bread and Cheese 
Club in New York, a literary society of which he was the 
moving spirit; he took a prominent part in the reception 
of Lafayette, who returned to a magnificent welcome in 
1824; in the same year Columbia College made Cooper 
honorary Master of Arts. In the excitement of being 
a national romancer, he planned a series of Legends of 
the Thirteen Republics, aimed to celebrate each of the 
original states, but he gave up his scheme after Lionel 
Lincoln (1825), dealing with Boston in the days of Bunker 
Hill, failed to please as his earlier novels had done. His 
account of the battle is in his best vein; but for the rest, 
Cooper was too unsympathetic toward the New England 
character and, in spite of all his research, too little at 
home in Massachusetts for his imagination to be inflamed 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 33 


by this material. Beguiling as his conception of the series 
was, Cooper was not fitted, by breadth either of knowledge 
or of temper, to succeed in it; and his initial failure seems 
his ultimate good fortune. His future did not lie along the 
path of history which he had taken in The Spy, but along 
the path of frontier adventure which he had strayed into 
with The Pioneers. 

The persuasion of friends led him to resume his narra- 
tive of Natty Bumppo, and in Cooper’s next two years and 
his next two novels he reached probably the highest point 
of his career. With The Last of the Mohicans (1826) 
he undertook to show the days of Natty’s prime, and with 
The Prairie (1827) his old age and final end. In each 
case Cooper projected the old hunter out of the world 
of remembered Otsego, into the dark forest which was 
giving up its secrets to the ax and the plow in 1793, or 
into the mighty prairies which stretched, in Cooper’s 
mind’s eye, for endless miles behind the forest, another 
mystery and another refuge. Natty, called Hawkeye in 
The Last of the Mohicans, no longer has the hardness 
which marred his disgruntled age in The Pioneers. He 
appears instead as erect, swift, shrewd, contented, and 
wise. With all his virtues of hand and head he combines 
a nobility of spirit which the woods have fostered in a mind 
never spoiled by contact with human meanness and injus- 
tice. He has grown nobler as he has grown more remote 
from quarreling Otsego, more the poet and the hero as the 
world in which he moves has become more wholly his own. 
Chingachgook has undergone even a greater change, has 
got back all the cunning and pride which had been deadened 
in that victim of civilization, Indian John. Both Hawk- 


34 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


eye and Chingachgook are of course considerably limited 
by their former conduct in The Pioneers: one must still 
be the canny reasoner, the other. a little saddened with 
the passing years. The purest romance of the tale lies in 
Uncas, the forest’s youngest son, gallant, skilful, courte- 
ous, a lover for whom there is no hope, the last of the 
proud race of the Mohicans. That Uncas was idealized 
Cooper then and always freely admitted; Homer, he sug- 
gested, had his heroes. And it is clear that upon Uncas 
were bestowed the standard virtues which the philosophers 
of the age had taught the world to find in a state of nature. 
Still, after a century many can smile upon the state of 
nature who are yet able to find m Uncas the perennial 
appeal of youth cut off in the flower. The action and the 
setting of the novel are on the same imaginative plane 
with the characters. The forest, in which all its events 
take place, surrounds them with a changeless majesty, a 
venerable calm, a depth of significance that sharpens, by 
contrast, the restless sense of danger. Pursuit makes 
almost the whole plot. The pursued party moving from 
Fort Edward to Fort William Henry has two girls to 
handicap its flight and to increase the tragedy of its cap- 
ture. Later the girls have been captured, and sympathy 
passes, a thing unusual in Cooper, to the pursuing res- 
cuers. In these tasks Hawkeye and the Mohicans are op- 
posed by the fierce capacity of the Huron Magua, who 
plays villain to Uncas’s hero, in physical qualities Uncas’s 
match, in moral qualities his opposite. ‘There is never 
any relaxation of suspense, though there are certain pre- 
eminent moments which belong with the most thrilling 
episodes in fiction. 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 35 


The Prairie has less swiftness than The Last of the 
Mohicans but more poetry. In it Natty appears again, 
twenty years older than in The Pioneers, far away in the 
plains beyond the Mississippi, where the popular mind 
knew that Daniel Boone had recently died. Natty owns 
_ his defeat and he still grieves over the murdered forest, 
but he has given up anger for the peace of old age. 
To him it seems that all his virtues are gone. Once vali- 
ant he must now be crafty; his arms are feeble; his eyes 
have so far failed him that, no longer the perfect marks- 
man, he has sunk to the calling of a trapper. There is 
a pathos in his resignation which would be too painful 
were it not merely a phase of his grave and noble wisdom. 
He is more than ever what Cooper called him, “ a philos- 
opher of the wilderness.”” The only change is that he has 
left the perils and delights of the forest and has been sub- 
dued to the eloquent monotony of the plains. Nowhere 
else has Cooper shown such sheer imaginative power as in 
the handling of this mighty landscape. He had never 
seen a prairie; indeed, it is clear that, like many travelers 
before him, he thought of the prairie as an ocean of land 
and described it partly by analogy. But he managed to 
endow the huge empty distances he had not seen with a 
presence as haunting as that of the populous forest he 
had intimately known in his impressionable youth. And 
the old trapper, though he thinks of himself as an exile, 
has learned the secret of the new scene and seems naturally 
to belong to it. It is his knowledge that makes him essen- 
tial to the action, which is again made up of flight and 
pursuit. Once more there are girls to be rescued, from 
fiercer white men as well as from fierce Indians. There is 


36 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


another Magua in the Sioux Mahtoree, another Uncas in 
the Pawnee Hard-Heart. These. Indians ride horses; the 
flat prairies afford few places of concealment. But the 
trapper is as ready as ever with new arts, and the flight 
ends as romance prescribes. The final scene, the death of 
the trapper in the arms of his young friends, is very touch- 
ing and fine, yet reticently handled. Thackeray imitated 
it in the famous death of Colonel Newcome. For the 
most part, the minor characters, the lovers and the pedant, 
are not new to Cooper and are not notable. The family 
of Ishmael Bush, the squatter, however, make up a new 
element, as realistic as the rougher sort in The Pioneers, 
but more sinister, more important in Cooper’s criticism 
of the frontier. Bush and his giant sons have been forced 
out of civilization by its virtues, as the trapper by its 
vices. ‘They have strength without nobility and activity 
without wisdom. Except when aroused they are as slug- 
gish as a prairie river, and like it they appear muddy and 
aimless. Ishmael Bush always conveys the impression of 
terrific forces lying vaguely in ambush. His wife is nearly 
the most memorable figure among Cooper’s women. She 
clings to her mate and cubs with a tigerish instinct that 
leaves her, when she has lost son and brother and retreats 
dumbly from the scene in a vast silent grief, still lingering 
in the mind, a shabby, inarticulate prairie Hecuba. 

The Last of the Mohicans and The Prairie, and the 
praise they won, did not convince Cooper that the frontier 
was his true province. His next novel, The Red ‘Rover 
(1828), written in France, turned to the noisy Atlantic 
between New England and the West Indies. Feeling that 
he must take care in writing of nautical affairs to avoid 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 37 


the themes and characters preferred by Smollett, Cooper 
was at some pains to invent all his details “ without look- 
ing for the smallest aid from traditions or facts.” His 
plot, however, follows the romantic mode: an imperiaé- 
souled hero, wounded in his sensibilities, has long been a 
successful pirate under the scarlet flag, but, in spite of his 
evil deeds, has so much conscience left that he can be con- 
verted in a dramatic moment, subsequently to expiate his 
sins by services to the Revolution. This story could not 
have made The Red Rover one of Cooper’s best tales. 
There must be taken into account also the solid basis of 
reality exhibited in the book’s seamanship and, less re- 
markably, in the characters of the old tar Dick Fid and 
the slave Scipio Africanus. The excitement is less sus- 
tained than in The Pilot, but portions of the narrative, 
particularly those dealing with storms, are tremendous. 
The ocean here plays as great a part as Cooper had lately 
assigned to the prairie. One voices the calm of nature, 
the other its tumult; both tend to the shaping and disci- 
pline of man. If the theme of The Red Rover is conven- 
tional, so is that of The Wept of Wish-ton-Wish (1829), 
an episode of King Philip’s War, in which frontier mate- 
rial indeed appears but in which it is overmuch involved 
with colonial history and with Cooper’s anti-Puritan pre- 
judices. 

What may be called his first period had come decisively 
to an end. Since 1826, when he went with his family to 
Europe for a foreign residence of seven years, Cooper 
had been growing steadily more critical and less romantic. 
His universe was enlarging. He found his books well 
known in Europe and society disposed to make much of 


88 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


him. In Paris he fraternized with Scott, who enjoyed 
and approved his American rival. Parts of Cooper’s 
stay were in England, Holland, Germany, Switzerland, 
which delighted and astonished him, and Italy, which he 
loved. Most of his time, however, he passed at Paris, 
charmed with a gayer and more brilliant society than he 
had known before. At first his nationalism was intensi- 
fied. Unabashedly, outspokenly American, he had ob- 
tained from Henry Clay the post of consul at Lyons, 
that he might not seem, during his travels, a man without 
a country. As consul, though his position was purely 
nominal, he felt called upon to resent the ignorance every- 
where shown by Europeans regarding his native land, and 
he set himself the task of educating them in sounder views. 
Cooper was not Franklin. Notions of the Americans 
(1828), while full of information and a rich mine of Ameri- 
can opinion for that day, was too obviously partizan to 
convince those at whom it was aimed. Its proper audi- 
ence was homesick Americans. He indulged, too, in some 
" controversy at Paris over the relative cost of French and 
American government which pleased neither nation. Fin- 
ally, he applied his art to the problem and wrote three 
novels “in which American opinion should be brought to 
bear on European facts.” That is, in The Bravo 
(1831), The Heidenmauer (1832), and The Heads- 
man (1833) he meant to show by proper in- 
stances the superiority of democracy to aristocracy as 
regards general happiness and justice. He claimed to 
be writing for his countrymen alone, some of whon, in that 
day of one-sided comparisons between Europe and Amer- 
ica, must have been thrilled to come across a passage like 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 39 


“a fairer morning never dawned upon the Alleghanies 
than that which uUlumined the Alps”; but he was not 
sufficiently master of his material, stout as his opinions 
might be, to make good romances out of it. 

He had, however, caught the contagion of the critical 
spirit, and he returned to New York in 1833 in no mood 
to lend his voice to the loud chorus of national self- 
approval then sounding. He found himself, in fact, 
fatally cosmopolitan in the republic he had been justify- 
ing from abroad for seven years. He sought to qualify 
too sweeping praise of America precisely as he had re- 
cently sought to qualify too sweeping censure in Europe. 
But he had not learned tact while becoming a citizen of the 
world, and he promptly angered the public he had only 
meant to correct. The result was the long and dreary 
wrangling which clouded the whole remainder of his life 
and has obscured his fame even to the present day. If 
he had attended the dinner planned in his honor on his 
return, he might have found his welcome warmer than he 
thought it. If he had been an observer at once keen and 
tolerant enough, he must have seen that the new phases of 
democracy which he disliked under the presidency of 
Andrew Jackson were in large measure a gift to the old 
seaboard of that very frontier of which Cooper had 
been painter and annalist. But he did not see these 
things, and so he carried on a steady fight, almost always 
as right in his contentions as he was wrong in his man- 
ner. From Cooperstown, generally his residence except 
for a few winters in New York, to the end of his life 
he lectured and scolded. His Letter to his Countrymen 
(1834), stating his position, and The Monikins (1835), 


40 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


an unbelievably dull satire, were the first fruits of his 
quarrel, He followed these with five books dealing with 
his European travels and constantly irritating to both 
continents. He indulged in a heated altercation with his 
fellow-townsmen over some land which they thought theirs, 
though it was certainly his. In 1838 he published a 
fictitious record, Homeward Bound and its sequel Home 
as Found, of the disappointment of some Americans who 
return from Europe with a passion like that with which 
he had recently returned, and who find America what he 
had found it; but he appears not to have realized that the 
colossal priggishness of his returning Americans would 
make them seem more obnoxious than any qualities he 
could expose in the Americans at large. With something 
of the same tactlessness he proclaimed his political philos- 
ophy and principles in The American Democrat (1838). 
Most spectacular of all, he declared war ‘upon the news- 
papers of New York and went up and down the state 
suing those that had libeled him. He won most of the 
suits, but though he silenced his opponents he had put his 
fame into the hands of persons who, unable to abuse him, 
could at least neglect him. 

All these controversies checked Cooper’s tendency away 
from romance and toward realism. How strong that ten- 
dency was few of his critics have remarked ; as a matter of 
fact, certain of his latest novels — such as Afloat and 
Ashore, Wyandotté, Satanstoe — are packed with the most 
valuable information concerning the manners, opinions, 
speech, and costumes of their periods. But with Cooper, 
to be critical was too often to be contentious, and as a 
result those very novels and others still more largely 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 41 


abound in prejudices and arguments that continually break 
the strong current of romantic narrative or disturb the 
broad picture of reality. All his better achievements after 
1830 came on those occasions when he could escape from 
contemporary New York to the ocean or to the old fron- 
tier. The ocean was an important relief. In 1839 he 
published his solid and long-standard History of the Navy 
of the Untted States, and followed it with various naval 
biographies. The History, indeed, led to a furious legal 
battle, but generally Cooper left his quarrels behind him 
when he went upon the sea. As a cosmopolitan, he felt 
freer on the public highway of the nations. His novels 
of this period and theme are uneven in merit. The Two 
Admirals (1842) contains one of his best naval battles; 
The Wing-and-Wing (1842) ranks high among his sea 
tales, richly romantic and glowing with the splendors of 
the Mediterranean, and yet charged with the theological 
bigotry which latterly possessed Cooper. The two parts 
of Afloat and Ashore (1844), dealing powerfully as they 
do with the evils of impressment, are notable also for sea 
fights and chases. And the inland frontier was quite as 
much a relief. Wyandotté (1843), its scene on the upper 
Susquehanna, and its subject the siege of a block house, 
though clumsily told is full of interesting matter. The 
Oak Openings (1848), fruit of a journey which Cooper 
made to the West in 1847, is a tale of bee-hunting and 
Indian fighting on Lake Michigan which has not deserved 
to be so much obscured as it has been by his greatest 
frontier stories. 

Obscured it and its fellows have been, however, by The 
Pathfinder (1840) and The Deerslayer (1841), which he 


42 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


turned aside long enough to write in the midst of his 
hottest litigation. The forest even more than the ocean 
was for Cooper a romantic sanctuary, as it was for Path- 
finder the true temple, full of the “ holy calm of nature,” 
the teacher of beauty, virtue, laws. Returning to these 
solemn, dim woods Cooper was subdued once more to the 
spirit which had attended his first great days. The fight- 
ing years through which he had passed had made him more 
critical, but so had they made him more mellow in the 
hours when he could forget his daily conflicts. He had 
now gone far enough from the original conception of 
Leather-Stocking to become aware of traits which should 
be brought out or explained. It was too late to make 
his hero entirely consistent for the series, but Cooper ap- 
parently saw the chance to fill out the general outline, and 
he did it with such skill that those who read the five novels 
in the order of events will notice relatively few discrep- 
ancies, since The Deerslayer prepares for nearly all that 
follows. In The Pathfinder, undertaken to show Natty 
in love and to combine the forest and a ship in the 
same tale, Cooper took unusual pains to point out how 
Pathfinder’s candor, self-reliance, justice, and fidelity 
have been developed by the life he has led in the for- 
est. Leather-Stocking, more talkative than before, may 
not seem more conscious of his special gifts, but 
Cooper does. Again there is abundant action: another 
flight through the woods with a timorous maiden, some- 
what too nearly resembling the flight in The Last of 
the Mohicans; another siege at a block house, very 
much like that in The Wept of Wish-ton-Wish and 
Wyandotté; and the more novel element of a storm on 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 43 


Lake Ontario which calls for a seamanship quite different 
from that learned on salt water. A romancer less real- 
istic than Cooper might have shown Pathfinder behaving 
on shipboard with the masterful competence he had on 
land; but Cooper did not. A romancer more sentimental 
than Cooper, too, would hardly have dared to let Path- 
finder love the heroine in vain; but Cooper did. Even 
though it is with a somewhat grandiose gesture that Path- 
finder is made to surrender the young girl to a more suit- 
able lover of her own choice, much more than a gesture 
was in Cooper’s mind. He was drawing a sharp, true 
line around Pathfinder’s character. Marriage would have 
domesticated the scout, whereas this sacrifice restores him 
to the forest solitude in which he essentially belongs. 

For the final book of the series, The Deerslayer, Cooper 
could do nothing less than to undertake the hard task of 
representing the scout in the fresh morning of his youth. 
Love appears in this story also, but Deerslayer, unable 
to love a girl who has been corrupted by the settlements, 
even though Judith Hutter seems the most real and desir- 
able of all Cooper’s heroines, turns to the forest with his 
best devotion. He is naive, friendly, virtuous with the 
engaging awkwardness of twenty, bound with a boy’s affec- 
tion to his companion and brother-in-arms, the young 
Chingachgook. ‘The book is the tale of Natty’s coming of 
age. Already a hunter, he here kills his first man and 
thus enters the long career which lies before him. That 
career, however, had already been traced by Cooper, and 
the distress with which Deerslayer realizes that he has 
human blood on his hands, becomes, in the light of his 
future, immensely eloquent. It gives the figure of the man 


44 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


almost a new dimension; one remembers the many deaths 
Natty has yet to deal. In other matters he is nearer 
his later self, for he starts life with a steady if simple 
philosophy which, through all his many adventures, keeps 
him to the end the son of nature he was at the beginning. 
Not a little of the charm of The Deerslayer arises from 
Cooper’s evident delight in the large, bland landscapes of 
the exquisite neighborhood of Cooperstown and Lake 
Otsego, here called Glimmerglass; in this same neighbor- 
hood Natty Bumppo had first revealed himself to his cre- 
ator’s imagination nearly a score of years before. 

“If anything from the pen of the writer of these ro- 
mances is at all to outlive himself,” Cooper declared, 
“it is, unquestionably, the series of ‘ The Leather-Stock- 
ing Tales.’” The truth of this prophecy steadily in- 
creases. At present the series is accepted as the quintes- 
sence of his achievement, and Leather-Stocking by any 
large ballot — both national and international — would 
be voted the most eminent of all American characters of 
fiction. ‘ The spirit of Leather-Stocking is awake,” said 
a French statesman in the spring of 1917, meaning that 
the United States had entered the World War, and by 
his remark surprising a good many Americans who had 
not realized how clearly Leather-Stocking still seems to the 
rest of the world a symbol of America. In Cooper’s most 
definite summary, Natty was “ simple-minded, faithful, 
utterly without fear, and yet prudent, foremost in all 
warrantable enterprises, or what the opinion of the day 
considered as such. . . . The most surprising peculiarity 
about the man himself was the entire indifference with 
which he regarded all distinctions that did not depend on 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 45 


personal merit. . . . His feelings appeared to possess the 
freshness and nature of the forest in which he passed so 
much of his time, and no casuist could have made clearer 
decisions in matters relating to mght and wrong; yet he 
was not without his prejudices, which, though few, and 
colored by the character and usages of the individual, 
were deep-rooted, and had almost got to form a part of 
his nature. ... In short... he was a fair example 
of what a just-minded and pure man might be, while un- 
tempted by unruly or ambitious desires, and left to follow 
the bias of his feelings, amid the solitary grandeur and 
ennobling influences of a sublime nature.” Nature in 
America is no longer so solitary, and perhaps no longer 
so ennobling, but much of this older simplicity, downright- 
ness, courage, competence, unsophistication, and virgin 
prejudice still marks the national type. No wonder then 
that generation after generation of American boys have 
read these romances as they have read no others. No 
wonder, either, that boys of other nations and races have 
admired in Leather-Stocking qualities generously tran- 
scending merely national ones. Cooper’s failure to write 
a sixth novel, as he at one time planned, which should 
show Natty in the Revolution, may be taken as a sign that 
he felt the difficulty of endowing the scout with the virtue 
of patriotism in the partizan degree which must have been 
demanded from that hero in that day and which would 
surely have been alien to the cool philosopher of the woods. 
Justice, not partizanship, is Leather-Stocking’s essential 
trait: justice as conceived, somewhat out of space and out 
of time, by the universal spirit of youth. Being so univer- 
sal, Leather-Stocking has naturally too simple a soul to 


46 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


call for minute analysis, and needs no more than the op- 
portunity, which Cooper gave him, to move through a long 
succession of events aimed to display his valor and test his 
virtues. There was thus produced the panorama of the 
American frontier which at once became and has remained 
the classic record of an heroic age. 

The classic record of an heroic age!— although not 
classic at all in the stricter sense of fidelity to all the cir- 
cumstances of the frontier. And yet in spite of the many 
charges that have been brought against Cooper’s accuracy, 
charges well founded and well proved, his fame holds 
steadily up. He may not have recorded his universe at all 
points exactly, but he created one. His mighty land- 
scapes lie still unshaken in a secure district of the human 
imagination. Over such mountains through such dim and 
terrifying forests to such glorious lakes the mind still 
marches, for the moment convinced. His Indians, what- 
ever their authenticity, are securely established in the 
world’s romantic memory as a picture of those belated and 
unfortunate men of the stone age who were fated to oppose 
the ruthless advance of a more complex civilization. It is 
to the credit of mankind that those naked savages, un- 

alive, should be 
ation when dead 
minded peoples 
es. And recent 
os have gone far 
if not precisely 
t least a fineness 
loser to Cooper’s 
ure as corrected 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 47 


by those subsequent critics who called the Indians mere 
squalid savages. That Natty Bumppo, to the contem- 
porary eye doubtless hard and crude enough, should have 
been made a hero is no more remarkable than that the 
same fortune should have come to Daniel Boone or Robin- 
son Crusoe, plain men who like Natty clung to the dearest 
human virtues in the face of a nature which would as 
readily have destroyed as dignified them. And finally, 
the unending charm of these diversified adventures inheres 
not only in the narrative itself but in the human disposi- 
tion which cherishes memories and hopes of a larger ex- 
perience, free, abundant, glorious, and on but casual provo- 
cation will follow a great story-teller to the ends of the 
earth. 

The Pathfinder and The Deerslayer seem to have left 
Cooper nearly exhausted, for his last decade saw him 
rise but once above the sensationalism which always men- 
aced the romancers of his school and the contentiousness 
to which he himself was prone. Most of the novels of the 
period do not deserve even to be called by name. He had 
still enough energy, however, to undertake and to complete 
his trilogy of Littlepage Manuscripts, Satanstoe (1845), 
The Chawmbearer (1845), and The Redskins (1846). 
Having tried the autobiographical method with Miles Wal- 
lingford in Afloat and Ashore, Cooper now repeated it 
through three generations of a New York family. In 
the last he involved himself in the question of anti-rentism 
then stirring — of course fiercely on the side of the land- 
lords — and produced a book both fantastic and dull; 
the second is better by one of Cooper’s most powerful 
figures, the squatter Thousandacres, another backwoods 


46 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


call for minute analysis, and needs no more than the op- 
portunity, which Cooper gave him, to move through a long 
succession of events aimed to display his valor and test his 
virtues. ‘There was thus produced the panorama of the 
American frontier which at once became and has remained 
the classic record of an heroic age. 

The classic record of an heroic age! — although not 
classic at all in the stricter sense of fidelity to all the cir- 
cumstances of the frontier. And yet in spite of the many 
charges that have been brought against Cooper’s accuracy, 
charges well founded and well proved, his fame holds 
steadily up. He may not have recorded his universe at all 
points exactly, but he created one. His mighty land- 
scapes lie still unshaken in a secure district of the human 
imagination. Over such mountains through such dim and 
terrifying forests to such glorious lakes the mind still 
marches, for the moment convinced. His Indians, what- 
ever their authenticity, are securely established in the 
world’s romantic memory as a picture of those belated and 
unfortunate men of the stone age who were fated to oppose 
the ruthless advance of a more complex civilization. It is 
to the credit of mankind that those naked savages, un- 
justly as they were dealt ‘with while alive, should be 
a little honored with a chivalrous reputation when dead 
or conquered. In this manner all high-minded peoples 
remember their ancient defeated enemies. And _ recent 
studies of the art and ritual of the Indians have gone far 
toward showing that the race possessed, if not precisely 
the qualities Cooper ascribed to them, at least a fineness 
and elevation of mind which are worlds closer to Cooper’s 
representation of them than to the picture as corrected 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 47 


by those subsequent critics who called the Indians mere 
squalid savages. That Natty Bumppo, to the contem- 
porary eye doubtless hard and crude enough, should have 
been made a hero is no more remarkable than that the 
same fortune should have come to Daniel Boone or Robin- 
son Crusoe, plain men who like Natty clung to the dearest 
human virtues in the face of a nature which would as 
readily have destroyed as dignified them. And finally, 
the unending charm of these diversified adventures inheres 
not only in the narrative itself but in the human disposi- 
tion which cherishes memories and hopes of a larger ex- 
perience, free, abundant, glorious, and on but casual provo- 
cation will follow a great story-teller to the ends of the 
earth. 

The Pathfinder and The Deerslayer seem to have left 
Cooper nearly exhausted, for his last decade saw him 
rise but once above the sensationalism which always men- 
aced the romancers of his school and the contentiousness 
to which he himself was prone. Most of the novels of the 
period do not deserve even to be called by name. He had 
still enough energy, however, to undertake and to complete 
his trilogy of Littlepage Manuscripts, Satanstoe (1845), 
The Chainbearer (1845), and The Redskins (1846). 
Having tried the autobiographical method with Miles Wal- 
lingford in Afloat and Ashore, Cooper now repeated it 
through three generations of a New York family. In 
the last he involved himself in the question of anti-rentism 
then stirring — of course fiercely on the side of the land- 
lords — and produced a book both fantastic and dull; 
the second is better by one of Cooper’s most powerful 
figures, the squatter Thousandacres, another backwoods 


46 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


call for minute analysis, and needs no more than the op- 
portunity, which Cooper gave him, to move through a long 
succession of events aimed to display his valor and test his 
virtues. There was thus produced the panorama of the 
American frontier which at once became and has remained 
the classic record of an heroic age. 

The classic record of an heroic age! — although not 
classic at all in the stricter sense of fidelity to all the cir- 
cumstances of the frontier. And yet in spite of the many 
charges that have been brought against Cooper’s accuracy, 
charges well founded and well proved, his fame holds 
steadily up. He may not have recorded his universe at all 
points exactly, but he created one. His mighty land- 
scapes lie still unshaken in a secure district of the human 
imagination. Over such mountains through such dim and 
terrifying forests to such glorious lakes the mind still 
marches, for the moment convinced. His Indians, what- 
ever their authenticity, are securely established in the 
world’s romantic memory as a picture of those belated and 
unfortunate men of the stone age who were fated to oppose 
the ruthless advance of a more complex civilization. It is 
to the credit of mankind that those naked savages, un- 
justly as they were dealt ‘with while alive, should be 
a little honored with a chivalrous reputation when dead 
or conquered. In this manner all high-minded peoples 
remember their ancient defeated enemies. And _ recent 
studies of the art and ritual of the Indians have gone far 
toward showing that the race possessed, if not precisely 
the qualities Cooper ascribed to them, at least a fineness 
and elevation of mind which are worlds closer to Cooper’s 
representation of them than to the picture as corrected 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 47 


by those subsequent critics who called the Indians mere 
squalid savages. ‘That Natty Bumppo, to the contem- 
porary eye doubtless hard and crude enough, should have 
been made a hero is no more remarkable than that the 
same fortune should have come to Daniel Boone or Robin- 
son Crusoe, plain men who like Natty clung to the dearest 
human virtues in the face of a nature which would as 
readily have destroyed as dignified them. And finally, 
the unending charm of these diversified adventures inheres 
not only in the narrative itself but in the human disposi- 
tion which cherishes memories and hopes of a larger ex- 
perience, free, abundant, glorious, and on but casual provo- 
cation will follow a great story-teller to the ends of the 
earth. 

The Pathfinder and The Deerslayer seem to have left 
Cooper nearly exhausted, for his last decade saw him 
rise but once above the sensationalism which always men- 
aced the romancers of his school and the contentiousness 
to which he himself was prone. Most of the novels of the 
period do not deserve even to be called by name. He had 
still enough energy, however, to undertake and to complete 
his trilogy of Littlepage Manuscripts, Satanstoe (1845), 
The Chainbearer (1845), and The Redskins (1846). 
Having tried the autobiographical method with Miles Wal- 
lingford in Afloat and Ashore, Cooper now repeated it 
through three generations of a New York family. In 
the last he involved himself in the question of anti-rentism 
then stirring — of course fiercely on the side of the land- 
lords — and produced a book both fantastic and dull; 
the second is better by one of Cooper’s most powerful 
figures, the squatter Thousandacres, another backwoods 


46 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


call for minute analysis, and needs no more than the op- 
portunity, which Cooper gave him, to move through a long 
succession of events aimed to display his valor and test his 
virtues. There was thus produced the panorama of the 
American frontier which at once became and has remained 
the classic record of an heroic age. 

The classic record of an heroic age! — although not 
classic at all in the stricter sense of fidelity to all the cir- 
cumstances of the frontier. And yet in spite of the many 
charges that have been brought against Cooper’s accuracy, 
charges well founded and well proved, his fame holds 
steadily up. He may not have recorded his universe at all 
points exactly, but he created one. His mighty land- 
scapes lie still unshaken in a secure district of the human 
imagination. Over such mountains through such dim and 
terrifying forests to such glorious lakes the mind still 
marches, for the moment convinced. His Indians, what- 
ever their authenticity, are securely established in the 
world’s romantic memory as a picture of those belated and 
unfortunate men of the stone age who were fated to oppose 
the ruthless advance of a more complex civilization. It is 
to the credit of mankind that those naked savages, un- 
justly as they were dealt ‘with while alive, should be 
a little honored with a chivalrous reputation when dead 
or conquered. In this manner all high-minded peoples 
remember their ancient defeated enemies. And recent 
studies of the art and ritual of the Indians have gone far 
toward showing that the race possessed, if not precisely 
the qualities Cooper ascribed to them, at least a fineness 
and elevation of mind which are worlds closer to Cooper’s 
representation of them than to the picture as corrected 


_ JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 47 


by those subsequent critics who called the Indians mere 
squalid savages. ‘That Natty Bumppo, to the contem- 
porary eye doubtless hard and crude enough, should have 
been made a hero is no more remarkable than that the 
same fortune should have come to Daniel Boone or Robin- 
son Crusoe, plain men who like Natty clung to the dearest 
human virtues in the face of a nature which would as 
readily have destroyed as dignified them. And finally, 
the unending charm of these diversified adventures inheres 
not only in the narrative itself but in the human disposi- 
tion which cherishes memories and hopes of a larger ex- 
perience, free, abundant, glorious, and on but casual provo- 
cation will follow a great story-teller to the ends of the 
earth. 

The Pathfinder and The Deerslayer seem to have left 
Cooper nearly exhausted, for his last decade saw him 
rise but once above the sensationalism which always men- 
aced the romancers of his school and the contentiousness 
to which he himself was prone. Most of the novels of the 
period do not deserve even to be called by name. He had 
still enough energy, however, to undertake and to complete 
his trilogy of Littlepage Manuscripts, Satanstoe (1845), 
The Chainbearer (1845), and The Redskins (1846). 
Having tried the autobiographical method with Miles Wal- 
lingford in Afloat and Ashore, Cooper now repeated it 
through three generations of a New York family. In 
the last he involved himself in the question of anti-rentism 
then stirring — of course fiercely on the side of the land- 
lords — and produced a book both fantastic and dull; 
the second is better by one of Cooper’s most powerful 
figures, the squatter Thousandacres, another backwoods 


46 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


call for minute analysis, and needs no more than the op- 
portunity, which Cooper gave him, to move through a long 
succession of events aimed to display his valor and test his 
virtues. There was thus produced the panorama of the 
American frontier which at once became and has remained 
the classic record of an heroic age. 

The classic record of an heroic age! — although not 
classic at all in the stricter sense of fidelity to all the cir- 
cumstances of the frontier. And yet in spite of the many 
charges that have been brought against Cooper’s accuracy, 
charges well founded and well proved, his fame holds 
steadily up. He may not have recorded his universe at all 
points exactly, but he created one. His mighty land- 
scapes lie still unshaken in a secure district of the human 
imagination. Over such mountains through such dim and 
terrifying forests to such glorious lakes the mind still 
marches, for the moment convinced. His Indians, what- 
ever their authenticity, are securely established in the 
world’s romantic memory as a picture of those belated and 
unfortunate men of the stone age who were fated to oppose 
the ruthless advance of a more complex civilization. It is 
to the credit of mankind that those naked savages, un- 
justly as they were dealt ‘with while alive, should be 
a little honored with a chivalrous reputation when dead 
or conquered. In this manner all high-minded peoples 
remember their ancient defeated enemies. And _ recent 
studies of the art and ritual of the Indians have gone far 
toward showing that the race possessed, if not precisely 
the qualities Cooper ascribed to them, at least a fineness 
and elevation of mind which are worlds closer to Cooper’s 
representation of them than to the picture as corrected 


_JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 47 


by those subsequent critics who called the Indians mere 
squalid savages. ‘That Natty Bumppo, to the contem- 
porary eye doubtless hard and crude enough, should have 
been made a hero is no more remarkable than that the 
same fortune should have come to Daniel Boone or Robin- 
son Crusoe, plain men who like Natty clung to the dearest 
human virtues in the face of a nature which would as 
readily have destroyed as dignified them. And finally, 
the unending charm of these diversified adventures inheres 
not only in the narrative itself but in the human disposi- 
tion which cherishes memories and hopes of a larger ex- 
perience, free, abundant, glorious, and on but casual provo- 
cation will follow a great story-teller to the ends of the 
earth. | 

The Pathfinder and The Deerslayer seem to have left 
Cooper nearly exhausted, for his last decade saw him 
rise but once above the sensationalism which always men- 
aced the romancers of his school and the contentiousness 
to which he himself was prone. Most of the novels of the 
period do not deserve even to be called by name. He had 
still enough energy, however, to undertake and to complete 
his trilogy of Littlepage Manuscripts, Satanstoe (1845), 
The Chaimbearer (1845), and The Redskins (1846). 
Having tried the autobiographical method with Miles Wal- 
lingford in Afloat and Ashore, Cooper now repeated it 
through three generations of a New York family. In 
the last he involved himself in the question of anti-rentism 
then stirring — of course fiercely on the side of the land- 
lords — and produced a book both fantastic and dull; 
the second is better by one of Cooper’s most powerful 
figures, the squatter Thousandacres, another backwoods 


48 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Titan of the breed of Ishmael Bush; the first, if a little 
beneath Cooper’s best work, is so only because he was 
never at his best except when he dealt with Leather-Stock- 
ing and his fortunes. No other novel by Cooper, or by any 
other writer, gives so firm and convincing a picture of 
colonial New York, when Pinkster, the annual holiday of 
the slaves, was still a great day in Manhattan and at 
Albany the Patroon still kept up something like baronial 
state. Even Cooper has no more exciting struggle 
than that of Corny Littlepage with the icy Hudson. 
But the special virtue of Satanstoe is a quality Cooper 
nowhere else displays, a positive winsomeness in the way 
Littlepage unfolds his memories (now sweetened by many 
years) and his humorous crotchets in the same words. 
Unfortunately Cooper did not carry this vein further. 
With his family and a few friends he lived his latter days 
in honor and affection, but he held the public at a sour 
distance, and before his death in 1851 set his face against 
a reconciliation even in the future by forbidding any 
biography to be authorized. The published facts of his 
life leave his personality less known to the general world 
than that of any other American writer of equal rank. 
This might be somewhat strange, since Cooper was 
lavish of intrusions into his novels, were it not that he 
wrote himself down, when'he spoke in his own person, 
as not only a powerful and independent man but also a 
scolding, angry man, and thus made his most revealing 
novels his most forbidding ones. One thinks of Scott, 
who when he shows himself most wins most love. The 
difference further characterizes the two men. In breadth 
of sympathies, humanity, geniality, humor, Cooper is less 


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 49 


than Scott. He himself, in his review of Lockhart, said 
that Scott’s great ability lay in taking a legend or his- 
torical episode, such as Scotland furnished in a splendid 
profusion that Cooper envied, and reproducing it with 
marvelous grace and tact. ‘“ This faculty of creating a 
wratsemblance, is next to that of a high invention, in a 
novelist.” It is clear that Cooper felt his own inferiority 
to Scott in “ creating a vraisemblance ” and that he was 
always conscious of the relative barrenness of American 
life; it is also tolerably clear that he himself aimed at 
what he thought the higher quality of invention. Of 
Leather-Stocking Cooper specifically said: ‘In a physical 
sense, different individuals known to the writer in early 
life certainly presented themselves as models, through his 
recollections ; but in a moral sense this man of the forest is 
purely a creation.” Cooper’s invention, however, though 
his highest claim to greatness, is not without a solid basis ; 
he is not to be neglected as an historian. No man better 
sums up in fiction the older type of republican — rather 
than democrat — which established the United States. 
No one — unless possibly Irving — fixed the current he- 
roic conditions of his day more firmly to actual places. 
Though Cooper might have supplied more facts to the 
great legend of the frontier, no one else supplied so many. 
Certainly it was his superior technical knowledge of ships 
and sailors which helped him to write such sea tales as 
give him, in that province of romance, still a high rank 
among many followers. True, Cooper had not Scott’s re- 
sources of historical learning to fall back upon when his 
invention flagged, any more than he had Scott’s good- 
nature when he became involved in argument; but when 


50 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


his invention escaped from the world of settled customs 
on which Scott’s art was built up, Cooper did with his 
invention alone what Scott, with his subsidiary qualities, 
could not outdo. After all else that can be said, one 
returns to Cooper’s invention, which is almost supreme 
among romancers, and which lifts him solidly above all his 
faults of clumsiness, prolixity, conventional characteriza- 
tions, and ill-temper. Merely the multiplication of inci- 
dents could not have preserved him. Merely his good for- 
tune in being first to celebrate the frontier would not have 
been enough. There had to be in him that intensity by 
virtue of which he so completely realized imagined, and 
often imaginary, events. How far this quality of his 
raises the quality of his invention may be observed in cer- 
tain of his “ recognition ” scenes — scenes of that kind 
which Aristotle considered to be of the very essence of dra- 
matic effect. Uncas revealing himself to the Delawares, 
the old trapper discovered on the prairie by the grandson 
of his former comrade — surely Euripides, had he been a 
writer of hasty prose romances, need not have been 
ashamed of scenes like these. 


- CHAPTER III 
ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 


1. MaTERIALS aND MEN 


Vrewep historically Cooper emerges from among his 
contemporaries as perhaps few of them realized he would 
after a century. Every one of the great matters of his 
day —the Settlement, the Revolution, the Frontier on 
land and water — he touched with a masterly hand, and in 
essential popularity he long ago distanced all his rivals. 
It is of course mere coincidence that he was born in the 
year which produced The Power of Sympathy and that 
when he died Uncle Tom’s Cabin was passing through its 
serial stage; yet the limits of Cooper’s life do mark almost 
exactly the first large period of American fiction; Neal, 
Thompson, Paulding, Kennedy, Simms, Melville — to 
mention no slighter figures — outlived him, but not, as a 
current fashion, the type of romance which had flourished 
under Cooper. Although by 1851 tales of adventure, as 
Cooper and his school conceived adventure, had begun to 
seem antiquated, they had rendered a large service to the 
course of literature: they had removed the stigma, for the 
most part, from the word “novel.” For the brutal 
scrapes of eighteenth-century fiction the new romance, of 
Scott and Cooper, had substituted deeds of chivalrous do- 
ings; it had supplanted the blunt fleshliness of Fielding 

51 


52 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


and Smollett by a chaste and courtly love. Familiar life, 
tending to sordidness and “ low ” settings, had been suc- 
ceeded by remote life, generally idealized; historical de- 
tail had been brought in to instruct readers who were being 
entertained, not without some sense of guilt in their en- 
tertainment. Cooper, like Scott, was more realistic than 
the Gothic romancers, more human than Godwin or 
Brown. 'The two most common charges against the older 
fiction, that it pleased wickedly and that it taught noth- 
ing, had broken down before the discovery, except in il- 
liberal sects, that the novel is fitted for both honest use and 
pleasure. 

In Europe, at Cooper’s death, a new vogue of realism 
had set in, but America still had little but romance. The 
presence of the frontier as a contemporary fact as well as 
a matter of fiction accounts for this condition quite 
as much as does the absence at the time of any strong 
realistic bent among American writers. With that vast, 
mysterious hinterland free to any one who might come to 
take it, novelists, like farmers, were less prompt in America 
than in Europe to settle down to the intensive cultiva- 
tion of known fields. There is a closer analogy, indeed, 
between the geographic and the imaginative frontier of 
the United States than has generally been realized. As 
the first advanced, thin, straggling, from the Atlantic to 
the Pacific, widening from Canada to Mexico, and reach- 
ing out in ships, the other followed, also thin and strag- 
gling but with an incessant purpose to find out new ter- 
ritories which the imagination could play over and claim 
for its own. “ Until now,” wrote Cooper in 1828, “ the 
Americans have been tracing the outline of their great na- 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 53 


tional picture. The work of filling up has just seriously 
commenced.” He had in mind only the physical process, 
but his image applies as well to that other process in 
which he was the most effective pioneer. ‘Two years after 
his death the outline of the national picture, at least of 
contiguous territory, was established, and the nation gave 
itself to the problem of occupation. In fiction, too, after 
the death of Cooper, the main tendency for nearly a gen- 
eration was away from the conquest of new borders to the 
closer cultivation, east of the Mississippi, of ground 
already marked. | 

As late as 1825 Jared Sparks thought ten American 
novels a striking output for one year, but during the 
second quarter of the century Cooper had many helpers 
in his task. For the most part they were more limited 
than he to particular sections. In New England, John 
Neal, D. P. Thompson, and Sylvester Judd had already 
set outposts before Hawthorne, at first a writer of short 
stories, came definitely with his greater novels to capture 
that section for classic ground. Paulding assisted Cooper 
in New York, and took Swedish Delaware for himself; for 
Pennsylvania, Bird was Brown’s chief successor; Mary- 
land had Kennedy; Virginia, without many native novels, 
began to undergo, in the hands of almost every romancer 
who dealt with either the Settlement or the Revolution, 
that idealization which has made it, especially since the 
Civil War, the most romantic of American states; South 
Carolina passed into the pages of Simms; Georgia and 
the lower South brought forth a school of native humor- 
ists who abounded in the truth as well as in the fun of 
that border; the Mississippi and the Ohio advanced to a 


54 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


place in the imagination with the Hudson, the Susque- 
hanna, the Potomac, and the James. North of the Ohio 
romance achieved comparatively little and the epic of the 
Great Lakes remained — as indeed it still remains — un- 
sung; but on the southern bank of the Ohio, Kentucky, 
“ dark and bloody ground,” rivaled its mother Virginia. 
Bird ventured into Mexico at a time when Irving and Pres- 
cott were writing romantic histories of the Spanish dis- 
covery and conquest. Melville, the most original and en- 
during of Cooper’s contemporaries, concerned himself with 
the wonders of the Pacific and the deeds of Yankee whalers. 
Nor did the romancers of the period confine themselves 
entirely to native borders and native ships, though the 
exceptions are relatively unimportant: various narratives 
by various narrators of the life and voyages of Columbus ; 
the African tales of Mayo; the one story of classical 
antiquity, Mrs. Child’s gentle, ignorant Philothea (1836) ; 
the Biblical romances of William Ware; and George 
Tucker’s satirical Voyage to the Moon (1827). 
The topographical arrangement is the natural arrange- 
ment of this body of romance, for as regards style, method, 
attitude toward the American past, present, future, gen- 
eral criticism of life, or individual distinction, the different 
novels exhibit but in rare cases any such qualities as would 
make classification significant or even possible. Again 
medieval France furnishes a parallel in the chansons de 
geste, which differ from these old American romances in 
' little besides their anonymity and their meter. Were the 

names of the American authors transposed it would be 
noticed, if at all, only by experts. Almost all of these 
-' tales employ a more or less standardized idiom and ter- 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 55 


minology, tending to the heroic and inflated in the dialogue 
and to the verbose in narrative and description. Swift 
improvisation underlies the method, with a large but heed- 
less handling of groups of characters and blocks of mate- 
rial, and with Providence and coincidence involved as 
lightly as in the most romantic ages. Although there 1s 
a strangely monotonous plethora of incident, the plots 
play continual variations upon a few themes and person- 
ages. In those dealing with the matter of the Revolution 
the war against the British never slackens; nor in those 
dealing with the Settlement and the Frontier, the war 
against the stubborn aborigines. Types of character are 
strongly opposed and slightly shaded, as suits an atmos- 
phere habitually tinged with conflict. Children hardly 
exist on the scene, and the women rarely rise above the 
pretty and elegant and helpless except when now and then 
one of them assumes the virago, often with comic effect. 
So far as the characters have a psychology, it is restricted 
to a few single motives: with the women, a passive readi- 
ness to be wooed, a meek endurance of husbands, and a 
tearful solicitude for children— again except for the 
viragoes, who anticipate their suitors, nag their husbands, 
and beat or savagely protect their young; with the men, 
intense patriotism, a burning confidence in the national 
destiny, a passion for fighting and hardships, considerable 
insensibility to pain, in themselves and others, which finds 
expression in stoicism, cruelty, and heavy pranks; and 
chivalric love remarkably sexless in any but the villains. 
The moral standards implied belong to conventional 
ethics, Christianity being professed and war practised in 
the ordinary modern mixture. While some strained points 


56 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


of honor appear, especially arising from the codes of the 
gaming table and the duel, there is little of that casuistry 
which in the medieval courtly romances plays so large a 
part. There might be more of it were there not a toler- 
ably constant strain of humor, though more generally the 
characteristic American “ good humor ” than wit or com- 
edy. Burlesque frequently shows its head, as a rule in 
connection with the lower order of characters, who, as with 
Scott, are more likely to be conceived as amusing than as 
heroic. Such non-English elements in the population as 
the Irish, German, and French commonly play comic réles ; 
the negroes have hardly ever any character but that of 
faithful slaves; and the Indians stand normally at one 
extreme or other of the scale — fierce savages to be ex- 
terminated without mercy or amiable sons and daughters 
of nature. ‘Towards history most of the romancers took 
the attitude that it existed for the edification or for the 
elevation of their readers, and they did not hesitate to en- 
large it at will. On the whole the most realistic elements 
in the entire tradition are the geography, which almost 
never becomes hazy and casual as in medieval romance, and 
the landscape, which, though grandiose and elaborate, is 
little more so in the novels than it was in fact at a time 
when the great forests and mountains and prairies of the 
continent were still immense as compared with the settled 
regions. <A certain largeness about the physical horizons, 
indeed, went a long way for Cooper’s generation, and in 
the twentieth century still goes a fair distance, toward 
tempting readers to forget the countless conventional ele- 
ments in our early fiction. Without their sense of that 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 57 


largeness these novelists could hardly have possessed the 
rough narrative enegy which is their highest quality. 
Only a few of them need to be specially characterized. 
John Neal of Maine, the first obvious and confessed imi- 
tator of Cooper, when The Spy appeared took fire at the 
example. Neal’s real master, however, was Byron, whom 
he followed with a fury of rant and fustion which would 
have made him, had he been gifted with taste and humor 
as well, no mean follower. The Down-Easters (1833), 
though promising at first to be a real picture of native 
life and character, soon runs amuck into raving melo- 
drama. The Rev. Sylvester Judd in 1845 published a 
novel, Margaret, which Lowell declared had the soul of 
Down East in it; but the soul of the book has not proved 
immortal. Written to show that the Unitarians could 
produce imaginative literature as well as the more ortho- 
dox sects, Margaret is badly constructed and it wanders, 
toward the close, into a region of misty transcendentalisms 
where characters and plot are lost; and yet it has genuine 
merits in its vivid fidelity to the life of rural Massachusetts 
just after the Revolution, in its thorough, loving famil- 
larity with the New England temper and scene, and in 
a kind of spiritual ardor which pervades it through- 
out. Judge Daniel Pierce Thompson knew the Vermont 
frontier as Cooper knew that of New York. After many 
struggles with the bitterest poverty he got to college, 
studied law, became a prominent official of his native state, 
and somewhat accidentally took to fiction. Of his half 
dozen novels, which all possess a good share of honest real- 
ism, Locke Amsden (1847) gives perhaps the most truth- 


58 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


ful record of frontier life, but The Green Mountam Boys 
(1839) is the classic of Vermont. It is concerned with 
the struggles of the Vermonters for independence first 
from New York and second from Great Britain; its hero 
is the famous Ethan Allen. Thompson had none of 
Cooper’s poetry and was little concerned with the magic 
of nature; he took over most of the tricks of the older 
novelists and their stock types and sentiments. But he 
made little effort to preach, he could tell a straight story 
plainly and rapidly, and he touched action with rhetoric in 
just the proportion needed to sell fifty editions of the book 
by 1860 and to make it in the twentieth century a standard 
book for boys—by far the most popular romance of 
the immediate school of Cooper. 

There was a school of Irving, too, which touched the 
novel. James Kirke Paulding, Irving’s friend, had con- 
siderable merit as a novelist, particularly in the matter 
of comedy. He enjoyed burlesque and he laughed at what 
he called “ Blood-Pudding Literature.” He was too facile 
in lending his pen, as parodist or follower, to whatever 
fashion prevailed at any given moment to do any very 
individual work, but The Dutchman’s Fireside (1831), 
his masterpiece, deserves to be mentioned with Cooper’s 
Satanstoe, considerably its superior, as a worthy record 
of the Settlement along the Hudson; and his Westward Ho! 
(1882) significantly reveals the charm which the West — 
especially Kentucky, in which the scene of this novel is 
chiefly laid — had for the natives of the older states. 
Other writers of Eastern birth, resident for a time in the 
new settlements, cheerfully or romantically undertook the 
representation of manners not known to the seaboard. 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 59 


The wittiest was Caroline Matilda Stansbury Kirkland, 
a native of New York, who wrote from the Michigan 
frontier, among other lesser books, 4 New Home — Who'll 
Follow? (1839), a volume of keen and sprightly letters 
avowedly in the manner of Miss Mitford, an English imi- 
tator of Irving. Still closer to Irving was Judge James 
Hall of Pennsylvania, who went west in search of adven- 
ture, lived in Illinois and Ohio, and by his various lit- 
erary enterprises served as an interpreter between West 
and East much as Irving did between America and Europe. 
Hall’s manner is like Irving’s in its leisurely, genial narra- 
tive, its abundant descriptions, and its affection for super- 
natural legends which could be handled smilingly. He 
had real powers of fidelity, the only merit he claimed, 
to the life he knew, but he had also a florid style and 
a vein of romantic sentiment which have denied his best 
book, The Wilderness and the Warpath (1846), a per- 
manent vitality. Nearest of all to Irving, however, was 
his friend and admirer, John Pendleton Kennedy. Of ex- 
cellent Virginia connections, but born in Baltimore, he 
served as bloodlessly as Irving in the War of 1812, like 
him was admitted to the bar, and like him lived merrily 
thereafter in his native town. His Red Book (1818-19) 
was a Baltimore Salmagundi in prose and verse, and his 
Swallow Barn (1832), an amiable and admirable record 
of life on a Virginia plantation, was a Virginia Brace- 
bridge Hall, even to certain incidents and characters which 
give the effect of having been introduced rather because 
Kennedy had observed them in Irving than because he 
had observed them in Virginia. But Kennedy’s easy 
humor and real skill at description and characterization 


60 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


make the book distinguished in its own right. His later 
novels, Horse-Shoe Robinson (1835), in which he dealt 
with the Revolution in the Carolinas, and Rob of the Bowl 
(1838), which has its scene laid in colonial Maryland, 
are nearer Cooper, with the difference that Kennedy de- 
pended, as he had done in Swallow Barn, on fact not in- 
vention for almost all his action as well as for his details 
of topography and costume. Indeed, he founded the 
career of Horse-Shoe Robinson upon that of an actual 
Revolutionary partizan wrth such care that the man is 
said later to have approved the record as authentic. De- 
cidedly Kennedy’s gift, like Irving’s again, was for en- 
riching actual events with a finer grace and culture than 
the ordinary romancers could command. His style is 
clear, his methods always simple and rational. 

Cooper’s closest rival among the romancers of his school 
was William Gilmore Simms (1806—70) of South Carolina. 
Born in Charleston, outside the little aristocracy of the 
town, Simms got but a scanty schooling. He seems, in- 
deed, during his youth to have been as bookish as Charles 
Brockden Brown, but it was romantic poetry and history 
which fascinated him, not romantic speculation. From 
his grandmother he heard innumerable legends of the Revo- 
lution, South Carolina’s epic age, and cherished them with 
a poetic and patriotic devotion. When he was eighteen 
he went to visit his father, who had left Charleston for 
the West, had become friend and follower of Andrew Jack- 
son, and had settled on a plantation in Mississippi. The 
young poet was thus shown the manners of a frontier which 
corresponded, in many ways, to that of Cooper, and he 
seems, during extended travels, to have observed its rough 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 61 


comedy and violent melodrama with sharp eyes. But the 
border — the matter of the Frontier — was not Simms’s 
first love as it had been Cooper’s, and the inalienable 
Carolinian went back, against his father’s advice, to the 
traditions and dreams of Charleston. There he was ad- 
mitted to the bar, and there he published the first of his 
many volumes of verse. 

It is unnecessary to say more of the miscellaneous 
literary tasks of Simms than that, somewhat after the 
fashion of Sir Walter Scott on a smaller scale, he wrote 
moderate poetry to the end of his life, including three verse 
tragedies; that he edited the apocryphal plays of Shake- 
speare; that he produced popular histories of South Caro- 
lina and popular biographies of Francis Marion, Captain 
John Smith, the Chevalier Bayard, and Nathanael Greene; 
and that he kept up a ceaseless flood of contributions 
to periodicals. His range of interest and information 
was large, but he commonly dealt with American, and par- 
ticularly Southern, affairs. His really significant work, 
as a. romancer, he began in 1833 with a Godwinian 
tale of crime, Martin Faber, which was so well re- 
ceived that he followed it in 1834 with Guy Rivers and 
in 1835 with The Yemassee, two romances in which al- 
most the full extent of his powers was thus early dis- 
played. Guy Rivers, thoroughly conventional as regards 
the love affair which makes a part of the plot, is a tale 
of deadly strife between the laws of Georgia and a fiendish 
border bandit. A born story-teller, like Cooper, Simms 
was as casual as Cooper in regard to structure and less 
careful in regard to style, but he was too rapid to be dull 
and he revealed to Americans a new section of their ad- 


62 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


venturous frontier. His concern with colonial South 
Carolina bore fruit in The Yemassee, a moving tale of the 
Yemassee War of 1715 which has been on the whole his 
most famous, and which is wrthout much doubt his best, 
work. Once again Simms took hints from current ro- 
mances, but when he set himself to describing the rich 
landscape of South Carolina or to recounting its annals, 
he was more fully master of his material than in Guy 
Ricers and more admirable in proportion as his subject 
was more congenial to him. He gave his Indians the 
dignity and courage which he said they must have had 
at an earlier period; he invented for them a mythology. 
But his triumph comes from the bold and truthful varia- 
tion he here plays upon the theme used by Cooper in The 
Last of the Mohicans. Occonestoga, the Uncas of this 
drama, has been corrupted by contact with the whites and 
has betrayed his people; Sanutee, his father, like another 
Brutus, denounces the renegade; Matiwan, his mother, 
with a more than Roman fortitude, kills him with her own 
hands to save him from the dishonor which his tribe could 
inflict only upon a living man. The older American ro- 
mance has no more dramatic moment. The various white 
and black characters in The Yemassee have somewhat less 
heroic dimensions than the red, but they are done with 
great vigor and some realism. 

Having succeeded with the matters of the Frontier and 
the Settlement, Simms now turned to the Revolution and 
wrote The Partisan (1835), designed as the first member 
of a trilogy which should properly celebrate those valorous 
times. He later wavered in his scheme, and though he 
finally called Mellichampe (1836) and Katherine Walton 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 63 


(1851) the other members of his trilogy, he grouped round 
them four more novels that have obvious marks of kin- 
ship. The Partisan traces events from the fall of Charles- 
ton to Gates’s defeat at Camden; the action of Melli- 
champe, which is nearly parallel to that of Katherine 
Walton, the proper sequel of The Partisan, takes place in 
the interval between Camden and the coming of Greene; 
The Scout, originally called The Kinsmen (1841), illus- 
trates the period of Greene’s first victories; The Sword 
and the Distaff (1853), later known as Woodcraft, fur- 
nishes a kind of comic afterpiece to the series. Simms 
subsequently returned ‘to the body of his theme and pro- 
duced The Forayers (1855) and its sequel Euwtaw (1856), 
to do honor to the American successes of the year 1781. 
Of these The Scowt is perhaps the poorest, because of the 
large admixture of Simms’s cardinal defect, horrible melo- 
drama; Woodcraft is on many grounds the best, by reason 
of its close-built plot and the high spirits with which it 
tells of the pranks and courtship, after the war, of Captain 
Porgy, the most truly comic character ever produced by 
this school of American romance. But neither of these 
works is quite representative of the series ; neither has quite 
the dignity which, lacking in his sensational] tales of the 
border, Simms always imparted to his work when he was 
most under the spell of the Carolina tradition. That al- 
ways warmed him; at times he seems drunk with history. 
He had a tendency to overload his tales with solid blocks of 
fact derived from his wide researches, forgetting, in his 
passionate antiquarianism, his own belief that “ the chief 
value of history consists in its proper employment for the 
purposes of art”; or, rather, he was too much thrilled 


64 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


by bare events to perceive that they needed to be colored 
into fiction if they were to fit his narratives. Simms never 
took his art as a mere technical enterprise. He held that 
“modern romance is the substitute which the people of 
the present day offer for the ancient epic,” and his heart 
beat to be another Homer. His seven novels are his epic 
of the Revolution. Marion, the Agamemnon of these 
wars, had already become a legend in the popular memory 
with the help of Weems’s fantastic ardor, but it remained 
for Simms to show a whole society engaged in Marion’s 
task. The defect of Simms was that he relied too much 
upon one plot for each of his tales — a partizan and a loy- 
alist contending for the hand of the same girl — and that 
he repeated certain stock scenes and personages again 
and again. His virtue was not only that he handled the 
actual warfare with interest and power but that he man- 
aged to multiply episodes with huge fecundity. He de- 
scribed, in a surge of rhetoric, his favorite material: “ Par- 
tisan warfare, itself, is that irregular and desultory sort 
of life, which is unavoidably suggestive of the deeds and 
feelings of chivalry — such as gave the peculiar charac- 
ter, and much of the charm, to the history of the middle 
ages. The sudden onslaught — the retreat as sudden — 
the midnight tramp — the moonlight bivouack — the swift 
surprise, the desperate defence — the cruel slaughter and 
the headlong flight — and, amid the fierce and bitter war- 
fare, always, like a sweet star shining above the gloom, 
the faithful love, the constant prayer, the devoted homage 
and fond allegiance of the maiden heart! ” 

The passage is almost a generalized epitome of his 
Revolutionary romances. It also betrays the fact that — 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 65 


the epic for Simms lay decidedly nearer to Froissart than 
to Homer. If he is more sanguinary, he is also more 
sentimental than Cooper. His women, though Nelly Floyd 
in Eutaw is pathetic and mysterious, and Matiwan in The 
Yemassee is nearly as tragic as romance can make her, are 
almost all fragile and colorless things. Even more than 
Cooper, Simms suffered from the pseudo-chivalrous in his 
Carolina tradition: tediously old-school toward his women, 
he is also undemocratically “ condescending ” toward his 
common men. His comedy is successful only, and then 
not always, in the words and deeds of the gourmand Porgy. 
In this respect he clearly surpasses Cooper, whom he 
equals if not surpasses in the description of landscapes, 
which in Simms range from the sterile wastes of Georgia 
to the luxuriant Carolina swamps in which the partizans 
found a refuge — descriptions full of reality and gusto, 
but with little emphasis on the “ poetry ” or “ philosophy ” 
of nature. | 

It was in dealing with the matters of the Revolution and 
' the Settlement, not Cooper’s forte, that Simms succeeded 
best; he was inferior when he dealt with the Frontier. 
Perhaps the earlier frontier had been intrinsically more 
dignified than that which Simms had observed; perhaps 
the difference is that Cooper’s had lain deeper under’ the 
softening shadow of the past. At any rate, Simms grew 
more melodramatic, as Cooper grew more poetic, the 
farther he ventured from regions of law and order. (\Rich- 
ard Hurdis (1888), Border Beagles (1840), Beauchampe 
(1842), and its sequel Charlemont (1856) are amazingly 
sensational — bloody and tearful and barbarously ornate. 
Nor was Simms happier when he abandoned native for for- 


66 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


eign history, as in Pelayo (1838), The Damsel of Darien 
(1839), Count Julian (1845), and Vasconselos (1853). 
Even more than Cooper he lacked judgment as to the true 
province of his art; like Cooper, he constantly turned 
aside to put his pen to the service of the distracted times 
through which he was fated to live. As the agitation 
which led to civil war grew more heated, he plunged into 
stormy apologetics for the grounds and virtues of slavery, 
as passionately tory as Dr. Johnson or Sir Walter Scott. 
Just on the eve of the struggle Simms repeated the suc- 
cess of The Yemassee with a romance of seventeenth- 
century Carolina, The Cassique of Kiawah (1859), a stir- 
ring, varied story which, though generally neglected, must 
be ranked with his best books. The war ruined and broke 
him, and though he wrote stoutly on till his death in 1870 
he never regained his earlier powers or his earlier prestige. 

Robert Montgomery Bird of Delaware, in his Mexican 
romances recalling Irving and in his novels of New Jersey 
and Pennsylvania nearer to Cooper, has survived solely 
—and that. but dimly — as the author of Nick of the 
Woods (1837), a powerful and exciting tale of the Ken- 
tucky frontier in 1782, wherein he attempted to correct 
Cooper’s heroic drawing of the Indian by presenting him 
as a fierce and filthy savage utterly undeserving of senti- 
mental sympathy. The book celebrates a type of charac- 
ter often spoken of in border annals, the white man who, 
crazed by Indian atrocities, gave his whole life to a career 
of ruthless vengeance. As critical a disposition as Bird’s 
rarely appeared outside of Cooper, but it appeared in 
The Partisan Leader (1836) by Judge Nathaniel Beverley 
‘Tucker of Virginia, a novel which was made the vehicle 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 67 


of criticism. Famous chiefly because it prophesied dis- 
union and civil war, the book deserves note also for 
its classical restraint, its pride, its intense, conscious 
Virginianism. Distinction of another sort belongs to 
the Rev. William Ware of Massachusetts, whose Zenobta 
(1887), Aurelian (1838), and Julian (1841), though 
strongly biased in favor of the creed Ware preached, 
and often diffuse and monotonous, have still force and 
charm enough to be read even in the present day by 
that considerable share of the population to whom books 
dealing with the origins of Christianity are equally duty 
and delight. And there is another distinction still in 
Kaloolah (1849), by William Starbuck Mayo of New 
York, a romance which contains a strange mixture of 
satire and romance ‘in its account of an African Utopia 
visited by the Yankee hero Jonathan Romer. 

Besides the novelists who can here be characterized or 
even named there were, or had been, by 1851 many others 
whom it would avail little to catalogue: authors for chil- 
dren, authors preaching causes, authors celebrating fash- 
ionable or Bohemian life in New York; writers of domestic 
stories with obvious morals, writers of adventure stories 
with shudderingly sensational'plots. Longfellow lamented 
the success which attended the flashy labors of Joseph 
Holt Ingraham. E. Z. C. Judson (“ Ned Buntline ”) and 
Emerson Bennett began their energetic, sub-literary ca- 
reers. As the century advanced there was undouhtedly 
an increase in the amount of trivial fiction produced. The 
rise of the great Victorian novelists in England was not 
paralleled in America. Their works in the absence of any 
copyright could be sold by American publishers more 


68 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


cheaply than native novels could be with the incumbrance 
of royalties to the native authors. Some Americans 
avoided competition by preferring short stories; others, by 
sinking to a lower level and manufacturing a cheap domes- 
tic grade of entertainment. All the more, then, do such 
figures as Cooper and Simms and Melville emerge from 
among the minor creatures of the day. 


2. Herman MELVILLE 


Herman Melville much surpassed Simms and Cooper 
in boldness and energy of speculation and in richness and 
beauty of style. A grandson of the conservative old gen- 
tleman about whom Holmes wrote The Last Leaf, and son 
of a merchant of New York, Melville was born there in 
1819. The early death of his father and the loss of the 
family fortune having narrowed Melville’s chances for 
higher schooling to a few months in the Albany Classical 
School, he turned his hand to farming for a year, shipped 
before the mast to Liverpool in 1837, taught school three 
years, and in 1841 sailed from New Bedford on a whaling 
voyage into the Pacific. Upon the experiences of that 
voyage his principal work is founded. The captain of the 
Acushnet, it seems, treated the crew badly, and Melville, 
with a companion whom he calls Toby, escaped from the 
ship to the island of Nukuheva (Nukuhiva) in the 
Marquesas and strayed into the cannibal valley Typee 
(Taipi), where the savages kept Melville, Toby having 
escaped again, four months in an “ indulgent captivity.” . 
Rescued by an Australian whaler, Melville visited Tahiti: . 
and other islands of the Society group, took part in a. 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 69 


mutiny, and once more changed ship, this time setting out 
for Honolulu. After some months as a clerk in Hawaii 
he joined the crew of the frigate United States and re- 
turned by the Horn to Boston in 1844, “From my 
twenty-fifth year,” he told Hawthorne, “I date my life.” 
Why he held 1844 so mportant is not clear, but it was then 
that he first thought of authorship. Though he had kept 
no notes of his journey, within a year he had completed 
his first book, T’ypee, the record of his captivity. This 
was followed the next year by Omoo (the word is Poly- 
nesian for “ rover”), which completed his island adven- 
tures. In 1849 came Redburn, based on his earlier voyage 
to Liverpool, and in 1850 White Jacket, an account of life 
on a man-of-war. 

The first two had a hearty vogue and all of them aroused 
much wonder as to the proportion of fact and fiction 
which might have gone into their making. Murray pub- 
lished T'ypee in England under the delusion that it was 
pure fact. There were others to rank it with Dana’s Two 
Years Before the Mast (1840) as a transcript of real 
events. But though little is known of Melville’s actual 
doings in the Pacific, it is at least clear that T'ypee and 
Omoo are no more as truthful as Two Years Before the 
Mast than they are as crisp and nautical as that incom- 
parable classic of the sea. Melville must be ranked less 
with Dana than with George Borrow. If he knew the 
thin boundary between romance and reality, he was still 
careless of nice limits, and his work is a fusion which 
defies analysis. White Jacket, of the four books, is prob- 
ably the nearest a plain record; Redburn has but a few 
romantic elements; but neither can approach the T'ypee- 


70 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Omoo series in charm. Typee was the earliest notable 
romance dealing with the South Seas, ‘a region abundantly 
exploited since. Merely as history the book has real value, 
with its sympathetic yet sharp-eyed observation of Mar- 
quesan customs and its finely colored descriptions. It is, 
however, of course as fiction that T'ypee has been generally 
read, as a romance of the life led by a sophisticated man 
among perilous, lonely, barbaric surroundings. The val- 
ley of Typee becomes, in Melville’s handling, a region of 
dreams and languor which stir the senses with the frag- 
rance and color of the landscape and the gay beauty of 
the brown cannibal girls. And yet Melville, though thor- 
oughly sensitive to the felicities of the exotic life, never 
loses himself in it entirely as did later men, like Lafcadio 
Hearn and Pierre Loti, but remains always the shrewd and 
smiling Yankee. Omoo carries Melville through still more 
cheerful vicissitudes to Tahiti; it is packed with activity 
and comedy. There is at least the look of reality about 
his racy sailors, his consuls and beach-combers, and his 
irresponsible natives hovering between cannibalism and 
a half-comprehended Christianity. His references to the 
missionaries led to much controversy with members of 
their profession, and Melville was, indeed, highly caustic 
and contemptuous toward them. The tale is dramatic; 
the teller had just emerged from a world of Edenic sim- 
plicity; and his recollection of that little world lends 
sharpness to his judgments of the tawdry figures he finds 
on the borders of civilization. Melville was something of 
a partizan of paradises, as the charm of T'ypee reveals; 
but Omoo takes its quality, its keen edge, not so much 
from his prejudice as from the comic force and the happi- 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 71 


ness with which he hits off the manners and personages 
of a heterogeneous community. 

The charge that he had been writing romance led Mel- 
ville to deserve the accusation deliberately, and he wrote 
Mardi (1849), one of the strangest, maddest books ever 
composed by an American. As in T'ypee, two sailors 
escape from a tyrannical captain in the Pacific and seek 
their fortune on the open sea, where they finally discover 
the mysterious archipelago of Mardi, a paradise which 
is more rich and sultry than the Marquesas and which be- 
comes, as the story proceeds, a crazy chaos of adventure 
and satirical allegory. In Mardi for the first time appear 
those traits which made a French critic call Melville “ un 
Rabelais américain,” his welter of language, his fantastic 
laughter, his tumultuous speculations. He had turned, 
contemporaries said, from the plain though witty style of 
his first works to the gorgeous manner of Sir Thomas 
Browne; he had been infected, say later critics, with Car- 
lylese and the midsummer madness of the New England 
transcendentalists. Whatever the process, he had surely 
shifted his interest from the actual to the abstruse and 
symbolical, and he never recovered from the dive into 
metaphysics which proved fatal to him as a novelist. It 
was, however, while on this perilous rim that he produced 
one of the best of his, and one of the best of American, 
romances; it is the peculiar mingling of speculation and 
experience which lends Moby Dick (1851) its special 
power. 

The time was propitious for such a book. The golden 
age of the whalers was drawing to a close, though no 
decline had yet set in, and the native imagination had 


1% THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


been stirred by tales of deeds done on remote oceans by 
the most adventurous Yankees of the age, in the arduous 
calling in which New England, and especially the hard 
little island of Nantucket, led and taught the world. 
“The Nantucketer,” says Melville, “ he alone resides and 
riots on the sea... . There is his home; there lies his 
business, which a Noah’s flood would not interrupt though 
it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the 
sea, as prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the 
waves, he climbs them as chamois hunters climb the Alps. 
For years he knows not the land; so that when he comes 
to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely 
than the moon would to an Englishman. With the land- 
less gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to 
sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the Nantucketer, 
out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his 
rest, while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses 
and whales.” A minor literature of whaling had grown 
up, chiefly the records of actual voyages and a few novels, 
like J. C. Hart’s Miriam Coffin (1834). But the whalers 
still lacked any such romantic record as the backwoods- 
men had. Melville brought to the task an exact knowl- 
edge of the craft, a large and curious learning in all that 
pertained to whales ancient and modern, and an imagina- 
tion which worked with lurid power upon the facts of his 
own experience, swinging resistlessly over the seven seas 
and the seventy regions of the earth. Moby Dick, the 
strange, fierce white whale with his wrinkled forehead and 
high pyramidical hump, the villain that Captain Ahab 
pursues with such relentless fury, was already a legend 
among the whalers, who knew him as Mocha Dick. And 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 13 


Melville was too much a transcendentalist — too richly a 
romancer — not to invest the chase with some kind of 
moral or poetic significance. As he handles the story, 
Ahab, who has lost a leg in the jaws of the whale, is driven 
by a wild passion of revenge which has maddened him. 
‘“* All that most maddens and torments; ali that stirs up 
the lees of things; all truth with malice in it; all that 
cracks the sinews and cakes the brain; all the subtle 
demonisms of life and thought; all evil, to crazy Ahab, 
were visibly personified, and made practically assailable in 
Moby Dick.” Infected himself, Ahab infects his crew 
with his frenzy, and leaving behind them the vivid actu- 
alities of Nantucket they move into a Pacific which seems 
less a fact than a truth, less a truth than an eternal 
symbol of the universe. ‘ There is, one knows not what 
sweet mystery about this sea, whose gently awful stirrings 
seem to speak of some hidden soul beneath; like those 
fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buried 
Evangelist St. John. And meet it is, that over these sea- 
pastures, wide-rolling watery prairies and Potters’ Fields 
of all four continents, the waves should rise and fall, and 
ebb and flow unceasingly; for here, millions of mixed 
shades and shadows, drowned dreams, somnambulisms, 
reveries; all that we call lives and souls, lie dreaming, 
dreaming, still; tossing like slumberers in their beds; the 
ever-rolling waves but made so by their restlessness. To 
any meditative Magian rover, this serene Pacific, once 
beheld, must ever after be the sea of his adoption. It 
rolls the midmost waters of the world, the Indian Ocean 
and Atlantic being but its arms. The same waves wash 
the moles of the new-built Californian towns, but yester- 


14 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


day planted by the recentest race of men, and lave the 
faded but still gorgeous skirts of Asiatic lands, older than 
Abraham; while all between float milky-ways of coral isles, 
and low-lying, endless, unknown Archipelagoes, and im- 
penetrable Japans. Thus this mysterious divine Pacific 
zones the world’s whole bulk about; makes all coasts one 
bay to it; seems the tide-beating heart of earth.” In such 
a setting no wonder that the chase after Moby Dick comes 
to have the semblance of a conflict between the eternal, un- 
scathable forces of nature and the ineluctable enmity of 
man; and the eventual catastrophe, which leaves ship and 
sailors strangling in the water while the great beast 
shoulders his white way off on other business, seems the 
crash of a tumbling order. These are the theme and 
climax, barely reported, but description cannot report the 
extraordinary mixture in Moby Dick of vivid adventures, — 
minute details, cloudy symbolisms, thrilling pictures of the 
sea in every mood, sly mirth and cosmic ironies, real and 
incredible characters, wit, speculation, humor, color. The 
style is mannered but felicitous, warm, insinuating, pic- 
torial, allusive, and witty; though the book is long, 
crowded with the lore of the deep, yet the delays of the 
narrative but arouse more and more faculties of suspense 
until the end comes, swift and final. Too irregular, too 
bizarre, perhaps, ever to win the most popular suffrage, 
the immense originality of Moby Dick must warrant the 
claim of its admirers that it belongs with the greatest 
sea romances in the whole literature of the world. 

This stupendous yarn, which Melville told Hawthorne 
had been cooked in hell-fire, seems to have exhausted its 


ROMANCES OF ADVENTURE 15 


author. Pierre (1852) is hopelessly frantic, the work 
of a mad Meredith raving over moral ambiguities; Israel 
Potter (1855), a Revolutionary story, is not markedly 
original; neither are The Piazza Tales (1856) and The 
Confidence Man (1857). The verses which Melville wrote 
in his later years, his sole output, are in a few instances 
happy and resonant, but more often jagged and harsh. 
Whatever the cause of his loss of power, he fretted under 
it and grew more and more metaphysical, tortured, accord- 
ing to Hawthorne, by uncertainty as to a future life, and 
by his own words shown to have despaired of any future 
for his writings. ‘The way of metaphysics, for Melville, 
was madness; his earlier works might have taught him 
that he was lost without a solid basis of fact; in himself 
he lacked discipline and form. He moved restlessly about, 
living now in New York, now in a farmhouse near Pitts- 
field, Massachusetts, now in New York again, marrying in 
1847, lecturing on the South Seas during the years 1857-— 
60 in many cities of the United States and Canada, and 
visiting Europe and Palestine, about which he wrote a 
poem — Clarel (1876) — two volumes long and a rival of 
Mardi in eccentricity. Finally, he was appointed to a 
place in the New York Custom House in 1866 and served 
there for twenty years, living a private life of almost 
entire, though voluntary and studious, seclusion, musing 
on the philosophies. ‘*‘ How many,” he had said in Moby 
Dick of Tashtego’s fall into the whale’s head, “ have like- 
wise fallen into Plato’s honey head, and sweetly perished 
there?” Melville’s death in 1891 removed from American 
literature one of its most promising and yet most disap- 


16 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


pointing figures. Of late years, however, his fame shows 
a tendency to revive, perhaps more considerably in Eng- 
land than in America. Barrie’s Captain Hook is con- 
fessedly derived from Melville; John Masefield has said 
that Moby Dick speaks the whole secret of the sea; Lady 
Sybil Scott admitted passages from Melville to The Book 
of the Sea, which, though verse for the most part, she 
could not think complete without Defoe, Melville, and 
Joseph Conrad. And while Melville at home has had 
somewhat slighter praise, an acquaintance with his work 
is a sign by which it may be learned whether any given 
American knows the literature of his country. 


CHAPTER IV 
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 


Tuus far the cause of the American novel had enlisted 
no man who came primarily for the sake of art. Brown 
had been a radical journalist, Cooper a stentorian man of 
action, Simms a passionate antiquarian, Melville a tran- 
scendentalist with adventures to recount; but all of them 
had been improvisatores, although Melville, it is true, took 
some heed of his technical maneuvers. The art of fiction 
was being studied in the United States during this half 
century only in connection with the short story, which 
Irving had invested with his amused and amusing charm, 
of which Poe had discovered secrets of structure and effect 
not heretofore analyzed, and into which Hawthorne as the 
century advanced was pouring a deeper and deeper strain 
of intellectual and moral significance. Neither Irving 
nor Poe undertook a novel in any strict sense of the word, 
nearly as Irving’s versions of history in works like The 
Conquest of Granada or Astoria approach the manner and 
color of contemporary romance; or as bulky as was Poe’s 
Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym, of Nantucket (1838), 
which pretended to be a veracious book of travels though 
it was not. Nor do such pleasant divagations as Long- 
fellow’s Hyperion (1839) and Kavanagh (1849) or 
Whittier’s Margaret Smith’s Journal (1849), though not 

7 


18 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


without invention, take any conspicuous position in the 
history of the American novel. ‘When Hawthorne pub- 
lished The Scarlet Letter in 1850 he could not profit by a 
long series of native experiments in the art of the novel 
but had to initiate the mode in which he has since seemed 
supreme. 

And yet, The Scarlet Letter represents in Hawthorne’s 
own career the fruit of an apprenticeship to art the like 
of which no other American man of letters has demanded 
of himself. For twenty-five years a disposition which 
Hawthorne generally encouraged had held him to a task of 
preparation. Born in Salem, Massachusetts, in 1804, 
he came of a line of substantial citizens settled in the town 
since its earliest days. Once prominent, the line had be- 
come less so, but all its generations had busied themselves 
with affairs, latterly on the sea. Nathaniel Hawthorne, 
who could not point to even a clergyman among his an- 
_ cestors, was the first of his name to be sedentary. As a 
boy he was robust, handsome, athletic, no particular 
student, but rather more of a reader of general literature 
than has been ordinarily noted, ranging easily from The 
Faerie Queene to The Newgate Calendar. When he was 
fourteen, Hawthorne proceeded to less literary adventures, 
and spent a year in the deep seclusion of the Maine woods 
along Lake Sebago. ‘It was there,” he later declared, 
“IT got my cursed habits of solitude.” At the time he 
took a keen and wild delight in his exposure to the forest, 
which eventually played a larger part in his imaginative 
life than the sea which his fathers had followed and to 
which he himself at first wanted to go. He spent four 
years at Bowdoin College, which was then scarcely more 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 79 


than a clearing on the edge of the frontier, although it 
was also an average country college for the day and in- 
cluded among its students, besides Hawthorne and his 
particular friend Horatio Bridge, a future president and 
a future poet — Franklin Pierce and Longfellow. After 
graduation in 1825 Hawthorne returned to Salem not yet 
finally decided upon a profession but evidently with a 
stronger drift, perhaps even a stronger determination, 
toward authorship than he was accustomed to admit. 
The records of his life between this and the appearance 
of T'wice-Told Tales (1837) are dusky and brief. His 
mother, since her widowhood in 1808, had lived in a rigid 
seclusion which naturally influenced the entire family, con- 
firming in her son an original tendency. “I had very few 
acquaintances in Salem,” he afterward said, “ and during 
the nine or ten years that I spent there, in this solitary 
way, I doubt whether so much as twenty people in the 
town were aware of my existence.” He rarely left the 
house except by twilight, but endlessly read and reflected, 
instructing himself in the dim Puritan past and absorbing 
into his imagination the residuum of its spirit, even while 
he grew increasingly critical of its doctrines. The gesture 
of sentimental asceticism with which the hero of his first 
book, the smooth but undistinguished Fanshawe (1828), in 
the conclusion waves aside a proposal of marriage from 
the heroine only himself to die interestingly of consump- 
tion within two paragraphs, could have come naturally 
from Hawthorne’s pen during but an_ inconsiderable 
period, for though solitary he was not morbid, and he 
developed in the grave sunniness of his temper as clearly 
as in any other quality he possessed. Viewing the matter 


80 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


subsequently, when love and ambition had plucked him 
from his first solitude, he did not disapprove of it; “if I 
had sooner made my escape into the world, I should have 
grown hard and rough, and been covered with earthly 
dust, and my heart might have become callous by rude 
encounters with the multitude. . . . But living in solitude 
till the fulness of time was come, I still kept the dew of my 
youth with the freshness of my heart.” From a less sin- 
cere man this would sound priggish enough. Hawthorne 
held aloof not because he thought himself too precious or 
merely because he knew himself too shy for general society, 
but in part also because of an opinion which governed 
his early behavior as an artist. “I used to think I could 
imagine all passions, all feelings, and states of the heart 
and mind.” So competent was his imagination to interest 
and sustain him, so pervasive if not powerful, in its silent 
way so full of vitality, that he did not starve during his 
twelve lonely years but gradually ripened into a spirit 
that was no less strong than tender, no less sane than orig- 
inal, no less massive end secure than delicate and sympa- 
thetic. 

Nor must his imagination be thought of as feeding 
solely upon itself. At least once a year it was his habit 
to rouse himself for a season and make excursions here and 
there through his native section, an alert and observant 
traveler. The journal which he regularly kept and vari- 
ous of his tales and sketches bear witness to these jour- 
neys. The White Mountains are the scene of The Great 
Carbuncle and The Ambitious Guest; somewhere north of 
Boston Hawthorne laid the meeting genially recorded in 
The Seven Vagabonds; at Martha’s Vineyard he met the 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 81 


village sculptor of Chippings with a Chisel; wpon a visit 
to the Shaker community at Canterbury, New Hampshire, 
he based The Canterbury Pilgrims and The Shaker Bridal, 
though the action of the latter story takes place else 
where; the shaggy flanks of Greylock in the Berkshires 
furnish the wild setting for the wilder story of Ethan 
Brand; and in other sketches and journal entries Haw- 
thorne writes of other regions in Vermont and Connecticut 
and New York to which he wandered, once as far as 
to Niagara and possibly still farther to Detroit. In 
none of these does there appear that elaboration of local 
color which was to characterize American short stories 
a generation or so later, but neither was Hawthorne in- 
attentive to the outward manners of his age. He is a 
prime source for modern knowledge of them. Somewhat 
unexpectedly, he had a decided taste for the low life which 
he encountered, for peddlers, drovers, tawdry hawkers of 
amusement, stage-agents, and tavern-haunters. A Field- 
ing would have known them better, but Hawthorne knew 
them. 

At the same time he invaded the past of New Eng- 
land, hunting for pictures with which to enlarge his con- 
sciousness of life. From the very first, as in his sketches 
of Sir William Phips and Mrs. Hutchinson, he neglected 
analysis or historical] narrative for the sake of construct- 
ing definite little scenes out of his material. “ And now, 
having arranged these preliminaries,” he says after two 
or three pages, “ we shall attempt to picture forth a day 
of Sir William’s life.” And similarly after the briefest 
discussion of Mrs. Hutchinson: “ We shall endeavor to 
give a more practical idea of this part of her course ” — a 


84 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


himself which he more than once cherished, and which he 
embodied in his original scheme for T'wice-Told Tales. 
This collection he wanted to call The Story-Teller and to 
present as a series of narratives in a framework describing 
the adventures and observations of just such a novelist 


errant on his varied rounds. The publisher would not . 


agree; the tales appeared without the framework in 1837, 
Horatio Bridge having guaranteed the expenses ; and Haw- 
thorne came promptly into a small but gratifying reputa- 
tion decisively helped by approving reviews from Long- 
fellow and, a little later, from Poe. 

That he had heretofore been, as he not quite correctly 
said, * the obscurest man of letters in America,” elicits 
the less complaint over the blindness of his contemporaries 
since he had worn anonymity as a regular garment and 
had addressed the public, for the most part, from the 
pages of very modest magazines or annuals among the 
dying birds and weeping willows which made up the fauna 
and flora of those periodicals in that period. A touch of 
fame stirred him to rather greater activity; and he was 
stirred still more by falling in love, very soon after the 
publication of his book, with Sophia Amelia Peabody, 
whom he married in 1842 and with whom he subsequently 
led a life of exquisite felicity. ‘We are but shadows,” 
he wrote during his engagement; “we are not endowed 
with real life, and all that seems most real about us is 


but the thinnest substance of a dream,— till the heart be 


touched. That touch creates us,— then we begin to be, 
— thereby we are beings of reality and inheritors of eter- 
nity.” Now he so far emerged from his solitude as to look 
about for some livelihood which would make marriage pos- 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 85 


sible. Appointed by George Bancroft to be weigher and 
gauger at the Boston Custom House early in 1889, he 
served there two years and then entered the community at 
Brook Farm, not because he was a communist or a tran- 
scendentalist but because he was a lover who hoped that 
the experiment would help him to become a husband. A 
year sufficed to make it plain that his art could not flourish 
under such conditions. He left Brook Farm, issued a sec- 
ond series (1842) of T'wice-Told Tales, was married, and 
went to live at the Old Manse in Concord, in the neighbor- 
hood of the two other most authentic New England authors, 
Emerson and Thoreau. There Hawthorne lived for three 
years, until he returned to Salem as surveyor of the Cus- 
tom House for three years more; in Concord he wrote, be- 
side certain hack pieces, the Mosses from an Old Manse 
(1846) ; there he rounded out his years of preparation for 
the greater novels. The differences between the T'wice- 
Told Tales and the Mosses are not important, nor are the 
stories of the later collection always later in composition, 
but it should at least be noted that whereas the T'ales con- 
tains a larger number of vivid pictures from past or pres- 
ent, the range of the Mosses is on the whole the greater. 
Here may be found those profound studies of conscience, 
Young Goodman Brown, Rappaccemi’s Daughter, The 
Christmas Banquet, and Roger Malvin’s Burial; while side 
by side with them are smiling and elusive exercises of Haw- 
thorne’s fancy, The Celestial Railroad and Feathertop. 
Rappaccini’s Daughter is longer than any tale Haw- 
thorne had written since The Gentle Boy a dozen years 
before ; the average sketch or story in the Mosses is nearly 
twice as long as in the Tales; and here, moreover, may 


86 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


be found all of those singular narratives— A Select 
Party, The Hall of Fantasy, The Procession of Life, The 
New Adam and Eve, The Intelligence Office, Earth’s Holo- 
caust, A Virtuoso’s Collection — written between 1842 and 
1844 in which Hawthorne assembles upon some fanciful 
scheme a gallery of personages or symbols or ideas among 
which he moves as showman or spectator commenting 
upon the varieties of. life and legend. Perhaps without 
being aware of it he was growing ready for larger flights 
and a wider scene. At the same time he imparts an art- 
ful unity to the Mosses by the preface which conducts to 
the stories as an avenue of trees conducts to the Old 
Manse itself and which concentrates attention upon his 
themes as the cylinder of a telescope concentrates atten- 
tion upon the object covered by the lens. 

A similar function is performed for The Scarlet Letter, 
written in Salem during the winter of 1849-50, by the in- 
troductory essay on the Custom House where Hawthorne 
had recently, as he thought, been wasting his time. The 
essay understandably surprised his late associates, who, 
though the gravest of citizens, learned now that they had 
been for Hawthorne little more than the characters of a 
farce; and it still surprises those of his readers who, 
knowing his reputation better than his veritable self, find 
in it a humor so chuckling, an eye for personal traits so 
sharp, a hand so deft at whimsical caricature, an intelli- 
gence so shrewd in its grasp of concrete realities. It w 
not for lack of talent in that direction that Hawthorne 
overlooked the surfaces of life; it was for lack of interest 
"in matters not central to the serious concerns of the soul. 

In being a Puritan to the extent that he rarely lifted his 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 87 


gaze from the human spirit in its sincerest hours, he was 
also a universal poet. He who during a long experimental 
stage had brooded over the confused spectacle of mankind, 
posing for himself various of the soul’s problems and trans- 
lating them into lucid forms of beauty, had now posed a 
larger problem on a larger scale. To make a novel out of 
his material instead of a brief tale Hawthorne did not 
increase it, as he might have done, out of his antiquarian 
knowledge of early Salem: as regards such decorations 
his story is almost naked. Nor did he increase it by add- 
ing to his caste of characters: he need not have named, 
he need hardly have referred to, others than the four who 
hold the tense center of his stage. Nor yet again did he 
increase it by any multiplication of events, by any loud 
or active phantasmagoria: few events and half a dozen 
acts suffice him. With an austere economy that must 
have seemed parsimony had Hawthorne’s vision and his 
style been less rich, he discarded all but the essential 
cruxes of his argument. His tableaux succeed one an- 
other almost without the links of narrative which ordi- 
narily distinguish the novel from the play; yet as the cur- 
tain dimly rises upon each new tableau there is the sense 
of something transacted since the last — a sense conveyed 
by subtle hints so numerous as to betray how much more 
Hawthorne knew about his characters than he had space 
to put into words. With the same parsimony he narrows 
the physical bounds of his action to a little strip of sea- 
coast between the gray Atlantic which signifies all the 
memories of Salem and the grayer forest which spells 
its obstinate expectations. Only supreme skill could have 
exhibited within these limits the seven years of action 


88 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


which have to seem at once long enough to constitute a 
cycle of penance and also brief enough to present a drama 
of which all the parts knit solidly together under the 
spectator’s eye. Something more than mere technical de- 
vices, however, rounds out and compacts the story — some- 
thing more than the scrupulous disposition of tableaux and 
the recurrence of that overshadowing symbol which is 
sewed upon Hester’s bosom and burned upon Dimmes- 
dale’s; which is significantly and exquisitely woven into 
Pearl’s very nature, and which, rather too artificially, is 
blazoned upon the sky. Hawthorne gives every evidence 
of having moved through his first and greatest long ro- 
mance with an unfaltering stride, never obliged to consider 
how he should construct because the story grew almost of 
itself, and never at a loss for substance because his mind 
was perfectly stored — neither too much nor too little — 
with the finest. materials of observation and reflection 
gathered during a lifetime. For three years he had writ- 
ten almost nothing; now all the power that he had uncon- 
sciously hoarded freed itself and flowed into his book; now 
all the quarter-century of discipline in form and texture 
effortlessly shaped an abundant flood. 

The historian should not hint at too much that is merely 
mystical in the making of The Scarlet Letter; it is an 
achievement of deliberate art grown competent and un- 
conscious by careful exercise. At the same time, the im- 
pact which the story makes may be traced back of Haw- 
thorne’s own art and personality to the Puritan tradition 
which, much as he might disagree with it on occasion, he 
had none the less inherited. An ancestral strain accounts 
for this conception of adultery as an affair not of the 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 89 


civil order but of the immortal soul. The same strain in 
his constitution, moreover, led him to make of these cir- 
cumstances more than the familiar triangle. A French- 
man might have painted the joy of Dimmesdale, the lover, 
with his forbidden mistress; an Italian might have traced 
the fierce course of Chillingworth, the husband, to a justi- 
fied revenge; a German might have exhibited Hester, the 
offending wife, as actually achieving an outer freedom to 
match that one within. Hawthorne transfers the action 
to an entirely different plane. Let the persons in the 
triple conflict be involved as they may with one another, 
each of them stands essentially apart from the remaining 
two, because each is occupied with a still vaster conflict, 
with good and evil as the rival elements which continually 
tug at the poor human-creature. Small wonder, then, that 
the flesh, to which the sin was superficially due, should go 
unsung; that the bliss of the senses should hardly once 
be attended to. After such fleeting pleasures comes the 
inexorable judgment, which is of the spirit not of the 
body. To the Puritan imagination, journeys begin not 
end in lovers meeting. The tragedy of Dimmesdale lies 
in his defeat by evil through the temptatton of cowardice 
and hliypocrisy, which are sins. Chillingworth tragically, 
and sinfully, chooses evil when he decides to take a treach- 
erous vengeance into his own hands, though vengeance, he 
knows, is another’s. Hester alone emerges from her guilt 
through her public expiation and the long practice of 
virtue afterward. 

So far The Scarlet Letter agrees with the doctrines of 
the Puritans. Its broader implications critically tran- 
scend them. In what dark slumber during these seven 


90 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


years has that Jehovah wrapped himself whom the elder 
Puritans invoked day and night about all their business, 
praying for the remission of sins through the merciful 
affection of his son? What prayers go up? Who counts 
upon the treasury of grace from which any sinner might 
hope to obtain salvation if his repentance were only sore 
enough? The theology which for seventeenth-century 
men was almost as real as religion itself had come to be for 
their profound descendant no more authoritative than 
some remote mythology except as it shadowed forth a 
cosmic and moral order which Hawthorne had himself 
observed. In one respect he seems sterner than the elder 
Puritans, for he admits into his narrative no hope of any 
providential intervention which might set these jangled 
bells again into accord. Dimmesdale will not encourage 
Hester to hope for a compensating future life even. The 
consequences of deeds live forever. At the same time 
Hawthorne has drawn the action down from heaven’s 
pavement, where Milton would have conducted it, to earth 
and has humanized it to the extent that he centers it in 
human bosoms. The newest schools of psychology cannot 
object to a reading of sin which shows Dimmesdale and 
Chillingworth as the victims of instincts and antipathies 
which fester because unnaturally repressed while Hester 
Prynne is cleansed through the discovery of her offense 
and grows healthier by her confession. All the Christian 
centuries have known the truth here represented. But 
only certain of those centuries— and not the Puritan 
seventeenth — have been capable of viewing love as Haw- 
thorne views it and unfolds its tragedy. To the actual 
contemporaries of Hester and Dimmesdale it would have 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 91 


seemed a blasphemy worse than adultery for the lovers to 
agree, in their meeting at the brookside, that “what we 
did had a consecration of its own.” These are Hester’s 
words, and so it was to Hester that eventually “ it seemed 
a fouler offence committed by Roger Chillingworth, than 
any which had since been done him, that, in the time when 
her heart knew no better, he had persuaded her to fancy 
herself happy by his side.” Hester thus becomes the type 
— subtly individualized but yet a type — of the moving 
principle of life which different societies in different ways 
may constrain but which in itself irresistibly endures. Her 
story is an allegory of the passion through which the race 
continues. She feels the ignominy which attends her own 
irregular behavior and accepts her fate as the reward 
of evil, but she does not understand it so far as to wish 
uncommitted the act which her society calls a sin. A 
harder woman might have become an active rebel; a softer 
woman might have sunk passively down into unavailing 
penitence. Hester stands erect, and thinks. She asks 
herself whether women, as life was constituted, could be 
really happy, even the happiest woman. “ As concerned 
her own individual existence, she had long ago decided in 
the negative, and dismissed the point as settled.” Yet her 
mind, though dismissing her particular case as a malady 
without a cure, still ranges the universe for some cure for 
the injustice her sex inherits. ‘‘ The world’s law was no 
law for her mind.” In this manner those whom the world 
crushes always take their surest revenge. Hester finds no 
speculative answer; and so she turns to action, plays her 
necessary part, and gives herself to the nurture of her 
child, no less a mother than if approved by every human 


92 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


ordinance. A universal allegory of motherhood, her story 
is also a criticism of the Puritan attempt to bind life too 
tightly. In the midst of the drab circumstances of Salem 
this woman of such radiance of beauty and magnificence of 
life rises up and cracks the stiff frame of the time. Great 
as her own suffering is, she has in some measure con-— 
tributed to let a little light into the general tragedy of 
her sex. The Scarlet Letter is not merely a Puritan 
story. A spirit larger than Puritanism, as large as the 
world’s experience, informs and ripens the book. 

Against a background so somber all the more do the 
fantastic elements stand out. ‘They are summed up in the 
crimson brand which Hester wears as the statutory label 
of her offense but which out of some trait of whimsy 
she embroiders and illuminates until it is a token of the 
“rich, voluptuous, Oriental ” luxuriance of her nature. 
The idea of such a label and its consequences for the 
wearer had long haunted Hawthorne, at least since he in- 
troduced it in 1837 into his story of Endicott and the 
Red Cross. It haunted him, indeed, so impressively at 
last as now and then almost to detach itself from the mat- 
ter symbolized and to assume an entity of its own — 
tending inevitably on such occasions to be a mere frozen 
fancy. What saved Hawthorne here was his felicitous 
conception of Pearl, the child of such wayward passion 
and defiant tenderness, as a reality sprung from a symbol, 
as the scarlet letter incarnate. Of this little creature, all 
brilliance and beauty yet all caprice and unaccountability, 
Hester “ felt like one who has evoked a spirit, but, by 
some irregularity in the process of conjuration, has failed 
to win the master-word that should control this new and 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 93 


incomprehensible intelligence.” Pearl lends this story its 
note of exquisiteness: she is the light that flashes across 
the gloom, the color that warms the sober tapestry, the 
wings that wake the scene when intensity has arrested 
movement. Nothing better than the figure of Pearl il- 
lustrates the intimate connection between Hawthorne’s 
most delicate fancy and the closely scrutinized actuality 
upon which he founded his art. When he shaped her he 
must have been thinking constantly of his little daughter 
Una, who during the composition of the book, while his 
mother lay dying in his house, frolicked before his eyes 
like a bright fairy at the doors of a tomb. It was of Pearl 
that he says: ‘‘ Hester could not help questioning, at 
such moments, whether Pearl were a human child. She 
seemed rather an airy sprite, which, after playing its fan- 
tastic sports for awhile upon the cottage floor, would flit 
away with a mocking smile.” It was of Una at nearly 
the same time that Hawthorne wrote in his diary, among 
many other comments which suggest the qualities of Pearl: 
“there is something that almost frightens me about the 
child,— I know not whether elfish or angelic, but, at all 
events, supernatural. She steps so boldly into the midst 
of everything, shrinks from nothing, has such a compre- 
hension of everything, seems at times to have but little 
delicacy, and anon shows that she possesses the finest 
essence of it,— now so hard, now so tender; now so per- 
fectly unreasonable, soon again so wise. In short, I now 
and then catch an aspect of her in which I cannot believe 
her to be my own human child, but a spirit strangely 
mingled with good and evil, haunting the house where I 
dwell.” 


94 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


It is a revealing fact about the American taste for 
fiction in 1850 that though Hawthorne’s publisher re- 
garded The Scarlet Letter as a masterpiece he issued the 
book in an edition of only five thousand copies, which 
were, however, so soon sold as immediately to call for 
another. The fame of Hawthorne was henceforth as- 
sured, and it helped stir him during the next three years 
to an activity he had never known before. Leaving 
Salem in the summer of 1850 for the lovely Berkshire vil- 
lage of Lenox, he proceeded early in the fall to a new 
novel, The House of the Seven Gables, completed and 
published early in the following year. In 1851 he wrote 
A Wonder-Book for Girls and Boys (1852) and collected 
various scattered pieces into The Snow-Image, and Other 
Twice-Told Tales (1852); that winter, now removed to 
West Newton, Massachusetts, he produced The Blithedale 
Romance (1852); the next summer, finally established at 
The Wayside, a house he had bought in Concord, he wrote 
his Life of Franklin Pierce (1852) ; and in the winter of 
1852-53, his Tanglewood Tales (1853), completed just 
before he left for England, where upon Pierce’s appoint- 
ment he was to be United States consul at Liverpool. 
The life of Pierce was a trivial biography of a trivial 
man who was Hawthorne’s close and loyal friend. The 
Wonder-Book and Tanglewood Tales, with their exquisite 
versions of Greek myths quaintly medievalized and gently 
Puritanized by a passage through Hawthorne’s imagina- 
tion, in becoming unchallenged classics for all children 
have perpetuated the grace of his attitude toward his 
own and continue to exhale the light and sweetness which 
Hawthorne seems to have distilled into them in the sunny 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 95 


intervals between his profounder studies of these same 
years. The Snow-Image volume, besides earlier writings 
some of great merit and some of little, boasts in the 
title story, The Great Stone Face, and Ethan Brand, three 
late tales that are among his best. ‘The most consider- 
able achievement of the period, however, is of course the 
two movels, The House of the Seven Gables and The 
Blithedale Romance. 

Writing in the preface to the first of these Hawthorne 
distinguished between the Romance and the Novel. ‘ The 
latter form of composition is presumed to aim at a very 
minute fidelity, not merely to the possible, but to the 
probable and ordinary course of man’s experience. The 
former — while, as a work of art, it must rigidly subject 
itself to laws, and while it sins unpardonably so far as 
it may swerve aside from the truth of the human heart 
—has fairly a right to present that truth under circum- 
stances, to a great extent, of the writer’s own choosing 
or creation. If he think fit, also, he may so manage his 
atmospherical medium as to bring out or mellow the lights 
and deepen and enrich the shadows of the picture.” 
Hawthorne, who called The House of the Seven Gables a 
Romance, assumed the full license to which he thought 
himself entitled, but it is with respect to the “ atmospheri- 
cal medium ” that his powers were most successfully em- 
ployed. If The Scarlet Letter springs from the faculty 
which had earlier created Young Goodman Brown and 
Rappaccini’s Daughter and Ethan Brand, The House of 
the Seven Gables springs from the descriptive faculty 
which had set down The Seven Vagabonds and The Toll- 
Gatherer’s Day and Mam Street. By some inexplicable 


96 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


alchemy practised upon the principles of color it multi- 
plies and combines shades of gray until they become — 
if it is not too fanciful to say so — silver and rose, fadéd 
green and dull crimson. The House itself, though the 
brisk daily life of Salem swirls naturally about it, con- 
trives to stand invested in a cloud of omen projected from 
the dusky interior which has been innocent of sunshine, 
physical or moral, for two centuries. Ghosts crowd it, 
the ghosts of extinct grandeurs which have left dim tokens 
in portraits and furnishings too valuable for the present 
fortunes of the Pyncheon stock, and yet fiercely cherished 
by old Hepzibah, whose pride is a token hardly less dim. 
All the elements of the story center around these dusky 
chambers: the ancestral curse upon the founder, the treas- 
ure hidden in some forgotten cranny, the faded old brother 
and sister who when they try to escape are drawn irre- 
sistibly back, even the “ antique and hereditary ” flowers 
in the garden and the almost exanimate poultry whose 
** queer, rusty, withered aspect ” parallels somewhat over- 
significantly the appearance of their human owners. The 
groundwork of this narrative is more richly woven than 
that of The Scarlet Letter, more full of details which 
Hawthorne had personally observed, but in picture and 
atmosphere it is no less finely unified. 

The characters and action suffer a little from the per- 
fection of the background. At certain moments they fade 
into it and grow indistinct, like men speaking out of dark 
corners In muted voices. When Hepzibah ventures so far 
from the recesses of the Pyncheon pride as to begin keep- 
ing her poor little shop, the light strikes her and she be- 
comes pathetically real, and again when she puts forth 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 97 


her timid efforts to cheer her brother; but most of the 
time she is half hidden against the background. So with 
Clifford, who actually first appears in a darkened room 
which he has not been seen to enter and who continues to 
inhabit shadows. It is because of the particularly with- 
ered look of these older Pyncheons and of the house which 
‘becomes them that Phebe shines, rather than because 
of any superlative vitality in herself. Externally the 
most natural of Hawthorne’s women, she proves upon 
analysis to be scarcely more than a winsome type of young 
girl deliberately introduced for the sake of contrast. The 
same purpose accounts for the daguerreotypist Holgrave, 
who in a rented gable of the old mansion nurses opinions 
which challenge the authority of the past here lying so 
heavily upon the present. What Phebe personifies Hol- 
grave argues: the need and night of living beings to throw 
off the burdens they inherit; but Phcebe has only the in- 
stincts of youth and Holgrave argues without activity. 
Their marriage at the end, while promising a renewal of 
energy for two decaying stocks, does not contradict 
the moral which Hawthorne had in mind — “ the truth, 
namely, that the wrong-doing of one generation lives into 
the successive ones, and, divesting itself of every tem- 
porary advantage, becomes a pure and uncontrollable 
mischief.” Clifford by his unjust imprisonment has been 
broken in mind and body until even his former love of 
beauty has turned to a sporadic gluttony, and Hepzibah 
has wasted her whole life waiting in poverty for her broth- 
er’s release. Nothing now can recompense them for what 
they have lost; in them the moral sternly and veraciously 
shows its head. Elsewhere, however, the tragedy wears 


98 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


thinner. Judge Pyncheon, who has oppressed his kins- 
folk and falls himself under the family curse, belongs 
too much to the stage — or to Dickens. The curse hangs 
vaguely over the action, a part of the house’s furniture, 
an element thickening the shadow, but still a thing with 
little life apart from that preserved by the Pyncheon be- 
lef — and pride —in it. As in The Scarlet Letter the 
implications frequently go beyond the doctrine, so in The 
House of the Seven Gables the picture, with its richness of 
texture and depth of atmosphere, frequently overpowers 
the argument. The picture is the memorable aspect of 
the book. 

Of The Blithedale Romance Hawthorne declared that 
he had “ occasionally availed himself of his actual reminis- 
cences ” of Brook Farm —“ essentially a day-dream, and 
yet a fact ”—* merely to establish a theatre, a little re- 
moved from the highway of ordinary travel, where the 
creatures of his brain may play their phantasmagorical 
antics without exposing them to too close a comparison 
with the actual events of real lives.” The personages of 
his romance he said were all imaginary. Conjecture has 
persisted in identifying Zenobia with Margaret Fuller and 
Mules Coverdale with Hawthorne himself; and research, 
since the publication of various portions of Hawthorne’s 
diary, has found numerous “ sources ” for Blithedale, such 
as the masquerade in the woods, which actually occurred 
at Brook Farm, the little seamstress there from Boston, 
whose appearance must have suggested Priscilla’s, and the 
woman drowned at Concord in 1843, whose fate 1s known 
to have suggested that of Zenobia. These, and many 
other items of actuality which might be added, are all 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 99 


subordinated to the central invention, enough so that in 
spite of them the romance has often been called the most. 
shadowy Hawthorne ever wnote. <A fellow-craftsman, 
however, William Dean Howells, preferred The Blithedale 
Romance to the others, and Henry James thought it “ the 
lightest, the brightest, the liveliest ” of them all. It lacks, 
indeed, any such mastering theme as that in The Scarlet 
Letter, or any such brocaded vestures as 1s worn by The 
House of the Secen Gables. Its particular excellence must 
be looked for in a touching charm that springs from the 
very tenuousness of its substance — a tenuousness greater 
than life’s even when Hawthorne was writing about mat- 
ters he had seen with his physical eye, because the entire 
action of the novel is represented through the medium 
of its narrator, Coverdale the minor poet, who daintily 
eyes the moving world without ever coming close to it. 
Because Coverdale has no means of knowing all the his- 
tory of the principal characters, Hawthorne waives the 
right of omniscience and omits certain hidden motives and 
submerged links of the story. Coverdale, too, being in 
love with Priscilla, tends to the confusion and limitation 
of vision appertaining to his state. While Hawthorne 
doubtless did not calculate all the consequences of his 
device, he was enough of a dramatist to incur them. The 
story flickers, lightens up, broadens, deepens, contracts, 
almost disappears, flares forth again, as it would have 
done in the perceptions of a real Coverdale; and the whole 
is seen through a misty illusion comparable in effect to 
those curtains of gauze let down at theaters to soften a 
scene. Through that wavering veil Coverdale sees en- 
acted, against scenery which truthfully represents a com- 


100 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


munity like Brook Farm, the tragedy of Hollingsworth 
the philanthropist and the two women who interrupt his 
career to love him. Through the figure of Hollingsworth 
project some of the bones of Hawthorne’s reasoning; the 
man who blindly sacrifices actual hearts for an abstract 
cause is himself here something of an abstraction, though 
he eventually recognizes his fault with a human sincer- 
ity. Priscilla, outwardly so visible because so closely 
studied from the little seamstress at Brook Farm, is 
never quite impressive; she thas been refined to a point 
which brings her too near the bloodless decorum of her 
decade. It is’ in Zenobia that the rather wintry senses 
of Coverdale — and readers of all degrees of vitality 
after him — detect the fullest flood of life, fire and color, 
passion and experience. Hester Prynne had been of this 
stature. Both of them come into Hawthorne’s New 
England from other regions; both to be gorgeous have 
to be exotic. This may perhaps be taken as his tacit 
accusation that magnificence of personality did not ripen 
on the rock-bound coast. At least his imagination had 
gone out and found abundance and ripeness where they 
dwelt. 

The seven years which Hawthorne spent in Europe 
removed him for the first time from the village atmos- 
phere which — except in his imagination — was all he 
had known heretofore. His journals in England, France, 
and Italy throw quite as much light backward upon his 
earlier days as upon those of which he sedulously records 
the very modest happenings. A man of genius, already a 
classic, nearly fifty years old when he left America, he 
had yet to make his acquaintance with architecture, music, 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 101 


painting, and sculpture on their native ground, had yet 
to study the remains of great antiquity or to encounter 
a brilliant society. Any such society he conspicuously 
missed; he met few men of letters of real distinction; and 
he never felt more at home than among the other Ameri- 
can and British expatriates in Florence. With the eager- 
ness of a very young American he tasted the delights of 
antiquity in the routine quarters. With the patience of 
a man long withheld from masterpieces he gorged cathe- 
drals and galleries. Very often he was bored. At the 
end of his journey he could still seriously condemn the rep- 
resentation of the nude in art. But his consistent pro- 
vincialism is saved from being disagreeable by his exquisite 
honesty. What far smaller men learn early Hawthorne 
was learning late, but he gave himself without stealth or 
affectation to the task of mastering a new world, as ob- 
servant, sensitive, and masculine in spirit as he had been 
in familiar New England. How good his temper was in 
the new circumstances appears from Our Old Home 
(1863), an account of his English stay subsequently re- 
fined from his English note-books: a book both beautiful 
and shrewd and nicely touched with international satire. 
A still more eminent, though hardly a more characteristic, 
product of his European experience was the romance 
which he himself always thought his best, The Marble 
Faun, begun at Rome in 1859 and finished the next year 
in England. 

The venerable commonplace regarding The Marble 
Faun says that it is a guidebook to Rome — the Rome, 
of course, of the tourist who studies the city as a glorious 
mausoleum without much attention to the living inhabi- 


102 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


tants -unless they appear in carnival or procession. 
Learning and observation, indeed, went into the rich, 
smooth, trustworthy, and often penetrating descriptions 
which adorn the tale, but the atmosphere, when all is said, 
lacks the golden depth and substantial intimacy which 
Hawthorne had caught for The House of the Seven 
Gables. Though the Rome he saw was older than his 
Salem by millenniums to centuries, he had lived more years 
in Salem than months in Rome. The sole new quality he 
could impart to his Italian romance was the sense of 
crowds of people filling the scene, constantly stirring in 
variegated abundance, and providing a new privacy in 
the midst of which his important characters might take 
refuge. From these crowds the atmosphere derives more 
density than from the works of art and the landscapes, 
comments upon which just miss overloading the narrative. 
It is perhaps the best proof of Hawthorne’s capacious- 
ness of mind that he could have admitted so much still life 
into his action without confusing it. Elaborate as the 
background is, and stiff and difficult as it must have been 
to handle, the few essential persons of the drama move 
as freely and naturally as in the earlier novels with their 
almost empty stages. 

The idea of the romance occurred to Hawthorne when 
he first saw the Faun of Praxiteles in the gallery at the 
Capitol and thought “ that a story, with all sorts of fun 
and pathos in it, might be contrived on the idea of [the 
faun’s |] species having become intermingled with the human 
race; a family with the faun blood in them having pro- 
longed itself from the classic era till our own days.” 
Originally struck, it seems, by the fanciful possibilities of 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 103 


his theme, Hawthorne afterward deepened it into another 
Paradise Lost — of a sort. Donatello, descendant of a 
faun and in spite of centuries of intermixture almost a 
faun himself, through sin estranges himself from his care- 
less Eden and enters the human fraternity of guilt in the 
companionship of the more experienced Miriam, on whose 
behalf he sins, and who, by not preventing him, sins with 
him. Having thus shared a sin they find themselves indis- 
solubly married by its spiritual consequences, whatever 
their outer fortunes may be. An accidental witness of the 
murder, Hilda, whose conscience grew in New England, in 
another degree also acquires the responsibility, which 
tortures her until she rises above her Puritan prejudices 
to a universal mood and unburdens herself at the confes- 
sional which her own creed has disallowed. The fourth 
character, Kenyon, has only technical duties to perform: 
to be a chorus in some scenes and a not-too-impassioned 
witness in others, and to marry Hilda at the end. The 
Marble Faun, though twice as long as The Scarlet Letter, 
has an equal unity —if not an equal depth — of tone 
and a still higher concentration of events. Donatello 
from his ancestral tower among the Apennines and Miriam 
and Hilda and Kenyon from their several birthplaces, 
their previous lives only hinted at, come together in the 
easy society of Rome, where the tragedy overtakes them. 
They act it with the swiftness of drama and then vanish, 
going as mysteriously as they came, so mysteriously, in- 
deed, as to vex all but those readers who are competent 
to perceive how much the strength of the central impres- 
sion depends upon the obscurity which hides the past and 
future of the characters. 


104 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Though set in an environment so amply pagan and 
Catholic, The Marble Faun is in some respects the most 
Puritan of all Hawthorne’s romances. He who under the 
gray skies of New England had created Hester and 
Zenobia, when he came to a world in which they and their 
kind might have grown to their intended stature, seems 
to have turned partially back to an austerer code. 
Among the children of the Renaissance he missed that 
sense of sin which in his native province had been as regu- 
larly present as sea and hills. Genial as were the pagan 
survivals in this many-stranded city, cheerful as were the 
Roman Christians, light-hearted as were the artists, Haw- 
thorne’s imagination would not expand unreservedly. It 
asked itself what would happen if sin and conscience 
should invade these charming precincts. Once more 
. pagan than the Puritans, he was now more Puritan than 
_ the pagans. He would not let even Donatello play for- 
ever, believing that as generous youth died out of the 
faun he would “ become sensual, addicted to gross pleas- 
ures, heavy, unsympathizing, and insulated within the nar- 
row limits of a surly selfishness.” There is more than 
Puritanism in such a prophecy. There is more than Puri- 
tanism in the speculation of Kenyon, which shocks Hilda 
but which touches the theme very sharply: “ Sin has edu- 
cated Donatello, and elevated him. Is sin, then, . . . like 
sorrow, merely an element of human education, through 
which we struggle to a higher and purer state than we 
could otherwise have attained?” This is almost as much 
as to wonder whether experience itself, evil as well as 
good, does not civilize us, as it civilized Donatello. Haw- 
thorne’s language is the language of sin and conscience 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 105 


which he had inherited, but here as in all his romances lurk 
certain questions the answers to which conduct to the most 
spacious regions of morals and imagination. 

From his return in 1860 to his death four years later 
Hawthorne accomplished no remarkable work except Our 
Old Home. Another theme for a romance constantly 
tempted him, or rather, two: the idea of an elixir of life 
and that of the return to England of an American heir to 
some hereditary estate; but though he experimented with 
them in four fragments, The Ancestral Footstep, Septsmius 
Felton, Dr. Grimshawe’s Secret, and The Dolltver Ro- 
mance, Hawthorne could not fuse or complete them. Not 
only had the Civil War fatally interrupted his reflections 
but his imagination was dissolving, his vitality breaking 
up, along with the New England era of which he had been, 
among its poets and romancers, the consummate flower. 
Had he survived he must have seemed an outlived figure in 
a community which after the war turned its eyes increas- 
ingly to Europe and to the American West, through 
emigration losing its compact strength, and as a result. 
of larger connections with the rest of the world losing its 
stout old self-sufficiency. Although The House of the 
Seven Gables points forward to a whole school of prose 
elegists recording the New England decline, Hawthorne 
himself wrote while his corner of the country was still 
thriving and busy. Among men confident of the future of 
New England he could survey its past without the sense 
that life about him had diminished and so could utilize it 
without clutching it too closely as a compensation for the 
present. But though New England was still strong, it 
had softened its former iron theology to a more endurable 


106 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


set of beliefs and under the sweet uses of prosperity had 
considerably enriched its life with secular culture. And 
yet so recent were the fires of that passion which had re- 
fined the spirit of the elder Puritans that the spirit of 
their descendants was still fine, though in a new way. In 
all but the sturdiest this modern spirit tended to be thin, 
frail, flat, merely a gentility of the intellect and disposi- 
tion. Hawthorne was of the sturdiest. To a full heritage 
of the traditional inwardness he added wide reading and 
wide speculation and not a little observation of the color 
and costume of his province ; he had talked with vagabonds 
and lived with transcendentalists. Of the little group at 
Concord — Hawthorne, Thoreau, Emerson — which with 
the passage of time stands up so eminently above the 
Longfellows and Lowells and Holmeses of the Cambridge- 
- Boston tradition, Emerson enunciated a larger diversity 
of maxims, and Thoreau most vividly lived the Yankee 
life; but Hawthorne alone shaped the stuff of his medita- 
tions into visible forms and living creatures. 

Thus he may be said to sum up and body forth the 
inner vision of his age and section so far as that was done 
by any imaginative writer. What he insufficiently reflects 
is the homelier, coarser qualities of New England: its 
tough rustic fibre, its hickory-hearted endurance, its can- 
niness yoked with dreams, its dry, knowing humor, its 
crackling dialect, its home-bred complacency, the fearful 
silence and obstinacy of which it is capable when crossed 
too long, the potentialities within it of degenerating when 
the stronger impulses weaken. Such of these as were sur- 
face matters Hawthorne eschewed as merely so much dia- 
lect — things not essential to the heart of his investiga- 


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 107 


tions. He took them for granted, without comment, and 
went deeper. In a world, he asked himself, where human 
instincts are continually at war with human laws, and 
where laws, once broken, pursue the offender even more 
fiercely than they hedged him before, how are any but the 
more docile spirits to hold their course without calamity? 
The Puritan Fathers at the same inquiry, which they asked 
hardly more frequently than Hawthorne, could point in 
answer to election and atonement and divine grace. Haw- 
thorne had inherited the old questions but not the old 
answers. He did not free himself from the Puritan mode 
of believing that to break a law is to commit a sin, or that 
to commit a sin is to play havoc with the soul; but he 
changed the terms and considered the sin as a violation 
less of some supernatural law than of the natural integrity 
of the soul. Whereas another romancer by tracking the 
course of the instincts which lead to what is called sin 
might have sought to justify them as native to the offender 
and so inescapable, Hawthorne accepts sin without a 
question and studies the consequences: in the souls of 
Hester and Dimmesdale, who sinned through love; of Chill- 
ingworth, who sinned through malice; of Judge Pyncheon, 
who sinned through covetousness; of Hollingsworth, who 
sinned through pride; of Donatello, who sinned, one may 
say, through chivalry; of Miriam, who sinned through 
the passion to escape her past; and of Pearl and Hepzibah 
and Clifford and Zenobia and Hilda, who are only the 
victims of sin in others. Although Hawthorne of course 
touches other themes than the consequence of sin, he 
touched it most importantly. He brought to his repre- 
sentation of the theme sanity without cynicism and tender- 


108 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


ness without softness ; he brought also, what is rarer than 
depth of moralism, an art finely rounded, a rich, graceful 
style, a spirit sweet and wholesome. He found a sub- 
stance apparently as unpromising as the original soil upon 
which the Pilgrims established their commonwealth, and 
no less than they with their stony province he tamed and 
civilized it — going beyond them, moreover, by lifting it 
into enduring loveliness. 


CHAPTER V 
BLOOD AND TEARS 


AutHovcH Hawthorne’s example subsequently exer- 
cised, notably upon Howells and Henry James but also 
upon various slighter figures, a spell which no one of 
them could either justify by wielding it or escape without 
a struggle, during his hfetime his serious and noble art 
was unimportantly heeded by his fellow-craftsmen. Nor 
did he seem to the wide public which had come to read 
novels anything like so eminent in the years between 
The Scarlet Letter and the outbreak of the Civil War 
as he seems when looked at from the twentieth century. 
Heavier and louder weapons than his were needed to break 
down the habits which for thirty years had led American 
novelists to write and American readers to expect tales 
of adventure and external events. It was a new school 
of sentimentalists who, beginning about 1850, advanced 
with a tearful rush, brandishing those weapons in soft but 
effective hands. 

The romance of the immediate school of Cooper did 
not die without a struggle, though it had indeed fallen 
into disuse among most writers of capacity at the time 
of his death and was rapidly descending into the hands of 
fertile hacks who for fifty years were to hold an immense 
audience without deserving more than the barest history. 


In that very year (1851) Robert Bonner bought the New 
109 


110 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


York Ledger and began to make it the congenial homz and 
the hospitable patron of a sensationalism which had been 
growing upon native romance as its earlier energy had 
gradually departed from it. Hitherto most nearly antici- 
pated by such a son of blood-and-thunder as Joseph Holt 
Ingraham, author of Lafitte; or The Pirate of the Gulf 
(1836), or by the swashbuckling Ned Buntline, duelist, 
sportsman, and perfervid patriot, this sensationalism 
reached unsurpassable dimensions with the prolific Syl- 
vanus Cobb, Jr., who besides The Gunmaker of Moscow 
(1856) counted his successes in this department of liter- 
ature by scores. From the Ledger no step in advance 
had to be taken by the inventors of the “dime novel,” 
which was started upon its long career by the publishing 
firm of Beadle and Adams of New York in 1860. Edward 
S. Ellis’s Seth Jones or the Captive of the Frontier 
(1860), one of the earliest of the sort, its hero formerly 
a scout under Ethan Allen but now adventuring in west- 
ern New York, is said to have sold over 600,000 copies in 
half a dozen languages. The type prospered, depending 
almost exclusively upon native authors and native mate- 
rial: first the old frontier of Cooper and then the trans- 
Mississippi region, with its Mexicans, its bandits, its 
troopers, and its Indians, who have now for the most part 
lost the high courtesy of Cooper’s and are displayed in 
the bitter spirit which prompted that Western saying 
that the only good Indian is a dead Indian. Among the 
actual heroes of this adventurous world the men who 
achieved a primacy like that of Daniel Boone among the 
older order of scouts were Kit Carson, the famous scout, 


and “ Buffalo Bill” (William F. Cody), who was first 


BLOOD AND TEARS 111 


put on the stage by the intrepid Ned Buntline and later 
capitalized his own personality and reputation in the 
circus which exhibited its microcosm of the Wild West 
round the world. The dime novels which suggested such 
an enterprise, and in turn were furthered by it, were 
cheap, conventional, hasty — Albert W. Aiken long aver- 
aged one a week, and Prentiss Ingraham produced in all 
over six hundred — but they were exciting, full of inci- 
dent and innocence, and scrupulously devoted to the popu- 
lar doctrines of poetic justice. What they lacked was all 
distinction except that of a rough abundance of invention, 
and Frank Norris could justly grieve that the epic days 
of Western settlement found only such tawdry Homers. 
A Scott or a Cooper for those days is yet to come. In 
the fourth decade of the century the detective story 
rivaled the frontier tale, for the West was filling up 
and the juvenile imagination, to which the older tales 
had been addressed, was now turning to the towns. After 
1900, both kinds, though reduced to the price of five cents 
a copy, gave way before the still more exciting and more 
easily comprehended moving picture. 

It is true that one successor of Cooper upheld for a 
time the dignity of the old-fashioned romance. John 
Esten Cooke (1830-86), born in the Shenandoah Valley 
and brought up in Richmond, cherished a passion as in- 
tense as Simms’s for his native state and deliberately sct 
out to celebrate its past and its beauty. Leather Stocking 
and Silk (1854) and The Last of the Foresters (1856), 
both narratives of life in the Valley, recall Cooper by 
more than their titles; but in The Youth of Jefferson 
(1854) and its sequel, Henry St. John, Gentleman (1859), 


112 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Cooke seems as completely Virginian as Beverley Tucker 
before him, though less stately in his tread. All three of 
these novels have their scenes laid in Williamsburg, the 
old capital of the Dominion; they reproduce: a society 
strangely made up of luxury, daintiness, elegance, penury, 
ugliness, brutality. At times the dialogue of Cooke’s 
impetuous cavaliers and merry girls nearly catches the 
flavor of the Forest of Arden, but there is generally some- 
thing stilted in their speech or behavior that spoils the 
gay illusion. Nevertheless, The Virginia Comedians 
(1854) may justly be called the best Virginia novel of the 
old régime, unless possibly Swallow Barn should be ex- 
cepted, for reality as well as for color and spirit. No 
other book, of fact or fiction, so well sets forth the vision 
which in the days immediately before the Civil War Virgin- 
ians cherished of their greater days on the eve of the Revo- 
lution — days the glories of which they thought it possible 
to bring back and for which if need be they were ready to 
fight another race of foreign tyrants. During the Civil 
War Cooke served as captain of cavalry, under Stuart, and 
had the experiences which he afterwards turned to use in 
a series of Confederate romances, most rememberable of 
which is Surry of Eagle’s Nest (1866). But in this and 
the related tales Hilt to Hilt (1869) and Mohun (1869), 
as well as in numerous later novels, he continued to prac- 
tise the old manner which grew steadily more archaic as 
the rough and ready dime novel, on the one hand, and 
the realistic novel, on the other, gained ground. Toward 
the end of his life he participated, without changing his 
habits, in the revival of the historical romance which be- 
gan in the eighties, but he still seemed a belated dreamer, 


BLOOD AND TEARS 113 


the last of the old school rather than the first of the 
new. 

Less close to Cooper was another novelist who fought 
in the Civil War, and who gave his life in one of its earliest 
battles, Theodore Winthrop (1828-61). Of a stock as 
eminent in New England and New York as Cooke’s in 
Virginia, he had a more cosmopolitan upbringing than 
Cooke: after Yale he traveled in Europe, in the American 
tropics, in California while the gold fever was still new, 
and in the Northwest. His work at first found so delayed 
a favor with publishers that his books were all posthumous. 
Time might, it is urged, have made Winthrop a legitimate 
successor of Hawthorne, but in fact he progressed little 
beyond the Gothic qualities of Charles Brockden Brown, 
whom he considerably resembles in his strenuous nativism, 
his melodramatic plots, his abnormal characters, his com- 
mand over the mysterious, and his breathless style. Of 
his three novels — Cecil Dreeme (1861), John Brent 
(1862), Edwin Brothertoft (1862) —John Brent is 
easily the most interesting by reason of its vigorous nar- 
rative of adventures in the Far West, at that time a region 
still barely touched by fiction; nor should the real hero 
of John Brent, the magnificent black horse Don Fulano, 
go unmentioned. That Winthrop’s talent looked for- 
ward in this direction rather than backward to Hawthorne 
appears still more clearly from The Canoe and the Saddle 
(1863), a fresh, vivid, amusing, and truthful record of 
his own journey across the Cascade Mountains and an 
established classic of the Northwest. His early death, 
however, closed a promising chapter. Until the arrival 
of Mark Twain and Bret Harte even California did not © 


114 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


enter fiction, and the states further north after sixty years 
still await their novelist, though the Canadian wilderness 
Just across the border has been the scene of dozens of popu- 
lar romances. 

But Hawthorne and Cooke -and Winthrop were not the 
characteristic novelists on the eve of the Civil War. It 
was the domestic sentimentalists who held the field. <A 
brief decade endowed the nation with its most tender, most 
tearful classics. Then flowered Mrs. E. D. E. N. South- 
worth with The Curse of Clifton (1853), and subse- 
quently with scores more to the very end of the century: 
Mary Jane Holmes with Tempest and Sunshine (1854) 
and Lena Rivers (1856) ; Augusta Jane Evans Wilson with 
Beulah (1859) and the slightly belated but no less char- 
acteristic St. Elmo (1866) — all of these ladies more or 
less in the Charlotte Temple tradition; Susan Warner with 
The Wide Wide World (1850) and Maria S. Cummins 
with The Lamplighter (1854), pious histories of pre- 
cocious, flirtatious young girls; and— not so far above 
them — Donald Grant Mitchell with Reveries of a Bache- 
lor (1850) and Dream Life (1851) and George William 
Curtis with Prue and I (1856), these two being, however, 
young men who thought of themselves as essayists rather 
than as novelists and who afterwards took themselves to 
sterner tasks. Professor Ingraham gave up his blood- 
and-thunder, became a. clergyman, and wrote the long 
popular Biblical romance The Prince of the House of 
David (1855). T. S. Arthur in Ten Nights in a Bar 
Room (1855) mingled weak tears with the strong drink 
against which his lurid romance was aimed. And these 
particular successes emerge from a ruck of smaller under- 


BLOOD AND TEARS 115 


takings which swarmed over the literary scene, coloring the 
world with pink and white, scenting it with the dry per- 
fume of pressed flowers, quieting it to whispers and gentle 
sobs, neglecting all the bitter and pungent tastes of life, 
softening every asperity, hiding every thorn and thought. 

Perhaps the best commentary upon this order of liter- 
ature is to point out that whereas the dime novels were 
consumed by boys, and meant for them, sentimental ro- 
mances fell increasingly into the hands of girls — espe- 
cially of girls as molded and approved by American 
Victorianism. And yet it would be idle to declare that 
none of such books rises above the confectionery level. 
For a world that accepted the Victorian maiden as an 
ideal, The Wide Wide World, to take a typical instance, 
was a satisfying account of how she might be shaped out 
of the plastic material which she was supposed to be at 
birth. The heroine reads no novels, but she knows 
Weems’s Washington and Hail Columbia for the sake of 
her patriotism and tons of hymns and Biblical texts for 
her piety. The Christian virtues which were supposed to 
be best for maidens she has steadily dinned into her: 
resignation, long-suffering, loving kindness, all-embracing 
faith and charity. She goes through the most pathetic 
domestic experiences, tempered by all the fires of affliction 
she is old enough to be scorched by. Perhaps such nar- 
ratives are little nearer to reality as regards the moods 
and conduct of the young girls of the time than are the 
dime novels as regards the actual adventures of their 
brothers, but they must have voiced contemporary aspira- 
tions and must have shown in action what was desired by 
the majority of parents and by many girls themselves. 


116 | THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


| The decade was fighting romance with romance, the ro- 
mance of blood with the romance of tears. 

The tears of the women sentimentalists were the daugh- 
ters of the tears of Richardson and the Evangelicals; the 
tears of Ik Marvel and G. W. Curtis were the sons of 
the tears of the gently secular Irving as exhibited in The 
Wife and The Pride of the Village. The Bachelor of the 
Reveries sits dreaming, at his comfortable hearth, the pen- 
sive dreams which the maiden of the time imagined he 
dreamed about the kind of maiden she magined herself to 
be. The images which run through his mind are all 
of snug cottages and soft wives and rosy children and 
trim servants and lawns and gardens. In Dream Life 
he ventures somewhat further with his dreams and dips a 
little deeper into the felicities of bachelor reverie, but 
he is still a Lord of Shalott, sitting before the mirror in 
his safe tower. He tastes affection but no passion, long- 
ing but no ambition, piety but no religion, expectation 
but no experience. He stands at the very antipodes from 
the older dream-world of frontier adventure, and of course 
from the jangling world of the American fifties between 
the Fugitive Slave Law and the guns of Sumter. His 
imagination, like the fictive imagination generally, had 
withdrawn from the cold wind outside and was hugging 
itself warm over sentimental fires. Had there been less 
of the spirit of adolescence in its behavior, it might have 
sounded those richer and more permanent notes which 
come from the similar withdrawal of Isaak Walton and 
George Herbert in the seventeeenth century, and might 
have had a larger claim upon posterity than that which 
lies in its lucid though fragile style and its sweetish taste 


BLOOD AND TEARS 117 


and fragrance and its steadily-fading colors. Prue and I 
has a larger claim. Not only does it have still less than 
the Bachelor’s evangelical orthodoxy but it has a fuller, 
firmer, more. masculine style, with certain grave tones 
lately contributed to the traditionary manner of Irving; 
and it has rather more body. The “I” of the story is 
substantially married to an amiable Prue who mends 
his trousers and understands his vagaries, which are to 
indulge as a spectator in the luxuries of the world he can- 
not afford in any other way. Castles in Spain, he argues, 
are never costly or impossible, for he himself has dozens. 
Thus did Curtis, who had already satirized the flamboyant 
wealth of New York in Potiphar Papers (1853), express 
the disposition of those New Yorkers who were not wealthy 
or fashionable to take refuge in an interwr life as a 
protection against the increasing plutocracy of the city. 
That disposition is universal, and Prue and I, still far 
from forgotten, fails of being a genuine classic only by 
reason of the oversoftness and oversweetness which char- 
acterized the decade from which it sprang as the decade’s 
finest purely sentimental masterpiece. 

The most effective of all these sentimentalists, a writer 
whom, indeed, a profound passion once or twice lifted 
above sentimentalism though its flavor still clung to her, | 
remarkably represents the clerical aspects of the decade, 
for she was daughter, sister, wife, and mother of clergy- 
men. Harriet Beecher (1811-96), born in Connecticut, 
was a most thorough child of New England when she went, 
in 1832, to live in Cincinnati, just across the Ohio River 
from slave soil. Her earliest sketches and tales, collected 
in a volume called The Mayflower in 1843, deal largely 


118 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


with her memories of her old home set down with an exile’s 
affection. In 1850 she returned to New England, for her 
husband, Calvin E. Stowe, had accepted a professorship 
in Bowdoin College. There, deeply stirred by the pass- 
ing of the Fugitive Slave Law, which was challenge and 
alarm and martial signal to all conscientious Northerners, 


she began Uncle Tom’s Cabin; or, Life Among the Lowly, 


which on its appearance in 1852 met with a popular re-. 


ception never before or since accorded to a novel. Its 
sales went to the millions. Over five hundred thousand 
Englishwomen signed an address of thanks to the author ; 
Scotland raised a thousand pounds by a penny offering 
among its poorest people to help free the slaves ; in France 
and Germany the book was everywhere read and dis- 
cussed ; while there were Russians who emancipated their 
serfs out of the pity which the tale aroused. In the United 
States, thanks in part to the stage, which produced a 
version as early as Sepember, 1852, the piece belongs not 
only to literature but to folk-lore. 

That Uncle Tom’s Cabin stands higher in the history 
of reform than in the history of the art of fiction no one 
needs to say again. Dickens, Kingsley, and Mrs. Gaskell 
had already set the novel to humanitarian tunes, and Mrs. 
Stowe did not have to invent a type. She had, however, 
no particular foreign master, not even Scott, all of whose 
historical romances she had been reading just before she 
began Uncle T’om’s Cabin. Instead, she adhered to the 
established native tradition, as old as Charlotte Temple 
and as new as The Wide Wide World, the tradition of 
sentimental, pious, instructive narratives written by women 
chiefly for women and very largely about women. Leave 


BLOOD AND TEARS 119 


out the merely domestic elements of the book — slave fam- 
ilies broken up by sale, ailing and dying children, negro 
. women at the mercy of their masters, white households 
which at the best are slovenly and extravagant by reason 
of irresponsible servants and at the worst are abodes of 
brutality and license — and little remains. Many of the 
pages, too, are purple with melodrama, especially in the 
conceptions which the parson’s daughter and the profes- 
sor’s wife had of St. Clair’s luxurious establishment and 
Legree’s filthy menagerie. To understand why the story 
touched the world so deeply it is necessary to understand 
how tense the struggle over slavery had grown, how 
thickly charged was the moral atmosphere awaiting a fatal 
spark, even though the spark might be naive and artless. 
And yet the mere fact of an audience already prepared 
will not explain the mystery of a work which shook a 
powerful institution and which, for all ifs defects of taste 
and style and construction, still has surprising power. 
There were other anti-slavery novels, but they no longer 
move, lacking the ringing voice, the swiftness, the fulness, 
the frequent humor, the authentic passion of the greater 
book. 

It has often been pointed out that Mrs. Stowe did not — 
mean to be sectional, that she deliberately made her chief 
villain a New Englander, and that she expected to be 
blamed no more by the South than by the North, which 
she thought particularly guilty because it tolerated slav- 
ery without the excuse either of habit or of interest. 
Bitterly attacked by Southerners of all sorts, however, 
she defended herself in A Key to Uncle Tom’s Cabin 
(1853), and then, after a triumphant visit to Europe, 


120 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


essayed another novel to illustrate the evil effects of 
slavery, particularly upon the whites. Dred (1856), in 
England known as Nina Gordon, has had its critical par- 
tizans, but posterity has not sustained them. Grave 
faults of construction, slight knowledge of the scene 
(North Carolina), a less simple and compact story than 
in Uncle Tom’s Cabin, a larger share of disquisition — 
these weigh the book down, and most readers carry away 
only fragmentary memories of the black prophet Dred’s 
thunderous eloquence, of Tom Gordon’s shameless abuse 
of his power as a master, and of Old Tiff’s grotesque 
and beautiful fidelity. Dred appears to have exhausted 
Mrs. Stowe’s anti-slavery material, though she was, of 
course, a partizan and a pamphleteer during the Civil 
War. Thereafter, being now an international figure, she 
let her pen respond somewhat too facilely to the many 
demands made upon it till her death; she wrote numerous 
didactic and religious essays and tales; she was attentive 
to the follies of fashionable New York society, in which 
she had had little experience; Lady Byron chose her to 
publish the scandal by which the poet’s wife defended 
herself against the dead poet. 

In another department of her work, however, Mrs. Stowe 
stood on surer ground, and her ‘novels of New England 
life do well what there was later a whole school of New 
England story-writers to do after her. Weak in struc- 
ture and sentimental she remained. Her heroines wrestle 
with problems of conscience happily alien to all but a 
few New England and Nonconformist British bosoms; 
her bold seducers, like Ellery Davenport in Oldtown Folks 
(1869) and Aaron Burr in The Minister's Wooing 


BLOOD AND TEARS 121 


(1859), are villains to frighten schoolgirls with; she 
writes always as from the pulpit, or at least from the 
parsonage. But where no theological or melodramatic 
idea governs her, she can be direct, accurate, and con- 
vincing. The earlier chapters of The Pearl of Orr's 
Island (1862) must be counted, as Whittier thought, 
among the purest, truest idyls of New England, much as 
doctrinal casuistry clogs the narrative thereafter. It is 
harder — impossible, in fact— to agree with Lowell in 
placing The Minister’s Wooing first among her novels, 
and yet no other imaginative treatment so well sets forth 
the strange, dusky old Puritan world of the later eight- 
eenth century when Newport was the center at once of the 
ruthless divinity of Samuel Hopkins, the minister of the 
novel, and of the African slave trade. Mrs. Stowe wisely 
did not put on the airs of an historical romancer but wrote 
like a contemporary of the earlier Newport with an added 
flavor from her own youthful recollections. This flavor 
was indispensable to her. When her memory of the New 
England she had known in her girlhood and had loved so 
truly that Cotton Mather’s Magnalia had seemed “ won- 
derful stories . . . that made me feel the very ground I 
trod on to be consecrated by some special dealing of God’s 
providence? —- when this memory worked freely and 
humorously upon materials which it was enough merely to 
remember and record, she was at her later best. These 
conditions she most fully realized in Poganuc People 
(1878), crisp, spare (for her), never quite sufficiently 
praised, and in Oldtown Folks, like the other a series of 
sketches rather than a novel, but — perhaps all the more 
because of that — still outstanding, for fidelity and point 


122 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


and canny, pawky humor, among the innumerable stories 
dealing with New England rural life. 

Evangelical sentimentalism was carried on with large 
popular success by the Rev. Josiah Gilbert Holland of 
Massachusetts and the Rev. Edward Payson Roe of New 
_ York until nearly the end of the century, when others took 

_ up the perennial burden. That both Holland and Roe 
were clergymen is’ a sign that the old suspicion of the novel 
was nearly dead, even among those petty sects and sec- 
tarians that so long feared the effects of it. Holland, 
whose first novel had appeared in 1857, was popular moral- 
ist and poet as well as novelist and first editor of Scrib- 
ner’s Magazine (founded 1870). His metrical novels, 
Bitter-Sweet (1858) and Kathrina (1867), sweet, soft, 
warm, and facile, probably caught more readers than 
any of his tales in prose. Roe contented himself with 
prose fiction. Chaplain of a regiment of cavalry and of 
one of the Federal hospitals during the Civil War, he 
later gave up the ministry in the conviction that he could 
reach thousands with his beguiling pen and only hun- 
dreds with his hortatory voice. His simple formula in- 
cluded: first, some topical material, historical event, or 
current issue; second, characters and incidents selected 
directly from his personal observation or from news- 
papers; third, an abundance of “ Nature ” descriptions 
with much praise of the rural virtues; and fourth, plots 
concerned almost invariably, and never too deviously, with 
the simultaneous pursuit of wives, fortunes, and salvation. 
Barriers Burned Away (1872), Opening a Chestnut Burr 
(1874), and Without a Home (1881) are said to have 
been his most widely read books, though none fell un- 


BLOOD AND TEARS 123 


heeded from the presses which labored to bring forth 
enough of them as fast as they were written. 

The greatest, however, and practically the ultimate vic- 
tory over village opposition to the novel was won by 
Ben-Hur (1880), a book of larger pretensions and broader 
scope than any of Roe’s or Holland’s modest narratives, | 
the only American novel, indeed, which can be compared. . 
with Uncle Tom’s Cabin as a folk possession, and one 80 
popular that as recently as 1913 an edition of a million © 
copies was called for and distributed. Its author, General 
Lew Wallace (1827-1905), an Indiana lawyer, a soldier 
in both the Mexican and the Civil Wars, had already 
published The Fair God (1873), an elaborate romance of 
the conquest of Mexico which recalled the earlier concerns 
of Irving and Prescott and Robert Montgomery Bird. 
A chance conversation with the notorious popular skeptic 
Robert G. Ingersoll led Wallace to researches into the 
character and doctrines of Jesus which not only convinced 
him of the essential truth of Christianity but bore fruit 
in a tale, grandiose and ornate, which thousands have read 
who have read no other novel except perhaps Uncle T'om’s 
Cabin and have hardly thought of either as a novel at all, 
and through which still more thousands know the geog- 
raphy, ethnology, and customs of first-century Judea and 
Antioch as through no other source. Without doubt the 
outstanding element in the story is the sufficiently un- 
Christian revenge of Ben-Hur upon his false friend, Mes- 
sala, a revenge which takes the Prince of Jerusalem 
through the galleys and the palestra and which leaves 
Messala, after the thrilling (and to the popular taste, the 
classic) episode of the chariot race, crippled and stripped 


124 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


of his fortune. And yet, following even such pagan deeds, 
Ben-Hur’s discovery that he cannot serve the Messiah 
with the sword does not seem quite an anticlimax, though 
the conclusion, dealing with the Passion, like the intro- 
ductory chapters on the meeting of the Magi, falls below 
the level of the revenge theme in energy and simplicity. 
Compared with other romances of the sort, however, with 
William Ware’s or Ingraham’s, for instance, Ben-Hur 
easily passes them all, by a vitality which probably has a 
touch of genius. It passes, too, Wallace’s third romance, 
written while he was ambassador to Turkey, The Prince of 
India (1893), a long, dull performance with the Wander- 
ing Jew as the principal performer. 


CHAPTER VI 
HOWELLS AND REALISM 


1. New Frontiers anp Op SETTLEMENTS 


Arter the weeping fifties came the Civil War, which 
broke the pattern, though at the time it contributed little 
to the mode of fiction except new materials for the inces- 
sant popular romancers who turned their pens from the 
past to the present without any change as regards sensa- 
tionalism. What the wicked Tory or the fierce Indian 
had been, the crafty Confederate or the cruel Federal — 
it depended upon the section to which the novelist was 
native — now became. The cloudy atmosphere and turgid 
style of the old romance wrapped themselves promptly 
around the new events and assisted in the process which, 
while the wounds of the struggle were still raw, began to 
transform it into an epic memory. ‘That memory, how- 
ever, had to wait a generation before it achieved any con- 
siderable maturity. Meanwhile, another tendency in fic- 
tion dispossessed the sentimentalism which had dispos- 
sessed the school of Cooper. 

After the Revolution there had sounded from many liter- 
ary throats the cry that the new nation ought to have an 
epic, as Greece and Rome and medieval Catholicism and 
English Puritanism had had; and although nothing great 


had been fortncoming the demand persisted until the middle 
125 


126 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


of the next century. Then it had gradually given way be- 
fore the idea that, as Simms pointed out, prose fiction is 
the modern epic form. Criticism came therefore to de- 
mand “The Great American Novel,” not so much to 
enshrine the national past as to reflect the national present 
on a scale commensurate with the new consciousness. 
Although this expectation, too, was disappointed, it un- 
doubtedly had something to do with the rapid rise of the 
fashion of local color, which may be thought of as 
initiated by Bret Harte’s story, The Luck of Roaring 
Camp, in 1868, and which for some thirty years gave a 
dominant type to imaginative writing in the United States. 
The war had stirred the surface of various provincialisms 
which now discovered themselves and one another. In 1869 
Mrs. Stowe in Oldtown Folks celebrated the manners of vil- 
lage New England ; two years later Richard Malcolm John- 
ston did the same for Georgia with his Dukesborough Tales 
and Edward Eggleston for the Indiana frontier with The 
Hoosier School-Master. These pioneers were shortly fol- 
lowed in almost every quarter of the country: by George 
Washington Cable in New Orleans, by Constance Feni- 
more Woolson in the Great Lakes region, by Sarah Orne 
Jewett in New England, by Joel Chandler Harris among 
the negroes, by Mary Noailles Murfree (“ Charles Egbert 
Craddock ”’) in the Tennessee mountains, by Thomas Nel- 
son Page in Virginia; and thereafter by an increasing 
multitude who strove, apparently, to furnish the country 
with an ordnance survey of all its riches of local custom. 
In the North, where the idea of “ The Great American 
Novel ” had been strongest, a good many writers and 
readers gave themselves to the new vogue in a romantic 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 127 


enthusiasm for glorifying the total national picture; in 
the South, the prevailing mood was a passion for display- 
ing the depth and charm of the society which had received 
a mortal blow from the war. Too many in both sections 
regarded local color as a garment which, when worn 
by a story, called for a swagger or an elegance in the 
action which was not natural to it; others regarded the 
garment as a sufficient thing in itself and nearly dis- 
pensed with the flesh and blood of narrative; too many, 
also, where the color was already thin, beat it thinner. 
Nevertheless, the episode contributed something to the 
advance of realism. Scenes could no longer be unlocal- 
ized; costume and dialect had to be reported with 
accuracy; characters and plots must consequently be 
fitted, more or less, to the actual circumstances among 
which they moved. The ordinary methods of local color, 
no less than doctrines of realism imported from Europe or 
than those Americans who espoused the doctrines, cleared 
the way for a critical conflict between romance and real- 
ism. Granted, controversy finally ran, that real persons 
and events should of course be represented, ought they to 
be merely everyday persons and events exhibited to the 
life or ought they instead to be selected with a view of 
making more of heightened moments and superior men 
and women than could be made of commonplace? 

Bret Harte, however, and his followers fought no crit- 
ical battles. Their victory was too easy. When The 
Luck of Roaring Camp was published California was the 
microcosm and focus of America. Every section was rep- 
resented there among the gold-seekers who gave the com- 
munity its picturesqueness. Every section of course read 


128 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Bret Harte with an interest compounded of curiosity 
about the unknown and delight in the familiar. The suc- 
cess of the master naturally suggested imitation, not only 
in regard to the local manners and types of other neigh- 
borhoods but in the very dimensions of the tales which he 
had thus begotten. The generation after 1870 practised 
the short story as no generation had ever done before. 
Brown and Cooper and Simms and Melville and Haw- 
thorne and Mrs. Stowe had all indeed written short stories, 
but the novel had called forth their major faculties. Bret 
Harte, a voluminous author, wrote only one full-length 
novel; Thomas Bailey Aldrich, H. C. Bunner, Cable, Mary 
E. Wilkins Freeman, Hamlin Garland, Miss Jewett, Miss 
Murfree, Page, Frank R. Stockton, though they wrote 
novels, are better known for their shorter stories ; Ambrose 
Bierce and O. Henry wrote no novels at all. There was 
still an economic factor, as during the days of Cooper. 
Until the passage of the international copyright law of 
1891 British novels could be freely pirated in the United 
States and American competition increasingly took the 
form of short stories, further encouraged by the multipli- 
cation of native magazines particularly hospitable to 
brevity. The novel, in consequence, was left standing for 
a few years out of the main channel of imaginative pro- 
duction. Those who chose it were likely to do so because 
of greater seriousness or larger strength than might be 
needed by the story-writers who were tempted to slighter 
and yet more profitable undertakings. 

Dufing the sixties realism hovered in the air without 
definitely alighting. Oliver Wendell Holmes, for instance, 
in Elsie Venner (1861) worked his romantic problem of 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 129 


heredity upon a ground of shrewd realistic observation; 
Bayard Taylor employed a similar composition of ele- 
ments; Louisa M. Alcott in Little ‘Women (1868) and 
Thomas Bailey Aldrich in The Story of a Bad Boy (1870) 
turned away from the watery illusions which in respectable 
circles had furnished the substance for children’s books; at 
the end of the decade the loud laughter of Mark Twain be- 
gan to clear the scene. The distinction, however, of writ- 
ing the first American novel which may be called realistic 
in a modern sense belongs to Colonel John W. De Forest of 
Connecticut, whose Miss Ravenel’s Conversion from Se- 
cession to Loyalty (1867), as William Dean Howells said, 
was “of an advanced realism before realism was known 
by that name.” Not half heroic or partizan enough to 
suit the contemporary feeling about the war, Miss Rav- 
enel’s Conversion missed the vogue of a war book, and 
when the tendency in fiction had caught up with it appar- 
ently it seemed too much a war book to fit the new taste. 
But no other novel of the decade has been less dimmed by 
a half century of realism. Coldly truthful in its descrip- 
tions of battles and camps, crisp and pointed in its dia- 
logue, penetrating, if not over-subtle, in its character 
analysis, sensible in its plot, and in its general temper 
alert and sophisticated, it is still almost as convincing as it 
was once precocious. De Forest wrote numerous other 
novels but none so notable. All of them suffered from the 
rivalry of local color in its romantic phases. 

While these phases originated on the frontier, so often 
influential in American culture, it was also on the frontier, 
though in another section of it, that realism took its 
earliest definite stand. Perhaps some bareness in the life 


130 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


of the Middle West, lacking both the longer memories of 
the Atlantic States and the splendid golden expectations 
of California, discouraged romance there and set going 
that tendency toward naturalism which descends unbroken 
from Edward Eggleston (1837-1902) through E. W. 
Howe and Hamlin Garland, Theodore Dreiser and Edgar 
Lee Masters. At first glance Eggleston looks strange 
enough in this gallery, for like Holland and Roe he was 
a clergyman and nourished upon the same soft food as 
they. As a Methodist on the frontier, though of culti- 
vated Virginia stock, he was even brought up to think of 
novels and all such works of the imagination as evil things. 
But his diversified experience as an itinerant preacher, or 
“ circuit rider,’”? and his reflective and studious habits 
lifted him out of these narrow nooks of opinion. It is 
true that he shared the customary local color motive. 
“It used to be a matter of no little jealousy with us, I 
remember,” he says, speaking of Westerners, “ that the 
manners, customs, thoughts, and feelings of New England 
country people filled so large a place in books, while our 
life, not less interesting, not less romantic, and certainly 
not less filled with humorous and grotesque material, had 
no place in literature. It was as though we were shut out 
of good society.” He had, however, a larger and sounder 
motive. Whereas Mrs. Stowe or her fellows would have 
thought of themselves as writing fiction considerably — 
or even primarily — for the sake of its moral consequences, 
Eggleston, having read Taine’s Art im the Netherlands, 
undertook to portray the life of southern Indiana in the 
faithful, undoctrinaire spirit of a Dutch painter, and 
wrote The Hoosier School-Master (1871). Refusing to 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 131 


follow the violent and yet easy road of the dime-novelists, 
he confined himself to a plain tale of plain men and women, 
choosing for his scene, however, a backwoods district where 
true Hoosiers flourished at their most typical, rather than 
any of the more cultivated Indiana communities. His plot 
exists almost solely for the sake of the manners described, 
the backwoods sentiments and dialects, labors and amuse- 
ments. 

These singularities had already been exposed by Bayard 
Rush Hall in The New Purchase (1855), and there was 
beginning to grow up a modest literature reporting “ that 
curious poor-whitey race which 1s called ‘ tar-heel ’ in the 
northern Carolina, ‘ sand-hiller’ in the southern, ‘ corn- 
cracker’ in Kentucky, ‘ Yahoo’ in Mississippi, and in 
California ‘ Pike’ . . . the Hoosiers of the dark regions 
of Indiana and the Egyptians of southern Illinois ” —a 
race, still not utterly extinct, which later observers think 
of as the “contemporary ancestors” of those modern 
Americans who have outgrown eighteenth-century condi- 
tions as the “ poor whites ” have not. All of Eggleston’s 
essential novels deal with this aspect of America, what- 
ever the scene: Indiana in The Hoosier School-Master, 
The End of the World (1872), and Rory (1878) ; Ohio 
in The Circuit Rider (1874); Tllinois in The Graysons 
(1887); Minnesota in The Mystery of Metropolisville 
(1873). Light is thrown upon his aims in fiction by the 
fact that he subsequently aspired to write a “ History of 
Life in the United States,” which he carried through two 
erudite, humane, and graceful volumes, neither of them, 
so abundant was his learning, able to bring the account 
beyond 1700. The Hoosier novels, simple in plot, clear- 


132 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


cut in characterization, concise and lucid in language, 
unwaveringly accurate in their setting, manners, and lan- 
guage, are indispensable documents, even finished chapters, 
for his unfinished masterpiece. What has given the 
School-Master its primacy in reputation is probably noth- 
ing but its having been first in the field, though something 
may also be allowed for its compactness and freshness of 
substance; Roxy is more interesting, and The Circuit Rider 
quite as informing. The Graysons deserves credit for the 
reserve with which it admits the youthful Lincoln into its 
narrative, uses him at a crucial moment, and then lets him 
withdraw without a hint of his future greatness. The 
morals of Eggleston’s tales, it is true, are over-obvious, 
though they are not strained or hectic. Without any 
rush of narrative, neither has he verbosity or inflation of 
style. Even where, in his fidelity to violent frontier habits, 
his incidents appear melodramatic, the handling is sure 
and direct, for the reason, as he says of The Circutt Rider, 
that whatever is incredible in the story is true. No novel- 
ist, within the range of topics Eggleston touched, is more 
candid, few more believable. With greater range and fire 
he might have been a national figure as well as the earliest 
American realist to leave behind him a settled classic, a 
true folk-book of its neighborhood. 


2. Wirtuum Dran HoweEtts 


From the Middle West came ‘the principal exponent of 
native realism, as an author so prolific during the sixty 
years between his carlicst book and his latest that he 
amounts almost to a library in himself, as editor and critic 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 133 


so influential that he amounts almost to a literary move- 
ment. William Dean Howells was born at Martin’s Ferry, 
Ohio, in 1837, the grandson of a Welsh Quaker and the 
son of a country printer with a passion for books. Like 
his friend Mark Twain, Howells saw little of schools and 
nothing of colleges, and like him he got his systematic 
literary training from enforced duties as compositor and 
journalist. But unlike Mark Twain, he fell as naturally 
into the best classical traditions as Goldsmith or Irving, 
who, with Cervantes, earliest delighted him. Though he 
did not always read, as the mellow pages of A Boy’s Town 
and Years of My Youth attest, his reading marked his 
growth. In My Literary Passions Howells has delicately 
recorded the development of his taste. At first he desired 
to write verse, and devoted months to imitating Pope in 
a youthful fanaticism for regularity and exactness. From 
that worship he turned, at about sixteen, to Shakespeare, 
particularly to the histories ; then to Chaucer, admired for 
his sense of earth in human life; then to Dickens, whose 
magic, Howells even then dimly saw, was rough though 
authentic. Macaulay taught him to like criticism and 
furnished him a temporary model of prose style. Thack- 
eray, Longfellow, Tennyson, followed in due course. 
Hawthorne for a time dominated him, more completely a 
passion with Howells than any other American author 
ever was. Having taught himself some Latin and Greek 
and more French and Spanish, Howells took up German 
and came under the spell of Heine, who persuaded him 
once for all that the dialect and subjects of literature 
should be the dialect and facts of life. 

Poems in the manner of Heine won Howells a place in the 


134 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


pages of the Atlantic, then the very zenith of his aspira- 
tion, and in 1860 he undertook the reverent pilgrimage to 
New England which he afterward recounted with such 
winning grace in Literary Friends and Acquaintance. 
Already enough of a journalist to have been asked to write 
a campaign biography of Lincoln and enough of a poet to 
have published a small volume of poems with his Ohio friend 
John James Piatt, Howells made friends wherever he went 
and was finally confirmed in his literary ambitions. At 
the outbreak of the Civil War he was appointed United 
States consul at Venice; he was married at Paris in 1862 to 
Elinor G. Mead of Vermont; and he spent four ex- 
quisite years of leisure in studying Italian literature, nota- 
bly Dante, as the great authoritative voice of an age, and 
Goldoni, whom Howells called “ the first of the realists.” 
In Italy, though he wrote poetry for the most part, he 
formed the habit of close, sympathetic observation and dis- 
covered the ripe, easy style which made him, beginning 
with Venetian Life (1866) and Italian Journeys (1867), 
one of the happiest of literary travelers. From such 
work he moved, by the avenue of journalism, only gradu- 
ally to fiction. On his return to the United States in 
1865 he first became editorial contributor to The Nation 
for a few months, and then served as assistant editor and 
finally editor of the Atlantic until 1881. 

The literary notices which he wrote for the Atlantic 
during these years of preparation would show, had he 
written nothing else, how strong and steady was his drift 
toward his mature creed. Not alone by deliberate thought 
nor even by the stimulus of polemic was he carried for- 
ward, but rather by a natural process of growth which, 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 135 


more than an artistic matter alone, included his entire 
philosophy. From his childhood he had been intensely 
humane — sensitive and charitable. This humaneness 
now revealed itself as a passionate love for the simple 
truth of human life, and a suspicion, a quiet scorn for those 
romantic dreams and exaggerations by which less con- 
tented lovers of life try to escape it. “ Ah! poor Real 
Life, which I love,’”? he wrote in his first novel, “can I 
make others share the delight I find in thy foolish and in- 
sipid face?” Perhaps Their Wedding Journey (1871) — 
ought hardly to be called a novel, but it is a valuable 
Howells document in the method, so nearly that of his 
travel books, by which he takes a bridal couple on their 
honeymoon over much the same route, in a reverse order, 
that he had traveled between Ohio and Boston in 1860, 
and also in the zeal for actuality which makes him exalt the 
truth, however tedious, over any unreality however agrec- 
able. “ As in literature the true artist will shun the use 
even of real events if they are of an improbable character, 
so the sincere observer of man will not desire to look upon 
his heroic or occasional phases, but will seek him in his 
habitual moods of vacancy and tiresomeness.” Less of 
such argument, though no less of implicit zeal for veracity, 
appears in A Chance Acquaintance (1873), more strictly 
a novel, in which Howells showed that he could not only 
report customs and sketch characters felicitously but also 
organize a plot with felicitous skill. A young Bostonian, 
passionately in love with an intelligent but untraveled 
inland girl, who returns his love, is so little able to over- 
come his ingrained provincial snobbishness that he steadily 
condescends to her until in the end he suddenly sees, as 


136 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


she sees, that he has played an ignoble and vulgar part 
which irrevocably separates them. Nothing could be more 
subtle than the dramatic turn by which their relative posi- 
tions are reversed. The style of A Chance Acquaintance, 
while not more graceful than that of Howell’s earlier 
books, is more assured and crisp. ‘The central idea is 
clearly conceived and the outlines sharp without being 
in any way hard or cynical. The descriptions are ex- 
quisite, the dialogue both natural and revealing, and over 
and through all is a lambent mirth, an undeceived kindli- 
ness of wisdom, which was to remain his essential quality. 

Although, to judge by A Chance Acquaintance, he had 
the art of narrative among his original endowments, he 
had only gradually discovered it in himself. His first 
narrative, No Love Lost (1869), had been in hexameters, 
more or less after the manner of Longfellow and Clough. 
Besides his life of Lincoln, Howells wrote three volumes of 
travels or essays before he attempted a novel at all. A 
Chance Acquaintance made no clean break with his previ- 
ous experiments, for it deals with a group of Americans 
traveling in Canada, three of whom had already appeared 
in Their Wedding Journey. And even the success of his 
novel did not turn him wholly to fiction. He continued 
to write criticism and began to write farces, merely en- 
larging his range as he developed in power. The stream 
of literature had never before poured from an American 
writer with such variety and volume. Besides his stated 
duties for the Atlantic he found time during the seventies 
to edit a group of autobiographies, and later to write 
book introductions by the dozen; he translated modern 
Italian pocts; he scanned the entire literary horizon for 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 137 


new planetaries; he was one of the most widely-read of 
Americans. As his curiosity never grew faint, so never 
did his pen, but kept up its amazing productivity without 
damage to the smooth surface of his style and the bland 
cheerfulness of his disposition. 

His principal limitation — his chariness of passion and 
tragedy — did not entirely reveal itself in the novels which 
he wrote during the Atlantic period. Like Henry James 
in those same years, Howells was at first concerned with 
the contrast between different manners or grades of so- 
phistication — a conflict to which his own sojourn as an 
American in Italy and as a Westerner in Boston had 
made him sensitive. A Foregone Conclusion (1875) and 
A Fearful Responsibility (1881) show American and Ital- 
lan manners in conflict ; Private Theatricals (published in 
the Atlantic m 1875-76 as a serial but never issued in a 
separate volume) and The Lady of the Aroostook (1879) 
set the social habits of the American village in contrast 
with those of the American city ; An Undiscovered Country 
(1880) takes its characters through contact with spirit- 
ualism and Shakerism, making clear Howells’s disagree- 
ment with those forms of otherworldliness; Dr. Breen’s 
Practice (1881) is the story of a woman’s struggle to 
make a place for herself in the medical profession against 
the stupid resistance of a public which has no objection 
except that women are new in that profession. Devoted 
as all these were to the transcription and criticism of the 
lighter manners of the age, they could hardly be censured 
for not going deeper, especially since they did what they 
set out to do with such ease, such dexterity, such revealing 
humor, such shrewd and illuminating comment. It ap- 


138 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


peared, however, as the series lengthened, that Howells 
was not doing full justice either to his material or to 
himself. The conventions of Boston restricted him. He 
who hardly ever portrayed a Bostonian of the respectable 
classes in anything but unlovely attitudes; he who, though 
an outsider, had as editor of the Atlantic inherited the 
power in a declining literary society — he fell too much 
into Boston habits and confined his art too much within 
the respectable reticences of Boston. Not without some 
complaint he nevertheless accepted the fate of writing 
largely for women — Boston women; he came to the de- 
cision that “ the more smiling aspects of life . . . are the 
more American.” A subsequent critical generation has 
accused him of thus vitiating his practice while contending 
for a realistic precept. He dared for the sake of truth- 
fulness to represent human beings in their “habitual 
moods of vacancy and tiresomeness” but was not 
willing to represent them in the hardly less habitual 
moods which make mankind so often illicit or savage or 
sordid. As a matter of fact he never consciously com- 
promised, for he held that the lawless moods of men 
belong to those “ heroic or occasional phases ” which he 
left to the romancers. His novels in effect pay an extraor- 
dinary compliment to civilization on its success with man- 
kind. Sterner critics call his compliment flattery and his 
shrinking from ugliness and vice a womanish defect. It 
has not generally been remarked how closely he stood 
with Emerson in the orthodox New England optimism 
which governed opinion in Boston at the end of its classic 
period — closing Boston eyes to evil and disease and point- 
ing to theosophical anodynes. 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 139 


Having resigned his Atlantic editorship at forty-four, 
Howells in the next half-dozen years brought his Boston 
period to its summit and conclusion. Besides certain 
minor novels —— 4 Woman’s Reason (1883), The Mtnis- 
ter’s Charge (1887) —he wrote A Modern Instance 
(1882), which he thought his strongest, The Rise of Silas 
Lapham (1884), which the public has generally found the 
best of his novels, and Indian Summer (1885), which he 
himself thought his best. Without the bitter tincture of 
pessimism which Howells lacked, realism can hardly go 
further than in these three. The superiority of A Modern 
Instance to all that had come before lies less in its firmer 
grasp of its materials, for Howells from the first was sure 
of grasp, than in its larger control of larger materials. 
It has a richer timbre, a deeper tone. Marcia Gaylord, 
the most passionate of all his heroines, is of all of them 
the most clearly yet lovingly conceived and elaborated. 
Her unaccountable impulses and endurances convey an 
impression that is completely individual. Types do not 
behave so. In the career of her husband, Bartley Hubbard, 
the journalist, Howells adroitly traces a metamorphosis 
from selfishness and vanity, fed in this case by Marcia’s 
unreasoning devotion, into contemptible viciousness which 
has not even a dash of boldness to redeem it. Like the 
impulses of Marcia, the process hides itself perhaps rather 
too closely from the observer, who as in the case of living 
persons may now and then be surprised to find that the 
decay has gone so fast and far with so few outward signs. 
Writing the winter scenes of the earlier chapters Howells 
had the advantage of those many pens which in the past 
decade had wrought at the local color of New England; 


140 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


he achieved something more faithful and vivid than any- 
thing yet achieved in that direction. Although done with 
an eye intensely on the fact, these scenes have still the 
larger bearings of a criticism of American village life in 
general. The subsequent adventures of the Hubbards in 
Boston, acutely local in setting and incident, are still as 
universal in application as any ever laid in that metropolis. 
Squire Gaylord’s arraignment of his son-in-law in an 
Indiana court room vibrates with a dramatic passion sel- 
dom met with in Howells, a passion made the more em- 
phatic by the sickening descent from a tragic occasion 
which follows immediately afterward in Bartley’s virtual 
offer of his former wife to his former friend. Following 
such episodes it is, however, difficult to forgive Howells his 
apparent sympathy with Halleck in the discovery that a 
New England conscience will now forever hold him from 
Marcia because he had loved her before she was free. 
The attentive imagination simply refuses to be convinced ; 
or else it finds itself disgusted at an ending no better than 
sentimental to a narrative heretofore full of wisdom ma- 
turely wielding the most admirable and enlightening de- 
tails. 

The theme of Silas Lapham is one very dear in a 
republic, that of the rising fortunes of a man who has no 
aid but virtue and capacity. Lapham, a country-bred, 
self-made Vermonter, appears when he has already achieved 
wealth and finds himself being drawn, involuntarily enough, 
into the more difficult task of adjusting himself and his 
family to the manners of fastidious Boston. A writer 
primarily satirical might have been contented to make 
game of the situation. Howells, keenly as he sets forth 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 141 


the conflict of standards, goes beyond satire to a depth 
of meaning which comes only from a profound understand- 
ing of the part which artificial distinctions play in human 
life and a mellow pity that such little things can have such 
large consequences of pain and error. The conflict, how- 
ever, while constantly pervasive in the book, does not 
usurp the action. The Lapham family has serious con- 
cerns that might arise in any social stratum. Most in- 
tense and dramatic of these is the fact that the suitor 
of one daughter is believed by the whole family to be in 
love with the other until the very moment of his declara- 
tion. The distress into which they are thrown is pre- 
sented with a degree of comprehension rare in any novel, 
and here matched with a common sense which rises to some- 
thing half-inspired in Lapham’s perception — reduced to 
words, however, by a friendly clergyman — that in such 
a case superfluous self-sacrifice would be morbid, and that, 
since none is guilty, one had better suffer than three. A 
certain rightness and soundness of feeling, indeed, mark 
the entire narrative. As it proceeds, as Lapham falls 
into heavy business vicissitudes and finally to comparative 
poverty again, and yet all the time rises in spiritual worth, 
the record steadily grows in that dignity and significance 
which, according to Howells’s creed, is founded only upon 
the unadorned and unexaggerated truth. 

As, with the increase of the American population and 
the diminution of opportunity for the individual, the self- 
made man becomes a less outstanding figure than he was 
in the generation to which Silas Lapham belonged, Lap- 
ham will still continue to seem a standard cxample of his 
type. But his type is of New England and not of the 


142 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


United States at large. In other sections — at least in 
those not dominated by New England habits transplanted 
—the adventures of the self-made have nearly always 
been more stirring, motivated by less lawful ambitions, 
colored by ranker senses. Lapham rises through the easy 
and yet compact levels of a homogeneous provincial so- 
ciety as law-abiding as any in the world. The clang of 
the larger America, the sense of the manipulation of vast 
forces which give the story of the self-made American its 
thrilling interest, do not, appear in this quiet story. 
Moreover, Howells presents Lapham, for the most part, in 
his milder hours, with his wife and daughters in the plain- 
est of households, barely hinting at the tough struggles 
with the world to which of course Lapham gave most of 
his time. Lapham represents the American magnate only 
as subdued to New England conditions and then further 
subdued to the domestic hearth. Here, Howells might 
probably have contended, the true and essential Lapham 
had his existence, at this central station of human affairs. 
One misses, nevertheless, the thrust and clutch and strain 
and sweat of actuality. The more wonder then that, lack- 
ing these, the book still seems so solid an image of the truth. 
Its flawless structure assists it in making the impression ; 
so does the unfailing lucidity and unobtrusiveness of the 
narrative and the unimprovable conversations. And yet 
all this art to conceal art must have been unavailing had 
not the final substance, thus exhibited, been shaped out 
of reality itself. To say, as one may say even of this 
admirable story, that it does not visit the uttermost deeps 
of human character, is not to say that it plays over 
the surface. Howells’s imagination has seen through and 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 143 


through all the persons in The Rise of Silas Lapham; it 
has thought round and round every situation. There are 
three dimensions to the matter; it is a sturdy, tangible, 
memorable block of life. To so much Howells added what 
his merely professional skill could not have added: the 
warm, friendly atmosphere which emanated from his own 
benign personality. 

That in 1890 he thought Indian Summer his best novel 
shows how well inclined he was toward the gayer side of 
his character, for in this exquisite interlude, lightly, 
sweetly, pungently narrating the loves of a man of forty, 
Howells reached his highest pitch of comedy. His touch 
on each page and sentence is as graceful as his spirit is 
unfailing from first to last. The scene he laid in Italy; 
its characters he chose from among those temporarily 
and voluntarily exiled Americans who in the seventies and 
eighties of the last century so tempted novelists with any 
partiality for satire or contrast; the moral hints, as the 
story unmistakably tells, that for a middle-aged lover 
there is much more joy and comfort in a woman his own 
age than in the most entrancing young girl whatever. 
Out of a dozen possible keys in which the theme might have 
been set, Howells chose — or seems to have chosen — the 
one best suited to the innocent branch of polite comedy. 
The easiest and yet wisest badinage flickers continually 
over the surface of a naturally moving stream of narrative 
so pellucid that nothing in it, event or motive or insinua- 
tion, is ever hidden from the at-all-experienced eye. The 
happy taste which prompted him to name it for the most 
distinctive and most charming of American seasons no 
less happily instructed him how to clothe it in a golden, 


144 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


impalpable, enriching haze borrowed apparently from the 
season. In this autumnal atmosphere the energy of youth 
in the spring of its love looks awkward; the winter of wis- 
dom is as near as the summer of desire. Only a sage 
could have carried the story through without falling now 
and then into the temptation of being too impassioned ; 
only a poet could have done it without now and then be- 
coming cynical and sounding elderly. 

In 1882 Howells had gone to England for a visit during 
which he brought out a series of his works there and with 
them and himself charmed literary London. He seriously 
questioned whether he should not settle in Italy for the 
remainder of his life, but his passion for America proved 
too strong, and he came back, first to Boston, to a position 
of almost unparalleled influence in American letters. In 
his earliest Atlantic days he had given Henry James 
needed encouragement at the outset of the younger man’s 
great career. Then and since Howells had been for Mark 
Twain the important critical element drawing that tumult- 
uous humorist from burlesque and uproar to the finer art 
of fiction. By the middle eighties all Boston that read 
at all was fighting for or against Howells’s principles. 
Promising writers, such as Hamlin Garland and Brand 
Whitlock, made discipular pilgrimages to him. The de- 
cade discovered a vitality and displayed a craftsmanship 
in novels and tales which the United States had never seen 
before. Of all this Howells was equally exemplar and 
critic. If his novels filled the air, so did his doctrines. 
The monthly articles which he wrote for “ The Editor’s 
Study ” in Harper’s Magazine between 1886 and 1891, 
though many of them were too timely to have survived, 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 145 


adumbrate the labors he performed on behalf of realism. 
Chiefly discussions of current books, they did not concern 
themselves merely with aspects of fiction, but also with 
poetry, history, and biography, applying to them all a 
calmly rational temper, measuring them by generous but 
none the less firm canons of truthfulness. What he warred 
upon particularly was the adulteration of honest liter- 
ature with false alloys like sentimentalism, pseudo-heroic 
attitudes, gaudy ornament, theatrical endings ; he enjoyed 
and praised works of pure fancy which do not pretend to 
paint the fact. Hardly one of the local ‘color writers 
but passed under his critical or editorial hand, and few 
of them but in some degree were touched by his creed. 
The short story as well as the novel responded to his in- 
fluence ; even the theater, ancient home of the tinsel which 
he hated, had for a time its James A. Herne trying to 
write plays which should be as real as Howells’s stories. 
Moreover, though as a rule unfriendly to French realists 
because of his dislike of their fierce candor, Howells was 
constantly introducing and commending the realists of 
Spain and Italy and Russia. 

Toward the end of the Boston period he had an eager 
partiality for Turgenev, his art, his poetry, his pity, his 
wisdom. But about 1886 a change came over Howells 
through his reading of Tolstoy, who became his final and 
greatest literary passion. ‘“ He has been to me that final 
consciousness, which he speaks of so wisely in his essay on 
‘Life.’ I came in it to the knowledge of myself in ways 
I had not dreamt of before, and began at last to discern 
my relations to the race.” “Tolstoy gave me heart to 
hope that the world may yet be made over in the image of 


146 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 
Him who died for it, when all Cesar’s things shall be finally 


rendered to Cesar, and men shall come into their own, 
into the right to labor and the right to enjoy the fruits 
of their labor, each one master of himself and servant to 
every other. He taught me to see life not as a chase of 
a forever impossible personal happiness, but as a field for 
endeavor towards the happiness of the whole human 
family.” Sincere as was his conversion, however, Howells - 
did not turn preacher as Tolstoy had done, and as his 
radical admirers expected. At fifty he could hardly un- 
dergo any more considerable change than that his sym- 
pathies should be enlarged and his utterance even further 
mellowed by the tides of benevolence and brotherhood which 
all his life had been rising within him and now knew them- 
selves. Tolstoy’s way was impossible to Howells’s will 
because Howells was a saint not of the other world but of 
this, a walker of amiable, companionable paths, too 
friendly for the solitude of the natural martyr, too kindly 
for the battles of the natural warrior. Others might grow 
angry for the sake of increasing peace, but Howells could 
not. Others for the sake of humanity might exchange 
an art for a mission, but Howells could not. The many 
books he subsequently wrote show him no less sunny and 
affectionate than before, though he had now a new eye 
for social injustices. In his Utopian romances, A T'ravel- 
er from Altruria (1894) and Through the Eye of the 
Needle (1907), without compromise with the economic sys- 
tem under which he had been bred, he threw it inconti- 
nently over— though how urbanely and serenely !— in 
favor of the system of his imaginary Altruria, where all 
work is honorable and servants are unknown, where capital 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 147 


and interest are only memories, where equality is com- 
plete, and men and women, in the midst of beauty, lead 
lives that are just, temperate, and kind. Besides these 
exotic matters Howells touched closer ones. No man 
spoke out more firmly or ringingly on behalf of the Chi- 
cago “anarchists” or against the annexation of the 
Philippines and the attendant saturnalia of imperialism. 
Had he been by disposition a fighting man he might have 
become a national voice. Not being that, he led his art 
if not his nation. 

Tolstoy’s novels seemed to Howells as excellent as his 
doctrine. “To my thinking they transcend in truth, 
which is the highest beauty, all other works of fiction that 
have been written. . . . He has not only Tourguenief’s 
transparency of style, unclouded by any mist of the per- 
sonality which we mistakenly value in style, and which 
ought no more to be there than the artist’s personality 
should be in a portrait ; but he has a method which not only 
seems without artifice, but is so.”?> Howells must have un- 
derstood that the artlessness of Tolstoy is only apparent, 
must have learned, then or later, how painfully Tolstoy 
toiled at his art; still it was hardly more than critical 
hyperbole to say that, compared to other novelists, Tol- 
stoy was a mirror of nature and had no art but nature’s 
own of growth. Howells himself having been in all his 
novels singularly unartificial, those written after he had 
read Tolstoy could exhibit no new methods. He merely 
broadened his field and deepened his inquiries. 

A Hazard of New Fortunes (1889), in which Basil and 
Isabel March, the bridal couple of Their Wedding 
Journey, give up Boston, as Howells himself had just 


148 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


done, for a future in New York, is not content merely to 
point out the unfamiliar fashions of life which they 
meet but is full of conscience regarding the evils of the 
modern social order. Or rather, Howells had turned 
from the clash of those lighter manners which belong to 
comedy and had set himself to discuss the profounder 
manners of the race which belong to morals and religion. 
He wrote at a moment of hope, at the end of a decade 
which had disturbed the heavy stagnation following the 
Civil War: ‘ We had passed,” he afterwards said, 
‘through a period of strong emotioning in the direction 
of the humaner economics, if I may phrase it so; the rich 
seemed not so much to despise the poor, the poor did not 
so hopelessly repine. The solution of the riddle of the 
painful earth through the dreams of Henry George, 
through the dreams of Edward Bellamy, through the 
dreams of all the generous visionaries of the past, seemed 
not impossibly far off.” In this mood Howells’s theme 
compelled him so much that the story moved forward al- 
most without his conscious agency, “ though,” he care- 
fully insists, “ I should not like to intimate anything mys- 
tical in the fact.” A Hazard of New Fortumes, which 
encountered greater immediate favor than any of his pre- 
vious novels, outdoes them all, and the subsequent ones 
too, in its conduct of different groups of characters, in 
the perfect naturalness with which now one and now 
another rises to the surface of the narrative and then re- 
treats at the due moment without a trace of management. 
New Englanders, Southerners, Westerners, all appear in 
their true native colors, as do various ranks of society, 
and many professions, in their proper dress and gesture. 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 149 


The episode of the street-car strike, brought in near the 
end, dramatizes the struggle which has heretofore been in 
the novel rather a shadow than a fact; but Howells, artist 
first then partizan, employs it almost wholly as a sort of 
focal point to which the attention of all his characters is 
drawn, with the result that, having already revealed them- 
selves generally, they are more particularly revealed in 
their varying degrees of sympathy for the great injustice 
out of which class war arises. 

To call the Huzard the best novel of New York, as it 
has been called, is stall to admit that the whole of that vast 
picture has yet not been drawn. Howells wrote from the 
point of view of the older America which in 1889 was 
mystified at labor unrest and horrified at a strike; the 
America in which the country had been one with the 
towns, and the villages had ruled them both; the America 
which knew the thunder and smoke of the industrial nation 
less as realities in themselves than as new problems crowd- 
ing in upon the older order of Americans. So New York 
was for Howells, in spite of his fine sympathies, a com- 
munity of established Americans moving somewhat gin- 
gerly among its immigrants, and not a new Rome or a new 
Constantinople for the Western hemisphere. The book 
partially suggests a volume of travels in a city where the 
traveler lives with the ruling class, without digging very 
deeply into the commoner soil of life, except as he en- 
counters some chance individual who belongs with the un- 
privileged or who out of conscience consorts with them in 
the hope of lightening their burdens. Howells’s sym- 
pathies were as wide as the metropolis, but his knowledge 
was restricted. For this reason his narrative seems quiet 


150 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


by comparison with the jagged, multicolored, whirling, 
rowdy, gorgeous reality which even then lay under his eyes 
and which since that day has grown in a hundred respects 
out of its former likeness. ‘This deficiency of depth and 
texture in the background, however, of qualities which 
Howells was too newly come to New York to have been 
able to capture, does not deprive the story of a very real 
substance, solidly conceived, felicitously portrayed, and 
. warmed with a quick wit and an affectionate understand- 
ing. 

The thirty years yet remaining of Howells’s life 
brought no marked new development. In 1891 he summed 
up his critical position in Criticism and Fiction, declar- 
ing “ I am in hopes that the communistic era in taste fore- 
shadowed by Burke is approaching, and that it will occur 
within the lives of men now overawed by the foolish old 
superstition that literature and art are anything but the 
expression of life, and are to be judged by any other test 
than that of their fidelity to it”; and at the same time 
declaring, as if to set limits to the naturalism thus implied, 
that “ [if] a novel flatters the passions, and exalts them 
above the principles, it is poisonous.” ‘The next year 
Howells succeeded George William Curtis in “ The Easy 
Chair”? of Harper’s and wrote thenceforth monthly 
articles which, less exclusively literary than those in “ The 
Editor’s Study,” carried on the same tradition. There 
and elsewhere his light, practised pen kept pace with Amer- 
ican literary production, commenting on new authors and 
tendencies with an unwearicd gencrosity which still never 
violated his central principles. Reminiscences and travels 
assumed a larger part in his work. After A Boy’s Town 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 151 


(1890) and My Literary Passions (1895) came Literary 
Friends and Acquaintance (1900), classic account of the 
silver age of Boston and Cambridge which Howells had 
lived through. He revisited Europe and left records in 
various books which occasionally drew his matter out thin 
but in which he was never for a page dull or untruthful 
or sour. My Mark Twain (1910) 1s incomparably the 
tenderest of all the interpretations of Howells’s great 
friend. Years of My Youth (1916), written when its 
author was nearly eighty, is the work of a master whom 
age had made wise and kept strong. In 1909 he was 
chosen president of the American Academy, and six years 
later he received the National Institute’s gold medal for 
** distinguished work im fiction.” He died in 1920. 

His later novels make up so long a list that some of them 
must go unnoted, though all, if not invariably profound, 
are invariably kind, gay, and mellow. In them his investi- 
gation moves over a wide area which includes the somber 
study of a crime in The Quality of Mercy (1892) ; the keen 
statement of problems in 4n Imperative Duty (1892) and 
The Son of Royal Langbrith (1904) ; happier topics as in 
Miss Bellard’s Inspiration (1905) ; the sound realism of 
The Landlord at Lion’s Head (1897) and The Kentons — 
(1902); and, it should be remarked, subtle explorations 
of what is or what seems to be the supersensual world in 
The Shadow of a Dream (1890), the two volumes of short 
stories Questionable Shapes (1903) and Between the Dark 
and the Daylight (1907), and The Leatherwood God 
(1916). This last, the study of a frontier impostor who 
proclaims ‘himself a god, as an actual person had onoe 
done in early Ohio, best hints at Howells’s views of the 


152 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


relation between the real world which he had so long ex- 
plored and those vast spaces which appear to be beyond 
it for the futile tempting of religionists and romanticists. 
The maturest Howells, like the Mark Twain whose Mys- 
tertous Stranger appeared in the same year as The 
Leatherwood God, speculated much upon such matters, but 
without losing himself in them. In The Kentons Howells 
most perfectly exemplifies his later reading of the actual 
world. ‘ You have done nothing more true and com- 
plete,” wrote Henry James about the book, “ more thor- 
oughly homogeneous and hanging-together, without the 
faintest ghost of a false note or a weak touch.” Return- 
ing to the Middle West of his youth Howells took a family | 
thence to New York and then to Holland, with all the 
freshness and point of his first period exposing the con- 
trasts between thcir Ohio manners and those of the other 
regions which they visit. More than ever he 1s sage first 
then satirist : “ remember,” says Judge Kenton in a speech 
which sounds nonc the less like him for being so much 
like Howells, “ that wherever life is simplest and purest and 
kindest, that is the highest civilization.” Without contend- 
ing on behalf either of his Ohioans, with their little angu- 
larities and large virtues, or of his experienced worldlings, 
with no angularities at all and their virtues more consider- 
ably mixed with manners, Howells interprets both with 
the lucid intelligence of an angel smiling at a beloved com- 
munity of men. He sets forth an acute conflict of emo- 
tions with regard to Ellen Kenton and her love affairs but 
never once raises his voice above the natural human dia- 
lect ; he flawlessly hits off that absurd adolescent, Boyne 
Kenton, who has read too many international romances, 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 153 


but he never once condescends to the boy or winks over 
his head at the beholders. The relations of Kenton and 
his wife and of both of them to their children are pre- 
sented, though so easily, with the nicest shades of distinc- 
tion, as if their creator not only seemed to employ no 
artifices but did employ none. Only the masters of nar- 
rative can tell a story which, like this, is clear yet full, 
continuous yet unhurried, balanced yet as natural as the 
flow of water or the movement of clouds across a blue 
sky. If not a great novel The Kentons is still a perfect 
one. 

It is to the difficult distinction between perfection and 
greatness that critical discussions of Howells always finally 
arrive. With few authors as eminent does it secm so hard 
to find the master conveniently distilled in a few master- 
pieces ready for transportation to posterity. His hand, 
like Andrea del Sarto’s, worked flawlessly from first to 
last, but never quite supremely. A Chance Acquaintance, 
A Modern Instance, The Rise of Silas Lapham, Indian 
Summer, A Hazard of New Fortunes, The Kentons, all 
admirable, do not stand more than measurably forth from 
the remainder of his novels. He must be studied rather 
in his total work, as the intimate historian of his age, 
who produced the most extended and accurate transcript 
of American life yet made by one man. Geographically, 
indeed, he was limited in the main to Ohio, New England, 
and New York, and to those parts of Europe and America 
in which Ohioans, New Englanders, and New Yorkers 
spend their vacations. He was conditioned, too, by his 
historical position as editor and arbiter so long in Boston 
at the declining end of an epoch, when taste ran rather 


154 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


to discipline than to variety or vividness, rather to 
decorum than to candor, rather to learning than to ex- 
perience, rather to charm than to passion. Howells, in- 
deed, instead of resting on the palms and laurels he 
already had, rose to meet the new world, contending as 
well as he could in his natural silver tone with the alter- 
nating tones of gold and iron which have lately dimmed 
the voice of Boston. But that in his creed and his tem- 
perament which had made him amenable to Boston lay 
deeper than its influences. On every ground he preferred 
to walk close to the commonplace, believing that the true 
bulk of life is always to be found there. “ It will not do,” 
he wrote, speaking in Their Silver Wedding Journey of 
the ducal palace at Weimar, “ to lift either houses or men 
far out of the average; they become spectacles, cere- 
monies; they cease to have charm, to have character, 
which belong to the levels of life, where alone there are 
ease and comfort, and human nature may be itself, with all 
the little delightful differences [which are] repressed in 
those who represent and typify.”” Does not Howells here 
reveal himself as the most democratic of novelists? Feni- 
more Cooper and Hawthorne, both democrats, could still 
never leave off complaining that democracy lacks the ele- 
ments of saliency and color upon which they thought the 
prosperity of the novelist depends. What his predeces- 
sors shrank from, Howells ardently embraccd, thoroughly 
satisfied to portray the plain universe which lay before 
him, in a style which, as he said of that of Jane Austen, 
whom. he preferred to all the novelists in English, is “ the 
elect speech of life expressing itself without pretending to 


HOWELLS AND REALISM 155 


emotions not felt, but finding human nature sufficient for 
its highest effects.” 

The question is whether Howells’s practice matched the 
serene consistency of his creed; and the truth is that he 
shrank from some of its consequences. His gentle nature 
would not permit him to follow men out of the cheerful 
sun into those darknesses of the mind and the soul which 
also belong to the commonplace. He clung to the day 
as Hawthorne to the night. Having planned just after 
A Modern Instance to writc a novel which should take some 
of its characters to Hong-Kong, he abandoned it because 
in “reading up” for his Chinese chapters he had come 
across details of the night side of the city which horrified 
and disturbed him into unwillingness to touch the material 
again. Like Emerson, he closed his eyes to evil and its 
innumerable traces. His America, transcribed so fully as 
it is, is still an America of the smooth surfaces. Great 
peaks of drama do not rise upon it; passion does not 
burrow into it nor adventure run over it with exciting 
speed. Not quite as a Puritan or a pedant, Howells none 
the less employed a selective, a respectable, an official 
realism. He chose his subjects as a sage chooses his con- 
versation, decently. To state these limitations is, how- 
ever, to accuse Howells of nothing worse than the uncom- 
mon sin of too much gentleness. They ask him to stand 
on the mountain of fame a little further off fram Ibsen and 
a little nearer Irving; nearer Thackeray than Tolstoy; 
nearer Daudet than Balzac. They remind his austerer 
critics that Goldsmith has outlasted a dozen austerer 
novelists. They challenge the historian to assert that 


156 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


work artistically flawless, which lacks malice or intensity, 
cannot be kept alive by ease and grace and charm, by 
kind wisdom and thoughtful mirth. Perhaps just his 
excess of gentleness, like his perfection of art, was needed 
to civilize American fiction by bringing it home from the 
frontier to the daily life of the settlements. 


CHAPTER VII 
MARK TWAIN 


Or the major American novelists Mark Twain derived 
least from any literary, or at any rate from any bookish, 
tradition. Hawthorne had the example of Irving, and 
Cooper had that of Scott, when they began to write; 
Howells and Henry James instinctively fell into step with 
the classics. Mark Twain came up into literature from 
the popular ranks, trained in the school of newspaper 
fun-making and humorous lecturing, only gradually in- 
structed in the more orthodox arts of the literary profes- 
sion. He seems to most eyes, however, less indebted to 
predecessors than he actually was, for the reason that his 
provenience has faded out with the passage of time and 
the increase of his particular fame. Yet he had predeces- 
sors and a provenience. As a printer he learned the me- 
chanical technique of his trade of letters; as a jocose 
writer for the newspapers of the Middle West and the 
Far West at a period when a well established mode of 
burlesque and caricature and dialect prevailed there, he 
adapted himself to a definite convention; as a raconteur 
he not only tried his methods on the most diverse auditors 
but consciously studied those of Artemus Ward, then the 
American master of the craft; Bret Harte, according to 
Mark Twain, “ trimmed and trained and schooled me”; 
and thereafter, when the “ Wild Humorist of the Pacific 

157 


158 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Slope,” as it did not at first seem violent to call him, came 
into contact with professed men of letters, especially 
Howells, he had already a mastership of his own, though 
in a second rank. 

To be a “ humorist ” in the United States of the sixties 
and seventies was to belong to an understood and accepted 
class. It meant, as Orpheus C. Kerr and John Phenix 
and Josh Billings and Petroleum V. Nasby and Artemus 
Ward had recently and typically been showing, to make 
fun as fantastically as one liked but never to rise to 
beauty; to be intensely shrewd but never profound; to 
touch pathos at intervals but never tragedy. The 
humorist assumed a name not his own, as Mark Twain 
did, and also generally a character — that of some rustic 
sage or adventurous eccentric who discussed the topics of 
the moment keenly and drolly. Under his assumed char- 
acter, of which he ordinarily made fun, he claimed a wide 
license of speech, which did not, however, extend to in- 
decency or to any very serious satire. His fun was the 
ebullience of a strenuous society, the laughter of escape 
from difficult conditions. It was rooted fast in that op- 
timism which Americans have had the habit of considering 
a moral obligation. It loved to ridicule those things 
which to the general public seemed obstacles to the vic- 
torious progress of an average democracy; it laughed 
about equally at idlers and idealists, at fools and poets, at 
unsuccessful sinners and unsuccessful saints. It could 
take this attitude toward minorities because it was so con- 
fident of having the great American majority at its back, 
hearty, kindly, fair-intentioned, but self-satisfied and un- 
speculative. In time Mark Twain partly outgrew this 


MARK TWAIN 159 


type of fun — or rather, had frequent intervals of a differ- 
ent type and also of a fierce seriousness — but the origins 
of his art lic there. So do the origins of his ideas lie 
among the populace, much as he eventually outgrew of 
the evangelical orthodoxy and national complacency and 
personal hopefulness with which he had first been bur- 
dened. The secret alike of his powers and of his limita- 
tions must be looked for in the dual, the never quite com- 
pleted, nature which allowed him on one side to touch, say, 
Petroleum V. Nasby and on the other William Dean 
Howells. 

Samuel Langhorne Clemens was born in 1835 at Flor- 
ida, Missouri, a cluster of houses which the boy’s father, 
in something the fashion of Judge Hawkins in The Gilded 
Age, confidently expected to become a metropolis. As 
it did not, the family soon removed to Hannibal, in the 
same state, which was on the Mississippi and so daily 
witnessed if not shared the river’s prosperity. There 
Clemens passed a boyhood and youth nearly as irrespons- 
ible as Huckleberry Finn’s and nearly as imaginative and 
mischievous as Tom Sawyer’s. Neither studious by 
nature nor offered even tolerable opportunities for study, 
he Ieft school at twelve upon the death of his father, and 
was apprenticed to a printer in the town. For three 
years with him and later for three years more with his 
own elder brother, who had bought a newspaper, Clemens 
worked in this department of literature, beginning as well 
to write jokes and whimsical skits in the manner approved 
up and down the river. Then he carried his trade into a 
larger world, seeing the sights as a skilled workman could 
then see them in New York, Philadelphia, Washington, 


160 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Keokuk, and Cincinnati, and finally in 1857 planning, 
as his visionary father before him might have done, to go to 
Brazil to pick up a fortune. Instead, however, a chance 
conversation with a pilot on the Mississippi decided him 
to enter the pilot’s profession, to which practically every 
boy in the river towns then aspired. 

If Mark Twain’s years as a printer represent a more or 
less academic aspect of his training, his four years as a 
pilot are its technical aspect. His Life on the Mississippi 
makes clear how exacting his new profession was; how 
much erudition it called for to know twelve hundred miles 
of shifting current by day or night, with absolute cer- 
tainty; how much responsibility for life and property 
lay in his hands. His powerful mind absorbed the neces- 
sary knowledge easily. His spirit delighted in the author- 
ity and prominence which his position gave. He had now 
a point of vantage from which he could look down on the 
whole pageant of the Mississippi. And that was a spec- 
tacle such as modern life has afforded at only a few times 
and in a few places. An enormous commerce flowed up 
and down the river, attended by every hue and condition 
of mankind. The United States filed by under the pilot’s 
observation: merchants about their business, planters on 
their occasional visits to the towns, laborers looking for 
work, immigrants on the way to new homes, curiosity- 
seekers and pleasure-hunters, slaves and slave-traders, 
stowaways and visiting noblemen and sportsmen. So 
much traffic called for a vast machinery to move it and 
entertain it and prey upon it: steamboats which competi- 
tion forced to be swift and beautiful; skilled navigators, 
with the pilots chief among them; crews for the boats and 


MARK TWAIN 161 


roustabouts for the landing-stages ; shipping agents, shore 
hotels, musicians, gamblers, and harpies of another sex. 
All these Mark Twain had an opportunity to observe at 
an age when most future authors are still at their books. 
He absorbed them as thoroughly as the lore of his craft. 
“In that brief, sharp schooling,” he later wrote, “I got 
personally and familiarly acquainted with all the different 
types of human nature that are to be found in fiction, 
biography, or history.” 

The Civil War, however, ended this vivid chapter, and 
the pilot for whom there was now no longer a vocation, 
after a brief period of comically bloodless service in the 
Confederate army, became a wanderer again, starting off 
by stage-coach across the plains with his brother, lately 
appointed secretary of the Territory of Nevada. Then 
followed nine years of travel and adventure by far the 
most varied which had ever gone into the making of an 
American novelist. There was too much of the sanguinary 
in his Clemens blood for Mark Twain to resist the tempta- 
tions to huge and easy wealth which the Far West offered ; 
he tried for gold and silver, bought in mining stock, took 
up timber claims. And there seemed to be little either in 
himself or im the lax society of the West capable of direct- 
ing him to the literary career for which his powers were 
being assembled. A writer, however, he did become, pick- 
ing up local items for the Virginia City Enterprise and 
reporting the sessions of the legislature at Carson City. 
Here in 1863 he first used ‘the name “ Mark Twain,” a 
leadsman’s term which he recalled from the Mississippi 
and which had, indeed, already been used by another writ- 
ing pilot. The same year Mark Twain met Artemus 


162 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Ward, then lecturing in Virginia City, and was pleased 
with his praise. The year following, having been forced 
to leave Nevada by participation in a farcical duel, Mark 
Twain took himself to San Francisco, where he wrote for 
various papers and came under the tutelage of Bret Harte. 
While there he wrote the Jumping Frog story which Arte- 
mus Ward wanted to use in a volume of his own but which. 
instead appeared in a New York newspaper late in 1865 
and tickled the country. A trip to the Sandwich Islands 
still further enlarged Mark Twain’s horizon and his jour- 
nalistic reputation. In 1866 he tried humorous lecturing 
with unequivocal success, made money, traveled to the East 
by the way of Panama, convulsed New York at Cooper 
Union, and in 1867 sailed for the Mediterranean and Pales- 
tine on an excursion of which he became the hilarious 
chronicler in his first important book, The Innocents 
Abroad, published in 1869. 

The sudden, the almost explosive fame which the book 
brought him sharply lights up the taste of the period 
which produced it. Of the older American schools the 
Knickerbockers had ceased to exist ; in New England Haw- 
thorne and Thoreau were dead and the creative vitality 
of their generation had waned. The rising men of genius 
looked to Europe for their guides: Whistler was estab- 
lished in London; Henry James was being sealed to the 
Old World; even Howells, loyally native as he was, worked 
upon his native material with the most classical tools. 
Only Whitman had stayed relentlessly at home, and he 
was still speaking prophecy out of a dim and narrow 
cloud. Upon this scene Mark Twain burst with a ringing 
American hurrah, a “ powerful uneducated person ” of the 


MARK TWAIN 163 


sort Whitman had promised. Once more the frontier 
came back upon the older communities as it had done 
under Andrew Jackson, when David Crockett was a nine- 
days’ wonder. But Mark Twain was more than a shrewd, 
barely literate backwoodsman. He had a tumultuous rush 
of expression; he had, moreover, thanks to Artemus Ward 
and his fellows, a literary form already prepared for him. 
Being expected, as a humorist of that type, to employ 
burlesque, he employed it to make fun of ecstatic travelers, 
particularly of those whose ecstasy followed the guidebook 
rather than their own taste and always rose with the repu- 
tation of the thing seen. Being expected, too, to be ir- 
reverent for humorous effect, he laughed at everything 
that did not seem to him overpoweringly sacred, and even 
from sacred moods often extricated himself with a jest. 
These were the conventions of his order. And as he was 
individually a husky, unashamed Westerner, when he found 
much in ancient art and scenery that, to his limited appre- 
ciation, fell below what he had heard of it, he said so in a 
loud voice irritating to fastidious ears. His public, how- 
ever, was not fastidious. Relieved by the absence of that 
note of breathlessness which had oppressed it in earlier 
travel books, it gasped and then roared. Here was a 
writer who scratched the surface of American culture and 
found beneath it the rough, insouciant, skeptical, hilarious 
fiber of the pioneer. “Undoubtedly Innocents Abroad flat- 
tered the mob with the spectacle of free-born Americans 
romping through venerable lands and finding them on so 
many counts inferior to America. The practical jokes 
of the book have lost much of their power to entertain; 
nor do the purple pages on which Mark Twain set down, 


164 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


in beadrolls of glorious names, his sense of the might and . 
thunder of antiquity now sound so eloquent as they prob- 
ably sounded in the sixties. But sweep and vigor and 
jolting contrasts and pealing laughter have not deserted 
the book. It remains an essential document in the biog- 
raphy of Mark Twain and in the history of American 
civilization. 

If confessed mendacity playing around facts can 
transform them into fiction, both Innocents Abroad and — 
Roughing It, published in 1872, approach the novel. Con- 
temporary readers thought of them as reasonably true, 
allowing the author, however, the large license of the suc- 
cessful liar. Now that Mark Twain is no longer in the 
news his actual exploits concern his readers less and less in 
comparison with the permanent elements contributed to his 
work by his elaborating imagination. These elements play 
a larger part in Roughing It than in Innocents Abroad. 
Having “ taken down ” the Old World as measured by the 
New, he now set up the New in a rollicking, bragging pic- 
ture of the Great West where he had acquired his stand- 
ards of landscape and excitement. His account, shaped 
to look like autobiography, takes him from St. Louis 
across the plains to the Rockies and on to California and 
Hawaii. But, unlike the story of the Innocents, this was 
not written day by day with the events still green in the 
mind. They had had time to ripen in the imagination 
and to take on a significance which the deepest impression 
can never have at the first moment. Roughing It is un- 
even in tone and in excellence; the exposition falls below 
the description, which is ordinarily florid, and neither can 
equal the narration, particularly when it runs lustily 


MARK TWAIN 165 


across the plains with the rocking stage-coach or when it 
cerries the narrator through his maiden adventures in the 
mining camps. Although he too frequently falls into the 
burlesquing habits which still clung to him from his days 
of Nevada and California journalism, he also rises de- 
cisively above them, and above all his predecessors in 
popular humor, with chapters of genuine poetry, of an 
epic breadth and largeness, commemorating free, mascu- 
line, heroic days. 

The tumultuous vogue of these books urged Mark Twain 
to new efforts in which his herditary ache for sudden 
wealth — an ache never discouraged by his Western fail- 
ures — regularly influenced his literary impulses. His 
marriage in 1870 to Olivia Langdon of New York, by 
bringing him into a wealthier and more formal circle than 
he had known before, still further influenced him. He 
made plans for being a sort of captain of letters: he 
would mine his literary ore for lectures, smelt it into news- 
paper and magazine articles, refine it into books which he 
would print, publish, and distribute, taking out a large 
profit for himself from every process. To this extent he 
shared in the furor of exploitation which followed the 
war and against which he had no artistic ideals to fortify 
him. Energy so immense as his could not lightly be held 
within bounds. Moreover, he had the contention in him- - 
self between his original nature, lyrical, explosive, boister- 
ous, and the restraints which he accepted without much 
question from his fastidious wife and the classical-minded 
Howells. Between them the two contrived to repress some 
of his tendencies, those toward blasphemy, profanity, the 
wilder sorts of impossibility, and also toward satire and 


166 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


plain-speaking. How far he was shorn of real powers 
no one can say; one can say, however, that under these 
‘Intenerating censors he moved from the methods which 
produced The Innocents Abroad to those which produced 
Huckleberry Finn and Joan of Arc. 

The year after his marriage he went to Hartford, where 
he lived for seventeen years, with intervals of lecturing 
and occasional sojourns in Europe. At Hartford lived 
also Mrs. Stowe and Charles Dudley Warner; and with 
Warner, who to the Mark Twain of that period seemed 
an important man of letters, he collaborated in a novel, 
The Gilded Age, which appeared in 1873. The more con- 
ventional elements in the book, the Easterners, Philip Ster- 
ling and Henry Brierly, and their loves and fortunes, are 
Warner’s; the more original, the sections portraying 
Western life and satirizing Congress and Washington, are 
Mark Twain’s. His, too, is the masterly conception of 
Colonel Beriah Sellers, the man of hope, who lives con- 
stantly in the expectation of an avalanche of unearned 
increment in his direction. From the collaboration of two 
such different authors nothing unified could come. War- 
ner’s chapters are usually tame; Mark Twain’s are often 
noisy and busy with his old burlesque. Neither man 
shrank from melodrama or hesitated to set it side by side 
with the most scrupulous realism. But the materials of 
The Gilded Age are a dozen times better than its art. 
Perhaps all the more truly because of its lack of balance 
and perspective does the book reproduce the jangled spirit 
of the time, its restlessness, its violence, its enthusiasms 
so singularly blended of the sordid and the altruistic. 
Colonel Sellers, who has the blood of his creator in him, 


MARK TWAIN 167 


typifies an entire age which had newly begun to realize 
the enormous resources of the continent and was mad, 
was ridiculous, with the fever of desire for sudden riches. 
The age was gilded. Mark Twain, just arrived from 
simpler regions, mocked the tedious formalisms and ac- 
cused the brazen corruptions of the capital. To judge 
by his share of this joint record he was ready to become 
a national satirist and to hurl his laughter against a 
thousand abuses deserving scorn. 

A national satirist, however, he did not become. Partly | 
from excess of patriotism, partly from a lack of the lit- 
erary seriousness which might have enabled him to hold 
out against the influence of his wife and of his new en- 
vironment, he did not assume, at least in public, the un- 
popular réle of critic. Instead, urged by Howells, he 
turned back to his Middle Western recollections and wrote 
for the Atlantic in 1875 his Old Times on the Mississippi, 
later included in Life on the Mississippi (1883), and The 
Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1876). Life on the Missis- 
sippt belongs with the most precious American books. 
The second part, indeed, which reports a journey Mark 
Twain made in 1882 to visit old scenes, rises in parts little 
above good reporting, though all of it conveys a sense 
of the deeps of many memories beneath the adventures it 
recounts. But the first twenty chapters flash and glow 
as even the highest passages of Roughing It had not done. 
Herein are set down with a crowded accuracy warmcd 
by eloquence and affection the impressions of Mark 
Twain’s eager youth, of his old aspirations toward the 
river, of his struggle to attain mastcry over it, of his con- 
summate hours as pilot. The splendor of those days had 


168 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


grown upon him, not faded, and he who had once entered 
into their events with the flushed passions of an epic hero 
now wrought at them with the accomplished strength of 
an epic poet. In his youth observing the river without 
one thought that he might some day translate it into art, 
he had had no bias and no self-consciousness. Now he 
could go back in his imagination to a world seen round 
and whole, as men of action see their worlds. He remem- 
bered a thousand hard actualities of those elder circum- 
stances. He remembered the dialect, the costume, the 
amphibious river men, “ half horse half alligator ” as the 
ancient phrase had it, the savagery, the danger, the ardors 
of the pilot’s calling, the thick, stirring panorama of that 
epoch. He remembered, too, the glamor of those days, 
the dreams of adventure, the mystery of black nights, the 
glory of dawn over the yellow water when the atmosphere 
was full of the songs of invisible birds. And winding 
through all his memories, like the Mississippi winding 
through its continent, went the great, muddy, mysterious 
river which had stirred his imagination for nearly half 
a century. 

The Adventures of Tom Sawyer took Mark Twain from 
epic to comedy. He first planned it as a play and when 
he decided upon another form for it he had in mind to 
write a story of boyhood which, like Aldrich’s Story of a 
Bad Boy, should emphatically depart from the customary 
type of Sunday school fiction. But its departure from a 
type is one of the least memorable aspects of Tom Sawyer. 
Tom and Huck are, indeed, “ bad ” boys; they have done 
more than overhear profanity and smell the smoke of 
pipes; they play outrageous pranks in the fashion of the 


MARK TWAIN 169 


disapproved youngsters of all small American towns; their 
exploits have even led both Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry 
Finn to be at times barred by librarians in whom zeal 
exceeds imagination. These qualities in the heroes, how- 
ever, only conform to the general quality of realism which 
characterizes Tom Sawyer throughout. To a delicate 
taste, indeed, the book seems occasionally overloaded with 
matters brought in at moments when no necessity in the 
narrative calls for them. The boyish superstitions, delec- 
table as they are in themselves, tend to lug Tom Sawyer 
to the documentary side of the line which divides documents 
from works of art. Nor can the murder about which 
the story 1s built up be said to dominate it very thor- 
oughly. The story moves forward in something the same 
manner as did the plays of the seventies, with exits and 
entrances not always motivated. And yet a taste so deli- 
cate as to resent these defects of structure would probably 
not appreciate the flexibility of the narrative, its easy, 
casual gait, its broad sweep, its variety of substance. 
Mark Twain drives with careless, sagging reins, but he 
holds the general direction. Most of his readers remem- 
ber certain episodes, particularly the white-washing of 
the fence and the appearance of the boys at their own 
funeral, rather than the story as a whole. To inquire 
into the causes of this is to find that the plot of Tom 
Sawyer means considerably less than the characters. A 
hundred incidents beside those here chosen would have 
served as well; the characters are each of them unique. 
Certain of them come directly from the life, notably the 
vagabond Huckleberry Finn and Aunt Polly and Becky 
Thatcher, the Gang, and Tom Sawyer himself, who, 


170 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


though compounded of numerous elements, essentially re- 
produces the youthful figure of his creator. Such a mix- 
ture of rich humor and serious observation had never 
before been devoted to the study of a boy in fiction. Mark 
Twain smiles constantly at the absurd in Tom’s character, 
but he portrays him in the dignity of full length; he does 
not laugh him into insignificance or lecture him into the 
semblance of a puppet. Boys of Tom’s age can follow his 
fortunes without discomfort or boredom. At the same 
time, there are overtones which most juvenile fiction en- 
tirely lacks and which continue to delight those adults who 
Mark Twain said, upon finishing his story, alone would 
ever read it. At the moment he must have felt that the 
poetry and satire of Tom Sawyer outranked the narrative, 
and he was right. They have proved the permanent, at 
least the preservative, elements of a classic. 

Tom Sawyer cannot be discussed except in connection 
with its glorious sequel The Adventures of Huckleberry 
Finn (1885). “By and by,” Mark Twain had written 
to Howells when he announced the completion of Tom 
Sawyer, “I shall take a boy of twelve and run him 
through life (in the first person) ”; and he had begun the 
new book almost at once; but with characteristic uncer- 
tainty of taste he had lost interest in it and turned to 
struggle over a preposterous detective comedy which he 
wanted to name Balaam’s Ass. Again in 1880 and finally 
in 1883 he came back to his masterpiece, published two 
years later. In spite of this hesitation and procrastina- 
tion Huckleberry Finn has remarkable unity. To tell a 
story in the first person was second nature to Mark Twain. 
His travel books had so been told, no matter what non- 


MARK TWAIN 171 


autobiographical episodes he might elect to bring in. But 
he was more than a humorous liar; he was an instinctive 
actor; Sir Henry Irving regretted that Mark Twain had 
never gone upon the stage. Once he had decided to tell 
the story through Huck Finn’s mouth he could proceed 
at his most effortless pace. And his sense of identity with 
the boy restricted him to a realistic substance as no prin- 
ciples of art, in Mark Twain’s case, could have done. 
With the first sentence he fell into an idiom and a rhythm 
flawlessly adapted to the naive, nasal, drawling little vaga- 
bond. “You don’t know me without you have read a 
book by the name of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer; 
but that ain’t no matter. That book was made by Mr. 
Mark Twain, and he told the truth, mainly. There was 
things which he stretched, but mainly he told the truth.” 
It has been remarked that Huck appears rather more 
conscious of the charms of external nature than his Hanni- 
bal prototype, Tom Blankenship, doubtless was; and of 
course, strictly speaking, he rises above lifelikeness alto- 
gether by his gift for telling a long yarn which has artistic 
economy and satiric point. But something like this may 
be said of all heroes presented in the first person. Mark 
Twain, though for the time being he had relapsed to the 
shiftless lingo of his boyhood companion, was after all 
acting Huck for the sake of interpreting him; and inter- 
pretation enlarges the thing interpreted. Tom Sawyer 
acquires a new solidity by being shown here through the 
eyes of another boy, who, far from laughing at Tom’s 
fanciful ways of doing plain tasks, admires them as the 
symptoms of a superior intelligence. After this fashion 
all the material of the narrative comes through Huck’s 


172 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


perceptions. Mouthpiece for others, Huck is also mouth- 
piece for himself so competently that the whole of his 
tough, ignorant, gencrous, loyal, pyrotechnically mendaci- 
ous nature lies revealed. 

And yet virtues still larger than the structural unity 
thus imparted make Huckleberry Finn Mark Twain’s 
masterpiece. In richness of life Tom Sawyer cannot com- 
pare with it. The earlier of the two books keeps close 
home in one sleepy, dusty village, illuminated only, at 
Inconvenient moments, by Tom Sawyer’s whimsies. But 
in Huckleberry Finn the plot, like Mark Twain’s imagina- 
tion, goes voyaging. Five short chapters and Huck 
leaves his native village for the ampler world of the 
picaresque. An interval of captivity with his father — 
that unpleasant admonitory picture of what Huck may 
some day become if he outgrows his engaging youthful 
fineness — and then the boy slips out upon the river which 
is the home of his soul. There he realizes every dream 
he has ever had. He has a raft of his own. He has a 
friend, the negro Jim, with the strength of a man, the 
companionableness of a boy, and the fidelity of a dog. 
He can have food for the fun of taking it out of the 
water or stealing it from along the shore. He sleeps and 
wakes when he pleases. The weather of the lower Missis- 
sippi in summer bites no one. At the same time, this life 
is not too safe. Jim may be caught and taken from his 
benefactor. With all his craft, Huck is actually, as a 
boy, very much at the mercy of the rough men who infest 
the river. Adventure complicates and enhances his free- 
dom. And what adventure! It never ceases, but flows 
on as naturally as the river which furthers the plot of 


baal 


MARK TWAIN 173 


the story by conveying the characters from point to point. 
Both banks are as crowded with excitement, if not with 
danger, as the surrounding forest of the older romances. 
Huck can slip ashore at any moment and try his luck 
with the universe in which he moves without belonging to it. 
Now he is the terrified and involuntary witness of a cruel 
murder plot, and again of an actual murder. Now he 
strays, with his boy’s astonished simplicity, into the 
Grangerford-Shepherdson vendetta and sees another 
Romeo and Juliet enacted in Kentucky. In the undesired 
company of the “king” and the “ duke,” certainly two 
as sorry and as immortal rogues as fiction ever exhibited, 
Huck is initiated into degrees of scalawaggery which he 
could not have experienced, at his age, alone; into amateur 
theatricals as extraordinary as the Royal Nonesuch and 
frauds as barefaced as the impostures practised upon the 
camp-meeting and upon the heirs of Peter Wilks. After 
sights and undertakings so Odyssean, the last quarter of 
the book, given over to Tom Sawyer’s romantic expedients 
for getting Jim, who is actually free already, out of a 
prison from which he could have been released in ten min- 
utes, is preserved from the descent into anticlimax only 
by its hilarious comic force. As if to make up for the 
absence of more sizable adventures, this mimic conspir- 
acy is presented with enough art and enough reality in 
its genre studies to furnish an ertire novel. That, in a 
way, is the effect of Huckleberry Finn as a whole: though 
the hero, by reason of his youth, cannot entirely take part 
in the action, and the action is therefore not entirely at 
first hand, the picture lacks little that could make it more 
Vivid or veracious. 


174 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


In the futile critical exercise of contending which is 
the greatest American novel, choice ordinarily narrows 
down at last to The Scarlet Letter and Huckleberry Finn 
— a sufficiently antipodean pair and as hard to bring into 
comparison as tragedy and comedy themselves. Each 
in its department, however, these two books do seem to be 
supreme. The Scarlet Letter offers, by contrast, prac- 
tically no picture; Huckleberry Finn, no problem. Huck 
undergoes, it is true, certain naggings from the set of 
unripe prejudices he calls his conscience; and once he rises 
to an appealing unselfishness when, in defiance of all the 
principles he has been taught to value, he makes up his 
mind that he will assist the runaway slave to freedom. 
- But in the sense that The Scarlet Letter poses problems, 
Huckleberry Finn poses none at all. Its criticism of life 
is of another sort. It does not work at the instigation 
of any doctrine, moral or artistic, whatever. As Haw- 
thorne, after long gazing into the somber dusk over an- 
cient Salem, had seen the universal drama of Hester and 
Dimmesdale and Chillingworth being transacted there, 
and had felt it rising within him to expression, so Mark 
Twain, in the midst of many vicissitudes remembering the 
river of his youthful happiness, had seen the panorama 
of it unrolling before him and also had been moved to 
record it out of sheer joy in its old wildness and beauty, 
assured that merely to have such a story to tell was rea- 
son enough for telling it. Having written Life on the 
Mississippi he had already reduced the river to his own 
language; having written T’om Sawyer, he had got his 
characters in hand. There wanted only the moment 
when his imagination should take fire at recollection and 


MARK TWAIN 175 


rush away on its undogmatic task of reproducing the 
great days of the valley. Had Mark Twain undertaken 
to make another and a greater Gilded Age out of his 
matter, to portray the life of the river satirically on the 
largest scale, instead of in such dimensions as fit Huck’s 
boyish lmitations of knowledge, he might possibly have 
made a better book, but he would have had to be another 
man. Being the man he was, he touched his peak of im- 
aginative creation not by taking thought how he could 
be a Balzac to the Mississippi but by yarning with all his 
gusto about an adventure he might have had in the dawn 
of his days. Although he did not deliberately gather 
riches, riches came. : | 

A Tramp Abroad (1880), written about a walking 
trip which Mark Twain made in 1878 through the Black 
Forest and to the Alps with his friend the Rev. Joseph H. 
Twitchell, continued his now expected devices in humorous 
autobiography, without any important innovations. Cer- 
tain episodes and certain descriptive passages emerge 
from the general level, but even they only emphasize the 
debt his imagination owed to memory. Writing too close 
to his facts he could never be at his richest. In 1882 he 
published his first historical novel, The Prince and the 
Pauper, avowedly for children and yet packed with adult 
satire in its account of how by a change of clothes Prince 
Edward, later Edward VI of England, and Tom Canty, 
a London beggar boy, underwent also a change of station 
and for an instructive period each tasted the other’s fare. 
By some such dramatic contrast Mark Twain, the radical 
American, preferred always to express his opinion of 
monarchical societies ; like the older patriots, he set hatred 


176 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


for kings as the first article in his political creed. Of 
this important side of his nature the most characteristic 
utterances are to be found in A Connecticut Yankee m 
King Arthur’s Court (1889), which deserves also to be 
sonsidered one of the most thoroughly typical books yet 
produced by the American democracy. It is typical in 
method and typical in conclusion. With the brash irre- 
sponsibility of frontier vaudeville it catches up a hard, 
dry, obstreperous Yankee, hurries him back through thir- 
teen centuries, and dumps him, with all his wits about 
him, into Camelot. Speaking in terms of literary history, 
the Yankee is an anti-romance; it indicates a reaction 
from the sentimentalism about the Middle Ages which 
had recently been feeding on Tennyson’s Idylls of the 
King, William Morris’s Earthly Paradise, the Pre- 
Raphaelites, and Pater, and now was languishing in the 
sunflower cult of Oscar Wilde. Gilbert and Sullivan had 
already satirized this cult in Patience, by exposing the 
affectations of the xsthetes who professed it. Mark 
Twain, partly aroused by the strictures on America of 
Matthew Arnold, went to work in a more burly way. 
Let us see, he said in effect, how this longing for the past 
would work out if gratified. What about the plain man 
under Arthur? What about plumbing and soap and 
medicines and wages and habeas corpus? What filth and 
superstition and cruelty did the pomps of feudalism not 
overlay? Mark Twain behaves as the devil’s advocate 
in the Yankee, candidly ascribing to the sixth century 
the abuses of other older ages as well as its own. Perhaps, 
since he habitually read Malory’s Morte d’Arthur and 
had a natural tenderness for its chivalric postures, he 


MARK TWAIN 177 


even exhibits a special animus arising from civil war within 
himself. At any rate, he let himself run almost with- 
out check among sixth-century scenes as he imagined 
them, ridiculing follies with a burlesque as riotous as 
that in The Innocents Abroad, and adding to it the more 
serious anger which had grown upon him. To appre- 
ciate the fun of the Yankee one must have been accustomed 
to the rowdy modes of American humor; to feel all its 
censure one must have at least a strain of the revolution- 
ary. And yet persons equipped with neither may per- 
ceive the magnificent vigor of the narrative. It ranges 
from ludicrous to sublime; from the tears of hysterical 
laughter to the tears of broken pity. With such con- 
sequences a barbarian of genius might burst into the 
court of some narrow principality; he would shatter a 
thousand delicately poised decorums— many of them 
harmless enough — and expose a thousand obnoxious 
shams. 

The irritation caused in England and among cultivated 
Americans by this slashing satire might have been allayed 
had Mark Twain turned his weapon toward grievances 
at home. Instead, his next and last large experiment in 
fiction was the Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc, 
published anonymously after long incubation in 1896. 
His decisive preference for this among all his books may 
perhaps be ascribed to the unusual labor to which he was 
put by an unprecedented task; it may also be ascribed 
to a lifelong interest in Joan which, beginning as a boy’s 
sympathy for a girl’s tragic fate, finally amounted to a 
genuine reverence for the Maid which saw in her the 
symbol of innocence undone by malice and corruption. 


178 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Like his fierce essay In Defense of Harriet Shelley (1894) 
and his' movingly tender Eve’s Diary (1905), Joan of 
Arc illuminates that region in Mark Twain’s nature which 
practised a sort of secular Mariolatry. Many American 
frontiersmen by their quite undoctrinal worship of woman- 
kind at large often approached the worship of the Ma= 
donna. Of course, this Joan of Arc pretends to be nar+ 
rated by the friend and secretary of the heroine; but the 
authentic tones of Mark Twain again and again drown 
the reminiscent treble of Louis de Conte. Against a 
confused, somber, truthful enough background he raises 
the white banner of the Maid. She is herself the banner, 
the quintessence of a cause. He accepts the voices with- 
out a question; nor do they seem particularly super- 
human by comparison with the radiant sweetness and 
wisdom with which he endows her. The book constitutes 
his answer to the charge brought up by the Innocents 
Abroad and the Yankee, that he lacked reverence for 
names made sacred to men by good report; it is proof 
that he commanded the accents of adoration. In its 
own right, however, it must rank below an imaginative 
achievement like Huckleberry Finn because it is less thor- 
oughly grounded than that book in any real experience. 
Over too many chapters of Joan of Arc droops the lan- 
guid haze which accompanied all the historical romances 
of the American nineties. Only in the final third, which 
deals with the trial and which masterfully employs the 
original records, does Mark Twain knit his passion with 
his facts in the degree which breaks down the boundaries 
ordinarily only too able to divide romance from reality. 

After Joan of Arc he wrote nothing equal to it in 


MARK TWAIN 179 


dimension and ambition. He gave up his house at Hart- 
ford and lived somewhat randomly, in various European 
cities, in New York, at Riverdale-on-Hudson, and finally 
from 1908 till his death two years later in his new house, 
Stormfield, at Redding, Connecticut. His sweetness had 
begun to grow weary and turn more and more insistently 
to thought which was neither sweet nor gay. His pes- 
simism appears unmistakably in Following the Equator 
(1897), fruit of a lecture tour round the world which at 
sixty he had courageously undertaken to pay off the 
burden of debts due to his failure as a publisher. His 
great schemes for a fortune had failed; a beloved daugh- 
ter died while he was on his royal progress; the antiquity 
of Asia appalled him. Though now a national figure, 
by popular suffrage the national man of letters, he had 
for some years suffered from a diffusion, if not a dimi- 
munition, of his power. The American Claimant (1892), 
returning to Colonel Sellers of The Gilded Age for ma- 
terial, and Tom Sawyer Abroad (1894) and Tom Sawyer, 
Detective (1896), had none of them fulfilled expectations 
naturally aroused. Even the better novel Pudd’nhead 
Wilson (1894) defied the efforts he put into it and es- 
caped his control as he wrote. Part of it moved off into 
unrestrained farce and had to be issued separately as 
Those Extraordinary Twins; part of it developed into 
the seriously conceived tragedy of Roxana and her son 
— but a tragedy founded on the conventional device of 
infants changed in the cradle. It adds something to 
Mark Twain’s documentary value by its picture of Vir- 
ginians in the West and by its principal character, 
Pudd’nhead Wilson. As an amateur detective he illus- 


180 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


trates the interest which Mark Twain, who liked all sorts 
of ingenuity, took in stories of the detection of crime, an 
interest also illustrated by A Double Barrelled Detective 
Story (1902). But Pudd’nhead is more memorable as 
the village atheist, whose maxims, printed at the head 
of each chapter in this book and also in Following the 
Equator, so frequently express the tired disillusionment 
which was becoming Mark Twain’s characteristic mood. 
‘* Pity,” says Pudd’nhead, “is for the living, envy is for 
the dead.” 

**T have been reading the morning paper,” Mark Twain 
wrote to Howells in 1899. “I do it every morning — 
well knowing that I shall find in it the usual depravities 
and basenesses and hypocrisies and cruelties that make 
up civilization, and cause me to put in the rest of the day 
pleading for the damnation of the human race.” Some 
such despair of mankind had furnished a strain in his 
constitution from his early days. He had the frontiers- 
man’s contempt for the ordinary gestures of idealism. 
Judged by his simple, though inflexible, code of morals 
the world fell pitifully short. The human race he ob- 
served to be lazy, selfish, envious, given to lying, dis- 
posed to disease and vice and crime, fawning in adversity, 
tyrannical in prosperity, and at all times the dupe of 
countless errors. ‘“ Let me make the superstitions of a 
nation and | care not who makes its laws or its songs 
either.” At the same time, Mark Twain largely lacked 
the outlet of misanthropy; he could not, because of his 
natural kindliness, help himself by laying his hatred of 
the race upon his fellows. His hatred came home and 
condemned him too. ‘ What a man sees in the human 


MARK TWAIN 181 


race is merely himself in the deep and honest privacy of 
his own heart.” In such a companionship he pitied men 
more than he hated them. ‘“ Everything human is pathe- 
tic. The secret source of Humor itself is not joy but 
sorrow. ‘There is no humor in heaven.” 

In various unendurable hours, however, Mark Twain 
did seek something upon which to throw off his burden. 
In theology a deist of the school of Paine and Ingersoll, 
with a tincture of modern science added to the iron con- 
science of old-fashioned backwoods Calvinism, he invented 
a machine more or less in the image of a god, and held 
it to account for the blunders of the world. The human 
individual, he argued in What Is Man? (written in 1898 
but not printed until 1906 and then privately), is a mere 
automaton, without choice as to his birth or as to any 
impulse or thought or action, good or bad. Each de- 
cision follows irresistibly from precedent circumstances 
and so on back to the protoplasmic beginnings. Beliefs 
and resolutions cannot control behavior, which follows in- 
stinctively from the temperament with which the individ- 
ual is endowed and which operates under the sleepless 
rule of the master-passion, the desire for self-approval. 
Punishment and censure are consequently meaningless ; so 
is remorse. Mark Twain, who had no more than an 
amateur’s learning in ethical systems, believed his doctrine 
of scientific determinism to be far more novel and con- 
tributory than it was. As a matter of fact, not the 
logical but the personal aspects of his contentions are im- 
pressive. By them he unconsciously defended himself 
from the savage, the morbid attacks of self-condemnation 
and remorse from which he repeatedly suffered for all 


182 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


his peccadilloes. Only by assuring himself that no one 
deserves such blame could Mark Twain quiet his raging 
conscience. The fault lies with the bungled system on 
which the universe is made; with the intelligences which 
created it and continue to play wanton pranks upon it; 
still more upon any competent intelligence, if there is 
one, which refuses to exercise mercy and destroy the mis- 
erable race of men. 

Such philosophic nihilism did not constantly possess” 
Mark Twain during the disturbed last dozen years of his 
life. In The Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg (1899) 
he produced a corrosive apologue on the effects of greed, 
which here overthrows all the respectable reputations in 
a smug provincial town. Only one of them wins pity; 
the others appear not as moral automatons but as respon- 
sible thieves and hypocrites. And similarly The $30,000 
Bequest (1904) traces in a foolish couple the fatal in- 
fluence of the anticipation of wealth. What Mark Twain 
had once thought hugely comic in Colonel Sellers he had 
now come, after his own hot hopes and disappointments, 
to regard as one of the first of follies, if not of offenses. 
In neither story, however, are the negligent or malicious 
higher powers shown at work, unless it is through the 
poor frailties of the men and women. Captain Storm- 
field’s Visit to Heaven (published 1908 but written fully 
forty years before) took a very substantial sailor to 
heaven as the Connecticut Yankee had taken a skeptical 
mechanic to Arthur’s Court. That Mark Twain origin- 
ally thought his whimsy blasphemous and suppressed it 
so long shows how orthodox — and how unimaginative — 
was the social stratum from which he derived and which 


é 


MARK TWAIN 183 


might actually have winced at light references to jasper 
walls and pearly gates. 

For intellectual energy Stormfield cannot be mentioned 
in the same breath with The Mysterious Stranger, written 
during the dark night of Mark Twain’s spirit in 1898 
and issued posthumously (1916). The scene lies ostensi- 
bly in sixteenth-century Austria but actually, to all intents, 
in the Hannibal of Tom and Huck. Boys like these make 
up the central group; the narrator, Theodor Fischer, 
is as much Mark Twain as Tom Sawyer ever was. To 
them comes at times a supernatural playmate calling him- 
self Philip Traum but rightly Satan, nephew of the might- 
ier potentate of that name. Though he plays terrible 
pranks upon the villagers, he seems beneficence itself as 
compared to them, with their superstition and cowardice 
and cruelty. And all the time he acts, for the three 
boys, as commentator upon the despicable human race, 
“a museum of diseases, a home of impurities,” which 
“begins as dirt and departs as stench”; which uses its 
boasted moral sense to know good from evil and then to 
follow evil. The sole redeeming fact in human life, Philip 
assures Theodor in the end, is that “ Life ttself ts only 
a viston, a dream. . . . Nothing exists save empty space 
—and you. . . . Strange, indeed, that you should not 
have suspected that your universe and its contents were 
only dreams, visions, fictions. Strange, because they are 
so frankly and hysterically insane — like all dreams, 
. . . the silly creations of an imagination that is not con- 
scious of its freaks — in a word, . . . they are a dream, 
and you the maker of it.” “I myself,” says Philip, like 
Prospero breaking his wand, “have no existence; I am 


184 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


but a dream. . . . In a little while you will be alone in 
shoreless space, to wander its limitless solitudes without 
friend or comrade forever—for you will remain a 
thought, the only existent thought, and by your nature 
inextinguishable, indestructible. But I, your poor ser- 
vant, have revealed you to yourself and set you free. 
Dream other dreams, and better! ” 

Although it was out of such deeps of despair that there 
rose into Mark Twain’s work the profounder qualities 
which lift him above all other American humorists, he 
nevertheless customarily lived and wrote nearer the sur- 
faces of existence. Heretical as he might be in his theol- 
ogy, he nevertheless employed — when he employed any- 
thing of the sort — the Christian mythology of the Sunday 
school, God and Satan, Heaven and Eden, the patriarchs 
and the heathen, all of them referred to in a language 
immediately understood by the populace which, with or 
without faith, shared that mythology. So in his political 
doctrines, though privately he might be now as Utopian 
as Sir Thomas More and now as realistic #s Nietzsche, 
he spoke in the American idiom as regards the usurping 
despots of the earth, the rights of the natural man, the 
superiority of republics to monarchies, the advantages 
of material well-being, the hope that through individual 
freedom and public education the human mass might be 
advanced to a plane never yet reached. He could rage 
over such abuses as Congressional stupidity and municipal 
graft, the brutality of the civil mob at home and the mili- 
tary mob in the Philippines, and yet could turn with 
patriotic fury against foreign detractors, as in his flay- 
ing of Paul Bourget for that critic’s sharp remarks about 


MARK TWAIN 185 


the United States. So also the geographical or historical 
culture taken for granted in Mark Twain’s books was 
that of the average American, who knows more about 
Palestine than about Greece, more about Rome than about 
all the rest of the Mediterranean, more about England 
than about all the rest of Europe, more about the Ameri- 
can Revolution and Civil War than about all the rest 
of history put together; who catches readily any refer- 
ences to Cesar or Shakespeare or George Washington 
or Napoleon but not so readily those to Cato or Leonardo 
da Vinci or Goethe or Pasteur. And finally, the typical 
heroes of Mark Twain’s imagined universe are of the sort 
considered typical in America. They walk the world, like 
the Yankee in medieval England, the Innocents in the Holy 
Land, Captain Stormfield in Heaven itself, erect and con- 
fident, neither cultivated nor colonial enough to be em- 
barrassed, testing and measuring all things by the sim- 
plest standards. They are as clannish as provincials and 
as cocksure as pioneers. Occasionally obsessed by the 
Puritan conscience, they lack the eccentric ideals of holi- 
ness, mysticism, poetry. Although brave enough in the 
flesh, they rarely have the courage to be original. In 
the spirit they rise as high as to a certain chivalry toward 
women, and toward children, and to an occasional fine, 
heroic altruism; but they rarely rise higher. Their 
moral concerns are about industry, common honesty, do- 
mestic loyalty, good comradeship, sensible habits of mind 
and body. Profane and irreverent enough, they are gen- 
erally chaste and considerate. They hold cruelty to be 
the principal vice and democratic friendliness the princi- 
pal virtue. 


186 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


The art of Mark Twain springs hardly less truly than 
his ideas from the American people as a whole. “I like 
history, biography, travel, curious facts and strange hap- 
penings,. and science,” he said. ‘ And I detest novels, 
poetry, and theology.” He would have been the last to 
reflect in what category his own writing fell, and he 
scarcely considered himself a novelist at all. For the 
more sophisticated in that department he had no use. He 
could not stand Henry James or George Eliot or Haw- 
thorne; he found Scott an unendurable snob and Cooper 
a literary bungler; he developed his loathing for Jane 
Austen until he came to take a positive delight in utter- 
ing it in the most violent language; and his admiration 
for the work of Howells must be assigned to his affection 
for theman. Mark Twain’s taste lay wholly in the direc- 
tion of large actions, large passions, large scenery. That 
he moved so casually over the face of the earth and 
through the historical periods that he knew is proof 
enough that he possessed none of the professed realist’s 
timidity when on unaccustomed ground. No Franklin 
and no later diplomatist in shirt sleeves ever felt more at 
home in temerarious surroundings than did Mark Twain. 
This same confidence, which deprived him of the austere 
seriousness of some men of letters, stood by him also in 
his methods. He did not mind a sudden change of key, 
but could fall from passionate eloquence to burlesque, and 
climb from farce to tragedy without even thinking whether 
this comported with the dignity of literature. Though 
at times he seems to have respected academic judgment 
too much — especially as represented by Howells and the 
Atlantic’s audience — and though he latterly resented the 


MARK TWAIN 187 


opinion that he was a humorist merely, he did depend in 
his art primarily upon the humorist’s technique. ‘“ To 
string incongruities and absurdities together in a wander- 
ing and sometimes purposeless way, and seem innocently 
unaware that they are absurdities, 1s the basis of the 
American art,” he said of the oral method of humor. Now 
the tricks of oral delivery are those he used most, whether 
he spoke or wrote. His rapid improvisation has the effect 
of flowing speech. To all appearances — which are borne 
out by what is known of his habits of composition — he 
drove his pen through his sentences at almost the rate of 
conversation, and had constantly a physical audience in 
‘mind. On it he tried his “ wandering and purposeless ” 
incongruities, his “ slurring of the point,” his “ dropping 
of a studied remark apparently without knowing it, ap- 
parently as if one were thinking aloud.” When actually 
lecturing he could hold, with his inflections and pauses, 
the attention of the most fastidious hearers as well as 
of the ordinary crowd, making capital of his lower mo- 
ments and shading down the higher with humorous dep- 
recation. Perhaps he never realized how far the coldness 
of print limited him in his control over his readers. At 
any rate, his methods were essentially oral. They reveal 
themselves in his partiality for autobiographical narra- 
tive, in his rambling sentence-structure, in his anti- 
climaxes and afterthoughts. Above all they are revealed 
in his humoristic device of occupying the stage so much 
of the time in his own person. For Mark Twain to prac- 
tise his art was, more than with any other American 
writer, to exhibit and expound his own personality. The 
greatness of his personality was the mcasure of his fame. 


CHAPTER VIII 
HENRY JAMES 


AmERicaNn patriotism, little less since the Civil War 
than before, has steadily contended that America does 
as well as Europe as a background for fiction, pointing 
to the epic dimensions and the epic hopes of existence 
on this continent. Less expansive critical dispositions 
have continued to feel that the human past of the country 
has not been large enough to match the landscape; that the 
present at any given moment has lacked the stability, the 
solidarity, which alone might afford the novelist a firm 
texture of reality in his representations; that the sim- 
plicity of American manners, being merely provincial 
rather than fittingly republican, renders impossible the 
subtleties and nuances of European fiction. Of the prin- 
cipal later novelists Howells held, on the whole, the broad- 
est views. He built, with some limitations, on what he 
saw before him, not unconscious of Europe but aware 
that the way to a body of American fiction was action 
as well as argument and that in the production of a na- 
tional literature imagination begets imagination. Mark 
Twain, without much reflection but with powerful in- 
stincts in the matter, wrought in the fashion of all great 
autochthons — as if his native land were the center of the 
world. Henry James, at the other extreme, never ceased 


to regard America as essentially an outlying region of 
188 


HENRY JAMES | 189 


European, more specifically of Anglo-Saxon, civilization. 
The differing governments of England and the United 
States were simply nothing to him, who knew and cared 
so little for man as a political animal. For this craftsman 
in language it was language which outlined the empire of 
the Enghsh and bound its various parts together in spite 
of such surface matters as ocean and revolution. He was 
a loyalist to the tongue of England. And of course 
speech was for him but a symbol of all the customs which 
he thought of as centering in or about London and to 
which he drew near and nearer with a passion of return 
which implies an atavistic hankering in the blood. In 
other words, Ilenry James was a patriot to his race, and 
his final transfer of citizenship, though immediately called 
forth by his sense of America’s procrastination in the 
World War, was but the outward sign of a temperamental 
repatriation already complete. 

The process began early under the deliberate guidance 
of a father, Henry James, Sr., a remarkable metaphy- 
sician and theologian, who sought to make his sons citizens 
of the world by never allowing them to take root in any 
particular religion, political system, ethical code, or set 
of personal habits. . Born in New York in 1843, Henry 
James had the most desultory schooling, under the most 
diverse teachers, in New York, Albany, Geneva, London, 
Paris, Newport, Geneva again, Bonn, and again Newport, 
studying now mathematics, now languages, reading a 
good deal of Latin and a little Greek, dabbling in Fourier 
and Ruskin, drawing a little, immersing himself in the 
British magazines and the Revue des deux Mondes, and 
from a very early period writing stories after the model 


190 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


of Balzac. A circle which contained at once the elder 
Henry James and his son William was out of contact 
with few of the important ideas then stirring; and the 
ffther was accustomed to bring into the household many 
of the eminent Europeans who visited the United States 
from time to time. The Civil War would possibly have 
enlisted Henry, as it did his two younger brothers, but for 
his uncertain health; and it did without doubt mark him 
deeply. ‘It introduced into the national consciousness,” 
Henry James wrote in 1879, by the “ national conscious- 
ness ” undoubtedly meaning his own as well, “a certain 
sense of proportion and relation, of the world being a 
more complicated place than it had hitherto seemed, the 
future more treacherous, success more difficult ... [a 
perception] that this is a world in which everything hap- 
pens.” His non-participation in the war at first hand 
appears also to have developed — hardly aroused — in 
him a sense that his! essential réle was to be that of a 
spectator of life. At any rate, instead of going to 
war he went to Harvard in 1862, for some vague reason 
to ‘the Law School, which touched him hardly at all in 
comparison with the men of letters whom he encountered 
in Boston or Cambridge, in particular Charles Eliot Nor- 
ton and William Dean Howells. Through them he be- 
came a contributor of critical articles to the Natton and 
the North American and of stories to the Atlantic and 
the Galary. The “ open editorial hand ” which Howells 
held out to him from the Atlantic during the summer of 
1868, Henry James said, “ was really the making of me, 
the making of the confidence that required help and sym- 
pathy and that I should otherwise, I think, have strayed 


HENRY JAMES 191 


and stumbled about a long time without acquiring. You 
showed me the way and opened me the door.” New Eng- 
land, however, could not satisfy him. Early in 1869 he 
made the passionate pilgrimage to Europe which, in va- 
rious forms, provides the theme for so immense a portion 
of his work: England, Switzerland, Italy, France in 
turn met his “relish for the element of accumulation in 
the human picture and for the infinite superpositions of 
history.” Singular contrast between the behavior of the 
Innocent Abroad and the Passionate Pilgrim! Without 
anything like so deep a sense for history as Mark Twain, 
Henry James had not Mark Twain’s ignorance to sus- 
tain him against the magnetic pull of Europe; nor had 
the younger man a touch of that indigenousness which 
restored Mark Twain to his original continent. Lacking 
any strong roots into the American soil, Henry James, 
though he returned to Cambridge in 1870 for two years, 
and after a further European sojourn during 1872-1874, 
for one year more, now succumbed to the centripetal pull 
which all along had been acting upon him, and in 1875 
finally decided that his future belonged to Europe. For 
a year he tried Paris, where he met Turgenev and the 
Flaubert group — Edmond de Goncourt, Daudet, Mau- 
passant, Zola; but he there felt too much a foreigner for 
comfort, and late in 1876 he settled for good in London, 
the natural home of his imagination. 

With Roderick Hudson (1876) James concluded the 
long years of experimentation through which, as had Haw- 
thorne before him, he seriously ascended to his art. His 
first novel, Watch and Ward, issucd as a scrial in the 
Atlantic during 1871, was a trivial performance. Of 


192 - THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


the more than a score of short stories he published before 
his homesick hegira, he later cared to preserve but three. 
The discarded trifles betray a strong influence of Haw- 
thorne, particularly The Romance of Certain Old Clothes, 
with its dusky scene laid in eighteenth-century America 
and its ghostly, inconclusive conclusion; De Grey: a Ro- 
mance, the study of an ancestral curse dubiously inherited 
by a New York family from its European forebears; and 
The Last of the Valerti, wherein a young Roman noble- 
man digs up a statue of Venus from his garden and 
fatally reverts to the worship of her pagan loveliness. 
No such dominant magic as Hawthorne’s, however, quite 
invests these tales; Henry James belonged to a different 
universe, with a different heaven and hell. Nor could he 
even as well as the Hawthorne of The Seven Vagabonds, 
for instance, succecd with little adventures into the 
picaresque like Professor Fargo, with its tawdry travel- 
ing showmen. James came nearer to achieving the con- 
sidered sobriety of George Eliot, whom he admired; and 
he tucked himself as far as he could under the edge of the 
mantle of Balzac. In Travelling Companions is fore- 
shadowed James’s later skill in the description of ancient 
landscape and architecture; in At Isella, his habit of 
rounding out a story from the most flying hint; and in 
The Sweetheart of Mr. Briseuzr, at least in patches, his 
smoothly ironical, dexterously enwinding style. The 
stiffness and scrawniness of youth appears more obviously 
in his purely American stories than in those narrated 
against a European background, as were all the three 
he salvaged from these days of experiment — A Passionate 
Pilgrim (1871), The Madonna of the Future (18738), 


HENRY JAMES 1938 


Madame de Mauves (1874). Madame de Mauves is a 
sort of American Una among European libns, the snowy 
wife of a sinful Frenchman who first hates her because 
she will neither “ submit basely nor rebel crookedly ” and 
then melodramatically blows his brains out because, when 
he has fallen in love with her, she cannot forgive him. 
Theobald, in the affecting Madonna of the Future, has 
for twenty years nursed in Florence the vision of a flaw- 
less Madonna which he means to paint, only to find out 
at last that he has dawdled away his powers and chances: 
his adored model has grown coarse, his hand cannot exe- 
cute his beautiful plan. 4A Passionate Pilgrim carries an 
overwrought American to England to claim a fortune, 
as Hawthorne’s Ancestral Footstep had done. ‘The plot 
is nearly as romantic as Hawthorne would have made it; 
the chief concern is the sensations of the ardent traveler 
in the presence of that charm which maddens, in Henry 
James, the “ famished race.”” This concern, too, makes 
up a large bulk of Roderick Hudson, the account of a 
young sculptor who, thanks to a friendly patron, is sud- 
denly lifted from the naked, rectangular society of North- 
ampton, Massachusetts, and set down in Rome in the 
hope that something great will come of his genius under 
circumstances luxuriantly propitious. His vein proves 
thin and he goes, with unconvincing promptitude, to 
pieces, and then on to fall to death over a Swiss precipice. 
James. subscquently admitted that the element of time in 
this novel should have been better handled; that he had 
borrowed more from the intensity of the dramatist than, 
as novelist, he could offer security for. But he still felt 
willing to acknowledge as his own the skill with which he 


194 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


had represented the entire action — Roderick’s aspiration 
and descent, his unfaithfulness to Mary Garland and his 
passion for Christina Light — through the consciousness 
of Rowland Mallet, who, though he does not speak in the 
first person, renders the narrative something the same 
service that Miles Coverdale renders in The Blithedale 
Romance. Without at the moment quite understanding 
it, James was working toward that admirable technique, 
in which he is practically supreme among novelists — the 
technique of concentration which makes his novels as com- 
pact as tales and which allows his tales to run without 
dilution of emphasis almost to the dimensions of novels. 

Now established in London, James sedulously worked 
at making himself a purer Anglo-Saxon than he believed 
he could be anywhere along the periphery of the race, 
forgetful, it seems, that Anglo-Saxons are explorers and 
colonizers no less truly than huggers of the insular hearth. 
As an American with proper introductions he went into 
penetralia of English society which novelists in the Islands 
do not easily reach unless they are born to them. He 
learned, after a struggle and occasional relapses, to like 
both the weather and the manners of Britain, exposing 
himself to both those cooling experiences, except for a few 
brief visits to France and Italy, during five remarkably 
busy years. The critical doctrines which sustained him 
he collected and put forth in French Poets and Novelists 
(1888), much of it written during his earlier years on 
the Continent. ‘ Realism,” he said, “ seems to us with 
‘Madame Bovary’ to have said its last word”; but he 
felt that for the most part Flaubert’s knowledge was 
greater than his imagination. James admired George 


HENRY JAMES 195 


Sand’s magnificent flow and color, which he oddly com- 
pared to that of Spenser in The Faerie Queene, but he 
thought she had too little form and too much optimism: 
“‘ We suspect that something even better [than optimism] 
in a novelist is that tender appreciation of actuality which 
makes even the application of a simple coat of rose-colour 
seem an act of violence.” Balzac, of course, James 
greatly preferred to either Flaubert or George Sand, for 
his great range and close texture: “He has against 
him,” James however added, “that he lacks that slight 
but needful thing — charm.” The informing imagination 
absent from Flaubert, the substantial texture absent from 
George Sand, the charm absent from Balzac — all these 
James found in his great master and favorite Turgenev, 
whom in 1874, so little had he been translated further west 
than Paris, it was still possible to include among French 
novelists. ‘Turgenev had, it seemed to James, “a deeply 
intellectual impulse toward universal appreciation ”; he 
had form and grace and tenderness and irony. When 
James says that “the blooming fields of fiction” can 
hardly show “a group of young girls more radiant with 
maidenly charm ” than Turgenev’s, or when he says that 
these girls “ have to our sense a touch of the faintly acrid 
perfume of the New England temperament — a hint of 
Puritan angularity,” the remark throws a long light ahead 
on James’s own deep concern with the characters of 
women. And he must have had in mind a parallel be- 
tween Turgenev and himself when he wrote that “ Russian 
society, like our own, is in process of formation, the Rus- 
sian character is in solution, in a sea of change, and the 
modified, modernized Russian, with his old limitations and 


196 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


his new pretensions, is not, to an imagination fond of 
caressing the old, fixed contours, an especially grateful 
phenomenon.” James still drew considerably, and was 
long to draw, upon the “sprawling continent” at his 
back; but he was “ fond of caressing the old, fixed con- 
tours ” of Europe. 

He sustained his position as an expatriate in his subtle 
study of Hawthorne (1879), which he had been asked 
by John Morley to contribute to the English Men of 
Letters series and in which the recent disciple of Haw- 
thorne, while delicately appreciating the master, wrote 
into almost every page his accusation of provincialism 
against the entire American nation. ‘“ Certain national 
types,” he answered to Howells’s comment that it is no 
more provincial for an American to be very American 
than for an Englishman to be very English, “ are essen- 
tially and intrinsically provincial.” If James during 
these acclimatizing years reflected almost constantly upon 
the “international situation” it was because he stood 
in that situation himself. A good deal of what it meant 
for him may be found ripely remembered in his posthumous 
autobiographical fragment The Middle Years. But he 
had thousands of companions under the same spell in 
varying degrees: those of his nationality who, the Civil 
War being now over and methods of travel in Europe 
easier than in the home-keeping days of the republic, 
annually swarmed to Europe for vacations of culture. 
Whether Henry James sympathized with their aspirations 
or satirized their numerous awkwardnesses in the midst 
of manners less casual than those of the United States, 
he could not overlook them or that simplicity which he 


HENRY JAMES 197 


identified with provinciality. The ground they traversed 
furnished him a sort of literary terrain which excited his 
imagination precisely as the frontier, on which another 
set of Americans had faced the new as these Americans 
faced the old, had excited the imagination of Fenimore 
Cooper. Highly ironical as it may seem, it is still not 
highly fanciful to say that The American (1877), begun 
in Paris in 1875 at a time when James, though delighting 
in the art and companionship of Turgenev, was yet feel- 
ing somewhat excluded from French society, sprang from 
James’s conception of a romantic American gesture 
quaintly like that of Daniel Boone renouncing the settle- 
ments, the gesture on which Cooper founded the character 
of Leather-Stocking. It was, as James subsequently ex- 
plained, “ the situation, in another country and an aris- 
tocratic society, of some robust but insidiously beguiled, 
some cruelly wronged, compatriot: the point being in 
especial that he should suffer at the hands of persons 
pretending to represent the highest possible civilisation 
and to be of an order in every way superior to his own.” 
But when the opportunity for vindication came, the Amer- 
ican, as James conceived him, “ in the very act of forcing 
it home would sacrifice it in disgust,” not out of for- 
giveness but out of so great a contempt for those who 
had wronged him that he was unwilling to touch them 
even in a rich revenge. Nor does the plot at large fall, 
in its romantic qualities, below this instigating gesture. 
Christopher Newman, intensely self-made and American, 
is in love with the widowed daughter of the intensely 
ancient and French house of Bellegarde, which, though 
the daughter loves him in return, snubs him, snatches 


198 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


the lady from him, and drives her into a convent. Then, 
though Newman has found out that her mother and 
brother murdered her father, the American, making his 
large gesture, refuses to let the ax descend. Claire 
de Cintré, lovely as she is made out, belongs with the 
heroines who are too limp for life though not for romantic 
tragedy ; the mother and brother, James himself admitted, 
in real life would have been remarkably careful to get hold 
of Newman’s money — through marrying Mme. de Cintré 
to him if need be — before showing him too much scorn. 
Nor is Newman excessively convincing; “‘ before the Amer- 
ican business-man, as I have been prompt to declare, I 
was absolutely and irredeemably helpless, with no fibre 
of my intelligence responding to his mystery.” Yet these 
imperfect elements are tangled in a fine net of charm. 
Though the style is sparer, sharper than James’s style 
was to become, its texture is here firm wrth adroit allusions 
and observant wit, while the background of Paris abun- 
dantly though unobtrusively fills the picture. Vain as 
it must be to strive for all the perfections of Balzac, 
Flaubert, George Sand, and Turgenev at once, here still 

was something that looked toward a synthesis of their 
~ excellences — with a singular alloy from the older type 
of American romance which rejoiced to set the American 
hero patriotically up above the European crowd. 

As if to redress the balance or to atone for this pa- 
triotic zeal, The Europeans (1878) subjects two charm- 
ing persons from Europe, though with some of America 
in their blood, to the deadly seriousness which Henry 
James remembered as prevailing in the suburbs of Bos- 
ton. There is caricature in his Wentworths, with their 


HENRY JAMES 199 


large square house and large square consciences; there 1s 
perhaps less of it in the European cousins who find here 
so little use for the virtues of joy or flexibility; but the 
conflict of manners is nevertheless presented vith nearly 
as much detachment as brilliance. Following it came 
two shorter novels — nouvelles — also equipoised between 
the hemispheres. An International Episode (1879), 
which shows an American girl insulted by an English 
duchess and her daughter and then taking such revenge 
as she can by refusing to marry the duchess’s son, vexed 
the British, who in such matters were accustomed to 
look for satire entirely on their own side. Daisy Miller 
(1879) enraged the United States, where it was thought 
an aspersion upon American girlhood to represent an 
entirely virtuous but innocently daring young woman 
from Schenectady as conducting herself in Switzerland 
and Italy in a manner which confuses, and worse than 
confuses, a half-Europeanized young American who loves 
her. Fault was naturally found with Winterbourne, the 
man in the case, who as an American might have been ex- 
pected to understand Daisy’s behavior as any average 
American would. But of course to have found fault re- 
veals the naive temper of criticism in the late seventies. 
Henry James had done nothing more reprchensible than 
to make international comedy out of the situation chosen 
by Milton for his Comus. Daisy wears her rustic inno- 
cence to the revels, and, though traduced, would have 
emerged safely had Winterbourne been true to the simple 
faith of his nation. Washington Square (1881) James 
called “a tale purely American, the writing of which 
made me feel acutely the want of the ‘ paraphernalia’ ” 


200 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


of an established civilization. This want, however, did 
not prevent his making a dainty masterpiece, lucid and 
quiet and cool, ironical yet tender, out of his story of 
how poor dull Catherine Sloper dreamed she had a true 
lover and then found he was only a fortune-hunter after 
all. The fashion in which James here constantly explains 
America to his readers, as if they were of course to be 
Europeans, hints that he had traveled a long way from 
his native shores in a half-dozen years, as indeed he had. 
His concern in the international situation had begun to 
wear thin. 

It was, nevertheless, at this point in his career that 
he produced the first of his books which may be character- 
ized as magnificent, The Portrait of a Lady (1881). . Al- 
though Isabel Archer belongs in the charming line of those 
American girls whom James subtly traces through their 
European adventures, she is more important than any who 
had gone before her. She is but incidentally American, 
made so for the convenience of a creator who chose to dis- 
play her as moving across a scene already lighted by his 
imagination and familiarized by his art. James saw in 
her the type of youth advancing toward knowledge of 
life; of youth at first shy and slight in its innocence but 
flowering under the sun of experience to the fullest hues 
and dimensions of a complexity which might under differ- 
ent circumstances have lain dormant; of youth growing 
irresistibly to meet the destiny which growth compels. 
Had James belonged to another school he might have 
preferred a young man for protagonist; as it was he pre- 
ferred to watch the more subterranean alchemies which, 
with the fewest possible external incidents, gradually en- 


HENRY JAMES 201 


rich this sort of woman to maturity. The methods of his 
narrative were suggested by his theme. He would scrupu- 
lously keep the center of his subject within Isabel’s con- 
sciousness, careful not to make her an egoist but equally 
careful to reveal her qualities by his notation of the deli- 
cate refraction which the scenes and personages of her 
career undergo in passing through her. Working thus, 
he could not skimp her story. “I would build large,” he 
determined, “ in fine embossed vaults and painted arches, 
as who should say, and yet never let it appear that the 
chequered pavement, the ground under the reader’s feet, 
fails to stretch at every point to the base of the walls.” 
His scene shifts spaciously from Albany to the Thames, 
among English country houses more ripe and ample than 
anything James had yet described, on to Paris, Florence, 
Rome — “the inimitable France and the imcomparable 
Italy.” Nothing hurries the stream of the narrative, 
which has time for eddies and shallows, broad stretches of 
noon and deep ominous pools. Isabel, being young and 
desirable, and like most of James’s heroines allowed no 
career beside that incident to her sex, gets much of her 
education from being loved — by the too aggressive Bos- 
tonian Caspar Goodwood, by the healthy, manly Lord 
Warburton, by her cousin Ralph Touchett, most whimsical 
and wistful and charming of all Henry James’s men, and 
by the dilettante Gilbert Osmond. “She marries Osmond 
only to find out finally that she had been coldly tricked | 
into the marriage by Madame Merle, whom Isabel has 
thought her best friend when the woman is in reality — 
Osmond’s mistress anxious to get money for their illegiti- 
mate child. Something in the intricate, never quite pene- 


202... THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


trable fiber of the heroine sends her in the end back to her 
husband for the sake of her stepdaughter, thinking, it 
seems, that she thereby encounters her destiny more nobly 
than in any previous chapter of it. The conclusion, on 
various grounds, does not satisfy, but it consistently 
enough rounds out Isabel’s chronicle. Praise can hardly 
exaggerate the skill with which James at first warily in- 
vestigates as from without the spirit of the fresh young 
girl, gradually transfers the action to her consciousness, 
and thenceforth with almost no appearance of art reduces 
his story to the terms of her realization of her fate. In 
something of this delaying fashion life dawns upon its 
victims. “’Tis surely a graceful, ingenious, elaborate 
work,” James wrote of the Portrait to Stevenson, who dis- 
approved of it, “ with too many pages, but with (I think) 
an interesting subject and a good deal of life and style.” 
He might justly have said that as to life it was unfailing 
and as to style all gold and ivory. 

In his next two novels, The Bostonians (1886) and The 
Princess Casamassima (1886) he relinquished the advan- 
tage of international contrast. The first deals with a 
group of American oddities somewhat stridently set on 
improving the status of women. Henry James himself 
belonged with the school of those who hold, in a phrase 
which must almost have driven him to a different position, 
that woman’s place is the homme. He brought to his nar- 
rative the tory disposition to satire, and filled the book 
with sharp caustic portraits and an unprecedented amount 
of caricature. His Bostonians recall that angular army 
of transcendentalists whom Lowell’s essay on Thorcau 
hung up once for all in its laughable alcove of New Eng- 


HENRY JAMES 203 


land -history. James regards them only too obviously 
from without, choosing as the consciousness through which 
they are to be represented an engaging young reactionary 
from Mississippi, Basil Ransom, who invades this fussy 
henyard and carries away its prized heroine, Verena Tar- 
rant, on the very eve of her great popular success as @ 
lecturer in behalf of her oppressed but rising sex. By 
such a scheme James was naturally committed to making 
his elder feminists all out as unpleasant persons, preying 
on Verena’s youth and charm and enthusiasm, and bound 
to keep her for their campaign no matter what it might 
cost her in the way of love and marriage. But more than 
James’s own prejudices and his technical device contrib- 
utes to a certain insufficiency in The Bostonians. It is 
too largely skeleton, without the blood which might have 
come from heartier sympathies, without the flesh with 
which James might have been able to round out a “ purely 
American ” tale had he not forgotten so much about Amer- 
ican life. He had forgotten, or at least ceased to care 
greatly about it. Two visits to his native country during 
1881-1883 had left him still hungry for Europe, from 
which after 1883 he was not to return for over twenty 
years. 

The Princess Casamassima is wholly European as to 
setting and characters. In it the bewildering Christina 
Light of Roderick Hudson, now a discontented princess 
dabbling in revolution, appears again with a maturer mys- 
tery of temperament and an achieved diversity of whim. 
The romantic strain which James had lately been repress- 
ing here rose unashamed to the surface and invented a 
cock-and-bull yarn about a vast, malignant, ramifying 


204 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


secret society which—not unlike that in Brockden 
Brown’s Ormond so long before — was supposed to under- 
lie the whole of modern Europe, ready at almost any mo- 
ment to break out and set thrones and governments top- 
pling. With the Princess is involved the pathetic Hya- 
cinth Robinson, unacknowledged son of a lord and yet a 
book-binder by trade, who falls first into the vicious coils 
of the militant socialists, then into the kindly, though as 
it turns out no less fatal, coils of the Princess Casamas- 
sima, learns to admire the aristocracy, and comes to a 
tragic end. The story, James said, proceeded directly 
from his habit of walking the streets of London and re- 
flecting upon the possible Jot of some person who should 
have been produced by this civilization and yet should be 
condemned, as James decidedly had not been, to witness 
it from outside — that is, from outside the world of 
fashion and intelligence. Would not such a humble hero, 
if sensitive enough, long for all the privileges of such a 
civilization, plot against them when denied them, fall in 
love with them when invited to share them even transi- 
ently? The Princess Casamassima is James’s answer to 
his question ; it is, moreover, a superb tour de force. Al- 
though written as from some timid boudoir or club or 
milder hearth which trembles fantastically at devouring 
socialists, the book pleases by its variety and swiftness. 
It has, in the vulgar sense, a plot. And it is evidence, 
too, how thorough was the process of saturation going on 
in its author, that the background, splendid or sordid, of 
this novel is crowded with aspects of reality in the still 
life and racy yet believable characters to an extent that 
makes The Bostonians seem by comparison flat and empty. 


HENRY JAMES 205 


If the international novels had shown the “ dense cate- 
gories of dark arcana” of European life threatened by 
Americans, and The Princess Casamassima by revolution, 
The Tragic Muse (1890) showed them threatened by art. 
Nicholas Dormer resigns his seat in Parliament to become 
a mere portrait painter, to the ineffable horror of his 
very political mother and fiancée and patron. Parallel 
to his career is that of Miriam Rooth, who without at first 
being a lady contrives to become, with the help of genius, 
a great actress, incidentally refusing, for the sake of her 
art, a rising diplomat who proposes to make her the most 
brilliant lady in Europe. The conflict between art and 
“the world ” had early struck James as “one of the 
half-dozen great primary motives.” That conflict had 
governed and shaped his own career. So far as he had 
been a partizan at all in his pictures of life he had sided 
with “the world ” in its compacter, urbaner phases as 
against uncivilized crudity and cruelty. But now, stand- 
ing at the center of the compact, urbane “ world,” he 
studied the phenomenon of genius which deflects Nick Dor- 
mer from all that his caste regards as desirable or even 
respectable; and which makes Miriam seem “ important ” 
as a human being in spite of her shortcomings as an orna- 
ment of society: That singular personage Gabriel Nash, 
who has no art but the art of living and who has no réle in 
the novel but that of chorus, sums up the general prob- 
lem. It’s the simplest thing in the world; just take for 
granted our right to be happy and brave. What’s essen- 
tially kinder and more helpful than that, what’s’ more 
beneficent? But the tradition of dreariness, of stodgi- 
ness, of dull dense literal prose, has so sealed people’s eyes 


206 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


that they’ve ended by thinking the most natural of all 
things the most perverse.” Such notes the esthetic 
movement in England had been striking for a decade, but 
only Pater had struck them with the sustained power or 
linked sweetness of The Tragic Muse, and Pater had wnit- 
ten about the long past instead of producing, as James 
here does, a marvelous document on the artistic life of his 
own immediate days. Peter Sherringham from watching 
Miriam arrives at a perception “ of the perfect presence 
of mind, unconfused, unhurried by emotion, that any 
artistic performance requires and that all, whatever the 
instrument, require in exactly the same degree: the appli- 
cation, in other words, clear and calculated, crystal-firm 
as it were, of the idea conceived in the glow of experience, 
of suffering, of joy.” Such a statement implies that 
James had found a new aristocracy to imagine about — 
an aristocracy essentially more cosmopolitan than the 
shining barbarians of his “ perpetual Piccadilly ” and his 
innumerable country houses. | 

This shift in the objects of his imagination was con- 
nected with certain external facts. The popular success 
which James had hardly tasted except in the case of Daisy 
Miller but which he had confidently expected would be won 
by The Bostonians and The Princess Casamassima, had 
failed him. He felt hurt and mystified, for, contrary to 
the general notion, he desired more numerous plaudits than 
he got. He wanted money, though he had a competency ; 
he wanted the power that comes from recognition. For 
these reasons more than any other he gave the five years 
of 1889-1894 very largely to the writing of plays, work- 
ing enormously without any substantial reward, and finally 


HENRY JAMES 207 


concluding early in 1895 that “ you can’t make a sow’s 
ear out of a silk purse.” The same period, and partly the 
same motive, turned him from full-length novels. “ I want,” 
he had written to Stevenson in 1888, “ to leave a multitude 
of pictures of my time, projecting my small circular frame 
upon as many different spots as possible, . . . so that 
the number may constitute a total having a certain value 
as observation and testimony.” Of these briefer stories 
a notably large number deal with problems of the artistic 
life in its clashes with “the world.” The Author of 
Beltraffio (1885) had exhibited the wife of that pagan- 
spirited author as so afraid of her husband’s influence 
upon their son that she actually — if not quite deliber- 
ately — lets the boy die to save him from the fearful con- 
tamination. The Aspern Papers (1888) recounts the 
strife between the former mistress of the famous Jeffrey 
Aspern and the critic who wants to publish the poet’s 
letters. In The Lesson of the Master (1892) Henry St. 
George’s lesson to his disciple is that perfection in art 
may not normally be hoped for by a man whose powers are 
drawn away by wife and children. To The Yellow Book 
James contributed three studies richly suited to the pur- 
poses of a periodical aiming to erect a temple of art in 
the midst of British Philistia: The Death of the Lion 
(1894), in which the genius Neil Paraday dies neglected 
in a country house while his hostess gets credit for being 
his patron; The Coxon Fund (1894), laughably modern- 
izing Coleridge into the parasite Frank Saltram who 
sponges on the rich and devoted and foolish; The Next 
Time (1895), about poor Ralph Limbert who fails in his 
struggles to boil the pot because he is incapable of any- 


208 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


thing less than masterpieces, no matter how hard he tries. 
This group of stories may be said to end with The Figure 
in the Carpet (1896), with Hugh Vereker explaining to 
his critics how it is they must look in the whole of a 
writer’s work for the “ primal plan,” the string his pearls 
are strung on, the complex figure in the Persian carpet of 
his art. “If my great affair’s a secret,” said Vereker, 
“that’s only because it’s a secret in spite of itself... . 
I not only never took the smallest precaution to make it 
so, but never dreamed of any such accident.”. So Henry 
James might have reasoned in his own behalf. Obscurity 
was his destiny not his design. He had set out to record 
certain subtle relationships that he perceived binding men 
and women together in the human picture, and he would 
not call it his fault if his perceptions had proved more 
delicate than those of the reading public. He had tried to 
make national contrasts intcresting; he had tried to 
diversify his matter in the great novels of the eighties ; 
he had tried a new literary form in his plays and had, 
restricting himself for a time as to dimensions, written 
about the artistic life as no one had ever done in English. 
Nothing had availed him with the wider audience. He 
now gave up the battle, reconciled himself to his limited 
fate, discovered the house at Rye which was to bc his 
permanent residence till the end of his life, and settled 
down to the untrammeled practice of his art. 

Nothing could be more autobiographical, in a sense, 
than this later work of Henry James, exquisitely repro- 
ducing as it so often does the adventures of exquisite 
souls among thorns and pitfalls. To robuster disposi- 
tions he appears, of course, to be making an incredible 


HENRY JAMES 209 


fuss over nothing to speak of, and he did cease to interest 
any but that small group capable of caring about passions 
so delicate as these. But art may be great without be- 
ing popular, just as now and then some magnificent radi- 
ance of personality may light up a narrow corner. A 
flawless story published in 1895, The Altar of the Dead, 
somewhat forecasts James’s final type. It is the tale — 
almost an apologue — of a George Stransom who at an 
altar privately maintained in a dim church sets up, one 
after another, candles for his dead, himself gradually per- 
fected by his worship until at last he can complete the 
symmetry of his ritual by setting up a final candle to 
the memory of his bitter enemy, now forgiven. This 
narrow corner of existence glows with the whitest, purest 
light of a noble imagination. James’s themes, however, 
rarely rose quite so high. He chose to walk closer to the 
ground of usual events, expanding and elevating not the 
deeds of his characters but their sentiments. In The 
Spoils of Poynton (1897) the action is only a sordid 
squabble between a widow and her son over the possession 
of a house made beautiful with objects of art which she 
has collected there for a lifetime but which by the hard 
English law now belong not to her but to him and the 
stupid bride he means to take. Round this central strife 
the story grew from a tale to a novel, from a vivid episode 
to a drama richly conceived and decorated. Another 
novelist might have abused the law; some other might have 
sided with son ormother. Henry James reveals his drama 
through a third person, the gentle, unselfish Fleda Vetch, 
who shares the mother’s passion for beautiful things but 
who loves the son. James lacked the moral arithmetic 


210 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


which taught Howells in The Rise of Silas Lapham that 
wisdom demands the strictest economy in sacrifice: Fleda 
Vetch, though Owen Gereth loves her and not Mona Brig- 
stock, renounces him without lifting a hand, and condemns, 
along with herself, son and mother and doubtless wife to 
pain—and all seemingly with James’s approbation. 
But though in this regard sentimental and immoral, The 
Spoils of Poynton as regards structure, proportion, tex- 
ture, style, is accomplished perfection, the result of 
methods now matured and working upon their materials 
with absolute competence, without sign of effort or haste. 

It was natural that in imagining the world in its impact 
upon tender intelligences, Henry James should have made 
use of children as his focuses of sensation. What Maisie 
Knew (1897) records the disgusting annals of a “ fast ” 
set in London through the mystified innocence of Maisie 
Farange, whose father and mother, divorced and both 
married again, toss her back and forth from one to the 
other in the intervals of incessant infidelity. She sees the 
outer facts of these obscene menages — joined together, 
by the way, through the haison of the step-parents — 
without comprehending their inner horror. She is like a 
flower blooming in a filthy pool, by her shy beauty making 
the contrast a dreadful thing. That contrast is the plot. 
Charming though Maisie appears in her own right, and 
ugly as her companions are in theirs, the interest lies 
essentially in the relations between them and her. The 
spectator, aware that in time her innocence will sink down 
and ‘the dirty flood overwhelm her, constantly winces. 
Stil worse horrors, however, threaten in The Turn of the 
Screw (1898), an almost incomparable short story which, 


HENRY JAMES 211 


as a sort of moral sequel to What Maisie Knew, exhibits 
two children so corrupted by wicked servants that words 
will not utter the evil in them. Although a certain sym- 
bolism hints at the nature of this particular evil, James 
was careful not to identify it exactly. Horror multiplies 
with the vagueness. Maisie is menaced by a bad example 
which is understood however hated; Miles and Flora ap- 
pear to have been exposed to dim cosmic forces of evil which 
surround mankind as in the old Puritan cosmos, now and 
then expressed in actual sin but always huger than any- 
thing which can come of them. The Awkward Age 
(1899), also concerned with the young, brought James 
back from his far explorations to polite comedy again, 
to the problem of the young girl in a society full of 
innuendo and intrigue. But Nanda Brookenham’s experi- 
ences are swathed in such countless folds of reference and 
gossip that, artfully as the drama is expounded, it comes 
to the ear with a muffled sound, like agreeable voices heard 
speaking at a distance which lets the actual words die 
away on the wind. Five hundred pages of such matter 
strain the most loyal attention to irritation if not to 
disgust. And much the same thing must be said of The 
Sacred Fount (1901), which has a soul the size of a short 
story and a body enlarged to the size of a novel by the 
solicitude with which James walks round and round his 
theme, hinting, hinting, hinting. 

A consequence of the exubcrant insinuation with which 
he worked in the first five years of his freedom from hope 
in the public was that the public found itself, by the re- 
ports of those who had read these later books, confirmed 
in its disposition to neglect him. From these years dates 


212 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


the legend that he had consciously, almost spitefully, 
evolved a style which no one could read but which it was 
a jolly game to laugh at. The laughter grew into a 
cloud which obscured, and still in most quarters continues 
to obscure, the three superb novels with which, in prolific 
succession, he brought his art to its peak: The Wings of 
the Dove (1902), The Ambassadors (1903), The Golden 
Bowl (1904). As if with some recurrence of his younger 
interests, he deals in each of the three with the old situa- 
tion of Americans in Europe, but in a spirit no longer so 
reproachful toward them as being merely provincial or 
dowdy. James had ceased to be worried over the petty 
blunders of his traveling countrymen, now that he felt 
himself securely European and no longer felt the re- 
sponsibility which once had brought compatriotic blushes 
to his cheek. Like Mr. Longdon in The Awkward Age, 
an elderly Englishman who has retired to the country 
but is now drawn back to London again, James’s Ameri- 
cans in his maturest masterpieces bring into a fast and 
loose society certain old-fashioned virtues and graces, 
such as simplicity, truthfulness, monogamy, solvency. 
Even Lambert Strether in The Ambassadors, who, having 
gone from “ Woollett Massachusetts” to save a young 
friend from the naughtinesses of Paris, himself surrenders 
to the beautifully beguiling universe he has entered — 
even Strether holds fast to the integrity which has all 
along given strength to his natural sympathy and which 
will not allow him to profit by his amiable betrayal of his 
mission. Strether’s being an American who can be con- 
trasted with Europeans, however, does not exhaust his 
function. He stands also for a common enough human 


HENRY JAMES 218 


type, the individual brought up in a limited community 
who discovers too late, or almost too late, what richness, 
what content, what joy might have awaited him in some 
fuller existence. “ Live all you can; it’s a mistake not 
to,” Strether says in a speech which Henry James himself 
pointed out to be the essence of The Ambassadors. “ It 
doesn’t so much matter what you do in particular so long 
as you have your life. If you haven’t had that what have 
you had?” With some such precepts Pater had talked 
of the counted number of pulse-beats and had counseled 
a life lived at the flame. And in that transcendentalist 
New England which James partially inherited, Emerson 
and Thoreau had constantly urged the need of fullness and 
intensity of life. Strether’s situation flawlessly fits 
James’s idea. To get the largest value from them James 
had of course to make Strether another of his exquisite 
intelligences — rather too exquisite for his upbringing; 
he had, too, to make this abundant life into which Strether 
is initiated a life of lovely line and color, of gorgeous 
vesture and sweet, subtle, intoxicating atmosphere. All 
. James’s old powers came in upon him, with his new free- 
dom. The execution of The Ambassadors, which he 
thought his most perfectly constructed novel, is as richly 
imaginative as it is deliberate. 

James had annually increased the distance between his 
art and improvisation. He built novels now as architects 
do cathedrals, planning every stone in advance, testing 
every material, calculating every stress, visualizing every 
“elevation.” Without any impetuous drive of narrative 
to carry him on, or the clashes of melodrama, he peculiarly 
needed anxious prevision and conscientious workmanship. 


Q14 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


The Golden Bowl excellently illustrates this. Maggie 
Verver, an American girl, marries an Italian prince living 
in London, and her widowed father marries her friend 
Charlotte Stant. But there had been between Charlotte 
and the Prince before their marriages a secret intimacy 
which afterwards is resumed. With the fictive parapher- 
nalia customary to such cases — jealousy, peeping, revela- 
tions, revenges— James of course has nothing to do. 
He would no more have brought the matter into the courts 
than would Maggie Verver and her quiet father. For 
James, as for Maggie, the evil of the situation consisted 
less in the sin of adultery than in the ugliness of stealth 
and deceit. The problem is to bring the hidden offense 
into light, and the plot is merely the process by which the 
various characters, one after another, first only gradually, 
accidentally, then with suspicions hurrying dreadfully into 
convictions, discover and are discovered. When the truth 
has come up into the light, the story ends, with Verver and 
his wife departing for America. Tenuous as the sub- 
stance may seem to any first glance, The Golden Bowl is 
still solidly constructed beneath its sumptuous garment 
of phrases and clauses; careless of moral considerations 
as it may seem to any moralistic eye, it still glows with 
condemnation of the ugly and the sordid facts which here 
disrupt a charming microcosm. The story suggests the 
coming of a great summer sun after a midnight of slinking 
ghosts. 

In The Wings of the Dove the beauty and power of truth 
and goodness receive a tribute which has rarely been paid 
them in sophisticated novels. As Isabel Archer in The 
Portrait of a Lady has risen magnificently to meet life, 


HENRY JAMES 215 


so here Milly Theale magnificently rises to meet death. 
The book is the drama of her “ inspired resistance.” 
Without gross or overt agonies, she struggles to experi- 
ence “ as many of the finer vibrations as possible, and so 
achieve, however briefly and brokenly, the sense of having 
lived.” James made her a New Yorker, the last of her 
family, rich and free, as the best way he could imagine to 
endow her with all the ages, and he took her of course 
to Europe to inherit her domain. There her battle and 
collapse, since she moves through her fate like a reigning 
princess, draw a whole circle with and after her; and in 
the end her tragedy shakes them all. The particular 
blackness against which she is exhibited is the scheme of 
Kate Croy and her lover Merton Densher to make Milly 
believe he is in love with her in order that before her 
death she may leave him her fortune. Yet so radiant is 
the whiteness of Milly’s character that, though the plot 
superficially succeeds, the plotters are separated by dis- 
gust at their own shame. Every dexterity was required 
in such a story to keep Milly from seeming a prig or at 
best a tedious saint. James avoids this fatal defect by re- 
vealing her not so much in her words and deeds as in the 
effect she has on those who devotedly or selfishly surround 
her. She stands, as it were, in the midst of a splendid 
hall of mirrors, which give back her beauty from every 
angle and which themselves report her quest of a crowded 
existence during her numbered days. As she slowly fades 
under her malady the mirrors have an increasing task, 
until at last she is no longer visible except in them, where 
eventually her image lingers even after her death. Such 
puissance as hers does not lapse with bodily extinction, 


216 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


but lasts on as a remembered effluence of loveliness. If 
The Ambassadors is the best constructed of these three 
novels, and The Golden Bowl the most subtly suggestive, 
The Wings of the Dove is most elevated, most tender, most 
noble. 

They issued from what might be called the Indian sum- 
mer of James’s career as an American. ‘“ Europe,” he 
wrote in 1902, “ has ceased to be romantic to me, and my 
own country, in the evening of my days, has become so.” 
But his longing did not survive the visit which he lustrously 
chronicled in The American Scene (1907). From New 
-Hampshire to Florida, from New York to California, the 
sensations awakencd by the roaring continent overwhelmed 
him. Like an astronomer come down from his tower into 
the town, James fled back with his hands to his ears. 
The remainder of his life was more fragmentary than the 
rounded period 1896-1904. He resumed for a little while 
his theatrical ambitions; he wrote more short stories; he 
worked at the two novels, The Sense of the Past (origi- 
nally begun in 1900) and The Ivory Tower, which, though 
incomplete when posthumously published in 1917, have the 
special interest that the second of them employs the Ameri- 
can scene and both are accompanied by the dictated notes 
which he latterly made to assist him in his composition ; 
and he carried avowed autobiography through A Small 
Boy and Others (19138), Notes of a Son and Brother 
(1914), and the unfinished The Middle Years (1917). 
The war shattered his peace beyond repair. This lover 
of art who had not taken the trouble to form an opinicn 
concerning the Dreyfus case, who had little more to say 
of the Boer War than that it doubled his income tax, who 


HENRY JAMES 217 


had vaguely hoped that the war with Spain might educate 
Americans as imperialism had educated the English, who 
had looked with candid contempt upon the Irish aspira- 
tions for freedom, now woke to the crisis of the world 
with a passion which ceased only with his death in 1916. 
There was nothing complicated in his loyalty, nothing 
critical in his attitude toward the drama being enacted. 
His “ Europe ” — France, England, Italy — had been as- 
sailed in utter wantonness ; the barbarians were pounding 
at the gates and might at any moment break in to befoul 
the pavements and violate the shrines of his sacred city. 
His own distant country looked on without lifting a help- 
ing hand, and he saw no better way to signify his protest 
and his allegiance than by becoming a British citizen in 
1915, declaring “ civis Britannicus sum” with a Roman 
boast, and ending his career, as he had begun it, on the 
note of romance. 

Criticism must take account of the vast gulf across 
which those who like Henry James view with contempt 
those who do not, and in return those who do not like 
him view with incredulity those who do. Casual gossip 
says that his style by its obscurity has fixed the gulf 
there. While this indubitably operates with regard to 
certain of his later works, it can have nothing to do with 
The American, or The Europeans, or Daisy Miler, or 
Washington Square, or The Portrait of a Lady, which 
are all as pellucid as a clean spring. And even in the 
elaborate, maturer books the style is obscure only in the 
sense that it speaks of matters less blunt and tangible 
than those which most fiction deals with. Nor will the 
cosmopolitan aspect of his themes entirely explain the 


218 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


hindering gulf, as has been argued by patriots who wish 
to punish him for his expatriation. The three metropo- 
lises — New York, London, Paris — which mark the tri- 
angle of his chosen territory are objects of curiosity for 
an enormous audience. Indeed, nationalism hurts James 
worse than internationalism: he suffers from the sensi- 
tiveness to national differences which kept him concerned 
too much with them and too little with the universal human 
likenesses which transcend nationality. He was actually 
less able to forget his American origin than such an un- 
hesitant son of America as Whitman, for instance, who, 
taking his native land for granted, could send his imagi- 
nations out to all the corners of the world without worry- 
ing at the national boundaries thus crossed. Neither may 
James’s failure to touch the wider world he really aimed 
at be accounted for by his unceasing labors to perfect 
his technique of representation. These concerned himself 
alone, or such fellow craftsman or connoisseurs as find in 
his prefaces to the New York Edition (1907-09) the most 
remarkable commentaries ever made upon the art of fiction. 

James’s essential limitation may rather accurately be 
expressed by saying that he attempted, in a democratic 
age, to write courtly romances. He did not, naturally, 
go back for his models to the Roman de la Rose or Morte 
d’Arthur or Sidney’s Arcadia or the Grand Cyrus. But 
he did devote himself to those classes in modern society 
which descend from the classes represented by the roman- 
cers of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. His char- 
acters, for the most part, neither toil nor spin, trade nor 
make war, bear children in pain nor bring them up with 
sacrifices. The characters who do such things in his 


HENRY JAMES 219 


novels are likely to be the servants or dependents of others 
more comfortably established. His books consequently 
lack the interest of that fiction which shows men and 
women making some kind of way in the world — except the 
interest which can be taken in the arts by which the penni- 
less creep into the golden favor of the rich or the socially 
unarrived wriggle into an envied caste. James is the 
laureate of leisure. Morcover the leisure he cared to write 
about concerns itself in not the slightest degree with any 
action whatsoever, even games or sports. Love of course 
concerns it, as with all novelists. Yet even love in this 
chosen universe must constantly run the gauntlet of a 
decorum incomprehensible to all but the initiate. Deco- 
rum is what damns James with the public. In one of 
Chrétien de Troyes’s romances Lancelot, on his way to 
rescue Guinevere from a most precarious situation, com- 
mits the blunder of riding part of the way in a cart and 
thereby brings upon himself a disgrace which his most 
gallant deeds can scarcely wipe out. Sensible citizens 
who may have happened upon this narrative in the twelfth 
century probably felt mystified at the pother much as do 
their congeners in the twentieth who stare at the wounds 
which James’s heroes and heroines suffer from blunders 
intrinsically no more serious than Lancelot’s. How much 
leisure these persons must enjoy, the sensible citizen thinks, 
to have evolved and to keep up this mandarin formality; 
and how little use they make of it! Only readers accus- 
tomed to such decorums can walk entirely at ease in the 
universe James constructed. But they have the privi- 
leges of a domain unprecedented and unmatched in modern 
literature. It is not merely that he is the most fascinating 


220 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


historian of the most elegant society of the century. He 
is the creator of a world immensely beautiful in its own 
right: a world of international proportions, peopled by 
charming human beings who live graceful lives in settings 
lovely almost beyond description; a world which vibrates 
with the finest instincts and sentiments and trembles at 
vulgarity and ugliness; a world full of works of art and 
learning and intelligence, a world infinitely refined, a world 
perfectly civilized. In real life the danger to such a 
world is that it may be overwhelmed by some burly rush 
of actuality from without. In literature the danger is 
that such a world will gradually fade out as dreams fade, 
and as the old romances of feudalism have already faded. 
Elaborate systems of decorum pass away; it is only the 
simpler manners of men which live forever. 


CHAPTER IX 
THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 


1. Varirep TyYprs 


Tue decade 1880-1890 produced more good novels than 
any other American decade. Howells was then at his 
height in A Modern Instance, The Rise of Silas Lapham, 
Indian Summer, A Hazard of New Fortunes; Mark Twain 
in The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, A Connecticut 
Yankee mn King Arthur’s Court; Henry James in Wash- 
mgton Square, The Portrait of a Lady, The Princess 
Casamassima, The Tragic Muse. It was the decade which 
saw the beginnings and the most brilliant successes of 
Francis Marion Crawford, the story-teller par excellence 
among American novelists, and Frank R. Stockton, de- 
lightful inventor of joyous extravaganza. It was the 
decade of Wallace’s Ben-Hur, of Cable’s The Grandissimes, 
of E. W. Howe’s The Story of a Country Town, of Blanche 
Willis Howard’s Guenn, of Helen Hunt Jackson’s Ramona, 
of Henry Adams’s Democracy and John Hay’s The Bread- 
Winners, of Constance Fenimore Woolson’s East Angels, 
of Margaret Deland’s John Ward, Preacher, of Edward 
Bellamy’s Looking Backward. In spite of the popularity 
of the short story, the novel prospered. The publication 
of novels serially in magazines had not yet begun to 


decline. Criticism of the art attained a high dignity in 
221 


299 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


the hands of Howells and Henry James; Bayard Tucker- 
man wrote A History of English Prose Fiction (1882) 
which included American authors; and Sidney Lanier used 
his lectures on The English Novel (1883) as the vehicle 
for a load of passionate opinions concerning literature. 
By the eighties practically all the types of fiction known to 
the United States had been invented and all of them were 
in use. Domestic sentimentalism of course still walked its 
everlasting way of tears with an abundant audience. 
The romance of adventure, though degraded to the dime 
novel for the most part, asked no quarter from the critical. 
The historical tale kept up its ancient habits with the past, 
sweetening and decorating it. The international novel, 
sometimes rather the exotic romance, was having its day, 
not only in Howells and James but in various followers. 
Local color, tending toward the romantic, divided the 
principal field with realism, tending away from it. The 
novel with some sort of purpose continued to be a tool 
ready to almost every hand. And there were also certain 
gaily whimsical stories of a sort new to the country if not 
to the language. 

The novels of the eighties cannot be reduced to any 
such simple formulas as suffice with the romance of 
Cooper’s school or with the tearful tales of the fifties. 
They show diversities of style and structure, of artistic and 
moral attitude, as well as topographical variety. In gen- 
eral they represent a decisive advance in simplicity and 
reality. Characters were now no longer required to speak 
the stilted language or to feel the quivering sentiments 
that had once seemed symptoms of nobility of soul. At 
the same time, but little advance had been made in the 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 223 


direction of studied raciness or strenuous naturalism. 
Howells’s honest decency set the tone for the period. 
As the master was often saved from seeming thin and 
tame only by his unfailing grace and mellow wisdom, the 
disciples, inferior in these respects, did not always escape 
thinness or tameness. The preoccupation with local color 
encouraged love of surfaces, if not a satisfaction with sur- 
faces alone; so that, though the local color novel was 
likely to be a more serious performance than the short 
story of the type, it nevertheless suffered from the con- 
tagion of triviality. The fiction of the eighties suffered, 
too, from the delicate contagion of gentility. At the best 
it imparted daintiness and charm; at the worst, timidity 
and bloodlessness. The violent currents of political life 
during the decade, which brought a new party into power 
for the first time in a quarter of a century; the rising 
warfare upon established economic privilege; the rapid 
growth in luxury and sophistication — these but faintly 
appear in the novels which the decade brought forth, ex- 
cept for those specifically designed to redress grievances 
or to expose wrongs. Ordinarily, ideas played but a 
small part. Nor was this absence of ideas compensated 
for, again except in special cases, by large ranges of per- 
sonality or depths of passion or impressive beauty or 
truth. The lives which these novels represent have little 
to do with the clash of the times in religious or moral, 
any more than in political, matters. Even in the love 
affairs which make up the great bulk of all such narra- 
tives the complications are of the simplest and the psy- 
chology simpler still. The very young do most of the 
loving, innocently, pathetically, hardly ever realistically or 


224 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


tragically. If love is simple, so is livelihood. While 
many of the novels do indeed concern themselves with the 
poor, it is the more or less contented poor of the older 
American villages where no serious poverty existed. In 
but few cases do the heroes and heroines of the eighties 
contend with the society in which they live, and then rarely 
indeed with the approval of their authors. Fiction, in 
short, had not assumed the heavier burdens laid on it by 
a subsequent generation, but existed largely for entertain- 
ment. 

If it was thus limited in certain directions, so was it 
freed in others. It recognized no obligation to be polemic, 
though it could be so on occasion. It did not look re- 
lentlessly for victims of the social order who might be ele- 
vated into champions of a higher truth. It did not feel 
obliged to take many exceptions to the broad average cur- 
rent of human existence. It chose the simpler emotions 
for the reason that American character was simple. It 
preferred to make as much of the cheerful aspects of life 
as possible, because that was the general American pref- 
erence, even when there was much unpleasantness to be 
blinked at. With such a temper prevalent, the style of 
fiction naturally became lighter and gayer. It discarded 
the blocks of description which the older romances had 
admitted and the showers of tears which had immediately 
preceded the Civil War. Having taken stock of technical 
methods, it varied its structures with its themes, gave an 
increased attention to dialect and dialogue, studied the 
problems of proportion and emphasis. The decade made 
a highly eclectic use of foreign models. Lanier devoted 
nearly a half of his study of the English novel to George 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 225 


Eliot, who was influential in many quarters. The writers 
of local color novels in not a few instances showed traces of 
Thomas Hardy. Ben-Hur recalls both Bulwer-Lytton 
and Victor Hugo. Aldrich and Cable and Bunner had 
obviously read such Frenchmen as Merimée, About, 
Daudet, Maupassant, though with reservations. Toward 
the end of the decade Zola began to be heard, particularly 
railed at, however, by the orthodox. Henry James and 
Howells investigated and expounded Turgenev; James 
added most of the French novelists of the time; Howells 
added Dostoevsky and his master passion Tolstoy, as well 
as the Spanish Galdés, Valdés, Valera, and the Italian 
Verga; while both Howells and James had something to 
say of almost every eminent European who practised fic- 
tion. Though eclectic, the American novel was not un- 
warrantably imitative. It had certain traditions of its 
own and followed them. It was faithful to American life, 
at least to those phases which it chose to record. Its 
points of view were clearly national. Without achieving 
methods as distinctive as those of the short story, the 
American novel was still a distinctively, unmistakably 
native product. : 

In the department of domestic sentimentalism the most 
widely read rivals of E. P. Roe and his kind who appeared 
in the eighties happened both to be Lancashire women 
resident in America: Frances Hodgson Burnett, whose 
Little Lord Fauntleroy (1886) moistened millions of un- 
critical eyes with its account of the American child in- 
structing the British aristocracy in democratic manners; 
and Amelia Edith Barr, whose swift, kindly pen played 
over all the fields of fiction except the distinguished. In 


226 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


the romance of adventure Anna Katharine Green Rohlfs 
made something of a new departure with her very suc- 
cessful detective stories, and Captain (later General) 
Charles King became the first novelist of the American 
army, with his brisk stories of field and camp and military 
post. The historical novel, for which Howells and James 
cared so little, suffered some neglect, though Ben-Hur 
belonged to that form and A Connecticut Yankee bur- 
lesqued it; John Esten Cooke worked in it till his death in 
1886; Marion Crawford handled past and present with 
almost equal ease; and at the end of the decade several 
writers began to point forward to the historical-romantic 
‘best sellers”? which crowded the nineties. The older 
fashion of sea tales and foreign adventure, now fallen into 
abeyance, had been succeeded by the milder comedy of 
international manners, as handled by Howells and James. 
Mark Twain, of course, handled it humorously, and Craw- 
ford, when he liked, with vigorous knowledge. A tragic 
note infrequent in these international comedies was struck 
by Blanche Willis Howard’s Guenn (1884), the story of 
an American painter in a Breton village and the hopeless, 
fatal love which he awakens in a young girl there. Most 
such novels represented their Americans as a little be- 
wildered by the superior complexity of European man- 
ners; to Guenn, wild and simple, Hamor seems rich and 
strange and great. The story, founded, it is said, on the 
actual experience of a painter who is still living, charm- 
ingly preserves the spirit of a day when American artists 
were mad with the love of France and swarmed over it 
in pursuit of the beauty and quaintness which at the 
moment seemed to reside there as nowhere else. 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 227 


Novels of foreign life might have flourished more nu- 
merously had it not been for the zest with which the rarer 
materials of existence were pursued at home. Better 
though the local color writers were in short stories than in 
novels, their longer novels cannot be overlooked. Bret 
Harte, in such attempts as The Story of a Mine (1878), 
Maruja (1885), Cressy (1889), A Waif of the Plains 
(1890), as in other brief novels like them, did no more 
than to expand short stories with a loss of effectiveness 
in proportion as he expanded them. And Gabriel Con- . 
roy (1876), a long novel, for all the novelty and even 
riches of its contrasts of California civilizations, is la- 
mentably deficient as regards conception, structure, and 
suspense. With certain touches here and there of Harte’s 
romantic charm or insinuating irony, it is for the most 
part mere melodrama, without even the distinction of being 
swift or thrilling as melodrama should be. The contrast 
of Californian civilizations led Helen Hunt Jackson to 
write one of the most moving of American romances. 
In A Century of Dishonor (1881) she had begun her in- 
dictment of the United States government for its treat- 
ment of the Indians. In Ramona (1884) she carried the 
indictment further, bringing her passion to bear in a new 
guise. What Uncle Tom’s Cabin had done to make known 
the wrongs of the black slaves, Ramona attempted to do 
for the red wards of the nation. It was no longer pos- 
sible to take Fenimore Cooper’s attitude toward the Indian 
as a lofty child of nature; since Cooper’s day there had 
been the wars with the Sioux and the massacre of Custer. 
Mrs. Jackson eluded the difficulty by making Ramona, 
the heroine, and her Temecula husband Alessandro so near 


228 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


to high caste Mexicans in color and nurture that their 
wrongs as Indians seem hardly typical of the real griev- 
ances of their unfortunate race. They suffer little more 
from the invading Yankees than do the proudest Mexicans. 
Indeed, the true conflict and injustice occur between the 
old Californians, Indian or Spanish, and the predacious 
vanguard of the Anglo-Saxon conquest. For Mrs. Jack- 
son California had been a splendid paradise of patri- 
archal estates, in vast fertile valleys, steeped in a drowsy 
antiquity, and cherished by fine, unworldly priests. 
Against this rich background she set a story which begins 
in peace, blackens to hard and ugly tragedy, and then 
grows at the end to peace again. The pomp of the set- 
ting, the strength of the contrasts, the eloquence, the in- 
tensity, the passionate color — these dominate, almost 
submerge, the problem with which the narrative is con- 
cerned ; but they also tend to lift it above controversy, into 
those higher regions of the imagination in which particu- 
lar acts of injustice take on a universal significance, in 
which blunders become tragedies not temporary accidents. 

Ramona was a local color novel which had a passionate 
aim and a large historical background as well as quaint 
surfaces. Two novels of the Mississippi Valley, G. W. 
Cable’s The Grandissimes (1880) and E. W. Howe’s The 
Story of a Country Town (1883), illustrate the range 
which the type permitted. The Grandissimes is to New 
Orleans what Irving’s Knickerbocker History might have 
been to New York had Irving given himself less to comic 
history and more to witty romance. For his period 
Cable chose the year of the purchase of Louisiana by the 
United States, but the entire history of the old province 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 229 


lies behind his narrative, constantly showing through; for 
his scenc he chose New Orleans, but action shifts, at least 
by report, to plantation and bayou, forest and swamp. 
No other American novel represents such a mingling of 
races: French and Spanish and German and Yankee, 
Creole and quadroon, Indian aborigines, and negro slaves 
who speak a strange jargon of French and English but 
who have the instincts of Africa in their blood. This 
New Orleans is a city of austere castes and almost incom- 
prehensible customs, never too obviously explained, though 
hinted at with laughing dexterity. The central plot, 
which shows the houses of Grandissime and De Grapion 
at war and then reconciles and unites them by marriage, 
loses itself, unfortunately, in a maze of episodes. But the 
episodes glitter under a treatment and a style to the last 
_ degree allusive, sparkling, felicitous. By comparison, The 
Story of a Country Town moves with the cold tread and 
hard diction of a saga. It has, indeed, various romantic 
elements: there is a mill in a dark wood; the church bell 
tolls fitfully in high winds; certain of the characters prowl 
about ominously midnight after midmght. The author, 
whose first book this was, apparently did not know how 
to give it the sense of locality. It is as if the bare, sun- 
burned Kansas plain, on which the action passes, had no 
real depth, no mystery in itself, no native motif but the 
smoldering discontent of an inarticulate frontier. If it 
lacks locality, so does it lack relief, comedy, poetical 
touches, and above all that flowing optimism which too 
often weakened the books of the period. The Story of a 
Country Town is the sternest, the grimmest of American 
novels — and it was published the same year as Mark 


230 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Twain’s joyous Life on the Mississippi. If happiness or 
gaiety ever lighted up Fairview and Twin Mounds Howe’s 
story does not tell it. There is something symbolic about 
the figure of the narrator’s father, the Rev. John West- 
lock, who outwardly practises the most ferocious Calvin- 
ism and yet is daily haunted by gorgeous processions of 
sin sweeping before his eyes, until he runs off with a 
vulgar woman to an existence more miserable than the 
first. Symbolic, too, is Lytle Biggs, who serves as im- 
pudent chorus with a cynicism that plays over the face of 
the story, cheapening and corroding all it touches. Howe 
wrote about Twin Mounds as Crabbe wrote about the 
English village — determined, it seems, to paint it “ As 
Truth will paint it, and as Bards will not”: a neigh- 
borhood as barren of beauty and elevation as of lakes 
and mountains; dogmatic without being religious, ambiti- 
ous enough without having any intelligent aims, indus- 
trious but futile. A Parisian never wrote more 
contemptuously of provincial life. And yet beneath 
this cold exterior, which will not let the narrative or the 
dialogue be flexible for one moment, lurks authentic power. 
No shallow mind could have conceived the blind, black, 
impossible passion of Joe Erring, who loves like a back- 
woods Othello; no tepid mind could have conducted such a 
passion through its catastrophe to the purgation and 
tranquillity which succeed. That Howe, though he wrote 
another novel or two, ended his career as a novelist almost 
where he began it, meant a grave loss to American fiction. 
He made himself a successful country journalist, a wise 
and ineffably disillusioned country sage; but the energy 
of his imagination sought other channels than the novel. 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 231 


Howe had taken a step beyond Edward Eggleston on 
the way to that stiffening of the conscience which brought 
the naturalism of the next decade, but in the eighties he 
had no fellow except Joseph Kirkland of Illinois, who wrote 
the crude, truthful Zury (1887). Elsewhere local color 
produced few novels that need to be called by name. 
Cable wrote others for Louisiana; Charles Egbert Crad- 
dock now and then turned away from the short story 
with her Tennessee material; as did Sarah Orne Jewett in 
New England, H. C. Bunner in New York, and Richard 
Malcolm Johnston in Georgia. An unusual control over 
a diversity of sections appears in the work of Constance 
Fenimore Woolson, a grandniece of Fenimore Cooper, 
who during the eighties had a promise that seemed to rank 
her little below Howells and James and Crawford. She 
lived in turn in the Great Lakes region, particularly 
Mackinac, in the devastated, reviving South of Reconstruc- 
tion times, and in Italy, applying her art to all of her 
neighborhoods. Henry James found her deserving of a 
fairly extended critique from a pen which did not often 
condescend to the underwoods of literature. Her storics 
are perhaps as good as her novels, but she has not quite 
survived by virtue of either. And yet East Angels 
(1886), that glowing, rich-hued picture of the Florida of 
the tourist, just misses being a classic. To be mistress 
of all the local colors will not make a writer even a minor 
classic unless something else is added — some superior 
grace as in Cable or superior veracity as in E. W. Howe. 

Little as most of the novels of the period touched upon 
its public affairs, some of them were not silent. Albion 
Winegar Tourgée’s A Fool’s Errand (1879) called atten- 


232 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


tion to the problem of the freedman. Henry Adams in 
Democracy (1880) drew a caustic picture of society and 
politics in Washington — a city strangely neglected in 
American literature, which can hardly point to a dozen 
political novels of any merit whatever. John Hay’s The 
Bread-Winners (1884) made a sensation by its defense 
of the old economic order against the increasing claims 
of labor. Margaret Deland’s John Ward, Preacher 
(1888), like the exactly contemporary Robert Elsmere of 
Mrs. Humphry Ward, aroused wide controversy by its 
account of a husband and wife so divided on doctrinal 
grounds that their lives are shattered. In the American 
novel it is the husband who is orthodox and the wife who 
is latitudinarian, but here as in the English book stress 
falls upon the consequences to love of such a difference. 
Though no civilized human being can now do more than 
stare at the zeal which impels John Ward in his efforts 
to save his wife’s soul by teaching her to believe in the 
fires of hell, by no means all the passion of the book has 
faded out. In the same year with John Ward appeared 
a work of fiction which caught the immediate public as 
hardly any book of its theme had ever done before. The 
book was Edward Bellamy’s Looking Backward 2000- 
1887, and the theme was communism. Hundreds of thou- 
sands of copies were sold with a tumult of acclamation; 
the book went round the world; a political party — the 
Nationalist party — was founded on Bellamy’s doctrines. 
Howells’s 4 Hazard of New Fortunes and his Altrurian 
writings bear witness to the influence Bellamy exerted in 
literary circles. Reversing the scheme of The Connecticut 
Yankee Bellamy allows his narrator to sleep until the year 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 233 


2000 and then to wake upon a Utopian Boston which, like 
the rest of the world. has moved forward, without revolu- 
tion, to a rational adjustment of production and distribu- 
tion, and has perfected the conditions of human life. In 
his glad millennium all capital belongs to the community 
and all labor contributes to it ; the inequality of reward has 
disappeared, for men and women all share alike, however 
different may be the tasks to which they arc assigned by 
the most careful selection; intelligent planning has in- 
creased the wealth of the community, wealth has increased 
leisure, and leisure has increased joy and goodness. Bel- 
lamy’s specific solutions of the ancient problem matter 
less to the history of American fiction than the fact that he 
found an enormous public ready to snatch from his ro- 
mance some sort of consolation in a vast discontent. 

At the opposite pole from Bellamy was Frank R. Stock- 
ton (1834-1902), in whom whimsy reached something like 
its apogee. Stockton, a Philadelphian, first worked at 
wood-engraving but deserted it for literature, which he 
reached by the unusual avenue of fairy tales and juvenile 
journalism. s in his fairy tales he had made his fanciful 
creatures behave, as far as possible, after the manner 
of the real world, so into his maturer stories of the rcal 
world he constantly infused a fairy irresponsibility. His 
earliest important book, Rudder Grange (1879), illus- 
trates all his qualities. The suggestion came from an 
actual maid in Stockton’s household, whom he called 
Pomona both in fact and in fiction, and around whose pre- 
posterous deeds and words and tastes he built up a little 
cycle of improbabilities. Pomona, after a youth largely 
devoted to the kind of literature that entranced Tom 


234 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Sawyer, marries a farmer who has ague at the altar; 
spends her honeymoon partly in a lunatic asylum as guest 
not inmate; and later has a child which so much occupies 
her mistress that the master of the house hires another 
child to amuse himself with. ‘The household which Pomona 
adorns is joyfully mad. Part of the time it inhabits a 
canal boat. Later it lets its house so that master and 
mistress can have the fun of tenting on the estate, though 
after a little they become bored and take refuge in their 
own house, which is that same day deserted by the pair 
which has leased it but now prefers to live in the tent, 
which they have discovered without knowing to whom it 
belongs. Still later the Rudder Grangers find a deserted 
tavern in which they take immense delight, disturbed only 
by travelers who insist on being entertained there. To 
the outward eye the novel resembles realism. The char- 
acters look real, they speak like beings who are real 
enough. But their adventures are the adventures of a 
Gilbert and Sullivan opera — one rollicking confusion 
which, so popular did it prove, had later to be con- 
tinued in The Rudder Grangers Abroad (1891) and 
Pomona’s Travels (1894). 

Stockton’s fancy found the short story peculiarly con- 
genial, and the dilemma he invented for his brief tale The 
Lady or the Tiger? (1882) won him his largest single 
applause. On the whole, however, his masterpiece was 
The Casting Away of Mrs. Lecks and Mrs, Aleshine 
(1886), which also had a sequel, The Dusantes (1888). 
The dauntless Mrs. Lecks and Mrs. Aleshine come, like 
Pomona, from reality, from two middle-aged women who 
knew too little of the world outside of their village ever 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 235 


to be surprised at anything which could possibly happen 
to them elsewhere. To them in the story it happens that 
they are wrecked in the Pacific Ocean, paddle themselves 
in life-preservers, using oars as brooms, to an island 
which might have been deserted but which instead has a 
comfortable house on it, and there begin housekeeping as 
cheerfully as if they were in Meadowville, scrupulously 
depositing each week in a gingcr jar on the mantelpiece a 
sum for board, minus a fair charge for their services in 
doing the housework. After a train of incidents which 
joyfully, though not too obviously, parody all the liter- 
ature of shipwreck, they are restored to the United States ; 
but they have left behind them a letter which so piques 
the curiosity of the real owners, the Dusantes, that those 
migratory personages follow Mrs. Lecks and Mrs. Aleshine 
and their companions to the United States, especially to 
return the money which Mr. Dusante is far too hospitable 
to be willing to keep. Mr. Dusante, who has an adopted 
mother with him, encounters in Mrs. Lecks a moral prin- 
ciple equal to his own and finds she will not take back the 
money; the sequel is largely devoted to the fate of the 
ginger Jar. If Stockton’s fantastic invention is here at 
its most luxuriant, so is his manner at its gravest. His 
tongue 1s only stealthily in his check, and his voice is as 
calm and level as if he were reciting the multiplication 
table. Thus inspired liars lie — sailors back from dis- 
tant voyages and yarning to landlubbers, cowboys 
“ stringing ” tenderfeet with tales of local. dangers, Sind- 
bads and Munchausens. 

Stockton dictated his stories lying comfortably in a 
hammock in summer and in an easy chair in colder weather. 


236 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


His delight in circumstantial mendacity was so unfailing 
that he often spun his matter out too thin, and he never 
concerned himself with the problem of structure beyond 
what he needed to give point to an episode. His variety 
came largely from within. At the same time, he was 
observant of costume and dialect. He amused himself 
particularly with the negroes and certain odd whites whom 
he encountered in the South (Virginia was latterly his 
home) and who make The Late Mrs. Null (1886) a con- 
tinual delight. In New Jersey, where he spent much of 
his life within surburban distance of New York, he con- 
stantly studied the village types, and above all the sailors 
along the coast, whose habits with regard to the sober 
truth fell in admirably with his own. Stockton’s mariners 
are among his happiest devices. They furnish a natural 
excuse for fibbing, and they themselves, rakish and tarry, 
give comic opera touches which nothing else in Stockton 
quite equals. The three seamen who in The Dusantes 
tattoo the barn and set out onions according to nautical 
designs may be said to head the humorous crew, but they 
have many rivals for preéminence. Stockton’s invention 
rarely flagged. The Adventures of Captain Horn (1895) 
plays with the search for hidden treasure in South 
America: its sequel, Mrs. Cliff's Yacht (1896), goes lark- 
ing among pirates, who interested Stockton in other books 
as well. He cheerfully perlustrated the strangest climes 
and ages, with a blithe inconsequence heaping all his 
visions together, as if he were some jovial Spenser taking 
a vacation in Fairyland. He delighted, too, in imaginary 
science, like that which in The Great Stone of Sardis 
(1898) proves that the center of the earth is one immense 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 237 


crystal, and in imaginary machines such as those for 
making war prohibitive in The Great War Syndicate 
(1889). In such directions he carried his fooling to an 
extravagance and a tenuity which have punished him 
with inpermanence, the fate, indeed, of most lighter com- 
edy. But in his three or four genuine successes he 
achieved more with merry farce than any other American 
novelist. Stockton should have credit, too, for his serv- 
ices in rendering popular the briefer type of novel called 
in America the novelette, the vogue of which was estab- 
lished during the eighties and early nineties. 

With Stockton may be mentioned Eugene Field, much 
better known for his verse and his comic skits than 
for his fiction, and yet the author of at least one novel — 
if it may be called a novel — which has achieved among 
book-lovers a little immortality. The Love Affairs of a 
Bibliomaniac (1896) chronicles no passions more violent 
than the desire for books, but it chronicles that desire in 
forms as diversified as Field’s own carcer as a collector, 
and in a tone as piquant and whimsical as that of his own 
personality. The tale is packed with charming episodes 
and vagaries recognizable by all the book-hunting tribe; 
indeed, it exhibits, in an unpretentious way, an unusual eru- 
dition playing over the amiable regions of literature which 
Field himself had explored. But the bibliomaniac of the 
narrative, though largely studied from Field’s own tastes, 
is also an actual creation, extended, if not enlarged, from 
the life by the addition of adventures which every book- 
collector has imagined himself as having, and portrayed 
with the sprightly humor and wistful grace which Field 
generally reserved for his verse. Something like the same 


238 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


quaint or homely touches may be found in two other novels 
of the period which both exploit elderly, eccentric, charm- 
ing heroes: F. Hopkinson Smith’s Colonel Carter of 
Cartersville (1891), displaying the type of old school 
Virginia gentleman now firmly fixed in the popular imag- 
ination; and Edward Noyes Westcott’s David Harum 
(1898), a novel dominated by a shrewd, racy-tongued up- 
state New Yorker who holds a comfortable place in the 


long American tradition of the unlettered philosopher and 
humorist. - 


2. Francis Marion Crawrorp 


In the eighties began the career of that later American 
writer who gave to the novel his most complete allegiance, 
undeflected by the vogue of briefer narratives, which he 
only barely attempted, or by other forms of imaginative 
literature. Francis Marion Crawford, descendant of the 
Revolutionary general and son of the sculptor, Thomas 
Crawford, was born at Bagni di Lucca, Tuscany, in 1854. 
Though the father lived in Rome, he sent his son to pre- 
pare for college at St. Paul’s School, New Hampshire, 
and then to Harvard; but Crawford soon left Cambridge 
to study successively at the English Cambridge, Heidel- 
berg, and Rome. Having become interested in Sanskrit, 
and having lost the expectation of a fortune, he went to 
India and there edited The Indian Herald at Allahabad. 
But he shortly returned to America, spent another year 
upon Sanskrit with Professor Lanman of Harvard, and 
wrote his first novel, Mr. Isaacs (1882), on the advice of 
an uncle who had been struck by Crawford’s oral account 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 239 


of a Persian jewel merchant who in the story is elaborated 
into the mysterious protagonist. The success was prompt 
and complete, like that of George Wood in The Three 
Fates (1892), which is admitted to be partly autobio- 
graphical. Crawford recognized his vocation once for all. 
The melodramatic Doctor Claudius, with its unabashed 
mixture of nationalities and characters and motives, fol- 
lowed the next year. Thomas Bailey Aldrich asked for a 
serial in the Atlantic and got A Roman Singer (1884), 
the story of an Italian urchin with a marvelous voice 
who rises to fame and marries the daughter of a Prussian 
count. To Leeward (1884) tells how the English wife 
of an Italian husband deceives him and is murdered for it. 
In An American Politician (1885) Crawford did what 
an innocent bystander could with politics as played in 
Boston. Zoroaster (1885), written also in French by 
Crawford himself, plunged headlong into the past, into 
affairs of intrigue and love in the Persia of Darius. Craw- 
ford’s recollections of that period of his schooling which he 
had passed at Hatfield Regis appeared in A Tale of a 
Lonely Parish (1886). Marzio’s Crucifiz (1887), written 
also in French as well, deals with the career of an Italian 
metal worker at Rome who carries on the ancient traditions 
of Benvenuto Cellini but who is bewildered by modern ideas. 
Paul Patoff (1887) was based upon adventures which 
Crawford had himself had in Constantinople. Saracinesca 
(1887) first represented the great Roman family of 
Saracinesca. With the Immortals (1888) brought Heine, 
Chopin, Julius Cesar, Leonardo da Vinci, Francis the 
First, Dr. Johnson, the Chevalier Bayard, and Pascal to- 
gether in a delightful post-mortem symposium near Sor- 


240 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


rento, where with certain fortunate mortals they discuss 
human affairs. 

In half a dozen years Crawford had written ten novels 
of a remarkable variety, and the remainder of his life but 
continued this brilliant beginning. Having returned to 
Italy in 1883, he thereafter spent most of his life at 
Sorrento in a quiet activity almost never disturbed. As 
no biography has been published, the published facts of 
his career are not numerous. It is generally known, how- 
ever, that he continued to travel widely, married, grew 
wealthy from the sale of his novels, became a Roman 
Catholic, and died in 1909. 

Except that toward the end of his life Crawford partly 
turned from fiction to sober — and not remarkably spirited 
— history, he can hardly be said to have changed his 
methods from his earliest novel to his last. Improvisa- 
tion was his knack and forte; he wrote rapidly and much 
— sometimes an entire novel in a month. He once said 
that, at least in his mature years, his imagination was 
constantly peopled with a swarming mass of human 
figures, of whom a group would now and then suddenly 
come together in a set of relationships and compel him 
to record them in a novel. His settings he took down, 
for the most part, from personal observation in the many 
localities he knew at first hand; his characters, too, are 
frequently studied from actual persons. Ir his plots, 
commonly held his peculiar merit, Crawford cannot be 
called really original; he employs all the ancient and 
honorable paraphernalia of melodrama — lost or hidden 
wills, forgeries, great persons in disguise, sudden legacies, 
physical violence. Moreover, it is almost a formula with 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 241 


him to carry a story by natural motives until about the 
last third, when melodrama enters to perplex the narrative 
and to keep up suspense until the triumphant and satis- 
fying dénouement. And yet so fresh, strong, and vera- 
cious is the movement that it nearly obscures these con- 
ventional elements. Movement, indeed, not plot in any 
stricter sense, is Crawford’s primary excellence. He could 
not tell a story badly, but flowed on without breaking or 
faltering, managing his material and disposing his char- 
acters and scenes without a symptom of effort, in a style 
always clear and bright. This lightness of movement 
is accompanied, perhaps accounted for, by a general ab- 
sence of profound ideas or of much of that rich color of 
life which comes only — as in Scott, Balzac, Tolstoy — 
when fiction is deeply rooted in some particular soil. As 
to his ideas, Crawford seems to have had few that were 
unusual, and he disliked the employment of unusual ideas in 
fiction, about the aims and uses of which he is very explicit 
in The Novel: What It Is (1893). Anglo-Saxons had 
recently been learning — through the critical pens of 
Stevenson and Howells and Henry James, to name no 
others — that fiction has an art which may be discussed; 
that a novel is not merely a novel, as a pudding is a pud- 
ding, to be boiled and swallowed and nothing more done 
about it. In answer to all these serious critics Crawford 
declared that novelists are “ public amusers,” who must 
always write largely about love and in Anglo-Saxon coun- 
tries must write under the eyes of the ubiquitous young 
girl. They might therefore, he concluded, as well be 
reconciled to the exigencies of their business, and by think- 
ing not too highly of it spare themselves the agony that 


242 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


goes with the more apocalyptic arts. For his own part 
he thought problem novels odious, cared nothing for dia- 
lect and local color, believed it a mistake to make a novel 
too minute a picture of one generation lest another should 
think it old-fashioned, and preferred to regard the novel 
as a sort of pocket theater — with ideals, it must be 
added, much like those of the British and American stage 
in the decades just before Oscar Wilde and Bernard 
Shaw came to add something of intellectual distinction 
to the entertainment. 

Thus far Crawford was carried by his cosmopolitan 
training and ideals: he believed that human beings are 
the same everywhere and can be made intelligible if re- 
ported lucidly and discreetly. Reading his books is like 
conversing with a remarkably humane, sharp-eyed trav- 
eler who appears — at least at first glance —to have 
seen every nook and corner of the globe and to have 
talked naturally to all the natives in their own languages. 
How many other novelists have known, as Crawford did, 
English, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Swedish, Rus- 
sian, Turkish, Portugese, the ancient tongues taught or- 
dinarily in universities, and Sanskrit? Crawford ranges, 
too, with apparent ease though with no great antiquarian 
knowledge, through large areas of recorded time, from 
the days of Belshazzar to the modern United States. Of 
his later novels, Khaled (1891) is a vivid and lovely tale 
of Arabia with something of the color of The Thousand 
and One Nights, and Via Crucis (1898) moves from 
England to the East during the crusading twelfth cen- 
tury; The Witch of Prague (1891) localizes a wildly 
supernatural legend in Bohemia; Greifensteim (1889) is 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN 243 


a study of German military pride against the background 
of the Black Forest, and The Cigarette-Maker’s Romance 
(1890), rapid, exciting, moving, transacts its charming 
drama among the artisans of Munich; In the Palace of the 
King (1900) is a chapter from the romantic history of 
Don John of Austria; Fatr Margaret (1905) and its 
sequels The Primadonna (1908) and The Diva’s Ruby 
(1908) all concern themselves with European — chiefly 
English — musical life; Marion Darche (1898), Kath- 
erine Lauderdale (1894), and its sequel The Ralstons 
(1895) have their scenes laid, though not always convinc- 
ingly, in and about New York. 

‘On the whole, however, the Italian novels are best of 
all, though several of them which Crawford wrote to- 
ward the end of his life add little to the total sum. The 
Children of the King (1892), recounting the fatal love 
of a common sailor for a lady, glows with the romantic 
ardor which temporarily satisfies all but the sternest 
realistic dispositions. Pietro Ghisleri (1893), as lifelike 
and vigorous a book as any Crawford wrote, seems to 
derive some power from its connection with the Sara- 
cinesca group. Saracinesca (1887), Sant’ Ilario (1889), 
Don Orsino (1892), and Corleone (1896) have all helped 
one another to reputation by the fact that they make 
up a cycle dealing generally with the same persons and 
centered about the fortunes of one great patriarchal 
house. In the first of the series Giovanni Saracinesca, 
only son of the old Prince of that name, loves and wins 
Corona d’Astrardente, whom the Roman world holds to 
be unquestionably the most superb woman in Europe. 
In Sant’ Ilario, Giovanni, who is also Prince of Sant’ 


244 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Ilario, becomes mistakenly jealous of his wife and both 
suffer deeply. Their eldest son, Orsino, in Don Orsino 
gets involved in the building craze which swept over Rome 
in 1887. Corleone concerns Orsino and his_ brother 
Ippolito, the priest, taking the two of them to Sicily 
where they fall foul of bandits. The series is held to- 
gether by the dominating figure of the magnificent old 
Prince Saracinesca, father of Don Giovanni. Of almost 
equal importance are San Giacinto, the giant cousin of 
the Saracinesca, Spicca, the melancholy but infallible 
duelist who dies in Don Orsino, Anastase Gouache, the 
French painter of whom Giovanni is jealous, and the 
villain Del Ferice. There are admirable melodramatic epi- 
sodes: Giovanni’s duel with Del Ferice; the plot of old 
Montevarchi to prove that Prince Leone Saracinesca is 
not really head of his house; the sacrifice of Maria Con- 
suelo d’Aranjuez, who marries Del Ferice to save Orsino 
whom she loves but who faces ruin by Del Ferice; the 
trick of Tebaldo Corleone who confesses a murder to 
Ippolito in order to bind the priest to secrecy and then 
accuses Ippolito of the murder. 

Without question, the peculiarly absorbing form of 
the four novels comes from the large admixture of melo~- 
drama. Without question, too, the characters are en- 
larged decidedly above verisimilitude by valiant deeds and 
lofty sentiments and eloquent speech. And yet neither 
melodrama nor heroic dimensions constitute the final im- 
pression of the Saracinesca cycle. That impression is 
rather of an admirable section of modern life admirably 
portrayed. Crawford understood the generous simplicity 
of the Italian character; he studied it here under the 


THE EIGHTIES AND THEIR KIN = 245 


most attractive conditions, in a society which still re- 
tained many of its feudal elements until after the taking 
of Rome in 1870. Although the career of Giovanni in 
1865-1867 offers many contrasts to that of Orsino in 
1887, the family character remains much the same — 
the same simple integrity which has no baser element 
than pride. While there have naturally been controver- 
sies as to Crawford’s accuracy of representation, the 
most serious charge against him is a partiality for the 


old order. Among Anglo-Saxon novelists, however, he 


is incomparable as an historian of Italy. And even 
where the charges against him hold, he still deserves the 
credit of adding a remarkable province to the world of 
the Anglo-Saxon imagination. ‘Among American novel- 
ists he takes his rank as the most cosmopolitan of 
them all and as on the whole the best story-teller. That 
he occupies, however, as compared with the greatest novel- 
ists, distinctly a lower rank, is a natural consequence of 
his method. No man can range so widely and still go 
deep. Crawford’s success with the Roman novels only 
confirms this dogma. Although he always called himself 
an American, he knew Rome better than any other quar- 
ter of the globe; and where his knowledge was greatest 
he went deepest. In such a tour de force as Khaled or 
in such a romantic melodrama as The Cigarette-Maker’s 
Romance he went far on the wings of an excited imagina- 
tion, but not as far as profounder observations took him 
in Pietro Ghisleri or Saracinesca. Realism, like charity, 
must begin somewhere near home. 


CHAPTER X 
REACTION AND PROGRESS 


I. Towarp THE Rieut: Rococo Romance 


DIVERSIFIED as were the types of fiction during the 
eighties, what actually prevailed then was a sort of offi- 
cial realism, expounded by Howells and James and prac- 
tised by most of the novelists of the decade at least in 
style or structure if not always in materials. From this 
most refined and, on the whole, most artistic moment in 
the history of the American novel, there followed two 
reactions. Perhaps the movement toward a harsher real- 
ism, an avowed naturalism, should hardly be called a 
reaction, proceeding as it did not so much by a return 
to some earlier mode as by an advance to a new idiom 
of actuality; still it indicated a temperamental reaction 
from the gentilities of the established school. The rush 
of historical romance, however, which amounted to a de- 
luge at about the time of the war with Spain, was clearly 
a reaction. As to form and doctrine, it proceeded largely 
from the example of Robert Louis Stevenson, who had — 
taken issue with the realists in defense of his own eager 
preferences for the tradition of Scott, and who in Eng- 
land had led an active group of romancers to new if not 
classic triumphs. Having set themselves in opposition 
to the current habits of realism, these romancers natu- 


rally limited themselves as compared with Scott, who was 
246 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 247 


romancer and realist both at once, but they brought to 
the revived ‘form a dexterity of plot and a neatness of 
finish which Scott had lacked. The American romancers 
of the period, accompanying their British contemporaries 
in art, at the same time kept for the most part at home 
in their choice of themes and matter. 

The local color writers had frequently dipped into such 
history as their sections afforded, though employing his- 
tory generally as handmaid not mistress. Within two 
or three years after Stevenson’s Kidnapped (1886) and 
Rider Haggard’s She (1887), history in the American 
novel assumed an importance it had not had since Cooper 
and Hawthorne. Arthur Sherburne Hardy in 1889 pub- 
lished Passe Rose, a dainty romance of the time of Charle- 
magne, and Harold Frederic, the next year, In the Valley, 
a substantial, unaffected narrative of life along the Mo- 
hawk at the time of the French and Indian War. The 
material thus touched upon by Frederic had already been 
discovered by Mary Hartwell Catherwood, who probably 
thought of Stevenson but certainly thought of Francis 
Parkman, who wrote an introduction to The Romance 
of Dollard (1889) vouching for its historicity. She had 
discovered a new romantic treasure; the angular quaint- 
~ ness of Pike County now gave way before the charm of 
an older world adventuring. in the Middle West, noble- 
men pitted against savages, black-robed Jesuits, coureurs 
de bois swarming through all the rivers and forests, high- 
bred ladies strayed into the wilderness, innocent Indian 
maidens, half-breed villains, French villages as little as 
possible like the Anglo-Saxon towns which had grown 
up on their ancient sites. 


248 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Mrs. Catherwood during the years 1889-1894 forecast 
almost all the developments of the more fecund years from 
1896-1902 which saw the most active school of historical 
romances the United States has produced. Merely to 
name the more successful performances of the period 
suffices to show in what fashion the romantic imagination 
then worked: Mark Twain’s Personal Recollections of 
Joan of Arc (1896), James Lane Allen’s The Choir In- 
visible (1897), Richard Harding Davis’s Soldiers of For- 
tune (1897), S. Weir Mitchell’s Hugh Wynne (1897) 
and The Adventures of Francois (1898), Charles Ma- 
jor’s When Knighthood Was in Flower (1898), Thomas 
Nelson Page’s Red Rock (1898), Mary Johnston’s Pris- 
oners of Hope (1898) and To Have and to Hold (1899), 
F. Marion Crawford’s Via Crucis (1898) and In the 
Palace of the King (1900), Paul Leicester Ford’s Jantce 
Meredith (1899), Winston Churchill’s Richard Carvel 
(1899), The Crisis (1901), and The Crossing (1904), 
Booth Tarkington’s Monsieur Beaucaire (1900), Maurice 
Thompson’s Alice of Old Vincennes (1900), Henry Har- 
land’s The Cardinal’s Snuff-Bor (1901), George Barr 
McCutcheon’s Graustark (1901), Robert W. Chambers’s 
Cardigan (1901), Mary Hartwell Catherwood’s Lazarre 
(1901),*Owen Wister’s The Virginian (1902), Gertrude 
Atherton’s The Conqueror (1902), Ellen Glasgow’s The 
Battleground (1902) and Deliverance (1904), John Fox’s 
The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come (1903). Mary 
E. Wilkins Freeman left her austere tales of rural New 
England to write a romance of the swashbuckling seven- 
teenth century, The Heart’s Highway (1900); Edward 
Bellamy similarly turned away from his forte in The 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 249 


Duke of Stockbridge (1900), and Cable in The Cavalier 
(1901), and Miss Jewett in The Tory Lover (1901), and 
Frank R. Stockton in Kate Bonnet (1902). After 1902 
the type began rapidly to decline, both in energy and 
popularity. Mary Johnston persisted in romance for 
several years, but her contemporaries, Winston Churchill, 
Ellen Glasgow, Booth Tarkington, moved on toward real- 
ism with the times. The older writers who had been 
drawn aside by the episode nearly all went back to their 
earlier methods. Even Churchill’s The Crossing in 1904 
seemed belated, and Weir Mitchell’s The Red City in 1908 
decidedly so; in The Slim Princess (1907) George Ade 
parodied the “ Ruritanian ” romance popularized by An- 
thony Hope in The Prisoner of Zenda (1894) and still 
continued by George Barr McCutcheon in Beverly of 
Graustark (1904) and later inanities; Frederick Jesup 
Stimson’s My Story (1917), an ostensible autobiography 
of Benedict Arnold, seemed almost prehistoric; and Irving 
Bacheller’s 4 Man for the Ages (1919) had to depend 
for its vogue upon the recent great increase of interest in 
Lincoln. 

Such of these narratives as dealt in any way with the 
present generally took their slashing, skylarking, and ro- 
bustly Yankee heroes, as in Soldiers of Fortune or Grau- 
stark, off to more or less imaginary regions for deeds of 
haughty daring and exotic wooing. Elsewhere, even in the 
romances with a foreign scene, taste ran to the past: to 
the whirling Paris of the French Revolution as in Frangois 
or to the frilled and powdered Bath of the eighteenth 
century as in Monsieur Beaucairé; or still further to the 
Tudor sixteenth century of When Knighthood Was m 


250 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Flower or the French fifteenth century of Joan of Arc. 
The bulk of the romancers, however, as in Cooper’s time, 
kept their imaginations ordinarily at home. Red Rock 
and Deliverance chronicled on a large if rather melo- 
dramatic scale the process of Reconstruction in Virginia ; 
The Crisis, The Cavalier, and The Battleground are all 
transacted during the Civil War in the regions respec- 
tively of the middle and lower Mississippi and of Vir- 
ginia ; Lazarre revived the old tradition that the Dauphin 
had been brought to America to grow up among the 
Indians; and Kate Bonnet made its heroine a mythical 
daughter of that very authentic buccaneer of the early 
eighteenth century, Stede Bonnet. And yet these belong 
but to the fringes of the historical fiction of their day. 
Much as with Cooper’s contemporaries, these American 
romancers exploited the American matters of the Settle- 
ment, the Revolution, and the Frontier. As the frontier, 
of course, no longer meant to Americans what it had 
meant when it still occupied a great portion of the 
continent, the romancers made less of it than of the other 
standard matters. The Virgintan, which is really an 
older dime novel somewhat glorified, accurately if senti- 
mentally preserves in its pictures of cowboy life in Wyo- 
ming the habits and speech of those amazing Centaurs of 
the last frontier who, though now practically banished 
from reality, are still firmly fixed in the national memory. 
Other records of that phase were racier and crisper but 
no one has been quite so well remembered. The Little 
Shepherd of Kingdom Come, as well as earlier and later 
novels by the same hand, portrayed the backward moun- 
taineers of Kentucky whose manner of life in 1900 still 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 251 


resembled that of the frontier of Cooper and Simms. If 
the matter of the Frontier partially eluded the ardor of the 
romancers, nothing of the sort happened to the Settlement 
and the Revolution, which now luxuriantly bloomed again. 
The hardships of pioneering and of warfare were united in 
Alice of Old Vincennes, an account of the expedition 
of George Rogers Clark, and in The Crossing, which por- 
trayed the West during the Revolutionary and Federal- 
ist eras from Vincennes and Kaskaskia on the north and 
from the Carolinas on the east to the Mississippi and to 
Louisiana. ‘The true territory of romance, however, lay 
east of the Alleghanics, between New Jersey and Richmond. 
For every tale concerned with New England or New York 
there were two or three concerned with Pennsylvania or 
Virginia. The Tory Lover moves from Miss Jewett’s 
gentle Berwick to Europe and back: The Duke of Stock- 
bridge is a romance of Shays’ Rebellion. But The 
Heart’s Highway hovers around Jamestown at the end 
of its first century; Prisoners of Hope and To Have and 
to Hold rarely stray far from Tide Water; Richard Carvel . 
joins the England of Dr. Johnson with Revolutionary 
Maryland; Hugh Wynne and Janice Meredith range from 
New York to Yorktown, yet the center of their interests 
is the Philadelphia of the Continental Congress. 
Topographical classification is practically as suitable 
with these tales as with those of the first period of Amer- 
Ican romance. Certain distinctions of course appear. 
Joan of Arc stands clearly to one side by virtue of a 
power which none of its rivals display. The Choir In- 
vistble employs history only incidentally in a poetic and 
highly sentimental interpretation of human existence. 


252 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


To Have and to Hold is more ornate in style, Monsteur 
Beaucaire more graceful and piquant, The Crossing more 
grandiose in its sweep, than the ordinary run. Janice 
Meredith is based upon remarkable erudition and Hugh 
Wynne remarkably sums up the traditions of Philadelphia 
as remembered by the descendants of her Augustan age. 
In spite of these distinctions, however, the general corpus 
of such romances forms a singularly unified mass. Cer- 
tain themes like the importation of wives to Virginia, the 
fate of gentlemen who desperately came over as inden- 
tured servants (“ convicts ”), the exploits of John Paul 
Jones, are repeated again and again. Historical person- 
alities so crowd the scene that a hero or a heroine can 
hardly step out upon the street or go to dinner without 
encountering some eminent man — particularly Franklin 
or Washington, or some one of the colonial governors of 
Virginia. While intensely American in reporting the con- 
flicts with English rule, the stories almost always sym- 
pathize with the colonial and Revolutionary gentry as 
against the humbler orders, with Washington as against 
Jefferson, with the aristocratic emigrés from France as 
against the revolutionists. Details of costume load the 
narrative far more than descriptions of landscape. Fine 
gentlemen, called “ Cavaliers” till the word becomes a 
byword, flutter and ruffle across the stage, with splendid 
gestures and delicate points of honor, sudden in quarrel, 
quick with quaint oaths, incomparable at the small sword 
or the minuet, poetic and patriotic and heroic. With 
them in all their lighter moments are exquisite ladies, 
gencrally very young but with some dowagers among them, 
who live in spactous, cool houses, in a world of mahogany 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 253 


and silver and brocade; ladies who ardently expect new 
bales of clothing from London but who joyfully sacrifice 
all such delights during the Revolution; ladies who rise 
late, take the air genteelly, play at lovely needlework, and 
gpend their nights at balls of elaborate splendor; and yct 
ladies who know the saddle and, when need comes, put 
off their squeamishness and rough it in the most dangerous 
escapades without a tremor. One formula furnishes some- 
thing like half the notable plots: an honest American 
gentleman, mortally opposed to a villain who is generally 
British, courts a beautiful American girl through acute 
vicissitudes and wins her only in the bitter end just before 
or after killing his wicked rival in a duel. As if this 
were a theater of marionettes there are only a few pup- 
pets, though there are plenty of handsome costumes to 
vary the entertainment. As might be expected, the style 
of all these novels approaches identity, a fluid, languid 
style, ready to slip into blank verse at the provocation 
of any heightened moment, and constantly tinctured with 
a faint archaism of diction and rhythm. “ There is an 
old book my grandchildren love to hear me read to them,” 
says Hugh Wynne in a tone which would fit nearly every 
novel of the time. ‘“ It is the ‘ Morte d’Arthur,’ done into 
English by Sir Thomas Malory. Often ‘when I read 
therein of how Arthur the king bade farewell to the world 
and to the last of the great company of his Knights of 
the Round Table, this scene at Whitehall slip [Wash- 
ington’s farewell to his officers] comes back to me, and 
I seem to see once more those gallant soldiers, and far 
away the tall figure of surely the knightliest gentleman 
our days have known.” 


254 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


The reference to Malory — who in The Chotr Invisible 
is cited as the truest teacher of virtue — illuminates the 
aims and methods of all the rococo romancers. Writing 
of a time so recent as the Civil War or Reebnstruction, 
they could use a dialect almost contemporary, but the 
moment they drew near to the Revolution or the Settle- 
ment they fell into the language which the nineteenth cen- 
tury had thought the fit medium for medieval deeds. The 
deeper American past to the romancers seemed a sort of 
middle age. Their inferiority to the Cooper of the 
Leather-Stocking Tales or to the Melville of Moby Dick 
lies in the fact that whereas Cooper and Melville, much 
as they might invent, still worked upon a solid basis in a 
mood not too far from the mood of realism, their successors 
wrote romance pure and simple, even when they were most 
‘erudite. Romance was in the air. Not all the publish- 
ing enterprise which developed romances into “ best 
sellers ” and distributed millions of copies could have done 
so but for the moment of national expansiveness which 
attended the Spanish War. Patriotism and jingoism, 
altruism and imperialism, passion and sentimentalism, 
shook the temper which had slowly been stiffening since 
the Civil War. Now, with a rush of unaccustomed emo- 
tions the national imagination sought out its own past, 
delighting in it, wallowing in it. Had the romancers who 
met the mood been more deeply grounded in reality and 
less sentimental, or had the national mood lasted for a 
longer time, some eminent masterpiece might have 
emerged. None did, and the gold lace and gilt of the 
narratives actually evoked began to tarnish almost as 
soon as the wind touched them. But it was an episode 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 255 


not without charm and not without a considerable ro- 
mantic energy. 

Of the novels Hugh Wynne perhaps came closest to 
permanence, and S. Weir Mitchell (1829-1913) of the 
writers who are no longer living most deserves special 
mention. A Philadelphian, he set aside his youthful lit- 
erary ambitions on the advice of Oliver Wendell Holmes, 
made himself a distinguished medical specialist, particu- 
larly in nervous diseases, and only after fifty gave much 
time to the verse and fiction which he wrote henceforth 
until his death. His professional knowledge enabled him to 
write authoritatively of difficult and wayward states of body 
and mind: as in The Case of George Dedlow (1880), so cir- 
cumstantial in its improbabilitjes, Roland Blake (1886), 
which George Meredith admired, The Autobiography of a 
Quack (1900), concerning the dishonorable purlieus of the 
medical profession, and Constance Trescott (1905), con- 
sidered by Mitchell his best constructed novel and cer- 
tainly his most thorough-going study of a pathological 
mood. His ps'ychological stories, however, had neither 
quite the appeal nor quite the merit of his historical 
romances, which began with Hephzibah Guinness (1880) 
and extended to Westways (1913). Westways is a 
chronicle of the effects of the Civil War in Pennsylvania, 
but Mitchell’s best work belongs to the Revolutionary 
cycle: Hugh Wynne, the career of a Free Quaker on 
Washington’s staff, The Red City, a picture of Wash- 
ington’s second administration, and The Adventures of 
Frangois, which stands as close to the Amcrican stories 
as did the revolutionary Paris to the city of Franklin. 
Philadelphia, so often the center of action, appears under 


256 ‘THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


a, softer, mellower light than has been thrown by romance 
upon any other Revolutionary city, and Washington, 
though drawn, like Philadelphia, as much to the life as 
Mitchell could draw him, is still a stately demigod. 

Since the decline of the rococo mode there has been no 
definite school of romancers in America, although the 
cult of Lincoln, both in poetry and imaginative prose, 
since the Lincoln centennial in 1909 has furnished a 
theme which may reasonably be expected to assume a 
large importance in any future revival of romance. The 
Revolution and the Settlement have had their chief ex- 
ponents among writers of juvenile fiction; the Frontier has 
attracted the notice of the moving pictures to an enormous 
extent ; the sea has been exploited in the overpraised tales 
of Morgan Robertson. The World War elicited, of 
course, an enormous number of romantic inventions, but 
they were restricted, almost without exception, to the 
melodramatic tradition of subliterary entertainment: 
German plots, German spies, dashing Yankee heroes, 
tender maidens. In dozens and scores of such novels the 
narrative begins in an effeminate or troubled peace, and 
then brings in the war with a rush of trial and purgation. 
Some of them skilful as propaganda, not one has the look 
of permanence. | 


9. Towarp THE LEerT: NATURALISM 


‘Among the followers of Howells toward realism, even 
though they might be genuine disciples, there was bound 
to come sooner or later a discontent with the gentleness ~ 
which restrained him from portraying the unlovely or 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 257 


illicit phases of American society. The earliest mani- 
festations of this discontent, not always conscious, came 
from men and women who had studied farming conditions 
and, like E. W. Howe in Kansas and Joseph Kirkland in 
Illinois, had found in them little that justified the smooth 
idyls of certain of the local color writers. Mary E. 
Wilkins Freeman in her short stories of New England, 
A Humble Romance and Other Stories (1887) and A 
New England Nun and Other Stories (1891); Harold 
Frederic in his novel of rural New York, Seth’s Brother’s 
Wife (1887); Hamlin Garland in his hard pastorals of 
the upper Middle West, Main-Travelled Roads (1891) 
and Prairie Folks (1893)— all these proceeded in a less 
cheerful mood than fiction had ordinarily employed in 
the eighties, and Garland was passionately devoted to 
the war on needless poverty which had already enlisted 
Henry George and Edward Bellamy. Ambrose Bierce’s 
fierce Tales of Soldiers and Civilians (1891) — later called 
In the Midst of Life — added a sardonic note rare in Amer- 
ican literature. That the short story at first prevailed 
among these new writers was owing to the enormous popu- 
larity of Kipling, who had developed the methods of Bret 
Harte and had returned them to America with interest, 
The novel, however, early shared the new impetus, which 
had a characteristic exposition in Hamlin Garland’s es- 
says, Crumbling Idols (1894). It was no longer enough, 
the new novelists argued and felt, to skim rosy surfaces. 
The novel, a powerful modern agency for civilization, must 
go deeper than it had gone in the United States, must 
turn to the light various ugly realities which, too long 
neglected, were growing more dangerous every day. It 


, As an =~ 8 


258 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


must deal candidly with political corruption, with 
economic injustice, with religious unrest, with sexual ir- 
regularities, with greed and doubt and hate and cruelty 
and blood, as well as with its standard subjects. It must 
assert its rights, its obligation, to speak of anything it 
chose, provided only the thing were true. 

Doctrines so unquestionable, and in time so unques- 
tioned, in the early nineties aroused vigorous antagonism. 
One pious reviewer declared that one of Mrs. Deland’s 
books combined “ the blasphemy of Ingersoll and the ob- 
scenity of Zola.” In the preface to Summer in Arcady 
(1896) James Lane Allen protested against “ those black 
chaotic books of the new fiction” which had lately come 
from Europe and were disturbing the simple virtues of 
American life. Tolstoy to many seemed unpardonably 
frank, and Flaubert and Zola to most seemed simply 
wicked, so strong was the tradition of optimism, decorum, 
reticence, in American fiction. Established habits of “ de- 
cency,” by which was meant a solicitous reserve in 
matters of sex and of suffering in general, did not 
break up, but the novel extended its inquiries to numer- 
ous matters rarely considered in the eighties. Three 
novels published in 1894 represent the transition: Mrs. 
Freeman’s Pembroke, a study of New England stub- 
bornness; Mrs. Deland’s Philip and His Wife, a study 
of an unhappy marriage; and Paul Leicester Ford’s The 
Honorable Peter Stirling, a chronicle of politics built up 
around the carcer, here idealized, of President Cleveland. 

Late in 1895 appeared a striking novel, The Red 
Badge of Courage, which definitely belonged to the new 
fiction. Its author, Stephen Crane (1871-1900), was a 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 259 


genius who admired Tolstoy and who somewhat febrilely 
aimed at absolute truthfulness. He had already written 
and printed Maggie (1893; published 1896), a horrible 
picture of a degenerate Irish family in New York and 
the tragedy of a daughter who by the brutality she has 
to face at home is driven in desperation to the streets. 
The style is hard and bald; Crane betrays a youthful 
partizan’s delight in candor on forbidden topics; he piles 
up savage details with violent plain-speaking; the plot 
amounts to nothing more than a succession of writhing 
tableaus of blood or wretchedness. And yet, despite a 
good deal that is metallic in its construction, the book 
has effectiveness and sincerity. In its sort it outdid 
any native naturalistic novel yet offered to the American 
public, and after a generation it remains an interesting 
document in the history of naturalism. But Crane’s great 
success attended The Red Badge of Courage, an 
episode of the Civil War. At the time of writing he 
knew war only from books, but the books he knew were 
Tolstoy’s War and Peace and probably Zola’s Débdcle. 
The plumes and trumpets and glory of battle consequently 
do not appear. The protagonist is a recruit for the first 
time under fire. Crane had but to imagine himself in a 
similar danger and reconstruct the moods that came over 
him. What he produced was amazingly brilliant. His 
recruit knows nothing of the general plan of the conflict. 
He obeys commands that he does not understand, that he 
resents, that he hates. His excited senses color the occa- 
sion, even the landscape. He suffers agonies of fatigue 
and almost a catastrophe of fear before he can be ac- 
climated to his adventure. If he seems unusually imagina- 


260 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


tive, still he is imagined without too much subtlety. He 
speaks a convincing boyish dialect. His sensations are 
limited to something like his spiritual capacity. And 
the narrative as a whole Crane holds firmly in hand, point- 
ing his prose with clean touches, heightening it here and 
there with poetry, warming it with an emotion which still 
leaves him critical. The Red Badge of Courage is a 
genuine feat of the imagination. | 

Crane’s later novels and short stories, though some are 
vivid, add nothing to these two novels, and his early death 
truncated his career. Early death, too, cut off Wolcott 
Balestier, Kipling’s’ brother-in-law, and Harold Frederic, 
both men of promise, but never of more than promise. 
None of them, not even Crane, equaled Frank Norris 
(1870-1902), whom death at thirty-two could not cheat 
out of at least one masterpiece. The fame of Norris 
has always been colored by expectations of what he might 
have become had he lived to realize them. He seemed, as 
the older century ended and the new one opened, an authen- 
tic and prophetic voice. A leader in the little movement 
to “ continentalize” American literature as a protest 
against local color, he was himself one of the least sec- 
tional of novelists. Born in Chicago, where he passed 
his boyhood, a student of art in Paris for two years, 
student for four years at the University of California 
and for one graduate year at Harvard, newspaper cor- 
respondent in South Africa at the time of the Jameson 
raid and in Cuba during the Santiago campaign, and 
later a journalist in San Francisco, Norris had a vision 
of American life which was geographically very wide. He 
- was not a victim of any arid cosmopolitanism, for Zola, 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 261 


his chief teacher, and Kipling had taught Norris how 
much the strength of realism depends upon facts observed 
in their native places. And though one of his earliest 
passions was for Froissart, and his first book, Yvernelle 
(1892), was a verse romance upon a medieval French 
theme, his mature plots were laid almost entirely in set- 
tings with which he was familiar. That so many of 
them are Californian must be ascribed to his early death; 
he meant later to turn to other regions. 

What gave Norris this large “ continental” view of 
his materials was a certain epic disposition which he had. 
He tended to vast plans and conceived trilogies. His 
Epic of the Wheat — The Octopus (1901), which deals 
with the production of wheat in California, The Pit 
(1903), which deals with the distribution of wheat through 
the Chicago Board of Trade, and The Wolf, which, though 
never written, was to have dealt with the relieving of a 
famine in Europe by American wheat — he thought of as 
three distinct novels, bound together only by the cosmic 
spirit of the wheat which comes up from the abundant 
earth and moves irresistibly to its appointed purpose, 
guided, of course, by men, and fought and played over 
by them, but always mightier than they and always their 
master as well as their sustenance. Another trilogy to 
which he meant to give years of work would have centered 
about the battle of Gettysburg, one part for each day, 
and would have sought to present what Norris considered 
the American spirit as his Epic of the Wheat sought to 
present an impersonal force of nature. Such conceptions 
- explain the grandiase manner which Norris never lost and 
they serve to explain, too, the passion of his naturalism. 


262 °*., THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


As to his actual achievement, The Pit, though its suc- 
cess on the stage and its vivid presentation of a thrilling 
drama of business made it more popular than The 
Octopus, is certainly inferior to the first member of the 
series. With greater ease and lucidity, it has less poetry, 
less depth of scene and texture, less final significance. In 
proportion as mere trafficking in wheat is a less organic 
function than either growing it or eating it, so The Pit 
falls in interest and power below The Octopus, which takes 
high rank among the best of American novels. The Oc- 
topus of the title is the Pacific and Southwestern Rail- 
road which holds the wheat growers of California in its 
cruel tentacles, able if it likes to deny them access to 
their natural markets, and consequently a symbol of the 
control which economic machinery exercises over the ele- 
ments of life. The book sets forth the drama of Agricul- 
ture and Trade locked in a fierce conflict, with Trade 
for the moment villain and victor. Norris’s sympathies 
lie with the oppressed ranchmen; the Railroad has the 
iron teeth and ruthless hunger of the Old Witch of ju- 
venile melodrama; in the end, though the ranchers have 
been defeated, the wheat itself too symbolically pours in 
upon the agent of the Railroad and destroys him — the 
wheat “ untouched, unassailable, undefiled, that mighty 
world-force, that nourisher of nations, wrapped in Nir- 
vanic calm, indifferent to the human swarm, gigantic, 
resistless.” And yet these cosmic implications do not re- 

move the story too far from actual existence in California. 
' The canvas swarms with actualities — plowing, planting, 
harvesting, sheep-herding, merry-making, rabbit-killing, 
love, labor, birth, death. Intimately involved with the 


* REACTION AND PROGRESS -_ 263 


hard, sordid strife of daily affairs are fine, if not always 
quite realized, phases of poetry and faith. The style, 
though tending always to turgidity, is strong and full; 
_ the movement, though at times nervous, is rapid; the pic- 
tures, though perhaps excessively panoramic, are always 
richly alive. . 

The passion which informs The Octopus, a kind of fiery 
* zeal for truth which lifted and enlarged all Norris wrote, 
is the quality which marked him off from the older realism 
of Howells. Zola had it, and Norris, who called Zola 
“the very head of the Romanticists,” was even willing 
to name his own form of naturalism romantic if he could 
thus argue for the use in fiction of deeper and more 
stirring truths than those minute, those surface matters 
which, in his judgment, were the chief stock in trade of 
official realism. Perhaps the most obvious instance in his 
work of this romantic tendency is the story of Vanamee 
in The Octopus, the sheep-herder who has mystical com- . 
munion with the spirit of his dead mistress. But equally 
romantic, in fact, is Norris’s constant preoccupation with 
** elemental ” emotions. His heroes are nearly all violent 
men, wilful, passionate, combative; his heroines — thick- 
haired, large-armed women, almost all of a single physi- 
cal type — are endowed with a frank and deep, if slow 
vitality. Love in Norris’s world is the mating of vi- 
kings and valkyries. A plain case of such heroic pas- 
sions may be found in Moran of the Lady Letty (1898), 
the story of a civilized young San Franciscan who is 
shanghaied upon a Pacific fishing boat and, among many 
adventures, meets and loves the splendid Norse savage, 
Moran, whom he wins with the valor aroused in him by a 


264 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


primitive life. Blix (1899) and 4 Man’s Woman (1900) 
and The Octopus and The Pit only repeat this pair of 
lovers in varying costumes and occupations. In Mc- 
Teague (1899) the protagonist, married to a woman of 
a different type, finally murders her. Love, however, is 
by no means the chief concern of these novels, which are 
crowded with ardently detailed phases of life which had 
not yet appeared, or at least had not yet become common, 
in American fiction: shark-fishing and beach-combing off 
the California coast; the routine doings of vulgar people 
in San Francisco and the city’s Bohemian aspects; the 
deadly perils of Arctic exploration; the materials of 
The Octopus already cited; the enormous conflicts of 
trading in the Chicago Wheat pit; the ugly dissipations 
of undergraduates as presented in the posthumous but 
early Vandover and the Brute (1914). In all these Nor- 
ris sought to find the basic elements of human nature 
and to present them with unhesitating accuracy. His 
eagerness to be truthful in a new way gave him his energy, 
particularly in scenes of action, although the same eager- 
ness deprived him of mellow reflection and rounded grace. 
His volume of essays, The Responsibilities of the Noveltst 
(1903), companion in theory to Hamlin Garland’s 
Crumbling Idols, shows him to have been less a thinker 
than a passionate partizan of the rising doctrine of natu- 
ralism. It shows, too, how large was the store in him of 
a fire and an energy which would not lightly have per- 
ished had he lived, but must have carried him on to growth 
and varied triumphs. 

- Norris was but one of a group of novelists who oegan 
their careers about 1900, in the very midst of the hulia- 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 265 


balloo of rococo romance — indeed, more or less as a pro- 
test against it. ‘Theodore Dreiser with Sister Carrie 
(1900) initiated his powerful, vexed career. Edith Whar- 
ton wrote her early short stories with caustic irony and 
without sentimentalism; Stewart Edward White in The 
Blazed Trad (1902) escaped from civilization to the 
thrilling rigors of Michigan lumber camps. Brand Whit- 
lock, titularly a disciple of Howells, in The 13th District 
(1902), and Alfred Henry Lewis in The Boss (1903), 
exposed the mean crafts of politics; Robert Herrick, par- 
ticularly in his Memoirs of an American Citizen (1905), 
hated the rose-color and fatuous optimism of conventional 
fiction; Charles D. Stewart in The Fugitive Blacksmith 
(1905) produced a strangely neglected and yet a singu- 
larly diverting picaresque tale; Upton Sinclair, romancer 
in Manaesas (1904), turned in The Jungle (1906) to his 
fierce warfare upon the abuses of modern industrial Amer- 
ica; William Allen White in his volume of stories In Our 
Town (1906) touched critical notes not always apparent 
in his work. All these writers are still living. 

One writer associated with them, David Graham Phillips 
(1867-1911), calls for especial mention. Like most of 
the others a Middle Westerner and a journalist, he 
emerged from the era of public muck-raking and car- 
ried his assault into the private lives represented in his 
novels. He believed — and proposed his doctrines in The 
Reign of Gilt (1905)— that democracy is essentially 
more decent and more efficient than aristocracy ; that most 
of the confusions and distortions of American life arise 
from the restricting hand which various forms of privilege 
lay upon it; that it is the duty as well as the natural 


266 - THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


behavior of a novelist to reveal existent conditions with- 
out favors or reserves. In a score of novels composed 
with a fierce energy he ranged over the American scene 
in his hunt for snobbery and stupidity and cruelty and 
greed, turning them up to the light with a gusto not 
matched by the art of his revelations. Serious as his 
books are in intention, useful as documents, no one of them 
is a masterpiece and no one of them shows any very defi- 
nite signs of surviving, though the bulky Susan Lenox 
(1917) has considerable notoriety as one of the fullest 
portraits of an American courtesan. With all his powers, 
Phillips was crude and heavy: he had neither the bright 
concentration of Stephen Crane nor the symbolic mean- 
ing and poetry of Frank Norris nor the large, blunder- 
ing tenderness of Theodore Dreiser. He is hopelessly 
deficient in charm, and his undoubted merits do not make 
up for the deficiency. 

Jack London (1876-1916) was a novelist of the Amer- 
ican proletariat. Born in California, the son of a fron- 
tier scout and trapper, he lived as a boy in an ordinary 
bourgeois environment, tempered by the novels and ro- 
mantic history which he insatiably devoured. At four- 
teen he left school to become an unskilled laborer in a 
dozen occupations, becoming in time an oyster-pirate and 
a longshoreman in and near the bay of San Francisco 
and shipping before the mast at seventeen to go as far 
as Japan and the Bering Sea. In a mood of disgust in- 
duced by overwork he became at eighteen a tramp who 
covered ten thousand miles in the United States and 
Canada during the hard times of the early nineties and 
who made up his mind that he could no longer continue 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 267 
in the treadmill which his great bodily strength had 


heretofore regarded as a pleasure and which his reading 
had told him was a virtue. Home once more, he encoun- 
tered books which confirmed him in his resolution. A year 
at the University of California and a winter in the Klon- 
dike during the gold rush still further confirmed him: he 
became a socialist and a revolutionist; with enormous la- 
bors he made himself into a popular writer, discovered that 
the politer world which he consequently entered was not 
all he had imagined it, and once for all cast in his for- 
tunes with the working class. He visited the East End 
of London, cruised in the South Seas, acted as corre- 
spondent during the Russo-Japanese War and in Mexico 
in 1914, lectured and traveled and farmed and made 
large sums of money till the end of his life. 

As a propagandist for socialism he wrote War of the 
Classes (1905), Revolution (1910), and The Iron Hee! 
(1908), a romance recounting an imaginary revolution 
of 1932. Of his autobiographical writings The People 
of the Abyss (1903), his adventures in the London slums, 
The ‘Road (1907), his life as a tramp, Martin Eden: 
(1909), his struggles in learning to write, The Cruise of 
The Snark (1911), a voyage in the Pacific, John Barley- 
corn (1913), his alcoholic memories, are most important, 
although autobiography colors all his records and inven- 
tions. His popularity and his eagerness for money 
tempted him to write much, especially in the way of short 
stories, that was decidedly below his better level, and he 
never, indeed, rose above his first marked success, The 
Call of the Wild (1903). Although he constantly played 
with ideas in his books, and liked to hint naively at his 


268 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


learning, he wrote always under the obsession of physical 
energy. What was “ elemental ” in Frank Norris became 
“ abysmal” in Jack London. He carried the cult of 
“red blood ” in literature to an extreme at which it be- 
gan to sink to the ridiculous, as in his lineal descendants 
of the moving-pictures. His heroes, whether wolves or 
dogs or prize-fighters or sailors or adventurers-at-large, 
have all of them approximately the same instincts and 
the same careers. They rise to eminence by battle, hold 
the eminence for a while by the same methods, and event- 
ually go down under the rush of stronger enemies. Lon- 
don, with the strength of the strong, exulted in the strug- 
gle for survival. He saw human history in terms of the 
evolutionary dogma, which to him seemed a glorious, con- 
tinuous epic of which his stories were episodes. He set 
them in localities where the struggle could be most ob- 
' vious: in the wilds of Alaska, on remote Pacific Islands, 
on ships at sea out of hearing of the police, in industrial 
communities during strikes, in the underworlds of various 
cities, on the routes of vagabondage. As he had a boy’s 
glee in conflict, so he had a boy’s insensibility to physical 
suffering. The Sea-Wolf (1904) represents at its fullest 
his appetite for cold ferocity in its record of the words 
and deeds of a Nietzschean, Herculean, Satanic ship ¢ap- 
tain whose incredible strength terminates credibly in sud- 
den paralysis and impotence. The Game (1905) shouts 
the lust of the flesh as expressed in pugilism. Before 
Adam (1906) goes apparently still further afield in a 
quest for the primitive and moves among the half arboreal 
ancestors of the race. White Fang (1905) reverses The 
Call of the Wud and brings a wolf among dogs. 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 269 


The Call of the Wild, summary as well as summit of 
London’s achievement, is the story of a dog stolen from 
civilization to draw a sledge in Alaska, eventually to 
escape from human control and go back to the wild as 
leader of a pack of wolves. As in most animal tales the 
narrative is sentimentalized. Buck has a psychology 
which he derives too obviously from his human creator; 
learns the law of the brute wilderness too quickly and 
too consciously; dreams too definitely of the savage 
progenitors from whom he inherits, by way of atavism, 
his ability to contend with a new world. The pathetic 
fallacy, however, has behind it a reality in London’s own 
experience which lends power to the drama of Buck’s 
restoration to the primitive. In something of this fashion 
the young tramp had; learned the hard rules of the road; 
in something of this fashion the gold-seeker had mastered 
the difficulties of the Klondike face to face with a piti- 
less nature which made no allowance for his handicaps and 
which apparently desired the destruction of the men who 
had ventured into. the wilderness. Out of his experience 
he had built up a doctrine concerning the essential life 
of mankind, and out of his doctrine he had shaped this 
characteristic tale. But the doctrine is not excessively 
in evidence, and the experience contributes both an ac- 
curate lore and an authentic passion. The narrative is 
as spare as an expedition over the Chilkoot Pass; it is 
swift and strong, packed with excitement and peril. 
Moreover, it has what almost none of Jack London’s 
“red blood ” rivals had, and what he later deprived him- 
self of by his haste and casualness: a fine sensitiveness 
to landscape and environment, a robust, moving, genuine 


270 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


current of poetry which warms his style and heightens 
the effect while enriching it. ‘The subsequent loss or sur- 
render of such qualities cost London the higher place to 
which his genius entitled him but from which the defects 
of his artistic conscience and his excess of popularity held 
him down. . 
American naturalism has never produced a school or 
announced a program. Instead, beginning primarily as 
a disposition to dissent from the milder imsipidities of 
average novels at the end of the last century, it has con- 
tinued in that disposition ever since. ‘Theodore Dreiser 
has successively set up massive pyramids of fiction built 
out of materials ordinarily rejected by genteel American 
builders as sordid or improper or dull. Though his hand 
is heavy and his mind not quite made up concerning his 
materials, his documentation of the age cannot be over- 
looked. Neither can that of Upton Sinclair, whose rad- 
ical opinions have cost him heavily with ordinary pub- 
lishers and public, but whose earnestness and skill in con- 
troversy deserve the high praise that they recall Thomas 
Paine. ‘The past half-dozen years in seeing the energies 
of Edith Wharton devoted to. the service of France have 
seen the cause of the novel temporarily deprived of an 
indubitable gentus whose work has sophistication, satire, 
acuteness, verisimilitude, and grace to a degree unmatched 
among those of her contemporaries whose qualities may 
be thought of as already proved. At the other extreme 
from the fashionahle New York which she ordinarily por- 
trays is the East Side of Abraham Cahan, a novelist who 
has written few books in English but who in knowledge 


REACTION AND PROGRESS 271 


and vividness surpasses all who have dealt with the pro- 
Jetarian immigrant in American cities. 

The term naturalism by no means fits James Branch 
Cabell, who has laid the scene of much of his invention in 
medieval Europe and who at many points seems incorrigibly 
romantic; and yet a temper so ironical and so unconven- 
tional sets him widely apart from the rococo romancers 
of the years during which he commenced to write. He 
belongs rather with those brilliant newer writers, like 
Sherwood Anderson, Dorothy Canfield, Willa Cather, 
Floyd Dell, Zona Gale, Joseph Hergesheimer, Sinclair 
Lewis, and Ernest Poole, who seem to forecast a new gen- 
eration of novelists who will not be content to strike some 
interesting note and then to keep on striking and exploiting 
it till the end of their careers, but who instead will dare to 
experiment and may thus succeed in growing. Hope 
springs, and help may come, from the example of the poets 
—of Edwin Arlington Robinson and Robert Frost and 
Edgar Lee Masters — who have recently been showing how 
much of drame can be distilled into a little verse. They 
have already been important influences upon the more 
scrupulous and reflective novelists, and a continuation of 
their influence is perhaps an element as much to be desired 
as any in the coming generation of American fiction. 


| 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


Full bibliographies for all of the major novelists and most 
of the minor figures discussed in this volume may be found in 
The Cambridge History of American Literature (Putnam: 
1917-21: 4 vols.) edited by William Peterfield Trent, John 
Erskine, Stuart P. Sherman, and Carl Van Doren. See espe- 
cially the bibliographies to Chapters vi and vu in Book ITI 
and Chapter x1 in Book III — all three of them dealing par- 
ticularly with prose fiction. In A Manual of American Litera- 
ture (Putnam: 1909) edited by Theodore Stanton there is 
a useful chapter on The Novelists by Clark Sutherland 
Northup. Other important general accounts are: Leading 
American Novelists (Holt: 1910) by John Erskine; Southern 
Fiction Prior to 1860: An Attempt at a First-Hand Bibliog- 
raphy (University of Virginia: 1909) by J. G. Johnson; 
History of Southern Fiction by Edwin Mims in The South 
in the Building of the Nation (Richmond: 1909-18: 18 vols.) ; 
A History of American Literature Since 1870 (Century: 
1915) by F. L. Pattee. 


CHAPTER I 


Tue period to 1830 is covered in Fhe Early American Novel 
(Columbia University: 1907) by Lillie Deming Loshe and 
in Early American Fiction, 1774-1880 (Privately printed, 
Stamford, Conn.: 1902; revised edition, New York: 19138), 
a bibliography by Oscar Wegelin. For Brackenridge see 
A Bibliography of H. H. Brackenridge (Heartman, New 

272 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 273 


York: 1917) by Charles F. Heartman. Modern Chivalry 
has long been out of print, as have A Pretty Story, The 
Foresters, The Coquette, The Algerine Captive, Female Quizo- 
tism, The Asylum, etc. An edition of Charlotte Temple 
(Funk and Wagnalls: 1905) contains an introduction and a 
bibliography by F. W. Halsey. Charles Brockden Brown's 
novels were issued in six volumes by Mackay (Philadelphia) 
in 1887. The Life of Charles Brockden Brown (Philadel- 
phia: 1815: 2 vols.) by William Dunlap and Memoirs of 
Charles Brockden Brown, the American Novelist (London: 
1822), a shorter biography by the same hand, are the sources 
of most information regarding Brown. Further titles may 
be found listed in the Cambridge History, Vol. I, pp. 527-29. 


CHAPTER II 


Tue most desirable edition of Cooper it that with introduc- 
tions by his daughter Susan Fenimore Cooper now published 
by Houghton Mifflin in 32 vols. James Fenimore Cooper 
(Houghton Mifflin: 1883) by Thomas R. Lounsbury and 
James Fenimore Cooper (Lane: 1918) by Mary E. Phillips 
are both important, the former for critical analysis, the latter 
for anecdotal information. See also the Cambridge History, 
Vol. I, pp. 580-34, for a more extended bibliography. 


CHAPTER III 


For Neal see his Wandering Recollections of a Somewhat 
Busy Life (Boston: 1869). For Judd see Life and Character 
of the Rev. Sylvester Judd (Boston: 1857) by Arethusa Hall. 
For Paulding see Literary Life of James K. Paulding (New 
York: 1867) by William I. Paulding. For Kennedy see 


21% THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


‘The Life of John Pendleton Kennedy (New York: 1871) 
by H. T. Tuckerman. For Simms see William Gilmore Simms 
(Houghton Mifflin: 1892) by W. P. Trent and A List of the 
Separate Writings of William Gilmore Simms of South Caro- 
lina, 1806-1870 (Privately printed: 1906) by Oscar Wegelin. 
For Bird see The Life and Dramatic Works of Robert Mont- 
gomery Bird (Knickerbocker Press: 1919) by Clement E: 
Foust. Thompson has been kept in print in an edition of 
four volumes (Lothrop). Kennedy’s Swallow Barn and Horse- 
Shoe Robinsor are still issued (Putnam). Simms exists in 
various editions of 17 volumes, apparently just now out of 
print. Ware’s Zenobia, Aurelian, and Julian are issued by 
several publishers. Of the other novels discussed. in this 
chapter only Melville’s Typee, Omoo, and Moby Dick continue 
to exhibit their original vitality. All three are included in 
the Everyman series, and they with White Jacket may be 
read in an edition in four volumes published by Dana Estes. 
Bibliographies of the writers discussed in this chapter are 
given in the Cambridge History, Vol. I, pp. 525-46. 


CHAPTER IV 


Tuer best editions of Hawthorne are those published by 
Houghton Mifflin, particularly the Riverside and Wayside 
editions in 13 volumes with notes by G. P. Lathrop. There 
are numerous useful biographical and critical studies: A 
Bibliography of Nathaniel Hawthorne (Houghton Mifflin: 
1905) by Nina E. Browne; Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne 
(Walter Scott: 1890) by Moncure D. Conway; N. Hawthorne: 
Sa Vie et son Oeuvore (Paris: Hachette: 1905) by L. Dhaleine; 
Nathaniel Hawthorne and his Wife (Houghton Mifflin: 1885: 
2 vols.) and Nathaniel Hawthorne and his Circle (Harper: 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 215 


1903) both by Julian Hawthorne; Hawthorne (Macmillan: 
1879) by Henry James; Memories of Hawthorne (Houghton 
Mifflin: 1897) by Rose Hawthorne Lathrop; Hawthorne and 
his Publisher (Houghton Mifflin: 1913) by Caroline Ticknor; 
Nathaniel Hawthorne (Houghton Mifflin: 1902) by George E. 
Woodberry. See also the Cambridge History, Vol. II, pp. 
415-24, for a larger bibliography. 


CHAPTER V 


For the dime novel see The Dime Novel in American Life 
(Atlantic Monthly: July, 1907) by Charles M. Harvey. For 
Cooke see the forthcoming Life of John Esten Cooke (Colum- 
bia University) by John Beaty. For Winthrop see The 
Life and Poems of Theodore Winthrop (New York: 1884) 
edited by Laura Winthrop Johnson. For Curtis see George 
William Curtis (Houghton Mifflin: 1894) by Edward Cary. 
Prue and I, Reveries of a Bachelor, Dream Life, The 
Wide Wide World, most of the minor sentimental novels of 
the period covered in this chapter, and the works of Holland 
(Scribner), Roe (Dodd, Mead), and Wallace (Harper) re- 
main regularly in print and are apparently still read, though 
by a diminishing audience. For Roe see E. P. Roe: Remi- 
niscences of his Life (New York: 1899) by Mary A. Roe. 
For Wallace see Lew Wallace: An Autobiography (Harper: 
1906). Mrs. Stowe’s works are published in 15 volumes by. 
Houghton Mifflin. See Life and Letters of Harriet Beecher 
Stowe (Houghton Mifflin: 1897) by Annie ‘Fields; Life of 
Harriet Beecher Stowe (Houghton Mifflin: 1889) by C. E. 
Stowe; Harriet Beecher Stowe (Houghton Mifflin: 1911) by 
C. E. and L. B. Stowe. The material dealt with in this chap- 
ter receives a somewhat similar treatment in Volume III of 


276 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


the Cambridge History, Chapter x1, the bibliography to 
which, Vol. IV, pp. 656-71, furnishes additional titles and 
critical guidance. 


CHAPTER VI 


Joun W. DeForest in The Nation for January 9, 1868, 
and T. S. Perry in The North American Review for October 
1872 interestingly discuss ‘The Great American Novel.” 
For the local color writers see Chapter x1 in Volume III of 
the Cambridge History, and also Chapter vi, The Short 
Story, in Volume II. For the period as a whole Pattee’s 
History of American Literature since 1870 is indispensable. 
DeForest’s novels have not been reprinted. There are ac- 
counts of Edward Eggleston in George Cary Eggleston’s 
The First of the Hoosiers (Philadelphia: 1903) and in Mere- 
dith Nicholson’s The Hoosiers (Macmillan: 1900). The 
writings of William Dean Howells are published by various 
houses, chiefly Houghton Mifflin and Harper. The most ex- 
tensive bibliography is that in the Cambridge History, Vol. 
IV, pp. 663-66. There is a critical study, William Dean 
Howells (Huebsch: 1917), by Alexander Harvey. No authen- 
tic biography of Howells has yet been published, but much 
information concerning him may be found in Mark Twain’s 
Letters (Harper: 1917: 2 vols.) and in The Letters of Henry 
James (Scribner: 1920: 2 vols.), as well as in Howells’s own 
autobiographical writings, particularly Years of My Youth, 
My Literary Passions, Literary Friends and Acquaintance. 


CHAPTER VII 


Tue books of Mark Twain are published by Harper. Al- 
bert Bigelow Paine’s Mark Twain: A Biography (Harper: 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 277 


1912: 3 vols.) is an essential source for information regard- 
ing not only Mark Twain but also the entire period, par- 
ticularly the relations between Mark Twain and Howells. 
There is also A Short Life of Mark Twain (Harper: 1920) 
by Paine. Of critical studies the most important are Howells’s 
My Mark Twain (Harper: 1910) and Van Wyck Brooks’s 
The Ordeal of Mark Twain (Dutton: 1920), the last a bril- 
liant and illuminating piece of criticism. The Cambridge 
History brings the bibliography of Mark Twain to 1920, Vol. 
IV, pp. 635-39. 


CHAPTER VIII 


Henry James collected most of his novels and tales for 
the New York Edition (Scribner: 1907-09: 24 vols.; 2 more 
vols, added 1917), to which he contributed prefaces contain- 
ing by far the most important commentary yet made upon 
his work. His Letters (Scribner: 1920: 2 vols.) are full of 
hints regarding his aims and methods. The Cambridge His- 
tory brings the James bibliography down to 1920, Vol. IV, 
pp. 671-75. Of critical studies the following are notable: 
The Method of Henry James (Yale University Press: 1918) 
by Joseph Warren Beach; Henry James (Holt: 1916) by 
Rebecca West. 


CHAPTER IX 


For this chapter Pattee’s American Literature since 1870 
and Chapters v1 (Vol. II) and x1 (Vol. III) of the Cambridge 
History, with the bibliographies, are essential. The works of 
Bret Harte are published in twenty volumes by Houghton 
Mifflin, a firm which also issues The Life of Bret Harte (1911) 
by H. C. Merwin. Mrs. Jackson’s Ramona is published by 


278 THE AMERICAN NOVEL 


Little Brown, Cable’s The Grandissimes by Scribner, and 
Howe’s The Story of a Country Town by Harper. Miss 
Woolson’s novels were published by Harper, and some of 
them are still in print. Mrs. Deland’s John Ward, Preacher 
and Bellamy’s Looking Backward are both published by 
Houghton Mifflin. The novels and stories of Stockton were 
issued by Scribner in a collected edition of 23 volumes in 
1899-1904. The Captain’s Toll-Gate (1908) contains a bio- 
graphical sketch and a bibliography by Mrs. Stockton. The 
works of Eugene Field are published in 12 volumes by Scrib- 
ner, as was also Slason Thompson’s Eugene Field (1905: 2 
vols.). The novels of Marion Crawford are published in 32 
vols. by Macmillan, but Crawford still lacks a biography. 


CHAPTER X 


For the rococo romancers see Paul Leicester Ford’s essay 
The American Historical Novel (Atlantic: December, 1897), 
Pattee’s American Literature since 1870, and the text and bibli- 
ography of Chapter xi in Vols. III and IV of the Cambridge 
History. Most of these novels are still in print. S. Weir 
Mitchell’s Hugh Wynne is published by Century as are his 
other chief novels. His works were collected in 16 vols. (Cen- 
tury: 1910). Crane’s The Red Badge of Courage is published 
by Appleton in an edition which has a biographical preface by 
Ripley Hitchcock. Norris’s works are published by Doubleday 
Page, who in 1914 issued a small pamphlet, Frank Norris, by 
Charles G. Norris. The novels of Jack London have recently 
been reissued in an edition of 21 volumes by Macmillan. No 
biography of either Norris or London has yet been published. 
For the living novelists a competent critical discussion is still 
lacking, though some material may be found in the following 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 279 


books: The Men Who Make Our Novels (Moffat, Yard: 1919) 
by George Gordon; Some American Story-Tellers (Holt: 
1911) by F. T. Cooper; The Women Who Make Our Novels 
(Moffat, Yard: 1918) by Grant Overton; Literature and In- 
surgency (Kennerley: 1914) by J. C. Underwood; Our Short 


Story Writers (Moffat, Yard: 1920) by Blanche Colton Wil- 
liams, 


INDEX 


About, Edmond, 225 

Adams, Henry, 221, 232 

Addison, 2 

Ade, George, 249 

Adventures (Boone), 21 

Adventures of Captain Horn, 
The, 236 

Adventures of Erancois, 
248, 249, 255 

Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, 
The, 166, 169, 170-75, 178 

Adventures of Tom Sawyer, The, 
167, 168-170, 172, 174 

Afloat and Ashore, 40, 41, 47 

Ahab, Captain, 72, 73 

Aiken, Albert W., 111 

Alcott, Louisa M., 129 

Aldrich, Thomas Bailey, 128, 129, 
168, 225, 239 

Aleshine, Barbara, 234, 235 

Alessandro (Ramona), 227 

Algerine Captive, The, 8-10 

Alice of Old Vincennes, 248, 251 

Allen, Ethan, 17, 58, 110 

Allen, James Lane, 248, 258 

Altar of the Dead, The, 209 

Altruria, 146-47 

Ambassadors, The, 212, 213, 216 

Ambitious Guest, The, 80 

American, The, 197, 217 

American Academy of Arts and 
Letters, 151 

American Claimant, The, 179 

American Democrat, The, 40 

American Politician, An, 239 

American Scene, The, 216 

Ames, Levi, 9 

Ancestral Footstep, The, 105, 193 

Anderson, Sherwood, 271 

Andrea de! Sarto, 153 

Andros, Sir Edmund, 82 

d’Aranjuez, Maria Consuelo, 244 

Arbuthnot, Dr. John, 4 


Arcadia, 218 

Archer, Isabel, 200, 201, 202, 214 

Aristotle, 50 

Arnold, Benedict, 18, 249 

Arnold, Matthew, 176 

Artemus Ward. See 
Charles Farrar 

Arthur (King), 17, 176, 182, 253 

Arthur, Timothy Shay, 114 

Arthur Mervyn, 10, 12 

Art in the Netherlands, 130 

Artist of the Beautiful, The, 83 

Aspern, Jeffrey, 207 

Aspern Papers, The, 207 

Astoria, 77 

d’Astrardente, Corona, 243 

Aeylum, The, 22 

Atherton, Gertrude, 248 

At Isetla, 192 

Atlantic Monthly, 134, 136, 137, 
138, 139, 144, 167, 186, 190, 191, 
239 

Aunt Polly (Tom Sawyer), 169 

Aurelian, 67 

Austen, Jane, 154, 186 

Author of Beltrafio, The, 207 

Autobiography of a Quack, The, 
255 


Awkward Age, The, 211, 212 


Browne, 


Bacheller, Irving, 249 

Bachelor, The (Reveries of a 
Bachelor), 116 

Bacon’s Rebellion, 20 

Balaam’s Ass, 170 

Balestier, Wolcott, 260 

Balzac, 155, 175, 190, 192, 195, 
198, 241 

Bancroft, George, 18, 85 

Barlow, Joel, 10 

Barr, Amelia Edith, 225 

Barrie, James M., 76 

Barriers Burned Away, 122 


281 


282 


Battleground, The, 248, 250 

Bayard, Chevalier, 61, 239 

Beadle and Adams, 110 

Beauchampe, 65 

Before Adam, 268 

Belknap, Jeremy, 4 

Bellamy, Edward, 148, 221, 282- 
233, 248, 257 

Belshazzar, 242 

Ben-Hur, 123, 124, 221, 225, 226 

Ben-Hur, 123, 124 

Bennett, Emerson, 67 

Between the Dark and the Day- 
light, 151 

Beulah, 114 

Beverly of Graustark, 249 

Bierce, Ambrose, 128, 257 

Biggs, Lytle, 230 

Birch, Harvey, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32 

Bird, Robert Montgomery, 53, 54, 
66, 123 

Bitter-Sweet, 122 

Blankenship, Tom, 171 

Blazed Trail, The, 265 

Blithedale Romance, The, 94, 95, 
98-100, 194 

Bliz, 264 

“ Blood-Pudding Literature,” 58 

Boer War, 216 

Bonner, Robert, 109 

Bonnet, Stede, 250 

Book of the Sea, The, 76 

Boone, Daniel, 21, 30, 35, 47, 110, 
197 

Border Beagles, 65 

Borrow, George, 69 

Boss, The, 265 ~ 

Bostonians, The, 202, 203, 204, 
206 

Bourget, Paul, 184 

Bowdoin College, 78, 118 

Boy’s Town, A, 133, 150 

Bracebridge Hall, 59 

Brackenridge, Hugh Henry, 4-6 

Braddock, General, 20 

Bravo, The, 38 

Bread and Cheese Club, 32 

Breadwinners, The, 221, 232 

Bridge, Horatio, 79, 84 

Brierly, Henry, 166 


INDEX 


Brigstock, Mona, 210 

Bristed, John, 15, 16, 22 

Brookenham, Nanda, 211 

Brook Farm, 85, 98, 100 

Brown, Charles Brockden, 10-15, 
ae 29, 52, 53, 60, 77, 113, 128, 


Browne, Charles Farrar, 157, 188, 
162, 163 

Browne, Sir Thomas, 71 

Bruce, Robert, 9 

Brydone, 9 

Buck (Call of the Wild), 269 

Buckminster, Rev. Joseph, 7 

Buffalo Bill. See Cody, Wil- 
liam F. 

Bulwer-Lytton, 225 

Bumppo, Natty, 26, 30, 32, 33, 
34, 35, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 
197 

Bunner, H. C., 128, 225, 231 

Bunyan, 9 

Burke, Edmund, 150 

Burnett, Frances Hodgson, 225 

Burr, Aaron, 120 

Burroughs, Stephen, 2 

Bush, Esther, 36 

Bush, Ishmael, 36, 48 

Byrd, William, 2 

Byron, 28, 57 

Byron, Lady, 120 


Cabell, James Branch, 271 

Cable, George Washington, 126, 
128, 221, 225, 228-229, 931, 249 

Cesar, 185, 239 

Cahan, Abraham, 270 

Caleb Williams, 10 

California (University), 260, 267 

Call of tle Wild, The, 27, 269 

Cambridge (University); 238 

Canfield, Dorothy. See Fisher, 
Dorothy Canfield 

Canoe and the Saddle, The, 113 

Canterbury Pilgrims, The, 81, 82 

Canty, Tom, 175 

Captain Smith and Princess Po- 
cahontas, 22 

Captain Stormfield’s Visit to 

eaven, 182, 183 


INDEX 


Cardigan, 248 

Cardinal's Snuff-Boz, The, 248 

Carson, Kit, 110 

Carwin, 14 

Casamassima, Princess, 204 

Case of George Dedlow, The, 255 

Cassique of Kiawah, The, 66 

Casting Away of Mre. Lecks and 
Mrs. Aleshine, The, 234 

Cather, Willa, 27 

Catherwood, Mary Hartwell, 247, 
248 

Cavalier, The, 249, 250 

Cecil Dreeme, 113 

Celebrated Jumping Frog of Ca- 
laveras County, The, 162 

Celestial Railroad, The, 85 

Century of Dishonor, A, 227 

Cervantes, 2, 133 

Chainbearer, The, 47 

Chambers, Robert W., 248 

Champions of Freedom, The, 23 

Chance Acquaintance, A, 135, 
136, 153 

Chansons de geste, 54 

Charlemagne, 17, 247 

Charlemont, 65 

Charles Egbert Craddock. See 
Murfree, Mary Noailles 

Charlotte Temple, 7, 8, 114, 118 

Charter Oak, 20 

Chaucer, 133 

Child, Lydia Maria, 54 

Children of the King, The, 243 

Chillingworth, Roger, 89, 90, 91, 
107, 174 

Chingachgook, 33, 34, 43 

Chippings with a Chisel, 81 

Choir Invisible, The, 248, 251, 
254 

Chopin, 239 

Christmas Banquet, The, 85 

Churchill, Winston, 248, 249 

Cicero, 23 

Cigarette-Maker’s Romance, The, 
243, 245 

Cincinnati, Society of, The, 5 

Cintré, Claire de, 198 

Circuit Rider, The, 131, 132 

Civil War, 53, 105, 112, 113, 114, 


2833 


120, 122, 123, 125, 134, 148, 161, 
185, 188, 190, 196, 224, 250, 254, 
255, 259 

Clarel, 75 

Clark, George Rogers, 251 

Clay, Henry, 38 

Clemens, Samuel Langhorne, 113, 
129, 133, 144, 152, 157-187, 188, 
191, 221, 226, 230, 248 

Cleveland, Grover, 258 

Clithero. See Edny, Clithero 

Clough, Arthur Hugh, 136 

Cobb, Sylvanus Jr., 110 

Cody, William F., 110 

Coffin, Long Tom, 26, 32 

Coleridge, 207 

Colonel Carter of Cartersville, 


Columbia College, $2 

Columbus, 10, 54 

Comus, 199 

Confidence Man, The, 75 

Connecticut Yankee in King Ar- 
thur’s Court, A, 176, 177, 178, 
182, 221, 226, 232 

Conqueror, The, 248 

Conquest of Canaan, The, 10 

Conquest of Granada, The, 77 

Conrad, Joseph, 76 

Constance Trescott, 255 

Conte, Louis de, 178 

“Continental ” literature, 260, 261 

Contrast, The, 9 

Cooke, John Esten, 111-113, 114, 


Cooper, James Fenimore, 23-50, 
51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 60, 61, 
62, 65, 66, 68, 77, 109, 110, 111, 
113, 125, 128, 154, 157, 186, 197, 
229, 227, 231, 247, 250, 251, 254 

Cooper, Judge William, 24 

Coquette, The, 7, 8 

Corleone, 243, 244 

Corleone, Tebaldo, 244 

Cortez, 10 

Count Julian, 66 

Coverdale, Miles, 98, 99, 100, 194 

Cowboys, 250 

Cozon Fund, The, 207 

Crabbe, George, 230 

Crane, Stephen, 258-260, 266 


284 


Crawford, F. Marion, 221, 226, 
231, 238-245, 248 

Crawford, Thomas, 238 

Cressy, 227 

Crisis, The, 248, 250 

Criticigm and Fiction, 150 

Crockett, David, 163 

Cross, Marian Evans, 186, 192, 
225 

Crossing, The, 248, 249, 2651, 

252 

Croy, Kate, 215 

Cruise of the Snark, The, 267 

Crumbling Idols, 257, 264 

Crusoe, Robinson, 47 

Curse of Clifton, The, 114 

Curtis, George William, 114, 116, 
117, 150 

Custer, General, 227 


Daisy Miller, 199, 206, 217 
Damsel of Darien, The, 66 
Dana, Richard Henry, 69 

Dante, 134 

Darius, 239 

Daudet, 155, 191, 225 

Davenport, Ellery, 120 

David Harum, 238 

Davis, John, 22 

Davis, Richard Harding, 248 
Day of Doom, The, 9 

Death of the Lion, The, 207 
Débdcle, La, 259 

Declaration of Independence, 18 
Deerfield raid, 20 

Deerslayer, The, 41, 42, 43-44, 47 
Deerslayer. See Bumppo, Natty 
Defoe, 2, 76 

De Forest, Col. John W., 129 

De Grey: a Romance, 192 
DeLancey, Susan Augusta, 25 
Deland, Margaret, 221, 232, 258 
Delawares, 50 

Del Ferice, 244 

Deliverance, The, 248, 250 

Dell, Floyd, 271 

Democracy, 221, 232 

Densher, Merton, 215 

Derby, George Horatio, 158 


INDEX 


Detective stories, 111, 170, 179, 
226 


Dickens, 3, 98, 118, 133 

Dime novel, The, 110-11, 112, 118, 
131, 222, 250 

Dimmesdale, Arthur, 88, 89, 90, 
107, 174 

Diva’s Ruby, The, 243 

Doctor Claudius, 239 

Dolliver Romance, The, 105 

Domestic sentimentalism, 6-8, 109, 
114-17, 118, 120-21, 129, 222, 
225 

Donatello, 103, 104 

Don Fulano, 113 

Lon Orsino, 243, 244 

Don Quixote, & 

Dormer, Nicholas,. 205 

Dostoevsky, 225 

Double Barrelled Detective Story, 
A, 180 

Down-Easters, The, 57 

Dr. Breen’s Practice, 137 

Dream Life, 114, 116 

Dred, 120 

Dreiser, Theodore, 180, 265, 266, 
270 

Dreyfus, 216 

Dr. Grimshawe’s Secret, 105 

Dudevant, Amandine Lucile Au- 
rore, 194, 198 

Dudley, Constantia, 11 

Duke of Stockbridge, The, 249, 
251 

Dukesborough Tales, 126 

Dusante, Albert, 235 

Dusantes, The, 234, 236 

Dutchman’s Fireside, The, 58 

Dwight, Timothy, 10 


Earthly Paradise, 176 

Earth’: Holocaust, 86 

East Angels, 221, 231 

‘“‘ Easy Chair, The,” 150 

Edgar Huntly, 12, 18 

‘“‘Editor’s Study, The,” 144, 150 

Edny, Clithero, 13 

Edward, Prince of Wales (Ed- 
ward V1), 175 

Edwards, Jonathan, 2, 7 


INDEX 


Edwards, Pierrepont, 7 

Edwin Brothertoft, 118 

Eggleston, Edward, 126, 180-132, 
931 


Ellis, Edward S., 110 

Elsie Wenner, 128 

Emerson, 85, 106, 138, 155, 213 
Endicott and the Red Cross, 92 
End of the World, The, 131 
English Novel, The (Lanier), 222 
Enterprise (Virginia City), 161 
Epic of the Wheat, 261-63 . 
Erring, Joe, 230 

Ethan Brand, 81, 83, 95 
Euripides, 50 

Europeans, The, 198, 217 
Eutaw, 65 

Eve’s Diary, 178 


Faerie Queene, The, 78, 195 

Fair God, The, 128 

Fair Margaret, 248 

Fanshawe, 79 

Farange, Maisie, 210 

Farrago, Captain, 5 

Fearful Responsibility, A, 187 

Feathertop, 85 

Female Quizotiem, 22 

Fenimore, Susan, 24 

Fid, Dick, 37 

Field, Eugene, 237 

Fielding, 1, 2, 3, 5, 51, 81 

Figure in the Carpet, The, 208 

Filson, John, 21 

Finn, Huckleberry, 159, 168, 169, 
171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 188 

First Settlers of Virginia, The, 22 

Fischer, Theodor, 183 

Fisher, Dorothy Canfield, 271 

Flanagan, Betty, 28 

Flaubert, 191, 194, 195, 198, 258 

Flora (Turn of the Screw), 211 

Floyd, Nelly, 65 

Following the Equator, 179, 180 

Fool’s Errand, A, 231 

Ford, Paul Leicester, 248, 258 

Foregone Conclusion, A, 137 

Forest, The, 24, 30, 33-34, 42 

Foresters, The, 4 

Foster, Hannah Webster, 7 


Fourier, 189 

Fox, John, 248 

Francis the First, 289 

Franklin, Benjamin, 1, 3, 8, 19, 
88, 186, 252, 255 

Frederic, Harold, 247, 257, 260 

Freeman, Mary E. Wilkins, 128, 
248, 257, 258 

French and Indian War, 247 

French Poets and Novelists, 194 

Froissart, 65, 261 

Frontier, The, 12, 17, 21-22, 29, 
31, 39, 41, 46-47, 49, 51, 52-53, 
55, 58-59, 60-61, 62, 65, 110-11, 
129-32, 155, 163, 164-65, 178, 
250, 251, 256, 269 

Frost, Robert, 271 

Fugitive Blacksmith, The, 265 

Fugitive Slave Law, 116, 118 

Fuller, Margaret, 98 


Gabriel Conroy, 227 

Galazry, The, 190 

Galdés, 225 

Gale, Zona, 271 

Game, The, 268 

Garland, Hamlin, 128, 180, 14, 
257, 264 

Garland, Mary, 194 

Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn, 118 

Gates, General, 63 

Gaylord, Marcia, 139, 140 

Gaylord, Squire, 140 

Genét, Edmond Charles, 4 

Gentle Boy, The, 82, 85 

George, Henry, 148, 257 

George Eliot. See Cross, Marian 
Evans 

George Sand. See Dudevant, 
Amandine Lucile Aurore 

Gereth, Owen, 210 

Gilbert and Sullivan, 176 

Cided Age, The, 159, 166, 178, 

79 

Glasgow, Ellen, 248, 249 

Godwin, William, 10, 11, 52 

Goethe, 185 

Golden Bowl, The, 212, 214, 216 

Goldoni, 134 

Goldsmith, 188, 155 


286 


Goncourt, Edmond de, 191 

Goodwood, Caspar, 201 

Gothic romance in America, 9-15, 
22-28, 52, 113 

Gouache, Anastase, 244 

Gordon, Tom, 120 

Grand Cyrus, 218 

Grandissimes, The, 221, 228 

Graustark, 248, 249 

Gray Champion, The, 82 

Graysons, The, 131, 132 

“Great American Novel, The,” 
126 

Great Carbuncle, The, 80 

Great Lakes, 21, 42-48, 54, 231 

Great Stone Face, The, 95 

Great Stone of Sardis, The, 236 

Great War Syndicate, The, 237 

Green, Anna _ Katharine. See 
Rohlfs, Anna Katharine Green 

Greene, Nathanael, 61, 63 

Green Mountain Boys, The, 58 

Greifenstein, 242 

Guenn, 221, 226 

Guinevere, 219 

Gunmaker of Moscow, The, 110 

Guy, Earl of Warwick, 2 

Guy Rivers, 61, 62. 


Haggard, Rider, 247 

-. Hatl Columbia, 115 

Hall, Bayard Rush, 131 

Hall, James, 59 

Halleck, Ben, 140 

Hall of Fantasy, The, 86 

Hamilton, Dr. Alexander, 32. 

Hamor (Guenn), 226 

Hard-Heart, 36 

Hardy, Arthur Sherburne, 247 

Hardy, Thomas, 225 

Harland, Henry, 248 

Harper (The Spy), 27 

Harper’s Magazine, 144, 150 

Harris, Joe] Chandler, 126 

Hart, Joseph C., 72 

Harte, Bret, 113, 126, 127, 1928, 
157, 162, 227, 257 

Harvard, 190, 238, 260 

Hawkeye. See Bumppo, Natty. 


INDEX 


Hawkins, Judge, 159 

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 53, 69, 74, 
75, 77-108, 109, 113, 114, 198, 
133, 154, 155, 157, 162, 174, 186, 
191, 192, 198, 196, 247 

Hawthorne, Una, 93 

Hay, John, 221, 232 

Hazard of New Fortune, A, 147- 
60, 153, 221, 232 

Headsman, The, 38 

Hearn, Lafcadio, 70 

Heart's Highway, The, 248, 251 

Heidelberg (University), 238 

Heidenmauer, The, 38 

Heine, 138, 239 

Henry, Patrick, 17 

Henry St. John, Gentleman, 111 

Hephzibah Guinness, 255 

Herbert, George, 116 

Hergesheimer, Joseph, 27 

Herne, James A., 145 

Herrick, Robert, 265 

Hilda (Marble Faun), 108, 104, 
107 

Hilt to Hilt, 112 

History of English Prose Fiction, 

» 222 

History of the Navy of the 
Onited States, The, 41 

Holgrave (House of the Seven 
Gables), 97 

Holland, Josiah Gilbert, 122, 123, 
130 

Hollingsworth (Blithedale Ro- 
mance), 100 

Holmes, Mary Jane, 114 

Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 68, 106, 
128, 255 

Home as Found, 40 

Homer, 34, 64, 65 

Homeward Bound, 40 

Honorable Peter Stirling, The, 
258: 

Hook, Captain, 76 

Hoosier School-Master, The, 126, 
130, 131, 132 

Hope, Anthony, 249 

Hopkins, Samuel, 121 

Hopkinson, Francis, 4 

Horse-Shoe Robinson, 60 


INDEX 


House of the Seven Gables, The, 
94, 95-98, 99, 102, 105 

Howard, Blanche Willis, 221, 226 

Howe, Edgar Watson, 130, 221, 
298, 229-930, 231, 257 

Howells, William Dean, 99, 109, 
125, 129, 182-156, 157, 158, 162, 
165, 167, 170, 180, 186, 188, 190, 
196, 210, 221, 222, 223, 225, 226, 
931, 232, 241, 246, 256, 263, 265 

Hubbard, Bartley, 139, 140 

Hudibras, 4 

Huckleberry Finn. See Adven- 
tures of Huckleberry Finn, The 

Hudson, Roderick, 194 

Hugh Wynne, 248, 251, 252, 255 

Hugo, Victor, 225 

Humble Romance and Other 
Stories, A, 257 

Hume, 5 

Humorists, 53, 158-59, 184, 187 

Humphreys, David, 17 

Huron (Indian tribe), 34 

Huntly, Edgar, 18 

Hutchinson, Anne, 81 

Hutter, Judith, 48 

Hyperion, 77 


Thsen, 155 

Idylls of the King, 176 

Ik Marvel, 116 

Imperative Duty, An, 151 

Imperialism, 147, 254 

In Defense of Harriet Shelley, 
178 


Indian Herald, The, 238 

Indian John, 30, 33 

Indians, 5, 6, 12, 18, 16, 20, 21, 35, 
86, 46, 47, 56, 62, 66, 110, 128, 
227, 228, 250 

Indian Summer, 139, 143, 158, 221 

Ingersoll, Robert G., 123, 181, 258 

Ingraham, Joseph Holt, 67, 110, 
114, 124 

Ingraham, Prentiss, 111 

Innocents Abroad, The, 162-64, 
166, 177, 178 

In Our Town, 265 

Intelligence Office, The, 86 

International Episode, An, 199 


287 


In the Midst of Life (Tales of 
Soldiers and Civilians), 257 
In the Palace of the King, 248, 

248 


In the Valley, 247 

Iron Heel, The, 267 

Irving, Sir Henry, 171 

Irving, Washington, 15, 49, 54, 58, 
59, 60, 66, 77, 116, 117, 193, 133, 
155, 157, 228 

Israel Potter, 75 

Italian Journeys, 134 

Ivory Tower, The, 216 


Jackson, Andrew, 39, 60, 168 

Jackson, Helen Hunt, 221, 227, 
228 

James, Henry, Sr., 189, 190 

James, Henry, 99, 109, 137, 144, 
152, 157, 162, 186, 188-220, 221, 
222, 225, 226, 231, 241, 246 

James, William, 190 

Janice Meredith, 248, 261, 252 

Jay, John, 27 

Jefferson, Thomas, 18, 252 

Jewett, Sarah Orne, 126, 198, 231, 
249, 251 

Jim (Huckleberry Finn), 172, 173 

Joan of Arc. See Personal Rec- 
ollections of Joan of Arc. 

John Barleycorn, 267 

John Brent, 113 

John of Austria, Don, 248 

John Phoenix. See Derby, George 
Horatio 

Johnson, Dr. Samuel, 66, 239, 951 

Johnston, Mary, 248, 249 

Johnston, Richard Malcolm, 126, 
231 

John Ward, Preacher, 221, 232 

Jones, John Paul, 31, 252 

Joseph Andrews, 1, 2 

Josh Billings. See Shaw, Henry 
Wheeler 

Judd, Sylvester, 53, 57 

Judson, E. Z. C., 67, 110, 111 

Julian, 67 

Jumping Frog. See Celebrated 
Jumping Frog of Calaveras 
County, The, 


288 


Jungle, The, 265 


Kaloolah, 67 

Kate Bonnet, 249, 250 

Katherine Lauderdale, 248 

Katherine Walton, 62, 68 

Kathrina, 122 

Kavanagh, 77 

Kennedy, John Pendleton, 51, 53, 
59-60 

Kenton, Boyne, 152 

Kenton, Ellen, 152 

Kenton, Judge, 152, 153 

Kentons, The, 151, 152, 153 

Kenyon (Marble Faun), 103, 104 

Key to Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 4, 
119 

Khaled, 242, 245 

Kidnapped, 247 

King, Charles, 226 

King Philip’s War, 20, 37 

Kingsley, Charles, 118 

Kinsmen, The. See Scout, The 

Kipling, 257, 260, 261 " 

Kirkland, Caroline, 59 

Kirkland, Joseph, 231, 257 

Knickerbocker History, 228 

Knickerbocker writers, 162 


Lady of the Aroostook, The, 137 

Lady or the Tiger? The, 234 

Lafayette, 32 

Lafitte, 110 

Lamplighter, The, 114 

Lancelot, 219 

Landlord at Lton’s Head, The, 
151 

Langdon, Olivia, 165 

Lanier, Sidney, 222, 224 

Lanman, Charles R., 288 

Laphan, Silas, 141, 142 

Last Leaf, The, 68 

Last of the Foresters, The, 111 

Last of the Mohicans, The, 33- 
$4, 35, 36, 42, 62 

Last of the Valerii, The, 192 

Late Mre. Null, The, 236 

Lawton, Captain, 29 

Lazarre, 248, 250 


INDEX 


Leather-Stocking. See Bumppo, 
Natty 

Leather Stocking and Silk, 111 

Leather-Stocking Tales, 44-47, 254 

Leatherwood God, The, 151, 152 

Lecks, Mrs., 234, 285 

Ledger (New York), 110 

Legree, Simon, 118 

Lena Rivers, 114 

Leonardo da Vinci, 185, 289 

Le Sage, 2 

Lesson of the Master, The, 207 

Letter to his Countrymen, A, 39 

Lewis, Alfred Henry, 265 

Lewis, Sinclair, 271 

Lewis and Clark, 21 

Life (Tolstoy), 145 

Life of Franklin Pierce, 94 

Life on the Mississippi, 160, 167, 
174, 230 

Light, Christina, 194, 203 

Limbert, Ralph, 207 

Lincoln, 132, 184, 136, 249, 256 

Linwoods, The, 17 

Lionel Lincoln, 32 

Literary Friends and Acquaint- 
ance, 134, 151 

Little Lord Fauntleroy, 225 

Littlepage, Corny, 48 

Littlepage Manuscripts, 47 

Tittle Shepherd of Kingdom 
Come, The, 248, 250 

Little Women, 129 

Local color, 81, 126-27, 129, 130, 
139, 145, 222, 223, 227, 231, 242, 
247, 257, 260 

Locke, David Ross, 158, 159 

Locke, John, 20 

Locke Amsden, 57 

Lockhart, J. G., 49 

London, Jack, 266-270 

Longdon, Mr., 212 

Longfellow, 67, 77, 79, 84, 106, 
133, 136 

Looking Backward 2000-1887, 
921, 282 

Loti, Pierre, 70 

Louisiana Purchase, 21, 228 

Love Affairs of a Bibliomaniac, 
The, 237 ; 


INDEX 


Lovelace, Robert, 7 

Lowell, James Russell, 57, 106, 
121, 202 

Luck of Roaring Camp, The, 126, 
127 


Macaulay, 133 

Madame Bovary, 194 

Madame de Mauves, 198 

Madonna of the Future, The, 192, 
198 

Maggie, 259 

Magnalia Christi Americana, 121 

Magua, 34, 36 

Mahtoree, 36 

Main Street (Hawthorne), 82, 95 

Main-Travelled Roads, 257 

Major, Charles, 248 

Mallet, Rowland, 194 

Malory, Sir Thomas, 176, 253, 254 

Manassas, 265 

Man for the Ages, A, 249 

Man’s Woman, A, 264 

Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg, 
The, 182 

Marble Faun, The, 101-105 

March, Basil, 147 

March, Isabel, 147 

Mardi, 71, 75 

Margaret, 57 

Margaret Smith’s Journal, 17 

Mariolatry, 178 

Marion, Francis, 17, 61, 64 

Marion Darche, 

Mark Twain. See Clemens, Sam- 
uel Langhorne 

Martin Eden, 267 

Martin Faber, 61 

Maruja, 227 

Marzio’s Crucifix, 939 

Masefield, John, 76 

Masters, Edgar Lee, 130, 271 

Mather, Cotton, 121 

Matiwan, 62, 65 

Matters of American Romance. 
See Frontier, Revolution, Set- 
tlement 

Maupassant, 191, 225 

Mauves, Madame de, 1938 

Mayflower, The, 117 


289 


Mayo, William Starbuck, 54, 67 

Maypole of Merry Mount, The, 82 

McCutcheon, George Barr, 248, 
249 

McFingal, 4 

McTeague, 264 

Mead, Elinor G., 134 

Mellichampe, 62, 63 

Melville, Herman, 51, 54, 68-76, 
77, 128, 254 

Memoirs of an American Citizen, 
The, 265 

Meredith, George, 75, 255 

Merimée, Prosper, 225 

Merle, Madame, 201 

Messala, 123 

Mexican War, 123 

Middle Years, The, 196, 216 

Miles (The Turn of the Screw), 
211 

Miller, Daisy, 199 

Milton, 90, 199 

Minister’s Charge, The, 189 

Minister's Wooing, The, 120, 121 

Miriam Schaefer, 108, 107 

Miriam Coffin, 72 

Mise Bellard’s Inspiration, 151 

Mies Ravenel’s Conversion from 
Secession to Loyalty, 129 

Mitchell, Donald Grant, 114 

Mitchell, Isaac, 22 

Mitchell, Silas Weir, 248, 249, 
255-256 

Mitford, Mary Russell, 59 

Moby Dick, 71-74, 75, 76, 254 

Moby Dick, 72, 73, 74 

Mocha Dick, 72 

Modern Chivalry, 4-6 

Modern Instance, A, 139, 153, 155, 
221 

Mohicans, 34 

Mohun, 112 

Montkins, The, 39 

Monsieur Beaucaéire, 248, 249, 252 

Montevarchi, 244 

Montrésor, John, 8 

Moran, 263 

Moran of the Lady Letty, 263 

More, Sir Thomas, 184 

Morley, John, 196 


290 


Morris, William, 176 

Morte d Arthur, 176, 218, 253 

Morton, Sarah Wentworth, 8 

Mosses from an Old Manse, 85 

Mr. Isaacs, 238 

Mrs. Cliff’s Yacht, 236 

Murfree, Mary Noailles, 126, 128 

231 

Murray, John, 69 

oy Litera Passions, 133, 151 . 
wain, 151 


id Mark 
ysterious Stranger, The, 152, 


183 
Mystery of Metropolisville, The, 
181 


My Story, 249 


Napoleon, 185 

Narrative of Arthur Gordon 
Pym, 77 

Nash, Gabriel, 205 

Nation, The, 134, 190 

National Institute of Arts and 


Letters, 151 

Neal, John, 51, 53, 57 

Ned Buntline. See Judson, E. 
Z. C 


Negroes, 56, 229, 236 

“ Neutral Ground,” 28 

New Adam and Eve, The, 86 

Newcome, Colonel, 36 

Newell, Robert H., 158 

New England Nun and Other 
Stories, A, 257 

Newgate Calendar, The, 78 

New Home— Who'll Follow? A, 
59 

Newman, Christopher, 197, 198 

New Purchase, The, 131 

Next Time, The, 207 

Nick of the Woods, 66 

Nietzsche, 184 

Nina Gordon. See Dred 

No Love Lost, 136 

Norris, Frank, 111, 260-64, 266, 
268 

N orth American Review, 
1 

Norton, Charles Eliot, 190 

Notes of a Son and Brother, 216 


The, 


INDEX 


Notions of the Americans, 38 

Novel: What It Is, The, 241 

Novelette, The, 199, 237 

Novels, opposition to, 2-3, 51-52, 
122, 128 


Oak Openings, The, 41 

Occonestoga, 62 

Octopus, The, 261, 262, 268, 264 

Official realism, 155, 246 

QO. Henry. See Porter, William 
Sydne 

Old Tiff, 120 

Old Times on the Mississippi, 167 

Oldtown Folks, 120, 121, 126 

Omoo, 69, 70 

Opening a Chestnut Burr, 122 

O’Regan, Teague, 5 

Ormond, 11, 204 

Ormond, 1 

Orpheus C. Kerr. 
Robert H. 

Osmond, Gilbert, 201 

Ossian, 28 

Othello, 2380 

Our Old Home, 101, 105 


See Newell, 


Page, Thomas Nelson, 126, 128, 
248 


Paine, Thomas, 8, 181, 270 
Pamela, 1 

Paraday, Neil, 207 

Parkman, Francis, 247 

Partisan, The, 62, 68, 66 

Pascal, 239 

Passe Rose, 247 

Passionate Pilgrim, A, 192, 193 
Pasteur, 185 

Pater, Walter, 176, 206, 213 
Pathfinder, The, 41, 42-43, 47 
Pathfinder. See Bumppo, Natty 
Patience, 176 

Paulding, James Kirke, 51, 53, 58 
Paul Patoff, 239 

Pawnee, 36 

Peabody, Sophia Amelia, 84 
Pearl of Orr's Island, The, 121 
Pelayo, 66 

Pembroke, 258 


INDEX 


Penn, William, 19, 20 

People of the Abyss, The, 267 

Personal Recollections of Joan of 
Arc, 166, 177-78, 248, 250, 251 

Petroleum V. Nasby. See Locke, 
David Ross. 

Philip and his Wife, 258 

Phillips, David Graham, 265-66 

Philothea, 54 

Phips, Sir William, 81 

Piatt, John James, 134 

Piazza Tales, The, 75 

Pierce, Franklin, 79, 94 

Pierre, 75 

Pietro Ghisleri, 243, 245 

Pilgrims, The, 9, 20, 82, 106° 

Pilot, The, 31, 37 

Pinkster (annual holiday of 
New York slaves), 48 

Pioneers, The, 24, 29-31, 33, 34, 
35, 36 

Pirate, The, 31 

Pit, The, 261, 262, 264 

Pizarro, 10 

Pocahontas, 20, 22 

Poe, 77, 84 

Poganwe People, 121 

Political novels, 232 

Pomona, 238, 234 

Pomona’s Travels, 234 

Poole, Ernest, 271 

Poor whites, 131 

Pope, 2, 138 

Porgy, Captain, 63, 65 

Porter, William Sydney, 128 

Portrait of A Lady, The, 200- 
202, 214, 217, 221 

Potiphar Papers, 117 

Power of Sympathy, The, 3, 7, 51 

Prairie, The, 33, 35-36 

Prairie Folks, 257 

Prairies, 21, 35, 229, 230, 257 

Precaution, 27 

Prescott, 54, 123 

Pretty Story, A, 4 

Pride of the Village, The, 116 

Primadonna, The, 243 

Prince and the Pawper, The, 175 

Prince of India, The, 124 

Prince of the House of David, 


291 


The, 114 
Princess Casamassima, The, 202, 
203, 204, 205, 206, 221 
Priscilla Fauntleroy, 98, 99, 100 
Prisoner of Zenda, The, 249 
Prisoners of Hope, 248, 251 
Private Theatricals, 137 
Procession of Life, The, 86 
Professor Fargo, 192 
Prospero, 183 
Prue, 117 
Prue and I, 114, 117 
Prynne, Hester, 88, 89, 90; 91, 92, 
98, 100, 104, 107, 174 
Prynne, Pearl, 88, 92, 98, 107 
Pudd’nhead Wilson, 179 
Puritans, The, 2, 83, 86, 89, 90, 
104, 106, 155 
Putnam, Israel, 17 
Pyncheon, Clifford, 97, 107 
Pyncheon, Hepzibah, 96, 107 
Pyncheon, Judge Jaffrey, 98, 107 
Pyncheon, Phoebe, 97 


Quakers, 5 

Quality of Mercy, The, 151. 
Queen 5) a * 
Questionable Shapes, 151 


Rabelais, 71 

Radcliffe, Anne, 9, 22 

Ralstons, The, 243 

Ramona, 221, 227, 228 

Ramona, 227 

Ransom, Basil, 208 

Rappaccini’s Daughter, 88, 85, 95 

Rasselas, 1 

Red Badge of Courage, The, 258, 
259, 260 

Red Book, The, 59 

Redburn, 69 

Red City, The, 249, 255 

Red Rock, 248, 250 

Red Rover, The, 36, 87 

Redskins, The, 47 

Reign of Gilt, The, 265 

Resources of the United States, 
The, 15 

Responsibilities of the Novelist, 
The, 264 


29Z 


Reveries of a Bachelor, 114, 116 

Revolution, The American, 1, 4, 
17-19, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, S37 
45, 51, 58, 55, 57, 60, 62, 64, 65, 
112, 125, 185, 250, 261, 258, 254, 
256, 267 

Revue des deuw Mondes, 189 

Richard Carvel, 248, 251 

Richard Hurdis, 65 

Richardson, Samuel, 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 
116 

Rise of Silas Lapham, The, 139, 
140-48, 153, 210, 221 

Road, The, 267 

Robert Elsmere, 232 

Robertson, Morgan, 256 

Robinson, Edwin Arlington, 271 

Robinson, Horse-Shoe, 60 

Robinson, Hyacinth, 204 

Robinson Crusoe, 1 

Rob of the Bowl, 60 

Rococo romance, 178, 226, 246-56, 
265, 271 

Roderick Hudson, 191, 193, 203 

Roe, E. P., 122-23, 130, 225 

Roger Malvin’s Burial, 85 

Rohlfs, Anna Kathariae Green, 
926 

Roland Blake, 255 

Romance of Certain Old Clothes, 
The, 192 

Romance of Dollard, The, 247 

Roman de la Rose, 218 

Roman Singer, A, 239 

Romeo and Juliet, 173 

Romer, Jonathan, 67 

Rooth, Miriam, 205, 206 

Roughing It, 164, 167 

Rowson, Susannah Haswell, 6, 
-§ 


Roxana, 179 

Rozy, 1381, 18° . 
Royal Nonesuch, The, 173 
Rudder Grange, 238 

Rudder Grangers Abroad, The, 


“ Ruritanian” romance, 249 
Ruskin, 189 
Sacred Fount, The, 211 


INDEX 


Salem witchcraft, 20, 82 
Salmagundi, 59 
Saltram, Frank, 207 
ancho Panza, 5 
San Giacinto, 244 
Sant’ Ilario, 248, 244 
Sanutee, 62 
Saracinesca, 239, 248, 245 
Saracinesca, Giovanni, 248, 244, 
245 


Saracinesca, Ippolito, 244 

Saracinesca, Prince Leone, 244 

Saracinesca, Orsino, 244, 245 

Satanstoe, 40, 47, 48, 58 

Sawyer, Tom, 159, 168, 169, 170, 
171, 172, 178, 183, 284 

Scarlet Letter, The, 78, 986-98, 
94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 108, 109, 174 

Scipio A/’ricanus, 37 

Scott, Lady Sybil, 76 

Scott, Sir Walter, 6, 15, 28, 31, 
38, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 56, 61, 66, 
111, 118, 157, 186, 941, 246, 247 

Scout, The, 63 

Scribner’: Magazine, 122 

Sea Tales, 22, 31-32, 36-37, 41, 54, 
69-74, 226, 256, 267, 268 

Sea-Wolf, The, 268 

Sedgwick, Catherine Maria, 17 

Select Party, A, 86 

Sellers, Colonel Beriah, 166, 179, 

Sense of the Past, The, 216 

Septimius Felton, 105 

Seth Jones or the Captive of the 
Frontier, 110 

Seth’s Brother's Wife, 257 

Settlement, The, 17, 19-21, 51, 5S, 
55, 58, 62, 65, 82, 250, 251, 254, 


256 
Seven Vagabonds, The, 80, 83, 95, 
192 
Shadow of a Dream, The, 151 
Shakeen, Bryan, 9 
Shaker Bridal, The, 81 
Shakespeare, 61, 133, 185 
Shaw, Bernard, 242 
Shaw, Henry Wheeler, 158 
Shays’ Rebellion, 251 
She, 247 


INDEX 


Shelley, 11 

Sherringham, Peter, 206 

Short stories, 15, 68, 77, 80-81, 
82-84, 85-86, 94, 95, 126, 128, 
144, 145, 151, 162, 178, 179, 180, 
182, 183, 192, 1938, 199, 207, 208, 
209, 210-11, 216, 221, 226, 297, 
231, 238, 234, 288, 257, 265 

Sidney, Sir Philip, 218 

Simms, William Gilmore, 51, 53, 
60-66, 68, 77, 111, 126, 128, 251 

Sinclair, Upton, 265, 270 

Sioux, 36, 227 

Sir Charles Grandison, 2 

Sister Carrie, 265 

Sky-Walk, 11, 14 

Slim Princess, The, 249 

Sloper, Catherine, 200 

Small Boy and Others, A, 216 

Smith, F. Hopkinson, 238 

Smith, Captain John, 61 

Smollett, 2, 3, 31, 37, 52 

Snow-Image, and Other Twice- 
Told Tales, The, 94, 95 

Soldiers of Fortune, 248, 249 

Son of Royal Langbrith, The, 151 

South Seas, The, 22, 68-74, 175, 
267, 268 

Southworth, Emma Dorothy Eliz- 
abeth Nevitte, 114 

Spanish War, 254 

Sparks, Jared, 53 

Spenser, 195, 236 

Spicca, 244 

Spoils of Poynton, The, 209, 210 

Spy. The, 27-29, 30, 31, SS, 57 

Stanley, Abigail, 8 

Stanley, Charlotte, 8 

Stant, Charlotte, 214 

St. Clair, Augustine, 119 

St. Elmo, 114 

Sterling, Philip, 166 

Sterne, Laurence, 3, 23 

Stevenson, Robert Louis, 202, 207, 
Q41, 246, 247 

Stewart, Charles D., 265 

St. George, Henry, 207 

Stimson, Frederic Jesup, 249 

Stockton, Frank Richard, 128, 
221, 283-37, 249 


293 


Stormfield, Captain, 185 

Story of a Bad Boy, The, 129, 168 

Story of a Country Town, The, 
921, 228, 229 

Story of a Mine, The, 227 

Story-Teller, The, 84 

Stowe, Calvin E., 118 

Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 117-22, 
126, 128, 180, 166 

Stransom, George, 209 

Strether, Lambert, 212, 2138 

Stuart, J. E. B., 112 

Summer in Arcady, 258 

Surry of Eagle’s Nest, 112 

Susan Lenox, 266 

Swallow Barn, 59, 60, 112, 192 

Swift, 5 

Sweetheart of M.Briseuc, The, 192 

Sword and The Distaff, The. See 
Woodcraft 


Taine, 130 

Tale of a Lonely Parish, A, 239 

Tale of a Tub, A, 5 

Tales of Soldiers and Civilians. 
See In the Midst of Life. 

Tanglewood Tales, 94 

Tarkington, Booth, 248, 249 

Tarrant, Verena, 203 

Tashtego, 75 

Taylor, Bayard, 129 

Tempest and Sunshine, 114 

Temple, Charlotte, 8 

Templeton, Judge, 24 

Tenney, Tabitha, 22 

Ten Nights in a Bar Room, 114 

Tennyson, 133, 176 

Thackeray, 3, 36, 133, 155 

Thatcher, Becky, 169 

Theale, Milly, 215 

Their Silver Wedding Journey, 
154 

Their Wedding Journey, 135, 136, 
147 

Theobald (Madonna of the Fu- 
ture), 193 

18th District, The, 265 

$30,000 Bequest, The, 182 

Thompson, D. P., 51, 58, 57, 58 

Thompson, Maurice, 248 


294 


Thoreau, 85, 106, 162, 202, 218 

Those Extraordinary Twins, 179 

Thousandacres, 47 

Thousand and One Nights, The, 
949 

Three Fates, The, 239 

Through the Eye of the Needle, 
146 

Toby (Typee), 68 

To Have and to Hold, 248, 251, 
252 

To Leeward, 239 

Toll-Gatherer’s Day, The, 95 

Tolstoy, 145, 146, 147, 155, 225, 
241, 258, 259 

Tom Jones, 1 

Tom Sawyer. See Adventures of 
Tom Sawyer, The 

Tom Sawyer Abroad, 179 

Tom Sawyer, Detective, 179 

Tory Lover, The, 249, 251 

Touchett, Ralph, 201 

Tourgée, Albion W., 231 

Tragic Muse, The, 205, 206, 221 

Tramp Abroad, A, 175 

Transcendentalists, 57, 71, 85, 106, 
202, 213 

Traum, Philip, 188 

Traveler from Altruria, A, 146 

Travelling Companions, 192 

Travels (John Bavis), 22 

Troyes, Chrétien de, 219 

Trumbull, John, 4 

Tucker, George, 54 

Tucker, Nathaniel Beverley, 112 

Tuckerman, Bayard, 222 

Turgenev, 145, 147, 191, 195, 197, 
198, 925 

Turn of the Screw, The, 210 

Tuscarora War, The, 20 

Twice-Told Tales, 79, 84 

Twitchell, Rev. Joseph H., 175 

Two Admirale, The, 41 

Two Years Before the Mast, 69 

Tyler, Royall, 8-10 

Typee, 69 

70, 71 


Uncas, 34, 36, 50, 69 


INDEX 


Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 51, 118-120, 
128, 227 

Underhill, Updike, 8 

Undiscovered Country, An, 137 


Valdés, 225 

Valera, 225 

Vanamee, 268 

Vandover and the Brute, 264 
Vasconselos, 66 

Venetian Life, 134 

Vereker, Hugh, 208 

Verga, 225 

Verver, Maggie, 214 

Vetch, Fleda, 209, 210 

Via Crucis, 242, 248 

Vicar of Wakefield, The, 1 
Virginia Comedians, The, 112 
Virginian, The, 248, 250 
Virtuoso’s Collection, A, 86 
Vision of Columbus, The, 10 
Voyage to the Moon, A, 54 


| Waif of the Plains, A, 227 


Wakefield, 8S 
Wallace, General Lew, 123-24, 
221 


Wallingford, Miles, 47 

Walton, Isaak, 116 

Wandering Jew, The, 124 

War and Peace, 259 

Warburton, Lord, 201 

Ward, Mrs. Humphry, 2382 

Ward, John, 232 

Ware, William, 54, 67, 124 

Warner, Charles Dudley, 166 

Warner, Susan, 114 | 

War of the Classes, 267 \ 

Washington, 17, 27, 185, 252, 253, 
255, 256 

Washington (Weems), 151 

Washington Square, 199, 217, 221 

Watch and Ward, 191 

Waverley, 15 

Weems, Mason Locke, 17, 19, 64, 
115 

Wept of Wish-ton-Wish, The, 37, 
42 


Westcott, Edward Noyes, 238 
Westlock, Rev. John, 230 


INDEX 


Westward Ho! 58 

Westways, 255 

Wharton, Edith, 265, 270 

What I: Man? 181 

What Maisie Knew, 210, 211 

When Knighthood Was in Flower, 
248, 249 

Whistler, 162 

White, Stewart Edward, 265 

White, William Allen, 265 

White Fang, 268 

White Jacket, 69 

Whitlock, Brand, 144, 265 

Whitman, Elizabeth, 7, 8 

Whitman, Walt, 162, 163, 218 

Whittier, 12, 77 

Wide Wide World, The, 114, 115, 
118 

Wieland, 13-15 

Wieland, Theodore, 14 

Wife, The, 116 

Wilde, Oscar, 176, 242 

Wilderness and the 
The, 59 

Wilkins, Mary E. See Freeman, 
Mary E. Wilkins 

Wilks, Peter, 173 

Williams, Rev. John, 20 

Wilson, Augusta Jane Evans, 114 

Wilson, Pudd’nhead, 179, 180 

Wing-and-Wing, The, 41 

Wings of the Dove, The, 212, 214- 
1é 


Winterbourne, Frederick Forsyth, 
199 
Winthrop, Theodore, 113-114 


Warpath, 


295 


Wirt, William, 17 

Wister, Owen, 248 

Witch of Prague, The, 242 

Without a Home, 122 

With the Immortals, 289 

Wolf, The, 261 

Woman’se Reason, A, 139 

Wonder-Book for Girls and Boys, 

, 94 

Woodcraft, 63 

Wood, George, 239 

Woodworth, Samuel, 23 

Woolson, Constance Fenimore, 
126, 221, 231 

World War, The, 189, 216-17, 256 

Wyandotté, 40, 41, 42 

Wynne, Hugh, 253 


Yale, 24, 113 

Years of My Youth, 188, 151 

Yellow Book, The, 207 

Yellow fever, 11-12 

Yemassee, The, 61, 62, 65, 66 

Yemassee War, The, 20, 62 

Young Goodman Brown, 82, 85, 
9 


5 
Youth of Jefferson, The, 111 
Yvoernelle, 261 


Zenobia, 67 

Zenobia Fauntleroy, 98, 100, 104, 
107 

Zola, 191, 225, 258, 259, 260, 263 

Zoroaster, 

Zury, 231 


o emus. - » & acu eens a 


sa en et 


14 TNNAV Ten __ 
RETURN CIRCULATION ‘DEPARTMENT | 


LOAN PERIOD 1 
HOME USE 


1-month feara may be renewed: by caning GE340e 


1-year loans may be recharged by bringing the books to the Circulation Desk 
Renewals and recharges may be made 4 days prior to due date 


DUE AS STAMPED BELOW 
RECEIVED B 


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY 
FORM NO. DD6, 60m, 1/83 BERKELEY, CA 94720 


“GENERAL LIBRARY - U.C. BERKELEY 


6000814353 


