Save this story
Save this story
Prime Day is
 in full swing, but Amazon isn't the only shop with deals. Walmart has a competing sale it calls, in a burst of creativity, “Walmart Deals.” Like Prime Day, Walmart's sale features a range of deals on headphones, tablets, kitchen gear, and other tech. The best part is, there are no members-only deals here, so you can shop without worrying you'll be asked to sign up for one. I've rounded up all the best deals on our favorite WIRED-tested gear.
Shop Walmart's Summer Sale Here
If you can't find anything you like, be sure to browse our roundup of the 
Absolute Best Prime Day Deals
.
Best Tech Deals
Photograph: Ryan Waniata
JBL Flip 7 Bluetooth Speaker for $95 ($55 off)
Our 
favorite portable Bluetooth speaker
, JBL’s Flip strikes the perfect balance between mobility and sound quality. The 
Flip 7
 also has some extra goodies like water resistance, an easy-release strap, and a two-hour battery boost (or four with reduced bass).
Roku Streaming Stick Plus TV Streamer for $34 ($5 off)
The 
best streaming device
 for most folks, this Roku stick is small, fast, and plugs right into your TV's HDMI port. It's super simple to use and has a handy remote for voice search support.
Photograph: Ryan Waniata
Beats Powerbeats Pro 2 Wireless Earbuds for $180 ($69 off)
With the same H2 chip that powers the AirPods Pro 2, the 
PowerBeats Pro 2
 impressed our reviewer, who praised the “crazy comfy” fit and dynamic sound. There’s also ANC and transparency modes for both road safety and gym sanity, wireless charging, IP57 durability, full-on bass-forward audio quality, and built-in heart rate monitoring.
Apple 11-inch iPad (2025) for $299 ($50 off)
The base iPad ticks all the boxes you need in a tablet. This is the latest model, updated in 2025 to an A16 chip and 6 GB of RAM. It's perfect for casual gaming, reading books, watching movies in bed, and sharing with your kids. Amazon has the same sale for Prime members right now, but this is as good a deal as we typoiucally see on iPads.
Apple AirTag Tracker for $24 ($5 off)
These teeny tiny trackers might be the best way to keep tabs on your keys or luggage if you use an iPhone. They're some of the 
best trackers
 around. Roughly the size of a quarter, they use Bluetooth and Apple's special U1 location-finding chip to pinpoint locations in the Find My app.
Photograph: Simon Hill
Google Nest Cam Outdoor for $130 ($50 off)
The best wireless 
outdoor security camera
 for Google households, the Nest Cam Outdoor has a handy magnetic mount, an expansive 130-degree field of view, and captures sharp 1080p video with HDR and night vision. There's also a clear-sounding speaker and microphone. You only get three hours of free event history, but you can add a Home Premium subscription ($10 a month, or $100 for the whole year) to get 30 days of event history and face recognition.
Microsoft Xbox Series X Game Console for $574 ($76 off)
It might be late in this console generation's lifespan, but you can still snag Microsoft's flagship Xbox Series X, and it might be the best way to take full advantage of its Game Pass library. It's 
not as good a deal as it was
, but what is nowadays?
Nex Playground Game Console for $239 ($60 off)
Worried about your kids becoming couch potatoes? This fun game console will get them up and jumping around your living room. I liked the 
Nex Playground
 when I first tried it, and the company has polished and added more games since then.
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Ninja Slushi Machine for $199 ($100 off)
Just in time for the summer sun, the 
best slushie machine
 is on sale. Whip up icy soft drinks for the kids and a frozen margarita for you. The perfect way to cool down on hot days, this machine has intuitive controls and a reliable drip tray, and it's easy to clean.
Google Fitbit Charge 6 Fitness Tracker for $80 ($80 off)
The 
Charge 6
 is old, but it's still 
our favorite Fitbit
 and may remain so until the Fitbit name is submerged by Google. The bright AMOLED touchscreen is easy to read and it covers all the basics, monitoring your heart rate, blood oxygen, and skin temperature. It also has ECG and electrodermal activity scans to gauge irregular heart rhythms and stress levels.
TCL QM6K QLED TV (65-inch) for $528 ($70 off)
Affordable at its regular price, the TCL QM6K is a steal with this discount. The 65-inch model employs QLED display tech for bright colors and good contrast, even from a side viewing angle. Gamers will appreciate the 144 Hz refresh rate for low-latency performance, all powered by the intuitive Google TV operating system.
Petlibro Scout Smart Pet Camera for $56 ($46 off)
Keep an eye on your pets with this AI-enabled smart 
pet camera
. It features 1080p HD video, black-and-white or color night vision, and two-way audio. The built-in AI learns who your pets are, and uploads photos that you can review to help it get smarter.
Bissell Little Green Portable Carpet Cleaner for $85 ($45 off)
You may remember this gadget went 
viral on TikTok
 a few years ago, and it's still an excellent upholstery or 
carpet cleaner
 at its regular price. It's pretty good at sucking up spills and may even remove stains, and it's way less bulky than your average carpet cleaner.
Ninja Luxe Cafe Pro Espresso Machine for $600 ($150 off)
Ninja’s flagship 
semi-automatic espresso machine
 can go toe-to-toe with Breville’s Barista Express for the title of most popular semi-automatic espresso machine. This is a great deal on a machine that nails automatic milk frothing.
