Save this story
Save this story
What if I
 told you Brooks Running started out making ballet slippers and bathing shoes? Founded in 1914, the Seattle-based company spent decades making just about everything except running shoes, moving from baseball cleats to roller skates, football cleats and children’s shoes, and softball cleats. It wasn’t until 1972 that Brooks made running its focus, and the company has been refining the category ever since.
Brooks introduced one of the industry’s earliest uses of EVA foam, developed the first running shoe with a breathable GORE-TEX upper, and introduced the Kinetic Wedge, which was an innovative design catered to women’s anatomy.
So, while Brooks may not be the trendiest brand, it has built a reputation for dependable support, comfort, and durability. Here at WIRED, Brooks has plenty of fans, especially for 
trail running
 and 
gravel running
. The company also offers apparel we regularly recommend, including sports bras, outerwear, and running bottoms.
Brooks Running shoes are relatively reasonably priced for 
performance running footwear
, with many models hovering around $150. If you’re in the market for a new pair, I’ve rounded up the best Brooks Running promo codes and Brooks Running coupons worth checking out.
Score 20% Off Your First Order With Brooks Promo Code
If you’ve never ordered anything off Brooks’ website before, new customers get 20% off their first order after subscribing to emails. You can apply the one-time Brooks coupon code for top-selling shoes, like the Caldera 7 and Adrenaline shoes, along with other gear and apparel. It’s an easy way to save on some of their top products to take your road and trail running game to the next level.
More Brooks Coupons and Offers
Are you already a member of Brooks Run Club? If you sign up, you get member perks, like early access to sales, standard free shipping with no order minimum, and free express shipping on orders from Brooks. Membership also includes more runner-specific perks, like a free birthday gift, an opportunity to earn prizes by syncing your fitness tracker and contributing research to the Brooks team. You can also win a chance to visit the Seattle flagship store and have your gait analyzed by Brooks’ team. To join, visit 
Brooks Run Club
 and register for the Brooks promo code.
If you shop and buy a complete outfit in one transaction from one of Brooks’ recommended buying guides—like 
Warm Weather Running Outfits
 or 
Fall Weather Running Outfits
—you can get 15% off automatically applied during checkout. This is a fantastic deal if you only just realized in the past 10 days that you’ve been running in hail in your tiny shorts and cropped sports bra.
Should You Hike in Boots or Trail Runners?
Lightweight shoes now dominate the trails, so do you still need boots? Here’s how to choose the right footwear for your outdoor adventures.
By 
Chris Haslam
Save on Our Favorite Brooks Running Shoes
Brooks makes so many iconic running shoes that it’s hard to list them all. I’m currently running in the 
Brooks Glycerin Max
, which is one of the cushiest shoes that I’ve ever tried. I don’t feel particularly stable on uneven terrain, but the padding is noticeably springy and cushy if you’ve been putting in some serious miles. WIRED director Michael Calore is a fan of the 
Brooks Ghost
 line, and if you’re planning on hitting the trails in the cold, wet Pacific Northwest, I would suggest the 
Brooks Cascadia Gore-Tex
. 
The Adrenaline
 is the company’s most popular shoe.
Photograph: Kieran Alger
Save to wishlist
Brooks
Glycerin Max
$202
 
Amazon
$210
 
Amazon (Women's)
$200
 
Zappos (Men's)
$200
 
Zappos (Women)
Preorder Your Favorite Glycerin Now
One of the most anticipated Brooks drops is the Glycerin line. These shoes are made to be durable, while allowing freedom of movement and flexibility. The cushioned shoes are comfortable for running and movement on many types of terrain. Tons of shoes in the Glycerin line are available to preorder, including the Glycerin Flex, Glycerin 23, and Glycerin GTS 23. Be sure to check out the 
Glycerin line
 to see which is best for you.
The Cascadia Elite Available Now
Brooks is constantly dropping new shoe styles, ensuring there’s a 
type of shoe for every runner
. The new 
Cascadia Elite
 Brooks Running shoe is unisex and great for trail running: with PEBA cushioning, a Vibram Megagrip Elite outsole, and a MATRYX engineered woven upper with Kevlar fibers to help secure your feet firmly, no matter what terrain you’re traversing. This shoe has a light, springy cushioning that helps to propel you forward, whether that be from competitive trail racing, to Sub-ultras to VKs to ultras.
Upcoming Brooks Sale Events to Watch Out For
Do you have a runner in your life? The odds are, they’re taking stock of their winter apparel and shoes and trying to decide if these leggings are going to make it through another winter season. The best time to save is during seasonal sales, with discounts on footwear and apparel, including discounts on popular items like the Ghost 16 running shoes.
Do you have running military, nurses, or first responders in your life? Brooks Running also offers 25% off Brooks promo code full-priced items for verified community heroes. 
Sign up here
.
Brooks Discount: Shop Pre-Owned Shoes at Brooks
If you’re looking for a new pair of shoes, but don’t have the cash to invest in a brand new, high-end pair, look no further than 
Brook’s restart page
, where gently-used Brooks shoes are on sale for deeply discounted prices. They have both men’s and women’s sections, recently added shoes, and a breakdown of bestselling styles, including the Adrenaline, Ghost, Glycerin, and Hyperion.
Brooks Coupon: 20% Off Join the Brooks Run Club
If you’re looking to shop at Brooks, it’s a great idea to join the 
Brooks Run Club
 for additional perks and discounts. Some of the best things Run Club offers are discounts of 20% off apparel when you join and an annual birthday gift. You’ll just need to log in or join the club for the discount code.
Brooks Sports Medicine Ambassador Program: 40% Off
If you’re a sports medicine professional, you can save big and get rewarded at Brooks Running. The 
Brooks Sports Medicine Ambassador Program
 is a free membership program for eligible sports medicine professionals as a way to say thank you for the care they put into runners and athletes. All you have to do is verify your status by signing in or creating an ID.me account to verify the applicant’s qualifications. Then, you’ll get a steep 40% Brooks discount on the first $1,000 spent on eligible items on Brooks Running online orders (it resets every January 1).
Brooks Return Policy and 90 Day Wear Test
Brooks knows how important gear is for the athlete. So, you can take your Brooks gear for a 90-day trial run, and if you aren't satisfied, return them for free. If you’re at all unsatisfied with your Brooks purchase, you can 
return it for free
, with no shipping or re‐stocking fees.
Does Brooks Running Offer Free Shipping?
For Brooks Run Club members, shipping is free! Free shipping applies to standard shipping and shipping to PO Box and US Territories, which takes about 5 to 8 business days. For members, express and next-day delivery is discounted at $25, or $15, unless the total is over $160, then express is free. Non-members have to pay $5 extra for all shipping options.
