Save this story
Save this story
If you’ve ever
 shopped for a beauty product, you’ve probably heard of Sephora. The brand is known for its excellent rewards program, free birthday gifts, free samples, generous return policy, and a giant variety of shades and products for everybody. Splurging on makeup, skincare, and haircare products can be expensive, but a Sephora promo code makes it easier to treat yourself to a big black-and-white striped bag of beauty products.
Sephora Promo Codes: 20% Off Face Moisturizers
As I get older, I realize that the product people really should be investing in and using multiple times daily is a great 
face moisturizer
. Get into your radiant skin era now for less, with Sephora promo code 
GETASAP
 for 20% off face moisturizers, until June 30. This means discounts on top brands like Tatcha, Laniege, Kiehl’s, and more.
How to Use a Sephora Coupon
While you don’t need to be a 
Beauty Insider
 to use every Sephora promo code, it’s definitely worth it if you sign up. You’ll earn points with nearly every purchase, plus you’ll get free shipping and a 
free birthday gift
 each year (like the heavily sought-after Dior perfume set of years past). There are member-exclusive sales and deals too. Once you’re signed up, you’ll be able to use coupons that are specifically for members, like those available during the Sephora Savings Event that takes place each November.
Here Are Current Sephora Beauty Codes
Did you know Sephora has a page dedicated to beauty offers and other ways to save big while shopping online at Sephora? Here you’ll find deals with Sephora promo codes to save, including offers like free hair-care in a travel size when you buy $30 or more with Sephora discount code 
HAIRMVP
, a free Laneige skincare set (my absolute favorite facial moisturizer brand) with a $45 or more purchase with Sephora promo code 
LOVEMYSKIN
, and a free sample bag with $100 purchase or more when you shop in-app with Sephora promo code 
ROUGEBAG
. These are just a few of the 
Sephora beauty offers
 available, so be sure to check the page for even more discounts.
Get Makeup Friendly Sunscreen at Sephora
We have strong opinions about the 
best sunscreens
. You should be wearing sunscreen every day—whether you are driving your car, going to the beach, or even just going on an airplane, sunscreen plays a pivotal role in protecting your skin. Whether you’re looking for a weightless Korean sunscreen, gentle, hydrating, or makeup-friendly sunscreen, 
Sephora has a plethora of sunscreen options
 so your skin can stay protected all summer long.
Our Top Beauty Picks to Get With Your Sephora Discount Code
Sephora sells most of 
our favorite hair straighteners
, 
curling irons
, and 
hair dryers
. I also love 
Sephora’s gift sets
, which are great for holiday gifts but also fantastic ways to treat yourself to something special. Sephora doesn’t only have great makeup, but beauty tech like PMD Clean Pro 
facial cleansing brushes
 or super trendy 
LED Light Therapy Devices
 to level up your beauty regimen. Microcurrent Devices like 
NuFace Trinity
, Cryotherapy Tools like BeautyBio Cryo 
Skin Ice Rollers
, or exfoliating Tools like 
dermaplaners
 are great beauty-tech gift ideas for others or yourself. Sephora has a 
wide selection of brands
 to choose from that you’ve probably seen on TikTok or Instagram. Some highlights include 
Drunk Elephant
, 
Tatcha
, and 
Fenty Beauty
.
Grab Your Rhode Favorites at Sephora While Supplies Last
I'm someone who just generally wants to consume products with little chemicals and harsh additives, I love 
Rhode makeup at Sephora
. From face sprays to moisturizer to serums, Rhode is certified clean, meaning that it’s without certain ingredients, like parabens, sulfates, phthalates, and mineral oils.
The Perfect Birthday Gift: Everyone Loves a Sephora Gift Card
Every year, the gift I get that always hits right is a 
Sephora birthday gift card
. Even when I think I’m just going for a few items, I always end up spending at least $100 every time I make a trip to Sephora. Those small product purchases add up quickly! If you’re unsure of what to get a loved one for their birthday, a Sephora birthday gift card is pretty much a fail-safe gift. Even if you’re not giving to the most MUA-ified person, Sephora has tons of other items, like skincare serums and face washes, perfumes, hair products, and tons of self-care tech like hair styling tools and wellness devices.
