Save this story
Save this story
Prime Day is
 in full swing, but Amazon isn't the only shop with deals. Walmart has a competing sale it calls, in a burst of creativity, “Walmart Deals.” Like Prime Day, Walmart's sale features a range of deals on headphones, tablets, kitchen gear, and other tech. The best part is, there are no members-only deals here, so you can shop without worrying you'll be asked to sign up for one. I've rounded up all the best discounted Walmart buys on our favorite WIRED-tested gear.
Shop Walmart's Summer Sale Here
If you can't find anything you like, be sure to browse our roundup of the 
Absolute Best Prime Day Deals
, or dip into our 
Amazon Prime Day live blog
 for real-time updates.
Updated June 25 at 7:30 am ET: I’ve added deals from Yamaha, Synology, Lenovo, and Lasko. I’ve also removed discontinued deals, and updated prices throughout.
Best Tech Deals
Photograph: Ryan Waniata
Samsung S90F QD-OLED TV for $1,198 ($200 off)
The 
best TV for gaming
 is incredibly accurate, offers near-infinite contrast, and boasts vibrant yet refined colors. Samsung's gaming hub is the best around whether you're playing on a console or cloud gaming, and features an intuitive gaming bar, snappy input response, and a full suite of HDMI 2.1 ports.
TCL QM6K QLED TV (65-inch) for $528 ($70 off)
Affordable at its regular price, the TCL QM6K is a steal with this discount. The 65-inch model employs QLED display tech for bright colors and good contrast, even from a side viewing angle. Gamers will appreciate the 144 Hz refresh rate for low-latency performance, all powered by the intuitive Google TV operating system.
Yamaha SR-C30A Soundbar for $216 ($84 off)
This compact bar-and-subwoofer set is the 
best soundbar
 for people who you love deep, cinematic bass but don't have tons of room right by the TV. The wireless subwoofer can be placed anywhere you have convenient power (you can even lay it flat to slide under furniture). There's also Bluetooth support to stream music from your phone or tablet.
Photograph: Ryan Waniata
JBL Flip 7 Bluetooth Speaker for $95 ($55 off)
Our 
favorite portable Bluetooth speaker
, JBL’s Flip strikes the perfect balance between mobility and sound quality. The 
Flip 7
 also has some extra goodies like water resistance, an easy-release strap, and a two-hour battery boost (or four with reduced bass).
Beats Powerbeats Pro 2 Wireless Earbuds for $180 ($69 off)
With the same H2 chip that powers the AirPods Pro 2, the 
PowerBeats Pro 2
 impressed our reviewer, who praised the “crazy comfy” fit and dynamic sound. There’s also ANC and transparency modes for both road safety and gym sanity, wireless charging, IP57 durability, full-on bass-forward audio quality, and built-in heart rate monitoring.
Apple AirPods Max 2 Headphones for $399 ($150 off)
With the same gorgeous, comfortable, iconic design as its predecessor, 
Apple’s AirPods Max 2
 bring improved noise canceling and Bluetooth connectivity. Apple also upgraded software features, like gesture controls and Adaptive Audio. They’re a bit pricey at the RRP, but this discount is decent for Apple fans.
Photograph: Adrienne So
Apple Watch Series 11 Smartwatch for $279 ($120 off)
The 
Apple Watch Series 11
 is by far 
the best smartwatch
 for iPhone owners. The headline improvement is 24-hour battery life, which enables proper sleep tracking. You also get clinically validated watchOS health updates, including FDA-cleared hypertension notifications, Apple’s proprietary Sleep Score, and blood oxygen sensing.
Apple 11-inch iPad (2025) for $299 ($50 off)
The base iPad ticks all the boxes you need in a tablet. This is the latest model, updated in 2025 to an A16 chip and 6 GB of RAM. It's perfect for casual gaming, reading books, watching movies in bed, and sharing with your kids. Amazon has the same sale for Prime members right now, but this is as good a deal as we typically see on iPads.
Apple AirTag Tracker for $24 ($5 off)
These teeny tiny trackers might be the best way to keep tabs on your keys or luggage if you use an iPhone. They're some of the 
best trackers
 around. Roughly the size of a quarter, they use Bluetooth and Apple's special U1 location-finding chip to pinpoint locations in the Find My app.
Photograph: Simon Hill
Oura Ring 4 for $244 ($105 off)
Our top pick among the 
best smart rings
, the Oura Ring 4 has never been cheaper than this. Oura did just release a slimmer version, but the Ring 4 is currently close to half off and it's still an excellent option for tracking health, fitness, and sleep.
Google Fitbit Charge 6 Fitness Tracker for $76 ($84 off)
The 
Charge 6
 is old, but it's still 
our favorite Fitbit
 and may remain so until the Fitbit name is submerged by Google. The bright AMOLED touchscreen is easy to read and it covers all the basics, monitoring your heart rate, blood oxygen, and skin temperature. It also has ECG and electrodermal activity scans to gauge irregular heart rhythms and stress levels.
GameSir G7 SE Wired Xbox or PC Game Controller for $36 ($24 off)
The 
GameSir G7 SE
 is an excellent wired controller with sensitive and drift-resistant hall effect sticks, customizable rear buttons, and swappable faceplates. If you don't mind plugging in, it makes an excellent choice for Xbox or PC gamers.
Photograph: Simon Hill
Nex Playground Game Console for $239 ($60 off)
Worried about your kids becoming couch potatoes? This fun game console will get them up and jumping around your living room. I liked the 
Nex Playground
 when I first tried it, and the company has polished and added more games since then.
EcoFlow River 2 Pro Portable Power Station for $289 ($240 off)
This is one of the 
best portable power stations
 for camping or road trips because it’s a manageable size. EcoFlow’s River 2 Pro has a LiFeP04 battery inside, good for 768 watt-hours. It has all the ports you need to charge your phones and small gadgets, and the X-Boost surge enables it to power small appliances.
Synology DiskStation DS225+ NAS Storage Server for $275 ($65 off)
This tops my 
best NAS devices
 guide because it's very fast, Synology offers the most polished and comprehensive software lineup, and it has a generous array of ports. It's also compact and relatively quiet, and the two bays are screwless.
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Lenovo LOQ 15 Laptop for $1,079 ($171 off)
The 
Lenovo LOQ 15
 really stands out as impressive for the price. It is thick and fairly plain-looking, but leapfrogs many 
budget gaming laptops
 that only feature an entry-level Nvidia RTX 5050 GPU. The LOQ 15 delivers well over 60 fps in almost any game at Medium settings.
Lasko Classic Box Fan for $21 ($5 off)
The best box fan is even more affordable than usual as part of the Walmart Deals event. With a big surface area, a handle to move it around, and a shape that fits easily in a window or sliding glass door, this is a solid way to keep cool.
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Ninja Slushi Machine for $179 ($120 off)
Just in time for the summer sun, the 
best slushie machine
 is on sale. Whip up icy soft drinks for the kids and a frozen margarita for you. The perfect way to cool down on hot days, this machine has intuitive controls and a reliable drip tray, and it's easy to clean.
Ninja Luxe Cafe Pro Espresso Machine for $600 ($150 off)
Ninja’s flagship 
semi-automatic espresso machine
 can go toe-to-toe with Breville’s Barista Express for the title of most popular semi-automatic espresso machine. This is a great deal on a machine that nails automatic milk frothing.
Google Nest Cam Outdoor for $130 ($50 off)
The best wireless 
outdoor security camera
 for Google households, the Nest Cam Outdoor has a handy magnetic mount, an expansive 130-degree field of view, and captures sharp 1080p video with HDR and night vision. There's also a clear-sounding speaker and microphone. You only get three hours of free event history, but you can add a Home Premium subscription ($10 a month, or $100 for the whole year) to get 30 days of event history and face recognition.
Photograph: Simon Hill
Mova Lidax Ultra 2000 Robot Lawn Mower for $1,199 ($700 off)
The 
best robot mowers
 save you from a tedious chore, and Mova's sleek model boasts 360-degree lidar for 3D mapping and a camera with AI vision. Setup was straightforward when I tried it: there’s no need for wires or an antenna, and you can set multiple mowing areas. It mowed in neat lines, successfully avoided obstacles, and completed an excellent edge pass at the end.
Bissell Little Green Portable Carpet Cleaner for $85 ($25 off)
You may remember this gadget went 
viral on TikTok
 a few years ago, and it's still an excellent upholstery or 
carpet cleaner
 at its regular price. It's pretty good at sucking up spills and may even remove stains, and it's way less bulky than your average carpet cleaner.
Govee Smart LED A19 Bulbs (4-Pack) for $25 ($34 off)
While you can get 
better smart bulbs
, Govee’s Smart LED bulbs are a solid choice if you already have 
Govee lights
 and want to group everything. These boast tons of colors, scenes, and effects, and you can schedule them, change the color temperature, and dim them using the Govee app.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
