Save this story
Save this story
There's a good
 chance that you initially purchased your Amazon Prime membership to get free two-day shipping. But there are dozens of additional perks that can be tricky to find—and considering the cost of an annual membership, you're doing yourself a disservice if you aren't taking advantage of all of them. I'm here to help you get your money's worth—especially ahead of Amazon Prime Day, which will run from June 23 to 26.
Below, I've listed the benefits you should be using as an 
Amazon Prime member
. Arguably, these incentives alone aren't worth the cost of a membership, but chances are at least one of them will come in handy.
Amazon has had 
more than its fair share of debacles
. But there are still an estimated 
201 million members in the United States
. If you're one of the hundreds of millions of folks with a Prime membership, these perks are worth checking out.
Updated June 2026: I've ensured coverage, pricing, and links are accurate ahead of Amazon Prime Day.
Table of Contents
AccordionItemContainerButton
What’s Amazon Prime, and How Much Does It Cost?
Basic Amazon Prime Benefits
Prime Day
Exclusive Deals
Early-Access Lightning Deals
Amazon Day Delivery
No-Rush Rewards
Alexa+
Grubhub+
Amazon Fresh and Amazon Grocery
Amazon Family
Amazon First Reads
Prime Reading
Prime Gaming
$10 off Game Preorders
Unlimited Online Photo Storage
Discounted Amazon Kids+
Fuel Savings
Additional Perks for Specific Customers
What’s Amazon Prime, and How Much Does It Cost?
Amazon Prime is a premium membership to 
Amazon.com
. If you've never had a membership before, you can 
try it free for 30 days
. This trial automatically renews, so set a reminder on your phone to reassess, and make sure to cancel if you don't want to continue your membership.
Amazon Prime costs 
$139 per year
. You can pay $15 per month instead, but that raises the cost of the membership to $180 annually, so you'll save more money by paying annually. Eighteen- to 24-year-olds can get 
Prime for Young Adults
 (formerly called Prime Student), which is $69 annually or $7.50 per month after an extended 
six-month free trial
. Prime for Young Adults has an exclusive 
cash-back program
 that lets members earn rewards on select purchases. Usually, they earn around 5 percent, but some shopping events bump up that rate.
Finally, some customers are eligible for 
Prime Access
, a discounted Prime membership that cuts the subscription cost in half. If you verify that you receive 
qualifying SNAP benefits or other government assistance
, you can get Amazon Prime for $7 per month. Note that Prime Access members have to reverify eligibility once per year, and can only use Prime Access for four years total before they need to choose a different membership.
Basic Amazon Prime Benefits
Prime members are eligible for free next-day shipping on millions of items and free two-day shipping on millions more. Depending on where you live, you may also be eligible for 
free same-day delivery
 or free 
Amazon Locker pickup
. Other Amazon-owned stores also offer free and/or expedited shipping to Prime members, including 
ShopBop
, 
Woot
, and 
Zappos
. Some merchants offer 
Buy with Prime
 at checkout, which lets you complete a purchase using your Amazon account instead of signing up for a new account entirely. It seems like more of a convenience than a benefit, but it may be appealing to some shoppers.
Prime members get free 
Amazon Music Prime
, which pulls playlists and podcasts from a selection of 100 million songs and serves them ad-free. Members are also eligible for discounted subscriptions to 
Amazon Music Unlimited
, a separate pick-and-play service like Apple Music or Spotify that offers on-demand access to 70 million songs. Normally, it costs $13 monthly, but Prime members can get it for $12 per month.
Prime Video
 is also included with your membership. There are some killer originals, like 
Fallout
 and 
The Boys
,
 in addition to other 
movies
 and 
shows
. You can also stream 
sports on Prime Video
, including 
NFL Thursday Night Football
 and select MMA fights. Purchased as a stand-alone subscription, Prime Video costs $9 per month. Note that, sadly, these plans include commercials. If you're a Prime member and you want to go ad-free, it'll cost another $5 per month.
Prime Day
I’d be remiss to gloss over Amazon’s members-only event, 
Prime Day
. The semi-annual “holiday” has outperformed both Black Friday and Cyber Monday in years past, but not every Prime Day deal is actually a bargain. The WIRED Reviews team always 
covers the event
 to make good deals easier to find—our coverage is unique because we only write about deals on products we have personally tested and can verify are great buys, rather than flooding our roundups with questionable third-party brands. This year, Prime Day will take place June 23 through 26, and we anticipate a secondary Prime Day event kicking off in the fall. Our team will cover the best-of-the-best deals throughout the event.
Exclusive Deals
Even outside of Prime Day, Amazon Prime members are eligible for special 
members-only discounts
. You might be able to knock off a few bucks from your 
portable charger
 purchase, use a coupon on household essentials, or find lower prices on new 
Amazon devices
. Individual discounts vary, but we see these sorts of promotions pretty frequently—and, as with Prime Day, not all of them are good.
Early-Access Lightning Deals
Both during and outside of special events like Prime Day, Black Friday, and Cyber Monday, Prime members get early access to 
select Lightning Deals
. You'll be able to shop 30 minutes before other customers. Whether Lightning Deals are worth your money is another discussion entirely, but it's a perk worth checking out.
Amazon Day Delivery
Overwhelmed by the sheer number of boxes at your door? (Honestly, as a product reviewer, I feel that.) 
Amazon Day delivery
 lets you schedule all of your deliveries to arrive on a certain day of the week. Rather than dealing with a box or two at a time on multiple days, you can get one package with all of your orders on whatever day you prefer. If you use Amazon Day delivery, you aren't locked in. That means if you're ordering something you need quickly, you can still opt for the fastest shipping method. Amazon Day delivery is a good way to cut back on all that extra cardboard (and your carbon footprint).
No-Rush Rewards
If you don't need your order to arrive right away, sometimes at checkout you'll see the option for free 
No-Rush Shipping
. You might get a free digital credit to use on things like ebooks or digital games, or you might get an instant discount off your order. (You can't choose which of the two you'll get.) Be aware that sometimes rewards expire after a certain duration.
Alexa+
Prime members get free access to 
Alexa+
, which is the 
newest version
 of Amazon's voice assistant. It uses 
generative AI
 and will cost $20 per month for non-Prime members when it leaves Early Access. According to Amazon, you'll be able to talk naturally, phrase requests however you'd like, receive tailored recommendations based on your preferences, create bedtime stories, and more.
Grubhub+
Amazon Prime members get free access to 
Grubhub+
, which includes free delivery on some delivery orders, plus an assortment of Prime-exclusive discounts at a selection of restaurants throughout the year.
Amazon Fresh, Whole Foods, and Amazon Grocery
Amazon Fresh
 lets you order groceries via Amazon and get them delivered to your door. It's not available in all areas, but it is a different way to shop if you're trying to avoid in-person trips. You also get a selection of products from Whole Foods available through Amazon Fresh. If you're shopping at Whole Foods in person, you can scan the smartphone app to get an extra 10 percent off storewide sales and make use of other member discounts available throughout the year.
There's a separate 
Amazon Grocery subscription
 that costs $10 a month or $99 a year. If you have SNAP or EBT benefits, you can get 50 percent off the monthly plan. This subscription gets you unlimited free grocery delivery on orders over $25 or more from Whole Foods Market, Amazon Fresh, and some 
local retailers
.
Amazon Family
Amazon Family
 is a great way to share benefits among multiple people who live together. You can share membership perks with up to two adults, four teens (ages 13 to 17, who were added prior to April 2025, or after January 1, 2026, where available), and four children. Parents can use this benefit to approve teens' orders or set up parental controls on kids' content. These perks only extend to people who live at the same residence.
Amazon First Reads
Each month, Prime members can benefit from 
Amazon First Reads
. You'll get at least one Kindle book from the selection for free. Nonmembers can get their two books for $2 apiece. As a reminder, you can read Kindle books even if you don't have a Kindle device, thanks to the 
free app
 available for phones and computers. (We also have a 
buying guide
 to help you pick the right Kindle.)
Prime Reading
In addition to First Reads, Prime members get access to tons of Kindle books via 
Prime Reading
. There are more than a thousand items to choose from. Aside from books, you can access audiobooks and magazines, plus comics via 
Comixology
.
Prime Gaming and Amazon Luna
Every month, Prime members are eligible for various rewards via 
Prime Gaming
 (formerly called Twitch Prime). The page redirects to Amazon Luna now, but you can still keep claiming your monthly rewards … you just 
also
 get access to Amazon Luna Standard, a cloud gaming service, if you want it. 
Amazon Luna
 gets you free access to many popular titles, though streaming games can be a little buggy. Prime Gaming includes in-game loot in a variety of popular games, free game downloads, free downloadable content (DLC) and expansions, premium currency, and more. You also get a free Twitch subscription, which are subscriptions to individual Twitch streamers (normally these “Twitch subs” cost money). With the free subscription you get from Amazon Prime, you can support channels you enjoy—creators make some money off the subscription, but it won't cost you anything extra.
$10 off Game Preorders
This discount used to be much better, but it's still worth looking into if you are in the market for a new video game. Occasionally, Prime members can receive $10 off when they preorder a game. Eligible titles 
show up here
 when they're available. Some video games also have 
free Release Day Delivery
—just look for that shipping option when preordering a game.
Unlimited Online Photo Storage
Prime members get access to unlimited full-resolution 
photo storage
, and 5 gigabytes of video storage as well. You can store, print, and share photos using the Amazon Photos app and back everything up to the cloud. (Printing is done through Shutterfly, where Prime members get a 45 percent discount and free shipping on orders over $35.) If your account ever loses Prime status, you'll need to pay at least $2 per month to keep storing your photos and videos, so this shouldn't be your 
primary backup method
. You might want to consider using 
one of these options
, too.
Discounted Amazon Kids+
Amazon Kids+
 (formerly called FreeTime Unlimited) is Amazon's content service for kids. The service is compatible with several iOS, Android, and Amazon devices, like 
Fire tablets
. It provides a bevy of parental controls while giving kiddos access to age-appropriate shows, books, games, and the like. Amazon Kids+ costs $8 per month, but Prime members can snag the subscription for $6 per month (or $79 and $48 per year, respectively).
Fuel Savings
By linking your Amazon Prime account to Earnify, a loyalty app owned by BP, you can save at least 10 cents per gallon on fuel at over 7,500 
participating gas stations locations
.
Additional Perks for Specific Customers
Expecting a new addition to your family? Select Prime members can claim a 
free Baby Registry Welcome Box
 by creating a registry that has at least 10 unique items and $10 worth of purchases (by themselves or others). 
Learn more here
.
Prime RX
 offers select customers discounts on prescription medications. It's a prescription savings card that can be used at pharmacies nationwide, including Amazon Pharmacy. These savings programs are nothing new—one similar program is 
GoodRx
—and one may argue that giving Amazon information about your medications adds another layer to privacy concerns. However, the benefit is free if you do decide to use it, and it may be worth checking out if you pay a lot out of pocket for prescription medications.
There's another health benefit called 
OneMedical
 that offers on-demand care for things like common colds, allergies, yeast infections, or urinary tract infections. It costs $99 per year or $27 every three months.
Amazon Key offers select Prime members 
in-garage delivery
. If you live in an eligible area and you're interested, you'll need to purchase and install a 
smart garage kit
. Amazon Key previously offered in-home delivery, but that service is currently on pause. (Of course, this also comes with a slew of 
privacy concerns
.)
There are three different 
Amazon credit cards
. These come in the form of rewards back for Prime members on select purchases or at select retailers. You don't need to get an Amazon credit card to make use of Prime benefits. In fact, I encourage you to read through all of the available information and carefully consider it before deciding whether or not to get a credit card.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
