Save this story
Save this story
Comments
Back to top
Join the discussion
Comments
Back to top
Topics
Special Edition
AI Hacks Are Bad. AI Worms and Viruses Will Be Worse
Chinese researchers have shown that AI models have the capacity to act like aggressive and adaptive computer viruses.
Will Knight
A Humanoid Company Backed by Eric Trump Is Preparing Its Robots for War
The CEO of Foundation Future Industries, which counts the president’s son as its chief strategy adviser, tells WIRED it’s exploring some “kinetic things.”
Will Knight
It’s Frighteningly Easy to Jailbreak Some Frontier AI Models
I watched a new tool try to get around the model safeguards of four major frontier companies. You might be surprised by how they performed.
Will Knight
AI Isn’t Smarter Than a Baby—Yet
Babies are tremendous learning machines, and key advances for AI may soon be found in the architecture of their little brains.
Will Knight
OpenAI’s Browser Could Be Hijacked to Spam Your WhatsApp Contacts
Researchers at security firm Zenity found more than a dozen flaws in AI browsers—and managed to get OpenAI’s Atlas to make an unauthorized Amazon purchase.
Matt Burgess
Google’s Gemini Can Now Stomp Around as a Humanoid Robot
The latest version of Google DeepMind's AI model includes a significant jump into “physical AGI.” But plopping AI into the real world comes with risks.
Will Knight
3 Clever Things You Can Do With an Old Amazon Kindle
These e-readers are more useful in their old age than you might think.
David Nield
Private Claude Chats Exposed in Google and Bing Search Results
The screwup shows how tricky it can be to stop web crawlers from making ostensibly private conversations with AI chatbots entirely too public.
Maddy Varner
How One Startup Built a (Mostly) China-Free Robot
Ati Robotics assembles its robots in India and uses just a few Chinese parts—a strategy that could pay off as the Trump administration cracks down on Chinese humanoids.
Paresh Dave
This Former Intel CEO Wants to Jumpstart Moore’s Law With Light
Pat Gelsinger wants to pave the way to ever more powerful artificial intelligence using tiny beams of light.
Joel Khalili
4 of Google’s Top AI Brains Are Leaving—and Launching Their Own AI Startup
Jeff Dean and other high-profile Google executives have founded Discovery Loop, a startup that will seek AI-powered breakthroughs in everything from drug discovery to chip design.
Steven Levy
Top Jabra Promo Codes: 30% Off for 2026
Unlock significant savings on Jabra headphones, headsets, and speakers with our verified promo codes, exclusive coupons, and limited-time deals.
Christopher Null
