Save this story
Save this story
The trouble with
 being an aging 
mountain biker
 is that while my skills may marginally improve, the rocks don’t get any softer with every passing year. I’ve come to accept, for example, that I’m never going to clean the Teacup Trail in Sedona when riding from the west side of town over to the fun, mellow trails like Adobe Jack around Soldier Pass. But I stupidly keep trying, broken bones be damned, because what is also true: With every passing year, bike suspension keeps getting better.
Garage mechanics have been tinkering with bike suspension since around 
1888
. Full suspension—bikes that are equipped with a front fork and a smaller rear shock—went mainstream in the 1990s when brands like Specialized, Trek, and Santa Cruz brought the results of their tinkering out of the garage and into the daylight.
I bought my first full-suspension mountain bike, a Santa Cruz Superlight, in 2000. With 100 mm of travel (the maximum distance suspension compresses while absorbing impact) in the rear shock and 120 mm of travel in the front, it gave me the confidence to ride lines through New Mexico rocks I wouldn’t have dreamed of riding on my Specialized Stumpjumper hardtail, which had front suspension only.
Today’s full-suspension bikes have so much cush that the world’s best downhill riders can safely crush events like Red Bull’s 
Hardline Tasmania
, a course that combines brutally technical features with massive jumps, because they have front shocks with 200 to 220 mm of travel.
I have ridden a full-suspension bike for the past three decades and have been 
testing bikes for WIRED
 since an 
ill-planned trip to the Mojave Desert in 2014
. But there are far greater experts than me when it comes to explaining how suspension works—so I asked 
Vernon Felton
, director of product at Canyon, former editor at 
Pinkbike
, and the former editor in chief of 
Bike
 magazine
, to lay it out for us.
What Is Suspension?
“Mountain bikes are designed to take you up and over mountains … and all the rocks and roots that stand between you and your destination,” Felton says. Of course, he adds, one 
can
 ride a mountain bike over all manner of obstacles without a suspension fork or rear shock, but “doing so, without the aid of suspension, requires a lot of very skillful body English and takes its toll on your body and energy levels.”
How Does It Work?
“Suspension almost always consists of a spring (made of either a metal coil or a sealed canister of air) that compresses when your wheels encounter rocks, roots, ruts, etc., and some kind of ‘rebound damper’ that slows down the spring when it rebounds back into its unloaded shape,” says Felton. “Without a damper unit (or ‘shock absorber’), your bike would bounce around uncontrollably like a pogo stick every time you hit a big enough bump.”
Better bike brands, he adds, work tirelessly with companies like 
Fox Racing
 and 
RockShox
 to “custom-tune those squishy bits so that they work optimally with the bike company’s frame design. The bike’s weight, style, and precise placement of its linkages all affect how the suspension works; consequently, companies employ specific ‘tunes’ to optimize oil flow inside the shock and change how the suspension feels.”
Why the need for oil? When a bike hits a rock, the suspension, either a coil spring or an air spring, is squeezed. At that point, a piston forces oil upward through small or large openings and valves, depending on the velocity of the impact. This creates resistance, also known as damping, which controls how quickly the suspension compresses. After the obstacle is cleared, the shock “rebounds” or returns to its original length. A shock’s “tune” essentially controls how quickly this process happens and, to some extent, how much impact the shock, rather than your arms, legs, back, neck, shoulders, and every other body part, will absorb.
How Does Suspension Differ between a Cross-Country, Trail, Enduro, and Downhill Mountain Bike?
“Ultimately, all suspension is designed to do the same thing—help you ride up and over rough terrain with more ease, speed, comfort, and control,” says Felton. But different styles of mountain biking, along with greatly varied terrain, require different styles and amounts of suspension.
“A cross-country racer is looking for the lightest and most efficient-feeling bike,” says Felton. “They place a premium on how quickly the bike lets them climb big mountains. As a result, cross-country suspension tends to have fewer inches of suspension travel, and the suspension might feel firm to a more casual rider.”
Trail, enduro, and downhill riders, on the other hand, says Felton, “want to maximize speed on the toughest descents and therefore generally equip their bikes with suspension that offers a greater amount of suspension travel and a softer, more forgiving ride quality.”
Is Ebike Suspension Different?
Ebikes are “invariably” different, says Felton, because you’re adding a motor and battery to the mix, which impacts how the suspension performs. Likewise, the motor introduces a surge of torque through the pedals that also impacts the suspension (oftentimes making the shock compress even when you are riding across smooth terrain).”
Photograph: Stephanie Pearson
Photograph: Stephanie Pearson
Photograph: Stephanie Pearson
Photograph: Stephanie Pearson
Save to wishlist
Specialized
S-Works Turbo Levo 4
$11,500
 
Specialized
To compensate, companies like Specialized custom-tune the suspension forks and rear shocks so they operate optimally despite the extra weight and power being added to the mountain biking mix.
There are, adds Felton, a few specially modified suspension forks that feature beefier components designed to keep the forks from flexing too much given the greater system weight and ride speed.
What Should Consumers Look for in Ebike Suspension?
“Most of the weight on an e-MTB stems from the addition of a battery,” says Felton. Batteries are getting lighter by the day, but a typical e-MTB battery can weigh about 7 to 11 pounds. The bigger the battery, the more fuel cells are housed within that battery … and the greater the weight added to your bike.
“If you want to shave weight off your ebike, start by finding a bike with a smaller battery. This can easily shave pounds from the bike’s total weight. Just understand that a smaller battery also means fewer miles per battery charge,” says Felton, “so you need to weigh how important weight versus miles-per-charge (or ‘range’) is to you.”
At the end of the day, ebikes help you ride farther, faster. So, look for the best-quality suspension possible. But unless you’re a master garage tinkerer, you may want to stick for now with an ebike that has front and rear shocks created by the forefathers of suspension.
“You want the smoothest feel, least flex, and best durability when you are knocking off long rides at great speed,” says Felton. “Look for suspension by brands such as 
RockShox
, 
Fox,
 
Cane Creek
, and 
Marzocchi
. These brands have been building world-class mountain bike suspension since the ’90s.”
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
