$350
 at Dell
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
8
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Extremely low price. Ergonomic stand. Superb contrast ratio and color performance. Buttery-smooth motion.
TIRED
Lackluster brightness in SDR and HDR. HDMI ports only support 120 Hz. No USB connectivity.
Alienware made the
 first major OLED gaming monitor, known as the 
AW3423DW
. It was a glorious piece of new technology, but it was also expensive at $1,400 (or $1,550 when adjusted for inflation). Three years later, you can buy this new Alienware OLED monitor, the AW2726DM, for just $350.
It's in some ways superior to the elder AW3423DW, yet it's 75 percent cheaper. That dramatic decrease in price might have your spidey senses tingling. You'd be right to wonder if Alienware value-engineered it to oblivion, but I'm happy to report that this is an affordable 
gaming monitor
 that makes its cuts in the right places.
Great Contrast, Great Color
Photograph: Matthew S. Smith
Not all OLED panels are made equal. That's one of the keys to understanding how Alienware brought the price down so much on the AW2726DM. Despite being a 27-inch QD-OLED with a native resolution of 2560 x 1440 and a 240-Hz refresh rate, this isn't the same kind of OLED that more expensive gaming monitors use. While Alienware doesn’t mention the panel used, it appears to be an older panel with a “triangle” sub-pixel layout, which is where some of the compromise comes into play.
This type of QD-OLED arranges pixels in a way that’s different from LCD, which can cause issues when viewing small text. You may notice “color fringing” visible as an odd burst of green or purple filling the negative space between letters.
The AW2726DM just isn’t a sharp display, and it’s not great for viewing small text. As mentioned, it has a resolution of 2560 x 1440—or 1440p. This provides a pixel density of about 110 pixels per inch. By comparison, a standard 27-inch 4K monitor delivers about 165 pixels per inch.
However, sticking to 1440p feels like the right call for a monitor at this price point. As PC gamers likely know, increasing a game’s render resolution from 1440p to 4K comes with a huge performance penalty, and midrange GPUs struggle to handle demanding games at 4K.
Still, it’s QD-OLED, and all QD-OLED panels have two things going for them: Incredible contrast and superb color performance.
You might be familiar with OLED’s contrast advantage if you’ve bought a TV sometime this decade. OLED pixels are self-emissive, meaning the pixels themselves create light. That’s different from an LCD panel, which requires a backlight that shines through the pixels. OLED’s self-emissive technology provides a lot more control over how the image is lit, and the result is an image with far more contrast and depth than what LCD can achieve.
Samsung’s QD-OLED also uses quantum dots, 
a very cool tech that requires its own article to explain
. Quantum dots generally provide great color, and the AW2726DM is no exception, as it reaches 98 percent of DCI-P3 and 94 percent of AdobeRGB. Those numbers are close to the top of what’s available from any monitor in 2026, regardless of price.
In the real world, the contrast and color translate to a vivid, realistic image with a sense of depth you won’t find from LCD alternatives. Games generally look colorful, rich, and alluring.
Brightness Gets the Boot
While the AW2726DM’s image quality is good, it makes one major sacrifice to achieve a lower price. It’s not very bright.
Alienware lists the AW2726DM’s maximum brightness at 200 nits. My review sample was just above that with a sustained maximum SDR brightness of 202 nits. For comparison, a more expensive OLED monitor (like the MSI MPG 271QR X50) can deliver 300 nits or more. I mostly used the monitor at about 60 percent of its maximum brightness, as the room where I view it doesn’t receive much direct sunlight. However, I had to up the brightness to 100 percent in peak afternoon sun if I left my curtains open.
The low SDR brightness has implications for HDR performance, too. The AW2726DM supports HDR, but it’s not VESA HDR–certified, and it promises just 400 nits of peak HDR brightness. In my testing, HDR brightness was no higher than SDR when the entire display was lit, and I recorded a maximum possible brightness of 398 nits when just 10 percent of the display was lit. For comparison, leading OLED monitors can deliver over 300 nits full-screen and over 1,000 nits in the 10 percent window. The AW2726DM can appear brighter in HDR than in SDR, but gamers who enjoy a lot of HDR titles will find the monitor underwhelming.
The AW2726DM supports a maximum refresh rate of 240 Hz. That’s not too impressive in 2026—the best gaming OLEDs exceed 500 Hz. But it’s adequate for the price.
You might be wondering—if the benefit of OLED isn't HDR, what's the point? Well, it has a number of built-in advantages over LCD alternatives. The QD-OLED panel provides a quoted gray-to-gray pixel response time of 0.03 milliseconds. Most LCD monitors have a pixel response time around 5 milliseconds. A lower response time reduces blur and ghosting.
This advantage is noticeable even at refresh rates below the maximum of 240 Hz. A game at 60 Hz will show less blur on an OLED display like the AW2726DM than it will on a typical LCD alternative. Adaptive Sync is supported, too, with official support for AMD FreeSync Premium and VESA Adaptive Sync. That means motion is generally smooth and fluid.
The Rest of It
Photograph: Matthew S. Smith
The AW2726DM’s stand is thinner than more expensive Alienware displays. It also lacks a tool-less design, which means you’ll need a screwdriver to attach the stand to the AW2726DM’s VESA mount. The display panel also lacks the organic dark-blue “Alienware 30” design language other Alienware monitors share.
It still includes an ergonomically adjustable stand, though, which can adjust for height, pivot, and tilt (but doesn’t swivel). This isn’t a trivial point. Samsung’s Odyssey OLED G5 (G50SF), which is often sold on Amazon for just $300, has a tilt-only stand. The AW2726DM also has an internal power supply, while the Odyssey OLED G5 has an included external power brick.
The AW2726DM’s connectivity is more basic, though, and could be a limitation in some situations. The display has two HDMI 1.4 ports and one DisplayPort 1.4. It’s important to note that only the DisplayPort input supports 1440p resolution at up to 240 Hz. The HDMI ports are limited to 120 Hz. USB-C is not available, either, and the monitor lacks downstream USB-A connectivity. In practice, this means you can only obtain the 240-Hz refresh rate from one device at a time.
Despite the weaknesses, the Alienware AW2726DM feels like a breath of fresh air in an era where many areas of PC gaming hardware have stagnated. It delivers performance broadly similar to more expensive OLED monitors at a much lower price, and provides a huge upgrade for people still using an LCD display.
I’ll go as far as to say that this is the minimum monitor you should consider for PC gaming in 2026. I understand this won’t always be possible. $350 still isn’t cheap. But if you can possibly stretch your budget to snag it, it delivers a lot more value for your money than a $200 or $250 LCD.
That’s not to say the AW2726DM is perfect. It’s definitely all about the panel. That comes across in both its design and its HDR performance. A more expensive OLED monitor will be required if you want great HDR in PC games. The AW2726DM nails the basics, however, which makes it a good introduction to OLED at a great price.
$350
 at Dell
