Save this story
Save this story
Three Amazon employees
 on Wednesday publicly called for regulations on 
new data centers
, telling elected officials in Seattle that unchecked development of the sharply disputed nerve centers of AI threatens the region’s environment, economy, and safety.
“Local governments, in collaboration with community stakeholders, should be setting the terms for data center buildout,” Amazon senior software engineer Liesl Wigand said at a city hearing. “Let’s not let Big Tech burn Seattle to win the AI race.”
The comments by Wigand and two other Amazon software engineers mark a significant escalation in the protest movement across the US against the rapid construction of 
data centers
 over the past couple of years. While workers at several big tech companies, including Amazon, have complained about the negative effects of data centers and the need for greater oversight, none are believed to have done so as publicly and explicitly before, according to labor organizers supporting the effort in Seattle.
Patrick Schloesser, who has worked at Amazon for nearly six years, said that data centers should have to supply more renewable energy than they consume and provide power storage to support the broader electricity grid. Schloesser also called for new taxes on tech companies and “worker-led safety committees that report to the city” about any AI tools that are “becoming a risk” to Seattle. Tech companies are desperate to get data centers built, giving Seattle leverage to extract concessions from them, Schloesser said.
Got a Tip?
Are you a current or former Amazon who wants to talk about what's happening? We'd like to hear from you. Using a nonwork phone or computer, contact the reporter securely on Signal at peard33.24.
Another engineer, Darius Irani, suggested during a separate committee hearing later on Wednesday that the city should require transparency about the companies behind particular projects and their ongoing water and electricity usage. “There’s a world in which more data centers could bring us closer to a good future, but it will exist only if we dream big and keep power in the hands of the people,” Irani said.
Tech companies and real estate developers have announced plans to spend hundreds of billions of dollars to construct dozens of data centers across the US to support surging demand for artificial intelligence chatbots and other generative AI technologies. Communities 
in nearly every state
 have organized against the projects, citing concerns about 
electricity
 and 
water usage
, 
toxic waste
, 
noxious emissions
, 
noise
, 
tax breaks
, and whether AI is even 
a technology
 worth advancing.
“We respect our colleagues' right to voice their opinions. Currently, we don’t have any plans to construct data centers within the Seattle city limits. Across the communities where we do operate data centers, we’re committed to being a responsible neighbor—investing in local economic development while prioritizing water and energy efficiency that exceeds industry standards,” Amazon spokesperson Margaret Callahan said in a statement. "We engage regularly with community stakeholders to understand local priorities and address concerns transparently, supporting both technological innovation and the specific needs of each region where we operate."
Other tech giants, including 
Microsoft
 and 
Google
, have recently tried to preempt backlash to their data center projects and get ahead of potential regulations around the country by strengthening commitments to transparency and environmental protections.
In Seattle, city officials are weighing 
a one-year pause
 on issuing permits for data centers to allow time for 
setting regulations on the projects
. Seattle doesn’t currently have any rules specific to data centers, according to 
city records
. The city 
has said
 it is home to some small data centers, but that several companies have expressed interest in setting up “large-scale” developments. Their arrival 
could drive up
 water and power prices for other residents and increase carbon emissions, with the city currently holding minimal authority to intervene.
All three employees who spoke out are members of a collective of current and former workers known as Amazon Employees for Climate Justice that has 
long advocated
 for the company to better address the environmental impact of its business. Additional members of the group may speak next week when the full city council could vote on the one-year pause ordinance. Amazon Employees for Climate Justice is also urging city officials to consult on data center rules with groups representing frontline workers such as labor unions.
Two of the Amazon employees were among about 30 members of the public, including some describing themselves as laid-off tech workers, who spoke during a comment period at a meeting of the Land Use and Sustainability Committee, a five-member panel that subsequently voted to advance the proposed data center moratorium. Most of the speakers favored the measure.
The other employee addressed the city’s Parks and City Light Committee. None of the Amazon workers explicitly expressed support for the pause, but rather explained what they believed could be the benefit of establishing broader rules for the industry.
Workers across several big tech companies have grown frustrated about their employers’ all-out emphasis on developing powerful AI capabilities. Last year, over 1,000 Amazon employees anonymously 
signed an open letter
 warning of harms from the company’s allegedly “all-costs-justified, warp-speed approach to AI development.” Microsoft employees have long 
raised concerns
 about AI furthering oil and gas production.
Recently, employees at Meta 
petitioned
 against the rollout of tracking software on their laptops to train AI systems, and the company later allowed for more exemptions from the initiative. The Meta workers have also been frustrated over the use of 
mass layoffs to free up cash
 for AI projects. In the UK, Google employees this year 
formed a union
 in large part because of opposition to the company’s AI systems being contracted for what they view as concerning military uses. But Amazon Employees for Climate Justice organizers don’t believe workers at any of the companies have advocated by name for regulations on data centers before.
Speaking to WIRED, a former manager at Amazon who lives in Seattle questioned why anyone wanted to locate a data center in an urban area, given that emerging technologies allow the facilities to be built further away from population centers. He questioned the need for regulations that might slow industry progress, but expressed support for workers’ right to speak freely without retaliation from Amazon.
6/3/26 6:05 pm ET: This story was updated with comments made by a third Amazon employee at a second city hearing.
6/3/26 7:55 pm ET: This story was updated with comment from Amazon.
