Get Back to School in Style
Dorm Essentials
Back-to-School Deals
Where to Find Student Discounts
Laptop Backpacks
Laptop Stands
Cheap Laptops
Office Chairs
Best Laptops
Smart Pens and Tablets
Paper Planners
Monitors Under $500 
MacBook Accessories
Save this story
Save this story
A trip to
 college—or even to avoid hard nights at home during high school—might come with an expense you didn’t think about: a good office chair. Dorm chairs are hard, awful, and not exactly ergonomic.
Luckily, there are some decent back-to-school office chair deals right now among chairs I can vouch for. My colleagues at WIRED and I have been testing and tracking the 
best office chairs
 for more than seven years. The 
ProtoArc Flexer Pro ($176)
 is half the price it was last year, probably the best deal at the moment. Others of our budget favorites, like the 
Staples Dexley ($169)
, are kinda always “on sale,” and remain among the best available at a low price.
Here are the best affordable office chairs and back-to-school chair deals available for the 2026 school year. Every single chair I recommend here is one we’ve personally tested. Also check out WIRED’s other back-to-school 
guides
, including 
dorm room essentials
 and 
college laptops
.
A Steeply Discounted Mid-Range Ergonomic Chair
Photograph: Julian Chokkattu
Save to wishlist
ProtoArc
Flexer Pro ergonomic Office Chair
$220
 
$176
 
(20% off)
 
Amazon
This Flexer Pro ergonomic chair from ProtoArc was a decent deal when it debuted last year at close to $400. But over the past year and month, prices have dropped considerably—this is the lowest price I’ve seen. The chair offers several points of adjustment, including seat pan depth, multiple recline angles, and four-way adjustable armrests.
The build quality and looks are far better than one could generally expect south of $200, with a five-year warranty that’ll get you through those undergrad years. Just note that there’s a detachable lumbar support that can pop off a little too easily from the backrest, and it’s not a great chair for people taller than 6 feet.
WIRED’s Favorite Budget Chair
Photograph: Julian Chokkattu
Courtesy of Staples
Save to wishlist
Staples
Dexley Ergonomic Mesh Swivel Task Chair
$169
 
Amazon
$330
 
$170
 
(48% off)
 
Staples
Staples basically holds down the discount chair scene, and the 
Staples Dexley
 is the best ergonomic chair that can be consistently had below $200. The five-year warranty will take it through most degree programs without a big hit to the wallet and the all-mesh seat offers terrific airflow; the chair is also easy to put together and decently adjustable. The mesh is a little scratchy for shorts wearers, but otherwise this is a solid chair with ergonomics good enough to support the occasional all-nighter.
Note that the Dexley is always “on sale”—and honestly, there were better prices earlier this summer. But you’ll be hard-pressed to find a much better chair at the price it’s selling for now.
A Good Starter Chair
Courtesy of Amazon
Save to wishlist
Staples
Essentials Ergonomic Fabric Swivel Task Chair
$120
 
Amazon
$190
 
$120
 
(37% off)
 
Staples
This Staples Essentials ergonomic chair is the even cheaper cousin of the Dexley. The chair is on its standard “sale” at the moment for $120, not the best price I’ve seen for it. The best sales sometimes drop below $100—but even at this price, this chair beats almost any budget chair you’d find from an Amazon brand. It’s likely among the cheapest chairs with a five-year warranty you can expect to be honored at five years.
And yet, the price comes at the expense of ergonomic features and adjustability. In general, we recommend the Dexley as the baseline for its ability to conform to different body types. Even college-age students get back pain from bad chairs. But in a cost crunch, this Essentials is the lowest-priced chair WIRED recommends.
