Save this story
Save this story
Although I'm a 
cat owner
 and not a dog owner, I know how quickly my pets can tire of toys (if they don't destroy them first). Plus, because my cats are indoor-only, I try to provide lots of 
enrichment
. 
Your pup
 needs enrichment too, even if they are going on walks. If you have a high-energy dog that requires lots of mental stimulation, BarkBox is a great solution to keep your pup busy, and you worry-free.  When you subscribe to BarkBox, you'll get themed treats and toys arrives sent to your doorstep on a repeated basis. Having a fur baby can be expensive, so we have lots of Barkbox promo codes and discount options ready for you and your furry friend.
Barkbox Promo: Enjoy a Free Toy for a Year at Barkbox
When your monthly Barkbox arrives, it’s like Christmas morning for your dogs. I watch as my two dogs, Rosi and Randy, shake their little Chihuahua mix bodies with barely restrained excitement. They’re never gentle on their toys but the stimulation that comes from textures and chewing is good for their little brains. With Barkbox you get a steady supply of two unique toys and two bags of all-natural treats every month. If you want to see how your dogs react, this Barkbox coupon is good for new Barkbox subscription customers and adds an additional toy in your box every month for a year.
Photograph: Barkbox
Save to wishlist
BarkBox
$20
 
BarkBox
$13
 
Amazon (Toys)
Save 50% on Your First Barkbox Food Subscription With a Barkbox Coupon Code
Another reason why Barkbox is the best dog subscription box is how easy the company makes it to keep your pantry stocked with your dog’s food. Use this 
Barkbox coupon
 to save 50% off your first Barkbox food subscription, so you won’t have to end up running out to the grocery store in the middle of the night when your scooper scrapes across the bottom of an empty kibble bin. Use Barbox promo code 
Belly50
 to get 50% off now.
Fly Travel Stress-Free With Your Dog and Get $300 Off BARK Air Flights
If you live in a Barkbox flight hub destination, please know I am insanely jealous of you. It’s no secret that flying is stressful and can be very dangerous for pets, especially if they have to ride in a cargo hold. Barkbox makes them the VIP with 
BARK Air
, letting them ride in the cabin with you and get doted on, so things are a lot less scary. This is another perk of having a BarkBox subscription, with the opportunity to save $300 off BARK Air Flights.
How to Get Your Pet to Lose Weight
Most household pets are overweight. I talked to experts to find the best ways to get your furry friend to shed a few pounds.
By 
Molly Higgins
Support Your Dog’s Dental Health and Get $10 Off With a Barkbox Coupon
Dental health is crucial for dogs, as it can prevent disease not just in their mouths, but their vital organs. Don’t forget to schedule your yearly cleaning with your vet, but in the meantime, use this BarkBox discount code to get $10 off a special 
BarkBox Dental kit
.
Do You Really Need to Brush Your Pet’s Teeth?
We talked to pet experts to find out if brushing is just a pet influencer craze, what products to use for oral health, and how to brush safely without losing a finger.
By 
Molly Higgins
Get an Extra Premium Toy in Every BarkBox With the Extra Toy Club
For having such tiny mouths, my dogs can gnaw through toys with surprising speed. If you’re also buried in a pile of shredded fluff and squeakers from disemboweled toys, the 
Extra Toy Club
 can help. This subscription includes dog toys for aggressive chewers of all ages, breeds, and sizes, offering extra durable toys meant to last longer. So far, so good at my house. To upgrade to this subscription box, it’s an extra $9 per month.
Get Exclusive BarkBox Discounts: Join the Email List
If you assume that the punchy branding and witty lingo extend to Barkbox’s email subscribers and not just the box subscription, you’d be correct. As a bonus, you can get exclusive BarkBox discount codes when you sign up to receive these emails. Who also doesn’t love a furry face and reminder of their pet in between work subject lines and bill payment reminders, too?
Don’t Miss Barkbox Monthly Themes
If your pup tires easily, or you’re a pet influencer who wants to change up content on a regular basis, 
Barkbox has monthly themed boxes
 to make sure you and your pup are up on the trends, and never get bored of their old toys and treats. Barkbox has themed boxes for holidays like Thanksgiving and Halloween, as well as cute topical themes like ocean exploration, movie night, Spongebob themed dog toys, aliens, Italy, and more.
Become a Belly Ambassador and Get Free Dog Food
One of the best ways to get free gifts and food for your pup is by becoming a Belly Ambassador. 
The Belly Ambassador program
 is a community of dog lovers who feed Belly to their pets and share photos and stories on social media. If you become an ambassador, you'll receive free premium Belly dog food in exchange for posting content about your dogs eating Belly food.
