Save this story
Save this story
Bartesian is the
 Keurig of cocktails. After 
trying several automatic cocktail makers on the market,
 it was the only cocktail maker I could see fitting into my normal routine. It works like any capsule-style device, but with booze. You fill the Bartesian’s glass bottles with your liquor of choice, make sure there’s water in the reservoir, plop in a cocktail capsule (these typically cost $2-3), choose your drink strength, press “mix,” and then a drink comes out. (If you’ve got kids, the 
Bartesian Professional
 version comes with a lock that will stymie curious fingers.)
Do you need a Bartesian to make cocktails? Of course you don’t. You can dump tequila into sour mix anytime and call it a margarita. But perhaps you’d like to make an espresso martini, a blackberry margarita, and also a Long Island Iced Tea? The Bartesian is a sort of shortcut to a home bar, without having to store all the mixers—and a bit of a novelty. It will be fun, and silly, and the drinks are kind of fine in a Spring Break way: strong and sweet and with sometimes fun flavors. Don’t expect sophistication. Expect a bit of a party trick, the sort of thing that makes a summer a little more fun.
You’ll, of course, want a Bartesian coupon to make that fun more accessible. Luckily, the current Bartesian discount codes are good for up to 35% off.
Save up to 35% With a Bartesian Cocktail Subscription
Standard pods on the Bartesian 
come in packs of 8, for $20 to $25.
 But if you know you plan to use the cocktail machine often—garden parties, art gallery openings, a really cool barber shop, an interesting home life, Friday afternoon margaritaville—the easiest way to save on the Bartesian pods is to 
sign up for a cocktail subscription
. No Bartesian subscription discount codes are required. Subscription boxes always cost $20, so get the ones that’d be otherwise expensive for a 20% discount—then get additional tiered discounts of Bartesian depending on volume and frequency. If you order often or in large quatnities, this can add up to 35% off the regular price.
You Don’t Need a Home Cocktail Machine. You Might Want One Anyway
Automatic cocktail machines are silly, but also kind of fun. Here’s how to choose between the Bartesian and Barsys cocktail machines.
By 
Matthew Korfhage
Save 15% (Or More) When You Purchase a Cocktail Bundle
I can’t tell you what to do. But at current discounts on Bartesian cocktail bundles and add-ons, only a sucker buys a Bartesian as a standalone item. If you flip to 
the Bartesian bundles page,
 you can find multiple bundles that offer glassware and cocktail variety packs for about the same price as the machine by itself. The 
Mom Bundle
 in particular costs less than the Bartesian Pro machine by itself, but includes 8 margarita capsules and two glasses. As of April 2026, Bartesian is also offering a Mother’s Day deal, offering $100 off the 
Bartesian Pro
 or the 
Bartesian Duet
 as long as you add a cocktail capsule pack to your order. Presumably, if you are buying the machine, you’ll want the cocktail capsules anyway.
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Save to wishlist
Bartesian
Cocktail Machine
$400
 
Amazon
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Save to wishlist
Bartesian
Professional Cocktail Machine
$400
 
Amazon
Bartesian Rewards Club: Get More for Your Buck
Bartesian also has a loyalty program that they’re calling, alternately, the Bartesian Club, the 
Bartesian Rewards Club
, or Bartesian Mixologist Rewards. One way or the other, it doesn’t cost anything to sign up, and you get discounts. Basically, you earn 4 to 6 points per dollar you spend, plus get additional points for referring other customers, following Bartesian on Instagram, or just having a birthday. 
If you get a thousand points,
 you can redeem them for a $10 discount. There are also exclusive members-only tiers. Rewards are bigger if you’re a big spender. Here are the 
three membership tiers.
Earn 2,500 Points and Give $25 When You Refer a Friend
The biggest rewards bonus comes when you refer a friend who then buys a Bartesian or otherwise spends at least $150 on the site. Use the 
friend referral page here
, and your friend will get a $25 discount using a Bertesian referral coupon code if they buy a Bartesian after using your link. You’ll also get 2,500 points on the Bartesian Rewards Club. Which is to say, you 
also
 get $25.
