Save this story
Save this story
Best Buy found
 a way to stay alive and even thrive as contemporaries like Circuit City fumbled in the age of Amazon. Now it’s one of the biggest electronics retailers on the web, leveraging a quality online shopping experience with brick-and-mortar outfits so you can choose to wait for delivery or head to your nearest store and get your new 
phone
, 
TV
, 
laptop
, or 
audio gear
 in a hurry. With a Best Buy discount code or Best Buy promo code, you can save on the company’s already competitive pricing. Here are some hot deals currently available.
Courtesy of TCL
Photograph: Ryan Waniata
Save to wishlist
Sony
WH-1000XM6
$460
 
$398
 
(13% off)
 
Amazon
$458
 
Walmart
$458
 
Best Buy
Get 10% Back in Rewards With the My Best Buy Credit Card
This 
Best Buy Credit Card
 deal is a solid offer for anyone shopping big on electronics like 
OLED TVs
, 
headphones
, 
soundbars
, and other gear. For everything you buy on your first day of purchases, you’ll get 10% back, including 2.5 bonus points and an additional 5% back in rewards. There are, of course, 
stipulations and terms
. You’ll need to make your purchases within 14 days of opening a new account, you can’t combine these deals with other offers, and points aren’t awarded on promotional credit purchases. The deal is available in select stores, and online offers “may vary.”
You can also choose financing options like 12-month 
financing on storewide purchases
 totalling $299 and up, 18-month 
financing on appliances and grills
 totaling $599 and up, or 
24-month financing on unlocked phone purchases
 totaling $649 and up.
Photograph: Ryan Waniata
Save to wishlist
Samsung
HW-Q990D Soundbar
$898
 
Amazon
$977
 
Walmart
$977
 
Best Buy
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Save to wishlist
HP
OmniBook Ultra 14
$1,900
 
HP (X2 Plus)
$2,250
 
Best Buy (X2 Elite)
Save up to 60% With Top Deals at Best Buy
Best Buy offers some sweet daily deals, including 
Top Deals
 that could save you up to 60% off retail pricing, and 24-hour discounts on a rotating 
deal of the day
 to help you save on gear like 
laptops
, 
TVs
, appliances, and 
other products
. These deals switch swiftly, so be sure to check back often so you can jump on the next big discount.
Join My Best Buy for Free Shipping, Member Prices, and More
If you’re in it for the long haul, it’s worth signing up for 
My Best Buy
. It’s free and you get all sorts of Best Buy discounts and promos, along with multiple other benefits, starting with Free Standard Shipping across all levels.
Move up to the 
My Best Buy Plus
 ($50/year) or 
My Best Buy Total
 ($180/year) will get you benefits like two-day shipping, exclusive member prices and deals on thousands of items, access to exclusive sales events and products, and a 60-day return window on the majority of products.
The 
My Best Buy Total plan
 offers a few other extras, including protection plans like AppleCare+, free in-store and online support services for computers and tablets, 24/7 tech support, 20% off repairs, and more.
Score Bonus Perks as a My Best Buy Plus or Total Member
Those aren’t the only perks of jumping on one of Best Buy’s paid membership plans. Join up with the 
My Best Buy Plus
 or 
My Best Buy Total
 plans and get a slew of other 
Membership Deals
, including a daily chance to win $1,000 in My Best Buy certificates (through May 2).
The paid membership deals also unlock all sorts of subscription deals, including , 30 days of free Fubo Pro, a 2-month trial of Tastemade+ recipes, 6 months of free SiriusXM All Access satellite radio, 3 months of free YouTube Premium, and 60 days of free LifeLock ID theft protection (along with 75% off on your first year’s subscription). You can also get a 90-day free trial for McAfee Privacy and Identity Guardian Online protection (or 80% off a 1-year subscription), and a month of 
Discord Nitro
 for free, to enhance your Discord experience with personalized profiles, animated emojis, and more.
Shop Best Buy Outlet to Save More
If you’re looking to upgrade your appliances, checking out the 
Best Buy Outlet
 is a great place to start. With the Best Buy Outlet, you’ll get top tech and super discounted prices, including clearance items, open-box, and refurbished items for even more savings. Outlet items include best-sellers like laptops, tablets, TVs, appliances and more. You can save up to 60% on open-box major appliances, on-sale laptops for as low as $299, up to 50% off select open-box TVs, and 40% on select open-box unlocked cell phones from Apple, Samsung and Google.
Use the Best Buy Price Match Guarantee to Always Pay the Lowest Price
Finally, there’s no better way to stretch your dollars than to leverage hot deals on items like TVs, monitors, computers, and other electronics from major competitors to save with the Best Buy Price Match Guarantee. The deal works like this: identify an identical product from a Qualified Competitor (which, sadly, excludes Amazon), then connect with Best Buy over Best Buy Chat online or by calling 1-888-BEST BUY to save.
