Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Amazon Prime Day Deals
Apple Watch Deals
Headphones Deals
Mesh Wi-Fi Router Deals
Oura Ring Deals
Vacuum Cleaner Deals
Beauty Tech Deals
Walmart Deals
Deals on Power Banks
Smart Bird Feeder Deals
Deals Under $30
Action Camera Deals
Save this story
Save this story
My home office
 is too hot, or it's too cold. It's in a weird cranny that my heat pump refuses to reach. The only solution in my awkward space was 
a good portable air conditioner
, and my life went from “steamy and irritated” to nice and breezy.
Luckily, WIRED's favorite portable air conditioners and window air conditioners are on solid Prime Day deals in 2026. This includes the 
Dreo 740S portable air conditioner
 that changed my entire work life. It also includes WIRED's favorite window unit overall, the 
Midea U-Shaped air conditioner,
 which is nearly 20 percent off for Prime Day.
These are the best Amazon Prime Day air conditioner deals of 2026 among units that WIRED reviewers have personally tested and can vouch for. In fact, every single one of these air conditioners is in the home of a WIRED reviewer right now.
Also check out the 
Absolute Best Prime Day Deals
, and the 
Best Prime Day Deals Under $100
.
Best Prime Day Portable Air Conditioner Deals
Photograph: Martin Cizmar
Photograph: Martin Cizmar
Save to wishlist
Zafro
Lullaby Duo Portable AC
$620
 
$527
 
(15% off)
 
Amazon (16,000 BTUs)
$470
 
$399
 
(15% off)
 
Amazon (12,000 BTUs)
Basically, a portable unit is an air conditioner on wheels, which connects via hoses to an adjustable panel that fits into your window frame. This makes these devices not just portable but extremely flexible for weird-shaped windows, weirdly placed windows, and even vertical sliding windows.
The best portable air conditioner we've fully tested at WIRED is the Zafro Lullaby, which has a smart inverter for low energy use and is drainage-free unless you live in a swamp. It's up to $95 off for Prime Day, depending on how powerful an air conditioner you need. The 12,000 BTU version that'd suit most offices and bedrooms 
is a mere $400 right now.
 Our commerce director, Martin Cizmar, is a true believer in this Zafro. After testing it out for a few weeks, he wrote saying he wasn't convinced it wasn't the best air conditioner he's used—and it was a lifesaver in the unusual-shaped window in his office. It's easy to install, though not quite as quiet as the best window units below.
Save to wishlist
Dreo
DREO Inverter Dual-Hose Portable Air Conditioner 740S
$700
 
$630
 
(10% off)
 
Amazon
The portable AC unit I'm currently testing, which dropped my office temperature by 20 degrees in as many minutes, is the energy-efficient 
Dreo 740S portable air conditioner
—which is on a $70-off Prime Day deal. It's a powerful 16,000 BTU device that makes quick work of office spaces and can be controlled via remote or app. It also has a vertical directional grate that can be set to oscillate so it heats the room from top to bottom.
Note that “portable” is relative. You've still got to put a little insert into your window and plug up the gaps with foam strips. But I can wheel this from my office to my bedroom and set it up in about 10 minutes in the new room. Most important, I don't have to heft a heavy window unit into my window frame—an important consideration for those living alone.
Best Prime Day Window Air Conditioner Deals
Courtesy of Midea
Save to wishlist
Midea
U-Shaped Air Conditioner
$510
 
$420
 
(18% off)
 
Amazon
$400
 
$330
 
(18% off)
 
Amazon
$450
 
Amazon
WIRED's absolute 
favorite window air conditioner
 just got tapped for a Prime Day deal, and it's a doozy, nearly 20 percent off. That's a great deal at the beginning of the hot season, when air conditioner makers otherwise take your business for granted. This U-shaped Midea is our favorite in part for its excellent energy efficiency. But also, its shape lets you actually open the window on cool nights, without de-installing. Mind = blown!
The big notch between the front and back also lets you pull down your window down deep into the unit, which means there's a smaller air gap, better soundproofing, and better insulation. Foam padding does the rest of the insulating. I've got the newest version in my window, with improved drainage and more installation assistance. The difference in soundproofing between it and my old Frigidaire is night and day.
Photograph: Lisa Shapiro
Save to wishlist
Windmill
8,000 BTU with WhisperTech
$449
 
$379
 
(16% off)
 
Amazon
$449
 
$409
 
(9% off)
 
Home Depot
$450
 
$410
 
(9% off)
 
Best Buy
This Windmill is also a favorite among multiple WIRED colleagues past and present. Why? It's easy to install, and it's not ugly. Most air conditioners are kinda ugly. In fact, the 
8,000 BTU Windmill
 window unit (8/10, WIRED Recommends) was the first window air conditioner that former WIRED reviewer Adrienne So didn't hate so much she wanted to “bash it out of the window.” High praise!
Because the install kit arrives preassembled, installation is a mere 15-minute affair. This is certainly 
not
 true with all window units. The newest WhisperTech model is pretty quiet, though not as quiet as the Midea above, ranging from a barely audible hum to around 50 decibels. The Windmill is compatible with Google Home and has an app, which means you can control it from a distance so it turns on before you get home from work. Anyway, it's on a nice deal for Prime Day as well, about $70 off depending on the BTUs.
