Save this story
Save this story
Few things are
 as iconic to 
camping
 as the green Coleman stove. Every summer you'll find them, along with Coleman lanterns and coolers, on picnic tables across America. At WIRED, we're big fans of the 
Coleman Cascade stove
, but all Coleman stoves are capable of 
cooking up delicious camp food
. There is more to Coleman than 
stoves
, of course. I'm a fan of the 
coolers
 as well, along with the 
tents
 (simple and sturdy), and the 
Forester Sling chair
 for lounging. No matter what you need to outfit yourself for outdoor adventure as warmer weather arrives, we have a Coleman promo code and coupons to help you save.
Coleman's New Camp Stoves Are Old-Fashioned in the Best Way
The Coleman Cascade and 1900 series both feature cast-iron grates that make camp cooking just like home cooking.
By 
Scott Gilbertson
Get 75% Off Coleman Drinkware
There’s nothing quite like a cold drink on a hot summer day. Keep hydrated and cool while out in the heat with Coleman’s signature drinkware that's built to last on every adventure. Right now, when you buy select 
Coleman drinkware
, you’ll get the second at 75% off. So whether you want to go classic Stainless Steel Insulated Tumbler for your joe in the morning, or FreeFlow AUTOSEAL Stainless Steel Water Bottle for your day adventure, you won’t have to choose.
Snag a 15% Coleman Promo Code When You Sign Up
If what you want isn’t on sale, no problem. You can get a 15% discount on one full-price purchase just for signing up for Coleman email list. Separately, you can save 15% on a full-price purchase and get free standard shipping when you sign up for texts.
Courtesy of Coleman
Save to wishlist
Coleman
Cascade 3-in-1 Stove
$275
 
REI
Photograph: Coleman
Save to wishlist
Coleman
Classic Propane Stove
$48
 
Target
$48
 
Walmart
Members Get Free Shipping at Coleman
If you create an account online on Coleman, you can snag free shipping. Free shipping doesn't apply to the expedited delivery options, but so long as you’re not in a rush it’ll save you a few dollars. Just create an account, login, and the free shipping will be automatically applied during checkout. This Coleman free shipping deal is only valid for standard shipping within the contiguous United States.
Photograph: Coleman
Save to wishlist
Coleman
Dome with Screen Room
$245
 
Amazon  (6-Person)
Shop the Coleman Sale
Summer is approaching quickly, and that means camping season is in full swing. These regularly pricey outdoor essentials are discounted from ten to hundreds of dollars, making it easier (and cheaper) than ever to get your camping set up ready to go before high-season. Be sure to check out the 
Coleman sale page
 for discounts on necessities from the 8P Skydome Darkroom Tent with Screen Room to the Coleman Classic Recharge 800 Lumens LED Lantern.
Coleman Discount: 30% Off Backyard Essentials
Summer’s upon us, and it’s time to level up your backyard game. Coleman is the best place to get summer 
backyard and outdoor essentials
 for up to 40% off, including coolers, Flex N Go shelters, portable 
grills
, 
camping chairs
, and more.
Photograph: Chris Haslam
Save to wishlist
Coleman
Forester Sling Chair
$63
 
Home Depot
$85
 
Coleman
Photograph: Chris Haslam
Save to wishlist
Coleman
Deck Chair with Side Table
$100
 
Amazon
$99
 
Walmart
Now Available Kane Brown at Coleman
Coleman has partnered with country superstar Kane Brown for an exclusive collaboration, so you can camp this summer in style. This 
limited-edition, exclusive collab
 features only four items: the Coleman x Kane Brown 
stainless steel tumbler
, 
steel-belted cooler
, 
6-can sling cooler
, and Snap 'N Go Cooler. Because of the popularity of the limited-run collab, 
Coleman x Kane
 Brown Snap 'N Go Cooler is currently sold out, but be sure to 
sign up for Coleman email
 newsletters to get notified of restocked, new drops, and early access to sales.
