Save this story
Save this story
Corsair is known
 primarily for its high-end gaming peripherals and accessories, as well as PC components like memory and power supplies. More recently, the company even dipped its toe into full-on, prebuilt gaming 
PCs
. So, if you’re shopping for a new gaming 
keyboard
 or 
building a new PC
, checking out Corsair’s website is a good way to go. But before you buy, we have some Corsair discount codes and Corsair coupons to help you save some extra cash.
Up to 50% Off the Certified Gear Corsair Sale
One of the best ways to save extra on high-end gaming gear like 
keyboards
, 
headphones
, and gaming 
chairs
 is to check out Corsair’s ‘
special offers
’ section online. Here is where you’ll find major discounts, up to 50% off, on nearly everything you’ll need to complete your gaming setup, like gaming PC and monitor deals, as well as deeply discounted tech to make your own DIY setup.
Apply a Corsair Discount Code to Save on Your Next PC Build
We all know that it’s never been more expensive to build or upgrade a PC. The memory shortage has taken its toll, graphics cards are in demand, and wide-ranging economic uncertainty has led to a situation where upgrading your PC or building one from scratch is outrageously expensive. Corsair is offering up to 30% off its most popular gaming products, which include components like memory, PC cases, and power supplies.
This also includes gaming-related peripherals, such as one of our favorite gaming headsets, the 
Corsair Void V2 Wireless
. WIRED reviewer Brad Bourque found this model to be a particularly good fit for people with larger heads, while remaining lightweight and comfortable with its breathable earcups.
Claim Your 15% Corsair Student Discount via UNiDAYS
Like many companies, Corsair offers a 15% discount for students, which is always helpful for saving some extra money. It does, however, require a valid student email address and a UNiDAYS account. Once you’re signed up, though, you’re on your way to 15% off Corsair’s entire catalog.
For college students looking to do some gaming on the weekends, I’d recommend checking out one of the company’s gaming mice, such as the 
Corsair Sabre V2 Carbon Fiber and Magnesium Gaming Mouse
. This pro-level esports mouse, which our mouse reviewer gave a very high 9/10 score, praising its extremely light design and comfortable shape. At the time of publication, it was 30% off, bringing the price down to $120.
Save More With Specials Offers at Corsair
One of the best ways to save on pricey gaming gear like processors, memory storage, monitors, and more, is to check out Corsair’s online deals 
special offers page
. Here, they have deals on a myriad of best-selling tech, including gaming PCs, monitors, gaming deals, memory deals, and discounts on Revival Series items (their refurbished like-new tech line). Right now, some of the best deals are a VENGEANCE a7500 Gaming PC for $3,300—a $500 discount, and the best-selling VIRTUOSO RGB WIRELESS High-Fidelity Gaming Headset for only $90.
Maximize Your Savings With a Corsair Discount on Certified Refurbished Tech
Unlike a lot of tech manufacturers, Corsair actually sells its 
own refurbished products
 that have been certified by the company itself. Products are up to 50% off the full retail price, and I saw some solid deals while perusing, including on its popular K90 and K70 series of keyboards, which 
we recently reviewed
.
The selection of refurbished products is extensive, including lots of different PC components. That includes CPU coolers, case fans, and power supplies—as well as entire prebuilt gaming PCs.
Sign up for Text Alerts to Get a 10% Corsair Discount Code
There’s one more way to save some extra money when shopping with Corsair. The company has a text alert discount code that you can sign up for. If you sign up for text alerts, you’ll also get a 10% Corsair discount code that can be applied to your shopping cart. Every little bit helps, especially if you’re putting together an entire PC with Corsair components.
Save More With Corsair Refurbished Products
Buying a like-new tech product is a great way to make a small investment with a big pay off. Rather than drop thousands on a brand-new gadget, snag a like-new refurbished item at Corsair. If you’re looking to upgrade your gaming set up or WFH haven for way less, be sure to check out Corsair’s refurbished products page. There you’ll find deeply discounted gaming PCs, LCD touchscreens, and more.
