Save this story
Save this story
Polymarket’s every move
 is under close 
scrutiny
 these days, as the 
prediction market
 giant 
fights dozens
 of 
legal battles
 about how it can operate. But one hiring decision has remained under the radar: Late last year, Polymarket brought on former Department of Government Efficiency affiliate Jonathan Mendelson as a senior strategic executive.
Prior to his stint at Elon Musk’s so-called 
DOGE
, Mendelson worked as an investor for the venture capital firm Accel in San Francisco, which invests in technology companies. At DOGE, Mendelson was technically employed by the General Services Administration, but worked as an advisor to the Securities and Exchange Commission chairman Paul Atkins. He was there for less than a year. Polymarket, which currently faces an investigation from the 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission
, declined to comment on this story. The SEC did not respond to requests for comment.
Mendelson isn’t the only former DOGE affiliate in a position of power in a prediction market. Elie Mishory, a former CFTC regulator who helped develop the agency’s framework for prediction markets, worked as Kalshi’s general counsel and chief regulatory officer in 2025 before stepping down to 
lead DOGE’s efforts
 at the SEC, where he worked with Mendelson. This June, he took a role as the chief regulatory and legal affairs officer at Novig, a newer, well-funded sports-focused prediction market. "Elie has been at the center of the most consequential regulatory developments in prediction markets—he helped bring them from a fringe idea to the center of the national conversation,” Jacob Fortinsky, Novig’s cofounder and chief executive, said in a statement announcing his hire.
Mishory tells WIRED that joining a prediction market company was a “natural dovetail” from his mission at the SEC for DOGE. There, he says he prioritized talking to staffers about how to streamline operations, and then tried to implement their suggestions about changing administrative processes or getting rid of redundant software. He was quick to note that his experience at DOGE was “atypical” in part because he didn’t focus on cutting staff. (The SEC did 
lose 18 percent
 of its staff in 2025; unlike 
DOGE-ravaged
 agencies like the 
United States Agency for International Development
, most of the cuts were voluntary buyouts.)
Got a Tip?
Do you have information about what's happening on prediction markets? We'd like to hear from you. Using a nonwork phone or computer, contact the reporter securely on Signal at Kateknibbs.09.
“My version of DOGE was to find the people who were the experts,” he says. “The people who actually used the software, not just the people who would buy the software, to give them a voice.” In Mishory’s eyes, this resembles the way that prediction markets “democratize” knowledge by rewarding people based on how well they perform. He also sees overlap in the appetite for risk in both DOGE and the prediction markets space. Indeed, the way that DOGE brought on 
young, inexperienced engineers
 to remake the federal government mirrors how many of the big prediction market companies, including Polymarket and Novig, are steered by twentysomethings with thin resumes.
These hires have been made at a tumultuous, politically charged moment for the industry. As prediction markets have exploded in popularity, many state regulators and federal lawmakers are calling for stricter guardrails on how they operate, arguing that they 
facilitate corruption
 and violate state gambling laws.
In many ways, the industry represents the zenith of the strain of startup culture that valorizes speed in a quest to remake institutions, while regulators struggle to keep up. Although many detractors say prediction markets’ offerings are sports betting products in disguise, the leaders in this space aim to compete with the world’s largest commodities and futures markets. They have found allies within the Trump Administration, especially as 
Donald Trump Jr.
 is an advisor to both Polymarket and Kalshi, and the Trump family-owned social media company Truth Social has 
a marketing collaboration
 with Crypto.com’s prediction market offering.
