Save this story
Save this story
President Donald Trump
 is enthralled with the Ultimate Fighting Championship staging an event at the White House on his birthday this weekend—in effect his present to himself, since he came up with the idea. We have the details on both the fighting and the anticipated lobbying.
Lobbying by the Octagon
While the White House does not yet know exactly which celebrities might show up for the UFC on Sunday because they have not accepted their Ticketmaster email invitations, Trump’s aides tell Inner Loop they are expecting a parade of donors to attend.
The tickets have been free—and there is no resale—because the UFC is footing the 
approximately $60 million cost
 to stage the event, but the UFC has also offered sponsor packages for 
upwards of
 $1 million that come with ringside seats.
With limited avenues for executives and companies to get close to Trump these days, political consulting firms in Washington have been advising clients to buy the packages, and Trump’s aides say they have been inundated with requests.
The sponsorship requests have come on top of a stream of queries by administration officials and members of Congress trying to get into the UFC White House event, which is oversubscribed because Trump has personal control over the majority of seats and is deciding who he wants and he doesn’t, the aides say.
The most sought-after seats are under the Claw, a giant 92-foot-tall arch structure that holds lights and sound equipment above the Octagon. The structure is actually called a “beta tent” by its supplier Stageco, but it was renamed by the White House, ESPN reported.
UFC president Dana White has 
said
 that he and Ari Emanuel, the chair of the UFC’s parent company, will control 700 seats between them, while Trump will control about 1,200.
The most well known method to get direct face time with Trump during his second term in office has been to buy a $1 million seat at the so-called 
candlelight dinners
 hosted by Trump super PAC MAGA Inc. Trump would go from person to person and talk with them directly, according to one political consultant with close ties to Trump’s fundraising operation.
But the candlelight dinners don’t happen with regular frequency—sometimes months go by without a dinner, the consultant said—and so, companies that missed out on donating to fund Trump’s ballroom have been advised to consider sponsoring.
A White House official tells Inner Loop that they have not been involved in any sponsorship discussions and any cost information could be found with UFC. At least some of the UFC’s regular Octagon sponsors, including Meta, have ongoing business interests before the federal government.
In a statement, White House spokesperson David Ingle disputed the notion of lobbying at the event. “The Fake News’ continued attempts to fabricate conflicts of interest are irresponsible and reinforce the public's distrust in what they read,” he said. “There are no conflicts of interest.”
Fight Night
Meanwhile, Trump’s team acknowledges that the UFC White House event won’t be featuring the biggest names; they were unable to get the likes of former UFC heavyweight champion Jon Jones and former UFC lightweight champion Conor McGregor.
There were conversations behind the scenes by White and his contract negotiator Hunter Campbell to book them both, but those talks fell through, people familiar with the matter tell Inner Loop.
It would have been a big deal for the White House to have landed McGregor, the biggest box office attraction in the sport’s history, for his comeback fight, after his last appearance in the Octagon in 2021 against Dustin Poirier ended with a broken leg.
But the issue with McGregor to the White House’s knowledge, one of the people said, was that he had not been in an anti-doping testing pool long enough to be eligible for a White House fight—something that has in the past 
not always prevented
 the UFC from booking a match—and Trump did not want to be seen pulling favors for specific fighters.
McGregor was found liable in a civil case in 2024 for sexual assault and lost an appeal last year. During a visit to the White House press briefing room in March, McGregor made controversial anti-immigration remarks, claiming Ireland was being overrun by illegal immigrants.
View From the Oval
Trump has loved having the Claw on the South Lawn and has been telling reporters in recent weeks that he might 
keep the structure there
 even after the UFC White House event is done after the weekend.
But a White House official tells Inner Loop that the realities of being president have upended that idea, and that the Claw is likely to be coming down without playing host to other events later in the summer.
One problem with the Claw is that it has been constructed on the top part of the South Lawn, where Marine One usually touches down to transport the president to and from Joint Base Andrews. With the Claw sitting on the landing zone, Marine One has been unable to fly for weeks, and Trump instead has gone by motorcade.
But Trump may not mind too much, given that he’s soon expected to get a new toy: the White House source tells us that the former Qatari royal family plane turned new Air Force One is expected to enter service in the first week of July.
Over the weekend, plane spotters in the Washington area 
posted on X
 that they had caught the retrofitted jumbo jet in Trump’s new navy-red-gold colors arriving and departing Joint Base Andrews under the cover of darkness.
This is an edition of 
Hugo Lowell’s
 
Inner Loop 
newsletter
. Read previous newsletters 
here.
