Save this story
Save this story
Now that Amazon
 Prime Day is over, it's time to start gearing up for Fourth of July sales. Most large retailers pivoted their summer-sale timing to compete head-on with Amazon's accelerated schedule, but you can still snag great deals this July 4th, particularly in active and outdoorsy categories.
REI has the hottest sale of the weekend
 as far as the WIRED Reviews team is concerned, but there are notable midsummer sales on other sites we shop, like 
Backcountry
, 
Home Depot
, and 
Lululemon
. Also, make sure you don't sleep on Duer.
The outdoorsy Canadian clothing brand makes highly functional classics that subtly incorporate performance elements like Tencel fabric and strategic triple-stitching. 
The No Sweat Relaxed Taper pants
 have been a weekly wear for me for years; they're as comfy as sweatpants but look dapper enough to wear to a business meeting, while being durable enough for a weekend camping trip.
Shop the men's sale
Shop the women's sale
Duer rarely has sales, and prices typically hover around $100 for pants and $50 for a shirt. Those aren't outrageous prices, but most guys I know won't build a wardrobe primarily from $50 tees. In the run-up to July 4th, you can save around 20 percent on a few of the brand's most popular pants and up to 35 percent on some styles of shorts and long-sleeve shirts.
For the last few months, I've had a handful of Duer garments in rotation: 
Performance Denim+ Straight
, 
Live Lite Traveller Pant
, 
Air Flow Pique Polo
, 
PurePima Only Tee
, and the aforementioned 
No Sweat Relaxed Taper
.
In addition to my beloved No Sweat pants, the pima cotton tee (some styles of which are 
on sale
) is a big winner. It's soft and still fits great after two trips through the washer and dryer. It's getting serious consideration for being my new favorite black T-shirt. (I would suggest the brand start claiming it's the best T-shirt in the world so as to be eligible for 
our tailor-judged shootout of men's shirts
.)
The pique polo is also great (the 
Hazy Mauve
 color is currently discounted), as it's super breathable, holds an appropriately stiff collar without feeling too rigid, and also keeps its shape perfectly through two washing cycles.
If you've got summer travel or a camping trip coming up, this clothing could be nice to bring with you.
Shop the men's sale
Shop the women's sale
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
