Save this story
Save this story
Long before we
 had Amazon or Facebook marketplace, or thousands of other online retailers, we had eBay. And now, we have an eBay coupon to help you save on basics like vacuums and phones, to even your most niche need—because eBay has everything from haunted objects to ironic 
landline
 phones to 
retro gaming consoles
. One of the first and most enduring online shopping platforms, eBay has stood the test of time, providing us with the old-school feel of estate sales, complete with bidding wars and gently used items of quite literally every type.
20% Off The Brand Outlet
Sometimes, it can be a little overwhelming to browse eBay and find exactly what you’re looking for with their big selection, not to mention which items are actually on sale. With the 
eBay brand outlet
, you can get 20% off eligible items with eBay coupon code 
BRANDS20
 until August 16. This means discounts on popular categories like women's fashion, vacuums, kitchen appliances, and more, with savings on top brands like Acer, Ninja, Anker, and more. Shop for eligible items on the site, input the eBay promo code in the redemption code field at checkout and save.
Save up to 60% on Your Next Purchase at eBay
eBay has 
rotating deals
, like 20% off up-and-coming brands, so be sure to check their page often to know which deals are next. They have huge savings on essentials, like 
Dyson vacuums
—an enduring titan in the home cleaning realm. There’s also discounts on like-new refurbished Apple 
MacBooks
 and 
iPads
 so you can work or study for so much less. It’s not only office tech they have deals on, but even kitchen essentials, like the forever-popular 
KitchenAid Stand Mixer
. eBay has deals on everything from clothing and jewelry to power tools, so check eBay’s deals page often.
Use this eBay Promo Code to Get 5% Off
If you’re not a new eBay customer or have a more generic shopping need, you can still get smaller discounts at eBay! This eBay promo code 
MIDYEAR5
 gets you 5% off your next purchase—you just need to spend a minimum of $50, and the maximum discount is $15. To redeem, you’ll need to add up to 10 eligible items to your eBay car, and enter the eBay coupon code 
MIDYEAR5
 in the “Add vouchers” field at checkout. The eBay discount will be applied automatically, but make sure you are shopping with 
eligible sellers
, and eligible categories are limited to Vinyl Records, Collectible Figures & Bobblehead, Games, Figures and Statues, and many more so be sure to 
verify that your items are eligible
 to get the eBay discount (through August 18).
How to Use an eBay Coupon (If you Have one Handy)
Once you’ve perused the nearly endless options of items on eBay, here’s how you can redeem the eBay discount code or offer at checkout: first, make sure your code isn’t expired (I know it sounds like a no-brainer, but you don’t want to be disappointed when that dreaded ‘invalid’ pop-up comes on the screen). Enter the code in the ‘Add coupons’ section, or check the box if the coupon is displayed. When you select ‘apply,’ you should see the discounted total, and then you’ll be prompted to pay.
Save More With Free Shipping
Once you find the special item of your dreams, go to the "shipping and pickup" search filter and check the "free shipping" box to get free shipping. Make sure you choose eBay free shipping on a multitude of items like motor parts, books, golf clubs, Pokemon cards, haunted objects, tech, and virtually anything else you can imagine.
Shop These Rotating eBay Deals
eBay has 
rotating deals
, like 20% off up-and-coming brands, so be sure to check their page often to know which deals are next. They also have spotlighted, trending, and 
featured
 deals for huge savings on a myriad of products like auto parts, golf clubs, shoes, and more. eBay has a 
money-back guarantee
 to ensure you get the item you ordered or you get your money back.
Shop With eBay Mastercard to Get More Rewards
Have you heard of an 
eBay Mastercard
? I hadn’t either, but if you’re a collector or frequent eBay shopper, an eBay Mastercard is a smart way to save on purchases you were already planning to make. You’ll earn five times the amount of points for the rest of the year after you spend $1,000 on eBay in a calendar year. Until then, you’ll earn three times the points per $1 spent, up to $1,000, on eBay in a calendar year. You can also earn twice as many points per $1 spent on gas, restaurant, and groceries, and 1 times as many points per $1 spent on all other Mastercard purchases.
Get Daily Deals With the eBay App
If you’re someone who shops or sells on eBay often, I’d suggest downloading the eBay app for even more perks. The 
eBay mobile app
 makes it easy to find the best rotating deals on various items and access to the hottest deals and discounts of the day before they leave. Through the app, you can browse everything from trendy items, to power tools, to tech gadgets, and then choose whatever price looks best. There’s also app-only discounts and special offers exclusively for eBay app users. Plus, eBay will help you figure out when’s the best time to buy, with price notifications to let you know when the price has dropped.
Try an eBay Gift Card
If you don’t know what to get the quirky fashionista or vintage collector in your life? Rather than a run-of-the-mill present, get them an 
eBay gift card
 so that they can use it to expand their rare baseball collection or get a discounted Nintendo Switch. eBay gift cards can be used to pay for almost any item online. You can get a digital gift card 
on eBay
, or you can buy a physical eBay gift card at CVS, Walgreens, and 
other retailers
.
Don’t Miss the Ebay Auction Hub
eBay has expanded considerably, but it first gained popularity by being the first online auctioneer, expanding the world of trading and rarities globally. Today, it’s even more streamlined, with the 
eBay auction hub
, where folks can catch the rarest weekly collectible drops from top vendors. Some of the most popular auction items include Pokemon, baseball cards, basketball, and football cards. If you’re looking to upgrade your collectibles collection, this is where you want to start.
Shop Car and Truck Parts at Ebay
You probably don’t think of eBay when you think of 
car parts and accessories
, but eBay has a wide range of everything you need for car additions and maintenance for way less than if you bought new at a chain retailer. On eBay, you can shop by popular car and truck parts categories, like racks, cargo carriers, towing parts, exhaust and emission systems, brakes, starters, alternators, and more.
