Save this story
Save this story
If I could
 only have one pod coffee maker for the rest of time, it would be the 
Bruvi BV-01
 (an 8/10 WIRED Review). It’s the 
pod coffee maker
 against which I compare every other pod coffee maker. It's the yardstick. The best of the best. The one to beat, and no competition has come close to taking the crown. It’s what I use when I’m not testing a new coffee maker for research. Truly and deeply, I love this chic machine with its large touchscreen, upscale-looking accents, and wide variety of biodegradable pods. And now, it can all be yours at a discounted price.
The Bruvi Bundle comes with a brewer and a sampler pack of biodegradable B-Pods. The bundle usually sells for $398, but you can use the exclusive coupon code 
WIRED
 to snag it for $198. That price matches the best I’ve ever tracked, including during Prime Day and Black Friday.
Photograph: Louryn Strampe
Save to wishlist
Bruvi
BV-01 Brewer
$398
 
$198
 
(50% off)
 
Bruvi
$348
 
$248
 
(29% off)
 
Amazon
$280
 
$260
 
(7% off)
 
Amazon (Starter Bundle)
$338
 
$149
 
(56% off)
 
Bruvi (Bundle with Subscription)
The 
Bruvi BV-01
 looks cute on a countertop in both the Black and Cream & Sugar colors. I own the latter, and I like the high-design vibes of its wooden-accented accents, including the latch handle, adjustable drip tray, and lid on the 70-ounce water reservoir. I also appreciate the large, sleek touchscreen, which offers a ton of customization options, including beverage type (brewed coffee, cold brew, matcha, espresso, tea, and more). The Bruvi’s waste bin has a six-pod capacity and conveniently automatically catches spent B-Pods. The machine heats up way faster than what I’ve experienced with other pod coffee makers, like my mom’s Keurig, and I love that there’s no need to wait around for five minutes before I can take my first sip.
Photograph: Louryn Strampe
The 
B-Pods
 cement the Bruvi system as the easiest and most ecofriendly pod coffee maker I’ve tried. Because they're 
designed to biodegrade
 in a landfill, you can toss the whole used pod right in the trash, without needing to peel off the lid, send it in to be recycled, or compost it. (You could technically compost the grounds and then separately recycle the used cup after rinsing it out, if you prefer.) As a result of an organic treatment, B-Pods are able to break down faster and more completely than other plastics, according to lab testing. While buying the Bruvi won’t solve the climate crisis, 
coffee pods are far from the worst offenders
 to the planet’s health.
Several supplies 
make B-Pods of various beverage types and coffee roasts
 (between $21 and $40 for 20 pods, depending on brand and type). I suggest ordering a variety pack to learn exactly what you like, then order accordingly from there. The main downside of the Bruvi compared to other popular pod coffee makers is that the B-Pods are unfortunately only available online. But otherwise, if you want a good-looking, efficient brewer that performs well and doesn’t leave a wake of waste with each cup it brews, this deal is a great one.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
