Save this story
Save this story
Taking a vacation
 is fun, once you get your toes in the sand. Though some people enjoy the process of researching and booking a trip, many people find it stressful and difficult. Booking hotels can be both expensive and complex, especially for extended bookings or international travel. Why not take a gander at one of our Expedia coupons? Book your vacation with less stress (and less money) and 
travel like a pro
. Expedia’s search makes it easy to find hotel stays, car rentals, flights, and even vacation packages. Want to bring your pet, relax in a spa, or book a romantic cabin weekend? There are filters for those things, too. All you’ll have to worry about is whether to hit the museum or the beach first.
Get 40% Off for the Expedia Summer Sale
Summer’s upon us which means primarily one thing: it’s vacation time, baby! It’s high time for trips, getaways, and travel, and Expedia wants you to get out for less with the 
Expedia Summer Sale
. During the sale, you’ll save on select hotels and vacation rentals, along with even more deals on cars, packages, and flights. You can save 40% on select hotels and vacation rentals in Las Vegas, Cancun, and more, and 25% or more off last-minute packages in New York City, Las Vegas, and more.
​​Unlock 30% Off Hotels this August
If you’re looking for last-minute vacation plans or want to embark on a quick getaway before summer ends, look no further than Expedia for 
30% off hotels this August
. Whether you want to splurge on the Venetian in Vegas, or relax in an all-inclusive resort in Orlando, Expedia has the discounted stays to make your August vacation unforgettable.
Expedia Promo Code: Save 25% on Your Next Dream Vacation
Whether you dream of escaping to the beach, city or in nature, Expedia is offering 
25% or more off your perfect stay
. On the landing page, you can input dates and search by city, or peruse the long list of icons of cities and stays around the world. Some of the best deals on getaways I’ve seen so far are 25% off stays at the Menger Hotel, 37% off stays at the iconic Caesars Palace, and 40% off rooms at Shinjuku Granbell Hotel. No matter where you’re itching to go, Expedia has a place for you to stay.
Don’t Miss Our Expedia Online Coupons: 20% Off Weekend Getaways
Looking for a quick getaway that won’t burn your budget? The 
Expedia Weekend Escapes
 page is the best place to find discounted stays and destinations, with up to 20% off hotels. Plus, escape for even less with deals on hotels, vacation rentals, and flights for a quick weekend getaway. So whether you want to spend a long weekend in a swanky Manhattan hotel, or a vacation all-inclusive package to Mexico, 
Expedia weekend escapes
 have something for every type of vacationer and budget.
Score Member Prices and Get Rewarded With OneKey
OneKey
 is Expedia’s loyalty program that lets members earn and redeem rewards, called OneKeyCash, across Expedia, Hotels.com, and Vrbo. Every time members book eligible hotels, rentals, flights, or activities, they will get at least 2% in rewards. Plus, members who travel or book a lot can achieve higher tiers for even more perks.
Perhaps the best part is that $1in KeyCash turns into $1 that you can use on eligible hotels, car rentals, flights and more. As a 
OneKey Expedia member
, you’ll save 10% or more on over half-a-million stays worldwide. Also, members get discounted prices, with up to 30% off when they add a hotel stay to a booked flight. Members can quickly progress through the tiers the more they book, and get perks like free room upgrades at select VIP Access properties, price drop protection when booking flights on Expedia, and more.
Popular Destinations to Book With Expedia
Expedia has tons of travel destinations in the United States and internationally. Find discounted stays in Mexico, Hawaii, New York, Dominican Republic, Chicago, Orlando, Las Vegas, and more, and be sure to check back often for a new Expedia coupon.
Expedia One Key Cards: Earn $350
As mentioned above, Expedia One Key is one of the best ways to get discounts and rewards on future travel by making purchases you were already planning to. Right now, you can earn $350 in 
OneKeyCash
 when you spend $3,000 on purchases in the first 3 months. This is an awesome offer if you’re planning on already making a big purchase like furniture or appliances. Plus, you can get an additional $100 in OneKeyCash for an anniversary bonus.
