Save this story
Save this story
Sometimes, eating makes
 me feel like Sisyphus. Every day, I must toil up the mountain and the rock to figure out what the heck I want to eat for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. I 
tested Factor meals
 earlier this year, and they’re a solid option if you’re the type of person that doesn’t want to fuss over your food. With expansive menus and an emphasis on tracking macros and nutrition, you can simply pick out your meals, get them delivered, and then reheat them in the microwave or oven when it’s time to eat.
Texture eaters might not love Factor’s meals, which tend to be a little mushy. They’re still tasty and very filling. I suggest accompanying them with some crisp veggies, parmesan snaps, or fresh fruit to jazz up the texture a bit. If you’re the kind of person that can meal prep a week’s worth of chicken and rice and happily eat it every day, Factor is going to be right up your alley. Right now, you can save with this Factor coupon and get up to $130 off 6 boxes. Just follow one of our links above, and enjoy your discounted meal kits.
Save With Factor Coupons and Get Meals Tailored to Your Health Goals
Not only is Factor a convenient way to make protein-packed meals in minutes, they also have tons of choices tailored to your 
dietary needs and preferences
. Different Factor meal categories you can choose from include GLP-1 Support, Low Carb, Fiber Filled, and Calorie Smart, ensuring that whatever health goal you may have, Factor has the meals to get you to reach that goal through convenient, pre-prepared meals.
Use Factor Promo Code for Keto Diet Food Delivery
If you want to get serious about your health goals, Factor makes it easy, with prepared 
keto meal delivery
 from Factor. Whatever your health goal may be, Factor’s prepared meal delivery makes it easy to stick to a keto diet plan and lose weight, using chef-prepared keto meals that are ready to eat in just a few minutes. Whether you want to use Factor for a keto diet food delivery service, or just want a healthy meal delivery plan, Factor makes it easy (and our promo codes make it cheaper).
Get High Protein Meals for Less
Factor is one of the easiest ways to conveniently get high-protein, chef prepared meals that are reheatable and ready in two minutes. These meals are not only packed with protein, but are also 
dietitian-approved and prepared by chefs
. Each has 30 to 50 grams of protein per serving, making it super easy to hit those nutrition goals without any extra work in the kitchen from you. Once you decide, you’ll pick from a new rotating menu of over 100 dietitian- and chef-designed meals, including add-on options each week that are especially tailored to a high-protein diet.
Does Factor Offer Free Shipping?
Factor wants to reward adventurous (and healthy) eaters, by offering 50% off your first subscription box, plus free shipping. The offer is only valid for new Factor customers with a qualifying auto-renewing subscription purchase (and you’ll still get an $11 shipping fee on subsequent boxes).
Discover More Ways to Save With Factor
Factor offers year-round promotions and savings, so you should always keep an eye out for an opportunity to save some cash. First responders, teachers, medical providers, nurses, doctors, military members, and veterans can take advantage of the 
Factor Hero Discount
 to save 55% on their first order and up to 15% on every box for the first year. Save the most with Factor first-order discounts, and what all the fuss is about.
Get Workplace Meals, Delivered Weekly
If you own a business and are looking for a convenient, consistent, low-cost way to feed your employees, 
Factor has workplace meals
 available for delivery. With this program, you can have ready-to-eat meals available without needing to take up time with daily coordination—Facotr delivers weekly so you won’t have to manage individual lunch orders. Plus,with a rotating weekly menu with over 35 options, including high-protein, vegetarian, and gluten-free choices, there’s something for everyone on the team.
