Save this story
Save this story
In May, the
 
White House announced
 that its new app would be automatically downloaded onto the work phones of millions of 
government employees
. The problem: 
Federal workers
 hate it and can’t get rid of it.
Employees of the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), the State Department, and the Department of Labor (DOL), who spoke to WIRED on the condition of anonymity due to fear of retaliation, say that they were disturbed when the app appeared on their phones. Some attempted to delete it, but to no avail.
“I deleted it as a test and it came immediately back,” says an employee from the USDA.
The app, which debuted in March, promises a mixture of “real-time updates, live events, and direct access to the Presidency,” according to the 
White House website
. It is, apparently, the same version that is available to the public on the Apple and Google app stores. A button within the app allows users to 
“text President Trump,”
 which autofills a text bubble 
reading
 “Greatest President Ever.”
Under the “Social” section of the app, users can see posts from the White House X account, Trump’s own Truth Social posts, and videos shared on official TikTok and Instagram accounts, among other platforms. The “News” section of the app includes White House press releases, briefings, and fact sheets, as well as selected articles from Fox, Breitbart, Reuters, The New York Post, and other outlets, all of which paint a positive picture of the administration’s policies or attack Democrats.
“It’s shooting pure unadulterated propaganda into our veins,” says another government employee. “Maybe Fox’s editorial standards are too high.”
In Apple’s App Store, the app’s privacy policy links out to the 
official page
 describing the privacy policy for WhiteHouse.gov. At the bottom of the page, there is a section for the policies for the White House Mobile App that includes only an email address, and no details on the privacy or data policies for the app itself.
“The White House app does not require anyone to create an account or enter any data into the app, and any information on the app is safe and secure,” says White House spokesperson Olivia Wales when asked about whether there were concerns about the app being downloaded onto government workers’ phones. “Government devices typically include pre-installed apps that provide value to government employees' day-to-day work.”
In April, shortly after the app launched, 
cybersecurity experts
 flagged several concerns, including the fact that the app initially shared users’ locations and IP addresses with third parties. It was developed by an Ohio-based company called 45Press, which, according to its 
X account
, specializes in “expert WordPress development, design, hosting, ecommerce, and so much more.” According to the System for Award Management, which is used to track government contracts, 45Press received 
$1.5 million
, and was eligible to receive more than $8 million, in government contracts. The 
company’s founder
 also runs an X account described as “a website directory of historical and paranormal locations.” 45Press did not respond to a request for comment.
An investigation by 
NOTUS
 found that the app incorporated widgets created by a Russia-based company called Elfsight, which exposed the personal information of White House officials. Elfsight did not respond to a request for comment. At the time of this reporting, the 
White House said
 Elfsight had been made aware of this vulnerability.
This is particularly concerning as the app has appeared on the phones of State Department employees, one of whom tells WIRED that they, too, had attempted to delete the app, only to have it reappear.
“I removed it from my phone but within 24 hours it was back on there,” a State Department employee tells WIRED. “I’m somewhat concerned as all my work applications are on that phone. I know the Microsoft suite of work applications has a lot of protections built in but many of my foreign contacts use WhatsApp so we use that to communicate and I’m worried about the White House app vulnerabilities.”
A State Department spokesperson would not discuss the settings or controls of the app, but tells WIRED, “department-issued devices are configured to meet applicable federal security requirements.”
When asked about whether the State Department had concerns about the security of devices of foreign diplomats abroad, the spokesperson says the agency “takes cybersecurity and the protection of Department-issued devices seriously,” and that “any applications made available on Department-managed devices are subject to applicable federal security and risk-management processes.” The spokesperson would not elaborate on what security measures the State Department has taken.
A Department of Labor spokesperson referred WIRED to the White House’s comment. The USDA did not respond to a request for comment.
Several government employees tell WIRED they rarely use their government-issued work phones, so are slightly less concerned about possible security issues. Others noted that not every agency has made the move to push the app onto government-issued devices. An employee of the General Services Administration (GSA), for instance, says that they have not had the White House app installed on their government phone.
None of the the employees who spoke to WIRED say they are actively using the app. “Have not looked at it,” a DOL employee tells WIRED. “Will not look at it.”
