Buy Now
Multiple Buying Options Available
$899
 at Amazon
$899
 at Best Buy
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
8
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Great camera. Strong battery life. Solid performance. Qi2 25W support. Slick contextual AI features.
TIRED
Not much is new. eSIM only in the US. Secure face unlock still doesn’t work in the dark.
The hot pink
 Hibiscus color is dazzling, but is Google’s 11th-generation Pixel just another iterative upgrade, or does it dial things up to 11? Diving beneath the surface, we find a slightly better chipset and camera, faster wireless charging, a fresh batch of AI features, and not much else. Don’t get me wrong: This is a slick smartphone, perhaps the 
best Android phone
 for folks who are comfortable with Google and Gemini AI, but it’s only a very slight improvement over last year’s 
Pixel 10
.
Although it lands alongside the 
Pixel 11 Pro and Pro XL
, the Pixel 11 shares more in common with the new Pro Fold (review coming soon). The Pro models' more powerful camera system, with the gimmicky, glowing HiLight LED, is what sets them apart. The base model storage has finally jumped up to a more practical 256 GB, but that means the starting price of the Pixel 11 is $100 more than the 10 at $899 (not technically a price bump since the 256 GB model of the Pixel 10 was the same price).
Refinement has been the pattern in smartphones for the last few years, and the Pixel 11 does nothing to buck that trend. If you’ve got a 3-year-old handset and you’re in the market for a new phone, the Pixel 11 should be in the conversation, but if you’re looking for a justification to upgrade from last year’s Pixel 10, you won’t find it here.
Minor Makeover
Photograph: Simon Hill
The instantly recognizable design has been slightly refined; most notably, the pill-shaped camera bump is thinner and all-glass. Stick a case on the Pixel 11, and it will lie flat on a desk. It sports the same satin finish on the recycled aluminum frame and gloss finish on the glass back as last year’s phone, but with some fun new colors.
I was delighted to get Hibiscus (otherwise known as hot pink), but there’s also a more subtle Pistachio (warm green), and the usual Frost (white) and Obsidian (black). I’m sad they cut Indigo (surely everyone’s favorite from last year). Like Apple, Google seems to save the fun colors for the regular Pixel, and the Pros look more muted.
Despite a 6.3-inch screen, this is what passes for a small phone nowadays. Switching from last year's Pixel 10 Pro XL, I really appreciated how easy it was to handle the Pixel 11 one-handed. It’s a little thick, but it feels good in hand and has almost the same profile as the Pro, so you can use cases interchangeably. And I do recommend snagging a Pixel 11 case; I already scuffed the paintwork when I dropped it on the beach.
The screen is the same as last year’s: an excellent 6.3-inch OLED display with a 1080 x 2424-pixel resolution and 
refresh rates of 60 or 120 Hz
. It’s a shame Google didn’t upgrade to a variable refresh rate (1 to 120 Hz) since it can save battery life. It also defaults to 60 Hz, and you have to dip into the Display settings to toggle on the smoother 120 Hz. The display is plenty bright with a 3,000-nit peak brightness; I never found myself squinting. Side by side with the Pro, it’s not quite as bright or sharp, and it has larger bezels, but you have to look closely to see the difference.
The fingerprint unlock is as good as any, but Google’s Face Unlock still doesn't work in the dark, which will annoy any iPhone defectors. US buyers will also have to do without a SIM slot, as the Pixel 11 is eSIM-only stateside. Physical SIM cards make 
switching between phones
 more straightforward, but phone makers and carriers have made that process smoother with eSIMs than in the past. Sure, it’s much easier to pop a card in than to go through your carrier when traveling abroad, but 
setting up an international eSIM
 isn't that complex. Both have benefits, but with US phones and carriers embracing eSIM over the past couple of years, it's become a nonissue.
Power Up
The new chip, Google’s Tensor G6, is supposed to deliver 20 percent gains in power efficiency, 25 percent faster browsing, and 15 percent faster app loading. The Pixel 11 has 12 GB of RAM and 256 or 512 GB of storage. For everyday use, it feels fast and responsive. I had no issues with loading apps or scrolling web pages, and the camera app feels a bit faster. Compared with my Pixel 10 Pro XL, I also noticed the Pixel 11 notified and loaded video from my Nest video doorbell a second or two faster.
I put it through its paces with the challenging mobile game 
Wuthering Waves
. It was playable, but the action stuttered, and even on the Balanced (graphics and performance) setting, there were dropped frames aplenty during combat. After an hour, the Pixel 11 was warm, and the battery went from 40 to 26 percent. Less demanding games, like 
Mini Metro
 and 
Alto’s Odyssey,
 were fine, but dedicated gamers should still look elsewhere.
The 4,985-mAh battery is a disappointing 15-mAh jump over the Pixel 10, but Google claims battery life has improved 25 percent from 24 hours to 30 hours. I’m not sure it’s quite that much based on my first week of testing, but the Pixel 11 has seen me through very busy days without hitting empty, though I still think daily charging will be the norm for most folks.
The Pixel 11 charges at 30 watts wired (cable but no charger included), but support for Qi2 25W enables faster wireless charging. I recommend buying a 
Qi2 wireless charger
. The magnetic Pixelsnap (Google's version of Apple's MagSafe on iPhones) feels a touch stronger than the one in the 10-series, and it’s such a handy feature that saves you from fumbling with cables. Google has also expanded the screensaver so you can have a multiple swipe function on the nightstand, including clock, weather, photos, charging status, and smart home controls.
Google has also switched to a MediaTek modem in the Pixel 11. I wouldn’t normally mention a modem, but the Samsung variant Google used in last year’s 10 series was prone to draining the battery and not holding a signal terribly well. Anecdotally, the Pixel 11 does better in a few spots where I’ve traditionally had trouble with my Pixel 10 Pro XL, which is great news for when you want to use your phone for calls. Your mileage may vary.
AI Everywhere
Photograph: Simon Hill
Google’s phones have always been about software over hardware, but the real-world value of AI features comes down to context. If I have to go digging or remember that a feature exists, I probably won’t get much value from it. This is why Google weaves its AI into everything, rather than applying it as a layer on top. The latest Gemini Intelligence features extend Google’s lead in this space.
Rambler improves the Pixel’s voice-to-text, cutting ums and ahs and letting you draft messages conversationally. I didn’t like it as much as my colleague, but I’m not really a speech-to-text guy, and I have a Scottish accent that it sometimes picks up wrong. I use the Pixel’s Recorder app a lot and love it for instantly transcribing my interviews, but Rambler doesn’t show the text as you talk like Recorder does; everything pops up after you’re done, which I don’t like as much.
AI overviews pop up right there in the Messages app when someone texts with a meet-up request, and you can add it to your calendar, or if they have a restaurant suggestion, you can tap to open it directly in Maps. Gemini can also dig details like flight numbers out of your Gmail to share via Messages if you let it. This is quite handy.
Fans of Circle to Search will be glad to know you don’t even have to snap a photo anymore; you can open the camera app, hold down the nav bar, and circle anything in the viewfinder to get info on it. You can also get location-based suggestions on the lock and home screen, such as a shortcut to your loyalty card in Google Wallet when you’re in a relevant store or recommendations for what to order at a restaurant from Maps.
There’s nothing groundbreaking here, but features like Call Screen for screening spam calls and Now Playing for surfacing the name of the song you can hear are still there, and those are the kinds of things that I miss when I switch away from a Pixel phone.
AI is firmly embedded in Google’s apps, and there’s no switch to turn it off completely, but you can choose to turn off Gemini, cut its access to apps like Photos and Messages, and turn off features like Circle to Search. Most of the camera app AI options are exactly that: options. But if this all sounds gimmicky and the idea of an AI-infused phone gives you the creeps, the Pixel line is not for you.
Camera Magician
The triple-lens rear camera is one of the top reasons to buy the Pixel 11. The camera feels faster, with less processing delay than the Pixel 10, and you can snap a shot and instantly load it into the gallery. Spec-wise, it’s almost identical, with a 48-megapixel main camera, 13-megapixel ultrawide, and 10.8-megapixel telephoto for 5x optical zoom. The main camera sensor is larger, enabling slightly better low-light performance, and the digital zoom capability is up from 20x to 30x. The 10.5-megapixel front-facing camera is the same.
Screenshot: Simon Hill
Everything works beautifully. Most people probably only ever use the main camera and the selfie camera, and reviewers can get too far into the weeds, but the bottom line is that you don’t need a particularly skilled hand or eye to snap great photos with the Pixel 11. I really appreciate the telephoto lens. I rarely have a use for the ultrawide, but the telephoto is great for zooming in from a distance, and though the 30x zoom is digitally enhanced by combining multiple images, there’s no generative AI at work, so you get a real image.
The camera app is feature-packed if you want to dive in. The most notable new features are the Camera Looks, which are like filters you select before you snap a shot. Phone cameras are typically tuned a certain way—Google’s phones tend to be punchy and high-contrast with realistic colors, while Samsung saturates colors and Apple prefers brighter images—but Camera Looks lets you tweak that to opt for warmer colors or dial up the shadows.
1 
/ 17
Photograph: Simon Hill
Google Pixel 11, main camera
Magic Capture is a clever new feature that lets you hold your phone up at a party or event and record video and select still shots simultaneously, without having to watch through the viewfinder. It’s a nice way to be more in the moment, and a safer way to hand your phone off to Mum and maybe get decent photos back.
No one really needs to upgrade their phone every year or two. It’s only by skipping a few releases that you’ll feel a real difference, and this is especially true for Google's phones because so much of what makes them special is on the software side, and many of those features will make it onto older phones too, though they might take a while.
For slick software features and a camera that’s easy to get great results from, the Pixel 11 is tough to beat in this bracket. If you want performance, both the 
Samsung Galaxy S26
 and the 
Apple iPhone 17
 are superior. Unless you’re a keen photographer, I don’t see a compelling case for paying more to get a Pro model. The Pixel 11 is the value sweet spot in Google’s new lineup, at least until the A-series next year.
$899
 at Amazon
$899
 at Best Buy
