Buy Now at Green Chef
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
8
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Organic ingredients and independently validated gluten-free selections. Diverse food, sophisticated options, elegant simplicity in instructions.
TIRED
Prep times are a little longer than advertised. Will generate more dirty dishes than expected. Among the more expensive meal kits.
I am mean
 about fish. I grew up in the Pacific Northwest, where steelhead trout is an IYKYK religion, and I take it for granted that my salmon is better than your salmon. I all but gave up eating salmon while living on the East Coast, where acrid and mushy farm fish reigns.
And so it was a shock when HelloFresh’s organic meal delivery service, Green Chef, actually sent me wild-caught sockeye salmon. It was even more of a shock when I dug into the tender flesh of a (farmed) steelhead trout to discover it was flavorful, fatty, flaky, and subtle. These were, without question, the two best filets of fish that I've ever gotten from a meal kit, and I've 
tried and reviewed most every meal delivery service in existence
.
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Last year when I tested Green Chef’s meals, I focused on the meal kit's gluten-free options, for the simple reason that Green Chef is among the only meal delivery services to prepare its gluten-free meals in separate facilities—backed by a 
hearty validation
 from the Seattle-area Gluten Intolerance Group. More than half of Green Chef's meals are gluten-free as of August, mostly dishes like rice or quinoa that don't need gluten rather than pale imitations of gluteny things.
But on my most recent test of three meals and three market items this August, it was Green Chef's food sourcing overall that caught my attention—meticulous enough that I received a little apology note when my plum tomatoes weren't organic, a situation caused by an apparent shortfall of available organic Romas at the moment of shipping.
The proteins were flavorful. And even in August, the most difficult time to ship perishable food, my herbs and veggies had nary a wilted leaf—a difficult and rare achievement, especially for fresh herbs like the parsley in the gremolata for my Turkish-spiced steelhead trout.
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
At $14 a serving, Green Chef ranks among the more expensive meal kits (HelloFresh runs around $10–$12), and the 42-deep selection of meals doesn't match middle-of-the-market meal kits like HelloFresh and Marley Spoon, which each offer 100-plus. But the recipes are thoughtful, and the care taken with its ingredients—especially for those with eating restrictions—makes it one of the tastiest meal kit options I've tried, without requiring long cook times.
Here's my experience with Green Chef, and how it works.
Cost per meal
$14 per serving on most plans, plus $12 shipping per week
Meal plan options
Three to eight meals per week; sized for two, four, or six people
Lowest-cost plan at full price
$96 (including shipping), for three meals for two people
Size of weekly menu
More than 40 options, plus salad-kit, protein, and smoothie add-ons
Gluten-free meals?
More than half the menu is certified gluten-free
Plant-based meals?
About a third of dishes are vegetarian. The vegan selection is more limited.
Other dietary plans/restrictions
A third of meals are dairy-free. A third are listed as low-calorie or low added sugar. Five to 10 keto offerings a week. Produce and eggs are organic unless otherwise specified. Allergens are clearly marked.
Prep time
20 to 45 minutes
The Nuts and Bolts
Like many other meal delivery services, Green Chef is subscription-based. After selecting your diet preferences, whether Mediterranean or gluten-free, you'll be asked how many people you're serving and how many meals a week you'd like to receive. Cost is straightforward: It's $14 a meal, plus $12 shipping per week. Generally, for first-time customers, you'll get 50 percent off the first week.
Also, as with HelloFresh's other meal kits, you can choose which day of the week you want your meals delivered. On the appointed day, a well-organized green box will arrive with recipes and most of the ingredients you need to prepare the meals. The exceptions are basic staples like oil, butter, salt, and pepper. Each recipe comes clearly marked with allergens, whether sesame or tree nuts.
Packaging and insulation are relatively minimal and mostly paper-recyclable, with the exception of two ice packs and the individual plastic packaging housing some produce and meat. Even in an August heat wave, my ice packs remained mostly frozen, and my meat remained at food-safe temperatures.
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Meat is stored up against the ice pack. Otherwise, each recipe is individually bagged in a paper bag, with recipe cards (and some other little marketing materials) on the top of the box, which means you won't have to sift around to find the proper ingredients. Most meals are advertised at around 30 minutes. Each will probably take you 10 minutes more than this to actually prep and cook.
Fair warning that Green Chef, like a lot of meal kits, makes liberal request of multiple mixing bowls for many recipes. A 
summer 2026 special deal offers two free Staub mixing bowls
 in addition to the usual trial discounts, making this a good time to sign up.
For gluten-free consumers, note that Green Chef is the 
first meal kit brand to be certified or validated as gluten-free
 by the Gluten Intolerance Group, one of few bodies that attempts to certify ingredients or restaurants as safe for the gluten-intolerant. In a conversation last year about the stringency of the validation process, GIG representative Christopher Lorenz told me his organization traces every ingredient used in Green Chef's meals, uses 
ISO-accredited
 in-person auditors, spot-checks and lab-tests delivery boxes for gluten, and also verifies that gluten-free meals are prepared in a dedicated facility.
Lorenz also checked for complaints and found that no one had filed a complaint that they'd been “glutened” by Green Chef during the years his organization had audited Green Chef's gluten-free meals.
Green Chef’s Food Is Mostly Organic, Delicious, and Varied
My testing last year showed that gluten-free meals from Green Chef were consistently among the most delicious I've tried from a meal kit claiming to offer gluten-free food—a low bar hurdled with aplomb. Rather than make pale imitations of gluteny things, Green Chef's meals were dishes that never needed wheat in the first place. This might include a kale and quinoa grilled chicken bowl with North African spice, steaks in red pepper sauce with green peas and rice, or a rice bowl topped with cabbage and honey ginger shrimp.
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
This year, gluten-free dishes included a lemon-oregano shrimp with schug and feta—a lemony-herbal romp served over rice livened up with dried apricots. (Adding dried fruit to liven up rice is a favored trick by Green Chef, one I might plan to add to my normal cooking routines.) The American-fished shrimp were plump and hearty, with no briny fishiness.
Yemeni schug remains one of my favorite condiments in existence, though this version could have been spicier. And the rice could have been more plentiful, perhaps. But these are small quibbles on a light, bright meal with lovely layers of flavor from herbal schug to toasted cauliflower and kale and the lightly tart bite of apricot.
I would almost never bring together this many ingredients on a weekday night, were they not helpfully bagged up in single portions. Indeed, if I tried, I probably would end up spending more at the grocery store than on the meal kit, 
as I discovered after an experiment last year.
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
But especially, I have been impressed with protein sourcing. A well-trimmed bavette steak last year came 
from a fourth-generation meat purveyor in Texas
. So did my chicken breast this year, on a harissa chicken dish. Shrimp are Atlantic coast, not Southeast Asian coast. My salmon was wild-caught. My steelhead came from a fishery in Norway. Each is clearly and transparently marked—a rarity among proteins from meal delivery services.
That steelhead in particular was among my favorite home meals of the summer. The dish's secret, again, was layering: earthy spice on the fish, citric accents and crispness on the gremolata. The pleasing chew of dates countered the soft give of ginger-spiced couscous.
While eating it, I actually felt proud of myself—though it only took a scant 40 minutes to make. If anything, this summer's meals were more sophisticated, but lower effort, than the Green Chef meals I tried last year.
Quibbles
Green Chef's recipe cards are thoughtfully designed, with helpful pictures guiding the way. But their format tends to separate out each prep step in full, carrying the entire step through to completion, whether veggie chopping or couscous cooking.
This makes sense, of course. But this does lead to a simple caution: Green Chef does not hold your hand as well as some meal kits as regards the best order of operations. Read through each recipe in its entirety before cooking, and decide your game plan.
I found that I could get quite close to the recipe's allotted cook time only if I planned ahead and thought through my order of operations so that baking, sautéing, and pot-cooking can all happen more or less simultaneously. Otherwise, if you operate sequentially, you may end up discovering that a recipe takes twice as long as advertised.
Other little quibbles are that the standard quarter-cup serving of rice can feel skimpy compared to most Americans' eating habits. And you will often need more dishes than you expect, leading to a bit of cleanup after roasting pistachios with one pan while steaming couscous in another, with steelhead in the oven.
I did not regret any of this when eating a many-layered bowl full of healthily plump shrimp or a tender-flaky steelhead or wild-caught salmon. Sourcing good ingredients is more than half the work when it comes to cooking a delicious meal. Cleaning up an extra mixing bowl feels like a small price to pay.
Love WIRED
? 
Add us as a preferred source on Google
 
to see more of us.
Buy at Green Chef
