Save this story
Save this story
Meta is testing
 
face-recognition software
 built by the United States military and regional police department supplier Rank One, WIRED found in an investigation this week. Meta has been exploring the possibility of adding face recognition tech into its smart glasses, and WIRED previously reported that 
the app for the glasses contained code
—now deleted—that would have enabled the company to activate face-recognition features on the devices.
Anthropic is 
still negotiating with the Trump administration
, after apparent White House concerns about the safety of new public model Claude Fable 5 resulted in Anthropic pulling the product off the market entirely. But security experts point out that AI models with advanced capabilities for discovering and exploiting software vulnerabilities—in other words, creating potentially dangerous hacking tools—
will be ubiquitous soon around the world
.
A leak exposed the identity of 
members of Peter Thiel’s secretive ‘Dialog’ society
 this week, revealing more than 200 prominent names registered for a retreat that includes panels on building a cult, sex, and prepping for World War III. WIRED also revealed the society has a 
secretive way of ranking its members
.
The United Kingdom 
will soon begin scanning the faces of asylum-seekers
 as part of age checks in spite of evidence that such age evaluation and verification tools are deeply flawed and can make mistakes with life-altering consequences.
In more uplifting uses of surveillance tech, Knicks fans around the world had a chance to watch Thursday’s ticker tape 
parade in New York City on traffic surveillance cameras
 thanks to livestreams from the artist Morry Kolman.
And there’s more. Each week, we round up the security and privacy news we didn’t cover in depth ourselves. Click the headlines to read the full stories. And stay safe out there.
Hackers Allegedly Publish Stolen Madison Square Garden Data
The hacking and extortion group ShinyHunters has been loudly proclaiming a slew of high-profile victims in recent months: including the education tech firm Instructure, causing 
disruption in thousands of schools
 in the process; the photography firm 
Kodak
; and a key European 
human rights organization
. This week, it also published data allegedly stolen from Madison Square Garden, according to 
reporting by 404 Media
.
The published data, allegedly comprising millions of records across 45GB of files, includes potential personal information from customers and references players and coaches from the Knicks. The data was published not long after the Knicks won their first NBA championship since 1973. A sample of the data reviewed by 
404 Media
 included one file purporting to include the names of “talent,” including Knicks members.
WIRED has recently reported on Madison Square Garden’s 
extensive use of surveillance technologies
, including face recognition systems. Alleged emails in the stolen data viewed by 404 Media include one man complaining about face recognition technology. MSG did not respond to the publication’s request for comment and after the story broke, a federal class action lawsuit was filed over the alleged data breach.
San Francisco Gay Bars Are Scanning People’s Faces on Entry
At least three bars in San Francisco's Castro district, the well-known LGBTQ region of the city, have been using face scanners at their entrances to collect detailed information on customers. The bars are using tech from Patronscan, an ID verification company, to collect facial images, names, genders, according to 
Gazetteer SF
, which went to bars using the technology. As well as the data collection, if staff at the bars spot customers fighting, being involved in theft, or other negative behaviors, they can log this in the system. Face recognition can then identify the person the next time they are at the bar. The recorded information can be shared as part of a “
safety network
” between other firms using the tech, creating a widespread surveillance network.
France’s Domestic Spy Agency to Drop Palantir Tech For French Alternative
For months, governments and companies in 
Europe have been ditching US technology
, citing surveillance and security risks. This week France’s domestic spy agency, the Direction générale de la Sécurité intérieure (DGSI), announced it would stop using Palantir’s data and AI tools in the coming years, 
replacing them with
 software from French firm ChapsVision. “We must use our own AI models,” French prime minister Sébastien Lecornu said. “We cannot rely on tools developed by foreign powers. France must have its own tools.”
While France has been 
particularly proactive in trying to remove US technology
 from its public institutions—going as far as building its own open source equivalents to Zoom and Microsoft Office—it is not the first European intelligence agency to snub Palantir for ChapsVision. Last month, Germany’s intelligence agency BfV 
said it would use the French technology
 instead.
Apple Plans To Tweak Private Email Tool—Making Its Use More Obvious
Apple’s 'Hide My Email' tool allows you to generate a random email address that you can use to 
privately sign-up to new websites and apps
, avoiding you handing over personal info to even more websites. However, the company is set to change the way it creates these email addresses. At present, they all use the @icloud.com domain. Going forward, as 
TechCrunch
 reported this week, Apple plans to use the domain: @private.icloud.com. The not-so-subtle change could make it easier for firms to detect people are using the privacy-preserving service and demand sign-ups with an alternative email address.
