Save this story
Save this story
HBO Max is
 not just for 
The Sopranos
 anymore (but it is the only place to stream 
The Sopranos
). Subscription video service HBO Max not only has 
The Sopranos
, but other content from the best entertainment libraries, including: Warner Bros., Discovery Channel, CNN, Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Animal Planet, and other brands.
We at WIRED also watch a lot of content—obviously, because we are always testing 
TVs
, 
soundbars
, and 
streaming devices
—and regularly round up our newest 
favorites from HBO Max
 so that you’ll know what to watch once you nab an HBO Max promo code. Whether you’re wanting to watch an HBO original series like 
Succession
 or a smash hit movie like 
Barbie
, HBO Max has the content you’re looking for, and WIRED has the perfect promo codes to help you save on these sometimes-pricey subscription plans.
50% Off HBO Max Promo Code for Students
Students rejoice, you don’t have to try to mooch off your friends’ parents' HBO Max subscriptions anymore when you want to rewatch Euphoria for the 15th time (...not speaking from personal experience or anything). HBO Max is offering a 
Student Discount
, where you can save and get 50% off subscriptions with a promo code. This means the price is only $5 a month. This discounted plan is eligible for The HBO Max Basic With Ads monthly plan, so you’ll get unlimited access to all of HBO, hit series, movies, news, sports, and more on up to two devices at once.
Save 35% by Bundling HBO Max, Disney+ and Hulu
This deal is honestly one of the best I’ve ever seen, and I’ve been thinking of switching as well, because with this 
Magic Bundle
, you can get HBO Max, Disney+, and Hulu for just $17 a month. (which is crazy because I pay that much alone for my Hulu! Again, I’m convincing myself while writing this that I should switch to this plan.) This crazy good deal is for those three streaming services with ads, but you’ll be saving 35% on the original price. If you’re impatient like me, you can get the same deal without ads for $30 a month, which is definitely higher than with ads but you’re still saving almost $19 a month with this Evergreen deal.
HBO Max Deals: Save up to $41
Like other streaming services, HBO Max has different tiers at different prices for streaming, so you can choose which one fits you (or your “household;” wink) best. Basic with ads allows you to stream on two devices at once in full HD for $10 a month. Standard is midrange, where you get everything from the previous basic plus 30 available downloads so you can watch on the go, for $17 a month. If you are impatient and a movie/TV buff, you might want to choose the premium, where you can stream on four devices at once, have 4k Ultra HD video quality, Dolby Atmos immersive audio, and 100 downloads to watch on the go for $21 a month.
HBO Max New Shows and Films
HBO Max is known for being one of the most heralded platforms in entertainment. These new shows and films on HBO Max are sure to be a hit too. We’re most excited for 
Task
, a new series set in the working-class suburbs of Philadelphia, where an FBI agent heads a task force aiming to end the violent robberies led by an unsuspecting family man. There’s also a new GOT spin-off series, 
A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms
, which premiered on January 18. Taking place a century before the events of 
Game of Thrones
, set in an age when the Targaryen line still holds the Iron Throne and the last dragon has not yet passed from living memory. There’s also 
Chair Company
 from the oddball mind of Tim Robinson, and 
IT: Welcome to Derry
, a spin off set in the 
IT
 universe for fans of horror.
And especially right now, several of my absolute favorite shows are returning for a brand-new season or their last season. Long-awaited season three of 
Euphoria
 returns, with more drug-fueled drama. 
Hacks
, the final season premiered and I’m going to miss the tumultuous relationships that orbit Deborah Vance’s solar system. Like everyone else, I’m libbing out every Thursday with the sexy doctors in 
The Pitt
. Please don’t go, I love you so. Plus, I’ve been loving the new Steve Carell comedy 
Rooster
, about a wholesome but goofy romance writer that begins a tenure at college.
I missed the GOT boat, and it’s a little too violent for me, but my brother recommended 
A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms
, the newest 
Game of Thrones
 spinoff that’s a little lighter and more family-friendly than the first and I think I’m becoming a late bandwagon-er. There’s also 
The Dark Wizar
d, an in-depth four-part documentary about extreme climber Dean Potter that I have in my queue for next weekend.
Watch Live Sports at HBO
If you’re a sports fan, HBO has the best selection of sports programming, including the NHL, NCAA March Madness, MLB, U.S. Soccer, NASCAR, Unrivaled, Roland-Garros, college football, and premier cycling events. So whether you want to see the live Yankees game, or highlights of College football, you won’t miss an action-packed moment with HBO.
