Save this story
Save this story
If you’re looking
 for home and office furniture that will be part of your life for the long haul, Herman Miller is a go-to for well-designed, long-lasting furniture. Whether it’s upgrading your work-from-home setup with a better office chair or amping up your curb appeal with stylish new house numbers, Herman Miller can help. There are several pieces from Herman Miller that we love here at WIRED: the Herman Miller Embody is our “buy it for life” 
office chair
, while Herman Miller’s Spout Sit-to-Stand 
standing desk
 is where I’m currently writing from. The brand is known for its thoughtful, high-quality pieces, but that quality level comes with a price tag to match. Luckily for you, you can pick up your own Herman Miller pieces for a little cheaper thanks to a Herman Miller promo code or a discounted Herman Miller bundle.
25% Off the Herman Miller Summer Sale
The 
Herman Miller Home Office Sale
 is maybe (actually, most likely) the best time to get huge savings on home office essentials like decor and furniture, including their famous, best-selling office chairs. This sale runs through July 29, and you can save up to 25% on select home office items. (Discount applies to merchandise only, excluding Gift Cards, taxes, and shipping, and is nontransferable and cannot be combined with other promotions or discounts, nor applied to past purchases or future deliveries.) During the sale, you can save hundreds of dollars on typically expensive investments, like 25% off the Aeron or Embody 
office chairs
 or gaming chairs, 20% off 
monitor arms
, and more.
Herman Miller Promo: Save 15% on the Better Home Office Bundle
Refreshing your office? Say no more. Herman Miller has a 
bundle, aptly named the Better Home Office Bundle
, that lets you bundle your choice of office chair, desk, and third item (a storage option, table lamp, or office accessory) to get 15% off the entire purchase. Use the Herman Miller promo code 
BUNDLE15
 once you’ve put all three items in your cart.
Claim Free Delivery on Herman Miller Orders Over $2,000
Need it delivered? Get free delivery with the Herman Miller promo code 
FORYOU
 for any purchase over $2,000. You might worry you’ll need to purchase multiple items to hit that threshold, but many high-quality office furnishings (like 
our favorite office chairs
 from Herman Miller) will easily hit the minimum for you.
Unlock a First-Order Discount as a New Herman Miller Buyer
First-time shoppers at Herman Miller also get a special discount. You’ll need to sign up for 
Herman Miller’s newsletter
, but a quick newsletter signup is well worth a Herman Miller discount code.
Multiply Your Savings by Stacking Herman Miller Sale Offers
If you wish, you can get multiple discount coupons going at the same time on Herman Miller’s site. You can stack Herman Miller’s coupon codes—like the one you’ll get for signing up for the newsletter, or bundling three items together—with seasonal sales to get multiple discounts at the same time. Memorial Day is right around the corner, after all, and 
Herman Miller’s site already has sales going
.
Herman Miller Discounts: Save More with Refurbished Chairs
We named the Herman Miller Aeron 
office chair
 the “Best Office Chair for Long Hours,” because it's durable, supportive, and airy’ plus, it's also an iconic office chair that graces workspaces all over the world. A Herman Miller chair is an investment, which means it can get very pricey. That’s where 
Herman Miller refurbished chairs
 come in. They use genuine Herman Miller parts, including casters, tilt mechanisms, and Pellicle suspension material, which have been restored or replaced to original specifications. Each chair is backed by a five-year warranty, covering defects in materials and workmanship, with parts and labor included. And you can sit assured knowing that each Aeronchair has been rigorously tested to meet the original specifications for performance and ergonomic support.
Get the Best Gaming Chairs at Herman Miller
Herman Miller has some of our favorite office chairs, but also some of our favorite gaming chairs, including the Embody, Aeron Onyx, and Vantum gaming chairs. With an ergonomic design meant for sitting long hours, optional spine alignment and support, and adjustable height, these 
Herman Miller gaming chairs
 are ideal for all your gaming needs. Plus, the all-new Coyl is a streamlined gaming desk designed for happier, healthier play with Herman Miller Gaming’s first-ever desk.
