$2,200
 
$2,000
 at Best Buy (65-inch)
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
8
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Stunning picture quality. Low price. Easy setup. Gaming uses a high refresh rate.
TIRED
Remote is too complex. Picture quality settings can be hit or miss. LG Micro RGB Evo has better picture customizations.
RGB Mini-LED TVs
 have officially arrived, and Hisense's UR9 was the first to hit the market, followed by 
Sony's Bravia 7 Mark I
I and 
TCL’s RM9L
. I wouldn’t blame you if you weren’t jazzed to learn what the new display technology means, particularly if you were just getting used to terms like OLED, QLED, and 
art TV
. Thankfully, understanding why the Hisense UR9 RGB MiniLED is a step up in picture quality compared to its competitors is more about the experience it provides than knowing the technical terms.
Even so, the general function of 
mini RGB tech
 is not so difficult to understand: Traditional LED and QLED televisions achieve their bright and colorful images by shining white or blue LEDs through an LCD panel. The newer mini RGB works by emitting red, green, and blue lights, resulting in better color accuracy, excellent contrast and brightness, and finer control over color zones. LG and Samsung use new tech called micro RGB, claiming it to be more advanced than mini RGB thanks to smaller LEDs, although both achieve roughly the same result.
The UR9 is the flagship in Hisense’s lineup, but it isn’t priced that way at just $2,000 for the 65-inch model I tested. What you get with the UR9 is an improved picture quality compared to the brand’s other models, which are typically priced lower than sets from big names like Samsung, Sony, and LG. I’ve tested countless Hisense entry-level models over the years, including a few that had poor contrast and brightness, putting them more in line with TCL, Roku, and Amazon Fire TV bargain models that cost around $800.
Not the case with this gaming monster, with its unusual-but-welcome 180-Hz refresh rate (330-Hz variable) when you link a high-end computer to the DisplayPort connection on the side. Overall, I was impressed by the picture quality at this price point, even if the UR9 can’t quite compete with the latest (but pricey) Samsung and LG models that use micro RGB tech.
Standard Setup for a Unique Television
Photograph: John Brandon
The all-black, notably thin (only 1.8 inches!) UR9 comes with a stand that’s much easier to assemble than the 
Sony Bravia 7 Mark II
 RGB TV. Once in position on my stand, setting up the Google TV operating system was simple, save for dealing with a known bug with the Google Home app’s QR code that required manually entering my Gmail address and password. The UR9 uses Wi-Fi 6E, which is faster than Wi-Fi 6.
I found the UR9 remote to be unnecessarily complex with too many buttons. The mute button is located at the bottom right, which is nowhere near the volume buttons. It features more shortcut buttons than most TV remotes, including one marked Kids (for the Kidoodle app). There’s a customizable shortcut button as well, which I mapped to YouTube TV. There’s even a Google TV profile button that lets you switch accounts, even though most people will switch accounts using individual streaming apps. However, I did like the colorful, easy-to-spot shortcuts for Netflix and Amazon Prime because they are colorful. The remote is also nicely backlit and conveniently adjusts for ambient lighting in the room.
Photograph: John Brandon
The back of the TV features three HDMI 2.1 ports—an upgrade from many televisions that only have two. In addition to the aforementioned DisplayPort connector on the side, the UR9 also features an Ethernet port, optical audio out, coaxial, and two USB ports (for connecting a hard drive or charging an HD antenna). Oddly, there isn’t a 3.5-mm headphone jack on this TV.
The UR9 meets 100 percent of the 
BT.2020
 color gamut standard range. Picture-quality enhancements and settings are hit or miss here. I liked how a Motion Clearness setting made a soccer ball easier to see during a World Cup match. There’s also Dynamic Color Enhancer that lets you select the color space and adjust sliders; this worked well to help make several shows and movies appear more vivid. I don’t think the Blue Light setting, which is supposed to reduce eye strain, made a huge difference. Several other settings for smoother gradients or contrast only had a marginal effect.
Keeping Me Entertained
Photograph: John Brandon
Before getting into mini RGB display test results, here’s what I’d expect from one, compared to that of an OLED: OLEDs tend to have deeper blacks, while a mini RGB should provide more accurate and vivid colors, a higher brightness rating (usually 5,000 nits compared to around 1,000 nits for OLED), and excellent contrast. OLED televisions are coming down in price, hovering around $2,700 for a 65-inch. The UR9 is priced higher than some Hisense models, but it’s very reasonable for a mini RGB.
To test the UR9, I watched the movie 
The Last Duel.
 The mini RGB tech provided exceptional color, contrast, deep blacks, and brightness, rivaling what I’d expect from an OLED. After watching 
The Last Duel
, I jumped into my typical 
Spears & Munsil Benchmark tests
, hoping to verify some of the mini RGB advantages. Unlike with the midrange Bravia 7 Mark II, the skin-tone test on the UR9 showed a nice variation and excellent contrast. The demo reel results were likewise mostly positive: Mist over a snowy mountain scene was easy to distinguish, and the green grass behind a fence was mostly accurate, if slightly brownish. The 
Leica Cine Play 1
 projector rendered that same grass as a brighter green. A nighttime scene with dark trees in the foreground had amazing contrast with deep blacks. A red cactus didn’t look quite as red as I would have hoped, but the yellow flower was extremely vivid.
I had a blast watching some of my favorite movies that sometimes look washed out and gray on TVs with poor contrast; on the UR9, those films—
Awake
, 
Tron: Ares
, and 
The Creator
—looked vivid and clear. You can also use Theater Day or Theater Night mode to adjust the contrast, but I felt Filmmaker mode was more accurate.
I would say OLED televisions still have the upper hand on mini RGBs in terms of deep blacks that can make some nighttime scenes look more immersive. The color brilliance is also sharper and brighter on a home cinema projector like the Leica Cine Play 1.
Still, there’s a case to be made for mini RGB: The reds pop brighter. While watching 
Project Hail Mary
 in 4K on the Fandango at Home app, I was blown away by the stunning rings around a planet. The much more expensive 
LG Micro RGB Evo
 rendered that scene at about the same level of vividness.
Photograph: John Brandon
For TV viewing, I watched several World Cup matches. The red, white, and green jerseys popped nicely, and the crowd, green grass, and white soccer ball all had an exceptional clarity. A news broadcast on CBS didn’t look fake or overly saturated, while the same clip on a Bravia 7 Mark II looked a bit flat.
The UR9 is not considered an art television and doesn’t have wood bezels or a matte finish, but I was still impressed by an artwork mode (called a Screensaver). A ship on a blue ocean looked stunningly realistic and textured.
Game On
Photograph: John Brandon
Of the mini RGB models I’ve tested, the Hisense UR9 is the best choice for PC gaming if you use a high-end computer. That’s because you can connect using DisplayPort on the side of the television, which requires a special USB-C 40-Gbps cable.
I tested the UR9 with an 
Alienware 16X Aurora
 gaming laptop that uses an Nvidia GeForce RTX card. At the 330-Hz variable refresh rate (VRR), 
Crimson Desert
 played outstandingly, enlivening the game with more than rich colors. Every controller nudge felt immediate to me, especially when I tried 
Forza Horizon 6
 and 
007 First Light
 at the high VRR.
Not everyone has a high-end gaming laptop at their disposal, so I also tested an 
Xbox Series X
. My go-to game for testing realistic graphics is 
Senua's Saga: Hellblade II
. Unsurprisingly, the game looked colorful and vivid during an atmospheric ocean scene that looks washed out on most budget televisions. Even the grays and blacks looked rich and inky. Underwater segments in the game 
Subnautica 2
 had a compelling look, making the gameplay even more enjoyable.
The Hisense UR9 RGB MiniLED stands out in a crowded market of much pricier mini and micro RGB models. The picture quality settings were less impactful on the UR9 than on the LG Micro RGB Evo, which is higher-end and has far more customizations. However, the UR9 is a better gaming television with a 180-Hz refresh rate and a dedicated gaming port on the side.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
$2,200
 
$2,000
 at Best Buy (65-inch)
