Save this story
Save this story
Traveling can be
 complicated, especially if you’re planning a last-minute trip. Hotels.com has hotel deals at thousands of hotels around the world, plus special members-only pricing when you join the free OneKey rewards program. You can save on flights and transportation, too, so everything you need for your next trip is ready to go on Hotels.com. It’s easy to find a place to stay, and save some major cash in the process, especially with this Hotels.com coupon.
Save Big, With or Without a Hotels.com Coupons at WIRED
Right now, Hotels.com OneKey members can get up to 30% off their stay with deals on hotels or hotels bundled with flights. Savings get better the higher your membership tier, but even the free membership offers great pricing to guarantee a great trip before it even starts. But while Hotels.com deals are amazing on their own, nothing beats the savings you can get with a good old-fashioned coupon for Hotels.com.
Hotels.com Discount: 40% Off Summer Sale
If summer travel is on your horizon, be sure to check out Hotels.com’s 
Summer Sale
 flash deals and sales, which include: up to 50% off limited-time deals on select hotels for summer, up to 40% off popular hotels, hotels under $250, last-minute weekend getaways, and more. So whether you want to get away to Las Vegas, Orlando, or somewhere in between, there’s a discounted summer stay waiting for you.
Top Hotels.com Coupon Deals Verified by the WIRED Team
Be sure to check out Hotels.com often for a wide selection of Hotel.com coupons and other deals available for booking in 2026 and beyond. So whether you’re planning your next hotel stay for summer vacation, or need to book transportation for that upcoming wedding, a Hotels.com coupon can help you save on your next vacay. Plus, we individually check each Hotels.com coupon code on our site, so you can rest assured that each deal is vetted and been used, like Hotels.com promo code 
SUMMER10
, which is a currently working discount code.
Unlock Hotels.com Savings on Last-Minute Bookings
I’m always looking to become more spontaneous. But it’s difficult when booking at the last minute can be confusing or pricey. Not on Hotels.com, though! You can save 20% or more on spontaneous city breaks and last-minute getaways when you book travel within the next two weeks with 
these Hotels.com offers
.
How to Buy Hotels.com Gift Cards at 10% Off
Don’t know what to get the travel bug in your life? While planning a surprise vacay for them may not be the most practical gift, a Hotels.com gift card can be a thoughtful way to help ease the financial burden of their next vacation. Plus, you can save 10% when you buy a 
Hotels.com gift card
 of $150 or more.
Save More With Hotels.com Car Rentals
Vacation costs can add up quickly—booking a hotel is just the beginning. This summer, Hotels.com wants to make it cheaper to get out and hit the open road with a 
cheap car rental on Hotels.com
. Take a road trip or just get peace of mind for your next out of town trip and book a cheap car rental today, with up to hundreds of dollars in savings on top models and car types.
