Save this story
Save this story
Apple CEO Tim
 Cook’s final time hosting the company’s annual Worldwide Developers Conference (
WWDC
) is just about here.
The 
outgoing
 Apple leader will shepherd a keynote address announcing new software features for Siri, iOS, and Apple’s artificial intelligence efforts. It’s likely to be a final look at the company’s vision from the leader who focused on 
turning Apple
 into a dominant subscription business.
The WWDC keynote kicks off Monday, June 8, at 10 am PT (1 pm Eastern). You can watch the livestream right here on this page, or on Apple’s 
WWDC website
. It will also play live on 
YouTube
 and the 
Apple TV app
.
WIRED will be running a live blog, so you can follow along as it happens for a drip feed of the announcements. We’ll also have roundups of the changes coming to iOS, MacOS, and everything else Apple puts out there during the show.
As always for these events, the rumor mill has been churning. Here’s what to expect from Apple’s announcements at WWDC.
AI OS
As it does just about every WWDC, Apple is bound to announce new software operating systems for its products. These should all have the OS 27 moniker, as Apple recently adopted the car industry naming strategy of labeling its operating systems for the year ahead. That means iOS 27, macOS 27, watchOS 27, and so on.
Apple seems keen to boost performance across its operating systems, prioritizing fixes and stability over big new features. There are bound to be a bundle of AI infusions, branded as Apple’s Intelligence features. According to Bloomberg’s Mark Gurman, Apple is likely to introduce some new AI-powered features that let you create your own 
digital passes
 for events and split bills by 
taking a picture of receipts
.
Siri Supersized
Everybody’s waiting for the big Siri glow-up.
Apple’s virtual assistant has been the company’s 
problem child
 for a while now, frequently more frustrating than actually useful. It was supposed to be revamped with Apple Intelligence a few years ago, but was delayed. Now, at long last, Apple is expected to announce its big Siri update, boosted by a partnership with Google to infuse Siri with its Gemini AI.
Apple and Google’s partnership has been in the works since 2024, but neither company confirmed the details until a 
joint statement
 in January that spelled out a “multi-year collaboration” to boost Apple Intelligence features with Google Gemini. That statement also promised “a more personalized Siri coming this year.” WWDC seems like a good time for such news to come out.
AI boosts in Siri have already been very confrontational, like in May when Apple agreed to 
pay $250 million
 to iPhone 15 and 16 owners who had never gotten Siri’s long-promised AI smarts.
Last week, Gurman again 
leaked some details
 about Apple’s potential changes to Siri. These include a darker interface in a dedicated Siri app, a dedicated spot in Apple’s Dynamic Island at the top of iPhone screens, and the chatbot-like capabilities enhanced by Google’s Gemini AI. It sounds like Apple is doubling down on Siri and putting it front and center in the iPhone interface.
Apple Hardware
After its 
expensive misstep
 with the Apple Vision Pro, it’s possible Apple may tease something about its upcoming smart glasses, which have not been officially confirmed to be in production, but are 
expected
 to arrive sometime next year. Apple doesn’t usually show off new hardware at its developer conference, but it has happened before, as with the 
Vision Pro reveal in 2023
.
Apple may also announce a split-screen feature on its iPhones, which is neat, but perhaps more importantly, there’s a sliver of evidence that an Apple 
foldable device
 is coming later this year. Looking at Apple’s software tinkering is a decent way to divine what’s coming next, as its mobile operating system 
already has software
 features that could support a folding device.
There don’t seem to be any new Mac computer announcements on the way, but those are more likely to come at Apple’s fall events anyway. There have also been rumors about Apple 
putting cameras into its AirPods
. There might be a tease for that, but it’s unlikely.
