Save this story
Save this story
As they say, the only things you can't escape in life are death and taxes. Doing your own taxes has only gotten easier over the years but it’s still plenty confusing, especially with both federal and state rules and rates always in flux. To help you figure out this confusing process, I’ve written a guide on 
How to Pay Your Taxes Online
 and to the 
Best Tax Services
. In these, I included 
H&R Block's DIY and Assisted Services
, along with other competitors to give you more information as you navigate between the seemingly endless options available for your specific tax needs. Tax day may not be until April 15 but as we all know too well, that date comes around quickly each year. With that in mind, now’s a great time to start getting your affairs in order.
For 70 years, H&R Block has stepped in to help with tax preparation services that aim to make things as painless as possible. H&R Block has its classic in-person help from a tax expert along with easy-to-use online tax services that you can complete online while in your pajamas. We here at WIRED love to help you save money too, and that’s why we have rotating deals and H&R Block coupons to help ease the pain of tax season a little more.
Save Over 25% on DIY Online Filing (Plus Pro Tax Review)
If you want to save coin by filing yourself, but don’t want to leave it up to chance, getting a Pro Review of your taxes can help you save big while providing peace of mind. You can do your taxes online, and then once you’ve filled out the info, have the 
H&R Block Tax Pro
 check, sign, and file for you! This service can be super helpful for those unsure of their taxes, like first-time filers or those with more complicated tax situations, as the expert reviews to catch any errors and maximize refunds and savings. Plus, you can connect with your Pro all online, either via chat or virtual call (no need to stop by a store). This service starts at $55 and $0 per state filed (it was originally $75 and $0 per state filed).
I Tried H&R Block’s Assisted and DIY Tax Services. Here’s Who’ll Benefit From It
Filing taxes is a pain. Here’s how H&R Block DIY and Assisted performed against other services I tested.
By 
Molly Higgins
Can I File My Taxes for Free at H&R Block?
H&R Block knows taxes are confusing, and the process is one that no filer looks forward to. That’s why H&R Block eases some of the tax filing woes by offering 
H&R Block Online Free Edition
. Over half (around 55% of filers) qualify; this service is for simple taxes only, meaning Form 1040s and no schedules except Earned Income Tax Credit, Child Tax Credit, Student Loan Interest, and Retirement Plan Distributions. File your simple state return for free on H&R Block today.
Photograph: Molly Higgins
Save to wishlist
H&R Block DIY
Shop at
H&R Block
How Much Does H&R Block Charge?
H&R Block has different tiers depending on tax filing needs, so you can pick the 
online filing
 option that works best for you. The free online option is best for simple returns, with $0 per state filed. From there, deluxe starts at $48 for federal plus $49 per state filed, which includes itemized deductions and free tax Pro review. Premium is now only $80 plus $49 per state filed, and also includes investments and free tax Pro review. Plus, they have an option for self-employed folks and business owners, whose taxes can be complicated and costly. That service includes 1099 forms with expenses and includes free tax Pro reviews, and costs $96 right now, plus $49 per state filed.
How to Pay Your Taxes Online
Paying US federal and state taxes online can be confusing, and one wrong move can result in penalties or extra money owed. We break it down so you can have the most worry-free tax filing possible.
By 
Molly Higgins
