Save this story
Save this story
A lot of
 the 
best meal kits
 offer the satisfaction of making a home-cooked meal, the chance to learn a little culinary craft, maybe even a chance at some pride in your handiwork. 
Hungryroot (7/10, WIRED Review)
 isn’t really like that. Hungryroot instead wants to replace your trip to the grocery store with a few good recipes.
After starting as a grocery service, Hungryroot spent years piecing together proprietary AI long before AI became the byword of everything from your electric shaver to your 
literal kitchen sink
. What Hungryroot’s AI does is geared to creating personalized food menus and shopping lists, based on your every micro-preference and whim, whether that’s a love of olives or a hatred of figs. A box then shows up at your door, with a mix of basic provisions, silly snacks, and desserts, along with recipes and usually some pre-prepped ingredients.
Cooking is often more assembly, with recipes pieced together from premium ingredients you’d expect to find at your local organic store. A fun sauce here, a pre-cooked protein there, a corn tortilla that just wants to be livened in the pan. Most meals come together in 15 or 20 minutes, in my experience—unless they need time in the oven. A bot concierge and pre-mixed sauces do cost a bit, however, and that’s where Hungryroot promo codes come in. There are Hungryroot coupons that offer 30% off or more, and Hungryroot coupon codes that offer extra free gifts for every box, for life: a protein here, a cookie there. Here’s what’s up.
Get 30% Off Plus a Free Gift With a Hungryroot First-Time Discount
The current 
Hungryroot discount code
 is good for a cool 30% off your first week’s box from Hungryroot. To qualify for the discount, you’ll need to sign up for a plan totaling $99 or more a week, including breakfast items, snacks, and produce in addition to recipes and ingredients. The Hungryroot promo offer also includes a free gift, which usually includes an option to get an extra premium protein like chicken or beef. You can see more 
information here
.
Take Advantage of Hungryroot Coupons for Referrals
Like a lot of meal kits, there’s also a 
Hungryroot discount code
 for referring your friends to the Hungryroot service—and this usually benefits both sides of the equation.
Your friend who orders after using your referral code gets a cool $50 off their first grocery delivery of $100 or more—which adds up, potentially, to half off. The person who refers their friend also gets $50 off their next order, once their friend finalizes their first grocery delivery of $100 or more. So basically, everybody gets $50.
Follow 
this link for info on the Hungryroot referral program
. Unlike other offers, the referral credits seem to be stackable with other offers—so you don’t miss out on any discounts by taking a referral.
Take Advantage of Hungryroot Coupons for New and Returning Customers
Most subscription services have hidden levels. The way to access them is to change your mind a lot. Just like some magazine subscriptions and almost all delivery meal kits and grocery subscription services, Hungryroot will chase you down with offers if you cancel a subscription or change your mind after already giving them your email.
What’s this mean? Usually, it means that in the days or weeks after changing your mind about Hungryroot, you’ll get a coupon in the mail. So if you take Hungryroot’s quiz about your dietary preferences, then don’t order? A few days later, you’ll likely get a sweet Hungryroot coupon code in your inbox. New subscription plans usually also come with free treats.
If you cancel or pause an existing account, you may also receive a Hungryroot promo code offering your $50 or even $100 off your next order, as an incentive to return.
Hungryroot retention offers will be different for each customer vary per customer, because offers are usually customized to previous orders—or the answers you gave on Hungryroot’s culinary preferences quiz.
Get Free Gifts for Life With Hungryroot
New HungryRoot customers almost always will get a promo code for a free gift. In some ways, choose carefully: This gift remains steady, as a “lifetime” offer. Generally you’ll choose among fresh produce, a premium protein, or just some tasty pre-packaged snacks. These will keep arriving with every delivery: Make sure it’s something you like! Click 
here for more information about free Hungryroot gifts.
