Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Amazon Prime Day Deals
Yeti Cooler Deals
Oura Ring Deals
Apple Deals
Tech Deals
Fitness Deals
Deals Under $100
Apple Watch Deals
Headphones Deals
Vacuum Deals
Air Conditioner Deals
Hydrow Deals
Save this story
Save this story
The newest iPad
 in the lineup just so happens to have gotten the largest discount for Amazon Prime Day this year. Apple refreshed the 
13-inch iPad Air
 with the M4 chip just a few months ago and already the price is down to $700. That's $100 off retail, and it's by far the best Prime Day deal on an iPad.
The deal is on the Space Gray model and comes with 128 GB of storage and 12 GB of unified memory. That extra memory—up from 8 GB in the previous generation iPad Air—combined with the M4 chip offer as much performance as you'll ever need in an iPad.
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Save to wishlist
Apple
iPad Air (2026, M4)
$938
 
$849
 
(9% off)
 
Amazon
$949
 
Apple
But really, this is the iPad for people who might occasionally need a bit more from their device. For example, you might want to try your hand at some more graphically intense games or even just get some work done while you're traveling. The iPad Air can handle this in a way that the standard iPad can't.
If that's your intent, getting the 13-inch model is important, too. That extra screen real estate really brings the brilliant screen of the iPad to life and allows you to spread out your windows a bit more. And yes, you heard that right. In the latest official iPadOS release from 2025, you can now drag windows around for proper multitasking, and the larger display makes that more useful.
Save to wishlist
Apple
iPad Mini (2024, 7th Gen)
$499
 
$400
 
(20% off)
 
Amazon
$499
 
Walmart
$499
 
Apple
The iPad Air isn't the only iPad on sale for Prime Day, though. The next best discount is on the 2025 iPad mini. It's also down $100, bringing the price to $500. That's the cheapest it's been in at least the past few months. Unlike the iPad Air, this is purely a content consumption device. It excels at those times when you want to lean back on the couch or by a pool. As a tablet that's small enough to use one-handed, it's a great reading device, too.
The other two iPads in the lineup don't have as big a discount. Both 
sizes of the iPad Pro
 are $100 off, but that's what they normally sell for. The same is true of the base 11-inch iPad, which is a standard $50, 
selling for $299
. There's nothing wrong with these iPads per se—in fact, the base iPad remains the 
best overall iPad
 that I think most people should buy. It's simple, but that's where the iPad shines as a tablet.
The iPad Air and iPad Pro, on the other hand, both really need accessories to make them feel like a complete product. Speaking of which, there are a number of my 
favorite iPad accessories
 on sale for Prime Day that are worth checking out, too.
iPad Accessory Deals
Apple Magic Keyboard for 13-inch iPad Air for $279
: There are tons of iPad keyboard cases out there, and many of them are good. But only the Apple Magic Keyboard truly elevates the iPad experience. The magnetic design means it's dead simple to add or remove the iPad, while the tiled angle is perfect for quick touches or swipes. It even adds an extra USB-C port for good measure.
Lamicall Gooseneck iPad Holder for $19
: iPads are great as secondary devices at your desk, and this clamped iPad stand as great for space savings. The unique design lets you twist it around to any angle or position imaginable. You could even clamp it to your nightstand for some late-night movie-watching.
Astropad Rock Paper Pencil V2 for $38
: As good as the Apple Pencil Pro and iPad are, it'll never feel the same as writing on paper. If you're an artist or illustrator, that paper feeling is essential—and that's what the Astropad Rock Paper Pencil is good for. It's a screen protector that gives a rougher touch when using it with the Apple Pencil.
Make sure to check our list of the 
Absolute Best Prime Day deals
 for more verified discounts on the gear we recommend.
