Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Amazon Prime Day Deals
Yeti Cooler Deals
Oura Ring Deals
Apple Deals
Our Favorite Espresso Machine Is on Sale
Deals Under $100
Apple Watch Deals
Headphones Deals
Vacuum Deals
Air Conditioner Deals
Smart Bird Feeder Deals
Beauty Tech Deals
Save this story
Save this story
If you're over
 seeing announcements about Amazon's Prime Day sale and Amazon's own on-sale devices, I can't blame you. It's everywhere these days, and every website is trying to replicate the sale. If you're feeling like you want to escape from the Amazon ecosystem grind, though, I've got an idea (and a sale!) for you.
One of the biggest markets Amazon has changed is book shopping. (I'll always miss my beloved Borders bookstores.) If you'd like to get your reading experience away from Amazon, you can put the 
Kindle
 deals down and start shopping for a whole different 
e-reader
. There's an excellent option for you that offers a better price for 
a color screen
, comes with page-turner buttons, 
and
 can double as a digital notebook.
What gadget is that, you may wonder? It's the Kobo Libra Colour, and it's not the only e-reader the brand has on sale.
The Best Color E-Reader Deal
Photograph: Nena Farrell
Video: Nena Farrell
Courtesy of Kobo
Save to wishlist
Kobo
Libra Colour
$260
 
$230
 
(12% off)
 
Kobo (E-Reader Only)
$330
 
$270
 
(18% off)
 
Kobo (With Stylus)
$260
 
Amazon
The Kobo Libra Colour is 
my favorite color e-reader.
 It has a colorful 7-inch screen with an adjustable warm front light, and 32 GB of storage to hold hundreds of books. I really like Kobo's e-readers, and you'll get all the features you'd find on a Kindle: a dedicated store to buy e-books, a membership (
Kobo Plus, starting at $8 a week
) you can join to get access to a library of e-books and audio content, and the ability to add library books right onto the device.
But what I especially like about the 
Kobo Libra Colour
 is how many more features you get for a price similar to the Kindle Colorsoft. Both have color screens, but the Libra Colour has page-turner buttons and a thicker side with said buttons, making it easy to hold and control your pages (no more rapidly tapping around your screen to find your page). I also love that if you purchase the 
Kobo Stylus 2 ($70)
, it can double as a digital notebook. I really like that you can annotate your books on the page with Kobo, which Kindle doesn't allow you to do.
Kobo recently raised its prices, so you're not getting as much of a discount as you used to. But that's also why I'd jump on this sale now, so you don't have to pay the new price tag instead of the cheaper one.
Another On-Sale Kobo
Save to wishlist
Kobo
Clara BW
$160
 
$140
 
(13% off)
 
Kobo
$140
 
Amazon
Looking for something a little cheaper, and aren't married to a color screen? Kobo's Clara BW is also on sale.
The Clara is smaller than the Libra Colour, with just a 6-inch black-and-white screen, but it has an adjustable warm front light. It's similar to the Kindle Paperwhite in that sense, but it's the size of the basic Kindle. It's not on as big a discount as the Paperwhite, so that one is a better buy if you're open to any black-and-white e-reader, but if you're looking for a cheaper way to get out from under Amazon's boot, this is a great option.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
