Save this story
Save this story
Layla mattresses let
 you flip between a softer or firmer side, depending on your needs, making it a versatile bedding brand that appeals to many different types of sleepers. We’re testing Layla’s 
bamboo sheets
 at the moment, and I can report that they’re ridiculously silky and breathable. If you’re looking for everything you need for a restful snooze—a 
mattress
, 
sheets
, 
bedding
, 
mattress toppers
, 
sleep masks
, and 
pillows
—you’ve come to the right place because we’ve got Layla coupon code options and Layla promo codes to help you save big below.
Score $10 off Your First Order With a Layla Sleep Coupon
If you’re brand new to the world of Layla and want to stay in the loop about the latest offerings, sign up for their email list. Once you do so, you unlock a Layla mattress coupon; first order is $10 off with it. Plus, you’ll be in the loop for any additional promotions happening that you can take advantage of.
Photograph: Layla
Save to wishlist
Layla Weighted Blanket
$220
 
Layla
Save 20% Instantly: Layla Promo Code for Military, Teachers, and Nurses
For those on the lookout for a Layla coupon code, 
military discount
, or even just a good deal, I have good news for you: here’s all three. For special customers, you get an instant 20% off at checkout once you verify your active status. This discount isn’t just for active military, but also for teachers, nurses, and first responders. Now’s your chance to rest and restore after a hard day’s work, saving lives and educating the next generation.
Photograph: Layla
Save to wishlist
Layla
Two-Sided Foam Mattress (10-Inch)
$949
 
Layla
Earn up to $260 Off When You Refer a Friend
Friends always keep each other in the loop on the latest updates in their lives, so if you're Team Layla and want your loved ones to be, too, listen up. Your friend can get up to $260 off when you refer them; either $260 off the Layla Hybrid or $210 off the Layla Memory Foam. Call it the “
friends and family discount
,” if you will.
You’re not getting the short end of the stick with this deal, either. Once you successfully refer someone and they complete their 120-night trial with their new Layla mattress, you’ll get a $50 Visa Prepaid Card to put towards a mattress, or a $10 card to put towards accessories.
It’s Time to Switch to Bamboo Sheets. Here’s Where to Start
Bamboo makes some of the softest bedding you can find. Here’s how it’s made and how it’s different from cotton and linen bedding.
By 
 Nena Farrell 
Enjoy Free Shipping This Month
We all know how shipping costs can make or break your order decision, so some good news for Layla customers in the contiguous US: shipping is free. There’s no Layla mattress promo code you need to enjoy this, or a minimum purchase you have to make. It’s just an extra detail to give you some peace of mind as you get ready to make a big purchase (or, finally, splurge on some new sheets and pillows!)
The Truth About Adjustable Mattresses and Smart Beds
Why the terms “smart bed,” "adjustable mattress," and “adjustable frame” are not interchangeable, and how to avoid an expensive mistake.
By 
Julia Forbes
