Save this story
Save this story
LG makes some
 of the 
best TVs
 you can buy. Its 
OLED TVs
 in particular are perennial favorites at WIRED, with C-series models like the C4 (
9/10, WIRED Recommends
) providing among the best performance for your dollars on the market. LG is about way more than TVs of course. The Korean brand offers multiple products across the A/V landscape, from 
soundbars
 to 
Bluetooth speakers
, along with a host of other products to upgrade your home setup. Save over 40% with LG promo codes and online exclusive discounts on home appliances, gaming monitors, and more tech.
Save 20% With Today’s LG Promo Codes
If you’re looking to save on LG gear today, you can get up to 20% back on your first order with 
select eligible products
 when you sign up for LG rewards with your email address. Simply go to the 
My LG Membership rewards page
, follow the instructions to sign up and save.
If you’re ready to check out one of those TVs mentioned above, LG’s C4 and the ultra-bright step-up model G4 are both eligible right now in 77-inch sizes. Otherwise, there are plenty of other products to shop currently on sale that you stack with MyLG Rewards for 5% back and points on every purchase.
We’ve Got an LG Secret Coupon at WIRED
We love LG products, and we know you do too. This tech is oftentimes the priciest investment you’ll make in your household. So, we snagged an 
LG secret coupon
 for you, which gives 5% off your next purchase. Although it doesn’t sound like much, with a bigger appliance purchase like a laundry set or range stove, this can add up to hundreds of dollars in savings. All you need to do is sign up to become a member, and you’ll get 5% off your purchase—but act quick, the offer is only good for 24 hours.
Save $800 Off New LG TVs
If you’ve been wanting to upgrade, now's a great time to get a new TV that will last for years to come for way less than usual. LG has tons of new TVs and smart screens, and you can get up to a $210 Sling credit when you buy, and free installation. You can get savings on select LG OLED and QNED Mini LED TVs or StandbyME 2 Portable Touch Screens. This deal is only good through June 21, so act soon.
Right now, you can get a 77 Inch Class LG OLED evo AI G5 4K Smart TV 2025 with Supplied Wall Mount for a whopping $800 off. The 
LG G5
 has “Brightness Booster Ultimate,” which magnifies each individual pixel for remarkably luminous detail, has “Bright Room Ready” which ensures it performs great no matter the room or the lighting, AI processing, and over 8.3 million self-lit smart pixels. Plus, it has a five-year panel warranty and OLED Care+.
Watch for LG Fridge Deals and Price Drops
One of the most sought after appliances from the brand is the 
LG fridge
. While we don’t have any set LG promo codes and discounts for refrigerators now, be sure to check back often and track price changes on these sought-after powerhouse appliances. The 
Counter-Depth French Door Refrigerator
 is a sleek, three-door stainless steel machine with a fancy ice maker and luxe mirror design. The 
Side-By-Side InstaView Refrigerator
 is the fridge of the future, with a translucent door to easily see what’s inside the fridge without having to open the door. The simple 
Single Door Refrigerator
 features a clean, compact design and easy-to-reach organization.
Students, Teachers, and First Responders Get a 10% Off LG Promo Code
Looking for further discounts? If you’re a teacher, student, or first responder, you could receive an additional LG Promo Code for more savings. To see if you’re eligible, simply click on the 
LG Appreciation Program link
 and follow the info to register your account. Exclusive discounts include free installation on refrigerators, cooking ranges, and washer/dryers, including select LG Studio and LG Signature appliances. You could also get year-round savings on LG products with a minimum guaranteed discount of 10% compared to sale prices you’ll find on their website.
Get up to 20% Back With MyLG Rewards or 5% Off Referral Code
With MyLG Rewards, you can get up to 
20% back in rewards
, as well as exclusive deals, extended warranties, and free installation. Eligible rewards members can get an additional 5% off LG products if you refer a friend or loved one with the 
LG Referral program
 when they make an eligible purchase of $200 or more. They’ll get 5% off, and you’ll earn 5,000 MyLG Rewards points, so it’s a win-win. This coupon is stackable with other promotions too, so you can still take advantage of the many other featured discounts.
