Save this story
Save this story
L.L. Bean is
 famous for its outdoorsy appeal, ranging from outerwear and supplies to withstand the elements to laid-back lifestyle products. The company was established in 1912 by Leon Leonwood Bean in Maine. It remains headquartered there today, continually rolling out revered classics and updated essentials for today’s nature lovers. Take the 
Bean Boots
: what started as L.L. Bean’s premier product ultimately helped shape the brand into what it is today. This definitive 
shoe
, which can be worn on hiking trails and rain-slicked city streets alike, has remained true to the original version. If you’ve ever wanted to capture the essence of being a rugged Mainer or recreate a cozy cabin at home, here are plenty of L.L. Bean promo code options at your fingertips.
Get 10% Off Your First Order With an L.L.Bean Promo Code
You may bemoan email updates, but in terms of sales, this L.L. Bean coupon is a pretty low lift. Sign up for email updates from the company, and you get 10% off your first order. This offer is valid only once per email address, so choose your purchase wisely.
Take Up to 75% Off Outdoor Gear in the L.L.Bean Sale Section
Sales mean stocking up, especially on outdoor equipment and 
camping supplies
 ahead of your next adventure. Whether you’re about to take up fishing and need supplies, or have Noah Kahan concert tickets in sight and want extras from his 
L.L. Bean collaboration
 collection for the event, all of that is available to you. You can save 75% off these L.L. Bean sale items, no promo code needed.
This is a different sort of two-for-one special: twice a day, L.L. Bean posts new sales at 6 AM and 2 PM sharp, Eastern time. While the 
two-a-day daily markdown
 is not super expansive in terms of inventory up for grabs, what is posted for sale usually comes at a heavily discounted price akin to deals you’d see on Black Friday.
This L.L. Bean sale is like an online treasure hunt. The 
daily markdown sale
 involves a new deal posted daily from 6 AM to midnight Eastern time. Inventory leans toward gear, such as backpacks, blankets, and shoes.
Military, First Responders, Medical Workers, and Students Can Save an Additional 10%
Being in the medical field or a first responder can often be a tough, thankless job. But, there’s a special L.L. Bean sale for 
medical workers
 and 
first responders
 so that you can stock up on supplies for when you rest and recharge in your down time. Use the L.L. Bean first responder discount for 10% off—be sure to verify your license status through SheerID.
L.L. Bean military discount offers 10% for 
military personnel
, current or former. This discount also applies to family members—if you or a family member would like to partake, verify your status via SheerID.
Teachers deserve their (wild)flowers. To make sure you have what you need for your next outdoor adventure and say thanks, you can get 10% off with the special L.L. Bean 
teacher discount
. 
College students
, there’s also the L.L. Bean student discount where you 10% off, too. To redeem either of these discounts, make sure to verify your teaching or student (or both!) status via SheerID.
10% Off L.L Bean Legendary Canvas Totes
We love a 
tote bag
. It doesn't collapse under pressure, doesn't mind getting dirty, and, most importantly, carries your baggage. No matter what you need a good tote for, you’ll need something spacious, wipeable, and tough enough to survive TSA. You’re in luck, L.L. Bean has durable canvas totes handmade in Maine. Plus, you can customize your bag with a personal monogram or bag charm to make sure it stands out on the conveyor belt or on the beach. When you sign up for the L.L. Bean newsletter, you can save 10% on a custom 
L.L. Bean boat and tote bag
.
