Save this story
Save this story
Chances are that
 when you google “mattress store near me,” one of the first results you will see is Mattress Firm. This brick and mortar titan carries both established mattress brands like Serta and Sealy, as well as many online brands, like 
Purple
, letting you go see for yourself if it’ll be the mattress for you. And if you were looking for an excuse to hop in the car and head over, we have a Mattress Firm coupon available right now, as well as tons of Mattress Firm promo codes to save big on those big (and small) purchases. Fingers crossed that you could start sleeping better, potentially as soon as tonight.
$700 Off Summer Mattress Firm Sale
Sleeping hot or uncomfortably in this summer heat? It may be time to invest in a new mattress. If you’re in the market for an upgrade, now is a great time to buy and save a little on that big investment—and I’m talking about both the mattress and your future sleep. The 
Summer Mattress Firm Sale
 has tons of great deals, like a free adjustable base with purchase, beds under $500, and a whole clearance section with hundreds of dollars in discounts. Some of the best deals I’ve seen so far during the sale are $450 off the DreamCloud PressureSmart Technology Plush Pillow Top Mattress with a free adjustable base when you use Mattress Firm promo code 
ELEVATE
, and the Sealy Frisco Medium Euro Pillow Top Mattress for half off. There are tons of other massive discounts, and a whole section of clearance items on markdown that you should check out for even more mattress and bedding savings.
Get 15% Off When You Sign Up for Emails
To make sure you never miss out on Mattress Firm discount codes, you can sign up for email notifications. By doing so, you automatically get one! You can get an extra 15% off on your first order. Heads up that it can’t be combined with other coupons, nor can it be applied to specific brands and models, including Nectar, Purple, Sealy Hybrid, Tempur-Pedic, Stearns & Foster, and Serta iComfort.
Score Up to $300 in Instant Credits and Gifts
Mattress Firm’s got a gift for you, just ‘cuz. For those eyeballing Tempur-Pedic, Sealy, and Sterns & Foster in particular, it’s your lucky day, as there are Mattress Firm coupon codes for all three of these brands.
Starting with Tempur-Pedic, when you buy a qualifying Tempur-Pedic mattress, you can receive a $300 Instant Credit on these adjustable bases: Tempur-Ergo, Tempur-Ergo Smart Base, Tempur-Ergo ProSmart Base, Tempur-Ergo ProSmart Air Base, or the Sealy Ease Base. Use code 
TEMPURGIFT.
 You can also get a $300 credit toward these same adjustable bases when you purchase a qualifying Stearns & Foster mattress: use code 
STEARNSGIFT
 at checkout.
Lastly, if you wanted to pair a 
Sealy mattress
 with the Sealy Ease adjustable base (or any of the aforementioned adjustable bases), there’s a Mattress Firm coupon for that, too. Use code 
SEALYGIFT
 at checkout, and get a $200 Instant Credit on select Sealy and Tempur-Pedic adjustable bases.
Take 20% Off With Military, Medical, Student, or Teacher Discounts
Sleep is a necessity for everyone. But for those who work all day on their feet, and have to be dialed in at all times, sleep is critical. This is especially true for first responders, nurses, doctors, and medical professionals. As a way to say “thank you” for all that you do, there’s a special mattress firm discount just for you. Use the 
Mattress Firm first responder discount
 for 20% off select purchases. It’s for one-time use, but renews every 90 days when you re-verify your status.
For military members, as a way to thank you for your service, you can use the 
Mattress Firm military discount
 for 20% off select purchases as well. It’s a one-time use code, but re-verify your status every 90 days, and you can get a new one!
If you’re a teacher or student, there’s also a Mattress Firm discount for you, too. To help you bounce back after long days teaching, or late nights studying, use this 
Mattress Firm student discount code
 for 20% off select purchases. Like the first responder and military coupons, it’s a one-time usage code that can be renewed every 90 days when you re-verify your status.
Don’t Miss the Mattress Firm Clearance Sale
As we said (and you know), buying a new mattress is one of the most expensive—and important—investments you can make. Shopping the 
Mattress Firm clearance sale
 is a great way to save majorly, with deals like almost 40% off a DreamCloud PressureSmart Technology Firm Mattress, over 60% off a Sealy Frisco 2.0 Firm Mattress, and more.
