Save this story
Save this story
The Maytag Man is one of the most enduring characters in American advertising, lonely because no one needs his help repairing a Maytag appliance. The Maytag brand, too, has endured—going back to the days when Frederick Maytag’s washers involved wooden tubs and cranks. Maytag was the first company to put an agitator at the bottom of a washing machine, a design still in use today, and it was the first to stack a washer and dryer, and 
one of the earliest adopters on smart appliances
. But mostly, the brand has eschewed novelty and staked its claim on durability and reliability for its heavy-duty dishwashers, washers, dryers, refrigerators, and ovens. This is true even as Maytag folded into ownership by former competitor Whirlpool.
Maytag remains one of the few appliance companies to offer 
10-year limited warranties on essential parts
. But Maytag promo codes are a bit more ephemeral, offering short-term deals on appliances that will hopefully last a decade. Here’s how to get a Maytag coupon code and Maytag promo codes, and find closeout deals on last season’s Maytag appliances to save even more.
Save Big With Maytag Appliance Closeout Deals
One of the easiest ways to find a deal on Maytag appliances is to look at the overstock and closeout deals, which offer significant markdowns on last season’s items as Maytag looks to clear out space for the new models. These deals do not require a Maytag coupon code, but they do require knowing where to look. Go to the 
Maytag outlet site
 for appliance closeout deals. These deals generally last only until supplies run out.
Select Customers Can Get a Special Maytag Promo Code
Like many big companies, Maytag offers 
professional discounts f
or military, first responders, healthcare workers, students, and teachers. To receive up to a 15% 
discount for active military, veterans, and spouses,
 you’ll need to create a Maytag account and then verify your military status using the SheerID program. Maytag 
first responder discounts
 and 
healthcare worker discounts
 also require SheerID verification. There’s also 
a discount program for both students and teachers,
 including a teacher savings program and up to 15% off sitewide. Verified students are able to access pricing unique to students, when moving into their first off-campus apartment.
Work Smarter, Not Harder With Maytag Smart Appliances
Maytag is also offering deals on select smart appliances. As of early April, this includes a somewhat unique 
combination toaster-microwave that’s about $100 off MSRP
, and a 
slide-in electric range with smart connectivity
 that’s on a steep discount to $1,260—hundreds of dollars less than even other recent sale prices. You can check out the special Maytag deals on connected and smart appliances by scrolling down to the bottom of 
Maytag’s smart appliance page
.
Get an Extra Year of Coverage With Maytag
If you’ve been wanting to upgrade your home with some new appliances that are built to last, now’s a great time to do so. For a limited time, when you buy select Maytag appliances, you can receive an additional year of the standard one-year manufacturer’s warranty, now for two years of coverage. Plus, this is on top of the 10-year limited parts warranty, so you get extra piece of mind. Eligible categories include: dishwashers, ranges, cooktops, microwaves, ovens, laundry machines, and refrigerators, and this Maytag promo is valid only for purchases made directly from June 1 to June 30. For more information visit the 
Maytag product warranty
 page.
