Save this story
Save this story
Dyson's vacuum lineup
 had a new look 
planned for this year
. Some of the vacuums have already arrived, like the 
Dyson PencilVac
 and 
Dyson Spot+Scrub robot vacuum
, but others we've still been waiting to see. That wait is over as of this month, as Dyson has finally dropped the rest of its anticipated models.
Dyson now has three new cordless vacuums you can shop, plus one with a Submarine head variant: the 
Dyson V16 Piston Animal ($980)
 and 
Dyson V16 Piston Animal Submarine ($1,100)
, the 
Dyson V10 Konical ($500)
, and the 
Dyson V8 Cyclone ($400)
. On top of the other vacuums the brand has launched this year, Dyson's lineup is bigger than ever.
Here's what's different about each of the new models, what's still to come, and whether or not it's time to start shopping for a 
new Dyson vacuum
.
Table of Contents
AccordionItemContainerButton
The Dyson V16 Piston Animal
Dyson V10 Konical
Dyson V8 Cyclone
Time to Buy?
The Dyson V16 Piston Animal
Courtesy of Dyson
Dyson calls the 
V16 Piston Animal ($980)
 its most powerful cordless vacuum yet. It has 315 air-watts of suction power and a new Dyson Hyperdymium 900-watt motor. There's a new cleaner head—the All Floor Cones Sense—with conical brush bars that look a bit like the PencilVac Fluffycones, with a similar design and color scheme. The All Floor Cones Sense head also promises to detect changes in floor type and respond automatically (hence the “Sense”). It also still comes with the Fluffy Optic cleaner head for hard floors, as seen on the 
V15 Detect and Gen5detect
.
The V16 Piston Animal also has a debris bin that can compress dust and debris, allowing it to hold up to 30 days’ worth. It also has an emptying mechanism now that lets you push out the debris, making it easier to empty. Dyson has promised a self-emptying docking station for this model, but it's not yet available; Dyson says it'll be available to purchase in the future.
There's also a 
Submarine variant that retails for $1,100
. That version adds on a wet roller head similar to the V15 Detect Submarine, but Dyson says this version has new hydration control technology for more targeted water use while cleaning, and a boost mode when you're dealing with stains.
Dyson V10 Konical
Courtesy of Dyson
The 
Dyson V10 Konical ($500)
 is Dyson's first self-emptying vacuum, but the massive docking station you'll sometimes see it photographed with—the auto-empty Dok, which will retail for $150—won't be available to purchase until August.
The Konical is otherwise a cheaper option with its lower power of 150 air-watts and only the new All Floor Cones cleaner head. It's not the same Sense cleaner head you'll get on the more expensive V16 Piston Animal, and it doesn't come with the Fluffy Optic head either. It does still come with two other attachments, but it's a pretty minimalist set of options compared to 
other Dyson models
. It has a run time of 60 minutes and HEPA filtration.
Dyson V8 Cyclone
Courtesy of Dyson
The least expensive of Dyson's newest vacuums is a revamp of an old favorite. The updated 
Dyson V8 Cyclone ($400)
 promises 30 percent more suction power and a full hour of run time over the older Dyson V8. It also has 150 air-watts of power like the V10 Konical above, and switches to a button to power it on and off instead of a trigger you have to hold.
You'll get even fewer attachments with this one, and no new cleaner head; it has the older Motorbar Cleaner head like 
the V15 Detect
, and only comes with a crevice tool. Still, if you want something affordable without being outdated, this is a great price for a Dyson vacuum. It'll also be compatible with the same auto-empty Dok as the V10, which will be available in August for $150.
Time to Buy?
With 
Amazon Prime Day around the corner
 and these new vacuums available, I'm also expecting better sales on 
older Dyson vacuums
 like the Gen5detect and V15 Detect. It's up to you if you want to snag an older model for a better sale price or if you want to splurge on a new model. You can also wait to see if these new models go on sale this month, but the odds are low; they'll likely be on sale for this fall's sale events instead.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
