Save this story
Save this story
Meta launched its inaugural AI image model from the 
Meta Superintelligence Labs
 on Tuesday, its effort to compete with the likes of 
OpenAI's GPT Images 2.0
 and Google's 
Nano Banana 2
 in the AI image generation race.
The new model, called Muse Image, rolled out with deep integrations woven into the Instagram app. As part of this update, public 
Instagram
 profiles are now automatically opted into being fodder for generative AI remixes. All someone has to do is tag your account’s profile in a prompt—if it’s public—and they can use Meta AI to generate an image using your likeness.
Meta
 positions this feature as a cheeky way to personalize generations with images of real people. "Whether you want to design a custom event invitation, mock up a collaborative creative concept, or generate a personalized graphic, tagging a username lets Meta AI use public photos to build a visual that’s ready to post,” reads one of Meta’s 
announcement blogs
 about the new AI tool.
If you want to avoid these AI generations of your Instagram posts, without switching your account to private, you’ll have to dig into the app’s settings. Open the Instagram app, tap your 
profile,
 and then tap the 
three lines
 in the top-right corner of the screen. Then, scroll down to the 
Sharing and reuse
 tab. Here is where you should see a section labeled 
Allow people to use your content on Instagram and with AI features on Meta
, with a toggle for 
Posts
 and one for 
Reels
.
When I checked my personal account on Tuesday afternoon, the settings had not yet been updated to include this new language.
Instagram’s help center site includes 
more details
 about how this feature will impact users, saying that “people may be able to create content with your Instagram content using AI features at Meta” if you leave your account public and on the default settings. (A previously archived version of this page from 2025 does not include similar, AI-focused language.)
While switching your account to private or adjusting your settings will prevent additional images from being generated, already existing AI images made with your content will not be deleted.
It’s also notable that Instagram users may be remixing your images using AI without your knowledge. “You will not be notified about content created using AI features at Meta,” reads the company’s help page. Of the numerous aspects of this rollout that make me uncomfortable, not even getting a notification when someone does this seems like the biggest red flag of all.
Even though it’s overwhelming just how often companies require you to 
opt out of AI training
, rather than opting in—just like how 
Google Search now stores
 media uploads, like from reverse image searches, to train its AI—as the default option for consumers, this new toggle is worth switching off immediately if you want to avoid additional generations based on your Instagram photos and videos.
