Save this story
Save this story
Microsoft has announced
 some 
long-awaited updates
 to its 
Surface Laptop and Surface Pro devices
, both of which are being refreshed with the latest Qualcomm Snapdragon X2 chips. The company hasn’t given specific names to this new generation of devices, but this is technically the eighth-generation Surface Laptop and 12th-generation Surface Pro.
These new 
Qualcomm
 chips have been slowly rolling out on various 
Windows
 laptops throughout this first half of the year. 
Microsoft
 says the new chips provide “up to 53 percent faster graphic performance than the previous generation,” as well as 15.5 hours of battery life.
While these chips are certainly impressive in the testing I’ve done (whether that’s the Snapdragon X2 Elite or Snapdragon X2 Plus), the real story here is the accompanying price hike.
The new Surface Laptop starts at $1,599, a $600 increase over the $999 starting price of the previous generation, which was known as the 
Surface Laptop 7th Edition
 when it launched in 2024. That initial $999 price was then officially increased a couple of months ago, bringing it up to $1,499. That increase was shocking enough at the time, but the new price feels even worse, as the new Surface Laptop is not only more expensive but comes with just 256 GB of storage—half as much as the previous generation. Microsoft discontinued the 256-GB version of the Surface Laptop late last year, but apparently now it’s back.
All the models do still come with 16 GB of RAM. But with the new 
Dell XPS 13 returning to 8 GB
 as a starting configuration, I wouldn’t be surprised if Microsoft follows suit on its 
budget-tier Surface Laptop
 later this year.
The Surface Pro’s new pricing is just as hard to swallow. That machine also started at $999 last year, then went up to $1,199 in early 2026 when Microsoft cut the 256-GB model. The new starting configuration costs $1,499 while the storage has dropped back down to 256 GB. And of course, that doesn’t include the 
price of the detachable keyboard
.
Microsoft isn’t alone. Other 
Windows laptops
 sporting the latest silicon from Intel or Qualcomm have been priced quite high, while previous-generation laptops have stuck around in retail channels. The prices provide a snapshot of how strong of an effect the 
component supply shortage
 continues to have on the PC industry, where RAM and storage prices remain dramatically inflated.
Many of my favorite things about the Surface Laptop are still in place, whether that’s the taller 3:2 aspect ratio display shape or the supreme detachable keyboard. But the only other changes in this year’s Surface devices are some new colors. There’s a new greenish color option called Jade for the 13.8-inch Surface Laptop, while the Surface Pro now comes in a goldish Dune color.
The new Surface Laptop and Surface Pro are both available starting today.
These new Surface devices are the follow-up to Microsoft’s flashier announcement earlier this month, the Surface Laptop Ultra. That one is based on the anticipated 
Nvidia RTX Spark chip
, which is coming out later this year and will serve as the company's proper MacBook Pro alternative.
