Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Amazon Prime Day Deals
Apple Watch Deals
Headphones Deals
Mesh Wi-Fi Router Deals
Oura Ring Deals
Vacuum Cleaner Deals
Beauty Tech Deals
Walmart Deals
Deals on Power Banks
Smart Bird Feeder Deals
Deals Under $30
Action Camera Deals
Save this story
Save this story
There's an undeniable
 upward trend for laptop pricing. But it's 
Prime Day
, and that's a time for exceptions to this pattern. I've been checking prices on all 
my favorite laptops
, and there's one clear winner for Prime Day this year: the 
Surface Laptop
.
Despite suffering official price hikes earlier this year, it's now down to just $835, which is $515 cheaper than what it's usually been sold for over the past few months. That's a fantastic deal, especially in 2026.
Photograph: Brenda Stolyar
Save to wishlist
Microsoft
Surface Laptop 13.8-inch (7th Edition)
$1,350
 
$835
 
(38% off)
 
Amazon
$1,500
 
$1,180
 
(21% off)
 
Best Buy
$1,600
 
$1,168
 
(27% off)
 
Amazon (15-inch)
This model came out in 2024, and comes with 16 GB of RAM and 256 GB of storage. While that sounds old, I wouldn't call this outdated in the least bit. The newer model, which uses the 
Snapdragon X2 chips
, only came out a couple of weeks ago and costs nearly twice this much. But this model gets really solid performance and has a long-lasting battery.
Regardless of which version you get, the chassis is nearly identical. It's supremely designed and well-built, featuring a thin profile, one of my favorite keyboards, and a haptic feedback trackpad. It's very MacBook-like in its approach to simplicity.
Its standout feature in my book, though, is the 3:2 aspect ratio display. That shape means it's taller than the average 16:10 laptop, giving you more vertical screen real estate to work with. That might sound counterintuitive for certain tasks, but I've found it to be quite useful. No matter what work you do on your laptop, having more vertical space on your screen will likely enable you to see more and do more. The display also has a 120-Hz refresh rate, which makes animation and motion look much smoother. That's a feature not even the 
MacBook Air
 has.
The downside with this deal is that you don't have an option here for different colors or configurations. The $835 deal is on just this one particular version of this laptop. If you want more storage, for example, you'll be paying hundreds of dollars more. But there's no question that this is the best laptop being sold at this price right now.
For more laptop deals, read my collection of the 
Best Prime Day Laptop Deals
 that I've seen so far.
