Save this story
Save this story
The Motley Fool
 is the O.G. stock and investment advice website, dating to the early days of the Internet 
when WIRED’s website was still called hotwired.com
. Started as a tip sheet in the early ‘90s by brothers Tom and David Gardner, it rode a wave of hype to become a cult phenomenon viewed with equal interest and skepticism by the established investment class. Thirty years and a whole bunch of books later, The Motley Fool now feels like the established investment class, with a Stock Advisor subscription service offering stock tips that were shown in 
a 2017 study led by Penn State
 to consistently beat the S&P 500.
Subscriptions to the basic Stock Advisor tips come at a quite reasonable price per week, but more sophisticated analysis is also available for professionals and high-volume investors at premium prices. Luckily, new subscribers usually can gain access to Motley Fool promo codes and introductory pricing. Be sure to check out our regularly updated Motley Fool discount codes and Motley Fool coupons to save big now for your future.
Get the Best Motley Fool Promo Code in 2026
The Motley Fool is not a single service. Rather, it’s a suite of stock tips and analysis services, packaged in different bundles. The three main tiers are Stock Advisor ($199), Epic ($499), and Epic Plus ($1,999). Each higher tier 
offers a greater number of stock tips per month,
 access to more complete data and research on potential investments, and more sophisticated analysis tools. The Epic Plus tier also offers access to “moneymaker” investment portfolios touted to follow Warren Buffett’s investment strategy. Generally, the site advises beginning investors with smaller portfolios to stick to the basic Stock Advisor tips to start out. The Fool also tends to recommend buying at least 50 stocks, and holding them for at least 5 years, so it’s not a day-trading tool. Anyway, it’s often hard to find the right links to receive Motley Fool membership discounts. Go 
to this Motley Fool subscription discount page here
, for as much as half off the Stock Advisor, Epic, and Epic Plus Bundles for the first year only.
Unlock Motley Fool Stock Advisor Promo Code to Save $100
The website tends to offer a wide range of Motley Fool subscription discounts, depending on what URL you reach. Honestly, it’s a little confusing (and maybe infuriating, if you accidentally paid too much.) Motley Fool’s most popular option, Stock Advisor, offers the fabled market-beating “Top 10 Stocks to Buy Now,” plus portfolio analysis, analyst news, and monthly stock rankings. The best Motley Fool Stock Advisor discount I’ve seen at the moment 
comes by locking in your subscription for two years at $149
 (as opposed to the nominal price of $199 per year.) Note that if you lock in a one-year subscription, Stock Advisor is yours for $99 a year, 
or $100 off.
Claim Your Motley Fool Discount to Get $200 Off the Epic Bundle
As a premium service, The Motley Fool offers an “Epic Bundle” meant to respond to the heavy concentration of the current markets in AI and AI infrastructure, robotics, drug discovery, and all that stuff we’re currently calling “the future.” The Fool also claims to have found a more defensive balance than competitors going all-in on the 
AI zeitgeist
 and probable 
AI bubble.
 Subscribers can choose among cautious, moderate, and aggressive risk profiles. This is a more expensive service than the basic Stock Advisor, at $499 a year. But with the introductory Motley Fool promo code 
EPICSALE
, you 
can try it for a year out at $200 off.
 It’ll renew at $499, though.
Check Out The Motley Fool Best Stocks to Buy Now
If you want to begin investing, but aren’t sure where’s the best place to start, I’d begin reading Motley Fool’s “
Best Stocks to Buy Now: Our Buy-and-Hold Picks
,” which gets updated monthly. Because there are thousands of publicly traded companies you can invest in, many investors don't know where to start. That, along with this year’s stock market volatility because of the Iran conflict, tariff uncertainty, and fears of a weakening economy, make things even shakier. But with this updated article folks can get insider knowledge to make the best financial decisions for their specific needs.
Get More Financial Advice With the Motley Fool Podcast
For better or worse, I’ve become a podcast person. Like so many people, I find them to be a great way to passively learn while doing other tasks. 
Motley Fool has a variety of podcasts
 to help you achieve your goals, or just find financial stability. There’s the Motley Fool Hidden Gems Investing podcast, which has new episodes daily at 4pm (Eastern time). This is a podcast for stock investors, offering a “long-term perspective on business news with The Motley Fool's investment analysts,” and the weekend episodes feature a mix of personal finance advice and longer-form interviews. There’s also the Rule Breaker Investing podcast, which airs on Wednesdays and features David Gardner, co-founder of The Motley Fool. During, Gardener shares his insights into “today's most innovative and disruptive publicly traded companies,” and gives advice on how every day people can profit from them using unorthodox methods.
