Save this story
Save this story
I recently took
 over testing for our guide to the 
best gaming headsets
, but before that, I purchased our top pick in March, with my own money, for $100. I've used it every day since. Right now, three of the four available color options are on sale. 
SteelSeries’ Arctis Nova 3P
 usually fluctuates between $110 and $90, so while $90 is still a decent price, snagging one of the less expensive color options, like white, makes the deal even better.
Photograph: Brad Bourque
Courtesy of Best Buy
Save to wishlist
SteelSeries
Arctis Nova 3P Wireless
$110
 
$79
 
(28% off)
 
Amazon (White)
$110
 
$90
 
(18% off)
 
Amazon (Lavender)
$110
 
$100
 
(9% off)
 
Amazon (Aqua)
$110
 
Best Buy
The Arctis Nova 3P works seamlessly with PC and most consoles. Note that the Xbox version will work with PlayStations, but the PlayStation version won't work with Xbox. Both versions are on sale (pick your version just below the price) and will work wirelessly or wired with computers, phones, and Nintendo Switch. I've tested quite a few headsets, and I have yet to find one I like more than this one. The battery lasts for around 35 hours for me. The mic sounds clear. The ear cups are supremely comfortable, and the whole headset is lightweight. My only gripe is that the pop cover on the mic seems to come off easily, but that also might just be user error. (I shake my head a lot while gaming due to my teammates—not at all my own actions.)
It can be a little tricky to swap between devices (like from a console to your phone to your PC again) if you aren't using the USB-C dongle every time, but it's not so cumbersome as to warrant an unenthusiastic recommendation. I've never used the app, but it has presets for different games like 
Fortnite
 or 
Grand Theft Auto
.
Alternatively, you can get the cheapest price by 
picking up the aqua color for $60 at Woot
 (an Amazon-owned discount store). Woot is trustworthy, but by purchasing there, you'll only get a three-month warranty instead of the standard one-year warranty. Either way, I think this headset offers fantastic value at full price. Picking it up for less is a no-brainer if you're in the market.
Power up with unlimited access to
 
WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore.
 
Subscribe Today
.
