Save this story
Save this story
With Prime Day
 in full swing, it's time to upgrade your home Wi-Fi network with 
Netgear’s Orbi 770 Series
. This is my 
favorite Wi-Fi 7 mesh system
 for most people because it's easy to set up and use, boasts stable and speedy performance, and delivers expansive coverage.
Netgear Orbi 770 Series Deal
Photograph: Simon Hill
Photograph: Simon Hill
Photograph: Simon Hill
Save to wishlist
Orbi 770 Series
$550
 
$425
 
(23% off)
 
Amazon (2-Pack)
$700
 
$570
 
(19% off)
 
Amazon (3-Pack)
$550
 
Netgear (2-Pack)
$550
 
$479
 
(13% off)
 
Best Buy (2-Pack)
Netgear's Orbi 770 Series
 is the sweet spot in its lineup for most folks. Refreshingly easy and impressively stable, it delivered Wi-Fi to every corner of my home and kept my demanding teens happy.
This tri-band mesh offers three bands (2.4 GHz, 5 GHz, and 6 GHz) as a unified network that’s available for devices and as backhaul (traffic between the main router and satellites). It is lightning fast at short range but also offers expansive coverage for more than 100 devices. A two-pack should be enough for modern homes of up to around 2,000 square feet, but larger, older, or more challenging homes may require three. Luckily, the three-pack is also on sale.
Photograph: Simon Hill
Handling four simultaneous movie streams and online gaming sessions with apparent ease, the Netgear Orbi 770 is easy to recommend. The accessible app shows connected devices, allows you to set up a guest network or IoT network, and offers a handful of analytical tools. The main router has a 2.5 Gbps WAN and three 2.5 Gbps LAN ports, while the satellites make do with two 2.5 Gbps LAN ports apiece.
Sadly, you must pay for a subscription if you want Netgear Armor, but this feature-packed security software includes Bitdefender Security and VPN service. It’s free for 30 days, then $40 for the first year, and $100 per year thereafter. Basic parental controls are free, but to set limits, track website and app usage, apply age-appropriate filters, and set bedtimes, you must subscribe to Smart Parental Controls for $8 a month or $70 a year after the 30-day trial. You can live without either.
Wi-Fi 7 support is widespread now, so snagging the Orbi 770 allows you to tick off Wi-Fi worries for the next few years. It is a supremely slick, set-and-forget mesh that’s robust, reliable, and rangey. And this Prime Day deal is the cheapest I've seen yet.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
