Save this story
Save this story
Nike has been
 having a bit of a comeback—“comeback” might be generous, but the sentiment is there. In 2024, the sportswear giant 
faced restructuring struggles
, accusations of sexism, and layoffs exceeding two percent of its staff. After difficult years marked by falling sales, poor innovation, and strained retail partnerships, CEO John Donahoe resigned, and company veteran 
Elliott Hill returned
 in his place. Under Hill’s leadership, Nike is shifting focus back to its core market, working to repair relationships with retailers, athletes, and creatives.
Despite these shortcomings, Nike remains one of the most popular brands worldwide. Having worked at a Nike outlet for a year, I can tell you that unless you need something immediately, paying full price is rarely worthwhile. Most Nike products eventually go on sale through seasonal discounts or promotions. And in the meantime, I’ve rounded up some of the current best Nike coupons and Nike promo codes to help you save.
Nike's New CEO Has One Hell of a Challenge Ahead
A ruinous pandemic business strategy, declining innovation, exodus of talent, and a “worst sneaker of all time” accolade has laid the world's biggest sports brand low.
By 
Amy Francombe
Score 15% Off App Orders With Our Nike Promo Code
Members get rewarded for shopping directly on the 
Nike app
. Once you log on to the app, you’ll automatically become a member. And if you use 
Nike promo code
 
APP15
, you’ll get 15% off your first app purchase and free shipping on orders of $50 or more. So whether you’re in the market for a new pair of Air Jordans or some new leggings for training for your next Marathon, you’ll want to take advantage of this deal.
Do You Need Waterproof Trail Running Shoes?
The idea of having warm, dry feet on your wet, snowy run is appealing. But you might not like the trade-offs.
By 
Kieran Alger
Celebrate With Nike Coupons For Your Birthday and Member Discounts Everyday
Nike offers a 10% birthday discount when you sign up on the website. You must be a Nike member and logged into your Nike account in order to redeem the discount. The minimum purchase is $100 and applies to the first $500 of a qualifying purchase. You can use it in combination with the Nike free shipping promo codes only. Nike members also receive exclusive access to certain products and member-exclusive sales and discount codes.
Remember earlier when I said Nike members get rewarded? Be sure to become a Nike Member before your birthday month to receive a special 
birthday Nike discount
. Not only will you get that birthday perk, but as a 
Nike member
 you’ll also get free shipping on orders of $50 or more, a free 60-day Wear Test to ensure the purchase is right for you, and returns with receipts.
Photograph: Chris Haslam
Photograph: Chris Haslam
Save to wishlist
Nike
Pegasus Trail 5 Gore-Tex
$180
 
REI (Men's)
$180
 
REI (Men's)
$180
 
Nike (Men's)
$180
 
Nike (Women's)
Nike Student Discount Code: 10% Off
All 
students
 over 16 in the US, whether you’re in high school, college, or a university, get 10% off at Nike, Nike.com. and in the Nike app. To get the Nike discount code, you’ll just need to verify your student status. To do this, you need to fill out a verification form, verify age, and you may need to provide documentation to verify your status. Once your status is successfully verified, you’ll be sent a single-use Nike promo code for 10% off most items. You’ll just need to make sure you're signed in to your Nike Member profile while using your Nike promo code. This 10% Nike discount code can be used on all sorts of the best Nike apparel and shoes, including the bestselling 
Nike Vomero Plus
 men’s running shoes that are full-stack, with ultra-soft max cushioning for enhanced comfort while running.
Nike Discount Programs: Teachers, Military, and Healthcare Works Get 10% Off
There are also other Nike discounts, like 10% off for military and spouses, first responders and medical professionals, and teacher discounts after verification. Check to make sure the items you’re shopping are covered by the discount; certain products, like Nike By You, gift cards, select launch and SNKRS products, and Apple products, are not valid.
Teachers
 get rewarded with 10% too, just follow the steps for verification status. All 
military
 personnel, including active, reservist, veteran, retired US military, and spouses and dependents of active personnel also get 10% off at Nike as a thank you for service. Plus, 
medical professionals and first responders
 are also eligible for 10% discounts; that means doctors, nurses, technicians, medical researchers, EMTs, firefighters, and law enforcement.
To get any of these discounts, you’ll need to verify with SheerID, where you’ll receive a single-use promo code that can be used once every seven days. Just be aware, the code expires after two weeks, but you can re-verify your identity to receive a new one.
Get 15% Off the Nike V5 RNR
The 
Nike V5 RNR
 just may be the hottest everyday shoe of the season. Stylish enough for streetwear, tough enough to withstand the daily grind, this Y2K inspired shoe has a chunky and lightweight foam midsole. So whether you want a Nike Men’s V5 RNR, women’s, or kid’s, the metallic details and a 3D Swoosh logo blend retro styles with modern sensibilities for an all-around solid shoe.
Trending Nike Styles to Score on Sale Today
Nike still outfits some of the top athletes in the world. If you’re a basketball player, I would say skip the Nike Dunks and get a pair of 
Kobe Protros
 like Caitlin Clark. If you’re a runner, Nike recently updated the classic running shoe, 
the Pegasus
. If you’re looking for a low-key street shoe that’s not an Adidas Samba, get the 
Nike Blazers
.
There are tons of Nike’s bestselling 
shoes on sale
 right now, including: Nike Dunk Low and Dunk Low Retro SE at 24% off (including multiple under $100 options), 24% off Zoom Vomero 5, 32% off Nike Free Metcon 6, and custom Metcon 10 for as low as $155. Plus, classics are also on sale, with Air Max 270 for up to 30% off, up to 33% off 
Air Force
 1 Low Retro, or Air Force 1 ‘07 LV8 for under $80. Be sure to check out these heavy discounts on tons of Nike styles, from classic to contemporary.
