Save this story
Save this story
Founded in 2008,
 Noom was launched as a human-to-human weight loss coaching service, which paired psychology-based methods with fitness and food tracking to help its users reach their weight goals. Since the rise of GLP-1 medications, Noom has also introduced a model that helps GLP-1 users taking WeGovy, Ozempic, Zepbound, or similar medications create sustainable lifestyle changes and healthy habits. It has also introduced the option for AI coaching. There are usually Noom free trials available, depending on which Noom Weight or Noom Med plan you choose, and a Noom promo code can help offset the cost as well. If you’re looking for a Noom coupon code, you’re in the right place.
The Best Noom Promo Codes Available Right Now
A Noom discount code can be used on the 
most popular Noom Weight programs
, which are available in lengths ranging from four to 12 months. The plans are automatically renewed and billed up-front. This plan includes habit tracking, optional coaching, and psychology-based lessons so you can meet your weight goals and feel good doing it. Noom also offers other plans for guidance and support around GLP-1 medication or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for menopause. These plans put you in touch with medical professionals who can assist in minimizing side effects and maximizing results.
Noom Coupon: Get $20 Off Microdose GLP-1 Program
Use a Noom coupon to sign up for the 
Noom Microdose GLP-1 program
 and you’ll receive a lower starting dose, which can help minimize side effects. Medications are prescribed to qualifying patients and are delivered straight to your door. Pair them with the Noom app for one-on-one coaching, tracking tools, and additional support. Right now, you can get the initial three-week subscription and four weeks of medication starting at $79 (plus tax), or at $199 per month (plus tax) for a 12-week subscription. A Noom promo code can make this program more affordable.
Noom Promo: Free Noom Trial
If you’re interested in sustainable weight loss, a Noom free trial might be helpful. The process of losing weight can feel endlessly daunting. I’ve personally lost more than 50 pounds in the last year, and none of it has been easy, least of which is figuring out what exactly I need to do to reach my goals in a healthy and sustainable way. Noom provides support at every stage, from coaching to meal tracking and more. The free week-long Noom trial can give you an idea of 
what to expect
, and you can cancel it at any time during the trial period. Afterward, it’s $17.42 per month when you choose the 12-month plan.
Noom GLP-1Rx Plus Limited Time Offers and Deals
Noom can provide 
GLP-1 prescriptions
 to qualifying patients, and while costs vary depending on your treatment plan and prescribed medication, access to GLP-1 meds starts at $99 regardless of insurance when prescribed. You can also gain access to GLP-1 medications like Zepbound and Ozempic starting at $69. A Noom promo code for GLP-1 medication might seem outlandish, but if you’ve been wanting to talk to a healthcare provider about it, Noom’s services might be what you’re looking for. Plans include coaching, habit tracking, and medical supervision, and you can add on extras like biomarker tracking. There’s even a dedicated GLP-1 AI companion with personalized protein and hydration guidance, workouts to help preserve muscle, and more.
Calculate Your Marcos Breakdown With Noom
One of the perks of using Noom is little things like their 
Macros calculator
, which helps you calculate your macros breakdown. This involves finding your daily calorie target and splitting it among protein, carbohydrates, and fats based on your specific goals. You’ll need to input information like weight, height, and more to begin. Calculating your macros breakdown helps you find the best balance for your body and body goals. Whether you want to lose body fat, build muscle, increase energy levels, or just ensure you’re getting the best nutrition for your health goals, Noom’s Daily Macros calculator is a good place to start.
