Buy Now
Multiple Buying Options Available
$250
 at Nyrius
$250
 at Amazon
$250
 at Walmart
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
8
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Simple to set up. Streams content perfectly in multiple scenarios. Useful streamer remote. Lets you control a computer from another room.
TIRED
USB ports for a keyboard and mouse on the receiver unit seem unnecessary. Both the transmitter and receiver run a little hot.
Cable clutter is
 more than just annoying—it’s been shown to raise stress levels. 
A famous 2010 study from UCLA
 found an association between household clutter and elevated cortisol levels. One peek behind my own 
TV
 stand raises mine. The Nyrius Phoenix Home True 4K60 is one attempt to solve this problem.
The Phoenix Home is designed to transmit an HDMI source—think an 
Xbox Series X
 or a 
Google TV Streamer
—across your room without needing to connect it directly to your television or 
monitor
. directly to physical cables. The kit includes both a transmitter (for the source video) and a receiver (that you connect to your TV or 
projector
), and transmits high-speed, lossless radio frequency signal between the two.
I tested the Phoenix Home True 4K60 over several months and found it to be a highly capable $250 kit that made cable management much easier.
Start Me Up
Setting up the Phoenix Home is remarkably easy. For the transmitter, you screw the two antennas into place, connect an HDMI cable to your source (like an Xbox or streamer), and plug in the power cord. The receiver is a similar story, only you connect it to your screen of choice. When I tried a Google TV Streamer, it worked right off the bat, connecting after only a few seconds.
The Phoenix Home transmitter only has one HDMI input for the source video and the receiver only has one HDMI out for connecting to a TV or projector. This was never an issue for me and kept things simple.
The transmission quality is frankly amazing. The Phoenix transmits in 4K resolution at up to 60 frames per second (fps) and supports Dolby Atmos, DTS, and 7.1 channel surround sound. It can transmit up to 500 feet away in clear areas with no obstacles, and 75 feet through walls, floors, and ceilings. That’s a better range than the more expensive options like the $450 
SIIG 4K HDMI Wireless Extender Kit
, for example.
The Phoenix Home transmitter also has a USB-C port that you might think is for connecting more devices, but it’s actually for controlling a computer wirelessly. You can connect a laptop over USB-C to the transmitter, then connect a mouse and keyboard to the receiver, and control the laptop remotely. I had to adjust the mouse speed, but it generally worked without any issues, allowing me to control a laptop that was physically in a totally different room. I imagine the USB ports would be helpful for school teachers, allowing them to control a slideshow or other apps. But for those who just want to stream video, it’s a bit unnecessary.
The transmitter and receiver also both have a port for an IR extender, which can be used for controlling a remote. An HDMI out lets you see whatever you are transmitting by connecting a TV or computer monitor, but I found that capability was entirely optional.
With everything connected—including the IR extenders, a keyboard, and a mouse—I was ready to start testing how it all performed for HDMI wireless transmission.
Testing Through Walls
Photograph: John Brandon
I used three scenarios to test the Phoenix Home True 4K. I started by playing games on my Xbox Series X and didn't noticed any lag or slowdowns. I completed a couple of chapters of 
Crimson Desert
 over several hours, and every controller nudge felt instantaneous to me. (The brand says there is a system latency of up to 88 milliseconds, but I never noticed it.)
I also used the Xbox Series X as a Blu-ray player to watch 
Blade Runner 2049
. The signal stayed perfectly clear, never pausing or stuttering during the film. I found the device could transmit easily within the 75-foot range in my house.
For sound, I used a Klipsch Flexus Core 300 soundbar with my television for surround sound and watched 
Unbroken
 and 
Masters of the Air
. Surround sound emanated around the room cleanly, whether I was using the Xbox Series X, Google TV streamer, or a laptop. To my ears, it all sounded as if it were connected directly to the source—no transmitter at all.
In terms of range, I had no trouble transmitting in the same room, to a side room where I tested a projector, and to my office to control a gaming laptop. The only glitch I experienced was that the Google TV streamer emitted a strange noise when I tested it with a very old Sony Bravia television. (A Nyrius representative said the HDMI handshake likely didn’t work with the old TV.)
My only gripe—and a minor one at that—was that both the transmitter and the receiver felt a bit hot after a full day of use.
Wireless clarity
Using the Phoenix Home True 4K60 was like I had run a really long HDMI cable from one room to another, which is probably the best thing I can say about how well it works. I never noticed any stuttering or lag in my three scenarios (video games, streaming, and a laptop). For anyone who hates cable clutter on movie night or wants to connect a video game console or laptop far away from a TV, the Phoenix Home True 4K earned my recommendation.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED
. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
$250
 at Nyrius
$250
 at Amazon
$250
 at Walmart
