Save this story
Save this story
NZXT has been
 a household name in the world of PC gaming for years now, much thanks to its PC cases. The company’s cases are known for their clean and highly aesthetic design, marketed toward gamers that really care about how their system looks. That’s been NZXT’s jam, even as it has moved into other parts and peripherals in the PC gaming ecosystem. So, if you’re looking for an NZXT discount code or information on promos and deals, you’ve come to the right place.
Score 50% Off PCs With NZXT Discount Codes and Deals
NZXT has already changed the game with 
Flex
, their subscription-based model for renting PCs that’s a cheaper way to get your hands on the latest tech. The idea is to service those gamers who might not be able to afford buying a PC gaming setup all at once upfront. Instead, you’re put on a monthly NXZT subscription plan, starting at $59 a month.
You can also save up to $250 on the company’s 
daily deals
. These include everything from PC cases or accessories. As we stated earlier, the company does far more than PC cases these days. We recently reviewed the 
NZXT Relay Headset and Switchmix
 and found it to be a really innovative wired audio solution. The company’s affordable wired gaming mouse, the NZXT Lift 2 Symm, even made it onto our picks for the 
best gaming mice
. Check back daily, as NZXT drops daily deals and special offers all the time.
I Love the NZXT Relay and SwitchMix System—but Wish It Was Wireless
NZXT’s first foray into audio gear comes with one of the most innovative accessories I’ve seen in years—if you use wired headphones.
By 
Eric Ravenscraft
Save up to $150 on Gaming Gear Bundles
The savings at NZXT pile up if you plan to spend a bit more. For example, you might want to tie a few of these products together into a 
Gaming Gear Bundle
. These NZXT combo deals are the best way to save money by bundling your purchases together, giving you discounts up to as much as $150.
Photograph: Amazon
Save to wishlist
NZXT
Relay Headset
$89
 
Amazon (Relay)
$135
 
Amazon (SwitchMix)
Enjoy Free Shipping on NZXT Gaming PCs
NZXT also offers free shipping on select NZXT gaming PCs and other products if your order reaches $75 or more. That’s important to consider as you’re putting together your shopping cart, as it may be worth adding in a cheaper peripheral or accessory just to save on the shipping cost.
The Best Mechanical Keyboard for Beginners Got a Little Better
With softer, quieter keys, and tools to customize the exact pressure of your key presses, the NZXT Function 2 improves on its predecessor.
By 
Eric Ravenscraft
Unlock Exclusive Discounts With NZXT Club Rewards
For the true NZXT fans, the company has something called the 
NZXT Club
. By signing up, you can unlock special offers and earn Pucci Points that can be redeemed for future discounts and exclusive perks that are only for NZXT Club members.
Get 10% Off Refurbished NZXT in 2026
Buying refurbished, like-new electronics is a great way to save money on major electronics purchases. NZXT makes it easy to save, with a whole section online of 
refurbished tech
, including a refurbished custom build 
H9 (2023) gaming PC
 with RTX 4060, regularly $3,238, but now only $2,650. There’s tons of other great clearance deals, like a refurbished 
Player Three Prime H9
 gaming PC with RTX 4080 SUPER, regularly $3,249, but on sale for $2,800.
Don’t Miss Out: $50 Off if You Refer Your Friends
NZXT makes it even easier to save by rewarding you for the purchases you were already going to make. If you’re happy with the service and want others to try it too, you can get a $50 discount when you 
refer a friend
. When you share your referral link with friends, you can give $50 off in discounts to any Player PC, and when they buy an NZXT Gaming PC, you’ll get $60 off your next order.
The Best Gaming Laptops I’ve Found After Hundreds of Hours of Testing
You don’t want any old gaming laptop. Here’s my take on which to get based on hundreds of hours of testing.
By 
Luke Larsen
