Save this story
Save this story
As someone who
 
WFH
 for a minimum of forty hours a week, and is constantly rotating between working from an 
office chair
, 
couch
, and 
bed
, I can truly say that the office furniture you use matters. Not only can it make or break your body (literally), it also helps to have office supplies and furniture to get you in the professional state of mind when at home.
We love Office Depot’s wide selection of 
office chairs
 and 
standing desks
 to outfit our home offices. Plus, Office Depot has a great selection of 
home printers
 for every price point and need, with options from our favorite brands like Epson and HP. Outfitting a home office or providing office supplies no matter where you work can be overwhelming and costly. Luckily, Office Depot has everything a business needs, from staples to paper to shelving and scanners. These costs can add up quickly, and that’s why we have rounded up some of the best Office Depot coupons to help you save big.
Get the Best Office Depot Back to School Deals
The early bird gets the worm, and although the start of the school year is several months away, you can save big on school supplies and essentials when you buy early. 
Office Depot school supplies
 have hundreds of supplies for under three dollars, in-store pick up available in minutes, and a handy school landing page where everything is categorized to make it easy to shop by grade, need, and price range. There are deals for 20% off JanSport backpacks, $98 Texas Instruments graphing calculators, BOGO deals on Sharpies, Scotch tape, Post-Its, and more essentials, and tons more deals (too many to include here!)
Save $20 on Your Next $100 Purchase
These days, it’s easy to spend $100. Whether that’s for a budget printer or a whole bunch of pens and paper clips, you can save money on purchases you were already going to make with this Office Depot promo code. Right now, you can get $20 off a purchase of $100 or more. Once you’re done shopping and have all of the items in your cart, input the Office Depot coupon code 
YES20
 in the box at the payment screen to get the Office Depot discount. Perhaps best of all, this Office Depot discount code applies to all regular-priced items across valuable home office categories like furniture, supplies, and tech. Be sure to act soon; this offer expires on June 27.
$40 Off Instantly With an Office Depot Coupon Code
If you need to upgrade your organizational system or get a new chair that doesn’t trigger back spasms, now’s a great time to invest in your home office setup for less. With this Office Depot promo code, you can get $40 off when you purchase $200 or more (an easy milestone to get to). To get this discount, input Office Depot promo code 
YES40
 at checkout for massive savings on a myriad of regularly-priced items. This Office Depot discount is only good until June 27, so I’d use it sooner rather than later.
Get a Free $50 Prepaid Visa Reward Card
If you’re wanting to upgrade your office furniture, like a luxe 
office chair
, 
gaming chair
, or 
standing desk
, now’s a great time to make an investment in your home office. Get rewarded for the larger purchases you were already going to make. When you spend $500 at Office Depot right now, you’ll get a free $50 prepaid 
Visa Reward Card
 (until May 23). This offer excludes products from HP, Samsung, Canon, Epson, Brother, Lexmark, Microsoft Surface, Google hardware, simplehuman, postage stamps, ink and toner. This offer isn’t valid in Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, or the Virgin Islands, and there’s a limit of one per household or business. This $50 reward Office Depot coupon code will be automatically applied and will be reflected during checkout, with no Office Depot promo code needed.
Office Depot Printing Coupons: Professional Projects With Office Depot
If you’re a small business owner, you can get deep discounts on business cards, banners, marketing materials, and basically everything needed to promote and get your business off the ground. We have a myriad of rotating 
Office Depot printing coupons
 (primarily aimed at business cards) so you can level up your branding, with no Office Depot coupon code needed to get steep discounts on professional printing.
Save on Printer Supplies With Office Depot Ink Coupons
We can put a man on the moon, we can 
clone sheep
. But somehow, home office 
printers
 have been stuck in the dark ages. Huge, clunky, and prone to error messages and hardware issues, printers have become a relic of the past, with many at a loss for where to get the best.
As digital tickets and phone camera scanning become increasingly common, more homes are operating without a 
printer
. However, if you have moved into your home office or need one for your business, buying printer supplies and ink in bulk from Office Depot is a great way to save some money on these annoying purchases. You can get recycling rewards and bundle deals on HP and Epson ink with these 
Office Depot ink coupons
 for HP printers. These Office Depot promo codes can help save on multi-pack cartridges, along with “subscribe and save” options for automated, recurring ink deliveries at an even lower price point.
Unlock 40% Off All Photo Products
If you’re looking for a great personal gift, or want to finally hang up those family portraits, now’s a great time to get all of your photo printing and photo gifts needs met for way less, with this 40% off Office Depot promo (until August 22). This means 40% off all photo products—perfect for custom gift ideas, invitations, greeting cards, and portraits for the home. With 
Office Depot Photo Services
, you’ll be able to choose your favorite photos and turn them into a myriad of personalized products and gifts, like canvas prints, large format posters, photo books, cards, invitations, and photo calendars. Plus, Office Depot has other perks, like same day and/or next day photo products which are available tomorrow if you order by 2 pm, as well as next-day custom cards, calendars, invitations, and announcements.
