$2,495
 
$2,295
 at Pedal Electric
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
8
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Very comfortable to ride. Solid battery range. Lots of power. Excellent hill climb power and top speed. Classic styling. Nice selection of accessories.
TIRED
Pedal assist is jerky. No rear suspension. No carbon belt drive.
One of my
 biggest complaints about a lot of 
ebikes
 is how nerdy they look. Pedal Electric’s H/T ebike, however, has the low-slung profile of a classic chopper motorcycle. A big contributor to that look is the H/T’s stripped-down style. While many ebikes can weigh close to 100 pounds, the minimalist H/T weighs a mere 60.
That low weight doesn’t mean low power, though. The 750-W rear motor pushes the bike to 20 mph in seconds in Class 2 mode and up to 28 mph in Class 3 “off-road” mode. Even at top speed, the frame geometry delivers nimble handling and excellent control, and the low-slung frame works for riders of any height. I’ve been riding to the grocery store and my barber, and just cruising around town, and my takeaway from my time with the H/T is that it’s not only practical…it’s also just plain fun.
Get Up and Go
Photograph: Billy Brown
Setting up the H/T couldn’t have been be much easier. I slid it out of the box, put the front tire and pedals on, and I was ready to ride. Unlike 
Segway’s ebikes
, there’s no app required to use the H/T, so there was no downloading or setting up an account to get started. I was able to get the H/T on the road within half an hour of its arrival.
The aircraft-grade aluminum frame is fairly low-slung, kind of like the BMX bike I had growing up. I’m 5’8”, so it was the perfect fit for me, but, surprisingly, it worked just as well for my taller friends. I had a friend who was 6’2” try it out, and he was just as comfortable on the frame as I was.
I live in California, so the bike came in Class 2 mode. In Class 2, it topped out at 20 mph, and the 750-W motor got me there in just under three seconds. The acceleration was perfect for zipping ahead of traffic at stoplights and whipping around corners. Despite its light weight, the bike can haul up to 350 pounds, which meant my wife and I could share the big, cushy seat without the performance taking a hit.
For such a small bike, the range is good, not great. The stated range is 60 miles, but that’s if you’re using the minimum setting on pedal-assist mode. If you stay under 20 mph using the throttle, you’re more likely to get around 40 miles of range, which is nothing to sneeze at. Riding at 28 mph drops that range down to roughly 20 miles per charge. And since I do love me some speed, I tend to get about 20 miles per full charge, give or take. Pedal Electric reports six hours to a full charge, which was in line with my experience.
Photograph: Billy Brown
Speaking of top speed, I reached out to Pedal Electric to see how to unlock Class 3 mode. Since it’s illegal in California to ride an electric bike faster than 20 miles per hour, I had to sign a waiver acknowledging that I understood the safety risks and that the mode was specifically 
for off-road use
. To avoid incriminating myself, let’s assume that I spent all my time in Class 3 in off-road situations.
The handling at that top speed was excellent. Thanks to the comfortable upright position and frame geometry, cruising along at 28 miles per hour felt smooth and comfortable. Turning at speed and quickly adjusting to avoid a pothole was also easy and smooth, even when I was gunning the throttle. The thrill of riding fast on the H/T comes from the exhilaration of speed, not the fear of losing control.
I appreciate that there’s no app to go along with the H/T. It makes hopping on the bike and going for a ride feel much more natural than it does with the app-controlled bikes I’ve tested. The handlebar-mounted screen is also very intuitive and easy to use, and it has a personal passcode for added security. There’s also a USB-C charging port if you decide to get a handlebar mount for your phone. The bike has a front daytime running light that automatically brightens when the sun goes down, two front and rear turn signal lights, and a brake light. The front and rear hydraulic disc brakes are responsive and have excellent stopping power.
Add Ons
It's easy to customize the bike and add utility. Pedal offers a 
range of accessories
, but my favorite is the 
dual battery system
. This $850 system isn’t cheap, but it adds another battery to the frame, which ups the range by another 40 miles. If you’re not taking this bike on long rides, it may not be worth the expense, but I appreciated the chance to maximize its range.
The rest of the accessory line focuses on storage. These include a cool in-frame rack, front and rear racks and boxes, and, for the beach bums, a very cool surfboard rack that mounts your board on the side of the bike.
Rough Ride
Photograph: Billy Brown
The H/T comes with five levels of pedal assist, but I mostly used the throttle, partly because I’m lazy and partly because the pedal-assist response could be wildly inconsistent. For levels 1 through 3, the pedal assist was smooth; it just felt like a little boost to my pedaling. On levels 4 and 5, however, the bike seemed to jerk forward every time I pressed down on the pedal. It felt more like my bike was leaping forward rather than assisting, to the point that I almost wobbled off the bike the first time I tried level 5. If you’re a chronic pedaler who’s looking for a more traditional cycling experience, this may not be the bike for you.
Also, while the adjustable front suspension is useful for soaking up curb drops and bumps, there’s no rear suspension on the bike. This definitely reduces weight, but it can also make the ride bumpy on dirt or rough roads. It wasn’t a deal-breaker for me, but I can see how it might be an issue for people with more sensitive backsides.
Bottom Line
Overall, riding the Pedal Electric H/T delivers some excellent playground vibes. The light frame and responsive handling make it a breeze to handle, and the acceleration is exhilarating. The 60-pound weight makes it one of the lightest ebikes I’ve used, and it was easy to toss it in the bed of a pickup or the back of my Outback.
At $2,195, it’s not the least expensive bike on the market, but the smooth acceleration, relaxed rider position, and comfortable feel make it a joy to ride. If you’re looking for a beach cruiser, a comfortable errand bike, or just a fun way to get outside, the Pedal Electric H/T is an excellent option.
$2,495
 
$2,295
 at Pedal Electric
