Save this story
Save this story
Like other online
 travel booking services, Priceline helps you compare offerings and rates for everything travel-related, like airline tickets, and hotel stays. Growing up, I always referred to singer/starship captain William Shatner as the annoying guy from Priceline, much to my grandmother and father’s horror. But, you have to admit, the ads were memorable and convincing, even if it did become Shatner’s legacy to a new generation. No celeb endorsement is needed to save with our Priceline promo codes, though. We update our Priceline coupons regularly to help you be a budget-friendly traveler, with Priceline coupon codes for dollars off car rentals, last-minute hotel bookings and other select discounts for (nearly) everything travel-related.
Priceline Coupon Code: $20 Off Your Next Booking
Summer means vacay and the best summer sports events are in full swing. With 
Priceline’s Fan Fest Getaways
, you can get up to 60% off stays in host and watch party cities for the world cup, as well as various discounts in sports-centric cities, for stays as short as one match-day, to weekend-long celebrations. You can get $20 off your next trip when you use Priceline coupon code 
FANFEST
, on everything travel-related, including hotel, flight, or rental car deals.
Save 10% Today with Priceline Promo Code
One of the easiest ways to save big on travel with Priceline is to sign up for VIP rewards. Sign up is free and includes tons of perks like best price guarantee, exclusive savings on hotels, rental car discounts, insider coupons, and more.
Early on, Priceline first became known for its “Name Your Own Price” system, where travelers would set their budget for airline tickets, hotel rooms, car rentals, and vacation packages. Details like the exact hotel were only shared after your credit card was charged, with no ability to cancel. This lives on, sorta, with Priceline’s Express Deals promo which shows up in the results for certain searches. Where, right now, you can get 10% off Express Deals when you sign up for VIP rewards.
Express Deals give you limited-time rates of up to 60% off on hotels, flights, and car rentals. Like the “Name Your Own Price” system, because of the extremely discounted rates of these deals, some 
details
 are hidden until after booking and are non-refundable.
How to use a Priceline Coupon Code
To get the 10% off Hotel Express Deals, all you have to do is simply sign-up for Priceline emails. Your custom code will be sent straight to your inbox. For these Priceline Hotel Express Deals, the customer must sign in, use the search tool to find valid hotels with the Express Deals badge, and apply code at checkout to save big (and stay bad and bougie) on your next vacay.
Deals You’ll Love With This Priceline Coupon (Verified by WIRED!)
We know travel can be egregiously expensive. That’s why we at WIRED rigorously test each Priceline coupon to make sure you’re getting those promised discounts on important travel details like flight, rental cars, and hotel bookings. Priceline sometimes had blanket deals, like 10% off promo codes when you sign up for emails. But some of Priceline’s best discounts are tied directly to the booking type you select. Savings fluctuate between Hotel Express Deals, Flight Express Deals, bundles, and VIP-exclusive rates, so make sure you’re checking to get the best deal for the type of booking you want to make.
The most effective method this month is the 
WIRED Priceline Booking Type Check
:
Start
 from a verified offer card on this page.
Select
 your category (Hotel, Flight, Car, Package, or Cruise).
Verify
 your login status and the presence of a coupon box.
Review
 travel dates, cancellation policies, and the final price before confirming.
Save on Priceline Discount Code Deals for Express Bookings
If you’re like me, someone who wants to book for way less but doesn’t necessarily care about brand type, you may want to check out Priceline express deals. With this, there are exclusive Priceline discount code deals which offer “blind-booking” savings. This means that to get express deals, which often save 40-60%, you’ll book your room or flight without knowing the specific brand until after purchase.
Get 10% Off Priceline Experiences
Summer is the official-unofficial vacation season, and Priceline is making it easier than ever to choose (and save) big on memorable vacations with 
Priceline Experiences
. These Experiences can be filtered by popular locations, like Paris and Oahu, or attractions, like the Sagrada Familia or Yellowstone National Park. They even include discounts on boat excursions! Plus, with Priceline promo code 
SUMMERSALE10
, you’ll get 10% off select experiences.
How to Use Priceline Hotel Promo Code for Hot Deals Like 99% Off Cancun
With a ‘Hot Deal’ Priceline discount, you can get massive discounts on your next warm weather getaway. This means up to 99% off hotel bookings for destinations like Cancun and Maui. If you’re like me and in desperate need of sandy beaches at a fraction of the cost, explore the '
Hot Deals
' available right now, like $1,000 off hotels in Cancun and Maui (expires July 8), or if you want to stay within the Lower 48, Priceline has a deal for $500 off stays in LA hotels (expires July 6).
Find Priceline Cruise Promo Code Savings on Your Next Trip
Make sure you check back often as we’re continuously updating Priceline promo codes, including massive savings with flash events like the "
4-Day Cruise Flash Deal
,” which give up to $1,250 to spend at sea after you book on top cruise lines. Happy sailing!
Apply Priceline Discount Code Rental Cars and Get $10 off
Oftentimes, the thing that makes travel pricey are the smaller expenses that stack up over time, like rental cars. You can greatly reduce upfront booking costs with a Priceline rental car promo code for immediate savings on vehicle bookings, including this Priceline coupon for $10 off your 
rental car booking
.
Discover Priceline Student Discount and VIP Rewards Perks
When you’re a student, you’re often not in the position to have extra funds to travel. Priceline wants to close that gap of inaccessibility, by providing a Priceline 
student discount
 through verification by Student Beans. And there are tons of student-specific Priceline discount codes for specific 
Spring Break travel
 destinations and dates. Plus, students can maximize benefits through Priceline's VIP Rewards program.
Priceline Military Promo Code: Up to 50% Off
Priceline wants to reward members of the military, with Priceline promo code for American Forces Travel members. Once you verify your 
military service membership
, you can save up to 50% on your next hotel stay and other exclusive travel discounts.
How to Contact Priceline Customer Service for Questions
Booking travel and figuring out logistics, including flight delays and car rentals, can be a lot. That’s where Priceline customer service steps in. You can contact 
Priceline customer service securely
 anytime. Make sure you contact Priceline through official communication channels only, which are listed on the website and within apps directly. The fastest method of support is the 24/7 chat.
Get 10% Off in the Priceline App
One of the best ways to save on your vacation this summer is by using the Priceline app. With the Priceline app, you can get 10% off when you purchase in-app, and 5% off on-site when you purchase any 
Hotel Express Deals
 (up to $50 in savings) with Priceline promo code 
SUMMERSTAY
. Act now to save big on primo summer destinations like Florida, California, and Tokyo.
Priceline Offer: 40% Off Near the Biggest Matches
Soccer (or futbol) fans, rejoice! The World Cup is upon us yet again, and Priceline is offering 40% off stays near the world cup matches. With up to 40% off stays, these savings are based on “the average nightly price of hotels in nearby cities compared to the average nightly price of hotels in the primary city for the same travel period.” You can get massive savings on select package deals sitewide when you book a hotel and flight or car together. So whether you’re watching the 
World Cup games
 in Atlanta or Los Angeles, you can save big while you cheer on the beloved game.
