Save this story
Save this story
There are basically
 two good times to buy an 
espresso maker
 or a 
latte machine
: Amazon Prime Day and Black Friday. That's when these machines go on the biggest sales of any given year—including the two most popular espresso machines on earth, according to Amazon sales figures. The 
Breville Barista Express
 and the 
Ninja Luxe Cafe Pro
, each number one in their respective categories, are on massive early Prime Day sales this week, up to $200 off list price.
Both of these also happen to be among my favorite espresso machines for most people—the devices I often recommend to espresso beginners who'd like to stop paying $7 a drink at Starbucks. That makes these two of the best early Amazon Prime Day Deals of 2026.
Photograph: Julian Chokkattu
Save to wishlist
Breville
Barista Express
$693
 
$500
 
(28% off)
 
Amazon
$700
 
$500
 
(29% off)
 
Best Buy
$700
 
$500
 
(29% off)
 
Seattle Coffee Gear
Breville's Barista Express
 is a semiautomatic espresso machine, which means that the grinder and steaming wand are included in the machine—a one-stop shop for milk-frothy drinks. It's been the top-selling espresso maker of its kind for so long I don't even remember when that wasn't the case.
WIRED has been recommending the Express as one of our favorite espresso makers for about a decade for its mix of value, reliability, precision, and ease of use. This $200 discount during Amazon Prime Day 2026 makes for the lowest price I've seen in years—a deal good enough I had to double- and triple-check to make sure it was true.
Why's it so popular? It's a Goldilocks thing—a mix of accessible price, beautiful ease of use, and outstanding product support. While the built-in grinder isn't as good as on Breville's top-tier 
Oracle Jet
, the Express will make full-flavored, consistent, well-extracted espresso on medium and dark roasts. Breville's reputation for honoring warranties and its excellent customer service don't hurt—a big deal on a device that'll hopefully be with you for years.
In fact, we can attest to its longevity: WIRED senior gear editor 
Julian Chokkattu
 has been pulling shots from his Barista Express for seven years, and it's still going strong.
Get $200 off Breville Barista Express
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Video: Matthew Korfhage
Save to wishlist
Ninja
Luxe Cafe Pro
$750
 
$599
 
(20% off)
 
Amazon
$750
 
$600
 
(20% off)
 
Ninja
Ninja's flagship semiautomatic espresso machine is also on a great sale for Prime Day 2026, in a deal that already started this week. The 
Ninja Luxe Cafe Pro
 is $150 off, matching the lowest price I've ever seen for it.
When Ninja announced it was jumping into the semiautomatic espresso market in 2024, I was skeptical. But both the Pro and the slightly downmarket 
Luxe Cafe Premium
 have surprised me with their ability to make excellent espresso with minimal effort. The best deal is on the Pro, which includes a useful bean assist function to help you dial in your beans—a rarity at this price point. It also offers a manual tamping lever and a hot water spout that was mysteriously lacking in Ninja's lower-tier device.
Ninja's devices aren't as tried and tested as the Breville. And the “drip coffee” function is best left alone. But if you're a latte lover, you may still have reason to prefer Ninja's coffee maker. The reason is the milk frother, which is among the best on any semiautomatic espresso machine I've seen, courtesy of a magnetic metal whisk at the bottom of the milk carafe. It's some of the most integrated, well-frothed milk I've seen from an automatic frother.
Get $150 Off Ninja Luxe Cafe Pro
