Save this story
Save this story
Good sleep is
 a priceless commodity, and a big factor is what you’re sleeping on, including your 
mattress
 and 
pillows
. Purple is one of our favorites on that front, from the brand’s super supportive-yet-soft pillows to its 
cooling mattresses
. All to say, there’s plenty of great bedding to shop at Purple, and right now you can get it at a serious discount. You can save up to 30% off of bedding, pillows, and more from Purple, from the 
PerfectStay Duvet Cover Set
 to the 
Purple Harmony Anywhere Travel Set
, with these Purple promo codes and deals.
Purple Promo Codes: Save on the Mattress That Fits You Best
Purple has a mattress for every type of sleeper, and we have a Purple promo code to help you save on those important sleep purchases. There are 
different types of mattresses
 to choose from depending on your need. The original Purple is the OG, with two inches of Purple’s signature GelFlex Grid for instant back pain relief, along with two layers of foam. The PurplePlus mattress has cradling support that isolates motion for a more peaceful sleep. And the luxe model, the RestorePlus hybrid mattress, allows for a cooler sleep and has lower back support with GelFlex Grid's deep relief and zoned coils for extra comfort.
Save up to 30% With Purple’s Limited-Time Sales (No Promo Code Needed)
Right now, Purple has huge savings on tons of their up to 30% off 
sleep accessories
 like pillows, cushions, and sheet sets. I’ve found that all kinds of sleepers are drawn to Purple’s 
Freeform Adjustable Pillow
 and 
Purple Harmony Pillow
 in particular, especially since you can adjust it to best match your sleeping position. Plus, you can find some nice accessory 
bundles
 on sale, too.
Other Ways to Save on Purple Mattresses and Pillows
Looking for other ways to save on Purple’s sleep gear? Don’t miss 
Purple’s bundles
 that offer up to 25% off. Shoppers using FSA and HSA funds can also save an average of 30% on a mattress, since it does support your health. Check out the 
eligible products from Purple here
 to shop with those funds.
If you’re looking for a single pillow, you can score a pillow for free by signing up for Purple’s email updates. Purple also offers as low as zero percent APR if you 
use Affirm to shop
.
Score a Friend a Free Purple Pillow
You can get a free pillow for a friend, too. When checking out for a $200 purchase as a new customer, you can choose to 
gift a friend a free Purple Cloud Pillow
. Plus, if that friend later shops at Purple, you could get up to $75 in Amazon gift cards for your friend’s purchase.
Qualified Customers Can Get 10% Off Their Purchase
Some folks will qualify for 10% off, no matter what time of year it is. That list includes 
healthcare professionals
, 
military members
, 
first responders
, 
teachers
, 
students
, and 
truck drivers
. Check out how each discount works at the included links, and don’t miss your chance to save on all kinds of Purple bedding with these promo codes.
Limited Time: $300 Off PurpleFlex Mattress
The PurpleFlex Mattress is one of the brand’s most popular, and most innovative beds yet. It is compatible with an adjustable base, has a supportive foam base and a two-inch GelFlex grid on top for instant adaptability to any type of body. Now, the 
PurpleFlex is $300 off
—a seriously low price for a bed of this caliber. It has firm support, with a cooling grid that allows air flow and never traps heat. Plus, it ships free within 2 days, has a 100-night trial, 10 year warranty, and low price guarantee (with price matching).
