Save this story
Save this story
Jordan vs. Algeria
 isn’t a soul-stirring 
World Cup
 matchup for most 
soccer
 fans.
They’re the 63rd and 29th best teams in the world, according to FIFA rankings. The game will be played at the San Francisco Bay Area Stadium (officially called 
Levi’s Stadium
) in Santa Clara, yet both nations’ diaspora are more heavily concentrated on the East Coast. And alongside exorbitant ticket prices and travel costs, Algerians hoping to make the trip have faced up to 
$15,000 US visa bond payments
.
Despite this, FIFA is charging $450 for a so-so view by the corner flag. Yet on its official marketplace, where existing ticket holders can sell, the price has cratered. On May 17, it became the first game to fall below $100 a ticket—a landmark celebrated on the 
r/WorldCup2026Tickets subreddit
.
What began as an ordinary soccer fan community for finding tickets to the most-expensive-ever World Cup has transformed into a grassroots, 
AI
-powered movement with its own ticketing infrastructure, operating in near real time. Redditors—r/WorldCup2026Tickets has more than 140,000 members—report on surprise ticket drops from FIFA, sharing game availability and price volatility. They post DIY tools that unearth cut-price deals, then exchange tickets on back channels, hurting the back pockets of FIFA and scalpers.
In recent weeks, as prices for marquee games 
fell below face value
, the subreddit has been filled with 
“do not buy” posts
 and “HOLD” memes, echoing the 
2021 GameStop phenomenon on r/WallStreetBets
, as fans are hoping ticket prices will plummet even further. “The ‘HOLD’ culture has grown significantly,” says Luke, a Chicago-based member of r/WorldCup2026Tickets who asked that his last name be withheld over privacy concerns. “It started as price frustration but has evolved into an almost coordinated resistance against both FIFA's pricing and scalper markups.”
Beyond complaints about the sky-high prices, FIFA has been accused of creating 
artificial scarcity
, offering an opaque ticketing process that drip-feeds inventory and offers no straightforward way of comparing prices. It’s also the first World Cup with dynamic pricing and uncapped resale listings—one ticket to the final on July 19 is priced at 
$11.5 million
. FIFA, a nonprofit, pockets 30 percent commission with each resale, evenly split between the buyer and seller. On May 27, the attorneys general of New York and New Jersey 
subpoenaed FIFA
 as part of an investigation into its ticketing practices.
This system has led to many resellers profiting—and many fans overpaying. But as more and more prices rose into the four figures, Redditors decided to fight back, building free ticket-analysis tools and sharing them with everyone on r/WorldCup2026Tickets.
On April 18, Luke released 
SeatSidekick
. Built in just five days with 
Claude Code
, the website received 178,000 unique visitors and over a million pageviews within a month of launching. It scans the backend of FIFA’s ticketing website to provide near-live data of seat availability, sorted by price, presenting fans with a user-friendly interface. It also features trend data and alerts to inform seat-seekers of potential bargains.
And it’s working. Luke points to France vs. Senegal, a premier New York matchup featuring stars like Kylian Mbappé and Sadio Mané. Its get-in price dropped 25 percent over two weeks in May, to around $450—a relative snip. “People are sharing price drops as victories and encouraging others to wait,” he says. “It's become part community support, part figuring out ways to combat scalpers.”
Fans are also using the platform to weed out scammers. “Someone on Reddit posts that they have two tickets available for an obscene amount, and the next comment says, ‘Yeah, but SeatSidekick is showing the same section as $500 cheaper,’” Luke says. “It’s helping to prevent scalpers taking advantage of fans.”
But in some cases, genuine fans looking to offload tickets are met with downvotes if they appear to be profiting.
“If your post isn’t anti-FIFA in some way, you don’t get traction,” says David Dirring, an Atlanta-based data scientist who has also created a ticketing tool. “My friend got too many tickets in the lottery, so I built a tool for him on Claude to help him price them. I got lit up on the subreddit because I was seen as helping a seller—even though it’s a marketplace, and fans will want to buy tickets from them.”
Alongside posting the latest ticket releases from FIFA’s ongoing “last-minute” sales window, the subreddit has created back-channel marketplaces on WhatsApp. That means fans can circumvent FIFA’s 30 percent fee on the official resale. The chat got so popular that a second group had to be created after the first reached WhatsApp’s 1,024-member limit. The subreddit’s moderators say there are transactions most hours.
Coleman, who works in finance for a major tech company and also asked that his last name not be used for privacy reasons, is a moderator of r/WorldCup2026Tickets. He secured four tickets to a New York game for $500 each—the seller traveled to his Manhattan office to do the transaction in person. Officially listed for resale at $800 each, the 15 percent buyer’s fee would’ve jacked their final cost up to $920—meaning Coleman saved a total of $1,680.
“People have been trying to figure out ways to avoid that fee, but it's impossible to avoid without risks,” says Coleman. “But I think there’s an unspoken trust on Reddit that makes it unique—the community really looks out for each other.”
Elsewhere, Redditors have 
posted news of potential class action lawsuits
 against FIFA, brought by fans who allege they were assigned worse seats than they paid for (FIFA revealed a 
new front-row category
 for thousands of dollars per ticket in April, months after the lottery phase closed). Non-coders have also shared homemade websites claiming FIFA’s original seat maps 
misled supporters
 into believing prized sideline seats were available when most may have actually been 
reserved for hospitality
.
The displeasure may explain the glut of tickets still for sale—more than 260,000, according to SeatSidekick, with little over a week before the tournament begins.
Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic, professor of business psychology at University College London, says disrupting FIFA is seen by many as morally acceptable given the high ticket prices and 
history of corruption
 surrounding the organization. He adds that the proliferation of AI tools—this is the first World Cup in the generative-AI era—could lead to a cat-and-mouse game between tech-savvy users and the organizations they seek to expose. “It leads to humans ‘creating’ technology that can only be combated with more advanced versions of AI,” Chamorro-Premuzic says.
FIFA didn’t respond to multiple requests for comment.
Luke says the organization shut down the main route he and others used to pull data, but he has since found a work-around. He believes his website actually benefits soccer’s governing body. “I’m sure FIFA won’t be happy that I’m creating a tool from its data and showing the world a better user interface,” he says. “But I’m providing it business—my website helps fans find official tickets at a price they’re comfortable with, in a seat they’re happy with.”
One such customer is Luke himself. He used his website to pick out two prime seats to see Japan play in Dallas. Like most, he overpaid—even with all of FIFA’s ticketing data, he had no idea prices would plummet. But he’s just happy he gets to see a World Cup game with his girlfriend.
“The irony is that tools like SeatSidekick showing prices falling may be fueling the confidence to hold even longer,” he says. “People are really anti-FIFA now.” But they’ll always be pro soccer.
