Save this story
Save this story
If you’ve been
 outside, to the gym, or on a basketball court, there’s a good chance you’ve seen someone wearing Reeboks. The brand has had its fair share of ups and downs, but is riding a wave of increased interest driven by smart business moves like a refocus on sports and lifestyle, alongside a number of high-profile collaborations like the 
Reebok G-Unit G6 50 Cent
.
Founded in 1958, Reebok has changed hands and gone through multiple iterations. Most recently in 2022, 
Reebok was sold by Adidas to Authentic Brands Group
 for over two billion dollars. Since then, it’s reinvigorated its sports lineup, 
hired Shaquel O’ Neal
 as president of Reebok basketball, and signed tons of professional athletes across basketball, golf, and tennis to the brand.
But what about the shoes? They’re solid. As someone who used to test training and 
running shoes
, the 
Reebok Floatzig
 and 
Reebok Nano X
 series are excellent performers for the price—I still wear my Nano X4s anytime I’m strength training. Other standouts include the more lifestyle oriented Classic and Club lineups.
But given how often you should replace sneakers (hint: often every six months), you should always look for a deal when shopping. That’s why I rounded up some of the best Reebok coupons and Reebok promo codes below, to help you save time and money.
Use this Reebok Promo Code for up to $30 off
The more you spend on Reebok’s site, the more potential savings you can get when you shop its 
Buy More, Save More section
. This collection has over 1,000 pieces of shoes and apparel, including popular styles like the Club and Nano series, so you can probably find something fitting. You get $10 off orders of $100 or more, $20 off $150 orders, and $30 off orders of $200 or more using the Reebok discount code 
BMSM
 at checkout.
Photograph: Adrienne So
Save to wishlist
Reebok
Nano X5
$140
 
Zappos
$140
 
$129
 
(8% off)
 
DSW
15% Reebok Discount Code for New Customers
Anyone making a new account at Reebok online or the Reebok app can get 15% off their first purchase using the Reebok discount code 
MOVE15
. This Reebok promo code works after you sign up for a new account and verify your email address, and is applied automatically at checkout if you are using the Reebok app. Standard exclusions to select collaboration items and limited-edition sneaker releases apply, so double check your order before purchase to make sure you qualify for the Reebok coupon code deal.
Make the Most of Reebok Authentic Membership With More Discounts
This is the best Reebok deal for anyone who shops the brand frequently. With an 
Authentics Membership
 ($5 a month), you get 10% off all Reebok products and free shipping on all orders. You also get access to early product drops, sale alerts, and birthday rewards. This perk is applied automatically when logged in using Shop Pay at checkout. An Authentics membership also gives you discounts at other participating brands like Champion, Billabong, Hunter, Ted Baker, and more, so it’s worth considering, especially if you shop multiple brands. This Reebok discount is for online purchases only.
Stack Reebok Coupons with Clearance and Seasonal Sales for up to 50% More Off
It’s easy to stack savings with Reebok if you know where to look. Items in season sales like Back to School or just the regular 
Reebok clearance section
 can be discounted by as much as 65%. Add extra discounts (and free shipping) from an Authentics Membership, plus Bundle & Save offers, and you can drop the price of your checkout cart dramatically, without needing a Reebok discount code.
Reebok Discount Codes for Students, Educators, Military, and First Responders
Students, educators (active and retired), military, veterans, first responders, government workers, healthcare professionals, and nurses can get 30% off purchases as part of the 
Reebok heroes discount
. All groups must verify their status via ID.me at checkout to receive a single-use Reebok discount code.
Fix a Reebok Discount Code That’s Not Working
There are times when a Reebok discount code might not work like you thought it would. Make sure your items aren’t excluded from site-wide Reebok promo codes (some sneakers, new releases, and third-party collabs are). Also make sure you’ve entered the Reebok coupon code correctly, confirmed its terms of use and active window, and met any spending requirements.
FAQs
How do I apply a Reebok promo code at checkout to make sure my discount is correctly applied?
You can typically apply a discount code in your cart, before you hit checkout, on Reebok online. Sometimes codes are applied automatically, but it’s always good to double check that you are applying the best discount code for your shopping cart.
Why is my Reebok discount code or coupon not working and how can I fix common issues?
A Reebok discount code or coupon code may not be working for a few reasons. Some products, like select new launches, sneakers, and third-party collaborations, are often excluded from discount codes altogether. Others are timed, and may have expired. Double check your code before looking elsewhere—it could be you just have a typo.
Does Reebok offer a student, military, or hero discount and how do I verify my status to claim it?
Reebok does offer a coupon code for students, military, teachers, healthcare professionals, and more under its 
Reebok heroes discount
 program. To verify your status, you’ll be prompted to log in to ID.me at checkout to receive your single-use discount code.
Can I stack a Reebok discount code with sale prices, membership perks, or other promotions?
Yes, you can stack Reebok discount codes with sale prices and other promotions. Items in seasonal sales and clearance sections can be combined with promo codes as well as free shipping benefits from an Authentics Membership.
Is there a Reebok first-order or new customer discount and what are the rules for using it?
Yes, Reebok does offer a discount code for first time customers placing their first order. To get yours, make a new account at Reebok online or sign up with the Reebok app. After verifying your email address, you can get 15% off your first order using the code 
MOVE15
. Standard exclusions to items like third-party collaborations still apply, though.
