$1,400
 at Retrospec
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
7
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Fun, retro style that appeals to both teens and adults. Well-priced. UL-2271 and 2849 certified. Frame triangle is big enough to attach a folding lock.
TIRED
Seat is cheap-feeling and very hard. No suspension and no way to carry cargo. Range takes a huge hit on hills. No battery IP rating for water resistance. Not a “real” BMX.
Though I’ve since
 gotten used to it, every time I ride the electric blue Joe Rev 2 electric BMX, people stare. Their heads turn as they drive past, eyes narrowed. “Is that an adult riding a BMX bike?” I imagine the thought process going. “Why is it so fast? Why is it so big?” These are valid questions, and they all have the same answer: Because it’s fun.
In fact, my entire family has taken turns riding this bike all over town for the past four weeks, testing it up and down hills, taking it on grocery runs, and even staying out riding until the battery drained. The verdict? The Joe Rev 2 may not be the smoothest ride, but for the price, it’s a unique and worthwhile option for basic cruising and casual riding.
All Eyes on Me
Photograph: Kat Merck
California-based Retrospec specializes in affordable outdoor toys; primarily paddleboards, longboards, bikes, and no-frills 
ebikes
 like the 
foldable Judd Rev 2
, which WIRED contributing reviewer Michael Venutolo-Mantovani wrote “captures the vibe of being a 12-year-old kid and riding your bike more than anything I’ve ridden in some time.”
The entry-level Joe Rev was created in this same spirit—a full-sized, BMX-inspired frame with fun color options (electric blue, matte gray), 3-inch tan wall balloon tires, and those unmistakable handlebars. There are no apps or fancy readouts, no lights, and no shocks. Just five levels of pedal assist and a throttle attached to a single-speed drivetrain and 750-watt rear-hub motor.
Photograph: Kat Merck
“No cream, no sugar” is even printed on the chain stays, lest one forget the minimalist doctrine. On the plus side, this lack of bones allows the Joe Rev 2 to weigh in on the lighter side at 56 pounds.
This is the second iteration of the 
original Joe Rev
, which is still available (for now) at the sale price of $1,200. The Rev 2 sports a bigger 500 Wh battery with a listed 60-mile range (up from 48 miles) and an updated display. Namely, a 2-by-2.5-inch LCD screen on the left handlebar displaying power level, battery life, and speed, as opposed to the original’s bare-basic hub with buttons.
The battery can be quickly locked and unlocked from the bottom of the frame with a key and charges from red to full green in several hours; it weighs about 7 pounds, so it’s easy enough to carry in a backpack, though at 18 inches long, it could be a tight fit if your bag is already packed.
Photograph: Kat Merck
Photograph: Kat Merck
Teen Spirit
At one point during the testing period, my almost-14-year-old son, who is 5’ 10” and 145 pounds, took the Joe Rev 2 out on a full battery to see how long he could ride in our town of hills. We were all surprised to find he hit the red “recharge” light in about 20 miles. It shouldn't have been too much of a shock, given that the hills were steep, and he was using the throttle primarily. But it is a good reminder that, like all ebikes, the Joe Rev 2’s range will vary dramatically depending on rider weight, speed, and conditions.
Interestingly, there’s an ominous warning sticker on the Joe Rev’s frame that states no one under 16 is to ride this bike. It does have pedals and a maximum speed of 20 mph, making it a 
Class 2 ebike
—legal in many, if not, most states for kids under 16.
When I asked Retrospec if there was anything specific about the Joe Rev 2 that would preclude younger teens from riding it, their rep told me the company “follows the most stringent regulations across the markets where their ebikes are sold. As a result, their minimum recommended rider age is 16. If local laws permit younger riders, such as a 12-year-old, it is ultimately up to parents or guardians to determine whether their child has the maturity, experience, and ability to safely operate an ebike.”
Though the Joe Rev 2 isn't overly heavy, I still wouldn’t feel comfortable letting a 
12-year-old ride any ebike
, and even 13 is debatable; I’m sure I don’t need to bring up that kids under 17 
accounted for 20 percent of US ebike injuries
 from 2020 to 2024.
However, an adult-sized, mature 14- or 15-year-old could be a gray area. My son is allowed to ride the Joe Rev 2 occasionally, but not regularly. If you decide to go this route, know this bike was deemed acceptable by several teens in my orbit, though stylistically a couple notches below the e-moto-style frames popularized by brands 
like MacFox
.
How It Rides
As is typical with ebikes, some assembly of the Joe Rev 2 is required upon arrival. Chiefly, attaching the wheels, pedals, and handlebars, for which it comes with a generously sized set of hex wrenches. The first night, it took a couple of tries to get the front wheel seated properly—there was a slight wobble during my husband’s inaugural ride around the block, but after further tightening, it has not resurfaced. The brakes are mechanical disc with 180 mm rotors, which also occasionally needed tightening, but otherwise caused no issues during the testing period.
My own first ride was on a flat surface, around the parking lot of my son’s former elementary school. I found that the five levels of pedal assist kick in quickly and almost forcefully; the throttle is an easy-to-use thumb switch located on the left handlebar. The frame feels like a good size for my height (5’ 6”), and the whole setup was easy to parse in just a couple of minutes.
Photograph: Kat Merck
Aside from the lack of suspension—you will feel every bump—my only major complaint is the seat. In fact, my butt still hurts as I write this from even a short ride yesterday. The Joe Rev 2's seat is hard, plasticky, and small—definitely worth swapping out if you’re going to be commuting on this or otherwise riding it daily.
My 5’ 8” husband rides the Joe Rev 2 to the grocery store several times a week, an activity he greatly enjoys, and over time we’ve found ourselves wishing there were an easy way to carry cargo, such as the ability to bolt on a basket or saddlebags. To be fair, though, I’m not sure it would ultimately be worth the reduction in range, though the bike does have a payload capacity of 350 pounds. We do, however, greatly appreciate the open space in the frame to attach a folding lock. (We went with the 
Seatlylock FoldyLock for $90)
.
One thing I have not yet been able to test is the water resistance. I live in western Washington state, where it rains nine months out of the year, and the Joe Rev 2's battery is mounted at the bottom of the down tube, where it could easily be splashed. There's no given IP rating for water resistance, so while I'm sure the battery housing can handle a light, occasional spray, riding the bike on a super-rainy day would make me nervous.
Who Should Buy?
The Joe Rev 2 occupies an interesting niche, offering retro flair while still looking like a regular bike. Price- and style-wise, I picture it in between a more feature-packed dupe like 
Murf Bikes’ overtly beachy, Class 3 Gigi cruiser ($1,995)
 and a lighter-weight, less powerful model like the 
Ride1Up Roadster V3 ($1,395)
, which WIRED reviewer Matthew Korfhage tested and said 
feels just like a regular bike would if you had bionic legs
.
It also bears mentioning that if you're hoping for a real BMX bike with which you can do tricks, the Joe Rev 2 is not that. Insofar as being a BMX, the only quality seems to be the handlebars. Nothing about it feels nimble, and at this weight, you’re not taking it to the skate park—the only jumps and rail hops happening are in your imagination.
However, if you do happen to lose control of yourself and break something, the Joe Rev 2 is 
UL 2849 Certified
 for the electrical system and 
UL 2271 Certified
 for the battery, meaning that, unlike with many other internet-purchased direct-to-consumer bikes, your local bike shop 
may be able to repair it
. Though this depends heavily on the type of repair needed; it’s worth calling to be sure.
$1,400
 at Retrospec
