Save this story
Save this story
If you’re a
 fan of Amazon’s ecosystem, whether that’s asking your Alexa speaker to tell you about the weather or compulsively checking the video feed from your Ring doorbell, then it makes sense to expand and build onto the system. It’s always easier to keep to one ecosystem as much as you can with smart home gear, letting you stick to a single app and single subscription if you decide to invest in one.
While we’ve liked Ring’s cameras and home security products fine enough, they’re hard to recommend at the top of our guides since Ring is 
reintroducing a policy
 to enable 
local law enforcement to request footage
 directly from Ring users. It’s up to you if that’s something you want to invest in, and if you already have Ring products, it might make the most sense to continue adding onto that ecosystem than diving into a new one.
No matter the reason, if you’re looking to add a Ring product to your home, don’t get one without using our Ring coupon codes to get it for a better price.
Ring Promo Code: 50% Off Ring Cameras, Doorbells, and Outdoor Cameras
Ring is running a deal all month long with up to 50% off 
different products and bundles
. You can get all kinds of Ring cameras and security accessories for a variety of discounts, from Ring’s video doorbell to indoor and outdoor cameras.
The Outdoor Smart Home Gear I’ll Always Recommend
These locks, lights, and other smart home upgrades let you add automation without messing up your home’s vibe.
By 
 Nena Farrell 
Save $150 on Wired Doorbell Pro and Floodlight Cam
If you’re looking for an outdoor combination, you can get both 
Ring’s Starter Pro Kit
, which includes the Wired Doorbell Pro and Floodlight Cam, for $150 off the set. It’s a great option if you want to get a camera feed both at your doorstep and over your garage.
Photograph: Simon Hill
Save to wishlist
Ring
Spotlight Cam Pro Battery
$200
 
Amazon
Bundle and Save on Ring Whole Home Basic Kit
Looking to deck out your whole home? Ring’s 
Whole Home Basic Kit
 is also discounted for $59 off. It includes Ring’s Outdoor Cam Plus Battery, Battery Doorbell, and the Alarm Security Kit, so you can get everything from video surveillance around the outside of your home and sensors to pair with the alarm system for inside of it.
Ring has a variety of subscription plans, which you’ll want since there’s no option to locally store your video footage. That means in order to play any video back to see what set off the camera or who was at the door, you’ll need one of these plans. Here’s a quick breakdown. 
Basic Ring Plan:
 Get the basics with video event playback and smart notifications for one camera. $5 per month or $50 per year. 
Standard Plan:
 All the core Ring experience with enhanced features for all your devices. $10 per month, or $100 per year. 
Premium Plan:
 Ring home the best of the best with our most advanced AI and recording features. $20 per month or $200 per year.
Photograph: Ring
Save to wishlist
Ring
Stick Up Cam Battery
$180
 
Amazon
Ring Coupons: $29 Off Pet Basic Kit + Pet Tag
Ring has 
a pet package
 you can get for a discount, too. You’ll get both Ring’s Indoor Cam and the Pet Tag, which has a QR code that lets anyone who finds your pet scan it and get your information to contact you. It’s 50% off right now, so if you’re looking for new tags and a camera to keep an eye on your favorite furry companion, this is your moment.
Photograph: Simon Hill
Save to wishlist
Amazon
Ring Indoor Cam
$50
 
Amazon
$100
 
Amazon (2-Pack)
Get $40 Off the Ring Outdoor Cam Plus Battery + Battery Doorbell
If you’ve been looking to upgrade your home security system, now’s a great time to invest in the 
Ring Outdoor Cam Plus Battery + Battery Doorbell
 for $30 off (now $160). This discounted Ring bundle includes the Outdoor Cam, plus Battery, Battery Doorbell, and a free 30-day trial of Ring Protect2. With this enhanced Ring bundle, you’ll be able to see all around your home as well as welcome your guests without needing to get up from the couch.
Save to wishlist
Ring Video Doorbell 3
$200
 
Target
There’s a reason these motion-activated, 1080p HD cameras have become ubiquitous: they’re super simple to setup and use. Just charge the battery, stick it by your door, and keep tabs on your place from wherever you are, day and night, through motion history or a live feed you can watch on an app. Two-way communication lets you chat with visitors or scare away porch pirates, while an optional subscription to Ring’s Protect Plan will let you share videos with your community.
