Save this story
Save this story
Rover, rover, send
 those coupons on over—especially since doggie daycare and pet sitting can add up quickly. If you’re like me, you often need an extra set of eyes on your pets, especially when last-minute travel, social, or work plans arise. I want someone responsible to guard over my dogs in my absence, but who is also just as obsessed with them as I am. As summer travel plans come up on the horizon and you’re getting ready to book, let’s get your fur kids squared away first with a Rover promo code.
Score Your Rover Promo Code for 2026
Last-minute weekend away, or need someone to pop in while you’re out to check on your pets? Make sure to check on Rover’s seasonal discounts, especially if you’re new to the platform. You can get up to $30 on your first booking this month, especially if you opt for dog-walking services or boarding.
There’s also a Rover referral code that you can share, so if you’re loving it and want others to join in, you get $20 off Rover services. The credit you receive doesn’t expire, and there's no cap on how many people you can share it with; so come one, come all!
Get a $50 Gift Card When You Refer a Sitter
We all have a friend who loves animals. We also have a friend who is considered the “responsible adult” of the group. Bonus points if both attributes describe the same person, who is more than qualified to be taking care of pets as if they were their own. Had I known about this 
Rover discount code
 pet-sitting promo in the past, I would have jumped on the opportunity.
It’s simple: Rover gives you a 
unique referral link
 within the platform, and then you share it with your qualified candidate. Once your nominee for Rover has their first successful go-around with either sitting or dog walking within the first 90 days of joining the platform, ultimately, you both win. They get a little money, and so do you: a $50 Amazon gift card. If you have pets of your own, you can put this money towards restocking their supplies—like their toys that never seem to last very long.
Give $20, Get $20: Save With the Rover Friend Referral Program
Give a little, get a little, too. The Rover Friend Referral Program helps everyone (and their pets!) win. With this Rover referral code, $20 is up for grabs once your referred friends complete their first booking. They’ll get 
20 bucks off
 and peace of mind that their pet is in good hands, and you get a $20 credit to use on Rover. Use this Rover reward towards dog walking, getting a house sitter, boarding, doggy day care, quick drop-in visits, or even dog training.
Love Dogs? Become a Dog Walker With Rover
If you’re a gig worker or looking for a part-time job, or a full-time job that gets you outside and hanging with Man’s Best Friend, look no further—become a 
dog walker with Rover
. As a Rover dog walker, you get freedom with scheduling, the ability to be your own boss, and a huge selection of clients to choose from. With Rover, you have a nationwide community of pet parents who have dog walking, overnight sitting, boarding, and training needs.
Enjoy Peace of Mind With the Rover Guarantee
Consider meeting your new Rover sitter in a panel interview, where you and your pet get a vibe check with your potential sitter. But to really help all parties and pets feel secure, the 
Rover Guarantee
 is available for emergencies, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. You never want it to come to that, but preparedness is key! Plus, Rover reps are on standby should you need them.
