Buy Now
Multiple Buying Options Available
$3,200
 at Best Buy (65-inch)
$3,200
 at Samsung (65-inch)
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
6
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Incredibly easy to set up. The remote is simple to use. Amazing AI Soccer Mode Pro made games more vivid and improved sound clarity.
TIRED
Colors did not look mind-blowing or realistic. Not as customizable as similar LG or Hisense RGB models. Some minor bugs with streaming apps.
With any new
 television you set up, you want the colors to pop, the surround sound to boom, and the overall experience to mimic that of a movie theater. This is especially true with 
new mini RGB televisions
, which use red, green, and blue pixels to produce a more vibrant display than the white or blue light of a traditional LED or OLED TV. Micro RGB TVs should bring vibrant color and excellent contrast to moody horror films and bright, fast-paced soccer games alike.
Instead, Samsung’s Micro RGB R95H is a really good television that doesn’t offer the precise picture-quality controls and other forms of pop and boom as its competitors do. At $3,200 for the 65-inch model, the Samsung R95H just can’t compete with the superior 
LG Micro RGB Evo
. (The smallest LG size is 75 inches and is priced at $4,500; the 75-inch Samsung R95H also retails for $4,500.) Apart from that disparity in size availability, Samsung’s anti-glare tech proved to be an Achilles’ heel, making movies and some video games look too subdued.
Easy to Set Up and Install
Photograph: John Brandon
Setting up the R95H television is easy and quick, thanks in part to its single pedestal foot that snaps into place in about 10 seconds and doesn’t require screws. Because the TV has a single foot, as opposed to two legs at its edges, I was able to place it atop a smaller hutch. The sides of the 65-inch model stuck out like airplane wings, but the TV was completely stable.
On the side of the R95H television, there are four HDMI ports, including one that is dedicated to gaming (it even has a small video game controller icon) and one for HDMI eARC pass-through audio to a soundbar or AV receiver. There’s also a coaxial connection for cable TV or an antenna, digital optical, two USB ports, and an Ethernet port for a wired connection. Like the Hisense 
UR9 RGB MiniLED
 (8/10, WIRED Recommends), the R95H uses Wi-Fi 6E, which is faster than Wi-Fi 6.
You can also add the Wireless One Connect box—Samsung’s wireless set-top box that connects from about 30 feet away—to add even more external HDMI ports and other connections, like USB. The main advantage of doing so is that it allows you to skip the ports on the R95H itself, which is nice for eliminating cable clutter and also for having a clean wall-mount aesthetic.
Samsung uses its own operating system, called Tizen OS, even though I wish it would switch to the more intuitive Google TV, as Hisense and Sony have. Netflix didn’t install and gave me an error (Samsung is looking into the issue), so I ended up testing that app using a Google TV streamer. While the 
Samsung Frame Pro 2026
 did not require me to use the Samsung SmartThings app during setup, I did have to use the app to add R95H and then go through a two-factor authentication process.
Photograph: John Brandon
On the positive front, I loved using the remote. It’s far more intuitive to use than the LG, Hisense, and TCL remotes that come with their new mini and micro RGB televisions. The R95H remote has fewer buttons, appearing almost like the minimalist 
Apple TV 4K
 remote. The Home button is centered, so it’s easy to find in the dark, although there’s no backlighting. I didn’t like that there are separate AI and mic buttons, since those concepts are merging. The AI button navigates to a screen that explains AI features, while the mic button starts Samsung’s Bixby or Amazon’s Alexa+ bots, depending on which one you want to use.
I tested Alexa+ and was mostly pleased with how it worked, allowing me to adjust the volume and search for obscure ’90s psychological thrillers. You can enable the Alexa voice prompt and skip the mic button on the remote, but that didn’t work as reliably as I would have liked. A few times, saying “Alexa” didn’t trigger the TV.
Benched on Benchmarks
Benchmarks don’t lie, or at least that’s the theory. We all see colors differently, and we respond to contrast and brightness based on our own visual perception. While the R95H met all of the BT.2020 color gamut specs, results of the 
Spears & Munsil Benchmarks
 made clear that the R95H’s performance is not as outstanding as that of competitor LG Micro RGB Evo. I could tell skin-tone variance on the Samsung was not quite as obvious: two people who don’t look that similar, complexion-wise, looked about the same on the screen.
Picture-quality settings didn’t help that much. Dynamic mode (which other TV makers call Vivid) caused some color blooming and bleeding, and Filmmaker mode made the skin tone scene too dark. The AI picture setting worked the best, especially for soccer, but most of the tweaks related to contrast and brightness didn’t help as much as they did on the LG.
Similarly, the demo reel tests were not as impressive as I would have expected for new display tech. The green grass behind a wooden fence was not as bright as I would have liked for a premium TV. The white mist over a snowy mountain was clearly visible but a little washed out. Picture modes and tweaks to white balance, brightness, and color temp didn’t help that much, either.
The actual LCD screen and anti-glare tech that Samsung uses on the R95H made this TV less susceptible to picture-quality tweaks than the LG or Hisense RGB models I tested. On the LG Micro RGB Evo specifically, simple tweaks to color temp and white balance had a more noticeable impact on picture quality, as did most picture modes. For example, using Vivid picture mode improved the benchmark tests, while Dynamic mode on the R95H didn’t move the needle. Buffalo roaming on a field looked a bit flat due to the anti-glare tech. Dark trees in a mountain scene were not distinct enough from the dark background. A yellow flower looked oversaturated using Dynamic mode but too flat and dull using Filmmaker mode.
Testing the Not-So-Brilliant Colors
Photograph: John Brandon
In testing the R95H, I learned that color processing is hugely important on micro RGB televisions as opposed to OLED televisions, because the colors have to be constantly rendered.
My movie testing started with a thud: The moody movie 
Awake
 on Netflix looked too dark and washed out. Standard mode helped only a bit, but upping the brightness just added more gray. More shadow detail also improved the visuals, but this capability was buried in the expert settings.
The movie 
The Creator
 (which also has very dark scenes) looked a bit more colorful, especially during a predawn home invasion scene. 
Tron: Ares
 on Disney+ had deep blacks and reds, which looked too bright on Dynamic mode and too dark on Filmmaker mode. 
Hoppers
 on Disney+ also looked dark, moody, and gray, when it was supposed to be bright and colorful. When bluebirds flew onto tree branches, the scene looked drab rather than its intended shocking blue. 
Project Hail Mary
 on the Fandango at Home app has a scene with rings around a planet, but once again, the blues appeared dim, not brilliant. That same scene on the LG and Hisense RGB models had a stunningly bright look.
Streaming the first 
Dune
 movie over HBO Max to the R95H using Google Cast from my iPhone 17 Pro didn’t work and gave me an error (which Samsung reps are investigating), but it did work over Apple AirPlay. Streaming the movie 
Americana
 from Hulu on my iPad 12.9 worked fine.
Photograph: John Brandon
The Samsung R95H performed OK but not great for video games, sporting events, and news programs compared with other mini RGB models.
This TV supports a 120-Hz refresh rate for the Xbox, with an excellent response time and low latency, helping 
Subnautica 2
 on Xbox Series X look impressively vivid. 
Forza Horizon 6
 on the Xbox tested well, showing a smoky haze over a distinct and colorful mountain highway in the distance. The anti-glare tech helped add some realism to this racing sim, making a white BMW M5 look less like a plastic car on a fake track. 
Senua’s Saga: Hellblade II
 also had a gritty realism during a level near the ocean. If you like “the Netflix look” for shows, where everything looks a bit gray, then the R95H is for you.
On a PC, I tested 
Crimson Desert
 at a 165-Hz refresh rate using the HDMI port marked with the game controller icon. I wasn’t as impressed with the quality or responsiveness, but it was certainly better than using an HDMI port that only supports a 60-Hz or 120-Hz refresh.
Ironically, World Cup soccer games didn’t have that grayed-out look, but that’s because this TV (like the Frame Pro 2025 and 2026 models) has a specific AI Soccer Mode Pro. The colors and clarity looked phenomenal.
I tested a BritBox show called 
Inheritance
 to see if the built-in speakers were up to snuff. This show was a bit hard to hear, but connecting a 
TCL A65K
 soundbar improved the clarity. An NBC News broadcast looked clear and crisp thanks to the anti-glare tech.
If you subscribe to the Samsung Art Store for $7 per month, your R95H can display artwork. However, several paintings of shipwrecks lacked texture and realism, compared with the much more capable Samsung Frame Pro 2026.
In the final tally, the R95H didn’t overwhelm me with brilliant colors and wasn’t as customizable for picture quality as the LG or Hisense models I tested. I wanted the micro RGB tech to be so impressive that the price wasn’t an issue. That’s not to say this is a poor performer; it’s just that the $3,200 price would indicate it is ready to give OLED fans something to think about. What I thought about the most is that the colors didn’t look as mind-blowing as they should.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
$3,200
 at Best Buy (65-inch)
$3,200
 at Samsung (65-inch)
