Save this story
Save this story
If there’s one
 thing Portlanders know, it’s rain. Since founder Meyer Blauer stepped outside on a typical Pacific Northwest rainy day in Portland in 1947, 
Shed Rain
 has stayed committed to making expertly crafted umbrellas to withstand even the rainiest seasons. Known for expertly crafted umbrellas made to last (with a 
lifetime warranty
, to boot!), Shed Rain has various styles and sizes to fit every dry need. We feature a few models in our guide to the 
Best Umbrellas
 and we’ve rounded up some great Shed Rain promo codes to help you save (and stay dry).
Get 15% Off With Our Shed Rain Coupon Code
Now, WIRED has teamed up with Shed Rain to give you the gift of dryness with this limited-time 15% off code. Just input the Shed Rain coupon code at checkout for money off your next umbrella purchase. The offer cannot be combined with other offers besides free shipping.
When you find that perfect umbrella to keep you stylish and dry outside in the rain, paste the promo code in the box at checkout. Once applied, watch the price fall like rain.
Stay Dry (And Save Big) at Shed Rain
Whether you need to keep your family dry under a 
Vortex Golf
 mega umbrella, want to keep sleek and stylish in a 
Stratus
, or need a hardy 
Vortex
 to brave 75-mph winds, Shed Rain has every type of umbrella to keep you dry in the 
rainiest conditions
.
Among the models WIRED has been fans of are the 
Vortex V1
 and the 
WalkSafe Reflective Stick Umbrella
, with the 
Auto Open Jumbo Compact
 named as the best umbrella 
for two people
 and the 
Clear Bubble Umbrella
 making our 
Best Umbrellas list
 for being both stylish and comfortable.
Shop the Latest Collection at Shed Rain
Rainy (and cold) season is upon us yet again, and Shed Rain has some 
new releases
 so you can stay styling and dry this season. This includes the 
AOAC Jumbo Compact
, a compact 2-person umbrella available in a ton of colorways, and 
Auto Open Bubble Stick
, a super stylish clear umbrella.
