Save this story
Save this story
The Harbor Charger,
 New York state's first hybrid-electric public ferry, is gearing up for its first full summer transporting passengers between the city’s South Ferry terminal and Governors Island, the 172-acre oasis across New York Harbor from Lower Manhattan. A draw for New Yorkers and tourists alike, Governors Island hosts outdoor concerts and art installations on its sprawling green spaces.
“A lot of what we do on the island is focused on public recreation, exploring the outdoors and public art,” says Clare Newman, president and CEO of the Trust for Governors Island. “The 
Harbor Charger
 reflects all three of those pillars, with the idea being that the boat ride itself is part of your Governors Island experience.”
The $33 million ferry was designed by Seattle-based Elliott Bay Design Group and built at the Conrad Shipyard in Morgan City, Louisiana. It’s 66 percent faster than the outgoing ferry—the nearly 70-year-old 
Lt. Samuel S. Coursen
 that consumed roughly 420 gallons of fuel daily—and can make the one-way trip in 10 minutes. It’s expected to cut carbon dioxide emissions by at least 600 tons annually.
The 
Harbor Charger
 can carry 1,200 passengers and 30 vehicles using 22 lithium-ion battery packs from Siemens Energy alongside backup diesel generators. The goal was to create a showcase for best-in-class technology, says Newman, who has already fielded requests from other cities interested in electrifying their public watercraft.
Historically, maritime transport has been one of the hardest sectors to decarbonize, due to the physics of moving heavy hulls through dense waterways. In addition to training the crew on swapping a traditional ship wheel for a digital video-game-like console, ferry operators must learn how to maintain, fix, and charge the vessels. Then there’s “ferrynoia,” the fear some island residents have that a software glitch or a faulty battery cell could halt the transportation they rely on for medical care, groceries, and school commutes.
Hybrid-electric ferries are faster, quieter, and less expensive to maintain due to their simpler drivetrains. The 
Harbor Charger
 can operate on battery power for up to 90 minutes before switching to hybrid mode, yielding an estimated $200,000 annual fuel savings, a modest beginning before infrastructure upgrades can be made. Once dockside rapid-charging stations are installed, the ferry will stop using diesel entirely, saving another 800 tons of carbon dioxide per year.
Across the country, San Francisco Bay Ferry is preparing to launch the first high-speed, fully battery-electric passenger ferry in the US, powered with specialized electric charging floats at certain terminals that will draw power from the city grid.
San Francisco’s first electric vessel, the 150-passenger ship is expected to begin service in early 2027 and will make an eight-minute trip from the city’s Ferry Building downtown to Treasure Island, a secluded, 400-acre parcel that the city hopes to reimagine as a destination for festivals, biking, and windsurfing.
“The island has historically hosted festivals, but it’s been hard to get on and off the island,” says Thomas Hall, San Francisco Bay Ferry’s director of operations and customer experience. “We’ll have lounge-style seating, bike storage, and outdoor viewing areas” on the ferry.
Backed by a $55 million federal grant, the agency is purchasing a handful of battery-electric catamarans and ferries to connect downtown hubs with emerging waterfront neighborhoods like Mission Bay and Treasure Island. The five boats, all named by public vote, represent the initial phases of the agency’s goal of building a fully zero-emission fleet by 2035.
Hall expects a more relaxed experience for commuters and visitors alike, even though the ship designs forego traditional concessions and bars for more seating and storage. “We just didn't think the faster trips would justify the extra weight and staffing that would be required,” he says. “Instead, you’ll be able to hear the sounds of the water and be able to hold a conversation without shouting.”
The Harbor Charger’s hybrid-electric system and San Francisco’s battery-powered catamarans are just a couple ways for watercraft to go electric. Cities around the world are using hydrogen fuel cells, wind power, and hydrofoil boats to move commuters, tourists, and residents across their waterways.
Denmark’s e-ferry 
Ellen
 holds the world record for the longest distance sailed by an electric passenger ferry on a single battery charge. The boat can travel 22 nautical miles between the islands of Ærø and Als in southern Denmark, saving an estimated 2,250 tons of carbon dioxide annually using wind-generated power.
Stockholm’s ferries bypass water resistance entirely using hydrofoil technology. The P-12 by Swedish boat manufacturer Candela uses computer-controlled underwater wings to lift its carbon-fiber hull completely out of the water once it exceeds 16 knots, reducing drag and cutting energy consumption by 80 percent. Since it “flies” above the water rather than pushing through, the P-12 can travel faster than a traditional vessel and potentially operate in no-wake zones.
Candela has tested its hydrofoil technology in Washington, DC, where authorities are purportedly considering using it to transport commuters across the Potomac and Anacostia rivers.
Eventually, the Trust for Governors Island hopes to fully electrify its ferry, too. “We made a choice to start by doing a hybrid technology boat,” Newman says, “but we felt strongly that we needed to make the investment and build the boat with enough battery storage to go fully electric one day.”
