Save this story
Save this story
I’ll say it:
 Starz is the “bad boy” of streaming platforms. Although competitor HBO is much better known, Starz’s content has a similar vibe, focusing on bold, oftentimes gritty, and action-heavy original series like 
Power
 and 
Outlander
. Plus, Starz has a catalogue of Lionsgate studio films like 
The Wolf of Wall Street
 and 
Django Unchained
. Starz also has a suite of over 17 channels and on-demand streaming, with original series, blockbuster movies, and niche genres, including the Starz Encore suite, with Spanish-speaking content, action, and western movies.
Starz is also one of the most inexpensive streaming platforms, on average about $7 less than equivalent HBO Max subscriptions. Plus, you can have four simultaneous streams so the whole family can watch what they want—a sad rarity today, where titans like Netflix crack down on multiple streamers. With Starz, you’ll always get ad-free content, offline streaming via downloads, and the aforementioned ability to stream on multiple devices simultaneously. Whether you want intense TV content or old film favorites, now’s a great time to see if Starz is a fit for way less when you use a Starz promo code or Starz coupon.
Grab Your Starz Promo Code: $5 Per Month for 3 Months
Never tried Starz before? Well, you’re in luck. Now’s a great time to check out if this streaming service is right for you with this Starz coupon code for new subscribers. New members can currently get Starz for only $5 per month for three months after signing up. You can stream on up to four devices at the same time, including unlimited HD streaming and downloads, so the whole family can enjoy high-quality, premium content.
How to Get a Starz Free Trial in 2026
If you have a platform like Amazon Prime Video or Hulu, you can sign up for a free seven-day trial of Starz to tack on to your existing subscription to one of those other platforms. Here’s how to get a Starz free trial: you’ll need to sign up through one of these platforms for the week-long free trial, and the trial provides full access to movies and original series. After the period expires, it will automatically convert to a monthly subscription fee of $11 or $12 per month if you don’t cancel before the trial is over.
Save More With a Starz Student Discount
If you’re a student who already has a Hulu subscription, you’re in luck. While there’s no set Starz discount for students, students can add Starz to an existing Hulu account for only $12 per month. With both, you’ll have access to hundreds of TV shows and films across various content and streaming platforms. You’ll need to verify your student status and complete the next steps to add the account to your existing Hulu account.
The 51 Best Shows on Hulu Right Now
A Thousand Blows
, 
Tell Me Lies
, and 
Paradise
 are just a few of the shows you should be watching on Hulu this month.
By 
Jennifer M. Wood
 and 
WIRED Staff
Keep Saving: Starz Coupon Codes for Existing Customers
While a Starz promo code for existing customers is rare, current Starz subscribers can save big by bundling offers through a cable provider or by bundling with an existing streaming account, as mentioned above. Right now, Starz is running promos on their monthly and annual plans, with plans as low as $5 per month, with savings of 58% for three months, and Starz deals for an annual subscription for as low as $3 per month when you prepay $36 for 12 months.
