Save this story
Save this story
T-Mobile for Business
 is the upgrade a small business owner will find useful, boasting unlimited plans, a super-fast 5G network, and customer service support whenever you need it. With no data overages, surprise fees, or annual service contracts, there’s an affordable plan for any type of business. Plus, without an annual contract, you’re never locked into anything long term, and as your business changes and grows, your plan can too.
With T-Mobile for Business, you can just focus on your growing business, knowing that you’ll have unlimited data and texting in over 215 countries, four full-flight Wi-Fi sessions per year, and unlimited one hour Wi-Fi sessions with streaming on flights, so wherever your business takes you, T-Mobile Business will be there. And we at WIRED have a T-Mobile promo code and other deals to help you save on essential plans so you can stay connected.
Lock in a Big Sign-Up Bonus for Business Internet
If T-Mobile Business is right for you (and your business), be sure to 
check business internet eligibility
 in your area. All you’ll need to do is enter your business address on T-Mobile’s site to see the plans available near you. And as an added bonus, you can get a Virtual Prepaid Mastercard when you activate (allow 10 weeks). But this deal isn’t going to be around forever, so act soon to get big rewards on the internet service you already need.
Switch to T-Mobile Business and Score a Prepaid Card Reward
No matter how your small business changes and grows, you can feel secure knowing that your 
5G Business Internet
 rate will be locked in for five years, guaranteed. Plus, T-Mobile has business experts available to assist in finding the perfect plan and hardware to support any and all of your business needs. And (perhaps best of all) for a limited time, you can receive cash via a Virtual Prepaid Mastercard when you sign up (allow 10 weeks).
Bundle and Save on Your T-Mobile Business Plan
You can get 
business internet
 at an even lower price when you bundle it with other T-Mobile plans. You’ll get huge discounts when you pair your business internet with any voice line. Plus, the offer is backed by the five year price guarantee, meaning your rate won't change for five years. There’s also no annual contracts, with flexible month-to-month services on T-Mobile’s fast 5G network.
Pick the Right T-Mobile Business Phone Plan for Your Team
There are a few T-Mobile Business phone plans to choose from, so you’ll want to make sure you’re choosing the right plan for your small business and its needs. The first plan is the basic CoreMobile plan, which has unlimited hotspots with 5GB high-speed data, 50GB of premium data, and unlimited talk and text. Next is ProMobile, which has all the above benefits, as well as enhanced security, premium and hotspot data, and in-flight Wi-Fi. The top tier is SuperMobile, which also includes all previous perks, as well as intelligent network performance, satellite coverage, unlimited premium data, and more mobile hotspot data.
Upgrade to iPhone 17 for Less With T-Mobile
The WIRED Gear team 
loves the iPhone 17
. We even have a guide to 
which iPhone 17 is best for you
, including a long list of our favorite 
iPhone 17 accessories and cases
 so that you can make sure your phone is fitted with all the right gear. Right now, you can get the 
iPhone 17 Pro for under $100 at T-Mobile
. All you need to do to score this deal is switch to T-Mobile and bring your number on either an Experience Beyond or Better Value plan.
Get a Third Line Free When You Activate a New Business Plan
Right now, if you’re a new customer and you activate a new 
business plan
, you’ll get a third line for free! This T-Mobile discount is for any new customer activating two new lines on a new eligible voice plan, which includes: SuperMobile, ProMobile, CoreMobile, Business Unlimited Ultimate+, Experience More for Business, and Experience Beyond for Business plans.
T-Mobile Discounts for Military and Veterans
If you or your family is an 
active military member or veteran
, you can save big at T-Mobile. Military and veteran families can save $720 per year when they have four lines on Experience plans. With the most popular Experience plan, you’ll have the option to upgrade your phone every two years with the same deals new T-Mobile customers get, along with a five-year price-lock guarantee. Plus, you’ll get unlimited premium data and texting, free Netflix with ads, Apple TV at only $3 per month, and up to 4K UHD video streaming. To get this deal, you just need to verify the military status of the account holder within 45 days and maintain a valid military line.
