Save this story
Save this story
Target has set
 itself apart from big box retailers like Walmart by having trendy clothes, homegoods branded by reality TV stars and, of course, in-store Starbucks. With malls and traditional department stores in decline, Target has even become the go-to destination for stay-at-home parents who need to get out of the house (and maybe get a Frappuccino). In recent years, the store has cemented themselves as a notch above similar retailers with exclusive products with a more high-end feel, while still being inexpensive and regularly 
holding sales
 for even more savings. Carrying everything from 
outdoor gear
 to 
clothes
 to 
tech
 and grocery items, save on your shopping spree with gift card bonuses, Target Circle coupons, as well as weekly deals up to 50% off—including this Target promo code to get $50 off.
Photograph: Louryn Strampe
Save to wishlist
Welly
First Aid Kit
$25
 
Amazon
$25
 
Target
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Save to wishlist
Zojirushi
Zutto 5-Cup Drip Coffeemaker
$90
 
Amazon
$84
 
Walmart
$90
 
Williams-Sonoma
$90
 
Target
New Target Circle Members Can Score a $50 Off Target Coupon
One of the best kept secrets to saving sitewide at Target? Get $50 off orders of $50 or more when you’re approved for a Target Circle Credit or Debit Card. As a bonus, you can also get a $50 credit when you open a Target Circle Reloadable account and spend $50 at Target. The good news is that with this deal, no code is required. Simply sign up for a Target Circle Credit or Debit card, and when approved, you’ll get $50 savings on a purchase of $50 or more.
Another benefit of being a 
Target Circle
 member? Exclusive coupons and rotating weekly 
Circle Deals
. There are countless discounts spanning across all departments, but this week’s highlights include a $15 Target gift card when you spend $100 on household essentials, 25% off Disney toys, 40% off Dyson vacuums, 25% off beauty and wellness products, and 40% off women’s dresses, exclusively for Circle members.
Get 50% Off Target Circle 360, a Free Gift Every Month + 5% Off Everything
This membership program rewards you for doing the shopping you already are. 
Target Circle
 members get 5% discounts in-store and online, free two-day shipping, no-rush returns, and a ton more perks. But the paid Target Circle 360 membership ($11 per month or $99 per year, which amounts to just a little more than $8 per month) unlocks better discounts, which gets you early access to online sales and free next day delivery. Plus, if you’re not sure if the plan is right for you, customers can also start a 14 Day Free trial to see its full benefits.
More perks for 
Circle 360
 members include an extra 30 days to return items, monthly freebies, and same-day delivery on Target, plus other stores like CVS, PetSmart, Petco, Lowe's, Office Depot, and 7 Eleven. Plus, Circle cardholders get an extra 5% off, free shipping, and 50% off Circle 360 membership fees. Cardholders even get $50 off annual 
Circle
 memberships (making it $49 per year instead of $99).
Get 25% Off Hair Care at Target
Target brings coupon clipping into the modern day with 
Target Weekly ads
, which are rotating deals on trending and seasonal brands and items. This week, you can get 25% off hair care products, pool toys and floaties for $10, 
pool accessories
 starting at $30, 
sunscreen
 for $7, and more.
Courtesy of Amazon
Save to wishlist
Blue Lizard
Sensitive Mineral Sunscreen, SPF 50
$15
 
Amazon
$18
 
Target
$16
 
Walmart
Photograph: Kat Merck
Save to wishlist
BabylissPro
Nano Titanium Prima3000 Ionic Hair Straightener
$210
 
Amazon
$240
 
Walmart
$240
 
$147
 
(39% off)
 
Ulta
$210
 
Target
Students Can Save 50% on Target Circle 360
The Target 
student discount
 gets you a Circle 360 membership for $5 per month, rather than the regular pricing of $11 ($48 in savings per year on fees). To be eligible for student discounts, you’ll need to upload a student ID, class schedule, or tuition receipt for proof.
Other customers can save too, including 50% off for those on 
Governmental Assistance
. Members who qualify can get free, fast shipping, unlimited same-day delivery and more at just $5 per month—$6 off the regular price.
There are even more ways to save. Customers who are enrolled in Target 360 get tons of perks, like one free gift every month, early sale access, free same day delivery, and free 2-day delivery.
Shop College Dorm Room Essentials at Target
Shopping at Target is one of the easiest ways to save when you’re stocking up on back-to-school essentials, with everything you need to outfit your college space, including coffee makers, notebooks, laptops, pencils, bags, and more. 
College dorm deals
 are also intuitively organized by popular picks, new and featured items, and by room or product type, making it easier than ever to find what you need and save money while you’re at it.
1 
/ 22
Photograph: Nena Farrell
Purpose Planner
$35
$27
Amazon (B5)
Buy
Get 15% Off With a Target Registry
Celebrating life’s big milestones has never been easier (or cheaper) with Target Circle. As you get close to your baby or wedding registry event date, you’ll receive a 15% off storewide Target Circle offer that you can actually redeem twice. Just make sure your registries are active for at least two weeks before.
You’ll get your 15% off coupon for the baby registry eight weeks before your expected due date and you’ll get the wedding registry offer during the week of your event date. And just like that, you’ll be getting 15% off your next in-store or online purchase. Although the offer is limited to one per Target Circle member, you can redeem it up to two times within 12 months. But the offer expires in 6 months, so make sure you check the expiration date on the offer. There are a few ways to redeem: you can Wallet in the Target app, enter your phone number on the keypad or self-checkout screen, or scan your offers barcode on target.com/circle/offers.
Discover More Discounts in the Weekly Target Ad
One of the best ways to save at Target is to channel your mom’s couponing and keep an eye out for the Weekly Ad. These offers focus specifically on certain departments, like electronics or groceries. For the Weekly Ad, you can use the search bar to find discounts on specific products or brands, or you can use the "Browse By Category” button to sift through departments, just like you’d do if you were shopping in-store! Coupons featured in the Weekly Ad are based on in-store deals that are closest to you (unless it mentions all stores). To find these, you’ll need to select the location nearest to you or look it up with your zip code.
There are also 
top deals
 in various categories, and online 
clearance
 items for major coin off major products. These can be found under "Deals" on the menu. These deals also include themed sale events, which usually entails freebies, gift cards, and up to an extra 50% off featured products.
