Save this story
Save this story
I had been
 leery of prepared meal delivery services. They gave me flashbacks to those delivery diet plans sold on late night television in the 1990s. And so 
Tempo Meals
, a spin-off prepared meal brand from meal kit service Home Chef, came as a pleasant surprise even after 
testing dozens of meal kits
.
Tempo meals look like TV dinners, but they’ve never been frozen, thanks to advances in packaging technology. The beef barbacoa and sous-vide chicken I tried actually retained moisture and tenderness. Green beans were still vibrantly green, with a little bit of snap. They’re cooked in a commissary kitchen, and shipped to your doorstep in special packaging that prevents spoilage without using a bunch of preservatives. Heat-and-eat meals won’t ever be quite as good as freshly cooked meals, but especially when I reheated them in an air fryer they got closer than expected.
Tempo is especially known for high-protein and GLP-1 plans created in consultation with dietitians, helping prevent people from losing muscle mass when on calorie-restricted diets or just in midlife. Meals are $11 to $13 a serving at regular price, but Tempo Meals discount codes are available. For now, with a Tempo Meals promo code, you can get up to 60% off your first box of Tempo, with discounts throughout the first month.
Score 30% Off Your First Month of Four Boxes
Like a lot of meal delivery services, Tempo Meals wants you to try them out in hopes you enjoy the service and decide you can’t live without it. And so Home Chef offers a Tempo Meals coupon code for new customers. Depending on the Tempo promo code, this may be a straight discount of 30% off for the first four weeks. Or it may be 50% or 60% off the first box, and then discounts off the next month of boxes. Right now, you can also sign up for a lifetime free breakfast item. For previous customers who for whatever reason paused their Tempo subscription, there are Tempo Meals promo codes for existing customers that show up in your inbox. These may automatically be applied when you visit the Tempo website.
Activate the Heroes Discount to Get 50% Off Now and 10% Off for a Lifetime
Most Tempo Meals promo codes are good for deals during the introductory week only. But the 
Tempo Meals heroes discount
 applies for life for military personnel, first responders, teachers, doctors, nurses, and other hospital employees. To get the heroes discount from Tempo, you’ll need to verify your identity with the ID.Me system. After this, you get a permanent discount—pretty much the best discounts available if you plan on using Tempo long-term for a high-protein meal program.
Secure Instant Savings by Applying Your Tempo Meals Coupon
Often, Home Chef offers multiple Tempo Meals coupons at the same time. These can usually be activated on the site by clicking on the right pop-up. After you enter your area code and email address to verify that Tempo serves your area, you’ll be asked a couple questions about your meal preferences, before selecting how many meals you want each week—anywhere from six to 20 meals. At checkout, make sure the right Tempo Meals discount code has been applied to your order. This may include free shipping for the first week, and an extra item such as free breakfast.
