Save this story
Save this story
For the first
 time in more than a century, Spain witnessed a 
total solar eclipse
. The astronomical phenomenon, which was also partially visible in some regions of northern North America, much of Europe, and western Africa, offered an unusual and particularly photogenic sight due to the sun’s position just above the horizon.
The solar corona glows as the moon completely obscures the sun during the total solar eclipse on Arenal Beach in Llucmajor, Mallorca.

Photograph: Jaime Reina/Getty Images
The path of totality traversed the northern hemisphere from west to east. Its path began in the Arctic Ocean, north of Greenland, continued west of Iceland, and crossed the North Atlantic. Later, at exactly 8:30 pm central European summer time, the shadow cast by the moon reached the Iberian Peninsula.
People gathered at El Cerro del Tío Pío Park in Madrid to observe the total solar eclipse.

Photograph: Pierre-Philippe Marcou/Getty Images
Regions such as Galicia, Asturias, Castile and León, Madrid, Aragon, Catalonia, the Valencian Community, and the Balearic Islands experienced the path of totality, while the rest of the country saw a partial eclipse.
The solar corona glows as the moon completely blocks the sun during the totality phase, as seen from San Asensio in the La Rioja region.

Photograph: Ander Gillenea/Getty Images
The event lasted about four and a half hours, while the total darkening of the sky lasted just under two minutes, allowing various space agencies to conduct scientific experiments along the path of totality.
Fans of Real Madrid watch the solar eclipse through special glasses before the Teresa Herrera Trophy match between RC Deportivo A Coruña and Real Madrid at Riazor Stadium.

Photograph: José Manuel Álvarez Rey/Getty Images
One of the most notable projects involved a NASA mission tracking the moon’s shadow using a WB-57 high-altitude research aircraft that flew at 50,000 feet. A team of scientists sought to gather new data on the dynamics of the solar corona—the sun’s outermost atmosphere—which can only be studied in detail during total eclipses.
The total solar eclipse as observed from Palencia, Spain.

Photograph: Leon Neal/Getty Images
The space agency also brought students from various universities in the US to Iceland and Spain to launch scientific balloons before, during, and after the event. The goal was to analyze how the temporary darkening of the sky caused by the eclipse alters conditions in Earth’s atmosphere, gathering information that will help better understand the effects of these astronomical events on the environment.
Beachgoers view the eclipse in Llucmajor, Mallorca.

Photograph: Jaime Reina/Getty Images
Later this month, a 
partial lunar eclipse
 will be visible across the Americas, offering new opportunities for researching the cosmos. In the meantime, we have the images of Wednesday’s solar spectacle to gawk at.
The moment following totality of the solar eclipse over the coastal lagoon of La Albufera in Valencia.

Photograph: Jose Jordan/Getty Images
Several people watch the total solar eclipse from Arenal Beach in Llucmajor, Mallorca.

Photograph: Jaime REINA /Getty Images
People prepare to watch the total solar eclipse from Arenal Beach in Llucmajor, Mallorca.

Photograph: Jaime Reina/Getty Images
A man watches the total solar eclipse from the port of Tarragona, in eastern Spain.

Photograph: Josep Lago/Getty Images
A view of the solar eclipse from Segur de Calafell, Spain.

Photograph: Eric Alonso/Getty Images
A girl watches the total solar eclipse in the port of Tarragona, in eastern Spain.

Photograph: Josep Lago/Getty Images
The eclipse in the moments following totality, as seen from La Zurriola Beach in San Sebastián.

Photograph: Thomas Coex/Getty Images
This story originally appeared on
 
WIRED en Español
 
and has been translated from Spanish.
