Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Deals
Favorite powers
Apple Watch deals
Now Reading
Headphone deals
Deals under $30
Vacuum Cleaner Deals
Tech Deals
Our Favorite Neck Fan
Jackery Portable Power Station Deal
Smart Bird Feeder Deals
Walmart Deals
Yeti Cooler Deals
Oura Ring deal
Action Cam Deals
Save this story
Save this story
We on the
 WIRED Reviews team are huge fans of 
smartwatches
 and 
fitness trackers
 in general. Rather than needing to pull out a phone for quick actions like accessing texts and music, you can do it at a glance at your watch. Plus, you can track your workouts, heart rate, and other health metrics without needing another device.
If you're already an 
iPhone
 user, we think the 
Apple Watch Series 11
 is the 
best Apple Watch
 for most people. It usually hangs around at an MSRP of $399 and a sale price of $299. At $279 right now, it's more than $20 below its lowest price this year. (In fact, we don't expect it'll be this low price again until Bl*ck Fr*day.)
Photograph: Michael Sawh
Photograph: Michael Sawh
Photograph: Adrienne So
Photograph: Adrienne So
Save to wishlist
Apple
Watch Series 11
$399
 
$279
 
(30% off)
 
Amazon
$399
 
Apple
$399
 
$299
 
(25% off)
 
Best Buy
$399
 
$329
 
(18% off)
 
Walmart
We gave the Apple Watch Series 11 a coveted 
9/10 WIRED Recommends
 rating because of its long battery life, iOS-integrated health updates, satellite messaging for off-grid communication, and blood oxygen monitoring.
For a long time, short battery life plagued Apple Watches, but this watch can last a full 24-hour day. This helps to more accurately track important health metrics like your full workout routine, plus an entire night's sleep. The watch has the typical 
fitness stats and workout tracking
 metrics, like heart rate, sleep score, and vitals and cycle tracking, which can be helpful for monitoring health problems or staying on track with health goals. It also has a new AI-enabled Workout Buddy that serves as an invisible fitness coach inside your watch.
The Watch Series 11 watch also includes the full suite of Apple's advanced health features, including monitoring for signs of hypertension and the ability to take electrocardiograms and track blood oxygen levels. It also has even more advanced safety features, such as FDA-cleared high-blood-pressure notifications, Fall Detection, and satellite messaging (on models with cellular connectivity).
Not every new Apple iteration is worth upgrading to or investing in, but even nearly a year out from its launch, the 
Apple Watch Series 11
 is the best 
smartwatch
 and 
fitness tracker
 for hands-free phone use and for monitoring health and day-to-day activities. At 30 percent off (or $120 less) than the lowest price we've seen this year, now's the best time to buy.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
Read next
Read next
The Best Amazon Prime Day Deals Sound Better Than Ever
