Save this story
Save this story
The UK government has laid out a $1.47 billion plan to shake its 
dependence
 on foreign-made 
artificial intelligence
 hardware.
Under the measures, announced Monday, the UK will spend more than $1 billion on a national AI supercomputer. It will be stocked with $530 million worth of hardware, including $200 million that will go toward specialist inference chips for processing AI tasks. Priority will be given to up-and-coming British firms in the procurement process; the government pointed to Olix and Fractile, two UK startups developing new styles of inference chip, as potential beneficiaries. British researchers and startups are expected to be able to use the supercomputer starting in 2030.
The new measures are part of a 
broader effort
 by the UK government to minimize dependence on foreign powers for access to AI products and services—a move made more urgent by the 
apparent souring
 of the relationship between the US and its European counterparts. The European Union outlined a 
similar “tech sovereignty” proposal
 last week. This year, European leaders have found themselves in confrontation with the Trump administration over issues ranging from the 
sovereignty of Greenland
 to 
tariff policy
 to 
immigration,
 leading to speculation about a 
deterioration in the NATO alliance
. Against that backdrop, a dependence on American technology could be a liability, wielded by the US against European countries as leverage.
“The geopolitical settlement of the last 40 years has ruptured—and many would argue is gone for good,” UK technology secretary Liz Kendall said during an April speech at the Royal United Services Institute, a defense and security think tank. “For Britain, AI sovereignty is about reducing overdependencies and increasing resilience.”
“There are those who say this race is already lost—that it is too late to challenge the dominance of the US or China in AI chips—but I do not accept such defeatism,” she added.
Last November, the UK began to establish “
AI growth zones
,” regions across the country with fewer administrative and regulatory barriers to building data centers. In April, it 
launched a $675 million venture fund
, SovAI, for investing in homegrown AI startups in fields ranging from model development to agentic AI to drug discovery. The supercomputer hardware plan is the latest piece of that expanding mosaic.
Though the UK is home to prominent firms like ARM, whose chip architectures are ubiquitous across the globe, semiconductor design and manufacturing is otherwise dominated by American and Asian companies. By acting as a large customer to domestic chip startups, the UK government is aiming to both support their growth and incentivize them to remain in the country long-term.
“Historically, the UK government has just been impenetrable … the willingness to back UK businesses with innovative technologies with hard contracts is a really important milestone,” says Ed Bussey, CEO at Oxford Science Enterprises, a venture capital firm that participated in Fractile’s 2024 seed round. “If we can build out a procurement pipeline of revenues for these companies, it helps to anchor them here.”
The changes unfolding in AI datacenter design—moving away from homogenous fleets of chips toward a mix of specialist hardware for different purposes—represent an opportunity for the UK to carve out a strategically important niche.
“You can't do everything on your own, so you really have to be militant about what areas you want to specialize in,” says Keegan McBride, director of science and technology at the Tony Blair Institute, a think tank founded by the former UK prime minister. “The UK is playing a very smart game … If they get it right, there’s a massive opportunity. If other companies begin to depend on British chips, that gives you leverage.”
