Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Amazon Prime Day Deals
Yeti Cooler Deals
Oura Ring Deals
Apple Deals
Our Favorite Espresso Machine Is on Sale
Deals Under $100
Apple Watch Deals
Headphones Deals
Vacuum Deals
Air Conditioner Deals
Smart Bird Feeder Deals
Beauty Tech Deals
Save this story
Save this story
Roborock is well
 known for its line of robot vacuums, but there are a lot of lines to familiarize yourself with if you're trying to learn the brand. There's the Saros series, the Qrevo Curv series, the Qrevo Edge series, and more. But if you're feeling overwhelmed, no need: There's one model I recommend above all others to shop this Prime Day.
A variety of Roborock's 
robot vacuums
 are on sale for Prime Day, including its newest Saros 20 model, and even the viral one with 
the arm that sticks out
. But there's a different model I'd recommend snagging instead on this made-up sale holiday: The 
Roborock Qrevo Curv 2 Flow
, a newer member of Roborock's more affordable Qvero Curv line. It already had a nice price point, and now it's even better for all you get.
(Looking for more great deals? Check out our roundup of the 
Absolute Best Prime Day Deals
.)
Get $300 Off One of Roborock’s Newest Vacuums
Photograph: Adrienne So
Photograph: Adrienne So
Photograph: Adrienne So
Video: Adrienne So
Save to wishlist
Roborock
Qrevo Curv 2 Flow
$1,000
 
$700
 
(30% off)
 
Amazon
$1,000
 
$715
 
(28% off)
 
Roborock
You might find bigger discounts on more expensive vacuums, but former WIRED reviewer Adrienne So tested both the 
Qrevo Curv 2 Flow
 and the Roborock Saros 20 that came out this year, and her results with the Curv 2 were better. The Saros 20 is more powerful, but it wasn't able to get itself out of her fireplace even with its AdaptLift technology, while the Curv 2 was able to identify the drop in the first place and keep itself away. The Curv 2 also didn't leave debris behind like the Saros 20 did when transitioning from her hard floors to her carpet.
The Curv 2 is also a great choice if your home has mostly hard floors, since it has an extra-wide, self-cleaning spinning roller mop that applies pressure to really scrub floors clean. It has 20,000 Pa of suction, which is still an impressive level even if it's lower than that of the Saros 20, and overall is a great vacuum for the price, even when it isn't on sale. If I were shopping for only one Roborock robot vacuum during Prime Day, this is the one I'd buy.
Curious about other options? Here are a few other Roborock deals going on.
More Roborock Robot Vac Deals
Roborock Saros 20 for $1,345 ($255 off)
:
 This newer model has serious suction but doesn't do as well with obstacles like fireplaces and carpet-to-hard-floor transitions.
Roborock Saros 10R for $885 ($715 off)
:
 This is an older vacuum in the Saros line, but it still packs 22,000 Pa of suction and a side arm brush for corner cleaning.
Roborock Saros Z70 for $1,085 ($915 off)
:
 If Roborock ever caught your eye with its arm-equipped robovac, this is the one you're thinking of. When we 
tested the Saros Z70 last year
, the OmniGrip didn't quite work yet to pick things like socks up and put them away, but there's always hope it could get better.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
