Save this story
Save this story
experts say this
 summer's main threat of lettuce-borne cyclospora 
may finally be waning
, with investigators having 
identified the likely culprit
 as iceberg lettuce sold through Taylor Farms de Mexico. But the fact remains that commercially-produced lettuce isn't always safe.
The FDA 
continues to flag cluster outbreaks
 of cyclosporiasis and salmonellosis, with a recent cyclosporiasis outbreak 
possibly tied to parsley and cilantro
. If you're not growing your own food, you can never truly know what’s in it or on it.
For almost two years, I have been 
growing my own
 organic salad greens and herbs—and even vegetables like beans and zucchini—right in my living room in a Lettuce Grow Farmstand, producing enough food for my family of three to avoid purchasing nearly all our vegetables from the grocery store. Here's what my garden looks like right now:
Photograph: Kat Merck
Photograph: Kat Merck
A full-size setup like Lettuce Grow's is an investment, but one that's likely to pay for itself over time; the water pump and LEDs don't use a noticeable amount of power, and all Farmstands come with their own first round of seedlings and enough nutrients to last a couple of grows.
Photograph: Kat Merck
Photograph: Kat Merck
Save to wishlist
Lettuce Grow
Farmstand
$574
 
$459
 
(20% off)
 
Lettuce Grow (Outdoor, Small)
$973
 
$778
 
(20% off)
 
Lettuce Grow (Indoor, Small)
$1,123
 
$898
 
(20% off)
 
Lettuce Grow (Indoor, Medium)
$1,423
 
$1,138
 
(20% off)
 
Lettuce Grow (Indoor, Large)
I have few complaints about the Farmstand, other than that it's rarely on sale. (Shown is the Medium Indoor, which has space for 24 plants.)
For a more in-depth look at the growing process and maintenance required with the Farmstand, 
see my full review
. Note that I do mention pest problems, but Lettuce Grow now recommends quarantining and treating seedlings as soon as they arrive, which did solve the problem with my current batch of Lettuce Grow-provided seedlings.
Save 20 Percent With Code SUNGROWTH20
Love
 WIRED? 
Add us as a preferred source on Google
 
to see more of us.
