Save this story
Save this story
Laptops keep getting
 more expensive. Many of my 
favorite laptops
 to recommend for budget-conscious shoppers are hundreds more today than they were six months ago.
Then there's the HP OmniBook 5 to save the day. Don't let the retail price of $1,300 throw you off, either. This configuration has a 14-inch OLED screen, 16 GB of RAM, and 512 GB of storage, but it's frequently discounted. And right now, it's 42 percent off, bringing the price 
down to just $750
, $550 off its retail price.
Photograph: Luke Larsen
Save to wishlist
HP
OmniBook 5
$1,300
 
$750
 
(42% off)
 
HP (14-inch)
$1,050
 
$650
 
(38% off)
 
HP (16-inch)
$930
 
Amazon (14-inch)
Importantly, this is also the model that comes with a Qualcomm Snapdragon X Plus chip inside. While HP also has Intel and AMD versions of this same laptop on offer, the Qualcomm model gets you long-lasting battery life, akin to what you get on a MacBook.
I already mentioned the OLED display this comes with, which is beautiful. The range of color blows a typical IPS display out of the water, especially the ones that typically come at this price. It is a bit reflective, though, as it's a glossy display. And while the standard resolution of 1920 x 1200 isn't quite as sharp as a 
MacBook Neo
, the extreme contrast ratio of OLED is undefeatable. There's also a discount on the 16-inch model, which is 
even cheaper at $650
 but doesn't come with a touchscreen. It also appears bit less sharp since it's the same resolution stretched across a larger screen.
Another strong suit for this device is its portability. The 14-inch model is only half an inch thick (and the 16-inch is only a hair thicker), right in line with the MacBook Neo. Combined with the thin bezels around the screen, the design has a modern, svelte look. HP even throws in a USB-A port for good measure, without adding extra thickness to the chassis.
Photograph: Luke Larsen
There's really just one major problem I have with this laptop: It has a crappy touchpad that is no fun to use. This is typical of cheap touchpads, but with the MacBook Neo around, it's harder to excuse something like this. I've spent a lot of time with this laptop over the months, and eventually I started to get used to this weakness. But every time I have to click and drag, I get frustrated.
Aside from that one issue, it's hard to find much else to complain about on the HP OmniBook 5. I will say—if you're looking for an even deeper discount—HP also sells the cheaper 
HP OmniBook 3
 that I've tested recently. It comes with a Qualcomm Snapdragon X chip, which is slightly less powerful but gets even better battery life. It even comes with an OLED display—it's just nowhere near as thin or pretty as the OmniBook 5. But it's easily the best laptop you can buy 
for under $600
.
For more laptop recommendations, check out my guide to the 
Best Cheap Laptops
 or the overall 
Best Laptops
. Both are full of good options that I've tested myself, some of which are on sale right now.
