Save this story
Save this story
If you've been
 Oura-curious but couldn't justify the price, this might be the deal that changes your mind. Both the Ring 4 and the Ring 4 Ceramic are nearly half off right now, making this one of the best opportunities I've seen to pick one up.
(For more great deals, check out our roundup of the 
Absolute Best Prime Day Deals
.)
Save More Than $100 on an Oura Ring
Photograph: Simon Hill
Photograph: Simon Hill
Photograph: Simon Hill
Save to wishlist
Oura
Ring 4
$349
 
$244
 
(30% off)
 
Oura (Silver)
$349
 
$215
 
(38% off)
 
Amazon (Silver)
$399
 
$244
 
(39% off)
 
Best Buy (Silver)
Courtesy of Oura
Photograph: Simon Hill
Save to wishlist
Oura
Ring 4 Ceramic
$499
 
$279
 
(44% off)
 
Oura
$499
 
$246
 
(51% off)
 
Amazon
The Oura Ring is our favorite smart ring and, by extension, one of our 
favorite fitness
 and 
sleep trackers
. It's comfortable, discreet, and, most important, consistently accurate. It tracks activity, sleep, and key health metrics without demanding much attention from you.
Oura recently launched the Ring 5, which is about 40 percent smaller than the Ring 4. Having worn both, I can definitely notice the difference in size and weight. Oura also says the newer model is more accurate thanks to more powerful LEDs and redesigned sensors that sit closer to the skin.
That said, in my testing, I haven't seen a meaningful difference in the data. The Ring 5 is an impressive refinement, but the Ring 4 was already one of the most reliable wearables I've used, and its tracking remains excellent. Unless you're particularly excited about a lighter, slimmer design, this discount makes the older model a very compelling buy. Plus, the Ceramic's pastel colorways are some of my favorite finishes Oura has made, and they're not available on the Ring 5 (yet).
Specs (Oura Ring 4)
Weight
3.3 to 5.2 grams (depending on size)
Materials
Titanium with physical vapor deposition (PVD) coating (for Black, Silver, Brushed Silver, Gold, and Rose Gold); Diamond-like Carbon (DLC) coating for Stealth
Battery Life
Up to 8 days
Charging Time
20 to 80 minutes
Water Resistance
Up to 100 meters
Sizes
4 to 15
Colors
Silver, Black, Stealth, Brushed Silver, Gold, and Rose Gold; Ceramic finishes in Midnight, Tide, Cloud, and Petal
Compatibility
iOS and Android
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
