Save this story
Save this story
It’s the depths
 of summer. It’s still stultifyingly, dangerously hot. Going outside is a fool’s game unless you have 500 SPF sunblock and a 
personal AC unit
. Be sensible: Stay inside and enjoy some of the best movies currently streaming instead.
August’s offerings include the return of 
Avatar: The Last Airbender
 on Paramount+, with a brand new adventure returning to 
the cast of the fan-favorite animated series
 as adults and struggling with newfound responsibilities. The same theme carries over to 
Heartstopper Forever
 on Netflix, where teen romance is dashed against the rocks of looming adulthood.
Elsewhere, there’s a double helping of liminal space creepiness from Japan, with the exceptional live action horror 
Exit 8
 on Shudder, and the action epic 
Demon Slayer The Movie: Infinity Castle
—one of the most successful 
animated
 movies in Japanese history—on Crunchyroll. And, if you’d rather not have to 
think
 in this heat, enjoy an action-packed pairing of 
Mortal Kombat 2
 and 
Masters of the Universe
, two films that aren’t so much “so bad they’re good”, as they are “turn brain off now for fun time.”
Here are WIRED’s picks of the best movies to watch right now.
Avatar Aang: The Last Airbender
Water. Earth. Fire. Air. Only the Avatar is master of all four elements—but Aang, the latest inheritor of the mantle, vanished when he was most needed. Frozen in suspended animation for decades, Aang was awakened by waterbender Katara and her warrior brother Sokka. Joined by earthbender Toph, and firebending enemy-turned-ally Zuko, Team Avatar went on to save the world. Now, as adults, they face an even more daunting task: rebuilding it. Yet with Aang the last living airbender, the world remains out of balance—until he discovers Tagah, an ancient airbender suspended as he once was. No longer alone, the group set out to find an ancient artifact belonging to a forgotten Avatar, in the hope it can restore airbending to the world. But why was Tagah frozen centuries ago, and can he be trusted now?
A direct sequel to the brilliant and beloved 2005 Nickelodeon animated series, this feature length adventure is a more mature outing, growing up with its original audience, and delivering some of the most breathtaking animation you’ll see all year. Sadly robbed of a wide theatrical release—and victim of a notorious leak of the full film—
Avatar Aang
 still shines on the small screen.
Watch on Paramount+
Heartstopper Forever
One of the most successful comic book adaptations in years, Alice Oseman’s 
Heartstopper
 reaches its long-awaited conclusion with a final movie. Fans have followed the love story of Nick (Kit Connor) and Charlie (Joe Locke) through high school, battling early doubts, coming-out confusion, and mental health struggles along the way. Yet as Nick embarks for university, the pair are forced to ask whether their relationship can survive—especially when friends Elle (Yasmin Finney) and Tao (William Gao) are choosing to break up after graduation. A beautiful ode to young love and queer joy, 
Heartstopper Forever
 fizzes with emotion. Grab tissues.
Watch on Netflix
Mortal Kombat II
It’s not big (only $129 million at the box office) and it’s not clever (superpowered martial artists stave off an interdimensional invasion via the fine diplomatic art of punching) but 
Mortal Kombat II
 is a hell of a lot of fun. Picking up from the stinger of 2021’s cinematic reboot of the long-running fighting game series, the focus switches to washed-up action movie star Johnny Cage (Karl Urban), who must prove he has what it takes to stand as one of Earthrealm’s defenders. Diving​ into some of the weirder fantasy elements of the source material, director Simon McQuoid delivers some incredible action set pieces, with fight scenes that deliver all the brutality fans expect, and a surprisingly sharp comedic edge throughout.
Watch on HBO Max
Masters of the Universe
When his home of Eternia was invaded, Prince Adam (Nicholas Galatzine) was sent to Earth for his own protection. Now, he’s a weirdo stuck in a dead-end corporate job who won’t stop talking about the fantasy world he came from—until his old friend Teela (Camila Mendes) tracks him down to take him home and fight off the forces of Skeletor.
As yet another go at bringing the 40-plus-year-old toyline-slash-cartoon advert 
for
 the toy line to the big screen, 
Masters of the Universe
 was probably doomed from the start. Yet director Travis Knight (
Bumblebee
, aka the only good live action 
Transformers
 movie) completely understood the assignment, delivering a wildly imaginative, colorful, and just-the-right-level-of-stupid adventure that embraces and pokes fun at its source material in equal measure. It’s charming, funny—shout out to Idris Elba as drunken, derelict mentor Man-at-Arms and Kristen Wiig as the voice of sardonic robot Roboto—and undeniably camp, and should tickle older fans’ nostalgia centers as much as it entertains their own little warriors.
Watch on Prime Video
Exit 8
A lost man (Kazunari Ninomiya) wanders through the stark white corridors of Tokyo’s subway system, searching for Exit 8. He’s trapped, not because of the labyrinthine layout of one of the world’s busiest transit systems, but because any wrong move sends him back to Exit 0. The only way out is to avoid “anomalies,” which may be as subtle as a changed poster in the looping tunnels, or blood flooding down from the ceiling—and each loop, the anomalies change, making escape feel maddeningly impossible.
Director Genki Kawamura brings the cult indie video game to life in this masterful slice of Japanese horror cinema, expanding on its claustrophobic sense of dread with a much-needed exploration of who the Lost Man is and why he’s caught in the unsettling liminal underworld. If you’re a fan of 
Backrooms
, you owe it to yourself to watch 
Exit 8
.
Watch on Shudder
Spider-Man MCU Trilogy
With 
Spider-Man: Brand New Day
 riding high in theaters, it’s the perfect time to dive back into Tom Holland’s first quasi-trilogy as the webbed wonder. After debuting in 
Civil War
 (also on Disney+), Holland’s Peter Parker establishes his heroic bona fides facing the Vulture (Michael Keaton) in 
Homecoming
, goes on a world tour and fights Mysterio (Jake Gyllenhaal) in 
Far From Home
, and battles a multiverse of menaces in 
No Way Home
—luckily with some assistance from previous cinematic Spider-Men Peter Parker (Tobey Maguire) and Peter Parker (Andrew Garfield). The real success of Holland’s films isn’t in the superpowered theatricality, but the way they bring Peter’s messy personal life straight from the comics to the screen, focusing as much on his supporting cast—chiefly love interest MJ (Zendaya), best friend Ned (Jacob Batalon), and Aunt May (Marisa Tomei)—as on his superheroic adventures.
Watch “Homecoming” on Disney+
Watch “Far From Home” on Disney+
Watch “No Way Home” on Disney+
The Blackening
When a group of Black college friends hold a reunion for Juneteenth, the vibe seems off. They’re meeting at a cabin in the woods for a start, which is a little too close to horror movie territory for anyone’s liking. Such genre-savviness begins to pay off when they discover a suspicious board game in the basement and find themselves playing by a serial killer’s twisted rules—starting with determining the “Blackest” member of the group to sacrifice.
With a cast of comedy greats including X Mayo, Jermaine Fowler, and Jay Pharoah, 
The Blackening
 is a self-aware and smartly satirical twist on horror movie conventions that brilliantly plays on its tongue-in-cheek tagline, “We can’t all die first.”
Watch on Hulu
Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba—Infinity Castle
Based on the manga by Koyoharu Gotouge, 
Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba
 is set in an alternate Taishō era Japan where a corps of specially trained warriors hunt down ferocious demons. 
Infinity Castle
 follows on directly from the fourth season of the television anime series, which is 
also on Crunchyroll
 for anyone who cares to do the homework, but this full-length movie is a thrill ride even if you’re jumping in blind.
After narrowly surviving an attack by the Demon Slayers, Muzan—progenitor demon and all-around big bad—traps the heroes in his stronghold, the ever-shifting dimensional prison of the Infinity Castle. Cue one epic battle royale as the Demon Slayer Corps fights their way to freedom, navigating the unpredictable landscape and seeing off scores of powerful foes—including a rematch between series lead Tanjiro Kamado (Natsuki Hanae in Japanese, Zach Aguilar in English) and powerful demon rival Akaza. The first in a planned trilogy set to cap the entire 
Demon Slayer
 saga, 
Infinity Castle
 is a visually stunning supernatural adventure.
Watch on Crunchyroll
Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes
Set decades after 2017’s 
War for the Planet of the Apes
 (but still a long way out from Charlton Heston screaming at the Statue of Liberty in the 1968 original), 
Kingdom
 opens with society’s tables having fully turned. Evolved apes rule, while most humans have been reduced to feral, nonverbal states. When Noa (Owen Teague), a young falconer from a chimpanzee clan, encounters an unusually intelligent human, Mae (Freya Allen), the unlikely pair are drawn into the orbit of Proximus Caesar (Kevin Durand), a power-hungry ape-king aiming to open a lost vault of human technology.
While it all leads to an unusually explosive conflict for a world that’s reverted to blood and bone barbarism, the film packs in a surprisingly deep examination of humanity’s relationship with the world around us. It’s also the best the series has ever looked, with incredible effects work and striking location shoots in Australia creating a fully believable post-apocalyptic world. Newly arrived on Prime Video, 
Kingdom
 may be the fourth installment in the 
Planet of the Apes
 reboot-prequel series, but as a standalone entry, it makes for a strong entry point.
Watch on Prime Video
