Save this story
Save this story
Campers, hikers, and
 generally outdoorsy folks, it's time to lock in. The REI 4th of July sale has great deals on hiking, camping, and backpacking essentials, so you can stock up for those summer adventures you're not quite prepared for yet without overpaying. This year, the sale runs from June 26 through July 6, although many of the REI Outlet discounts end July 2. Backcountry and other retailers are also having sales (lucky you), and we've included deals from those brands as well. There are deep discounts (over 50 percent off in some cases) on everything from our favorite sleeping bags to our favorite camp chairs.
We review camping and hiking gear all year-round here at WIRED, and these REI deals are on gear we've already tested and loved. There’s something here for nearly all our favorite summer activities—tents, stoves, backpacks, and plenty of outdoor apparel.
If you're not sure what you need, be sure to look at our 
guides to outdoor gear
, like the 
Best Backpacking Tents
, 
Best Backpacking Sleeping Pads
, 
Best Rain Jackets
, 
Best Merino Wool Clothes
, and 
Best Binoculars
.
Do I Have to Be an REI Member to Save?
AccordionItemContainerButton
No, but REI Co-op members earn 10 percent Member Rewards on all their purchases (which you can redeem at the end of the year), and there are some special deals for members, like a coupon for 20 percent off any one full-price item. 
REI membership is a one-time fee of $30
. Right now, when you spend $50 on gear, you can sign up for a new membership, and REI will give you a $30 bonus card, making membership effectively free.
When Does the REI 4th of July Sale End?
AccordionItemContainerButton
This year, the REI 4th of July sale runs from June 26 through July 6. Both Backcountry and Public Lands are running sales through July 6 as well.
Can’t You Just Put Links to All Your Outdoor Guides Right Here?
AccordionItemContainerButton
Sure. Here you go:
Hiking & Backpacking Gear Guides:
Best Backpacking Tents
Best Sleeping Pads for Backpacking
Best Backpacking Stoves
Best Backpacking Water Filters
The Best Day-Hiking Backpacks
The Best Binoculars
The Best Hiking Boots and Shoes
Camping Guides
Best Sleeping Bags
Best Sleeping Pads
Best Family Camping Tents
The Best Camping Chairs
Our Favorite Overlanding Gear
The Best Bug Sprays
The Best Sunscreens
Best Flashlights and Headlamps
Outdoor Apparel Guides
Best Base Layers
Best Merino Wool Clothes
Best Rain Jackets
Best Merino Wool T-Shirts
Best Puffer Jackets
Winter Sports
The Best Ski Helmets
The Best Ski Goggles
Best Ski Clothes
Best Ski Gloves and Mittens
What You Should Get with Your Yeti Coupon
During the REI 4th of July sale, REI Members get a coupon for 20 percent off one full-price Yeti item. Not an REI member? You can 
sign up today
 and get access to the coupon. Here's what we think you should get with yours.
Courtesy of Yeti
Save to wishlist
Yeti
Tundra Haul
$450
 
REI
The Tundra Haul is our 
top-pick cooler
. It's expensive and big, but Yeti's rotomolded cooler is the undisputed king for a simple reason—it keeps your stuff cold longer. The Tundra Haul is built like a tank, with 3-inch-thick insulated walls, a heavy aluminum arm, and puncture-proof, one-piece wheels. Fill this thing up and you'll need a second person to lift it in and out of your trunk (or truck, in my case). I've managed to get five days of cold out of it in the insane humidity of Florida in the spring.
Deals on Rain Jackets and Outdoor Apparel
Courtesy of REI
REI Co-op Rainier Rain Jacket for $50 ($50 off)
REI (Men's)
REI (Women's)
The Rainier is 
our favorite budget rain jacket
, especially when it's on sale. This particular deal, while limited in color options, is the lowest price I've seen in 5 years of covering REI sales. Unlike most rain jackets in this price range, the Rainier uses high-quality three-layer, seam-taped, laminate waterproofing that's non-fluorinated (meaning no PFAS). It has some other features rare in budget rain jackets, like pit zips or venting, a weatherproof center zip, and an adjustable, stowable hood.
Outdoor Research Foray Rain Jacket for $174 ($86 off)
Backcountry (Men's $174)
Backcountry (Women's $208)
REI (Men's $199)
I have the 2024 version of this jacket and it has served me well. The taped seams and welded construction keep wind and moisture at bay, and the side zip vents run all the way from the hem to the bicep, offering great ventilation when you're moving (they're also handy for getting at stuff in the pockets of your mid layers).
Arc’teryx Beta AR Jacket $553 ($97 off)
REI (Men's)
REI (Women's $325)
The best deal here is the women's version of this classic rain jacket, which is nearly half off in some colors and sizes. The AR (for “all-round”) is the beefiest of Arc'teryx's Beta jackets. The combination of 40-denier fabric (with 80D reinforced areas) and Gore-Tex Pro 3L membrane make this not just highly waterproof, but very durable as well. When I know it's going to rain, this is the jacket I bring.
Photograph: REI
REI Co-op 650 Down Jacket for $70 ($60 off)
REI (Men's)
REI (Women's)
One of my 
favorite bargain three-season puffer jackets
, the REI 650 down jacket, is a cheap, packable option for cold summits or stargazing on chilly nights. The stitched-through baffles mean this one isn't as warm as some jackets, and it is more susceptible to wind. But at this price, it's worth buying. The vest is 
also on sale for $50 ($50 off)
.
REI Co-op Snowballer Kids' Down Jacket for $47 ($72 off)
REI
This is a steal on REI's warmest 
puffer jacket
 for kids. My son lived in this jacket all winter and despite getting plenty dirty (you can machine wash and tumble dry it), it's never let us down. The 650 fill power down matches the adult jacket above, but feels more generously stuffed and therefore warmer (REI does not list a fill weight for the Snowballer).
Mountain Hardwear Ghost Whisperer Down Jacket (Women's) for $245 ($105 off)
REI
The Ghost Whisperer Down Jacket is my 
top pick for a backpacking puffer jacket
. It weighs just 6.7 ounces for a men's medium (7.3 ounces for the men's large I tested), packs down to a tiny little thing (stuffing into its own pocket), and the 1,000-fill-power goose down offers one of the best warmth-to-weight ratios on the market. Unfortunately, the men's version is not on sale right now.
Fjällräven Canada Shirt Jacket for $119 ($51 off)
Public Lands (Men's)
Backcountry (Women's)
If you live in a cold climate, even if it's not quite Canada, you need this shirt. It's your classic, ultrawarm wool shirt. Sorry, shirt jacket. Whatever it is, it's warm, cozy, and comfy. Don't let the wool scare you, it's not itchy.
Courtesy of REI Co-op
REI Co-op Midweight Long-Sleeve Base Layer Top for $35 ($20 off)
REI (Men's)
REI (Women's)
The best value pick on our 
base layer guide
, REI's midweight base layer is pleasantly soft and quick drying. It's comfortable with a tight, but not overly-tight, fit that makes it easy to layer over. I especially like the thumb loops on the sleeves, and the flatlock stitching keeps these from rubbing under load.
REI Co-op Merino 185 Base Layer for $50 ($30 off)
REI (Men's)
REI (Women's)
REI's 100-percent merino base layers are some of the best deals around on merino wool, and that's when they're full price. On sale, they're a true steal. 
The pants are also on sale for $60
.
REI Co-op Sahara Shade Hoodie for $42 ($18 off)
REI (Men's)
REI (Women's)
REI (Kids')
Looking to avoid the sun? REI's Sahara Shade hoodie is a great alternative to sunscreen. I don't often use a sun hoodie myself, but I have worn this one and it does do a good job of protecting you without feeling too stuffy on a hot day (it's definitely better for protecting against high altitude sun rather than humid, Florida sun).
Courtesy of Patagonia
Patagonia Capilene Midweight Crew for $71 ($18 off)
Backcountry (Men's)
Backcountry (Women's)
The 
best synthetic base layer
 we've tested, Patagonia's Capilene crew is justifiably popular. This is super soft and stretchy. Capilene is Patagonia's proprietary fabric, made from 100 percent recycled polyester (note that it is not polypropylene). We find Capilene to be nearly as comfortable as merino wool, while being light and quick-drying. The matching bottoms are also 
on sale for $89 ($10 off)
Darn Tough Hiker Micro Crew Socks for $19 ($7 off)
REI
Darn Tough are our favorite merino wool socks, and the Hiker Micro Crew is the most versatile style in my experience. These are good for hiking, backpacking, and just wearing around town. There is some padding, but not enough that it affects me 
wearing barefoot shoes
.
Deals on Daypacks and Hiking Gear
If you're hitting the trail soon, be sure to read our guide to the 
best hiking daypacks
 and our favorite 
new outdoor gear for 2026
.
Photograph: Adrienne So
Photograph: Adrienne So
Nemo Resolve 25L Pack for $126 ($54off)
REI (Men's)
REI (Women's)
Nemo's Resolve is 
a great pack that incorporates a low-waste footprint into the design
. It uses solution-dyed fabrics, and eschews straps and buckles in favor of bungees and pull-tabs. This does make adjusting it fussier, but once you're used to it and have the fit dialed in, it's not an issue. The Resolve is a comfortable pack. While technically frameless, it feels like it has some structure. and it sits nice and high on your back. At just over two pounds, it’s also pretty light.
Deuter Speed Lite Pro 25 Pack for $105 ($35 off)
REI
I own a very dirty, somewhat sad looking older version of this Deuter day pack, and the suspension system is so comfortable that I still regularly load it down with way more than the recommended weight. I found the same to be true of this updated version when I 
tested it last year
. It's a comfortable, capable day pack and Deuter's ventilation system is the best I've used, keeping your back from turning into a sweaty mess in summer heat.
Black Diamond Distance 22 Pack for $165 ($55 off)
REI (Men's)
REI (Women's)
This one has yet to be added to 
our daypack guide
 (I'll be updating it soon), but I've been very impressed with the ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) ripstop body fabric, which manages to be durable, but not annoyingly crinkly the way some UHMWPE packs are. 22 liters is spacious enough for day hikes and the mesh rear pocket helps expand that capacity for things you want close at hand.
Photograph: Scott Gilbertson
Rab Protium 35 Backpack for $150 ($50 off)
Backcountry
The Protium 27 is 
our favorite approach pack
. It'll comfortably haul up to about 20 pounds of 
climbing gear
. It's also one of the easiest packs to dial in a great fit. The hook and loop mesh backing slides up and down, adjusting to fit my daughter's smaller frame (5'4") as well as mine (5'11"). The shoulder straps are comfortable and the weight distributes to the waist strap if you load it properly. As I increased the load, the shoulder straps did start to seem a little thin at times. It also has an included rain cover to keep your gear dry.
Mountainsmith Lumbar Pack for $75 ($30 off)
REI
This humble lumbar pack, which Mountainsmith has been making seemingly forever, is my most used pack, thanks in part to its convertible nature. It can be worn as a lumbar pack (which I do when riding my bike), or as a a shoulder bag around town. I've also devised a way to strap it to the handle bars of my bike (it's amazing 
what you can do with some voile straps
), and to the outside of a Mystery Ranch backpack (to use as a daypack/outside storage). I have the 9L version, but if I were doing it over again I'd get the 13L to have a bit of extra space.
Peak Design Everyday Pack 20L for $224 ($76 off)
REI
A long time WIRED favorite, Peak Design's everyday pack is a chic and understated, endlessly adaptable, and easy-to-use pack that can go everywhere you go—from the woods, to the office, to the bar. The greatness is in the thoughtful design details. For example, there are quick-release loops on the arm straps to swiftly loosen one just enough to swing the bag around and get your keys or wallet while standing or walking.
REI Co-op Tarn 40 Pack Kids' for $97 ($32 off)
REI
This is the pack I started my kids backpacking with. It's one-size, so you might want to head to an REI store to make sure it fits, but it's a comfortable, capable, reasonably-priced first backpack for kids. REI rates it for ages 8 to 12 years, but probably the more pertinent spec is that it fits best at between 4'9" to about 5'3".
REI Co-op Big Haul 60 Duffel for $104 ($35 off)
REI
REI's Big Haul duffel is a durable, water-resistant 
gear-swallowing bag
 for carrying, well, just about everything. The strap system is cleverly customizable, and you can convert it to a backpack.
Deals on Ebikes and Outdoor Tech
Photograph: Michael Venutolo-Mantovani
Lectric XP4 750 Electric Bike for $1,299 ($396 off)
Lectric
The Lectric XP is the most popular electric bike, and the 
third-most-popular electric vehicle of any kind
. The only thing more popular than this is Tesla's Model Y and Model 3 cars. Lectrics are notably the easiest bikes to assemble—reviewer 
Michael Venutolo-Mantovani
 only took 20 minutes to put it together—and it's foldable, portable, and very attractive, especially in this forest green color. It has a powerful 750-watt motor, and even though it had to carry 225 pounds of human reviewer, the battery lasted well over 50 miles.
Ride1Up TrailRush Electric Mountain Bike for $1,999 ($100 off)
Ride1Up
This 
Class 3 ebike
 tops out at 28 mph, but has some high-quality components for the price: a Shimano Deore 10-speed drivetrain, a 120-mm RockShox Judy Silver TK Air Fork, and Tektro Orion Quad Piston brakes. The TrailRush also has extras like a dropper seat post and huge 29-inch Maxxis Minion tubeless-ready tires for covering serious ground. Sure, who wouldn't love to have the $11.5k 
Specialized S-Works Levo 4
? But if that's not in the budget, this is a great, less expensive option.
Aventon Aventure.2 for $1,599 ($400 off)
Aventon
We've tried several Aventon models and appreciate the high level of quality for a relatively low price point (the accessories are better than Lectric's, too). This 
fat-tire ebike
 is affordable, versatile, and has built-in commuter essentials. We also like the 
Abound
, which is on sale, too.
GoTrax F2 Folding Ebike for $699 ($300 off)
GoTrax
We've tested several GoTrax's 
escooters
, but we like the company's folding, step-through ebike as well. It has the usual pitfalls of a cheap folding ebike (heavy, awkward), but it has a decent 20-mile range and all the commuter essentials for well under $1,000.
Photograph: Kieran Alger
Garmin inReach Mini 2 for $329 ($71 off)
Amazon
I have yet to do a trip with a satellite communicator, but I do understand why people use them. If I were to bring one along, this is the one I'd get. It's tiny, light (3.5 ounces), and easily stashable. It utilizes the super-fast Iridium satellite network, so you can send a rapid SOS from pretty much anywhere. There are extra features like waypoints and interval tracking, and it plays nice with 
compatible Garmin watches
.
Garmin Venu 4 for $500 ($50 off)
REI
The Venu 4 was notable for introducing 
Sleep alignment
, a new piece of information about sleep that aims to help you pick the right time to go to sleep in accordance with your natural circadian rhythm.
Garmin Instinct 3 Solar for $350 ($100 off)
REI
The Garmin Instinct 3 Solar is 
our favorite rugged and affordable outdoor watch
 powered by the sun. The Instinct 3 offers the same multi-band GPS navigation capability, stellar battery life, and durability as the Fenix 8, but it's significantly cheaper (especially on sale) and lighter. And yes, recharges any time it's in the sun.
Photograph: Michael Sawh
Garmin Forerunner 970 for $650 ($100 off)
REI
The 
Garmin Forerunner 970
 is Garmin's best watch for runners. With a bright AMOLED screen, and up to two weeks of battery life you won't have to plug it in every night (looking at you other watch which shall not be named). The running-specific 
training features
 include Garmin's Running Tolerance score, which uses acute impact load to measure not just how far you ran, but how hard the run felt.
Camping Deals
Before you head out to your local state park this summer, check out our guides to the 
Best Tents
, 
Best Sleeping Pads
, and 
Best Camp Stoves
 for all our camping gear recommendations.
Photograph: Scott Gilbertson
REI Co-op Base Camp 6 Tent for $427 ($142 off)
REI
REI’s Base Camp tent is the 
best-designed, best-built six-person tent
 I've tested. It's a traditional dome tent design, with two crossed poles and two side poles. The tent floor is high-quality 150-denier (150D) polyester, while the sides are a combination of mesh and 40D nylon. There's loads of storage pockets, double doors, great vents, and huge windows, making it comfortable even in summer heat. It's also one of the few family-size, three-season tents on the market with a nearly full-length rain fly (made of 75-denier polyester).
Marmot Halo 4-Person Tent for $390 ($159 off)
Backcountry
The Marmot Halo is my 
favorite all-weather 4-person family tent
. It features a low-profile design, with steep sidewalls, and a reliable, nearly full-length rain fly, which, when combined, make this a livable haven in a storm. The name comes from the unusual pole design. There are two cross poles, like every square, domed tent, but the side poles connect halfway up the tent body instead of at the ground. This gives the Halo steeper sidewalls—and therefore more usable space—than any other tent I've tested. The downside is that you can't stand up in it.
REI Co-op Campwell 30 Sleeping Bag for $75 ($25 off)
REI
REI's Campwell line is a new line of budget camping gear focused on the idea that you don't need thousands of dollars of gear to go camping. You just need something that's good enough to keep you warm and dry. The Campwell 30 sleeping bag is a great example of that, especially on sale. This bag will handle your summer camping trips without batting an eye. It's plenty warm, you can completely unzip it to use like a double quilt, and it packs down small enough that you don't need to worry about space in your trunk.
REI Co-op Kindercamp 40 Kids' Sleeping Bag for $52 ($18 off)
REI
Most kids will 
do just fine in an adult sleeping bag
 (as long as it's not too cold), but if you want to save some money, REI's Kindercamp is a good sleeping bag for younger kids.
Courtesy of Coleman
Coleman Cascade 3-in-1 Camp Stove for $206 ($69 off)
REI
REI sales are the time to 
grab this upgrade stove
. Sure, the basic version below gets the job done, but the cast iron burners of the Cascade 3-in-1 are so much nicer and more durable. The griddle plate is also handy, perfect for cranking out pancakes. My only gripe is that I wish there were an option to get two griddles, as I find the grill not nearly as useful.
Coleman Cascade Classic Camp Stove for $98 ($32 off)
REI
Walk around any campground in America and you'll likely see dozens of these, for good reason. They're easy to use, last a long time, and aren't all that expensive. The 10,000-BTU burners are plenty to cook on just about any pan you have (I use 
cast iron pans
 on mine), and the electronic ignition means you don't have to keep track of a lighter.
REI Co-op Flexlite Air Chair for $70 ($30 off)
REI
You could argue this belongs below in the backpacking section, but I just can't justify the weight of a chair when backpacking. I think of this and others like it as very compact camp chairs. Part of what I like about this chair is that it's a good example of REI's basic value proposition succeeding: it's not the lightest chair you can buy, but it's sturdy, well-made, and probably light enough. It's also now outlasted the much more expensive Nemo Moonlight Elite, which ripped during a recent camping trip.
Kelty Low Loveseat for $112 ($38 off)
REI
My Kelty Loveseat finally gave up the ghost this summer (thanks to a puppy who was really, really convinced he could dig right through it, which, turns out he was right). I did not anticipate how much I would miss it. There's just no better way to sit around the fire as a family than with a couple of these.
Photograph: Scott Gilbertson; Getty Images
Bote LowRider Aero Inflatable Paddle Board for $764 ($135 off)
REI
It's watersports season. If you don't have a paddle board, it's time to invest. My favorite paddle board for lazy days paddling at the lake, this Bote is large and stable, making it great for beginners. Despite it's size, it's surprisingly nimble and easy to steer, with very good tracking ability. I also love the two-in-one kayak/SUP hybrid design, which means you can turn it into a full fishing rig with Bote's various add-ons.
Oru Lake Kayak for $399 ($100 off)
Oru Kayak
Oru's 
foldable kayaks
 are genius—all the boat, none of the size. The Lake is light, reasonably fast, and the cheapest way to get into the world of folding kayaks. As with all Oru's offerings, the Lake folds origami-style into a roughly 30-inch square that’s just 15 inches deep—small enough to fit in a car trunk or hall closet.
Backpacking Deals
Headed out overnight in the backcountry? We've got you covered with our guides to the 
Best Backpacking Tents
, 
Backpacking Sleeping Pads
, 
Backpacking Stoves
, and 
Backpacking Water Filters
.
Courtesy of REI
REI Co-op Half Dome 2 Tent for $247 ($82 off)
REI
The REI Half Dome 2 is 
the best budget two-person backpacking tent
. We’ve toted it on many a backpacking trip and found it to be plenty sturdy, quick to set up, and capable of fitting two people and their gear. It even comes with a footprint (which I never bother with, but it's nice to have it if you have to deal with rough ground).
Zenbivy Light Bed for $348 ($90 off)
Zenbivy
The Zenbivy sleep system is hands-down the 
best way I've slept in the backcountry
, and the Light Bed is my favorite Zenbivy. It's not the lightest (that's the 
Ultralight Quilt
), but it's light enough for me at 1 pound, 12 ounces (or 793 grams) for the 25 degree Fahrenheit large version (and somewhat cheaper than the Ultralight). The Light Bed consists of either the 
Light Quilt
 or the 
Light Convertible Quilt
 (I like the latter for the option to open it up completely flat) paired with the 
Light Sheet
.
Petzl Tikka Headlamp for $28 ($7 off)
REI
Petzl's Tikka headlamp is 
one of our favorite headlamps
. It provides plenty of light to cook by in the backcountry, runs on three AAA batteries (we recommend 
Panasonic Eneloop rechargeable batteries
) and lasts over 5.5 hours. It's also compatible with Petzl's 
USB-rechargable Core battery ($30)
.
Photograph: Scott Gilbertson
Firebox Folding Gas Grill Kit for $90 ($20 off)
Firebox Stove
If you want to 
cook
 in the backcountry, like legitimately cook with ingredients, not rehydrated food, the best stove I've tested is the 
Firebox Nano with the gas burner and diffusion plate
. The Firebox Nano is a twig stove, so you have that option as well (I am fortunate to live somewhere I can use this feature), but with summer burn bans in many places, it's really the gas burner and diffusion plate combo that is the centerpiece here. Together, they spread out the flame enough that cooking on a 10-inch pan is pretty much like cooking on my stove at home. This is a nearly miraculous achievement for a stove setup this small and light (8 ounces).
Sea to Summit Frontier 3L Ultralight Cook Pot for $47 ($28 off)
Amazon
If you're cooking for a group, this 3-liter pot is about as light as you're going to find. It's my go-to pot for family backpacking trips. The hard-anodized aluminum is sturdy and provides good heat transfer. The ceramic nonstick coating makes for easy cleanup (especially paired with the GSI scraper below). You can also nest the 
2L version (also $47)
 inside this one for more cooking options on the trail. If you want to go nuts with it, I haven't tried it, but you can theoretically also nest 
the 1.3L version ($39)
 inside the 2L.
GSI Outdoors Compact Scraper for $5 ($2 off)
REI
This is a backpacking must-have for me. It turns cleanup from a tedious chore to a couple of seconds’ work. I've even perfected cleaning burnt pans with it: Boil water in the pan to loosen the burnt bits and scrape them out. It's not a massive savings, but you might as well grab one while it's a couple bucks cheaper.
Photograph: Scott Gilbertson
Sawyer Squeeze Water Filter With Cnoc 2-Liter Bladder for $49 ($16 off)
REI
This deal is a combo of our 
top-pick backpacking water filter
 and our top-pick water bladder. As the name suggests, the Sawyer is a squeeze filter, but paired with the Cnoc it turns into a gravity filter when you have the time. When I'm not testing something else, this is the filtration system I use, and it's never let me down. If you don't want the Cnoc bladder for some reason, the Sawyer is also 
on sale for $35 ($10 off)
.
Katadyn BeFree AC 1.0L Water Filter for $45 ($15 off)
Backcountry
The Katadyn BeFree Water Filter is 
one of the lightest filters on the market
 (2.3 ounces, or 65 grams, for the filter and bottle) and a great option for when you want to go as light as possible, like when you're trail running or on a day hike. The filter is inside the collapsible container. Scoop up some water, screw on the lid, and drink. It doesn't get any easier than that.
Matador Flatpak Soap Bar Case for $10 ($3 off)
REI
This tiny toiletry bag is 
our favorite for toting bar soap
. I use it 
for a shampoo bar
. It's essentially a tiny dry bag for your soap, but the great thing is that Matador's proprietary Dry-Through fabric really does manage to keep your soap dry inside.
Matador Flatpak Zipper Toiletry Case for $15 ($5 off)
REI
The larger cousin to the soap bag above, this one does not make our guide, but I am a fan, again for the Dry-Through fabric, which really does work. The zipper here is sealed and will contain leaks should the worst occur. This is also nice and light at 1.1 ounces.
