Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Amazon Prime Day Deals
Yeti Cooler Deals
Oura Ring Deals
Apple Deals
Our Favorite Espresso Machine Is on Sale
Deals Under $100
Apple Watch Deals
Headphones Deals
Vacuum Deals
Air Conditioner Deals
Smart Bird Feeder Deals
Beauty Tech Deals
Save this story
Save this story
I'm not sure
 whether this is an error or a last-minute clearance, but I'm not questioning it: 
Aerogarden's high-end Bounty model
, which usually retails for $220 or more, has just been marked down 63 percent, to $84. It's 
currently still $230 on Aerogarden's site
. Even though I already have one, this is still such a good deal that I'm buying another as a gift.
When someone brand new to hydroponic gardening asks me which system they should start with, I almost always tell them to begin with an Aerogarden. These gardens have been around forever, and they’re famously foolproof and easy to maintain—just add water and nutrients every couple of weeks. That's it. No futzing with pH or total dissolved solids or pipes and hoses.
You don't even have to use the brand's proprietary pods, either, though this model comes with a set to get started. While it's still Prime Day, grab some sponges and baskets (also on sale right now—
50 for $13
) so you can eventually use your own seeds to grow right in the garden or transplant outside.
Photograph: Kat Merck
Photograph: Kat Merck
Save to wishlist
AeroGarden
Bounty
$180
 
$108
 
(40% off)
 
Amazon (Basic)
$275
 
Scotts Miracle-Gro (Elite)
Typically, if you're in the market for an Aerogarden under $100, you're limited to a small, bare-bones model 
like the six-pod Harvest Lite
, which has no smart features and just one button to turn the lights on and off and set a schedule. The Bounty is a larger, heavier-duty model with nine pods, plus it's got stronger lights and a taller maximum height (24 inches) for bigger plants like tomatoes and peppers.
Buttons and a digital screen on the front panel make it easy to tell when to add more water or plant food (included), set a light schedule, or even activate vacation mode when you're away. (Cheaper gardens typically don't even have vacation mode.) It's also Wi-Fi compatible and can be set up with Alexa.
If you've been interested in growing your own salad greens, herbs, tomatoes, or peppers right at your dining room table—and you should be, in this economy—this is the best deal you're going to find all year on a user-friendly, compact system.
Aerogarden Bounty for $84 ($136 off)
Be sure to check out our roundup of the 
Absolute Best Deals
, as well as all-day, every-day musings on our 
Prime Day Live Blog
.
