Save this story
Save this story
Former members of
 the so-called 
Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE)
 have launched a startup to, they say, bring 
“DOGE for the private sector.”
 Their holding company, called Special, has backing from billionaire 
Marc Andreessen’s
 venture capital firm a16z and several other former DOGE members.
In 
a post
 on a16z’s Substack, Nate Cavanaugh and Justin Fox, who led DOGE’s efforts at several government agencies, write that their startup will build “an operating system to transform critical American industries with AI,” and claim that “Main Street,” like the federal government, is inefficient. The plan, according to Fox and Cavanaugh, is to “vertically integrate,” buying up businesses in critical sectors and running them using Special’s operating system. Their first target is senior care, with a vertical called 
FigureHealth
. In an 
interview on TBPN
, Cavanaugh said that Special is also looking at “markets like construction, manufacturing, other very labor intensive, highly regulated markets that a lot of the learnings we had from DOGE can then get applied back into the private sector."
Their work also purports to target waste, and cites recent Republican talking points about 
blue states and fraud
. “One needs to look no further than childcare learning centers in Minnesota or hospice businesses in California to find immense waste at the state level from businesses that benefit from taxpayer dollars,” Fox and Cavanaugh write. Allegations of waste and fraud were key to DOGE’s own justification for cutting government contracts, jobs, and even shutting down the 
US Agency for International Development (USAID)
. Fraud allegations against Minnesota childcare centers formed the justification for President Donald Trump’s administration to deploy 
thousands of immigration agents
 to the state earlier this year.
“This pitch relies on DOGE-y tropes, with references to fraud in Minnesota. It’s a very bro-y perspective on government and what the issues are,” says Don Moynihan, a professor of public policy at the University of Michigan. “If you think the biggest issue in the American government is welfare fraud, then that suggests a pretty narrow perspective on the major challenges that we face right now. But that has been the perspective of DOGE, Musk, and the rest of the administration.”
With Andreessen Horowitz leading the funding round, Cavanaugh and Fox also say that some of their “DOGE teammates” were backing the venture, including Steve Davis, billionaire Elon Musk’s right-hand man who functioned as the coordinator of DOGE’s operations; Antonio Gracias, founder of Valor Equity Partners and a close Musk associate who was involved with DOGE’s work at the 
Social Security Administration
; 
Baris Akis
, a Turkish national who functioned as an informal recruiter for DOGE; Anthony Armstrong, formerly the chief financial officer at Musk’s xAI; 
Donald Park
, who was part of DOGE’s operations at the 
Small Business Administration
; and Adam Ramada and Brooks Morgan, who founded the Austin-based BANNER VC after leaving DOGE in August 2025. Coinbase founder Brian Armstrong, and Shyam Sankar, the chief technology officer at Palantir, the defense contracting firm co-founded by billionaire and Musk ally Peter Thiel, also participated in the funding round.
Cavanaugh and Fox did not respond to requests for comment; neither did their apparent investors.
While part of DOGE, Cavanaugh and Fox led the 
forcible takeover
 of the Congressionally-funded nonprofit organization, the US Institute of Peace (USIP). After being installed as USIP’s acting director, Cavanaugh attempted to gift 
its building to the government
, a move that is currently the subject of an 
ongoing court case
. Cavanaugh was also appointed the acting director of the Interagency Council on Homelessness. At both institutions, Cavanaugh put nearly all staff members on administrative leave.
The two were also part of the 
DOGE takeover
 of the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), where 
whistleblower Dan Berulis
 claimed that DOGE members had compromised sensitive data and appeared to be exfiltrating it out of the agency.(Cavanaugh and Fox were not named in Berulis’ complaint). Berulis also claimed that after DOGE members accessed the systems, an IP address in Russia attempted to log into the systems. Six days after Berulis filed his whistleblower disclosure to Congress, his car’s break lines were cut. The NLRB’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG) is continuing to investigate Berulis’ claims.
In a 
legal deposition
 related to their work with DOGE, Fox admitted that he had used an LLM to identify government contracts that used terms like “LGBTQ,” “tribal,” and “BIPOC” that appeared to indicate that they were related to diversity, equity, and inclusion. Fox also revealed that Armstrong, one of Special’s investors, 
was the father of a friend and a mentor
.
Several of DOGE’s other members have also 
returned to the private sector
, from investment firms to established companies. Last month, WIRED reported that 
former DOGE member Ethan Shaotran
, who was one of the 
young engineers
 that comprised some of the earliest DOGE teams, is now running a defense tech startup that appears to be positioning itself to receive government contracts. Though Shaotran did not reply to WIRED’s questions about who was funding the startup, in an email viewed by WIRED, he described it as “backed by big names.”
DOGE, says Moynihan, appeared to have worked as an employment conveyor belt for many of the organization’s affiliates. “It operated effectively as a place for people who wanted to get into venture capital networks to demonstrate their skills and loyalty to the owner class,” he says.
