Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Amazon Prime Day Deals
Yeti Cooler Deals
Oura Ring Deals
Apple Deals
Our Favorite Espresso Machine Is on Sale
Deals Under $100
Apple Watch Deals
Headphones Deals
Vacuum Deals
Air Conditioner Deals
Smart Bird Feeder Deals
Beauty Tech Deals
Save this story
Save this story
Go to any
 home in Scandinavia. Look on the counter. There, you will find a majestic 
coffee maker
 that has probably lived on that home's counter for as long as your host has been an adult. That magical device is called a Moccamaster. It will make you some of the best coffee of your life.
In one of the 
best Amazon Prime Day Deals
 of 2026, you too can own a Moccamaster—
for about $120 off regular price
, depending on the model. This is the best Moccamaster deal I've seen this year. It's the best deal you're likely to see till autumn. If you have already lusted after a Moccamaster in your heart, Prime Day is your time.
A Technivorm Moccamaster, if you don't know, is a finely engineered and wholly analog coffee maker—no AI here, and no one selling your data. It makes lovely drip coffee, courtesy of a brewing process tightly regulated and certified according to parameters set by of the international Specialty Coffee Association. Coffee from a Moccamaster tastes like berries and chocolate and caramel, nothing like the sad diner coffee you may have grown up with.
Moccamasters also quite famously last forever—they are hand-built, and every part is replaceable. A Moccamaster has adorned 
WIRED's buy-it-for-life guide
 for as long as we've had a buy-it-for-life guide. The warranty is 5 years, but after this the North American workshop will famously fix your Moccamaster till you die, for a flat rate of $99. So really the question is: Which Moccamaster will serve you best?
For Small Batch Lovers: Moccamaster KBGV
Photograph: Matthew Korfhage
Courtesy of Moccamaster
Save to wishlist
Moccamaster
KBGV Select Coffee Maker
$369
 
$240
 
(35% off)
 
Amazon
The KBGV is, to me, the iconic Moccamaster—the model with the most balanced design, and the most balanced coffee. It's a 10-cup machine (for Moccamaster, cups are about 4 ounces), but the real beauty with this one is that you can also brew a smaller 5-cup batch. Just toggle a switch to slow the flow rate of the water and make sure you still get full extraction.
This KBGV is the one that suits me best. And this is one of two times a year you can get a terrific deal on it. Act fast, before your favorite color runs out. And trust me: This will almost certainly happen before the end of Prime Day.
For Slow Sippers: Moccamaster KBGT
Photograph: Simon Hill
Photograph: Simon Hill
Photograph: Simon Hill
Save to wishlist
Technivorm
Moccamaster KBGT Coffee Machine
$339
 
$219
 
(35% off)
 
Amazon
$359
 
Walmart
My colleague, WIRED reviewer Simon Hill, 
starts every day instead with the Moccamaster KBGT.
 “It’s stylish and reliable,” he writes. “And you can pry my Moccamaster from my cold, dead hands.” Rather than brew multiple batches and drink each cup as close to possible to when it's been brewed (that's me), Simon brews one full batch, and trusts in the thermal carafe to keep it warm. If this is you, you want this thermal model instead.
Either way, whatever Moccamaster you pick is likely to serve you for more than a decade. I know at least one person who's had their machine for 15 years. I expect there are people out there who've had them much longer. Amortized over the life span of the device, that's less than $20 a year, at this sale price.
The downside is that there are a few extra fiddly parts you have to play with when brewing. The upside is that each and every one of those parts is easily replaced.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
