Save this story
Save this story
I get stressed
 out every time I turn on my television. A giant tech company is to blame.
Google TV
, the television operating system based on Android, is great in some ways: It runs well on my TV, there are apps available for every streaming service, and the interface is very customizable. It comes preinstalled on 
new sets
 from Sony, Hisense, and TCL, among others.
The default home screen, though, is a mess. There's a row of your applications, if you squint, but the majority of the screen is taken up by ads for movies and shows that some company is presumably paying to promote.
So I was thrilled when I found 
AT4K
, an alternative home screen for Google TV. Inspired by the Apple TV interface, this launcher shows me only thumbnails for the streaming services I use, and I can even turn those off if I want to. It's free with no advertisements; there is a premium version you can unlock for $5 and get some nice extras, but that’s completely optional, and the free version works great.
To get started, simply 
install the application on Google Play
. You can do so in your browser on whatever device you're reading this article on. Or, if you want, you can launch Google Play on your smart TV and search for “AT4K.” Either way the launcher will load and the installation will be initiated on your television.
AT4K’s interface is clean and uncluttered, a lot like the Apple TV interface.

Courtesy of Justin Pot
Everything about the AT4K is quite clean. At the very top of the screen, in the right corner, there is a clock alongside buttons for the application settings, system settings, and connectivity settings. Below that is a row of boxes with thumbnails for shows you're currently watching. Below that is a row of five applications. Keep scrolling and you'll find the rest of the applications installed on your device, along with icons for your various inputs.
I recommend moving the streaming services and input devices you actually use to the top of the list, so you can access them quickly. To do that, select the app you want to move, then press and hold your enter button. You'll see a sub-menu.
The Move App option lets you use the arrow buttons on your remote to move the application where you want. Repeat this process until the top row includes all of your favorite streaming services.
You can move or hide apps on the home screen.

Courtesy of Justin Pot
You can configure things more in the settings, which you'll find in the top-right corner of the screen (next to the clock). You can change the color scheme if you're interested, but the main thing you should configure is found under Controls.
From here you can enable the application's access to accessibility permissions. This is a workaround, of sorts, which allows AT4K to replace the default Google TV launcher. Follow the prompt and the appropriate section of the Google TV settings will open, allowing you to grant AT4K the permission it needs. After doing this you can configure the application to completely take over from the default Google launcher. AT4K will launch when you turn on your TV and when you back out of another app.
If you enable the accessibility service, AT4K can take over from Google TV’s launcher and become your television’s default interface.

Courtesy of Justin Pot
You may need to make other changes. For example, on my personal TV, pressing the Home button still took me to the Google launcher; I was able to change this using 
Button Remapper
, another free tool.
You can use the App Manager, found in the Appearance section of the settings, to hide certain applications from showing up on your homescreen. This is great if your TV, like mine, came with a bunch of built-in applications and streaming services that can't be deleted. Just uncheck what you don't want to see and you won't have to look at those options anymore.
Hide multiple apps and services at once.

Courtesy of Justin Pot
I really appreciated finally being able to take control over how my TV looks and functions, and all for free. And the developer is committed to not adding analytics, ads, or trackers, which is great to see.
You can even get a bit more control if you're willing to pay $5 for the premium version of AT4K. The premium tier unlocks a few more abilities, including custom wallpaper, custom app icons, and the ability to add more applications to the dock. These are nice perks to have, but the real reason for paying is to contribute to the application's development. Pitch in if you find the app worthwhile.
