Save this story
Save this story
For millions of
 Americans, Guy Fieri’s 
Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives
 is a comfort show.
With more than 500 
episodes
 produced and aired over nearly two decades, it serves as a 
Food Network
 staple that runs in nine-hour blocks, with Fieri himself—the peroxide blond Mayor of Flavortown—a reassuringly familiar and upbeat guide to the nation’s mainstream cuisines.
But what if the pleasure Fieri apparently takes in sampling all those 
burgers
 and 
tacos
 was a deception of sorts? Could it be that each declaration of “That’s money!” or “I’d eat that off a flip-flop!” isn’t totally sincere? Is it possible that the entire loud Fieri aesthetic, from the flame-patterned shirts and cherry-red convertible to wrap-around shades and frosted tips, serves to conceal a quiet yet devastating truth?
That’s the contention of a video creator and 
Twitch
 streamer known as 
Doctor Spaghetti
, who has lately gone viral with an explosive claim: Fieri never swallows the food he eats on the show. The 
conspiracy theory
 has gained 
surprising traction
 across 
social media
, even as chefs and television industry professionals who say they’ve worked with Fieri dismissed it as ridiculous.
“As far as my thoughts on Guy before all this, I didn't have many, to be honest,” Doctor Spaghetti, who declined to give his real name for fear of harassment by Fieri fans, tells WIRED. “I thought some of his catchphrases—‘That’s gangster!’—were really corny, but other than that, I didn't really care either way. It wasn't until this theory was born that I started to look closer.”
For whatever reason, Fieri has often been the subject of both silly internet rumors and unhinged conspiracy theories. One popular conceit was that Fieri and his late friend Steve Harwell, lead singer of Smash Mouth, were 
actually the same person
. (Harwell died in 2023.) Elsewhere, some Pizzagate believers attempted to implicate Fieri in their baseless conspiracy theory because the host had 
taped a segment for his show
 in Washington, DC’s Comet Ping Pong pizzeria.
Two weeks ago, when Doctor Spaghetti was streaming himself playing a video game, a viewer in his chat room tipped him off to the idea that Fieri doesn’t swallow food on 
Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives
, with the camera shot always cutting away before he’s done chewing. “My initial thought was that it's too dumb to have any credibility, but also too dumb to ignore,” he says. When he set about analyzing the series with a mind to debunk the claim, however, he found that “the show's cuts were just incredibly suspicious.”
In a series of videos that have collectively amassed about a million likes on Instagram, Doctor Spaghetti showcases various kitchen scenes in which Fieri is tasting a dish but is not shown swallowing. In the 
first one
, he jokes that Fieri’s beard “is there to disguise his neck so that you can’t tell.” For 
another video
, he slowed down footage that, on closer inspection, shows Fieri lifting chopsticks to his face without anything on them. Doctor Spaghetti also scrubbed through an episode from 17 years ago, reasoning that “in the early days he must have swallowed,” and 
found a moment
 when Fieri pulled a spoon out of his mouth with the food still on it. He compiled much of his research into a 
half-hour YouTube video
.
“Fully invested,” wrote one commenter on Doctor Spaghetti’s Instagram account. “Diners, Drive-ins, and LIES??!!” another replied.
As 
critics of the conspiracy theory
 were quick to point out, some of this 
sleight-of-fork
 is to be expected in the production of 
DDD
. Fieri visits lots of restaurants in a short span of time and can’t eat full meals at all of them. Sometimes a second or third (or tenth) take is necessary, and it’s not practical to take a new bite for each. Certain editing choices are no doubt for the sake of continuity and flow: does the audience really want or need those few extra seconds of awkward silence as Fieri finishes chewing a morsel of barbecued meat and gulps it down?
Others simply disputed the accusation that Fieri is faking it. “Not true,” Joe Sasto, a chef who has competed on a Food Network 
Tournament of Champions
 series hosted by Fieri, commented on the Doctor Spaghetti video that ignited the no-swallow controversy. “I’ve filmed plenty of shows with him. He eats EVERYTHING.”
A representative of Warner Bros. Discovery, majority owner and operator of the Food Network, replied to a request for comment but did not offer one. A representative for Fieri’s own brand did not immediately return a request for comment.
Doctor Spaghetti says that, despite extensive efforts, he has been unable to pin down a single example of Fieri swallowing on camera. “I've had multiple five-hour streams at this point, going through footage,” he says. “They cut every single time he's about to swallow.”
And, Doctor Spaghetti notes, you can see other cooking show hosts swallow all the time. He even noticed a moment in a 
DDD
 when Fieri’s eldest son, Hunter Fieri, can be seen swallowing. “The very first Gordon Ramsay video I clicked on, he gave us multiple clear swallows,” he says, arguing that there are “so many cuts” in Fieri’s show that “are just objectively unnecessary.” He posted 
one video
 to demonstrate to skeptics that whatever the production logistics at play, the finished edits are flat-out “disorienting.”
“I understand that some shots will get redone for any number of reasons,” Doctor Spaghetti concedes. “I get that if he swallowed everything he'd be wildly unhealthy. I'm just asking him to swallow 
something
.”
Thankfully, some close with Fieri have seen the humor in the supposed scandal. Ryan Larson, a director of photography for the Food Network, recently commented on a Doctor Spaghetti video—and it wasn’t to complain.
“I’ve filmed the show for 16 years, over 1000 restaurants,” he wrote. “Don’t get me wrong, I love that this is a thing. Keep shining the light on non chain scratch made restaurants.”
