Save this story
Save this story
Total Wireless, formerly
 known as Total by Verizon, is a prepaid, no-contract wireless provider with unlimited data covered by the Verizon 5G network. Total Wireless Total 5G Unlimited plan has unlimited data, talk, and text, along with a five-year price guarantee—meaning it won’t get jacked up after a trial period, guaranteeing you get unlimited data at a low price. Total Wireless has also introduced unlimited data on Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband network that promises to be up to 10 times faster than the median download speeds of other providers.
Whether you have to have the newest 
iPhone 17
, or are more of an 
Android
 phone person, we wanted to highlight the best Total Wireless promo codes and discounts that will make anyone happy!
50% Off With BYOD at Total Wireless (No Promo Code Required)
My phone bill is always way more expensive than I think it will be, and it doesn’t help that phone contracts can be confusing and difficult. Total Wireless makes it easy, with incentives like free items and price-lock discounts. Right now, you can get 50% off the 
Total 5G Unlimited
 plan when you bring your own phone (aka ‘Bring Your Own Device’). These plans start at as low as $20 per month, with taxes and fees included.
Total Wireless Discount: 15% Off
To get this Total Wireless promo code for 15% off, all you have to do is sign up for the Total Wireless newsletter and get 15% off on your first phone purchase. Plus, with the newsletter, you’ll get exclusive Total Wireless offers and promotions delivered to your inbox to save even more and get up-to-date on the latest drops.
Save up to $250 on Select Devices When You Switch to Total Wireless
Total Wireless wants to thank you for switching. Right now, you can get a free Galaxy A36 5G when you switch to a Total 5G or 5G+ unlimited plan. Or, you could choose to get up to 4 free Moto G Stylus 5G phones when you switch to the Total Base 5G Unlimited plan (or higher). They have tons of other promos going on too, so there’s something no matter your taste. Right now, if you switch, you’ll get up to $250 off select devices, including the iPhone 13 for $50 ($249 off), a free Samsung Galaxy, or a free Samsung Galaxy A25 5 (originally $180), and so much more.
Loop in Friends, Get a Month Free
Total Wireless also has a 
loyalty program
; when your friend gives you a referral code to join, you’ll get a free month of service upon joining. Once you make the switch to Total Wireless and join Total Rewards, as long as you enter your friend’s code within 14 days of activation, you’ll both receive 5,000 points, which is enough for a $50 service plan.
