Save this story
Save this story
At Ulta Beauty,
 you can stock up on skincare, makeup, and haircare, then head to the salon to get your brows shaped, your hair styled, and your ears pierced, all in a single visit. You’ll find brands like Dior, Estée Lauder, and Gucci alongside more affordable favorites and drugstore staples. Many locations house a Benefit Cosmetics BrowBar, so you can sample products and book an in-store brow service in the same visit. Ulta’s return policy is very forgiving, allowing you to bring back “gently used” products within 30 days for a full refund. Add in its weekly sales, the 
21+ Days of Beauty Event
, and stackable Ulta coupons, and you’ll rarely pay full price.
I’ve tested a wide range of beauty products that are sold at Ulta, from 
hair tools
 and 
LED devices
 to 
pimple patches
 and 
lip balms
. Here’s how to shop smarter, with the best Ulta promo codes and Ulta coupons to keep on your radar.
Get 20% Off One Ulta Beauty Item
For a limited time, through August 1, you can get 20% off a qualifying item, including those from prestige and fragrance lines. To redeem the Ulta discount code, use Ulta promo code 
SCORE
 in-store by showing a printed copy or the code on your phone. In addition to in-store, you can also use this Ulta promo code for 20% off online and in-app, just make sure you enter the code at checkout. This Ulta coupon code is good for most items, but excludes The Salon at Ulta Beauty, Ear Piercing, Ulta Beauty via third-party marketplaces, and more, so be sure to 
check the fine print
 of the offer. Plus, this deal cannot be redeemed for cash or gift cards.
15% Off at Ulta Beauty When You Download the App
If you already shop at Ulta often, downloading (and using) the 
Ulta app
 is one of the best ways to save money on purchases you were planning to make. All you need to do is download the Ulta app (fo’ free), by texting "Beauty" to 95637. From there, you’ll get an Ulta promo code 
APP15
 sent to you to use for 15% off your next purchase. Plus, with the Ulta app, you’ll be able to virtually try on thousands of beauty products with GLAMlab, use the Ulta Foundation Matcher to virtually match your skin tone to find your best shade match, and an AI-powered analysis of your skin to get customized skin care recommendations.
Plus, 
Ulta app
 members get exclusive in-app features, offers, and deals. You’ll also be able to monitor your membership rewards status and points, and get notified of app-exclusive deals, discounts, brand offers and more. And with the handy bar code scanner, shopping has never been easier—you can scan any product’s bar code to see information on ingredients and product reviews. When you’re an Ulta member, you’ll get 1 point for every $1 spent and birthday perks.
Ulta Promo Code: Get 10% Off When You Sign Up
You can instantly score 10% off your order when you sign up for text alerts. Text “ULTA” to 95637, and you should receive a one-time use discount code for online purchases only. There are a couple of brand exclusions, like Chanel, and you can’t use the discount on Black Friday deals, so make sure to 
read the fine print
.
Use Ulta Beauty Rewards for Ulta Discounts
The 
Ulta Beauty Rewards program
 is free to join and offers many perks with minimal effort required from you. First, you earn points for every dollar you spend. The program has multiple tiers: as a standard member, you earn 1 point per dollar; platinum members earn 1.25 points, and diamond members earn 1.5 points. To qualify for platinum status, you need to spend $500 per year, and diamond members must spend $1,200 annually.
These points can be redeemed for discounts, and the best part is that they do not expire. (To activate your rewards, you need to download the Ulta Beauty app.) Here's how the points translate into savings: 100 points gives you $3 off, 250 points offers an $8 discount, 500 points saves you $17.50, and 750 points grants you $30 off.
During your birthday month, you get even more special perks. These include earning extra points on every qualifying purchase, a free gift, and a $10 coupon exclusively for platinum and diamond members. Some other benefits include exclusive beauty deals, early access to sales, and full-size gifts for diamond members. Diamond members also get a $25 discount on beauty services and free shipping on orders over $25.
Score Trending Beauty Tech at Ulta
Always check Ulta's Featured Deals and Sale pages, as they regularly update with new offers. In addition to makeup and skincare products, Ulta also provides discounts on 
hair care tools
 and 
wellness technology
 that we have tested and recommended.
Look out for 
Dyson products
, which frequently go on sale. Some of my favorites include the 
Supersonic Nural
, the 
Airwrap i.d. Multistyler
, and the 
Airstrait Wet-to-Dry Straightener
. If you're looking for a more affordable option, 
Shark's FlexStyle Air Styling System
 and 
SpeedStyle Pro Flex Hair Dryer
 (currently on sale) are also often discounted. Other hair stylers we've noticed on these pages include the 
L'Oreal Professionnel AirLight Pro
, 
T3 Aire IQ Intelligent Hair Dryer
 (currently on sale), 
Ghd Duet Style 2-in-1 Hot Air Styler
 (currently on sale), and the 
Bio Ionic Smart-X Dryer
.
If you’re shopping for 
red light therapy masks
, keep an eye out for sales, as they frequently occur. My personal favorite is the 
Shark Beauty CryoGlow LED Mask
, which often sells out, likely because of its cooling pads for the under-eye area. The 
Therabody TheraFace Mask Glo
 and the 
Solawave 4-in-1 Radiant Renewal Wand
 are also currently available at a discount.
Unlock Free Standard Shipping on Your $35 Purchase
All online customers qualify for free standard shipping on purchases of $35 or more. It's easy to rack up this amount at Ulta, even with all the discounts.
What We’ve Learned From Tracking Ulta Beauty Coupon Deals
We’ve been doing this awhile, and we’ve become pretty good at tracking and determining the best offers available, and bringing them to you, of course. We check Ulta often, testing the Ulta coupon codes ourselves and bringing them to you here weekly (if not more often). These are often deals for things like 20% off certain beloved brands or beauty categories, as well as BOGO deals.
Why Is My Ulta Beauty Coupon Not Working?
AccordionItemContainerButton
One of the best ways to determine if your Ulta coupon isn’t working is to check the fine print—oftentimes, deals end on specific dates, so make sure you’re within that time frame. Also, make sure that the product you want to buy is included in the sale, as many items and brands aren’t eligible on certain offers. If you still aren’t sure why, reach out to support for further help.
Does Ulta Offer Student, Military, or Healthcare Worker Discounts?
AccordionItemContainerButton
Ulta doesn't currently have a standing student, military, or healthcare discount program. Savings mainly come through Ultamate Rewards and sale events instead.
How Do Ulta Reward Points Work?
AccordionItemContainerButton
Members earn 1 point per $1 spent (2 points/$1 for Diamond and Platinum tiers). Points convert to redeemable dollars off, usually in $3–$50 increments, and typically expire at year-end if unused.
Are Ulta Coupons Stackable?
AccordionItemContainerButton
Ulta allows one coupon per transaction, though reward point redemptions can often be combined with a separate promo code. Coupons usually can't be combined with each other.
