Amazon Prime Day June 2026
Absolute Best Amazon Prime Day Deals
Yeti Cooler Deals
Oura Ring Deals
Apple Deals
Our Favorite Espresso Machine Is on Sale
Deals Under $100
Apple Watch Deals
Headphones Deals
Vacuum Deals
Air Conditioner Deals
Smart Bird Feeder Deals
Beauty Tech Deals
Save this story
Save this story
this colorful bar-cart-style
 minifridge has been all over my social media lately. I don’t know if it’s because it’s summer or because the algorithm has pegged me (correctly) as someone who would not like to walk more than 50 feet for a canned cocktail.
Former WIRED contributor Andrew Watman 
reviewed it for us in 2024
, giving it a solid 7/10 and confirming that it is every bit the statement piece it’s designed to be. Having just seen it myself for the first time yesterday, I agree.
Photograph: Kat Merck
I’m not sure if I can overstate how good the Rocco looks in person. The metal, color-matched tray on top and fluted glass front is meant to refract light to keep UV rays from damaging your kombucha or cava. The metal body somehow looks both retro and totally contemporary at the same time and would fit in with just about any decor.
Photograph: Kat Merck
Photograph: Andrew Watman
Save to wishlist
Rocco
Super Smart Fridge
$1,995
 
$1,595
 
(20% off)
 
Rocco (Blue or White)
$1,995
 
$1,695
 
(15% off)
 
Rocco (Other Colors)
Rocco app via Andrew Watman
The Rocco’s marquee feature, other than its coming in eight colors—including black, white, two blues, orange, yellow, green (shown), and a new beige—is its smart app. It allows you to see the fridge contents as scanned by the fridge itself, and control the lights and temperature from afar. When Watman tested it, he was impressed by the library of drinks the fridge recognized, from an obscure OoMee algae-infused beverage to canned Yaté yerba mate.
Alas, the Rocco is not on Amazon for Prime Day, but you can grab it—and its 10-year warranty—on Rocco’s website right now on a rare seasonal sale. Only the 
Blue, White, and Icy Blue colors
 are $400 off, but all other colors are $300 off, now through July 5.
As a bonus, if you buy during the sale, you’ll get 12 cans of Tropical Mango Trip to put in your fridge, which appears to be some kind of magnesium-based functional beverage. (No doubt recognizable by the Rocco’s scanner.)
Save Up to $400 on Rocco
While you're here, be sure to check out the rest of our 
Prime Day coverage
, including the 
Absolute Best deals
, and hot takes and sales on our 
all-day Live Blog
 running each day of the event.
