Save this story
Save this story
Upgrading your home
 office can feel like going down a rabbit hole. A simple search for a basic new desk can quickly turn into hours down the drain and endless tabs open on your computer, with every option starting to blur together. Uplift has a loyal following for its super customizable desks, smart (and creative—under-desk hammock, anyone?) accessories, and a solid build quality that makes long workdays more manageable.
We’ve explored the 
perks of a standing desk
, and the takeaway is pretty clear: even if it won’t magically fix everything, 
the right standing desk setup
 can make all the difference in the way you work. If you’re ready to make the leap into the standing desk space, starting with an Uplift coupon code is a smart move.
Uplift Desk Coupon Code: $300 Off
Right now, with the 
Uplift Sunny Setup Sale
, you can save up to $575 on a standing desk. To get this offer, you’ll choose any Uplift standing desk model, and then you’ll get five accessories or your choice while configuring your desk, valued at $275.
Then, you can also save up to $300 with the Uplift coupon code SUNNY. With this Uplift promo code, you’ll save $300 on purchases of $2,000 or more, save $200 on orders over $1,999, $150 on $1,499, or $100 off orders over $999.
Get $20 Off When You Sign up for Uplift Emails
Like many other brands, Uplift rewards their loyal customers. When you sign up for Uplift emails, which include things like product drops and restock alerts, you can save $20 on your order over $199. Not only will you get exclusive discounts, you’ll get email-only deals, early sale access, and special promotions with this Uplift newsletter sign up. Plus, the $20 off your next purchase.
Score Free Shipping on all Orders This Month
Who can say no to free shipping, especially when it’s for a major furniture item like a standing desk? Right now, Uplift is offering free and fast shipping on all orders, no Uplift desk coupon code required. And timing can work in your favor: most orders placed before 3 pm CST ship the same business day, so you’re not stuck refreshing the tracking page for a week. Whether you’re in the middle of an office refresh (or just impatient when it comes to deliveries), this is a major perk.
Claim up to 5 Free Accessories With Your Standing Desk Purchase
A built-in bonus when you buy an 
Uplift standing desk
 is that you get up to five free accessories baked into the purchase. You can choose from a 
huge
 catalog of over 400 add-ons to go with the desk (honestly, I was overwhelmed at first). Options range from practical to fun, like cable management kits and desk organizer sets to a desk-mounted cup holder and an under-desk hammock. There are even some branded extras, like a stainless steel tumbler and a t-shirt, depending on your vibe.
Use Your FSA Dollars to Get the Most out of Your Desk
Uplift desks may be eligible for reimbursement 
through your HSA or FSA
, which means you could effectively pay for part of your desk setup with pre-tax dollars. This can lead to major savings, especially when stacked with an Uplift promo code.
The process is pretty straightforward: Check out normally (no need to use your HSA/FSA card upfront), then complete a quick health survey through Uplift’s partner program, which will be on your confirmation screen or through your email receipt. If you qualify, a licensed provider will issue a Letter of Medical Necessity, which you can then submit for reimbursement. It’s a few extra steps, but the payoff is worth it, especially if you’ve been eyeing a bigger purchase.
Share the Joy With an Uplift Gift Card
Not sure what to get the new grad headed to college, or your loved one who works from home? An 
Uplift desk gift card
 is a great way to help with these big purchases without having to make the weighty decision on behalf of someone else. Uplift gift cards are good for five years from purchase date, and are available in increments of $50 to $5,000.
