Save this story
Save this story
One of WhatsApp’s
 most in-demand features is finally coming out of beta. Later this year, the messaging app used by over 3 billion people plans to add usernames. It’s an additional (and more privacy-friendly) way for 
WhatsApp
 users to connect without sharing phone numbers.
But that means the race to grab the best WhatsApp usernames is about to begin. Hold on tight.
WhatsApp says username reservations open up this week on the platform, and you’ll see a notification in the app when it’s available. Check in the app by going to 
Settings
 and then 
Account
. Here’s where you’ll find the 
Username
 tab if it’s enabled. Then, you’ll have the option to create a new username or port over your existing name from 
Instagram
 or 
Facebook
. WhatsApp offers a username generator, but you can also just go with your gut (or really whatever you’re feeling at the moment).
“Usernames are designed to give you control over who gets to see your phone number in the first place,” says Alice Newton-Rex, vice president of Product at WhatsApp. “It's an optional feature; you choose your own username, you can change it or remove it, and it doesn't have to match your handle or account name on any other app.”
Newton-Rex stressed that this WhatsApp feature was designed around user 
privacy
. There’s no public list of usernames for people to search through. Users can also add an extra layer of security by only allowing people who know a unique four-digit key, in addition to their username, to contact them.
Courtesy of WhatsApp
These usernames will remain fully optional, but Newton-Rex sees this new choice as a privacy measure many existing users have already expressed excitement about. “I do think that we'll see a lot of adoption, but that's going to be one of the things that we learn as we start rolling it out,” she says.
WhatsApp is not shy about this feature’s similarities to competitors. “Signal usernames are probably a good comparison,” Newton-Rex says. “This will work in a very similar way.” 
Signal
 rolled out usernames on its platform in 2024. Many messaging apps are still experimenting with different ways for users to connect without sharing numbers. For example, 
Germ DM
 allows its users to create “burner cards” so people can connect with multiple groups in different ways.
If you’re thinking that this could be your chance to snag @kimkardashian on WhatsApp, you’re out of luck. You’re not even going to be able to get @k1mkarda$hian, bucko. “The highest-profile names, like public figures or government entities or celebrities, are held,” Newton-Rex says. “So, they can only ever be claimed by their legitimate owners. Look-alike derivatives of known names are also held back as well.” Even if you’re not a celebrity, you will still have first dibs on your existing Facebook or Instagram account name during this RSVP period before the wider launch.
That username hold doesn’t last forever. Best to grab yours this week as the global reservation rollout begins, while there are still plenty of options left.
