$1,049
 at Steam
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
5
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
Solid performance at 1080p. Access to a voluminous Steam library. Excellent physical design. Linux-based desktop is clean, accessible, and intuitive.
TIRED
Fundamentally cannot deliver 4K quality gaming. Immediately feels like it needs an upgrade. Expensive. Steam Controller sold separately.
From the moment
 it was 
unveiled
, the new Steam Machine has been a captivating proposition for gamers. A decade on from Valve’s flawed 
first attempt
 to bring PC gaming into the living room—a mess of competing manufacturers and inconsistent hardware specs—surely this time, Valve would get it right?
Early signs were positive. A single device from a single manufacturer, the only variable being a choice between 512 GB and 2 terabytes of storage, promised consistency. Technical specifications offered roughly six times the power of Valve’s successful 
Steam Deck handheld
, hinting at high-end performance. In many ways, it seemed Valve was pitching a 
console experience
, a way to access the impossibly large Steam library on a 
big-screen TV
.
So, how did it all go so frustratingly wrong? Sadly, while 2026’s Steam Machine is tantalizingly close to greatness, it ultimately can’t live up to either its grand potential or players’ expectations.
A Game Cube
Courtesy of Matt Kamen
As a device, the Steam Machine is easy to like. Its tightly engineered design is adorable; the 156 x 152 x 162.4-mm body is comparable to Nintendo’s 
GameCube
 and fits just as easily into most media consoles. The signature LED light bar, which by default serves as a visual progress bar for game installations, almost smiles out from under your TV.
It has a sleek, clean design, with replaceable faceplates to offer some aesthetic versatility, though only the 2-TB model comes with any—one wooden, one red fabric—both giving 1970s Aperture Science offices from 
Portal
 vibes. Take the panel off, and you’ll see the tightly packed 
PC case
 is mostly tailored toward ventilation, an airway leading to a vast exhaust fan dominating the rear.
Connection options
 impress, with two USB-A 3.2 Gen 1 ports and a microSD slot at the front, while the back crams in two USB-A 2.0 ports and one USB-C 3.2 Gen 2, DisplayPort 1.4 and HDMI 2.0 outputs, plus a Gigabit 
Ethernet
 port. It’s got fast 
Wi-Fi 6E
 and 
Bluetooth 5.3
 for wireless options too. An internal power supply accounts for much of its 5.7-pound weight, but the lack of an external power brick means it’s easy to move it between rooms or screens as needed.
Its plug-and-play design makes setup simple, bar a roughly 15-minute wait for necessary system updates. You’ll need a controller, and while any 
PC-compatible pad
 will do the trick, it’s really designed for the new 
Steam Controller
. Unfortunately, it doesn’t actually come with one unless you pay extra—unforgivable given the grip really does come alive here. Connect via USB, and the Steam Controller pairs directly with the hardware, forsaking its wireless puck, and becomes capable of waking the Steam Machine from sleep.
Once everything’s updated, the Steam Machine boots into the now-familiar SteamOS in Big Picture mode, a console-like interface tailored for the TV, with bold, clear tiles and easily sorted categories. Sign in to your existing Steam account, install some games, and thanks to cloud save support, you’ll be able to pick up where you left off from the comfort of your couch.
The front of the Steam Machine, sans the faceplate.

Courtesy of Matt Kamen
Before getting too cozy, though, you might want to check out the desktop mode. As Valve is keen to insist, the Steam Machine is, technically, a full PC; you can switch to its desktop through the power menu at any point.
It runs 
KDE Plasma
, a graphical shell for Linux, and USB-compatible mice and keyboards are automatically detected for simple navigation. Compared with Microsoft and Apple’s efforts, it’s a refreshingly clean OS install—a desktop with a link back to Steam’s gaming mode, and a taskbar with icons for Settings, Discover software center, Dolphin file manager, and a link to install Firefox as a browser. That’s it.
It’s surprisingly welcoming, even for anyone accustomed to Windows or macOS. I’ve barely scratched the surface, but everything about it is intuitive. Discover can bring up a host of apps and services for anything you might want to do with a computer, most of them free or open source—I installed 
LibreOffice
 directly from it, making this the first review of a “console” I’ve partly written 
on
 said console. Far away from gaming, Steam Machine’s biggest contribution to computing could 
be making Linux less scary
 to newcomers (especially as Microsoft 
winds down Windows 10 support
).
Talk Nerdy to Me
Realistically, hardly anyone is going to be buying a Steam Machine for office tasks. The real question is how it holds up as a gaming rig, and that’s where cracks begin to show. Let’s talk numbers.
Bluntly, its specs are comparable to the nearly six-year-old 
PlayStation 5
. The Steam Machine’s CPU clinches a small win, with a semi-custom AMD Zen 4 housing six cores and 12 threads, promising up to 4.8-GHz clock speed. The base PS5 has an eight-core, 16-thread chip but is built on much older Zen 2 architecture, with a max clock speed of 3.5 GHz (3.85 GHz on the 
PS5 Pro
).
The Steam Machine’s similarly semi-custom AMD RDNA3 GPU offers 28 CU (compute units) of graphical power, versus Sony’s titan’s 36 CU, although the latter again uses an older RDNA2 process. Arguably, the Valve cube’s weakest spot is its single stick of 16 GB DDR5 RAM, with 8 GB of GDDR6 VRAM. Technically, as a PC, components are upgradable, but the thought of diving into those densely packed innards is daunting.
The back of the Steam Machine and all the various ports.

Valve 
claims
 the Steam Machine can hit “up to 4K at 
120 Hz
” on supported displays via HDMI 2.0 connections (albeit using AMD’s 
FidelityFX Super Resolution (FSR)
 upscaling tech, rather than at native resolutions), but the Steam Machine Verified label it will be applying to games on the Steam Store is based on a 1920 x 1080 benchmark.
I’ve been testing it on a 55-inch 
4K OLED TV
 and a 27-inch 
1080p desktop monitor
, both with 120-Hz refresh rates, both using HDMI. I used four games as references: 
Marvel’s Spider-Man Remastered
, 
Crimson Desert
, 
Lego Batman: Legends of the Dark Knight
, and Japanese RPG 
Granblue Fantasy Relink: Endless Ragnarok
. Frame rates were tracked using the Steam Machine’s built-in monitor, accessed by tapping the “…” button on the Steam Controller and activating the “Performance Overlay.”
On the TV, 
Spider-Man
 defaulted its output resolution to 2048 x 1152 but hit a smooth 60 frames per second (fps). Manually switching to 3840 x 2160 (full 4K) without AMD’s FSR active and all graphics settings at “High” dropped performance to 30 to 45 fps. With FSR on and “Dynamic Resolution Scaling” set to a 60 fps target, the Steam Machine delivered, running in 4K at the desired frame rate, with no noticeable image degradation. My HDR-enabled TV also allowed for improved colors and contrast. On the PC monitor, the Steam Machine easily pushed out a 1080p image at 60 fps, though the panel lacks HDR, so everything looked a little muted. Overall, this would prove to be the best-performing game of the lot.
Crimson Desert
 is interesting—a notorious resource hog and officially unsupported on the Steam Machine. However, it boots and loads just fine. With graphics quality set to a demanding “Ultra,” FSR on, and upscale resolution at “Native Anti-Aliasing,” it pushed out a not-terrible 40 fps … in menus. In-game, that dropped to a juddery 20 to 25 fps. Dropping quality to “High” saw a marginal improvement to 25 to 30 fps, but introduced screen tearing during cutscenes.
Cutting the upscale resolution to “Quality” squeezed out 30 fps, and cutting further to “Balanced” saw the game brushing up against 60 fps, but image quality began to suffer, particularly with environmental details like foliage and water.
On the 1080p monitor, things were much better, serving a solid 60 fps even with settings at “Ultra” and advanced features like shadow ray tracing and advanced weather effects active. Still, not bad for a game that Valve says you can’t run on the Steam Machine at all.
Lego Batman
 on the TV, at 4K with FSR on and graphics quality set to “High” (rather than “Epic,” its best setting), saw wildly variable frame rates of 15 to 45 fps. Focusing FSR on performance got a reliable 45 fps, occasionally spiking to 75 to 90 fps, but dropping below 30 fps for vehicle sections. On the monitor, at 1080p, with settings at “High” and upscaling to “Ultra Performance,” I finally got a sweet 60 fps, but any attempts to improve image quality tanked it back down to around 30 fps. However, getting good results was just as problematic on the powerful 
MSI Claw 8 EX AI+ gaming handheld
, which convinces me that the game is poorly optimized on PC—and therefore that the Steam Machine can’t handle poorly optimized games.
Granblue Fantasy
 gave the weirdest results. On the 4K TV, Steam’s performance monitor finally displayed 120 fps—but only in the game’s menu and loading screens. A flashy and fast-paced anime-styled game, I saw 30 to 45 fps for cinematic cutscenes and actual gameplay, with very occasional crests of around 55 fps. However, in undemanding and mostly static conversation scenes, it bizarrely sank to 15 fps. As the game itself has no options for frame gen or upscaling, I tried lower overall graphics quality presets, but frame rate numbers seemed uniform, whatever the setting. Oddly, on the 1080p monitor, it still thought it was outputting 4K, but manually dropping to 1920 x 1080 did deliver a reliable 60 fps.
Courtesy of Matt Kamen
My takeaway? Despite Valve’s lofty claims, the Steam Machine is almost wholly incapable of delivering a true 4K, high-frame-rate experience. Getting passable results for living room play requires mind-numbing dives through display settings, both at the system level and in every single game you try to play. It’s a massive 
faff
, and for what—a worse experience than most people will get from a dedicated console, on a device that costs more than a PS5 Pro? The value proposition just isn’t there.
Ultimately, the Steam Machine feels like a compromise, the device Valve 
had
 to release, months after its announcement, rather than the one it 
wanted
 to. In an ideal world, it’d have that bit more RAM, a slightly faster chip, and a marginally better GPU to deliver on its promise. Instead, even the biggest company in PC gaming can’t do much in the face of the AI bubble sending 
component prices through the roof
—a sentence I’m as tired of writing as you probably are of reading.
If you’re mainly playing less demanding games, or don’t mind slumming it with sub-4K output on your 4K TV, this is still one of the best ways to access PC gaming in your living room—far better than docking the Steam Deck to your TV. It’s just disappointing that the Steam Machine feels immediately outclassed at launch. It may walk the line between PC and console, but when it comes to AAA-tier gaming, the PS5, 
Xbox Series X
, or even 
Nintendo Switch 2
 still have it beat.
$1,049
 at Steam
