$1,999
 at Velotric
Save this story
Save this story
Rating:
8
/10
Open rating explainer
WIRED
The bike's wide seat feels comfortable and sturdy. The front suspension smooths out even the bumpiest of rides. Massive 4-inch tires absorb impact expertly.
TIRED
The 75-pound weight is heavy—you definitely don't want to risk it conking out mid-ride and leaving you to pedal home unassisted. The hefty frame can make it feel unwieldy to steer and maneuver.
I'm a longtime
 ebike fan, and with the sting of constantly rising gas prices, it only makes sense for me to continue riding one as my primary mode of transport. But not all ebikes are created equally, which is why I was excited to test the comfort-forward, do-it-all 
Velotric Nomad 2
, a newly updated step-through model with massive 4-inch tires, a seat as wide as a couch, and front suspension to absorb bumps. Its 750-watt motor revs up quickly and maintains a steady pace—up to 28 mph as a Class 3 ebike once you adjust the settings (more on this below). While I’d stop short of taking it on single-track, the Nomad 2 has proven itself on some pretty rough dirt and gravel, along with smooth riding on pavement.
The Nomad 2 has been versatile and reliable since I started testing it in early April, and I haven’t had any issues with its mechanics or construction. However, it’s quite large and can feel unwieldy at first, especially while maneuvering down winding pathways. And I sure don’t want to let this thing die on me while I’m far from home—it weighs a whopping 75 pounds and is a real bear to pedal without throttle or pedal assist. Ultimately, though, it's been excellent for both pavement and off-road riding, and the throttle holds speed better than others I’ve tested.
Ready, Set, Go
Photograph: Maggie Slepian
Putting together this bike was a breeze, especially compared to recent experiences assembling other ebikes that had me digging in my toolbox and scratching my head at the instruction manual. On the contrary, this bike comes with the nicest tool and packaging setup I’ve seen. The neatly organized, well-labeled boxes and well-padded bike components meant the whole assembly—from box opening to riding—took just 30 minutes. After screwing on the seatpost, handlebars, pedals, and front wheel, all I had to do was attach the headlight and screen cables and activate the battery by plugging it in (the battery comes around 70 percent charged). Then, I was off.
The Nomad 2's bulkiness lends a nice sturdiness to its frame. The handlebars are easy to adjust to a comfortable height, and achieving a good fit is a cinch. Maneuvering and steering took some getting used to as I learned to control the weight. When I first got on the bike, I did some practice loops around my subdivision before taking it on busy roads and trail connectors. I immediately felt confident in both the mechanical and electronic components of the bike.
Photograph: Maggie Slepian
The Tektro hydraulic disc brakes were responsive, even after I pinned the throttle, but I’d still exercise caution in traffic. It’s a heavy bike, and you don’t want to risk delayed stopping. The Velotric has a left-thumb throttle, similar to the one I did not love on the 
Centris 2
 folding ebike. But here, the mechanisms are easier to control. I still prefer a right-hand twist throttle, like on the 
Rad Radster
 and 
HeyBike Ranger
, but I was able to dial in throttle speed and easily hold it in place on this ebike. There’s enough resistance to stop me from accidentally zooming forward, but it’s not fatiguing to hold down.
Life in the Fast (Sturdy, Convenient) Lane
The electronics on the Nomad 2 are intuitive and easy to use. Even in direct sunlight, the 3.5-inch, full-color display screen was easy to read. I found it simple to toggle through various settings for power engagement, speed limiters, and ride settings. Unlike with some other electronics (like my 
automatic cat feeder
), I didn’t have any issues learning the commands and buttons on the bike’s touchscreen.
The front light is a whopping 500 lumens, and the brake light and turn signals are all bright and easy to see while riding in traffic—a requirement for me whenever I commute on an ebike.
The 750-watt motor revs up immediately and gets to the desired speed in just a few seconds. The bike comes set as a 
Class 2 ebike
 out of the box with a default maximum speed of 20 mph. But once you unlock it via the display screen’s settings, the Nomad 2 can reach up to Class 3 speeds (28 mph with pedal assist). It’s important to note that Class 3 bikes typically aren’t allowed on trails or in parks, so you’ll have to stay in Class 2 settings in those areas. Always make sure to follow Class 3 bike restrictions for your state, including specifications around helmets and age. During my testing, I maxed out at 28 mph on regular traffic streets and stayed within the Class 2 setting for off-road riding.
Performance-wise, there’s no pedal-assist or throttle lag, as I've experienced on some cheaper ebikes. I thought this would feel unnervingly fast, but the sturdy frame and wide tires are incredibly stable. I felt totally comfortable going fast (for an ebike). I avoided taking corners and tight turns at full speed because the bike is so heavy, but otherwise, I felt self-assured during testing.
With a 505-pound on-bike weight limit, the Nomad 2 has a higher load capacity than other ebikes I've tested, particularly folding models. Velotric also advertises a 1,000-pound towing capacity. That number registers impressively high to me, but I haven't tested the claim. Even so, I’m skeptical of how long the battery would last while towing 1,000 pounds of cargo.
The battery range is pretty standard for a full-size ebike, though impressive for a model of this heft. Velotric advertises a 65-mile range for pedal-assist and 45 miles for throttle, and I appreciate that both ranges are listed. That said, I've maxed out at around 37 miles on the throttle and at around 47 miles with pedal assist. To be fair, I’m often riding on hills and bumpy surfaces, which also drains the battery faster. I also enjoy the IPX7 waterproof battery housing, as I’m liable to get caught out in the rain during the shoulder seasons of southwest Montana, where I live. My Rad Powerbike can’t handle rain with its partially enclosed battery, so I’m more likely to take the Velotric out if the weather is iffy.
An Off-Road Delight
Photograph: Maggie Slepian
I tested this bike for commuting purposes on the paved roads of my very suburban town. I also used it off-road on bike paths, gravel, rutted dirt, and in open fields. It worked well in all scenarios. The massive 4-inch Kenda tires, which came perfectly inflated, do a wonderful job absorbing impact while rolling easily over obstacles. I encountered some ruts and ridges that I thought would yield a painful thud, but the bike handled them smoothly.
Adding to the off-road comfort is that the Velotric 2 comes with 100-millimeter front suspension, which absorbs whatever bumps the beefcake tires don’t already take care of. The Nomad 2 also has one of the widest seats I’ve ever seen on a bike, which will be a welcome bonus for people who really hate feeling the ground as they roll over it. This thing is like a couch. I have never felt more protected or sturdier on a bike seat than I do on this.
The downside of all these comfort-forward components and materials? They're heavy. The Velotric Nomad 2 weighs a whopping 75 pounds, which is more than any other ebike I’ve tested. This is too heavy for most standard bike racks, and it would be an absolute bear if the battery died while you were on the road. You do not want to be stuck manually pedaling this heavy hitter all the way home.
Who Should Buy the Velotric Nomad 2?
The Nomad 2 is in the low- to mid-price range for full-size ebikes, and you'll get good performance and specs for the price. The bike has proven sturdy and durable. It’s remarkably comfortable off-road, and its battery range is comparable to that of lighter bikes with fewer features. I’ve enjoyed this bike for commuting on pavement and joyrides on trails. While it's more unwieldy than ebikes with a slimmer profile, it’s an excellent option for people who want a high weight capacity and emphasis on comfort. Shoppers looking for a similar style with upgraded components might want to check out the 
Nomad 2x ($2,399)
, which has 120 millimeters of front suspension, an advertised 75-mile maximum battery range, and rear suspension.
Power up with unlimited access to
 WIRED
.
 
Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. 
Subscribe Today
.
$1,999
 at Velotric
