Save this story
Save this story
Remember Vimeo? You
 probably don’t use it to browse videos the way you might with some other services. But if you landed on this page, there’s a good chance you use it to host your professional portfolio. Or assets for your business. Or your short films. Vimeo has tools other video hosting services simply don’t have, like AI editing tools, on-demand content selling, customizable embeds, and collaborative editing features. And best of all: There are no ads. WIRED has rotating Vimeo promo codes to help you save.
Get 10% Off Annual Plans With This Vimeo Promo Code
No matter what you need for your business or career, when it comes to video, Vimeo’s got 
multiple plans
 to suit. And luckily, right now, you can save with a Vimeo promo code—even on the annual plans, which already include 40% in savings. Just use the Vimeo coupon code to save 10% on your membership plan.
The Easiest Way to Save 40% on Your Vimeo Plan
Vimeo has a few different 
membership plans
 that you can save on. No matter which you go with, the easiest way to save a lot is with an annual membership, which has automatic 40% savings compared to paying monthly. And yes, you can even stack promo codes with the annual billing options.
More on Vimeo Pricing and Membership Plans
So what tier do you need? The Starter plan starts at $12 per month (billed annually) or $20 per month (billed monthly). It comes with 100 gigabytes of storage, plus boosted privacy controls, custom video players, custom URLs, and automatic closed captioning.
Boost your plan to Standard for $25 per month (billed annually) or $41 per month (billed monthly) to upgrade to 2 terabytes of storage, 5 “seats” (which are collaborative team member spots), a brand kit, a teleprompter, text-based video editing, AI script generation, and engagement and social analytics.
Finally, there’s the Advanced plan, which costs $75 per month (billed annually) or $125 per month (billed monthly). You’ll get 10 “seats”, 7 terabytes of storage, AI-generated chapters and text summaries, live chat and poll options, plus streaming and live broadcast capabilities.
Use a Vimeo Coupon Code to Get Savings on Vimeo on Demand
Vimeo on Demand
 is a new way to stream and download movies online. Through Vimeo on Demand, you can rent, buy and subscribe to the best original films, documentaries and series directly from your favorite small business video creators, including 
The Talent
 and 
Wild Magic.
Use Vimeo for Webinars
Vimeo wants to make it easier than ever for you to run your live event without hiccups. With 
Vimeo webinars
, you’ll present live, stitching together pre-recorded videos and schedule in advance with simulive—or a mix of both. Plus, you can add your logo, custom graphics, and descriptors to make sure you’re brand-aligned throughout.
Does Vimeo Have a Free Trial?
While Vimeo doesn’t have a free trial of its paid plans, it does have a free plan with some basic features. Additionally, paid plans can be canceled anytime–within 14 days for an annual subscription, or 3 days for a monthly subscription. You’ll get a full refund if you decide to cancel within the respective timeframes.
