Save this story
Save this story
Visible offers access
 to Verizon’s network in two unlimited plans for as low as $25 per month, with unlimited data, talk and text using Verizon’s 5G & 4G LTE networks, and unlimited talk and text to Mexico and Canada. Buying a new phone and signing up for a new phone contract can be super overwhelming—with all of the options available, confusing contract terms, and hidden fees making things more complicated. Visible makes it easy to save even more on their already affordable plans, and you can even score a free phone with our Visible promo code.
It should be said, for transparency, that such low costs mean that you won’t get some of the perks we’ve come to expect with the bigger tech and cell providers. For the low price of Visible, there’s only minimal customer service via an on-site chat, so if you’re someone who needs a lot of technical support, this may not be the provider for you.
Unlock 5G for $19 Per Month
Right now, you can save $6 per month on 
any monthly plan
 on Verizon’s network, and get a one-year rate guarantee when you use Visible promo code 
SAVE6
 at checkout. The Visible plan is Visible's basic plan which costs only $19 per month when you use Visible promo code SAVE6 (regularly $25 per month). With the Visible plan, you’ll get unlimited data, talk and text on Verizon’s 5G and 4G LTE networks. You’ll also get protection against high-risk spam and robocalls, up to 480 SD quality video, and a mobile hotspot. Plus, if you have a smartwatch, you can add service to it for only $10 per month. And when you’re traveling, you get tons of perks, like unlimited use of your phone as a WiFi connection, international unlimited talk and text to Mexico and Canada, along with an optional global pass that starts at $5 per day.
Get 50% Off the Best Annual Plan at Visible
If you’re looking to change to a cheaper, less fussy phone plan, 
Visible
 is a good choice. If you’ve never used Visible, now’s a great time to switch, because new members pay just $225 upfront for one year of 
Visible+ Pro
, which amounts to only paying $18.75 per month! To nab this super-cheap deal, new customers can use Visible promo code 
SAVEHALF
 at checkout.
Save on Your Plan With a Visible Promo Code
There are tons of Visible promo codes available this year, so be sure to check out our coupons above. Some of the best deals we’ve seen are major discounts on various plans, including a code (above) that will help you get Visible+ for $30/month for up to 5 years when you port in from an eligible carrier. And when you join Visible with a Back Market phone, you can save up to $432 over 36 months. Use code 
SWITCH26
 for $6 per month off Visible, $9 per month off Visible+ plans, or $12 per month off Visible+ Pro plans for 26 months (valid only for new members).
Join Visible and Go Unlimited for Only $20
If you’ve been wanting to switch providers and pay way less, now is the time to make the change! Right now, when you pick any monthly plan, you’ll get unlimited 5G data on the Verizon network, starting at $20 per month for 12 months. To get this discount, use Visible promo code 
FRESHSTART
.
