Save this story
Save this story
I've been hooked
 on smoothies in an almost superstitious way ever since college: A fruit smoothie is like a good luck charm, promising the health you feel you deserve despite all your other bad decisions. But in my more recent adult life, a good blender is the passport to taqueria salsas, Oaxacan-style mole, and all the delicate emulsions I once had to buy at restaurants and in jars.
Well, Vitamix crushes the blender game, but usually comes with a price tag to match. Luckily Vitamix promo codes crop up at various points during the year, and we’re here to help you stay up to date on those discounts.
The Vitamix Made Me a Blender Person—No Kale Required
The spin cycle is this machine’s sweet spot.
By 
Joe Ray
Vitamix New Ascent X5 With Stainless Steel Container
Vitmix’s top-of-the-line blender model, 
Ascent X5
, is now constructed with a stainless steel container. The 48-ounce stainless steel container is not only huge and hygienic, the machine itself combines an intuitive touch interface with a refined, timeless design. The non-reactive stainless steel material resists stains, odors, and corrosion, and expertly handles hot, cold, and acidic ingredients. This futuristic gadget also has an automatic self-cleaning program and ten blending programs for popular items like smoothies, soups, frozen cocktails and more for a precise blend, every time.
Vitamix’s Ascent Series Combines Tech and Power
This smart blender is a workhorse meant for more than smoothies and baby food.
By 
Heather Arndt Anderson
Get a $50 Vitamix Promo Code Plus Free Shipping
Vitamix has tons of ways to save on these handy kitchen gear items, including $50 off when you register your email. All you have to do is input your email on Vitamix’s website, and you’ll get a discount of up to $50 sent straight to your inbox. Plus, you’ll get free shipping on orders of $100 or more.
IMAGE COURTESY OF VITAMIX
Save to wishlist
Vitamix
5200 Blender
$490
 
Amazon
Does Vitamix Offer Free Shipping?
Glad you asked. Vitamix is offering free standard shipping for orders above $99. This pretty much means that ground shipping is free for blenders at the current discounts. Priority shipping is not free, however.
The WIRED Gear Team's Favorite Vitamix Blenders
WIRED has long been singing the praises of the classic Vitamix 5200. The model made a blender convert out of contributing reviewer Joe Ray after he realized that the “model of preference for blender aficionados around the world” was also his key to home mole and Oaxacan-style cookery.
A similar road-to-Damascus moment beset WIRED contributing reviewer Heather Arndt Anderson when she tested the Vitamix 
Ascent X2
, also currently on a $50 promo discount. “The more I thought about it,” she wrote, “the more I realized that maybe I’ve never been a blender person because I never had a good blender.” Anderson also made a big batch of mole and avoided passing out from chile fumes, then moved on to homemade masa and a Georgian walnut spread. She regretted only that the blender wasn't easier to clean.
After testing through a number of brands' blenders, WIRED contributing reviewer Emily Peck 
marveled
 that even the basic Vitamix Explorian 
E310
 churned almonds frictionlessly into butter without even need of a presoak.
Photograph: Heather Arndt Anderson
Save to wishlist
Vitamix
Ascent X2
$550
 
Amazon
$550
 
Vitamix
$550
 
Williams Sonoma
Save More with Vitamix Refurbished Blenders
Buying like-new refurbished Vitamix blenders and appliances is a great way to save hundreds of dollars, and go green with less waste. Be sure to check 
Vitamix refurbished blenders
, as they are constantly adding new refurbished appliances, and once they’re gone, they’re gone! Right now, a certified reconditioned Vitamix Propel 750 is only $230—a savings of $400! And a certified reconditioned Vitamix Venturist Pro is only $240—a savings of $310.
