Save this story
Save this story
Started more than
 50 years ago, data storage company Western Digital is one of the world's largest computer hard disk drive manufacturers, and produces solid-state drives (SSDs) and flash memory devices. Western Digital makes all the essentials for home office and business digital storage, whether you want to back up via 
cloud storage
, easily take your presentation on a 
USB flash drive
 to your next important meeting, or upgrade your 
home security
 surveillance’s storage system, Western Digital has what you need—and we have promo codes to help you save.
Recycle and Save 15% Off With Western Digital Promo
One of the biggest issues of our modern life is 
how to responsibly recycle e-waste
. That’s why Western Digital makes it easier to recycle your old, broken, or defunct electronics. With 
Western Digital’s Easy Recycle program
, you can safely dispose of NAS systems and internal or external HDDs and SSDs. Plus, they recycle devices from any manufacturer—not just Western Digital products. And when you go green and recycle through their program, you’ll get a 15% off Western Digital promo code that counts towards your next purchase of $50 or more when you shop online at Western Digital.
How to Responsibly Dispose of Your Electronics
Get rid of old, broken, and unused devices—even Lightning cables—without adding to the e-waste problem.
By 
Simon Hill
Get 10% Off With a Western Digital Coupon Code
Right now, you can save 10% on your first order when you sign up to receive emails from Western Digital. All you need to do is head to Western Digital’s 
promo page
, where you’ll input your email to sign up for special offers, promotions, and that Western Digital promo code for 10% off. The code will be sent to your inbox where you can use it to save on tech essentials.
The Best External Hard Drives to Back Up Everything You Have
Need an ultrafast drive for video editing or a rugged option to back up your photos in the field? We’ve got a solution for every situation.
By 
Scott Gilbertson
Does Western Digital Have Free Shipping?
Western Digital has even more ways to save, with free standard shipping on eligible orders of $50 or more for non-members. Western Digital 
members
 receive free standard shipping on all eligible orders in the lower 48.
Courtesy of Western Digital
Save to wishlist
Western Digital
Elements Desktop Hard Drive
$376
 
Amazon (8 TB)
$380
 
Adorama (8 TB)
Western Digital Weekly Deals
Be sure to check out 
Western Digital’s weekly deals
 page, where they put some of the best discounts and sales on best selling tech, including Western Digital’s top picks for storage, backup, and performance. Plus, when you shop on Western Digital online, you’ll receive an extra year of limited warranty on select products. And you can also save 15% on your next order at Western Digital when you recycle old drives from any manufacturer.
Photograph: Scott Gilbertson
Save to wishlist
Western Digital
My Passport Ultra
$178
 
Amazon
$289
 
Amazon (5-TB)
Additional Western Digital Deals
Western Digital has 
education discounts
, where students and teachers can get up to 15% off purchases after verifying their status with Youth Discount. Once their identity is verified, they’ll get a voucher code sent to their inbox to use at checkout. Western Digital also has a 15% 
discount for seniors
 55 years or older. Seniors just need to verify their status with Senior Discount. Once age is verified, folks will get a Western Digital promo code sent to their email to save.
In a commitment to sustainability, Western Digital has a program with 
Easy Recycle
, where you can safely dispose of NAS systems and internal or external HDDs and SSDs. (They’ll also recycle devices from any manufacturer, not just Western Digital). As a token of appreciation for participating in their initiative for a greener future, participants can get 15% off their next purchase of $50 or more.
Courtesy of Western Digital
Save to wishlist
Western Digital
P40 Gaming Drive
$210
 
$199
 
(5% off)
 
Amazon
$600
 
Adorama (2-TB)
Choosing the Right Western Digital Product
It’s hard to know which is the right digital storage system for you—in fact, we even made a handy guide on 
How to Back Up Your Digital Life
, and have a whole roundup of some of our favorite WIRED-tested 
external hard drives
. In a similar vein, Western Digital created a FAQ webpage on 
how to choose the right storage drive for your needs
, like budget and data. A Western Digital hard drive is a budget-friendly option that delivers the capacity needed to store years of photos, videos, backups, workloads, and archives. While a Western Digital SSD offers fast and reliable responsiveness for more large-scale operating systems and active projects.
How to Back Up Your Life With Hard Drives, Cloud-Based Services, and More
Backups are boring, but they’ll save your bacon. Here’s how to make sure your data lives on, even when your PC doesn’t.
By 
Scott Gilbertson
