In Transit
Portland
Chicago
Seattle
San Francisco
Twin Cities
Dumbo
Save this story
Save this story
Houston has long
 been known as the energy capital of America, if not the world, but tech has been slowly grinding its way to prominence here, with over 
230,000
 of the metro area’s 7.9 million residents employed in the tech sector. That, of course, only tells part of the story: Techies wind up here to market technology services to companies in the city’s bustling oil and gas, health care, and logistics sectors. You may also come to attend a trade show at the sprawling George R. Brown Convention Center. Or find yourself passing through as part of a layover at the massive George Bush Intercontinental Airport (IAH), a virtually mandatory stop for trips to Central and South America.
Houston is the most populous city in the U.S. state of Texas, fourth most populous city in the United States
Photograph: Denis Tangney Jr/Getty Images
Countless travelers’ sole experience with Houston is marked by transit through IAH, and it’s hard to blame folks for not wanting to venture further afield into the fourth-largest city in the country. Houston is massive, not just in population but in its sweaty, geographic sprawl, making it all but impossible to truly understand the place as a whole in a limited amount of time. (The city’s lackadaisical approach to zoning has never helped.) Here, the humidity and traffic are reviled by locals in equal proportions, and given that there’s no public transportation worth mentioning, a drive across town can easily take an hour. It’s easy to dismiss the place entirely.
That would be a huge mistake, though, if for no other reason than the dining scene. Houston is one of the most diverse cities in the US. Combined with its size, that means every type of cuisine you can imagine is available here–and it’s usually outstanding. Per Houston’s travel board, you’ve got about 
13,000 restaurants
 to choose from, representing the food of 70 countries and regions. So if business has brought you to Space City, know that at the very least, you’re going to eat well. Think of the heat as helping you to burn off some of those calories.
Here’s where to eat, stay, work, and more.
Jump to Section
AccordionItemContainerButton
Where to Stay in Houston
Where to Work
Where to Get Coffee
Where to Eat
Where to Drink
Downtime and Day Trips
Where to Stay in Houston
Let’s be frank: Where you stay in the megalopolis depends in large part on where you have to be the next day. These options are some of the top business travel outposts, and most are centrally located, so you won’t need to drive or Uber across town to get to your meeting.
The Post Oak Hotel at Uptown
1600 W Loop S,
 (844) 386-1600
This hotel is a widely loved indie gem owned by Tilman J. Fertitta, who owns hundreds of hotels and restaurants in this corner of the world (plus the Houston Rockets NBA team). Situated near the Galleria (once the largest shopping mall in the country and still bustling), the property is luxurious without being pretentious, including an on-site spa and salon and meeting spaces of every size. Rooms even come equipped with dumbbells so you can get in some curls between emails.
Houston, TX, USA - September 10, 2018: The Marriott Marquis is a Four Diamond hotel located in downtown Houston and features a Texas shaped pool, five restaurants and beautiful views from all angles.
Joe Hendrickson
Marriott Marquis Houston
1777 Walker St.,
 (713) 654-1777
Adjacent to the George R. Brown Convention Center downtown, the Marriott Marquis has another 100,000 square feet of meeting space of its own, including Houston’s largest ballroom. Often mentioned as the top hotel in town, it caters to business travelers and pleasure seekers alike, famously featuring the world’s largest Texas-shaped lazy river on its roof. If you don’t think that’s something anyone would brag about then you haven’t spent enough time in the state.
Magnolia Hotel Houston
1100 Texas Ave.,
 (713) 221-0011
A more affordable lodging option located in what was formerly Shell Oil’s headquarters, this refurbished downtown hotel offers quick access to the convention center and Daikin Park, which the Astros call home. You may not be able to paddle around in the rooftop plunge pool like you would at the Marquis, but a quick, cooling dip at the end of the day will not disappoint, nor will the free cookies at bedtime.
Courtesy of Bunkhouse Hotels
Hotel Saint Augustine
4110 Loretto Dr.,
 (832) 844-0057
This new, midcentury-inspired gem can be found in the Montrose neighborhood, a block away from the Menil Collection, arguably the best and most eclectic museum in town. The boutique property includes just 71 rooms and is designed to fit in with its surroundings, which are largely residential and very subdued in comparison to the more raucous downtown. Despite its small size, it still has room for a small event space, private pool, and a slick lobby lounge.
The Houstonian Hotel
111 N Post Oak Ln.,
 (713) 680-2626
The Houstonian occupies a massive 27 acres in Houston’s West Oaks district, just outside the Loop. Despite its central location, the hotel offers a level of seclusion you won’t find anywhere else in town. It’s probably why George H. W. Bush used the hotel as his official residence for years in the 1980s and spent time here for decades after. The 125,000-square-foot spa is also the largest in the state.
The Royal Sonesta Houston Galleria
2222 W Loop S,
 (713) 627-7600
Another Galleria-area hotel, this is an all-around good option for business travelers who need executive-focused amenities like 24-hour business and fitness center access, shuttle service, and meeting and event space (all 50,000 square feet of it). With 485 guest rooms on its 23 floors, there’s probably space for your whole organization to find a berth for the week.
Where to Work
Houston has hundreds of coworking spaces, so chances are you’ll be able to find something close to where you’re staying. As with most things in this city, travel time is an essential consideration. These picks may be some of the best options in town, but no sane Houstonian would recommend you spend an hour in traffic to get to one of them if another solid option is closer.
Courtesy of POST
POST Houston
401 Franklin St.,
 (713) 999-2550
Named for the former post office that used to occupy this Museum District space (it was a railroad depot before that), POST was redeveloped in 2019 as a cultural center that includes food-hall-style dining, an art museum, a concert hall, and a rooftop garden. It’s also got loads of workspace options ranging from single desks to full offices, with day passes starting at $25.
The Ion
4201 Main St.
Rice University helped to develop the Ion District, which occupies 16 acres in Midtown and serves as a technology park and innovation center for tech and energy outfits, and now includes the largest climate and sustainable energy incubator in the country. Coworking passes (starting at $60/day) get you access to the venue’s copious networking events plus snacks and coffee.
HUB htx
1430 Yale St.,
 (832) 203-5115
This boutique office space is ideal for those doing business in the Heights, with amenities including an on-site notary, conference room rentals, and virtual office options for those who need a physical address in town. Plenty of usage options are available from $25 day passes to $359 monthly memberships (which include free conference room access).
Where to Get Coffee
Yes, there are nearly 200 Starbucks in the greater Houston area, and while you’re welcome to visit them or any other corporate chain for your pick-me-up, these spots offer a more refined (and independent) experience that, if nothing else, will help you impress your business colleagues with your sophisticated palate.
Blendin Coffee Club
3201 Allen Pkwy. Ste. 170
8410 Hwy. 90 ALT, Bldg. B, Sugar Land,
 (346) 368-2895
Blendin focuses on sourcing coffee from unique locations with a “tree to cup” philosophy, which means your cup (or bag of beans) is likely to hail from a single farm in Panama, Ethiopia, Burundi, or somewhere further afield. Put yourself in the hands of the barista at one of the two locations to help you find the perfect base for your latte.
Blacksmith Montrose
1018 Westheimer Rd.
At this beloved local coffee shop with a full menu, you’re best off pairing your Vietnamese matcha or Golden Monkey tea with a hearty brunch, like a smoked salmon scramble or scratch biscuits topped with smoked ham. Skip lunch to make room.
Common Bond Cafe & Bakery employees take orders during their lunch rush,  photographed, Friday, July 18, 2014, in Houston. ( Nick de la Torre ) (Photo by Nick de la Torre/Houston Chronicle via Getty Images)
Photograph: Houston Chronicle/Getty Images
Common Bond Coffee & Bakery
Multiple locations
The pastries are the major draw here, with top-shelf croissants and kouign-amann bringing in fans from all over town to one of its five locations. All are spacious and well appointed, offering convenient spots for a quick meeting over coffee or lunch, should you wish to dig into the sandwich-centric menu.
Where to Eat
Ah, the main event. Driving in Houston can be stressful, which means that even a short trip is going to leave you famished by the time you get where you’re going. While you can throw a dart at a map here and find somewhere outstanding to eat, these selections are some of Houston’s tried and true essentials.
Uchiko
1801 Post Oak Blvd.,
 (713) 522-4808
The Uchi empire stretches across Texas and beyond, but the pinnacle of this Japanese concept is arguably Uchiko, which offers fresh sushi, bright tempura, and items from the grill and smoker. The menu is mighty and extensive, so trust your server for guidance on how to craft the perfect culinary journey.
Xochi, an Oaxacan inspired restaurant, photographed Friday, July 14, 2017, in Houston. ( Nick de la Torre /  ) (Photo by Nick de la Torre/Houston Chronicle via Getty Images)
Photograph: Houston Chronicle/Getty Images
Xochi
1777 Walker St.,
 (713) 400-3330
Located within the Marriott Marquis (see above), Xochi is a James Beard–winning Oaxacan restaurant, so expect intense moles and hearty meats instead of the tacos and enchiladas you’ll get at any number of Tex-Mex joints across town. Consider the mole tasting menu if you want to see how far five wildly different styles of the dish can take you.
*** Top 100 Restaurants *** Caracol's mariscos con arroz negro, shrimp, clams, mussels, squid, octopus, chorizo, with rice cooked in black bean broth. Photographed Wednesday, June 29, 2016, in Houston. ( Nick de la Torre /  ) (Photo by Nick de la Torre/Houston Chronicle via Getty Images)
Photograph: Houston Chronicle/Getty Images
Caracol
2200 Post Oak Blvd., Ste. 160,
 (713) 622-9996
This Galleria-area hot spot focuses on seafood with a Mexican flair, and while it’s a solid pick most any night of the week, the pro move is to visit for the Sunday brunch buffet, which includes traditional Mexican pastries, classics like enchiladas and chiles rellenos, and an unlimited oyster bar.
Courtesy of Brennan's
Brennan’s of Houston
3300 Smith St.,
 (713) 522-9711
For nearly 60 years Brennan’s has been a Houston fixture as the western companion to its sister restaurant Commander’s Palace in New Orleans, serving white tablecloth renditions of Cajun and Creole cuisine to the masses who long for some of Louisiana’s finest dishes. Yes, the turtle soup is made with actual snapping turtle meat. And yes, the 25-cent martinis are for real (weekday lunchtime only, limit two per person).
Ishtia
709 Harris Ave., Kemah,
 (713) 429-4311
Ishtia’s location in Kemah—a small town southeast of Houston—is as unexpected as its food, which draws from indigenous Choctaw cuisine. The restaurant seats only 18 people and offers two experiences—nine courses or 18 courses—built heavily around Native American ingredients and cooking techniques. There’s nothing like it anywhere else in town.
Bludorn
807 Taft St.,
 (713) 999-0146
Chef Aaron Bludorn only arrived in Houston (via Café Boulud in New York) in 2020, but the way he’s taken over this town would make you think he’s lived here his whole life. His small restaurant empire now spans four concepts, but his original space in the Montrose neighborhood is still going strong, serving Texified French-inspired cuisine that remains a standout.
March
1624 Westheimer Rd.,
 (832) 380-2481
Expense account alert! March is one of the prettiest and fussiest dining experiences in town, offering tasting menus that change with the seasons to focus on the cuisine from a different part of the Mediterranean—with several weeks of closure in between each one. Season XII debuts in August 2026 with a fresh menu that showcases the food of Portugal.
Photograph: George Rose/Getty Images
Pappas Bros. Steakhouse
5839 Westheimer Rd.,
 (713) 780-7352
1200 McKinney St.,
 (713) 658-1995
In a city where high-quality steak is nearly ubiquitous, the Pappas family rises to the top. Slinging beef since 1995, the steaks are thick and the presentation is delightfully old-school. Visitors are often surprised by the proliferation of Pappa-prefixed restaurants around town, which are all run by the family. Pappas BBQ, Pappadeaux (Cajun), and Pappasitos (Tex-Mex) are among your many other options if filet mignon is off the table.
Feges BBQ
8217 Long Point Rd.,
 (346) 258-6313
3 E Greenway Plaza Ste. C210,
 (832) 409-6118
Ultimately, there’s no point debating who has the best BBQ in town, as a half-dozen venues could easily lay claim to the top spot. Feges has to be part of that conversation, however, with its juicy prime brisket and house-made sides that include Cajun-inspired potato salad and hog-fat cornbread. The Spring Valley Village location is even open for dinner, a rarity in the BBQverse.
Where to Drink
If Houston loves anything more than eating, it’s drinking. From icehouses to honky tonks to craft cocktail outfits, this town has you covered. Here are some of the more refined and venerable spots in town to wet your whistle.
Julep
1919 Washington Ave.,
 (713) 869-4383
This sunny, classic cocktail-centric watering hole has been a standby since it opened in 2014. Now a mecca for cocktail fans from all over, you’ll almost certainly need a reservation to get a seat.
Courtesy of Anvil
Anvil
1424 Westheimer Rd. Ste. B
The flipside to Julep, this is a more brooding Montrose area bar that’s just as renowned and invariably packed to the gills. The place is so popular that the owners opened a second establishment, 
Refuge
, next door.
Photograph: Greg Noire for The Washington Post/Getty Images
Better Luck Tomorrow
44 Yale St.,
 (713) 802-0845
Better Luck Tomorrow is an upscale cocktail bar where you can also bring your kids and enjoy the spacious outdoor area. There’s a sizable food menu that ranges from burgers to mussels–plus a kids’ menu.
Bandista
1300 Lamar St.,
 (713) 650-1300
This speakeasy can be found inside the Four Seasons downtown, behind a secret bookcase (of course). Getting in is half the fun, but the Latin-inspired cocktail list is equally exciting. Reservations required.
Lei Low
6412 N Main St. Ste. C,
 (713) 380-2968
Never mind the absence of idols and orchids outside: Houston’s best tiki bar is located in a surprisingly grungy strip center in the Heights. Once inside, the venue transforms into a rum-fueled oasis, filled with the expected Polynesian decor and an expansive menu of island classics.
Lee’s
5117 Kelvin Dr. Ste. 200,
 (713) 492-2490
One of the buzziest new hot spots in town, this Rice Village watering hole is attached to 
Milton’s
, an Italian-American trattoria that is equally popular. The pro move is happy hour at Lee’s, dinner next door.
Downtime and Day Trips
Got a day off? Check out these iconic amusements in town and nearby.
An exhibit at the NASA Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, U.S., on Friday, Jan. 14, 2022. Axiom Space stands out among the handful of space startups trying to build the first commercial space station. In 2020, Axiom won the first and only NASA contract to build a detachable module for the International Space Station (ISS). It plans to eventually build its own station off of that module and put it into its own orbit before the existing station retires in 2030. Photographer: Go Nakamura/Bloomberg via Getty Images
Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images
NASA Space Center Houston
1601 E NASA Pkwy.,
 (281) 244-2100
Before there was Elon, there was NASA, and it’s still here on the outskirts of Houston, where the grounds have become something of a mecca for rocket boys and space nerds who want to see what the origins of space flight were really like. Be dazzled by the sheer size of a Saturn V rocket, step inside a Space Shuttle replica (and its carrier aircraft), and try not to repeat Jim Lovell’s immortal line when you visit Mission Control.
Photograph: Houston Chronicle/Getty Images
Museum District
Houston doesn’t just have an outstanding arts and history scene, it all happens to be concentrated in one part of town, the Museum District. More than 20 venues occupy this space, so while you can easily hit a few in a day, visiting everything would take weeks. Highlights include the aforementioned Menil Collection, the 
Holocaust Museum Houston
, and the vast 
Museum of Fine Arts
 (MFAH). Don’t miss the cool, underground tunnels that connect the MFAH’s various buildings, where you’ll find some incredible light-based art installations.
Galveston
Truth be told, I now spend less time in Houston than in Galveston, situated on a barrier island about an hour outside of town. The Queen City of the Gulf was the largest in Texas until the hurricane of 1900 decimated the place, forcing residents to move inland (which directly influenced Houston’s rise). Today the scrappy but charming burg, rebuilt time and time again after each subsequent disaster, is home to the country’s second largest Mardi Gras celebration and offers some of the freshest straight-off-the-boat seafood you’ll ever taste.
SLABs in the City
Houston’s unique car culture is known as SLAB—Slow, Loud, and Bangin—and you’ll spot the unmistakable Caddies, Lincoln Town Cars, and Buick LeSabres pretty much everywhere in town. You can’t miss them with their bright paint and protruding “Swanga” wheels, usually riding awfully low to the pavement. If you can’t get enough in the wild, check out the unofficial Instagram page for word of official meetups.
The author is a Houston native who now lives in Austin. His frequent visits back to town are ostensibly made for the purpose of visiting family but are really for the Vietnamese crawfish.
