Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



MARK TWAIN 

themselves that we couldn't make oat what the 
matter was. However, we plunged into the wood, 
they scurrying in the lead, and the trouble was 
quickly revealed: they had hanged a little fdlow 
with a bark rope, and he was kicking and struggling, 
in the process of choking to death. We rescued him , 
and fetched him around. It was some more human 
nattire; the admiring little folk imitating their elders; 
they were playing mob, and had achieved a success 
which promised to be a good deal more serious than 
they had bargained for. 

It was not a dull excursion for me. I managed to 
put in the time very well. I made various acquaint- 
anceships, and in my quality of stranger was able to 
ask as many questions as I wanted to. A thing which 
naturally interested me, as a statesman, was the 
matter of wages. I picked up what I could under 
that head during the afternoon. A man who hasn't 
had much experience, and doesn't thiok, is apt to 
measiue a nation's prosperity or lack of prosperity by 
the mere size of the prevailing wages; if the wages 
be high, the nation is prosperous; if low, it isn't. 
Which is an error. It isn't what sum you get, it's 
how much you can buy with it, that's the important 
thing; and it's that that tells whether your wages are 
high in fact or only high in name. I could remember 
how it was in the time of our great civil war in the 
nineteenth century. In the North a carpenter got 
three dollars a day, gold valuation; in the South he 
got fifty — ^payable in Confederate shinplasters worth 
a dollar a bushel. In the North a suit of overalls coft 
three dollars — a day's wages; in the South it cost 

304 






A CONNECTICUT YANKEE 

seventy-five — ^which was two days' wages. Other 
things were in proportion. Consequently, wages 
were twice as high in the North as they were in the 
South, because the one wage had that much more 
ptirchasing power than the other had. 

Yes, I made various acquaintances in the hamlet, 
and a thing that gratified me a good deal was to find 
our new coins in drctdation — ^lots of milrays, lots of 
mills, lots of cents, a good many nickels, and some 
silver; all this among the artisans and commonalty 
generally; yes, and even some gold — ^but that was at 
the bank, that is to say, the goldsmith's. I dropped 
in there while Marco, the son of Marco, was haggling 
with a shopkeeper over a quarter of a potind of salt, 
and asked for change for a twenty-dollar gold piece. 
They furnished it — ^that is, after they had diewed the 
piece, and rung it on the counter, and tried add on 
it, and asked nle where I got it, and who I was, and 
where I was from, and where I was going to, and 
when I expected to get there, and perhaps a couple of 
hundred more questions; and when they got aground, 
I went right on and furnished them a lot of infor- 
mation voluntarily; told them I owned a dog, and 
his name was Watch, and my first wife was a Free 
Will Baptist, and her grandfather was a Prohibi- 
tionist, and I used to know a man who had two 
thumbs on each hand and a wart on the inside of his 
upper lip, and died in the hope of a glorious resurrec- 
tion, and so on, and so on, and so on, till even that 
hungry village questioner began to look satisfied, and 
also a shade put out; but he had to respect a man of 
my financial strength, and so he didn't give me any 

30s 



MARK TWAIN 



Clarence's editorial reference to this affair was tx> 
this effect : 



tbdrew. 

wcffk maintained 

Ihere since, loon 

lastic have witq 

oked interest 

ttpon the oMa- 

vc been m^^ d 

Vy thean^^, 

cut ont d^^y by 

f lerian Bami^ and 

• SQBie ;^Fng me 

of our under the 

I guidance of thd 

Sm aid in ajknown 

bi great enterpnae 

c' making pure; 

eien) 

flkwement had its 

oiigin in pteven 

hit ever beena 

ikmaidoar 

flotbefiu- 

otber odk 



ne 

lib* tame 

CDicPtcaent 

bed thirty of 

Oeeds and hear- 

«hicb,Jycan age ! 

it«esgn wasosgan- 

teg, the missions, 

IK) that both had 

to withdraw* and 

mocb to their 

grief, 



It win beofaaenredtbyag^Tnoeat oar 
advertising columns, that the commu- 
nity is to be favored iuth a treat of un- 
usual interest in the toumament line. 
The names or the aitiits aie warrmt of 
good enterTNnment. The box-office 
will be open at noon of the 13th; ad- 

ssion 3 cent!, reaervet/ seats 5; pro- 
ceeds to go to the hospital fund jjie 
royal pair and all tfteOosirt will be pres- 
ent. With these cviepliooa, and the 
press and the clergy, the free list is strict- 
ly suslTended. FSrties are herd^y warn- 
ed against buying tidceis d ipecnlatocs; 
they win not be good al the door. 
Eveiybo^ knows and Skes The Boas, 
eveiybody knows and Hkea Sir Sag.; 
come, let us give tne lads a good send- 
off* ReMember, tne piocesds go to a 
great and free charity, and one irixM 
bfoad begevolence stretches ooL itshc^ 
ing hand, warm vrith the blood cf a lov 
ing heart, to aU that suj^er, regprdleas of 
race, creed, conditioa or color— tk 
en^ diarity yet established in the earth 
iriiich haa no polltico-rdigkMi stop- 
cock on its compaasioa, bat saya Here 
flows 2the stream, let aS come and 
drink I ^jpaxL out, aU handsl lelcl along 
your dou3hnnts and your gum-urops 
and have a good time. Fie for sale en 
the grow*, and locki to crack ilwidi; 
also ciRcus-lemonade — three dsapa of 
lime fnice to a barrel of water* 

K. B. TkU if tki firsHomnfomim 

eemdaiani t9 ute wty weapon ktwta^pre- 
fir. You wast to make a noteoC isqi 

384 



^nnnptly 
two 01 their Mc 
erlam, and otbe 
ers havcgalieafA 
spoken, you b 
funuaed for 
their nse^m 
make and 
theipiid 



Of introd 

nUCtlfiTll WmB 

thqr are mfai 
u^ frienosto aw 
ried, andleavi ili# 
tholjkind words «^ 
which you mjio^ 
hind; and it ist 
home matter of k 
it boardmp 
direct diem to 
now under the 
gBeldrai 



are wann-heei«ed( 
acpri, regioiia iMft 
not to '« build* 
ond,'( and tfasi 
der instraod 
onsof our 
anothernaB 
founhati^s Qb.» 
ociety,wUcb 
They go un- 
say ti{Bt**iar 
ionariesto 



MARK TWAIN 

then for a time he lay silent, and apparently sinking 
away toward death. Presently his fingers began to 
pick busily at the coverlet, and by that sign I knew 
that his end was at hand. With the first suggestion 
of the death-rattle in his throat he started up slightly, 
and seemed to listen: then he said: 

"A bugle? ... It is the king! The drawbridge, 
there! Man the battlements! — ^tum out the — " 

He was getting up his last "effect"; but he never 
finished it. 



THE END 



/ 




,1 

1^1 



V . \ t 



^."M 



