The 
most downloaded
 mobile game last year has just landed on Apple’s subscription gaming service, Apple Arcade. On Tuesday, Apple announced the addition of 
Block Blast!+
, an ad-free version of the popular puzzle game that has around 725 million lifetime installs, according to app intelligence provider 
Appfigures
. Other 
estimates
 put that figure even higher, at 868 million installs.

The game will be released on Apple Arcade on September 3, alongside a 2025 App Store Award winner, 
Art of Fauna: Cozy Puzzles+
, and others.

Image Credits:
Apple/Art of Fauna

Apple’s internal data indicates that Block Blast! was the 
most downloaded free iPhone game in 2025
. It has continued to rank No. 1 in the early months of 2026, 
according
 to its developer, Hungry Studio, and other third-party app intelligence providers, such as 
Sensor Tower
. 

Given that the puzzle game continues to acquire tens of millions of new users every month, it raises the question: why would the studio offer an ad-free Arcade version now, before growth has plateaued? After all, just a few months ago, the studio reported that Block Blast! was still seeing high engagement, with 70 million daily active users and 300 million monthly active users worldwide. It even 
promoted
 the title at this year’s Coachella, suggesting there’s still room for growth. 

However, a deeper dive into the data indicates Block Blast! downloads may have fallen from their peak in late 2024, when it was 
pulling in nearly 50 million downloads
 per month. This suggests the title is indeed maturing, which makes it a good candidate for Apple’s subscription service.

For Block Blast! fans, which are still many, the Arcade version will address the most annoying thing about playing this puzzler: all those ads. After every loss, ads play before you can start a new gaming session, leading users to swipe the game closed to skip the ad, then re-open the app to play again. It’s a tedious way to play this puzzle game, and one that has long seen fans begging for a subscription option to go ad-free. The Arcade version will now be that option. 

Apple’s Arcade service is $6.99 per month for its 200+ games, or it can be bundled with Apple One plans, which start at $19.95/month for individuals.   

Other titles launching on Arcade on September 3 include  
NFL Retro Bowl ’27
, 
Coloring Games for Families+
, and 
Let’s Play! Oink Games+
, a digital collection of nine tabletop games. 

Topics

Apple
, 
Apple Arcade
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Gaming
, 
Gaming

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
