We spend dozens of hours at our desks each week (if not more), so it’s worth creating a workspace that’s productive and enjoyable. The right desk gadgets can help you reduce clutter, stay focused, and add a little extra convenience to your day.

From ambient lighting to smart mugs, there are lots of products designed to make your time at your desk better, so we’ve combined a list of some options. Whether you’re working from home or in an office, these gadgets can help transform your workspace.

Odistar Desktop Vacuum Cleaner — $13

Image Credits:
Odistar

The 
Odistar desktop vacuum
 is an affordable option for keeping your desk clean and crumb-free, especially if you often eat lunch or snack at your desk. You can also use it to clean your keyboard and remove dust and debris between keys. 

It’s quiet and simple to use, and because it’s so compact, you can keep it on your desk or tuck it away in a drawer until you need it. It’s cordless and uses two AA batteries. At just $13, the desktop vacuum is a great way to keep your desk clean as you work. 

Ember Mug 2 — $150

Image Credits:
Ember

If you’re someone who enjoys hot coffee but often finds yourself drinking it cold after getting sidetracked while working, the 
Ember Mug 2
 can help keep your drinks at the perfect temperature. 

You can set an exact temperature using your phone and the smart mug maintains it for up to one and a half hours with the 10-ounce version and up to 80 minutes with the 12-ounce version. The mug allows for a more consistent coffee experience, making your workday more enjoyable. 

Amazon Echo Dot — $50

Image Credits:
Amazon

The 
Amazon Echo Dot
 can be a great addition to your work desk as you can use voice commands to set reminders, create to-do lists, check your calendar, play music, adjust smart lights, or get quick answers to questions without having to reach for your phone. 

Since it’s small, you can easily place it anywhere on your desk where it can act as a hands-free assistant that helps keep you organized and focused throughout your workday.

Govee Glide Hexa Light Panels — $189.99

Image Credits:
Govee

The 
Govee Glide Hexa Light Panels
 are a simple and fun way to add some personality to your work desk setup without taking up any actual desk space. The hexagon-shaped panels mount on the wall behind your monitor and can display different colors and customizable lighting effects through the Govee app. 

They can be used to create a focused atmosphere during work hours and can be switched to more dynamic effects when gaming or taking a break. The panels can be arranged in different patterns to match your style.

Speks — $35

Image Credits:
Speks

If you’re someone who hasn’t yet delved into the world of fidget toys but often finds yourself playing with random objects or even wrappers during calls or meetings, 
Speks
 might be for you. They’re tiny magnets that you can fidget or build with to keep your brain focused and your hands busy. 

Instead of fidgeting with whatever happens to be within reach, you can have something that is actually made for the job and is more satisfying to have in your hands. They can help you stay focused and relieve stress throughout your workday.

Topics

evergeen
, 
evergreens
, 
Gadgets
, 
Gadgets
, 
Hardware
, 
hardware

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek

Flipper Device’s new Busy Bar is a customizable display for productivity

Ivan Mehta
