Ceva Logistics, one of the world’s largest shipping and logistics giants, has been hacked. Several companies that rely on Ceva for shipping their products to their customers say that their personal information was also stolen in the breach.

The cyberattack on Ceva is affecting at least eight warehouses across Europe used for shipping goods across the continent, the company told TechCrunch.

Industry news site 
FreightWaves
 reports that the hack began on July 29 and is causing shipping delays for many of the goods in affected warehouses.

Ceva is a France-headquartered shipping and logistics giant that companies around the world rely on to deliver their goods from their assembly lines to customer homes. The company, which brought in $18.3 billion in revenue in 2025, has over a thousand warehouses across the world.

Shipping and logistics giants have become a growing target for cybercriminals 
in recent years
 for their ability to access and hijack trucks and containers full of goods 
into the hands of real-world gangs
.

The hack at Ceva also resulted in a data breach, affecting a large amount of personal information belonging to retail customers that Ceva relies on for delivering goods to people’s home addresses. Several companies reported that hackers took their customers’ names, home addresses, phone numbers, and email addresses used to place their orders from Ceva’s systems.

Dutch online retail giant Bol said 
on its website
 that hackers gained access to systems of its warehousing partner, Ceva, and warned that their customers’ data may have been taken. Bol 
also said
 that it expects delays and some customer orders to be cancelled as a result of the incident.

De Bijenkorf, another Dutch luxury retailer, 
similarly confirmed
 order delays following the theft of its customers’ data, per 
local media
. Football club Ajax, banking giant ING, and eyeglass maker Ace & Tate 
also reported
 that customers’ shipping information was affected. 

Video game giant Valve 
told customers
 that it learned on August 7 that data was taken from Ceva’s systems, and alerted customers who recently bought its Steam hardware that they had personal information taken in the incident. Valve said in its note to customers, 
posted to Reddit
, that Ceva stores their shipping and delivery information for 90 days following their order.

Valve spokesperson Doug Lombardi did not respond to a request for comment about the incident. 

Ceva confirmed in a statement to TechCrunch that it was experiencing a cyberattack.

“On Aug. 1, CEVA Logistics confirmed to affected customers that a cyber intrusion was impacting part of its European contract logistics operations. As soon as the incident was identified, CEVA’s cybersecurity teams immediately activated its security protocols and launched a thorough investigation, which is still ongoing,” per the statement provided to TechCrunch. “The operational impact is limited to eight warehouses. No other CEVA systems globally were affected, and all other operations continue without incident.”

Ceva spokesperson Ryan Fisher would not answer TechCrunch’s questions about the incident, such as if the company knows how much personal data was taken, or if Ceva has received any communication from the hackers, such as a ransom demand.

Ceva said some of its affected applications and services are back online, and that it was working with the authorities. Ceva’s website was not properly loading at the time of publication on Monday.

Authorities in the Netherlands are said to be investigating the incident. 

Mark Schenkel, a spokesperson for the Dutch data protection authority, did not respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment on Monday about the incident.

Topics

ceva logistics
, 
cyberattack
, 
data breach
, 
Security
, 
Shipping
, 
Steam
, 
Valve Software

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

Cloudflare launches Kitesurf, a browser built for AI agents

Sarah Perez

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta
