A 
new app
 called 
HyperTexting
 is making it as easy to surf the web as it is to scroll through a social media feed, like Facebook or X. The app, newly available for iOS, also aims to make updating your own personal website as simple as sending a text message.

This algorithm-free vision for the future of the web was built by Caleb Hailey, a 20-year tech veteran who still remembers the internet’s early promise, where everyone would own their own domain and publish content on their small slice of the wider web. That, of course, changed with the arrival of social media.

“Somewhere along the way, social media came, and it was easier to make a page and post to your page than it was a website,” Hailey explained in a recent interview. “And the rest is history.”

Image Credits:
HyperTexting

Beyond centralizing access to the personal connections and conversations that take place online, the shift to social media also established norms in a consumer app’s user interface, including a scrollable feed, user profiles, and other elements, like buttons for following, liking, and commenting.

Those concepts form the basis for HyperTexting, which has been built to make the majority of the web available in this same format. On the app, users can follow people and their websites, news outlets, blogs, newsletters, and more with a click. Users can then scroll through their articles, essays, and multimedia-filled posts in what feels very much like a modern-day social media feed.

Image Credits:
HyperTexting

Hailey was inspired to build HyperTexting after seeing Twitter lose its way over the years, he said.

“[Twitter] used to be a good place to discover things and share things, before they were chasing growth, and no longer reverse chron,” Hailey told TechCrunch, referring to the way the main Twitter timeline is now algorithmic, instead of displaying things in reverse chronological order. Plus, he adds, “links got deranked” on Twitter, which 
was
 
another
 
change
 that made the app worse than before.

Then, during the COVID era, the concept of “doom scrolling” emerged, and Hailey found that social media was beginning to make him feel badly about the world. 

Image Credits:
HyperTexting

“I basically uninstalled all the social apps from my phone,” Hailey said, noting that he found his way back to an old RSS news reader app, NetNewsWire, as a way to keep up with the flow of news and information online. Around the same time, he began working on another passion project — a way to make it easier to post to the web via a static website generator built for iPhone.

“But then I started to realize that all these different things that I was passionate about could potentially be packaged up into something that looks and feels really familiar to more people, and [could] solve that problem that has bothered me for so long about RSS — like, why don’t more people care about this?” Hailey said.

That led to HyperTexting, an app that leverages RSS under the hood but doesn’t promote the protocol in its marketing, while also providing a way to easily post to your own website.

Image Credits:
HyperTexting

“It’s trying to combine that publishing and subscribing experience, and really, it’s almost like a viewer to the discourse that already happens in the open web,” Hailey noted.

RSS, for context, is an open protocol that is still very much a part of the web’s underpinning, powering products like WordPress blogs and podcast feeds.

While adding your own list of RSS feeds to an app like NetNewsWire or Feedly is arguably a better way to follow website updates — especially for those who spend a lot of their day reading, like journalists or researchers — it’s not the format that everyday web users have gravitated to. Most prefer a scrollable feed — the kind that social media sites use.

Over the years, attempts to drive mainstream consumers to RSS readers have fallen short. 
Google shut down its own app in this space in 2013
, Google Reader, and no other tools have gone mainstream since.

Image Credits:
HyperTexting

In addition to 
being able to explore and follow websites
 and their content, read articles without ads, and listen to podcasts, HyperTexting lets users add their own website, like a WordPress blog, Ghost newsletter, or other site built with open source static site generators like 
Hugo
 or HyperTexting’s own product, 
HyperTemplates
.

That way, if a user wants to join in the conversation, they can post on their own website instead of a centralized social media platform. The post is then linked to the original website or article and will be surfaced in the feed for those following that same site.

Image Credits:
HyperTexting

The app also includes an “Explore” section that points users to trending content across the web. (For those who remember it, this is like a rudimentary version of 
Nuzzel
, which 
once surfaced 
what people were talking about on Twitter.)

An optional Safari extension also lets users add new websites to follow on HyperTexting as they browse the web.

Image Credits:
HyperTexting

“My experience in tech over the last 20 years is that things have just gotten so complicated. And to some degree, there’s this urge — this irresistible urge — to reinvent the wheel. Part of my experiment with HyperTexting is like, what if we didn’t?” Hailey mused.

“Instead of chasing the platforms — the handful of websites we call social media today — and instead of trying to assert some opinion in this decentralized federated social networking thing that’s happening right now, my opinion is that the greatest decentralized social network ever created already exists, and it’s called the World Wide Web,” he said. “Like, let’s just use that.”

The app, built by Hailey’s 
Herd Works
, is a 
free download on iOS
. Over time, it may add premium subscriptions for extra features or include a single sponsored post per day to generate additional revenue to keep it afloat.

Topics

Apps
, 
Exclusive
, 
hypertexting
, 
Mobile
, 
RSS

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha
