In Brief

Posted:

6:24 AM PDT · August 28, 2026

Image Credits:
Smith Collection/Gado / Getty Images

Sean O'Kane

a16z creates a $1.1B ‘Machine Age’ fund to ‘accelerate the physical buildout of AI’

Andreessen Horowitz has 
launched
 a new “Machine Age” fund with $1.1 billion raised. The firm’s aim with the new fund is to “open the throttle and accelerate the physical buildout of AI.”

The fund will focus on hardware, bucking the firm’s typical focus on the scaling power of software. In a post on the venture capital firm’s website, a16z says the fund will focus on investing in the infrastructure that powers AI — a swath that includes everything from computer chips and memory to data centers and robots.

“We need faster, more efficient systems. We need cheaper and higher-bandwidth memory across the memory hierarchy. We need faster and more scalable interconnects between nodes and systems. We need power efficient edge devices for AI to explore and interact with the world. And of course we need all the cooling, materials, electrical, and real estate build out to support them,” the post reads.

AI is the “strongest tool ever developed for solving problems and bestowing abundance,” the firm writes, calling its advancement a “social and national imperative.”

Topics

a16z
, 
Andreessen Horowitz
, 
Fundraising
, 
In Brief
, 
Venture

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Startups

This former PG&E engineer is building a ‘Google Maps for the underground’

Sean O'Kane

	1 day ago

Government & Policy

Will the DOJ’s investigation into a16z spook other VCs?

Anthony Ha

	Aug 22, 2026

Venture

For a16z, AI gives foreign founders an advantage

Anna Heim

	Aug 20, 2026

Latest in Fundraising

In Brief

Neocloud Lambda secures $1B in debt to buy more chips

Rebecca Bellan

	45 minutes ago

Apps

Friend-focused photo-sharing app Retro snags $21M

Sarah Perez

	6 hours ago

In Brief

a16z creates a $1.1B ‘Machine Age’ fund to ‘accelerate the physical buildout of AI’

Sean O'Kane

	8 hours ago
