Adobe on Thursday said it is acquiring 
Topaz Labs
, which offers AI models for video and image enhancement, and that it will make it a part of its creative business.

Topaz Labs, which won 
an Emmy last year for its production tech
, has existed for more than two decades, making tools for enhancing videos and images. In recent years, the company has released its own models: Astra for AI video upscaling and Wonder for image retouching and enhancement. The startup has also worked on 
a technology
 that makes it easier to run large video models on consumer-grade GPUs.

Adobe, which already offers some of Topaz’s tools in its Creative Cloud suite, said it will integrate Topaz’s models into its Firefly AI app as well as other parts of its image and video editing suites. Adobe said Topaz’s offerings will be available as stand-alone services through its website.

Deepa Subramaniam, VP of product marketing for Creative Cloud at Adobe, said professionals who want to combine real-life footage with AI clips can use Topaz’s products for tasks like sharpening details, reducing noise, or restoring archival footage.

“Topaz Labs brings deep expertise in optimizing large, complex AI models to run directly on device, a capability that will allow Adobe to deliver faster, more responsive experiences for customers and make advanced AI more accessible and cost-effective for creatives. In addition, Topaz Labs is trusted by professionals of all creative crafts – from designers and video professionals to photographers and enterprise creative teams,” Subramaniam said in an emailed statement.

Adobe has been in fierce competition with Canva and DaVinci Resolve-owner Blackmagic Design in the image and video editing space. Adobe has been stuffing 
AI into all of its apps
 and has also created an AI-centric media editing studio with 
Firefly
. By acquiring startups like Topaz Labs, Adobe wants to keep its users from turning to other software for video editing and enhancements, encouraging them to stick to its ecosystem.

Adobe said the transaction will close in the second half of 2026.

Topics

Adobe
, 
AI
, 
Apps
, 
Creative Cloud
, 
Mergers and Acquisitions
, 
topaz labs
, 
Video enhancement

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos
