In Brief

Posted:

7:54 AM PDT · July 21, 2026

Image Credits:
TechCrunch

Sarah Perez

After TikTok, Snap settles social media addiction case

Snap is the latest big tech company to settle a lawsuit that claimed social media platforms are harmful to children and young adults. The company has reached a “tentative” agreement in a case that was set to go to trial later this month. 

TikTok recently settled
 its portion of the case with the plaintiff, known by the initials “R.K.C.,” ahead of a jury trial that starts next week in Los Angeles.

YouTube has also reached a deal, leaving Meta as the only remaining defendant.

Meta has lost similar child safety lawsuits focused on social media, including 
one in New Mexico earlier this year,
 which marked its first courtroom defeat over the matter. In March, a Los Angeles jury also handed the social media giant, along with Google, 
another defeat
, and awarded the defendant in that case, who went by “K.G.M,” or Kaley, 
$6 million
 in damages.

The precedents set by these cases are encouraging a wave of lawsuits against social media platforms over their purported harms, including their addictive nature and algorithms that negatively impact children and teens’ mental health. The results of these lawsuits could see the companies reshaping their platforms with more robust child safety measures, parental controls, and other design choices that could help them avoid future litigation.

The terms of Snap’s agreement weren’t disclosed, but 
Bloomberg reports
 that Snap confirmed the settlement has been achieved.

Snap did not immediately return a request for comment.

Topics

In Brief
, 
lawsuit
, 
Snap
, 
Social
, 
Social media addiction

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Hardware

Light made a flip phone. It’s colorful and it’s cheap.

Amanda Silberling

	41 minutes ago

Media & Entertainment

What to know about the landmark Warner Bros. Discovery sale

Lauren Forristal

	1 hour ago

Hardware

The Xteink X4 Pro could be the tiny e-reader of your dreams

Amanda Silberling

	2 hours ago

Latest in Social

In Brief

After TikTok, Snap settles social media addiction case

Sarah Perez

	46 minutes ago

Social

X relaunches a rebuilt Android app after year-long effort

Sarah Perez

	20 hours ago

Social

YouTube clarifies policies around AI slop and upsetting videos

Sarah Perez

	1 day ago
