Days after reporting an incident affecting a number of its customers, enterprise data giant Alation on Thursday confirmed a cyberattack.

Alation makes data software that its enterprise customers use to search for files and data using natural language queries. In recent years, the company has 
expanded into AI
, allowing customers to turn large amounts of messy data into usable content. The company says it services more than 500 global companies, including around half of the Fortune 1000 largest companies in the United States.

When reached by TechCrunch about the incident, the company said it was investigating.

“Alation recently identified an isolated incident involving unauthorized activity in one of its systems,” the company said in a statement provided to TechCrunch by an external representative, Stephen Russell. “We are conducting a thorough investigation of what occurred and we will provide additional information as appropriate.”

Alation did not specify the nature of the cyberattack, mention the root cause of the incident, or say how many customers are affected. The company did not say if it had alerted its customers to the incident or what defensive actions, if any, they should take following the intrusion.

On Tuesday, Alation reported 
an unspecified incident
 that resulted in “degraded availability” for some of its customers. The company said it had resolved the incident within an hour. 

Much of the company’s systems are hosted on Amazon Web Services. It’s not immediately clear if any data was stolen or exfiltrated during the incident.

This is the latest cybersecurity incident in recent weeks to affect a large-scale technology giant, as hackers increasingly target companies that store large amounts of sensitive or proprietary information for their corporate customers.

Earlier this month, several companies reported data thefts 
following a breach at European shipping giant Ceva Logistics
. Hackers are also said to be 
targeting financial firms and private equity giants
 in recent weeks.

Do you know more about Alation’s security incident? Do you work at Alation or have received communications from Alation? Contact this reporter via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal.

Topics

AI
, 
Alation
, 
cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
Exclusive
, 
Search
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker
