The near-bottomless demand for unique AI training data from top labs and corporations is driving a massive boom for a cohort of data-labeling startups.

One of these fast-growing businesses is Micro1, a four-year-old startup that expanded its gross annual run rate from $100 million to $500 million over the past eight months, according to a person familiar with the company. Like its peers that hire domain experts such as doctors, lawyers, and scientists on a contract basis, Micro1 retains roughly 60% to 70% of that figure, putting its net annual run rate between $150 million and $200 million.

While Micro1 still lags competitors like Mercor (which hit 
$2 billion
 in gross annualized revenue this summer) and Handshake (which reached 
$1 billion
 earlier this year), the startup’s revenue growth shows that there is more than enough demand to support multiple players supplying AI training data. 

The rapid growth is bound to continue, with some researchers 
hypothesizing
 that future AI spending on data could rival spending on compute.

That outlook bodes well for Micro1, which is seeing its contract sizes grow at an accelerated pace and expects its margins to expand over time. The startup is increasingly generating synthetic data without human involvement, such as by creating automated descriptions of video content. Additionally, some of the data it generates can be sold to multiple customers, driving gross margins for this “off-the-shelf” data as high as 80% to 90%, a person familiar with the startup’s finances told TechCrunch.

Selling the same datasets to multiple clients has sparked recent controversy, with 
critics arguing
 that distributing off-the-shelf data to Chinese AI developers helps make their models as powerful as top U.S. models.

Micro1’s founder, Ali Ansari, 
said last month on X
 that unlike some of its competitors, the startup doesn’t sell its data to Chinese model makers. “Some human data companies work with foreign adversaries. [A]nd the results show today in Kimi K3. We believe it’s shameful to claim American AI dominance desires while selling millions worth of data to countries that we are in adversarial competition with.”

Like Mercor, Micro1 began as an AI recruiting startup. But after noticing that data-labeling clients were using his AI platform to vet and recruit engineers for annotation, Ansari decided to pivot and enter the data-labeling business, too.

Ansari 
previously
 told TechCrunch that in addition to having its experts evaluate model outputs — a concept known as reinforcement learning gyms — the company is building a robotics pre-training dataset by having hundreds of generalists record everyday object interactions in their homes.

Micro1 raised its Series A at a 
$500 million
 valuation last September, and TechCrunch understands that the startup may have recently raised another round at a significantly higher valuation.

Micro1 didn’t respond to a request for comment.

Topics

AI
, 
data labeling
, 
micro1
, 
reinforcement learning
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Marina Temkin	

Reporter, Venture

Marina Temkin is a venture capital and startups reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she wrote about VC for PitchBook and Venture Capital Journal. Earlier in her career, Marina was a financial analyst and earned a CFA charterholder designation.

You can contact or verify outreach from Marina by emailing 
marina.temkin@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 347-683-3909 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Etched’s valuation doubles to $21B in a month

Julie Bort

AI automation startup Relay shuts down, staff joins Google’s Chrome team

Lucas Ropek

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik
