It’s been called 
RAMageddon
: AI’s insatiable demand for hardware has caused a worldwide shortage of memory chips. Now outgoing Apple CEO Tim Cook is warning its customers that your next Mac, iPhone, or iPad could be more expensive thanks to surging memory and storage chips costs.

In a recent interview, Cook 
told the WSJ
 that price increases are “unavoidable,” in spite of efforts to absorb chip costs that have increased fourfold since last year. He described the situation as “unsustainable.”

Cook didn’t name which products will be affected or when prices will rise, but he’s raised the alarm about the impacts of RAMageddon before. In April, after delivering record quarterly sales, 
he said
 that these higher costs could impact Apple’s next business results. Incoming CEO John Ternus also 
warned about the issue that same month
.

If Apple raises prices, the iPhone seems almost certain to be impacted, memory supply experts 
told the Financial Times.
 The company is expected to launch its next iPhone in September, which gives it the opportunity to announce increased prices. Of course, Apple sells many other devices that contain memory (DRAM) and storage (NAND) chips, including the Apple Watch, Mac, iPad, and Apple Vision Pro.

It’s not clear how much more expensive any of these products will be, although research firm TechInsights gave the WSJ its estimate. It said Apple would need to add another $270 to the next iPhone Pro to keep its profit margin intact. The iPhone 17 Pro starts at $1,099. 

So far AI has not been a particular boon to Apple. The company is already under pressure to figure out its AI strategy for its devices. It even paid a $250 million settlement earlier this year to end a false advertising lawsuit filed after it failed to 
deliver the AI features
 it promised two years ago. 

The company’s Worldwide Developers conference held earlier this month showed progress on fulfilling those previous 
AI promises
, including an overhaul of Siri. Of course, more on-device processing could mean more need for memory — a trajectory that seems destined to end with consumers paying more for Apple products. 

Topics

Apple
, 
Hardware
, 
Tim Cook

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
