In Brief

Posted:

9:08 AM PDT · July 16, 2026

Image Credits:
RLT_Images / Getty Images

Dominic-Madori Davis

AI-powered travel agency Fora hits unicorn status, raises $60M

Travel agency Fora 
announced a $60 million Series D round
 led by Forerunner and Tactile Ventures, valuing the company at $1 billion. 

Fora
, founded in 2021, is a two-part platform: it lets people easily become travel agents by providing the infrastructure to support client communication and travel planning; it also lets users find and communicate with advisors as they plan trips for occasions like honeymoons or family trips, to destinations like Costa Rica or Thailand. Other investors in this latest round include Insight Partners and Thrive Capital. The company has raised $138.5 million in funding to date, it said. 

Part of the fresh capital will go toward expanding Fora’s AI assistant, Via, which helps travel agents on its platform with tedious administrative tasks such as research and itinerary building. The hope is that the human travel agents who use the platform can instead spend more time building client relations, and that using Fora’s AI will help human productivity rather than attempt to replace it. 

Fora said that since its launch, agents on the platform have booked over $3 billion worth of travel, with a majority of its agent users being new to travel advising. The company also hopes to use the money to hire and grow in other travel categories, such as cruises and flights. 

This article was updated to correct the spelling of Fora’s name in the last paragraph. 

Topics

Fundraising
, 
Startups
, 
unicorn
, 
Venture

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

Sheryl Sandberg leads $10 million investment in AI-powered vehicle inspection service

Sean O'Kane

	1 hour ago

AI

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

	21 hours ago

AI

Vint Cerf is working on a plan to unleash AI agents on the open internet

Tim Fernholz

	1 day ago

Latest in Startups

In Brief

AI-powered travel agency Fora hits unicorn status, raises $60M

Dominic-Madori Davis

	17 minutes ago

Startups

The founder who left Google and secured a $300M pre-seed valuation in months

Maggie Nye

Isabelle Johannessen

	18 minutes ago

34 min

Transportation

Sheryl Sandberg leads $10 million investment in AI-powered vehicle inspection service

Sean O'Kane

	1 hour ago
