Blackstone-backed data center operator AirTrunk said on Friday it would invest $30 billion in India by 2030, adding to a wave of commitments from technology and infrastructure groups seeking to expand computing capacity in the country.

The Australian company 
said
 it would develop 5 gigawatts of new data center capacity in India, one of the largest commitments to the South Asian nation’s digital infrastructure sector. AirTrunk entered India earlier this year through the acquisition of Lumina CloudInfra.

AirTrunk’s commitment underlines India’s growing appeal as a destination for AI infrastructure, as tech companies and investors seek new geographies to expand computing capacity. Data center capacity in the country is 
projected to rise
 to as much as 8GW by 2030 from about 1.5GW today, according to research firm Bernstein.

The Indian government has also taken steps to attract investment in AI infrastructure. Earlier this year, New Delhi offered foreign cloud providers 
tax exemptions through 2047
 on services sold overseas if those workloads are run from Indian data centers.

AirTrunk has already begun laying the groundwork for its expansion in the country. Earlier this week, Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis 
said in a post on X
 that the western Indian state had exchanged a letter of intent for land allotment at the Raigad Pen Growth Center, where AirTrunk is planning a 3GW data center involving an investment of about ₹2 trillion (around $21 billion). The company already has a development pipeline of about 600MW across Mumbai, Chennai and Hyderabad.

AirTrunk did not respond to questions on whether the proposed Raigad project would account for most of the planned 5GW capacity, or whether it plans to make additional developments elsewhere in India.

The announcement follows a meeting between AirTrunk CEO Robin Khuda and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who 
said in a post on X
 that the planned investment would help strengthen India’s position as a global hub for cloud computing and artificial intelligence.

AirTrunk joins a growing list of companies investing in infrastructure in the country. 
Amazon
, 
Google
, 
Microsoft
, 
OpenAI
, and 
Uber
 have announced major investments in cloud and AI infrastructure, while Indian companies 
Reliance Industries
, 
Adani Group
, and 
TCS
 have laid out ambitious plans to expand data center capacity.

However, data centers require vast amounts of electricity, water and land, and industry executives and analysts have pointed to resource issues as a potential bottleneck, particularly regarding power.

Deloitte 
estimates
 data center build-outs in the Asia Pacific could require tens of terawatt-hours of additional electricity by the end of the decade.

AirTrunk’s investment thesis is underpinned by government support, a large pool of technical talent, and access to renewable energy, Khuda said. 

Topics

AI
, 
AirTrunk
, 
data centers
, 
India

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

DuckDuckGo makes its ‘no-AI’ search engine easier to access as its traffic booms

Sarah Perez

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez
