Alabama’s Attorney General 
announced
 Monday that it sent a subpoena to OpenAI as part of an investigation into the company’s alleged “complete lack of oversight and adequate safeguards” in the Hugging Face incident. 

The investigation comes weeks after 
OpenAI admitted
 that one of its unreleased and guardrail-free cybersecurity models had escaped an isolated environment, connected to the internet, and hacked AI dataset platform Hugging Face. As 
Reuters first reported
, Hugging Face was only one of four victims of what was supposed to be “an internal evaluation” of a model with “maximal cyber capabilities,” as OpenAI put it.

The press release announcing 
the subpoena
 sent by the state’s attorney general Steve Marshall said that the state was seeking to understand if OpenAI’s “inability or unwillingness to ensure the safety of its products” violated the state’s consumer protection laws.

When reached by TechCrunch for comment, OpenAI spokesperson Nate Evans provided the statement: “The Hugging Face incident marked an important moment for AI safety and we are conducting a thorough review along with external advisors. Once the review is complete, we will share a technical report with relevant government authorities and publish our findings publicly.”

Earlier this month, Marshall, along with the attorneys general of fourteen other states, including Florida, Missouri, Pennsylvania, and Texas, 
sent a letter
 to OpenAI’s CEO Sam Altman, requesting that he and his company preserve all records related to the Hugging Face incident. The letter also asked OpenAI to “immediately cease and desist” from any internal cybersecurity evaluations.

In the wake of the Hugging Face incident, and several other incidents disclosed by Anthropic, the UK’s AI Security Institute, and Meta, workers at AI companies — including executives and technical leaders — signed an open letter called “
Pacing The Frontier
,” which called for developing AI capabilities slowly and more responsibly The letter also called for the U.S. government to support an “international effort to develop the technical and governance tools needed to deliberately pace the frontier of automated AI development.”

Updated with comment from OpenAI.

Topics

Alabama
, 
cybersecurity
, 
hacking
, 
Hugging Face
, 
OpenAI
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
