The Honda Prologue, you may have heard, is officially dead — a decision the company confirmed to TechCrunch, removing the last all-electric vehicle from the automaker’s U.S. portfolio. The Prologue’s departure signals more than Honda’s EV backpedaling. It also illustrates a broader EV industry retreat from the U.S. market (in 
stark contrast to the rest of the world
).

The demise of the Honda Prologue got us thinking: What other EVs have left the U.S., and why?

The end of the 
$7,500 federal tax credit
 had an outsized effect on EV sales in the United States. But there are other reasons behind the winnowing choices, including tariffs, changing consumer tastes, costs, company priorities, and regulatory action. According to data published in July by 
Kelley Blue Book
 and 
Cox Automotive
, 247,226 EVs were sold in the second quarter or about 5.8% of the total market. While EV sales grew between the first and second quarters of 2026, they are still down from the same period last year (and before that tax credit ended in fall 2025).

Still Americans are still buying EVs, and there are new EVs entering the U.S. market — the Rivian R2 is one example. And there are signs of a slow recovery. Fourth quarter 2025 sales were 36% lower than the same period in 2024. This year that gap has narrowed, albeit still below sales figures from the previous year. For example, EV sales in Q2 were 20.5% lower than the same period in 2025.

Even with a recovery underway, automakers are pulling the plug on many EV modes. Here are those ones that have left or are leaving. TechCrunch will periodically update this list of EVs that have left, or are leaving, the U.S. market in 2026.

Afeela

Afeela prototype at the 2026 CES event in Las Vegas.
Image Credits:
Bridget Bennett/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Ah, Afeela we never even knew ya. 

The Afeela got its start as the Vision S, a prototype announced by Sony in 2020 at the Consumer Electronics and that ended up being one of the big, surprising reveals of the annual tech trade show. Honda entered the picture in 2022 when the two Japanese conglomerates announced a joint venture; they showed off an Afeela-branded 
prototype
 the following year. 

In the months and years that followed, there was constant barrage of updates about the Afeela, which seemed to be everywhere, and yet nowhere. It was even displayed at TechCrunch Disrupt one year. 

The Afeela, despite the marketing blitz, never made it into production. In March 2026, the joint venture gave up on the 
two Afeela-branded EVs
. The move followed Honda’s decision, announced just a two weeks before, to cancel three EVs planned for the U.S. market. 

Honda (and Acura!)

Honda 0 SUV
Image Credits:
Honda

It was just a couple of years ago that Honda declared its EV ambitions with its O Series, including a 
mid-sized SUV prototype
 that debuted at the CES 2025 tech trade show and its futuristic 
Saloon and Space-Hub concepts
 the year before. The SUV, which was slated for production at Honda’s “EV Hub” factory in Ohio, was supposed to debut in North America in the first half of 2026. 

Honda 
stopped development
 of the Acura RDX, Honda O sedan and SUV in March 2026 as part of a major overhaul of the company’s EV plans. The company blamed U.S. tariffs and Chinese competition for the decision. 

There was also chatter at the time that Honda was planning to stop production of the Prologue, but there was no official announcement until July 16 when 
CarBuzz 
was the first to report that the Prologue program was ending. TechCrunch confirmed with Honda that the Prologue was going out of production.

The death of the Series 0 is difficult to measure since it never went into production. The Prologue represented more grounded goals than the O Series, and one that actually went into production and sold to U.S. consumers. The Prologue was a product of a partnership with General Motors — it is built at GM’s Ramos Assembly Plant in Mexico — and closely related to the Chevrolet Blazer EV. And it did OK for awhile, selling roughly 33,000 units in 2024 and 39,000 in 2025, before the tax credit ended and sales went into a free fall. 

Hyundai

Image Credits:
Hyundai / Hyundai

The Korean automaker has actually done quite well selling EVs to Americans. But it has made a few changes based on changing economics. In March, the company said it would no longer sell the 
Hyundai Ioniq 6 
in the U.S., a decision that was likely tied to tariffs. The Ioniq 6 is made in South Korean and imported to the U.S., while its Ioniq 5 and Ioniq 9 models are assembled at its Georgia factory. 

The company has said it will continue to import its more expensive, lower volume N-model of the Ioniq 6. 

Nissan

Nissan decided last year it would not produce a 2026 model year of its 
all-electric Ariya SUV
 for the U.S. market. And it doesn’t appear to be returning. Nissan first 
unveiled the Ariya
 in 2020 and planned to start selling it in Japan the following year.

The Ariya was the first all-electric to come out of Nissan since the early EV pioneer introduced the Leaf hatchback a decade ago. 

Polestar

Image Credits:
Polestar

Swedish EV maker Polestar, owned by Chinese automotive giant Geely, has been 
forced to leave U.S.
 over the country’s ban on Chinese-connected vehicle technology. Polestar needed specific authorization from the U.S. Department of Commerce to continue importing and selling its vehicles in the United States. 

Without it, Polestar has been effectively banned from the United States. The company said it would continue selling its existing stock of Polestar 3 and Polestar 4 vehicles in the U.S., and that it will “continue to support customers, including providing access to its service network.” The Polestar 3 was assembled at a factory in 
South Carolina and in Chengdu, China
. 

Volvo Cars, Polestar’s sibling company that is also owned by Geely, did 
receive the authorization
. 

Tesla Model S and Tesla Model X

A Tesla Model S in Palo Alto, California.
Image Credits:
David Paul Morris/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Tesla announced in January that it would 
end production
 of the Model S sedan and Model X SUV to make way for what the company views is the future. And it’s not a traditional electric sedan or SUV. In Tesla’s view, the future is AI, autonomy, and robots. It’s worth noting that sales of the S and X have fallen steadily over the years as consumers turned to its high volume and cheaper vehicles, the Model 3 and Model Y. 

The last 
Model S and X vehicles
 rolled off the assembly line this spring. The company recently removed the assembly lines for the S and X at its Fremont, California factory to make room for production of its Optimus robots. 

Volkswagen 

Image Credits:
Volkswagen

Volkswagen has pulled back on the ID. 4 electric SUV and the ID Buzz. 

In April, Volkswagen said it would 
no longer produce
 the ID.4 at its U.S. factory in Chattanooga, Tennessee in a shift to high-volume vehicles like its upcoming gas-powered Atlas SUV. The company said, at the time, U.S. customers will be able to buy the ID.4 until the current inventory runs out. VW said it expects U.S. inventory to last into 2027.

To be clear, Volkswagen has said the ID Buzz is merely on a hiatus and will return in 2027. But there is no 2026 model. 

There are, however self-driving versions of the ID buzz currently being tested in the United States. Volkswagen subsidiary MOIA America and Uber started testing 
autonomous microbuses
 in Los Angeles in April in preparation for a robotaxi service that is supposed to launch in late 2026. When the service initially launches there the vehicles will have himan safety operators. 

Volvo 

Image Credits:
Volvo

Volvo decided in March that it would pull its subcompact 
EX30 and EX30 Cross Country
 variant from the U.S. market. The company said at the time that production for the U.S. would end sfter the summer. The EX30 had a promising start. It recieved a lot of attention prior to it official entry into the U.S. in 2025, and it was the company’s more affordable EV option.

Volvo does plan to continue selling the larger, all-electric EX60 and EX90 SUVs in the United States.

Topics

honda
, 
hyundai
, 
Polestar
, 
Tesla
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh
