If Alphabet’s record-breaking $85 billion stock sale signals investor appetite for AI-related offerings — and it does — we can safely say that investors are voracious.

Google’s parent company had initially intended to sell a first tranche of $40 billion worth of various equity instruments — two different classes of shares, plus smaller “depositary shares” priced to be accessible to a broader range of investors. But the offering was so oversubscribed that it raised $45 billion instead, CEO Sundar Pichai said in a 
post on X
 on Monday. Among the buyers: Berkshire Hathaway, still known for its love of value investing, picked up $10 billion worth.

Alphabet plans to sell another $40 billion worth next quarter, for $85 billion total.

Even $80 billion would have topped the record for equity offerings previously set by Brazilian oil producer Petroleo Brasileiro SA, which raised $70 billion in 2010, 
Bloomberg reports.

Now, it’s true that these investors are buying shares of Alphabet, not shares in a younger, possibly debt-riddled AI startup. Alphabet is a very healthy business: $110 billion in revenue (with high profit margins) in Q1 alone, up 22% year-over-year.

Still, the money from this stock sale is earmarked for AI. “Part of our multi-year investment strategy to meet the AI opportunity ahead and support the demand we’re seeing from enterprises and consumers,” as Pichai described it. At Google I/O last month, he 
said
 the company expects to spend between $180 billion and $190 billion on capital expenditures — largely on AI infrastructure and data centers — before the year is out.

The timing matters beyond Alphabet itself. As Anthropic 
gets ready to go public
, this enormously successful stock sale is a very good sign for the broader AI IPO pipeline. It indicates that public investors, particularly the deep-pocketed institutional ones, are ready to pony up.

The upcoming SpaceX IPO is expected to smash records for cash raised and valuation, and Anthropic’s deal is expected to do the same, possibly surpassing SpaceX. OpenAI is also waiting in the wings.

But all of this rests on public investors’ appetite — not just private VCs — remaining strong, and then staying that way. An unprecedented 
nearly $8 trillion in AI spending
 has been committed over the next five years. That money has to come from somewhere — and that somewhere includes individual company revenues, loans, and capital raised through stock sales. Whether public markets have the stomach to absorb that much, for that long, is the question that every AI company eyeing an IPO should be thinking about right now.

Topics

AI
, 
Alphabet
, 
capital expenditures
, 
Enterprise
, 
Google
, 
IPOs
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
