On Monday, Amazon 
introduced
 a new feature that allows anyone to design merchandise using AI, posing an expanded challenge to online merch platforms like Redbubble, Bonfire, Spring, Fourthwall, and others. The company announced that people are now able to create new products using AI prompts via the Alexa feature in its Shopping app. 

In doing so, anyone can turn their idea into a design that can be featured on items from apparel to tumblers and more available through Amazon’s print-on-demand service, Merch on Demand.

The service could be useful for printing one-off designs — like T-shirts for a family reunion, a personalized gift of some type, or to create products featuring a portrait of your dog, Amazon suggests. (Artists whose work has been used to train AI models may be less enthusiastic about this type of idea, of course.)

After prompting to create the design, Amazon handles the production and delivery of the items through Prime shipping, the company says. 

The move puts AI-generated merchandise directly inside Amazon’s Shopping app, lowering the barrier for consumers who want to turn ideas into physical products but lack traditional design skills. While typically, print-on-demand businesses have catered to creators and various organizations, Amazon’s new feature could make AI-designed merchandise become just another shopping option.  

Currently, the option is only available in the U.S., Amazon notes. It is free to use the feature, as customers only pay for the products themselves. 

To use the feature, customers will tap the Alexa icon in the bottom right of the Amazon Shopping app or search “customize” in the search bar and click the drop-down option. This will take them into an experience where users can describe their idea to Alexa and see the design generated. Users can then edit the design by clicking on suggested actions or by typing in changes. Results can be shared with friends or family, allowing everyone to add the product to their own Amazon shopping carts. 

The full list of supported merchandise includes T-shirts, V-necks, long-sleeve shirts, polo shirts, quarter zips, jerseys, hoodies, sweatshirts, tank tops, raglans, tumblers, and water bottles.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Alexa
, 
Amazon
, 
Commerce
, 
commerce
, 
e-commerce

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
