If Amazon Web Services has its way, the cloud giant is going to push even deeper into Nvidia’s market, in what might be one of the biggest challenges to Nvidia’s AI chip dominance we’ve seen so far.

Amazon’s AI chief Peter DeSantis 
told Bloomberg
 that AWS is in talks to sell its AI chip Trainium to other companies for use in data centers. DeSantis declined to specify which companies could be the buyers of such chips.

Such talks about selling chips are in the early stages, the company tells TechCrunch, and stem from Amazon CEO Andy Jassy’s 
annual shareholder letter
 in early April, in which he said the company’s homegrown AI chips were so coveted that he was thinking about selling them.

“If our chips business was a standalone business, and sold chips produced this year to AWS and other third parties (as other leading chips companies do), our annual run rate would be ~$50 billion. There’s so much demand for our chips that it’s quite possible we’ll sell racks of them to third parties in the future.”

How much of a challenge to Nvidia could Amazon be? A $50 billion competitor wouldn’t exactly tank Nvidia — which is currently on a $326 billion revenue run rate — 
if it keeps delivering quarters like the last one
. But it’s akin to 
Intel’s annual revenues
.

AWS has so far resisted selling its AI chips for a lot of reasons. The biggest is that the money AWS actually makes on its chips is a waterfall effect. Sure, it charges customers directly for the AI tokens those chips process on its cloud, but it also gets to charge for a host of other services companies need for their AI apps, including storage, security, networking, and monitoring services.

Equally importantly, Amazon has touted the capacity of its chips has been selling out faster than it can produce them. In that same shareholder letter in April, 
Jassy said
 the current Trainium chip capacity had sold out almost instantly. So too, he said, had the capacity for the next one, Trainium4, which won’t even be available for more than a year. This was before AWS 
formally added OpenAI to the models it was serving up.

So selling its chips to others means it would likely have to leave current customers on waiting lists, unless it could somehow manufacture a surplus of chips through its manufacturing partners such as TSMC. But it would have to miraculously elbow Nvidia out of the way to do that with TSMC, which has recently 
supplanted Apple
 to become the foundry’s largest customer.

AWS spokesperson Doron Aronson (
who hosted me during a recent private tour of the AWS chip design facility
) also confirmed that AWS may sell these chips. “While we’ve historically declined requests to sell chips directly, Andy noted it’s quite possible we’ll sell racks of them to third parties in the future.”

So while Nvidia’s founder and CEO Jensen Huang recently declared that 
he’s found a brand new $200 billion market for Nvidia
 in selling CPUs for AI, not just GPUs — thereby moving into Intel and AMD territory — Jassy clearly has his own chip ambitions: a $50 billion market that would put elbow more directly into Nvidia’s world.

Topics

AI
, 
AI chips
, 
Amazon
, 
AWS
, 
Enterprise
, 
nvidia
, 
TC
, 
trainium

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

As Anthropic suspends access to new models, India debates its AI future

Jagmeet Singh

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos
