Amazon on Thursday said it would invest an additional $13 billion to expand its AI and cloud footprint in India through 2030.

The fresh investment, 
announced
 after Amazon CEO Andy Jassy met India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi in New Delhi, will fund the expansion of Amazon Web Services’ data center capacity in Mumbai and Hyderabad.

The announcement marks Amazon’s third major commitment for India in as many years. In 2023, following a meeting between Jassy and Modi, the company said it would 
invest $15 billion
 by 2030, 
including $12.7 billion
 for Amazon Web Services. It followed that with an 
over $35 billion commitment
 in December 2025. The company’s investment commitments in the country now total $48 billion.

Amazon did not detail how the total $48 billion would be deployed across its India businesses. Long-term commitments by technology companies usually include both capital and operating expenditures, rather than only new infrastructure spending.

Amazon’s announcement follows a wave of investments by global technology companies that are betting that India will become a major hub for the computing infrastructure needed to power artificial intelligence products. 
Microsoft
 said in December it would invest $17.5 billion in India by 2029, and 
Google
 said in October it would spend $15 billion to build an AI hub and data center infrastructure in the country.

India has also attracted billions of dollars in commitments for data center projects from investors including 
Australia’s AirTrunk
, 
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board’s CPP Investments
, and domestic conglomerates 
Reliance Industries
 and 
Adani Group
.

New Delhi has sought to attract more investment through policy incentives, including 
tax exemptions
 for foreign cloud providers on services sold overseas if those workloads are run from Indian data centers.

Amazon is also investing in its domestic retail and logistics network. The company plans to open more than 20 fulfillment centers, and over 100 last-mile delivery stations this year, and this week it detailed plans to expand its quick-commerce service, Amazon Now, to 
more than 300 cities
 and towns in the country.

The expansion comes as Amazon seeks to gain ground in India’s crowded quick commerce market, where it competes with Eternal-owned Blinkit, Swiggy’s Instamart, Zepto, and Walmart-owned Flipkart. Earlier this week, Flipkart said it plans to 
open 1,500 micro-fulfillment centers
 across the country by the end of 2026.

Topics

AI
, 
Amazon
, 
Andy Jassy
, 
AWS
, 
data centers
, 
Enterprise
, 
India

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis
