AI is coming to your TV, whether you want it or not. 

On Wednesday, Amazon said its AI assistant, Alexa+, will be rolled out to all compatible Fire TV devices in the U.S. for free, whether or not the customer has a Prime subscription. The update brings conversational search, smart home controls, and AI-powered recommendations, the company says.

Previously, 
Alexa+
 cost $19.99 per month for anyone who didn’t have an Amazon Prime membership, and was initially made available to the 
new Fire TV devices 
the company announced last fall.

Now, 
Amazon says
 that everyone will be upgraded to Alexa+ automatically. They won’t need to download an app or sign up for a subscription. Compatible devices include all the current-generation Amazon Fire TV Sticks, the Fire TV Cube, Amazon Ember smart TVs, and other smart TVs that have Alexa+ built in, including Hisense and Panasonic.

The move follows an industry-wide push to make AI services available on more consumer electronic devices, often through non-optional upgrades like this. Google, for instance, rolled out 
Gemini to its Google TV platform earlier this year,
 replacing simple search features with AI-powered conversational modes. Roku 
upgraded its voice assistant to AI
 last year, too.

The companies point to metrics like time spent with the features to suggest positive consumer adoption trends. For instance, Amazon says that Alexa+ customers now have nearly twice as many conversations on Fire TV as they did with the original Alexa, which apparently suggests that customers with Alexa+ are no longer using their TV only as a lean-back source of entertainment, and are instead engaging with the AI, too. 

Whether or not that’s a good thing is debatable.

Amazon says that with Alexa+, users don’t have to ask for shows by title, but can instead ask for suggestions based on other factors such as theme, age or popularity — for example, “a top-rated thriller” or “a historical drama with a strong female lead.”

The AI bot can also help customers manage and control their smart home, including displaying their Ring camera feeds on the TV.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Alexa
, 
Amazon
, 
Fire TV
, 
Media & Entertainment

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic set AI agents loose on the same task. They started a turf war.

Rebecca Bellan

Instagram introduces a redesigned wordmark

Sarah Perez

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek
