In Brief

Posted:

9:38 AM PDT · August 17, 2026

Image Credits:
Studio 642 / Getty Images

Amanda Silberling

Amazon, which started off selling books, is destroying rare texts to train AI

Amazon is buying tons of rare books, cutting off their spines, and scanning them for AI training, according to 
404 Media
, which placed a tracking device in a rare book that ultimately arrived at an Amazon facility in Las Vegas.

The facility, known as VGT3, identifies itself with a symbol of a dinosaur holding a book in its claws. Amazon told 404 Media in a statement that it “purchases books through commercial channels to improve the products and services customers use.”

Companies like Amazon need unfathomably large amounts of text to train their LLMs, which have already ingested what they can from the internet (and, in Anthropic’s case, illegally 
pirated
 books). Rare books, especially ones that are out of print or impossible to find on the internet, offer a new source of coveted training data.

These texts are especially valuable since there’s no chance that anything published before 2022 was written by an LLM. When LLMs train on AI-generated text, they risk “
model collapse
,” which can occur when the quality of an LLM’s outputs degrade after ingesting too much AI-generated text.

Topics

AI
, 
AI training
, 
Amazon

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Groq raises $350M to fuel its pivot from AI chips to neocloud

Rebecca Bellan

	58 minutes ago

Fundraising

Wispr raises $280M at $2B valuation as it looks beyond dictation

Ivan Mehta

	4 hours ago

Gadgets

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

	2 days ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Amazon, which started off selling books, is destroying rare texts to train AI

Amanda Silberling

	34 minutes ago

AI

Groq raises $350M to fuel its pivot from AI chips to neocloud

Rebecca Bellan

	58 minutes ago

In Brief

Nvidia investing $1.5B in SoftBank data center developer behind OpenAI project

Tim De Chant

	2 hours ago
