If you’re looking for an e-reader that allows you to buy expensive bestsellers from your local independent bookshops, your research will inevitably point you to Rakuten’s 
Kobo eReader
. But, as it turns out, this reputation is largely based on outdated methods for buying Kobo books, involving signing up for a Kobo account from bookshops’ websites.

While there are a handful of indie bookshops nationwide still supporting Kobo through this website method, most of that kind of support ended years ago. I’ve found it impossible to buy e-books for my recently purchased Kobo from any of my local, beloved bookshops.

I want to support these bookshops, and I don’t want to own a physical copy of every book I read. I also want to use an e-reader rather than an Android or iOS app on a phone or tablet because e-readers offer long battery life, digital ink, and low-glare screens. These allow me to read comfortably for hours, even outdoors, similar to a physical book.

One solution for Kobo owners, originally promised for 2025, was a partnership with 
Bookshop.org
, an Amazon competitor that supports local bookshops with every order. Bookshop.org currently offers e-books through its mobile app for iOS and Android.

That 
partnership
 was at first promised for 2025 and then 
delayed
 to 2026, and for a brief time earlier this year, looked like it would be delayed indefinitely.

After Bookshop.org changed the wording on its web page referencing Kobo support, removing “2026” 
and replacing it with “sometime in the future,”
 I reached out to get a status update.

Bookshop.org’s founder and CEO, Andy Hunter, told me in an emailed reply that progress with Kobo has now been made. The web page has been updated, saying once again that support is expected to roll out “later this year.”

“The Kobo integration is something both Kobo and Bookshop.org want to make happen,” Hunter said.

The holdup has been both on the business side and engineering side to ensure it is “done in such a way that respects publisher requirements for digital rights management. It took us some time to hammer out the business terms and allocate the necessary engineering resources,” he explained.

Hunter, whose company also competes with Amazon by selling physical books, says his engineers have been focused on improving the mobile device app, which launched about 15 months ago. 

Their attention is now being returned to Kobo support, albeit the timing remains vague. “We have recently settled on business terms with Kobo, and we are confident the collaboration is going to happen, but can’t promise a specific launch date until the engineering work is further along,” Hunter said.

Obviously, whether or not Bookshop.org ever figures out Kobo support, Kobo users don’t have to buy all their books from Japanese-based e-commerce giant Rakuten. Kobo users can read a large selection of digital rights management (DRM)-free books on their readers, and a large selection (though not all) of 
library books offered through Overdrive
. 
Independent e-book store eBooks.com
 also delivers DRM-protected books in a format that Kobo supports, it says.

Another solution, should your goal be to support local bookshops with e-book purchases, is to use a different e-reader. An Android reader like Boox or Meebook that supports the Google Play app store should be able to download Bookshop.org’s app, the bookseller 
says
.

Still, like countless other Kobo owners, I’m rooting for the Bookshop.org integration to materialize. Supporting local independent bookstores was my main motivation for buying this particular e-reader, misled as I was by my online research (and the confident advice of ChatGPT).

Now that I own a Kobo Libra Colour, I really do love its reading screen, fast response, and long battery life. I also continue to hold on to my six-year-old Kindle for the same reasons.

But I also love the local, small-business bookstores with their personalized recommendations, support of local authors, and sheer love of books. Here’s hoping that the top e-commerce site that supports local shops, Bookshop.org, will soon actually support the popular Kobo device, which claims 12 million users in 190 countries.

Topics

Apps
, 
bookshop.org
, 
ebooks
, 
ereaders
, 
Gadgets
, 
Kobo
, 
kobo ereader
, 
Rakuten

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek
