Amazon 
announced
 on Thursday that it’s bringing games to 
Prime Video
 by integrating its Luna cloud gaming service into the streaming platform. Games including “Hogwarts Legacy,” “EA Sports FC 26,” “Indiana Jones and the Great Circle,” “Clue,” and “Taboo” will be available starting today on Fire TVs in the U.S. and U.K.

With this move, Amazon is hoping games can turn Prime Video into a one-stop entertainment destination, borrowing a strategy from Netflix, which has increasingly 
embraced party games
 over the past several years. Since Amazon already operates a gaming service, it makes sense for the tech giant to integrate it into its streaming platform.

Alongside third-party titles and cult classics like “Taboo,” the games library will also feature titles developed by Amazon’s own gaming division, including its “Courtroom Chaos” games and the co-op card battler “Masters of the Universe: Legends Unite.”

Until now, games on Luna were only accessible through the cloud gaming platform’s standalone app available to Prime members. Now, they’ll be available alongside Prime Video’s movies and TV shows. 

Image Credits:
Amazon

Amazon says its vision is to remove the barriers to gaming and make it accessible to anyone regardless of their experience or budget. The tech giant says Luna is designed to bring gaming to a much broader audience by removing the need for expensive consoles or gaming PCs and making games as easy to access as movies or TV shows.

Prime members can now access the new “Games” tab on Prime Video and start playing on their TV using a controller or their phone.

“For a lot of people, games have been harder to find than they should be,” Jeff Gattis, general manager of gaming at Amazon, said in a press release. “Bringing Luna inside Prime Video allows Prime members to discover games more naturally, and if they see one they like, they click it and they’re in. That’s less time searching and more time playing great games included with their Prime membership.”

Amazon says it will add new games every month. The tech giant also plans to bring games to additional devices and countries in the coming months.

Topics

Amazon
, 
Apps
, 
Gaming
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
prime video

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI says Hugging Face was breached by its pre-release models

Russell Brandom

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik
