Amazon filed an application with the Federal Communications Commission for a license to operate a new network of 5,105 satellites that would provide service to mobile phones, with plans to start launching them in 2028.

The move comes several months after Amazon 
acquired
 the satellite operations of Globalstar, which provides emergency connectivity to Apple iPhones and Internet-of-Things devices. The filing revealed the company’s plans to leverage Globalstar’s radio spectrum to expand these offerings and integrate them with Leo, Amazon’s broadband internet satellite network.

That sets up more competition with SpaceX, which has dominated both the satellite internet and satellite-to-mobile services market. SpaceX will spend $20 billion buying spectrum from EchoStar to build out its mobile constellation, one of the key growth strategies described in its IPO filings.

Still, it’s not yet clear how valuable satellite-to-mobile connections will be. Most offer limited bandwidth, suitable only for text messages or emergency situations. The CEO of T-Mobile, which uses SpaceX satellites to offer customers satellite connectivity, said this spring that there wasn’t significant customer interest.

“Just to give you an example, we look at our data in May, and satellite usage is 0.0002% of our total network usage. That’s three zeros,” Srini Gopalan said 
at a conference
 in May. “We’re seeing it largely focused on the national parks.”

Amazon has an additional challenge: It doesn’t have its own fleet of rockets. It had planned to depend on Jeff Bezos’ space company, Blue Origin, to launch its satellites, but the company’s rocket, New Glenn, has been delayed and is now grounded following an anomaly that 
destroyed its launch
 pad in May. The company had to request an extension to the deadline imposed by its FCC license to build out its network.

While Amazon still lags behind SpaceX, its massive capital reserves — $255 billion in current assets on the books as of the end of April — mean that it can keep investing in its network, while SpaceX’s capital needs appear far more pressing.

Topics

Amazon
, 
Space

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim Fernholz	

Senior Reporter

		Tim Fernholz is a journalist who writes about technology, finance and public policy. He has closely covered the rise of the private space industry and is the author of 
 Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and the New Space Race.
 Formerly, he was a senior reporter at Quartz, the global business news site, for more than a decade, and began his career as a political reporter in Washington, D.C. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing tim.fernholz@techcrunch.com or via an encrypted message to tim_fernholz.21 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
