These may be the last days of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.

An announcement on 
the Mechanical Turk website
 says that on July 30, 2026, the crowdsourcing service will close to new customers. 
Amazon Web Services says
 the decision was made after “careful consideration,” adding, “Existing customers can continue to use the service as normal. AWS continues to invest in security and availability improvements for Mechanical Turk, but we do not plan to introduce new features.”

In other words, Amazon isn’t completely pulling the plug, but the service is very much on life support.

First launched in 2005, Mechanical Turk was a marketplace where people were paid tiny amounts to perform simple tasks that resisted full automation — things like completing CAPTCHA challenges or identifying the basic sentiment in a sentence.

In its heyday, the service was at the center of 
debates around the ethics of crowdsourced labor
, and it even 
played a small role
 in the early stages of the Facebook-Cambridge Analytica scandal. 

Beginning in 2018, Amazon also began 
billing it as a way for companies to annotate data
 to train neural networks as part of its SageMaker AI service.

Less overtly, Mechanical Turk has also been described as 
the hidden enabler
 for companies taking a 
fake-it-till-you-make-it
 approach to AI, where products marketed as Ai are actually being performed by the Mechanical Turk workforce — all the more fitting since 
the original Mechanical Turk
 was itself a hoax, with a hidden human chess player pretending to be a chess-playing machine

Over time, the relationship between Mechanical Turk and AI models grew even more complicated. In a 
snake-eating-its-own-tail irony
, a 2023 analysis found that between 33% and 46% of workers on the platform were using large language models to complete their tasks, 
raising questions about the reliability of data annotated on the platform
 and also about whether humans needed to be in the loop at all.

This week, after Amazon’s decision became public, one Reddit user suggested the platform died “years ago,” with workers and researchers abandoning it due to bots and fraud. The user 
predicted
, “Someone at Amazon is going to decide keeping the Mturk servers running is a waste of time and resources and pull the plug entirely.”

Topics

AI
, 
Amazon
, 
Amazon Web Services
, 
mechanical turk

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Anthony Ha	

Anthony Ha is TechCrunch’s weekend editor. Previously, he worked as a tech reporter at Adweek, a senior editor at VentureBeat, a local government reporter at the Hollister Free Lance, and vice president of content at a VC firm. He lives in New York City.

You can contact or verify outreach from Anthony by emailing 
anthony.ha@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek

Flipper Device’s new Busy Bar is a customizable display for productivity

Ivan Mehta
