In Brief

Posted:

12:54 PM PDT · August 24, 2026

Image Credits:
Amazon

Lucas Ropek

Amazon hikes hardware prices by 60 percent, blaming memory shortage

Over the weekend, Amazon 
significantly raised the prices
 of its hardware devices, jacking them up by as much as 60 percent in some cases.

The price explosion impacted Fire TVs, Echos, Kindles, and Eeros. One egregious example that’s
 been cited
 is that of the Echo Dot, one of Amazon’s cheapest smart speakers, the price of which jumped 60% overnight, from $49.99 to $79.99. Price tracking sites like 
CamelCamelCamel
 show the stark uptick, which has previously hovered much lower.

When reached for comment by TechCrunch, Amazon shared the following: “The consumer electronics industry is facing significant increases in memory and storage component costs. After absorbing these increases for as long as we could, we recently adjusted pricing across our product lines.” 

The company also said that it would continue to offer occasional promotions to customers over the course of the next year. 

Amazon’s price hikes reinforce the reality that it’s a terrible time to buy hardware. The 
global memory shortage
  fueled by the AI boom (also known as “
RAMmageddon
“) is driving up the cost of producing devices of all stripes. As a result, companies are increasingly passing on the costs to their customers. 

In a sign of the times, Apple recently 
hiked its prices
, and has sought to offset the steep new rates by introducing a 
device leasing program
, thus allowing users to pay off their devices over time.

The RAM shortage 
is expected to continue
 throughout 2027 before prices potentially crest and stabilize in 2028.   

Topics

AI
, 
Amazon
, 
echo
, 
Fire TV
, 
Hardware
, 
hardware

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Showcase your startup at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 and book an exhibit table while there’s still space

TechCrunch Events

	9 minutes ago

Security

Alabama launches investigation into OpenAI’s hack of Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	27 minutes ago

TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Amjad Masad, CEO and co-founder of Replit, joins the Disrupt Stage at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 

TechCrunch Events

	31 minutes ago

Latest in Hardware

In Brief

Amazon hikes hardware prices by 60 percent, blaming memory shortage

Lucas Ropek

	30 minutes ago

Gadgets

Linkdaze’s smart calendar is built to run a household, not just track a schedule

Lauren Forristal

	1 day ago

Hardware

Flock CEO calls for ‘compromise’ as surveillance company faces growing backlash

Anthony Ha

	1 day ago
