Suno, the service that allows users to create AI-generated songs, today announced new tools to mark tracks made on its platform, limit downloads, and update community guidelines to prevent copycat songs. The changes come as 
Suno
 faces numerous lawsuits from labels and 
artist bodies
.

In 
a blog post
, co-founder and CEO Mikey Shulman shared core principles and said that the platform wants to promote original creation while enabling more people to make music with its AI tools.

One of the key points of contention involved users uploading AI-generated songs on other streaming platforms and gaming the system to earn revenue. Suno said that now it will use audio watermarking and fingerprinting to prevent misuse on other streaming platforms. It’s not clear if Suno will use an existing system like 
Google’s Synth ID 
or adopt a new one, and the company did not say when contacted by TechCrunch about this.

The startup also signed an agreement with lyrics provider Musixmatch to use its Sentinel system for copyright detection, the blog post said.

“These tools are designed to be durable and resistant to tampering, without affecting the listening experience. They are also not intended to pass judgment on whether a song is good, meaningful, or sufficiently human,” said Shulman in the blog. “Ultimately, we believe it should be up to artists and platforms to decide what they want to disclose. Our role is to build tools that give them transparency options and make it easier to collaborate across the industry.”

The company added that it plans to add a new download policy to bar mass distribution on streaming platforms, but the company declined to provide details.

Suno has also changed its 
community guidelines
 to explicitly prohibit “deceptive audio presented as real” and “using a real person’s voice or likeness without permission” to prevent copycats.

The company, which raised 
$400 million in a Series D funding round in June
, is fighting legal battles on many fronts. The startup is in a lawsuit with 
the Universal Music Group (UMG) and Sony Music Group
 in a case coordinated by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).

Late last month, a German court ruled in favor of a government-mandated licensing agency, GEMA, and said 
Suno was breaking copyright rules
.

Separately, 404 Media reported that 
Suno experienced a data breach
 in November 2025, which revealed that the platform scraped YouTube, Deezer, and Genius to train its models. Later, data breach notification service Have I Been Pwned said that 
the data breach affected 55 million users
. The startup now faces a class action lawsuit in Massachusetts, which alleges that 
the company overlooked security measures to focus on profit
.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Music AI
, 
music streaming
, 
suno
, 
watermarking

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

VC-backed startups commit more fraud, and researchers think they know why  

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta
