The AI boom has made it possible for a significantly wider range of people to dip into development, create code, and launch software for the first time. There are pros and cons to this, even for established developers who are being 
pushed to use it
 to produce work faster.

Replit sits at the center of this evolution, and when its CEO and co-founder, Amjad Masad, takes center stage at 
TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
, he’ll speak about the future of programming and the wide-ranging implications of a world in which ideas can be easily turned into products.

Join the audience to watch our wide-ranging discussion with Masad at San Francisco’s Moscone West from October 13–15. You’ll also catch the rest of our excellent Disrupt lineup across six stages that address the most pressing questions facing the startup community, including, most critically, how do you build a sustainable company in the AI era?

Get your tickets now during our special promotional pricing extension — 
get up to $300 off your ticket until 11:59 p.m. PT Tuesday, August 25
. 

Why Replit is joining the Disrupt Stage

Replit’s rise has been explosive, mirroring the broader ascent of AI and the companies furthering its proliferation. Though Masad founded the company a decade ago, the past 18 months have marked the biggest changes, with the company’s current run-rate tracking toward a 
billion dollars annually
, compared with just $2.8 million in reported revenue in 2024.

But this conversation is about much more than Replit’s revenue. Masad’s conversation will dive into his perspective about the future of programming, entrepreneurship, and how Replit ensures that its service is doing more than helping users prototype their ideas — it helps fully flesh them out, too.  

Investors are convinced of Replit’s value to both nontechnical users and professional coders. They assigned the company a 
$9 billion valuation
 earlier this year, a mere six months after the company was assigned a $3 billion valuation.  

Of course, the question is whether it can keep that momentum going — or whether its growth in 2026 will look quaint a year from now because it’s growing even faster.  

If you’re interested in building within the AI era, you can count on many sessions, in addition to Masad’s, across our other stages:

Builders Stage
, which will be chock-full of VCs and corporate development pros who’ll dive deep, providing the kinds of insights every founder needs to have.

AI Stage
, where we’ll examine the presumed SaaSpocalypse, career opportunities, emerging security challenges, and more.

Smart Systems Stage
, for those working on the vital infrastructure underpinning this era and for those who need to learn more about it.

Real World AI Stage
, where we’ll explore the sundry ways that new technologies are beginning to impact the physical world around us.

To hear it first and in person, join the more than 10,000 founders, investors, and technologists who are heading to San Francisco for Disrupt 2026 on October 13–15. Grab your ticket today to make sure you get the best available price.

Learn more about Disrupt 2026 

Check out Disrupt’s headline speakers

Everything founders should know about Disrupt

Get the best hotel deals ahead of Disrupt

How to host your own Side Event at Disrupt

Take part in Disrupt and learn how to exhibit your startup

Topics

AI
, 
Amjad Masad
, 
Replit
, 
Startups
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
