Defense tech company Anduril is said to be raising a new round of capital that may push its valuation up by a whopping $40 billion to about $100 billion, 
Reuters
 reported, citing anonymous sources.

The company, which 
raised
 $5 billion in May at a $61 billion valuation — itself roughly double the 
$30.5 billion valuation
 it landed in its June 2025 Series G round — may be structuring the fundraise as a two-stage process, with the second stage bringing in investors at a higher valuation. Both tranches could be closed within the year, Reuters reported.

The news comes as the defense tech industry experiences an unprecedented revival, spurred by demand for drones, autonomous craft, and AI’s role in warfare, as war rages both in the Middle East and Eastern Europe. In the first six months of the year, the sector saw venture funding 
more than double
 to over $12 billion, eclipsing the nearly $10 billion that startups in the space raised in all of 2025.

Anduril has benefited from this demand, signing contracts with the U.S. 
Department of Defense
, 
Air Force
, and 
Army
; the 
Dutch Ministry of Defence
; 
NATO
; the 
U.K. Ministry of Defence
; 
Poland
; and more.

The company 
said
 in May that it had more than doubled its revenue to $2.2 billion in 2025 compared to a year earlier.

Other startups have cashed in, too: Military aircraft maker Shield AI in March 
raised
 $1.5 billion, Mach Industries 
quadrupled
 its valuation to $1.8 billion last month, and Europe’s Helsing this month 
raised
 $1.8 billion at an $18 billion valuation.

A common thread across these deals is a shift toward cheaper, more expendable hardware — often called “attritable” systems — rather than the expensive-to-replace equipment that’s defined defense contracting for decades. Mach CEO Ethan Thornton has said Mach is designing systems for the 
current era of warfare
 at significantly lower cost than traditional defense contractors, citing Ukraine’s use of autonomous drones as a model.

Separately, both Mach and Anduril have also moved to secure their own propulsion supply. Mach 
acquired
 solid rocket motor maker Exquadrum for $50 million in May, while the Pentagon has 
funded
 Anduril’s efforts to expand domestic solid rocket motor manufacturing capacity — moves aimed at a supply bottleneck that predates and cuts across the low-cost-weapons trend.

Anduril’s investors include Thrive Capital, Andreessen Horowitz, Founders Fund, ICONIQ, Flux Capital, Greycroft, Altimeter, 1789 Capital, and current U.S. Vice President JD Vance, according to PitchBook.

Anduril did not immediately return a request for comment. 

Topics

anduril
, 
defense tech
, 
Fundraising
, 
Palmer Luckey

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ram Iyer	

Editor

Ram is a financial and tech reporter and editor. He covered North American and European M&A, equity, regulatory news and debt markets at Reuters and Acuris Global, and has also written about travel, tourism, entertainment and books.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ram by emailing 
ram.iyer@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI says Hugging Face was breached by its pre-release models

Russell Brandom

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik
