Nuclear power startup 
Antares Nuclear
 said Monday that it has raised $470 million to build small reactors for U.S. military bases.

The Series C round, which was led by Paradigm and Caffeinated Capital with participation from Industrious Ventures, Point72 Ventures, and Shine Capital, underscores investors’ growing interest in advanced nuclear startups — a trend fueled by an AI data center building boom and demand for new sources of power. The Series C round included $370 million in equity and $100 million in debt.

Antares has been developing a small modular reactor (SMR) capable of producing between 100 kilowatts and 1 megawatt of electricity, enough to power up to 750 homes. 

Like many other advanced nuclear startups, Antares’ reactor uses TRISO fuel, which encapsulates uranium in carbon and ceramic shells. TRISO has been touted for years as a safer alternative to traditional nuclear fuel. The billiard ball-sized spheres of TRISO fuel can be cooled by gases like helium or molten salts. The coating is designed to prevent the fuel from melting in typical high-temperature reactors. 

Antares’ demonstration reactor, the Mark-0, reached criticality 
on June 4
 at the Idaho National Laboratory.

The company is one of 
three finalists
 in the Pentagon’s Advanced Nuclear Power for Installations program, which will test SMRs on Air Force bases in Colorado and Montana. Antares aims to bring its first electricity-producing reactor online next year, with deployments at U.S. military installations planned for 2028.

Investors have been flocking to nuclear power, and fission in particular, as electricity demand surges in response to data center construction and the broader electrification of the economy. In April, X-energy 
raised $1 billion
 through an IPO, while 
Radiant Energy
, 
Standard Nuclear
, and 
Last Energy
 have each raised nine-figure rounds since December.

Antares closed its 
last round
, a $96 million Series B, also in December. Altogether, Antares has raised $604 million, based on a TechCrunch analysis of PitchBook data.

Despite investor excitement, advanced nuclear startups face several hurdles to commercialization, including an immature supply chain in the U.S. and challenges with scaling production. Many SMR startups tout the benefits of mass manufacturing, claiming it will significantly reduce costs. But the benefits of mass manufacturing typically take 
at least a decade to materialize
, and no startup has reached that stage yet.

The first SMRs, which are expected to enter service in the early 2030s, are unlikely to be cost competitive with most new power plants. Lazard, which 
analyzes the cost of energy
 for a variety of technologies, expects new SMRs to cost about $214 per megawatt hour. At that price, they would cost more than all but the most expensive gas turbines.

Antares hasn’t disclosed its pricing. But given the realities of the market, it’s not surprising that the startup decided to chase contracts for the U.S. military, a famously price-insensitive customer.

Topics

Antares Nuclear
, 
Climate
, 
nuclear fission
, 
nuclear power
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
