Apple has begun restoring card payments for Apple Account purchases in India more than four years after withdrawing the option, the latest sign of how the iPhone maker is adapting its services to regulatory changes that have reshaped the country’s digital payments landscape.

The change, which is rolling out in phases, allows users in India to add eligible Visa and Mastercard credit and debit cards to their Apple Account to pay for subscriptions such as iCloud+ and Apple Music, as well as App Store purchases.

In May 2022, Apple 
suspended
 card payments in India following changes to the country’s recurring payments framework. Since then, users have relied on UPI, India’s real-time payments network, net banking, and Apple Account balance for subscriptions and other Apple digital purchases.

The move illustrates a broader challenge for Apple as governments around the world impose country-specific rules on digital platforms, increasingly requiring the Cupertino company to tailor products, payments, and other services to local regulatory frameworks rather than offer a uniform global experience. Similar pressures have led Apple to revise parts of its 
App Store business in Europe
, while regulatory changes in 
Japan
 and 
South Korea
 have also reshaped aspects of app distribution and payments.

Apple has made the backend changes needed to support card payments under India’s regulatory framework, according to a person familiar with the matter. The phased rollout began recently and is expected to expand to all eligible users over time. Apple has also 
updated
 its support documentation to reflect the change.

The framework, 
introduced
 by the Reserve Bank of India in 2021 and implemented in stages, required merchants and payment providers to introduce stronger customer authentication for recurring card payments and adopt tokenized card credentials, while preventing merchants from storing customers’ card details. The transition disrupted subscription billing for many domestic and international companies before they updated their payment systems.

“It’s long overdue but happening finally. This solves one of the friction points for subscription renewals,” said Tarun Pathak, research director at Counterpoint Research.

Apple’s services business in India has continued to grow at a double-digit pace despite the lack of direct card payments, but restoring the option becomes increasingly important as the company’s installed base expands and more users expect multiple ways to pay, he told TechCrunch.

The restoration of card payments is also likely to rekindle speculation about Apple Pay in India, following media reports that the company has 
explored bringing the service
 to the country. Apple has not announced any plans to launch the mobile payments service in India.

Apple did not respond to a request for comments.

Topics

Apple
, 
Apple Account
, 
apple app store
, 
Apps
, 
Commerce
, 
India

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek
