Apple is getting in on the hottest new trend in women’s health: perimenopause. The company announced at its 
WWDC 2026 event
 on Monday that it’s adding perimenopause and menopause support to its existing cycle-tracking feature.

Apple has been pushing deeper into women’s health 
since 2019
 when it added a cycle tracker to Apple Watch and iOS. The tracker lets women log key information about their menstrual cycle and fertility through its Health app.

This latest update embraces a topic that has gone mainstream, popping up everywhere from social media platforms like TikTok and Instagram to daytime TV shows like The Drew Barrymore Show. For Apple, that cultural moment points to both a product opportunity and a ballooning market: According to research published in the journal Menopause, an estimated 
1.1 billion women 
worldwide were postmenopausal as of last year, and digital health tools targeting that demographic have attracted significant investment in recent years.

In February, for example, five-year-old Midi Health — which initially focused on perimenopause and menopause care — raised $100 million in a Series D round led by Goodwater Capital, reaching a 
$1 billion valuation
.

According to Apple’s Stacey Ford, vice president of OS Product Management, women can be able to receive notifications when their cycle patterns are suggestive of perimenopause.

Ford said the feature also allows users to log symptoms and read educational information, “so you can understand more about what’s going on with your body and be better prepared to talk to your doctor.”

Topics

Apple
, 
Apple WWDC
, 
Apps
, 
Biotech & Health
, 
wwdc
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
