Apple is reportedly teaming up with deferred payment processor Klarna to launch a new lease-to-own program for its devices. 

Bloomberg 
reported
 Tuesday that the program — dubbed Apple Upgrade — is set to launch next Tuesday, July 28. It will allow consumers to pay for their purchases over multi-year periods, including iPhones, iPads, Macs, and Apple Watches.

Bloomberg writes that the lease term for iPhones and Apple Watches will be up to 24 months, while leases for Macs and iPads will be up to 36 months. The devices can either be kept or returned at the end of the leasing period, while upgrades to new devices will also be available (hence the name of the program). The report notes vaguely that, in some cases, “transactions will incur an additional fee.”

Apple already has a similar program called iPhone Upgrade, although the company plans to stop allowing new customer sign-ups to instead build out the broader, more inclusive Apple Upgrade program, the report said.

A leasing program is an obvious strategy for Apple at this point. The iPhone maker has 
been battling supply chain issues
 wrought by “RAMageddon” — the industry-wide shortage of memory chips that is driving up the price of hardware. Those shortages have been driven largely by the AI industry, which is gobbling up so much memory that it’s not leaving much for the rest of us.

To deal with these issues, Apple recently announced that 
it would be raising prices
, and Upgrade clearly seems designed to make those hiked prices more palatable to consumers.

TechCrunch reached out to Apple and Klarna for more information. 

Overall, the new program seems like a shrewd move for Apple, which is currently facing a hectic transitional period. As 
new CEO John Ternus
 takes the reins, the company also 
entered into a legal battle
 with AI startup superstar OpenAI — suing the company for alleged trade theft.

In short: The company has its hands full, and anything that can shore up sales and keep the business headed in the right direction is worth trying.

Topics

Apple
, 
Hardware
, 
Klarna

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Microsoft patches bug in video game Age of Empires II

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan
