Have you ever used the Image Playground app on your iPhone? Probably not — and you might not even know that your phone has a built-in AI image generation tool. That’s because until now, Image Playground has 
kind of sucked
, generating AI imagery that simply isn’t as high-quality as what 
Apple’s competitors
 can make. At 
WWDC 2026
 on Monday, Apple announced some necessary improvements to Image Playground.

While we haven’t yet gotten to use the app, Apple’s presentation makes it seem like the company’s overall AI overhaul will make Apple Intelligence-powered apps, like Image Playground, perform a lot better.

Image Credits:
Apple

“From stunning nature scenes to fun images using multiple people from your Photos library, you can also transform your photos into endless styles just by describing what you want in natural language, and with 
private cloud compute
, your photos are never stored or shared, even with Apple,” said Apple Senior Director Leslie Ikemoto in a WWDC presentation.

Image Credits:
Apple

As an example, Ikemoto explained that if you’re throwing a birthday party for your friend, you can design an invitation by using Image Playground to create an image of your friend holding a cake. Then, you can use natural language prompting to add candles to the cake or change your friend’s outfit.

“You also have more ways to use the images you create, like choosing the right dimensions for what you’re working on, including a landscape image for your small business’s website, or a portrait image for your flyer,” Ikemoto added.

Image Credits:
Apple

Since Image Playground is integrated across your device, you can also use it to generate lock screens, iMessage backgrounds, contact posters, and more.

AI art is generally pretty corny, but at least Apple won’t use your private photos for AI training, unlike many of its 
competitors
. 

Catch up on WWDC 2026

Everything announced, from start to finish

Siri AI’s update, explained

All the new AI features coming to Apple Photos

Apple Intelligence’s updates coming this year

Topics

AI
, 
Apple
, 
Apps
, 
image playground
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
