Apple on Thursday offered its annual update on the state of the App Store ecosystem ahead of its Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) that begins next week. The technology giant said that its App Store facilitated over $1.4 trillion in developer billings and sales in 2025, a figure up from the 
$1.3 trillion it announced
 last year around this time.

The figure, which includes all business taking place through apps on its platform, is meant to represent how the App Store creates financial opportunities for mobile developers that extend beyond sales from in-app purchases. It also helps to frame Apple’s portion of this business — a commission on in-app purchases of digital goods — as a much smaller portion of the overall pie.

As Apple noted in its announcement, 90% of the $1.4 trillion involved transactions where developers didn’t pay any commissions. 

Broken down further, the 2025 total included $1.1 trillion in sales of physical goods and services and $149 billion in billings and sales for digital goods. The latter is largely commissioned at a rate of 15% to 30%, depending on transaction type and the size of the business, and is higher than the $131 billion Apple reported last year. Regardless of how it’s presented, it’s still a multi-billion-dollar market that Apple takes a piece of. 

Additionally, Apple said that in-app revenue from ads was $151 billion in 2025, up from $150 billion the year prior. 

Image Credits:
Apple

Apple also highlighted that the App Store saw over 850 million average weekly users from across 175 countries and regions in 2025.

Notably, Apple called out AI apps in particular, remarking that 40 of the top 100 apps in 2025 had consumer-facing AI capabilities, and these saw stronger billing growth than the others in the top 100. This could be setting the stage for a WWDC announcement about Apple’s plans to allow AI agents on its App Store, as has been 
rumored
.

The company is also poised to make announcements of its own around AI at WWDC, with an anticipated Siri revamp and deeper AI integrations into its operating systems.

Apple’s announcement pointed to the App Store’s growth in China, as well, adding that, in the last six years, billings and sales facilitated by the App Store have more than doubled in the country. Meanwhile, billings and sales in the App Store more than tripled in the U.S. and Europe. Again, most of this is attributable to physical goods and services, like retail, grocery delivery, ride-hailing, travel, and more. 

Topics

AI
, 
Apple
, 
apple store
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
developers
, 
wwdc

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
