Apple has quietly published a rulebook for its new Maps ads, revealing a more curated approach than advertising giant Google. 

The iPhone maker has not disclosed a launch date for Maps ads, which was 
announced
 earlier this year,  beyond 
saying
 they would arrive “this summer” in the U.S. and Canada. However, the company has published advertiser documentation and Maps-specific ad policies, suggesting the rollout is approaching.  

In a newly published 
Apple Advertising Services policy,
 effective as of July 14, 2026, the iPhone maker shares its rules for advertising on Apple Maps. Notably, it prohibits the broad category of home services businesses, like plumbing, electrical, locksmith, HVAC, pest control, roofing, and general contracting services, among others.

That sets Apple apart from Google, where Local Services Ads are one of the company’s largest local advertising categories. Apple’s policy suggests the company is initially limiting its ads to places with a physical presence that their customers actually visit. 

Apple did not respond to a request for comment about the new rulebook.

Image Credits:
Apple

This approach could help make Apple’s ads feel more like organic map listings, rather than traditional paid search ads.

It could also save Apple some headaches as it gets its Apple Maps ads off the ground. Home services businesses, including locksmiths and garage door service providers, often require additional verification. Google, for instance, 
allows these categories
, but requires initial verifications, follow-ups, and audits to remain in good standing.

Apple’s curated approach to its App Store is also spilling over into its newest advertising vertical. In addition to banning home services, the policy prohibits a handful of businesses from advertising on Maps, like cryptocurrency ATMs and bail bonds providers.

Apple is also taking a hands-on approach to approving ads for businesses offering medical services, as the policy notes these ads will be “evaluated on a case-by-case basis.” 

These restrictions appear in a dedicated section of the new “Apple Advertising Services News and Stocks, Maps, and Sports Programming Policies,” which details the rules around publishing ads across Apple’s first-party apps beyond the App Store.

The broader policy also prohibits deceptive or profane ads, political ads, and ads featuring weapons, violence, controlled substances, defamatory material, and more. 

Although Apple may expand to other ad categories over time, its initial approach positions Maps and its ads as a more curated, navigation-focused product, rather than an extension of a web search engine. 

Apple’s approach to displaying ads will also differ from Google; Apple 
said it would only show a single ad
 to users in its Maps search results. It noted that the advertised businesses would be clearly marked with a small blue halo around the pin, and labeled as an ad in the list of Suggested Places.

Apple also said that data about the ads that users interact with stays on the device and is not collected by the company or shared with third parties.

Another recent update to Apple’s 
Advertising Services Terms of Service
 also suggests that Apple could be planning to expand its Apple Apps to non-Apple-owned services, a report from 
Mobile Dev Memo
 noted. Apple has not confirmed any changes on that front, however.

Topics

Apple
, 
Apple Maps
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Commerce
, 
Exclusive

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
