Apple on Tuesday 
unveiled
 a new Mac Mini that runs on the latest iteration of its “M” processors, the M6. 

The base model of this device comes with 256GB of storage, 16GB of RAM, and costs $899. It’s available for pre-order now, but the device will ship only after September 22, the company said.

Apple said the new Mac Mini’s AI performance is 4x better than the M4 model, and storage and graphics are twice as fast. The new processor has a 12-core CPU and 12-core GPU, as compared to the 10-core CPU and 10-core GPU on the M4.

Alongside the M6 model, there is also a Mac Mini with the M5 Pro chip. This model comes with base storage of 512 GB and RAM of 24GB, and starts at $1,699. By default the M5 Pro chip ships with a 15-core CPU and 16-core GPU, and can be upgraded to a 18-core CPU and 20-core GPU.

Both variants have Wi-Fi 7 and Bluetooth 6, along with a 2.5Gb Ethernet port. Users can upgrade to a 10Gb port as well.

The new Mac Minis will start shipping on September 22nd with macOS 27 and Siri AI. 

The Mac Minis have grown popular over the past year among tech enthusiasts for running local AI agents such as OpenClaw and Hermes. People were selling Mac Minis at marked-up prices on platforms like eBay earlier this year due to rising demand.

Besides the new Mac Minis, the company also released new Mac Studio models that run on the M5 Max and M5 Ultra chips, starting at $2,499 and $5,499, respectively. The M5 Max base model comes with 36GB of unified memory and 512GB of storage. The M5 Ultra base model has 96GB of unified memory and 1TB storage.

Earlier this year, the company discontinued the previous base model of the Mac Mini, which offered 256GB of storage and retailed for $599. It was until now offering the 512GB version with an M4 processor for $799 as the base model.

Topics

Apple
, 
Gadgets
, 
Hardware
, 
mac mini
, 
Mac Studio

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
