At WWDC 2026 on Monday
, Apple unveiled 
the new AI-ified version of Siri
 — in what has been called the assistant’s biggest and most dramatic transformation in the company’s history.

In addition to the 
launch of its new Siri AI system
, the personal assistant now has its own standalone app. The app is designed to serve as a warehouse of the user’s previous, archived conversations with the assistant. Much like the functionality of chatbots like ChatGPT or Claude, users can scroll through all of those previous conversations and re-visit a session.

When a user opens a previous conversation, the app provides an overview of what was said so that users don’t have to read through the entire transcript. The app is also the place where users can launch a new conversation with the assistant. 

Siri now offers users a multi-function interface that mirrors other AI chatbots where users can enter text, upload documents and images, and a voice mode, where you can speak directly to it.  

The Siri app is designed to give users access to the assistant across Apple devices, including iOS, MacOS, and iPadOS. All of a user’s Siri conversations are synced privately with iCloud, per Apple’s typical privacy protections.    

Image Credits:
Apple

The dedicated app is obviously designed to give users a more organized way to interact with the assistant, as its powers become more extensive within Apple’s software.

Catch up on WWDC 2026

Everything announced, from start to finish

Siri AI’s update, explained

All the new AI features coming to Apple Photos

Apple Intelligence’s updates coming this year

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Apple
, 
siri
, 
siri app
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
