In Brief

Posted:

8:29 AM PDT · July 15, 2026

Image Credits:
Apple (event screenshot)

Sarah Perez

Apple Intelligence approved for launch in China with Alibaba’s Qwen AI

Apple Intelligence, the iPhone maker’s generative AI offering, is coming to China. On Wednesday, Reuters 
reported 
that China’s regulator, the Cyberspace Administration of China, approved Apple’s AI services in the country, on the back of a deal to integrate Alibaba’s Qwen AI model into Apple’s operating systems, including iOS, iPadOS, macOS, and visionOS.

The deal, which was 
rumored to be in the works
 last year, marks an important step for Apple’s AI ambitions in a key market. In the second quarter, Apple sales in Greater China 
increased 28%
 to $20.5 billion. Apple also recently 
regained the No. 2 position
 in China’s smartphone market after a recent shopping festival offered discounts on the iPhone lineup. 

Prior to working with Alibaba, Apple was reportedly exploring a deal with Baidu, but faced issues adapting its models for Chinese customers. It also explored integrations with DeepSeek and with models from ByteDance, reports claimed. This led to delays in getting Apple Intelligence features, which debuted in 2024, to the Chinese market. 

Alibaba 
confirmed
 the company’s news to CNBC in a statement, saying that Qwen would be “integrated into Apple Intelligence experiences,” but did not provide a timeframe. It also said the integrations would involve AI capabilities like “text and image understanding and generation.”

U.S. shares of Alibaba rose 4% in pre-market trading on news of the deal, and are now up by over 6%, as of the time of publication. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Apple

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Hardware

India bets billions on breaking China’s grip on smartphone manufacturing

Jagmeet Singh

	2 hours ago

AI

Apple opens its new Siri AI to everyone with the iOS 27 public beta

Sarah Perez

	20 hours ago

AI

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

	2 days ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Apple Intelligence approved for launch in China with Alibaba’s Qwen AI

Sarah Perez

	42 minutes ago

AI

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan

	3 hours ago

Fundraising

Rime picks up $24M Series A to help enterprises field customer calls

Ivan Mehta

	3 hours ago
