Finding a new app on Apple’s App Store is about to become less about browsing top charts or picking through curated collections from App Store editors. This week, Apple 
announced
 a series of discovery features that will personalize app recommendations based on users’ interests and behavior, providing a new way for developers to have their app discovered.

At Apple’s Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC), the iPhone maker introduced Personalized Collections in the App Store, which will showcase recommendations tailored to the individual. These will also include new “App Notes” that explain why the specific apps were recommended to you. Starting this week, you’ll find these new personalized suggestions in various places in the App Store, including the Apps or Games tab or on the Search tab.

The suggestions will also evolve over time based on a user’s app usage and downloads. 

The feature will initially be available in English in the U.S., and will expand to other regions and languages over time, Apple says. It complements a range of other new tools designed to help developers better promote their apps to potential customers and encourage users to return to their apps and games.

The update reflects the maturity of the App Store ecosystem, where being featured by Apple’s App Store editors or being made “App of the Week” is no longer enough to drive guaranteed growth. As competition for users’ attention increases, a selection of new tools could help to re-engage existing customers, promote special offers, and package services together in new ways.

For instance, developers will now be able to use rich images and videos in their product page header and search results that can highlight their new content or seasonal offerings, which could encourage existing users to return to the app to see what’s new. They can also organize all their different marketing materials in a new Asset Library, where they can store regularly used assets for things like in-app events and special sales or promotions. Developers can also showcase special offers and engage players on the Apple Games app.

Apple will also allow App Bundles for developers running subscription businesses, allowing them to partner with other developers to offer groups of subscription apps for a lower price than if bought as separate subscriptions.

Under the new system, developers will also be able to sell subscriptions to larger groups and organizations using new options to build multi-user in-app purchase experiences.

Topics

app store
, 
Apple
, 
Apps
, 
developers
, 
wwdc
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin
