At its Worldwide Developers Conference, WWDC 2026, Apple launched a new systemwide dictation experience with its new Apple Intelligence model created based on Google’s Gemini on iOS 27.

The company said that the dictation experience is built into the keyboard and can correct spellings, punctuation, and capitalization, allowing the feature to work across apps.

AI-powered dictation apps have been very popular recently, including Wispr Flow, Willow, and Monologue. These apps clean up filler words like “ums” and “ahs” and format the text after transcribing based on context. The company started 
restricting some of these apps with iOS 26.4
, where they needed extra steps to activate a session with keyboards for those apps.

With the new in-built dictation, Apple’s dictation might get a leg up over other apps in terms of ease of use. It’s not clear if Apple will allow an easier workflow for third-party developers with the new iOS 27 update, however.

Apple’s move comes after Google released 
a similar feature with Gboard,
 powered by Gemini, that works across the system.

Topics

Apple
, 
Apple Intelligence
, 
Apps
, 
Dictation
, 
Wispr flow
, 
wwdc
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
