In Brief

Posted:

7:34 AM PDT · August 13, 2026

Image Credits:
Cheng Xin / Getty Images

Aisha Malik

Apple in talks to pay publishers to provide Siri with current news: report

Apple is in talks to pay publishers to use their content to power the upcoming Siri AI, according to a new report from 
The Wall Street Journal
. The tech giant has reached out to publishers in recent months about using their content to provide Siri with access to current news and information.

Apple has proposed a variable compensation model that would pay publishers when their content is used, rather than through a fixed licensing fee. This marks a departure from the standard industry practice of guaranteed fees, which are generally tied to broad access to content, rather than a pay-as-you-go model. Apple has considered a nine-figure budget for the payments, the report says.

Apple did not immediately respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment. 

The discussions come as Apple has been working to significantly enhance Siri, years after promising users a smarter and more capable AI assistant.

Siri AI is expected to roll out later this year.

Topics

AI
, 
Apple
, 
Apps
, 
siri

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Security

In a first, US will allow some private firms to carry out cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

	26 minutes ago

TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Can social media start over? Bluesky’s CEO and COO deliver their case at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 

Morgan Little

	1 hour ago

AI

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

	16 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Apple in talks to pay publishers to provide Siri with current news: report

Aisha Malik

	5 seconds ago

AI

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

	16 hours ago

Social

Amazon will train on Twitch streamers’ content by default, unless they opt out

Amanda Silberling

	18 hours ago
