The vibe of Apple’s 2026 Worldwide Developers Conference felt like a spouse proudly listing all the items on a honey-do-list they’d finally completed. Rather than showcase something exciting and new, Apple launched the keynote detailing fixes to 
last year’s “Liquid Glass”
 design; an 
overhaul of its awful search function
; 
improvements to its Playground feature
; and so on.

Perhaps most importantly, 
two years after promising but failing to launch a smarter Siri
, Apple finally showed off an overhauled version of its AI-powered voice assistant.

But the most telling detail wasn’t what Apple announced. It was how it chose to show some things off. Many of the Apple Intelligence demoes featured someone standing, phone in hand, pressing buttons or using voice commands in real time, while another camera showed off the phone’s response.

These weren’t live onstage, anything-could-go wrong demos; they were pre-taped. But they looked far more like proof of working features than what Apple showed at WWDC 2024, when the company 
unveiled Apple Intelligence and a new Siri
 to the world through slickly produced videos that turned out to be more promise than product.

Apple WWDC 2026 iOS 27 demo
Image Credits:
Apple/screenshot

This demonstration style was noticed, with comments on X on Monday comparing today’s keynote to those 2024 so-called “
vaporware
” demos.

Apple said at that time that the features would be available soon to those who upgraded to 
the iPhone 15 Pro and newer devices with M1
 chips or better. But by March 2025, Apple admitted to 
Daring Fireball
 that rolling out the features shown via production video was “going to take us longer than we thought to deliver.” Not long after, the Cupertino company 
faced a lawsuit in federal court 
alleging false advertising over the features shown at that 2024 event — a case that carried real reputational risk for a company whose brand has long been built on the promise that its products just work.

Last month, Apple agreed to pay 
a $250 million settlement
 on the suit, without admitting wrongdoing.

Monday’s presentation appeared designed, at least in part, to avoid a repeat. There were still plenty of fully produced videos of features, like the one showing how to adjust Siri’s voice and another demonstrating improved voice-to-text transcription. But many of the AI features were shown in this “live-like” format, with someone using the feature on an actual device. The implicit message being that these features work on actual devices, and you will soon have them.

Apple WWDC 2026 iOS 27 demo
Image Credits:
Apple/screenshot

Apple also is not requiring users to buy the latest iPhone to get these features. The new Siri will be available through the new iOS 27 on iPhone 15 Pro and Pro Max and all iPhone 16 models and later, 
according to the company
. The current model is the iPhone 17, meaning most users who upgraded in the past couple of years won’t need to buy new hardware to get access.

It’s a concession, perhaps, that Apple won’t lock the features behind new devices to create upgrade pressure when it promised, two years ago, that such features would be available on iPhone 15.

Apple also said the new features will be available across its broader hardware lineup, including the iPad mini (A17 Pro), iPad models with M1 or later, MacBook Neo (A18 Pro), Mac models with M1 or later, Apple Vision Pro, Apple Watch Series 10 or later, Apple Watch Ultra 2 or later, and Apple Watch SE 3 when paired with an Apple Intelligence-enabled iPhone nearby.

Topics

AI
, 
apple intellignce
, 
Apps
, 
Gadgets
, 
siri
, 
TC
, 
wwdc
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
