At its WWDC 2026 event
, Apple introduced a host of tools designed to put parents back in control over how their kids are using the iPhone. This includes features that let parents decide who a child can talk to, what apps they can use, and whether they can visit specific websites, as well as access to other tools to block inappropriate texts, manage screen time schedules, find age-appropriate app suggestions, and more.

The redesigned version of its Screen Time controls builds on the technology Apple already offers, expanding its capabilities in new ways with more granular controls. This comes as the mental health impacts of technology on children’s development have come to the foreground of people’s minds, and as new laws and regulations are attempting to rein in kids’ access to devices and social media.

When creating a child’s accounts on a new device, Apple will tailor safeguards to their age, blocking adult websites, allowing only age-appropriate media, and setting age-based restrictions on the App Store. Parents can adjust these settings if they prefer, but now they can go even further.

Image Credits:
Apple

For instance, parents can start off by providing kids access only to the content they’re comfortable with, then add more over time, as they deem it appropriate. Apple will make smart app suggestions upon setup, letting parents pick whether they want to only give a child access to the essentials, or if they want to pick and choose specific apps the child can use. This particularly makes sense for younger kids getting iPhones, like tweens and other school-aged children, who may not be ready for all the social experience an iPhone provides.

In addition, parents will be able to control access to which websites kids can browse — a feature that’s been much in demand since kids have historically used websites to work around parental controls that would restrict access to certain apps, often social media.

This feature, “Ask to Browse,” works across iPhone, iPad, and Mac with Safari, Apple notes. And it, along with “Ask to Buy” for apps and games, is on by default for kids under 13.

Parents will also be able to control which contacts the child can add to their contacts, and can opt to block media arriving in text messages that may include gore or violence. A similar feature has already been available to block possible nudity, to assuage sexting concerns. 

Image Credits:
Apple

The company’s existing Screen Time lets parents set up a schedule and choose which apps are available on which days and at which times. The feature helps parents limit access to things like social media during school hours, but not on weekends.

What’s new is that Apple is now relying on experts’ advice to make some initial screen time allowance recommendations, based on a child’s age and the app category. Apple said it consulted with the American Academy of Pediatrics and others on this feature. The company also pointed in particular to the fact that social media apps aren’t advised for children under 13, which is why Apple may suggest that category is turned off for younger kids. 

Image Credits:
Apple

The Screen Time feature has been redesigned, as well, to make it easier for parents to see how kids have been using their devices, and to allow parents to adjust that access with just a tap.

App developers, meanwhile, are offered a full suite of APIs that let them protect against nudity and violent content in apps, help ensure parents approve any new contacts in apps, or ensure a child is of age to use their app, among other options.

The new parental controls will roll out to consumers with the release of iOS 27 in the fall. 

Catch up on WWDC 2026

Everything announced, from start to finish

Siri AI’s update, explained

All the new AI features coming to Apple Photos

Apple Intelligence’s updates coming this year

Topics

Apple
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
parental controls
, 
Social
, 
TC
, 
wwdc
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
