Apple is hoping to draw in newer developers with lower AI infrastructure costs, the company announced during its developer keynote at its Worldwide Developers Conference on Monday. The tech giant said that developers with fewer than 2 million first-time App Store downloads will be able to use its 
Foundation Models
 running in 
Private Cloud Compute
, with no cloud API cost.

“It’s access to frontier-tier level intelligence with unparalleled privacy protections, because getting started exploring ideas shouldn’t be held back by infrastructure costs,” the presenter noted. 

The “under 2 million” figure is another means of capturing the indie developer audience, similar to Apple’s efforts with the 
Small Business Program
, where the company offers lower commission rates to smaller developers who are just starting to build their applications and aren’t yet earning millions.

Apple also noted that the Foundation Models framework is expanding this year to include image input and support for server models. That means the API can now integrate with the cloud model provider of developers’ choice, to ensure getting started with a large cloud model is as “accessible as possible,” as needed for more complex tasks, said Apple.

The move reflects a growing reality in the AI industry that experimentation is no longer cheap. By waiving infrastructure fees for smaller developers, Apple is positioning its models as a lower-cost alternative for those developers who don’t want to take on additional cloud bills. 

Small developers aren’t the only ones tightening their belts these days. Tech giants like 
Meta
 and 
Amazon
 have discontinued their internal AI token usage leaderboards, where developers once competed to burn cash by experimenting with AI tools. Uber, meanwhile, recently 
said
 it had run through its 2026 AI budget in just four months, news that some have taken as a need for more fiscal responsibility when it comes to AI.

Topics

AI
, 
Apple
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
developers
, 
wwdc

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
