For the first time, Apple will allow developers to partner with one another to offer subscription bundles through the App Store that would give users access to multiple apps at a lower price than if they subscribed to each separately.

At its Worldwide Developers Conference, the iPhone maker announced an expansion to its App Bundles feature, which had typically allowed a developer with multiple apps to sell them in bundles.

Now, Apple says developers will be able to team up with each other to offer users “more for less.” Instead of only bundling apps within their own catalog, developers can partner with each other to create bundles of apps, which cost less than if a user were to buy subscriptions to each app separately.

The new bundles borrow from a strategy that’s become increasingly common in streaming and media, where companies like HBO and Disney package together their subscriptions to boost their perceived value and retain customers.

Bundles could similarly make sense for developers who have overlapping customer bases, but aren’t direct competitors. For instance, you could imagine a creativity-focused app bundle containing a camera app, photo and video editing tools, and perhaps an app for publishing content across social media platforms.

Similarly, productivity app devs could team up with others to fill in gaps that their own products miss, allowing users to buy bundles that include one developer’s to-do list with another’s calendar app, for instance.

Apple says developers will also be allowed to create “Suites,” which are subscription packages that aren’t available as standalone purchases.

Topics

app bundles
, 
app store
, 
Apple
, 
Apps
, 
developers
, 
wwdc
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin
