Apple is being sued for alleged negligence regarding its App Store security measures. In a lawsuit filed on Friday in the U.S. District Court of Northern California, three plaintiffs claim they were tricked into downloading and installing a fraudulent crypto wallet app, leading them to collectively lose more than $1.8 million.

The lawsuit centers on Apple’s claim that it secures its App Store by reviewing apps before they go live to protect users from fraudulent and malicious apps. In this case, the plaintiffs downloaded an app called Sparrow Wallet, even though the official Sparrow Bitcoin wallet is not available on iOS.

The plaintiffs transferred their Bitcoin to the fraudulent app, losing large amounts of the virtual currency, according to the complaint. Plaintiff James Ramirez lost about $875,000; plaintiff Christopher Ellis lost around $840,000, and plaintiff Jalen Delgado lost roughly $120,000.

The complaint targets one of Apple’s longtime competitive arguments: that its tight control over its App Store makes its platform safer than those offered by its rivals. The company has used this claim to push back against deregulation of the app ecosystem, including third-party app stores and sideloading.

“As part of a sustained marketing campaign, Apple has positioned itself, its products and services, as offering a level of security and trustworthiness superior to any competing technology company,” the new filing states. “This includes assurances about the safety of applications distributed through its App Store. By retaining exclusive control over which apps are permitted on Apple devices, Apple has structured its platform to ensure that consumers depend entirely on its promise of safety and reliability,” it reads. 

The complaint also accuses Apple of knowingly hosting fraudulent apps, pointing to public criticism by Sparrow Bitcoin Wallet’s creator, Craig Raw, who said Apple had allowed fake Sparrow Wallet apps to remain on the App Store.

The three are asking for a trial by jury and seek to recoup their lost money and other damages. They also want Apple to provide warnings and disclosures about the App Store’s risks.

Apple declined to comment on the lawsuit. The company did stand behind its security measures, telling TechCrunch that apps impersonating others are a violation of its guidelines and it takes swift action to remove them. Apple added that there are currently no Sparrow Wallet copycats on the App Store.

The company also pointed to its latest 
analysis
 of its ecosystem, which found that in 2025 it rejected more than 371,000 submissions that copied other apps, were spam, or otherwise misled users.

Topics

app store
, 
Apple
, 
Apps

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
