We’re getting close to 
TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
! In less than two months, more than 10,000 innovators, founders, investors, and industry leaders will gather in San Francisco. You can meet up with that community the week of TechCrunch Disrupt, which runs from October 13-15.

With our Disrupt Side Events program, 
you can bring people together anytime from October 10-16
 for a custom event that gets promoted to Disrupt’s attendees. But time is running out — 
our deadline to apply for Side Events is September 4
, so act now!

What are the benefits of a Side Event?

Hosting a Side Event puts you in control of how your community meets up, placing your brand front and center with the people who matter most. Whether you’re a VC looking to spark conversations, a company ready to showcase breakthrough innovation, or a community builder with something to say, this is your moment to:

Engage directly with thousands of the sharpest minds in tech.

Build authentic relationships with potential partners, investors, and collaborators.

Own your narrative and showcase your expertise on your terms.

Generate buzz that extends far beyond the event itself.

Approved Side Events are all promoted to Disrupt attendees and the rest of our audiences through the official Side Events calendar and marketing channels.

What Side Events can you host?

Anything that aligns with your vision is likely to be approved. Everything from industry roundtables and VC office hours to deep-dive workshops to intimate dinners and casual networking happy hours have succeeded at past Disrupt events.

The format is yours to design — we just ask that you bring the energy and make sure it’s open to both Disrupt attendees and the broader public. We recommend hosting events that take place in the evenings during Disrupt from October 13-15, as there’s less competition and more post-conference excitement to fuel meaningful conversations with undivided audiences.

How can I apply for a Side Event?

You can look at the application form here
, but it’s helpful to have a few things locked in before starting the application process:

Have a venue selected in the Bay Area — this is all about in-person experiences.

Have a title, description, and venue prepared for the event.

Double-check the 
Side Events Host Guide
 and the 
Side Event Host T&Cs
.

If you have additional questions, we’re here to help! 
Just email our Side Events team
 and we’ll follow up to help.

We prioritize events that provide meaningful value to founders, investors, and the startup community, but aside from that, you know your community and ideal audience the best! There’s zero cost to apply and participate, so let’s hear your ideas.

Apply by September 4 to be a part of Disrupt

Apply now
 and tell us your vision, goals, and what you need logistically in your application, and we’ll handle the rest to give your team the support and exposure you need to make the most of the community and opportunity Disrupt brings to San Francisco and the Bay Area.

Topics

Social
, 
Startups
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
