Apple’s plan to change a privacy feature that lets paying customers hide their real email addresses when creating online accounts could make it easier for apps and websites to block anonymous sign-ups.

Apple’s Hide My Email is an iCloud+ feature that generates anonymous email addresses under the 
@icloud.com
 domain, which then forward messages to a person’s real email address. The reason these privately generated email addresses work is because they cannot be distinguished from regular Apple users, whose email addresses also use the 
@icloud.com
 domain.

Apple said in 
a note to developers on Monday
 that in the coming weeks the company will move its anonymously generated email addresses to 
@private.icloud.com
, effectively making it easier for apps and websites to know that an email address is private and block users from signing up.

Existing addresses will continue to function and forward mail without interruption, Apple said in the note to developers. The company added that app and email providers would have to update their filtering to ensure that emails to customers who rely on the feature continue to go through.

Several Apple users on Reddit 
criticized the change to the email domain
, saying it would make it more difficult to use the service. 

Apple did not respond to a request for comment from TechCrunch about the change, or explain why it made the change.

Earlier this year, 
TechCrunch reported that Apple turned over the real account information of a user
 who generated an anonymized email address using Hide My Email to send an allegedly threatening email to the girlfriend of the FBI director Kash Patel. 

The Trump administration has made efforts over the past year to 
unmask anonymous accounts
, including those of Trump’s critics, by using subpoenas to demand that tech companies turn over information about their users.

Topics

Apple
, 
cybersecurity
, 
hide my email
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
