In Brief

Posted:

6:17 AM PDT · July 16, 2026

Image Credits:
Apple (event screenshot)

Sarah Perez

Apple Intelligence approved for launch in China with Alibaba and Baidu

Apple Intelligence, the iPhone maker’s generative AI offering, is coming to China. 

On Wednesday, Reuters 
reported
 that China’s internet content regulator, the Cyberspace Administration of China, approved Apple’s AI services in the country on the back of a deal to integrate Alibaba’s Qwen AI model into Apple’s operating systems, including iOS, iPadOS, macOS, and visionOS.

On Wednesday evening, a Baidu spokesperson confirmed to TechCrunch that it is also working with Apple on developing Apple Intelligence features for Chinese users.

The Alibaba deal, which was 
rumored to be in the works
 last year, marks an important step for Apple’s AI ambitions in a key market. In the second quarter, Apple generated $20.5 billion in sales in Greater China, 
up 28%
 from a year earlier. Apple also recently 
regained its No. 2 position
 in China’s smartphone market after a recent shopping festival offered discounts on the iPhone lineup.

The Baidu partnership was also rumored, but 
reports at the time
 claimed Apple was facing issues adapting its models for Chinese customers. Apple is also said to be exploring integrations with DeepSeek and ByteDance.

A lack of approval by Chinese regulators has led to Apple Intelligence features, which debuted in 2024, being delayed in the Chinese market.

Alibaba earlier 
confirmed
 the company’s news to CNBC in a statement, saying that its Qwen models would be “integrated into Apple Intelligence experiences,” though it did not provide a time frame. It also said the integrations would involve AI capabilities like “text and image understanding and generation.”

This article was updated Thursday, July 16, to add the statement by Baidu.

Topics

AI
, 
alibaba
, 
Apple
, 
Apple Intelligence
, 
In Brief
, 
qwen

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Hardware

India bets billions on breaking China’s grip on smartphone manufacturing

Jagmeet Singh

	1 day ago

AI

OpenAI pushes back on Apple trade secret lawsuit

Kirsten Korosec

	2 days ago

AI

Apple opens its new Siri AI to everyone with the iOS 27 public beta

Sarah Perez

	2 days ago

Latest in AI

AI

Why AMI Labs’ Alexandre LeBrun won’t call his AI ‘AGI’ or ‘superintelligence’

Kate Park

	16 minutes ago

In Brief

Moonshot’s upcoming Kimi 3 is expected to close the gap with Anthropic’s Opus 4.8

Dominic-Madori Davis

	30 minutes ago

Startups

How Elorian AI pulled off a $300M pre-seed valuation

Maggie Nye

Isabelle Johannessen

	54 minutes ago
