In Brief

Posted:

7:46 AM PDT · August 25, 2026

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin / TechCrunch

Zack Whittaker

Apple rescues Hide My Email feature from the privacy scrap heap

Apple has 
reneged
 on a planned change to its Hide My Email feature that users said would have made the privacy tool less effective.

Hide My Email is a privacy feature for paying iCloud+ users that generates a unique and disposable email address to give websites instead of a person’s real email address and still have emails route to their regular inboxes. The benefit of the email-hiding feature is that privately generated email addresses cannot be distinguished from regular Apple users with an 
@icloud.com
 email address. However, the feature still allows Apple to tell law enforcement 
who is behind a masked email address
.

Earlier this year, the company 
said it
 would move users to 
@private.icloud.com
, which users said would make it easier for websites to reject these email addresses during sign-ups. On social media and Reddit threads, users criticized the change as defeating the purpose of the service altogether.

The company confirmed an update on Monday that Hide My Email addresses “will remain” on 
@icloud.com
, after previously saying it would move users to 
@private.icloud.com
.

Apple did not give a reason for changing its decision, but
 Daring Fireball’s John Gruber
, who first reported the about-face, said that Apple employees had objected to the change all along.

Earlier this year, 404 Media reported
 that a bug in Hide My Email
 revealed people’s real email addresses. Apple
 fixed the bug
 more than a year after it was first made aware that emails rejected as spam would leak the masked users’ real email addresses.

Topics

Apple
, 
cybersecurity
, 
iCloud
, 
privacy
, 
Security
, 
TC

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Hardware

Apple debuts its ‘most powerful chip ever’ in M5 Ultra and M6

Amanda Silberling

	1 hour ago

Gadgets

Apple’s latest Mac Mini runs on a new M6 chip, and starts at $899

Ivan Mehta

	1 hour ago

Latest in Security

In Brief

Apple rescues Hide My Email feature from the privacy scrap heap

Zack Whittaker

	32 minutes ago

Apps

WhatsApp tightens account security with stronger two-step verification and more

Aisha Malik

	2 hours ago

Security

Alabama launches investigation into OpenAI’s hack of Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	19 hours ago
