Apple announced at 
WWDC 2026
 on Monday that its Photos app is getting a few new AI features that 
leverage Apple Intelligence
.

A new spatial “Reframe” feature will let users use AI to reframe images. For instance, if a user accidentally capture a sign above someone’s head, if the photo would have been more symmetrical by stepping slightly to the right, or if eye contact with a subject was missed by a fraction of a second, the new reframing tool can help fix all of these issues.

Users can touch and drag photos to adjust the perspective as if they had repositioned the camera in the original scene. Users can also preview the effect in real-time. As the photo is being adjusted, a blur will appear around the edges of the original image, which will be filled later by Apple’s generative models.

Image Credits:
Screenshot/TechCrunch

The feature only generates new content to fill in the gaps where the perspective has been affected to ensure that the reframe photo stays consistent with the original scene.

The “Extend” tool expands images to give subjects more breathing room, or to straighten a crooked horizon without cropping out anything important. Users can pinch to zoom out, or adjust the crop to add more to the scene.

The app’s popular “Cleanup” tool is also getting an upgrade so users can remove distractions with better quality and more realistic infill with generative AI. The feature lets users tap, brush, or circle what they want to remove.

Catch up on WWDC 2026

Everything announced, from start to finish

Siri AI’s update, explained

All the new AI features coming to Apple Photos

Apple Intelligence’s updates coming this year

Topics

AI
, 
Apple
, 
Apps
, 
wwdc

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
