Apple announced two new processors on Tuesday, which power its 
new Mac Mini and Mac Studio
 models: the 
M5 Ultra and M6
 chips. 

The M5 Ultra, which Apple deems its “most powerful chip ever,” fuses two dual-die M5 Max chips to form Apple’s first quad-die chip, designed to manage hefty AI workloads.  The chip includes an up-to-36 core CPU and up-to-80 core GPU and 1.2 TB/s of unified memory bandwidth, which is 50% more than the 
M3 Ultra
, which Apple released only about a year and a half ago. 

While the M5 Ultra is designed for professionals doing compute-intensive work like complex 3D rendering, visual effects, and running frontier AI models, the Mac Studio with M5 Ultra will no doubt appeal to hobbyist AI developers as well. But Apple’s M6 chip is more geared toward these everyday users, according to the company.

“Built using the cutting-edge 2 nm process, M6 combines a new CPU complex, two additional CPU and GPU cores, a Dual 16-core Neural Engine, and more unified memory bandwidth to power through workloads with amazing energy efficiency,” Apple vice president of Silicon Engineering Sri Santhanam said in a press release.

With the M6’s 12-core CPU complex, which adds two more cores than the M5, the M6 chip can offer nearly a 30 percent increase in peak GPU compute for AI compared to the M5, which improves the speed of prompt processing when using on-device LLMs. 

“With these frameworks and new chips, developers can run and fine-tune large AI models locally on their Mac,” Apple wrote in a press release. “Apple’s developer tools and frameworks automatically optimize performance across the CPU, GPU, and Neural Engine, and give developers the ability to use Apple Foundation Models, App Intents to tap into Apple Intelligence features, or their own proprietary AI models to build and run powerful AI workloads entirely on device.”

Apple trailed behind its competitors when it comes to building its own proprietary AI model — the long-awaited Siri upgrade is powered by Google’s Gemini. But Apple has excelled in using on-device technology to allow users to more securely take advantage of tools like Face ID and Touch ID, which would be a privacy nightmare if processed via the Cloud. Similarly, Apple’s emphasis on powering on-device AI workloads could be where the company has a chance to shine, offering a more secure, controlled environment for developers to experiment with new AI tools.

Apple’s newest Mac Mini devices are available for pre-order now, starting at $899. They will ship after September 22.

Topics

Apple
, 
Hardware

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
