Apple is warning developers that some of their apps may not be able to call the App Store home forever. In its newly refreshed 
App Review Guidelines
 released this week, the tech giant said it may begin removing apps in certain well-established categories if they’re not “updated, improved, or attracting customers.” This marks a significant shift on Apple’s part, which earlier used to simply reject copycat apps or those in saturated categories.

Previously, Apple’s guidelines had cautioned developers not to pile on in categories that already had plenty of apps. The line, somewhat hilariously, had read: “The App Store has enough fart, burp, flashlight, fortune telling, dating, drinking games, and Kama Sutra apps, etc. already. We will reject these apps unless they provide a unique, high-quality experience.”

The updated text, released alongside Apple’s Worldwide Developer Conference (WWDC), warns developers against “opportunistically creating variants of existing app categories or popular apps.” The list now includes wallpaper apps, simple timers, and sound effects, in addition to dating apps, flashlight, and fortune-telling apps.

“We may remove these apps from the App Store going forward if they are not updated, improved, or do not attract customers,” the guidelines state.

These apps, Apple explained, are “well established on the App Store,” and submissions will no longer be accepted unless they offer a “meaningfully different or improved” experience.

The change comes as Apple focuses on improving app discovery across its App Store. At WWDC, the company introduced 
personalized app recommendations
 and 
merchandising tools to help developers
 grow their businesses and re-engage existing users. Removing low-quality apps could help the App Store reduce clutter, making it easier for developers who are putting in the effort to have their apps discovered.

In addition, Apple called out apps like drinking games, Kama Sutra, fart and burp apps as “low-quality,” “mediocre,” and “low-effort,” warning that developers who repeatedly submit such apps may lose access to the Apple Developer Program entirely.

Topics

app store
, 
Apple
, 
Apps
, 
developers
, 
WWDC 2026

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin
