Apple has leveraged AI to make its visual-scripting tool, Shortcuts, easier to use in iOS 27, 
in a reveal shown at its WWDC 2026 event.

The Shortcuts app was largely built for power users who wanted to automate repetitive tasks, create workflows, or set up multi-app actions. The new version of Shortcuts will instead allow users to write a prompt and simply describe what they want to do.

The new feature is powered by Apple Intelligence, which helps to determine what a natural language description means so it can build out the required steps.

“While super powerful, the process of creating these shortcuts can feel, well, complicated,” admitted Celcia Dantas, Sr. Manager of Home Software Product Marketing during Apple’s Worldwide Developers Conference keynote on Monday. 

The AI update makes the Shortcuts app more approachable and expands what non-technical people can do, as they’ll no longer need to worry about finding the right app actions or variables.

Dantas also offered an example of how this feature could be put to real-world use, suggesting that users could design a shortcut that would automatically notify their partner when they leave work and give them an expected ETA for their arrival at home.

Instead of having to figure out how to build this type of automation, users could just type in a request, and Shortcuts would then pull together whatever system and app actions are needed. In this case, it would create an automation that runs the shortcut once the users leaves work — accessing a stored address — then calculates their ETA using Apple Maps, and sends the alert via Messages.

Users can also make edits or changes by describing them, Apple notes. In the “leaving work” example, for instance, the user could edit it after the fact to start playing a favorite podcast, for instance.

The updated version of Shortcuts will roll out with iOS 27 later this fall. 

Catch up on WWDC 2026

Everything announced, from start to finish

Siri AI’s update, explained

All the new AI features coming to Apple Photos

Apple Intelligence’s updates coming this year

Topics

AI
, 
Apple
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Shortcuts
, 
wwdc

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
