Apple is introducing a new leasing program in partnership with the “buy now, pay later” service Klarna, giving eligible customers the option to pay for Apple devices through monthly installments, the tech giant 
announced
 on Tuesday. The program is available for the iPhone, Apple Watch, Mac, and iPad on the Apple Store online, in the Apple Store app, and at Apple Store locations in the United States.

Leasing prices start at $17.99 per month for iPhone, $11.99 per month for Apple Watch, $24.99 per month for Mac, and $11.99 per month for iPad. Apple Upgrade offers one- and two-year leasing options for iPhone and Apple Watch, and two- and three-year for Mac and iPad.

At the end of the lease term, customers can upgrade to the latest generation of their device, purchase their current device with a one-time payment, or return it and exit the program, Apple says. 

The rollout of the program comes as Apple has been struggling with supply chain issues related to “RAMageddon,” which refers to the industry-wide shortage of memory chips that is driving up the price of hardware. As a result, Apple recently 
announced price hikes
 for its Mac and iPad lineups, sparing the iPhone for now. The new Upgrade program seems to be Apple’s answer to making those higher prices more manageable for consumers.

Customers can manage their lease directly in the Klarna app, where they can view their billing schedule and track remaining payments. 

With the launch of the new Upgrade program, Apple is discontinuing its existing in-house financing and installment programs in the U.S., which include the iPhone Upgrade Program and iPhone Payments. 

The official launch follows a report from 
Bloomberg’s Mark Gurman
 last week, which revealed that Apple was preparing to 
introduce a lease-to-own program
 for its devices. 

Apple says that when customers enroll in Apple Upgrade, they can lower their monthly lease payments by trading in their existing device through its Apple Trade In program. They can also earn 3% Daily Cash back when using Apple Card to make their lease payments. 

Topics

Apple
, 
Hardware

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
