The world uses a lot of copper, but thanks to the energy transition and data centers, it’ll need a lot more. Between now and 2050, we’ll have to 
produce more copper
 than has been mined throughout all of human history, according to one study.

A lot of that copper ends up in the electrical grid, which in the U.S. is 
showing its age
. 

“We’re hitting this inflection point of AI and the electrification of nearly every industry, and it’s creating this point where we have overburdened and overstressed the energy grid,” Amir Mashal, founder and CEO of 
Arcturus
, told TechCrunch.

One option is to throw more copper at the problem, but Mashal said his startup, which has been operating in stealth, offers an alternative. Arcturus can reduce the amount of energy that electrical conductors lose to heat by infusing carbon nanomaterials into copper and aluminum using lasers. Replacing traditional copper with Arcturus’s material would allow the same size power lines to carry more electricity.

In practical terms, that could cut losses on the electrical grid in half, which would immediately unlock 
around 3% more
 electricity on average and 
up to 10% more
 during the most congested times, when the grid arguably needs it most. At the low end, that’s about 
a year’s worth
 of demand growth in the U.S.

“Copper loses conductivity as it heats up, so the hotter it gets, the more energy it wastes as heat,” Mashal said. “As I kept peeling back the layers of that onion, everything kind of started clicking to me because I noticed the same limit shows up everywhere. The modern world really runs on metals.”

While the grid is the ultimate destination for a materials startup like Arcturus, the company is starting smaller with drones, robotics, and, yes, data centers, where a few percentage points more electricity can have an outsized impact. 

The company exclusively told TechCrunch that it raised $8 million in a seed round led by Initialized Capital with participation from Toyota Ventures, Breakthrough Energy Discovery, 1517, and Wireframe Ventures.

Mashal has been quietly refining his materials in a garage in Malibu, California, where he’s currently able to produce several centimeters of wire as a proof of concept. With the new funding, he plans to ramp up to tens of meters so that the nano-infused materials can be tested in various applications, including windings in electric motors and busbars in power distribution equipment.

Though the materials’ properties are new, Mashal said they’re engineered to be a “drop-in replacement” in existing copper and aluminum applications. “Same form factors, no system redesign, no new training for folks to handle or crimp the material.” 

Arcturus’s materials could make for lighter drones or more efficient EVs. By reducing the amount of energy lost to heat, they can also reduce data centers’ needs for cooling.

“All those industries have the same kinds of bottlenecks, whether your drone wants to have double the flight time or your graphics card is just heating up too much,” Mashal said. “Those are all areas where our material can fundamentally disrupt things.”

Topics

Arcturus
, 
Climate
, 
copper
, 
electrical grid
, 
Exclusive

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

If you want to cut your screen time, just get a Brick

Amanda Silberling
