As Gen Z 
rethinks
 the point of online dating, Tinder is trying to stay in the game by expanding its in-person events to dozens of new cities by September, the company told analysts on its second-quarter earnings call on Tuesday.

Match Group (Tinder’s owner) reported its flagship dating app saw 
revenue decline
 in the quarter, which sent the company’s 
stock down by over 10%
 in after-hours trading. Nevertheless, Match still appeared to be bullish on its Tinder turnaround efforts.

CEO Spencer Rascoff spoke of narrowing Tinder’s declines in monthly active users, which were down 7% in Q2, slightly better than last quarter’s 8% decline. He also said he believed Tinder’s daily active user growth would once again lean positive “any day now.” The app has not reported positive user growth in more than three years.

Still, Match, which also runs Hinge, OkCupid, Match, PlentyofFish and other dating apps, is planning for a future where online dating itself may become passé.

Numerous
 
reports
 
have
 suggested that younger Gen Z users are increasingly turning to real-world experiences that get them off their phones and out of the house as they seek to connect with others.

Now, Match’s own internal data is backing this up.

“Our internal research shows that nearly half of singles aged 18 to 29 want to share in-person experiences with people who could become closer connections,” Rascoff said. “Yet, for a generation that grew up online, making that transition into real life can still feel hard. That is why we are doubling down on more social, lower-pressure ways for users to connect in real life,” he told analysts on the call. 

In March, Tinder 
introduced in-person events,
 starting in Los Angeles, that are featured in a dedicated Events tab in Tinder’s mobile app.

This tab features curated local events that are held at speakeasies, bowling alleys, raves, and pottery classes, among others, and Rascoff said 71% of Tinder’s active users in LA, aged 18 to 24, had engaged with the new sections.

That suggested “especially strong adoption” among Gen Z users, the company said. Since its March debut, the company has featured over 60 events.

Now, Tinder is expanding its events efforts beyond LA’s initial beta test. Since March, the Events tab has been launched in nine additional U.S. and European cities, and it will reach 26 cities globally by the end of September. By the end of 2026, Tinder expects to launch the feature in 75 cities.

Rascoff told analysts on the call that Events was being scaled via a “low-cost model built primarily around partnerships with leading event providers” — in other words, Tinder itself isn’t directly running the events; it’s just making them discoverable via its app. However, this strategy could provide the company with valuable data if it wanted to invest more directly in such events.

“We see the value of events extending far beyond those who attend,” the CEO noted. “Bringing more real-world connection into the experience can help shift perception of Tinder and the category more broadly, giving singles a reason to reconsider and try the app. Early signals support that potential. Roughly three in five people who do not use Tinder today say events would make them more likely to do so, and a similar share say it would make connecting feel easier,” Rascoff added.

Topics

Apps
, 
online dating
, 
Social
, 
Tinder

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
