In Brief

Posted:

3:41 PM PDT · June 8, 2026

Image Credits:
Worldcoin 
(opens in a new window)

Amanda Silberling

As OpenAI files for IPO, Sam Altman’s eye-scanning company is doing layoffs, report says

OpenAI announced on Monday that it confidentially 
filed for an IPO
, marking what could become the one of the defining public offerings of the decade. And then there’s OpenAI CEO Sam Altman’s other company, 
Tools for Humanity
, which is reportedly conducting layoffs, according to 
Business Insider
. TechCrunch has reached out to the company for confirmation.

You might know Tools for Humanity better through its verification project known as World — and its related device, a creepy silver orb that wants to scan your eyeballs. The idea is that the company will be able to verify people’s identities using unique iris scans, helping to distinguish human activity from bot activity in the increasingly automated world that Tools for Humanity co-founder and chairman Altman is constructing. The company would also use these scans to validate people’s identities to support the trade of its own cryptocurrency, Worldcoin.

Image Credits:
JUAN MABROMATA/AFP via Getty Images / Getty Images under a  license.

These vague, suspicious ambitions were enough to 
raise money
 at a 
$2.5 billion valuation
 from investors like Andreessen Horowitz, Bain Capital, and other funds backing blockchain companies. But now the company is reportedly 
downsizing
 as it struggles to create revenue.

In the U.S., companies like 
Tinder
, Zoom, and Docusign have partnered on Altman’s side project. Internationally, Tools for Humanity has faced 
regulatory and ethical concerns
. In Kenya, India, and Hong Kong, for example, people were offered the equivalent of 
$50 in Worldcoin
 in exchange for their biometric data. Kenya later banned World from operating in the country, citing privacy and financial concerns; meanwhile, South Korea fined the company $830,000 for 
allegedly violating
 local privacy law.

Who would’ve thought? People don’t feel great about giving their biometric data to a startup in exchange for $50 worth of crypto.

Topics

AI
, 
TC

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Breaking

OpenAI files confidentially for IPO, following Anthropic

Rebecca Bellan

	2 hours ago

Apps

Apple’s Image Playground doesn’t suck anymore

Amanda Silberling

	5 hours ago

Apps

Apple is fixing the headache of splitting the bill with its new Siri in Camera feature

Amanda Silberling

	5 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

As OpenAI files for IPO, Sam Altman’s eye-scanning company is doing layoffs, report says

Amanda Silberling

	1 hour ago

Apps

Apple’s WWDC AI demos looked more real after $250M false ad settlement

Julie Bort

	1 hour ago

Breaking

OpenAI files confidentially for IPO, following Anthropic

Rebecca Bellan

	2 hours ago
