TV Time, the popular TV and movie-tracking app whose 
pending shutdown
 has 
prompted 
more than 25,000 users to petition
 against its closure, is getting a reboot of sorts.

One of the 
app’s original founders
, 
Antonio Pinto
, says he’s creating a new TV show tracking app, 
Bingers
, which will attempt to rebuild the best features of TV Time while also addressing the issues that bothered him over the years.

Bingers will offer TV Time’s existing users a potential lifeline soon after the original app disappears from the app stores. It also gives the existing social community another place to go to continue discussing TV episodes, something that not all TV show tracking apps offer. According to data from app intelligence provider 
Appfigures
, TV Time has more than 26.4 million lifetime installs, many of those users potentially helping seed the new app’s community.

Image Credits:
Bingers

Pinto, who is based in Paris, sold his app, then called TVShow Time, to Whipclip (now Whip Media) in 2016, after the company promised it could grow the app’s user base significantly thanks to its Los Angeles ties. When he heard the app was being wound down as 
Whip Media shifted its focus to AI,
 Pinto said he felt sad.

“Sad because TV Time was part of my life for so many years. And sad because this community was like my other family. Reading the community reactions after each episode became a ritual for me, and for many others,” Pinto wrote in a 
blog post
 on the new Bingers website.

“I decided to build the new home where the TV Time community could go. I wanted to rebuild all TV Time[‘s] great features, but also fix everything that always bothered me,” he said. 

Image Credits:
Bingers

Notably, the new Bingers app will address TV Time’s performance issues, which often caused the app to load slowly and made it expensive to run. Pinto claims high server costs led to the shutdown, noting that its premium subscription plan only covered about 10% of those expenses due to the size of its community.

Instead, Bingers has been architected to keep its server costs low, making it more sustainable, Pinto claims. It will also allow the app to respond faster when users mark an episode as watched, even when millions of others are connecting at the same time.

Image Credits:
Bingers

The developer tells TechCrunch that the new app will be available on the App Store and Google Play by the end of July 2026. Until then, the website is 
collecting sign-ups for a waitlist
 that will alert users when the new app is ready for launch.

Of course, Bingers will also be able to import data from users’ TV Time archives, available through the app’s 
GDPR-compliant export tool
 before its removal from the app stores on July 15. By importing users’ archives, Pinto says Bingers will be able to recreate TV Time’s community comments as well.

The archive import is already up and running on the Bingers website, so your TV viewing history will already be available when the app launches on the app stores.

Topics

Apps
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Social
, 
social network
, 
television
, 
TV Time

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Reed Jobs would rather talk about curing cancer than his last name

Connie Loizos

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Feds demand autonomous vehicle companies stop interfering with first responders

Kirsten Korosec

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta
