No one has made a fusion reactor capable of generating power, but physicists have a pretty good road map for how to get there. One major milestone is heating fusion fuel up above 10 million degrees Celsius — nearly as hot as the center of the Sun.

Avalanche
 exclusively told TechCrunch that its 
desktop-scale fusion prototype
 has exceeded the milestone, heating a plasma to roughly 11 million degrees C. Only a handful of companies have accomplished the feat.

Most fusion startups burned through more cash to get there, too. Avalanche said it had spent less than $50 million of venture investment to hit the mark.

Plasma physicists don’t measure the temperature using a thermometer, but instead study the energy of the particles inside the plasma using a metric known as the kiloelectron volt, or kEV. 

The fusion world is always on the lookout for experiments that exceed 1 keV. “That’s hot enough that the world will take notice,” Bob Mumgaard, CEO of Commonwealth Fusion Systems, has 
said
.

Plasma temperatures are one of the key variables that physicists study when assessing a fusion experiment. If a plasma does not get hot enough, its particles have a lower chance of hitting each other, reducing the chances of them fusing into a new atom. But if a plasma is hot enough — and dense enough for long enough — then fusion reactions will occur, releasing large amounts of energy.

The milestone isn’t a guarantee of success, but it does suggest that the startup is on the path toward generating conditions in its reactor that could spark fusion reactions capable of producing more power than they need to start. 

Avalanche’s small-scale prototypes suggest that fusion power might work at smaller scales than its competitors are pursuing. Most fusion startups are designing large reactors capable of generating dozens or hundreds of megawatts of electricity. But if Avalanche can develop a smaller, less expensive fusion power plant, it could challenge a number of other energy technologies, from diesel generators to natural gas turbines.

Avalanche hasn’t published the results in a peer-reviewed journal, though it said the report was validated by a plasma physicist at MIT. 

Most fusion reactors are large devices, but Avalanche decided to go small, in part because smaller devices are easier to iterate. The fusion core of the startup’s recent device, Jyn, is only five inches in diameter. The company said it has updated the device 25 times since last fall.

Topics

Avalanche Energy
, 
Climate
, 
Exclusive
, 
fusion power

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
