Vibe coding startup 
Superblocks
 announced a multi-year joint marketing agreement with Amazon Web Services (AWS) that enables its tool to be embedded within the private clouds of AWS customers.

That means an enterprise on AWS that subscribes to Superblocks will be able to offer vibe coding to the company’s business users, and those apps will not send data or information externally to model providers or databases. The apps will spin up Amazon Aurora databases within the company’s private cloud, not, for instance, create external 
Supabase databases, the vibe-coding database of choice. 

The apps will also integrate with 
Amazon Bedrock
, the cloud giant’s AI app development/AI gateway/inference platform. Essentially, these apps will automatically fall under IT’s management and security, rather than be rogue applications.

“We’re going to bring it to your data inside your private cloud,” Superblocks co-founder and CEO Brad Menezes tells TechCrunch of vibe coding. “The big thing about that is data never leaves. … It’s their AWS account and basically secure with all of the auditing, all of the encryption, all of the network controls.”

AWS will also help sell Superblocks to enterprises as it does for many of its Marketplace partners. “We support partners where we see strong customer demand and alignment with how customers want to build,” an AWS spokesperson tells TechCrunch.

Still, AWS does not yet have its own vibe-coding agent aimed at business users. It has Kiro, an AI coding agent aimed at developers, but it’s not a vibe coder. Amazon also has an AI assistant, Quick, for business users. But again, that’s more like a Claude Cowork or Microsoft Copilot, rather than a Lovable or Replit.

So this should be a nice boost for early-stage Superblocks, which has 50 employees and raised 
a total of $60 million as of its Series A
, announced in May 2025, backed by Spark Capital, Kleiner Perkins, Meritech Capital, and Greenoaks.

Yet, it’s actually a more significant symbol than that. It’s part of a growing trend where the hyperscaler cloud providers urge their enterprise customers to separate their AI models from all the other scaffolding needed to run enterprise AI and do so on their clouds. They want enterprises to buy AI harnesses (aka agentic apps), AI orchestration, security tools, and the like from them, and not from the frontier providers.

In the past few weeks, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella has been banging the drum with exactly that message. He’s been telling his many enterprise customers to 
use multiple models to reduce costs and avoid lock-in
. He’s also been preaching that the 
AI labs are not trustworthy enough
 to turn to for agent orchestration or app-level harnesses because they may use that data to study a business and 
later compete
 with it.

Enterprises perhaps don’t need such warnings. They have already decided to adopt multiple models, particularly frontier Chinese open-weight options. “That is flipped because 60 days ago they were like, I want a specific model. It’s called Anthropic,” Menezes adds.

Open models, for instance, accounted for 29% of all traffic routed 
through Vercel’s AI gateway
 last month, a popular tool among enterprises to manage multi-model AI use.

Then, by necessity, all of their AI scaffolding can’t be tied to one provider. 

“Having a multi-model strategy across big frontier labs, OpenAI, Anthropic, and open source — and I’d say Chinese open source right now, but also U.S. open source is now starting to come up. It’s a must-have for the CIO,” he says. They want model choice for coding as well as customer service, HR, [and] sales automation, he adds.

Menezes says the movement is so strong, he predicts that “any enterprise that is betting on a single model provider, that executive will be fired.”

So now, we’re seeing the cloud providers bring vibe coding for business users into private, secure clouds, too. That’s like a potential second wave after bringing AI coding agents for enterprise developers. “It’s an emerging category with real momentum, and exactly the kind of innovation we support,” AWS tells TechCrunch.

Topics

AI
, 
AWS
, 
Startups
, 
TC
, 
vibe coding

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Data centers may face temporary power cuts to prevent blackouts on largest US grid

Tim De Chant
