Where most energy storage companies look for big tracts of land near large connections to the grid, Base Power is betting that it can beat them all by putting batteries in people’s backyards instead.

It appears to be paying off, with 
Base Power
 installing more than 500 megawatt-hours of storage over the past few years. The startup announced today that it has raised another $1 billion 
less than a year
 after its last billion-dollar round.

The Series D values the company at a $13 billion post-money valuation. Base Power is installing about 100 batteries per day, 
according
 to The Wall Street Journal report, and it hopes to double that by the end of the year. That works out to about 8 megawatt-hours of storage installed per day.

Base Power also rolled out a new version of its home battery today, called Base Core. The device is built at its Austin, Texas factory, and it can store 39.2 kilowatt-hours of electricity, significantly more than those of its competitors. Customers can choose either one or two batteries. Base Power operates in Texas and Illinois.

The round arrives as electricity demand has been skyrocketing due to economy-wide electrification and the rapid pace of AI data center construction.

Over the last several years, the U.S. electrical grid has expanded after decades of stagnation. The surge in demand has 
strained the grid
 in many locations, 
most notably PJM
, which hosts a large number of data centers. Portions of Illinois, where Base Power operates, are part of PJM’s territory.

Rather than charge thousands of dollars up front, as most home battery installers do, Base Power offers its batteries the device on a subscription basis. In the Houston area, for example, Base Power charges customers $695 to install a single battery, $19 per month, and 13.1 cents per kilowatt-hour for electricity, which is about the going rate in the region. Base Power, which owns the battery, sells stored electricity back to the grid during periods of high demand. Such services can pay handsomely. 

In regulated markets, Base Power works with utilities to place batteries in customers’ homes to alleviate strain on the local grid. In both regulated and deregulated markets, homeowners can use the batteries to power their homes in case of blackouts. At nearly 40 kilowatt-hours, the batteries can provide backup power for a day or more.

The new round was led by Ribbit, Addition, Valor Equity Partners, and JPMorganChase’s Strategic Investment Group with participation from Altimeter, D1 Capital Partners, Sands Capital, Coatue, Layer Global, and Energy Impact Partners, Thrive Capital, a16z, Lightspeed, Trust Ventures, CapitalG, and others. Base Power was co-founded by Zach Dell, who serves as CEO. His father, Dell CEO Michael Dell, did not participate in the round.

Topics

Base Power
, 
Climate
, 
energy storage

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Data centers may face temporary power cuts to prevent blackouts on largest US grid

Tim De Chant
