In Brief

Posted:

4:30 AM PDT · August 4, 2026

Image Credits:
Airtable /

Ivan Mehta

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

In its first acquisition since going public last month, Bending Spoons on Tuesday said that it has agreed to buy spreadsheet and database startup Airtable for $1.28 billion in cash. 

Founded in 2013, Airtable has so far raised over $1.4 billion over multiple funding rounds. At its peak, during the boom days of 2021, it was valued at over $11 billion, but earlier this year, its shares were said to be 
trading on the secondary markets at a valuation of $4 billion
. 

With its current net cash-and-cash-equivalents balance, Airtable is now valued at about $2.25 billion, Bending Spoons said.

“Airtable is a pioneering brand reshaping how teams organize data and manage critical workflows. The value being delivered is reflected in annual recurring revenue growing over 20% YoY to approximately $480 million as of June 2026, and joining forces with Bending Spoons will accelerate innovation even further,” Bending Spoons’ founder Luca Ferrrai said in a statement.

In January, Airtable unveiled 
a new product line
 under the Superagent moniker: an orchestration platform that can help users spin up a team of AI agents to do tasks. The company’s CEO, Howie Liu, said at the time that Airtable serves over 500,000 organizations, including 80% of the Fortune 100.

Bending Spoons, which went public at 
an $18 billion valuation in July
, typically acquires companies that are trading at a decent discount to their private valuations, trims the staff, streamlines products, and tries to make them run profitably. 

The company has so far acquired several notable brands, including Evernote, 
WeTransfer
, 
EventBrite
 and 
Vimeo
.

Topics

Acquisitions
, 
Airtable
, 
Bending Spoons
, 
Fundraising
, 
Startups

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Startups

AWS is helping vibe-coding startup Superblocks, and the implications are big

Julie Bort

	17 hours ago

Apps

Wispr Flow is preparing to launch a meeting notetaker, updated terms suggest

Ivan Mehta

	21 hours ago

AI

A Marc Benioff-backed startup thinks AI can solve the AI deployment problem

Tim Fernholz

	1 day ago

Latest in Fundraising

In Brief

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

	2 hours ago

In Brief

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

	20 hours ago

In Brief

Fresh off its Wiz payout, Index Ventures raises $2B across three funds

Marina Temkin

	4 days ago
