In Brief

Posted:

8:16 AM PDT · July 9, 2026

Image Credits:
Thomas Fuller/SOPA Images/LightRocket / Getty Images

Aisha Malik

Block reaches $45M settlement with 46 states over Cash App fraud probe

Block has 
agreed to pay $45 million
 to settle claims brought by 46 U.S. states alleging that its peer-to-peer payments app, Cash App, failed to adequately protect users from fraud.

State attorneys general said they found that Block misled users by falsely advertising that Cash App provided bank-like protections, including advanced fraud detection. Block denied wrongdoing. 

According to the states, Cash App allowed users to create accounts without a Social Security number or date of birth, and didn’t place limits on the number of accounts a person could open, making it easier for scammers to exploit the platform. The states also alleged that because Cash App didn’t provide an official customer support phone number, many users who were locked out of their accounts turned to fake customer service numbers that were operated by scammers. 

Many Americans rely on fintech apps as their banking services, which has led to increased oversight. Block’s settlement marks the latest chapter in regulators’ scrutiny of Cash App’s business practices. It follows earlier action by 
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
, which had 
similarly accused Block
 of failing to investigate fraud claims or provide adequate customer service, resulting in $175 million in penalties and other redress to consumers.

Under the new settlement, Block will improve Cash App’s fraud prevention measures and customer service, including by providing live customer support for users of the mobile payments platform.

News of the settlement was first reported by 
Reuters
. Block did not immediately respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment.

Topics

Apps
, 
block
, 
Cash App
, 
Government & Policy
, 
In Brief

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Apps

‘Slow-cial’ app Roost forces you to slow down to the speed of a carrier pigeon

Amanda Silberling

	21 hours ago

Apps

Google Photos adds a new AI ‘Video Remix’ tool

Aisha Malik

	22 hours ago

Apps

Venus Williams-backed WeWard can now lock your apps until you hit your steps

Amanda Silberling

	1 day ago

Latest in Apps

In Brief

Block reaches $45M settlement with 46 states over Cash App fraud probe

Aisha Malik

	58 minutes ago

AI

Anthropic’s new Claude feature is quietly selling you on AI

Sarah Perez

	1 hour ago

AI

Character.AI enters the microdrama arena with its own productions, but there’s a twist

Ivan Mehta

	3 hours ago
