Decentralized social network Bluesky was one of the bigger beneficiaries of the 
exodus from Elon Musk’s X in November 2024,
 following the U.S. elections. But now, nearly two years later, the social network and would-be X competitor is struggling to hold on to its momentum.

According to data from digital intelligence provider 
Similarweb
, Bluesky’s mobile app had 10.4 million monthly active users worldwide in June 2026, down 27.2% year-over-year. In addition, mobile daily active users continued to decline, falling 25.6% year-over-year in July to around 3 million.

Image Credits:
Similarweb

Image Credits:
Similarweb

These declines indicate that even though Bluesky’s app continues to add registered accounts, fewer people are using its mobile app on a regular basis. It also suggests that some of those who joined Bluesky due to their dissatisfaction with X post-elections haven’t stuck around long-term. 

But the bigger takeaway here is not just that Bluesky’s post-election bump has shrunk. Bluesky’s app has lost more than half its monthly active users from its late-2024 high, which means that its app usage continued to shrink even after the initial post-election surge subsided. (Its quarterly average was around 22.1 million monthly active users in the fourth quarter of 2024, Similarweb’s data indicates, and it declined to 10.7 million in the second quarter of 2026. That’s a decline of around 52%.)

Building beyond Bluesky

While Bluesky’s numbers are down, those who stuck around are committed. Its smaller community remains relatively active, with a stickiness rate (the ratio of daily to monthly active users) of roughly 29% in June, about the same as Threads.

For 
Bluesky’s new CEO, Toni Schneider,
 these numbers may not be as concerning. The company is not entirely focused on making Bluesky (the app) succeed, but on making it possible for the underlying protocol (AT Proto) to power a growing number of social apps, services, and communities. That’s something that is now taking place, as projects like BlackSky and Eurosky are growing, while some AT Proto apps 
like the video-focused Skylight
 have found early traction, too. 

In addition, the company has launched new products, like the 
AI-powered research tool Attie
, and is now working on adding support for private data to Bluesky. The latter could generate new interest in Bluesky from a different type of user — those less interested in the public square, and more interested in private networking and communities. 

Bluesky’s Attie
Image Credits:
Bluesky (screenshot)

What’s more, Similarweb’s data doesn’t necessarily suggest that Bluesky users have returned to X, as some may have feared.  

Instead, the data shows that X’s worldwide monthly active users on mobile were down around 3% year-over-year in June, and X’s mobile daily active users dropped 7% in July to 123.7 million. (Of course, X remains a sizable social network with around 302 million monthly active users on its app as of June 2026 and a growing number of web visits, up 5.3% year-over-year in July to 4.7 billion.)

If anything, the app to now be concerned about is Threads. It’s unclear whether Threads is benefiting from Bluesky’s falling engagement, or if it has managed to attract a new set of people who had never used a Twitter-like service.

In any event, the Meta-owned app’s daily active users were up 21.3% year-over-year to 147 million in July 2026, and its website visits were up 112% year-over-year to 471.6 million.

Bluesky’s 
own public stats indicate
 the company now has nearly 46 million registered users, but it 
doesn’t share
 specific data on daily or monthly active usage.

Topics

Apps
, 
Bluesky
, 
Open Web
, 
Social
, 
social media

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
