Social network Bluesky 
launched
 support for group chats on Thursday, another feature designed to make the app more competitive with its larger competitor, X.

While Elon Musk-owned X recently doubled down on chats with the launch of a 
stand-alone XChat app
, Bluesky is only now catching up by offering a way for groups to interact more privately on its platform.

The feature, which is 
arriving
 in the latest version of the social app (v1.124), is one of the first to deliver on Bluesky’s plan to focus more on communities, rather than trying to be a social network where people post solely to reach a wider public audience.

That’s a notable shift in strategy, and one that arrives as Bluesky’s overall growth has slowed. Today, the network reaches 
some 44.8 million
 registered users, compared with X’s 
600 million
 monthly active users. If Bluesky can’t reach the scale of competitors like X or Meta’s Threads, it may need to find new ways to make its app attractive to would-be users, including by offering different forms of social connection.

Screenshot
Image Credits:
Bluesky

The startup 
added support for messaging in 2024,
 but it only more recently began offering 
encrypted chats
, and only by integrating the third-party messaging service Germ. Now, Bluesky is offering support for group chats of up to 50 people, its announcement states.

That’s smaller than 
X’s support for 1,000 members
, but it’s a start. And the company says it may increase this limit in the future.

Group chat creators can manage their chats however they like and can decide who is allowed to participate, the company noted. They can generate an invite link that can be shared across the web, including in Bluesky posts where it’s displayed as an embedded card. 

Chat participants, meanwhile, can control who’s allowed to invite them to chats — everyone, only people they follow, or no one. The default setting will be “only people you follow,” unless users select a different choice for DMs.

Sharing media in group chats is not yet supported, as it will require additional safety and moderation systems, Bluesky says.

Image Credits:
Bluesky

In a series of 
recent posts
 from Bluesky’s head of product, Alex Benzer spoke about how Bluesky will be working to make its app more community-focused in the days ahead.

“Today, Bluesky is one big space. Communities will be smaller spaces inside that where you can go deeper and hang out with people who care about the same stuff,” he wrote. Benzer also explained that the goal was to build more community features on the underlying protocol (AT Proto) with support from the wider developer ecosystem.

“On Bluesky, you’ll be able to create communities, join them, post in them, and get updates,” Benzer added. 

The timing is particularly notable given that X announced in April that it 
was shutting down its Communities feature
 because of low usage and too much spam. Bluesky, seemingly, is trying to pick up where X left off by catering to those who want more control and ownership over their online community experience.

For instance, Benzer noted that communities on Bluesky will get their own handle that doubles as a URL, like community-name.bsky.social or community-name.bsky.space. They’ll also be able to be set it as either public, invite-only, or private, similar to the options available on Facebook Groups or Reddit.

Image Credits:
Bluesky

With communities, Bluesky is ultimately betting that people are looking for an exit from platforms operated by Big Tech players, and could be enticed to explore more open technologies where they feel they have more control over the experience (and won’t have their account 
disabled by rogue AI moderation systems
!).

Along with group chats, the updated version of Bluesky is also offering a new way to share profiles via a personalized QR code, similar to other social apps.

Topics

Apps
, 
Bluesky
, 
open social
, 
Social
, 
social media
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
