Brad Lightcap, one of the longest-serving executives at OpenAI, is leaving the powerful AI lab to “start something new.”

In an internal message that 
Lightcap shared online Tuesday
, the outgoing executive told OpenAI staff that it was “bittersweet to share that I’ll be moving on from OpenAI to start something new.”

Lightcap, who joined the company in 2018, spent four years as OpenAI’s chief financial officer. He then ascended to chief operating officer, where he served from 2022 until earlier this year when, amidst a shakeup of executive roles, 
he transitioned
 to lead special projects at the company. Prior to OpenAI, Lightcap also 
worked with
 CEO Sam Altman at venture capital firm Y Combinator.

“I had the privilege of building the first versions of most of our operations and business teams – from Finance to Legal, People, CorpSec, GTM/Gov, Partnerships, and more,” Lightcap wrote in his message Tuesday. “Among the most rewarding parts of this journey for me has been watching each of these teams mature under brilliant leaders.” 

In his note, Lightcap also looked ahead and hinted at a future venture while giving scant details as to what it might be. 

“Over the last few months, I’ve been focused on the next horizon and what would stand in the way of mission success,” Lightcap said. “I believe there are a few important new things the world will need to get right as we enter this next period. I’ll have more to share soon, but I believe in OpenAI more than ever and am excited to help you all advance the mission from a different vantage point.”

As OpenAI preps for an 
IPO of industrywide significance
, the company has been undergoing a shakeup of top-level executives. In July, the company’s No. 2 executive, Fidji Simo, who led AGI development, 
announced
 she would be stepping down. Other executives from less central areas of the company — including 
Bill Peebles
, who formerly headed the company’s now dead 
video generator Sora
, and 
Kevin Weil
, the vice president of the company’s Science vertical — have also recently left the firm.

Topics

AI
, 
Brad Lightcap
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
