Chrome alternative Brave just added a good reason to make the switch to its browser: email aliases. The feature, 
announced
 this week, allows Brave’s users to sign up for websites and other online services without having to share their personal email addresses.

To use the feature, you first need to create an account with Brave, where you can provide your real email address. Then, once logged into the browser, you’ll see a pop-up appear when clicking an email field on a website, offering the option to use an alias instead. (If the pop-up doesn’t appear, just right-click on the field to access the option.) The email alias will be filled in on the website’s form, and any emails coming to that address will be forwarded to your primary email account.

Image Credits:
Brave

The company explains that using an alias can protect your privacy, particularly because websites use your email as a personal identifier, allowing them to target you for ads. Ad tech giants like Meta are also able to match the email you provided to a retailer’s website, for instance, with the address they have on file for you, allowing these companies to track what you bought or viewed.

Plus, if any website where you shared your email gets hacked, the hackers will then know your primary email address, and this information can be leaked and shared with data brokers.

Brave says it built the new feature to plug this privacy hole, adding that it doesn’t read the contents of emails sent to an alias — it only processes them for spam and virus filtering. After the email is forwarded, Brave deletes it from its servers. All data in users’ Brave accounts is also encrypted at rest, and any notes you save alongside an alias are stored locally on your device, unless you turn on the sync option. If syncing is enabled, notes will be encrypted end-to-end.

As the email alias feature is still new, Brave cautioned that some of the forwarded mail may initially go to your spam folder, but this should improve as Brave builds up its reputation score as a mail provider. 

For the time being, Brave users are being offered five free email aliases. More will be available for Premium plan users in the future. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Brave
, 
browsers
, 
Privacy

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Nvidia closes in on Hugging Face acquisition

Connie Loizos

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Hugging Face reportedly in talks to be acquired for $13B

Rebecca Bellan

Who’s behind the new ‘stealth model’ Ox Alpha?

Anthony Ha

Flock CEO calls for ‘compromise’ as surveillance company faces growing backlash

Anthony Ha

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim
