Battery materials startup Sila 
announced
 Tuesday that it raised $300 million to expand its factory in Washington State to produce enough anode material for more than 100,000 EVs.

Sila
’s expansion arrives as electric vehicle demand in the U.S. has softened in the wake of the Trump administration’s efforts to hamstring the propulsion technology. While sales 
remain depressed
 in the U.S., down this year relative to 2025 when demand spiked before the sunset of tax credits, EVs are taking a bigger slice of the market elsewhere. 
According
 to Benchmark Minerals Intelligence, global sales are up 27% year over year.

Sila previously announced deals to supply its anode material to 
Mercedes
 and 
Panasonic
. It also sells to consumer electronics companies such as Whoop as well as drone manufacturers, and satellite companies.

Most lithium-ion batteries today using graphite anodes, and Chinese companies control about three-quarters of the supply chain, 
according
 to Benchmark Minerals Intelligence. That has spurred automakers outside of China to search for alternatives that aren’t subject to tariffs.

Sila’s anode material is one of the few alternatives that’s available in sufficient quantity.

In addition to being an alternative to Chinese graphite, Sila’s anode material can store up to 40% more energy than traditional graphite anodes. It can also charge faster. Sila has been developing the material for the last 15 years. Its founder and CEO, Gene Berdichevsky, previously worked at Tesla, where he was the seventh employee.

The startup began production at its Moses Lake, Washington plant 
in September
. The factory is capable of making up to 2 gigawatt-hours of silicon-carbon anode material. The expansion will allow the plant to produce tens of gigawatt-hours per year, enough to power more than 100,000 EVs.

While EVs are the biggest user of lithium-ion batteries, energy storage systems have been taking a bigger piece of the market as demand for electricity grows. AI data centers have become a major buyers of grid-scale batteries. The packs can serve as backup power sources, help trim peak demand charges, and allow for around-the-clock use of solar and wind power.

The new round was led by Atreides Management and Sutter Hill Ventures with participation from 8VC, Bessemer Venture Partners, Matrix Partners, and funds and accounts advised by T. Rowe Price Associates Inc. Sila previously raised about $1.3 billion across previous rounds, according to PitchBook.

Topics

Climate
, 
lithium ion batteries
, 
Sila
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Microsoft patches bug in video game Age of Empires II

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan
