Note-taking has quickly turned into a critical part of the productivity space, with many workplace software companies chasing the dream of having AI automate tasks based on action items created from meeting transcripts. Calendly, known for its scheduling and meeting booking software, is now entering the fray with a note-taking product.

Like others in the space, Calendly’s note-taker also joins meetings, records the audio and video, and transcribes it, after which it can generate a summary and action items, and draft follow-up emails. The company said it is also testing a Granola-like feature that uses system audio to transcribe meetings.

Calendly is also planning to release an AI assistant named Callie that taps the company’s existing meeting and scheduling stack to set up meetings, check peoples’ availability, and surface context from prior meetings. (Meeting note-taking startup Read AI launched 
a similar email-based assistant earlier this year
.)

Calendly CEO Tope Awotona said the company wanted to automate workflows for its top users: people in outward-facing roles like sales and marketing whose workday is typically inundated with meetings.

But the competition in this space is intense. On one end, you have meeting note-taking apps like 
Granola
, 
Fireflies
, 
Read AI
, 
Otter
, and 
Fathom
; on the other, productivity companies like Notion, ClickUp, and Wispr have also added note-taking assistants and features to their suites.

Still, Awotona says there’s big opportunity in automating tasks after the meeting is transcribed.

“There’s a litany of note-takers, and all of them do a great job of recording and transcribing notes. But a lot of work happens after the meetings. And we think that really that’s where the opportunity for our note-takers to be efficient,” he said.

Given that some companies in this space, like 
Otter
 and 
Granola
, are facing allegations of violating privacy, Awotona said Calendly’s note-taker will inform users that their meeting is being recorded. The recording assistant sends a message in the chat to inform everyone of its presence and activity, and any user can ask the app to leave the conversation. It can even inform people before the meeting starts that the call will be recorded, thanks to its integration with Calendly’s scheduling system.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
calendly
, 
Meeting notetakers

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic set AI agents loose on the same task. They started a turf war.

Rebecca Bellan

Instagram introduces a redesigned wordmark

Sarah Perez

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek
