In Brief

Posted:

2:06 PM PDT · July 26, 2026

Image Credits:
Justin Sullivan 
(opens in a new window)
 / Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Can Apple make smart glasses that aren’t a constant privacy threat?

As Apple prepares to launch its first smart glasses, the company is also wrestling with how to address consumer privacy concerns, 
according to Bloomberg’s Mark Gurman
.

Gurman reports that Apple has pushed back the launch target from early 2027, with the glasses now set for unveiling at the Worldwide Developers Conference in June 2027 and actually becoming available by the end of the year. That delay allows Apple to work on the product itself, and on the messaging around privacy.

It sounds like the company has noticed the concerns around Meta’s smart glasses — sometimes decried as “pervert glasses” — being 
used to make non-consensual video recordings
. That could be a bigger issue for Apple, which constantly emphasizes privacy in its marketing.

Among other things, Apple will reportedly try to emphasize privacy-friendly features like on-device processing, as well as the absence of facial recognition. The company will likely steer clear of using customer recordings to train AI models, and it’s unlikely to follow Meta’s 
reported practice of using contractors to review customer footage
.

Topics

Apple
, 
Gadgets
, 
Hardware

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

TechCrunch Mobility: Uber bets on its former CEO

Kirsten Korosec

	6 hours ago

AI

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

	1 day ago

AI

I tried out OpenAI’s new AI keypad — which will be fun for some coders and slightly mystifying to everyone else

Lucas Ropek

	2 days ago

Latest in Gadgets

In Brief

Can Apple make smart glasses that aren’t a constant privacy threat?

Anthony Ha

	30 minutes ago

Gadgets

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

	Jul 21, 2026

Hardware

Can an Apple lawsuit derail OpenAI’s hardware plans?

Anthony Ha

	Jul 19, 2026
