The AI boom has been built on a basic assumption: Bigger models are more powerful, and the most powerful models win. Now, the industry is about to learn what happens if that assumption starts to break.  

Mounting costs have already pressured users to give smaller and cheaper models a second look. This 
cost-conscious model-shopping
 is new and it’s unclear how it will affect the industry, but the impact is likely to be significant. 

One prediction, laid out best by Coinbase co-founder Brian Armstrong, is that it will result in the vast majority of tasks shifting to cheaper models. 

“[D]emand for intelligence is near infinite, but 80% of workloads will be running on 99% cheaper models within 12-18 months,” Armstrong 
wrote on X
. “20% of workloads will still run on latest gen models where IQ maxing is important.” 

It’s hard to overstate what a significant shift it will be for the AI industry if Armstrong’s prediction comes true.  

Before now, most AI companies have competed on quality, which has meant defaulting to the most advanced available model. If those same jobs can be handled by cheaper models without affecting quality, it would mean a massive shift in the economics of AI. And critically, much of the savings would be coming out of the pockets of the big labs, dealing a financial blow to OpenAI and Anthropic just as they’re heading for their IPOs. 

It’s a potentially seismic change in the industry, resting on one basic question: Are companies ready to switch to smaller models? 

Initial tests suggest that, when the system is arranged right, cheaper models could sub in without any sacrifice in quality. In a recent test by the legal AI tool Harvey, the company was able to reduce inference costs by 3x without reducing quality. The test, 
performed in partnership
 with the inference platform Fireworks AI, combined Claude Opus and Fireworks’ GLM 5.1, and shifted to Opus for the most intensive tasks. The result was a significantly lower load in terms of server time and overall cost. 

“Quality comes first, and in legal it always will,” Harvey co-founder Gabe Pereyra told TechCrunch, referring to the AI legal services his startup provides. “However, the definition of quality is evolving from simply using the most powerful model for everything, to using the best model that gets the right answer most efficiently.”

This trend is often framed in terms of major labs versus Chinese models or open-weight ones, but that misses the bigger point. The real divide isn’t between proprietary and open models; it’s between large models and small ones. You can save money by switching from GPT-5.5 to DeepSeek’s V4 Flash, but switching to GPT-5.4-mini works just as well.  

There’s an active price war going on between in-house inference from the big labs and independently served open-weight models. For the bigger question of small versus large, it doesn’t really matter which kind of small model wins out.  

All of this might seem obvious — of course you shouldn’t use more compute than necessary — but it runs counter to the scaling-first approach that has dominated the industry until now. Inspired by 
the bitter lesson
, labs have leaned hard into training the most compute-intensive models possible, pushing the frontier of what AI models can do. With prices heavily subsidized by investors, clients had no reason to choose anything but the most advanced option. 

With token prices rising and subsidies slowing down, users are facing cost pressure for the first time. We don’t know whether the new cost pressure will actually drive enterprise users to smaller models. They could just as easily economize by making fewer calls, using less context, or simply giving up on the least promising deployments. 

But if it turns out that most deployments can be run just as well on a smaller model, it could put a serious damper on the growing demand for inference — and raise new questions about how to justify the cost of training a frontier model. 

Topics

AI
, 
ai models
, 
Anthropic
, 
Harvey
, 
OpenAI
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Russell Brandom	

AI Editor

		Russell Brandom has been covering the tech industry since 2012, with a focus on platform policy and emerging technologies. He previously worked at The Verge and Rest of World, and has written for Wired, The Awl and MIT’s Technology Review.
 He can be reached at russell.brandom@techcrunch.com or on Signal at 412-401-5489.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
