The next era of social media might not be defined by a platform — it could be written by a protocol. That’s the bet Bluesky is making, and at 
TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
, two of its leaders steering that bet will make their case in person. 

Toni Schneider became Bluesky’s permanent CEO after leading the company on an interim basis since March. He’s joined by COO Rose Wang, who has been with the company since 2021, for a Disrupt Stage session on whether social media can start over and where Bluesky fits into that potential reboot. 

For founders building consumer products, the stakes couldn’t be higher. If social media is entering a new era, it creates opportunities for entirely new products, business models, and communities to emerge. 

This discussion — among many others, as well as a wealth of networking opportunities and front-row access to the Startup Battlefield competition — can be seen 
only in San Francisco from October 13-15 at Moscone West
. And no matter your role within the startup community, 
we have a ticket option to match
. Act swiftly before prices rise later this month! 

Why this moment matters for Bluesky, and the social web 

Bluesky, along with many of the scrappy platforms that reemerged or 
were established in the wake of Twitter’s transformation into X
, is in a transitional moment. As the incumbents have entrenched themselves, Bluesky and similar platforms remain a test of whether networks built upon open protocols can retain communities and potentially claw market share away from competitors. 

To that end, 
Bluesky’s founding CEO, Jay Graber, recently pivoted toward becoming chief innovation officer
, saying Bluesky needed “a seasoned operator focused on scaling and execution.” Enter Schneider, who took on full-time CEO duties following a four-month interim period.  

“We’re at the very beginning of this story, with a decade of exciting work ahead to build an open web that reflects the full richness of how people connect, communicate, and build livelihoods together,” 
he wrote in his announcement post
. At Disrupt, we’ll see how the first steps toward that decade are progressing. 

Rose’s perspective, informed by having been with Bluesky since late 2021, along with a past role leading customer experience at Forethought AI, is that a focus on users is a part of that rebuild. 

She asserted at SXSW London earlier this year that there’s an increasing need for human-to-human connection to return after a deluge of AI-filled feeds. And that shift in user need gives Bluesky an opportunity. “Facebook and Twitter are huge, and they have tons of users, so for them to turn the shift is really difficult. Also, they’re basically AI companies at this point,” 
Rose said
. 

To hear that level of candor in person, and to join the 10,000+ founders, investors, and technologists at 
Disrupt 2026
 on October 13-15, 
grab your ticket today and ensure you get the best available price
. 

Learn more about Disrupt 2026

Check out Disrupt’s headline speakers

Everything founders should know about Disrupt

Get the best hotel deals ahead of Disrupt

How to host your own Side Event at Disrupt

Take part in Disrupt and learn how to exhibit your startup

Topics

Bluesky
, 
Social
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Morgan Little	

Director of Audience Development

Morgan Little is TechCrunch’s Director of Audience Development, having joined the team in 2023. He helps steer the site’s efforts across social media, SEO, newsletters and external partners, and is based in San Francisco.

In prior roles, Morgan led the audience teams for sites like CNET and GameSpot, juggled social media and political reporting for the Los Angeles Times and had a stint at marketing agencies that has given him a fear of timesheets. 

He’s worked within the space long enough to have professionally run a Tumblr account, and still has Peach downloaded on his phone.

You can contact or verify outreach from Morgan by emailing 
morgan.little@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

Google co-founder Sergey Brin has now spent $100 million to fight the billionaire tax

Amanda Silberling

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker
