Three years ago, Sequoia partner David Cahn was one of the first people to do the math and put a number on the implications of Silicon Valley’s titanic spend on AI infrastructure.

In 
2023
, he was reacting to Nvidia’s reported annual GPU revenue of $50 billion. Starting with that figure, and adding in the implied costs of operating the data centers and the margins for their operators, he deduced that $200 billion in revenue would be required to pay back the up-front investment.

He took it as a challenge, asking entrepreneurs to come up with AI products and services to make use of, and generate revenue from, all that infrastructure. Fast forward to today, adding up three years of hyperscaling, and Cahn’s got a 
new number
 on AI infrastructure spending for 2026: $1.5 trillion.

All told, he calculates that the AI industry will have to earn $3 trillion to justify all those chips and other data center expenditures. And that’s probably an underestimate—the rising costs of memory and the increasing use of exotic or inference-specific chips will drive that number up. “Recently,” he writes, “the required revenue per GW of CapEx has sharply increased due to these bottleneck dynamics and rising costs of construction.”

On the other side of the ledger, Anthropic is thought to have hit 
$60 billion in ARR
, while OpenAI reportedly earned 
$13 billion
 in 2025 (although in 
November 2025, it said it was at $20 billion ARR
) and is presumably making more this year. But there’s clearly a large gap to be closed.

Someone minding that gap is Torsten Slok, the chief economist at Apollo, the giant asset manager. In a 
recent note
, he points out that the hyperscalers — Google, Meta, Microsoft and Amazon — are all predicting massive accelerations in their free-cash flow in 2028. That is, they expect to see the pay-back from all those chips they bought.

Image Credits:
Torsten Slok/Apollo / Torsten Slok/Apollo

What if they don’t? Slok notes a risk we’re currently seeing across AI usage: More organizations turning to cheaper open weight models, often Chinese, not those built by the frontier labs, and overall token prices falling. OpenAI’s latest model, per CEO Sam Altman, is 
54% more token efficient
 on coding tasks. That’s good for users fretting about the cost of their AI agents, but it may be bad for companies building token factories should users not wildly increase their overall token usage with them.

Image Credits:
Torsten Slok/Apollo / Torsten Slok/Apollo

Slok worries that if hyperscalers don’t meet their cash flow goals, the market reaction could be severe—
“with so much riding on so few names,” he writes, “a slower payoff wouldn’t just be a sector problem, it would risk tipping the economy into recession and the S&P 500 into a correction.”

Just something to keep in mind keep in mind as you’re herding your AI agents toward cheaper tokens.

Topics

AI
, 
apollo
, 
CAPEX
, 
Sequioa

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim Fernholz	

Senior Reporter

		Tim Fernholz is a journalist who writes about technology, finance and public policy. He has closely covered the rise of the private space industry and is the author of 
 Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and the New Space Race.
 Formerly, he was a senior reporter at Quartz, the global business news site, for more than a decade, and began his career as a political reporter in Washington, D.C. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing tim.fernholz@techcrunch.com or via an encrypted message to tim_fernholz.21 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant
