Hundreds of thousands of people are receiving letters notifying them that their medical records were stolen in a cyberattack at U.S. health tech giant CareCloud earlier this year, as new details about the data breach come to light.

The company has said little about the breach since March, when it 
first admitted that hackers had raided one of its six stores of patient data
. New disclosures seen by TechCrunch offer the clearest picture of the breach so far, including that nearly 350,000 people have been affected so far.

The New Jersey-based CareCloud stores patient records for more than 45,000 providers across the U.S., including doctors’ offices, hospitals, and other medical practices. As such, the company handles a large amount of sensitive medical and billing data on millions of healthcare patients across the country.

According to 
a data breach notice filed
 with California’s attorney general’s office this week, CareCloud said hackers had access to one of its electronic health record data stores for at least six days, between March 10 and March 16. The company said a hacker “claimed to have exfiltrated data from databases.” The company did not say how the hackers made the claim, but it’s not uncommon for hackers to share samples of stolen data with victims alongside a ransom demand to prevent it from being published online.

TechCrunch is unaware of any ransomware or extortion group publicly taking credit for the data breach at CareCloud.

The notice said little about the hack beyond its 
initial March 27 disclosure
 to regulators, but confirmed TechCrunch’s earlier report that the hackers broke into the company’s data storage hosted on Amazon Web Services.

TechCrunch has learned that the data breach affects at least 345,000 people across the United States, according to listings with several attorneys general, including those in New Hampshire, Massachusetts, and Texas. TechCrunch has also obtained CareCloud’s disclosure filed with Maine’s attorney general. 

The number of affected people is likely to rise as more disclosures are filed with state authorities. 

The notices confirm that CareCloud notified authorities that the stolen data included people’s names, postal addresses, and Social Security numbers, as well as government-issued identification numbers, such as passports and driver’s licenses. The notices also say that the stolen data included financial information, such as bank account information and payment card numbers, alongside a wealth of medical and health-related information.

CareCloud chief executive Stephen Snyder did not respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment or to questions about the incident.

The cyberattack targeting CareCloud is the latest in a series of breaches targeting healthcare providers this year, including one at healthcare revenue tech giant TriZetto that 
affected 3.4 million people
, and a month-long breach at New York’s public health provider NYC Health + Hospitals, in which 
hackers stole 1.8 million people’s health data
 and thousands of employees’ fingerprint scans.

Last week, U.K.-based tech provider Craneware, which provides accounting and billing software to thousands of U.S. healthcare providers, confirmed 
hackers stole a “significant volume” of its customers’ data
 from its servers, raising concerns about a breach involving patient data.

Do you know more about CareCloud’s data breach? Do you work at CareCloud and know about its security practices? Contact this reporter via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal.

Topics

Biotech & Health
, 
cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
data breach
, 
electronic health records
, 
healthcare
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
