Hackers have stolen the personal information and medical records of more than 3.75 million people in a data breach at health data giant CareCloud, the company has confirmed with federal regulators. The disclosure marks the first confirmation of the scale of the data breach, which is now confirmed to be the fifth-largest theft of health data in 2026 so far.

CareCloud detailed the March data breach in a filing with the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) on Monday. The number of affected victims was 
reportedly revised up
 in an update on Tuesday, though it’s unclear if the figure is expected to rise further.

The New Jersey-based tech company provides electronic medical record storage to tens of thousands of healthcare providers around the United States, consequently serving millions of patients. CareCloud handles a large amount of patient data and billing information on behalf of hospitals, doctor’s offices, and other medical practices.

CareCloud has not publicly commented on the cyberattack 
since it disclosed the breach in March
, when it said hackers had accessed patients’ medical data stored in one of its cloud storage environments over six days. The company later said 
in data breach notifications
 that the hackers exfiltrated data from the company’s Amazon Web Services account and stole reams of patient data.

The stolen data includes patients’ names, postal addresses, Social Security numbers, and their medical and health information. The hackers also took government-issued identification numbers, such as passports and driver’s licenses, as well as banking and financial information.

CareCloud chief executive Stephen Snyder has not responded to multiple emails to date requesting information about the incident, including whether the company has paid the hackers; who, if anyone, is responsible for cybersecurity at the company; or if Snyder plans to resign following the incident.

The breach at CareCloud follows several sizable healthcare breaches confirmed this year.

Tech giant TriZetto confirmed in March that a 2024 data breach affected 3.4 million people’s data, and an as-yet-unspecified number of people have had their data stolen 
during a July data breach
 at healthtech billing software maker Craneware.

According to HHS’ running tally of healthcare data breaches, dental insurance giant DentaQuest has had the largest data breach this year so far, with at least 15 million people’s personal and health information being affected.

Topics

Amazon Web Services
, 
carecloud
, 
cyberattack
, 
data breach
, 
electronic health records
, 
healthcare
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic set AI agents loose on the same task. They started a turf war.

Rebecca Bellan

Instagram introduces a redesigned wordmark

Sarah Perez

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek
