Carvana has been granted the option to invest in Slate Auto, the electric vehicle startup backed by Jeff Bezos, according to documents obtained by TechCrunch.

Paperwork filed with Delaware’s division of corporations shows that the online used car retailer was given a warrant to buy shares in the startup in 2025 — around the same time Slate Auto was starting to put together 
its $650 million Series C funding round
.

It’s not clear if Carvana has exercised that warrant, or how many shares it is allowed to buy. Carvana declined to comment, and Slate Auto didn’t respond to requests for comment on the deal.

The transaction with Carvana comes as the retailer is looking at ways to expand into new car sales, according to the 
Wall Street Journal
. The company has reportedly purchased a number of Stellantis dealerships across the United States. Asked about new car sales on a recent earnings call, CEO Ernie Garcia III told analysts to “stay tuned.”

Slate Auto is also just 
weeks away from announcing
 final pricing and taking the first nonrefundable preorders for its low-cost EV, which is expected to start in the mid-$20,000 range. Slate has said it will deliver its first vehicles by the end of this year.

Similar to Tesla and other all-electric car companies like Rivian, Slate says on its website that it “won’t have traditional dealerships.” The company has said it will sell vehicles directly to customers, but it hasn’t offered much detail about how it plans to handle the logistics of the car-buying experience. Selling through physical Carvana dealerships could help mitigate some of those logistics headaches while also raising the startup’s profile.

Slate has been tight-lipped about its investors since it emerged from stealth last year, shortly after TechCrunch 
first revealed
 that Bezos and Guggenheim Partners CEO Mark Walter were backing the company. Slate 
revealed
 in April that Walter’s firm TWG Global led the Series C round, making the businessman one of the startup’s largest shareholders.

Walter also holds a major stake in Carvana. He owns 8% of the company’s Class B common stock and 1% of the overall voting power. Only Garcia III and his father, Ernie Garcia II, have more control.

It’s possible Carvana has already revealed some details about the Slate tie-up to investors without naming the startup.

In March, Carvana revealed in a 
regulatory filing
 that it had been granted a warrant to purchase shares of a “private consumer products company” in June 2025. Carvana did not name the company but said the aggregate value of the warrant was $1.5 million at the end of 2025 and that it “vests in tranches through 2029 based on jointly determined performance goals.” Carvana noted that Walter has a “substantial ownership interest in the warrant issuer.”

Carvana did not say whether this was a reference to Slate or another company in Walter’s portfolio.

Topics

Carvana
, 
Exclusive
, 
slate auto
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
