Digital wallet app Cash App is launching a new gadget on Thursday, seemingly inspired by 
the social media trend
 that involves paying for items in the real world with a tap of a homemade magic wand, which hides a tap-and-pay credit card. Now, there’s a real wand you can buy to take part. The company’s $25 wand is part of its new NFC-powered tag hardware lineup, which Cash App plans to expand to include more form factors in the coming months.

The company said that its tags are linked to the Cash App Card and would work at outlets compatible with Visa’s tap-to-pay platform. Tags are activated by linking the wand hardware (pictured above) to the app, and there’s no minimum balance needed for the tag to work.

pay by magic  
pic.twitter.com/RWeIHSIzE0
— jack (@jack) 
June 4, 2026

Cash App’s new wand comes with a keychain ring that lets you easily attach it to a bag or clip it to clothes. The gadget ostensibly allows you to make payments at times when it’s too cumbersome to get your phone out of your bag, like concerts or sporting events. Of course, the real driver is that there’s something whimsical about tapping a wand to pay for things, especially on special occasions like birthday shopping trips, which may appeal to younger users.

Wand users will get instant spend notifications as they pay, and they can lock or unlock the tag from the app at any time. If a user loses a tag, they can use the app to deactivate it. The company said it’s also monitoring fraud for payments made through tags to protect users.

“While digital wallets are invisible and physical cards are often buried in wallets, Cash App Tags are just the opposite. We see a unique opportunity here to make payments visible and social for the first time,” Thomas Templeton, Hardware lead at Block, said in a statement.

The company said that it plans to introduce more types of tags, including limited-edition drops, in the coming months before making some versions permanently available this summer. 

Cash App is largely targeting Gen Z users with this launch in a move to attract younger users to the app. The Block-owned fintech introduced 
accounts for teen users in 2021
, and this year, it launched 
a parent-controlled debit card
 for kids aged between six and 12 years.

Topics

Apps
, 
Cash App
, 
digital wallet

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
