In Brief

Posted:

12:01 PM PDT · August 20, 2026

Image Credits:
Castelion 
(opens in a new window)

Marina Temkin

Castelion hits $13B valuation to mass-produce hypersonic missiles

Castelion
, a 
missile startup
 founded by former SpaceX executives, has raised a $1 billion Series C at a $13 billion valuation. The round was co-led by Andreessen Horowitz, Carlyle, and JP Morgan Chase.

Founded in 2022, Castelion 
set out to
 manufacture hypersonic weapon systems at a lower cost and at faster speeds than traditional defense primes. Since then, the startup has secured more than $500 million in U.S. military contracts.

The funding for the startup is timely. The Pentagon has been looking to procure more of these weapons, since the U.S.’s stockpile of hypersonic missiles capable of travelling at speeds above Mach 5 hasn’t kept pace with China’s. Castelion is betting it can help close the gap with its faster manufacturing process.

The Torrance, Calif.-based startup will use the fresh capital to produce its Blackbeard missiles, named after a fierce English pirate, and other hypersonic weapons in its New Mexico production facility.

The funding round, which included participation from existing backers including Lightspeed, General Catalyst, and Altimeter, comprised $800 million in equity and a $250 million revolving credit facility.

Topics

defense tech
, 
Fundraising
, 
missiles
, 
Startups
, 
TC

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Venture

DOJ’s probe into Andreessen Horowitz over board seats baffles VCs

Marina Temkin

	2 days ago

Fundraising

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

	Jul 24, 2026

AI

The first American autonomous ground vehicles are fighting in Ukraine

Tim Fernholz

	Jul 7, 2026

Latest in Fundraising

In Brief

Castelion hits $13B valuation to mass-produce hypersonic missiles

Marina Temkin

	31 minutes ago

Startups

Etched’s valuation doubles to $21B in a month

Julie Bort

	2 days ago

Transportation

Detroit startup Grounded raises $5M to customize electric and gas-powered vans

Sean O'Kane

	2 days ago
