In Brief

Posted:

3:41 PM PDT · June 24, 2026

Image Credits:
Pavlo Gonchar/SOPA Images/LightRocket / Getty Images

Aisha Malik

Cerebras stock plunges after earnings as CEO says margin outlook was misunderstood

Shares of Cerebras Systems dropped almost 20% on Wednesday, even after the company delivered better-than-expected 
first-quarter earnings
 on Tuesday.

That’s because in its first earnings report since going public, the AI chipmaker forecast a narrower gross margin in its core business, guiding for a full-year margin of 38% to 41%, compared with the 47% reported in the first quarter. The stock hit a new low on Wednesday, almost hitting the company’s IPO price. 

Cerebras CEO Andrew Feldman 
told CNBC
 that investors had misunderstood the company’s margin guidance, noting that Cerebras will need to rent back some equipment from one of its largest customers. 

The company said during its 
earnings call
 that it decided to make more capacity available sooner by temporarily renting its own systems back from an existing customer while it builds out and deploys its own data center capacity. The company said this would cut into profit margins this year.

According to the company’s earnings report, revenue for the quarter reached $193 million, up 94% year-over-year. Net loss narrowed to $14 million, down from $23.9 million a year earlier.

Topics

AI
, 
Cerebras
, 
In Brief

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

TechCrunch Founder Summit 2026

4 days left to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit 2026

TechCrunch Events

	1 day ago

Startups

Fika Jobs raises $4M to build a video-first hiring platform where AI agents interview candidates

Lauren Forristal

	1 day ago

AI

The running list: major tech layoffs in 2026 where employers cited AI

Rebecca Bellan

Connie Loizos

	2 days ago

Latest in AI

AI

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

	27 minutes ago

In Brief

Cerebras stock plunges after earnings as CEO says margin outlook was misunderstood

Aisha Malik

	1 hour ago

AI

AI was supposed to kill engineering jobs, but new data suggests they’re the most resilient

Marina Temkin

	2 hours ago
