China’s state-owned space company successfully launched a Long March orbital rocket and landed the booster on a seagoing recovery vessel, making it the second country to achieve the feat.

The demonstration on Friday shows that China’s Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASC) is poised to match the advance that catapulted SpaceX to the top of the heap: reusing the same booster again and again to drive down the cost of launching spacecraft. CASC said it would attempt to reuse the booster, which can carry about as much payload as SpaceX’s workhorse Falcon 9, by the end of the year.

Instead of unfolding landing legs to settle onto a floating platform, as the Falcon 9 does, China’s approach uses netting strung across a large frame onboard a recovery ship to capture the descending rocket. The ability to get the rocket back to the ship in a controlled flight, however, depends on sophisticated guidance software and sensors, along with engines that are reliable enough to restart and rugged enough to survive the descent back through the atmosphere.

https://t.co/jtCmasw3Y0
 
pic.twitter.com/ZsbVRk6FS0
— Andrew Jones (@AJ_FI) 
July 10, 2026

SpaceX is currently breaking launch records on an annual basis with its fleet of reusable Falcon 9 rocket boosters. The vehicle underpins the company’s Starlink satellite network, which depends on cheap, regular space access, as well as its work for NASA and the U.S. Space Force.

China wouldn’t compete directly with Musk’s company for launch customers due to national security rules that effectively split the global market for rockets between the U.S. and Europe on one hand, and Russia and China on the other. However, a reusable rocket would enable China’s satellite communications networks and hypothetical orbital data centers to compete with SpaceX’s offerings.

That would mean more competition for Starlink in global markets, particularly in Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. For the U.S. military, it would mean a diminished advantage in space. The Long March booster recovery comes days after a consortium of investigative journalists 
reported
 new documents showing that China and Russia are cooperating on ways to damage Starlink because of its successes in Ukraine.

Unless, that is, SpaceX can get its much larger Starship rocket flying successfully. The last attempt to launch the rocket ended with 
mixed results
 at best, but Musk’s newly public conglomerate is expected to make another attempt this month. A static fire test of the huge booster appeared to go off without a hitch today.

The U.S. has other companies trying to develop reusable rockets, notably Jeff Bezos’ Blue Origin, which recovered a booster in 2025 and 
reused it
 earlier this year. Blue Origin saw one of its rockets 
explode on the launch pad
 in May, delaying any further attempts for now. Rocket Lab has been working on Neutron, which is intended to fly with a reusable booster, while 
Stoke Space
 is developing a fully reusable rocket that it hopes to test this year.

Topics

China
, 
Elon Musk
, 
Space
, 
SpaceX

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim Fernholz	

Senior Reporter

		Tim Fernholz is a journalist who writes about technology, finance and public policy. He has closely covered the rise of the private space industry and is the author of 
 Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and the New Space Race.
 Formerly, he was a senior reporter at Quartz, the global business news site, for more than a decade, and began his career as a political reporter in Washington, D.C. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing tim.fernholz@techcrunch.com or via an encrypted message to tim_fernholz.21 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha
