Spies working for Chinese intelligence are using job search and recruitment websites, including LinkedIn, to lure Western workers into sharing sensitive information, according to 
a joint advisory
 by the FBI, the U.K.’s security service MI5, and the governments of Australia, Canada, and New Zealand.

The advisory says Chinese spies pose as online recruiters and human resources firms who represent fake companies purportedly located outside of China, and target people with the aim of obtaining non-public information that might benefit Beijing.

The advisory comes as governments continue to issue warnings about Chinese espionage, even as the U.S. and the U.K. have tried to improve relations with Beijing of late. While Chinese spies often 
rely on hacking
 to 
steal information
, the advisory underscores how spies also attempt to cultivate sources through public websites and communities.

China’s military intelligence services “ultimately seek to acquire privileged military, political and economic intelligence that can provide China with a strategic and tactical advantage over the Five Eyes,” the advisory reads, referring to the decades-old intelligence-collection alliance formed by the five countries behind the joint statement.

The spies target and cultivate long-term relationships with security clearance holders and military personnel, particularly in the Indo-Pacific region, as well as journalists, academics and think-tank employees with knowledge of unclassified information. Targets are selected partly based on their resume and the likelihood that they might have knowledge of potentially sensitive or non-public information.

Per the advisory, unclassified information can still be useful to the spies, particularly if it is combined with other, more sensitive information that can benefit Beijing’s policy decisions.

When reached by TechCrunch for comment, a spokesperson for LinkedIn said: “Creating a fake account or misrepresenting your identity is a clear violation of our terms of service. We remain focused on detecting state-sponsored abuse, and will continue to enforce our policies against fake accounts.”

Topics

China
, 
cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
espionage
, 
LinkedIn
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
