Security researchers say they have evidence that a Chinese-linked spyware has expanded from mainland China to now target victims in over a dozen countries, including across Europe and the United States. The previously identified spyware also has new functionality capable of stealing troves of data and remotely bricking devices.

The researchers at cybersecurity firm Arctic Wolf said that the LightSpy spyware, first discovered in 2018 and previously linked to Chinese state-backed hackers, has since evolved into a commercial spyware platform operated by a single threat actor who caters to governments, enterprises, and militaries. 

The platform is said to feature custom branding, billing, and demos for advertising it to prospective customers.

The findings underscore how the use of spyware 
continues to proliferate
 beyond governments and nation-backed hackers, and more broadly into the private industry. 

LightSpy is a modular spyware platform that allows whoever is controlling it to attack a multitude of different devices, including smartphones, Apple devices, Linux servers, and Windows PCs. By using exploits for each device, the spyware can steal large amounts of sensitive information from its targets, including precise location data, chat messages, screen recordings, and stored passwords. The researchers also said the code is capable of remotely wiping and destroying data on a compromised device.

The researchers said that LightSpy has now been identified infecting routers, which researchers say they had not seen before. By attacking routers, the hackers can gain visibility and access to any other device on the same network.

Some of the compromised routers are associated with NATO member countries, said Arctic Wolf. 

According to the company, LightSpy operates a network of at least 117 servers in several countries around the world.

The researchers said they were able to link the latest activity to a Chinese contractor after one of the spyware’s operators used the LightSpy administrator’s panel to place an order with Kentucky Fried Chicken using his real name and office address.

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
nato
, 
Security
, 
Spyware

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

VC-backed startups commit more fraud, and researchers think they know why  

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta
