U.S. cybersecurity agency CISA said it has observed cyberattacks targeting over 100 internet-exposed systems across the U.S. water and wastewater sector, amid a wave of hacks targeting American critical infrastructure.

The number of affected systems provides new context to the scale of the ongoing cyberattacks targeting water providers in Michigan, Minnesota, and at least five other states.

The federal agency, which oversees cybersecurity defense and critical infrastructure protections, said 
in an advisory
 that the attacks have largely targeted programmable logic controllers (PLCs), which are used to control physical systems and machinery across water providers, energy systems, and other parts of critical infrastructure. 

In recent weeks, hackers have targeted PLCs made by several manufacturers, 
including Rockwell, Schneider Electric
, and 
more recently, Siemens
. CISA previously said that the cyberattacks are relying 
in part on AI tools
 that rely on public information to develop scripts capable of targeting vulnerable Siemens PLCs.

The intrusions have had little effect on water or waste water supplies to local communities, but have resulted in outages and disruption as incident responders investigate the breaches. CISA 
previously reported
 that some of the intrusions allowed hackers to modify affected PLCs to disable shutdown processes and alarms, potentially creating “unsafe conditions” without notifying the affected operators.

Many of the affected communities are in rural or isolated areas, where disruption to critical infrastructure systems can affect a large area of people.

Reports citing senior American officials say that U.S. intelligence believes Iran 
is likely behind the largely opportunistic
 attacks on water providers, likely in response to the U.S. and Israel-led war against Iran, but officials have fallen short of a concrete attribution.

The intrusions have sparked broader concerns about the cybersecurity and resiliency of critical infrastructure across the United States.

U.S. officials have warned in recent years that 
hackers working for China
 have been 
planting destructive malware
 on critical infrastructure ready to activate as a distraction in the event of an anticipated Chinese invasion of Taiwan. Russia has also been linked to several cyberattacks on water providers, and power and energy grids, across Europe as part of a growing campaign seen as aimed at testing the NATO alliance.

Topics

CISA
, 
critical infrastructure
, 
cybersecurity
, 
iran
, 
Security
, 
Water

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Nvidia just showed that the harness, not the AI model, is now the real hero

Julie Bort

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
