Clicks Technology
, a startup that’s preparing to launch 
its own take on the BlackBerry smartphone
, is showing off what it has in store in a new video, released today. 

The device, known as the Clicks Communicator, 
was introduced
 at January’s Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas to cater to people who do a lot of work on their phones, like texting and emailing. It’s particularly meant to appeal to those who miss the BlackBerry’s physical keyboard, which some argue is better for these types of tasks.

Priced at $499, the Communicator looks a lot like a modern-day BlackBerry might, with a screen for viewing and responding to messages, and a tactile, touch-sensitive keyboard below. 

The phone goes beyond being just a BlackBerry dupe, however, by innovating in other areas. For instance, its clever “Signal Light” feature offers a light-up button on the side of the phone that can be customized with different colors and light patterns to indicate when you’ve received messages from certain people, groups, or apps. 

It also offers customizable back covers that can be popped off and swapped, a 3.5 mm headphone jack, a physical SIM card tray (in addition to an eSIM), expandable microSD storage (up to 2TB), and a tactile switch for turning on or off airplane mode.

The Clicks Communicator may also appeal to the growing number of users looking to distance themselves from modern-day smartphones, with their addictive social apps and games. (The company partnered with the Niagara Launcher to provide access to the Android apps it runs). With the Signal Light, you can safely ignore your phone unless you see a critical notification come through. 

In the new video, the company shows its pre-production hardware and internal software as a preview of what’s to come when the phone begins shipping in the fourth quarter of this year.

At CES, TechCrunch was able to get a feel for the Communicator by handling a prototype that was the same size and weight as the device that’s preparing to ship at the end of this year. We found it felt good to hold, not too light or heavy, and was easy to grip. The keys were also fairly clicky, giving it a BlackBerry-like feel, though the team was then planning to slightly adjust the pressure to make the device work better for fast typers.  

Future videos will go more in-depth into specific Clicks Communicator features, like the Signal Light, Prompt Key, Message Hub, touch-sensitive keyboard, and more. 

Topics

BlackBerry
, 
Clicks
, 
Gadgets
, 
Hardware
, 
smartphone
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

Here’s why Slate changed the battery in its cheap EV truck

Tim De Chant

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom
