Cloudflare is the latest company to join the race to build a new web browser. But instead of pitching a Chrome alternative to consumers, the internet infrastructure provider launched 
Kitesurf
, a cloud-hosted browser designed specifically for AI agents.

AI software is evolving from chatbots that answer questions to agents that can complete tasks on users’ behalf. Browsers are a critical part of this transition, as they’ll need to navigate the web and use websites, as humans do.

Unlike traditional web browsers built for humans, a browser built for AI agents doesn’t care about visual elements, like themes, tabs, or browser extensions, Cloudflare explained in its 
announcement
. A browser designed for AI agents needs to manage context windows, performance, token costs, and scalability. It also faces a different threat model because an AI browser could be subject to vulnerabilities like prompt injection attacks and more, the company noted.

With Kitesurf, AI developers will be able to build software that can navigate websites, fill out forms, and complete other browser-based tasks, without having to build their own browser software. 

Cloudflare says it decided to build Kitesurf just 12 weeks ago, and it runs entirely on top of the company’s serverless platform, called Workers. Kitesurf is available for free while in beta in 
Browser Run
, which lets developers programmatically control and interact with headless browser instances on Cloudflare’s network.

For developers, Cloudflare’s pitch is that this enables AI agents to use the web more efficiently while using less computing power than Chromium, which keeps costs down. 

“Kitesurf is significantly more efficient in CPU and memory consumption than Chromium for common agentic tasks like screenshots and HTML extraction,” according to the company.

Image Credits:
Cloudflare

The browser itself was built from other technologies, including a modular rendering engine from 
Blitz
; Firefox’s CSS parser, 
Stylo
; and 
Boa JS
, a Rust ECMAScript engine. Everything else runs inside Cloudflare Workers. Although still new, Cloudflare says Kitesurf already passes around 215,000+ 
web platform tests
, and it’s adding hundreds more, passing tests every week.

Cloudflare also credited the open source Rust headless engine, Obscura, for inspiring it to develop Kitesurf, noting that the first proof of concept was a port of Obscura to Workers.

The company said the browser correctly renders pages like 
TodoMVC
, a popular benchmark application for comparing JavaScript frameworks, along with Wikipedia, Hacker News, the Cloudflare Blog, and much of the Cloudflare dashboard.

Topics

AI
, 
AI agents
, 
Apps
, 
cloudflare

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha
