As AI agent traffic 
surpasses human traffic
 on the internet, companies working in commerce and finance are building tools that allow agents to take action on behalf of users at a rapid pace. Days after trading platform Robinhood introduced agents that can trade for users, Coinbase launched its own agents that can execute trades and pay for premium research.

The company said Thursday that users can integrate the agent with their main account and start trading. If users don’t want to give the agent access to their main account, they can choose to have it operate in a separate sandbox.

Coinbase noted that the agent can use tools like Coinbase Advanced, the company’s platform for professional traders that includes extra features like TradingView charts to analyze and execute trades. Users can ask the agent to rebalance their portfolio, ask it to follow an investment thesis and trade on their behalf, or provide advice on a one-time crypto trade.

Loading the player…

At the moment, the agent can trade in crypto spot markets and derivatives, with support for equities and prediction markets planned for the future. Coinbase added that it will soon add support for custom limits such as maximum trade size, which services the agent can interact with, and how much it can spend.

Coinbase is taking advantage of 
the open x402 payment protocol
 it launched in collaboration with AWS, Anthropic, Circle, and Near last year. Using this standard, the agent can pay for premium research data APIs and on-demand compute for trading insights without requiring any login or subscription. This 
website
 lists services that the agent can access through the x402 protocol.

The trading platform has been actively investing in AI tools for the last few years. It launched AgentKit, which allows 
developers
 to integrate automated wallets into their apps in 2024. Last December, it added an 
AI-powered assistant to the app
 that provides trading tips and financial advice. The company said that the latest agent launch can also work in ChatGPT or Claude through its MCP server.

“Coinbase for Agents is informed by insights gleaned from years of building the agentic economy, and the primary goal is to create agents that can transact. And unlike pure trading platforms, we’re the only one that combines exchange access with a native payments protocol. We’re aiming to build a fundamentally different product for a future where most of the internet is accessed through agents,” Lincoln Murr, Head of AI Product, told TechCrunch via email.

AI companies are exploring agentic payments at a rapid pace through new partnerships. Last month, Visa invested in Replit to 
power agentic payments for developers
. The payment network company made a deal with OpenAI this week to 
explore similar products
. The pace of development in the sector has made global financial regulators take notice. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) said that there should be 
strong safeguards in place
 to mitigate AI risks.

Topics

AI agents
, 
Apps
, 
coinbase
, 
trading

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
