When de-extinction startup Colossal Biosciences revealed last year that it was attempting to “resurrect” the dire wolf from genetic material found in fossils
, we argued
 that, despite the controversy surrounding the project, the company was building valuable technologies that justify its 
$10.2 billion
 valuation.

Now, roughly 16 months later, the startup is in talks to raise new funding at a $20 billion to $30 billion valuation, 
Axios reported
. 

It’s not clear who is leading the new round, or how much capital the five-year-old company is looking to raise. But we do know, according to the report, that Colossal has started generating revenue over the last year.

Colossal co-founder and CEO Ben Lamm told TechCrunch last year that the company sees three revenue streams for the business.

The company has offered its conservation technology to the U.S. government and the UAE, which recently 
invested $60 million
 in the company, according to Wired.

Colossal has spun out three startups, including Breaking, a company that helps break down plastics; Form Bio, a computational biology platform that secured $30 million in funding; and Astromech, an AI-driven predictive modeling company focused on biology and life sciences, which was valued at 
$2 billion
 in March.

The company, which operates out a 55,000-square-foot 
headquarters in Dallas
, keeps finding new applications for its core science, too. In late April, it added the 
bluebuck antelope
 as its sixth target species, while late last month, its nonprofit conservation arm, the Colossal Foundation, struck a University of Tasmania partnership to help protect Tasmanian devils from a 
contagious facial cancer
.

Lamm told TechCrunch last year that the company also plans to spin off its artificial animal womb technology, which could have applications for human fertility treatment. In May, he told 
Rolling Stone
 that the technology is expected to be ready next year.

If the company manages to reintroduce extinct animals, including the woolly mammoth and the dodo bird, to their native habitats, it may eventually generate revenue through the sale of biodiversity credits, a market-based mechanism similar to carbon credits, according to Lamm.

The new fundraising effort comes amid a boom in longevity tech, alternative energy, and other deep-tech sectors.

Colossal didn’t respond to our request for comment.

Topics

Ben Lamm
, 
Biotech & Health
, 
Colossal Biosciences
, 
de-extinction tech
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Marina Temkin	

Reporter, Venture

Marina Temkin is a venture capital and startups reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she wrote about VC for PitchBook and Venture Capital Journal. Earlier in her career, Marina was a financial analyst and earned a CFA charterholder designation.

You can contact or verify outreach from Marina by emailing 
marina.temkin@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 347-683-3909 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek
