In Brief

Posted:

1:09 PM PDT · June 24, 2026

Image Credits:
Kenneth Cheung 
(opens in a new window)
 / Getty Images

Lucas Ropek

Companies are scrambling to stop employees from maxing out AI budgets with small tasks

The era of 
tokenmaxxing
 is over. After the AI industry 
encouraged companies
 to max out their AI budgets earlier this year, and some companies 
even built employee leaderboards to encourage internal AI usage
 — they are now realizing just how easy it is to spend huge sums of money on AI and get little in return.

We now appear to be entering the era of token rationing.

Recent news has been rife with stories about 
AI cutbacks
 and now 404 Media 
reports that
 consulting firm Accenture has been attempting to stop its employees from depleting its token reserves by using AI to do basic tasks — like converting PDFs into presentation slides.

The cutbacks take place not long after Accenture threatened that employees would “risk losing out on promotions” if they didn’t use AI, 404 writes. 

404’s reporting is based on leaked audio from a recent internal meeting involving Accenture’s agentic AI strategy lead, Justice Kwak. 

“We’re hitting this inflection point where AI is becoming material to the cost structure,” Kwak says. “Spend is becoming very unpredictable; and leadership, especially at the CFO, COO, and CIO level, are still asking the question of whether they’re getting value from what we’re spending on in the context of AI.”

The cost of tokens has thrown into doubt the AI business model — as evidenced by what’s being called the “
AI selloff
” which has battered some AI-dependent businesses the last few days, especially memory chip makers. The AI industry has reached the stage where it can’t just be exciting and new anymore. It has to prove its worth.

Topics

Accenture
, 
AI
, 
In Brief
, 
tokenmaxxing

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Startups

Fika Jobs raises $4M to build a video-first hiring platform where AI agents interview candidates

Lauren Forristal

	1 day ago

AI

The running list: major tech layoffs in 2026 where employers cited AI

Rebecca Bellan

Connie Loizos

	2 days ago

AI

OpenAI launches new initiative to help find and patch open source bugs

Lucas Ropek

	2 days ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Companies are scrambling to stop employees from maxing out AI budgets with small tasks

Lucas Ropek

	25 minutes ago

Apps

Facebook rolls out an AI companion app for creators

Aisha Malik

	3 hours ago

In Brief

Agility Robotics plans to go public via SPAC in a $2.5B deal

Kirsten Korosec

	4 hours ago
