Y Combinator-backed insurance tech startup Corgi became embroiled in yet another controversy earlier this week when Papermark, maker of open source data room software, accused Corgi of stealing its software and passing it off as its own. 

Corgi denies this, telling TechCrunch. “No code was used from Papermark.”

But there were reasons why people believed the initial allegation, which was made by 
Papermark co-founder Marc Seitz on X
, concerning Corgi’s newly released product called Dataroom.

Seitz’s post blew up because he shared screenshots showing Corgi’s product using the same language for the same features as Papermark’s, word for word. Deal room software is essentially secure document sharing. It is famously used by startups to pitch VCs and send them supporting materials for due diligence.

Image Credits:
Marc Seitz/Papermark

Seitz went as far as to call Corgi’s new product copyright and license-infringing, and “fraud.”

Corgi’s co-founder and CEO Nico Laqua saw the tweet and promised to investigate. Soon after, he 
posted on X
 his full denial with receipts of his own, showing that the code was different between the two products.

While he strenuously pushed back on the allegations of a license violation (“‘stole my enterprise-code’ is a different claim than ‘copied my style,” Laqua argued), he did admit that relying on a vibe-coding design led to the replica features.

“Looking back, we should’ve leaned more into our own language and visual choices instead of taking cues from existing products in the space, and that’s on us,” he posted.

A Corgi spokesperson confirmed to TechCrunch that the offending features were vibe-coded and said they have already been changed, downplaying the situation.

“The issues were isolated to visual elements on two peripheral settings pages,” the spokesperson told us, adding that these elements were “immediately updated” and that “our team confirmed that no code was used from Papermark.”

Laqua and the spokesperson also accused Papermark of making these accusations because Corgi is offering a less expensive product. “I get that this stings since we’re putting out something mostly free that competes with his SaaS. I’d be mad too,” Laqua wrote of Seitz. (Seitz has not yet responded to our request for comment.) 

Yet, this clearly wasn’t just sour grapes when identical features and wording were used.

It’s about a new question: If vibe coding makes it so easy to copy the look, feel, and every function of another’s work, while not copying every line of the code itself, how much does it matter if the source isn’t identical?

Obviously, legally speaking, it’s the only thing that matters. So this is not the same as the controversy over Y Combinator alum PearAI, a 2024 startup that 
admitted to cloning another open source project
 and releasing it under its own license.

Morally speaking, this is ambiguous and will become increasingly common.

As fellow YC alum and founder of the agent operating system 
OpenProse
, Dan Barrett 
explained on X
: “In a world where a bot can trivially copy 1:1 the structure of something even if the character-level code diverges … what makes one unacceptable and the other not? existing IP law, incidental to the old world? is there not some greater principle at work here?”

Corgi is now vigorously trying to clean up any reputational damage. It has issued a cease and desist letter to Seitz demanding that he take down the tweet, the company confirmed to TechCrunch.

The founder of Hello World Cafe, which somewhat competes with Corgi’s coffee shop business, 
also contends on X 
that he got a cease and letter from Corgi’s lawyers for 
his tweet that joked
 about the Dataroom controversy. Though X still remembers. There have been hundreds of comments and countless subtweets. (Corgi also offers a 24-hour coffee shop, with plans to open more, Laqua recently said on 
Harry Stebbings’ podcast
.)

This latest hullabaloo adds to a growing list of chatter around Corgi. The two-year-old startup, for instance, has 
a growing reputation for being litigious
. It’s already 
sued various former employees
.

Laqua also recently went viral for his 
comments on Stebbings podcast
 about how he expects employees to work 7 days a week. “Whatever you can done in five days, I promise you, you’ll get more done in six and seven,” he said. 

That is, of course, the fallacy of startup hustle culture. Decades of 
research repeatedly conclude
 that human productivity is not a quadratic equation. While sprints can be effective (and build camaraderie) for short-term problems like the site going down, the research shows that, as a matter of routine, 
more hours of work reduces productivity
, not the other way around.

The startup also got tongues wagging for how fast it has raised money with increasing valuations, even by AI-startup standards. Last month, Corgi raised a $106 million Series B1 raise, valuing the company at $2.6 billion, just three weeks after 
announcing a $160 million Series B at a $1.3 billion valuation
 and four months after its $108 million Series A. 

Topics

corgi
, 
open source
, 
Startups
, 
TC
, 
vibe coding
, 
Y Combinator

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

Slate Auto’s radically simple electric truck starts at $24,950

Sean O'Kane

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Beyond Siri: Here are the practical AI features coming to your iPhone in iOS 27

Sarah Perez

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal
