Data breaches at two shipping companies has put cryptocurrency owners with physical hardware wallets at greater risk of having their funds stolen, highlighting weaknesses in the broader tech ecosystem relied on by the crypto industry.

In recent weeks, makers of 
hardware crypto wallets Trezor
 and 
SafePal reported that collectively thousands
 of their customers had their personal data and shipping information stolen during separate data breaches at their shipping partners. The crypto wallet makers provided their customers’ names, home addresses, email addresses, and phone numbers to the shipping companies for mailing out their hardware wallets.

The hacks did not affect the security of the wallets, a hardware device that stays offline to make it far more difficult for hackers to compromise from over the internet. Instead, the hackers targeted the broader supply chain of tech companies to obtain personal information about where high-net worth crypto holders live. 

By stealing the names and home addresses of hardware wallet customers, the hacks expose crypto owners to physical attacks that rely on physically obtaining the seed phrase stored on the wallet by force or violence. 

Known as wrench attacks (referring to the use of weapons), these kinds of real-world attacks 
are on the rise
 as criminals increasingly seek out crypto belonging to high-net individuals. Blockchain security company CertiK confirmed dozens of reported wrench attacks during 2025, up by 75% on the previous year, with robbers stealing upwards of $40 million. Crypto forensics giant Chainalysis puts this year’s figures 
at closer to $30 million
 so far, with gangs using kidnapping and home invasions to demand a person’s crypto seed phrase.

With knowledge of a person’s seed phrase, the attackers can irreversibly take control of the person’s crypto on the public blockchain.

Both Trezor and SafePal also warned customers to stay vigilant against phishing attacks, which rely on sending targeted messages to a person’s phone number or email address in an attempt to steal their crypto.

In a separate attack on a hardware wallet earlier this month, hackers stole more than $130 million in cryptocurrency directly off the blockchain by guessing the passwords set by Coinkite’s Coldcard hardware wallet. 

The hackers, who have not yet been identified, were able to 
predict the seed phrases that Coldcard wallets would generate offline
 for their customers. Even though the wallets and seed phrases never touched the internet, the hackers were able to generate customer wallet passwords on the fly and pluck their funds directly off of the blockchain.

One victim said 
in a post on X
 that they had done “everything right,” but that “none of it mattered… all because the hardware that created the seed phrase originally had one line in their code from 2021 that had a vulnerability.”

Topics

crypto
, 
cybersecurity
, 
Security
, 
wrench attacks

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Everything announced at Made by Google ’26: Pixel 11, Pixel Watch 5, Pixel Tag, and tons of Gemini features

Lauren Forristal

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta
