In Brief

Posted:

9:29 AM PDT · July 8, 2026

Image Credits:
Getty Images

Dominic-Madori Davis

Crypto VC firm Paradigm raises $1.2B to invest in ‘technical frontier’ startups

Crypto VC firm Paradigm has raised $1.2 billion — its third venture fund and fourth overall — with the aim of investing in the “technical frontier,” the firm’s founder Matt Huang 
announced
 Wednesday.

For Paradigm, the technical frontier will stretch beyond its cryptocurrency investment roots. This fund is expected to expand its investment focus to include robotics and AI. That’s not a surprising move given how hot the AI market has become over the past few years, while crypto has faced challenges.

Paradigm isn’t abandoning crypto altogether, according to a 
blog post
 written by Huang and the firm’s managing partner, Alana Palmedo. The firm will “continue investing in crypto and the reinvention of markets and the financial system” and will “continue to research and build where it accelerates the industry, from blockchain tools (Foundry, Reth) to agent tools (Centaur) to security work (EVMbench, a collaboration with OpenAI),” the pair wrote.

But AI and robotics are also priorities. In an interview with 
Bloomberg
, Palmedo said, “There’s so much else happening right now that’s pretty hard to ignore.”

Paradigm’s Fund III has already made some investments, including in 
drone delivery company 
Zipline and 
space startup
 True Anomaly. 

The firm, which was founded in 2018 by Huang, a former partner at Sequoia, and Fred Ehrsam, who co-founded the cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase, filed to raise the fund earlier this year, 
according to SEC filings
. The fund size is slightly less than the 
$1.5 billion
 the firm was seeking to raise, as reported by the Wall Street Journal in February.

Topics

crypto
, 
In Brief
, 
Paradigm
, 
Venture

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Latest in Venture

In Brief

Crypto VC firm Paradigm raises $1.2B to invest in ‘technical frontier’ startups

Dominic-Madori Davis

	57 minutes ago

In Brief

Solo GP Ashley Smith announces second $25M fund to back startups in AI, security and more

Dominic-Madori Davis

	2 hours ago

In Brief

VC firm Chemistry is raising $500M for its second fund

Dominic-Madori Davis

	1 day ago
