For as long as anyone can remember, Github has been the de facto code host preferred by a majority of developers. However, in recent times, the platform has struggled with 
widely reported
 outages and performance degradation and, as it drops the ball, Cursor is waiting to pick it up.

The AI startup, which is now 
officially a part of SpaceXAI
, launched Origin this week — a new code hosting platform designed to do all of the things that developers typically use Github for: collaboratively work on codebases, browse and edit them, handle pull-requests (edits made by others asking to be added to the main codebase) and store them in repositories.

This seems like a natural next step for Cursor, whose primary focus up until this point has been selling automated web development services through 
its AI Code Editor
. Cursor has also said that “agent native” features will soon be available for Origin, although hasn’t shared many details yet. The company also says it is building a wider “app ecosystem” to support broader coding efforts within Origin.

Interestingly enough, using Origin doesn’t require a user to stop using Github. Indeed, Origin is designed to allow developers to work alongside Github and pass code back and forth between the two in an interoperable manner. 

“Your GitHub repos can sit alongside the ones Cursor hosts,” Cursor 
says in its blog
. “Connect GitHub to Cursor, pick your org, and you’ll see the repos you can sync. Select one and Cursor pulls it in.”

The launch of Origin coincides with 
ongoing frustration
 over a perceived dip in Github’s services. Indeed, on the same day that Cursor launched its new platform, Github suffered a 
quite lengthy worldwide outage
. For over six hours, the site’s functions were 
reportedly
 degraded, with 
a nearly 20 percent
 error rate worldwide.

This isn’t the first time in recent times when this has happened either. Earlier this year, after a rash of outages, Github 
announced 
new actions to sate unhappy coders as its availability problems seemed to escalate. More broadly, the platform has 
suffered 257 outages
 over the past year, a recent analysis by LeadDev states. Such persistent issues have led to “a visible exodus of high-profile users” writes LeadDev’s reporter Charles Humble. 

Still, if Cursor wants to compete with Github, it will have its work cut out for it. According to Github’s own metrics, 
some 180 million developers use its platform
 as of last October. The platform, which was founded in 2007 and was acquired by Microsoft in 2012, 
continues to be
 the largest source code hosts in the world.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
cursor
, 
GitHub
, 
spacexai

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Instagram introduces a redesigned wordmark

Sarah Perez

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Everything announced at Made by Google ’26: Pixel 11, Pixel Watch 5, Pixel Tag, and tons of Gemini features

Lauren Forristal
