Cybercriminals have compromised tens of thousands of Fortinet firewalls and VPNs used by major companies all over the world, according to two cybersecurity firms.

The widespread hacking campaign, which is ongoing and has been dubbed FortiBleed, appears to not involve abusing any unknown vulnerability in the targeted devices, but rather on a more basic issue: companies may not be changing passwords to the firewall, nor making sure that the credentials they use for sensitive systems exposed on the internet are not already known by hackers. 

In this campaign, hackers are first using automated tools to scan the internet for exposed Fortinet firewalls and VPNs. Then, they are breaking into the devices thanks to lists of previously known passwords. At that point, the cybercriminals can steal more sensitive data from the victim companies, cybersecurity firms 
Hudson Rock
 and 
SOCRadar
 wrote in their reports that they published this week.

“Once a device is compromised, [the hackers] use it as a listening post, monitoring traffic passing through and collecting any additional credentials that flow by. Those freshly collected passwords are then fed back into the scanner to compromise even more devices. The system feeds itself,” SOCRadar wrote. 

Hudson Rock said they found evidence that suggests more than 73,000 unique Fortinet URLs have been hacked, while SOCRadar said the total of hacked devices is more than 30,000. 

According to Hudson Rock, the hacked companies include: Accenture, Comcast, Foxconn, Lenovo, Oracle, Samsung, Siemens, and PwC.  

A Lenovo spokesperson acknowledged receipt of TechCrunch’s request for comment but did not respond. None of the other companies responded to a request for comment. 

According to both Hudson Rock and SOCRadar, the countries with the most affected devices are India, the United States, Taiwan, and Mexico. But both companies say there are victims all over the world. As for industries, the most affected ones are IT services, construction materials, and telecommunications, according to Hudson Rock. Government agencies are also among the victims, per SOCRadar. Both cybersecurity companies said the group behind the hacking campaign appears to be Russian-speaking. 

Fortinet did not respond to a request for comment.

Hudson Rock and SOCRadar’s reports are based on the discovery of a list of credentials for Fortinet devices and associated companies. This hacking campaign 
was first reported
 by security researcher Bob Diachenko over the weekend. Independent cybersecurity researcher Kevin Beaumont 
said in a blog post
 on Wednesday that he analyzed and confirmed the data “is legit.”

In recent years, 
several
 
hacking
 
campaigns
 have targeted and compromised Fortinet devices, usually abusing vulnerabilities in those systems. Instead, in this case, the hackers are relying on leaked passwords, a simpler and less sophisticated attack.

Topics

cybercrime
, 
cybersecurity
, 
data breach
, 
Fortinet
, 
hackers
, 
hacking
, 
Passwords
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
