In Brief

Posted:

5:09 PM PDT · July 28, 2026

Marina Temkin

Cyera agrees to acquire Oasis Security for $1B to safeguard proliferating AI agents

Data security company Cyera, which recently raised 
$600 million
 at a $12 billion valuation, announced Tuesday that it signed a letter of intent to acquire Oasis Security for approximately $1 billion in a deal expected to be paid mostly in cash, with the remainder in Cyera shares.

Oasis focuses on non-human identities, primarily AI agents. As the number of AI agents proliferates, companies must deploy cybersecurity software that monitors these agents’ behavior and grants them permission to access other software.

Founded in 2022, Oasis has raised about $195 million from Accel, Craft Ventures, Cyberstarts and other investors.

The deal highlights a surging market for cybersecurity providers defending enterprises against AI-weaponized threats.

Cyera, which shares investors Accel and Cyberstarts with Oasis, has been on an acquisition spree, recently purchasing Index Ventures-backed Ryft and the less-than-one-year-old Genie Security.

Post-acquisition, Cyera plans to integrate Oasis’s technology into a unified identity and data security platform.

Although Cyera recently surpassed
 $150 million 
in annual recurring revenue (ARR), the company is far from profitable, TechCrunch reported last month. The five-year-old company has raised about $2.3 billion in total funding.

Topics

AI
, 
Cyera
, 
M&A
, 
Security

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Startups

MCP startup Runlayer accuses Rippling of stealing its product idea

Julie Bort

	7 hours ago

Enterprise

Satya Nadella says companies that trust one AI for everything may not survive

Julie Bort

	1 day ago

Robotics

Enigma raises $71M to make controlling a robot as easy as adjusting the volume

Marina Temkin

	2 days ago

Latest in Security

In Brief

Cyera agrees to acquire Oasis Security for $1B to safeguard proliferating AI agents

Marina Temkin

	3 hours ago

AI

PSA: Your Claude shared chats and Artifacts may have ended up on Google

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	1 day ago

AI

Microsoft launches its first cybersecurity model, plus a new agentic cybersecurity system

Lucas Ropek

	1 day ago
