In Brief

Posted:

12:46 PM PDT · July 15, 2026

Image Credits:
Neko Health 
(opens in a new window)
 under a 
CC BY 2.0 
(opens in a new window)
 license.

Julie Bort

Daniel Ek’s body-scanning startup Neko Health raises another $700M

Neko Health
, the 
body-scanning and health assessment startup
 founded by Spotify’s Daniel Ek (pictured above, right) and his co-founder Hjalmar Nilsonne (above, left), 
has raised
 a $700 million Series C.

The round was led by Lightspeed Venture Partners and O.G. Venture Partners. This follows the company’s $260 million 
Series B raised
 in January 2025.

Neko Health has developed proprietary body-scanning technology, which it couples with bloodwork, to assess a person’s health. For gym lovers, the scan also now includes body composition information. It can couple the assessment with Apple Health data, which 
Nilsonne says
 gives its medical clinicians real-world data to use in its assessments.

Neko Health, which has locations in the UK and Sweden, is preparing for its first U.S. location in New York. The company says more than 100,000 people have already had scans and more than 350,000 people have either registered for the waitlist or set an appointment. 

One of the people who had a Neko Health scan is Calm founder Alex Tew. He 
posted on X
 that it found a malignant mole on his back, which he promptly had removed. “I’m grateful to Neko for helping me discover this – I’m not sure how I would have otherwise.”

Neko Health isn’t the only health scanning company founded by tech folks. MidJourney, the AI Lab best known for its AI image and video creation model and website, is also 
creating a body scanner
, which it plans to integrate into a spa experience with hot tubs and saunas, opening in San Francisco sometime in 2027.

Other investors in Neko Health’s latest round include Atomico, General Catalyst, Lakestar, Liberty City Ventures, Positive Sum, and BDT & MSD.

Topics

Biotech & Health
, 
Fundraising
, 
Health
, 
Neko Health
, 
Startups
, 
TC

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

	5 minutes ago

Apps

Apple bans home services from its upcoming Maps ads

Sarah Perez

	1 hour ago

Space

SpaceX slips below its $135 IPO price ahead of Starship launch

Sean O'Kane

	2 hours ago

Latest in Startups

In Brief

Daniel Ek’s body-scanning startup Neko Health raises another $700M

Julie Bort

	11 seconds ago

Commerce

Whatnot acquires Shaped to power real-time live shopping recommendations

Lauren Forristal

	3 hours ago

Startups

Inside Ode with Anthropic, the startup betting AI services are the future of enterprise

Theresa Loconsolo

	5 hours ago
