AI coding agent startup 
Niteshift
 has raised a $7 million seed round led by Greylock’s Jerry Chen. That’s a modest sum by AI standards, but the startup, founded by two former early Datadog engineers, has attracted some big-name angels like Reid Hoffman, Datadog’s Olivier Pomel and Alexis Lê-Quôc, Ankur Goyal of Braintrust, and Misha Laskin of Reflection AI. 

Founded by Sajid Mehmood and Conor Branagan, who helped grow Datadog from its early days to a multi-billion valuation, the company has entered the crowded AI coding space with a compelling idea: Why would any company trust its most sensitive assets — code that runs its products — directly to model makers like OpenAI and Anthropic, given that those companies are constantly “killing” startups and businesses by launching competing apps?

Mehmood, who is CEO, likens it to Datadog’s early growth, when the monitoring company won e-commerce customers who refused to build on Amazon Web Services. It was a reasonable concern, given that Amazon was simultaneously putting many of those same retail stores out of business in what became known as the “
retail apocalypse
.”

The AI equivalent, as Mehmood sees it, is already underway. Anthropic, OpenAI, and others are moving fast into vertical software markets — what some are calling the 
SaaSpocalypse
.

“At Datadog we saw this clearly,” Mehmood said. “A big part of our multicloud business came from e-commerce businesses who did not want to run on Amazon, right? … We are absolutely going to see the same dynamic as Anthropic goes to compete in legal and healthcare and finance and whatever else.” 

The bet is that companies will increasingly seek infrastructure that separates the coding model from all the other orchestration needed to ensure AI-generated code is properly vetted and maintained (and that they’ll want a vendor without a competing agenda).  

To be clear, Niteshift isn’t replacing Claude Code or Codex, the two most popular coding agents. It argues that it reduces dependence on them.

Niteshift’s AI coding cloud will route between those models — along with open source options and others — based on the needs of each project.

“Being able to switch between GPT and cloud models is important,” Mehmood said, “Everybody’s worried about getting stepped on by these giants.” 

That idea is what got Greylock’s Chen to bite. 

“As the frontier labs move up the stack, there’s an opportunity to offer customers an alternate path: unbundling their agents from the infrastructure they run on,” Chen told TechCrunch. “Niteshift is building the platform that enables this for coding agents, letting customers invest deeply in their developer tooling without locking themselves into a single model or agent vendor.”

More than that, Niteshift isn’t selling tokens. It sells infrastructure, charging like a cloud provider, with per-minute usage rates. 

“Everybody else is selling labor replacement intelligence,” Mehmood said. “We’re selling software to agents, as opposed to humans — but we’re still out here selling software.”

Even so, Niteshift is entering a crowded market of AI coding tools. Model independence isn’t a novel idea, and Niteshift’s competitors have a massive head start. That includes Cursor, 
though it could soon be gobbled up by SpaceX
; Cognition, which just 
raised $1 billion at a $26 billion valuation
; Amazon Bedrock; and AI gateway platform OpenRouter, which 
just raised $113 million at a $1.3 billion valuation
. The list goes on.  

Mehmood’s answer to all of that is the founding team’s depth. Mehmood and Branagan didn’t just study these problems — they lived them, scaling Datadog through the exact growing pains that large engineering organizations now face with AI-generated code. Teams, he said, need to run, test, and verify software autonomously in their real production environments, and they need infrastructure built by people who’ve done it at scale.

Topics

AI
, 
AI coding agents
, 
ai coding assistant
, 
Fundraising
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
