Databricks on Thursday announced a new round of funding that values the company at 
$188 billion
. The round was led by Coatue.

Databricks didn’t disclose exactly how much it raised; it said the money isn’t in its hands yet and that the round will close later in this summer. (Other outlets have since reported the raise is roughly 
$3 billion
.) While it’s unusual for a company to announce before it gets the money, a VC tells TechCrunch that the deal is solid, with so many firms wanting in that the company had no reason to keep its shiny new valuation a secret.

In fact, Databricks has been on a year-and-a-half fundraising tear as it successfully transitioned its image into an AI provider and not just a yesteryear SaaS sensation. Yesteryear being back in the BC times (Before ChatGPT).

Only five months ago, in February, Databricks closed a $5 billion Series L raise 
at a $134 billion valuation
. Five months before that, in September 2025, 
it raised $1B at $100 billion valuation
. And roughly nine months before that, in December 2024, it raised what was a 
record-breaking round at the time of $10 billion
 at a $62 billion valuation.

Databricks has raised so many rounds over the years that this latest one became the subject of 
memes about running out of letters
 of the alphabet. “Turning on alerts for when we get a Series AA,” one person posted.

But its image reconstruction has been legit. Founded in 2013, it initially grew to success back in the big data era, with software that enabled enterprises to store enormous amounts of data in the cloud, yet produce speedy analytics.

Because it already sat on troves of enterprise data, Databricks was then well-positioned to respond as companies started wanting AI with the same security and governance they expect from traditional enterprise software.

The company began rolling out one AI product after another, like 
Lakebase, its database built for AI agents
, and Unity, its AI gateway, along with a “meta-harness” called Omnigent that manages multiple agents.

Databricks also increasingly 
became known
 as one of the big examples of enterprises adopting more affordable Chinese-based open-weight models (models whose underlying code is published for anyone to use and modify) for cost control, 
one of the big trends of 2026
. It is a particular champion of Z.ai’s GLM 5.2 as a model for coding.

Last week Databricks CEO Ali Ghodsi 
shared the results
 of some internal benchmarking done to manage his own AI costs for his 3,000 software engineers. 

The company compared AI models on the actual tasks its programmers do. Not surprisingly, 
in the blog post revealing the results
, Databricks shared that “open models, and GLM 5.2 in particular, are now able to handle even the highest level of task difficulty” in coding, and at a total lower cost than proprietary models from Anthropic and OpenAI.

But it did surprise people by finding that the choice of harness — the agentic coding tool, like Codex or Claude Code, that wraps around a model and manages its context and instructions — equally impacted costs. It found that open-source harness Pi to be one of the best at managing context surrounding each prompt, and therefore one of the lowest costs choices without sacrificing quality.

“The lesson here isn’t that one harness is always cheaper or that native harnesses are worse,” the 
post declared
. “Instead, model choice is only one piece of the puzzle.” 

All of this has added to Databricks image as an AI company, even if it wasn’t founded as an AI lab. This, in turn, has granted it the AI-halo for raising money and leaping its valuation. As we previously reported, the AI effect is so strong these days, that even 
sandwich shop Jersey Mike’s mentioned
 AI 22 times in its S-1 documents.

Topics

AI
, 
Databricks
, 
Enterprise
, 
Fundraising
, 
Startups
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh
