In Brief

Posted:

5:30 AM PDT · July 14, 2026

Image Credits:
IM8

Julie Bort

David Beckham’s health drink startup IM8 takes $1B from General Catalyst’s unusual CVF fund

David Beckham’s startup IM8 has taken on $1 billion in funding from General Catalyst’s Customer Value Fund (CVF), the company announced on Tuesday. 

CVF doesn’t make standard venture equity investments, but offers what are essentially loans with some non-traditional repayment terms. Startups funded by CVF repay the loan amount along with a fixed, capped the percentage of revenue they generate.

As such, GC isn’t buying stock, and won’t have an ownership stake in IM8. Likewise, the startup’s ownership will not be diluted. As GC 
previously told TechCrunch
, this is an option for startups that have predictable revenue streams and a plan for how more capital will supercharge their growth.

IM8 was co-founded by CEO Danny Yeung, 
a self-described high-school dropout
 who founded a health company called Prenetics that went public in 2022. From there he landed in the kinds of circles where he found himself having dinner with David Beckham. That dinner led to IM8, a subsidiary owned by Prenetics that sells a vitamin drink stuffed with compounds linked to longevity that range from açai fruit extract to Coenzyme Q10. Customers buy the drink via subscriptions.

The loan is structured to finance up to 70% of IM8’s customer acquisition costs and, in return, GC receives a capped share of what it calls “reference income.” That’s defined as the revenue generated from those customers “multiplied by a fixed gross-margin assumption.” Once GC has recovered its investment and hits its cap on the revenue share, all subsequent revenue from those customers will go to Prenetics.

As we previously reported, Grammerly also took 
$1 billion
 from GC’s CVF in May 2025, just prior to 
acquiring Superhuman
.

Topics

david beckham
, 
General Catalyst
, 
TC
, 
Venture

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Already rich, already successful, why the last wave of tech winners is grinding again

Connie Loizos

	13 hours ago

Transportation

Uber’s robotaxi lobbying effort puts it on a collision course with Waymo

Kirsten Korosec

	1 day ago

Featured

Could Supernova be an ‘ethical alternative’ to the social media giants?

Mike Butcher

	Dec 20, 2021

Latest in Venture

In Brief

David Beckham’s health drink startup IM8 takes $1B from General Catalyst’s unusual CVF fund

Julie Bort

	3 hours ago

Venture

Hermes agent maker Nous Research in talks for new funding at $1.5B valuation

Ivan Mehta

Marina Temkin

	16 hours ago

Biotech & Health

Reed Jobs would rather talk about curing cancer than his last name

Connie Loizos

	3 days ago
