At conferences, speakers are often delivering their keynote or panel discussions in languages that many attendees might not know. That leads to users scrambling for their phones and opening translation apps to capture audio from a distance, which is not always effective. Mixhalo, 
a real-time audio startup that solves for situations like these
, is joining DeepL to boost the German startup’s translation suite to help improve these kinds of translation experiences.

Mixhalo was founded in 2016 by Incubus guitarist and songwriter Mike Einziger, violinist Ann Marie Simpson-Einziger, and Vik Singh, who is now the CEO of the startup.

The company’s initial pitch was to improve the listening experience for concert attendees through its platform, but over the years evolved into a company that powers real-time audio for sports and live events. The startup raised over $39 million in capital from investors including Fortress Investment, Founders Fund, Defy Partners, and Cowboy Ventures.

Mixhalo’s CEO Singh said in an email that tons of voice models coming to market were beneficial to Mixhalo, as it could integrate a variety of them and compare performance. He said that the rise of voice AI didn’t directly contribute to acquisition talks, but as model companies grow big, they would “start encroaching” on the space Mixhalo operated in, making it difficult to win on pricing.

Mixhalo said it already relied on DeepL as its primary translation provider, and it made sense to work closer with the company.

Singh tells us: “The DeepL conversation was very organic. Mixhalo has been a long-time DeepL customer, and I attended a customer dinner and ended up seated next to Sebastian, DeepL’s CTO. We just got to talking, and the more we talked, the more obvious the overlap became across the event space, the API, and the application layer, whether that is voice for meetings, document translation, or live event.”

DeepL has been a text translation player for a long time, but in the last few years, it has started making noise about its voice products. In 2024, the company launched 
voice-to-text translation capabilities in over 33 languages
. This April, it launched 
a voice-to-voice translation suite
 to support use cases like multilingual meetings. Mixhalo’s acquisition can push DeepL into the live event space with the same suite.

“For us, Mixhalo will work as a solution and also a marketing use case. The platform will allow us to show how DeepL’s tech works in real-time and in environments like conferences where people are present on the ground,” DeepL CEO Jarek Kutylowski told TechCrunch in a call.

Kutylowski said that with the acquisition of Mixhalo, which is based in San Francisco, DeepL is opening an office in the Bay Area to expand its U.S. operations. Mixhalo competes with the likes of 
Wordly AI 
and 
Seven Seven Six-backed Palabra
.

Topics

AI
, 
AI translation
, 
DeepL
, 
Mixhalo
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
