As the rise of AI-generated music on streaming services continues, concerns are growing regarding how AI companies use copyrighted material to train their models, as well as how potential manipulations in streaming systems could lead to fraud.

However, many music streaming services have yet to launch AI music detection tools. So, the streamer Deezer has taken matters into its own hands.

In the ongoing effort to tackle this issue, Deezer 
introduced
 a tool that scans playlists from various streaming platforms to identify AI-generated tracks. Announced on Thursday, this free online AI music detector supports 27 languages and gives users from 20 of the most popular platforms the chance to see if their playlists include any AI-generated songs.

The launch further positions Deezer as one of the music industry’s most aggressive opponents of AI music, which could be a selling point for its service among consumers. While rivals like 
Apple Music 
and 
Spotify
 have opted for a tagging approach, Deezer actively removes AI tracks from recommendations and excludes them from editorial playlists.  It also recently began offering its 
AI detection technology to rival platforms
. 

To use the new tool, go to Deezer’s 
AI music detector website,
 select your streaming service, and allow Deezer to access your playlists. Once you import your playlists, the service scans for AI content, notifies you of any findings, and even offers the option to share the results. The tool is compatible with Spotify, Apple Music, SoundCloud, and YouTube Music, among other platforms. 

“By detecting and tagging AI-generated music over the past year and a half, Deezer has been at the forefront of transparency in music streaming. No other company has followed our lead yet, so we decided to make it possible for everyone to check if their playlists include synthetic music, no matter which streaming platform they use,” CEO Alexis Lanternier said in a statement.

Notably, the company revealed in today’s announcement that it is carefully considering future steps, such as updating supplier policies or removing content. This would follow in 
Bandcamp’
s footsteps, which banned AI music earlier this year. 

The launch of the new tool comes on the heels of Deezer 
revealing
 that a staggering 44% of all new music uploaded to its platform is AI-generated. 

The company is currently being flooded with nearly 75,000 AI-generated tracks daily, which totals over two million each month. Despite this influx, the listening rate for AI-generated music remains relatively low, accounting for just 1-3% of total streams. Around 85% of these streams are flagged as fraudulent and are demonetized by the platform.

Topics

AI
, 
ai music
, 
Apps
, 
Deezer
, 
Generative AI
, 
Media & Entertainment

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
