Global music streaming service Deezer 
announced
 on Wednesday the launch of its new feature, “Remix Lab,” which allows fans to creatively remix songs with the consent of the original artists and rights holders. Plus, the company says artists actually get paid for every stream of these remixed tracks. 

The new Remix Lab feature can be found in the app on select artists’ pages. Unlike competing services that rely on AI for remixes, Deezer implements in-app tools to create remixes, such as adjusting tempo and adding reverb, or “more elaborate transformations such as changes to musical genre and style,” head of product Pierre Trochu explains in today’s blog post. 

In comparison, 
YouTube
 lets creators remix tracks using AI tools, and 
Spotify
 has recently teamed up with Universal Music Group for AI-generated covers and remixes. However, 
some argue
 that this approach brings more AI music to these platforms, which could overshadow human artists, making it more challenging for them to gain traction.

Deezer has taken a strong stance against AI for some time and recently introduced a new tool that analyzes playlists from streaming services such as Spotify and Apple Music to detect AI-generated tracks. The platform is also recognized as one of the few streaming services that actively removes AI tracks from its recommendations and omits them from editorial playlists.

“This remix tool perfectly embodies our vision of offering a product that enriches the listening experience for fans, by allowing them to participate in the creative process and create a deeper connection with their favorite music, directly in the Deezer app,” CEO Alexis Lanternier said in a statement. “True to our DNA, these features are made possible with full participation of the artists, fully respecting rights, and maximizing earnings for each track.”

While Remix Lab is initially available in France (with vague plans to roll it out to other countries eventually), this feature is notable in the streaming industry because it runs so contrary to the AI-generated direction that most of them are going. Should it prove popular with music fans and artists, it could be a signal that the AI invasion on streaming services isn’t the only future the music industry could pursue.

It could also become an example for other services of how artists can be compensated for their work as fans enjoy remixes. Currently, users are able to remix tracks from select French artists, such as Céline Dion, Alain Souchon, Alonzo, Ronisia, Mosimann, Tiakola, and Zaho.

Additionally, users can sign up for contests hosted in the Deezer Club, where winners will be announced in early September. Winning remixes will be featured in a dedicated Deezer playlist, and each winner will also receive two tickets to a Deezer Purple Door event, along with exclusive merchandise from the respective artist.

Topics

ai music
, 
Apps
, 
Deezer
, 
Media & Entertainment

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Beyond Siri: Here are the practical AI features coming to your iPhone in iOS 27

Sarah Perez

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz
