In Brief

Posted:

4:11 PM PDT · July 8, 2026

Image Credits:
Stefani Reynolds/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Lucas Ropek

Despite ‘misgivings,’ judge approves Elon Musk’s $1.5M SEC settlement

A judge has approved a $1.5 million penalty levied against Elon Musk that will settle a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission lawsuit despite having “significant misgivings” about it.

U.S. District Judge Sparkle Sooknanan noted that her court would accept the settlement, 
Bloomberg reported
 Wednesday, which cited her 
court opinion
.

Sooknanan’s approval settles a lawsuit filed by the SEC against Musk in early 2025 over how the billionaire handled his takeover of Twitter. The lawsuit, which was filed only days before Donald Trump took office, revolved around Musk’s failure to disclose to public investors, in a timely manner, his growing stake in the company in 2022.

The fact that Musk did not initially disclose his stake “ultimately saved him a whopping $150 million,” the SEC argued. 

In May, Musk 
reached a settlement
 with the SEC that stipulated a trust in Musk’s name would be responsible for paying a $1.5 million penalty without admitting wrongdoing.

Sooknanan 
previously questioned
 whether Musk was receiving “special treatment” from the Trump administration. Musk helped to bankroll Trump’s campaign during the 2024 presidential race.

In her opinion, Sooknanan noted that her court was “limited to evaluating whether the proposed consent judgment meets minimum standards of fairness and reasonableness,” or whether it “make[s] a mockery of judicial power.”

“Although the Court has significant misgivings about the settlement reached in this case, it cannot say that
the settlement meets that high threshold,” Sooknanan wrote. 

Topics

Elon Musk
, 
Government & Policy
, 
In Brief
, 
SEC
, 
Trump
, 
Twitter

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

SpaceXAI releases Grok 4.5, which Elon describes as an ‘Opus-class model’

Lucas Ropek

	7 hours ago

Social

Elon Musk says X will send DMs when posts you’ve engaged with are corrected

Sarah Perez

	8 hours ago

Security

Hacked, leaked, and held for ransom: The worst breaches of 2026 so far

Zack Whittaker

	1 day ago

Latest in Government & Policy

Apps

Truecaller clashes with India’s telecom regulator over anti-spam rules

Jagmeet Singh

	10 minutes ago

In Brief

Despite ‘misgivings,’ judge approves Elon Musk’s $1.5M SEC settlement

Lucas Ropek

	3 hours ago

In Brief

Trump memecoin investors lost $3.8 billion, analysis finds

Anthony Ha

	3 days ago
