Disney is 
partnering
 with TikTok to bring Disney-focused fan content directly into the Disney+ app. The companies are starting with a pilot program in the U.S. in the coming months, and plan to expand to additional markets later on.

As part of the agreement, fan-made videos on TikTok about Pixar, Marvel, Star Wars, and other franchises will be featured in the “Verts” section of Disney+, the streamer’s 
short-form video feed
 that rolled out a few months ago. 

Disney has been working to flesh out the amount and variety of content on the video feed. The company late last year committed to making a significant 
$1 billion investment
 in OpenAI as part of a three-year licensing deal that would let people create short videos using Disney characters on the AI lab’s video generation platform, Sora. However, those plans fell through after OpenAI suddenly decided to 
shut down Sora
 in March.

This partnership with TikTok seems like a natural progression of that, especially as many streaming platforms are competing with social platforms for users’ attention. This competition is partly why Disney launched the Verts feature in the first place, along with 
Netflix
, 
HBO Max
, and 
Prime Video
. 

The deal also indicates that Disney is acknowledging that the next generation of talent is on social media. The company said that, through the newly launched Disney Creator Ambassador Program, TikTok creators will gain access to the media giant’s vast library of content, as well as opportunities to earn rewards, increase visibility, access exclusive events, and career opportunities. 

Other streaming services, such as 
Tubi
 and 
Peacock
, have collaborated with TikTok creators to produce original long-form content for their platforms.

The timing of the announcement aligns with Disney’s 
Q3 results
. The company reported its subscription video-on-demand (SVOD) operating income more than doubled to $712 million from $329 million a year earlier. Plus, in a restructuring move, Disney has decided to shift its consumer products business from the Experiences division to Studios.

Topics

Apps
, 
content creator
, 
disney+
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
short form video
, 
streaming service
, 
TikTok

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
