The Department of Justice on Monday sided with xAI in a lawsuit that sought to stop the company’s use of 
dozens of unpermitted natural gas turbines
 near its Memphis data centers, according to a 
Wired
.

The DoJ said if the NAACP, which filed the lawsuit in April, prevails, the result would undermine “American national, economic, and energy security by seeking to shut off the power supply for artificial-intelligence innovation that supports the Department of War’s military operations.”

The memorandum filed by the Justice Department said that Grok is one of four AI models that support “mission-critical operations,” such as its recent strikes in Iran.

The NAACP started telegraphing its intent to sue xAI 
last June
, seeking to end the company’s practice of using “mobile” gas turbines at its Colossus and Colossus 2 data centers. Those efforts failed, and Elon Musk’s AI company has since added more turbines, bringing the total to 57.

Because the turbines have remained on trailers, xAI claims that they are exempt from Mississippi air pollution regulations for one year. The Southern Environmental Law Center, which filed the lawsuit on behalf of the NAACP, says that the company’s use still violates federal law, which states that trailer-mounted turbines can be considered stationary and are therefore subject to regulation.

The NAACP has said that the region, already one of the most polluted in the country, has suffered worse air quality since xAI’s data centers went online.

Since last year, the number of turbines at the data centers have more than doubled, resulting in a corresponding increase in three major air pollutants: PM2.5, formaldehyde, and oxides of nitrogen (NO
x
). All three have been linked to asthma and cardiovascular disease. Formaldehyde exposure increases the risk of cancer, and PM2.5 has been implicated in a range of ailments, from stroke to Alzheimer’s disease.

The company, which is now a division of SpaceX, is likely to buy more generators in the coming months or years. In 
SpaceX’s IPO filing
, the company said that it will 
buy another $2.8 billion worth
 of gas turbines to power its AI data centers over the next three years. Of that, at least $2 billion are earmarked for “mobile gas turbines.” 

Topics

AI
, 
air pollution
, 
Climate
, 
data centers
, 
lawsuit
, 
SpaceX
, 
xAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos
