In the lead up to the 
SpaceX IPO
, there were dozens of stories about early employees and investors who stood to make millions of dollars for betting on, or working for, Elon Musk. 

But thanks to Musk’s work with DOGE, his public comments on X, and the infamous gesture he made at Donald Trump’s inauguration that looked a lot like a Nazi salute, someone realized there was money to be made by avoiding him. 

An exchanged-traded fund creator with the appropo name of Subversive Capital has found a way to tap into that negative sentiment with two new anti-Elon exchanged-traded funds.

The ETFs, which are similar to mutual funds, except they are traded like regular stocks, are legally registered by Tidal Trust I and attached to a brand called Subversive Markets Lab LLC. (Bloomberg was the first to spot the filing.) 

Avoiding the world’s richest person can be tricky for the average investor, who likely puts their money into mutual funds tied to indices like the S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100. SpaceX, which is in the FTSE Russell and MSCI indexes, was recently added to the Nasdaq 100. That means it’s included in funds that track those indexes. Musk’s other publicly traded company, Tesla, is a longtime favorite of mutual funds, especially the large cap and growth varieties.

The two 
newly registered ETFs
, named Nasdaq-100 Ex-Elon Enterprises ETF and S&P 500 Ex-Elon Enterprises ETF, are designed to block these companies. As of the date of the prospectus, the excluded enterprises are Tesla (TSLA) and Space Exploration Technologies Corp. (SPCX), the filing states. Musk’s other companies, including 
Neuralink
 and The Boring Company are not publicly traded. 

It is possible that the Ex-Elon funds may exclude other companies that become closely associated with the near-trillionaire, too. The Ex-Elon funds seek “to provide capital appreciation through exposure to a broad universe of large-capitalization U.S. equity securities, while excluding the equity securities of companies that are founded, controlled, or led by Elon Musk, or with which Mr. Musk is otherwise primarily associated,” so the document filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission reads. 

While these are legit funds that investors will soon be able to trade, there’s also more than a bit of tongue and cheek going on. Prior to the Ex-Elon funds, Subversive 
earned headlines
 for its other ETFs that promise to let regular folks “invest like the oligarchy.” One of those funds holds stocks known to be traded by Democratic members of Congress and their spouses, and the other mirrors those held by the Republican side of the aisle.  

It’s too early to say if investors will pile into these Ex-Elon ETFs, which have the tickers QQNE and SPNE, or if they will perform better than funds that include Musk’s companies. But they do reflect a growing appetite for ways to avoid Musk, and, 
given his famed hostility to traders who shorted Tesla
, perhaps even annoy him a little.  

Topics

Elon Musk
, 
ETFs
, 
Fintech
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant
