One of the most bizarre episodes in e-commerce history has come to a close. eBay and several former eBay employees have agreed to pay $56 million to a newsletter-writing couple who were targeted by the company’s former executives 
in a horrific targeted harassment campaign
 that took place in 2019.

Ina and David Steiner, a married couple and the co-authors of 
EcommerceBytes
, inspired the ire of high-level eBay executives after occasionally criticizing the company in their newsletter. In 2019, a plot was concocted to intimidate the couple into halting their negative coverage.

Executives used sock puppet social media accounts to harass the couple, while also sending them anonymous threatening letters and bizarre items in the mail — including live spiders and cockroaches, pornographic magazines, a bloody pig mask, a funereal wreath, and a book about surviving the death of a spouse. 

According to previously 
released court documents
, a plan that was attempted but never successfully carried out involved 
affixing a GPS tracking device
 to the couple’s car. Yet another internally broached plan involved sending a “Samoan gang” to the Steiners’ home.

The settlement this week resolves a 2021 civil case brought by the couple against eBay. The law office representing the Steiners writes that the 
settlement includes $46.15 million
 paid to the couple by eBay itself, as well as $2 million from former eBay executive CEO Devin Wenig.

Additionally, $500,000 will be paid out to the couple from former eBay executive Wendy Jones, as well as $50,000 from former eBay executive Steve Wymer. Additional funds are being paid to various non-profits. 

In 2022, seven former eBay employees were 
criminally charged
 and pled guilty in relation to the plot, including the company’s former security chief, James Baugh — who was sentenced to nearly five years in prison. Others indicted by the U.S. Department of Justice include David Harville, Brian Gilbert, Stephanie Popp, Stephanie Stockwell, Philip Cooke, and former eBay contractor Veronica Zea.

In 
a statement
 published Tuesday, eBay disavowed its former employees’ behavior as “not representative of eBay’s culture” — which is comforting, I guess.

“As we have long stated, what the Steiners were subjected to by former eBay employees in 2019 was wrong, reprehensible and should never have happened,” eBay continued. “We condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the employees who perpetrated and pled guilty to criminal charges for the misconduct against Ina and David Steiner.” 

“We continue to extend our deepest apologies to the Steiners. This agreement is consistent with our commitment to fairly compensate the Steiners and fulfills our efforts to make things right.”

“This case was always about more than obtaining financial recovery,” 
said Christopher Murphy
, one of the Steiners’ attorneys. “From the beginning, our clients wanted to uncover the truth, protect journalists and publishers, hold those responsible accountable, deter future corporate misconduct, and help ensure others would never have to endure what they experienced.”

Topics

Commerce
, 
eBay

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
