Swedish electric and autonomous trucking company Einride has agreed to acquire EV charging startup Flipturn in an 
all-stock deal 
worth $38 million.

The acquisition — Einride’s first as a publicly traded company — will expand its EV charging ecosystem as it works to scale its electric trucking business. The deal is expected to close this month. Flipturn, which employs 17 people, will continue operating with the same team, a company spokesperson confirmed.

Flipturn, founded in 2022, raised $15.5 million in venture capital to build an EV charging software platform that can communicate with any EV charger over the Open Charge Point Protocol, the industry standard for communication between EV chargers and management systems. The software monitors the health of charging infrastructure, pulls in data such as vehicle battery levels, driving history, and routes to help companies better manage charging, and integrates with on-site solar and energy storage systems.

Einride CEO Roozbeh Charli said the “acquisition is a decisive step in our U.S. scaling strategy.” The deal will also make Einride a more vertically integrated company, allowing it to offer customers not just electric trucks but also the charging software needed to run them more efficiently and reliably.

That’s an attractive, and potentially influential pitch to future customers that want to add electric big rigs to their fleets, but may be apprehensive to do so. 

Einride is perhaps best known for its unusual-looking cabless autonomous pod-like trucks. But its biggest revenue driver is its fleet of 200 heavy-duty electric trucks, which it operates for companies including Heineken, PepsiCo, and Carlsberg Sweden in Europe, North America, and the United Arab Emirates.

The company, which merged with a blank-check company and debuted on Nasdaq in June, recently landed 
Amazon as a customer
. Amazon isn’t buying Einride’s trucks; instead, Einride owns and manages the trucks —through its own Saga AI software — which can be used by drivers in Amazon’s Relay freight network. Relay, which launched in 2017, is an app that truck drivers use to book hauling gigs with Amazon.

Topics

einride
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Microsoft patches bug in video game Age of Empires II

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan
