X’s crowdsourced fact-checking system, Community Notes, will be updated to send users direct messages alerting them whenever a post they have interacted with has received a correction. The change, which is not yet live, was 
announced
 by X owner Elon Musk. He did not share a time frame for its launch.

The update attempts to address one of the bigger criticisms about Community Notes — that corrections arrive too late to matter. A misleading post can accumulate views and reposts while its accuracy is disputed, and by the time it’s corrected, the damage has been done. By proactively notifying users when a post receives a correction, X is trying to extend the reach of the note beyond the original post. This could also allow users who spread false information to issue their own mea culpa, if they had been duped.

We will be releasing a new 
@CommunityNotes
 feature that sends you an 𝕏 Chat message if a post you interacted with is corrected
— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) 
July 8, 2026

X’s Community Notes system was first established when the company was still known as Twitter, before Musk’s acquisition. 

The idea was to introduce a different way to address misinformation on the platform, rather than require Twitter (now X) to be the centralized authority for moderation decisions. Instead, Community Notes contributors could suggest corrections and add critical details or missing information to posts. Consensus is achieved when people who rate the note as helpful are those who 
typically have different perspectives
, and the note goes live.

A similar system has 
since been adopted
 by Meta as part of its broader moderation overhaul last year, which saw the company 
eliminate its partnerships with fact-checkers
.

Though Community Notes makes sense for a company that wants to distance itself from the business of fact-checking, it’s also proven difficult to scale. A 
2025 study of the feature
 by Spanish fact-checking site Maldita found that 85% of the proposed notes on X remain invisible to users, and only 8.3% get published and become visible. 
A separate study
 conducted by the Digital Democracy Institute of the Americas (DDIA), which encompassed 1.76 million notes published on X between January 2021 and March 2025, put the figure for unpublished notes even higher at 90%.

This weakens Community Notes as a system that surfaces information when it’s most needed, critics have pointed out. Plus, they’ve argued, people aren’t aware when a post they saw or boosted receives a correction later on, as there’s been no way to bring that information to their attention. 

Musk’s proposal to send users alerts via X Chat (DMs) would address the latter issue, at least, assuming it goes live. X was asked for comment, but a response was not immediately available.

Topics

Apps
, 
community notes
, 
fact checking
, 
Social
, 
social media
, 
X

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort
