In Brief

Posted:

7:57 AM PDT · July 28, 2026

Image Credits:
X Money

Amanda Silberling

Elon Musk’s X Money app is rolling out in the U.S.

X is launching its 
X Money
 app for paid X subscribers in the United States. 

Users get an X Visa debit card, which they can immediately add to Apple Pay and use to make instant peer-to-peer transfers within the app without fees or limits. They will also receive a physical X Visa debit card which, according to X Money, has no foreign transaction fees and offers free cash withdrawals at worldwide ATMs.

Your money, on the world’s most powerful network
𝕏 Money is rolling out to U.S. Premium and Premium+ subscribers starting today 
pic.twitter.com/2c1UMkB4Kn
— X Money (@XMoney) 
July 27, 2026

X Premium+ users (who pay $40 per month or $395 per year) are eligible for 6% APY, while Premium users (who pay $8 per month or $84 per year) can access the 6% rate if they link a direct deposit to their X Money account. X Money also says that users can get up to 3% cash back on certain purchases, and if they link a direct deposit, they can access that money a few days early. 

The release of 
X Money
 reflects a decades-long dream for Elon Musk. In 1999, he founded X.com as a financial services startup, which later merged into PayPal. When he acquired Twitter in 2022, Musk changed the name of the platform to X and repurchased the X.com domain name.

Since the Twitter acquisition, Musk has repeatedly stated that he wants to turn the social platform into an “
everything app
,” and the rollout of X Money is part of that ambition.

Topics

Apps
, 
Elon Musk
, 
X

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Fundraising

Fish Audio raises $50M seed to build AI voice models for creators and enterprises

Ivan Mehta

	57 minutes ago

Hardware

Apple launches ‘Upgrade’ device leasing program in partnership with Klarna

Aisha Malik

	1 hour ago

AI

Recursive Superintelligence signs $410 compute deal with Amazon

Russell Brandom

	2 hours ago

Latest in Apps

In Brief

Elon Musk’s X Money app is rolling out in the U.S.

Amanda Silberling

	9 seconds ago

In Brief

WhatsApp now lets you make calls using its web app

Ivan Mehta

	4 minutes ago

Apps

Granola launches an Apple Watch app

Ivan Mehta

	2 hours ago
