Elon Musk’s X has settled its multiyear legal battle with advertising trade group the World Federation of Advertisers (WFA), the 
two organizations said
 on Wednesday.

The settlement ends Musk’s aggressive attempt to hold advertisers legally responsible for pulling spending from X over brand safety concerns.

X sued the WFA in 2024
 for conducting what it called a “systematic illegal boycott” of the platform after it saw a decline in advertising revenue following Musk’s $44 billion takeover of the social network in 2022. Companies X accused of doing so included Mars, CVS Health, Shell, Lego, and more. The advertisers rejected the allegations and argued that brands are free to decide where to spend their advertising dollars. 

A federal court dismissed the lawsuit in March after a judge said X had failed to demonstrate that it had suffered any harm under federal competition laws. X had appealed the decision in April. 

“Today the World Federation of Advertisers (WFA) and X Corp. are putting the litigation involving the Global Alliance for Responsible Media (GARM) behind them,” the joint statement reads. “This resets the relationship between the two organizations.”

X had alleged that advertisers reduced their spending because of guidelines developed by the WFA’s Global Alliance for Responsible Media (GARM), a coalition of brands and advertising agencies that was established to develop standards aimed at preventing ads from being displayed alongside harmful online ⁠content.

Advertisers were concerned that their brands would appear alongside harmful content on the social network after Musk overhauled the platform’s content moderation policies.

“WFA reiterates its commitment to freedom of speech, a principle first included in WFA’s founding constitution back in 1953, and a principle it shares with X,” the statement reads. “On August 9, 2024, WFA discontinued GARM. WFA will not form or restart GARM or a similar initiative. WFA and X are fully aligned in the view that brands, platforms, and consumers will all benefit from brand-safety innovation.”

The lawsuit wasn’t the only time Musk clashed with advertisers. After acquiring X, he 
told advertisers
 who paused spending on the platform to “go f*** yourself.” 

Topics

Apps
, 
Social
, 
X

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

OpenAI makes ChatGPT Health available to all US users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane
