In Brief

Posted:

1:35 PM PDT · August 9, 2026

Image Credits:
Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Embattled hedge fund Situational Awareness invests $400M in chip startup Source Foundry

Situational Awareness may have had to sell off the majority of its public portfolio last month, but the AI-focused hedge fund is still making some big bets.

This week, the fund invested $400 million into Source Foundry, a startup founded by Stanford researchers aiming to make chip manufacturing faster and cheaper, 
according to The Wall Street Journal
. That brings its total investment in Source Foundry to $500 million.

Situational Awareness was founded by Leopold Aschenbrenner, a former OpenAI researcher in his mid-twenties who had no trading experience when he launched the fund in 2024. Early returns were reportedly strong, but the fund faced steep losses in recent months amidst the decline in AI infrastructure stocks.

At the end of July, Situational Awareness sold off the majority of its public portfolio to Ken Griffin’s Citadel, although 
the fund held on to its Anthropic shares
. Its assets under management reportedly fell from $20 billion to $10 billion.

On the bright side, Aschenbrenner 
didn’t let those setbacks get in the way of his wedding
.

Topics

AI
, 
Fundraising
, 
situational awareness

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Government & Policy

Historian Jill Lepore says Silicon Valley misreads science fiction and undermines democracy

Anthony Ha

	6 hours ago

Latest in Fundraising

In Brief

Embattled hedge fund Situational Awareness invests $400M in chip startup Source Foundry

Anthony Ha

	30 minutes ago

In Brief

Defense tech Hadrian raises $1.37B at $8B valuation

Julie Bort

	3 days ago

Startups

Naïve raises $28.5M to automate the grunt work of setting up and running a company

Ram Iyer

	3 days ago
