In Brief

Posted:

5:08 PM PDT · June 24, 2026

Image Credits:
Lina Selg/Bloomberg 
(opens in a new window)
 / Getty Images

Connie Loizos

Europe is pushing back on Washington’s chip war

Dutch Trade Minister Sjoerd Sjoerdsma visited Washington this week to meet with Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick and members of Congress to oppose the 
MATCH Act
, a bill that would bar Chinese chipmakers from accessing Western semiconductor equipment, and one that would hit ASML especially hard.

ASML, based in the Netherlands, is Europe’s most valuable company and the only maker in the world of the sophisticated lithography machines that are used to make cutting-edge AI chips.

“It’s exceptional that I’m coming here to broadly outline our concerns to Congress,” Sjoerdsma 
told Bloomberg
 after the meetings. “The stakes for the Netherlands may be very high.”

China accounts for 19% of ASML’s net system sales. The MATCH Act would go further than existing controls, extending curbs to ASML’s deep ultraviolet immersion machines on top of the long-standing ban on its most advanced extreme ultraviolet, or EUV, tools reaching China.

As ASML CEO Christophe Fouquet 
told TechCrunch
 in May, what China can currently buy are older-generation deep ultraviolet tools — gear first shipped about a decade ago — the same machines the MATCH Act would now relegate off limits.

The bill, introduced in April, hasn’t yet faced a full House or Senate vote; Bloomberg notes it would likely need to be folded into a larger package to pass.

Topics

AI
, 
TC

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

	42 minutes ago

AI

AI was supposed to kill engineering jobs, but new data suggests they’re the most resilient

Marina Temkin

	2 hours ago

Transportation

Here’s why Slate changed the battery in its cheap EV truck

Tim De Chant

	5 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Europe is pushing back on Washington’s chip war

Connie Loizos

	9 seconds ago

AI

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

	42 minutes ago

In Brief

Cerebras stock plunges after earnings as CEO says margin outlook was misunderstood

Aisha Malik

	1 hour ago
