Italian app studio 
Bending Spoons
, which has acquired businesses like 
Eventbrite
, 
Vimeo
, and 
WeTransfer
 in recent years, has filed to go public in the U.S. The company joins other names like SpaceX and Anthropic that are preparing to IPO this summer.

The company said it has over 500 million monthly active users across its apps, with 9 million paying customers. To date, it has made over 50 acquisitions, including AOL, Eventbrite, Vimeo, Komoot, WeTransfer, Evernote, and Brightcove.

In its filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Bending Spoons said it ended the year with $1.31 billion in revenue and has generated $601 million in Q1, a 132% year-on-year jump. The company gets the majority of its revenue from subscriptions, which account for 84% of its business. It generated $27.4 million in profit in Q1 2026.

The company raised funding at an 
$11 billion valuation last year
, up from $2.8 billion in 2024. In April, 
Reuters
 reported that the company could seek a $20 billion valuation with the IPO.

Investment management firm Baillie Gifford holds a big chunk of the company, with other institutions such as Cox Enterprises, Durable Capital Partners, and Fidelity also on the list of backers.

Bending Spoons typically acquires a property whose business is not in a healthy state, trims the teams, and pushes it to profitability with different kinds of subscription structures.

Topics

Apps
, 
Bending Spoons
, 
IPO
, 
Vimeo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
