Facebook 
announced
 on Wednesday that it’s rolling out a standalone 
Creator Studio app
, an AI-powered app that gives creators personalized tips to grow their audiences and new tools to engage with their communities. The official iOS rollout comes a few weeks after 
Facebook began testing
 the app with select creators.

Facebook’s 
AI creator assistant
 is built into the new app to provide creators with personalized recommendations based on their content style, performance, audience engagement, and goals.

Creators often have to sift through charts and dashboards to understand their performance, but with the AI assistant, they can get quick answers to questions like “When should I post?” and “What are people saying in my comments?” Creators can also ask follow-up questions. 

By giving creators access to the new Creator Studio app, Meta is looking to keep creators active on Facebook as it competes for their attention against rivals like TikTok and YouTube. The company may also be trying to reduce its reliance on third-party tools like ChatGPT when it comes to content ideas and analyzing performance.

Image Credits:
Facebook /

The Creator Studio app includes several new features, including an AI-powered comment tool that surfaces the most important comments and drafts replies in the creator’s own tone. Creators can edit and approve the suggested replies before posting them, according to Facebook.

Additionally, when creators open up the app each day, they’ll see a feed of daily priorities, including reviewing their latest post’s performance, tracking progress toward their goals, and flagging comments that need a reply. 

Creator Studio is available for all creators on iOS in the United States and Canada.

The new app isn’t Meta’s only recent launch; the company has been on something of a product spree in recent months. The tech giant recently released a standalone app for Facebook Groups called 
Forum
 that functions similarly to Reddit, an app called 
Instants
 that lets users share disappearing photos with Instagram friends, a vibe-coded gaming app called 
Pocket
, and an AI storytelling app called 
StoryKit
 that creates AI-generated children’s stories.

Topics

Apps
, 
Facebook

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
