In Brief

Posted:

11:50 AM PDT · July 9, 2026

Image Credits:
Leo Patrizi / Getty Images

Amanda Silberling

FanDuel sent a video from star athlete Bryce Harper to a customer with a gambling problem

FanDuel
, a sports betting app, is being sued for allegedly using VIP perks to deepen customers’ gambling addictions. According to 
the Philadelphia Inquirer
, Phillies star and two-time MLB MVP Bryce Harper sent a personalized video message to Terry Thompson, one of two plaintiffs in the case, as part of FanDuel’s special treatment for big spenders.

FanDuel assigns VIP managers to build personal relationships with high rollers like Thompson, who has wagered $18.5 million with FanDuel since 2020. According to the lawsuit, he eventually took out a second and third mortgage on his home, lost it to foreclosure, and sought psychiatric treatment for gambling addiction. While these companies often woo their top customers with Super Bowl tickets and other perks, the Inquirer found no precedent for an active, star athlete like Harper sending this kind of personal message to a bettor.

In the 21-second video, obtained by the Inquirer, Harper does not directly tell Thompson to gamble; however, he mentions that Thompson’s FanDuel host wanted to ensure that Thompson had an “extra special Thanksgiving.”

The video calls into question the muddied relationship between professional athletes and gambling apps. MLB players are prohibited from gambling — two pitchers, Emmanuel Clase and Luis Ortiz, were 
federally indicted
 last year for allegedly accepting bribes to fix pitches. However, the MLB partners extensively with sports books and prediction markets like 
Polymarket
, and gambling apps are frequently advertised in ballparks and broadcasts.

Topics

Apps

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Google will now disclose which ads are made with AI

Sarah Perez

	9 minutes ago

AI

How did the government decide OpenAI’s frontier model was safe to release?

Tim Fernholz

	28 minutes ago

Apps

How to stop Meta’s AI image generator from using your Instagram photos

Lauren Forristal

	53 minutes ago

Latest in Apps

In Brief

FanDuel sent a video from star athlete Bryce Harper to a customer with a gambling problem

Amanda Silberling

	10 seconds ago

Apps

How to stop Meta’s AI image generator from using your Instagram photos

Lauren Forristal

	53 minutes ago

In Brief

Block reaches $45M settlement with 46 states over Cash App fraud probe

Aisha Malik

	4 hours ago
