Aluminum has left an indelible mark on the world — 
more than 3 billion tons
 of red mud, a waste product of the refining process, are currently stored in open-air ponds or mounds. But to Sumedh Gostu, co-founder and CEO of 
Fast Metals
, there’s treasure in the caustic waste. 

“It is a very rich resource,” he told TechCrunch. “If you attack with the right chemistry, it can be very profitable.”

Gostu thinks Fast Metals has found that chemistry, which just so happens to be partially comprised of another waste stream, also produced from alumina refineries.

The startup recently raised a $4.3 million pre-seed round led by New Climate Ventures with participation from Azolla Ventures, Astor Swiss, and Rio Tinto’s accelerator, Founders Factory.

Red mud’s vermillion hue comes largely from rusted iron, which is the most common compound in the mix. But the byproduct also contains 
critical minerals
, including titanium, aluminum, and rare earth elements. 

Despite its mineral riches, red mud has largely been ignored because it has been too expensive to separate those minerals from the iron oxide, Gostu said. “We are removing that impediment,” he said.

Gostu had designed most of the process during his doctoral studies at the Colorado School of Mines. But one piece was missing, until one day, while talking with his fellow co-founder Anthony Staley, things fell into place. “We were like, ‘oh wait, theres’s a waste stream which can make the whole process very economical, and it’s lying right there,’” Gostu said.

Fast Metals applies this waste stream, along with other chemicals, to red mud over six different steps. Different minerals fall out along the way, each of which can be sold.

“Iron pays for the opex, and the other stuff is profit,” Gostu said.

The profit potential is significant. Titanium dioxide sells for 
around $2.50 to $3
 per kilogram, while scandium oxide sells for about 
$750 per kilogram
.

With the fresh funding, Fast Metals plans to scale up its process. The startup has a commercial contract with Metalox, a mineral processor, to treat one ton of red mud and refinery waste per week later this year.

Topics

Climate
, 
critical minerals

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

OpenAI makes ChatGPT Health available to all US users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane
