In Brief

Posted:

12:38 PM PDT · August 11, 2026

Image Credits:
Matt Cardy / Getty Images

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

FBI says cybercriminals are hacking into victims’ online accounts to steal their intimate pictures

The FBI is 
warning
 that cybercriminals are hacking into the social media accounts of adults and children to steal their intimate explicit images and videos. 

The perpetrators rely largely on social engineering tactics to target people, the alert said, and victims are often extorted, or their stolen content published online.

“Victims often face re-victimization through harassment, sextortion, stalking or other targeted attacks, such as advertising stolen content on a victim’s own social media page,” the FBI wrote.

These types of crimes have been 
known
 for 
years
. But the FBI’s public alert could indicate that these incidents are now on the rise, according to Rachel Tobac, the CEO of the security awareness training firm SocialProof Security. The FBI did not respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment.

Tobac said that these attacks especially target young boys, and that these attacks are “a big public health issue,” given that sometimes the victims are driven to self-harm in response.

The FBI’s advisory said the attackers rely on brute-forcing accounts using leaked or previously used passwords, impersonating customer service representatives by pretending to work for Instagram and other social media companies, and contacting targets alleging that they need to recover their account. Some hackers use phishing emails that rely on fake domains that look like legitimate social media log-in pages.

To protect yourself, use unique passwords stored in a password manager, ensure multi-factor authentication is switched on, and be suspicious of anyone reaching out unprompted claiming to work for a social media company, as tech companies generally do not reach out to their customers. The advisory also urges people to avoid storing sensitive and intimate pictures in online accounts.

Topics

cybercrime
, 
cybersecurity
, 
extortion
, 
hacking
, 
Security

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Google’s Gemini app surges to one billion users

Lauren Forristal

	50 minutes ago

Social

Bluesky’s active user base is shrinking as its focus expands beyond the app

Sarah Perez

	2 hours ago

Venture

What’s Scaleup Europe, the $5.7B fund that just backed satellite company ICEYE?

Anna Heim

	2 hours ago

Latest in Security

In Brief

FBI says cybercriminals are hacking into victims’ online accounts to steal their intimate pictures

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	45 seconds ago

In Brief

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	4 hours ago

Security

North Korean remote IT staffer worked for US government agency, says FBI

Zack Whittaker

	6 hours ago
