U.S. prosecutors have accused a Florida man of uploading fake video games that contained malware to Steam, the popular PC games platform. Once victims downloaded and installed the games, the malware was designed to infect their computers, steal their passwords and other data, and drain their crypto wallets, 
according to a criminal complaint
.

On Tuesday, the FBI arrested Zyaire Wilkins, a 21-year-old Florida resident and student. On Wednesday, prosecutors accused him and a number of unnamed co-conspirators of hacking crimes. Over the past two years, Wilkins and his partners allegedly published several malware-laden video games on Steam, including BlockBlasters, Dashverse, Lampy, Lunara, and 
PirateFi
. Using that malware, says the FBI, Wilkins and his accomplices infected around 8,000 victims, and then hacked around 80 cryptocurrency wallets to steal at least $220,000 worth of crypto.

Wilkins and the others marketed their malicious video games on Discord, LinkedIn, and Telegram, according to the authorities.  

Wilkins’ lawyer did not respond to a request for comment. 

In March, 
the FBI announced that it was investigating a hacker
 suspected of using malware-embedded video games published on Steam to hack victims. 
In the announcement
, the bureau called for people who downloaded the malicious games, which included those named in this week’s complaint, to come forward and provide evidence to aid the investigation. 

In the last year, Steam’s maker Valve has removed 
several
 
video
 
games
 from its platform after they were found to contain malware, including PirateFi. All the games were designed to look legitimate, to the point that players could install them and play them, but they all contained malware. 

After the FBI identified another person involved in the crimes, according to the complaint, federal agents interviewed them. The unnamed person said they worked with other people to raise money to launch and market the malicious games in return for sharing some of the stolen cryptocurrency. The FBI identified a specific crypto account involved in the scheme, and then traced cryptocurrency payments made with that account to buy several gift cards, including for UberEats. After subpoenaing Uber, the feds were able to see that the gift cards were linked to an account that made deliveries to Wilkins, who went by the nickname Sibel.eth online, according to the complaint. 

The feds then got a search warrant for Wilkins’ residence, where they seized his MacBook laptop, cellphones, other devices, and digital wallets. According to the complaint, he refused to speak or answer any questions.

Topics

crypto
, 
cryptocurrency
, 
cybercrime
, 
Gaming
, 
hackers
, 
malware
, 
Security
, 
Steam
, 
Valve
, 
Valve Software

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh
