In Brief

Posted:

8:54 AM PDT · July 18, 2026

Anthony Ha

Federal employees can download TikTok on their work phones again

The Department of Justice says that federal employees can now download TikTok on their government devices, 
according to Reuters
.

A 2022 law banned federal employees from using the short-form video app on those devices, but the DOJ reportedly says the law no longer applies, thanks to 
a deal transferring ownership of TikTok’s U.S. operations
 to a joint venture backed by Oracle, Silver Lake, and MGX. (Oracle serves as the security partner for the new joint venture, while previous owner ByteDance retains a 19.9% stake.)

The DOJ memo reportedly says President Donald Trump has cleared “employees of Executive Branch agencies” to “download TikTok onto their official devices, subject ​to the agency’s discretion and consistent with all applicable workplace policies.”

Following the ban focused on government employees and devices, the app was banned more broadly across the United States. But as the law was set to take effect early last year, 
the app only went down briefly
 before Trump repeatedly delayed the move and urged service providers to restore access.

Topics

Apps
, 
Government & Policy
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Social

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

A 600-mile road trip (and data) proves EV charging doesn’t suck anymore

Tim De Chant

	1 hour ago

Venture

Neil Rimer thinks the AI money is coming back out

Connie Loizos

	11 hours ago

Stripe x Startup Battlefield

Applications close in 48 hours — here’s everything Australian founders need to know about Stripe x Startup Battlefield

Isabelle Johannessen

	17 hours ago

Latest in Government & Policy

In Brief

Federal employees can download TikTok on their work phones again

Anthony Ha

	9 seconds ago

Media & Entertainment

12 states sue to block Paramount’s $110B Warner Bros. deal

Aisha Malik

	Jul 13, 2026

Transportation

Uber’s robotaxi lobbying effort puts it on a collision course with Waymo

Kirsten Korosec

	Jul 13, 2026
