Bad news for those who get their updates through RSS feeds: 
Feedly
, the largest standalone RSS reader worldwide, has experienced technical issues for over a week, and paying users are upset that the web app has been “unusably slow.” Some users have also reported that the company has ignored their support requests. 
Uh-oh. 

Feedly, the 
heir to the market ceded by Google
 when it 
closed
 Google Reader in 2013, is today among the most successful RSS newsreaders globally with 15 million users, according to its 
website
. That makes it larger than competitive products like the web-based Inoreader as well as various desktop apps like NetNewsWire, Reeder, and others.  

And yet, the app is experiencing a number of 
ongoing
 
issues
 that are affecting users and paying subscribers alike. The most critical problem is a significant slowdown on its web app, which has made browsing feeds quickly and efficiently very frustrating. Users on Reddit reported the app running “extremely” slow, making it “unusable.”

Further, users said that 
the company’s iOS app
, including on iOS 27 beta, has not been working, and the classic version of Feedly’s mobile app (preferred by a small subset of customers) 
was shut down
 without warning weeks ago. 

As most consumers now keep up with news through dedicated apps, like Apple News by browsing the web and sources like Google News, and through posts on social media, the market for RSS readers has always been relatively small. However, Feedly has been working to shift its focus to AI, offering businesses a way to track emerging threats and keep up with tailored intelligence through its app.

With the latest issues, it begs the question as of whether Feedly is still focused on its core RSS customers amid its pivot to AI, which is the product the company now advertises 
via its homepage
.

TechCrunch reached out to Feedly for an update on these issues, given that multiple 
customers on Reddit
 said their requests for technical support had been ignored. 

In response, Feedly CEO Edwin Khodabakchian reassured TechCrunch that RSS was still a focus.

“Despite the pivot to cyber threat intelligence, fixing the basic RSS functionality is still a priority because our CTI community uses the news-reading capability,” he said. “Our goal has been to maintain the Feedly News Reader as fast and streamlined as possible.” 

In addition, the CEO said the company was aware of the issues with its web app, which were attributed to a bug, and said the front-end team had been testing a fix. Currently, the team believes the issue was related to using “Mark as Read” on accounts with a lot of folders, and a fix for that was released Friday. The company is still confirming whether this has resolved the problem for all users.

Khodabakchian also confirmed that the Feedly Classic app was “retired two weeks ago because it “no longer met some iOS and Android requirements,” though it had been removed from the App Store long before that. At the time, the app had only a few hundred active users, he noted. The team did not notify those existing users before its final shutdown.

In addition, Khodabakchian said he was not aware of 
the iOS app issues
, which prevent the app from loading, but said Feedly would investigate. He also promised it would be fixed quickly, noting that the company still actively invests in its main iOS and Android app.

Topics

Apps
, 
Apps
, 
RSS
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Everything announced at Made by Google ’26: Pixel 11, Pixel Watch 5, Pixel Tag, and tons of Gemini features

Lauren Forristal

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta
