Fidji Simo, OpenAI’s No. 2 executive, is stepping down from her full-time role, 
the Wall Street Journal reports
.

In a staff note Thursday, Simo said her ongoing medical leave has proven longer and harder than expected, and that she’ll transition to a part-time advisory role instead. Simo joined OpenAI’s board of directors in 2024 and joined OpenAI in May 2025 as CEO of Applications, then a newly created role reporting directly to Sam Altman that consolidated the company’s business and product operations. 

That move was integrated into a wider reporting shift: COO Brad Lightcap, CFO Sarah Friar, and CPO Kevin Weil all began reporting to her, while Altman stepped back to focus on research, compute, and safety. 

Simo first 
disclosed
 her health issues in April, when she announced she was taking medical leave for a relapse of a neuroimmune condition; it was in that same memo that it was share publicly that Lightcap moved into a new “special projects” role and CMO Kate Rouch was 
leaving the company
 to focus on cancer recovery. Weil has since 
left the company
, too.

Simo came to OpenAI from Instacart, where she’d been CEO since 2021 and led the company through its 2023 IPO, and before that spent over a decade at Meta, including running the Facebook app.

Simo’s decision to step back permanently leaves Altman searching for a successor right as OpenAI itself eyes a possible IPO and races to close the enterprise gap with Anthropic. She’d been widely seen as a likely candidate to take on even more responsibility once OpenAI went public, making this a real gap for him to fill.

Simo was primarily focused on growing OpenAI’s consumer business. But ChatGPT’s growth cooled late last year, missing internal revenue targets, pushing the company to lean harder into coding tools instead, an area where it has been and continues, for now, to trail Anthropic. 

TechCrunch has reached out to OpenAI for more information.

OpenAI’s executive ranks appear from the outside to be on the thin side for a company that was most recently assigned an $852 billion valuation. In addition to Altman, Lightcap, Friar, and co-founder Greg Brockman (who is also the company’s president and was overseeing product strategy while Simo was out), its bench includes Denise Dresser, who in December joined as the company’s chief revenue officer, overseeing its “global revenue strategy across enterprise and customer success,” per a release at the time. 

It wouldn’t be shocking to see Dresser take on a more expansive role, given she previously spent two years as the CEO of Slack and, before that, spent 14 years with Slack’s parent company, Salesforce.

Simo’s departure come against another backdrop worth understanding, which is OpenAI’s shifting approach to employee equity. In April of last year, the same month that Simo joined, the company shortened its vesting cliff — the waiting period before new hires’ stock grants begin vesting — from the industry-standard 12 months to 6 months. Then n December, OpenAI eliminated the cliff altogether for new hires, letting equity start vesting from day one. 

The move, described internally by Simo as a way to let employees “take risks” without fear of losing equity if let go early, came amid an escalating AI talent war and reflects just how aggressively OpenAI has been spending to retain staff. The company was projected to spend $6 billion on stock-based compensation in 2025 alone.

None of the aforementioned exits appear tied to compensation; Simo’s own equity would have cleared any cliff well before the policy changed. 

Topics

AI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Connie Loizos	

Editor in Chief & General Manager

		Loizos has been reporting on Silicon Valley since the late ’90s, when she joined the original Red Herring magazine. Previously the Silicon Valley Editor of TechCrunch, she was named Editor in Chief and General Manager of TechCrunch in September 2023. She’s also the founder of StrictlyVC, a daily e-newsletter and lecture series acquired by Yahoo in August 2023 and now operated as a sub brand of TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Connie by emailing 
connie@strictlyvc.com
 or 
connie@techcrunch.com
, or via encrypted message at ConnieLoizos.53 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant
