Figma on Wednesday showed off an update that adds a new code layer, support for motion and shaders, and the ability to create custom plugins for various tasks using AI.

The design platform has been working on bringing code integration into its tool for a while. Last year, it unveiled an AI prompt-based prototyping tool, Figma Make, and has since launched integrations with 
Claude Code and Codex
 to improve the hand-off between coding and design. 

The company is now adding code layers directly to the collaborative canvas, helping teams clone repositories and extract flows from code to design layers for testing. 

Image Credits: Figma
Image Credits:
Figma

Figma’s chief product officer, Yuhki Yamashita, said code layers make it easier for designers, product managers and programmers to iterate on ideas rather than focus on creating pristine code that goes into production.

“We think the multiplayer canvas is really powerful because this is an environment where you don’t really care about the quality of the code. If you’re rapidly exploring or need to kind of explore a bunch of new directions, you can do that in this spatial way. We hope that this feature produces different behaviour not just with designers, but also with engineers and PMs,” he said over a call.

Figma now also supports animations, transitions and 3D transforms. Previously, designers had to create animations in other software and convert it to code that the app could understand. Now, designers can integrate animations and transitions directly into Figma. 

Image Credits: Figma
Image Credits:
Figma

You can now use AI to create some of these assets, and the update is adding support for adding shader effects and fills using AI, too.

Figma 
acquired node-based tool Weavy
, which helped designers run workflows through different models to compare outputs, last year, and is now working to integrate the two apps better. In an update rolling out later in the year, users will be able to generate Weavy workflows directly within Figma.

The company’s also adding new skills to make 
its AI assistant
 more useful with its collaborative canvas. Users can now write text prompts to create repeatable skills that AI agents can use. You can also connect tools like Notion, Granola, Excel and GitHub, or attach files to give the AI bot more context about what you want it to do.

The company is also adding a feature to help users create custom plugins, like layout generators or vector path tracers, with prompts. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI agents
, 
Apps
, 
design
, 
Figma

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The CEO of Allbirds’ new AI biz has a plan. Now she needs a “brand-new team”

Tim Fernholz

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz
