A years-long lawsuit between the 
college-focused social app Fizz
 and rival 
Sidechat
 over unfair competition practices has taken an interesting turn. In 
a new filing
, Fizz is accusing investor Jerry Lu, who is with venture capital firm Maveron, of meeting with Fizz under the guise of exploring a potential investment, but then turning around and sharing Fizz’s non-public information with its rival, Sidechat.

The new allegations raise questions about the role venture capitalists play in competitive startup markets, as founders routinely share confidential business information while fundraising, trusting that investors won’t pass it along to competitors. Some VCs continue to request updates from startups they passed on, 
founders have said
.

Image Credits:
Fizz

Both 
Fizz
 and 
Sidechat
 are in the same business: anonymous online forums and apps where college students can network and gossip. As a result, competition for students’ attention is fierce. However, not all universities see the apps as providing value to their students. The UNC system 
banned the apps
 from its campuses across North Carolina, citing the bullying and bad behavior that take place on these anonymous social platforms. On Fizz, for example, students can simply post an individual’s name, inviting peers to say whatever they want about that person.

Fizz 
originally sued Sidechat in 2023
, alleging a range of abuses, including attempts to disrupt its launches at various college campuses, spreading false rumors about hackers accessing Fizz’s data, sending false spam reports to Instagram, and paying students to delete Fizz’s app.

The original complaint didn’t name Lu, as his involvement wasn’t known at the time. 

Fizz says in its complaint that it only learned of Lu’s involvement through the legal discovery process, which revealed his role in obtaining and transmitting Fizz’s confidential information to Sidechat’s owner, Flower Ave Inc., which also acquired the Yik Yak app in 2023.

Fizz’s filing also alleges that Lu continued to act as a conduit, funneling information about Fizz’s fundraising efforts and other matters to Sidechat.

Image Credits:
Fizz (screenshot)

A screenshot of a text attached to the 
filing
 shows Lu sharing notes with Flower after meeting with Fizz in March 2022, the complaint alleges. In that meeting, Fizz founders Teddy Solomon and Ashton Cofer shared non-public information about Fizz’s “business strategy, growth plans, campus-launch playbook, user metrics, ambassador program, fundraising efforts, and product roadmap,” the complaint states.

Lu went on to invest in Sidechat’s second seed round in October 2023, per 
PitchBook
 data. However, Fizz claims Lu had been in discussions with Sidechat as early as 2022.

Additionally, Fizz claims that Jack Burlinson, an acquaintance of both the founders and Lu, shared confidential information — including Fizz’s investor deck and its fall summary for investors — with Lu, who then passed it directly to Sidechat.

Requests for comment sent to Lu and Maveron were not returned. Fizz declined to comment.

Kyle Venn
, CEO of the social media platforms Yik Yak and Sidechat, shared the following comment with TechCrunch via email:

“These are allegations, not court findings. We deny any wrongdoing and will address this through the legal process. The alleged events happened before the current Sidechat team acquired the business in 2025 and inherited the lawsuit. No one on today’s operating team was involved. We’re currently focused on making a great product, not suing other apps.”

Topics

Apps
, 
fizz
, 
Fundraising
, 
lawsuit
, 
sidechat
, 
Social
, 
social media
, 
TC
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha
