Using an ad blocker is good for your 
security
, 
privacy
, and even the 
FBI recommends them
 to defend from online harms. But as much as ad blockers are great for cleaning up your browsing experience, these tools often do little to prevent the pervasive tracking from ads within apps.

Now, thanks to a new feature in iOS 26 and macOS 26, one developer has built the first device-level ad blocker that works across all of Apple’s main products — iPhones, iPads, and Macs — and isn’t just limited to the browser.

Filtr is a new tool created and maintained by Kaylee Serena Calderolla, the developer behind the 
popular Safari browser ad blocker Wipr
. Wipr prevents ads from ever appearing in Safari, meaning that the ads won’t load, nor will their tracking code that advertisers use to follow you around the web and snoop on which websites you visit. The result is a cleaner browsing experience, free from advertisers watching over your online activity.

Filtr
 is an additional paid-for feature bundled into Wipr that goes one step further than ad-blocking in the browser by blocking ads in iPhone, iPad, and Mac apps. Filtr does this by using a new feature embedded in the latest Apple software called 
URL filters
, which lets developers block access to certain websites or domains at the network level, rather than just in the browser.

Image Credits:
TechCrunch/screenshot

Image Credits:
TechCrunch/screenshot

I use ad blockers across various devices all the time (even if websites like this one ask that you switch them off). I have — full disclosure — used Wipr as my main ad blocker on my Apple devices for years as a paying customer. I also use ad blockers on other browsers on my desktop computers and make use of 
a Pi-hole ad blocker
, a small server that sits on my network at home and prevents ads from reaching any of my devices connected to my home Wi-Fi. 

But that still leaves my devices largely open to ads when I’m not on my home network, as well as the various apps that I use that are chock full of ads — including web browsers that aren’t Safari. 

As you can imagine, I was keen to give Filtr a spin. Filtr particularly appealed because, as Calderolla states in 
her privacy policy
, her apps “do not collect personal data.” Her apps also don’t 
need
 to access any personal information to work, and neither does Apple’s URL filter feature.

For me, it was a no-brainer — all upside, and no tradeoff. I paid for the $5 annual subscription, added the URL filter to my iPhone, and that was that. The relief was immediate. Every app I opened  loaded without its usual flood of ads. Some ad slots showed greyed placeholder spaces where the ads would have loaded.

Image Credits:
TechCrunch/screenshot

Image Credits:
TechCrunch/screenshot

Calderolla told me this week that Filtr is the first app so far to utilize the URL filters feature; though, that may be in part because it was a “nightmare” to get it to work, some of which she described in 
a May blog post
. Calderolla said that Apple’s documentation on the URL feature was sparse, requiring her to do much of the work to understand how to implement and use the feature.

The URL filter feature relies on an advertising blocklist that Calderolla maintains. Calderolla explained that Filtr consults a “pre-filter” blocklist that is stored on the user’s device and is kept constantly up-to-date via automatic updates in the Wipr app. The pre-filter list determines if a website is not on the block list and, most of the time, the website loads as normal. But if the pre-filter list finds that a website might be on the block list, it will quickly confirm against the list on Calderolla’s servers. Calderolla said that these requests are routed through Apple’s servers as a proxy so that app developers do not know who is querying their blocklists.

This means that you can set up Filtr once and generally never have to think about it again. (For a security or privacy product, that’s high praise.)

There are some caveats, but far from dealbreakers. No ad blocker is perfect, period, but minimizing exposure to the ad networks as much as possible is a major win for your privacy. Filtr also does not block ads that are served from the 
same network
 as the website you’re visiting. That means you will still see ads in the Facebook, Google, and Reddit apps, as well as any other app that serves ads from its own domain, as blocking these would block the domain entirely, rendering it likely very broken. (Lifehacker 
also tested and reviewed Filtr
 and found that using their mobile websites instead of their apps will still allow Wipr to block the ads.)

Wipr
 is a universal app that costs $5 in the Apple App Store and works across all of your Apple devices. Filtr costs an additional $5 each year, or $25 for a one-time lifetime payment, via in-app purchase.

Topics

ad blocker
, 
cybersecurity
, 
Privacy
, 
privacy
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
