The real-time flight tracker FlightAware is 
suing the prediction market Kalshi
 for allegedly using its data to host gambling markets.

Kalshi started letting users bet on the number of flights cancelled in the U.S., or at a given airport, about 
a month ago
. According to FlightAware, Kalshi used FlightAware’s data and name without authorization, displaying FlightAware’s branding and information even after the flight tracker demanded that Kalshi stop.

“Kalshi never informed FlightAware that it would rely on FlightAware’s data to determine the outcome of these betting markets,” the lawsuit says. FlightAware maintains that it did not know about Kalshi’s flight cancellation bets until the media began reporting on these new prediction markets.

TechCrunch has reached out to Kalshi for comment.

Kalshi and similar platforms, like Polymarket, allow users to place bets on various future events, ranging from the results of a political election to the number of albums a musician will sell in a given week.

These markets have already shown their extensive potential to be manipulated by bettors, even though their rules prohibit insider trading. In one high-profile instance, a Polymarket user suspiciously 
bet $32,000
 that Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro would be removed from power by the end of January — just hours later, the U.S. military captured Maduro, earning that user a $400,000 payout. A White House teleprompter operator allegedly 
made over $100,000
 on Kalshi by using his advanced knowledge of the president’s speeches to place bets.

FlightAware argues that these gambling markets could similarly be abused to interfere with flights, posing a safety risk for travelers and airport employees. 

FlightAware is seeking a jury trial and has not specified how much money it seeks in damages.

Topics

Apps
, 
Kalshi
, 
prediction market

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
