Florida man Angelo Martino has been sentenced to more than five years in prison for conspiring with hackers to deploy ransomware during his job as a ransomware negotiator for a U.S. cybersecurity company.

The U.S. Department of Justice 
confirmed the sentence
 on Thursday, noting that the government seized more than $10 million worth of cryptocurrency and assets. Martino allegedly bought these assets, which include a food truck and a luxury fishing boat, with money stolen in the hacks.

Martino is the third person to be jailed for the scheme, following the earlier incarceration of cybersecurity professionals Kevin Martin and Ryan Goldberg. The trio, prosecutors say, 
worked together to deploy the BlackCat ransomware
 against companies in the United States throughout 2023. In one successful attack, the cyber professionals moonlighting as criminals extorted a company for about $1.2 million, which they then split three ways after laundering the funds.

The investigation highlights a rare case of security professionals working for malicious hackers while on the job. Governments have long advised victims of hacking and extortion not to pay any ransom and prevent cybercriminals from profiting, some companies 
do so anyway in attempts to prevent their
 customers’ private data from being leaked.

Extortion attacks have helped create an entire insurance sub-sector in the U.S. for responding to ransomware and extortion attacks. Some companies in this space employ negotiators to try to bring down the cost of ransoms.

BlackCat (also known as ALPHV) is a ransomware-as-a-service operation that allows independent hackers, known as affiliates, to rent access to the gang’s file-encrypting malware in exchange for a cut of the profits from cyberattacks. 

The group’s ransomware was famously used to steal 
highly sensitive medical and billing data of more than 192 million people in America
 during a hack at U.S. health technology giant Change Healthcare in February 2024, though the affiliate hackers responsible for the 2024 data breach were never identified.

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
extortion
, 
Florida
, 
ransomware
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha
