Andreessen Horowitz has made headlines for its 
American dynamism thesis
, but a U.S. passport is no requirement. According to Gabriel Vasquez, a partner focusing on AI apps and the firm’s global investment strategy, “44% of our investments in the Apps Fund One and Two have an international founder.” 

Together with general partner Angela Strange, Vasquez is the driving force behind 
a16z’s Borderless Founder network
, an initiative to support immigrant and international founders. Their premise is that great companies could be born anywhere, but they now believe foreign entrepreneurs actually have an edge over their American peers.

The U.S. has always attracted foreign founders; but in the current AI-dominated cycle, a16z acknowledges that their roots are more helpful than they used to be. “There is now an advantage to having one foot in your home country, and one foot in Silicon Valley,” Strange and Vasquez wrote in a 
post
 to which TechCrunch had early access. 

Talking to TechCrunch exclusively, Vasquez broke down how this advantage has become significant enough for a16z to “spend more than one million air miles” in order to go after international dealflow — rather than expecting each and every team to move to the U.S. 

This expectation didn’t come out of nowhere, especially for enterprise startups, where there’s been a marked shift in buying patterns from those based outside the U.S. “The buyers from countries outside the U.S. were not moving rapidly, and their willingness to pay was very low,” Vasquez said of the old pattern. 

But this has changed dramatically “in the last three to five years,” with startups now able to secure major companies worldwide as customers, even in less cutting-edge markets.

When a16z started hearing from international seed-stage startups working with Fortune 500 companies, “we thought this might be an exception, but it was clearly a trend,” Vasquez said. Examples now abound of international AI startups signing major clients early on — but Vasquez is also right that it was rarely the case even a few years ago.

In Europe, in particular, it used to be that corporations would only engage with startups through open innovation programs and accelerators, but rarely with their main checkbook. Turning them into paid customers was hard enough that France launched a dedicated initiative, “I Choose French Tech.” But according to Vasquez, AI has been the driver in making this shift a reality.

That’s because AI made legacy players realize they would have to buy third-party solutions to remain competitive — even in areas where human labor is still affordable, like Latin America, Vasquez said. “Software never really picked up in the region, because you were competing with cheap labor.” But now that AI agents are “always on” and increasingly accurate, they have become commonplace in customer service and more.

Others could go after these opportunities, too. “There’s so much appetite at the enterprise level for companies all around the world to consume AI, but American [startups] don’t have the speed yet to go serve the entire market from day zero, so they obviously prioritize U.S. companies,” Vasquez said. 

This leaves the door open for a local founder to sell an AI solution to companies in their country, while splitting their time between home and the U.S. “The concept of headquarters is something that is changing a lot; it’s just more fluid,” Vasquez said, noting that even governments seem to take a similar view. 

Case in point: Poland recently 
took a stake
 in a16z portfolio company ElevenLabs. The voice AI startup only has a subsidiary in the country, and not its headquarters, but its customers include InPost and LOT Polish Airlines, and its founders are Piotr Dąbkowski and Mateusz Staniszewski — two examples of Polish talent in AI, also 
strongly present at OpenAI
.

From Vasquez’s point of view, access to talent is a key differentiator. “Right now, recruiting in Silicon Valley is the hardest thing, because you’re competing with Anthropic and OpenAI that have raised billions and billions of dollars for the best talent.” But international founders are often tapping into the talent pool that exists in many places outside of the U.S.

Talent clusters are also the reason why Vasquez has been spending a lot of time on a plane — often in Stockholm — 
in search of the next unicorn
. Some of the top AI scaleups are 
European academic spinouts
, and VCs are going after them. In a sense, the story goes the other way around; to 
quote
 Dealroom founder Yoram Wijngaarde: “European talent remains one of America’s biggest startup advantages.”

Topics

a16z
, 
Europe
, 
Exclusive
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Anna Heim	

Freelance Reporter

Anna Heim is a writer and editorial consultant.

You can contact or verify outreach from Anna by emailing annatechcrunch [at] gmail.com.

As a freelance reporter at TechCrunch since 2021, she has covered a large range of startup-related topics including AI, fintech & insurtech, SaaS & pricing, and global venture capital trends.

As of May 2025, her reporting for TechCrunch focuses on Europe’s most interesting startup stories.

Anna has moderated panels and conducted onstage interviews at industry events of all sizes, including major tech conferences such as TechCrunch Disrupt, 4YFN, South Summit, TNW Conference, VivaTech, and many more.

A former LATAM & Media Editor at The Next Web, startup founder and Sciences Po Paris alum, she’s fluent in multiple languages, including French, English, Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker
