Ford made a 
$2 billion bet
 two years ago when it closed its Louisville Assembly Plant in Kentucky and scrapped the assembly line system it had used for more than a century. Its goal was to transform the factory into one capable of making a new generation of affordable EVs.

The auto giant 
provided an update
 on Thursday, stating that its factory overhaul is on track and in 2027 will be ready to start producing the 
Fathom
, an all-electric midsize truck that costs less than $30,000 and is the first EV built on its new universal platform.

Ford said it expects to begin prototype builds of the Fathom in the first quarter of 2027, with customer vehicles to follow later in the year. The U.S. automaker is already testing production-level tooling ahead of the prototypes.

The stakes for Ford are high. The company’s previous EV efforts were a drag on its profitability, while Chinese competitors and Tesla leapt ahead with vehicles that sell at volume and with a profit margin. 

To catch up, Ford ditched the moving assembly line system that its founder Henry Ford launched and turned to a system developed by its skunkworks team led by former Tesla executive Alan Clarke.

This “universal production system,” as Ford calls it, uses a three-branched assembly tree. Ford will use large single-piece aluminum unicastings that use far fewer parts — a technique that Tesla has popularized — and that will allow the front and rear of the vehicle to be assembled separately on two of the branches. The third branch  is where the structural battery will be assembled with seats, consoles, and carpeting. The three components will come together at the end of the line to form the vehicle. 

As part of the factory rebuild, Ford has also nearly tripled the Wi-Fi coverage density in the factory to 1,080 access points to the kind of high-bandwidth, low-latency connectivity required for software quality checks. 

Ford said it will be able to assemble the Fathom a net 15% faster than the former vehicles that were built at the Louisville plant.

The company said some employees have already spent months training on the new system at its New Models Program Development Center in Allen Park, Michigan.

Topics

electric vehicles
, 
EVs
, 
fathom
, 
Ford
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker
