Apple on Thursday announced a new set of developer tools that will let automakers embed Apple Maps navigation and mapping directly into their vehicles’ infotainment systems. 

The software development kit, called MapKit for Automotive, will debut with Ford and its new line of electric vehicles, starting with a 
$30,000 midsize truck
 in 2027. 

Ford is placing a hefty bet on its next-generation of EVs, which it has promised will be affordable and efficient while still offering the latest technology. To build them, Ford ditched its 
century-old tradition
 and instead started with a universal EV platform, or UEV, that will underpin the midsize truck and eventually other vehicles including a sedan, crossover, three-row SUV and even small commercial vans. 

Features like Apple Maps integration may seem minor compared to Ford’s decision to use single-piece aluminum unicastings for the vehicle, which are large components cast as one piece to eliminate parts and allow for faster assembly. 

But the Apple Maps integration is central to Ford’s plan to deliver more responsive features to owners, such as navigation that includes efficient routing designed for EVs and turn-by-turn directions with natural language capabilities.

Drivers will be able to see real-time traffic and incident information, search for destinations, and view detailed place information. Importantly, Apple MapKit runs natively in the vehicle and is separate from Apple CarPlay, which mirrors apps from an iPhone onto the vehicle’s central display.

The integration will also feed road-level information from Apple Maps to Ford’s next-generation BlueCruise hands-free driver assistance system. The upgraded version of BlueCruise, which is expected to roll out next year, will be able to handle an entire highway journey, including entrance and exits ramps. The company has said the new system will ultimately handle “point-to-point autonomy,” similar to Tesla’s Full Self-Driving (Supervised) software, before progressing to 
eyes-off driving
 in 2028. 

The companies said that by embedding Apple Maps directly in the vehicle, drivers will gain access to smarter EV routing, including battery preconditioning. This feature prepares the battery before arriving at a charger, reducing charge times by ensuring it’s at the optimal temperature.

It could also enable smart home integrations, like opening the garage door and turning on the lights when the driver arrives at home.

While the technology will be open to any automaker, Ford is Apple’s first partner on the new effort. The companies have signed a commercial agreement, but did not disclosed its terms.

Ford noted that the Apple integration could also help its Ford Pro business, which serves its commercial fleet customers. For example, businesses could use the technology to route drivers to their next job site or display other fleet vehicles on the map. Those kinds of fleet features become much easier when the mapping platform is built directly into the vehicle.

Topics

Apple
, 
Apps
, 
Ford
, 
TC
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI says Hugging Face was breached by its pre-release models

Russell Brandom

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik
