Executive search firm Christian & Timbers estimates that there are only about 2,000 engineers in the U.S. with the special cocktail of sector know-how, gravitas, and hands-on applied AI experience needed to consistently help enterprises see a return on their AI expenditures. 

“Not 2,000 available,” reads the study, shared exclusively with TechCrunch. “2,000 total.”

As enterprises move from trying to access the best models to figuring out how to implement them into workflows that meaningfully improves their bottom line, it appears the forward-deployed engineer (FDE) — engineers who work within client organizations to build, implement and deploy software or AI models — is about to become among the most sought-after specialist in the AI industry. 

Demand for FDEs is already rising rapidly, according to the C&T study, which projects demand for these specialists to surge by 2,100% by the end of the year. 

The research draws on interviews with more than 250 C-suite hiring executives across 180 companies, a focused survey of 80 Fortune 500 executives, and interviews with more than 300 FDEs and applied AI engineers between January and June 2026. 

At the start of the year, only 5% to 10% of companies were planning to hire FDEs, and mostly only for small pilots. By the end of the second quarter, however, that number jumped to 70%, with the largest consulting and services firms reporting a need to increase their FDE headcount by 10 times, building full teams of 20 to 100 employees. 

“This is all happening at a speed I’ve never seen. Enterprises are hiring in the middle of summer,” Jeff Christian, founder of C&T told TechCrunch.

That kind of demand will outstrip supply, if C&T’s study is accurate. The report found that there are roughly 17,000 U.S. FDEs on the market today, a good chunk of whom are already employed by Palantir, which invented the concept of the FDE years ago. (Christian said some of his clients are even buying Palantir’s technology just so they can access the firm’s FDEs.) 

Only a fraction of the FDEs out in the wild are apparently elite enough to deliver true ROI, which these days is measured as “multiple tens of millions of dollars of ROI impact,” according to Christian. That could manifest as revenue acceleration on the go-to-market side (lead generation) or “replacing FP&A or replacing 2,300 document processors in India,” Christian says. 

As Chris Taylor, CEO of 
Ode with Anthropic
 (a new FDE-focused services firm), put it: “Many FDEs are well equipped to help you roll Claude Code out to your workforce. Very few are capable of building your flagship AI product feature.”

Now that token-maxxing has morphed into value-maxxing, and 
enterprises taking a harder look
 at their balance sheets, accounting for AI spending is becoming more important than ever.

“This fall, [Wall Street] is about to say, ‘Hey, we’ve given you two years to figure this out…and you haven’t. There’s no ROI. So we’re going to start punishing those that have spent hundreds of millions, maybe even billions on this, and aren’t generating ROI, and rewarding those that have’,” Christian said.

Loading the player…

AI companies are under pressure, too, as they’ve already spent tens of billions to train and deploy their models. For frontier AI firms, reaching profitability will depend on whether they can inject their technology into as many enterprises as possible, though that task is now being threatened by cheaper, increasingly capable open-weight models from China. 

That’s why firms like 
OpenAI and Anthropic
 have set up their own ventures — 
Ode with Anthropic 
and OpenAI’s 
Deployment Company
 — and staffed them with FDEs whose sole purpose is to go forth and spread their tech around the enterprise. 

It’s not only top AI firms and large consultancies clamoring for FDEs, however. Enterprises from insurance and fintech to healthcare and gaming, are seeking out these specialists, Christian said.  

Companies are hiring teams of FDEs instead of bringing them in from firms like Ode, or Deployment Co, seeking to keep knowledge of proprietary processes in-house and protect them from the likes of OpenAI and Anthropic.

“Everybody’s concerned that if they give up their proprietary business processes, [the AI firms] can compete with them, which is true in many different areas,” Christian said. “So having this muscle internally is so important.”

Taylor said he’s starting to hear the phrase “internal forward-deployed engineers” more often, but his clients aren’t yet asking Ode to put together internal FDE teams for them.

While many an enterprising young engineer might think they have the industry expertise and AI chops to take advantage of what may turn out to be a talent war, Christian warns that the FDE may not always be in demand. 

“Maybe in two years, everything’s automated, and agents are automating agents as opposed to humans automating agents,” Christian said. “That is something that could occur. Hopefully, it doesn’t, and we continue to need these people within companies.”

In the medium-term, he thinks the need for FDEs will shift from enterprise AI to physical AI as companies try to implement things like humanoid robots into their workflows. But within five or 10 years, he says it’s entirely possible that the role of FDE will “go away.”

That may be true for all knowledge work, if AI leaders and CEOs’ vehement predictions come true. While C&T focuses on recruiting for fast-growing industries and hasn’t seen a pullback yet, Christian says more general search firms have definitely experienced a slowdown in recruitment requests. 

Everything to do with AI is growing and in demand, he says. For now.

“I think that there’s absolutely a time soon where we’re going to see an impact in our business,” Christian said.

Topics

AI
, 
AI talent wars
, 
Enterprise
, 
Exclusive
, 
FDE
, 
Forward deployed engineers

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Rebecca Bellan	

Senior Reporter

Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing 
rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
