Have you ever had the desire to see Sam Altman and Palmer Luckey square off over a moderately suspenseful card game? If so, you are in luck. 

Silicon Valley’s leaders are rushing to embrace the 
power of media
 for the purposes of 
marketing
 and political capital. Now, in a sign of the times, Founders Fund, the venture capital firm co-founded by Peter Thiel, has launched its own game show.

MAFIA the GAME, will apparently be an ongoing thing, where prominent tech luminaries get together and face off over a game of cards (the show is named after the 
party-game favorite
).

The spectacle is moderated by Pirate Wires editor Mike Solana (who is also the chief marketing officer at Founders Fund). The debut episode includes a who’s who of players, Altman, Luckey, Bryan Johnson, the famed biohacker who will (according to him) live forever, and Moxie Marlinspike, the founder of encrypted chat app Signal.

“I’m so f*cking bored with VC content,” Solana 
told Newcomer
, which originally reported the show’s existence. “There has to be a more interesting way to get to know someone, and I think that this is a way more interesting way to get to know someone.”

TechCrunch reached out to Founders Fund for more information on the program. 

In many ways, having a reality-TV-esque platform is just good business these days. The internet has turned the world into a population of chronic media consumers, and the average American spends around 2.5 hours on social media per day. Much of that time is spent scrolling through an endless flood of advertising-laced memes and videos. 

In the modern era, the road to power and influence is paved by infotainment.

Companies and executives have sought to take advantage of this new reality in different ways. OpenAI recently raised some eyebrows when it 
procured TBPN, the buzzy founder-led podcast
. Meanwhile, a number of tech’s most prominent players have leveraged virality to their advantage. Johnson, for instance, has managed to grow his following through a very active (and quite bizarre) social media presence. Elon Musk, meanwhile, has also managed to leverage his public persona to go viral (although arguments could be made that his online presence has sometimes hurt rather than helped his businesses).

This trend has also spread 
to the startup space
, where people like Cluely CEO Chungin “Roy” Lee have demonstrated the 
power of being a one-man viral hype machine
. 

Topics

bryan johnson
, 
Founders Fund
, 
media
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Palmer Luckey
, 
sam altman

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
