Asking venture capitalists for investment is a rite of passage for tech founders. This has led to another universal experience: the VC pitching horror story. A 
massive conversation
 sharing such stories has taken place all week on X, with the comments both funny and infuriating. We read through them all to find the most interesting ones so you don’t have to.

Greg Isenberg
, a startup podcaster, newsletter writer, and founder of 
Late Checkout Studio
 — a holding company whose previous ventures include a company acquired by WeWork — got the conversation started with a story about a VC falling asleep during a pitch meeting. Isenberg has a large following on X, and his post clearly struck a nerve.

“I was once pitching in a board room at a top 3 VC firm for a $15M Series A. 12 people in the meeting. One of the GPs fully fell asleep. Out cold for 30+ minutes. Nobody acknowledged it. Everyone just kept going,” he 
shared on X
.

VCs sleeping through pitch meetings was far and away the most common horror story shared. Not just drowsing, but full on zonked.

Zynga founder Mark Pincus told his VC-asleep story. “I looked at my friend who set up the meeting and asked if i should keep presenting and she said yes. It was ‘weekend at bernies’ meets Silicon Valley,” 
he wrote. 

Interestingly, falling asleep didn’t mean the VC wouldn’t invest. 
Multiple founders
 reported receiving term sheets from partners who’d dozed off during the pitch.

“I once pitched a partnership in 2015 for our Series A where one partner (famous Midas lister) fell asleep & another couldn’t stop scowling. Got a call 2 hrs after the IC that they were sending a term sheet over,” wrote 
Liz Wessel
. Wessel, who co-founded and sold HR startup WayUp and is now a partner at First Round Capital, said her team didn’t take the money — and that the VC was shocked.

There were so many stories about VCs sleeping that former a16z partner Arianna Simpson 
wrote
, “Are VCs ok?? Narcolepsy appears to be running rampant.”

There were, of course, more than a few stories about VCs signing term sheets then pulling out last minute, or ghosting, never wiring the money. The even more galling part? Some of 
these VCs apparently went on to treat
 the founders like portfolio companies anyway, asking 
for company updates
 or to 
serve as a reference
. One founder said the VC even 
wanted a share of the post-acquisition proceeds
.

Travis Kalanick, the Uber co-founder renowned for his determination, 
told a story
 about discovering that a VC was attempting to ghost the meeting and leave the building. Kalanick said he followed the VC to his car and pitched from the passenger’s seat.

Not everyone had bad experiences to report. Some founders said they’ve never had anything but 
great experiences with VCs
, with a few even sharing 
love stories
 about specific investors. Yes, most VCs are hardworking, genuinely try to be helpful, and don’t take naps during meetings. But poor experiences are so common that Pincus exclaimed, “I f*cking love this moment, when founders no longer have to be afraid to call out VCs for dumb behavior.”

The most stunning stories

Still, the stories that truly stunned were t
he ones posted by Cloudflare founder Matthew Prince
. “A Sequoia partner passed on Cloudflare because he didn’t think a woman could lead a security infrastructure company,” Prince wrote. The woman in question is Cloudflare’s co-founder and COO Michelle Zatlyn. Given that Cloudflare is now an $87 billion market cap company, with expected annual revenue 
of $2.8 billion
 in 2026, the judgment hasn’t aged well.

Sequoia partner Shaun Maguire, no stranger 
to controversy
 over his remarks himself, replied that he’s always admired Zatlyn, and asked Prince to spill the name of the partner who said that. Prince punted, “Maybe over a drink one day. But I bet you have a good guess already.”

But wait, Prince dished more! 

He 
told
 a story about prominent investor Vinod Khosla, who offered to invest and then, according to Prince’s recollection, suggested that the founder “fire” his co-founders and take their stock. “I think the charitable read was it was a test of my character. But I was so offended that we never spoke again. Literally blocked his number.”

Prince was quick to 
add nuance
 about Khosla: “He’s extremely smart/clever. Has been an incredible investor — can’t argue with his track record. Just not the personality I’d choose to work with.”

It’s worth noting that recollections of conversations tend to vary, and we don’t know what Khosla actually said, meant, or remembers. But eyes popped at such open talk about one of the Valley’s most successful, powerful VCs. Many people called Prince’s candor 
an example of having “FU” money.
 Prince, 
of course, is a billionaire
 these days.

Not all of Prince’s stories cast VCs as the villains. Specifically, he thought he had lined up a simple meet-and-greet on a Monday with Marc Andreessen, the co-founder of venture firm a16z. Instead, Andreessen showed up with his whole investment team, ready to be wowed. The ill-prepared Prince did not impress. “I framed the rejection letter they sent,” he said of the result. Others 
told similar stories
 of meetings with Andreessen and his firm.

Perhaps the funniest story came from Julie Fredrickson, a 
founder-turned-investor
, who received a call from a VC associate before arriving at a firm’s office — warning her about a rock formation visible outside the window that, apparently unbeknownst to the investors inside, was shaped like male genitalia. “The firm will forever in my mind be 
Dickrock Ventures
,” she wrote.

While the Valley’s VCs got roasted most heavily, founders shared incidents involving 
international VCs
, too. Some VCs also 
dished
 about pitching to limited partner investors.

The threads are worth reading not just for the laughs, but for what they reveal: The fundraising process is opaque, the power dynamic is real, and the experiences that founders whisper about privately are a lot more common than the industry tends to acknowledge publicly.

Perhaps Isenberg explained the moral behind all of these stories best. “If you’re raising right now, just know: every founder has a story like this. The process is weird. The power dynamic is weird,” he wrote.

A second lesson may be: If Andreessen agrees to meet with you, he means business.

Topics

Fundraising Advice
, 
Matthew Prince
, 
TC
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

DuckDuckGo makes its ‘no-AI’ search engine easier to access as its traffic booms

Sarah Perez

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez
