In Brief

Posted:

1:19 PM PDT · June 10, 2026

Image Credits:
Matthias Balk/picture alliance / Getty Images

Lucas Ropek

Fresh off bond sale, Amazon borrows $17.5 billion from banks as AI spending continues

Companies are burning through exorbitant sums of money to keep pace in the AI arms race. 
Debt is climbing
. Amidst this flurry of activity, Amazon has signed a deal to borrow some $17.5 billion from a number of financial lenders, 
according to Bloomberg
.

The banks behind the loan 
reportedly
 include Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, Wells Fargo, HSBC, and BofA Securities. The deal has been characterized as a 
delayed draw term loan
, meaning Amazon can draw down the funds on its own timeline rather than taking the full sum upfront, giving it flexibility in how and when the money gets deployed.

The loan comes just two days after it was reported that Amazon would also 
raise $14 billion in a Canadian bond sale
, bringing its total new financing to roughly $31.5 billion in the span of roughly 48 hours.

It’s not clear exactly how Amazon plans to spend all the new money. Reuters 
notes that
 the new loan will be used for “general corporate purposes.” TechCrunch has reached out to Amazon for more information.

Amazon is hardly alone. To fund new AI infrastructure like chips and data centers, companies are leveraging historic capex. Increasingly, companies 
are borrowing money
 to fund their massive AI buildouts. The question investors and analysts are increasingly asking isn’t whether this spending is necessary — it’s whether the returns will ever justify it.

The scale of the borrowing is striking even by Silicon Valley standards. About a week ago, Google parent company Alphabet said that it 
planned to raise $80 billion
 through a stock sale designed to help “fund its investments in a balanced way while retaining a healthy balance sheet.” Meta has also announced plans to 
raise $30 billion in a bond sale
 — its largest ever.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Amazon
, 
citigroup

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Security

North Koreans behind nearly half of US tech industry hacks, says CrowdStrike

Zack Whittaker

	23 minutes ago

Media & Entertainment

Netflix expands revamped mobile app across Asia and doubles down on kids’ gaming

Lauren Forristal

	3 hours ago

Space

The Indian government got cold feet on Starlink just before SpaceX’s IPO

Tim Fernholz

	4 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Fresh off bond sale, Amazon borrows $17.5 billion from banks as AI spending continues

Lucas Ropek

	21 seconds ago

In Brief

‘AI-pilled’ firms spend $7,500 per employee each month on AI

Rebecca Bellan

	3 hours ago

AI

How memory tools can make AI models worse

Russell Brandom

	4 hours ago
