Retro
, the 
friend-focused photo-sharing app
 built by former Instagram product engineers Nathan Sharp and Ryan Olson, has raised north of $21 million in Series A funding, according to 
an SEC filing
.

The fundraise is a testament to the enduring need for social apps that connect people with one another more directly, instead of through personalized algorithms filled with creator content and now, often, AI slop.

“Something that has to be true and will be true is that people will still want to see more of their friends,” Sharp told TechCrunch in December, referring to how For You-style feeds have taken over today’s social media. “The photos and videos you take will need to find a place where they can reach the intended audience,” he said.

Business Insider
 first spotted the SEC filing, which is under the startup’s name, Lone Palm Labs. The filing, dated August 19, indicates the funding itself was closed in December. 
PitchBook
 now estimates the startup is valued at over $100 million.

Retro didn’t respond to a request for comment.

Launched in 2023
 as more of a personal photo journal, Retro has since expanded its feature set to let users privately share photos of their week with friends; create shared albums; view and share recaps; or “
rewind” to time-travel back
 through photo memories.

Image Credits:
Retro

The app has another advantage that appeals to consumers: It doesn’t monetize via advertising. Instead, the company offers in-app subscriptions that offer features like support for video, GIF and sticker comments, more styles, unlimited history, and special app icons.

According to data from app intelligence provider 
Appfigures
, Retro has been downloaded around 7 million times since its launch and has seen its in-app spending jump north of 460% over the past 180 days. While it’s still a small subset of app users who subscribe, the expectation is that those who make that jump are committed customers who have turned Retro into a frequently used photo-sharing app.

Retro’s backers include Thrive Capital, Figma CEO Dylan Field, Scribble Ventures, Box Group, Imaginary Ventures, Coalition, Conviction, Copper, Positive Sum, and various angels.

Topics

Apps
, 
Fundraising
, 
retro
, 
Social
, 
social media trends

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Nvidia closes in on Hugging Face acquisition

Connie Loizos

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Hugging Face reportedly in talks to be acquired for $13B

Rebecca Bellan

Who’s behind the new ‘stealth model’ Ox Alpha?

Anthony Ha

Flock CEO calls for ‘compromise’ as surveillance company faces growing backlash

Anthony Ha

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim
