In Brief

Posted:

5:38 PM PDT · June 26, 2026

Image Credits:
Spencer Platt / Getty Images

Marina Temkin

FTC gives Musk the OK to acquire SpaceX alumni startup Mesh

Elon Musk is eyeing an acquisition of Mesh Optical Technologies, a startup founded by three former SpaceX engineers last year developing hardware for fast data center communications.

The potential acquisition, which was revealed in a 
Federal Trade Commission filing
 and first 
reported by Bloomberg
, confirmed the agency expedited its antitrust review.

Mesh Optical came out of stealth in February when it announced that it raised a 
$50 million Series A
 led by Thrive Capital.

Before founding Mesh Optical, the startup’s co-founders, Travis Brashears, Cameron Ramos, and Serena Grown-Haeberli, developed the optical communication links that keep thousands of SpaceX’s Starlink satellites interconnected.

The Mesh co-founders saw an opportunity to develop optical transceivers for terrestrial data centers, as light-based hardware is faster and more energy-efficient than traditional electrical-based systems.

SpaceX has recently entered into agreements with Anthropic, Google, and the open-source AI developer Reflection AI to provide them with compute capacity at its data centers, generating a substantial new revenue stream for the newly public company. Acquiring Mesh could eventually allow SpaceX to improve the efficiency of its data centers, whether they are located on Earth or, in the future, in space.

Topics

data centers
, 
Elon Musk
, 
Hardware
, 
M&A
, 
Mesh Optical Technologies
, 
Space
, 
SpaceX

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Netris raises $15M Series A from a16z to help AI neoclouds go live faster

Ram Iyer

	1 day ago

AI

Amazon ups India bet with fresh $13B AI infrastructure investment

Jagmeet Singh

	2 days ago

Climate

Nvidia wants to cut data center water use, but that’s not the same as fixing AI’s water problem

Tim De Chant

	4 days ago

Latest in Hardware

In Brief

FTC gives Musk the OK to acquire SpaceX alumni startup Mesh

Marina Temkin

	2 hours ago

Gaming

Xbox follows Apple with price increases 

Lauren Forristal

	1 day ago

Gadgets

Apple raises Mac and iPad prices, spares iPhone for now

Ivan Mehta

	1 day ago
