A 
new lawsuit filed
 by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is a showcase of how hard it’s become to police the app stores for scammy apps. The suit alleges that a company known as Genesis Tech defrauded consumers and routed revenues overseas through the use of shell companies designed to conceal its identity and hide its assets.

Genesis Tech’s network allegedly included a series of subsidiaries incorporated in Cyprus and operating in Ukraine, which marketed its apps to U.S. consumers. Among its brands were fitness and nutrition apps MadMuscles, Harna, and Unimeal by 
Amo Apps Limited
; PDF Guru and PDF Master from 
GuruDocs Limited
; fashion app Lumi from 
Bramol Limited
; horoscope app Nebula by 
Obrio Limited
; habit and personal productivity apps under the brand Wisey by 
Koflimin Limited
; and others.

From early 2023 to mid-2025, these five companies’ product offerings accounted for nearly a quarter of a billion dollars in global revenue. 

The suit also notes that, in the 12 months ending in September 2025, the transactions through all the company’s connected PayPal accounts totaled nearly $700 million.

The case highlights a growing challenge for Apple and Google, as subscription scams evolve beyond individual apps into intricate networks of shell companies. Genesis Tech, for instance, registered new corporate entities and created multiple merchant accounts to hide its identity, the suit claims, and would then transfer the money it made across borders among its various corporate affiliates. 

By continually making new accounts, the app publisher was able to avoid fraud monitoring programs for years, the FTC explains.

Like other scammy subscription apps plaguing today’s app stores 
that
 
have drawn scrutiny
 
from
 
regulators
 and consumer advocates, Genesis Tech’s products made it easy to sign up but hard to cancel. 

While the company promoted its products as free or low-cost, consumers who signed up would instead be met with auto-renewing subscriptions. At times, the company would also charge customers for extra products without their knowledge or consent or 
even double-charge
 them.

The company also made cancellation difficult by omitting cancellation options from its websites and apps, and would often continue charging customers without authorization, the FTC’s suit says.  

Genesis Tech’s practices violate the FTC Act and the Restore Online Shoppers’ Confidence Act (ROSCA), the complaint says. It also names Stamatis Skianis, Oksana Kucher, Iryna Oleksyn, Olga Garbuzenko, Rostyslav Ivanitsa, and Viktoriia Savchuk as co-defendants in the case, which will be tried in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California.

TechCrunch reached out to Genesis Tech for comment through the publicly available email addresses for the subsidiaries named in the case. A comment was not immediately provided.

The FTC has taken mobile app makers to court before, having investigated and settled cases with the 
anonymous teen Q&A app NGL
, 
dating app giant Match
, 
gig app Handy
, 
kids’ app maker HyperBeard,
 and adjacent players, like 
mobile ad company Tapjoy
 or 
data broker X-Mode
, among others. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Commerce
, 
FTC
, 
Government & Policy
, 
lawsuit
, 
scams

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
