The Federal Trade Commission 
is suing
 healthcare giant Hims & Hers for allegedly sharing its customers’ medical and healthcare information with advertisers and tech giants, like Meta and Snap, as well as for misleading consumers about its privacy practices.

The lawsuit is the federal consumer watchdog’s latest crackdown in recent years on healthcare companies that share sensitive information with outside companies without their customers’ knowledge. Hims & Hers, now a 
publicly traded company
, provides prescription medication for sexual wellness, mental health conditions, weight loss, and other issues, and as such handles a large amount of sensitive patient data.

Companies typically try to learn more about their customers by installing code on their websites in order to share users’ information with advertisers, like Meta and Snap, which then use the data to provide information about who is visiting their websites and when. 

In its 
complaint
 filed in a California federal court, the FTC alleged that Hims & Hers placed pixel-sized trackers provided by Meta, Snap and other tech and advertising giants, including Microsoft, Pinterest, Reddit and X. These trackers, the FTC said, “captured and shared users’ health information,” contrary to Hims & Hers’ own privacy policy. The FCC alleges the company also used Meta’s tools to track users’ clicks and other actions that users took on its website.

The FTC also accused Hims & Hers of deceptive billing, and drawing up policies that allegedly made it difficult for customers to cancel, in violation of federal consumer protection laws.

Hims & Hers did not explicitly deny the FTC’ s claims 
in a statement on its website
. The company claimed its privacy policy “makes clear” that users “may choose how their data is used,” and said it is “confident” in its position. Hims & Hers said it plans to defend against the FTC’s allegations.

The FTC has previously taken action against telehealth startup 
Cerebral, alcohol recovery provider Monument
, as well as 
data giant GoodRx
 and 
therapy provider BetterHelp
. These companies were similarly accused of sharing patients’ sensitive data through their websites to third-party tech giants and advertisers.

The use of pixel-sized trackers has previously revealed how people’s sensitive data gets shared with the companies who provide the code, highlighting how misconfigurations can result in unwanted data collection. 

In 2024, TechCrunch found that the U.S. Postal Service was 
sharing logged-in users’ home addresses
 with Meta, LinkedIn and Snap by using their pixel tracking code. The USPS removed the code soon after.

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
Federal Trade Commission
, 
Hims & Hers
, 
Privacy
, 
privacy
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
