Commonwealth Fusion Systems (CFS) has long been the 
best-funded fusion power startup
. Now, it’s extending its lead.

CFS announced Thursday that it raised $1 billion in a new round that included “significant institutional investors, such as pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, and infrastructure and industrial corporate partners,” the company said. When asked by TechCrunch, the company declined to name the specific investors. To date, CFS has raised $4 billion. 

The funding arrives as the company’s spending ramps up. CFS is currently building Sparc, its demonstration reactor, and finalizing the design of Arc, its first commercial power plant. 

The company said the new funding will go toward commercializing fusion, and CEO Bob Mumgaard has hinted that CFS will continue to raise more capital. 

CFS hasn’t disclosed either Sparc’s or Arc’s price tag, though in 2024, Virginia’s former governor Glenn Youngkin 
said
 that Arc would be a “multi-billion-dollar fusion power plant.”

This is CFS’s largest round since raising $1.8 billion in 2021. The startup’s previous fundraise, announced in August, 
added $863 million
 to its coffers and included Nvidia, Google, Khosla Ventures, and Breakthrough Energy Ventures among its investors. 

CFS is pursuing a form of fusion known as magnetic confinement, in which powerful magnetic fields confine plasma inside the reactor, keeping the plasma dense and hot enough to spark fusion reactions. When atomic nuclei from the fusion fuel fuse, the reaction releases enormous amounts of energy. CFS plans to harvest the heat thrown off by the reaction to power a steam turbine.

The company has made significant progress on its Sparc reactor, which it now expects will achieve scientific breakeven in 2027. 

Scientific breakeven is a key milestone at which fusion reactions release more energy than the reactor consumes to ignite them. It’s not enough to generate electricity for export to the grid, but hitting the mark will show investors that CFS’s approach is likely to bear fruit. To date, only 
one fusion device
, at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s National Ignition Facility, has achieved scientific breakeven.

Alongside work on Sparc, CFS has been finalizing the design for Arc, the commercial-scale power plant planned for Virginia. Italian energy company Eni said it will buy 
more than $1 billion
 worth of electricity from Arc, while Google has committed to buying 
200 megawatts of electricity
, or half of Arc’s total output. 

Topics

Climate
, 
Commonwealth Fusion Systems
, 
fusion power
, 
nuclear fusion

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
