Presentation startup 
Gamma
 has acquired Accel-backed design startup 
Lica
 in a bid to build out its own design research lab, TechCrunch has exclusively learned. Lica’s co-founders will lead the effort.

Lica started off as an app that could turn screenshots and recordings into project presentations and videos. Founded by Priyaa Kalyanaraman and Purvanshi Mehta in 2023, the company a year later raised $4 million from investors including Accel, South Park Commons, and Village Global. Over the past couple of years, it has focused on working with e-commerce sites to create marketing videos that adhere to brand guidelines.

Kalyanaraman said Lica wanted to build AI models around communication methods, including video and design, and the founders were familiar with Gamma’s CEO, Lee Grant, as both companies are backed by Accel and South Park Commons. Those conversations eventually led to the acquisition.

“We have a very similar North Star vision of wanting to make visual communication easy. We focused a lot on frontier research and making sure that became accessible to users. But that’s just one part of the solution. Gamma had focused a lot on building distribution, taking the application to 100 million-plus users. Given how fast things are moving, we decided to join forces,” Kalyanaraman told TechCrunch.

Gamma will continue to focus on helping people build presentations, but like other design companies, it’s also started offering image generation. The company says it now wants to explore different formats of communication with the new research division.

“Presentations for us are today a core use case, but how do we expand what presentations look and feel like, and how do people engage with them in the future? What visuals are possible? How interactive are they? These [questions] all require us to think deeply about the core responsibility of communication. This is why we’re excited to invest in this area, because we don’t think anybody else is thinking at that level,” Lee said.

Lica’s Mehta said the new research division would work on customizing the presentation and communication styles of AI models for different audiences and tastes.

“The point of the presentation is to communicate a large goal. We are thinking about building a platform where these two goals can be personalized to such an extent that you just get a really good output, and then you’re able to edit for different audiences,” she said.

Gamma didn’t reveal what products it plans to build as a result of this acquisition, but it did say that it wants to create fluid, multimodal presentations and other communication modalities.

AI presentation startups have received tons of investor attention and money over the last few years. Prezent raised 
$50 million in two rounds
; Gamma raised 
$68 million at a $2.1 billion valuation
; and 
Presentations.ai was also backed by Accel
. We’re even starting to see some consolidation in this category: Earlier this month, 
OpenAI acquired NextSlide
.

Topics

Accel
, 
AI
, 
AI design tools
, 
Gamma
, 
presentaiton

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
