Google 
announced
 on Monday that the Gemini app is now offering its personalized Nano Banana-powered image generation feature to a broader audience. Starting today, all eligible users in the U.S. can access the feature for free, a service that was 
previously only available
 to Plus, Pro, and Ultra subscribers.

Google initially announced that Gemini’s Personal Intelligence feature would get Nano Banana-powered image generation back in April, allowing users to create images that reflect their unique interests. This means that images can be generated based on Gemini’s understanding of your likes and preferences without you having to specify them in your prompt. Gemini utilizes data from your Google account connections — such as Gmail, Google Photos, YouTube, and Search — to achieve this. 

For example, instead of saying, “Create an illustration of me and my favorite things, such as coffee and baking,” you can simply request, “Create an illustration of me and my favorite things.”

Gemini can also pull actual images of you from Google Photos, so you don’t need to manually upload photos. 

Image Credits:
Google

Google initially rolled out the Personal Intelligence feature earlier this year, making it 
widely available
 to all U.S. users in March. The company recently 
expanded
 this functionality to users in India and Japan. 

Personal Intelligence is an opt-in feature, allowing you to decide which apps Gemini can access. Once enabled, it is set as the default for every prompt, but you can disable it using a new toggle in the Tools menu.

Additionally, last month, Google 
announced
 several upcoming updates for the Gemini app, including a new “Daily Brief” feature, a revamped interface, access to AI video model Gemini Omni, and a personal AI agent named Gemini Spark.

Notably, Google’s AI chatbot Gemini surpassed 750 million monthly active users (MAUs) earlier this year, reinforcing its position as a major player in the AI space.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
gemini
, 
Gemini Nano
, 
Generative AI
, 
Google
, 
image generation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Chamath Palihapitiya raises $135M Series A for his AI coding startup, takes CEO role

Julie Bort

Gemini’s personalized AI image generation is now free for US users

Lauren Forristal

Watch out, Amazon: The Kobo eReader now has a Goodreads rival

Sarah Perez

Waymo and Uber quietly part ways in Phoenix

Sean O'Kane

Anthropic and Gov. Newsom forge deal allowing California government to use Claude at half price

Amanda Silberling

South Korean tech giants commit over $550B to ease ‘RAMageddon’

Kate Park

Arena, the AI leaderboard everyone uses, is now a $100M business

Marina Temkin
