Developer platform GitLab has laid off about 14% of its workforce, about 350 employees, as part of a broader restructuring effort it 
detailed
 last month.

The company said in May that it was going to reduce its workforce as it exited 22 countries, flattened management layers, and invested in infrastructure to scale its platform and serve increased traffic from AI workflows, with a sharper focus on research and development.

CEO Bill Staples said during a 
conference call
 on Tuesday that agentic workloads are stressing developer infrastructure more than it was designed to handle. It isn’t a problem unique to GitLab. The company’s rival GitHub has itself 
struggled
 to deal with a massive influx of AI-powered submissions that have affected its uptime.

“Agents work at machine scale, and they’re pushing competitors to the brink. This quarter we began a generational rebuild of git to support the scale and features required for 100x growth. This is a scale requirement that didn’t exist before and has become a real pain point for every team on their agentic journey,” Staples said.

Staples said the company has partnered with an unspecified AI lab to design and rebuild its infrastructure for AI workloads, as well as construct APIs “optimized for agents to store and retrieve context, including code.” It is also investing in orchestration tools for coordinating software development between AI agents and developers, building a context layer, and baking in governance tools directly into its platform.

GitLab joins a number of tech companies such as 
Intuit
, 
Amazon
, 
Block
, 
Cisco
, 
Cloudflare
, 
Meta
, 
Microsoft
, and 
Oracle
 that have laid off large numbers of employees, citing a need to make AI a core part of their business. The tech industry has already cut more than 100,000 jobs this year, 
per Statista
, and is on track to outpace both 2024 and 2025 if the layoff trend continues.

The pattern is by now familiar: Companies are reporting record revenues while simultaneously shrinking their workforces, with AI cited as both the reason for the growth and the justification for the cuts.

Indeed, all of these companies have recently reported strong revenue and profit, pointing to strong demand for AI products, services, or the infrastructure to power them, and GitLab is no exception.

On Tuesday, the company 
reported
 first-quarter revenue of $264 million, up 23% from a year earlier, and gross margins of 88%. It expects to incur $30 million to $35 million in restructuring expenses as part of the effort.

Topics

AI layoffs
, 
AI workloads
, 
Enterprise
, 
GitHub
, 
gitlab
, 
Layoffs

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ram Iyer	

Editor

Ram is a financial and tech reporter and editor. He covered North American and European M&A, equity, regulatory news and debt markets at Reuters and Acuris Global, and has also written about travel, tourism, entertainment and books.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ram by emailing 
ram.iyer@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
