Google 
said
 it has made its largest solar power and battery storage purchase to date. The first two phases of the project, located in Arkansas, will generate enough electricity to power about 6% of the state’s 
peak demand
, the company said earlier this week.

Electricity from the project will flow directly to the grid, offsetting demand from Google’s data centers. Google is both investing in the project alongside developer Cypress Creek Energy and purchasing the entire output of the first two phases, adding 1 gigawatt of solar capacity and 1.9 gigawatt-hours of battery storage to its portfolio.

When completed, the three-phase project will be the largest solar facility in the United States, the companies said. The third and final phase of the project is scheduled to connect to the grid in 2029, bringing the power plant’s total capacity to about 1.8 gigawatts of solar and 2.9 gigawatt-hours of battery storage. Cypress Creek has secured $3.5 billion in financing to support the first two phases.

The Steel River Energy Center, as the project is called, will be located about 30 miles north of Memphis, Tennessee. By pairing solar panels with large batteries, the power plant will be able to provide power to the grid all day, every day. It will also help Google in its quest to match its electricity use with clean power on an hourly basis, a stringent measure that should help bring more hybrid power plants to the grid.

Google’s decision to invest in a large solar and battery facility stands in contrast to xAI, which operates an 
unpermitted natural gas power plant
 about 40 miles to the south. 

Elon Musk has invested heavily in natural gas to power xAI’s Colossus data centers, despite running Tesla, which makes solar panels and grid-scale batteries. XAI is running nearly 60 natural gas turbines without federal clean air permits, according to a 
report
 from Reuters. Pollution from xAI’s power plant in Mississippi is affecting predominantly Black neighborhoods, Reuters found.

Musk is unlikely to change course. He recently 
purchased APR Energy
, a project developer that specializes in modular natural gas power plants.

Google has also invested in natural gas, 
working with Crusoe
 to build a 933-megawatt power plant in West Texas, though that project has been something of an anomaly for the company, which has mostly relied on clean power to expand its portfolio. Given the speed with which projects like Steel River can be deployed — nearly 2 gigawatts of solar capacity in three years — it’s likely that Google will continue to invest in renewables and batteries. 

Topics

Climate
, 
energy storage
, 
Google
, 
Solar Power
, 
xAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
