With help from its internal AI tools, Google says it has patched more security flaws in its Chrome browser in the last month than in the past two years combined.

The tech giant 
announced on Thursday
 that it has fixed a whopping 1,072 security bugs in the last two versions of Chrome, both released in June. That is more than the number of bugs patched in the previous 23 versions released over the last two years, which totalled 1,036 fixes.

Ever since the advent of LLMs, cybersecurity experts have warned that AI-powered systems would find an increasingly and exponentially enormous amount of bugs, forcing defenders to also use AI to get ahead of malicious hackers. 

That prediction is starting to become true, and it’s backed by real data. 

A chart published by Google, which the company revealed as part of a white paper on the company’s efforts to use AI to find flaws and patch them faster, shows the exponential increase. For context, Chrome’s 126 
was released
 in June 2024, while the latest two Chrome releases, Chrome 149 and 150, were released last month. Google calls each version a “milestone.”

A chart showing the Number of security bugs fixed in released versions of Chrome, which Google calls “milestones.” (Image: Google)
Image Credits:
Google /

Doug Turner, Chrome’s director of engineering, told TechCrunch in a statement that LLMs have “fundamentally shifted the economics of cybersecurity, transforming vulnerability discovery into an automated, industrial-scale operation.” 

“By applying models like Gemini, we are preemptively fixing vulnerabilities, outpacing our adversaries and making Chrome safer with every update,” said Turner.

Google is not the only company seeing this trend.

Earlier this month, Microsoft 
announced
 that it had patched a record 570 security flaws across its product lines as part of its monthly round of scheduled patches — colloquially known as “Patch Tuesday.” Microsoft cited its own use of AI to explain the sudden jump in bug fixes.

Apple, meanwhile, does not appear to be registering the same exponential increase. According to 
an independent count
 of bugs fixed by in its products, Apple has patched 482 bugs in 2026, which is roughly on pace to equal or surpass the number of fixed buts from last year, and also roughly equal from the number of bugs that Apple patched in 2015.

TechCrunch reached out to Apple for comment, but did not hear back.

Topics

AI
, 
Chrome
, 
Google
, 
LLMs
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
