OpenAI’s 
Sora
 may 
have shut down
, but Google apparently thinks there’s still interest in a tool that lets you star in your own AI videos. On Thursday, the tech giant 
announced
 an update to Google Vids that will allow you to create a custom digital avatar that looks and sounds like you based on a selfie and a voice recording you upload.

In addition, Google said it’s bringing its multi-modal AI model 
Gemini Omni
 to Vids, letting you create videos using a combination of a written prompt and reference images you upload. Omni then mixes those inputs together to create the AI video you want. It can also be used to do things like swap out the background or fix the lighting in a video recorded on your phone, or add effects.

Plus, Omni now supports step-by-step edits, meaning you can make changes to your video as you go instead of starting over from scratch. 

The updates push Google Vids beyond its original role as an AI-assisted workplace presentation tool to become more of an all-in-one video creation platform. By making Vids a part of Google Workspace, the company is telegraphing its use as a business tool for things like company updates or training videos, but personalized avatars and conversational edits could put it in closer competition with other AI video startups and tools like 
HeyGen
, 
Synthesia
, 
Cap
t
ions
, 
D-ID
, and others.

Google notes that the new AI avatars will be tied to the account holder’s likeness, tied to their Google account, and watermarked invisibly with SynthID. (I suppose that means no one will be using the tool to make bizarre AI videos of Google CEO Sundar Pichai, the way that OpenAI CEO Sam Altman had let users do with Sora when it was available!)

The company also says that access to personal avatars is limited to users in certain regions who are aged 18 or older.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Google
, 
Google Vids
, 
Video

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez
