Google is rolling out a new feature aimed at helping people understand when an ad they’re seeing was made using AI technology. 

AI makes it easier for businesses to create ads, place their brand’s products in various settings, and save money on real-world e-commerce photography. But it can also be misleading if consumers don’t know that what they’re looking at isn’t a real product photo. While Google prohibits misleading and deceptive ads, an ad can still leverage AI to create some type of synthetic or digitally altered content. Until now, that’s something Google only required election ads to disclose.

Screenshot
Image Credits:
Google

The tech giant said the new consumer-facing feature will be introduced to the “My Ad Center” panel, which anyone globally can access by clicking the three-dot menu or on the info icon on the ads they come across via Google Search, YouTube, and Google Discover. 

This panel already lets users block or report ads, learn more about the advertiser or why the ad was shown, among other things. Now, users also see an option that says “how this ad was made,” which will indicate if the ad was created or edited with AI.

Google says that when advertisers use its own generative AI advertising tools to create ads, the disclosure will be automatically enabled. 

However, if the ad is created elsewhere, the advertiser will need to use a new control to indicate if AI was involved in its creation — Google will not perform its own check to determine if that’s the case. In some markets, the ad may also be labeled as AI if local law requires it.

Topics

Adtech
, 
advertising
, 
AI
, 
AI
, 
Commerce

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant
