In Brief

Posted:

11:38 AM PDT · July 7, 2026

Image Credits:
Google

Lauren Forristal

Google’s Pixel event is set for August 12

Google is preparing for its Made by Google launch event, which is scheduled for August 12 in New York City, as announced on Tuesday.

We’re hoping this event will be less 
cringeworthy
 than last year’s, which featured Jimmy Fallon and other celebrities, including Stephen Curry and the Jonas Brothers.

There are numerous rumors circulating about the upcoming Pixel 11 lineup. According to email invites shared by outlets like The Verge and Bloomberg, the new devices are expected to feature design upgrades, particularly a new gold color variant for the Pixel 11.

Google Pixel event – August 12 
pic.twitter.com/Veo1RCJN7j
— Mark Gurman (@markgurman) 
July 7, 2026

Other leaks suggest that the base Pixel 11 may come with slimmer bezels and a sleek black camera bar, while the Pixel 11 Pro is 
rumored
 to be slightly thinner than its predecessor. Additionally, there is speculation about the Pixel 11 Pro Fold, which might have a redesigned camera bump and a lighter profile compared to the previous model.

On a negative note, one 
report
 suggests that Google may skip the 128GB option for the new models, starting instead with 256GB, which could lead to a higher price tag.

Last year, the event took place on August 20, where Google 
announced
 the Pixel 10 series, AI-powered upgrades, and other devices, including a new foldable, the Pixel Watch 4, and the second generation of its budget-friendly A-Series earbuds.

Topics

Gadgets
, 
Google
, 
Google Pixel
, 
Hardware
, 
In Brief

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

This startup pits dealerships against each other to bid on your used car

Sean O'Kane

	5 hours ago

AI

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

	1 day ago

Media & Entertainment

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

	3 days ago

Latest in Hardware

In Brief

Google’s Pixel event is set for August 12

Lauren Forristal

	24 minutes ago

Hardware

US investors will soon get access to SK Hynix, another memory maker riding the AI boom

Julie Bort

	20 hours ago

Startups

Smart glasses maker Even Realities hits $1B valuation with $150M funding led by Meituan, Tencent

Kate Park

	1 day ago
