Google co-founder Sergey Brin has donated another $20 million to Build a Better California, an organization 
advocating against
 California’s proposed billionaire tax, according to a new 
filing
. That means that the world’s 
fourth-richest man
, whose net worth hovers around $267 billion, has now spent more than $100 million to avoid an estimated $13.3 billion tax payment.

California’s Prop 40
, known as the billionaire tax, would impose a one-time 5% tax on the net worth of around 200 billionaires that live in the state. The windfall from this proposed tax would mostly go toward funding California’s healthcare programs. The state’s Medicaid program alone could lose up to 
$30 billion
 in federal funding once Trump’s budget cuts take effect next year.

Brin isn’t the only tech mogul seeking ways to avoid such a tax. It’s no coincidence that Meta founder Mark Zuckerberg reportedly bought a 
$170 million mansion
 near Miami this year. Former Uber CEO Travis Kalanick, venture capitalist Peter Thiel, and Brin’s fellow Google co-founder Larry Page have also left the state.

Prop 40 has also generated dissent from Governor Gavin Newsom (D-CA), who is concerned about the economic impact of these billionaires and their businesses fleeing California. Instead, Newsom has called for a “
national billionaires’ tax
.”

“Today, the office worker can shoulder a higher tax rate than the heiress,” Newsom noted in a blog post. “We should end the ‘tax-free lifestyle loan,’ the gimmick that lets the ultra-wealthy borrow against their stock portfolios while reporting no taxable income.”

Californians will vote on Prop 40 in November. The organization that Brin is funding has proposed opposing ballot measures that, if passed, could effectively block Prop 40 by limiting the introduction of new taxes.

Meanwhile, Nvidia co-founder and unlikely working class hero Jensen Huang says he’s “
perfectly fine
” paying the tax.

“I have not even thought about it once,” Huang, who would owe around $8 billion in taxes, said in a January 
interview
 with Bloomberg. “We chose to live in Silicon Valley, and whatever taxes they would like to apply, so be it. I’m perfectly fine with it.”

Topics

billionaire tax
, 
Google
, 
Government & Policy
, 
Sergey Brin

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

Cloudflare launches Kitesurf, a browser built for AI agents

Sarah Perez

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta
