In Brief

Posted:

1:37 PM PDT · July 8, 2026

Image Credits:
Google

Russell Brandom

Google’s deepfake detector system used to debunk McConnell hoax pic

Google’s 
SynthID
 system has been used to debunk a high-profile AI-generated hoax image, in a rare but significant win for the system.

Earlier this week, a picture circulated online that seemed to show Kentucky Senator Mitch McConnell covered in tubes in a hospital bed in a state of extreme distress. The image was shared widely on 
Reddit
 and 
X
, but by Wednesday, the revered fact-checking site 
Snopes
 had debunked the image, noting that, when checked, the image registers as containing the SynthID watermark designed by Google to identify AI-generated pictures.

In short, the watermark worked exactly as it was supposed to in a win for anti-deepfake technology.

Senator McConnell’s health has been the subject of intense speculation since he checked into the hospital 
after an emergency call on June 14
. Since that time, he’s been largely absent from the public eye, fueling speculation that his health may be failing. In this case, however, the evidence proved to be entirely fake.

Launched
 at Google’s I/O developer conference in 2025, SynthID works as an invisible signature, visible to SynthID algorithms but designed to be unnoticeable to the casual observer. Because the signature is built into the image itself, it survives even when an image is screencaptured across multiple platforms, as the McConnell image was.

SynthID’s main limitation is that it can only be used when an image-generation tool actively participates in the program. Gemini models have included the watermark since the program launched in 2025. OpenAI joined in May 2026, as part of 
a broader effort to fight malicious image generation
. Anthropic does not participate in the program.

Users can check if images contain the watermark by asking a Gemini model or uploading them to 
OpenAI’s public image verification tool
.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
deepfakes
, 
synthid

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Meta wants its AI glasses to seem less creepy. Its AI strategy says otherwise.

Sarah Perez

	4 hours ago

AI

OpenAI releases new voice models for more natural live conversations

Ivan Mehta

	4 hours ago

AI

Why the rise of open source AI isn’t hurting Anthropic … yet

Russell Brandom

	1 day ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Google’s deepfake detector system used to debunk McConnell hoax pic

Russell Brandom

	30 minutes ago

AI

SpaceXAI releases Grok 4.5, which Elon describes as an ‘Opus-class model’

Lucas Ropek

	2 hours ago

Robotics

This startup thinks robotics is about to have its ChatGPT moment

Rebecca Bellan

	2 hours ago
