Google Labs, the tech giant’s team devoted to experimental product design, has launched a new AI-fueled app for iOS and Android that will quite literally animate your life. 

Behold, 
Dreambeans
. Why is it called that? We’ll get to that later.

First, what is it?

Gozde Oznur, the product lead behind the new app, told TechCrunch that the idea is to use data culled from across your various Google services to generate a curated list of AI-illustrated “stories.” These stories come in a variety of different shapes and forms, although — in general — they seem to be lifestyle suggestions. Oznur describes them as “places to visit, topics to explore, things to try, upcoming trips, events that you should be aware of.”

Dreambeans generates these ideas based on a user’s Google data. “With your permission, Dreambeans uses Personal Intelligence to connect information from Google apps like Gmail, Calendar, Photos, YouTube and Search History, to curate a finite collection of daily stories designed to spark new ideas,” the company says.

So for instance, some stories may be geographical recommendations — like suggesting a new coffee shop near where the user lives that they might be interested in. Or, as is the case in this 
marketing video
, if you’re getting a new dog and that event has been marked in your Google Calendar, Dreambeans might deliver some insights about what it’s like to live with a new puppy. Still other stories may simply be news articles curated from the web, based on a user’s past interests.

Image Credits:
Google

Oznur said the app has also been built as a doomscrolling antidote, in that it only provides users with a limited number of stories per day — typically 10 to 14. The idea is to get a few inspirational ideas and then go out and live your life, she said. A lot of companies are currently trying to court the user that is sick of phone addiction. I recently 
reviewed a startup, Bond,
 which also uses AI to auto-generate lifestyle suggestions for the user.

What about privacy protections? 

According to Oznur, they are pretty solid. The only person with access to the app’s stories is the user, she said. Users can also delete their data whenever they want, and can choose which Google services they want to connect to the tool.

Finally, where did the name “Dreambeans” come from?

The idea for the name was generated, in part, by the way the system works while you are asleep, she said.

“The dream part is literal, because while you sleep, the app is working through everything across your connected apps, because, as you can imagine, it’s a lot of data that it is distilling,” Oznur said. “The beans part is about how you kind of start your day with a freshly brewed cup of coffee. It has processed everything overnight and hands you a concentrated drop of inspiration in the morning.” 

Dreambeans is currently only available for eligible U.S.-based Google AI Ultra subscribers on Android and iOS. However, there is also a 
waitlist
 that is available to users with a personal Google account.

Topics

AI
, 
Dreambeans
, 
Google

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
