Google is giving Pokémon fans a new reason to wear a Fitbit. The company 
announced 
Thursday a special-edition Fitbit Air that works with Pokémon Sleep, combining Fitbit’s health and fitness tracking and the sleep-focused Pokémon game. The announcement comes as Pokémon celebrates its 30th anniversary this year.

Pokémon Sleep 
launched 
in 2023, turning something as ordinary as going to bed into a Pokémon game. Players can earn in-game rewards for getting to sleep before their set bedtime, while the amount and quality of sleep they get helps drive their progress. You start with a big, sleepy Snorlax. The more you sleep, the more “Drowsy Power” your Snorlax builds up, which in turn attracts more Pokémon for you to discover.

The Fitbit Air adds another layer to that experience. It can sync with both the Google Health app and Pokémon Sleep, allowing users to track metrics including daily movement, heart rate, and cardio load during the day, then use the device to record sleep duration and quality overnight.

This isn’t the first wearable that can connect with Pokémon Sleep. The app already supports several 
wearables
, including Apple Watch, the Fitbit series, Galaxy Watch, and Google Pixel Watch. Players can also use Pokémon Sleep without a wearable at all.

For Pokémon’s 30th anniversary, however, it’s a particularly clever crossover. It turns something people already do every night into another opportunity to engage with the franchise, while giving Google a playful way to make wearable health tracking feel more fun. Google has also recently teamed up with athlete Stephen Curry for a special edition of the 
Pixel Watch
 for $579, featuring an exclusive design built for workouts.

The special-edition device is available to preorder for $129 and starts shipping September 15. It will be sold online and in stores through the Google Store and Target. 

The standard 
Fitbit Air
, meanwhile, costs $99. Google introduced its new Fitbit Air in May, featuring a slimmer design, improved health and fitness tracking, and an AI-powered coach that provides personalized guidance based on users’ activity, sleep, and wellness data.

Topics

Apps
, 
fitbit
, 
fitness wearable
, 
Gadgets
, 
Google
, 
Hardware
, 
pokemon

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
