A group of publishers and authors have 
filed a class action lawsuit
 against Google, accusing the tech giant of using their copyrighted works to train its AI platform, Gemini.

The group of plaintiffs, which includes Hachette, Cengage, Elsevier, author Scott Turow, and S.C.R.I.B.E., also alleges that Google intentionally removed or changed copyright information on these works to “conceal… that its Gemini Models were trained on stolen materials,” according to the lawsuit.

This lawsuit is just one of many complaints that publishers, authors, and other copyright holders have filed against AI companies such as Google, Meta, OpenAI, and Anthropic.

While many of these lawsuits are still pending, two early court decisions in California have 
favored
 the AI companies, ruling that the use of copyrighted works for AI training is considered “
fair use
” under U.S. copyright law that has 
not been updated
 since before the existence of the internet.

Anthropic was, however, fined $1.5 billion for pirating the works it trained on, marking the largest payout in the history of U.S. copyright law. Around half a million writers were eligible for payments of at least $3,000. However, many authors opted out of receiving the settlement so that they could pursue 
further legal action
 over AI training.

The California judges’ decisions don’t bode well for how other courts may view the tech companies’ fair use defense, but the conflict is too nuanced for these rulings to establish an inarguable precedent. The lawsuit against Google was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, giving a different judge the opportunity to weigh in.

In the Google case, the publishers have a more nuanced, long-term relationship with the company. The lawsuit explains that publishers and authors have a long history of providing Google with copyrighted works for the specific purpose of making books searchable through Google Books. These search results do not allow users to view entire books. Instead, they provide access to short snippets of the book along with bibliographic information. The plaintiffs claim that Google trained Gemini on copies of these books, as well as books uploaded to the Google Play store, even though it never received permission to do so.

“Google illegally copied works from all these scope-limited programs for AI training, knowing it lacked authorization to do so,” the lawsuit reads.

The plaintiffs also cite an internal document from Google that allegedly states that using copyrighted books for AI training could be “highly problematic for Google” and might result in “$10Bs-$100Bs in potential fines.”

Google did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Topics

AI
, 
Google
, 
google gemini
, 
lawsuit

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
