Samsung’s short and wide 
foldable
 is the talk of the town, but Google is not experimenting with its design with today’s unveiling of the new Pixel 11 Fold, which appears largely unchanged on the outside. The company said that the new foldable is stronger and lighter than the previous-gen phone, but it’s also costlier.

Google said that it developed a new, stronger hinge for this year’s 
Pixel 11 Pro Fold
. It’s also adding a Super Actua display to the outer display with 3,600 nits of peak brightness. Both the inner and outer displays are 20% brighter than its predecessor, according to the company. 

There is a bit of a battery downgrade, however, as it now offers a 4,750 mAh capacity battery instead of 5,015 mAh from last year’s model. On the plus side, this is probably the reason why the phone is 1mm thinner and roughly 20 grams lighter. 

Image Credits:
Google

Another small upgrade on the charging front is that the new foldable supports 25W wireless charging.

The Pixel 11 Pro Fold is getting an updated 48-megapixel sensor that pulls in more light for more detailed photos in different lighting conditions. Because of the new G6 Tensor chip and the updated image processor, the phone can digitally zoom at 30x, up from 20x.

The device will be available in both the Olive and Obsidian colors, and will cost $1,899.

Topics

foldable
, 
Gadgets
, 
Google
, 
Google Pixel

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
