Even in the age of 
AI-powered
 
autonomous
 
cyberattacks
, the crude, tried and tested hacking techniques of tricking victims into doing things they shouldn’t are still producing great results. 

Groups of unknown hackers are targeting and breaking into large financial and investment firms in the United States with the goal of stealing sensitive data to extort the victims with the threat of publishing it, Google’s security researchers 
wrote in a report
 on Thursday.

The company did not name the victims, but 
Reuters reported
 that among them there are leading private equity firms such as Apollo Global Management, Bain Capital, Blackstone, Bridgewater Associates, CME Group, KKR, Moody’s, and TPG. 

The hacking groups, which Google dubbed Falcon, Helix, Pink, and Redact, are using an old-fashioned technique to break into those firms: phone calls to employees’ personal cellphones in which the hackers pretend to be co-workers or IT helpdesk staffers, during which they try to trick targets into entering their credentials and multi-factor codes on spoofed websites, according to Google. In cybersecurity parlance, this technique is known as voice phishing, or vishing.

Some of the groups identified by Google run websites where they publicize their hacks and threaten to leak the stolen data as a way to extort the victims into paying a ransom, a common strategy among cybercriminals.

Image Credits:
Google /

“We conduct every negotiation on professional terms. The publication of your data is never our preferred resolution; it is the consequence of refusal to engage, deliberate stalling, or failure to honor an agreement,” read one of the sites. “Respond promptly and in good faith, and the matter is resolved without further incident.”

Google researchers said that the different groups may all be part of a larger umbrella collective the company tracks under the name UNC6671. But it’s unclear if they are affiliates, splinter groups, or they all use the same Phishing-as-a-Service infrastructure. 

“We believe that this most likely reflects a coordinated group of threat actors operating multiple public extortion brands possibly in an effort to compartmentalize operations, hide overall breach volumes, and isolate any negotiation fallout,” read the report.

Contact Us

			Do you have more information about these data breaches? We’d love to hear from you. From a non-work device and network, you can contact Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai securely on Signal at +1 917 257 1382, or via Telegram and Keybase @lorenzofb, or 
email
.

According to Google, the hacking groups have also previously targeted large companies in the manufacturing, real estate, healthcare, and insurance sectors, as well as tech, transportation, and hospitality companies with the goal of stealing “valuable intellectual property, software source code, or sensitive VIP client data.”

More recently, the hackers have targeted legal and financial organizations such as private equity firms. “Concentrating on organizations involved in mergers, acquisitions, capital deployment, and litigation may reflect a strategy to target high-value corporate and confidential data to maximize leverage extortion demands,” wrote Google’s researchers. 

Google said that one cryptocurrency wallet associated with one of the hacking groups received around $10 million in bitcoin in the first few months of this year, and that the hackers usually demand from $750,000 to $3 million from victims.

Laurie Bischel, a spokesperson for CME Group, declined to comment. 

Apollo Global Management, Bain Capital, Blackstone, Bridgewater Associates, KKR, Moody’s, and TPG did not respond to a request for comment.

Topics

cybercrime
, 
cybersecurity
, 
Google
, 
hackers
, 
hacking
, 
phishing
, 
Private Equity
, 
Security
, 
venture capital
, 
vishing

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

VC-backed startups commit more fraud, and researchers think they know why  

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta
