Alongside its announcement of a new lineup of Pixel 11 smartphones, Google on Wednesday introduced its answer to Apple’s AirTag. At its 
Made by Google ’26
 event, the company will unveil a new product designed for keeping track of your valuable items: the $29 Google Pixel Tag.

Similar to how Apple’s 
AirTag
 leverages its network of iPhones to find lost devices, the new Pixel Tag uses Google’s Find Hub network, which taps into Android devices around the world. Android users can add the tag to their phone’s built-in Android Find Hub, which is already used to help users find their lost Android smartphones and other devices, similar to Apple’s Find My.

Helpfully, you can locate and ring your Pixel Tag directly from your Pixel Watch, too, not just your phone.  

Image Credits:
Google

Where the Pixel Tag differs from AirTag is in its look and feel.

Apple’s lost-item finder is small, round, and engravable; Google opted for a slimmer, elongated device instead. Spec-by-spec, the Pixel Tag is 1.1 inches wide, compared to the AirTag’s 1.26 inches. As the Pixel Tag is oval-shaped, it’s 1.8 inches high from top to bottom. Thickness-wise, the Pixel Tag clocks in at a depth of 0.2 inches, compared with the AirTag’s 0.31 inches (which Apple calls its height).

By weight, the two competitors are comparable, as the Pixel Tag weighs 0.4 ounces with the battery, and the AirTag comes in at 0.39 oz.

Both are also rated IP67 for splash, water, and dust resistance, meaning they can withstand submersion in a maximum depth of 1 meter for up to 30 minutes.

Image Credits:
Google

Taking other cues from AirTag, the Pixel Tag offers connectivity via Bluetooth and Ultra Wideband for precision finding; however, it doesn’t include NFC. Pixel Tag has a built-in speaker to help you find the lost device when nearby, and it’s powered by the user-replaceable CR2032 coin cell battery — the same used by the AirTag. This allows the Pixel Tag to work for roughly a year before the battery needs to be replaced.

Designed to be attached to items like keychains and bags, the Pixel Tag will cost $29 for a one-pack and $99 for a four-pack when it becomes available for purchase on November 11, 2026. 

Topics

Gadgets
, 
Google
, 
Hardware
, 
PIXEL

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
