In Brief

Posted:

9:13 AM PDT · August 14, 2026

Image Credits:
Matteo Della Torre/NurPhoto / Getty Images

Ivan Mehta

Google will now allow users to remove visible watermark from its AI generations

Google 
announced
 on Friday that it will now allow users to remove a visible watermark from its AI generations, including images, videos, and songs. The company specified that this won’t affect the invisible 
SynthID watermark
 and C2PA standard-related metadata.

Josh Woodward, the company’s VP for Gemini, 
said in a post on X
 that this toggle will be available for Nano Banana, Omni, and Lyria models. He specified that the setting to turn the visible watermark off will be available in Gemini and Google’s 
video editor, Flow
, with support for Search coming soon.

The change reflects an evolving approach to labeling AI-generated media, as visible watermarks can often make content less useful for professional and creative work, but the need to identify AI-generated content remains. 

“We’re striking a balance here between creative control and safety: while the visible watermarks are now optional, invisible SynthID watermarks and C2PA metadata are still being used for transparency. So you can still use Gemini or Search to see if an image was AI-generated,” he wrote.

The feature is rolling out in the coming days, and once available, users will be able to go to Settings > Media Watermark to turn the visible mark on or off.

Google is also open sourcing a new library called 
Credentio
 to let developers embed a local validation mechanism in their apps.

This comes after 
Anthropic’s hotly debated move
 to include 
a watermark in text and files generated by Claude
 to comply with EU regulations. 

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
gemini
, 
Google
, 
In Brief
, 
watermarks

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Climate

Hyperscalers might regret embracing natural gas if new forecast proves correct

Tim De Chant

	3 hours ago

AI

IBM partners with OpenAI to bolster enterprise AI push

Jagmeet Singh

	22 hours ago

AI

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

	2 days ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Google will now allow users to remove visible watermark from its AI generations

Ivan Mehta

	1 hour ago

AI

Does Mark Zuckerberg really believe AI is ‘for everyone’?

Theresa Loconsolo

	2 hours ago

33 min

AI

Kog is going deeper to squeeze more inference out of GPUs

Anna Heim

	3 hours ago
