Google announced on Thursday that Google Wallet will now allow parents to set up a secure balance for children under 18. The tech giant says the new feature is designed to help parents teach healthy financial habits while maintaining oversight of their child’s spending through built-in safeguards.

Parents can set daily spending limits, review their child’s transaction history, and choose to receive notifications whenever a purchase is made. Parents can also lock or unlock the account if the child’s device is lost, or activate a temporary “spending timeout” to pause spending at any time.

The new feature brings Google Wallet more in line with competing financial tools, including Apple Cash Family, which lets parents send money to their children while monitoring transactions and managing spending controls. 

Additionally, the company is positioning itself against startups like 
FamZoo
 and 
Greenlight
, which allow parents to teach their children financial literacy through prepaid debit card systems.

Image Credits:
Google /

Kids can use their Android device or Wear OS devices to tap and pay wherever Google Pay is accepted. The tech giant sees the new feature as a way for kids to manage their own money without the need for an actual bank account. 

The update is rolling out in the United States. It’s unknown when, or if, Google plans to bring the new capability to additional regions.

The new feature builds on 
Google’s announcement
 last year that parents and guardians in select countries can allow their children to use digital payments on Android devices under parental supervision. A payment card can only be added with parental consent, and parents receive an email whenever their child makes a transaction. 

With last year’s update, kids also gained the ability to use Google Wallet to access supported passes, like event tickets, library cards, and gift cards. 

Topics

Apps
, 
google wallet

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

VC-backed startups commit more fraud, and researchers think they know why  

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta
