Google on Thursday 
launched
 a dedicated mobile app for Google Finance that houses users’ watchlists and provides real-time market data, live financial news, and Google’s AI-powered “Key Moments” feature, which explains why stocks are moving.

The app is launching on Android first, and Google says it will launch an iOS version in the coming months. More features, such as the ability to listen to live earnings calls, are also coming.

Google launching a stand-alone finance app is likely less about giving investors another place to check stock prices and more about Google trying to stake a claim in the increasingly crowded financial information app market.

The move puts Google in direct competition with consumer finance platforms like Yahoo Finance and trading apps like Robinhood.

Image Credits:
Google

The tech giant also said its new AI-powered 
Google Finance web experience
, unveiled last year, is coming out of beta with new features.

Google is also rolling out portfolios globally within the new Google Finance web experience, allowing users to view their investments in a single dashboard that tracks holdings and their performance. Users’ existing Google Finance portfolios will automatically be visible, and they can create new portfolios by uploading files or describing their investments to the chatbot.

Once these portfolios are set up, users can use Google Finance’s AI research tool to ask questions, like “what sectors are currently underrepresented in my portfolio?”

Image Credits:
Google

Google has added an AI feature that lets users set up tasks using natural-language prompts, such as timely briefings analyzing market changes, or summaries of their holdings performance. Users can ask the AI assistant to use their watchlist or portfolio to get insights tailored to their own investments, and once a task is set up, Google Finance will work in the background.

Google says these new portfolio and task features are available on the web starting today, and that they will be added to the Google Finance app in the coming months.

Topics

Apps
, 
Fintech
, 
Google
, 
google finance

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos
