Google on Tuesday 
released
 Nano Banana 2 Lite, the newest version of its in-house AI video and image generator. This version is significantly faster and more affordable than its previous release, the company claims.

The model has much lower latency and can produce images in four seconds, which makes it a good option if you need to workshop images and produce a large number of them in quick succession, Google says. It costs $0.034 per 1,000 images, which makes it quite affordable for people looking to draft and perfect their content at scale.

Image Credits:
Google

The release follows last summer’s launch of the original Nano Banana, powered by Gemini 3.1 Flash, and the February release of 
Nano Banana 2
. The latter introduced new powers for the generator, including the ability to create more realistic images. The company also offers Nano Banana Pro, which is described as a more powerful (and more expensive) model for advanced use cases.

While Nano Banana 2 is referred to as a “generalist workhorse,” Banana 2 Lite is optimized for high-volume workflows that need to occur at a rapid pace, Google claims.

Image Credits:
Google

Despite consumer backlash over 
so-called AI slop
 created by image models, companies continue to 
invest heavily
 in AI tools that can generate imagery and videos. However, Google often markets its models as convenient tools that can assist with the creation of advertisements.

That said, the ties between Hollywood and AI companies continue to tighten — much to the consternation of some creative communities and audiences. Indeed, Google 
just struck a $75 million deal
 with the much-beloved indie studio A24 — a partnership that has suffered 
significant
 
criticism
 from fans.

Nano Banana 2 Lite is now available through Google AI Studio and the Gemini API, as well as Google’s Gemini Enterprise Agent Platform. Google says it serves as a replacement for Nano Banana, which the company now refers to as its “legacy model.”

Also on Tuesday, Google announced a wider release of Gemini Omni Flash, which was 
initially introduced
 at Google I/O earlier this year. Flash costs $0.10 per second of video output. Plus, Google showed off a new demo app, Omni Product Studio, which it says can take static images generated by Omni and transform them into “cinematic e-commerce videos.”

“Building with generative media is often about creative iteration,” the company said 
in a blog
. “With these two models, developers can build comprehensive, end-to-end multimedia experiences that connect rapid image generation with video creation and editing.”

Topics

AI
, 
AI videos
, 
gemini omni flash
, 
Google
, 
Nano Banana 2 Lite

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

Here’s why Slate changed the battery in its cheap EV truck

Tim De Chant

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom
