Google is adding new ways for users to plan and book trips through AI Mode, its conversational search experience, the company announced on Thursday. Users will now be able to ask AI Mode to track flight prices, book hotels, and see the cost of flights and hotels in points or miles.

The updates indicate that Google is looking to position AI Mode as an AI travel agent of sorts, as it’s moving beyond simply helping users find information to actually handling parts of the trip-planning and booking process itself. 

Users can now describe to AI Mode when and where they want to fly, and the tool will display the best options available with the latest prices from more than 300 airlines and travel sites. If they’re ready to book, they can go ahead and build their itinerary in AI Mode. If they want to wait and see if prices drop, they can ask something like “track these flight prices for me.”

Image Credits:
Google

They’ll then get an email if prices change for the destination and dates they entered. Flight price tracking in AI Mode is now available in more than 180 countries.

As for hotel booking, users will be able to discover and book their next hotel through a conversation with AI Mode. Users can tell AI Mode about their upcoming trip and their hotel preferences to get a list of options alongside reviews and key factors.

Once they’ve found a hotel they like, they can ask AI Mode to help complete the booking. Then they need to select the “Continue on Google” option that will appear alongside Google’s integrated partners, which includes hotel chains and travel sites.

From there, they can choose their room, review details such as the cancellation policy, and complete the booking with Google Pay. The tech giant notes that the hotel or booking platform will handle the booking and any customer service.

Image Credits:
Google

Hotel booking in AI Mode has started rolling out in the U.S. in English and will be available over the coming weeks with offerings from Booking.com, Choice Hotels International, Expedia, Hilton, Hotels.com, IHG Hotels & Resorts, Marriott International, Priceline, Trip.com, and Wyndham Hotels & Resorts.

Google also announced that AI Mode can now display the cost in points or miles for flights and hotels by asking something like “I want to travel from Atlanta to Miami using my AA miles. Help me find some options for nonstop flights departing Oct 9 and returning on Oct 12”.

Users will then see how many miles they need to book matching flights. The update is now available globally.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Google

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
