Google Images, the tech giant’s image search engine, is taking on Pinterest with its latest redesign that turns the site into a browsable, dynamic gallery of images from across the web. Google is also adding a way for users to create AI images right in Search, as it celebrates 25 years since the debut of Google Images.

Pinterest has long been known for allowing people to browse and save visual inspiration for everything from fashion to home decor. With this redesign, Google is essentially copying that playbook by turning Google Images into a place for discovery and inspiration, and not just search, which could increase users’ time spent on Google platforms, helping boost its ad revenue. 

In addition, Google is likely hoping that when users can’t find the image they’re looking for on Google Images or when they want to visualize something, they’ll stay within its ecosystem to create it rather than turn to third-party services like ChatGPT.

Image Credits:
Google

After navigating to the redesigned Google Images, users will see a “For You” gallery of images tailored to their interests and browsing history. Like Pinterest, the gallery is designed for continuous browsing, with Google saying it updates in real time with new images.

As users browse, they can save ideas to their “collections,” which will appear as tabs above the main gallery of photos. For example, users can create collections for things like vacation outfit ideas, travel inspiration, and ways to design a reading nook, which they can come back to later.

The redesign is rolling out over the coming weeks on desktop in the U.S. in English. Users need to be signed into a Google Account to try it out, the tech giant says. 

Image Credits:
Google

As for generating images directly in Search, Google says the feature is meant for moments when you have a highly specific idea for an image that doesn’t already exist online. Google is bringing image generation directly into AI Overviews on Search and will use its latest Nano Banana model to transform a text prompt into a custom visual. 

The feature can also help users reimagine spaces and visualize ideas, such as seeing what a room might look like painted red or what a dorm room with a coastal theme could look like. 

Image generation in AI Overviews will start to roll out over the coming weeks in English for all regions that currently support image creation in AI Mode, Google says.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Google
, 
imagess
, 
Search

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
