In Brief

Posted:

11:49 AM PDT · June 22, 2026

Image Credits:
Dia Dipasupil/WireImage / Getty Images

Dominic-Madori Davis

Google DeepMind bets $75M on AI’s future in Hollywood with A24 deal

A new alliance has formed between a Hollywood studio and a tech juggernaut. 

On Monday, Google DeepMind announced 
a $75 million investment (per the WSJ)
 into popular indie film studio A24, known for hits like “Marty Supreme,” “Everything Everywhere All At Once,” and the latest blockbuster “Backrooms.” Google DeepMind is billing the investment as a partnership, a 
“first-of-its-kind”
 that will see the two companies create AI tools for filmmaking, with Google DeepMind receiving “feedback and guidance from leading artists.” A24 has recently worked with big names like Timothée Chalamet and Anne Hathaway on several projects. 

“We believe the best way to develop tools that empower artists is to work directly with them,” Demis Hassabis, Google DeepMind co-founder and CEO, said in a press release. “By collaborating with filmmakers and industry leaders like A24 from the beginning, we can build new AI features to support artists in authentic, meaningful storytelling that helps enable their creative vision.” 

Though controversy has swirled around Hollywood over the use of AI in movies, A24 would be far from the first studio to explore integrating AI into the creative process. Netflix 
announced earlier this year that it was buying
 Ben Affleck’s company, InterPositive, which creates AI tools for filmmakers. Last year, meanwhile, Amazon’s 
MGM Studios launched
 an AI unit focused on developing tools for television and movie production.  

Topics

a24
, 
AI
, 
DeepMind
, 
filmmaking
, 
In Brief
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
movies

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Startups

AI chipmaker Groq confirms $650M raise, re-staffs after Nvidia’s $20B not-acqui-hire deal

Julie Bort

	33 minutes ago

Climate

Nvidia wants to cut data center water use, but that’s not the same as fixing AI’s water problem

Tim De Chant

	38 minutes ago

Security

Tata Electronics, a major tech supplier to Apple and Tesla, confirms data breach

Jagmeet Singh

	1 hour ago

Latest in Media & Entertainment

In Brief

Google DeepMind bets $75M on AI’s future in Hollywood with A24 deal

Dominic-Madori Davis

	2 hours ago

Apps

Instagram looks to take on streaming services with longer-form, episodic and live formats for its TV app

Aisha Malik

	7 hours ago

In Brief

Ubisoft co-founder Claude Guillemot dies in plane crash

Anthony Ha

	1 day ago
