AI search is rapidly becoming the default, whether users like it or not. In just a year’s time, Google’s AI-generated answers in search, known as 
AI Overviews
, have gone from appearing in 15% of searches to 43%, according to a new report, driving a shift in how web users consume information online.

In a 
recent analysis
 of the generative landscape, market intelligence firm 
Similarweb
 noted that what began as an AI layer on top of search has become an integral part of the search journey itself, as Google drops users into AI Overviews, where they can then continue their research via Google’s more conversational 
AI Mode
.

Image Credits:
Similarweb

During the same period, AI Mode visits rose from 126 million in June 2025 to 279 million by May 2026.

The data illustrates a broader 
change in how users search
 the web — a shift from an era when Google provided a simple list of blue links to click through and read to one in which Google itself is the destination, sourcing its answers and information from the websites it indexes.

This, in turn, appears to increasethe time users spend on Google’s platform rather than using it only as a tool to discover websites. Over the past year, Similarweb’s data shows that the average length of Google searches has risen, suggesting that people are now replacing their short keyword-based search queries with longer, more natural conversational ones designed for AI.

Image Credits:
Similarweb

This change has not been welcomed by publishers, who are 
losing out on referral traffic
 due to the rise of AI citations that don’t lead to clicks. Last year, Similarweb 
reported
 on this trend, noting in particular how devastating it was for news publishers. More recently, tech infrastructure company Cloudflare 
introduced tools
 that allow publishers to fight back by 
blocking AI crawlers
 from their websites unless those AI companies pay for access to their content through 
its marketplace
.

While AI citations don’t always lead to users clicking through to a destination, the number of AI responses that include a citation has risen more than fivefold during the past year, Similarweb’s new report says.

Still, just 6.8% of U.S. ChatGPT desktop queries included citations as of May 2026, despite this growth. (Some industries fare better, with travel, retail, and sports queries generating cited responses more frequently than others.)

Image Credits:
Similarweb

There is some hope for publishers, however. In terms of ChatGPT at least, U.S. desktop referrals have improved after a May 7 search update, which saw the proportion of visits landing on webpages more than double from 25% in March 2026 to nearly 60% by May 30, 2026. 

This suggests that users are taking advantage of the more prominent blue links within AI-driven search results when they’re available.

Image Credits:
Similarweb

Even with these improvements, the larger AI search trend remains unchanged, as Google transforms itself from a gateway to the wider web into a destination in its own right.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
ai overviews
, 
Google
, 
Search
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker
