Google Photos is getting a new “Video Remix” feature that can edit and transform videos in seconds, Google 
announced
 on Wednesday. The feature is powered by 
Gemini Omni,
 Google’s recently released model that promises to “create anything from any input.”

The launch is Google’s latest push to bring more generative AI tools into its consumer apps as it continues to compete with companies like Apple, OpenAI, and Adobe. By baking AI-powered video editing into Google Photos, the tech giant is making it easier for users to edit clips with a few taps instead of relying on dedicated software, giving users another reason to stay within Google’s ecosystem.

The Video Remix tool can be accessed in the “Create” tab in Google Photos, allowing you to do things like apply cinematic relighting to brighten up a dark clip, swap out a plain background for something else, or add artistic styles to videos, such as watercolor, raw sketchbook, and oil painting effects.

For example, you could edit a video to make it appear that you shot it in a greenhouse, relight a video with a morning glow, or paint a video in a watercolor effect.

Image Credits:
Google

“Creating beautiful video clips shouldn’t require professional skills or hours of editing,” Google wrote in the blog post. “Now, with Video Remix in Google Photos, you can transform ordinary videos into share-worthy moments in just a few taps.”

Video Remix starts rolling out today to eligible Google AI Plus, Pro, and Ultra subscribers in the U.S., Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, Colombia, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Pakistan, Philippines, South Korea, and Turkey.

The feature is the latest in a series of AI-powered updates introduced to Google Photos. The app recently launched 
new touch-up tools
 to allow users to apply subtle edits and fixes, such as removing blemishes, refining skin texture, brightening eyes, and whitening teeth. Google also announced 
an AI-powered feature
 that turns photos of your clothes into a digital closet where you can create new outfit ideas and virtually try on outfits.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Google
, 
Google Photos

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort
