Startup Groq has 
raised
 $350 million as it continues to pivot from an AI chipmaker to a neocloud company that provides powerful GPUs and AI infrastructure services. 

The new capital, led by investment firm Disruptive with planned participation from Nvidia, values the company at $3.5 billion. That’s down from the 
$6.9 billion Groq
 was valued at last September, just a few months before Nvidia 
hired the startup’s founder
 and CEO, Jonathan Ross, and other top talent as part of a licensing deal. 

A spokesperson for the company told TechCrunch that despite the difference in valuation, the company doesn’t see it as a down round, but rather as establishing a new valuation for the “post-Nvidia-lincensing-deal version of Groq.” 

Groq was focused on building its own chips, dubbed LPUs (language processing units), to compete with Nvidia on inference — the type of compute needed to run AI workloads in real time. After it lost its star team, Groq shifted from being a pure AI chipmaker into a cloud and data center provider that operates Nvidia systems, making the remaining Groq company an Nvidia customer. 

In June, 
Groq raised a $650 million 
round to kick off its pivot. The company intends to scale from 54 megawatts to more than 200 megawatts by 2027.

Today, Groq operates 13 data centers across North America, Europe, the Middle East, and Asia Pacific, serving more than 6 million developers, enterprises, and AI-native companies. Groq says the fresh funds will support “those seeking usage of medium and larger sized clusters of Nvidia accelerated computing for training and inference.” 

“We are building Groq into the world’s leading AI inference cloud,” Alex Davis, Groq’s chairman and CEO of Disruptive, said in a statement. “Inference will without a doubt become the largest and most critical layer of AI infrastructure.”

While inference is in high demand as enterprises scale AI workloads, it’s an open question whether neoclouds will be a profitable enough business to provide returns on their considerable investment in the long term. CoreWeave reported strong second-quarter revenue growth and recently landed major contracts, including with Meta and Anthropic. However, investors remained concerned about the company’s high capital expenditures, 
heavy reliance on debt
, and exposure to rapidly depreciating hardware, and its ability to turn growth into free cash flow. 

Groq’s financials are still private for now, but its pivot puts the company directly inside Nvidia’s AI infrastructure ecosystem. That’s not exactly a unique relationship among neoclouds today. Nvidia supplies the GPUs powering clouds from 
CoreWeave
, Lambda, and Nebius, while also investing billions into some of those companies as they race to build more capacity.

TechCrunch has reached out to Groq for more information.

Topics

AI
, 
data centers
, 
Fundraising
, 
groq
, 
neocloud
, 
nvidia

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Rebecca Bellan	

Senior Reporter

Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing 
rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Everything announced at Made by Google ’26: Pixel 11, Pixel Watch 5, Pixel Tag, and tons of Gemini features

Lauren Forristal

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta
