Well over half a million Grubhub drivers and customers are set to receive a share of $23.8 million following allegations that the food delivery company misled workers about their potential earnings and engaged in other deceptive practices.

The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) 
announced
 on Wednesday that it’s distributing the money to 640,038 consumers, with most recipients receiving a check in the mail. Some will receive their payments through PayPal.

The payouts stem from a lawsuit the FTC and Illinois Attorney General 
filed
 against Grubhub in December 2024. The complaint accused the company of a range of unlawful practices, including making misleading claims about how much drivers could earn, restricting customers’ access to their accounts and money, and listing restaurants on its platform without their permission.

Another allegation involved Grubhub’s restaurant listings. According to the complaint, the company had as many as 325,000 restaurants on its platform that were not affiliated with Grubhub. The FTC alleged that Grubhub used those listings to make its platform appear larger.

The complaint also alleged that Grubhub sometimes refused to remove restaurants after they asked to be taken off the platform. Instead, the company allegedly tried to convince some of those businesses to enter into paid partnerships.

The settlement required Grubhub to change how it operates in several areas. For instance, the company must be more accurate when advertising potential driver earnings, give customers a way to challenge account restrictions that leave them unable to access their accounts or funds, and obtain a restaurant’s consent before listing it on the platform.

Today’s announcement puts renewed attention on Grubhub’s treatment of its drivers and diners and the company’s broader business practices. Notably, it comes just one month after a federal judge 
granted final approval
 of another settlement worth nearly $25 million and involving approximately 60,000 Grubhub delivery drivers in California.

Grubhub also isn’t the only delivery company to face scrutiny. In the past, 
DoorDash
 has faced criticism and 
legal challenges 
over driver compensation, while 
Uber Eats
 has dealt with allegations involving customer charges and its 
relationships with restaurants
.

Topics

Apps
, 
grubhub

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
