The U.S. Army has reportedly fixed two of its websites that had been defaced to display pro-Kurdish messages and to call out President Donald Trump, the latest case of hackers compromising systems run by the federal government in recent months.

Security researcher 
Ronald Lovelace
 told Cyberscoop, which 
first reported
 the defacements, that error pages were modified on two U.S. Army websites, the Open Innovation Lab and the AI Integration Center, which test and integrate AI and other tech into emerging technologies.

The defaced messages would show up when someone tried to visit a webpage that didn’t exist on the websites.

The websites’ error pages had been altered with messages calling Trump a “pedophile” and a “thief,” likely referring to the President being extensively named in files held by the Justice Department concerning the late financier and convicted sex offender, Jeffrey Epstein. The messages also mentioned Tom Barrack, the current U.S. ambassador to Turkey, and called for a “free Kurdistan.”

The defacements were visible as of Monday, per Cyberscoop. The publication contacted the Army, which took the pages down soon after.

The U.S. Army did not say how the error pages were defaced. The Army’s websites appear to run on WordPress and rely on several plugins, which can be targeted by hackers who seek to break into websites. It’s not clear if any data was stolen during the incident. Cyberscoop said the Army was investigating the incident.

A spokesperson for the U.S. Department of Defense did not respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment.

Hacktivists typically deface or modify websites, aiming to raise awareness about political causes, but such attacks 
can also be destructive
. Earlier this year, hacktivists targeted the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and published reams of records on contracts that enable U.S. immigration authorities, like ICE, to carry out deportations.

The Department of Homeland Security confirmed another breach this week, after hackers 
broke into one of the department’s intelligence sharing platforms
 used for passing information between state, local and federal authorities.

Topics

cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
hacktivist
, 
Security
, 
us government

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek
