U.K.-based healthcare billing software maker Craneware is responding to a cyberattack in which hackers stole a “significant volume” of customer data from its systems, the company said on Monday.

The company said the hackers appear to have been expelled from its systems, but its investigation into the breach is ongoing, according to a statement filed 
with the London Stock Exchange
.

Craneware’s flagship accounting and billing software is used by thousands of clinics, hospitals, and pharmacies across the United States. The company did not say exactly what kinds of data were taken in the breach, only noting that a “percentage” of employee data, customer data, and partner records had been exfiltrated.

The company, whose software helps healthcare providers bill patients for services, handles large amounts of medical records and patient data on behalf of its customers. When it bought Florida-based pharmacy software maker Sentry in 2021, Craneware 
said it gained access
 to the company’s 147 million patient records that had been collected over two decades.

Craneware CEO Keith Neilson did not immediately respond to TechCrunch’s questions about the incident, or if the hackers have contacted the company with any demands, such as a ransom. 

It’s not yet clear if the company’s systems can receive email amid the ongoing cyberattack.

While details of the hack are still under investigation, this is the latest data breach in recent months where hackers have targeted tech companies that supply tech and services to the U.S. healthcare sector. By compromising software that many healthcare providers use to analyze and understand their billing processes, hackers can access vast amounts of patient medical and health-related data, and extort the companies with threats of publicly releasing the information.

Craneware is the latest health tech giant to be breached in the past year.

In March, healthcare revenue tech firm TriZetto confirmed hackers stole 
more than 3.4 million people’s personal and health data
 from its systems during an earlier cyberattack. That very month, medical data storage giant CareCloud reported a breach of one of its 
stores of patients’ electronic health records
, but has not yet said how much data was taken. 

Last July, medical billing company Episource 
began notifying at least 5.4 million people
 that their information had been stolen by hackers.

The largest ever breach of U.S. medical and healthcare data occurred in 2024, when a Russian-speaking ransomware gang hacked UnitedHealth-owned Change Healthcare. The hackers stole the medical and patient records 
of at least 192 million people
, which the company conceded affected a “substantial proportion of people in America.”

Topics

cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
data breach
, 
healthcare
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek
