In Brief

Posted:

10:00 AM PDT · July 15, 2026

Image Credits:
Suno 
(opens in a new window)

Amanda Silberling

Hack suggests AI music generator Suno scraped YouTube for training data

The AI music generator Suno was hacked, according to a report from 
404 Media
.

The hacker told the publication that they used a supply chain attack to access an employee’s credentials, allowing them to then access source code showing how Suno allegedly scraped decades of audio from YouTube Music, Deezer, Genius, stock music libraries, and podcast RSS feeds.

Suno previously 
admitted
 that it trains its AI on “publicly available music files” on the open internet, arguing that it can train on copyrighted material under the fair use doctrine, a subjective carve out of copyright law. But according to the major record labels actively 
suing
 Suno, it is 
illegal
 under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) to deliberately circumvent YouTube’s protections against data scraping; it also violates YouTube’s terms of service.

Udio
, a competitor to Suno, has also been accused of scraping YouTube data. Google, the parent company of YouTube, faces similar allegations of 
copyright infringement
 from a variety of major book publishers.

The hacker reportedly accessed customer data including 
customer emails, phone numbers
, and partial credit card numbers in Stripe. 

Suno did not notify customers about the November 2025 breach and claims that this was a “limited security incident that was quickly contained.”

Topics

AI
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
suno

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Google faces another AI training lawsuit from major publishers

Amanda Silberling

	24 hours ago

Media & Entertainment

Still facing copyright lawsuits, AI music generator Suno raises another $400M

Amanda Silberling

	Jun 3, 2026

Media & Entertainment

Bandcamp takes a stand against AI music, banning it from the platform

Amanda Silberling

	Jan 14, 2026

Latest in AI

AI

Thinking Machines amps up its bet against one-size-fits-all AI with its first open model, Inkling

Connie Loizos

	18 seconds ago

In Brief

Hack suggests AI music generator Suno scraped YouTube for training data

Amanda Silberling

	1 hour ago

Commerce

Whatnot acquires Shaped to power real-time live shopping recommendations

Lauren Forristal

	1 hour ago
