HBO Max is the latest streaming service to add a TikTok-like short-form video feed to its platform to help users find something to watch. The service is also launching an experimental AI-powered conversational search experience, Warner Bros. announced on 
Tuesday
.

HBO Max, like other streaming platforms, is rethinking content discovery as large libraries are making it hard for viewers to find something to watch and as audiences become accustomed to short-form content on platforms like TikTok and Instagram Reels. 

With its vertical video feed and AI search feature, the platform is looking to give users more ways to navigate its content library and find something to watch.

The new “Shorts” icon in the bottom navigation menu of the HBO Max app will open a feed of trailers, clips, and bonus content. The company says the content that appears in a user’s feed is customized to their individual taste and preferences based on watch history. If users come across a video they find interesting, they can start watching the TV show or movie immediately, or they can choose to save it to their watch-later list.

Warner Bros. also says the clips included in the video feed are powered by an AI tool that uses scene-level metadata to analyze thousands of hours of film and TV show content to surface the most compelling scenes for discovery. HBO Max editors then decide which clips best represent the streaming service’s library of content.

HBO Max joins streaming services like 
Netflix
, 
Disney+
, and 
Peacock
, all of which feature vertical video feeds to surface clips from their content libraries.

Warner Bros. says the new vertical feed is being tested with select iOS users in the U.S. before it’s rolled out across more devices and markets.

The new conversational search feature uses natural language understanding to interpret queries and recommend relevant movies and TV shows. For example, you could search for terms like “in the mood for a comedy,” “dysfunctional family drama” or “best movie for a girls night in,” to find relevant recommendations.

It’s worth noting that Netflix launched a similar 
AI-powered search experience
 for its users last year. HBO Max and Netflix aren’t the only streaming services leveraging AI, as 
Amazon
 has an AI voice search experience on Fire TVs that responds to open-ended inquiries about TV shows and movies.

HBO Max’s new experimental feature is available to select Android users in the U.S., with plans for it to be expanded to more devices and markets soon. 

Topics

Apps
, 
HBO Max
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
short form
, 
Vertical Video

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
