In Brief

Posted:

12:04 PM PDT · August 17, 2026

Image Credits:
Paul Devlin / Contributor

Dominic-Madori Davis

Higgsfield raises $400M Series B, quadrupling its valuation in 8 months to $5.4B

Higgsfield 
announced
 Monday that it has raised a $400 million Series B at a $5.4 billion valuation. This new round is just eight months 
after nabbing a $1.3 billion valuation
.  

Higgsfield, founded by former Snap exec Alex Mashrabov in 2023, lets users create AI images and videos. It made headlines this past year for premiering 
AI-generated movies at both Cannes
 and in New York. It has tools like the Cinema Studio to help filmmakers direct AI films and the Marketing Studio for marketing and advertising teams. In a release announcing the round, the company touted $700 million in annualized revenue and 30 million users across 200 countries. 

One growing market for the company has been enterprises. It is now working with 390 of the Fortune 500, it said. Mashrabov told TechCrunch that Higgsfield expects “enterprise adoption of video AI to become much more deeply embedded in everyday marketing and creative workflows.” 

The fresh capital will fund the usual business needs like hiring and product development. But it will also help pay for compute. “Video is one of the most compute-intensive domains in AI,” Mashrabov explained. Just one minute of video is like processing 60,000 words. Securing reliable compute capacity has therefore become a necessary expense to remain competitive with others in the industry like Synthesia and Runway. 
DST Global led the latest round, with many other investors piling in including Goldman Sachs Alternatives, Valor Capital, and Tribe Capital.

Topics

ai video
, 
Fundraising
, 
Higgsfield AI
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Startups

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Apps

Reddit begins testing a new audio and video experience, similar to popular TikTok videos

Sarah Perez

	22 minutes ago

Climate

Sound-powered fire protection startup gets $15M to snuff out fires before they turn catastrophic

Tim De Chant

	32 minutes ago

Apps

YouTube will now count a view as soon as a video starts playing

Aisha Malik

	55 minutes ago

Latest in Startups

In Brief

Higgsfield raises $400M Series B, quadrupling its valuation in 8 months to $5.4B

Dominic-Madori Davis

	8 seconds ago

In Brief

Terra Industries closes $52M seed round to build defense infrastructure for the Global South

Dominic-Madori Davis

	4 hours ago

In Brief

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

	22 hours ago
