Want to tap into the energy of 1,100+ startup founders, investors, and tech leaders descending on Boston for the 
Founder Summit 2026
 on November 4th? Host your own 
Side Event
 during “Founder Summit Week,” happening November 1-7!

Whether it’s a networking mixer, workshop, morning run, fireside chat, or cocktail hour — you call the shots. Create a moment. Build your community. Increase brand visibility with a Side Event.

Why host a Side Event?

Along with extending the energy beyond the venue and the actual event, you’ll get:

Visibility to the full TechCrunch audience.

Featured on the official agenda, Side Events page, and mobile app.

Highlighted in attendee emails and articles.

A community discount code for your team and guests.

Must-know details about Side Events

Check out the full details on the 
Founder Summit 2026 page
. As the host, you’ll handle the event details, and we’ll help spread the word. There’s no fee to be listed, and everything must be:

In-person and Boston-based.

Held November 1-7 (only post-5 p.m. ET events will be allowed on November 4).

18+ only (21+ if there’s alcohol).

Apply now to make a brand impact at Founder Summit 2026

Let’s make it happen! Hosting a Side Event is an easy way to grow your network and connect your brand to Boston’s startup crowd. 
Apply here
 to lock in your Side Event before the deadline. This is your moment to show up and stand out.

Topics

Startups
, 
TechCrunch Founder Summit 2026
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec
