OpenAI is the original frontier lab. Its latest publicly released model, GPT-5.6, is one of the most capable and efficient on the market. Its desktop app for agentic coding and workplace tasks has seen its user base 
grow by about 15 million 
subscribers in the last two months.

OpenAI has also already filed to go public. So why are all the executives heading out the door?

Since the turn of the year, more than a dozen executives have departed, including 
CEO Sam Altman’s top deputy
, the 
chief operating officer
, 
a chief revenue officer
, its 
chief marketing officer
, as well as several 
different team leads
. Yesterday, 
news broke
 that Chris Malone, the company’s head of data centers, left the company last week after joining in March 2025.

Some of those departures have come due to health issues, and others are were due to reorganization that occurred as Altman sought to cut expensive “side projects” and focus on revenue-generating opportunities. 

Still, Malone’s unexplained departure is striking, if only because OpenAI’s primary advantage over rivals like Anthropic or SpaceX is its investment in compute. OpenAI noted to TechCrunch that the departure follows a reorganization of the company’s infrastructure team, which is now led by vice president Sachin Katti, whereas Malone once reported directly to president Greg Brockman. It’s not surprising that a senior executive might leave a company if he suddenly finds himself several rungs further down the ladder.

The frontier lab declined to comment on broader changes at the company, but it seems apparent that Brockman is 
reasserting his leadership
 at the company. As co-founder and president, he played important roles building OpenAI’s early infrastructure, but he was relieved of most management responsibilities in 2019, when Altman became CEO.

After that, Brockman played a disruptive role at the company, according to Karen Hao’s book “Empire of AI.” His contributions to individual projects like GPT-4 were undeniable, but he also seeded internal rivalries that helped kick off the “Blip” in 2023, when the company’s board briefly ousted Altman as CEO. Brockman would take a brief sabbatical in 2024 before returning to the company.

Today, the infrastructure and product teams report to him. “I like to say that everyone reports to Greg at the end of the day,” Thibault Sottiaux, who leads the company’s API and app offerings, 
told TechCrunch
 last week.

The specter of the company’s IPO hangs over everything. In June, OpenAI said it had filed going-public disclosures confidentially with the SEC. Tapping into public markets would be a boon for the capital-hungry frontier lab, but it also brings the prospect of disclosing its financials around the same time as rival Anthropic, which is also planning its public debut. Anthropic, however, is 
reportedly
 profitable, while OpenAI is 
reportedly
 seeing its losses grow along with its revenue. Now, OpenAI’s IPO isn’t expected until 2027; the average company that files confidentially for an IPO usually hits the trading floor within about five months; SpaceX did so in less than two.

Altman’s public comments about a bad past 12 months at the company and the internal reorganization jibes with a narrative that the company got over its skis with its IPO filing, and is now reshaping the organization to make more money and carry less dead weight.

There’s a common cycle for some tech startups: Brilliant founders create the product, then bring in an experienced CEO to scale the company and prep it to go public. There was a sense of that dynamic when OpenAI brought in now-departed execs like Fidji Simo and Kevin Weil, who were veterans of multiple tech businesses — and now we’re seeing it again as Brockman’s influence grows. Before OpenAI, he was best-known for building out Stripe’s business, and internally for championing the company’s go-to-market efforts. 

With so much high-level turnover, OpenAI will need someone to fill the vacuum. The company will also need to trim its sails ahead of the IPO, boosting revenue and cutting costs wherever possible. For both problems, Brockman’s influence may be rising at the perfect time.

Topics

AI
, 
greg brockman
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim Fernholz	

Senior Reporter

		Tim Fernholz is a journalist who writes about technology, finance and public policy. He has closely covered the rise of the private space industry and is the author of 
 Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and the New Space Race.
 Formerly, he was a senior reporter at Quartz, the global business news site, for more than a decade, and began his career as a political reporter in Washington, D.C. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing tim.fernholz@techcrunch.com or via an encrypted message to tim_fernholz.21 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
