Earlier this year, Lightspeed made headlines when it announced that Claire Zau, an investor and popular tech content creator, would join the venture firm. She has more than 100,000 followers on TikTok and over 250,000 followers on Instagram, where she breaks down the day’s biggest tech trends. 

Lightspeed partners Josh Machiz and Zau stopped by the Equity studio to talk about the strategy behind their growing social media presence; their podcast, Lightwork; and how it all started with a direct message on Instagram.

“A lot of people want to participate in the future and are excited about technology,” Zau told Equity. “They just don’t have the facts presented to them in an accessible way. So that’s hopefully the role I feel very lucky and privileged to play.” 

Zau, in many ways, is part of a new class of venture operators using social media to connect with new audiences, whether that’s people who are simply tech curious or future founders who may then turn to Lightspeed for a check.

The podcast she co-hosts with Machiz, Lightspeed’s CMO, is part of the new media trend that many venture firms are embracing, where firms take on a greater role in helping their portfolio companies share their stories with the world. 

“There’s less and less traditional journalism out there because of layoffs and the consolidation in media,” Machiz said. “If you’re a startup, it’s harder to get your story out there. There are less places to go to get it out. There’s now pretty heavy bars to get your funding story out. And so we hope to also be able to provide in the new media world another opportunity to tell your story.” 

So far, the duo — and the firm — see some benefits to expanding the Lightspeed media empire. Connecting with early founders is the main one, but being online also helps them get real-time feedback on investments and new technology. For example, Zau talked about how, within the Silicon Valley bubble, everyone was so excited to cut a check for a new AI startup, but then she would talk about the investment online and get the sense that Gen Z was actually quite anti-AI. 

“It was, I would even say, humbling,” she said of the direct feedback she would get to some of her videos. “It’s so helpful to have basically real-time visibility into how people are using these technologies and what kinds of narratives are hitting.” 

Machiz and Zau also spoke to Equity about what comes next for them. Another podcast? A TV show one day? “Our goal is to be the place where hopefully future founders learn about venture, understand the ecosystem,” Machiz said. “We’re still early days.” 

Listen to hear more of the conversation — and what Machiz and Zau have planned next. 

Topics

Equity
, 
lightspeed
, 
Startups
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Dominic-Madori Davis	

Senior Reporter, Venture

Dominic-Madori Davis is a senior venture capital and startup reporter at TechCrunch. She is based in New York City.

You can contact or verify outreach from Dominic by emailing 
dominic.davis@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 646 831-7565 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
