Congrats, you’re all set for 
TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
! Or, you might still be on the fence and wondering about your accommodations. Either way, the reality is San Francisco can be an expensive place to stay, which is why 
we’ve partnered with hotels around Moscone West
 during Disrupt, taking place October 13 to 15, to secure the best prices available for attendees.  

Before diving into your options, there are a few key benefits to keep in mind: 

These reservations can be canceled or modified without penalty. 

There’s zero upfront cost to any of these reservations.

Your rewards points and loyalty programs will work as expected. 

Each hotel is within walking distance of Moscone West, which means more time for that crucial pre-Disrupt coffee or more post-Disrupt networking.

Each of these hotels provides a great mix of accessibility to Disrupt
, and plenty of options for catering your San Francisco experience to your tastes. 

The Hyatt Regency

Image Credits:
Smith Collection/Gado/Getty Images

Located right along the waterfront, 
the Hyatt Regency
 places you just a brief walk away from Disrupt and its many side events, and an even shorter distance from the city’s beloved 
Ferry Building
. 
Hog Island Oyster Company
 or 
Gott’s Roadside
 make for great dining options, and if you’re extending your stay, you can take the ferry to scenic spots like Sausalito and Angel Island. 

Hotel Zelos

Image Credits:
Smith Collection/Gado/Getty Images

For those with energy to spare after an exciting day at Disrupt, 
Hotel Zelos
 is a four-star hotel with a rooftop bar perfect for post-event conversations and meetups. Or for the urban explorers out there, it’s much easier to hop on public transportation if you want to have your post-Disrupt networking elsewhere in the city. 

InterContinental San Francisco

Image Credits:
Smith Collection/Gado/Getty Images

You can’t get any closer than the 
InterContinental
, which sits right beside Moscone West and is the perfect home base for exploring the event and branching out into everything else. Within walking distance is the world-class 
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art
 and the Metreon theater — though we can’t promise its 70MM IMAX will still be playing the Odyssey… 

The Grand Hyatt San Francisco 

Image Credits:
Smith Collection/Gado/Getty Images

The Grand Hyatt
 towers over San Francisco, perched beside Union Square, where you can check out some of the city’s best restaurants or best shopping in your downtime. Explore 
old-school steak houses
, 
new spins on Vietnamese cuisine
, or one of the city’s 
most celebrated cocktail bars
. Plus, it’s a quick walk from historic Chinatown and its many attractions. 

And if there’s a colleague you’d like to bring along, it’s not too late! Register a teammate and save on their pass while ensuring you both get the most out of the Disrupt experience. 

With discounted hotel room blocks available for a limited time, we recommend booking early to secure your preferred hotel at the best price. 
Start getting your itinerary together right here
. 

If you remain on the fence, keep in mind that until 11:59 p.m. this Friday, August 7, we’re offering a limited-time flash sale on tickets, 
with this link giving you an extra $100 off founder, investor, or attendee tickets
. And if you’re all set, we can’t wait to see you in San Francisco in October!  

Topics

Startups
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec
