Meta-owned chat app 
WhatsApp started to roll out username reservations
 for its 3 billion users earlier in June. The username feature is not active, but you can claim your username and start using it whenever the feature becomes available this year.

With usernames, people will be able to share their WhatsApp contact without having to disclose their phone number. This could be useful for people who want others to contact them on WhatsApp, but don’t want to share their information or their phone number. For businesses, it might be easier to share a name than a phone number to their customers.

Image Credits: Jagmeet Singh / TechCrunch
Image Credits:
Jagmeet Singh / TechCrunch

Here is how you can reserve your username:

Go to 
Settings > Account
 and tap on the Username option under the “Your Account” section

If you are setting up your username for the first time, you will get a “Create username” option, and then you can type in and choose your username. 

If the username you chose is not available, WhatsApp will suggest some variations if you tap the “suggest a username” option.

WhatsApp is reserving certain usernames of public figures and entities, so you won’t be able to reserve them for yourself. If you already have a Facebook or an Instagram username, you can log in through either of the services and reserve your handle as a username too. 

Once you set the username, you can go to the same menu and change it by tapping on the “Edit” button on the top right-hand corner. Alternatively, you can also delete your username. 

WhatsApp also allows for an extra layer of protection with a username key. You can limit people who contact you from “Everyone” to “People who know my key” from the username menu. This means that people who know your username will also type in a four-digit key before contacting you for the first time. Users can save the key or generate a new key at any time.

The username feature will go live in the coming weeks. Until then, WhatsApp is only allowing people to claim their usernames to avoid duplication.

Topics

Apps
, 
Meta
, 
Social
, 
username
, 
WhatsApp

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek
