Loading the player…

Open source AI is booming, according to 
Hugging Face
 CEO 
Clem Delangue
. The company has grown into something like a GitHub for AI in recent years, where AI builders can share and download open models and datasets, now used by roughly half the Fortune 500. Delangue has seen the same story play out again and again: companies start out on frontier APIs, but as they scale, the costs push them towards open source models. 

On this episode of TechCrunch’s
 Equity
 podcast, Rebecca Bellan talked to Delangue about why the open vs closed source fight matters in the wake of Anthropic’s halted Fable release, and why he’s worried about the possibility that a handful of big companies could end up controlling everything. 

Subscribe to Equity on 
YouTube
,
 Apple Podcasts
,
 Overcast
,
 Spotify
 and all the casts. You also can follow Equity on
 X
 and
 Threads
, at @EquityPod. 

Topics

AI
, 
ai safety
, 
AI startups
, 
Chinese AI Models
, 
Clem Delangue
, 
Enterprise AI
, 
Hugging Face
, 
open source ai
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Theresa Loconsolo	

Audio Producer

Theresa Loconsolo is an audio producer at TechCrunch focusing on Equity, the network’s flagship podcast. Before joining TechCrunch in 2022, she was one of 2 producers at a four-station conglomerate where she wrote, recorded, voiced and edited content, and engineered live performances and interviews from guests like lovelytheband. Theresa is based in New Jersey and holds a bachelors degree in Communication from Monmouth University. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Theresa by emailing 
theresa.loconsolo@techcrunch.com
.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha
