Hugging Face unveiled the 
Microduck
 on Thursday, a cute little duck-like robot that sells for $399 — and ships before Christmas. 

Clem Delangue, CEO of Hugging Face, 
said
 the Microduck is an “open-source robot you can teach new tricks with reinforcement learning.” The 25-centimeter-tall duck can waddle, pick things up with its beak (up to 800 grams), get back up when it falls, crouch, and even roller skate.

“Welcome to the era of open-source affordable robots to democratize physical AI and world models!” Delangue said. 

raw footage 
pic.twitter.com/HUTKEb9bXT
— clem 🤗 (@ClementDelangue) 
August 27, 2026

Hugging Face is best known as a platform and community where developers go for open model weights. However, the company acquired French startup Pollen Robotics in April 2025 to build affordable, open source AI hardware. A couple of months later, the two launched 
Reachy Mini
, a small 
desktop robot
. Today, they sell the $499 Reachy Mini, which is powered by a Raspberry Pi computer, and the $399 Reachy Mini Lite, powered by a Mac or PC. 

The new Microduck perceives the world with a camera, lidar sensors, and two IMUs (inertial measurement units that measure and report an object’s movement). 

Pollen Robotics noted that the Microduck’s behaviors can be trained in simulation and directly deployed on the robot. Developers can then fine-tune the bot, retrain it, and redeploy it. The SDK (software development kit), simulation, and full RL training stack are available on GitHub.

For those who might find it concerning to have a robot with a camera in their bedrooms and private spaces, Delangue 
previously
 told TechCrunch that bots run by open source models are much better from a privacy standpoint than “a black box system” controlled by a few organizations, “especially if these organizations’ CEO is not the most stable person in the world.” 

While open source gives developers auditability and control, it doesn’t provide a guarantee that sensitive data remains private after consumers start installing software applications on top of the model. Those apps can access the bot’s cameras and microphones and, depending on how they’re built, send that data to external services.

The launch of the Microduck comes as Hugging Face is reportedly 
set to be acquired by Nvidia at a $13 billion valuation
. Nvidia and Hugging Face have been partners for years, with Nvidia providing the startup’s infrastructure since at least 2023. Both companies have also been publicly aligned in 
promoting open source AI
. 

Hugging Face was recently in the headlines over a 
cybersecurity incident
 that occurred after OpenAI’s systems breached its sandbox during safety testing and hacked into the platform’s servers.

TechCrunch has reached out to Hugging Face and Pollen Robotics for more information. 

Topics

AI
, 
Hugging Face
, 
pollen robotics
, 
Robotics

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Rebecca Bellan	

Senior Reporter

Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing 
rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
