IBM on Thursday announced its partnership with OpenAI to bring the AI company’s models and tools to more enterprise customers, opening another avenue for OpenAI to connect with some of the world’s largest companies through IBM’s global consulting business as competition for corporate AI spending intensifies.

The deal, terms of which were not disclosed, 
comes
 less than a year after IBM announced a similar alliance with Anthropic. OpenAI and IBM will jointly market AI offerings and develop industry-specific solutions for sectors including financial services, government, telecommunications, and retail, IBM said.

Under the agreement, IBM will establish a dedicated OpenAI practice within IBM Consulting and train and certify tens of thousands of consultants — primarily retraining existing employees — on OpenAI’s technologies over the next several months, Mike Healy, managing partner at IBM Consulting, told TechCrunch.

The training will focus on OpenAI’s Codex, API, cybersecurity, and consultative solution credentials. IBM will also create a group of specialized “Forward Deployed Experts” trained through OpenAI’s Partner Network, Healy said.

IBM said that it would integrate OpenAI’s latest models, including GPT-5.6, Codex, and ChatGPT Work, into IBM Consulting Advantage, its AI platform for consultants, to help clients deploy AI across core business operations.

The partnership is the latest in OpenAI’s push to expand its enterprise business through consulting firms and technology partners, as competition among AI model developers increasingly shifts from building more capable models to winning corporate customers and large-scale deployments. The company has previously announced partnerships with IT services firms, including 
Infosys
 and 
Tata Consultancy Services
, underscoring a strategy of working with large global systems integrators to bring its AI products to enterprise customers.

For IBM, OpenAI’s agreement expands its range of frontier AI partnerships as the company pursues a model-agnostic strategy that combines its own Granite family of AI models with offerings from third-party developers. The company has increasingly positioned itself as an integrator of multiple AI models through its watsonx platform and global consulting business.

The partnership also comes as IBM looks to accelerate growth in its AI business after 
lowering its 2026 revenue forecast
 last month following weaker-than-expected quarterly results. During its last earnings call, Chief Executive Arvind Krishna maintained that AI remains a long-term growth driver. He stated that 
AI adoption was complementing
, rather than replacing, demand for IBM’s mainframe business.

In June, IBM and OpenAI 
partnered
 for the cybersecurity-focused OpenAI Daybreak Cyber Partner Program. The new deal expands that relationship by integrating OpenAI’s AI models with IBM Autonomous Security, the company’s multi-agent-powered cybersecurity service.

Topics

AI
, 
Enterprise
, 
IBM
, 
OpenAI
, 
United States

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker
