Apple has sent out a new batch of notifications to customers who it suspects have been targeted with spyware capable of hacking into their devices. The tech giant sends out these notifications 
on occasion
 to alert its customers that their iPhones, iPads, or Macs might have been compromised with spyware typically used by governments.

Apple told TechCrunch that it sent out the notifications on Thursday to users targeted in 110 countries. Apple says to date it has notified customers in over 150 countries, giving some context to how far government-used spyware has spread around the world.

In a 
new support article
 on its website, Apple says it will notify users directly on their iPhone lock screen with a push notification that urges the person to take action. Apple told TechCrunch that it has updated the user experience, making it easier for recipients to access important information on what to do next.

When received, a threat notification will read: “Apple detected a mercenary spyware attack targeted at your iPhone. There are actions you can take now to protect your data and device.”

Apple also sends notifications by email and to users when they log in to their account.

John Scott-Railton, a senior researcher at digital research group Citizen Lab, first highlighted the latest batch of spyware notifications 
in a thread on X
.

If you receive a notification like this, take it seriously. We’ve explained before what happens when 
someone gets a notification saying they’ve been targeted
. It may not mean that you have been successfully hacked, but you should still take immediate steps to protect your device and data. 

The push notification also opens up advice on who to reach out to for help. You will also be advised to switch on Lockdown Mode, a security feature that makes it far more difficult for spyware attacks to succeed. 
According to Apple
, it has yet to see a case where someone’s device was hacked while Lockdown Mode was enabled.

Spyware attacks are generally rare, but 
the proliferation of the surveillance technology in recent years
 has allowed them to be abused by governments and deployed against critics, including members of civil society.

Citizen Lab’s Scott-Railton told TechCrunch that these new push notifications are a “big improvement” in urging people to seek help to secure their devices since Apple debuted its spyware alerts in 2021.

“Notifications create a critical signal that a community is being targeted. People get an alert, and then some of them reach out and seek help. Often this kicks off an investigation that reveals many, many more cases,” said Scott-Railton.

Citing the ongoing scandal 
in Poland over the former government’s use
 of spyware against its rivals, Scott-Railton said that without Apple’s notifications, “that entire massive scandal about spyware abuse in the Polish election wouldn’t have been uncovered.”

Topics

Apple
, 
cybersecurity
, 
iPhone
, 
Security
, 
Spyware

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker
