Consider this a belated PSA: A recent change to Google’s privacy settings is allowing the company to store more of your data, including media such as “images, files, and audio and video recordings,” to improve its AI models. In other words, if you upload any media to Google’s Search services, it’s being used to train AI unless you opt out.

The change came about via an under-the-radar update to Google’s Search services privacy settings, announced in June via a customer email. With the update, the company essentially opted people into this expanded AI training under the guise of giving users more control over their saved history and personalized recommendations.

Image Credits:
Google (screenshot)

Google is now training on your media, too

The update introduced two new settings, Search Services History and Personalized Recommendations, allowing you to configure how your activity is used to personalize your Google experience and how long your web and app activity is saved.

This update applies beyond Google Search itself, and also includes other search services such as Maps, Shopping, Flights, Hotels, Translate, and News.

For instance, when you use Google Lens to search for something visually by snapping a photo, that image may now be saved for AI training. 

Similarly, if you use the newer 
Search Live
 feature to search via voice input in the Google app, those audio recordings could be saved, as can any other Google voice search. If you use Google Translate to practice speaking, that audio is saved, too.

The changes reflect a broader industry shift toward gathering data by any means necessary to improve AI services. Instead of relying solely on information scraped from the web, Google and others are increasingly collecting data that people upload or create when using their services. Meta is another example of a consumer-facing tech company doing this at scale, 
training its AI on users’ images 
and media, as well as on 
content recorded by its AI glasses
.

Google confirms the media-training use directly, stating in that email to customers: “Like your Search Services History, your saved media is also used to develop and improve Google services and technologies, including AI models and safety measures.” 

Its 
help documentation
 echoes this, noting that the company “uses your history to provide, develop, and improve its services (such as training generative AI models) and to protect Google, its users, and the public with the help of human reviewers.”

Some of this storage is temporary and tied to making the product work, but per Google’s own language, saved media can also be retained specifically to train its AI.

Adjusting your settings

The good news is you have some control here. You can change your preferences on the 
Search Services History
 and 
Search Services Personalization
 pages. On the former, you can uncheck the “Save Media” box separately from the “Search Services History” box, or uncheck both. You can also configure how often you want saved data automatically deleted — after 3 months, 18 months, or 36 months.

From there, you can 
jump to this page
 to dig into other privacy settings, including Web & App Activity, Timeline, YouTube History, and more.

Google
Image Credits:
Google (screenshot)

Beyond saved media, Google also uses your search history, location, and other information from the websites you visit to personalize your experience on Google, including which ads are shown.

Before this update, Google let you configure what historical search data was saved via its “Web & App Activity” settings. That’s now been separated into two settings: the Web & App Activity data and the new Search data setting, which is on by default. 

That means if you make a change to the Web & App Activity data retention settings in an effort to opt out of having your data stored by the tech giant, the update will no longer impact your use of Google Search services, as it’s now a separate option. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Google
, 
Google Search
, 
psa

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek
