Governments have long warned not to pay a hacker’s ransom demands, arguing that doing so only lets 
criminals profit from their cyberattacks
 and funds the next one. There’s also another reason: The hackers are unlikely to leave you alone if you pay up once, and many will come back demanding more.

In a report published Wednesday, cybersecurity giant Proofpoint said it surveyed 953 companies and 
found
 that over one-third of companies that paid a hacker’s ransom were hit with a second extortion demand. The findings underscore the long-held understanding among security researchers and network defenders that it’s impossible to negotiate in good faith with an extortion racket because there’s no incentive for the other side to actually walk away.

Proofpoint’s data shows that ransomware attacks and extortion attacks have evolved from a single transaction where hackers would get paid once and move on, into an effort using multiple forms of leverage, such as retaining stolen data under the threat of publicly releasing it.

While hackers have claimed in the past that they will delete or destroy the victim’s stolen data, past incidents have shown that not to be the case.

Last month, a hack at market research firm Klue exposed 
data belonging to its customers
, including several cybersecurity firms. The company said it struck a deal with the hackers, who claimed to have deleted the data, but the company later conceded that a separate hacking group swiped a sample of the company’s stolen data, leaving its customers exposed to 
potential future extortion demands
.

A similar situation befell Change Healthcare in 2024, after a Russian-speaking ransomware gang stole the health and medical data of the majority of people in America, some 192 million people. Amid a dispute between the hackers and their affiliates (criminal groups often 
subcontract out
 attacks), 
Change Healthcare paid separate ransoms
 to both groups of criminals to keep the sensitive medical data off of the internet.

Security researchers have long suspected that ransomware gangs and extortion rackets will keep hold of the victim’s stolen data, even after a payment is made. U.K. law enforcement confirmed this during their takedown efforts targeting 
the prolific LockBit ransomware gang in 2024
. Police said that they found victims’ stolen data stored on LockBit’s servers long after they had paid the ransom.

Topics

cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
extortion
, 
ransomware
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker
