After two years in stealth, Safe Superintelligence, the AI lab founded by former OpenAI co-founder and alignment 
lead Ilya Sutskever
, has announced a long-term partnership with Nvidia as it prepares to scale to its next phase. 

The deal, which includes an undisclosed investment, will give Safe Superintelligence (SSI) access to Nvidia’s Vera Rubin GPU platform, which is expected to increase the startup’s compute resources “by an order of magnitude.” The partnership comes as SSI has achieved significant research milestones, 
per Nvidia
. 

Nvidia’s investment stretches into multiple billions, a source familiar with the deal told TechCrunch.

Already an investor in SSI, the chipmaking giant said it signed this compute partnership to “accelerate SSI’s next stage of growth after obtaining rare access into the company’s closely guarded research.”

“We have research that is worthy of scaling up, and having access to a big NVIDIA computer will let us do so,” Sutskever said in a statement. “We are confident that our big bet on the Vera Rubin platform will take us to the next level.

The partnership news, while sparse in details, brings SSI back into the spotlight after a quiet two years since it was founded. The company is pursuing a “straight shot” research approach to building what it says is a safe, aligned artificial superintelligence, without getting distracted by commercial product releases or short-term revenue cycles. 

At a time when commercial pressures to move fast could encourage AI labs to lower their bar for safety, SSI’s approach to developing foundational techniques focused on alignment and true general reasoning feels poignant. That’s especially true in light of 
OpenAI’s recent disclosure
 that one of its advanced models broke out of its sandbox to hack into Hugging Face during testing — sparking concerns about whether it’s even possible to ensure AI alignment before new, increasingly capable models are released.

According to Nvidia, the two companies will also collaborate on advancing Nvidia’s current and future compute platforms, relying on SSI’s tech and “unique insights into the future of AI.” (SSI also partnered last year with 
Google Cloud
 to power its research.)

Sutskever is a pioneer in the field of AI. He co-authored and co-created AlexNet alongside Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton, proving that GPU scaling and deep neural networks can work. That work has largely been credited for setting the groundwork for today’s generative AI.  

Prior to leading SSI, Sutskever headed the 
now-defunct Superalignment team
 at OpenAI. He 
left OpenAI 
months after a 
failed attempt to oust OpenAI CEO Sam Altman
, following what Sutskever referred to as a “breakdown in communications.”

SSI has raised $7 billion to date, and is valued at 
$32 billion post-money
, according to PitchBook data. Aside from Nvidia, the firm’s backers included Andreessen Horowitz, Alphabet, Lightspeed Venture Partners, GV, Sequoia Capital Partners, and others.

TechCrunch has reached out to SSI and Nvidia for more information. 

Topics

AI
, 
Ilya Sutskever
, 
nvidia
, 
OpenAI
, 
safe superintelligence
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Rebecca Bellan	

Senior Reporter

Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing 
rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker
