The U.S. Supreme Court on Monday limited the law enforcement use of “geofence” search warrants, in a major legal ruling that is likely to have broad ramifications for privacy rights and law enforcement across the United States.

In the 6-3 r
u
ling
, the U.S. top court said that “an individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy in his cell-phone location information.” According to the court, that means people have privacy rights when it comes to the location history collected by their phones, as well as the services and apps running on them. 

Because of that, the court ruled that authorities need to obtain a search warrant when asking tech companies, such as Google, for the location data of their users, including when requesting historical geofence location data. 

In part, the Supreme Court argued that authorities need to obtain a search warrant to get geofence location data because a user is not willingly sharing their location data to a company like Google by simply using its services. If that was the case, then the “
third-party doctrine
,” which generally says people have no expectation of privacy when it comes to data they willingly share with others, would apply. In those cases, authorities don’t need a search warranty to obtain user data from telecom providers, for example. 

Geofence warrants allow law enforcement to force tech companies to hand over information about where any of its millions or billions of users were located at a particular place in time, based on a record of their phone’s location stored in their databases. In practice, police will draw a shape over a map and ask a judge to allow them to demand that tech companies, such as Google, search their vast banks of users’ location data and tell them which of their users was there at the time of inquiry.

Critics argued that these oft-called “reverse” search warrants are unconstitutional because they are inherently overboard and include innocent people’s data.

The court seemed to agree, but stopped short of banning the use of geofence warrants altogether, allowing police to narrow their data requests when asking for a search warrant. 

In other words, the Supreme Court simply ruled that the 4th Amendment, which protects against unreasonable searches and seizures and effectively protects privacy rights, applies to location data collected by companies such as Google from their users’ cellphones. The decision doesn’t stop law enforcement from getting historical cellphone location data, it simply ruled that authorities need to get a search warrant when requesting geofence location information, and show that there’s probable cause that the target may have committed a crime. 

The decision centers on a case brought by 
Chatrie v. United States
, who accused the government of using evidence during his trial for bank robbery collected by an unconstitutional search warrant. Okello Chatrie’s lawyers argued that geofence warrants allow investigators to “search first and develop suspicions later,” and flouting long-standing norms around how government authorities demand to search or seize data from companies. 

Authorities typically have to establish “probable cause” linking a person to a crime to justify a search warrant, whereas critics argue geofence warrants work in reverse.

The Supreme Court 
took on the case
 after several legal cases involving geofence warrants, including Chatrie’s, split the courts around the United States, including at the appeals level.

It’s not immediately clear how the ruling will affect past court cases. A spokesperson for the Department of Justice did not respond to a request for comment.

The ruling was not expected to change Chatrie’s sentence in his case as previous courts ruled that the evidence obtained from the geofence warrant was collected in good faith. Chatrie’s attorneys did not respond to a request for comment from TechCrunch.

The Supreme Court ruled that it is now up to the Appeals Court to decide whether the search warrant requested in the Chatrie case showed probable cause and thus was valid. 

Some companies that were frequently targeted with requests for location data, like Google, have begun storing users’ location data on their devices and not on their servers to stop handing over users’ data, prompting investigators to go to the users themselves. Other companies that store location data, such as Microsoft, Uber, and Yahoo, also receive geofence warrants on a regular basis.

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
geofence warrants
, 
Google
, 
privacy
, 
Security
, 
supreme court
, 
surveillance

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis
