Indian AI coding startup 
Emergent
 has raised $130 million in a Series C funding round at a $1.5 billion post-money valuation, a five-fold jump in six months.

The funding round was led by private equity firm Creaegis. New investors MNI Ventures-Claypond, Sentinel Global, and existing backers Khosla Ventures, SoftBank’s Vision Fund 2, Lightspeed, and Y Combinator also participated. The deal takes Emergent’s total funding to $230 million. The startup had previously raised 
a $70 million Series B
 at a $300 million valuation in January.

AI coding has attracted hordes of investors, with startups such as 
Lovable
, 
Replit
, and 
Cursor
 raising billions in funding to develop tools that allow developers to speed up their work. AI labs such as OpenAI and Anthropic have also 
pushed deeper into coding
. 

Emergent is looking to gain a share of this crowded market by targeting entrepreneurs looking to start new businesses and small and medium-sized companies that have traditionally relied on email, spreadsheets and messaging apps to run their operations.

“Our thesis has always been to build a production-grade application for serious builders,” Emergent co-founder and chief executive Mukund Jha (pictured above, right) told TechCrunch in an interview. “So you’re basically getting an engineering team in a box.”

Jha said the startup has reached an annual run-rate revenue of $120 million, up 70% in the last four months, and has more than 200,000 paying customers. Jha started Emergent with his brother Madhav Jha (CTO) in June last year.

Customers include trucking companies building software to track shipments; factories; construction businesses creating enterprise resource planning systems; and property managers developing internal customer management tools.

North American customers account for about a third of Emergent’s revenue, Europe makes up another third, and the rest comes from other markets, Jha told TechCrunch. India accounts for about 8% to 9%.

Emergent’s focus on small businesses and entrepreneurs pits it directly against Replit, which Jha described as the startup’s closest rival. He sought to distinguish Emergent from developer-focused coding tools such as 
Anthropic’s Claude Code
, 
OpenAI’s Codex
, and Cursor, arguing that non-technical users need a platform that handles deployment, hosting, testing, and debugging alongside the work of programming.

However, Jha acknowledged that design remains a weakness, pointing out that many websites built using AI tools tend to look similar. 

Emergent plans to use the fresh capital to accelerate product development and research, including improving the success rate of applications built on its platform and its core AI agent workflows. The company is working to support more complex AI applications, including those that use local and open-source models, Jha said, adding that it will also invest in expanding its go-to-market operations.

The company is also considering opening an office in Europe, where Jha said Emergent is seeing significant customer traction.

Emergent has about 200 employees, most of whom work in Bengaluru, with a handful in San Francisco. The startup plans to expand its San Francisco office by 30 to 40 people by the end of the year, Jha said.

Topics

AI
, 
Claypond
, 
Creaegis
, 
emergent
, 
India
, 
Sentinel Global
, 
Startups
, 
vibe coding

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
