India is taking steps to reshape the business model behind its Unified Payments Interface (UPI), a widely used payments network built by the government, via new legislation that could pave the way for merchants to pay charges on some UPI transactions.

The 
legislation
 (PDF) lays the legal groundwork for a potential overhaul of India’s zero-merchant-discount-rate (MDR) regime, under which businesses have not paid fees to accept UPI payments since 2020.

The policy shift comes as UPI has become ubiquitous in India, processing a record 23.66 billion transactions worth ₹29.88 trillion (around $313.4 billion) in July alone, 
per
 the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), the operator of UPI.

India scrapped merchant discount rates on UPI transactions in January 2020 to accelerate adoption of the payments network, which instead relied on 
state incentives
 to support its operation and development.

The proposal comes after years of argument between the finance ministry, India’s central bank, and payment companies over how to fund the fast-growing network. Banks and fintech firms have argued that the policy of keeping merchant payments free has become harder to sustain as transaction volumes and infrastructure costs climbed.

“For us to get to 90% penetration, and to take UPI global, startups, fintechs and banks will need to fund this expansion through continued investments in IT, innovation and cyber security,” Amrish Rau, chief executive of fintech firm Pine Labs, 
wrote
 on X, welcoming the move.

Rau said allowing the industry to recover part of those investments from merchants while keeping consumer and peer-to-peer payments free would put UPI on a more sustainable footing. 

The legislation does not itself impose merchant fees or specify which transactions would be affected, leaving those details to be specified later.

Nonetheless, market analysts believe the legislation could mark the first step toward a significant new revenue stream for India’s payments industry. In a report published on Tuesday, Jefferies estimated that introducing merchant charges on higher-value UPI transactions could generate an additional ₹50 billion to ₹100 billion (about $525 million to $1.05 billion) in annual revenue by fiscal 2028, assuming a fee of 15-30 basis points.

Indian daily Economic Times 
reported
 last month that officials were considering limiting any merchant charges to larger merchants rather than applying them across all UPI transactions.

In a report last week, brokerage firm Bernstein wrote that such an approach would preserve UPI’s consumer-friendly model while creating a meaningful new revenue pool for banks and payment companies. The report noted that transactions above ₹2,000 (about $21) account for only about 4% of payment volumes but nearly 70% of transaction value.

The legislation will be closely watched by countries where UPI is now live, which 
include
 Singapore, the United Arab Emirates, and France.

The law could be particularly significant for companies that dominate India’s digital payments market. Walmart-owned PhonePe and Alphabet’s Google Pay together account for nearly 80% of UPI transaction volumes, according to NPCI data. However, how much either company ultimately benefits will depend on how any merchant fees are distributed among banks, payment apps, and other participants in the ecosystem.

Topics

digital payments
, 
Fintech
, 
Google Pay
, 
Government & Policy
, 
India
, 
PhonePe
, 
UPI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec
