Indian customer engagement software firm 
MoEngage
 has acquired San Francisco-based startup 
Aampe
 in an all-cash deal, betting that AI agents that make decisions for individual customers will become the future of marketing.

MoEngage did not disclose the financial terms of the transaction, but a source familiar with the matter told TechCrunch that the all-cash deal was worth tens of millions of dollars.

Founded in 2020, Aampe develops software that assigns a dedicated AI agent to each customer, 
allowing brands to personalize messaging
 based on individual behavior rather than traditional audience segments and campaign rules. The startup has more than 30 customers across the U.S., Europe, and Asia-Pacific, and grew annual recurring revenue by 150% over the past year, MoEngage co-founder and Chief Executive Raviteja Dodda said in an interview.

Dodda told TechCrunch that the acquisition will help it win customers using rival marketing platforms such as Salesforce and Adobe. 

“A large part of our growth is driven by migrations of enterprise customers from Salesforce Marketing Cloud and Adobe Experience Cloud,” Dodda said.

MoEngage recently signed three to four multi-million-dollar annual contract value deals with customers that switched from Salesforce, Dodda said. He’s hopeful that the Aampe acquisition will help him win more of such customers.

The acquisition comes as software companies race to embed AI deeper into enterprise applications, moving beyond tools that generate content or assist employees towards agents making autonomous decisions. In marketing, that includes deciding which customers to target, what messages to send, and when to send them.

Aampe’s technology is used by brands including Swiggy, Grab, and Taxfix, some of which also use MoEngage’s customer engagement platform.

The acquisition comes over six months after MoEngage 
raised $280 million
 through a mix of primary and secondary transactions. Around 20 Aampe employees will join MoEngage, taking the company’s workforce to roughly 820 people.

Founded in 2020, Aampe has raised about $28 million across three funding rounds. The startup counts Peak XV Partners, Z47, and Theory Ventures among its investors.

Topics

Aampe
, 
AI
, 
ai agent
, 
Enterprise
, 
India
, 
MoEngage
, 
United States

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The CEO of Allbirds’ new AI biz has a plan. Now she needs a “brand-new team”

Tim Fernholz

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz
