AI 
infrastructure company Infinity 
announced a $15 million raise at a $100 million valuation on Monday from investors including Touring Capital, Principal VC, and researchers from companies such as OpenAI and Anthropic.  
The startup is building software to make it easier for AI chips to run AI models. One big reason Nvidia became the top player is not just its high-performance chips, but also its CUDA software (Compute Unified Device Architecture), which allows its GPUs (originally designed to run graphics) to act as general-purpose processing CPUs. The largest AI development frameworks PyTorch and TensorFlow have been built on top of CUDA. This allows developers to write their apps in popular languages like Python, use those major AI frameworks and their apps will, by default, run on Nvidia chips.  

Most of these app-level startups wouldn’t have the resources or know-how to write their own kernels — the low-level software that operates chips — and port their apps to other AI chips. So Infinity is trying to build CUDA-alternative kernel software that works with any type of chip, like SRAM, GPUs, phone chips, and Systolic Arrays. Infinity is part of a new wave of startups that are attempting, product by product, to chip away at Nvidia’s market dominance.  

Infinity is attempting to build a universal inference library to run on all chips, allowing these chips to automate replicating state-of-the-art research results. 

Infinity was launched last year by Jeremy Nixon, once a researcher at Google Brain and creator of the hacker network community AGI House. Nixon told TechCrunch he decided to launch this company because he was obsessed with the idea of “automated invention” — the belief that “AI systems can actually be a meta technology.” He himself had invented a machine learning algorithm called Omega, he said, which essentially created new machine learning algorithms and automatically evaluated them in a feedback loop.  

That success got him thinking about other cases where this approach could work, and he turned to hardware, believing that automated systems could also generate the low-level code, like the kernels and so forth, needed to help run chips more effectively. 

Infinity’s AI research agent Ignition is intended to write the low-level code needed for AI inference on Nvidia-alternative chips. It tests, debugs, and measures how fast the hardware performs with the code, and automatically rewrites the code if needed to improve performance. The system is self-optimizing, meaning it continuously learns and improves itself. It also adapts to different chip architectures, regardless of proprietary designs, Nixon says. The result is what Infinity claims is a CUDA-level software stack. 

Customers include the AI chip maker (and would be Nvidia challenger) D-Matrix, and Infinity is in talks with other big chip and cloud companies, Nixon said. 

Humans are in the loop, however, providing high-level direction while the agent does more of the tedious grunt work. In 
one case study
, the startup found the agent works much faster than a human alone, reducing what could have been a years- or months-long process to hours or days. Infinity doesn’t charge an upfront license fee; instead, it takes a cut of performance gains and cost savings, measuring changes in tokens per second.  

Right now, Infinity has 26 employees, including those in design, operations, and engineering.  

Topics

chips
, 
nvidia
, 
Startups
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Dominic-Madori Davis	

Senior Reporter, Venture

Dominic-Madori Davis is a senior venture capital and startup reporter at TechCrunch. She is based in New York City.

You can contact or verify outreach from Dominic by emailing 
dominic.davis@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 646 831-7565 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek
