The widespread hacking campaign that relied on simply asking Meta AI’s chatbot to take over a victim’s Instagram account appears to have continued even after the company said the issue had been resolved. Meanwhile, the company has been scrambling to secure the targeted accounts and alert victims. 

Over the weekend, 
hackers claimed to be exploiting Meta’s AI support chatbot
 to take over several high-profile Instagram accounts. At the same time, a 
large
 
number
 
of
 
people
 
complained
 on social media that their Instagram accounts had been hacked, some of them with unique short user-profile handles. 

TechCrunch has seen examples of allegedly hacked handles featuring common forenames or names of countries, which can be then re-sold almost as collectibles in a gray market for so-called “OG handles.” Other victims of the hacking spree appeared to be the dormant 
Obama White House
 account (which Meta disputed), and the account of the U.S. Space Force’s chief master sergeant, 
John Bentivegna
.

These attacks were so simple that calling them hacks may be giving the people behind them too much credit, while at the same time not putting enough blame on Meta for not preventing rudimentary attacks from hijacking people’s accounts.

Hackers simply told Meta’s AI chatbot that they were the owners of the target’s account, and asked the bot to link that person’s account to an email they controlled. The chatbot complied with the request, allowing the hacker to reset the target account’s password and take control of the account — in some cases locking out the victims. At no point were Meta employees or contractors involved in the chat.

A screenshot that shows a successful takeover, posted in a Telegram group where hackers were sharing the technique, as well as bragging about their hacks
Image Credits:
TechCrunch/Screenshot /

On Monday, Meta spokesperson Andy Stone 
said
 that “the issue that did happen has already been fixed.” 

On Tuesday, however, more 
Instagram
 
users
 claimed to have had their accounts hacked. 

At the same time, TechCrunch has seen discussions among members of a Telegram channel where the hacking technique had been publicized, who claimed to still be able to exploit Meta’s AI chatbot, and they were advertising apparently hacked handles for sale, including at the time of TechCrunch’s writing. (It’s important to note that it’s hard to know for sure if all these accounts were hacked due to the same technique.) 

Contact Us

			Do you have more information about these Instagram hacks? We’d love to hear from you. From a non-work device and network, you can contact Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai securely on Signal at +1 917 257 1382, or via Telegram and Keybase @lorenzofb, or 
email
.

In a later 
post on X
, Stone said: “Some people may receive password reset notifications and some may be asked security questions when they try and log into their accounts.”

Stone told TechCrunch in an email that Meta secured affected accounts on Monday, then began sending password reset emails. When asked by TechCrunch, Stone would not say how many users were hacked.

Several people have reported that Meta has begun notifying users that they were being targeted. Victims 
publicly
 reported receiving emails from Instagram warning them that the company had “detected some suspicious activity that suggests your Instagram may have been compromised.” The message also said that the company took measures to secure the account, and asked the user to reset their password.

An example of an email sent to a victim of the hacking campaign, which was shared with TechCrunch
Image Credits:
TechCrunch/Screenshot /

As 
404 Media noted
, Meta 
announced
 in March that it was implementing AI to automate its support to users, saying the AI-powered chatbot was “designed to resolve account issues from start to finish,” and would have the ability to “reset your password securely.” That suggests the chatbot can perform actions that may have previously required a human in the loop, given how critical they were. 

For years 
there has been a flourishing market
 where hackers stole and then sold “OG” usernames, referring to the usernames and handles taken by the earliest users of Instagram. In the past, however, taking over those accounts required more complex strategies, such as phishing the victim, taking over their phone number, or bribing insiders at telecom providers.

Here, the hackers just asked, and Meta’s chatbot dutifully complied.

Topics

AI
, 
cybercrime
, 
cybersecurity
, 
hackers
, 
hacking
, 
Instagram
, 
Meta
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
