Instagram is exploring new formats in an apparent effort to bring its platform to more TV users. The social network, which 
launched a TV app last year
, says it’s going to experiment with longer-form content, episodic series, and Live TV.

Instagram said it is exploring ways to bring longer-form videos, content spanning multiple episodes, and live creator experiences to its TV app. This follows news earlier this month that 
Meta is testing a new “Series” feature
 for Reels that’s designed to make it easier to keep up with serialized content on Instagram and Facebook.

While Instagram has long been competing with TikTok and YouTube, the social network is now coming for streaming services like Netflix and Amazon Prime Video as it strives to capture eyes in the living room in addition to everywhere else.

Instagram also said its TV app is being rolled out to Samsung TVs. The app is already available on Amazon Fire and Google TV.

Image Credits:
Instagram

Additionally, the TV app is getting several features, including channels, the ability to cast from your phone, and support for horizontal videos and stories.

When users open the app, they will see channels tailored to the creators and topics they are interested in. The company claims that channels make it easier to find videos people can enjoy together, whether that’s comedy, sports, or specific creators.

The company is also testing a dedicated section for horizontal videos, making it easier to watch content on TV. This format will lay the groundwork for Instagram’s living room viewing ambitions.

Users can now also cast Reels, or content from their Saved tab, directly from their phone to their TV. Additionally, you can now check out other users’ Stories within the TV app, which previously only let you watch Reels natively.

Topics

Apps
, 
Instagram
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Social
, 
streaming services

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz

Snap finally debuts its long-awaited AR glasses, Specs, and, oof, they aren’t cheap

Lucas Ropek

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

ChatGPT’s market share slips below 50% for first time

Ivan Mehta
