Instagram on Thursday introduced a new wordmark, which is the text-only logo that spells out the company’s name. The social media giant’s logic was that the older version of its logo felt dated after a decade in use. 

The change was announced by Instagram head Adam Mosseri on both Instagram and Threads, where he 
described
 the new logo as “sharper and more modern” while still referencing the original and maintaining simplicity.

Although people can often be averse to change, particularly when it comes to brands and the logos they’ve long been familiar with, Instagram’s refreshed design is seeing some compliments among the complaints, noting the fresher look or praising the font choice.

Screenshot
Image Credits:
Threads

While there are certainly plenty of people joking that the logo now looks like it reads “Instagzam” because of the shape of the font used for the “r,” it’s fair to say that the name “Instagram” is such a recognizable brand that most people will immediately know what this says, despite the artistic flourishes.

The wordmark’s font recalls cursive writing as it adds old-fashioned curves to the “s,” “r,” and “g,” too. This is something of an interesting choice, given that the younger generations are no longer learning to write in cursive for the most part, so may not immediately understand why the shape that looks like the sail on a little boat is actually an “s.”

The last time 
Instagram updated its design was 2016
, when the company moved away from the classic brown camera with the rainbow stripe to the colorful pink gradient that remains the icon today.  

Meta hasn’t yet responded to a request for further comment about the redesign, or whether or not we should expect other design changes to come to Instagram in time, like a new app icon. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Instagram
, 
Social
, 
social media

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

Cloudflare launches Kitesurf, a browser built for AI agents

Sarah Perez
