Instagram announced on Tuesday that users can now swap out the music on their published feed posts and carousels. Until now, users could only change the music on a post by deleting it and then re-uploading it. 

With a newly launched “Replace Audio” tool, users can update the music on their post at any time while keeping the post’s existing likes, comments, shares, and reach intact. The Meta-owned company says the new feature is another step in its efforts to build tools that give creators more creative control over their content.

The update removes a limitation that forced creators and brands to choose between keeping a post’s engagement and updating its soundtrack. In some cases, changing a song can help keep content aligned with trends. Other times, people may want to refresh old posts to reflect their evolving music tastes.

Image Credits:
Instagram

The new feature is accessed by navigating to the post where you want to change the audio, then tapping the two-line menu in the top-right corner of the post. You will then need to scroll down to “Edit,” after which you’ll see the option to swap out the audio.

Instagram has come under fire over the years for introducing controversial features that many users never wanted, so it makes sense for the social media giant to now add a small but meaningful feature that people may actually find useful. 

For example, the social media giant recently 
killed a feature
 that allowed users to modify photos from public Instagram accounts using AI. The company said last week that the feature “missed the mark” and would be removed.

In May, the company 
released a feature called “Instants”
 that Instagram billed as a new format to share real-life moments as they were happening. However, many users weren’t aware of how the feature worked and ended up 
accidentally sending images
 to everyone in their Friends list, leading to many sharing their frustrations with the feature online.

Topics

Apps
, 
Instagram
, 
Meta
, 
Social

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Microsoft patches bug in video game Age of Empires II

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan
