Everyone is buzzing about 
Instinct
, an AI personal assistant still in private access, not only for its incredible capabilities, but also for its potential privacy concerns. The agent, a veritable taskmaster, has been 
praised
 as feeling “like magic” and 
being
 one of the “most exciting launches” since OpenClaw. However, some testers have also raised concerns about the AI agent’s security model and its worrisome 
terms of service
.

To be fair, Instinct is still in private testing for now, so these concerns haven’t yet scaled to the wider public at this time.

Created by a small team led by former Sierra research scientist 
Noah Shinn
, San Francisco-based Instinct is operated by 
Spear Street Technology,
 per its 
terms
 and 
California
 business 
filings
. It’s currently operating in stealth, per 
PitchBook
. 

The AI agent itself works by connecting to your applications and devices, including your email, messaging apps, calendar, and your device’s audio, location, screen, and more. You can text the agent or call it via text message or WhatsApp, asking it to perform various tasks for you, like booking your appointments and reservations, scheduling a ride to the airport, cleaning up your inbox, organizing important information, handling your shopping, 
finding
 you cheap flights, and much more.

Though Instinct is described by testers as outperforming their expectations, some have also raised concerns about the company’s approach to customer privacy and security. This raises a timely question: are the trade-offs of giving AI this level of access and autonomy actually worth it?

For instance, several people 
are
 
circulating
 
screenshots
 from the company’s 
Terms of Service
, which 
grant
 Instinct a broad “perpetual and irrevocable” license to “access, use, host, cache, store, reproduce, transmit, display, publish, distribute, and modify” any of the user’s materials, including for training its AI models. The terms also detail how Instinct can receive information from users’ devices, including screen captures, cursor movements, and keyboard inputs.

The terms also allow Instinct to enter into “agreements, commitments, or transactions” on users’ behalf, which would be binding.

let’s pause for a sec and talk about 
https://t.co/19wLOjliYq
VCs, notable people, successful people hyping it up all week. They all just giving away their emails and all their personal data, emails, messages:
“sub-licensable, worldwide, perpetual and irrevocable license to… 
pic.twitter.com/MWb3LKnvQp
— Mike Khristo (@MikeKhristo) 
August 22, 2026

From a 
#cyberhealth
 perspective, Instinct is a hard no. 
On the positive side, their policy is 100% forthcoming. 
However, the access they require comes with responsibility I would not bestow on any company. 
For those who desire speed or the "current thing" if you want to be… 
https://t.co/HdXO1k18u3
 
pic.twitter.com/VczQw9P0Sa
— Jeremy Banon (@jeremybanon) 
August 21, 2026

One early adopter, Peter Yang, 
pointed out that
 Instinct would not delete his Gmail records when asked. (The team later 
fixed
 the problem by adding a tool for deleting external data in its settings, he said.)

Hey Instinct, it's not cool to index and retain my emails without my permission and not let me delete them from your records? 
I can't recommend this to anyone until this is figured out. Thanks 
@clairevo
 for spotting this. 
pic.twitter.com/J2qhYVqwxN
— Peter Yang (@petergyang) 
August 21, 2026

Another person, Claire Vo, found that Instinct was still summarizing their inbox 
after disconnecting its access
. When she asked Instinct what happened, the bot confirmed that the emails were stored in plain text for later searches.

what a thrill! 
i disconnected ai bot instinct from google at 11 AM and got a summary of my emails at 2 PM 😵
here's what happened, and what i've learned 👇 
pic.twitter.com/LMGGLXcrD5
— claire vo 🖤 (@clairevo) 
August 21, 2026

Many others questioned the security model, too. One tester 
was a bit worried
 when they found that Instinct was able to pull a sign-up code from their email inbox to complete a particular task — in their case, booking a table at a restaurant via Resy. And Hello Patient co-founder Alex Cohen wrote that once he found out 
how easily Instinct could be phished
, he deleted his account:

For additional context, I don’t think we’re at the point where it’s safe to give AI read/write access to your inbox.
I wanted to see how easily Instinct could be phished, so I created a brand new Gmail account and emailed my real personal account with instructions for Instinct… 
https://t.co/Mh1W3xJQov
 
pic.twitter.com/V5inRtK9Zj
— Alex Cohen (@anothercohen) 
August 22, 2026

In addition, Moxxie Ventures founder Katie Jacobs Stanton 
shared
 that Instinct broke her trust when it sent an email on her behalf without first checking with her.

“We’re trading privacy and control for hyper-personalized AI tools (AI notetakers, personalized AI agents, etc), often without fully understanding the trade,” she remarked on X, summarizing the dilemma posed personal AI agents. “The more powerful these agents become, the more trust matters. Every successful action earns a little more trust. One unauthorized action can reset that trust to zero,” she said.

Instinct is an amazing product. I've been using it for mostly personal needs and a little bit of work. 
Last night, it was a little naughty and sent an innocuous email on my behalf without checking with me first. I told it that it had broken my trust and disconnected my email.…
— Katie Jacobs Stanton (@KatieS) 
August 22, 2026

Michael Mignano, the founder of Anchor, which was acquired by Spotify, and now a GP at Union Square Ventures, 
noted that 
products like Instinct are going to “change modern security norms for consumers,” adding that “people will increasingly hand over passwords to 3p [third-party] apps, unaware of how or what they are storing for them.”

Interest in Instinct and personal AI has been growing since the arrival of OpenClaw, a personal AI assistant that became popular for its powerful capabilities,
 leading its founder to join OpenAI 
to help work on the next generation of personal agents. Another messaging-based assistant, 
Poke, also just exited to Cognition
. 

Amid the criticism, Instinct’s team hasn’t yet responded to anyone’s concerns or complaints on X, preferring to keep a 
low profile
. (The 
bot itself identifies
 Luca Borletti, also formerly of Sierra, as being involved with the company, but that has not been confirmed.) TechCrunch has heard from multiple investors that Kleiner Perkins and Conviction have invested in the startup and those rounds have now closed. 

I've been using Instinct every day for the last week now. It’s been awesome for travel booking, rebookings, restaurant reservations, email follow-ups, CRM management, even working on our data room for LPs. I've tried Hermes, OpenClaw, Tasklet, GrokBot but Instinct takes the cake…
— Jesse Middleton (@srcasm) 
August 22, 2026

Requests for comment sent to both the startup’s main email address and Shinn directly have not yet been returned.

Topics

AI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
