General Fusion
 began trading on the Nasdaq today under the ticker GFUZ, becoming the first publicly listed fusion power company, beating competitor and 
Trump-backed TAE Technologies
 by several months. 

And investors seemed to want in. The stock rallied as trading began Monday and is now up 40% from $12.85 as of 12:50 p.m. ET.

General Fusion 
announced in January
 that it would merge with Spring Valley Acquisition Corp. III, and the transaction was completed last week.

Without redemptions, the fusion power company could have added as much as $230 million to its balance sheet. But most de-SPAC deals see a wave of redemptions before the merger completes. This one is no exception, and while the company hasn’t disclosed the exact amount yet, a 
report
 in the Globe and Mail estimates that General Fusion might receive less than $30 million after redemptions and fees. 

Alongside the de-SPAC, General Fusion also raised $108 million from private investors. Altogether, the company says it holds about $150 million in cash.

Before the reverse merger was announced, General Fusion was running short on cash and struggling to raise more. The company had reportedly been attempting to raise $125 million. But by May 2025, it hadn’t materialized, and General Fusion 
laid off at least 25% of its employees
. Three months later, the company convinced existing investors to 
put in another $22 million
 in what was reportedly a “pay to play” round. 

That round gave General Fusion some breathing room. But fusion power is an expensive business, and the company was soon looking for more funding, which culminated in the reverse merger announced in January.

Founded in 2002, General Fusion is one of the oldest fusion power companies around. Over the years, it has raised 
over $600 million
 from private investors.

The company’s approach to fusion power, known as magnetized target fusion, uses electromagnetic fields to create magnetized plasma, a soup of superheated particles, inside a chamber lined with liquid lithium. Once the plasma is formed, it will use rings of pistons to compress liquid lithium around the fusion fuel until the atoms within fuse and release energy. 

Previously, the company said it would use steam to drive the pistons, though today it doesn’t specify, merely saying that “synchronized mechanical drivers” will force the lithium blanket inward around the plasma. 

The company had hoped to use 
its LM26 device
 to hit a milestone known as breakeven, where a fusion reaction releases more energy than was required to ignite it, sometime this year. Its funding woes have pushed the timeline back, though, likely to 2028 or later. General Fusion says it is aiming to turn on its first power plant “by approximately 2035.”

Topics

Climate
, 
fusion power
, 
General Fusion

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Reed Jobs would rather talk about curing cancer than his last name

Connie Loizos

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Feds demand autonomous vehicle companies stop interfering with first responders

Kirsten Korosec

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta
