In Brief

Posted:

3:12 PM PDT · August 13, 2026

Image Credits:
MICHAEL TRAN/AFP / Getty Images

Aisha Malik

Investors sue Selena Gomez alleging fraud tied to her mental health startup

Singer and actress Selena Gomez and her mother are being sued over their mental health startup, 
Wondermind
. The plaintiffs in the lawsuit say they invested nearly $1.2 million in the startup, and are accusing Gomez of securities fraud and breach of contract.

They allege that the startup failed to deliver on its commitments without informing investors, and Gomez failed to market the startup after promising to do so. The news was first reported by 
Forbes
.

Wondermind launched in 2021 and aimed to offer daily mental health resources to users. The lawsuit alleges that investors were unaware of the company’s troubles until a September 2025 story from The Cut uncovered them. 

“Gomez purported to sign a contract obligating her to perform and then ignored it,” the 
complaint reads
. “The partnerships did not exist. The initiatives never materialized. The app was never built. And for three years, while the Company quietly collapsed around them, not one of its founders, officers, or directors said a word to the investors whose money was funding the collapse.”

The investors allege that Gomez and Wondermind misrepresented the company’s finances and overstated the extent of Gomez’s involvement. The plaintiffs are seeking to recover their investments and legal fees. 

Wondermind did not respond to our request for comment.

Topics

Biotech & Health
, 
fraud
, 
In Brief
, 
lawsuit
, 
Startups

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Climate

Hyperscalers might regret embracing natural gas if new forecast proves correct

Tim De Chant

	44 minutes ago

Security

US courts will start publishing how often the government uses spyware

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	1 hour ago

Security

Flock says its new tool will help identify police abuse, but hasn’t explained how it works

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	17 hours ago

Latest in Startups

In Brief

Investors sue Selena Gomez alleging fraud tied to her mental health startup

Aisha Malik

	17 hours ago

Startups

Databricks wanted to raise $1B, investors wanted $15B. It settled on $5B at a $190B valuation.

Julie Bort

	19 hours ago

Startups

The VC backing the American dream

Maggie Nye

Isabelle Johannessen

	19 hours ago
