In Brief

Posted:

9:09 AM PDT · June 9, 2026

Image Credits:
TechCrunch (AI-generated)

Julie Bort

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

With 
SpaceX about to break records
 with an IPO on Friday, 
Anthropic about to break records 
with its pending IPO, and 
OpenAI racing to match or best its archrivals
 with its own potentially record-breaking IPO, the tech industry will soon have a new set of public company overlords.

Should all these IPOs take place as planned, these companies will be replacing the vicious-sounding 
FAANG
 cabal — Facebook (now Meta), Amazon, Apple, Netflix, Google (now Alphabet) — with the delightfully sweet-sounding (though truly sour and atrocious if consumed unripe) coterie MANGOS: Meta, Anthropic, Nvidia, Google, OpenAI, SpaceX.

As these companies go, so shall the whole tech industry, or so it’s looking like from the summer of 2026. 

The new acronym was proposed by developer 
@krishdotdev
 and 
@lilscoot
 on X and is now going viral.

Of course, FAANG is not exactly dead — Amazon and Netflix remain powerful — but streaming services and Amazon’s e-commerce business, if not its cloud, are perhaps less groundbreaking these days than the AI and agentic companies the tech industry is about to crown.

To that we say: Farewell to FAANG! Long live the MANGOS!

(At least if they prove to be a nourishing foundation of a healthy economy powered by an upcoming autonomous AI age, and don’t usher in an unpalatable future where we all wind up jobless and broke.) 

i prefer MANGOS 
pic.twitter.com/fNnomeqgL5
— scoot (@lilscoot) 
June 8, 2026

Topics

AI
, 
big tech
, 
FAANG
, 
In Brief
, 
Startups
, 
TC

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

	4 hours ago

AI

OpenAI files confidentially for IPO, following Anthropic

Rebecca Bellan

	23 hours ago

AI

Apple bets cheaper AI will woo small developers

Sarah Perez

	24 hours ago

Latest in Startups

In Brief

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

	4 hours ago

Transportation

Evotrex raises $30M to build the RV that doesn’t need a charging station

Sean O'Kane

	12 hours ago

Commerce

Zepto’s IPO filing reveals fast growth, bigger losses, and a valuation question nobody’s answered yet

Jagmeet Singh

	16 hours ago
