I can’t tell the exact tipping point from realistic excitement over a new technology, to hype, to 
aww-come-on
 — but I’m pretty sure when a sandwich shop with Danny DeVito as its public face talks about AI in its IPO documents, we must be getting close.

So it is with Jersey Mike’s. 

Because of investor thirst for all things AI these days, I understand why tech companies feel the need to sprinkle AI dust all over their pitches. This is as true for non-AI startups 
raising venture capital
 as it is for 
Bending Spoons’ public debut
, a company in the business of buying aging, “not-AI” tech companies to rehabilitate.

Just for kicks, I took a look at Jersey Mike’s IPO documents to see how far this compulsion may go. Surely a sandwich shop would have no need to mention AI in its 
S-1
. But lo and behold!

The term artificial intelligence and its acronym “AI” were mentioned 22 times. In this case, the company can’t claim to be selling AI software. It sells submarine sandwiches. AI products are what investors are really hungering for (terrible pun intended).

Still, it found a way to mention AI in its investor-risk warnings. That may be even more funny. It doesn’t explain what it’s using AI for that could be dangerous to investors, beyond a hand-wave of a phrase, “We are beginning to use AI Technologies in our business.”

In all fairness, as a company that operates franchisees, it does rely on software (mentioned 52 times) and data (112 mentions), as all businesses do. Its AI risk warning was boilerplate copy, perhaps even necessary, as such disasters have already happened to other food businesses, like 
the half-baked AI inventory tool
 that Starbucks rolled out, which couldn’t count and was recently scrapped.

Still, I’m going to go out on a limb here and predict that the risk of an AI disaster for a company that produces real-life sandwiches, not AI slop, is about the same as, say, a franchise shop getting hit by lightning. That actually 
happened, by the way,
 to a shop in Texas in 2021. Yet weather was only mentioned five times in the S-1. And lightning? Not once.

Topics

AI
, 
IPOs
, 
sandwiches
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

Flipper Device’s new Busy Bar is a customizable display for productivity

Ivan Mehta

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

FTC gives Musk the OK to acquire SpaceX alumni startup Mesh

Marina Temkin

Corgi, the buzzy Y Combinator-backed insurance tech startup, says it didn’t steal an open source product

Julie Bort
