Joby Aviation
 reached an agreement to acquire Resonant Sciences for $500 million in cash and stock, according to a 
regulatory filing
 posted Tuesday. This is the electric air taxi developer’s latest move to push deeper into the defense sector.

Ohio-based Resonant Sciences, which makes radio frequency and sensor systems, will become a dedicated defense business under Joby. Resonant Sciences’ co-founder and CEO J. Micah North will lead this new division, which will absorb Joby’s defense projects, including the development of a turbine-electric and hydrogen-electric aircraft, and autonomy technology stack.

The new defense division will allow the rest of Joby Aviation to focus on certifying, manufacturing, and launching its electric air taxi, the company said. 

California-based Joby is best known as a company trying to develop and launch a network of electric urban air taxis that can shuttle people and goods over short distances. The company has also pursued defense, an effort that became more public over the past two years.

Last year, Joby signed an agreement with defense contractor 
L3Harris Technologies
 to “explore opportunities” to develop a new aircraft class — specifically, a gas-turbine hybrid vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) aircraft that can fly autonomously — for defense applications.

The gas-turbine hybrid VTOL will be based on Joby’s current S4 aircraft platform, the company said at the time. Joby has focused on developing the S4 with an all-electric powertrain, but in 2024 it demonstrated under a government contract a 
hydrogen-electric hybrid version
 that flew 521 miles — more than two times farther than its battery-electric prototype.

Joby’s acquisition of Resonant Sciences gives it a money-making business. Resonant has reported $100 million in trailing 12-month revenue, and access to classified programs run by the U.S. government. Resonant’s radio frequency and sensing tech also complements Joby’s own electric vertical takeoff and landing aircraft (eVTOLs). 
Joby has tapped this revenue-generation-through-acquisition strategy before. Developing, certifying, and mass-producing eVTOLs is an expensive and years-long process, the kind of frontier tech that excites shareholders until they start wondering when the money is going to come in.

Joby, which went 
public in 2021
 through a merger with a blank-check company, has assuaged investors by finding near-term sources of revenue. 

Last year, Joby acquired Blade Air Mobility’s helicopter rideshare business for about $125 million. The acquisition gave Joby instant access to a network of 12 terminals in key markets like New York City as well as terminal bases at John F. Kennedy International Airport, Newark Liberty Airport, on both east and west sides of Manhattan, and Wall Street.

It also delivered much-needed revenue for Joby. The company reported $38.6 million in revenue in the second quarter, $36.2 million of which came from Blade. 

Topics

Joby Aviation
, 
Mergers and Acquisitions
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
