Paramount Skydance’s proposed acquisition of Warner Bros. Discovery has hit a roadblock after a judge 
temporarily paused
 the deal in response to a 
lawsuit filed by a coalition of 12 state attorneys general
 who argue that the merger would harm competition.

U.S. District Judge Araceli Martínez-Olguín issued a 14-day pause on Monday after hearing arguments from both sides last week. The coalition, which is being led by California Attorney General Rob Bonta, could seek another pause after the 14 days, further delaying the merger. 

The lawsuit from the states alleges that the deal would harm movie theaters, basic cable distributors, and audiences. They argue that if the two companies are allowed to merge, it would lessen competition in three areas: wide release theatrical film distribution, “top-grossing” theatrical distribution, and basic cable licensing. 

“This is a critical first win in our case to ensure this megamerger never sees the light of day,” said Attorney General Bonta in a 
statement
. “History tells the tale of what happens when a few people have great power over markets that are central to Americans’ lives: fewer opportunities for more people, worse products and services for all people. With our lawsuit, we’re fighting for a free and fair market and a thriving film and television industry that serves creatives and audiences alike. We have a full tank of gas, the law on our side, and look forward to continuing to make our case.”

The deal would combine two notable film studios as well as streaming platforms 
Paramount+ and HBO Max
. It would also create one of the largest portfolios of television networks, bringing together Paramount’s CBS and MTV with WBD’s CNN and HBO.

Paramount CEO David Ellison had said in May that the transaction was on track to close by September. The legal roadblock has the potential to derail Paramount’s efforts to transform into a major competitor to companies like Netflix.

The proposed acquisition has 
received scrutiny
 from filmmakers, actors, and industry professionals who argued that the deal would reduce competition and further consolidate the U.S. media industry. 

Paramount and WBD did not immediately respond to TechCrunch’s requests for comment.

Topics

HBO
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Paramount
, 
regulation
, 
Warner Bros

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek
