Publicly traded e-commerce marketing automation platform Klaviyo has agreed to acquire Agency, a three-year-old AI-powered customer success startup founded by serial entrepreneur Elias Torres. The terms of the deal were not disclosed.

Founded in 2023, 
Agency
 had raised $32 million from investors including Sequoia, Menlo Ventures, and Felicis prior to the acquisition.

As part of the deal, Torres (pictured left) will join Klaviyo as chief product officer (CPO), leading Agency’s 25-person team to accelerate the development and expansion of Klaviyo’s AI agents: Composer, which builds marketing campaigns, and Customer Agent, which handles post-sale support like returns and order tracking

“Elias and the team built a great product with Agency,” Klaviyo co-founder and CEO Andrew Bialecki (pictured right) told TechCrunch. “We’re going to take that and combine it with our agent products and try to bring that to 200,000 businesses—and hopefully to millions more over the next couple of years.”

For Torres, joining Klaviyo brings his career full circle. He is no stranger to M&A exits, having co-founded Performable (acquired by HubSpot in 2011) and later Drift, where he served as CTO for eight years until its $1.2 billion 
sale to Vista Equity
 in 2021.

Back in 2010 at Performable, Torres hired Bialecki, who had graduated from Harvard two years earlier, as one of that startup’s first engineers. Torres mentored Bialecki on early-stage startup dynamics. “He soaked it up in a short amount of time,” Torres recalled of their time working together.

Bialecki co-founded Klaviyo, which he initially bootstrapped, shortly after leaving Performable. When Klaviyo raised its first outside capital in 2015, Bialecki invited Torres to back the seed round as an angel investor.
Klaviyo went on to complete a high-profile IPO in September 2023 at a 
$9.2 billion 
valuation.

While Klaviyo’s stock has taken a hit alongside other SaaS companies, Torres and Bialecki believe the platform’s years of customer data give its AI agents an advantage over competitors like Decagon and Sierra.

“Elias and I coalesced on the mission of how we provide agents for businesses that they can give to their customers,” Bialecki said, adding that he is excited to work with Torres again as he did at the beginning of the cloud era. “It’s the next big tech revolution: agents. Let’s get the band back together, and let’s go build.”

Topics

acqui-hire
, 
AI
, 
exit
, 
Klaviyo
, 
M&A
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Marina Temkin	

Reporter, Venture

Marina Temkin is a venture capital and startups reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she wrote about VC for PitchBook and Venture Capital Journal. Earlier in her career, Marina was a financial analyst and earned a CFA charterholder designation.

You can contact or verify outreach from Marina by emailing 
marina.temkin@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 347-683-3909 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
