Market research company Klue has confirmed that a credential dating back to 2022, which was part of a limited pilot, was used by hackers earlier this month to steal reams of data from its corporate customers, including several cybersecurity companies.

The new detail suggests that Klue may have had years to decommission the credential that was used for the pilot, raising questions about the company’s security posture and what actions it could have taken to prevent the breaches of its customers’ data.

The hack at Vancouver-based Klue, which it detected on June 12 and first disclosed last Friday, allowed hackers to steal data from a number of its customers, including 
password manager maker LastPass
 and 
several other cybersecurity companies
. The hackers used their access to Klue’s systems, which store the keys — known as OAuth tokens — to access their customers’ data stored in other clouds and databases, to download that data, and extort the companies.

Klue spokesperson Katie Berg told TechCrunch that the company’s investigation so far indicates that the credential used by the hackers to steal customers’ data “was originally provided to a third-party in 2022, for a limited pilot.”

When asked by TechCrunch, Klue would not explain the purpose of the pilot, how long it ran, or identify the third-party that the company gave the credential to. Klue also did not share why the credential wasn’t revoked following the conclusion of the pilot.

Klue did not respond to follow-up emails about the incident before publication.

Questions remain about the incident as the company says its investigation is continuing.

Klue hasn’t said what kind of credential was stolen, only stating 
in a blog post
 that it was a “legacy credential associated with an integration service.” Klue also would not say whether the credential was an employee’s username and password, for example, or if the company believes the credential was stolen from the third-party rather than from its own systems. 

These details may be crucial to understanding how the breach was carried out — and how to prevent a repeat incident.

Klue’s statement to TechCrunch added that the company is “conducting a comprehensive review of credential management, vendor-access controls, monitoring capabilities, and deployment security processes,” offering no further details.

A hacking group called Icarus took credit for the breach on its data leak site, and has publicly threatened to release the stolen data if its ransom isn’t paid.

Klue has not said if it has had contact with the hackers, or if it plans to pay their demands.

Do you know more about the Klue cyberattack? Are you a company affected by the breach? We would love to hear from you. To contact Zack Whittaker securely, reach out via Signal at username zackwhittaker.1337
.

Topics

cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
data breach
, 
Klue
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The CEO of Allbirds’ new AI biz has a plan. Now she needs a “brand-new team”

Tim Fernholz

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz
