Micromobility company Lime has raised $167 million in its IPO.

The nine-year-old scooter and bike company, which is backed by Uber, sold 6.68 million shares at $25 each, at the mid-point of its $24 to $26 price range. Shares started trading on the Nasdaq stock exchange under the ticker “LIME” on Wednesday afternoon, 
jumping
 around 9% in the first hour.

Lime has been considering an IPO for years. In 2021, following a $523 million funding round, CEO Wayne Ting told TechCrunch the company was 
eyeing an IPO in 2022
. He re-heated the idea in 2023, saying that Lime was still waiting for the 
right market conditions
.

The long-awaited IPO pegs Lime’s valuation at around $1.66 billion, just shy of the price fellow micromobility company Bird got 
when it merged with a special purpose acquisition company
 in 2021.

Lime needs the funds. In its IPO filing in May, the company expressed “substantial doubt” that it could continue as a going concern. Lime said it needs the IPO proceeds to pay around $1 billion in liabilities, more than half of which is due by the end of this year. Without an IPO, Lime told prospective investors, it would need to find other sources of financing.

Lime is riding that financial edge because the micromobility industry has proven to be fairly brutal over the last few years, even in the good times. Bird had to file for bankruptcy protection and restructure after it went public, and other competitors have either merged (
Tier and Dott
), been delisted from major exchanges (
Micromobility.com
), or gone out of business entirely (
Superpedestrian
).

Amid the chaos, Lime has managed to improve its revenue over the last few years. It generated $521 million in 2023, $686.6 million in 2024, and $886.7 million last year. The company also trimmed its losses from $122.3 million in 2023, to just $33.9 million in 2024, though that figure edged back up in 2025 to $59.3 million.

That growth has come largely from Lime’s ability to scale globally. It now operates in 230 cities across 29 countries. But the company is also somewhat dependent on Uber, which owns 24% of Lime, and accounted for more than 14% of its revenue last year. (Uber allows people to book Lime rides through its app in some cities.)

This story has been updated with information about Lime’s stock starting to trade.

Topics

e-bikes
, 
e-scooters
, 
IPO
, 
lime
, 
micromobility
, 
Scooters
, 
Transportation
, 
Uber

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Flipper Device’s new Busy Bar is a customizable display for productivity

Ivan Mehta

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

FTC gives Musk the OK to acquire SpaceX alumni startup Mesh

Marina Temkin

Corgi, the buzzy Y Combinator-backed insurance tech startup, says it didn’t steal an open source product

Julie Bort

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane
