Europe’s fast-growing vibe coding startup, Lovable, tells TechCrunch it has surpassed $500 million in annualized revenue run rate.

Lovable last discussed its revenue in February, when the company 
said it crossed $400 million
. In August, 2024, Lovable said it could hit $1 billion in annualized revenue within 12 months. It may not be on track to double that figure by summer, but it is still reporting jaw-dropping growth; the company, founded in late 2023, hasn’t yet hit its three-year anniversary.

The company also claims it has been used to build over 50 million projects and says usage has accelerated to one million new projects a week. According to 
a survey of those projects
 that run on the company’s blog, Lovable says its users are primarily non-technical, yet are increasingly building software they intend to monetize or use in their businesses. 

Its users are founders, designers, and salespeople building websites and e-commerce storefronts, as well as internal tools like CRMs, inventory systems, and HR platforms, the company says.

That list tells a story. AI vibe coding platforms have been seen as a threat to legacy SaaS software. Why buy expensive annual contracts when you can just vibe code it yourself? Lovable’s survey appears to offer some data that this is indeed happening. Of course, Lovable — therefore most of the projects built on it — isn’t old enough to answer the harder question about vibe-coded software: will such an approach prove short-lived? That’s because it’s not the initial building part that’s the problem — it’s the maintaining part.

Software operates almost like a living organism: even well-written, well-designed code that isn’t AI slop runs atop an ever-shifting stack of dependencies, third-party services, and infrastructure — all of which is constantly being updated, which means end-user software is always breaking. That’s why so many companies choose to buy instead of build. They want others to be responsible for keeping it running. We’ll have to see if Lovable and other vibe coders will transparently report abandoned projects as their platforms mature — aka the not-as-flattering stuff. If those abandonment rates are low, that will be the 
true indication that the so-called SaaSpocalypse
 is here and here to stay. 

Topics

AI
, 
Lovable
, 
TC
, 
vibe coding

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin
