Lovable and Google 
announced
 an expanded multiyear collaboration on Wednesday. Lovable, the fast-growing Stockholm vibe-coding startup, has long been a Google Cloud user. Under the new agreement, it will be a much bigger one.

While the companies did not disclose the dollar figure, a person with knowledge of the deal tells TechCrunch it involves a fivefold increase in Lovable’s footprint on Google Cloud, including AI usage. As part of the deal, this individual tells us, Lovable will gain expanded access to both Anthropic’s Claude — the AI model widely used for coding tasks — and Google’s own Gemini models.

The Anthropic piece in particular is interesting. Google invested $10 billion in Anthropic in cash and compute credits in April, promising another $30 billion if Anthropic hits certain performance targets. It made that investment at a $350 billion valuation — just one month before Anthropic raised a staggering 
$65 billion round
 that valued the company at nearly $1 trillion. This deal stands to help Anthropic hit those targets, because Lovable is one of Europe’s fastest-growing startups on record. According to Lovable, it crossed $400 million in 
annualized revenue in February
, having added $100 million in a single month with just 146 employees. The company claims that more than half of Fortune 500 companies use its product in some fashion.

The deal also plugs Lovable into several other parts of Google’s ecosystem. Lovable’s new agent will be available through Google Cloud’s enterprise agent marketplace, the Gemini Enterprise Agent Gallery — an arrangement the two companies 
first telegraphed
 at Google’s major U.S. cloud conference in April. And to help secure the code that both humans and agents write, Lovable will integrate with Wiz, Google’s biggest ever acquisition at $32 billion, which 
officially closed
 in March, a year after it was 
announced
. The integration will allow Wiz to identify and remediate security problems in real time.

By selling Lovable’s agents through Google’s marketplace, the cloud giant says enterprise procurement and billing will be simplified, making it easier for Lovable to land more enterprise customers.

The calculus for Google is simple enough. If it can keep both Lovable and Anthropic growing by attracting deep-pocketed enterprises, the revenue helps fund the $180 billion to $190 billion in capital expenditures Google plans to spend this year. The company is already in the process of 
selling a record-breaking $85 billion in equity
 to cover some of that, so only another $100 billion or so to go.

Topics

AI
, 
Anthropic
, 
google cloud
, 
Lovable
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
