In Brief

Posted:

3:41 PM PDT · July 8, 2026

Image Credits:
Bruno de Carvalho/SOPA Images/LightRocket / Getty Images

Marina Temkin

Lovable reportedly in talks to double its valuation to $13.2B

Lovable, a Swedish vibe-coding startup, is in talks to raise $300 million at a valuation of $13.2 billion — exactly double the
$6.6 billion
 valuation the company achieved last December, 
Sifted reported
. Menlo Ventures, a firm that announced its latest 
$3 billion fund
 last month, is expected to lead the round, according to the report.

The less-than-three-year-old startup hit 
$500 million
 in annualized revenue run rate in June.

Lovable’s users include founders, individual designers, and salespeople building websites and e-commerce storefronts. The company also sells its vibe-coding tool to large enterprises, including Workday, Asana, and Nvidia.

Vibe coding, which allows users to build software simply by describing it, is by far the most popular and lucrative use case for AI. Other high-profile vibe-coding startups include Replit, valued at 
$9 billion
 in March, and Factory, a startup that helps enterprises develop AI agents, which 
raised $150 million
 at a $1.5 billion valuation in April. Meanwhile, Cursor, which offers vibe coding for developers, was acquired by SpaceX for 
$60 billion
 last month.

Topics

AI
, 
Lovable
, 
menlo ventures
, 
Startups
, 
vibe coding

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

Feds demand autonomous vehicle companies stop interfering with first responders

Kirsten Korosec

	52 minutes ago

Startups

With EU backing, QuantumDiamonds aims to speed up chip manufacturing

Anna Heim

	2 hours ago

Transportation

Autonomous drone delivery startup Manna plots major US expansion

Kirsten Korosec

	3 hours ago

Latest in Startups

In Brief

Lovable reportedly in talks to double its valuation to $13.2B

Marina Temkin

	10 seconds ago

Startups

With EU backing, QuantumDiamonds aims to speed up chip manufacturing

Anna Heim

	2 hours ago

Startups

Why this CEO thinks video games make better training data than the internet

Theresa Loconsolo

	5 hours ago

26 min
