Lucid Motors is 
laying off
 18% of its workforce, or around 1,500 employees, just four months after the EV maker cut 12% of its staff. The company said on Monday that it has also “eliminated the second shift” of EV production at its factory in Casa Grande, Arizona.

The cuts are part of a bid by Lucid’s 
new CEO, Silvio Napoli
, to “simplify the company, sharpen execution, and position Lucid to become more competitive over time,” the company said in a statement. The layoffs come as the electric vehicle market in the United States has cooled, with major automakers pulling electric models from their own product plans.

Marc Winterhoff, who served as interim CEO for more than a year until Napoli took the job, has also left the company. Winterhoff, Napoli, and the company had all previously said that Winterhoff would stay on as chief operating officer after stepping down as interim CEO. In a regulatory filing, Lucid Motors said it has eliminated the chief operating officer position entirely.

This round of cuts comes as Lucid Motors works toward releasing its first mass-market vehicle later this year, the Lucid Cosmos SUV. The lower-cost EV is supposed to start at under $50,000 and put Lucid Motors on the path to profitability.

Lucid Motors is also attempting to become a major player in the autonomous vehicle space, partnering with Uber and Nuro on a luxury robotaxi service slated to launch later this year in San Francisco. The company declined to comment on whether any of its programs are being mothballed.

The Saudi Arabia-owned, publicly traded company has seen more than a dozen top executives leave over the last two years. Longtime CEO Peter Rawlinson 
abruptly resigned in February 2025
; Chief Engineer Eric Bach was let go in late 2025, and filed 
a wrongful termination
 lawsuit shortly after (though that lawsuit has been stayed pending arbitration); and Emad Dlala, another longtime employee, 
resigned earlier this month
, just a few months after being promoted to a top role.

The latest cuts include full-time employees, contractors, and hourly production workers. The company reported having 9,000 employees globally at the end of 2025, prior to the 12% cut in February.

Lucid said the layoffs will help it align “production plans with anticipated demand,” and generate annualized savings of around $158 million. The company expects the restructuring to complete by the third quarter of this year. 

Lucid will pay approximately $32 million in severance. Winterhoff, the outgoing executive, will get severance, “certain security support,” and will be able to keep his company vehicle, according to the regulatory filing.

Topics

electric vehicles
, 
EVs
, 
Layoffs
, 
Lucid Motors
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz

Snap finally debuts its long-awaited AR glasses, Specs, and, oof, they aren’t cheap

Lucas Ropek

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

ChatGPT’s market share slips below 50% for first time

Ivan Mehta
