In Brief

Posted:

10:05 AM PDT · August 2, 2026

Image Credits:
TechCrunch

Anthony Ha

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

The Malaysian government has ordered the shutdown of a startup-centric community called the Network School, 
according to The Wall Street Journal
.

Billing itself
 as “a frontier community for techno-optimists,” the Network School reportedly grew out of entrepreneur and investor Balaji Srinivasan’s conviction that the United States is in irreversible decline; Srinivasan has said his goal is “to start a new country.”

So the Network School is supposed to represent the first step in a seven-stage plan (outlined in 
Srinivasan’s book “The Network State”
) for building a new society. Based in an abandoned Malaysian hotel, the WSJ described the program as “part tech incubator, part self-improvement retreat.” Attendees, however, complained about moldy rooms, as well as a dearth of women and nightlife. 

After receiving questions from the WSJ, Srinivasan – who apparently renounced his American citizenship in 2023 — published 
a lengthy post on X
 declaring himself “a proud Singaporean” and complaining that the WSJ was working on a “hit piece” that would make him look like “an odd duck […] as opposed to an early adopter.”

And although the current Malaysian campus will reportedly need to shut down due to licensing issues, Srinivasan 
recently announced
 a new agreement for a campus in Kazakhstan.

Topics

Government & Policy
, 
TC

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

TechCrunch Mobility: Two roads diverged — for robotaxis

Kirsten Korosec

	1 hour ago

Apps

These App Store hidden gems prove there’s still room for great software in the AI era

Sarah Perez

	2 hours ago

Venture

Inside the London hacker house taking a stand against founder burnout

Dominic-Madori Davis

	20 hours ago

Latest in Government & Policy

In Brief

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

	12 seconds ago

In Brief

Judge denies xAI’s request to block Minnesota ban on ‘nudify’ apps

Anthony Ha

	21 hours ago

In Brief

Judge says Trump admin still lacks evidence for Anthropic ‘supply-chain risk’ label

Rebecca Bellan

	3 days ago
