In Brief

Posted:

12:19 PM PDT · June 23, 2026

Image Credits:
David Paul Morris/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Lucas Ropek

Mark Zuckerberg wants Meta to launch its own prediction market

Mark Zuckerberg is betting that prediction markets are the future. 

The New York Times 
reports
 that Zuck wants Meta to have its own Polymarket-like smartphone app and has given the go-ahead to develop one, internally calling it “Arena.” The app would be independent of Meta’s other social media offerings, although sources told the paper that those social sites could direct users to engagement with the app.

Sources said the current concept for Arena can be described as “experimental but a top priority,” and it weirdly wouldn’t involve money. Instead, it would essentially be a video game where users would earn points for betting correctly on particular topics. The sources added that money could be added later.

Over the past year, prediction markets have fueled big profits and controversy. As of April, trading volume on platforms such as Polymarket and Kalshi had 
reached
 tens of billions of dollars. Other social media sites — like X (which 
forged a partnership
 with Polymarket last summer) — have sought to capitalize on the industry.

Legal cases have also spiked. A notable case involves a former high-ranking special forces soldier who was accused of 
using insider knowledge
 to profit from the operation to capture Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro. George Santos is also 
currently under investigation
 over alleged Kalshi trades.

States have also begun to 
sue prediction markets
 over what they allege are violations of gambling laws. To complicate things further, the current administration, which is 
decidedly pro-prediction market
, 
has sued states
 for having sued prediction markets.

Topics

Fintech
, 
In Brief
, 
Kalshi
, 
Mark Zuckerberg
, 
Meta
, 
Polymarket
, 
prediction markets

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Anthropic’s Claude Tag is learning your company, one Slack message at a time

Rebecca Bellan

	3 hours ago

Security

Password manager maker LastPass says hackers stole customer support case data during Klue breach

Zack Whittaker

	4 hours ago

Hardware

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis

	5 hours ago

Latest in Fintech

In Brief

Mark Zuckerberg wants Meta to launch its own prediction market

Lucas Ropek

	21 minutes ago

TechCrunch Founder Summit 2026

4 days left to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit 2026

TechCrunch Events

	6 hours ago

AI

Anthropic’s latest feud with the Trump admin may actually help it, sales data suggests

Julie Bort

	Jun 16, 2026
