In Brief

Posted:

12:55 PM PDT · August 20, 2026

Image Credits:
John Nacion / Contributor / Getty Images

Dominic-Madori Davis

Mark buys a castle

Mark Zuckerberg just bought a cozy abode close to Meta’s international headquarters in Ireland. By cozy abode, 
we mean a castle
. Zuck bought the 19th-century Strancally Castle and its 440-acre grounds, an estate estimated to have cost him anywhere from $23 million to $35 million.

“Mark and his family are excited to continue caring for this historic home and look forward to spending time in Ireland, where Meta maintains its international headquarters,” a spokesperson told the press about the purchase.

We’ve reached out to Meta for further comment.  

The home is stunning: It
 sits on a river, surrounded by greenery, and the Irish Times 
reported in 2001
 that it has at least 11 bedrooms, four tower suites, a library,
 a dining room, and a drawing room. Zuck bought the castle from a financier who’d lived there with his family for 25 years. 

Meta’s international headquarters is in Dublin, where the company opened a 
31,000-square-foot data center
 in 2017, just 20 minutes from the city. Waterford, where Zuck’s new castle is, is about a two-hour drive from Dublin.

This isn’t Zuck’s first big real estate purchase this year. He and his wife also reportedly 
splashed out $170 million
 for a home in the same exclusive Miami neighborhood as Jeff Bezos, joining a slew of tech billionaires leaving California as the state seeks to implement a form of wealth tax. 

Topics

In Brief
, 
Mark Zuckerberg
, 
Meta
, 
Real estate

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Gaming

Meta brings Pocket, an app that lets you vibe-code and share games, to US users

Sarah Perez

	4 hours ago

Latest in Real estate

In Brief

Mark buys a castle

Dominic-Madori Davis

	20 minutes ago

Climate

Sound-powered fire protection startup gets $15M to snuff out fires before they turn catastrophic

Tim De Chant

	3 days ago

Real estate

San Francisco’s housing market has lost its mind

Connie Loizos

	May 8, 2026
