Massachusetts lawmakers have voted to pass privacy protections that grant the state’s residents new rights over accessing and deleting their data held by big tech giants. The bill also bans companies from selling their users’ precise location data.

Lawmakers in the Massachusetts House passed the state’s 
Consumer Data Privacy Act
 in a unanimous 146-0 vote on Thursday, months after all of the Senate’s 40 lawmakers voted in favor of advancing its own bill 
in September
. Now, the bills will be combined in the Senate, and sent to the state governor’s office, where it is expected to be signed into law. It’s not immediately clear when that will happen.

The move makes Massachusetts the latest U.S. state to push for stronger consumer privacy rights after years of documented abuses by the wider technology, advertising, and social media industries. While the United States does not have a nationwide privacy law, unlike many of the world’s major democracies, U.S. states have filled the void of legislation by bringing their own patchwork of privacy rules that apply to their states.

The bill, if passed into law, will apply to companies that handle or process the personal data of more than 100,000 consumers. It will largely affect medium-sized startups as well as Silicon Valley technology titans.

The law would block the sharing or sale of sensitive information without a user’s explicit consent. This data includes biometrics (such as health data, genetic information, and fingerprints), their precise geolocation data, and other markers about their religion, immigration status, and sexual orientation.

The collection and sale of people’s location data has been a major flashpoint in privacy debates for years. Data brokers have for years relied on app developers selling their users’ location data to repackage and sell it to anyone who can pay, including stalkers, governments, and militaries. In many cases, the government says 
it does not need a warrant
 to purchase data that’s commercially available on the open marketplace. 

The Biden administration came close to banning the sale of Americans’ sensitive data at the federal level, but the Trump government has since 
scrapped the change
. 

By applying the location data ban to both residents and visitors, the Massachusetts law will effectively blanket-ban the sale of location data across the state. The bill is 
anticipated to have a broad effect on startups
 that collect, share, and sell location data in Massachusetts, as well as advertising companies that use location data to target people with ads.

According to local media 
WBUR
 and Massachusetts newspaper 
Lynn Journal
, state lawmakers worked across party lines under the belief that privacy is a fundamental right to Massachusetts state residents.

The bill was generally praised by privacy groups and advocates.

Evan Greer, director of the Fight for the Future advocacy group, said the Massachusetts bill “took a major step toward cracking down on Big Tech’s surveillance abuses,” while the ACLU praised the landmark bill as positioning the state as a “leader in protecting personal privacy and curbing digital surveillance.”

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
location data
, 
Massachusetts
, 
Privacy
, 
privacy
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
