Mastodon
, the 
open, decentralized alternative
 to Big Tech apps like X and Threads, is betting that email could help solve the open social web’s biggest problem: audience growth.

With the software’s latest release, the social networking platform is introducing email newsletters, a feature that will allow writers to send their posts directly to subscribers’ inboxes, even if those subscribers don’t have or want a Mastodon account.

The feature could allow Mastodon to evolve beyond being just another X alternative, and provides a way for creators to build portable audiences on the decentralized web, reducing their dependence on other social platforms. By tying the functionality to email, a communication system that’s stood the test of time, Mastodon may appeal to those who want to support creators outside of Big Tech ecosystems without requiring them to sign up for a new social network.

The feature is arriving as 
part of Mastodon 4.6
, a broader update that introduced other changes, like refreshed user profiles and support for “Collections” — Mastodon’s take on the user-generated suggested follow lists 
popularized elsewhere on the social web
 as “Starter Packs.”

Image Credits:
Mastodon

Instead, users can simply enter their email address to start getting updates from the creator. Mastodon’s default post character limit is 500 characters. However, individual server administrators can modify this limit, which means some servers could be set up specifically for the distribution of longer posts.

With newsletters, the company sees the potential for media organizations to join Mastodon, and for independent journalists and bloggers who want to allow anonymous visitors to subscribe to their accounts. The anonymity these subscriptions provide could also encourage sign-ups among those who don’t like to be tracked by newsletter platforms for privacy reasons.

Because Mastodon accounts are portable, creators could still 
take their audience with them
 if they ever wanted to move to a new server.

The company explains in a 
blog post
 that the new feature, for now, is intended more for its institutional users, referencing its 
recent move
 to offer hosting and moderation services to organizations and entities that want to run their own servers.

If adopted, email support could allow Mastodon to grow its footprint beyond the 
735,000 monthly active users
 it sees today, and 
over a million active accounts
 on the wider open social web, also known as the fediverse.

There are some caveats to using newsletters on Mastodon, however. Creators who want to take advantage of the feature will need to have an assigned role on the server with the correct permissions, which means either setting up your own server, opting for one hosted by Mastodon, or having a chat with your existing server operator. 

The company said it chose not to make newsletters a default feature because sending emails can “significantly rack up the costs of operating a Mastodon server.” 

Topics

Apps
, 
Mastodon
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
newsletters
, 
open social web
, 
Social

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
