A cyberattack on U.S. medical device maker Boston Scientific is causing an ongoing “global disruption” to its operations, according to a federal regulatory filing on Wednesday. This is the latest health tech giant to face a cyberattack in recent weeks.

The Massachusetts-based company, which makes medically implanted devices like pacemakers and defibrillators, confirmed in 
a filing
 with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission that on Tuesday it began experiencing “disruptions and limitations of access” to its IT systems and business applications critical for its operations.

Boston Scientific said the cyberattack has affected its ability to ship and process orders, but has not said whether the disruption extends to customers with medical devices and implants.

When asked by TechCrunch, Boston Scientific spokesperson Chanel Hastings shared the company’s 
public statement
 but would not comment on whether patients are affected by the cyberattack, say what steps patients should take, or answer questions about the nature of the incident.

Boston Scientific treats around 48 million patients a year, according to 
its website
.

The company’s public statement said that its investigation is ongoing and that a timeline for its restoring its systems is not yet known.

It’s not clear what caused the cyberattack at Boston Scientific. 
Local media
 in Ireland reported that 
thousands of st
a
ff
 across Boston Scientific’s campus in Cork were sent home on Tuesday after network communications were cut across the company.

Boston Scientific is the latest health technology company to have been hacked this year, including medical device makers Abbott Laboratories and Medtronic. Earlier this year, Iranian-backed hackers were blamed for a cyberattack on U.S. medical device maker Stryker, which allowed the hackers to 
remotely wipe tens of thousands of employee devices across its Windows network
 by abusing a centralized device management portal provided by Microsoft.

According to public internet records, Boston Scientific relies largely on Microsoft and Amazon Web Services for its corporate infrastructure.

Do you know more about Boston Scientific’s cyberattack? Do you work at Boston Scientific or have you received communications from the company or the hackers? Contact this reporter via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal.

Topics

Biotech & Health
, 
cyberattacks
, 
cybersecurity
, 
medical device
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
