The applications are in. The TechCrunch Startup Battlefield team made their decisions. Eight Australian startups have earned their spot on the 
Startup Battlefield stage
 at Stripe Tour Sydney on August 19 — and they’re ready to pitch for $15,000 in Stripe fee credits, investor attention, and a spot in Startup Battlefield 200 at TechCrunch Disrupt in San Francisco.

They represent the future of Australian tech — from enterprise tech to health and wellness tech to entertainment and media. Here’s who they are.

The eight finalists

Aigentsphere

Independent AI management and governance platform 
Aigentsphere
 helps enterprises scale AI safely and well, giving leaders visibility, control, and accountability over their entire AI agent workforce.

Apate.ai

Apate
 help banks, telcos, and governments dismantle scam operations by engaging scammers in live conversation and turning it into real-time intelligence.

Callease Ai

Callease Ai
 is the operating system for physical security control rooms, starting with voice AI that automates welfare, escalation, patrol, and many more — the entire calling engine.

Choosey App

Choosey App
 helps businesses hire instantly and workers get paid instantly through agentic AI-powered matching, workforce management, and same-day pay.

Doomers AI

Doomers AI
 helps AI and tech companies make product launches trend on X by orchestrating a vetted creator network that reaches the buyers who block ads.

equ

Startup 
equ
 helps health and wellness businesses deliver personalized nutrition at scale by embedding equ’s AI engine, built on 10 years of data and 100,000+ users, into their product.

LeadStory

LeadStory
 is the video intelligence layer powering the next generation of screens, surfacing exact video moments from sports, news, and finance clips to answer natural language queries.

Preve

Preve
 helps physical therapy clinics improve patient retention and clinical outcomes by automating the treatment plan creation and adherence.

Three will win prizes. One will go to San Francisco. All eight will pitch in front of investors, press, and the Australian tech community. If you want to see the future of Australian startups unfold, 
register for Stripe Tour Sydney on August 19 →

The stage is set. The judges are ready. Let the pitching begin.

Hosted and MC’d by Isabelle Johannessen, Director of Startup Battlefield.

Topics

Startups
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Isabelle Johannessen	

Head of the Startup Battlefield Program

Isabelle leads Startup Battlefield, TechCrunch’s iconic launchpad and competition for the world’s most promising early-stage startups.

You can contact or verify outreach from Isabelle by emailing 
isabelle.johannessen@techcrunch.com
.

She scouts top founders across 99+ countries and prepares them to pitch on the Disrupt stage in front of tier-one investors and global media. Before TechCrunch, she designed and led international startup acceleration programs across Japan, Korea, Italy, and Spain—connecting global founders with VCs and helping them successfully enter the U.S. market. With a Master’s in Entrepreneurship & Disruptive Innovation—and a past life as a professional singer—she brings a blend of strategic rigor and stage presence to help founders craft compelling stories and stand out in crowded markets.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
