Mesh
, the relationship manager and personal CRM 
acquired by WordPress.com’s parent company, Automattic
, last year, is now available to users on Android devices. The software allows users to privately visualize and keep track of the people in their personal and professional networks, add notes to people’s contact information, and be reminded when to reach out.

On 
Android
, the company customized Mesh’s app to work with key platform features, like split-screen and pop-up views. This allows users to access Mesh while working in other apps, like messages or email. It also supports keyboard shortcuts for foldables and tablets, in-app search, home screen widgets (with Material You colors that match your Android’s wallpaper), and real-time sync across devices.

Image Credits:
Mesh

The company’s broader plans for Mesh could eventually see it tied more closely to Automattic’s all-in-one messaging app, 
Beeper
, which offers a way to connect with people across platforms, including through WhatsApp, Instagram, Signal, Messenger, X, LinkedIn, Slack, Discord, Google Messages, and more.

Already, Mesh and Beeper interoperate to some extent, as Mesh users can draft a text to someone in Beeper or click deep links in the app to visit a Mesh user’s profile.  In time, the company wants to add additional AI features that will make users of both products more productive in terms of managing their personal relationships.

“We’re thinking a lot about how can AI help you be a better friend and have better work and personal relationships?,” Mesh co-founder Zachary Hamed told TechCrunch in an interview earlier this spring. “We have users who have ten-, twenty-, or fifty-thousand connections across multiple social media apps, across their work products. It’s an impossible task to think and be conscientious with you, with each of those people, by yourself,” he noted. 

Image Credits:
Mesh

Today, Mesh’s Nexus AI is in early access, offering a way to use AI to navigate your network. That means users can ask questions like who they know at a particular company or who lives in a certain city, or who has expertise in a particular topic. The company is also experimenting with using AI technology to provide a voice-based, hands-free experience and an improved business card scanning feature.

Importantly, personal information stored in Mesh isn’t shared or used for ad targeting, the company says, as the product is supported by 
subscriptions
. (It’s free for up to 1,000 contacts, then has higher tiers for unlimited contacts and other features.)

In time, Mesh may consider a bundled subscription with Beeper or other Automattic products, but has nothing to announce on that front at this time. 

Currently, the majority of Mesh’s customers, or around 70%, are using the app for some type of business purpose. Mesh co-founder Matthew Achariam says Mesh’s sweet spot is executives running bigger teams or those who have a tight network to stay in touch with. However, the company still thinks about the consumer use case, he notes.

“The beauty of [serving business users] is that the same things they’re using apply to every individual consumer. So every feature that we think about has to apply to both,” he says.

Mesh (
formerly Clay
) for Android will roll out 
to Google Play
 for phones, tablets, and foldables as a free download with in-app purchases.

Topics

AI
, 
android apps
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Automattic
, 
mesh

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
