Over the past year, Meta has funded the construction of at least a dozen natural gas power plants, including 
one project
 that alone will burn enough natural gas to generate as much electricity as the entire state of South Dakota uses.

Now Meta is no longer part of the 
RE100
, a corporate renewable energy initiative, after a decade of membership, the company confirmed to TechCrunch today. The breakup was mutual, according to a Meta spokesperson.

The exit caps months of Meta expanding its bet on fossil fuels to power its AI data centers and begs the obvious question: What does “clean energy” actually mean to a company that keeps building gas plants while still calling itself renewable?

RE100 is a project of the Climate Group, a U.K.-headquartered nonprofit co-founded by former prime minister Tony Blair. The initiative provides policy and technical support to corporations seeking to transition to 100% renewable energy. Meta competitors Apple, Google, and Microsoft remain among the group’s 444 members. Recharge News was first to 
report
 Meta’s departure.

While Meta wouldn’t comment on the reasons behind the departure —and the Climate Group did not reply to TechCrunch’s inquiry — the nonprofit recently 
updated its guidance
 for companies, enforcing more rigorous reporting on progress toward renewable energy goals. 
Previously
, Meta told RE100 that it would “run its entire operations on renewable electricity by 2020.”

Like many tech companies, Meta’s embrace of AI has pushed it to secure large amounts of power for its data centers, and while the company continues to 
procure renewable energy
, it has embraced natural gas like few others.

Meta’s toe in the water was a 200-megawatt behind-the-meter gas power plant 
in Ohio
, announced in June of last year, that will power one of its data centers. 

Two months later, Meta said it would build 
three large natural gas power plants
 in Louisiana to supply electricity to its Hyperion data center. Then in April, the company announced that it would fund 
seven more
 natural gas power plants for the same project. Combined, the 10 power plants will generate 7.5 gigawatts, enough electricity to power South Dakota and then some.

Meta, through a spokesperson, told TechCrunch that it remained committed to matching its data center electricity usage “with 100% clean and renewable energy.”

That’s a lot to promise. While natural gas burns more cleanly than coal, it still produces significant amounts of pollution. A single 1-gigawatt data center running 24/7, powered exclusively by natural gas, will release 438 metric tons of nitrogen oxides, 149 metric tons of fine particulate matter, 61 metric tons of sulfur oxides, and 298 metric tons of carbon monoxide. Those pollutants contribute to a 
range of diseases
, including asthma, cancer, cardiovascular disease, and dementia, among many others.

Meta can still claim to be 100% renewable by purchasing environmental attribute certificates. These allow companies to invest in a solar farm in Arizona, for example, while building a data center in Ohio. As long as the solar farm makes enough energy in one year to offset the data center’s use, Meta counts that as 100% renewable.

Most companies have tackled their renewable power goals using annual matching, but some, including Microsoft, are striving to match their electricity use 
on an hourly basis
. This more stringent approach would bring power production more in line with how data centers use electricity. It also encourages companies to invest in projects that pair renewables with batteries, 
like Google did
 earlier this year in Minnesota, rather than polluting ones like Meta’s Hyperion power plants.

Meta isn’t alone in pursuing natural gas — both 
Google
 and 
Microsoft
 have recently invested in large fossil fuel projects — but it has placed the biggest bet. Withdrawal or removal from a voluntary industry group isn’t always big news, but the timing, amid Meta’s fossil-fuel buildout, makes the change hard to ignore.

Topics

Climate
, 
Meta
, 
natural gas

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI says Hugging Face was breached by its pre-release models

Russell Brandom

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik
