Meta 
has unveiled
 its new AI image generator, Muse Image, which was produced by Meta Superintelligence Labs, the company’s dedicated AI unit.

The new feature, which was internally code-named Mango, 
will be available
 for free through the Meta AI app, as well as in Instagram Stories and WhatsApp.

What exactly can you do with Muse? It sounds like the use-cases are similar to most other AI image generators — you’ll be able to create a whole lot of goofy and cartoonish images, for instance.

If you’re suffering from a dearth of imagination and can’t come up with any original prompts on your own, Meta says that Muse comes with “presets” — prefabricated image prompts — to “spark ideas.”

An accompanying video shows other potential uses. One is to use Muse to 
create custom ads
 (AI has notably crept into advertising over the past year) or to play around with interior decoration ideas (in the video, a user leverages Muse to see what a used couch might look like in their garage). This last function is designed to be integrated with Facebook Marketplace, Meta’s popular Craigslist-like locus of used furniture and accessories.

The model also features prompt-based image editing, which can be used to create images to share across Meta’s various apps and platforms.

“Ask it to mock up an image of you in front of a historical landmark, cleanly erase a photobomber from the background of a shot, or write a custom prompt to build a functional QR code,” the company offers.

At the same time, Meta is 
launching a host of new AI effects
 for Instagram Stories which are supported by Muse. Those effects include various customizable filters that can be used to modify existing photos.

Meta says that the use of the new AI model is free for “everyday creation” although, past a certain limit, users will need to use Meta’s subscription plans.

The company also said that Muse Video — presumably an AI video generator — is “already in development.” TechCrunch reached out to Meta for more information.

Meta has released a number of AI apps and services over the past year, including an assistant 
called Creator
, and 
Pocket
, an app that can be used to vibe code video games. The company has been accused of having a 
nebulous AI strategy
, although it’s still
 on track to spend a whole lot
 on AI infrastructure this year as it continues to build out its services.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Meta
, 
Meta Superintelligence
, 
Muse Image

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

SpaceX has an AI device prototype, and it sure sounds phone-ish

Rebecca Bellan
