Meta’s 
newest advertisement
 begins with a black-and-white shot of an eye, showing us what someone sees as they read countless panicked headlines about how AI is going to take our jobs, isolate us, and spark a global crisis.

“Some people will have you believe AI is going to make us feel less connected. That it’s going to leave us behind,” a voiceover says. “We couldn’t disagree more.”

Suddenly, the video shifts to color, and shows a cycle of different people opening their eyes and smiling. Then, we see a couple dancing on a rooftop, pointing at a rainbow; a group of teens swimming in a lake; a child frolicking in a field; friends embracing after time apart.

“Call us optimists. Call us dreamers. Call us whatever the hell you want. But we’re betting on people, and we like those odds,” the voiceover says. “The future is for everyone.”

That’s a nice sentiment — pretty convenient for a company betting hundreds of billions of dollars that AI will revolutionize humanity. But the strangest part of the advertisement is not that we’re watching these happy moments play out via Instagram posts. It’s that the soundtrack to the ad is the David Bowie song “Five Years.”

If you are not familiar with this song, I urge you to 
give it a listen
, 
read the lyrics
, and think about what it is trying to say. It seems clear to me, but I studied poetry in college, so as a control for this experiment, I asked my brother — a blockchain analyst who loves Claude Code and does not read for fun — if he could tell me what the song is about.

“I thought climate change at first, then zombie apocalypse, then an asteroid hitting the earth,” he told me. He is correct. It is a song about the human race panicking after learning they will die in a mass extinction event in five years.

Image Credits:
Texts from my brother, a consenting participant in this literary experiment

If you’re not familiar with Bowie’s music, this track might sound happy and inspiring, matching the ad’s upbeat tone. The part of the song that is used for the advertisement was probably chosen because it uses the word “people” over and over again, and without the context of the song, it’s not clear what it’s about.

But if we look at the lines directly preceding this section:

News had just come over
We had five years left to cry in
News guy wept and told us
Earth was really dying
Cried so much his face was wet
Then I knew he was not lying

We “had five years left to cry in” and the “earth was really dying.” It’s pretty bleak.

It is not reassuring to convince people that AI is going to make the world better while playing a song about the end of the world, and yet, this contradictory musical choice seems to have sailed right past everyone at Meta, including CEO Mark Zuckerberg.

“Meta has always believed in giving people the power to share, connect, and shape your world in the ways you want,” he 
wrote
 alongside the video. “As we enter this next wave with AI, we continue to believe the future is for everyone. We’re focused on giving every person the tools to reach your full potential and making sure the benefits of technology are distributed to everyone.”

Then again, tech leaders are not known for their literary analysis skills. Meta’s Oculus used to give new hires copies of the science fiction novel “
Ready Player One
,” which is set in a dystopia in which a tech company making virtual reality products becomes overly powerful and evil. OpenAI CEO Sam Altman has 
directly cited
 inspiration from the movie “Her,” which warns us about what can go wrong when we 
use AI for emotional support
. Palantir, a company that builds AI surveillance systems for the government, is named after Palantir, a seeing stone from the “Lord of the Rings” franchise that the Dark Lord uses to spy on his enemies. Elon Musk is 
currently throwing a fit
 about the “accuracy” of Christopher Nolan’s blockbuster adaptation of “The Odyssey,” a story with such realistic elements as sea monsters, magic, and divine intervention. These guys make a great argument for the value of studying the humanities.

Sci-Fi Author: In my book I invented the Torment Nexus as a cautionary tale
Tech Company: At long last, we have created the Torment Nexus from classic sci-fi novel Don't Create The Torment Nexus
— Alex Blechman (@AlexBlechman) 
November 8, 2021

Meta isn’t alone in its recent promotional foibles. Instead of racing to build AGI, the top AI companies seem to be fighting over who can make the creepiest advertisement. A few weeks ago, Anthropic released an eerie video of its own. As my colleague Lucas Ropek 
described
 it:

The ad begins with a video of a burning house (not exactly a heartwarming start) before pivoting to a series of still images. These images include a crowd of people being surveilled by facial recognition, a homeless person sleeping on the street, rows upon rows of tombstones in a cemetery, and what appears to be a group of laborers toiling in a mine where (presumably) raw materials for smartphones are being dug up.

Meanwhile, a voice-over track features different people asking questions like “Can AI be trusted?” and “Who’s gonna hit the brakes if we need to?”

Anthropic is trying to convince us that it understands the risks AI poses to society, and therefore, this is the company that people can trust to develop AI responsibly. The message it actually conveys feels closer to the mood of Bowie’s “Five Years.”

i thought this was satire, kept looking for the handle to be spelled c1audeai or something 
https://t.co/4AVBA93Z27
— Sam Altman (@sama) 
July 14, 2026

OpenAI CEO Sam Altman 
responded
 to the Anthropic ad, “I thought this was satire, kept looking for the handle to be spelled c1audeai or something.”

As these companies spar to control the public perception of AI, their efforts don’t seem to be making much progress. A recent 
Pew survey
 found that only 16% of Americans think that AI’s impact on society over the next twenty years will be positive, and 40% believe it will have a negative impact. Better luck next time, Meta.

Topics

AI
, 
Meta

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI says Hugging Face was breached by its pre-release models

Russell Brandom

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik
