Meta 
announced
 on Thursday that it’s introducing a new AI creator assistant on Facebook that will give creators personalized recommendations based on their content style, performance, community, and goals. 

Creators often have to parse through charts and dashboards to understand their performance, but with the new AI assistant, they can get quick answers to questions like “When should I post?” and “What are people saying in my comments?” 

Since the AI assistant is conversational, they can ask follow-up questions and dig deeper on a topic, like how their audience has shifted over time. The answers they receive will be based on their own presence and what they can do differently to improve performance. 

Beyond performance, the AI assistant can help brainstorm ideas for new content by drawing on what’s trending. For example, it may suggest using trending audio or creating content around cultural moments.

Image Credits:
Meta

The new assistant is rolling out to creators in the U.S., Canada, and India. Meta plans to add new capabilities and bring the assistant to more countries in the future.

By giving creators access to an AI assistant, Meta is looking to keep creators active on Facebook as it competes for their attention against rivals like TikTok and YouTube. Additionally, by offering creators content ideas, Facebook is encouraging more frequent posting, which could in turn boost user engagement.

In-app access to an AI assistant also gets rid of the need for creators to turn to third-party tools like ChatGPT when brainstorming and understanding performance, keeping them within Meta’s ecosystem.

Meta also announced that it’s introducing new languages for AI translations on Facebook, including Arabic, Bahasa Indonesian, French, Thai, and Vietnamese. With 
AI-translated Reels
, a creator’s tone and sound are preserved and automatically translated into another language. Launched last year, the idea behind the feature is to allow creators to reach more audiences by breaking down language barriers.

Creators also have the option to use a lip-sync feature to align the translation with their lip movements, which makes it seem more natural. 

Meta says over half a billion users on Facebook are now watching AI-translated videos weekly. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Apps
, 
Creators
, 
Meta
, 
Social

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
