Meta is using AI to quickly launch apps, and more are on the way. During this week’s second-quarter earnings call, Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg said the social giant has new apps in the works, following a recent spate of other launches that included an 
app for Marketplace sellers
, 
one for Facebook Groups
, a vibe-coded 
gaming app
, a new
photos app from Instagram
, and an 
experiment
 involving AI bedtime stories.

Meta has spent years trying and failing to produce new, standalone social apps to complement its core platforms. Now, the company says that large language models (LLMs) make it possible to ship software faster, allowing it to test new ideas at a quicker pace.

“I’m…excited about how AI is helping our teams speed up product development,” Zuckerberg told investors on Wednesday’s call. “Earlier this year, we shipped Instagram Instants. We also just launched Forum, a standalone Groups app, and Seller, a standalone Marketplace app. I expect it to become a lot easier to ship new apps. So we are planning to build out more ideas and use our recommendation systems to scale them,” he said.

“AI is improving our core business; it’s making our apps more relevant and delivering better results for businesses. We’re starting to deliver more novel products, and we’ll have a lot more there soon as well,” Zuckerberg said.

Meta has been down this road before. In its earlier days, Meta (then known as Facebook) ran an internal incubator called Creative Labs, which aimed to test new social concepts. 

That effort produced a handful of launches:  the photo-sharing app 
Slingshot
, an anonymous chat app 
Rooms,
 a Flipboard competitor called 
Paper
, the Moments photo-sharing app, and a collaborative video app known as Riff. Those experiments 
came to an end in 2015
, and the apps were eventually all shuttered, as the company struggled to find an audience for its efforts.

In the early 2020s, Meta tried again, this time with an internal R&D group, 
NPE Team
, which tested apps that included the chat app Bump, social music app Aux, 
task app Move
, dating app 
Spark
, calling app 
CatchUp
, 
zine maker E.gg,
 events app 
Venue
, creator Q&A app 
Hotline
, Cameo competitor 
Super
, couples app 
Tuned
, music app 
BARS
, and others.

Again, none became a breakout success, and the apps were shut down.

Now Meta can point to at least one example of how AI is helping new apps scale. It has finally delivered a modest hit with Threads, 
which now has 500 million monthly active users
. Zuckerberg likes to say Threads will one day become the company’s next billion-user app.

With Threads, Meta learned to 
heavily lean on its existing user base
 to help initially seed the app with people, then continued to heavily promote it across its existing platforms, including Facebook and Instagram. But LLMs are another key factor in Threads’ growth, as the company said it sees “significant gains” from its AI-powered content recommendations.

“We are finding that LLMs are increasingly capable of delivering ranking and recommendations gains,” Meta’s CFO Susan Li told investors on the call. “First, they make our existing systems smarter by understanding what the content is actually about and generating better training data. Second, LLM-powered agents are also helping with engineering development by evaluating content quality, detecting trends, and testing ranking changes.”

Li added that earlier this year, Meta reached a milestone: every Reel and Feed post on Instagram is now automatically processed through an LLM and analyzed for topic and tone, which helps improve recommendations.

The company is also developing LLM-native recommendation systems, which could help it to better scale new apps as they arrive.

Investors didn’t follow up with company executives to ask more questions about the new apps Meta has in the works, as they were more concerned with AI spending and Meta’s growing enterprise ambitions. However, Zuckerberg suggested that people won’t have long to wait to see what’s next, saying the “new consumer products” were “releasing soon.”  

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Meta
, 
Social
, 
social media

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
