Meta publicly launched a new version of Muse Spark on Thursday, a multimodal AI model designed for agentic coding that aims to compete with similar products offered by OpenAI and Anthropic.

Spark 1.1, the first version of which 
was announced in April
, can engage in multistep reasoning and handle complex processes, manage digital workflows, and deploy new features in enterprise systems, the company says.

Meta is a bit behind its competitors here; Anthropic and OpenAI have 
offered similar models
 for quite some time. But that doesn’t mean Meta’s entry into the market isn’t a threat.

An ongoing source of competitiveness within the AI industry remains the cost of usage, and Meta appears to be offering a competitive rate. Reuters 
reports that
 the company will charge $1.25 per million input tokens and $4.25 per million output tokens. That puts it in line with (albeit slightly above) Anthropic’s Claude Haiku 4.5 and OpenAI’s GPT-5.6 Luna.

Meta’s pitch to users is Spark’s ability to handle large agentic workloads, fix bugs, and help with large code migrations — the kind of automation that enterprises are increasingly turning to AI companies to provide. 

“Muse Spark 1.1 delivers exceptional performance in personal agentic tasks that require planning and orchestration across a range of external apps and services,” the company 
wrote in a blog post
.

Meta has released a handful of foundation AI models over the past few years. The Muse Spark release was apparently important enough to compel CEO Mark Zuckerberg 
to post
 on X for the first time in three years. Zuckerberg’s last post was in July 2023, around the time the platform rebranded 
from Twitter to X
.

In his post, Zuckerberg called Spark “a strong agentic and coding model at a very low price,” noting that the model was “strongest at agentic performance, tool use, and computer use.” 

Zuckerberg also noted that there was “more to come soon” — implying that the company plans to release additional models.

It’s been a big week for AI announcements — particularly for Meta, which also 
unveiled a new AI image-generation model
 on Tuesday, dubbed Muse Image. Other releases this week have included 
a ne
w
 version of Grok
 from SpaceXAI and a 
new family of models
 from OpenAI, GPT-5.6, that also dropped Thursday. Suffice it to say that the competition within the AI industry is as healthy as ever, and companies that wish to stand out from their peers have their work cut out for them.

Topics

AI
, 
Anthropic
, 
Mark Zuckerberg
, 
Meta
, 
muse spark
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant
