Meta on Tuesday said it’s launching a new line of smart glasses, dubbed 
Meta Glasses
, starting at $299. These glasses are being made in partnership with EssilorLuxottica, but unlike the tech giant’s other smart glasses, they don’t carry Ray-Ban or Oakley branding.

The Meta Glasses are available in several countries starting today in a variety of color and lens combinations.

Meta has been continuing its push into wearables as competition in the space heats up. It’s worth noting that Meta and EssilorLuxottica are the largest players in the space, with an estimated market share of more than 80%, according to data from 
Counterpoint Research
.

Image Credits:
Meta

The Meta Glasses don’t have a screen, but they come with a camera and personal speakers. There’s a dedicated button that by default triggers the Meta AI assistant, or you can customize the button to launch a specific feature.

Meta claims these new glasses have over eight hours of battery life, and the on-the-go charging case provides up to 40 hours of additional usage.

The first pair of the new glasses, called the “Meta Adventurer,” features a rectangular shape, and is available in standard and large sizes. The “Meta Fury” frame is boxier, resembling popular styles of men’s glasses. The most notable are “Meta Glasses by Kylie,” which feature a slim oval frame designed in collaboration with American model Kylie Jenner.

Image Credits:
Meta

Meta says the Meta AI assistant on these new glasses can answer questions about everything from sports scores to local restaurant picks, can understand what you’re seeing, and can help manage your daily life.

The company said these display-less glasses will soon support the “Pedestrian navigation” feature, which provides turn-by-turn directions for walking around. Meta’s also adding support for 14 new languages for its live translation feature, including Japanese, Chinese (Mandarin), Hindi, and Korean.

Meta’s new smart glass range comes a week after 
Snap unveiled Specs
, its long-awaited consumer smart glasses, at a hefty $2,195 price tag.

Topics

Gadgets
, 
Hardware
, 
Meta
, 
meta glasses
, 
SMART Glasses
, 
wearables

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The CEO of Allbirds’ new AI biz has a plan. Now she needs a “brand-new team”

Tim Fernholz

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz
