Meta’s attempt to pioneer a metaverse and make VR cool 
totally flopped
, except for one shining diamond in the rough: 
Supernatural
, a VR fitness game that made working out feel fun and accessible. Now, users can rejoice that Supernatural isn’t shutting down after all.

Meta went through the hassle of 
fighting an eight-month antitrust battle
 so that it could acquire Within, the game studio that made Supernatural, in 2023. The deal was reportedly worth around 
$400 million
, plus however much it costs to fight and win an FTC lawsuit. Yet after all that effort, Meta 
laid off
 much of its VR team and announced that it would stop adding new content just a few years later.

But Meta had a rare moment of mercy and listened to the Supernatural users who 
protested
 the app’s sad fate. About five months later, Meta is now letting the Supernatural team spin off into a 
new independent company
 called Supernatural Health, which will take over the app later this year.

“Supernatural is being reborn. Same coaches, same DNA, same obsession with making fitness feel like the best part of your day — now under a new, independent company we’re starting from the ground up,” Supernatural Health says on its 
website
.

Who’s behind Supernatural Health? The original founders, of course.

It’s a happy ending, yet it’s maddening. It’s the regulatory equivalent of a high schooler confessing their undying love to their crush through an elaborate prom-posal, then navigating a tense dinner with their date’s parents to prove they have good intentions, only to break up right after the dance.

“We’re grateful for the platform and resources Meta provided during a critical growth phase,” Supernatural Health 
wrote
. “This transition reflects a shared belief that Supernatural’s community is best served by a focused, independent team. Meta has been supportive throughout.”

I’ll be over here pulling my hair out at how dumb this whole situation has been, but at least I know that one online community has escaped the harsh anvil of big tech.

“Like so many of us I was so devastated when the coaches were let go and we were told our beloved Supernatural, while we loved it and it was great, would never get any better than it was. What we had was what we had. We all felt like it was purchased to kill,” one user 
wrote
 in the public Supernatural Facebook group. “I am such a sap. Why am I tearing up?”

Topics

fitness
, 
Gaming
, 
Hardware
, 
Meta
, 
supernatural
, 
VR

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
