Meta’s experimental vibe-coding gaming app, 
Pocket
, is now rolling out to everyone in the U.S. The app, which 
arrived quietly last month
 in the test market of Brazil, allows people to generate small, interactive games using AI prompts, which are published to a scrollable feed.

Based on Meta’s 
acqui-hire
 of the team at the 
vibe-coded gaming platform Gizmo
 earlier this year, these games — or “gizmos” as they’re called — respond to touch and the tilt of your phone, play sound effects, and can include clips of your favorite songs. 

They can also use photos from your camera roll or access your camera. The resulting games can then be shared on your profile, where others can save them, remix them into other creations, or simply repost them.

Pocket
Image Credits:
Meta

The app is the latest example of Meta’s push to make AI creation tools mainstream, following its earlier efforts that included making AI-generated images with 
its Meta AI app
 as well as AI videos created with 
an experimental app called Vibes.

Pocket now joins these and several other standalone mobile applications from Meta in recent months. CEO Mark Zuckerberg has credited the increased output to AI-enabled software development, which makes it faster for the company to test and ship new ideas.

“Earlier this year, we shipped Instagram Instants. We also just launched Forum, a stand-alone Groups app, and Seller, a stand-alone Marketplace app. I expect it to become a lot easier to ship new apps,” he told analysts on July’s earnings call. “So we are planning to build out more ideas and use our recommendation systems to scale them.” 

In addition to 
Instants
, 
Forum
, and the Seller app, Meta has shipped an experiment involving AI bedtime stories, and this week, a 
Meta AI app for Mac
. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Gaming
, 
Gaming
, 
Social

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Etched’s valuation doubles to $21B in a month

Julie Bort

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez
