Meta’s AI glasses have a growing reputation as a 
creepy technology
. The company hopes to change that opinion by announcing an update that will disable the camera if the LED light that indicates the glasses are recording has been tampered with. 

The move is seemingly a concession to 
consumer
 
sentiment
 that the glasses aren’t just fun, fashionable accessories, happily promoted by Kylie Jenner, but have serious implications for consumer privacy: they can be abused as surveillance devices. 

Yet, even as Meta touts the new safeguard this week, the company is also pushing products and features that ask users to surrender more of their privacy to the company. 

Whether that’s 
training its AI on your images
, 
enabling AI features using your personal content
 unless you opt out, or exploring ways to 
continuously record
 or use 
biometric facial recognition
, Meta’s vision of the future seems to always depend on collecting more of your personal data.

In its 
blog post
 about the new camera safety feature, the company pats itself on the back, noting that “no other kind of camera has done this and we’re proud to lead the industry forward.” However, Meta also admits that the move was necessary because some people had been using tape to cover up the LED light, which had already forced Meta to adapt its tech to disable recording when the LED is blocked.

Determined, those same AI glasses creeps would then use “sophisticated efforts to modify or destroy the capture LED,” Meta’s announcement explains. 

In other words, Meta is confirming that some people who use AI glasses have hidden agendas — namely a desire to record situations or people (
often
 
women
) without their consent.

Despite this, the company is reportedly testing a prototype of AI glasses that would “continuously collect audio while taking photos every few seconds,” sources recently told 
the Financial Times
.

Meta’s blog post about the glasses feature attempts to assuage people’s fears about the devices’ privacy by answering questions like “who can see the photos and videos I take on my glasses?” Meta answers by promising, “You, and only you — unless you choose to share them.” Yet, Meta’s 
privacy policy
 has explained that any image you share with Meta AI 
can be used to train its AI
.

Meta
Image Credits:
Meta (screenshot of privacy policy on July 8, 2026)

All the while, the company is facing multiple 
investigations
 and 
lawsuits
 over Meta AI glasses privacy violations. 
One lawsuit comes after
 Meta notably canceled a contract with an outsourced tech firm after some of its Kenyan workers alleged they had to view graphic content, like 
sex, nudity, and people using the toilet
, while training Meta’s AI using people’s Meta AI glasses’ videos. 

These are hardly Meta’s first scrapes with privacy violations or safety measures, either. 

Arguably, Meta’s reputation on privacy has been tainted for years after 
numerous
 leaks 
and lost lawsuits
 about 
its alleged lack of child safety measures
 and 
desire for growth at all costs
. There are 
books by whistleblowers
 documenting its alleged 
abuses
, not to mention previous large-scale privacy disasters, like 
the Cambridge Analytica data scandal
 and 
others
.

After the 2018 Cambridge Analytica scandal, Meta now insists on its 
Privacy Progress Update page,
 “Since 2019, we’ve invested significantly in people, products, and technology to continue to evolve our rigorous privacy program.” 

Still, the company plows forward with what many people would consider privacy-violating ideas. Case in point: on the same day it announced the Meta glasses’ new safeguard, it shared that 
Meta AI can now use anyone’s public Instagram photos
 to make AI images, 
unless you opt out
.

It also built features to 
use Meta AI on images in your Camera Roll you’ve never shared
 and implemented such 
poor privacy controls
 in its Meta AI app, leading users to essentially dox themselves by 
revealing their embarrassing searches
.

This is the same company that 
Apple wouldn’t partner with due to privacy concerns
, that 
records its employees’ keystrokes to train its AI
, and that 
plans to sell targeted ads based on data in your AI chats.

So, while an LED safeguard on AI glasses might be a necessary feature, consumers clearly still have many reasons to remain distrustful of how social media will use their images and data, especially in its broader AI plans.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Apps
, 
Gadgets
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Meta
, 
meta ai
, 
privacy
, 
Social
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort
