Meta is getting into gaming with the launch of a new app called 
Pocket
, which allows people to generate small, interactive apps and games using AI prompts. The software, a result of Meta’s 
acquisition
 of the team at the 
vibe-coded gaming platform Gizmo
 earlier this year, describes itself as “a creative platform for making and sharing gizmos,” which is what the interactive experiences are called. It also offers a scrollable feed where you can play with gizmos others have made.

Based on the 
app’s screenshots in Google Play,
 there are many similarities to Gizmo’s original app, 
which is still listed
. Like Pocket, Gizmo also offers a way to use written AI prompts to build small, interactive experiences, and it includes a discovery feed.

Alessandro Paluzzi,
 a reverse engineer and regular spotter of new apps and features, first noticed the app’s launch this morning and published a Play Store 
screenshot
 of the app on X. According to data from app intelligence provider 
Appfigures
, however, Pocket was first launched on June 29, 2026 on the App Store and Google Play. (Because of its newness, the firm can’t tell if it’s yet to see any downloads.)

#Meta
 is working on a new app called Pocket 👀
ℹ️ A new creative platform to make and share gizmos. 
pic.twitter.com/zFjMU5jj1U
— Alessandro Paluzzi (@alex193a) 
July 2, 2026

Other outlets, including 
Business Insider
 and 
Investing.com
, have also reported on Paluzzi’s discovery. Meta has not yet responded to a request for comment. 

Pocket is another example of Meta’s push to make AI creation tools more mainstream, extending its earlier efforts, which included AI-generated images created via 
its Meta AI app
, and AI videos created with 
its app called Vibes.
 It has also added AI features across its social platforms and into its 
video-editing app for creators, Edits
. 

Image Credits:
Meta

Given that Meta has not officially announced Pocket’s debut, it’s likely that Pocket is still in its initial experimentation phase. 

Its counterpart Gizmo, however, had generated 635K lifetime installs across both iOS and Google Play, according to Appfigures, which noted it had a 98% positive sentiment.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Gaming
, 
Gaming
, 
Meta
, 
Social

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

Flipper Device’s new Busy Bar is a customizable display for productivity

Ivan Mehta

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

FTC gives Musk the OK to acquire SpaceX alumni startup Mesh

Marina Temkin

Corgi, the buzzy Y Combinator-backed insurance tech startup, says it didn’t steal an open source product

Julie Bort
