Meta on Monday released 
Muse Glimmer
, an open-weight model designed to power AI agents locally on consumer hardware, providing the clearest picture yet of what CEO Mark Zuckerberg’s vision of “personal superintelligence” could look like in practice. 

The 30-billion parameter model is essentially an open version of Meta’s most powerful closed model, Muse Spark, which 
the company debuted in April
. Glimmer’s weights are available under the permissive Apache 2.0 license, so developers can download them and modify as necessary.

Glimmer is designed to run AI agents that can perform multi-step tasks — like call tools, write and debug code, work with files and screenshots, and execute on a task over an extended workflow — locally on a Mac or PC with a single consumer GPU. It supports text and images, and was trained across more than 100 languages, the company said.

Meta imagines Glimmer being used for things like managing schedules, drafting messages, and organizing files — tasks that would require large amounts of access to personal data. By processing the information on a user’s device instead of sending it to the cloud, Meta is laying the groundwork for a more privacy-sensitive personal agent. Glimmer is also designed to be “always-on” and able to operate “anywhere, anytime, with or without an internet connection.”

That vision mirrors the future Mark Zuckerberg has previously laid out for Meta. Last year, 
he argued 
that advanced AI should empower individuals rather than stay concentrated in the hands of a few companies, while also warning that Meta would have to be careful about which of its increasingly powerful models it released openly due to safety concerns.

In a new letter Monday
, Zuckerberg reiterated that vision, arguing that distributing superintelligence widely “has the potential to begin a new era of personal empowerment where individuals can use this powerful new capability to reach their full potential, pursue their interests, and improve their lives and the world more than ever before.”

Zuckerberg went on to list the ways Meta’s superintelligence can improve a person’s life, from providing a capable personal agent that “will work 24/7 on your behalf to improve your relationships, health, career, finances, home management, hobbies, and more” to giving people access to tools needed to create a new business or advance scientific progress. The biggest promise of all is that “everyone will have free or affordable access to these tools.”

But access isn’t the same as ownership. Zuckerberg’s promise to distribute superintelligence widely comes as Meta is increasingly distinguishing between models it will release openly and those it will keep under its control. Muse Spark, its more powerful mode, remains closed-weight, while the smaller Glimmer can be downloaded, fine-tuned, and run on a user’s hardware. 

As a result, Glimmer offers an early indication of where Meta may draw the line between the AI it wants people to own themselves and the more powerful intelligence that remains under the company’s control.

Topics

AI
, 
Enterprise
, 
Mark Zuckerberg
, 
Meta
, 
Meta Superintelligence
, 
superintelligence

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Rebecca Bellan	

Senior Reporter

Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing 
rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

Cloudflare launches Kitesurf, a browser built for AI agents

Sarah Perez

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta
