In Brief

Posted:

6:43 AM PDT · August 26, 2026

Image Credits:
Kyle Grillot/Bloomberg 
(opens in a new window)
 / Getty Images

Amanda Silberling

Meta settles for $18 billion in lawsuit brought by 29 states over social media harms to children

Meta has agreed to 
pay up to $18 billion
 to settle claims from 29 U.S. states over children’s safety.

The 
lawsuit
 alleged that the social media giant knowingly designed platforms like Instagram and Facebook to addict children, despite knowing about the harms the platforms could pose to young users. The states also claimed that Meta knowingly collected data from children without parental knowledge, which violated the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA).

By settling, Meta is not admitting that it’s guilty of these claims, but it shows the company’s reluctance to move forward with a jury trial.

Meta is framing its settlement as a call to action for YouTube and TikTok to adopt a set of protections for teens and controls for parents, illustrated in a 
blog post
.

“Ensuring teens have a safe and productive experience on our platforms is an absolute imperative for Meta,” Meta wrote. “We want to get this right for parents and teens, and that’s why we partnered with state attorneys general to set a new industry standard.”

Topics

Meta
, 
Social

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Robotics

Robot brain builders are pushing out of their GPT-2 era

Tim Fernholz

	16 minutes ago

AI

QueryStory wants you to believe what AI is telling you

Tim Fernholz

	46 minutes ago

AI

Arga Labs is building a better way to train enterprise AI agents

Russell Brandom

	50 minutes ago

Latest in Social

In Brief

Meta settles for $18 billion in lawsuit brought by 29 states over social media harms to children

Amanda Silberling

	3 minutes ago

In Brief

Bluesky now lets you upload 10-minute long videos

Ivan Mehta

	33 minutes ago

Social

X sends cease-and-desist to open source project Nitter over alleged scraping

Sarah Perez

	17 hours ago
