Meta announced on Thursday that it will now notify parents if their teen discusses suicide or self-harm with the company’s Meta AI chatbot. Meta says it’s also working on the ability to contact emergency services if someone’s conversations suggest they may be at risk of self-harm.

These changes arrive as Meta and other tech companies face scrutiny from regulators and parents over how AI chatbots 
respond to users in crisis
, particularly teenagers —a liability question that’s increasingly shaping how AI companies design and market their products.

Meta says it has built a dedicated AI system to identify conversations where a teen makes a clear reference to hurting themselves.

“We understand how distressing these alerts may be for a parent to receive,” Meta wrote in a blog post. “That’s why, as we continue to improve our detection, all chats flagged by our AI will be manually reviewed before an alert is sent. If a teen’s intent is ambiguous, we’ll err on the side of caution and alert the parent. While that means we may sometimes notify parents when there may not be real cause for concern, we feel this is the right starting point, and we’ll continue to monitor to help make sure we’re in the right place.”

These alerts are now live for parents using Instagram 
Parental Supervision
 in the U.S., U.K., Australia, and Canada, and will roll out globally by the end of the year, Meta says.

This update builds on the 
alerts that Meta already sends
 to parents when their teen repeatedly searches for suicide or self-harm terms on Instagram. It also builds on a feature that 
allows parents to see the topics
 their teen discussed with Meta AI over the past week.

Meta also announced that its “
Limited Content
” setting—which lets parents place their teens in a more restrictive experience on Instagram—now applies to Meta AI as well. Meta AI is already trained to avoid sexual or romantic conversations or alcohol-related discussions with teens, and the Limited Content setting expands those safeguards by making the chatbot decline a broader range of prompts. Meta didn’t specify what those additional prompts include, but TechCrunch has asked for company for more information.

Additionally, Meta says it will contact emergency services if someone’s conversation with Meta AI, whether the user is an adult or a teen, suggests someone is at risk of suicide. It’s worth noting that Meta already takes this step when someone posts something on Facebook or Instagram that suggests they are at risk, so this extends that same practice to conversations with its chatbot.

Topics

Apps
, 
meta ai
, 
Social

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
