Microsoft has cut off access to dozens of its open-source projects hosted on GitHub as it investigates how hackers apparently breached the projects and injected password-stealing malware into the code.

Many of the affected projects relate to Microsoft’s cloud service Azure and other tools used by developers to code with AI development apps, such as Claude Code, Gemini’s command line interface, and VS Code.

According to 
security firm Cloudsmith
 and community-driven malware analysis site 
OpenSourceMalware
, who were some of the first to flag the hack, the malware allowed the hackers to steal the user’s passwords and other sensitive credentials when they opened the compromised tools in their AI coding apps.

It’s not immediately known how many people have downloaded the affected tools.

Microsoft confirmed it pulled the repos, as first reported by 
404 Media
. A Microsoft spokesperson acknowledged receipt of our email, but did not immediately comment.

At least 70 projects belonging to Microsoft have been “disabled,” per a message loading when trying to access the projects’ pages on GitHub, a code-hosting site that Microsoft owns. “Access to this repository has been disabled by GitHub Staff due to a violation of GitHub’s terms of service.”

Image Credits:
TechCrunch /

This is the latest example 
in recent months
 of hackers breaching widely popular open-source projects with the aim of planting malware on a large number of users who have the code installed on their computers. These hacks are known as “supply chain” attacks as they target code that is often used in a large number of software products, or by a specific kind of user, which may be advantageous to hack as they sometimes have access to cloud systems and large amounts of customers’ data.

While it’s not uncommon for sole developers of open source projects to be targeted by hackers — in some cases as part of 
long-running efforts to gain the trust of the developer
 — it is rare for large tech giants like Microsoft, which have the resources to defend against these kinds of attacks, to get breached..

This is Microsoft’s second known breach over the past few weeks that has allowed hackers to compromise its open-source projects, per 
Ars Technica
. In mid-May, security researchers said that Microsoft’s open source project Durable Task, a tool that helps developers build apps, was hacked. OpenSourceMalware said that Microsoft’s latest incident is a “re-compromise” of the Durable Task project, suggesting that Microsoft may not have eradicated the hackers on its first attempt or an entirely new, distinct breach.

Topics

Claude
, 
cybersecurity
, 
data breach
, 
gemini
, 
GitHub
, 
Microsoft
, 
open source
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
