In Brief

Posted:

11:47 AM PDT · July 15, 2026

Image Credits:
Microsoft /

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Microsoft patches bug in video game Age of Empires II

On Tuesday, 
Microsoft patched
 a historic record number of security bugs across its product lines, in large part due to the use of AI to help the company and external researchers discover bugs. 

Among the fixed vulnerabilities 
was one
 for the remastered version of the classic 25-year-old war strategy video game Age of Empires II. The flaw allowed hackers to take over a victim’s computer by sending a custom malicious game invite, according to security researchers. 

A video 
posted on X
 shows how the flaw could be exploited by hackers.

Here’s the Age of Empires RCE from yesterday’s Patch Tuesday: CVE-2026-50663.
Join an attacker’s lobby, (auto-)accept UCG, and you get  remote code execution. 
pic.twitter.com/QmMkY07C8S
— Rick de Jager (@rdjgr) 
July 15, 2026

According to 
cybersecurity firm Rapid7
, a successful attack would have allowed hackers to place malicious files on the victim’s computer, opening the door for the hacker to achieve the ability to run malicious code on the victim’s machine.

That means, effectively, the hacker could have taken over control of the hacked computer.

There is no evidence that this bug was successfully exploited in the wild by hackers. But 
targeting video gamers
 can be an effective way to install malware on a high number of victims’ computers and steal their passwords, for example.

Topics

Age of Empires
, 
Age of Empires II
, 
cybersecurity
, 
In Brief
, 
Microsoft
, 
Security
, 
video game hacking

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Security

US charges Russian ‘bulletproof’ web hosts over cyberattacks that netted $62M from cybercrime victims

Zack Whittaker

	6 hours ago

Latest in Security

In Brief

Microsoft patches bug in video game Age of Empires II

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	1 hour ago

In Brief

Hack suggests AI music generator Suno scraped YouTube for training data

Amanda Silberling

	3 hours ago

In Brief

Microsoft patches record number of security vulnerabilities, citing its use of AI

Zack Whittaker

	4 hours ago
