In Brief

Posted:

10:38 AM PDT · June 12, 2026

Image Credits:
Photo by Thomas Fuller/NurPhoto / Getty Images

Ram Iyer

Mistral is rumored to be raising €3B at €20B valuation

French AI lab Mistral AI is in early discussions to raise about €3 billion ($3.5 billion), Bloomberg 
reported
 Friday, citing anonymous sources.

The funding round would value the company at around €20 billion (about $23.15 billion), nearly double the €11.7 billion valuation it 
received
 in a Series C funding round last September.

One of Europe’s leading AI startups, Mistral launched in 2023 with the stated ambition to “put frontier AI in the hands of everyone.” The company has taken a more open approach to its AI development compared to its American rivals, 
offering
 some foundational large language models with open weights, allowing anyone to customize them as they see fit.

The company also offers closed models tailored for use cases such as programming, voice cloning and generation, and optical character recognition.

Lately, with European countries 
distancing
 themselves from American tech, Mistral has 
positioned
 itself as a friendlier, “sovereign” and homegrown alternative. The company is setting up 
a data center near Paris
 and has partnered with 
France’s army
, the 
government of Luxembourg
, and 
several
 major European 
companies
.

Still, Mistral has only raised about $4 billion to date, per PitchBook, a fraction of what U.S. rivals OpenAI ($186 billion) and Anthropic ($161.25 billion) have taken in. These labs are also valued much, much higher, reflecting how much further American labs have pulled ahead in revenue, model adoption, and enterprise demand.

Mistral did not immediately return a request for comment.

Topics

AI
, 
Fundraising
, 
In Brief
, 
Mistral AI

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Cheaper, faster, and culturally aware, Avataar’s video AI is built for India’s scale

Ivan Mehta

	14 hours ago

Robotics

Theker just raised $85M to build the factory robot that doesn’t specialize in anything

Anna Heim

	17 hours ago

AI

Deezer’s new tool can identify AI music from Spotify, Apple Music, and others

Lauren Forristal

	1 day ago

Latest in Fundraising

In Brief

Mistral is rumored to be raising €3B at €20B valuation

Ram Iyer

	1 hour ago

AI

SpaceX, Anthropic, and OpenAI’s hot IPO summer

Theresa Loconsolo

	3 hours ago

33 min

Apps

Equal AI raises $30M to screen calls so Indians don’t have to

Ivan Mehta

	14 hours ago
