Doomscrolling
 on social media is a very common problem and can feel like an endless loop of constantly losing track of time. Instead of tackling this issue with strict limits, a new mindful screen time app called 
Mivo Scrolling
 is trying to shake things up.

Launched last month, Mivo doesn’t look super different from other screen time apps. It tracks screen time, usage patterns, and provides insights into daily habits. However, Mivo believes what sets its app apart is its no-shaming approach. The idea that users should be more intentional about their time online has also been 
fueling the slowtech movement,
 as of late, which is focused on rethinking our relationship with technology. 

Rather than outright blocking certain apps, users can set customizable time limits for how long they wish to scroll on specific platforms. For instance, users can schedule two daily scroll sessions, allocating one-hour windows during which they select the apps they want to focus on. When it’s time to take a break, a friendly reminder pops up, nudging them to think about why they’re scrolling right then. Is it out of boredom, looking for a distraction, or genuinely trying to relax? 

Image Credits:
Screenshot of Mivo Scrolling app

Notably, unlike other apps that might just try to pull you away from your phone, Mivo lets the user decide if they want to continue, encouraging users to become more aware of how and why they’re using it instead. 

“Most screen time tools try to restrict people after the habit is already happening,” Pranshu Raithatha, creator of Mivo Scrolling, told TechCrunch. “Mivo adds a small reflection moment right when someone opens a social app, so they can pause and ask why they’re opening it before falling into an automatic scroll.”

Additionally, users can set regular pauses every two, three, or five minutes, encouraging intermittent check-ins that help maintain awareness of their scrolling habits. Plus, after the scrolling session, Mivo asks the user if they feel like the time was well spent or if they just got lost in the scroll, aiming to help users build a healthier relationship with their phone.

Mivo also includes a widget that users can install on their home screen to display daily scroll time and be reminded of when the next scheduled scroll session is.

Mivo Scrolling is currently available for free on the 
App Store
. 

Topics

Apps
, 
doomscrolling
, 
iOS app
, 
mindfulness
, 
screen time
, 
screen time management

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

As Anthropic suspends access to new models, India debates its AI future

Jagmeet Singh

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos
