In Brief

Posted:

3:40 PM PDT · July 23, 2026

Image Credits:
Bridget Bennett/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Kirsten Korosec

Mobileye CEO Amnon Shashua to step aside as company pushes into robotaxis, robotics

Mobileye founder and CEO Amnon Shashua plans to step down from the top leadership post after nearly three decades, just as the company pushes into robotaxis and humanoid robots.

Shashua will remain CEO until Mobileye hires a replacement, according to a 
regulatory filing
 Thursday. 

Mobileye got its start making computer vision chips based on Shashua’s academic research at Hebrew University in Israel, and grew into a major supplier of the chips that power automotive safety and driver-assistance features. It had the largest IPO in Israel’s history, was 
acquired
 in 2017 by Intel for $15.3 billion, then 
spun back out
 as a publicly traded company in 2022, though Intel remains its largest shareholder.

Under Shashua, Mobileye also moved beyond selling chips to automakers and began building its own systems that 
handle autonomous driving
, which it now supplies to Volkswagen and its MOIA subsidiary.

In January, the company acquired Shashua’s humanoid robotics startup Mentee Robotics for 
$900 million
, which Shashua called part of “Mobileye 3.0,” the next phase of the business focused on robotics and automotive AI.

Mobileye also said in June it would expand beyond its supplier status to launch its 
own robotaxi service
 in a U.S. city in 2027.

Topics

Transportation

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

AMD takes on Nvidia with its Helios AI rack-scale system

Lucas Ropek

	2 hours ago

Apps

Patreon lays off 20% of its workforce

Aisha Malik

	2 hours ago

Startups

Insurance startup Corgi reportedly raised more money at $4B — its third round in 8 weeks

Julie Bort

	2 hours ago

Latest in Transportation

In Brief

Mobileye CEO Amnon Shashua to step aside as company pushes into robotaxis, robotics

Kirsten Korosec

	7 seconds ago

Transportation

Tesla’s door handles may spur new US safety rules

Kirsten Korosec

	3 hours ago

Transportation

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

	6 hours ago
