NASA briefly had five astronauts aboard the International Space Station shelter in a docked SpaceX Crew Dragon spacecraft on Friday, while their Russian counterparts attempted to repair a leaking service module.

NASA spokesperson Bethany Stevens initially 
wrote
 in an X post on Friday that Russia’s space agency, Roscosmos, had discovered new leaks in its service module, and decided to perform an “extensive repair operation.”

“Out of an abundance of caution, NASA has directed all four of the agency’s SpaceX Crew-12 members and NASA astronaut Chris Williams to assume an elevated safety posture in the Dragon spacecraft while the repair is underway,” she wrote. “We continue to work with our Russian counterparts, along with the rest of the international community that supports the space station, to arrive at a more permanent resolution.”

Roughly one hour after that statement, though, Stevens published another 
post
 that said Roscosmos paused their repair efforts to assess “more measurements and data.” 

“Given this development, NASA has instructed the crew members inside the Dragon spacecraft to end the safe haven procedures and return to planned operations aboard the International Space Station.”

The Russian service module has been dealing with leaks for some time now. Stevens wrote on Friday that the cracks “have always been a concern that NASA watches very closely.”

SpaceX did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

There are currently 10 people aboard the ISS. Four of them (two NASA astronauts, one European Space Agency astronaut, and one Russian cosmonaut) arrived at the station in February as part of the long-duration SpaceX Crew-12 Dragon mission. The other three (one NASA astronaut and two other cosmonauts) arrived last November aboard a Russian Soyuz mission.

The repair operation and temporary shelter order come as the future of the International Space Station (ISS) is in question. Under the leadership of its new administrator, Jared Isaacman, NASA is 
pushing
 to replace the aging space station with commercially-produced modules later this decade.

This story has been updated to reflect that the shelter has ended.

Topics

crew dragon
, 
Dragon
, 
international space station
, 
NASA
, 
Space
, 
SpaceX

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

DuckDuckGo makes its ‘no-AI’ search engine easier to access as its traffic booms

Sarah Perez

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez
