Netflix is doubling down on one of television’s biggest franchises, signing a massive new licensing agreement worth a 
reported
 $500 million to bring The Walking Dead Universe to audiences around the world.

AMC Global Media 
announced 
Thursday that it has reached a multi-year global licensing agreement with Netflix that will give the streaming giant co-exclusive rights to the original “The Walking Dead” series and all six of its spin-offs. In total, the deal covers 371 episodes spanning the entire franchise.

Netflix has been the exclusive U.S. streaming home of The Walking Dead since 2011, helping introduce the survival drama to millions of viewers. Now, thanks to the new agreement, its availability extends to additional markets including the U.K., Italy, Australia, and New Zealand.

The deal is particularly notable because Netflix will not have exclusive rights. Instead, the company will share streaming access with AMC+, meaning it will end Netflix’s more than decade-long exclusive hold on the series.

The $500 million price tag ranks among the most expensive television licensing deals in recent years. (For comparison, HBO Max paid 
$425 million
 to bring “Friends” from Netflix to its platform in 2020.) 

Additionally, the move comes as 
recent data
 suggests many Netflix subscribers don’t stick around for second seasons of newer shows, making established franchises with hundreds of episodes a safer bet for driving binge-watching and overall viewing hours.

Beginning in 2027, Netflix subscribers around the world will also gain access to the franchise’s entire slate of spin-offs, including “Fear the Walking Dead, “World Beyond Tales of the Walking Dead,” “Dead City,” “Daryl Dixon,” and “The Ones Who Live.” 

The agreement also arrives as “Dead City” returns for its third season. Fans are also looking ahead to the final season of “Daryl Dixon,” scheduled to premiere in 2027.

The Walking Dead joins a growing list of popular shows Netflix has pursued to drive engagement. Over the years, it has spent billions securing streaming rights to series such as “The Office,” while earlier this year it also 
reached a deal 
to stream “Sesame Street.”

Meanwhile, the announcement provided a boost to AMC Networks’ financial outlook. The company unveiled the Netflix agreement alongside its 
quarterly earnings report
 on Thursday, using the deal to raise its forward guidance. 

Topics

Media & Entertainment
, 
Netflix
, 
streaming service

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
