In Brief

Posted:

7:53 AM PDT · July 10, 2026

Image Credits:
Chesnot / Getty Images

Lauren Forristal

Netflix could be planning ‘always-on’ live TV channels

As Netflix searches for new ways to keep viewers engaged amid signs of slowing engagement, the streaming giant appears to be exploring yet another avenue: always-on live TV channels.

According to 
The Wall Street Journal
, Netflix is considering launching live channels that continuously stream content, giving subscribers something to tune into 24/7. Rather than committing to binge-worthy dramas like “Avatar: The Last Airbender” or the newest thriller “I Will Find You,” subscribers could leave a channel running in the background for hours of entertainment.

This move would put Netflix in more direct competition with free, ad-supported streaming services such as Pluto TV and Tubi. It could also provide a meaningful boost to Netflix’s ad business, since live programming typically doesn’t allow viewers to skip commercials.

The WSJ also reports that Netflix is exploring bundles, similar to offerings from Apple and Amazon. According to people familiar with the matter, Peacock is among the services being discussed as a potential partner.

Netflix didn’t immediately respond to our request for comment.

The reported plans come as Netflix has made other moves to increase viewer engagement. Recently, the company has experimented with 
short-form video
, 
video podcasts
, and a 
new gaming app for kids
 to drive viewership. 

Earlier this week, Bloomberg 
reported
 that the company has become increasingly concerned about audience declines between the first and second seasons of many of its original shows, raising questions about its ability to sustain long-term hits. Plus, Netflix’s share of total TV viewing has also slipped. According to 
Nielsen
, the streamer accounted for 7.8% of TV viewing in April.

Additionally, 
Variety
 reported on Friday that Netflix is in talks to buy Letterboxd, the popular social platform for movie fans.

Topics

In Brief
, 
live tv
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Netflix
, 
streaming
, 
streaming service

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Latest in Media & Entertainment

In Brief

Disney+ is considering a free streaming tier, report says

Aisha Malik

	13 minutes ago

In Brief

Netflix could be planning ‘always-on’ live TV channels

Lauren Forristal

	2 hours ago

AI

Meta wants its AI glasses to seem less creepy. Its AI strategy says otherwise.

Sarah Perez

	2 days ago
