In Brief

Posted:

2:30 PM PDT · August 5, 2026

Image Credits:
Matt Cardy 
(opens in a new window)
 / Getty Images

Sean O'Kane

Nikita Bier steps down as X’s head of product

Nikita Bier has stepped down as head of product at X, Elon Musk’s social media platform, after a little more than a year in the role. 

Bier wrote Wednesday that he thinks it’s “time to pass the torch and demote myself to my natural state: a poster,” adding that he’ll continue to advise the company. 

The serial entrepreneur and Lightspeed venture partner took over the 
product lead role in July 2025
. He wrote Wednesday that, while in the role, he oversaw the launch of 30 new products while “protecting the integrity of the town square.” 

Of course, Bier was also head of product during a number of scandals at X. Just a few days after he took the product lead role, the chatbot Grok — made by xAI, which was then a separate company owned by Musk — started 
calling itself
 “MechaHitler.” Grok has also been used by X users to generate 
nonconsensual nude imagery
, including child sexual abuse material, which has gotten the platform in legal trouble.

“X is, and will remain, the most important communication technology in history. But running this app is a 24/7 job and it’s now time for me to take a breather,” Bier wrote Wednesday.

Topics

Apps
, 
Elon Musk
, 
Nikita Bier

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Space

Elon Musk repeatedly one-upped his execs on SpaceX’s first earnings call

Sean O'Kane

	24 hours ago

Space

SpaceX doubles revenue on Anthropic and Google compute deals, Starlink growth

Sean O'Kane

	1 day ago

Transportation

Elon Musk spends half his time talking robots and AI on Tesla earnings calls

Sean O'Kane

Russell Brandom

	1 day ago

Latest in Apps

In Brief

Nikita Bier steps down as X’s head of product

Sean O'Kane

	30 minutes ago

Social

As Gen Z reconsiders dating apps, Tinder’s IRL events expand to dozens more cities

Sarah Perez

	7 hours ago

Media & Entertainment

Disney+ looks to TikTok creators to bring fan content to its short-form video feed

Lauren Forristal

	9 hours ago
