It’s not just you: AI startups are taking in a huge amount of seed funding, and in the process making things harder for anyone looking for funding even at a pre-seed stage. 
We’ve covered the trend in detail
, and at 
this year’s TechCrunch Disrupt event
, we want to help pre-seed founders now being held to seed-stage expectations. 

With AI making the development of a minimum viable product swifter than ever, is there even hope for a founder who has a compelling idea, but nothing concrete to show for it? That’s what our “Winning Pre-Seed Without a Product” panel will seek to answer. 

And it’s just one of the many sessions you can look forward to at 
our popular Builders Stage at Disrupt 2026
. That’s where our most pointed conversations and workshops take place, tackling everything from getting your hands dirty with operational decisions, fundraising, go-to-market strategies, and other vital subjects. 

And you can be a part of it all by 
getting your ticket to attend Disrupt 2026
 in San Francisco at Moscone West, October 13-15, at the best prices you’ll find for the remainder of the year. 

As for this specific session, we’ve gathered a great trio of speakers to provide their expertise on this nuanced and pivotal topic. 

Sandhya Venkatachalam: Founder, managing partner, Axiom Partners 

Image Credits:
Axiom Partners

Venkatachalam both knows a thing or two about having a successful exit, and what investors are looking for when taking the plunge with companies that eventually succeed through an acquisition of their own. Her current role is overseeing the newly launched 
Axiom Partners
, which is 
an early-stage, $52 million venture fund
 that’s focused on connecting founders to top-class AI practitioners to help fuel AI that leads to real-world improvements. 

Previously, she worked as a GP at Khosla Ventures and Social Capital, where she was the first investor in Groq, and also led investments into GalileoAI, ForethoughtAI, and FirefliesAI, which have all either been acquired or reached unicorn status. 

Puneet Agarwal: Managing partner, True Ventures 

Image Credits:
True Ventures

True Ventures has been a mainstay of the startup community, with a focus on early-stage companies that stretches back to 2005. And Agarwal has worked there for nearly that whole time, starting in 2008 and now evolving into a managing partner who’s especially focused on the transformation of enterprise infrastructure and applications amid the AI era. 

If you’re looking for expert advice on what VCs want, Agarwal is here to provide it. True Ventures isn’t just a fund; it stretches across 12 funds, with partnerships stretching from more than 500 companies and 1,050 founders to more than 60 acquisitions and seven IPOs. 

Austin Clements: Managing partner, Slauson & Co. 

Image Credits:
Slauson & Co.

Slauson & Co.
 isn’t at the scale of True Ventures, but their mission, and Clements’ work within it, will be of particular note for the founders in the crowd. They’re particularly focused on economic inclusion and small business empowerment, and Clements started an accelerator within the firm to hone in on this mission even further.  

His work to broaden the founder community through inclusive efforts is echoed in his work as the founding chair of 
PledgeLA
, which in partnership with the Annenberg Foundation and LA mayor’s office, further promotes the importance of diversity within the tech community.  

And frequent readers may recognize one of the companies Slauson & Co. has invested in: 
Startup Battlefield 2026 victor Glīd
! 

Learn from experts, embrace the Disrupt 2026 excitement 

They’re just the beginning of our rollout of Disrupt 2026 programming as we build up to our October 13 kickoff in San Francisco.  

And let that Battlefield highlight be a reminder that Disrupt isn’t just the valuable insights and sessions — it’s getting to celebrate the community, learn from their success and stumbles, and equip yourself for the new step of your journey. Whether you’re a founder, investor, or playing any number of other vital roles in the startup ecosystem, 
now’s the time to get your Disrupt 2026 ticket
!

Topics

Fundraising
, 
Startups
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt
, 
True Ventures
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek
