The FBI is reportedly investigating how a North Korean was hired to work for a U.S. federal government agency. 

News of the investigation was 
first reported by Federal News Network
, citing a senior FBI official speaking at a conference on July 28 in Washington, D.C.. The official confirmed to Federal News Network that the FBI is investigating a North Korean working for an unnamed federal agency.

It’s unclear how the North Korean was hired, but the regime is known for its coordinated and long-running campaigns aimed at 
fraudulently obtaining employment at private organizations and multinationals
. The case marks a rare confirmed instance of a sanctioned North Korean working for a government agency.

There are thought to be 
thousands of North Korean IT workers
 who have gained employment with U.S. and European organizations in recent years by exploiting weaknesses in the hiring process. The goal is to use fraudulent identities to gain employment with remote positions and to earn a wage that gets funneled back to the regime, all the while stealing intellectual property and other data, then using that information to extort the companies when they are inevitably caught.

But strict vetting and security clearance practices have largely kept the regime’s hackers out of government — though, not without incident. The Justice Department brought charges in 2024 against a Maryland man who 
assisted a North Korean hacker
 to pose as an American to get a remote job as a contractor for the Federal Aviation Administration.

The FBI did not respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment on Tuesday, and it’s unclear which federal agency was affected, and if any data or funds were stolen during the incident.

The U.S. has long warned about the risks posed by North Korean IT workers’ schemes. U.S. authorities have taken 
several enforcement actions
 and 
sanctions
 to stymie both the networks that operate from Pyongyang, as well as neighboring Russia and China, as well as 
the American facilitators
 who set up fleets of laptops that allow the North Koreans to work remotely as if they were in the United States.

North Korea operates more like a transnational criminal gang than a government, and relies on hacks, including thefts of cryptocurrency, to fund its globally sanctioned nuclear weapons program. The Kim Jong Un regime is reportedly 
responsible for 76% of cryptocurrency thefts
, per blockchain forensic firms, netting the regime 
at least $2 billion during 2025
 despite being banned from the global financial system.

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
North Korea
, 
Security
, 
us government

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

Cloudflare launches Kitesurf, a browser built for AI agents

Sarah Perez

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
