A new report by cybersecurity giant CrowdStrike found North Korean hackers posing as remote IT workers and online recruiters made up about half of all documented “hands-on-keyboard” intrusions at U.S. tech companies over the past year.

The 
company’s latest annual report
 on the cybersecurity landscape highlights the growing threat from North Korean operatives, which have become a significant source of cyber intrusions across the tech industry. Hackers associated with the Kim Jong Un regime continuously target companies and developers with schemes aimed at stealing information and cryptocurrency to fund Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons program, which is banned under international law.

CrowdStrike said that during period covered by the report — April 2025 to May 2026 — the North Korean hacking group that the company calls “Famous Chollima” accounted for 47% of all state-backed activity targeting the tech sector.

The security giant 
keeps track of hands-on-keyboard intrusions
 because they typically represent real human hackers conducting malicious and evasive cyber activity, rather than automated malware that traditional security tools can catch. These attacks generally begin with stolen passwords or credentials, followed by the abuse of legitimate tools already present in the target’s systems to maintain persistent access over time.

Famous Chollima is known for posing as tech workers, such as developers, coders, and IT, then applying for remote jobs at U.S., European, and Asian tech companies under false pretenses. To pull it off, the hackers use AI to generate real-time deepfake images to spoof the faces of real people, and pair those with fraudulent identity documents like stolen passports and driver’s licenses to pose as Americans or other foreign nationals. This is because North Korea is heavily sanctioned by the West and the United Nations for its ongoing development of nuclear weapons. 

Once in, the hackers also earn a salary from the companies they infiltrate, which gets funneled back to the North Korean regime, all while stealing intellectual property and other sensitive corporate information. That stolen information is frequently weaponized; when the operatives are eventually caught, they often threaten to expose what they’ve taken unless the company pays a ransom.

The hackers also target blockchain developers with the intention of 
stealing large amounts of crypto
, which the Kim regime uses to skirt its broad inability to use the Western banking system. North Korea has 
netted billions of dollars in stolen crypto
 over the years, with some 
$2 billion
 during 2025 alone.

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
hackers
, 
north korean
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
