Google on Monday announced an update to its 
NotebookLM
 research tool, which includes new features and the shift to Gemini 3.5 as the default model. The company is also adding 
Antigravity
-powered software skills to help users with research and generating different kinds of outputs. 

This is similar to Google adding coding chops to its 
search
 products to make them more engaging for Q&A.

Google said that with the latest update, you can start a chat about a project with the app, and it will help you build the knowledge base by suggesting different sources using its research skills and Google Search. The feature could help users get primary sources in other languages or find new material from related authors.

Previously, NotebookLM required you to bring your own sources to start building a knowledge base in order to extract insights.

Image Credits:
Google

The company added that users can now give detailed instructions to NotebookLM to generate output in different formats. Plus, they can edit the output once generated. The tool now supports exports in formats including Data visualizations and charts (.png, .svg); Documents (PDFs, .docx, Markdown, text files); Nano-banana-powered images; Structured data (.csv, .json); and Microsoft Excel and PowerPoint.

Last year, the company introduced 
a “Deep Research” mode for structured online research
. With the new feature rollout, NotebookLM will show detailed steps in the chat about how it arrived at the answers for users to check the output. 

Image Credits: Google
Image Credits:
Google

Google said that the updates are available to Google AI Ultra users and all Workspace business customers with AI Ultra Access and AI Expanded Access starting today, with the aim of expanding them to others. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Google
, 
notebooklm

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
