In Brief

Posted:

12:13 PM PDT · June 26, 2026

Image Credits:
ADRIAN DENNIS/AFP / Getty Images

Dominic-Madori Davis

Novak Djokovic has a new job —  advisor to private equity firm General Atlantic

General Atlantic has tapped tennis legend Novak Djokovic to serve as a global strategic advisor, where, 
according to a press release,
 he “will work closely with the firm’s leadership, portfolio companies, and investors, bringing perspectives on leadership, resilience, and innovation that reflect General Atlantic’s commitment to excellence.”

The news comes just days before Djokovic is set to play at Wimbledon, with his eyes set on a 25th Grand Slam title. 
The partnership, in many ways, makes sense. Djokovic has invested in a handful of wellness companies, 
including Waterdrop in 2023
, and co-founded his own 
supplement company, SILA
, in 2024, followed by the clean snack food company 
Cob Foods in 2025.
 He also backed the wearables company Incrediwear. 
As reported by Bloomberg,
 General Atlantic hopes to leverage Djokovic’s network to gain further exposure to the health and wellness sector.

At the same time, the firm is hoping to expand further into sports investing, having, over the past two years, taken stakes in a football club, a sports stadium, as well as a sports media agency. The presence of private equity in tennis has increased, with General Atlantic being just the latest name to enter the game. The firm’s CEO said in an interview with Bloomberg that Djokovic had “strong views about how professional tennis can be reshaped” and that “there’ll be opportunities there.”

Topics

Sports
, 
tennis
, 
Venture
, 
wellness

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

OpenAI limits GPT-5.6 rollout after government request, says restrictions shouldn’t be the norm

Rebecca Bellan

	1 hour ago

AI

OpenAI poaches Uber India chief to lead its biggest market outside the US

Jagmeet Singh

	1 hour ago

Apps

TikTok’s road to becoming a super app

Aisha Malik

	3 hours ago

Latest in Venture

In Brief

Novak Djokovic has a new job —  advisor to private equity firm General Atlantic

Dominic-Madori Davis

	32 minutes ago

Venture

Patronus AI lands $50M to build ‘digital worlds’ that stress-test AI agents

Marina Temkin

	23 hours ago

In Brief

Valor Equity Partners looks to raise a $2.5B Fund VII, per Bloomberg

Dominic-Madori Davis

	2 days ago
