In a bid to capture more of its customers’ AI spending, British AI neocloud 
Nscale
 is buying software startup 
Anyscale
, which helps companies scale their AI workloads across data centers and servers.

Nscale is paying $1.65 billion for Anyscale, Bloomberg 
reported
, citing an anonymous source.

Founded by the same team that built the open-source 
Project Ray
 distributed programming Python framework, Anyscale started by building a platform that allowed people to run projects that needed large amounts of computing power.

But after the launch of GPT-3 in 2022 brought AI into the spotlight, the company pivoted to offer scaling services for serving and training large language models, data curation, inferencing, reinforcement learning, and other tasks. The company’s platform is built around Ray, offering developer tools, observability and orchestration.

A deal to buy Anyscale would fall neatly into Nscale’s focus on building vertically to serve compute needs. The neocloud has set up business lines across energy, data centers, orchestration software, and now, with Anyscale, it will also offer workload management and scaling.

“Together, Anyscale and Nscale can co-design the software layer and infrastructure beneath it, something that neither company could do as effectively by optimizing its layer alone,” Anyscale said in a 
statement
.

Nscale this March raised 
$2 billion
 in a Series C round that saw it valued at $14.6 billion. Its investors include Nvidia, Nokia, Blue Owl, Dell, and Norwegian industrial giant Aker. The neocloud has been busy putting that money, as well as 
various
 
debt
 
raises
, to work, securing compute and data center partnerships with the likes of 
Microsoft
, 
British Telecom
, and 
Nordcraft
. 

Anyscale, which was valued at  $1.38 billion in a 2022 
Series C round
, said its revenue increased by 70% in its most recent quarter, compared to the previous sequential quarter. 

Nscale said Anyscale will continue to operate under its own branding and serve its existing customers. The startup’s about 200 employees are all joining Nscale. 

Topics

AI
, 
anyscale
, 
data center infrastructure
, 
nscale

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ram Iyer	

Editor

Ram is a financial and tech reporter and editor. He covered North American and European M&A, equity, regulatory news and debt markets at Reuters and Acuris Global, and has also written about travel, tourism, entertainment and books.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ram by emailing 
ram.iyer@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
