In Brief

Posted:

8:16 AM PDT · August 17, 2026

Image Credits:
Chesnot / Getty Images

Tim De Chant

Nvidia investing $1.5B in SoftBank data center developer behind OpenAI project

Nvidia 
said
 on Monday that it will invest $1.5 billion in SB Energy, a data center linked to SoftBank and OpenAI.

The investment ensures that Nvidia will be the sole supplier of compute infrastructure at OpenAI’s Ports-Pike data center near Cincinnati, Ohio. Nvidia will also provide up to $105 billion in credit to help build the facility, which could scale from an initial 4.25 gigawatts to 8 gigawatts in size, according to 
documents
 the company filed with the SEC.

SB Energy’s existing investors include SoftBank and OpenAI. SoftBank had previously held $5.8 billion worth of Nvidia stock, which it 
sold in November
 to help fund other AI investments.

The data center and power developer will 
build a 9.2 gigawatt natural gas power plant
 on the site, which is land owned by the U.S. Department of Energy. The site previously enriched uranium for the U.S. nuclear arsenal and for U.S. Navy submarines.

The power plant is 
expected to cost $33 billion
. The steep sum reflects the skyrocketing costs of building natural gas power plants, which have 
risen 66% in the last two years
, according to BloombergNEF. 

By the time SB Energy’s power plant and others are completed, they’ll be competing for natural gas with export markets, a confluence that could 
triple natural gas prices
 in some parts of the country.

Topics

AI
, 
data centers
, 
nvidia
, 
OpenAI
, 
Softbank

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Apps

WordPress.com targets the next generation of web creators with a free student plan

Sarah Perez

	21 minutes ago

Transportation

Uber adds Zipline drones to its Eats delivery network

Sean O'Kane

	2 hours ago

Fundraising

Wispr raises $280M at $2B valuation as it looks beyond dictation

Ivan Mehta

	2 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Nvidia investing $1.5B in SoftBank data center developer behind OpenAI project

Tim De Chant

	31 seconds ago

Fundraising

Wispr raises $280M at $2B valuation as it looks beyond dictation

Ivan Mehta

	2 hours ago

In Brief

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

	18 hours ago
