In Brief

Posted:

10:37 AM PDT · July 16, 2026

Image Credits:
whitemay / Getty Images

Tim De Chant

Oil giant BP shutters its corporate venture arm after 20 years

BP has had an on-again, off-again relationship with climate tech. Now, it’s definitely “off.” On top of 
pivoting away
 from clean energy earlier this year, the oil giant 
announced today
 that it was selling the majority of its venture portfolio — more than 10 companies, according to BP — to 
Verdane
, a Nordic private equity firm.

Since BP launched its venture arm in 2007, it has invested in a wide range of industries, many of them focused on the energy transition, including 
green hydrogen
, 
e-mobility
, 
ride-hailing
, 
autonomous vehicles
, 
private jet charters
, and 
geothermal energy
, among other sectors.

In a press release, the company said it would “retain interests in a small number of investments where the technology has the potential to create value for its businesses.” When reached for comment, BP declined to specify which companies it would be keeping. The company also declined to comment on the fate of BP Ventures employees, citing local legal and regulatory requirements, though layoffs seem likely. BP expects the portfolio sale to be completed in the second quarter of 2027.

Over the years, BP Ventures’ varied investments haven’t been terribly successful financially: Axios reporter Alan Neuhauser 
said
 last year that the portfolio was valued at about $1.2 billion, or roughly the same amount that the company had poured into it since establishing the unit in 2006.

Topics

bp ventures
, 
Climate

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Apps

Newsletter platform Beehiiv now lets subscribers chat with each other, adds AI

Ivan Mehta

	37 minutes ago

Social

X cracks down on creators who steal content

Sarah Perez

	57 minutes ago

Apps

Google’s AI Mode now lets you link and interact with select apps

Aisha Malik

	2 hours ago

Latest in Climate

In Brief

Oil giant BP shutters its corporate venture arm after 20 years

Tim De Chant

	17 seconds ago

Startups

Lululemon backs nylon-recycling startup Syntetica in $30M Series A

Anna Heim

	14 hours ago

Climate

Google’s biggest clean power project is 40 miles north of xAI’s unpermitted gas power plant

Tim De Chant

	24 hours ago
