At the Hot Chips conference on Tuesday, OpenAI shared a more detailed look at Jalapeño, including the first batch of benchmark results for the new system. Tested on Semianalysis’s InferenceX benchmark, Jalapeño registered both more tokens per user and more throughput per kilowatt than the currently available state-of-the-art inference processors.

“The bottom line is that the results show a very, very significant performance advance over state of the art,” said Richard Ho, OpenAI’s head of hardware, in a press call. “Jalapeño can serve more AI work per unit of power, while also returning responses more quickly. It’s very efficient to serve a lot of customers, but it can also be very low latency.”

Notably, that comparison is against an Nvidia Blackwell system — but by the time Jalapeño reaches full deployment, the competition may have advanced significantly. Ho estimated that Jalapeño would deploy at the end of 2026 “in very small volumes,” with more significant deployment coming in 2027.

First announced last October, Jalapeño was developed by OpenAI in close collaboration with Broadcom, with OpenAI’s own models assisting in the development process. The company plans to make Jalapeño a multigenerational platform, allowing AI products, models, chips and memory all developed in concert. 

Because of that full-stack approach, OpenAI was able to address specific phases in the inference process that often cause friction during inference processing. In particular, Jalapeño is designed to minimize delays during the prefill and communication phases of processing, which OpenAI says often act as bottlenecks.

“We designed Jalapeño to minimize data movement and communication delays,” the company said in a blog post presenting the results. “This means that model state, including the KV cache used while generating a response, can be explicitly placed and kept local while the system activates the right combination of compute, memory, and networking for each inference phase.”

Topics

AI
, 
Broadcom
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Russell Brandom	

AI Editor

		Russell Brandom has been covering the tech industry since 2012, with a focus on platform policy and emerging technologies. He previously worked at The Verge and Rest of World, and has written for Wired, The Awl and MIT’s Technology Review.
 He can be reached at russell.brandom@techcrunch.com or on Signal at 412-401-5489.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
