In Brief

Posted:

3:43 PM PDT · August 6, 2026

Image Credits:
SeongJoon Cho/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Lucas Ropek

OpenAI’s new AI smart speaker will reportedly sell for between $300 and $400

More details continue to trickle out about OpenAI’s mysterious 
new hardware device
 — described previously as an AI-fueled smart speaker that will be the “
physical manifestation
” of ChatGPT.

Bloomberg now 
reports
 that the device will be “donut-shaped,” designed thusly to allow users to carry it around their home and place it in different locations, like a bedside table or a kitchen counter.

It will be constructed from “high-quality metal,” have a “premium look,” and (in a detail that mystifies) will have distinct “moving parts,” sources told Bloomberg.

It also could be slightly more expensive than your average smart speaker, perhaps $300 to $400 per unit, according to this report. For comparison, most of Amazon’s smart home speakers range in price from $40 on the low end to $240 on the high end.

So, to sum up: an expensive talking AI donut that has … moving parts? OpenAI releasing a smart home device has a certain logic to it, in that it would further integrate ChatGPT into users’ lives. However, historically speaking, smart speakers 
have not always been profitable
 and may prove a 
difficult market to break into
. The potentially high price point also might not help.

The device, which is being developed in partnership with LoveFrom, the design studio founded by famous former Apple developer Jony Ive, will likely be released at some point in 2027, Bloomberg writes. 

The company’s attempt to enter the hardware market has not gone off without a hitch. 
OpenAI is being sued by the current king of hardware, Apple
, which has accused the AI lab of stealing trade secrets. OpenAI has denied wrongdoing.

Topics

AI
, 
ChatGPT
, 
Gadgets
, 
Hardware
, 
In Brief
, 
jony ive
, 
OpenAI

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Get up to $400 off your TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 pass until tomorrow

TechCrunch Events

	2 hours ago

AI

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

	6 hours ago

AI

OpenAI says Apple’s own security practices undermine its trade secrets case

Sarah Perez

	9 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

OpenAI’s new AI smart speaker will reportedly sell for between $300 and $400

Lucas Ropek

	1 hour ago

AI

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

	6 hours ago

Startups

Naïve raises $28.5M to automate the grunt work of setting up and running a company

Ram Iyer

	7 hours ago
