In Brief

Posted:

3:47 PM PDT · July 31, 2026

Image Credits:
Samuel Boivin/NurPhoto / Getty Images

Lucas Ropek

OpenAI reportedly finds evidence that more of its agents ran amok

Much has been made of the incident in which one of OpenAI’s agents broke out of its sandboxed test environment and 
proceeded to hack
 the AI hosting platform Hugging Face. OpenAI has since 
launched an investigation
 into how the incident occurred, which is still ongoing.

Now, anonymous sources have told 
Reuters
 that more of OpenAI’s agents are believed to have escaped their sandboxes. However, one source downplayed the severity, saying that with those escapes, the agents didn’t appear to leave OpenAI’s network to hack into another company’s. TechCrunch reached out to OpenAI for more information.

AI programs acting in bizarre ways has apparently become a weird, almost bragging point for companies. The same week, Anthropic also announced that it 
had discovered not one, but three instances
 in which its agents had escaped test environments and hacked other organizations.

AI companies 
have also been accused
 of using such incidents for marketing purposes — as they generate considerable attention and may underscore how powerful the companies’ products are. The flip side of that is that these disclosures are also 
ramping up discussions
 of government regulations.

Topics

AI
, 
Hugging Face
, 
In Brief
, 
OpenAI

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Anthropic says its own AI models breached three companies during security tests

Kirsten Korosec

	23 hours ago

Security

In the Hugging Face breach, OpenAI’s hacker was noisy and fast — but not unstoppable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	1 day ago

Enterprise

Microsoft is openly competing with OpenAI, Anthropic more than ever

Julie Bort

	2 days ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

OpenAI reportedly finds evidence that more of its agents ran amok

Lucas Ropek

	51 minutes ago

Apps

India is starting to pay for apps, not just download them

Jagmeet Singh

	3 hours ago

In Brief

Google nixes its Earth AI feature one day after launch, amid criticism it would spread misinformation

Lucas Ropek

	4 hours ago
