OpenAI admitted Tuesday that one of its AI models breached the systems of Hugging Face, the unaffiliated AI hosting platform, during an internal cybersecurity test that went awry. The models reportedly escaped their isolated testing environment and reached Hugging Face’s systems from there. Hugging Face initially 
attributed the breach
 to an “external AI agent.”

In 
a blog post published Tuesday afternoon
, OpenAI detailed the steps that led the models to compromise the service.

“After investigating, we now know that this particular incident was driven by a combination of OpenAI models — including GPT‑5.6 Sol and an even more capable pre-release model, all with reduced cyber refusals for evaluation purposes — while being internally tested on a benchmark⁠ of cyber capabilities,” the post reads.

In particular, the breach appears to have focused on 
ExploitGym
, a publicly hosted benchmark measuring models’ ability to execute attacks based on existing vulnerabilities. Benchmarks like ExploitGym are commonly used in model training to refine specific skills, but this is the first known incident in which that testing resulted in an actual cyberattack.

In this case, the model in question should not have even had internet access, outside of a specific tool that enabled models to install software packages they might need to complete their task. Instead, the model was able to find an undisclosed vulnerability in the package-installer program, which it used to access the broader internet at will.

“The models were hyperfocused on finding a solution for ExploitGym, going to extreme lengths to achieve a rather narrow testing goal,” OpenAI’s post reads. “After gaining Internet access, the models inferred that Hugging Face potentially hosted models, datasets and solutions for ExploitGym. Knowing this, the model searched for and successfully found ways to gain access to secret information that it could use to cheat the evaluation.”

Ultimately, the models found vulnerabilities in Hugging Face’s infrastructure that allowed them to “obtain test solutions directly from Hugging Face’s production database,” effectively providing the answers to the benchmark.

For Hugging Face, the apparent result was a sophisticated and aggressive cyberattack, with “many thousands of individual actions across a swarm of short-lived sandboxes, with self-migrating command-and-control staged on public services,” as the company stated in its initial disclosure.

OpenAI has identified and reported the vulnerabilities in the package installer and is working with Hugging Face to investigate the incident further. The company also said it would implement new controls on both model testing and the related infrastructure, meant to prevent similar incidents in the future.

It’s unclear whether OpenAI will face any legal consequences as a result of the breach, although it’s likely that the models’ actions violated the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act.

Nevertheless, the result is an unusually vivid illustration of the power and dangers of frontier AI models operating on long time horizons. As OpenAI researcher Micah Carroll 
posted in response to the news
, “If this doesn’t convince you that misalignment risks are going to be a key concern going forward, I don’t know what will.”

Topics

AI
, 
Hugging Face
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Russell Brandom	

AI Editor

		Russell Brandom has been covering the tech industry since 2012, with a focus on platform policy and emerging technologies. He previously worked at The Verge and Rest of World, and has written for Wired, The Awl and MIT’s Technology Review.
 He can be reached at russell.brandom@techcrunch.com or on Signal at 412-401-5489.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan
