OpenAI is 
sunsetting
 Atlas, the AI-powered browser it 
launched in October
 with ChatGPT at its core. But it’s not giving up on the idea that AI should help people browse the web. Instead, it’s taking some of the agentic browsing features it tested in Atlas and redistributing them across ChatGPT’s desktop app and a Google Chrome extension. 

The move to shut down Atlas comes a few months after OpenAI’s CEO of applications Fidji Simo told the team to 
cut back on “side quests,”
 which led to the AI firm shutting down its AI 
video generation tool Sora
.

For much of the past year, the AI industry had been engaged in a 
war to unseat Chrome
 as the place where people spend most of their time online. Perplexity launched Comet, The Browser Company launched Dia, and Google and Microsoft have updated Chrome and Edge, respectively, with new AI-powered features. 

After a few months of experimenting, OpenAI appears to have concluded that the browser is a feature, not the destination. So it’s folding Atlas’s browser-like agent capabilities into the places people already work — and that includes Chrome. 

OpenAI is launching a ChatGPT extension on Chrome that gives it access to the context of the page you’re viewing, lets users ask questions about webpages, summarize content, or start longer tasks all from the browser. It’s a direct competitor to Google’s Gemini Side Panel, which performs several of the same tasks. 

OpenAI is also boosting its ChatGPT desktop app by featuring a more robust browser that allows users to browse websites, log into accounts, download files, and interact with web pages without leaving ChatGPT. A separate cloud browser runs remotely on OpenAI’s servers as a place where the app’s agents can complete tasks on a user’s behalf. 

Together, the updates turn ChatGPT into a continuous workspace that spans Chrome, the desktop app, and an AI agent. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI browser
, 
atlas
, 
chatgpt atlas
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Rebecca Bellan	

Senior Reporter

Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing 
rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant
