OpenAI is making yet another big, visible bet on India. It has appointed former Uber India and South Asia president Prabhjeet Singh as its first managing director for the country to scale its presence in what it has called its second-largest market after the U.S.

Singh, who announced his resignation from Uber on Friday, will join OpenAI in September and report to Kiran Mani, the company’s managing director for Asia Pacific, the company told TechCrunch. He will be responsible for OpenAI’s performance in India across consumer growth, enterprise adoption, partnerships, regulatory engagement, and operations, the company said.

The hire marks OpenAI’s latest investment in India. The company 
opened its first office in New Delhi
 last August and earlier this year said it would 
establish new offices in Mumbai and Bengaluru
. In 2024, it hired former Truecaller and Meta executive Pragya Misra to lead public policy and partnerships before expanding her role to head of strategy and global affairs last year. OpenAI had earlier 
brought on former Twitter India head Rishi Jaitly
 as a senior adviser to help establish its engagement with the Indian government on AI policy.

Over the past few months, OpenAI struck partnerships in the nation spanning 
higher education
, 
enterprise payments
, 
AI-powered commerce
, and 
web streaming
, while 
also becoming part
 of the country’s 
growing data center build-out
. OpenAI has pointed to 
India’s rapidly growing adoption of ChatGPT
 as a sign of the market’s importance. Indian conglomerates Reliance and Tata Group are also among its early partners in the market.

The company has simultaneously ramped up hiring in India, with 
openings
 including AI deployment engineers, developer experience engineers, a developer marketing lead, a partner director, and solutions engineers.

India has emerged as one of the key battlegrounds for U.S. AI companies, driven by its vast developer base, more than a billion internet users, and surging demand for generative AI. Rival Anthropic 
opened its India office in Bengaluru
 in late 2025 and earlier this year 
named former Microsoft India managing director Irina Ghose
 as its India head.

Topics

AI
, 
India
, 
OpenAI
, 
Prabhjeet Singh
, 
Startups
, 
Transportation
, 
Uber

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

Slate Auto’s radically simple electric truck starts at $24,950

Sean O'Kane

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Beyond Siri: Here are the practical AI features coming to your iPhone in iOS 27

Sarah Perez

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal
