Last week, an unreleased model built by OpenAI 
breached Hugging Face’s systems
 during internal testing, and a lot of theoretical research suddenly became very practical. The hack was the first verifiable case of an AI lab losing control of its own model, chaining together exploits to gain access it never should have had. But while the AI industry has been united in its alarm, a split has emerged in how researchers want to respond.

For some, the problem is a basic cybersecurity issue: The sandbox failed to contain the model, and Hugging Face’s cybersecurity systems failed to keep it out. Those problems can be solved by patching bugs and building more robust control and containment methods for increasingly capable AI that is prone to go rogue in autonomous environments. 

But another camp takes a more pessimistic view. For them, AI’s rapidly increasing capabilities mean that trying to control rogue models is a losing game. The only robust security comes from making sure the models aren’t trying to escape in the first place — a challenge often referred to as alignment. In alignment terms, the problem is that OpenAI’s model was trying to cheat, and solving that problem is more urgent than short-term containment efforts.

Judging by its public statements, OpenAI is taking both camps seriously. The company has rushed to patch the bugs involved in the hack, and it referenced both alignment and monitoring approaches in its statement after the breach became public. But the company’s response also suggests a philosophy that has left many safety researchers alarmed: Rather than slowing down or stopping the development of more capable models, it should instead focus on building stronger cages around them.  

“As models take on longer and more complex tasks, failures that evaluations miss may carry greater consequences,” OpenAI said in a 
postmortem of the incident
. “We will keep working to narrow the gap between evaluation and deployment: testing models over longer trajectories, improving alignment, building monitoring that can intervene, and giving users clearer visibility and control.”

OpenAI’s latest frontier model is more likely than its predecessor to engage in misaligned behaviors. 
Image Credits:
OpenAI

There’s also reason to think OpenAI’s models are becoming less aligned as they become more powerful. According to 
OpenAI’s system card
 ,GPT-5.6 Sol is significantly more prone to agentic misalignment than its predecessor, GPT-5.5. In deployment simulations, the company also found the model was more likely to circumvent restrictions, engage in destructive actions, and perform unauthorized data transfers than GPT-5.5. Those figures were largely overlooked on first release, but in the wake of the breach, they’re getting a second look — particularly since Sol was one of the models involved.

In a 
social media post
, OpenAI’s Head of Strategic Futures, Dean Ball, argued that monitoring and transparency were the best ways to keep those tendencies in check. 

“These issues will become more salient as the capabilities of models improve, and as the stakes of their deployment grow,” he said. “The solution is neither alarmism nor complacency. Instead, I believe the solution lies in careful measurement and monitoring, an engineering mentality, and transparency.”

One former OpenAI researcher told TechCrunch that the firm tends to focus on “outer alignment” rather than “inner alignment” — essentially the difference between an AI system that understands a set of values and can represent them convincingly, and one that actually has those values at its core. In this case, outer alignment wasn’t enough to convince the model that it shouldn’t cheat on the test.

OpenAI did not respond to repeated requests for more information. 

For alignment-focused researchers, OpenAI’s response isn’t good enough. Zvi Mowshowitz, a writer who focuses on new AI developments, argued that OpenAI’s decision to treat the incident as an infrastructure problem may help solve the immediate cybersecurity issues, but it will fail in the long term. 

“This is an alignment problem,” 
Mowshowitz
 wrote
 in a recent Substack blog. “This is the models being misaligned, and all of the OpenAI models showing severe signs of exactly the problem we are all most worried about, in a way that is likely embedded into their training on a deep level. The entire training pipeline needs to be addressed in this light, or it will only get worse.”

Several experts told TechCrunch that the incident is evidence that today’s training methods produce systems that optimize for outcomes rather than internalize human intentions. 

Redwood Research, a nonprofit AI safety and security research organization, classified OpenAI’s model behavior in this case as “score-seeking misalignment,” a pattern in which AI models try to get a high score regardless of instructions, side effects, or downstream consequences. 

“Models with these alignment properties could set up a ‘Potemkin village’ of false successes to make it look like things are fine when they’re not,” Alex Mallen and Girish Gupta, two researchers at Redwood, wrote in 
a recent paper
. 

Score-seeking behavior and other misalignment isn’t unique to OpenAI. Anthropic has published several papers on emergent misalignment behaviors that surface when its frontier models are optimized or placed in autonomous environments, including 
deception
, 
reward-hacking
, and 
malicious autonomy
. 

“We still consistently see models trying to circumvent constraints and act deceptively when they are asked to do tasks at the edge of their abilities,” Neev Parikh, an AI safety researcher at alignment nonprofit METR, told TechCrunch via email. “In our 
frontier risk report
, we saw this behavior fairly consistently, despite efforts from companies to try and reduce this behavior.”

Implicit in OpenAI’s response to the Hugging Face incident is the assumption that development will continue on even more capable systems, whether they are suitably aligned at their core or not. Going back to the drawing board isn’t really an option when the business models of AI firms depend on delivering the next generation of models. If it may never be possible to know with certainty that a model is fully aligned, then the practical question comes down to how to safely contain and control increasingly capable systems.

“There’s not yet a good understanding of how to align the most capable AI systems, but there’s much more consensus about how to control them,” Steven Adler — a former safety researcher at OpenAI and current chief scientist of 
Guidelight AI Standards
, an organization that publishes a standard for avoiding incidents like the Hugging Face one — told TechCrunch. “Every company has a ways to go in achieving this.”

Topics

AI
, 
ai alignment
, 
ai safety
, 
Hugging Face
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Rebecca Bellan	

Senior Reporter

Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing 
rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal.

View Bio
