OpenAI released its official report Wednesday on the Hugging Face breach, offering the clearest picture yet of how an unusual chain of events allowed an AI model to escape its testing environment and triggered a sprawling cybersecurity incident.

The report, released more than a month after the incident became public, spans several discrete cybersecurity compromises.

“This incident reflects misaligned behavior in an outlier scenario involving a rare and unexpected confluence of events: the presence of impossible tasks in the ExploitGym evaluation, model persistence over long task horizons, and messages to peer models that caused those models to deviate from their goal,” the report reads.

Many of the details in OpenAI’s report were previously made public in 
a Black Hat presentation on August 6
, but OpenAI’s official report gives a more thorough accounting of the incident, including more detail on the testing that initiated it. The report also gives critical new detail into how OpenAI aims to prevent future incidents, including chain-of-thought monitoring and a more advanced system for halting rogue agents.”

METR and Redwood Research also conducted third-party assessments of the models’ behavior during the incident; both groups are planning to publish their own reports on the incident.

In broad strokes, the report describes how an OpenAI model was presented with an unsolvable problem in testing and proceeded to chain together previously undiscovered exploits in order to bypass security measures and complete its task. The model initially compromised the Artifactory package management tool in order to gain access to the internet, then compromised various systems across OpenAI, Hugging Face, and other vendors.

The report gives critical new details about the models that carried out the breach. The primary model was from the same family as OpenAI’s forthcoming Astra model, although the report emphasizes that it was “a distinct model with different post-training, where much of a model’s behavior is shaped.”

Because OpenAI was testing the model’s capabilities, it was also unrestrained by the normal classifiers meant to prevent models from compromising digital infrastructure.

“OpenAI estimates maximal cyber capabilities by running this evaluation without the production classifiers intended to prevent models from pursuing high-risk cyber activity,” the report explains. “These evaluations are important so that OpenAI can measure models’ underlying capabilities and design appropriate safeguards.”

The report also gives significant new information about OpenAI’s security changes going forward, building on the heightened monitoring and alignment efforts 
made public last week
.

In particular, the company is increasing its monitoring of AI agents’ “chain of thought,” a working space in which AI systems record short-term reactions and goals. That monitoring will be paired with 24/7 escalation systems, as well as new tooling to halt workloads that are deemed unsafe.

“These changes are intended to improve both the breadth and speed of detection — from infrastructure anomalies to potentially concerning model behavior — and pair that visibility with mechanisms for rapid containment,” the report states. “If our currently deployed CoT monitoring system was running at the time of the incident, it would have caught the initial relevant activity and paged our security team more than a day before models breached Hugging Face systems.”

Topics

AI
, 
Hugging Face
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Russell Brandom	

AI Editor

		Russell Brandom has been covering the tech industry since 2012, with a focus on platform policy and emerging technologies. He previously worked at The Verge and Rest of World, and has written for Wired, The Awl and MIT’s Technology Review.
 He can be reached at russell.brandom@techcrunch.com or on Signal at 412-401-5489.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
