Everyone’s waiting for Nvidia to confirm this week’s most interesting tech deal: A 
reported $13 billion acquisition
 of Hugging Face, a platform for sharing open-weight AI models and benchmarks.

Now best known as the target for a team of reward-hacking OpenAI agents, Hugging Face is at the center of the ecosystem of developers building and deploying LLMs that aren’t owned by frontier labs. Think of it as a kind of GitHub for the AI era.

Rumors of that deal come after Nvidia struck a $6 billion agreement with Poolside, an open-weight model builder, that will see most of its employees move to the chip-making giant. And two weeks ago, Stripe acquired OpenRouter, the top provider of open-weight models to businesses, for more than $7 billion. 

That’s a lot of capital pouring into a sector based on giving stuff away, and it reflects the latest trends in the AI sector. 

For Nvidia, there’s a need to avoid further dependence on its deals with the major hyperscalers and frontier labs. That’s particularly the case when major AI model builders like OpenAI and Google are also building their own inference chips, like 
OpenAI’s Jalapeño
, whose capabilities were announced this week. If model builders are making chips, Nvidia wants a chunk of the model-making business.

Nvidia already builds its own 
Nemotron family
 of open-weight models, but their uptake hasn’t been huge. By taking control of the largest U.S. developer space for open models, the company will have access to a mass of users it can drive to its chips and standards.

There are also growing questions about the cost of AI inference, which has companies exploring cheaper models built by Chinese companies like Moonshot, DeepSeek, and Alibaba. Right now, adoption is relatively small but growing — just 6% of companies use open-weight models, according to a 
survey of spending data
 by Ramp, or just 2% of software engineers 
measured by Jellyfish
, which makes tools for developers.

Nik Albarran, the AI product lead at Jellyfish, told TechCrunch that open-weight models are primarily used by companies whose products rely on repeated inference workloads, like those providing customer service chats. Because these are high-volume tasks with a lot of repetition, an open-weight model can be tuned to answer the questions cheaply.

That’s certainly how Stripe has framed its OpenRouter acquisition. “Tokens are the central currency for companies building with AI, and it’s clear that the real-world economic potential will depend on making good use of scarce compute resources,” Patrick Collison, Stripe’s co-founder and CEO, said in a statement.

For coding and agentic tasks, however, varying requests and more reasoning mean that frontier models often win out, in part because the proprietary labs provide easier access, and in some cases a token subsidy. Albarran says that as companies dial in AI workflows, it will be easier to turn to open models. Still, the main reason companies look to those models now is for control and configurability, not because of spending concerns.

“There are not many companies where that is the case yet … [but] if the prices continue to go up from the frontier labs, more and more companies will be forced to at least consider it,” Albarran told TechCrunch. “When your AI-driven workflows are much more mature, that’s when it makes sense to invest in self-hosting models.”

Lin Qiao is the CEO of Fireworks, a leading open-weight models router and host for corporate users that is often discussed as a potential acquisition for a tech giant. Qiao says her company processes 40 trillion tokens a day, more than either of Gemini’s or OpenAI’s APIs.

Fireworks’ bet is on model diversity: As LLMs proliferate and improve, it will be easier for companies to train them specifically for their needs. “Every single app company should consider hiring an in-house researcher,” she told TechCrunch last week. “They can use their product and product data to build their own model. The future is actually specialized intelligence. Literally, every single company should have their own model per use case, and that will happen automatically.”

It’s easy to forget how early we are in the development of AI as a tool and a business. The dominance of OpenAI and Anthropic, however, isn’t inevitable. As the tech giants look to hedge their bets on the biggest labs, the allure of open technology is proving tough to resist.

Topics

AI
, 
Hugging Face
, 
nvidia
, 
openrouter

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim Fernholz	

Senior Reporter

		Tim Fernholz is a journalist who writes about technology, finance and public policy. He has closely covered the rise of the private space industry and is the author of 
 Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and the New Space Race.
 Formerly, he was a senior reporter at Quartz, the global business news site, for more than a decade, and began his career as a political reporter in Washington, D.C. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing tim.fernholz@techcrunch.com or via an encrypted message to tim_fernholz.21 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Nvidia closes in on Hugging Face acquisition

Connie Loizos

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Hugging Face reportedly in talks to be acquired for $13B

Rebecca Bellan

Who’s behind the new ‘stealth model’ Ox Alpha?

Anthony Ha

Flock CEO calls for ‘compromise’ as surveillance company faces growing backlash

Anthony Ha

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim
