A coalition of state attorneys general has reportedly opened an investigation into OpenAI.

The company was 
served with a subpoena from New York’s attorney general on Friday
, according to The Wall Street Journal. That subpoena sought documents related to a broad range of topics including the company’s advertising, user engagement and retention, model sycophancy, handling of consumer data and health data, and treatment of minors and seniors.

TechCrunch has reached out to OpenAI and the New York attorney general’s office for confirmation. A company spokesperson told the WSJ that OpenAI is cooperating with the investigation.

“AI is a new and powerful technology, and we work every day to safely bring its benefits to people in a responsible way,” the spokesperson said in a statement. “We take the concerns raised by state attorneys general seriously and intend to engage constructively with their offices.”

According to Bloomberg
, the spokesperson also said that ChatGPT now “includes a more protective experience for minors and people experiencing difficult situations, with safeguards that direct them to real-world resources and trusted human contacts.” The company declined to specify which states are involved in the investigation or to share more details about what information was requested.

OpenAI recently 
defeated its co-founder Elon Musk
 in a high-profile trial, after Musk accused the company of violating its founding agreement. (Musk’s lead attorney said he will appeal the decision.)

However, OpenAI still faces lawsuits over everything from 
alleged copyright infringement
 to 
ChatGPT’s alleged role in suicide
. Earlier this month, Florida Attorney General James Uthmeier 
sued OpenAI and its CEO Sam Altman
, claiming that OpenAI and Altman “ignored internal and external safety warnings, put children at great risk, and allowed a dangerous product to reach millions of Floridians.”

Altman recently 
apologized to the community of Tumbler Ridge, Canada
 after a mass shooting; he acknowledged that OpenAI failed to alert law enforcement after the company flagged and banned the suspected shooter’s ChatGPT account.

The company announced this week that it has 
filed confidentially to go public
.

Topics

AI
, 
Government & Policy
, 
OpenAI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Anthony Ha	

Anthony Ha is TechCrunch’s weekend editor. Previously, he worked as a tech reporter at Adweek, a senior editor at VentureBeat, a local government reporter at the Hollister Free Lance, and vice president of content at a VC firm. He lives in New York City.

You can contact or verify outreach from Anthony by emailing 
anthony.ha@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker
