A 
number of companies
, betting on various architectural approaches, are trying to build the first commercially viable quantum computer capable of significantly outperforming current systems.

Oratomic
, which entered the race earlier this year with the goal of developing the first utility-scale quantum computer by the end of the decade, said this week that it has raised $300 million. The massive Series A round was co-led by ARCH Venture Partners, Spark Capital, and Khosla Ventures, with participation from Bezos Expeditions, Index Ventures, General Catalyst, Lowercarbon Capital, Bain Capital, and others.

Founded by Caltech physicists, Oratomic uses lasers, which act as optical tweezers, to hold individual atoms in place as the basis for its quantum computer.

The startup was launched after its researchers discovered that their approach can correct errors using significantly fewer qubits — the basic unit in quantum computing — than previously thought possible. Since quantum computers are sensitive to noise, effective error correction is the key to turning them into truly useful tools.

“You would have not previously been able to convince any of us to start a quantum computing company, because we just thought it was way too far away,” Oratomic’s co-founder and CEO Dolev Bluvstein told TechCrunch. “Only when we made this recent breakthrough did we simultaneously all change our minds.”

While most other quantum companies are making prototypes available to research scientists and corporations, Oratomic has no plans to develop or sell these systems, known as noisy intermediate-scale quantum, or NISQ.

Bluvstein noted that Oratomic shouldn’t be compared to PsiQuantum, a startup valued at 
$7 billion
 last September, which is also bypassing the NISQ stage and aims to deliver a viable, million-qubit quantum computer by the end of next year.

Oratomic’s approach is fundamentally simpler and less expensive, Bluvstein argued. “The difference is that we need roughly 10,000 to 20,000 qubits to build a useful computer, and we have already experimentally demonstrated all of the core components required of that computer at a slightly smaller scale,” he said.

A full-scale quantum computer could facilitate breakthroughs in any field requiring complex calculations, from biotech, chemistry, and logistics to artificial intelligence and cryptography.

Companies working toward building these machines and developing software for their use have seen a wave of enthusiasm from investors recently. Several startups in the space, including Infleqtion and Quantinuum, have gone public this year. Meanwhile, existing public companies like Rigetti and IonQ have seen their share prices surge over the past 18 months.

Still, investor Vinod Khosla is so confident Oratomic will build the first fault-tolerant quantum computer that he 
wrote on X
 it was his firm’s “largest initial investment yet.”

Topics

Arch Venture Partners
, 
deep tech
, 
Fundraising
, 
Khosla Ventures
, 
Oratomic
, 
quantum computing
, 
Spark Capital
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Marina Temkin	

Reporter, Venture

Marina Temkin is a venture capital and startups reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she wrote about VC for PitchBook and Venture Capital Journal. Earlier in her career, Marina was a financial analyst and earned a CFA charterholder designation.

You can contact or verify outreach from Marina by emailing 
marina.temkin@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 347-683-3909 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha
