When I first opened the box the 
Oura Ring 5
 comes in, my first thought was, “Wow, that’s tiny.” My second thought was that this is a smart ring a lot of people have been waiting for. 

As someone who got quite used to wearing the 
Oura Ring 4 Ceramic
, I was surprised how noticeably smaller and lighter the new Ring 5 is.

The Ring 5, which Oura describes as the world’s smallest smart ring, is 40% smaller than its predecessor, measuring 6.09 mm wide compared to the Ring 4’s 7.90 mm, and 2.28 mm thick compared to the Ring 4’s 2.88 mm. Although the exact weight depends on your ring size, the Ring 5 weighs between 2 grams and 2.69 grams, while the Ring 4 weighs between 3.3 grams and 5.2 grams. 

I found that these changes dramatically improve the ring’s comfort, and also make it more aesthetically pleasing compared to its predecessor. The ring no longer screams smart ring, and blends in with the rest of your jewelry. Oura says the Ring 5 is designed to look and feel like any other ring, and I think the company has achieved that. 

The Ring 5 starts at $399.

Whenever I saw people discussing Oura’s smart rings, there always seemed to be two opposing viewpoints. One side swore the ring had changed their life, and the other argued that it was too bulky and that they would never consider getting one. I think the Oura Ring 5 changes the game and appeals to a larger audience, including those who shied away from smart rings due to their bulkiness. 

Image Credits:
Aisha Malik/TechCrunch

Oura was aware of the demand for a smaller ring. The company told me that users had been asking for a thinner and more compact design, prompting the company to comply. Of course, Oura has also had to update its rings in response to competition from subscription-free rivals like RingConn and Ultrahuman, both of which sell rings lighter than the Ring 4. 

While I never found the Oura Ring 4 overtly uncomfortable, the Ring 5 feels noticeably better on my finger. With the Ring 4, I was always aware that I was wearing it, but with this latest model, I often forget it’s there, which is great for people like me who don’t always wear jewelry. 

I also found that the ring’s smaller size makes it more comfortable to wear at night for tracking sleep and health metrics. A smart ring is more comfortable than a smartwatch for nighttime wear, and the Ring 5’s smaller design lets it be even less noticeable at night.

As for battery life, the Ring 5 lasts between six and nine days, compared to the five to eight day range on the Ring 4. In my experience, the improvement seems to hold up. The ring arrived 50% charged, and after about 30 minutes on the charger following the set-up process, it reached 75%. After five days of continuous wear, I still haven’t needed to charge it, and I’m down to about 25% battery. 

It’s worth mentioning that the Ring 5 comes in fewer sizes (sizes 6 to 13) than the Ring 4 (sizes 4 to 15). Oura told me that the fewer sizing options are due to the challenges of manufacturing smaller rings in the new form factor. The company said it chose to focus on the most popular sizes, and is monitoring demand for the discontinued sizes.

Image Credits:
Oura

The Ring 5 comes in six finishes, including a redesigned Gold with a truer gold tone, an updated Deep Rose with a copper-like look, plus Silver, Brushed Silver, Black, and Stealth.

Oura sent me the Gold version, and I really like how it looks. Unlike previous gold Oura rings, this new color doesn’t have a yellow tinge to it, and instead has a subtler tone that feels closer to actual gold jewelry. It’s worth noting that the Gold finish, along with the Stealth and Deep Rose finishes, is priced at $499, exactly $100 more than the standard finishes. 

As for durability, Oura says the Ring 5 is more scratch-resistant than previous generations thanks to a new finishing technique, but I can’t fully speak to durability yet considering I’ve only had it for five days. There was a moment when I thought I had scratched the ring’s alignment guide line when I’d grabbed a rusty swing chain, but it turned out that rust had only rubbed on to the ring, and I was able to clean it off with a cloth.

Oura says the Ring 5’s new physical vapor deposition (PVD) coating process ensures the wearable retains its premium “out-of-the-box” look for longer. It will be interesting to see how this promise holds up.

The Oura Ring 5 is being launched alongside 
new software features
 that are also coming to the Oura Ring Gen3 and later products, including Blood Pressure Signals and Nighttime Breathing. I can’t speak to those yet, as they’re set to launch later this month. 

Overall, the Oura Ring 5 is a notable upgrade over the Ring 4 in terms of comfort and aesthetics, making it a great choice for anyone who has yet to buy a smart ring. As for people who already have the Oura Ring 4, the decision to upgrade depends on your budget and how much you value aesthetics, especially since the Ring 4 will get all of the new software updates.

Topics

Gaming
, 
Hardware
, 
oura
, 
oura ring 5
, 
smart rings

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
