Danielle Egan and Athena Leong know how to have fun. Between the two of them, they’ve organized 
a citywide scavenger hunt in San Francisco
 and turned a viral prank into an 
exclusive NYC restaurant
 for a night. They even created an alternative to a running club for socializing, 
dubbed a “sit club
,” where people just bring their chairs and relax. Now, with their new startup, 
Outernet
, the co-founders want to help others add more fun to their lives, too.

The app’s name is inspired by the concept of using the internet as a tool to get you to go outside, hence “outernet.” It’s one of several apps that helps you save the things you see online — like local events, restaurants or bars to try, or other city landmarks — and turn them into a list of to-dos for exploring the world around you.

Outernet’s pitch is that instead of simply liking a post about something you’d like to see or do on social media, you should share it to its app, where it will track the activity or place you want to visit for you in an organized interface. 
(Invite codes to try the app for yourself are at the bottom of this post). 

What makes 
Outernet
 different from others in the space, like Albo, Tabi, or Plotline, is who’s behind it: founders who have devoted much of their time to playfulness and having fun offline. Now, they want to bring that same spirit into their app. 

Image Credits:
Outernet

“In my free time, I’m very passionate about getting people to go outside and do things,” explains 
Egan
, whose offline persona is quite different from her former day job working in product BizOps at LinkedIn. “I just love capturing attention in unexpected ways and delivering delightful things.” She says the thesis behind the app is becoming the “motivation engine for IRL” — something that removes the friction between wanting to do something and actually going out to do it.

Outernet taps into an already common consumer behavior. As you scroll TikTok and Instagram, you’re often inspired by a creator’s post, so you’ll save it in the app as a reminder. But then you promptly forget about the idea as you continue to consume more content. Outernet solves this problem by keeping track of the things you want to do or places you want to visit, all in one place.

Image Credits:
Outernet

To save a post to the app, you’ll tap the share option from the source app, like TikTok or Instagram, then scroll through the list of places you can share to until you find Outernet. You can also paste in social media URLs or website links directly into the app, or upload a photo of something you see, like a flyer.

To organize everything, Outernet leverages AI to pull relevant information, like the date, time, location, and details about the activity you want to try or the location of a place you’d like to visit. Events are saved to a chronological feed, which you can revisit whenever you’re looking for something to do. Other activities without a date, as well as places you’d like to visit, are organized into separate tabs within the app. You can also save events to your Apple or Google Calendar or view them in Outernet’s map.

Image Credits:
Outernet

The app can also send proactive reminders and nudges that encourage you to go do the things you’ve saved.

Then, as you explore places in the real world, you can “stamp” them as such, building what will eventually become a passport documenting your activities.

Image Credits:
Outernet

“We’re thinking of different ways of creating maybe some sort of like passport book where you can look at all the things [you’ve done] and maybe share that with friends and get some sort of sense of pride of that,” Egan says of future product plans. They’re also thinking of using traditional gamification techniques to encourage activity, like giving out stamps when you reach different milestones. 

The idea for Outernet came out of the co-founders’ experience designing a citywide scavenger hunt in San Francisco, called “Pursuit,” which began three years ago and is now held annually. The monthlong game drew participation from about 1.5% of San Francisco’s population during its most recent run.

As the founders chatted with participants, they found that people didn’t get involved because they loved scavenger hunts or adventure games; they just wanted an excuse to go outside. This sparked an idea.

“We just realized that people really have an appetite for doing things, like going on adventures. This is the new trend,” notes 
Leong
, whose background is in computer science and child development, before she landed a job in adventure game design.

@outernet.app
 
go on more adventures!!! 
#thingstodo
 
#whimsy
 
#saveforlater
 
♬ original sound – estwne

“There are so many incredible community events, and being community organizers ourselves, we’re very plugged into that scene,” Egan adds. “What’s so hard is there are these boots on the ground — incredible community organizers who are hosting these amazing events, and they just don’t know how to reach people because marketing and grabbing people’s attention is such a different skill set. And that’s something that we are exceptional in. So we see ourselves as the conduit,” she says. 

Outernet’s app has been on the market for roughly two months and is already profitable from its premium subscription ($6.99/mo or $39.99/year), which lets you save more items per day. It has around 18,000 users in total, and the team is experimenting rapidly with new ideas.

The founders are now having casual conversations with investors about their next steps, but finding the right fit is key.

“We want to bring on investors — if we do — [who are] people who are really aligned with us,” says Leong. “We’re whimsical, and we have to find investors that match.”

Outernet is invite-only and available on 
iOS
, with an Android 
waitlist
. TechCrunch readers can use the invite code “coffeewalk” to skip the waitlist.

Topics

Apps
, 
Apps
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Data centers may face temporary power cuts to prevent blackouts on largest US grid

Tim De Chant
