Ozlo
, the sleep earbuds startup from 
former Bose engineers
, is launching its next device. On Tuesday, the company unveiled Sleepbuds 2, an updated version of its original product that tackles key areas of improvement, including battery life, connectivity, and sound quality. The new model costs $279, a 12% increase from its predecessor.

The launch marks Ozlo’s first major update since the release of its original device and reflects the company’s evolution from a continuation of Bose’s brand into its own sleep platform.

Image Credits:
Ozlo

The original Sleepbuds, 
launched
 in late 2024, were meant to fill the hole left by Bose’s departure from the category the year prior. Ozlo’s co-founders, N.B. Patil, Brian Mulcahey, and Charlie Taylor, were Bose veterans who had been deeply involved with the Sleepbuds program and saw the potential to continue the business. They 
acquired
 and 
licensed the Sleepbuds research and IP
 for their new company, Ozlo, making its first product essentially a continuation of Bose’s earlier efforts.

The initial earbuds, which now have more than 200,000 customers, were smaller and more low-profile than AirPods. This made them more comfortable to wear at night, especially for side sleepers. They also offered built-in sleep sounds, Bluetooth streaming, passive noise blocking, an in-ear alarm, sleep tracking, and other features.

The Sleepbuds 2 promise a range of improvements, including, most notably, 14 hours of battery life instead of roughly 10 hours. Plus, the charging case can now store enough power for two to three nights of use per charge and adds a button that lets users play a sleep sound or snooze the alarm without reaching for their phone.

Image Credits:
Ozlo

The update also tackles one of customers’ biggest complaints: Bluetooth connectivity, which could be flaky, although software updates improved it over time. Ozlo claims the Sleepbuds 2 offer longer Bluetooth range, a more reliable connection, and dedicated pairing controls for faster setup. The improvements come from a redesigned antenna and extender, 
Ozlo said
.

The audio system has also been updated with a built-in amplifier for better sound masking and improved sound quality. Personalized sound tuning is new, too, optimizing audio for specific use cases such as Spoken Word, Airplane mode, and Focus mode, in addition to a Balanced mode.

Image Credits:
Ozlo

Another new feature is a Sleep Shield, which will block incoming calls, alerts, notifications, and Bluetooth audio streaming. This works if the users hasn’t already enable their phone’s built-in sleep focus mode.

Ozlo’s sleep insights have expanded to include more details around sleep patterns. The biometrics in the buds monitor breathing and movement, while the case monitors room conditions, such as the sound levels, light, and temperature. This can help wearers learn which sleep environments lead to deeper, more restorative sleep, helping them improve their sleep over time.

The company outlined 
its plans to become a broader platform for sleep data
 during an interview with TechCrunch at the Consumer Electronics Show in January, including plans to use AI for better interpret users’ sleep patterns. It is also developing an AI “sleep buddy” that would allow users to chat with about their sleep data.

To kick off the launch, Ozlo is offering a sleep mask and travel case with each purchase for a limited time. The $279 Sleepbuds 2 also ship with four pairs of silicone ear tips in different sizes, the charging case, and a USB-C cable.

As an aside, I purchased my own Ozlo Sleepbuds after reading initial reviews of the product and found them to be an effective tool for blocking out noise and streaming sounds and music, and far more comfortable than sleeping in my AirPods. They never fell out overnight, either.

However, I found that I prefer streaming from the Calm app instead of using Ozlo’s built-in sounds. (Apparently, i’m not alone: Ozlo and Calm 
partnered
 on a co-branded case last year that included a year’s subscription to Calm’s library of sleep sounds, stories, and other sleep experiences.)

I’m looking forward to trying the new Sleepbuds 2 to see if they’re worth the upgrade for an existing Sleepbuds owner like me.

Topics

Hardware
, 
ozlo
, 
sleepbuds
, 
Startups
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
