Pacific Fusion is one step closer to commercializing fusion power after breaking ground Tuesday on a facility in New Mexico designed to generate as much energy as it consumes. 

“It’s a huge step forward for commercial fusion power,” Carrie von Muench, co-founder and chief operating officer at Pacific Fusion, told TechCrunch. “To our knowledge, there’s no such facility being constructed in the country.”

While fusion power startups have been making rapid progress, no experiment or device has been able to generate enough power to offset the energy used by the facility, a milestone the industry calls net facility gain. One device, at the National Ignition Facility, has shown that controlled fusion reactions can 
generate more energy than they consume
, but it is still far short of what would be needed to power the facility.

Pacific Fusion aims to hit net facility gain by 2030, with an eye toward operating a commercial power plant in the mid-2030s. Its commercial-scale reactor will need to generate about five times more energy than the demonstration system, in part to power the additional equipment a power plant requires.

The new facility, in Albuquerque, will test 
Pacific Fusion’s approach to fusion
, which uses intense, tightly coordinated pulses of electricity to create a magnetic field around a fuel target about the size of a pencil eraser, 
squeezing it
 until the fuel atoms fuse.

The demonstration facility will be able to fire a handful of “shots” per day, Keith LeChien, co-founder and chief technical officer at Pacific Fusion, told TechCrunch. A full-size power plant will need to complete one shot per second.

The pulses of electricity will be generated by 156 pulser modules, each of which contains 32 circular stages made up of 10 bricks. Each brick consists of two capacitors, which store power, and one switch, which releases it. Earlier this year, Pacific Fusion tested a one-third-scale version of a pulser module, which 
released 440 gigawatts of peak power
 in 80 nanoseconds. The results were good enough to greenlight the demonstration facility.

In addition to demonstrating net facility gain, Pacific Fusion’s new campus will also host national security-related experiments involving high-yield fusion. The U.S. government has other sites that conduct similar research, like the National Ignition Facility, though that facility is starting to show its age. Each pulse of the new demonstration system will generate on the order of 100 megajoules, about 10 times the output of the National Ignition Facility, LeChien said.

“This exists nowhere in the world,” he said. “China is building these types of facilities, and we intend to be the first to deliver them.”

Pacific Fusion has moved swiftly in the last few years. The company was founded in 2023, making it one of the younger entrants to the field. It’s also among the 
best funded fusion startups
, having raised over $1 billion in a milestone-based Series A round.

The large, gated funding round allowed the company to plan farther in advance, eliminating the need to fundraise every few years, von Muench said. “I don’t think it would have been possible to move at this speed if we hadn’t designed the capital stack the way that we have.” 

Pacific Fusion will need every advantage it can get in the race to deliver a commercial power plant. The field is filling up with similarly well-funded startups, including Commonwealth Fusion Systems, Helion Energy, Proxima Fusion, and Inertia Enterprises, all of which are aiming to connect a fusion power plant to the grid by the mid-2030s, if not earlier. 

Topics

Climate
, 
fusion power
, 
Pacific Fusion

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
