In Brief

Posted:

11:34 AM PDT · July 9, 2026

Image Credits:
Carol Yepes / Getty Images

Julie Bort

Paris-based AI voice startup Gradium raises $100M seed, backed by Nvidia

Gradium, a Paris-based startup that offers voice AI models, re-opened its seed round to new investors, including Nvidia, and has now raised $100 million total for the round, it 
said Thursday. 

The company is using the cash to open an office in the Bay Area and compete for talent there, “strengthening its position at the heart of the world’s leading AI ecosystem,” as Gradium put it. Paris is a major European hub for AI, so this is an interesting acknowledgement of the benefits for AI startups in being close to Anthropic, Google, Meta, and OpenAI.

Gradium originally launched out of stealth in December with $70 million from a roster of impressive investors, including FirstMark Capital, Eurazeo, DST Global Partners, Eric Schmidt, and French telecom billionaire Xavier Niel.

The startup was spun 
out of French AI lab Kyutai
 (a lab backed by Niel). Both Kyutai and Gradium were co-founded by Neil Zeghidour, a researcher who previously worked at Google Brain, DeepMind, and Facebook.

Gradium is working on audio models that deliver voice at scale with ultra-low latency, meaning AI voices that respond almost instantly, without that awkward pause that often creeps into AI agent conversations.  

The company has plenty of competition, though, from other voice AI startups like ElevenLabs, 
valued at $11 billion
 in February, to major model makers known for voice like Google’s Gemini. But Gradium seems to be winning ground anyway. Since its December launch, Gradium says it has landed some big customers, including French auto manufacturer 
Renault.

Topics

AI
, 
Venture

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

How did the government decide OpenAI’s frontier model was safe to release?

Tim Fernholz

	12 minutes ago

Apps

How to stop Meta’s AI image generator from using your Instagram photos

Lauren Forristal

	38 minutes ago

AI

Meta’s new AI chips will begin production in September

Ram Iyer

	1 hour ago

Latest in Venture

In Brief

Paris-based AI voice startup Gradium raises $100M seed, backed by Nvidia

Julie Bort

	11 seconds ago

Startups

Why raising your first found is harder than ever

Maggie Nye

Isabelle Johannessen

	3 hours ago

40 min

Startups

The new rules of early-stage fundraising with Charles Hudson

Maggie Nye

Isabelle Johannessen

	3 hours ago
