Passionfroot
, a German startup building a marketplace connecting B2B creators with brands, said on Wednesday it has raised $15 million in a Series A funding round led by Insight Partners.

Rebecca Liu-Doyle, managing director at Insight Partners, said Passionfroot is placed well at a time when creators are specializing as AI companies look for more visibility.

“Passionfroot has the perfect dynamics on both sides to warrant a true marketplace for B2B creators. On the demand side, there is increasing consumerization of the way B2B brands go to market. That’s a product of, in part, AI technology requiring evangelism, narrative building, and education. On the supply side, there are people who have real expertise, understand a market deeply, and want to create quality content,” she told TechCrunch over a call.

With the funding, the Berlin-based startup’s co-founder and CEO, Jen Phan, is moving to New York, where Passionfroot is opening an office to expand its U.S. operations. The company is also opening an office in São Paulo, and expanding its current headcount of 15 employees.

As AI makes it easier to build products, companies are focusing on using creators to improve brand recall and recognition, Phan said.

“Every head of marketing or growth leader I’m talking to is saying really the same thing: AI is commoditizing software and flooding every category with new products, features, and launches. It’s incredibly crowded and noisy. That is why B2B buyers are going to channels like LinkedIn, a creator’s Substack, or a podcast on YouTube to discover new products and tools,” she said.

Phan said over the last year, the company increased its revenue by 13 times, and onboarded clients such as ElevenLabs, Figma, Replit, Framer, and Gamma.

Since its last fundraise in 2024, the company has released an AI agent called Zest, which helps brands create, execute and monitor the performance of campaigns. Passionfruit claims Zest can also help companies find suitable creators both inside and outside the platform that are suited to its marketing strategy.

The startup says it uses a proprietary creator graph based on data about reach and performance from thousands of campaigns. There’s also a wallet that companies can use to pay creators across the globe, and measure their expenditure. 

Passionfroot claims it has paid at least $10 million to creators on its platform in the last 18 months.

The company says it is working on helping its clients measure how a campaign is impacting AI citations, and how their brand appears in AI-powered answers. The startup is also planning to build AI features for creators, such as helping them with monetization tips and content ideas.

The funding comes as creator platforms like Substack and Beehiiv move to help creators find better monetization opportunities. Beehiiv launched 
a new community and ad marketplace last week
, and Substack has 
introduced subscriber-only perks within newsletters
.

Passionfroot’s Series A also saw participation from existing investors Creandum, Supernode Global, and s16vc. The company has raised more than $21 million so far.

Topics

AI
, 
creator economy
, 
Fundraising
, 
Insight Venture Partners

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Cascade raises $3.5M to help construction firms find and win projects

Dominic-Madori Davis

The browser wars aren’t about search anymore — here are the best alternatives to Chrome and Safari

Lauren Forristal

Passionfroot raises $15M to expand its B2B creator marketplace to the US

Ivan Mehta

WhatsApp adds Apple CarPlay and Android Auto upgrades, iPad sign-ups, and more

Aisha Malik

Glow emerges from stealth at $1.2B valuation to challenge endpoint security in the AI era

Jagmeet Singh

Synthesia’s AI training platform is moving beyond videos into live coaching

Rebecca Bellan

The Anthropic-Physical Intelligence rumor roiling AI Twitter

Connie Loizos
