Patreon is laying off 20% of its workforce, or 93 people, CEO Jack Conte told employees on Thursday. In a memo to staff that was 
shared online
 by the company, Conte said Patreon’s core business is strong but that the platform has to respond to market changes and adjust its cost structure to remain stable, which is why it needs to make the “painful” but necessary cuts.

Conte wrote that “AI has fundamentally transformed the tech industry,” and that the pace of change has “never been more intense.” However, Conte went on to note that Patreon isn’t making the cuts because it wants to replace employees with AI.

“To be clear about the impact of AI on today’s decision: we are 
not
 making the above changes because we believe AI replaces humans,” he wrote. “The more we have learned to use these new tools, the clearer it has become that they are not substitutes for the creativity, judgment, detail orientation, or craftsmanship that our teammates have in spades, nor do they replace the desire for human connection that all of us cherish so deeply. That’s my personal opinion, but more importantly, it’s the foundation of Patreon’s strategy: our product vision and business are both predicated on the value of human creativity and human connection.”

He continued, “AI 
has
 fundamentally transformed the tech industry, though, including how we work, how we build products, how we communicate, and more. That 
does
 have an impact on how we operate and organize.”

Beyond the headcount reduction, Conte said Patreon is also restructuring how it operates, “flattening” its organizational chart and refocusing teams around its top priorities. Affected employees will receive at least 16 weeks of severance pay, plus an additional week for every year worked, healthcare coverage through the end of the year, and a $1,500 stipend to replace their company laptop.

Last week, Patreon 
announced
 that it was partnering with internet infrastructure provider Cloudflare to directly block access to AI bots designed to train their AI models on creators’ work without permission. The company said it had to enhance its efforts on this front because AI scraping has become more sophisticated. The move came as online publishers and creators are grappling with AI companies using their work to train AI models. 

Patreon’s latest round of layoffs is the platform’s largest since it cut 17% of its staff back in 2022. During that earlier round of layoffs, Patreon also closed its offices in Berlin and Dublin.

Topics

Apps
, 
Layoffs
, 
Patreon

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI says Hugging Face was breached by its pre-release models

Russell Brandom

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik
