PayPal is seemingly still open to 
Stripe’s $53.4 billion takeover bid
, just not at the price the latter had offered. 

On the company’s Q2 2026 earnings call on Tuesday, PayPal CEO Enrique Lores didn’t fully shut down the idea of a deal, saying the company would consider a path that created “superior value” for its shareholders.

While that’s not the same as saying, “PayPal’s not for sale,” it still suggests the company doesn’t believe Stripe and Advent International’s 
current offer of $60.50 per share
 values it correctly, especially after the company 
reported
 better-than-expected profit and revenue, and said it had made progress on its turnaround strategy.

An analysis from financial services firm Cantor 
valued PayPal
 at closer to $70 per share. The company’s shares are currently trading at around $58.

PayPal reported adjusted profit of $1.38 per share, beating expectations of $1.28 per share. Revenue was up 5% year-over-year to $8.68 billion, above 
estimates
 of $8.47 billion. And adjusted free cash flow of $1.8 billion gives the company room to continue investing in its products and strategy.

That doesn’t mean PayPal would walk away from a takeover bid.

While Lores didn’t directly address Stripe’s offer, saying PayPal doesn’t comment on potential mergers or market speculation, he did acknowledge that a viable M&A bid would not be dismissed outright.

“If we see levers or a path that we believe would create superior value for our shareholders than executing our current strategy, we would, of course, carefully consider them,” he told investors on Tuesday.

PayPal is still busy with 
its AI-focused turnaround
, which included a 
restructuring exercise
 to streamline its operations into three segments: checkout solutions and PayPal; consumer financial services (and Venmo); and payment services and crypto. The company has said it will generate additional cost savings as it embraces AI in areas like coding, customer service, support operations, and risk management.

Lores offered an update on this strategy on Tuesday, saying the company was “making good progress” on its plan to deliver at least $1.5 billion in gross run-rate savings over the next two to three years. He also said PayPal is on track to remove three organizational layers across the company, and is continuing to modernize its technology. This last bit includes migrating from its data center to the cloud, building a more modular and scalable architecture, and reducing platform complexity.

“We believe that executing the transformation strategy I have outlined will create significant value for shareholders. That remains our focus,” Lores said. “While there is still significant work ahead. I have strong conviction in our direction and in our ability to execute.”

Topics

Commerce
, 
M&A
, 
payments
, 
PayPal
, 
stripe

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
