PayPal Ventures is no more.

Five sources told 
Fortune
 that the corporate venture arm, which was founded in 2016, will be winding down operations. A company spokesperson confirmed the news to TechCrunch, albeit with a nuanced statement:

“As part of our continued efforts to sharpen our focus, we are exploring strategic options for our corporate venture arm,” the spokesperson said in an email. 

PayPal Ventures has made more than 80 investments, including the crypto trading platform Talos Global, fintech infrastructure company Plaid, and the crypto bank Anchorage Digital. It has 
raised $850 million across three funds
. 

The decision to close the venture fund follows the departure of PayPal CEO Alex Chriss, who was replaced by Enrique Lores in February. The board said Chriss had failed to keep pace with industry changes and did not meet its expectations. Ironically, the end of PayPal Ventures could mean the company falls further behind. The venture arm gave PayPal a front-row seat to emerging fintech innovation; without it, the company risks losing visibility into startups shaping the future of financial services and falling behind competitors that maintain strategic venture arms.

Lores took the helm with the mission to restructure things, and he has done so, with more cuts and layoffs expected to continue throughout the next few years, Fortune reported. The outlet also said that PayPal is exploring secondary sales to offload some of its venture holdings and has hired Jefferies to help with that task. Lores said in the company’s first-quarter earnings call last month that it needed to “recommit to the fundamentals,” which included 
“becoming a technology company again.”

It’s clear the company wants to reposition itself in the ecosystem — particularly around AI — which means this may not be the final chapter for corporate venture investing at PayPal.

The PayPal Venture 
news also comes after the company
 reached a $30 million settlement with the Justice Department over the creation of an investment program back in 2020 that targeted Black and minority-owned businesses. PayPal was also 
sued in January 2025
 by an investor who claimed she was excluded from the investment program because she was Asian. That case looks to be headed toward trial, 
according to court documents
.

Topics

CVC
, 
Enrique Lores
, 
PayPal Ventures
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Dominic-Madori Davis	

Senior Reporter, Venture

Dominic-Madori Davis is a senior venture capital and startup reporter at TechCrunch. She is based in New York City.

You can contact or verify outreach from Dominic by emailing 
dominic.davis@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 646 831-7565 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
