Peacock is the latest streaming service to raise prices, with its cheapest ad-supported “Select” plan increasing from $7.99 to $8.99 per month. The ad-supported “Premium” tier now costs $12.99 per month, up from $10.99, while the ad-free “Premium Plus” plan is increasing from $16.99 to $19.99 per month.

The price hikes will go into effect August 18 for new and returning subscribers. Current subscribers will see the increased prices on their next billing date after September 17. 

“These price changes allow Peacock to continue to create the best experience for its viewers, remain competitive in the marketplace, and deliver unique content across all genres,” the company wrote on a 
support page
.  

Current annual subscribers and users with active promotional offers will keep their existing rates until their plans or promotions expire.

Peacock has 
added new features
 to its streaming service in recent months, including an AI-powered “Bravoverse” vertical-video feed with clips from franchises like “The Real Housewives” and “Vanderpump Rules.” The service is also adding a feature that will eventually let fans stream live games in a vertical format that uses real-time AI-driven cropping optimized for phone screens.

The streamer recently launched two new mystery games, Law & Order: Clue Hunter and Public Eye, which both come from AI gaming startup 
Wolf Games
.

Last month, NBCUniversal 
announced a partnership
 to bring Peacock’s Premium plan to YouTube Premium subscribers in the U.S. starting in early 2027. 

Launched in 2020, the streaming service reported its 
first-ever profitable quarter
 last month, as subscribers grew to 48 million, driven by the NBA playoffs, FIFA World Cup, and “Love Island.”

Peacock, like other streaming services including Netflix and HBO Max, has been steadily raising its prices in recent years, with its most recent price hike taking effect in July 2025, when prices increased by $3. The latest increase marks the platform’s fourth price hike in four years. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
peacock

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Instagram introduces a redesigned wordmark

Sarah Perez

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Everything announced at Made by Google ’26: Pixel 11, Pixel Watch 5, Pixel Tag, and tons of Gemini features

Lauren Forristal
