“Your data is private. Period,” says period tracker Stardust on its website. As new research by Mozilla discovered, some users might find that claim to be a stretch.

According to 
Mozilla’s latest findings
 examining the privacy practices of period-tracking apps, Stardust was found to be sharing users’ sensitive health information with third-party analytics company RudderStack. This data included the user’s birthdate, birth control type, reproductive goals, and specific symptoms that the user was experiencing, and it tied that record to a unique identifier in place of the person’s name. (The FTC has 
long warned
 that this does not make the data anonymous or prevent it from being linked back to a person.)

Mozilla’s research underscores the security and privacy risks with using period tracking and other health apps that share data with third parties. Oftentimes this happens as background activity within the app, and isn’t visible to the user. It’s not uncommon for apps to share data with other services for storage, analytics, and payments, but sharing users’ information with third parties inherently carries risks, such as potential security lapses, data breaches, or having the data sought by law enforcement.

TechCrunch previously wrote about Stardust in 2022 after the app surged in downloads following the overturning of the constitutional right to seek an abortion in the United States. Stardust claimed it was end-to-end encrypted — meaning that not even the company could access its users’ data — but TechCrunch found by analyzing the app’s network traffic 
that the company’s claim was false
.

Mozilla security researcher Shoshana Wodinsky used a similar technique of analyzing the network traffic of several period trackers, including Stardust, to understand how the apps collected and shared data (if at all) with third parties. Wodinsky found that Stardust was the only app out of the six tested that shared the user’s sensitive health data with another company.

As quoted by 
BBC News
, a Stardust spokesperson said that RudderStack is “contractually prohibited from selling or using it for its own purposes.” As U.S.-based companies, both Stardust and RudderStack can still receive demands for users’ information from law enforcement for users’ health information that’s stored on their servers.

Stardust founder Rachel Moranis did not respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment on Thursday, or questions about whether the company has received demands for its users’ data. A spokesperson acknowledged receipt of an email but did not provide comment.

Of the six apps tested by Wodinsky, Mozilla recommended Euki as “squeaky clean,” as the app was not seen to be sharing any data with third parties with its core features, and the user’s health data did not leave their device.

Topics

Biotech & Health
, 
cybersecurity
, 
period trackers
, 
Privacy
, 
privacy
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez
