AI browsers were all the rage in 2025. Companies large and small tried to build browsers that baked in AI in an effort to own the interface people use to browse the internet. 

How the tables have turned. Today, OpenAI’s Atlas is history, and The Browser Company sold to Atlassian, with its Dia browser now focusing on productivity use cases. Firefox tried to strike a balance in its own AI efforts by providing 
an off-switch
, but it got 
shouted at
 anyway.

This year, the focus has shifted to agents and automation. Startups like Strawberry, Browser Use, and Aside are building browsers with an agentic slant, and even Perplexity’s Comet has moved toward providing browser agents.

Amid this change, a startup called 
Polar
 has come out with an AI-first browser aimed at knowledge workers, and it has now raised a $5.7 million seed round led by Madrona.

CEO Kevin Jiang, who previously worked at Perplexity on Comet, said the first wave of AI browsers aimed to change default search for users and have them chat with tabs for doing tasks like travel booking, which wasn’t a strong long-term proposition.

“If you think about end-user consumers, they don’t book a flight or make a reservation every day or every week. There wasn’t a strong pull for mass consumers to go to an AI browser and find value in it. That’s why our AI browser is not focused at all on mass consumers. We’re focused on where we think browser agents are actually valuable, which is knowledge work,” Jiang told TechCrunch.

With Polar, users can schedule workflows, save prompts, and assign tasks to agents based on their open tabs. The company says the browser can be easily used by non-technical users, and can help with work like sales, recruitment, marketing, research, and business operations.

The browser itself is free to use, and you get a few daily credits to spend on AI tasks. Users that want higher credit limits can pay for subscription plans starting from $20 per month.

Polar says most of its current user base just uses its browser for automating tasks while using another browser as their daily driver. The startup’s goal is to become a tool for automation, and it believes that the browser is currently the best way to do it. Still, it is open to exploring other avenues, such as computer use.

Sabrina Albert, a partner at Madrona, said automating tasks for knowledge workers is a huge market.

“I think that the hard part is building really reliable agentic work on the open, logged-in web. Building a web browser has a whole set of different advantages of understanding how users interact and engage with websites. Plus, they are logged into most of these websites, giving the tool access to services they use the most,” she said over a call.

The round also saw participation from ex-GitHub CEO Thomas Dohmke, Phia founder Phoebe Gates, Modal CEO Erik Bernhardsson, Flapping Airplanes co-founder Benjamin Spector, Etched co-founder Rob Wachen, and Fundamental Research Labs co-founder and CEO Robert Yang.

Topics

AI browser
, 
Apps
, 
Fundraising
, 
Perplexity

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

OpenAI makes ChatGPT Health available to all US users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane
