In Brief

Posted:

5:29 PM PDT · July 10, 2026

Image Credits:
Kimberly White/Getty Images for TechCrunch

Dominic-Madori Davis

Phia accused of ‘cookie stuffing,’ taking affiliate credit on purchases it didn’t earn

Phia, the shopping startup co-founded by Bill Gates’ daughter, Phoebe Gates, and Sophia Kianni, has been accused of a practice known as “cookie stuffing,” which may have helped the product receive commissions and credit for sales it did not actually generate, 
according to a Bloomberg investigation
. 

The report has sparked controversy and led to Phia’s suspension from 
Impact.com
, a leading affiliate and influencer platform. Other startups have been sued over “cookie stuffing,” notably Honey, which is owned by PayPal and remains the subject of an ongoing class action lawsuit. 

Founded in 2025, Phia 
has raised more than $40 million
 in funding and has a star-studded list of investors, including Khloé Kardashian and Hailey Bieber. The startup developed an app as a browser extension that works somewhat like Google Flights, but for shopping. Phia helps customers find the lowest-priced items across various retailers as well as discount codes to use when shopping. The company takes a commission on purchases made through the platform, an industry practice known as affiliate marketing. 

The Bloomberg investigation, as well as findings from an independent consultant and a competitor, found that if a user shopped at an online retailer — even if they arrived at the site on their own or through another affiliate program like Wirecutter — Phia would open a new tab in the background. During the checkout process, Phia would override the referral codes from other affiliates and instead inject its own, allowing it to take credit for and potentially receive a commission on a purchase it didn’t earn. 

Once the issue was flagged to Phia, a spokesperson told Bloomberg that all necessary changes had been made to fix the issue. A check by Bloomberg found the issue had been resolved. It’s unclear if the fix is enough to satisfy the retailers and affiliate partners that work with Phia.

TechCrunch reached out to Phia for comment and has not received a response. 

This article was updated to clarify the celeb investors in the company. 

Topics

affiliate marketing
, 
In Brief
, 
Phia
, 
Phoebe Gates
, 
Sophia Kianni
, 
Startups

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Security

Florida ransomware negotiator convicted for helping ransomware gang extort US companies

Zack Whittaker

	12 hours ago

Startups

Charles Hudson shares the common mistakes he’s seen after investing in 500+ startups

Maggie Nye

	1 day ago

Apps

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni’s Phia raises $35M to ‘make shopping fun again’

Amanda Silberling

	Jan 27, 2026

Latest in Startups

In Brief

Phia accused of ‘cookie stuffing,’ taking affiliate credit on purchases it didn’t earn

Dominic-Madori Davis

	2 hours ago

Startups

Open source AI matters more than ever, according to Hugging Face’s Clem Delangue

Rebecca Bellan

Theresa Loconsolo

	7 hours ago

Startups

Oratomic raises $300M to build a viable quantum computer that needs only 20K qubits

Marina Temkin

	11 hours ago
