Phia, the shopping startup co-founded by Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni, is once again under fire for its alleged business practices. The latest issue stems from earlier this year when 
Bloomberg published an investigation
 that mapped out how Phia was taking credit and commission for affiliate purchases it did not help to generate, known as cookie stuffing. 

It’s a controversial practice that can get startups sued, mainly because it’s seen as taking referral revenue away from other affiliate marketers. Usually, when affiliate platforms like Phia sign on to work in a marketplace, they sign a contract stating that cookie stuffing is banned because it’s unfair. 

When Bloomberg first reported on Phia’s cookie stuffing, a Phia spokesperson told the publication that the company was only made aware of the issue when Bloomberg reached out to them. 

But new reporting by 
Bloomberg shows
 that Gates and Kianni knew their startup was cookie stuffing as far back as December, based on leaked Slacks and sources familiar with the matter speaking to the publication.

The latest reporting found that cookie stuffing made up a good chunk of Phia’s sales and the company saw a sizable drop in daily revenue once it stopped the practice. The outlet also gained insight into the affected retailers, including Nike and Nordstrom. 

Back in early July, a Phia spokesperson referred to the cookie stuffing as a bug, but Bloomberg now reports that this was a purposefully built feature that could be switched on and off. The leaked Slack messages also show Gates and Kianni talking about cookie stuffing practices with other executives and engineers. 

Regarding the new allegations, a Phia spokesperson told Bloomberg that it rebuffed some of the publication’s claims, but said the company would “learn from this.” 

Phia did not immediately respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment.

Phia launched last April with the promise to be a more effective Google Flights-like site for shopping — helping users find the best prices across various retailers. 

A few days after Bloomberg’s investigation in July, Puck 
also dug around and found
 that Phia lost almost half its full-time employees since the beginning of the year; that several brands were unaware that they were listed on the app; and that investors got the ick from how aggressively Phia was leaning into affiliate marketing. It’s also faced controversy in the past, like about 
how it was secretly collecting swaths
 of sensitive data, including tracking user behavior across the web and sending it back to their servers. 

Topics

Phia
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Dominic-Madori Davis	

Senior Reporter, Venture

Dominic-Madori Davis is a senior venture capital and startup reporter at TechCrunch. She is based in New York City.

You can contact or verify outreach from Dominic by emailing 
dominic.davis@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 646 831-7565 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Mark Zuckerberg’s AI manifesto is exactly why people don’t like AI

Russell Brandom

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
