Pinterest is expanding its partnership with Amazon. The social pinboard site said on Wednesday that it will now serve as a home for creators’ Amazon Storefronts. These online stores allow creators to generate income from affiliate links that direct their fans to products that they often feature in their videos and social media content.

The move gives Pinterest another way to appeal to creators who have largely built their shopping and affiliate businesses on larger platforms like Instagram, TikTok, YouTube, and Facebook. Pinterest says more than half its users visit it to shop, and that it sees more than 80 billion searches per month.

The deal comes as Pinterest works to regain its position as a shopping destination, and responds to user complaints about the growing volume of AI-generated content on the platform.

Image Credits:
Pinterest

Pinterest 
said
 creators will now be able to use a new tool to connect their Amazon Storefront directly to their Pinterest account. After setup, their affiliate link will be applied automatically whenever they tag an eligible Amazon product, automating the process of promoting items.

These storefronts can then be featured on creators’ Pinterest profiles, allowing their fans and followers to see a broader picture of their recommendations beyond a single Pin or Board. 

The deal ties Amazon and Pinterest closer together after the companies introduced their 
multi-year ads partnership
 in 2023, which made Amazon the first partner on third-party ads on Pinterest. The company then followed this up with a similar 
advertising deal with Google
 in 2024, as it continued to struggle to grow revenue for its popular but not fully monetized bookmarking, shopping, and inspiration platform.

Image Credits:
Pinterest

However, Pinterest has also faced a barrage of AI content over the past year that has alienated some of its user base and led to many complaints about “AI slop.” The company last year 
rolled out a series of new tools
 to fight the AI content and put users in control, but it can only do so much when much of the AI content remains unlabeled.

This partnership offers Pinterest a new way to get back on track. By working with real-world creators, Pinterest could potentially reverse its souring reputation and become known once again as a place to shop and be inspired by other people’s recommendations.

Pinterest notes it will support storefront linking with “other partners” soon. 

Topics

Amazon
, 
Apps
, 
Commerce
, 
Creators
, 
Pinterest
, 
Social

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
