In Brief

Posted:

2:24 PM PDT · August 8, 2026

Image Credits:
Thossaphol / Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Planned Amazon data center could become the biggest climate polluter in the U.S.

As part of a planned data center in Pecos County, Texas, Amazon is investing in an on-site power plant that could become the largest source of climate pollution in the United States, 
according to The New York Times
.

The NYT says the plant would burn natural gas and is permitted to release 33 million tons of carbon dioxide per year — more than any other power plant in the U.S.

In a statement, an Amazon spokesperson confirmed that the data center will “be powered by new on-site generation that won’t raise electricity costs for Texas families.” (Data centers 
face growing political opposition
 for a number of reasons, including their effect on electricity costs.)

AI has already had a significant impact on Amazon’s carbon emissions, which it 
reported were up 16% last year
 — the wrong direction for a company that pledged to eliminate its carbon emissions by 2040. And that could get worse as Amazon and tech companies 
back the development of huge natural gas plants
 to support their power-hungry data centers.

The Amazon spokesperson said, “The world looks different now than when we co-founded the climate pledge,” while also claiming, “Our commitment hasn’t changed.”

Topics

AI
, 
Amazon
, 
Climate

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Media & Entertainment

X replaces ‘misaligned’ revenue sharing program with Original Content Rewards

Anthony Ha

	5 hours ago

Hardware

The Kindle Scribe Colorsoft is a lot of fun, but it’s not a must-have

Aisha Malik

	5 hours ago

Security

Google’s top hacker hunter explains why hacking groups get codenames

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

	6 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Planned Amazon data center could become the biggest climate polluter in the U.S.

Anthony Ha

	12 seconds ago

In Brief

OpenAI acquires presentation startup NextSlide

Anthony Ha

	2 hours ago

AI

OpenAI says it slowed Astra model development over security concerns

Kirsten Korosec

	23 hours ago
