There aren’t many success stories to refer to when it comes to AI hardware. 
Plaud
, which 
makes AI-powered notetakers
, is trying to become one by targeting professionals who take a lot of meetings. The company said it has sold more than 2 million of its devices, including Plaud Pins and credit-card-styled gadgets that stick on the back of the phone. It also said that its subscription business has reached over $100 million in annualized revenue run rate.

Plaud pointed out that many AI companies often rely on digital documents and prompts typed from memories. Its argument is that its devices, which don’t have any screens, help people have conversations in real life and recall important points along with summaries and action items later.

“Most AI companies have scaled through software behind a screen. We took a different path. The conversations that actually move things forward don’t happen on a keyboard. We built the interface for the post-screen world. And the market validated it,” said Nathan Xu, co-founder and CEO of Plaud.

Last year, the company launched the $179 Plaud Pro, and this year, it added 
the new Plaud Pin S at a similar price
. Besides hardware, the company has accelerated its software development, too. Earlier this year, it launched a desktop app that can take Granola-style notes via system audio for online meetings. Last month, it also introduced 
Plaud Teams
 with shared memory to target enterprises.

Plaud users can buy the hardware and get 300 minutes of transcription for free. However, if someone has many meetings a day, the free limit is likely to run out quickly. For extra minutes and other features, users can get 
monthly, annual, or add-on plans
. Xu told TechCrunch that its revenue is largely powered by nearly 50% of the device users upgrading from the basic plan to the pro or unlimited plans.

The company doesn’t yet sell standalone software subscriptions. That means, typically, it’s the users who own a Plaud device who are buying its paid plans.

The meeting note-taking hardware market has a lot of competition, including accessories company 
Anker, Transsion-backed Viaim, Sequoia China-backed Vibe, and YC-backed Pocket
.

Topics

AI
, 
AI note-taking
, 
Gadgets
, 
hardware
, 
meetings
, 
plaud

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos
