Video and podcast recording tool maker 
Riverside
 is giving its users a new way to reach their audiences: newsletters.

Riverside isn’t aiming to directly take on established newsletter platforms like Mailchimp, Substack, Beehiiv or Ghost, however. Instead, recognizing that its userbase already generates a lot of content, the company is giving the users of its recording tools an AI tool to turn their existing videos and podcasts into newsletters, and send them directly from within its app. Users can also create and send newsletters from scratch without using the AI conversion feature. 

“Substack and Beehiiv start you at a blank page. But our creators and business customers are already producing rich, information-dense spoken content on Riverside. For most people, speaking is easier and more natural than writing from scratch, and the ideas are already there, in the conversation. So instead of asking them to start over in a separate tool, we help them turn a recording they’ve already made into newsletter-ready content with far less effort,” Riverside’s founder and CEO Nadav Keyson told TechCrunch.

The company is also updating its recording suite to support multi-camera recording setups. It’s also giving users the ability to add remote guests to recordings. 

Image Credits:
Riverside

The update brings new AI features as well. Users can use AI to draft a first cut of a recording as soon as it’s finished, and the assistant can also create hooks and content for various social media platforms. The company is also adding an AI video enhancement feature, trained on conversational video podcasts, that it says can improve lighting, depth and sharpness of recordings.

Riverside, 
which has raised over $60 million in funding
, joins a host of platforms that have been trying to enter alternative publishing avenues to either diversify or expand their revenue streams. For instance, Substack in March launched 
a built-in recording studio
 that competes directly with Riverside, and in April, newsletter platform 
Beehiiv ventured into podcasting
 as well. In June, social network Mastodon said that it will allow users to 
publish their posts as newsletters
.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
creator economy
, 
newsletters
, 
Riverside
, 
Substack

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

If you want to cut your screen time, just get a Brick

Amanda Silberling
