In Brief

Posted:

9:35 AM PDT · June 21, 2026

Image Credits:
Omar Marques/SOPA Images/LightRocket / Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Polymarket reportedly paid creators to post deceptive videos about fake bets

Polymarket has been paying online creators to post deceptive videos that show them making lucrative bets on the prediction market, according to 
a new investigation
 in the Wall Street Journal.

The WSJ said that it analyzed 1,100 videos about Polymarket and also viewed instructional materials that the company provided to creators. Many of those videos were reportedly filmed on “near-perfect copies” of the Polymarket website, while featuring trades and winnings that were not real. The creator videos were then amplified by a “social-media army” deployed by a marketing contractor.

The WSJ said the company also told those creators not to specify that they’d been paid by Polymarket, although the creators started adding “@polymarket partner” to their bios after journalists began asking questions.

Razeen Khan, a college student and creator who worked with Polymarket until March, compared the practice to commercials that make fast food look more appealing than it is in real life: “We’re depicting what actually happens.”

Polymarket said it is “committed to maintaining accurate, fair, and transparent markets” and plans to conduct an audit of its promotional content.

Topics

Crypto
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Polymarket

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

TechCrunch Mobility: A new robotaxi scorecard shows China’s dominance

Kirsten Korosec

	30 minutes ago

AI

When the Trump administration cracks down on Anthropic, who benefits?

Anthony Ha

	1 hour ago

AI

Beyond Siri: Here are the practical AI features coming to your iPhone in iOS 27

Sarah Perez

	2 hours ago

Latest in Crypto

In Brief

Polymarket reportedly paid creators to post deceptive videos about fake bets

Anthony Ha

	12 seconds ago

In Brief

Sam Bankman-Fried applies for a pardon from Trump

Sean O'Kane

	Jun 8, 2026

TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Today is the last day to apply to speak at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

TechCrunch Events

	May 29, 2026
