The U.K. has just imposed legal guardrails on Google’s AI search onslaught. On Wednesday, Google 
announced
 compliance with the U.K.’s regulatory requirements, which state that the tech giant must offer publishers a way to opt out of being aggregated into AI search.

To opt out, publishers will be able to use a new toggle in Google’s 
Search Console
, a free service that allows website owners to manage their web presence in Google’s search results.

Once opted out, the publisher’s site will not be shown in Google’s generative AI Search features, like AI Overviews, AI Mode, or AI Overviews in Discover. (Google, of course, makes a point to note in the same announcement that its AI Overviews now have over 2.5 billion monthly active users, and its AI Mode has surpassed one billion monthly users.) 

The tech giant says it will initially test the opt-out option with a subset of U.K. publishers before rolling it out globally. 

The U.K.’s Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) 
calls the move
 to put publishers back in control of how their content is used a “world first,” and points out that it will put publishers, including news organizations, into a stronger position to negotiate content deals with Google for use of their content in AI features.

The CMA had first designated Google as having “strategic market status” last October, laying the groundwork for future regulations. In 
January
, it pushed Google to give website publishers a choice as to whether their content is aggregated into AI search features or used to train stand-alone AI models.

Alongside the opt-out toggle, Google will also now be required to make sure publisher content in AI features is properly attributed, using clear links. Google suggested that it’s complying with this as well, noting that it had recently 
increased
 the number of inline links directly within its AI responses, and added website previews to encourage users to click through.

Google notes that a website’s decision to opt out of generative AI search features will not be used as a ranking signal for traditional Google search. 

The company, however, will present new metrics in its Search Console to hopefully sway publishers who could be considering opting out, including impression metrics and other information about which of their pages appear in AI responses, and in which countries. More metrics will be added over time, Google said. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI search
, 
Google
, 
media
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
TC
, 
United Kingdom

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
