Corporate expense management platform Ramp on Thursday said it has raised $750 million at a valuation of $44 billion, nearly tripling its valuation 
within just a year
 as investors scramble to grab a part of the fast-growing startup.

The funding round was led by ICONIQ, GIC, and Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan, and saw investments from a slate of new backers such as Goldman Sachs Alternatives, D.E. Shaw & Co., Morgan Stanley Investment Management, Generation Investment Management, Insight Partners, and BroadLight Capital. Several of the company’s previous investors also participated. 

Ramp said its annualized revenue is currently more than $1 billion, though it said it had 
crossed
 that milestone last September (Bloomberg 
reports
 its run-rate revenue is now more than $1.5 billion). The company said it has also reached positive free cash flow, and that it has over 70,000 customers (up from 50,000 last November), which include Visa, Uber, Shopify, Anduril, and Figma.

The company, which initially targeted startups with its expense management products, has now expanded its remit to include payments, fraud detection, procurement, vendor management, and, of late, even accounting.

Ramp has also built an AI story around itself, offering AI agents within its procurement, expense management, accounting, budgeting, and other products. It also launched a 
corporate credit card
 specifically for AI agents to use.

In a long 
blog post
 that 
feels a fair bit AI-generated
, CEO Eric Glyman on Thursday touted how his company is building a product that helps businesses monitor their AI token usage across providers, and setting up its infrastructure to enable AI agents to make payments on their users’ behalf. The company also noted in its 
press release
 that some of its newfound growth spans token spend management, too.

AI token usage and costs have lately come into focus
 as companies look for ROI in AI and control expenditures from AI usage. Uber recently set a 
cap
 of $1,500 per employee for using AI tools after the company spent its entire AI budget for 2026 in just four months. 

And Ramp is now betting that helping companies measure and control those costs will open up a new revenue stream. 

Bloomberg cited Glyman as saying Ramp has its sights on eventually going public, though he didn’t say when. 

The company said it has now raised more than $3 billion in total. 

Ramp’s competitors include Brex, which was acquired by Capital One for 
$5.15 billion
 this year in a cash-and-stock deal, and Rippling, another 
highly valued startup
, though the latter bundles spend management alongside HR, IT, and payroll tools.

Topics

ai tokens
, 
corporate expense management
, 
Fintech
, 
Fundraising
, 
Ramp

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ram Iyer	

Editor

Ram is a financial and tech reporter and editor. He covered North American and European M&A, equity, regulatory news and debt markets at Reuters and Acuris Global, and has also written about travel, tourism, entertainment and books.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ram by emailing 
ram.iyer@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
