Corporate expense management platform Ramp is hot on the heels of 
Stripe in setting up toll houses for AI inference
.

Ramp on Wednesday evening launched its own AI model routing service, dubbed 
Router
, that lets users and companies use and switch between various large language models through an API. The company says it has been using the router it built for its own AI usage needs over the past three years.

The service is only available in the United States. It’s free to use for the remainder of 2026 (users will still have to pay for AI model inference costs), and it comes with a $26 credit launch offer. The company did not say how much the service will cost next year.

Router functions similarly to how OpenRouter operates, though the latter offers many more AI model options than Ramp’s current offerings.

Router offers access to models from OpenAI, Anthropic, DeepSeek, Moonshot, Minimax, Nvidia, xAI, and Z.ai. It also provides several “strategies” to help its customers route AI requests to models based on their preferences. For example, one lets users set a preference for model providers’ flex usage tiers, while another lets Router choose which model to route queries to based on up to three user-specified benchmarks. Users can also choose to route only difficult problems to expensive models or test models easily without having to switch.

Users get a dashboard, too, that lets them see token spend, cost, latency, fallback attempts, and other details.

Notably, Router has an opt-out data retention policy: It will record model inputs, outputs, and tool calls for one year by default, though the company says it will remove “personally identifiable information before using that content to improve the product.”

For Ramp, entering the model routing business offers a two-pronged opportunity: It gets to tap the booming AI inference market 
and 
offer its existing clients a model routing service that fits in neatly with its existing products, which includes AI token usage monitoring and token spend management.

And, if Router proves as attractive of a model testing arena as OpenRouter has, Ramp may also be able to build long-standing relationships with AI labs and inference providers worldwide. That could help Ramp, which 
raised
 $750 million at a $44 billion valuation in June, gain new customers and a new point of entry for selling its expense management products.

Topics

AI
, 
corporate expense management
, 
Fintech
, 
openrouter
, 
Ramp

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ram Iyer	

Editor

Ram is a financial and tech reporter and editor. He covered North American and European M&A, equity, regulatory news and debt markets at Reuters and Acuris Global, and has also written about travel, tourism, entertainment and books.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ram by emailing 
ram.iyer@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Etched’s valuation doubles to $21B in a month

Julie Bort

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez
