For fusion startups, the hard part is over: Thanks to 
a groundbreaking experiment in 2022
, we know that controlled nuclear fusion reactions can generate more power than they consume. But now companies need to prove their reactors can make enough electricity to be profitable.

One option is to simply turn up the temperature, generating more heat to produce more steam to spin a bigger turbine. Another is to harvest electricity directly from the fusion reactions themselves, an approach that promises to be more efficient.

Realty Fusion
 announced that an experiment it conducted on June 19 successfully powered a lightbulb using electricity harvested directly from WHAM, its demonstration fusion device. The Wisconsin-based startup believes it is the first private company to publicly demonstrate such a feat.

“We can take power from a plasma,” Kieran Furlong, co-founder and CEO of Realta Fusion, told TechCrunch. The milestone shows “what’s possible,” he added.

Realta plans to use direct electricity conversion to heat the plasma in its reactor, a process that requires a lot of energy. Furlong estimates that direct conversion is about 90% efficient, meaning it will convert 90% of the potential energy into electricity. By comparison, steam turbines in today’s fission reactors are about 
33% efficient
. The more energy the company is able to harvest, the quicker it will get to profitability.

Every power plant consumes some of the power it produces simply to operate, and fusion reactors are no exception. The big challenge fusion startups face today is building reactors that can produce more energy than they consume. The efficiency boost from direct energy conversion should make clearing that hurdle easier.

About 20% of the energy from fusion reactions fueled by deuterium-tritium, the kind Realta plans to use in its commercial reactors, are charged helium nuclei known as alpha particles. The startup built a prototype electricity converter and attached it on the end of its reactor. There, it was able to harvest enough “alpha power” to generate multiple amps of electricity at 100 volts, powering a few lightbulbs.

Realta Fusion’s WHAM device is built to demonstrate the magnetic mirror approach to fusion power.
Image Credits:
Realta Fusion

On a commercial scale power plant, the direct energy converters should provide enough energy to heat the plasma. “You’re basically able to recirculate the electricity,” Furlong said. 

Ultimately, Furlong estimates that circularity could boost a commercial scale power plant’s total output by 20% to 30%. “Spinning a flywheel of electricity, if you like, is very beneficial,” he said.

Though it might be the first to demonstrate direct energy conversion, Realta isn’t the only startup planning to deploy that technology in its reactor. For Helion, the startup backed by Sam Altman, direct energy conversion is key to its plans, though it has yet to demonstrate it publicly.

Harvesting electricity directly from the fusion reaction “really helps with the economics” of a reactor’s design, Furlong said.

Realta previously raised 
$36 million in a Series A
 led by Future Ventures in 2025. Furlong said the company is in the midst of raising a new round.

Topics

Climate
, 
fusion power
, 
nuclear fusion
, 
Realta Fusion

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

Here’s why Slate changed the battery in its cheap EV truck

Tim De Chant

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom
