Reddit on Wednesday 
announced
 a series of changes to its infrastructure and tools, designed to make it easier for people to participate on its site, protect against scraping and spam, and aid in the moderation of its online communities. In addition to providing a new suite of moderation tools, the company said it’s working on more advanced abuse prevention systems that could eventually help communities move away from using things like account age and “karma” to determine who’s allowed to post. 

Karma, Reddit’s digital reputation system, 
allows users
 to raise their score by posting and commenting helpful, friendly, or funny responses that lead to upvotes. Originally designed to weed out spam, bots, and trolls, many communities came to rely on karma and other account-age restrictions that make it difficult for legitimate newcomers to participate in their communities. Reddit says it now wants to shift to stronger, built-in abuse prevention systems to do more of the moderation work, so communities can be more open to new users.

Reddit didn’t say karma would go away entirely with these coming changes, but it did suggest that its importance could dwindle in the future. 

“This will make it easier for genuine new users to participate and easier for mods to welcome them with confidence,” Reddit’s 
announcement
 stated.

Related to this, the company said it’s expanding the test of its new suite of AI-powered moderation tools, the Rules Hub, which helps moderators by choosing when to automatically enforce certain community rules and what action should be taken when doing so. Initially used by 700-plus communities, Reddit says that all new communities can now test the tool. Later this year, the tool will be widely available to all communities, both new and existing.

With Rules Hub, Reddit uses large language models (LLMs) to determine whether a post or comment matches the intent of a rule, which the company says allows it to “better handle nuance,” natural language, and edge cases. 

Reddit also expanded the capabilities of other tools, including one that helps moderators inform users about their community’s rules when posting and commenting, and another that helps members set their flair — a custom tag users append to their name that only appears in the community they’re posting in.   

“Today, new users can encounter invisible barriers like account age and karma thresholds, unclear removals, and poor community discovery,” Reddit explained. “We want new users around the world to be able to easily find relevant communities, understand their rules and norms, and make useful contributions.”

The company also said it would make changes to its legacy desktop site, Old Reddit, by shifting its moderator workflows to its new stack and migrating other critical bots.

On Reddit’s second-quarter earnings calls with investors last week, company executives stressed that one of Reddit’s near-term goals was to convert its half-billion weekly active users to daily users through product updates. The company had 
crushed earnings
 with revenue of $805 million and earnings per share of $1.25, above estimates, but still saw its stock sink because of what Reddit CEO Steve Huffman described as “choppy” search referral traffic.

Topics

Reddit
, 
Social
, 
social media

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
