In Brief

Posted:

3:35 PM PDT · June 5, 2026

Image Credits:
David Paul Morris/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Julie Bort

Reid Hoffman is leaving Microsoft’s board to go ‘founder mode’ with  startup Manus

After a very profitable decade on Microsoft’s board, Reid Hoffman is stepping down, the 
company announced Thursday.
 Hoffman joined the board after Microsoft bought his company 
LinkedIn for $26.2 billion in 2016.

Hoffman was on Microsoft’s board when it invested its first $1 billion into OpenAI in 2019. Hoffman was one of OpenAI’s original investors and served on the model maker’s board until he stepped down in 2023, 
citing
 too many potential conflicts of interest to continue. He was also on Microsoft’s board when the tech giant entered into one of those non-acquisition, 
acqui-hire deals for $650 million 
with his AI startup Inflection AI. Microsoft hired Inflection co-founder Mustafa Suleyman through that deal.

Hoffman said on a recent episode of his “Possible” podcast, while talking with Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella, that he’s ready to go “founder mode” with his latest AI startup, 
Manus
. Manus is a drug discovery company that 
raised over $50 million
 through a 
couple of seed rounds last year.
 Hoffman is an investor, as is General Catalyst.

Hoffman is cited as a co-founder of Manus and chairman of the board, not the CEO, though. That job belongs to Dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee, a physician, biologist, and Pulitzer Prize-winning author of the 2011 book “The Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer.”

Still, Hoffman said he’s excited to give Manus more attention. 

“One of the things I realized over the last month was that, we’re seeing such progress with Manus. I need to get back to founder mode,” he said. He believes the startup is making progress 
on “Move 37” AI
, meaning AI that supersedes human creativity in chemistry, especially to combat various cancers, he added.

Topics

In Brief
, 
Manus AI
, 
Microsoft
, 
Reid Hoffman
, 
TC
, 
Venture

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Venture

Benchmark raises its first-ever growth fund as part of $2B capital haul

Marina Temkin

	2 days ago

AI

Meta just bought Manus, an AI startup everyone has been talking about

Connie Loizos

	Dec 29, 2025

Latest in Venture

In Brief

Reid Hoffman is leaving Microsoft’s board to go ‘founder mode’ with  startup Manus

Julie Bort

	36 minutes ago

Venture

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

	1 hour ago

StrictlyVC Los Angeles 2026

Defense tech, AI, and fundraising take center stage at StrictlyVC Los Angeles on June 18

TechCrunch Events

	1 day ago
