Whether you’re a baseball fan or not, there’s a lot to love about 
Ribbie
, a vibe-coded website that turns real-time Major League Baseball (MLB) data into 8-bit broadcasts with arcade-style, animated pixel art.

“I love how much data is available to baseball fans […] but when I try to follow a game with ESPN Gamecast, I find it kind of boring,” Ribbie creator 
Eric Brownrout
 told TechCrunch.

Still, the idea for Ribbie didn’t materialize until Brownrout generated a pixel-art image of Phillies slugger Kyle Schwarber to use as his fantasy baseball team’s logo.

“I love the aesthetic, and started thinking about ways I might be able to apply it to a data or visualization tool,” Brownrout said. “A quick Google search revealed the MLB public StatsAPI, and I realized I could theoretically recreate an entire baseball game in the same pixel format.”

Image Credits:
Ribbie 
(opens in a new window)

Like many other tech workers in San Francisco, Brownrout has now spent many nights experimenting with 
Claude Code
. He stands out, though, because his tinkering yielded something that’s delightful.

“I used Claude Code and Codex extensively to turn a project that would have easily taken months into something I could build and launch in a few weekends,” he said. “I used Codex to build the image- and sprite-generation workflow, and Claude Code helped with the web app development. I’ve never built a video game before, so this was a new one for me.”

Visiting Ribbie — an onomatopoeia of the baseball stat RBI (runs batted in) — transports you to a pixel-art living room that shows which MLB games are being played, and you can select one to “watch” with Ribbie. (You can choose to zoom in on the screen and cut out the living room graphics, if you want something more practical.)

Left: ESPN Gamecast / Right: Ribbie
Image Credits:
Ribbie 
(opens in a new window)

On mainstream play-by-play apps like ESPN’s Gamecast and MLB’s own Gameday, the interface is pretty basic, clearly displaying information without frills. 

Ribbie prioritizes aesthetics instead, with unique pixel-art representations of every stadium and player. But it’s still simple enough to see the score of the game, as well as who’s pitching, hitting, or on base. 

Because the data for all of these visualizations comes from the MLB’s API, you can find most of the information you’d be used to seeing on other apps, but it makes for a more descriptive play-by-play. Brownrout recently added support for fantasy baseball, which allows people to add their rosters and track which players are currently active in their respective games.

“I just really love the aesthetic of the miniature pixel-art stadiums,” Brownrout said. “There’s something so satisfying about it that’s hard to put a finger on. I think it’s one of the reasons people are obsessed with games like Stardew Valley. It’s an entire pixel world in the palm of your hand.”

Passion projects like Ribbie feel refreshing because they’re not trying to extract anything from us, something rare at a time when we’re so inured to being tracked everywhere online. But can projects like Ribbie last? Is it inevitable that the MLB’s lawyers will come after Ribbie because the mammoth sports organization feels threatened by a pixelized sprite of Shohei Ohtani?

These are real risks, but Brownrout thinks he’s got his bases covered (pun intended). He referenced a 
legal case
 from 2007 in which the court ruled that baseball stats are facts, and therefore are not copyrightable. This allows fantasy baseball products to exist without the MLB’s permission.

“The API is the same one that powers fantasy baseball websites, third-party stats sites, live game threads on Reddit […] So it’s historically been used for all types of official and fan-created projects,” he said. “Ultimately, the project is completely free and non-commercial, and I try to make it very clear on the website that Ribbie is an unaffiliated fan project. It’s a ‘love letter’ to baseball, not something trying to compete with MLB.tv.”

Though Brownout is pretty busy as the co-founder of AI SaaS platform Frigade, he’s still finding time to build Ribbie for the love of the game.

“I’m adding sound effects and fuller animations to make it a little easier to passively follow along with while it’s on in the background,” he said. “My neighbors must think I’m crazy, because last night I was in my bedroom doing 100 takes of ‘Ball! Strike! Out!’ on my iPhone to record for the Ribbie audio track.”

Topics

Apps
, 
baseball
, 
major league baseball
, 
pixel art
, 
ribbie

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The CEO of Allbirds’ new AI biz has a plan. Now she needs a “brand-new team”

Tim Fernholz

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz
