In Brief

Posted:

1:12 PM PDT · August 19, 2026

Image Credits:
Rillet

Dominic-Madori Davis

Rillet raises $100M Series C at $1B valuation — 2 years after emerging from stealth

AI accounting startup Rillet 
announced
 a $100 million Series C at a $1 billion valuation on Tuesday, 
led by Iconiq
. Returning investors included Andreessen Horowitz and Sequoia. Rillet, which emerged from stealth in 2024, is quickly becoming one of the hottest AI startups in the enterprise resource planning (ERP) industry. 

The company’s software deploys AI to help finance professionals manage a company’s books. It says it can, for instance, automatically and continuously pull data from sources like Salesforce or Brex.

Rillet touts more than 600 companies as customers and says it has doubled its ARR in the past three months. Nicolas Kopp, the company’s co-founder and CEO, 
said on X
 that this latest round came together in “less than 48 hours.” The company wasn’t planning to raise, he said, but interest grew because so much had happened since its last round, like an 
alliance with EY
 and the jump in ARR and customers.  

“A year ago, we backed a bold vision for Rillet: that the general ledger could become more than a system of record and instead the operating system for finance,” Seth Pierpont, General Partner, ICONIQ, said in a statement shared with TechCrunch. “That vision is now reality.” 

Rillet last raised 
a $70 million Series B
 last year in a round led by ICONIQ and Andreessen Horowitz. Shortly before that round, it announced 
a $25 million Series A
 led by Sequoia. The company has raised more than $200 million to date. The rapid growth of AI startups — and how quickly they can raise large sums — shows how feverish investors remain about AI, especially regarding those poised to disrupt legacy SaaS players like NetSuite. Though 
reports of a SaaSpocalypse
 might be overplayed, smoke indeed hints at a fire.

Topics

Startups
, 
Venture

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Apps

Gambling on the Little League World Series? Sports bettors have gone too far

Amanda Silberling

	12 minutes ago

AI

AI was supposed to win people over by now — it hasn’t

Sarah Perez

	1 hour ago

Apps

Google packs Search and Gemini with new AI study tools

Aisha Malik

	1 hour ago

Latest in Startups

In Brief

Rillet raises $100M Series C at $1B valuation — 2 years after emerging from stealth

Dominic-Madori Davis

	19 seconds ago

Startups

Meet the startup helping Wall Street put a price on AI compute

Theresa Loconsolo

	3 hours ago

31 min

Startups

Time’s running out! Save $300 on your TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 pass until August 21 

TechCrunch Events

	4 hours ago
