Voice AI startups’ biggest unlock has been handling calls for enterprises in areas like sales, marketing, and customer support. Large organizations are offloading calls to voice model developers like 
ElevenLabs
 and 
Deepgram
; infrastructure companies like 
Vapi
, Retell, and LiveKit; and dedicated customer support shops like Decagon and Sierra.

San Francisco-based 
Rime
 is trying to gain an edge in this crowded market with its voice AI models that are trained on conversational data that it records, aiming to reduce its clients’ customization load.

Founded in 2022 by former Stanford PhD student Lily Clifford, ex-Amazon Alexa engineer Brooke Larson, and Stanford engineer Ares Geovanos, Rime has built a recording studio in San Francisco to collect its own conversational data rather than relying on scraping the web for audio.

The startup said it focuses on tuning its voice models to nail the pronunciation of different brand entities and industry-specific terms. It employs a phoneme-based architecture to adapt to different pronunciations so that customers don’t have to retrain models for their specific industry.

Rime on Wednesday said it has raised $24 million in a Series A funding round that was led by M13 Ventures. Twilio Ventures, Corazon Capital, Unusual Ventures, and other existing investors also participated.

Clifford said that despite progress in voice AI development, enterprises still prefer legacy IVR (interactive voice response) implementations, as AI voice technology still can’t match up to IVR’s effectiveness.

“The voice technology is still not there to automate the vast majority of enterprise phone calls. LLMs have made it a lot easier to build voice applications that work, but they haven’t changed how it feels to interact. Talking with a voice AI agent is not the most compelling experience for the end user. It’s kinda like a new IVR, but with a better voice,” she said.

The startup began with a pipeline of separate models for speech-to-text, text-to-speech, and a large language model. But it is now shifting focus to develop better speech-to-speech models to reduce latency, improve turn-taking, and tackle issues like background noise. The new approach will also serve to decrease reliance on orchestration, so the company doesn’t have to manage a bunch of models.

Rime says it has customers in food service, healthcare, airlines, and fintech. The company claims that because of its training data and model positioning, customers stay longer on the call, which has helped it win enterprise contracts from clients like Mayo Clinic, Dialpad, Upstart, and Asurion.

With the new funding, Rime is planning to expand its team of 35 people, aiming to hire for model development, engineering, and partnerships. It recently brought on Rafael Valle, who worked on audio understanding at Meta Superintelligence Labs and Nvidia’s applied deep learning audio research team, as its chief scientist.

“Companies like ElevenLabs have moved into being an orchestration and the application layer, going head to head with the Sierras and Decagons of the world. I think there’s just so much more to be done technically, and Rime’s approach of pushing forward on the best model with low latency and high reliability in a regulated environment stands out,” M13’s Morgan Blumberg told TechCrunch.

It had previously raised $5.5 million in 
a seed round last May
. Blumberg is joining the startup’s board as part of the fundraise.

Topics

AI
, 
Fundraising
, 
M13 Ventures
, 
Rime
, 
voice AI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
