Amazon’s smart home division Ring said on Wednesday that it is adopting a new encryption standard called TAKE (Throw Away the Key Encryption) as the default setting for video encryption and user control. The company says this standard lets it protect user privacy without relying on end-to-end encryption, which can restrict some features such as video search, video description and shared trusted users.

Ring says the standard involves using a rotating set of encryption keys that are temporarily stored in the cloud and can only be accessed by the company to power features that users may have active. Once the request is completed, the company will delete the keys within 24 hours. 

Ring said the standard lets it temporarily decrypt and process users’ videos so it can offer cloud-based features like Smart Alerts, which can notify users when people, vehicles, or packages are in the camera’s field of view.

“With TAKE, Ring delivers the intelligent features you love and rely on, like Smart Alerts, and then throws away and deletes the encryption key. Only you retain the keys to your video,” the company 
said in a blog
 post.

Amazon’s 
white paper detailing the standard
 notes that it was developed with a base of Messaging Layer Security (MLS), an open messaging standard developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force. The company said that with TAKE, if you lose access to your device and buy a new one, you can authenticate yourself by standing near the Ring cameras to recover your encryption keys. Separately, you can use a passphrase, cloud-based backups, another approved device, or passkeys to recover your account.

The company said that TAKE will be gradually rolled out to customers from September, and will be the default standard worldwide. Users can still manually choose end-to-end encryption instead of TAKE.

Over the last few months, Ring has received a lot of criticism for its 
“Familiar Faces” feature, which uses facial recognition
 to identify visitors. In June, a class action lawsuit accused 
Amazon of storing images of passersby without consent
.

Topics

Amazon
, 
Apps
, 
encryption
, 
Hardware
, 
privacy
, 
Ring cameras

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Nvidia just showed that the harness, not the AI model, is now the real hero

Julie Bort

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
