Also has raised another $150 million as the micromobility startup that 
spun out of Rivian
 last year expands its business beyond pedal-assist electric bikes and commercial cargo quads to autonomous delivery vehicles. 

The Series D round was led by Prysm Capital and included existing backers Eclipse, Greenoaks, and MVP Ventures. Also has raised $455 million since its founding less than two years ago. 

The new capital will be used to “accelerate the development” of the company’s autonomous driving technology and the “simultaneous progression of multiple autonomous form factors,” according to the company. These future vehicles will use the same electric architecture developed for its consumer electric pedal-assist bike and commercial electric delivery quad.

Prysm Capital co-founder and managing partner Jay Park said the firm is backing Also for the same reason it was an early investor in Rivian. 

“We backed Rivian early because we saw the potential behind wonderfully designed, vertically integrated electric trucks, vans and SUVs,” Park said, adding that Also us applying that same approach to smaller form factor vehicles.

The fresh funding comes a few months since Also raised $200 million in a round led by Greenoaks, with participation from Prysm Capital and a strategic investment from DoorDash. As part of that funding round, DoorDash struck a multi-year commercial agreement to develop and deploy 
autonomous delivery vehicles
.

While Also is increasingly focused on autonomous vehicle tech, that’s not where it started. Also began as a skunkworks project within Rivian, a pursuit driven by founder and CEO RJ Scaringe’s interest in micromobility. That team, which pulled in people from Apple, Google, Specialized, Tesla, evolved into a startup, which spun out of Rivian in 2025 armed with the name Also and $150 million in funding. 

While Also is independent, Rivian is still very much tied to it. Rivian holds a minority stake, and Scaringe serves on its board. Also has previously said it will leverage the automaker’s tech, retail presence, and economies of scale as it grows.

Last October, Also revealed its first products, a $4,500 two-wheeler called the TM-B and two quad vehicles as well, one of which will be 
supplied to Amazon
.

Also has struggled to get its ebike into customers’ hands and its launch edition was delayed for months. The company said the Launch edition is now 
beginning to ship
 to customers and has opened up the pre-order and configuration access to its performance and standard models. The company said initial deliveries of these other models will begin in fall.

Topics

also
, 
ebike
, 
Rivian
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic set AI agents loose on the same task. They started a turf war.

Rebecca Bellan

Instagram introduces a redesigned wordmark

Sarah Perez
