Rivian has filed a 
lawsuit
 against the U.S. government in an attempt to claw back a “full refund” on tariffs it paid under President Trump’s “Liberation Day” taxes, which the Supreme Court later ruled unconstitutional.

The automaker joins a 
long line of companies
 seeking such refunds. In April, Rivian CFO Claire McDonough said she expected the company stood to reap a refund in the “tens of millions of dollars.” 

Rivian’s action comes as the company is in the middle of rolling out its first mass-market SUV, the R2. It expects to ship around 20,000 to 25,000 of them by the end of this year and help the company finally reach profitability. Reaching that goal 
may not happen until 2028
, though, as Rivian is currently plowing a lot of money into developing autonomous vehicles. The company recently sold shares to 
raise around $1.3 billion
 to help pad out its cash balance in the meantime.

The lawsuit, filed on Thursday in the U.S. Court of International Trade, names the U.S. government, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), and CBP’s commissioner Rodney Scott as defendants. CBP collected the tariffs on behalf of the Trump administration, which tried to justify them under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA).

In a statement to TechCrunch, CBP said that over $121  billion in both “potential and certified refunds have been accepted for processing .” The agency did not comment specifically on the lawsuit.

Earlier this month, the Cato Institute 
wrote
 that $71 billion had been paid out, which “suggests that frictions built into” the refund process created “obstacles for importers seeking refunds.”

According to Rivian’s lawsuit, the company wants a guarantee that it will get its money — and the proper amount — back from the government. 

“Although the Supreme Court invalidated the tariffs, this separate action remains necessary because importers that have paid IEEPA tariffs, including Plaintiffs, are not guaranteed a refund of amounts previously paid based on the Supreme Court’s decision,” Rivian’s lawyers wrote in the complaint. 

Rivian did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

Rivian CEO RJ Scaringe told Reuters last year after the tariffs were imposed that he expected the cost of each vehicle to rise by “a couple of thousand dollars” as a result. By the end of 2025, he said the company had 
mitigated
 the impact to “low hundreds of dollars.”

“The resulting environment of retaliatory trade or other practices or additional trade restrictions or barriers has harmed, and could continue to harm, our ability to obtain necessary raw materials, components and equipment and could harm our ability to sell our products and services at prices customers are willing to pay,” the company 
wrote
 in a regulatory filing earlier this year. 

Rivian is asking the trade court to declare the tariffs “contrary to law,” issue a refund with interest, and pay any associated court fees. 

Topics

Exclusive
, 
Rivian
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI says Hugging Face was breached by its pre-release models

Russell Brandom

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik
