Rivian spinoff Also will finally start delivering its first e-bikes to customers next week, after months of delays related to unspecified supply chain issues.

The company told TechCrunch on Friday that the Launch Edition of its TM-B e-bike, which 
retails
 for $4,500, has started shipping from its manufacturer to its warehouse in the U.S. Also said it expects to deliver all Launch Edition bikes between next week and September. 

Also began as a 
skunkworks project
 inside Rivian in 2022, after CEO RJ Scaringe started looking into making an e-bike to complement his portfolio of electric vehicles for the outdoorsy set. The company spent a few years tinkering with the idea, and even hired Jony Ive’s design firm LoveFrom to help with an early design, as TechCrunch first 
reported
 in 2025.

In March 2025, Rivian spun out Also as its own company, with $105 million in 
backing
 from Eclipse. The startup revealed its first e-bike, the TM-B, in October of last year. It originally 
targeted
 a “Spring” 2026 ship date, but supply chain headaches got in the way, and the company pushed the delivery window to July.

“The primary factor driving our updated summer timeline is current stress on global supply chains. A rapid, industry-wide spike in demand for raw materials and electronic components has impacted key parts required for the TM-B. This has temporarily delayed our planned manufacturing ramp-up and pushed our first delivery dates past our original spring window,” the company wrote in June on a 
support page
. “Our engineering and production teams are working around the clock to minimize these constraints without cutting a single corner on safety or quality.”

Also declined to say what components, specifically, caused the delay.

Also has big plans beyond the TM-B. The startup mostly refers to itself as a “vehicle” company, and has 
plans
 to make four-wheel pedal-assist cargo vehicles for Amazon. The company is 
working
 on an autonomous delivery vehicle for DoorDash, too.

But for now, Also needs to focus on delivering its first e-bikes while navigating the next set of headaches for a company shipping products like these: customer service. On Friday, the last day of July, a number of customers were venting in a thread in the r/ALSOmicromobility subreddit about the repeated delays.

“I’m really frustrated by the lack of communication and the actual miscommunication/lies from Also regarding shipment timelines,” the original poster 
wrote
. “Why do they keep making these promises about shipping timelines just to blow right past them without any communication or actual updates? It really makes no sense.”

“Hey we’ve still got a few business hours left in July. Maybe we’ll get an email later this morning ☺️,” a different user responded.

Not everyone was so patient. 

“Couldn’t wait any longer and canceled my reservation,” another wrote. 

Topics

also
, 
e-bikes
, 
Exclusive
, 
Rivian
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Data centers may face temporary power cuts to prevent blackouts on largest US grid

Tim De Chant

PSA: Your Claude shared chats and Artifacts may have ended up on Google

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Kalshi demands Netflix take down trailer for ‘Prediction Games’ documentary

Anthony Ha

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling
