It appears using AI as a cover story for cutting jobs is fast falling out of fashion. 

Unlike many of his tech industry peers who have 
cut thousands of jobs this year
 citing the need to restructure their teams to make the most of AI, Robinhood’s CEO Vlad Tenev conspicuously made no mention of AI in his 
note to employees
 announcing that the company is letting go 10% of its full-time employees, or about 290 people. 

Nor did the company’s regulatory 
filing
 announcing the move, which instead framed the cuts as a restructuring exercise. 

Still, Tenev did say the company would use “frontier technologies to push our execution even further,” which sounds like a conscious effort to avoid even naming AI. Which isn’t surprising: Sentiment 
against AI
 and related infrastructure projects has been 
trending lower
 even as a small minority of tech executives make 
ridiculous bank
. 

But Tenev did add to the ongoing narrative that it’s now necessary for companies to operate with smaller teams and “flatter organizational structures,” writing: “We ⁠cannot default to operating as a heavily-layered organization. We must be a lean, hyper-focused team where every single individual is empowered to make a massive impact.”

We’ve seen companies of various stripes, from 
Amazon
, 
Block
, 
Coinbase
, 
GitLab
, and 
Intuit
 employing similar language in their layoff announcements, indicating that large teams, bureaucracy and siloed departments are now seen as undesirable line items at a time when AI tools promise to significantly improve productivity.

Some even think it’s a tacit allusion to the fact that tech companies 
over-hired
 following the COVID-19 pandemic, and are now scaling back as expenses begin to pile up — especially those associated with massive AI usage.

Regardless, these companies are doing quite well. Tech stocks have surged broadly, spurred by record 
revenues
, improving profit margins (GitLab reported 
88% gross margin
 last month), skyrocketing demand for 
cloud services
, and the belief that the billions being poured into data center projects will 
produce returns that are orders of magnitudes higher
. 

Robinhood itself 
reported
 a 15% improvement in first-quarter revenue in April, and the company said its second quarter is looking better thanks to rising prediction market fees, subscription revenue, and strong equity and option trading volumes as markets stabilize.

The company said on Tuesday it is also closing “a small number” of open roles, and that it would incur about $28 million in costs related to the cuts.

Topics

AI
, 
Fintech
, 
Layoffs
, 
Robinhood

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ram Iyer	

Editor

Ram is a financial and tech reporter and editor. He covered North American and European M&A, equity, regulatory news and debt markets at Reuters and Acuris Global, and has also written about travel, tourism, entertainment and books.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ram by emailing 
ram.iyer@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos
