Robinhood 
this week
 unveiled a financial instrument that lets anyone feel like they, too, can make money by backing Y Combinator startups.

Robinhood Venture Fund II (RVII) is expected to become a publicly traded fund on August 13 at an opening price of $25 per share.

The fund intends to raise as much as $200 million, 
Reuters reports
, and use that money to invest in startups founded by current and former Y Combinator participants, should those startups agree to sell their shares.

While any retail investor can buy shares in the fund, they will not directly hold any shares in the startups. Investors will be able to trade their shares in the fund, but it’s unclear how much profit they can expect to make should the YC companies manage big exits.

The fund intends to pay the 2/20 fees typical in the VC world to another entity owned by Robinhood, plus tack on extra fees. That means Robinhood’s unit will collect 2% of the net returns as a management fee, plus other fees, taking the total to just over 4%, 
the company said
. The fund will also pay the Robinhood unit 20% “carried interest” (commonly called “carry”). That means if enough Y Combinator companies have good exits for the fund to make money, that Robinhood unit will get 20% of the resulting returns.

But RVII doesn’t appear to have an end date for returning its remaining profits to investors, unlike VC funds, which typically tend to run for about 10 years. Nor does RVII appear to promise regular distributions of cash profits. It may issue such distributions, but investors may largely have to bank on returns from the fund’s rising stock price. (We’ve asked Robinhood for more information about this.)

It’s certainly possible to make money by trading the fund’s shares. Robinhood Ventures Fund I (NYSE: RVI), which was also founded to buy shares in hot private companies like Databricks, Mercor and OpenAI, routinely trades above its IPO price of $21. 

It’s equally possible to lose money: After peaking at over $56 in May, RVI’s stock now trades at around $28 per share.

Robinhood has also gotten some 
push back on other schemes that tried to tie financial products
 to the names of valuable private companies. In 2025, it sold crypto assets described as tokenized shares of OpenAI and SpaceX. OpenAI condemned these, saying it wasn’t involved, and that the tokens did not represent any holdings in the company.

This fund, however, appears to operate 
more akin to a special purpose vehicle
 than to that 2025 crypto vehicle. It is buying actual shares. So, for anyone that likes the idea of betting on the YC pedigree, this is certainly a very Silicon Valley way to go.

Topics

Robinhood
, 
Startups
, 
Venture
, 
Y Combinator

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
