Roblox 
announced
 Thursday a new feature called “Build,” allowing users to design games from their mobile devices using AI. 

The Build feature lets anyone turn simple text prompts into a basic game without any programming experience. For example, if a user types, “Let’s make a cozy adventure game set in a dense forest,” the new feature will generate an initial version of the game, which users can then modify and share with friends.

“Powered by a broad set of AI models, including both open-source and proprietary Roblox models, Build handles gameplay mechanics, environment, characters, visual style, sound, and more,” the company wrote in its blog post.

Companies like 
Google
, 
Microsoft
, and Tencent have built similar tools. However, AI-powered game generation has raised concerns among developers and players, with critics arguing that reducing the barriers to game development via text prompts could lead to an influx of low-quality and repetitive games. This may also increase competition on the platform, as creators are required to compete not only with other developers but also with AI-generated content that can be produced far more quickly. 

These concerns are reflected in this year’s 
Game Developers Conference State of the Game Industry
 survey, which found that 52% of game industry professionals believe generative AI is having a negative impact on the industry.

To address this, Roblox plans to rank these AI-generated games based on player retention, similar to the system used for other games on the platform. If a game is not played, it won’t be featured as prominently.

“Our discovery systems are designed to highlight games with long-term retention, which doesn’t include AI slop. The quality of games on the homepage isn’t changing: If no one plays it — no one can find it. The goal across these new tools is to continue to accelerate creation across all experience levels,” the company added.

The Build feature will enter public alpha testing on July 28, available to users in New Zealand aged nine and older who have verified their age. Users aged 16 and up will have the opportunity to publish their creations to a global audience. There will be a free, basic version available along with paid options.

Beyond the Build feature, Roblox is also working on developing AI agents that will assist creators in playtesting and providing analytics. These features are anticipated to roll out in the upcoming months.

The new feature highlights Roblox’s ongoing investment in AI, including an 
AI foundation model
 for generating 3D game assets and an 
AI chatbot
 for supporting developers through the game-building process. Additionally, Roblox is developing a “new scene-generation model” capable of creating entire editable and playable 3D scenes from a single text prompt.

Additionally, the announcement comes shortly after Roblox 
disclosed
 plans to discontinue “Roblox Connect,” the avatar-based video-calling feature introduced in 2023.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Gaming
, 
Roblox

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez
