Generalist, a robotics startup, is now valued at $3 billion after raising additional capital led by 8VC, according to two people with knowledge of the funding. 

The fresh capital totals nearly $200 million according to a regulatory filing. That additional capital is an extension of a $400 million Series B led by Radical Ventures that the company announced in June at a $2 billion valuation, the people said. The new capital brings the round’s total funding to $600 million.

Generalist and 8VC didn’t respond to a request for comment.

Generalist was founded in 2024 by former Google DeepMind researchers Pete Florence and Andy Zeng, along with former Boston Dynamics engineer Andrew Barry. It received early backing from 8VC and Radical Ventures as well as Nvidia, Union Square Ventures, Bezos Expeditions, and AI researcher Fei-Fei Li.

Until recently, the startup operated quietly and with little publicity. 

Generalist is developing an AI foundation model that can work with various robots. It claims its newly released Gen 1.5 model enables robots to master new tasks from video demonstrations as short as 3 to 12 seconds long.

The startup is working with a handful of customers, using their feedback to tailor the model for specific use cases, according to one source.

Generalist isn’t alone in its pursuit of building a brain for a broad range of robots. Other competitors include Physical Intelligence, which is reportedly valued at $11 billion, and SoftBank-backed Skild AI, valued at $14 billion, as well as Genesis AI, which was in talks as of last month to raise capital at a $3 billion valuation.

The funding surge reflects a bet from some investors that robotics may soon reach its own “ChatGPT moment,” meaning that robots will be able to perform general tasks without being explicitly trained for each one. However, because robots cannot be trained on the entirety of the internet’s data the way LLMs can, some VCs warn that a truly general robotics model may still be years away.

Topics

8VC
, 
AI
, 
Exclusive
, 
radical ventures
, 
Robotics

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Marina Temkin	

Reporter, Venture

Marina Temkin is a venture capital and startups reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she wrote about VC for PitchBook and Venture Capital Journal. Earlier in her career, Marina was a financial analyst and earned a CFA charterholder designation.

You can contact or verify outreach from Marina by emailing 
marina.temkin@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 347-683-3909 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Nvidia just showed that the harness, not the AI model, is now the real hero

Julie Bort

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
