Former Sequoia Captial managing partner Roelof Botha is joining SpaceX’s board of directors, less than a week after the company went public in the largest IPO ever.

SpaceX 
announced
 the appointment in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday. It said Botha was appointed “to fill the existing vacancy on the Board” and that he will serve until SpaceX’s next annual shareholder meeting.” He will also join the SpaceX board’s audit committee. Botha didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.

Botha “brings extensive public company experience along with a deep audit committee background, having served on the boards and audit committees of numerous public companies,” SpaceX wrote in the filing. He stepped down from 
his role as Sequoia’s leader late last year
 as the firm was dealing with blowback against partner Shaun Maguire, who had made comments attacking then-New York City mayoral candidate Zohran Mamdani.

Botha is on many public company boards, but none quite like SpaceX, where CEO Elon Musk enjoys near-absolute control and shareholders have little power. Musk has more than 80% of the now-public company’s voting power, and owners of SpaceX stock will have 
severely limited opportunities
 to challenge him should they disagree with his actions. Musk also has control over all changes to the board’s makeup, 
filings show
. 

Botha briefly overlapped with Musk at PayPal in 2000. Botha started at the payments company in March of that year, according to his LinkedIn profile. Musk was pushed out as CEO of PayPal in September 200.

The addition of Botha brings SpaceX’s board to nine directors. He joins Musk confidants Ira Ehrenpreis, Antonio Gracias, Steve Jurvetson, and Luke Nosek, SpaceX chief operating officer Gwynne Shotwell, as well as Google executive Donald Harrison, and VC Randy Glein. Musk is chairman of the board. 

Botha has been with Sequoia for more than 20 years, and the firm invested in SpaceX in 2019. It reportedly 
owned
 1.5% of SpaceX heading into the IPO, giving it a position worth more than $20 billion.

This story is developing. Check back for updates.

Topics

AI
, 
roelof botha
, 
Space
, 
SpaceX
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
