With 
Harvey
 and 
Legora
 burning through eight-figure funding rounds, legal tools have proven to be one of the fastest-growing and most hotly contested verticals among AI startups. But while those tools focus on private practice, some startups believe there’s still plenty of the legal market that isn’t being served.

Sandstone
, which announced $30 million in Series A funding on Tuesday, is focused on an overlooked slice of the legal space, focusing on the tangle of overlapping tasks and systems facing in-house legal teams. 

The Series A was led by Lightspeed Venture Partners, with participation from existing investors at Sequoia, Mantis VC, SV Angel, Operator Partners, Kearny Jackson, Daybreak Ventures, Litquidity Ventures, and others. The Series A comes just six months after a $10 million seed round in January, which was led by Sequoia.

As the founders describe it, Sandstone’s initial user base will be the legal departments at small and mid-sized businesses.

“They open up their laptop in the morning, they see all the work that’s come in through different intake channels, whether that’s Slack messages, emails, Jira,” co-founder and chief operating officer Jarryd Strydom told TechCrunch. “AI helps them route and triage that work appropriately, and then they can build custom workflows on top of our platform to actually execute work, whether that’s drafting, reviewing, or providing legal analysis.”

The result has little in common with legal reasoning systems like Harvey and Legora. Instead, Sandstone focuses on relationship management and workflow automation, both tuned to the unique demands of in-house legal work. As Strydom sees it, the focus on in-house legal departments allows Sandstone to provide value where more generalized AI deployments often flounder.

“One of the convictions of Lightspeed was that they really believe in highly specialized vertical AI,” Strydom says, “because it takes a granular understanding of workflows to really nail down how AI can help.”

Sandstone will also face heated competition from frontier AI labs, which are increasingly turning their attention to the legal space. Anthropic has been 
steadily expanding
 its Claude for Legal offering, adding new tools in May for case law searches and deposition prep.

Topics

AI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Russell Brandom	

AI Editor

		Russell Brandom has been covering the tech industry since 2012, with a focus on platform policy and emerging technologies. He previously worked at The Verge and Rest of World, and has written for Wired, The Awl and MIT’s Technology Review.
 He can be reached at russell.brandom@techcrunch.com or on Signal at 412-401-5489.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin
