On Sunday, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella doubled down on the 
shocking warning he issued earlier
 this month to businesses that use AI, taking it a step further this time. Companies that rely wholly on the proprietary AI labs for their AI needs ultimately won’t survive, he predicts.

That’s what he said on 
CNN’s “Fareed Zakaria GPS.”
 When Zakaria asked Nadella to explain what constitutes a company sharing too much with an AI model provider, Nadella said businesses need to be wary of everything they hand over, from their data to their prompts.

Nadella called for a setup where “every time you use the model, all of the metadata around it is retained by you, so that you could use all of that to train perhaps your own weights or your own open model.” (Weights are a model’s trained parameters — essentially its brain. Nadella’s point: Companies should hold on to their own usage data so they can eventually build a model of their own.)

“Any firm that doesn’t have this control, I will claim will not remain a firm because you’ve essentially outsourced your thinking,” he added.

In short: Companies without their own models — or without a layer of AI infrastructure known as AI gateways to separate their prompts from the model itself — will be in trouble, Nadella says.

He specifically wants companies to stop relying on AI labs’ built-in coding tools, known as harnesses.(Anthropic’s Claude Code and OpenAI’s ChatGPT Codex are examples of these.)

“By keeping the harness separate from the model and the context and memory separate from the model, you absolutely can use multiple models for what they’re great at. At the same time, any one model can go away, and you can still continue to be in control of your own destiny,” Nadella said.

Mind you, Microsoft is an investor in the two largest AI labs, Anthropic and OpenAI. Coding agents are a particularly popular way for enterprises to use AI models and by all accounts are earning the 
model makers gobs of money
.

And yet, Nadella is telling enterprises not to rely too heavily on them. Microsoft, naturally, would benefit from that warning, as its cloud business is now also selling the kind of alternative infrastructure he’s recommending.

Despite the obvious self-serving fear tactic, he’s not wrong. Enterprises are increasingly realizing that they need many model options, particularly cheaper options, and 
are turning to open-weight models
 — models whose underlying code is publicly available — that they can fine-tune and run on their own hardware. That, in turn, means they will also need ways to manage multiple models, as well as coding agents that aren’t tied to a specific model provider.

But Nadella’s observation isn’t just about runaway budgets. He anticipates that once a company has “outsourced its thinking” to a model, there’s little to stop the AI lab from eventually offering a competing service of its own. This risk grows as enterprises adopt AI agents and give them access to the innards of the company.

It’s the kind of warning that the startup industry has been shuddering about for years: What’s to stop model makers from wiping out startups by copying and competing with them?

In May, for example, when OpenAI CEO Sam Altman offered to 
invest in every Y Combinator startup
 in its latest cohort by offering them AI credits, seed investor Jason Calacanis issued a similar buyer-beware, posting: “If you take these tokens, there’s a non-zero chance that OpenAI will study exactly what your startup is doing, copy your idea and put your app into their free offering. This is the classic platform playbook — be careful, founders!” he posted.

Now Nadella is making that same case to enterprises.

One caveat: Nadella’s concern about oversharing with AI models applies only to businesses — not individuals. When Zakaria specifically asked Nadella how everyday people could protect themselves, Nadella shrugged it off, saying that sharing data is simply the price consumers pay for using a service, especially a free one.

“To some degree there’s got to be some value exchange in the consumer space where you’re getting something for free, maybe for your data. That’s sort of how the advertising business model has worked,” Nadella said. 

Topics

AI
, 
Enterprise
, 
Microsoft
, 
Satya Nadella

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane

How OpenAI’s human mistake led to the AI-powered hack on Hugging Face

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
