Two Polish security researchers wanted to find out how vulnerable their country’s internet was to potential cyberattacks, and quickly found that thousands of public agencies and websites were at risk of being hacked.

At the Def Con cybersecurity conference in Las Vegas on Friday, security researchers Robert Kruczek and Kamil Szczurowski said they wanted to understand the state of Poland’s public web out of a sense of patriotism and a desire to make it safer for everyone. 

Before long, the duo discovered more than 10,000 affected public entities with 250,000 websites with security flaws, including airports, hospitals, and government offices. 

The researchers found that some of the vendors’ buggy software, coupled with a lack of bug bounties and ways to report security flaws, are putting Poland’s public services at risk of hijacks and other attacks. The researchers also said that some bugs were incredibly easy to exploit but were not always taken seriously, with some vendors describing the bug reports as inconveniences.

The research comes as Poland is trying to shore up its cyber defenses after a wave of suspected Russian hacks targeting the country’s 
energy
 and 
water providers
. Some of the hacks have been carried out by 
taking advantage
 of weak cybersecurity. 

Kruczek and Szczurowski found several bugs in the widely used content management system Pad CMS, which website owners use to organize and display content.

The two found critical vulnerabilities in 
one web system called Pad CMS
, which allowed them to easily access over 300 public websites without needing a password. The software developer did not patch the software because it had become “end of life” and was no longer supported.

Another bug allowed them to gain access to the websites of some two-thirds of Poland’s judiciary, or about 245 courts, they said.

The duo reported their findings to the government through various official channels.

The researchers said during their talk that it was ultimately worth the hassle, saying that as a result we are “a little bit more safe.”

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
poland
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $400 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha
