Democratic senator Ron Wyden is asking the U.S. government to review how federal law enforcement agencies use hacking tools and spyware against Americans, citing a lack of transparency into how often or for what reasons these tools are deployed.  

On Friday, 
Wyden sent a letter
 to the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), which audits the federal government, requesting it to launch a comprehensive inquiry into how the FBI, the Drug Enforcement Administration, ICE’s Homeland Security Investigations, and the Secret Service employ hacking and spyware in their investigations.

In the letter, shared with TechCrunch, Wyden wrote that while these tools have been used for more than two decades, “there exists little public information regarding its scope, frequency, or operational safeguards.”

Wyden said that, unlike wiretaps and pen registers, which allow authorities to see when a call is placed and to whom, the government “does not publish annual reports for hacking operations.” For that reason, Wyden requested GAO to publish an unclassified report with its findings and recommendations. 

Federal agents have used hacking tools and spyware several times over the years, but as Wyden noted in the letter, the U.S. Department of Justice and the FBI “have repeatedly ignored congressional requests for greater transparency across multiple administrations.”

Wyden is making several requests to the GAO: 

Investigate whether agents abused hacking tools and spyware for unauthorized or personal purposes, and to check what technical and oversight measures are in place to control and prevent misuse;

Review how agencies “acquire, store, and secure” these tools to avoid dangerous leaks, as well as whether they submit them to 
a program
 designed to determine if the U.S. government should report security flaws to help tech companies fix them;

And, assess how the feds inform courts when requesting warrants for the use of these tools, and whether they disclose the risk of affecting unknown or innocent targets.

To highlight the risks around the acquisition of hacking tools, Wyden specifically mentioned the case of Peter Williams, a former executive at the defense contractor L3Harris, 
who stole and sold advanced hacking tools to a Russian broker
. The tools 
ended up being used
 by Russian spies against Ukraine, and Chinese cybercriminals against cryptocurrency owners. 

The earliest documented case of the FBI using spyware goes back to 1999. During an investigation for illegal gambling and loan sharking, federal agents discovered that Philadelphia mobster Nicodemo S. Scarfo used the program Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) to encrypt a file on his computer, which they believed contained key evidence. 

To access it, the FBI 
installed a rudimentary malware
 designed to record the keystrokes on Scarfo’s computer, which allowed them to decrypt the file.

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
Exclusive
, 
FBI
, 
hacking
, 
ICE
, 
privacy
, 
Ron Wyden
, 
Security
, 
Spyware
, 
surveillance
, 
United States

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Etched’s valuation doubles to $21B in a month

Julie Bort

AI automation startup Relay shuts down, staff joins Google’s Chrome team

Lucas Ropek

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik
