In Brief

Posted:

10:16 AM PDT · August 3, 2026

Image Credits:
Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Valar Atomics confirmed 
the whisperings
 that it was raising a giant round led by Sequoia on Monday. The startup’s founder and CEO Isaiah Taylor 
announced
 that the company has raised $1 billion in equity, with Sequoia partner Shaun Maguire joining its board, and that it also secured a $200 million line of credit from Erebor and other banks.

While the nuclear startup did not disclose its valuation, 
Bloomberg reported
 that it was $6 billion.

Valar is building small modular nuclear reactors (SMRs) — essentially miniaturized, factory-built power plants intended to be cheaper and faster to build than traditional reactors. In June, it demonstrated its Ward 250 reactor successfully powering an Nvidia Blackwell system, the company said, and announced a deal with Nvidia to develop a waterless 30MW AI factory.

Valar says its reactors generate the engineering, manufacturing, and operational data needed to improve next-generation reactors, speeding its development cycles.

“It took two years to complete the NOVA core. It took seven months to take Ward 250 critical. With each reactor built, the tick rate will become smaller until Valar is producing tens, then hundreds, then thousands of reactors per year,” it said, adding that this funding will allow it to reach to its next milestone: manufacturing fleets of its SMRs.

It certainly isn’t the only nuclear startup pursuing such ambitions. Over the past few months, 
Antares raised $470 million
, and 
X-energy raised $1 billion through its IPO.

As for Valar’s new round, other investors include Apandion Capital, Atreides Management, Conviction, Dream Ventures, HOF Capital, Point72 Ventures, Riot Ventures, Snowpoint Ventures, and Valor Equity Partners.

Topics

Climate
, 
Fundraising
, 
Sequoia
, 
Startups
, 
TC
, 
valar atomics

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Climate

Base Power raises another $1B to save the grid using backyard batteries

Tim De Chant

	2 hours ago

AI

Sales automation startup Rox AI hits $1.2B valuation, sources say

Marina Temkin

	Mar 12, 2026

Venture

Roelof Botha explains why Sequoia supports Shaun Maguire after COO quit

Sarah Perez

Julie Bort

	Oct 27, 2025

Latest in Startups

In Brief

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

	2 hours ago

Security

Horizon3 hits $2 billion valuation with $250M Series E as AI threats escalate

Kate Park

	6 hours ago

Startups

Silicon Valley loves young founders. Until it doesn’t.

Dominic-Madori Davis

	3 days ago
