In Brief

Posted:

3:43 PM PDT · June 22, 2026

Image Credits:
Kent Nishimura / Getty Images

Kirsten Korosec

Shareholders sue Uber’s board over sexual assaults, other incidents

A lawsuit led by a Detroit pension fund accuses Uber management and its board of putting profits ahead of compliance and safety, decisions that have exposed the company and its shareholders to risk.

The lawsuit, which was filed Monday in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California in San Francisco, alleges that Uber is a “serial compliance offender” that has “knowingly” cut corners. This lack of compliance culture has led to thousands of lawsuits by victims who have alleged sexual assault and harassment by drivers, according to the complaint.

The lawsuit, which names CEO Dara Khosrowshari, claims board members breached their fiduciary duty to the company and its shareholders by ignoring repeated warnings of compliance and safety failures. The plaintiffs want Uber’s leaders to personally compensate the company for alleged harm, return certain compensation they received, and implement stronger oversight and compliance measures.

“The victims of this lack of compliance culture include sexual assault and harassment victims, customers with disabilities, and unwary consumers looking to subscribe to Uber One,” the complaint reads.

Uber pushed back on the accusations in the lawsuit. 

“This suit ignores important facts and is based on misleading, false narratives from other meritless lawsuits that we have already addressed publicly and in the courtroom,” an Uber spokesperson wrote in an emailed statement. 

It’s not unusual for companies like Uber to face derivative lawsuits, when a shareholder sues the company’s directors on behalf of the corporation. Shareholders have filed such lawsuits against Adobe, Apple, and Intel this year, for instance.

Topics

Dara Khosrowshahi
, 
Transportation
, 
Uber

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

The AI world is getting ‘loopy’

Russell Brandom

	2 hours ago

Startups

AI chipmaker Groq confirms $650M raise, re-staffs after Nvidia’s $20B not-acqui-hire deal

Julie Bort

	2 hours ago

Climate

Nvidia wants to cut data center water use, but that’s not the same as fixing AI’s water problem

Tim De Chant

	3 hours ago

Latest in Transportation

In Brief

Shareholders sue Uber’s board over sexual assaults, other incidents

Kirsten Korosec

	14 seconds ago

Transportation

Lucid Motors’ new CEO cuts 18% of staff to ‘simplify the company’

Sean O'Kane

	9 hours ago

Transportation

TechCrunch Mobility: A new robotaxi scorecard shows China’s dominance

Kirsten Korosec

	1 day ago
