E-commerce software maker Shopify seems to be benefiting handily from people using AI to search. 

On the company’s second-quarter earnings call, Shopify President Harley Finkelstein said AI has become a “complement to search, rather than a substitute for it,” and had particularly benefited the long tail of e-commerce, including the smaller merchants that make up the majority of its customer base. Indeed, the company credited its 
earnings beat
 and soaring revenue to AI search, at least partly. 

This is quite different from how AI is 
impacting
 online publishing, where AI summaries have led to a measurable drop in click-through rates, which lowers traffic and consequently eats into advertising revenues.

Instead, Shopify believes that AI is a boon to its business. The company noted that AI-driven traffic and orders to Shopify stores had tripled year-over-year in the second quarter. 

And, this was not a result of AI taking share from search. “In fact, search remains one of our largest sources of buyer traffic to our merchants, and it’s still growing,” Finkelstein told analysts on the call. “Traditional search sessions are up 1.3x over the past two years, holding roughly a third of all storefront sessions.”

The e-commerce platform reported strong results in the quarter, with revenue rising 36% to $3.6 billion from a year earlier, outstripping Wall Street’s forecast of $3.4 billion. Gross operating profit rose 31% to $1.71 billion, also ahead of analysts’ expectations of $1.63 billion.

The company went into further detail about why AI search was working for its business.

“While search engines rank by popularity against a handful of keywords, AI agents make multiple calls into Shopify’s catalog, working with richer structured data to match products with the buyer’s specific intent, rather than just keywords,” Finkelstein explained. 

“When a buyer asks an AI assistant for the best car seat that fits three across a sedan, traditional search focuses on the keyword ‘car seat.’ An agent, however, understands the actual need, the dimensions, the vehicle type, and the fact that they need three. It searches across all of those constraints at once to find the product that actually works, not just the one that ranks highest,” he said.

In other words, AI’s capability to search across many dimensions to find the best product for users is resulting in better conversions for merchants.

“Buyers’ shopping journeys are being compressed as half of all AI-referred sessions are landing directly on a product description page. That is 2.5 times more than what we see with traditional search,” Finkelstein added. 

Plus, the company said 75% of AI-attributed purchases in Q2 happened outside the top 100 categories, or what Shopify called its “sweet spot.”

In addition, the company suggested Shopify stands to benefit from AI playing a larger role in transactions thanks to its trusted checkout experience.

The company pointed out that it’s also working with AI tools and agents, having built connectors to Claude, ChatGPT, Perplexity, Manus, Replit and Vercel, as well as vibe-coding platforms like Lovable that let merchants build on Shopify however they choose.

Topics

AI
, 
AI search
, 
Commerce
, 
Shopify

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
