In his final 
earnings call
 as CEO of Apple, Tim Cook said that the company’s long-awaited Siri AI upgrade could come with some paywalled limits. While Cook conceded that these plans are not set in stone, he envisions users being able to buy more compute for Siri AI via its existing iCloud+ subscriptions, which offer extended cloud storage.

“We do believe there will be people that want to use [Siri AI] a lot, and so we will have some kind of upgrade possibilities on iCloud+, where people can buy up the stack on iCloud+, and we’ll see how the pickup for that is,” Cook said on Thursday. “But we could not be more excited about where [Siri AI] is.” 

Most other AI providers like Anthropic and OpenAI operate similarly, offering a limited free version to consumers with the option of upgrading to support more usage. 

The new-and-improved Siri AI is available in the iOS 27 beta, and is planned to roll out more broadly this fall.

As longtime Senior Vice President of Hardware Engineering 
John Ternus
 steps into Tim Cook’s shoes, he will take the helm at a critical time for the company. Apple has fallen behind in its efforts to build an advanced AI assistant, even capitulating to its direct competitor Google by 
licensing a custom Gemini model
 to augment Siri. The Siri AI overhaul was so delayed that Apple had to pay 
$250 million
 to settle a class action lawsuit over how it marketed the iPhone 16’s AI capabilities. 

Apple, like every other hardware manufacturer, is also staring down a rocky road for 
accessing the supplies
 it needs to meet customer demand. Due to the AI-driven 
RAM shortage
 across the industry, it’s more expensive to build hardware, which has led companies like 
Meta
, 
Samsung
, 
Microsoft
, and 
Sony
 to raise prices of some devices. Apple 
raised the price
 of Macs and iPads last month, but has yet to adjust the price of its existing iPhone models.

Topics

AI
, 
Apple
, 
siri ai

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Data centers may face temporary power cuts to prevent blackouts on largest US grid

Tim De Chant

PSA: Your Claude shared chats and Artifacts may have ended up on Google

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Kalshi demands Netflix take down trailer for ‘Prediction Games’ documentary

Anthony Ha

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling
