In Brief

Posted:

5:23 PM PDT · August 24, 2026

Image Credits:
Valerie Plesch/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Lucas Ropek

Situational Awareness, star AI hedge fund that nearly imploded, now being probed by the SEC

Situational Awareness, the AI focused hedge fund that was Wall Street’s fleeting obsession, is having a very bad month.

The company, led by twentysomething OpenAI alum Leopold Aschenbrenner, went all-in on a variety of AI investments and, for a period, enjoyed phenomenal growth. Then, at the end of July, a downturn in AI stocks 
erased billions
 of dollars in value at the firm. Now, federal regulators are reportedly probing the company as well.

The New York Times 
reports that
 the Securities and Exchange Commission has been subpoenaing banks that did business with the hedge fund. The subpoenas focus on the banks that supervised the fund’s trading and that channeled funding to support it, the outlet says.

The government reportedly warned the banks to “preserve any information” about the hedge fund, though it noted that Situational Awareness has not been accused of any wrongdoing.

Situational Awareness did not respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment but told the Times that scrutiny of high-profile funds is to be expected, and that it would “cooperate to the fullest extent with any regulatory request.”

The company, which very publicly hitched its wagon to AI’s star, may serve as a cautionary tale about the industry’s supposedly unstoppable trajectory.

Topics

AI
, 
TC

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Fundraising

Valor, Point72 back General Intuition at $6B valuation as AI startup pushes into robotics

Rebecca Bellan

	9 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Situational Awareness, star AI hedge fund that nearly imploded, now being probed by the SEC

Lucas Ropek

	30 minutes ago

In Brief

Trump bought SpaceX shares two weeks after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

	3 hours ago

TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Amjad Masad, CEO and co-founder of Replit, joins the Disrupt Stage at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 

TechCrunch Events

	5 hours ago
