Slate Auto
, the EV startup backed by Jeff Bezos, has built its business around the idea of simplicity and customization. Start with a $24,950 
unpainted gray electric truck
 with 205 miles of range — and none of the technological flair — and let the buyer customize it to their liking through vehicle wraps, decals, lighting, and other accessories.

The vehicle wraps — printed vinyl film that can be applied to a car, truck, or SUV without needing to paint it — are a central component of this 
customization strategy
 with hundreds of different colors and combinations. And now Slate is adding even more through a partnership with crayon maker Crayola.

Slate said Thursday it will offer five vehicle wraps that use signature Crayola colors, including Cerulean, Fern, Jersey Tomato, Razzmatazz, and Dandelion. The Crayola-color vehicle wraps cost $1,549.99, according to Slate. The company is also throwing in a matching 
Crayola key fob
 and “Slatelet,” which are custom art pieces that snap onto the dashboard, for those who opt for a crayon-colored vehicle wrap. 

Image Credits:
Slate Auto (screenshot)

This is not Slate’s only collaboration, although it might be the one most recognizable to children. The company is also working with NYC artist 
Max Kolo
 on a vehicle wrap. This is, however, a first for Crayola. Anna Roca, head of global partnerships at Crayola, said this is the company’s first automotive partnership.

Slate wouldn’t disclose whether it’s working with other companies like Crayola to offer more vehicle wrap designs. A Slate spokesperson said in an email that “we’re excited to welcome Makers, creators, and partners over time,” suggesting that more wraps could still come.

And considering the custom-heavy path Slate has taken so far, it’s easy to imagine a slew of design collabs in the future. 

Slate is still a newcomer in the automotive industry. The company emerged from stealth in April 2025 and has yet to make its first deliveries. Last month, the company revealed its $24,950 base price and started taking preorders for the vehicle, which starts as a two-seat truck and can be modified into a more expensive $29,950 five-seater SUV.

Topics

crayola
, 
EVs
, 
jeff bezos
, 
slate auto
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant
