While AI agents are increasingly capable of solving customer support problems, most people can still tell immediately when they’re talking to a machine instead of a human.

Smallest.ai
, a startup founded in late 2024, is betting the next leap in voice agents will not come from making large language models faster, but from using smaller, specialized models built for human conversation. Simply put, the company wants to make speaking to an AI agent indistinguishable from talking to a human.

To do so, it’s developing a small voice model designed to mimic how humans process information by listening, thinking, and speaking simultaneously.

“While I’m speaking to you, you’re already thinking, and you might interrupt me if I talk for too long,” Sudarshan Kamath (pictured left), founder and CEO of Smallest.ai, told TechCrunch, adding that this is exactly how the startup’s model is designed to work.

To fuel this mission, Smallest.ai has raised $13 million in a Series A round, led by Seligman Ventures with participation from Sierra Ventures and 3one4 Capital. The fresh capital brings the startup’s total funding to over $21 million.

“The way an LLM works is you give it an entire prompt, and then it starts thinking,” Kamath said. While that latency is acceptable in a text chat, in a voice conversation, even a short pause feels unnatural. “If you think about how we are talking, I’m not giving you like a large clipping of my audio, and then you start thinking.”

The startup’s model serves as a real-time intelligence layer that enables natural customer conversations on specific topics, with virtually zero response lag. But if the model encounters a subject outside its limited knowledge base, Smallest.ai hands off the query to a large foundational model, briefly placing the customer on hold to “research” the issue — just as a real human would do.

Kamath believes that all AI agents will soon rely on two models: a small voice model for real-time interaction, and an “offline” LLM that is called upon as needed to solve complex problems.

Unlike large foundational models, Smallest.ai focuses strictly on voice-specific nuances, such as handling diverse accents, supporting dozens of languages, and operating in noisy environments.

The startup’s existing customers include companies in the voice space, including RingCentral and Truecaller. Kamath said that any customer support company, including newer ones like Sierra and Decagon, is a potential customer for the startup.  

When asked why a well-funded AI customer support company wouldn’t build its own voice model, Kamath said that for customer support startups, becoming “extremely good at doing voice is a distraction from their core business.”

Smallest.ai competes with voice AI leader ElevenLabs, as well as Cartesia and regional players like Sarvam that focus on local languages.

While some competitors apply voice AI to use cases, like audio dubbing and podcasting, Smallest.ai focuses strictly on real-time conversational voice agents for its enterprise customers.

“We want our models to break the Turing test,” Kamath said. “You should speak to our model and not know it’s AI or human. That’s the sole focus of the company.”

Topics

AI
, 
customer support
, 
Startups
, 
Venture
, 
voice AI

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Marina Temkin	

Reporter, Venture

Marina Temkin is a venture capital and startups reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she wrote about VC for PitchBook and Venture Capital Journal. Earlier in her career, Marina was a financial analyst and earned a CFA charterholder designation.

You can contact or verify outreach from Marina by emailing 
marina.temkin@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 347-683-3909 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

PSA: Your Claude shared chats and Artifacts may have ended up on Google

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Kalshi demands Netflix take down trailer for ‘Prediction Games’ documentary

Anthony Ha

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane
