In an attempt to guard underage users from being doxxed, Snapchat is adding new content control restrictions on its platform: Users between 13 and 15 years old will only be able to share Spotlight posts with people they follow back. 

The social network said that users under 16 years old will get a separate profile to show Stories and Spotlight posts to friends that they follow back. The content for these users won’t show metrics, like favorite counts, that create pressure to rank up engagement.

Until now, Snapchat has allowed this cohort of users to share Spotlight posts with everyone, though their posts aren’t attributed to their profiles, preventing other users from contacting them.

Image Credits: Snapchat
Image Credits:
Snapchat

Users aged 16 to 18 can still share Spotlight posts publicly, but their posts will be limited to friends, followers, and users with whom they share mutual friends. Plus, parents can see how much time their kids spent on parts of the platform, like Stories and Spotlight, 
through the Family Center
.

The company currently prevents strangers from sending friend requests or messages to teenagers. The app shows a warning message to teen users if they start a chat with a stranger, and also restricts the type of content teenagers can see on the platform.

Loading the player…

Social media platforms like Instagram have also moved to restrict experiences for teenage users in recent years, 
including introducing specialized accounts
.

Earlier this year, Snap settled 
a lawsuit
 that accused it of abetting social media addiction. It is fighting other, similar cases across the U.S.

In an interview with 
CNBC
, Snap CEO Evan Spiegel cited some studies to say Snapchat has a “positive impact” on users as it connects them to friends, and that the service shouldn’t be lumped with the likes of TikTok and Instagram.

Topics

Apps
, 
Snap
, 
Snapchat
, 
teen safety

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
