A day after 
Snap tentatively settled with the plaintiff
 in a social media addiction lawsuit, leaving Meta as the only remaining defendant, the case has been dropped. In a statement, Meta said the plaintiff chose to drop his case against Meta without receiving any payment.

TikTok and Google’s YouTube had previously reached settlement agreements with the plaintiff. (Snap on Tuesday confirmed a tentative agreement had been reached.)

The bellwether jury trial had been set to begin next week in the Superior Court of California in Los Angeles.

The plaintiff, a Florida teenager known by the initials “R.K.C.,” had sued the social media companies for creating addictive platforms. It was one of thousands of similar lawsuits from teens, schools, and state attorneys general that had accused the big tech companies of knowingly creating addictive platforms.

The precedent that would have been set by this lawsuit and others could have impacted how the companies build their apps, known for features that keep people engaged, like the infinite scroll and their continual buzz of notifications. 

The plaintiff’s decision to drop the case follows 
Meta’s loss in a New Mexico case earlier this year
, which marked its first courtroom defeat over social media harms. Meta was ordered to pay $375 million in penalties after the company was found to have misled consumers about the safety of its platforms and endangered children.

In March, a Los Angeles jury also handed both Meta and Google 
another defeat
, awarding the defendant in that case some 
$6 million
 in damages.

Meta had been prepared to argue that the plaintiff in this case had allegedly only used Facebook and Instagram accounts for minutes per day on average, and was planning to claim that most of his accounts had been created after hiring a lawyer. 

In its statement, Meta said that, “this outcome makes clear that we will not back away from defending ourselves against baseless lawsuits.”

Topics

lawsuit
, 
Meta
, 
Social
, 
social media

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker
