For years, social media giants controlled what users saw in their feeds. While people could follow accounts, like posts or hide content they didn’t enjoy, recommendation algorithms controlled what was shown to them. 

Now, social platforms are handing over some of their power by allowing users to personalize their algorithms with the help of AI. 

Beyond traditional “Not Interested” buttons, apps like Threads, Instagram, and TikTok have begun introducing tools that let people train their own algorithms and influence what appears in their feeds.

The shift reflects an evolution in how recommendation systems work. Social media feeds are moving away from a one-size-fits-all TV channel and toward something more like a streaming service, where users can tune recommendations to their interests and have more control over what they see. 

For users, the advantage of customizable algorithms is a feed tailored to their interests. For social media giants, it’s a way to boost engagement by displaying content that people are most likely to consume.

Here’s a look at how social media platforms are giving users more control over their recommendation algorithms.

Threads

Image Credits:
Meta

On July 16, 2026, Threads launched a new 
“Your Algo” feature
 that builds on the platform’s 
“Dear Algo” tool
, which debuted in February. The “Dear Algo” tool lets users influence their feed by publishing a public post, such as “Dear Algo, show me more posts about podcasts,” to indicate the types of content they want to see more or less of in their feed. With the new “Your Algo” feature, users can make those preferences privately, without having to post publicly. 

Users can tell Threads you want to see more or less of certain topics and choose how long the request lasts: one, three, or seven days. For example, you could ask to see more baseball content and less stressful news. 

Instagram

Image Credits:
Instagram

In early June, Instagram launched a new tool that lets you see and control your algorithm across your feed. The tool, called “Your Algorithm,” lets you view the topics that shape your recommendations and customize them to better fit your interests. The tool first launched for the reels feed 
in December 2025
, but is now available across the feed, explore, and reels. 

Once you access the tool in your settings, you see the topics Instagram thinks you care about the most. You can then tell the app what you’re interested in and what you want to see more or less of, and your recommendations will adapt accordingly. 

Instagram head 
Adam Mosseri has said
 that social media ranking models have historically been built with technology that wasn’t transparent to users, but now large language models (LLMs) can make recommendation systems more understandable by showing why content is displayed and letting users explicitly communicate their preferences.

TikTok

Image Credits:
TikTok

TikTok features a 
“Manage Topics” tool
 that gives you more control over what you see in your “For You” feed. Launched in 2024, you can access the feature in your settings to customize your preferences for different topics, such as sports, travel, humor, current affairs, dance, and food. You can do so by moving the slider to adjust how much you do or don’t want to see that sort of content in your For You feed. 

If you are uncertain about which type of videos fall under a category, you can click the “information” button next to a topic. For instance, TikTok says the “Creative arts” topic includes “painting, drawing, graphic design, and art-related tutorials.”

In 2025, TikTok expanded its Manage Topics tool by introducing 
AI-powered Smart Keyword Filters
, which automatically limit content containing related keywords, such as synonyms. For example, if you use the Manage Topics tool to filter out “remodeling,” TikTok will also filter out “renovation” and “renovations.”

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Instagram
, 
Meta
, 
Social
, 
social media
, 
TikTok

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
