If you are a malicious hacker, cybersecurity professionals may very well be the worst people in the world to try to hack, as there is a very good chance they are going to catch you.

A person pretending to work for a leading crypto news site targeted several cybersecurity professionals around the time of the hacking conferences Black Hat and Def Con earlier this month. The hacker approached attendees on social media site X, both via public replies and DMs, and then leveraged Google Docs in an attempt to trick the targets into installing malware, according to researchers. 

On Wednesday, security firm Huntress 
published a blog post
 detailing the hacking campaign, which targeted one of its researchers, who pretended to go along with it to learn what the hacker was trying to do. 

In broken English, the hacker asked the researcher if they had plans to attend a conference next, and then mentioned a conference allegedly organized by the crypto news website, according to a screenshot of the conversation.

After that, the hacker shared a legitimate Google Doc that looked like it was a planning document for the fake conference. The document displayed a sidebar designed to make the target think it was encrypted. The goal was to first trick the target into entering a fake decryption key provided by the hacker. That was the first step in a process that would lead to the installation of malware for macOS and Windows, depending on the operating system used by the target, according to Huntress.

To make the sidebar appear real, the hacker used 
Google App Script
, a platform that allows developers to customize the user interface of Google Docs with menus and sidebars, for example.

A screenshot of the Google Doc sent by the hacker to the Huntress researcher.
Image Credits:
Huntress/Screenshot

The hacker tried to trick Huntress’ researcher into installing an 
infostealer
 for Apple computers; a remote desktop viewing tool repurposed as malware for Windows; and a fake installer for the cryptocurrency wallet Ledger.  

The person
 behind the account identified by Huntress researchers as the hacker did not respond when TechCrunch sent them a private message on X. 

Hackers of all kinds — be them 
unknown government hackers
 using advanced spyware, or 
North Korean
 
government hackers
 using fake Twitter profiles — have targeted cybersecurity professionals before. What made this campaign a bit more believable was the use of a legitimate Google Doc and Google feature. 

Google did not immediately when TechCrunch reached out asking if the company had seen this hacking campaign, or similar ones.

Topics

cyberattack
, 
cybercrime
, 
cybersecurity
, 
Google
, 
google docs
, 
malware
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Etched’s valuation doubles to $21B in a month

Julie Bort

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez
