Sony 
announced
 Wednesday that it will stop producing physical discs for all new PlayStation games starting in January 2028, marking a move into an all-digital future. After that, every new release will be sold digitally through the PlayStation Store and other retailers. Games released before the cutoff will continue to be available on disc.

Physical copies have long been a staple of gaming culture, so for many players, saying goodbye to game discs will be bittersweet. However, Sony said the decision reflects how most players already buy and play games today.

“This is a natural direction for Sony Interactive Entertainment to adapt to consumer trends as the general preference for digital media significantly outpaces physical discs. This transition will enable us to align more closely with how most of our community prefers to access and play games today,” the company wrote in its announcement. 

According to Sony’s 
financial re
s
ults
 for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2025, digital downloads accounted for 85% of full-game software sales on PS4 and PS5, while physical copies accounted for the remaining 15%.

The decline of physical games has also been reflected in retail, with stores that once relied heavily on physical discs continuing to shrink as more players buy online. 
GameStop
 has reportedly closed more than 1,300 stores over the past two fiscal years.

The announcement comes just days after 
Grand Theft Auto 6
 fans reacted negatively after learning that the game’s “physical” edition would include only a download code inside the box instead of an actual game disc, highlighting that a group of gamers still value collecting physical editions.

Additionally, Sony 
revealed
 on Wednesday that it’s shutting down the PlayStation Store on the PlayStation 3 in select markets later this year, followed by global closures of the PS3 and PlayStation Vita stores next year. 

Once those stores close, players won’t be able to purchase new digital content on those systems. Sony said previously purchased games and content will still be available to download for the foreseeable future.

Topics

Gaming
, 
playstation
, 
Sony
, 
video games

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Flipper Device’s new Busy Bar is a customizable display for productivity

Ivan Mehta

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

FTC gives Musk the OK to acquire SpaceX alumni startup Mesh

Marina Temkin

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh
