SpaceX said this week that it will build natural gas power plants to supply electricity to the 
Terafab semiconductor factory
 it plans to build in Texas, according to a 
report
 from Bloomberg. 

Riley Trettel, who leads energy and data center development for SpaceX, said in a public meeting on Wednesday that his company will be “bringing our own power” for the project, which will also include “very large battery arrays.”

Notably absent from the Bloomberg report — and other SpaceX announcements related to Terafab — is any mention of terrestrial solar power for the facility. Tesla, which is also a solar developer, is a partner in the project.

Despite his investments in solar power, SpaceX and Tesla’s CEO Elon Musk has bet heavily on natural gas lately. The xAI data centers in Memphis run almost exclusively 
on the fossil fuel
. Musk also 
recently bought
 a company that specializes in natural gas power plants, and SpaceX has said it plans to buy 
$2.8 billion worth
 of gas turbines over the next three years.

Terafab will be built in Grimes County, which is about 45 miles northwest of downtown Houston. SpaceX, which recently went public in 
an IPO that raised $87.5 billion
, received a 
100% tax abatement
 from the county in exchange for spending at least $5 billion by 2030 and creating at least 1,800 full-time jobs by 2035. Texas is also providing $30 million in incentives. 

The initial phase of the fab unit is expected to cost $16.8 billion, though SpaceX had previously estimated it would cost $55 billion. The fab is intended to build chips for data centers that will be run by SpaceX and its xAI subsidiary.

The AI data center boom has driven a surge in proposals for new natural gas power plants across the industry, which has in turn 
driven up costs
 for natural gas power plants by 66%. 
Google, Meta and Microsoft
 have all announced massive projects in recent months.

Texas has been ground zero for these so-called “bring your own power” data centers, and 
more than 70 gigawatts
 of capacity has been charted out. 

Such schemes are intended to speed up project development while addressing concerns about rising electricity prices for consumers, but natural gas turbines can release significant amounts of pollution. SpaceX subsidiary xAI 
has been sued
 over its use of unpermitted natural gas turbines in one of the most polluted parts of the country.

Topics

Climate
, 
natural gas
, 
SpaceX
, 
Tesla

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha
