SpaceX has captured the attention of media, investors, and the public for years now — interest propelled by the company’s reusable rocket launches, the rise of its Starlink satellite network, and, of course, for its founder and CEO Elon Musk.

But in its 24-year history, nothing quite compared to its initial public offering. Everyone seemed interested — perhaps because of the sheer size of the IPO. The company priced its 555.6 million shares at $135 each to raise $75 billion, making it the largest IPO in history and turning Musk into the 
world’s first trillionaire
. 

TechCrunch has followed SpaceX’s start, struggles, and successes from the early days. And we’re here for what happens next too. Here is your go-to landing page for all the relevant SpaceX IPO news, including notable updates now that the company is public.  

SpaceX is now public. What’s next?

On its first full day of trading, SpaceX shares pushed even higher. As of 2:30 p.m. ET, SpaceX shares were up more than 15% to $186.15.

The latest on the SpaceX IPO

SpaceX shares opened June 12 at $150 on the Nasdaq public exchange, an 11% pop for the most anticipated debut in history. And it has continued to rise. The shares kept rising too. In midday trading, SpaceX shares soared 30%. SpaceX shares closed at 
$160.95, up 19%
.

There has been heavy trading volume, as expected. Robinhood said it has seen 
“record-breaking traffic
 on its trading platform in the hours after SpaceX’s historic public markets debut. 

SpaceX COO Gwynne Shotwell was interviewed by CNBC on June 12 and among the many interesting comments she made, here is one that might get the attention of Tesla shareholders. At one point in the interview, 
Shotwell said
 a “merger between SpaceX and Tesla might make Elon’s life a little easier.”

Among the winners are the banks, which have brought in about 
$500 million 
in total fees. The big winners are Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley, per the WSJ.

Musk took to X, the social media company he owns, to share his appreciation of SpaceX employees as the stock rose. “I love the incredible people of SpaceX beyond words,” 
he wrote Friday afternoon
. He also reposted a number of SpaceX IPO related posts, including a photo of insiders all 
wearing green shoes 
in what appears to be a nod to “the green shoe option.” This is a provision in an IPO underwriting agreement that lets underwriters sell up to 15% more shares than originally planned if demand is strong.

To get a deeper look into what happened, and all the far-ranging implications of SpaceX now being a publicly traded company, 
Senior Reporter Sean O’Kane
 and 
AI Editor Russell Brandom
 sat down for a special episode of our Equity podcast, which 
you can listen to right here
 or via your podcast player of choice, or 
queue it up on YouTube here
.

How to track the SpaceX IPO

With an offering this large, there is a lot of financial machinery operating behind the scenes — so the first question is just when the stock makes it to the market to start trading. SpaceX is debuting on Nasdaq and you can see the official Nasdaq listing 
here
, which will have the price of record as soon as there is one. Nasdaq also has video of the SpaceX crew 
ringing the bell
, if that’s your thing.

But the price is just part of the picture. For the most up-to-the-minute information, your best bet is still financial press outlets like 
Bloomberg
 and 
CNBC
, both of which have liveblogs running and will have close coverage of any hiccups that happen in getting the stock to market.

The SpaceX IPO, by the numbers

Here we look at some of the bigger numbers, the consequential figures, and the eyewatering amounts that make up the company’s S-1 form. 

For instance, SpaceX lost $4.9 billion on revenues of over $18 billion in 2025. That’s only a fraction of the more than $37 billion lost since SpaceX’s inception. 

As CEO, Elon Musk holds about 85.1% of the company’s voting power. You can read more about that in the next section “Who wins and who doesn’t” — and we’ll continue to drop interesting numbers in here.

Here is another figure that caught our attention… 4,400. That’s the number of SpaceX employees who could become millionaires, 
according to the NYT
.

Elon Musk can’t hear you over the sound of his $1.75 trillion IPO
: The Equity podcast weighs in on the IPO.

Who wins and who doesn’t

SpaceX is the world’s largest IPO in history and means a big payday for some investors, employees, and of course, Elon Musk. 

Elon Musk becomes the world’s first trillionaire after SpaceX’s historic IPO
: The SpaceX IPO has boosted Musk’s paper wealth to more than $1,000,000,000,000 at a time when he is more hated — and powerful — than ever.
How Elon Musk will increase his power through the SpaceX IPO
: Musk, who will have more than 50% of the voting power, will have a monarchical grip over the publicly traded version of SpaceX — control that goes far beyond what other tech founders enjoy.

Who will benefit most from SpaceX IPO? Mostly Elon — and a few from his inner circle
:  Elon Musk has the largest stake in SpaceX by billions of shares, but others also stand to win. Here’s the rundown of who owns what.

SpaceX SPV investors won’t know their true holdings until post-IPO lock-ups lift
: After SpaceX makes its public debut, lower-tier SPV investors face hidden fees, lengthy payout delays, and the risk of outright fraud.

What’s in the S-1

The S-1 registration document
 gave the world an unprecedented look inside SpaceX, including its financials and its various businesses. The S-1 continued to be amended as the IPO date approached, and we were on it. Here is what we found.

The SpaceX IPO filing is filled with AI bets, Starship dreams, and Elon Musk at the center
:
 The contents of the SpaceX IPO details a business dominated by its Starlink satellite internet offering, more than $37 billion in losses, and future business prospects through its xAI division.

Starship’s path to reusability looks murky after SpaceX’s S-1
: SpaceX’s IPO and Starship rocket test flight delivered two big data points that offer a realistic vision for the coming years — and one that may disappoint both the company’s boosters and its critics.

SpaceX warns investors of future dilution, adding fuel to Tesla merger rumors
: The company added new language to its S-1, a warning to prospective investors that a major dilution could be in the cards after it goes public. 

Pre-IPO deals and events

Leading up to the IPO, SpaceX locked in a string of deals, mostly selling off compute to improve its balance sheet.

Anthropic will pay xAI $1.25B per month for compute
: Initial coverage of the Anthropic deal on May 20.

How long is Anthropic’s lease with SpaceX? Opinions vary
: Elon Musk keeps downplaying the duration of SpaceX’s contract with Anthropic.

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute
: A Google representative described the deal as a short-term deal addressing unexpected demand for its recently launched AI products.

This article originally published at 10 a.m. ET, June 12, 2026. It has been updated with new coverage of the SpaceX IPO, share price, and other related events. 

Topics

AI
, 
Elon Musk
, 
IPO
, 
Space
, 
SpaceX
, 
spacex ipo
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

			Russell Brandom	

AI Editor

		Russell Brandom has been covering the tech industry since 2012, with a focus on platform policy and emerging technologies. He previously worked at The Verge and Rest of World, and has written for Wired, The Awl and MIT’s Technology Review.
 He can be reached at russell.brandom@techcrunch.com or on Signal at 412-401-5489.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort
