Spotify is adding a new mode to its phone app for people who like to listen to music on runs. The new running mode cues up songs based on different phases of runs, and selects tracks based on your preferences and tempo.

Paying subscribers can find the running mode in Fitness Hub, and can select from one of the 25 presets. Users can choose their workout type from options like interval runs, steady runs or pyramid, and can customize the duration, beats per minute, and the kind of music they want to listen to.

Image Credits: Spotify
Image Credits:
Spotify

As well as playing songs, running mode can create audio cues for different stages of your run, too. This feature only works in English for now.

The new mode takes advantage of the AI chops Spotify has been testing as part of its 
prompted playlists for the past year
. The streaming platform noted that many people use this feature to create lists for fitness and workout activities, and this new running mode was inspired by those observations. 

Earlier this year, the company introduced fitness content with 
fitness device maker Peloton
.

The running mode comes a couple of months after fitness app Strava 
said
 its Record feature would no longer integrate Spotify within the app. 

The feature is available starting Wednesday to Premium users on iOS in the U.S., Canada, the U.K., Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, and Sweden.

Topics

Apps
, 
running
, 
Spotify
, 
TC

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
