Spotify 
announced
 on Wednesday that it’s bringing parent-managed accounts for kids to its free tier. Families in the U.S., U.K., Australia, France, Germany, and the Netherlands can now create a “Managed Account” for their child, a feature previously available only to paid subscribers.

“Managed Accounts,” which 
launched in 2024
, is a shared account feature that allows parents to control what their children listen to.

Since these accounts are separate, kids’ music choices won’t impact their parents’ algorithm or show up in their annual Spotify Wrapped experience. Children can add songs to their favorites, create their own playlists, and have their own personalized recommendations.

The expansion of Managed Accounts to free users reflects broader efforts by major tech companies to give parents greater control over how their children use online platforms, and which features are available to them in response to regulatory pressure.

Image Credits:
Spotify

With Managed Accounts, parents can control and restrict playback of specific artists and songs. By default, children can’t listen to music labeled as explicit, and video playback is also disabled by default. Interactivity features are also limited on managed accounts, which means that kids don’t get access to age-gated features like Messages.

Managed Accounts give parents more granular control over the music their child can listen to, without requiring them to use the more restrictive 
Spotify Kids
 app.

To set up the managed account, Family Plan account holders need to navigate to their account pages in the app, select the “Add a Member” option, and tap the “Add a listener aged under 13 (or the market equivalent)” option. From there, parents will be guided through some steps to get their child’s account set up, including choosing a display name and setting up content preferences. Parents have the option to make adjustments at any time.

Spotify says it plans to bring Managed Accounts to more countries soon. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Spotify

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
