Spotify is giving users a new way to personalize their playlists with “User Notes,” a feature that lets them add their own notes to individual tracks, the company announced on Thursday. 

The streaming service says the new feature is designed to let users add personal captions to their favorite songs, such as noting why a track was added to a playlist or when they first discovered it. For example, you could note that you discovered a specific track while walking the streets of Paris on vacation or that it was playing during a first date.

The launch reflects Spotify’s efforts to make playlists feel more personal by giving users a way to preserve the memories tied to the songs they listen to. It also helps Spotify differentiate itself from rivals like Apple Music and YouTube Music by offering a journaling-like feature that goes beyond music discovery and isn’t available on other platforms. 

Image Credits:
Spotify /

“Over time, these notes paint a picture of the music listeners love and the moments that shaped it,” the company said in an email to TechCrunch. “User Notes transforms playlists from a collection of songs into a more personal space for music discovery — bringing together personalization and added context around the music that listeners love.”

The new feature is available to users who are 16 and older on both free and premium plans in select markets. 

Users can access the new feature by navigating to a playlist they’ve created or one containing tracks they’ve added, tapping the three-dot menu next to a song, and selecting “Add note.” From there, they can type a note and then save it. The note will then be visible to anyone who can see the playlist, with their name linking to their profile.

It’s worth noting that User Notes isn’t the only feature Spotify announced on Thursday, as the company also 
debuted a new Running Mode
 that cues up songs based on different phases of a run and selects tracks based on a user’s preferences and pace. The feature is available to premium users in select countries.

Topics

Apps
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Spotify

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
