Spotify 
announced
 Monday the launch of “Playlist Notes,” a new feature that lets listeners add their thoughts to the playlists they make. The feature builds on “
User Notes
,” which the streaming giant debuted last month, allowing people to add personal notes to individual tracks. 

With Playlist Notes, users can add context to songs, podcast episodes, and audiobooks in their playlists. Maybe a song reminds you of someone, brings back a specific memory, or is simply a track you think everyone should hear. 

To add a note, go to the mobile app, then open a playlist that you either own or collaborate on, tap the three dots next to a track, podcast episode, or audiobook, choose “add note,” and save it. Anyone who can view the playlist can see the note.

Spotify is also bringing the idea to its own editorial playlists. Now, Spotify’s editors can add notes explaining why they picked certain songs. To start, listeners will see the feature on some of Spotify’s biggest playlists, including Today’s Top Hits, RapCaviar, Hot Country, All New Pop, and Fresh Finds Hip-Hop.

There’s a new profile feature for those editors, too. Editor Profiles show an editor’s top tracks and albums, along with the playlists they work on. It gives listeners a bit more insight into the people behind Spotify’s curated recommendations.

User-created notes are rolling out on iOS and Android devices in more than 100 markets. Editor notes and profiles are rolling out to free and premium users ages 16 and older in the U.S., Canada, the U.K., Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand. 

While it’s arguably a small feature, it fits into Spotify’s bigger push to make the app feel more social and personal, giving users a chance to explain the stories and reasoning behind their favorite music. 

It also gives Spotify another way to stand out from rivals Apple Music and YouTube Music. The company recently reported its Q2 earnings, touting that it surpassed 
300 million subscribers
 for the first time. It also reached 777 million monthly active users.

Topics

Apps
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Spotify

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta
