In Brief

Posted:

6:52 AM PDT · August 4, 2026

Image Credits:
Klaudia Radecka/NurPhoto 
(opens in a new window)
 / Getty Images

Ivan Mehta

Spotify now has over 300M subscribers

Spotify has zoomed past 300 million subscribers for the first time, the company said on Tuesday. The streaming service also reached 777 million monthly active users in the second quarter, 12% more than a year earlier.

Notably, the company saw its subscriber base swell by 9% in the quarter despite 
raising subscription prices
 in several regions this year. The platform has tried to diversify its offerings by 
introducing
 fitness content, 
narrations of magazines
, integrating 
concert ticket sales
, and even selling 
physical books
.

The company reported quarterly revenue of €4.8 billion ($5.52 billion), up 14% from a year earlier. 

Spotify has focused strongly on building AI features in the last few months. It has released tools to create 
personalized podcasts
 based on 
content from different sources
. It even launched a NotebookLM-like feature as an experimental desktop app in May. 

The streaming service has also added AI-powered Q&A and briefing-generation features to podcasts; partnered with ElevenLabs for an Audiobook creation tool; and struck 
a deal with music labels to allow users to make fan-generated remixes
. Last month, it launched 
a new conversational AI assistant
, which lets users steer content on the app using prompts.

The platform is seeing its subscriber counts grow despite increasing backlash against its hosting of AI-generated music. To appease its users, Spotify has added a 
verification system for artists
, and last year introduced optional labeling for AI-generated music. 

In the absence of effective systems for identifying AI music, users are resorting to alternative services like 
SoullessMusic.com
 and 
SlopTracker
, 404 Media 
reported
 last month.

Topics

Apps
, 
In Brief
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
music streaming
, 
Spotify

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Latest in Media & Entertainment

AI

Spotify expands AI remix and covers project with Merlin partnership

Sarah Perez

	10 minutes ago

In Brief

Walmart completes its acquisition of TV advertising company Vibe.co

Aisha Malik

	22 minutes ago

In Brief

Spotify now has over 300M subscribers

Ivan Mehta

	2 hours ago
