Former tech executive and VC Sriram Krishnan is leaving the Trump administration at the end of June.

“It is hard to express how big a privilege it has been to serve the American people and how grateful I am to have had the opportunity to do so,” Krishnan said in 
a post on X
. “First and foremost, it has been an honor to serve under President [Donald Trump]. Without his leadership, we would not be leading in the AI race.”

Krishnan, who’s been serving as 
a senior policy advisor
 on artificial intelligence at the White House, was one of a number of tech industry figures to 
take roles in the second Trump administration
. Krishnan has led product teams at Microsoft, Twitter, Yahoo, Facebook, and Snap, and he was most recently a partner at Andreessen Horowitz, a firm whose founders 
threw their support behind Trump
 during the 2024 election. 

In his post, Krishnan highlighted some “key public accomplishments,” starting with t
he administration’s AI Action Plan
, which prioritized data center construction over regulation and safety. Since then, Trump has signed several executive orders around AI, including one that 
seeks to challenge state-level AI regulations
 and another focused on oversight that was 
delayed and narrowed after industry pushback
.

Trump has also endorsed the idea that 
the government could take an equity stake in major AI companies
.

Krishnan noted that the person he “worked [most] closely with over the last 18 months” was David Sacks, the investor and podcaster who 
stepped down as AI and crypto czar
 earlier this year and became co-chair of the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology.

“[Sacks’] continuing advocacy for America winning on AI has been and continues to be crucial,” Krishnan said.

Next, Krishnan said he will be “building institutions” that tackle big challenges for “America and its allies.” 
According to The Washington Post
, he’s planning to start an outside institution that will still give him a role in influencing Trump’s AI policy.

“Whether it is energy, data centers or a clear path for Americans to experience the benefits of AI, there are many tough issues we all need to navigate together,” Krishnan said.

Topics

AI
, 
Donald Trump
, 
Government & Policy
, 
Sriram Krishnan

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Anthony Ha	

Anthony Ha is TechCrunch’s weekend editor. Previously, he worked as a tech reporter at Adweek, a senior editor at VentureBeat, a local government reporter at the Hollister Free Lance, and vice president of content at a VC firm. He lives in New York City.

You can contact or verify outreach from Anthony by emailing 
anthony.ha@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

DuckDuckGo makes its ‘no-AI’ search engine easier to access as its traffic booms

Sarah Perez

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta
