Stability AI, the startup behind AI image generation model Stable Diffusion, has raised $76 million in Series B funding. The new haul brings the company’s fundraising total to $232 million.

The company 
announced
 the round Tuesday, saying the new capital comes partly from a number of prominent entertainment industry organizations, including Universal Music Group, Sony Music Group, and Warner Music Group, and gaming giant Electronic Arts (EA). Two investment firms, AMD Ventures and Pacific Alliance Ventures, also took part.

It’s an unusual roster and less a typical venture round than a lineup of the companies Stability now depends on for content licensing and distribution deals.

Stability AI CEO Prem Akkaraju, who joined the company in 2024, called the funding “an affirmation of our vision where generative AI empowers every producer, musician, and storyteller.” Akkaraju joined the company in 2024.

The company says it plans to use the money from its latest funding round to continue building out its “creative production” product suite while also expanding its professional services arm. Currently, Stability offers a variety of AI models that are designed for the purposes of AI music, video, and image generation.

Stability, founded in 2019, has spent the past year signing deals to weave generative AI into entertainment companies’ creative workflows. It struck partnerships with 
Universal Music
 and 
EA 
last October and with 
Warner Music
 last November, each giving those companies a hand in co-developing Stability’s AI tools rather than just licensing the output..

Stability has also had a mostly winning stretch in court. The company largely prevailed in 
a copyright lawsuit
 brought by Getty Images in the United Kingdom, which had accused the company of infringing upon IP rights by using the company’s images in the training of its image generation model. A judge ruled largely in Stability’s favor in that case, but a similar lawsuit from Getty in the U.S. is still 
working its way through the courts
.

Stability was also sued in 2023 by the company’s co-founder, Cyrus Hodes, who claimed 
that he was tricked
 by the other co-founder, Emad Mostaque, into selling his share in the company. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Stability AI
, 
Stable Diffusion

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lucas Ropek	

Senior Writer, TechCrunch

		Lucas is a senior writer at TechCrunch, where he covers artificial intelligence, consumer tech, and startups. He previously covered AI and cybersecurity at Gizmodo. 

You can contact Lucas by emailing lucas.ropek@techcrunch.com.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
