In Brief

Posted:

2:55 PM PDT · June 14, 2026

Image Credits:
Yuki Iwamura/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Connie Loizos

Startup CEO Charlie Javice is reportedly angling for a Trump pardon

Charlie Javice, the convicted Frank founder, is reportedly seeking a presidential pardon, with her camp quietly courting people close to the Trump administration, 
according to the WSJ
. So far, her name hasn’t turned up on a formal clemency request list at the Justice Department, it adds.

That list is growing fast. As the administration reportedly weighs handing out roughly 250 pardons this summer to mark America’s 250th birthday, a wave of clemency requests is pouring in from white-collar defendants — 
including Sam Bankman-Fried
.

JPMorgan can’t be pleased by any of this. Last September, Javice was found guilty of fabricating millions of customer accounts to inflate her startup’s value before selling it to the bank for $175 million. She’s now serving more than seven years and is appealing, arguing the case against her was unfair.

The bank may have extra cause for concern given its relationship with President Trump. In early 2021, it closed accounts tied to Trump and his businesses shortly after the January 6 Capitol riot, a move that Trump has since called political “debanking,” suing JPMorgan and CEO Jamie Dimon for 
$5 billion
. (JPMorgan denies any political motive.)

Javice has powerful friends, too, including Apollo’s Marc Rowan, an early Frank investor who testified on her behalf at trial. Rowan has donated to Trump’s campaigns and, since his reelection, has given millions more to Republican congressional groups.

Topics

Charlie Javice
, 
Fintech
, 
Frank
, 
jpmorgan
, 
pardon

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Social

UK may ban social media for children under 16

Anthony Ha

	2 hours ago

AI

As AI companies race to go public, who else is along for the ride?

Anthony Ha

	5 hours ago

Transportation

TechCrunch Mobility: SpaceX rockets past Tesla

Kirsten Korosec

	6 hours ago

Latest in Fintech

In Brief

Startup CEO Charlie Javice is reportedly angling for a Trump pardon

Connie Loizos

	47 seconds ago

TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Startup Battlefield 200 applications officially close in 3 days

TechCrunch Events

	Jun 5, 2026

Fintech

Ramp raises $750M at $44B valuation as investors hunger for fintechs with an AI story

Ram Iyer

	Jun 4, 2026
