Substack has launched a new feature that can show you which of your favorite newsletters are being written using AI. 

This week, the newsletter and writing platform 
announced
 an integration with the AI writing detection software 
Pangram
 that will allow users to scan posts, comments, and replies on Substack’s app to see an estimate of how much of the content was written by a human and how much was AI.

In the short term, the move might be bad for Substack’s business, as it could expose many of the newsletters on its platform that aren’t entirely written by people. That could potentially erode trust in the platform’s ecosystem of independent news and blogs, or even damage its reputation as a host of high-quality content.

But in the long term, AI-detection features could help keep Substack free of “AI slop” and encourage more users to trust what they’re reading was written by a person, or at least better understand when it’s not.

Image Credits:
Substack

Substack joins several platforms that are leaning toward 
labeling AI content
 as such, especially now that AI is playing a greater role in the creation process. Photos and videos generated with AI are 
labeled
 on social media sites, while 
music streaming services
 have more recently begun labeling and, in some cases, 
penalizing
 AI-generated music.

“This is good use of AI,” Substack CEO Chris Best said.

“When I used to pitch Substack to writers, one way I would do it is … we’ll do everything for you except the hard part,” he explained in an 
online chat
 with Pangram’s founder, Max Spero. “You have to have something — an idea that’s worth reading, that’s worth caring about, that’s worth sharing. That one thing is very hard and very valuable … [S]oftware should do everything else, but I think you do want the person to do the hard part.”

The feature will be available in Substack’s app for any post, note, reply, or comment above 100 characters. Substack will also allow its writers to include an optional AI author’s note, using which creators can properly disclose their use of AI, the company told TechCrunch.

The company clarified that the tool is not meant to prohibit or penalize AI-assisted writing, but rather to encourage writers to add a “how I make this” statement, where they explain their process.

Publishers can also run Pangram on their own drafts before publication, and report and remove scans on their own work they believe are mistakes.

Topics

AI
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Substack

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Jack Dorsey is taking on Slack with Buzz, a group chat platform for teams and their AI agents

Amanda Silberling

Light made a flip phone — it’s colorful and it’s cheap

Amanda Silberling

AI music generator Suno breach affects 55M users, per Have I Been Pwned

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic’s landmark $1.5B copyright settlement is approved

Kirsten Korosec

Google is working on a new AI chip designed to make Gemini more efficient

Lucas Ropek

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker
