Substack 
announced
 on Wednesday a new feature called “Reply Rules,” designed to give creators greater control over how their audiences are able to respond. 

With the feature, creators can establish specific guidelines for comments on their posts, in Notes, or in Chat. These guidelines might include requests to eliminate AI slop or profanity, or something silly like only requiring replies in haiku form.

Substack explains that the system learns from users’ actions, such as when they hide replies, and will automatically filter out comments that don’t match the creator’s preferences. Creators maintain visibility over these hidden replies and have the option to unhide them if they change their minds. 

Currently, Reply Rules are available for all English-language publications. 

Substack has always gone for a decentralized moderation approach, where writers are responsible for policing their own communities. Creators have access to tools such as the option to lock posts or threads to prevent additional comments, comment deletion, and the ability to ban or suspend users when necessary. 

The new feature may reduce the need for creators to sift through every comment manually.

Image Credits:
Substack

However, it’s important to note that Substack has faced criticism regarding its content moderation practices, especially regarding 
far-right newsletters
. Critics argue that the platform’s more lenient approach allows harmful rhetoric to thrive. In today’s announcement, Substack seemed to address this and underscored its commitment to fostering diverse online communities, despite the challenges this entails.

As Substack puts it, “Since its founding, Substack has sought to create the best possible conditions for cultures of many varieties to flourish online. Achieving this often involves difficult trade-offs, but alongside our core model — where we only earn when writers, artists, journalists, musicians, and others earn — we’ve managed to carve out a unique path relative to other platforms.”

This year, Substack has rolled out several updates to its platform, including a 
built-in recording studio
 for creators to pre-record and publish videos. It also launched a 
TV app
 for subscribers to watch video posts and livestreams on their living room screens.

Topics

Apps
, 
content moderation
, 
Substack

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
