Supabase, the open source database of choice for the vibe-coding world, 
has raised
 a $500 million Series F at a $10 billion pre-money valuation, the company announced Friday. That’s about $10.5 billion after the investment.

The newly minted decacorn has been doubling its valuation every few months for a couple of years now, as vibe-coding tools have driven its usage to astounding growth. Database launches on Supabase have grown over 600% in the past year, with over 60% of them launched “by some sort of AI tool,” CEO and co-founder Paul Copplestone wrote in a blog post 
announcing the raise
.

The startup also now claims nearly 10 million developers as users, which has doubled in eight months. Copplestone particularly credits Claude Code and Codex for this growth because the popular AI models “expand the number of people who can build.” Supabase is also a database of choice for Bolt, Figma, Lovable, Replit, and others.

This new influx of cash follows a 
$100 million round at a $5 billion valuation
 in October. And that raise came just months after closing $200 million at $2 billion. 

Supabase uses popular open source database Postgres as its engine, which launched long before AI was a twinkle in Sam Altman’s eye. One of the more interesting things about Supabase is the work it’s doing to make Postgres less of a maintenance hog for developers and vibe coders as their apps grow and attract users.

For instance, this week Supabase launched a tool called Multigres that it describes as an “operating system” for Postgres. It’s intended to ease the complexity of running Postgres at scale, giving developers a central way to manage pesky tasks like read replicas, failovers, connection limits, backups, and so on.

Another interesting aspect about the company involves the choices Copplestone made to build it. 

He told us on an 
episode of the Equity podcast in November
 how he refused to partake in the “sh*tification” of developer tools because he wouldn’t cater to enterprises offering multimillion-dollar contracts that then make product demands. Instead, he sticks to his own product vision. That’s the reverse strategy of most startups, but there’s no denying it’s been working for Supabase.

The round was led by GIC, with existing investors piling in like Stripe, and new investors Georgian and Salesforce Ventures.

Topics

AI
, 
Fundraising
, 
Startups
, 
Supabase

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

DuckDuckGo makes its ‘no-AI’ search engine easier to access as its traffic booms

Sarah Perez

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez
