In Brief

Posted:

10:26 AM PDT · August 19, 2026

Image Credits:
Gabby Jones / Bloomberg / Getty Images

Zack Whittaker

T-Mobile ‘chopped a cable’ to expel Chinese hackers from its network

New 
reporting from Bloomberg
 revealed how cybersecurity staff at U.S. phone provider T-Mobile identified and expelled Chinese hackers from its network in 2024 during a spate of industry-wide intrusions by Beijing aimed at stealing customer data.

The hacks were carried out by a Chinese government-backed hacking group called 
Salt Typhoon
. The campaign compromised 
hundreds
 of phone companies, internet giants, and datacenter providers with the goal of collecting phone records and information about senior U.S. government officials, including then-presidential candidates. Hacked companies 
included AT&T, Verizon
, satellite phone network 
Viasat
, and network infrastructure giants 
Charter and Windstream
.

By and large, T-Mobile escaped 
a widescale breach of its network
 by catching the activity early — and resorted to physically cutting the cable to a compromised system, per Bloomberg. 

The publication said T-Mobile’s cyber staff spent months looking for suspected hackers in its network without success. Eventually, the company found unusual behavior on one of its systems coming from another router belonging to a different telecom company, which T-Mobile did not name.

After identifying the breach, T-Mobile’s cybersecurity chief Jeff Simon told Bloomberg that he and three others drove to the nearby Bellevue, Washington, data center, found the compromised system, pulled out a set of scissors and snipped the cable connecting the box to the outside world.

We’ve reached out to T-Mobile for more information, and we’ll update this story if we hear back.

Topics

China
, 
cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
salt typhoon
, 
Security
, 
T-Mobile

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Startups

Time’s running out! Save $300 on your TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 pass until August 21 

TechCrunch Events

	1 hour ago

Hardware

Let’s take a look at the retro tech making a comeback

Lauren Forristal

	2 hours ago

Climate

TerraPower’s nuclear reactor has a secret weapon for powering AI data centers

Tim De Chant

	2 hours ago

Latest in Security

In Brief

T-Mobile ‘chopped a cable’ to expel Chinese hackers from its network

Zack Whittaker

	7 seconds ago

Security

CareCloud confirms 3.7M patients had their medical records stolen in data breach

Zack Whittaker

	4 hours ago

AI

OpenAI institutes new safeguards after Hugging Face breach

Russell Brandom

	23 hours ago
