Tata Electronics, an Indian electronics and semiconductor manufacturer and a key supplier to Apple and Tesla, among other tech giants, confirmed a data breach weeks after files purportedly obtained from the company appeared on a hacker forum.

The confirmation comes as the hacker forum listing claims to offer more than 630GB of data allegedly stolen from Tata Electronics, comprising over 204,300 files. A review of a sample of the files by TechCrunch found what appear to be Apple supplier specifications and Tesla manufacturing documents. The authenticity, provenance, and completeness of the data could not be independently verified.

Founded in 2020, Tata Electronics has emerged as a key player in India’s push to expand electronics manufacturing and semiconductor production. The company operates facilities across India and 
employs more than 75,000 people
, per its parent company’s website. Tata has forged partnerships with global companies, including Apple, ASML, Intel, Qualcomm, and Tesla as manufacturers diversify supply chains beyond China and increasingly turn to India as an alternative production hub.

Cybersecurity researcher Rajshekhar Rajaharia told TechCrunch that the data advertised on the forum included Outlook email conversations, SAP-related information, and documents purportedly linked to some of Tata Electronics’ customers, including Apple and Tesla.

A Tata Electronics spokesperson confirmed the incident in a statement to TechCrunch, saying the company had identified a cybersecurity incident on some of its systems “a few weeks ago” and had immediately activated its response protocols. The spokesperson added that the incident had “no impact on our operations across businesses, which remain unaffected.”

However, the company declined to answer questions about the nature of the compromised data, the number of affected individuals or organizations, whether customers had been notified, and whether any information belonging to clients such as Apple and Tesla was exposed.

Reuters 
reported
 that Tata Electronics informed some employees at its iPhone assembly operations last week about the data breach. The report also said Apple was investigating the incident and that a ransom demand had been made to Tata Electronics.

The breach comes as Tata Group assumes a growing role in global technology supply chains. The company 
entered iPhone manufacturing
 in 2023 through the acquisition of the India operations of Taiwanese contract manufacturer Wistron, a longtime Apple supplier. Tata Electronics later 
acquired a 60% stake in the Indian unit
 of Pegatron, another major Apple manufacturing partner. 

Tata also signed a 
semiconductor supply deal
 with Tesla in 2024, highlighting its expanding relationships with some of the world’s largest technology companies.

Apple and Tesla did not respond to TechCrunch’s requests for comment.

Topics

Apple
, 
India
, 
Security
, 
tata
, 
Tata Electronics
, 
Tesla

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Jagmeet Singh	

Reporter

Jagmeet covers startups, tech policy-related updates, and all other major tech-centric developments from India for TechCrunch. He previously worked as a principal correspondent at NDTV. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Jagmeet by emailing 
mail@journalistjagmeet.com
.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz

Snap finally debuts its long-awaited AR glasses, Specs, and, oof, they aren’t cheap

Lucas Ropek

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

ChatGPT’s market share slips below 50% for first time

Ivan Mehta
