Welcome back to 
TechCrunch Mobility
, your hub for the future of transportation and now, more than ever, the role AI is playing in it. To get this in your inbox, sign up here for free — just click 
TechCrunch Mobility
!

Proponents of autonomous vehicle technology have long argued that robotaxis and other self-driving vehicles will reduce crash incidents and make roads safer. And there is some evidence of that. But that doesn’t mean there hasn’t been a cost to those who are working (or have worked) for the companies developing that tech. 

Sean O’Kane, senior reporter, special projects, dug into data submitted to the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
 and found that test drivers for 
Waymo
 and 
Zoox
 sustained more than two dozen injuries in 2024 and 2025 from hard braking or other sudden movements made by the autonomous vehicles. In some cases, these workers were sidelined for months after sustaining injuries like whiplash when the AVs stopped abruptly, and hard.

Check out his full story,
 which includes interviews with former and current workers. 

There is one important item to consider. You might ask yourself, well what about the other AV developers? Surely, this isn’t a problem isolated to Waymo and Zoox? And you’re probably right. It’s likely that test drivers for other AV developers are also getting injured, but the companies they work for may be exempt from OSHA’s reporting requirements.

Got a tip for us on this story or others? Email Kirsten Korosec at 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or my Signal at kkorosec.07, Sean O’Kane at 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
.

Deals!

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

I’ve been writing about 
Gatik
, the autonomous vehicle startup known for its self-driving box trucks, since 2019 when it came out of “stealth.” At the time, I wasn’t sure if the startup would survive. The hype cycle was already chewing up and spitting out AV startups and no one seemed close to commercializing their tech. 

Gatik has not only survived, but it has also crossed over from R&D lab to commercial operator, albeit at a small-scale compared with traditional human-driven delivery companies. (The company’s box trucks are driverless and deliver freight from distribution centers to retails stores like Walmart.) And now, with 
$200 million
 in fresh funding, it’s pushing to scale. The round was led by Qatar Investment Authority and Koch Disruptive Technologies, with participation from Millennium Management, ARK Invest, and Intact Private Capital. 

This is Gatik’s largest funding to date. But I might argue that its multiyear commercial agreement with PepsiCo, which was signed in June and is part of $600 million in contracted revenue, is the bigger deal here. 

Other deals that got my attention …

Airbound
, an Indian startup building autonomous drones, 
raised $37 million
 in a Series A round led by Greenoaks with participation from DoorDash, Lachy Groom, Lightspeed, and Humba Ventures.

Mubadala Capital
, the alternative asset management arm of Mubadala Investment Company, 
agreed to acquire
 a majority equity interest in 
Arrive Logistics
, a truckload brokerage based in Austin.  

Regent Craft
, a Rhode Island electric startup developing and manufacturing electric seagliders, 
raised $120 million
 in a Series B round co-led by Mare Liberum and AE Ventures. (The seaglider is a class of vehicle called a wing-in-ground effect vehicle, or WIG.) Regent also secured about $120 million debt capital provided by Erebor Bank, which was launched by Anduril Industries founder Palmer Luckey. One note about Regent, a company I have followed for a while: The startup, which recently completed its 255,000-square-foot seaglider factory, is clearly pushing deeper into the defense sector, probably because there is money and partnerships to be had.  

Vista Global Holding
, a private aviation group based in UAE, is considering a 
European IPO
 that could raise more than a $1 billion, Bloomberg reported.

Notable reads and other tidbits

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

According to a recent YouGov survey, more 
Americans
 oppose 
police license plate cameras
 than support them. Do you? Shoot me an 
email
 and share your opinion. 

Any
, an electric two-wheeler startup out of Belgium, is placing a bet on 
cargo space
. 

General Motors
 is facing increased scrutiny from U.S. safety regulators after hundreds of incidents, more than 20 crashes or fires, and at least six injuries involving 
brake problems
 in its EVs.

Ford
 has 
hired Dave Carroll
 as president of the company’s energy business. Carroll, who previously worked at ENGIE North America, will succeed long-time executive Lisa Drake.

Rivian
 CFO 
Claire McDonough
 is 
resigning from her position
 and will leave at the end of October. Her tenure at Rivian came during a tough, and exciting (ahem IPO), period for the company. And her departure comes at another critical moment for Rivian as it takes on some of its biggest projects to date, including the robotaxi deal with Uber and scaling production and sales of its R2 SUV. 

Uber
 is launching a new live 
video streaming feature
 that will allow parents to keep track of their children during rides. 

Waymo 
shared 10 lessons
 it has learned after its vehicles had driven more than 200 million autonomous miles. The first lesson — that multimodal sensors are indispensable — received the most attention because it is in direct opposition to 
Tesla’s
 camera-only approach. But there were other lessons that got my attention, including Waymo’s promotion of vision language models (an area that is starting to get a lot of attention). 

Meanwhile, Waymo is making more inroads overseas. The company announced that it plans to launch in 
Munich, Germany
. 

One more thing …

One important clarification on what I wrote about last week. You might recall that 
Waymo
 shared information about its 
custom silicon chip
 — specifically a 5 nm ASIC chip that is designed to handle the massive influx of raw data before it reaches the core “brain” of the self-driving system. Waymo stated in its blog post:
“While these ASICs alone deliver over 1,000 TOPS of ML performance dedicated to front-end processing and ML models, we optimize across the full stack to maximize achieved performance, especially in the low-batch regimes we often operate.”

That line led me, and others, to believe that its one chip can deliver 1,000 TOPs (trillions of operations per second) of computing performance. I compared it to Nvidia’s Drive AGX Thor automotive processor, noting it was about the same performance. 

But alas, one eagle-eyed reader reached out with some questions, which prompted me to turn to Waymo for official answers. A Waymo spokesperson told me, “It’s for the system, not a single chip.”

That’s an important distinction.

Topics

robotaxis
, 
techcrunch mobility
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, and 100 other companies call for action to defend against rogue AI

Lucas Ropek

Hugging Face is selling a cute $399 open source duck robot, Microduck

Rebecca Bellan

Nvidia closes in on Hugging Face acquisition

Connie Loizos

Viral AI startup Instinct has raised $350M at a $2.5B valuation

Lucas Ropek

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

India’s Airbound bags $37M to take on trucks with rocket-like drones

Jagmeet Singh

Hugging Face reportedly in talks to be acquired for $13B

Rebecca Bellan
