Welcome back to TechCrunch Mobility — your central hub for news and insights on the future of transportation. To get this in your inbox, sign up here for free — just click 
TechCrunch Mobility
!

Today is Juneteenth, a U.S. federal holiday marking the end of slavery in the United States. 

About 10 years ago, there was a lot of chatter about who was winning the self-driving car race. One of the problems with that debate — besides assuming there would be just one winner — was that no one had a reliable way to measure it. This was an early era filled with a lot of demos and capital, but little substance — at least what the public, and folks like myself, had access to. 

Advisory and research startup 
Autnmy AI
 has developed a generative AI platform to create a benchmarking system that evaluates and ranks autonomous vehicle companies in an effort to answer that question in real time. And this week, the startup released its 
Road to Autonomy Index
, which searches relevant global public databases, including federal and state reports, SEC documents, public exchanges, and other data. The system weighs the company’s operations, scale, revenue, commercial partnerships, manufacturing, and safety record based on that data and provides an update every 12 hours. There are four indices that rank robotaxis, autonomous driving licensing companies, autonomous trucks, and delivery bots.

One important note, per Autnmy AI co-founder Rob Grant, the AI platform doesn’t just scrape information off the internet. “We agreed early on, we don’t scrape information,” he said. “If it’s publicly available or if it’s available under a Creative Commons license, we will use that information. We do have some license data that we pay folks for, and under that agreement too.”

The indices take a global approach, which produces some interesting results. One of the initial takeaways that made an impression on Grant was China’s stronger ranking across multiple categories.

As of Friday, the robotaxi leader was not 
Waymo
. It was China’s 
Baidu
 Apollo Go program — just barely. Waymo was in the secondary position, followed by Chinese companies 
Pony.ai
 and 
WeRide
. 
Tesla
 was in the fifth position. 

A little bird

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

I was reminded recently by a little bird to keep an eye on the Texas automated vehicle tracker tool that launched in May. And I am glad they did; looks like 
Tesla
, 
Waymo
, and
 Zoox
 are building up their respective fleets in the state. Reminder: This doesn’t mean every one of these are being used commercially. Zoox, for instance, cannot operate commercially until it receives 
an exemption
 from the federal government. It currently has the ability to give rides in its custom-built robotaxi but cannot charge customers.

As of May 28, Waymo had 577 autonomous vehicles registered in the state. It now has 620 of them, about a 7.5% increase in less than a month. Tesla now has 69 registered autonomous vehicles, a 64% increase from the 42 it had on May 28. Zoox, which had 35 registered autonomous vehicles last month, now has 43.

Avride
, 
Nuro
, and Volkswagen subsidiary 
MOIA
 are holding steady at 317, 47, and 12, respectively. 

Got a tip for us? Email Kirsten Korosec at 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or my Signal at kkorosec.07, or email Sean O’Kane at 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
.

Deals!

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Cargofy
, a logistics company that uses AI to automate freight operations, 
raised $11 million
 in a Series A funding round led by u.ventures, Toloka, and Movens Capital. Des Traynor, co-founder of Intercom, and several angel investors, also participated. 

Carro
, the Singapore-based online car marketplace, acquired Australian used-car platform CarPlace, 
Reuters reported
. Terms were not disclosed.

Gatik
,
a startup that has developed self-driving trucks for short hauls, announced a 
multi-year partnership
 with 
PepsiCo
. The companies wouldn’t share the value of this deal, but it does signal PepsiCo’s commitment to Gatik, which is already operating driverless trucks for the food and beverage giant across Arkansas, Arizona, and Texas. 

QuantumScape
 announced a 
joint research agreement
 with Honda R&D Co. to accelerate solid-state battery development and associated manufacturing processes.

Automaker 
Stellantis
, self-driving startup 
Wayve
, and ride-hailing giant 
Uber
 
struck a deal
 to jointly develop and deploy driverless robotaxis.

XDOF
, a startup focused on robot training data, 
raised $70 million
 from Thrive Capital, Spark Capital, a16z, Lux, and WndrCo.

Notable reads and other tidbits

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

A video posted on Reddit showed a driver running a stop sign and 
hitting an autonomous vehicle
 in Dallas. TechCrunch confirmed it was an 
Avride robotaxi
, which was hailed via the Uber app. An Avride spokesperson said no injuries were reported and that data from the incident is being reviewed “to continuously refine our technology and processes, as part of our standard procedures.” When asked about the reaction of the self-driving system and the human safety operator who was behind the wheel, Avride said, “Our safety review is currently ongoing, so we cannot provide more precise details at this time.”

Tesla
 owners in China have 
discovered a workaround
 to the vehicle’s distracted driving monitor: 
tiny plastic heads
.  

Over on X, folks spotted a Tesla with an 
authorized limousine permit sticker
 for San Francisco County and the San Francisco International Airport. A spokesperson for SFO told TechCrunch that “Tesla has been issued a limousine permit to operate at SFO. This is for traditional limousine operations, meaning the vehicles have a human driver. Tesla has not been issued a permit for any autonomous operations at SFO.”

Mobileye
, which has pitched itself as an autonomous vehicle technology supplier, is now making moves to 
become a robotaxi operator
. The company plans to launch a robotaxi service in an unnamed U.S. city in 2027. History lesson: Mobileye founder and CEO Amnon Shashua told me back in 2020 that to crack the holy grail of passenger car autonomy, you needed to pursue robotaxis first.  

Uber
 plans to launch a premium robotaxi service 
in Houston
 by mid-2027, making it the second U.S. market under its partnership with EV maker 
Lucid
 and autonomous vehicle startup 
Nuro
.

Waymo
 
recalled its fleet
 of nearly 4,000 robotaxis to stop them from driving into highway construction zones. Waymo took its robotaxis off the freeways weeks ago and has identified at least 13 instances of its robotaxis driving into highway sections that were closed for construction. Here is a detail worth noting: The software fix is “under development,” which means this issue is not resolved.

Topics

avride
, 
robotaxi
, 
techcrunch mobility
, 
Tesla
, 
Transportation
, 
Uber
, 
Waymo
, 
zoox

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

ChatGPT’s market share slips below 50% for first time

Ivan Mehta

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos
