Welcome back to 
TechCrunch Mobility
, your hub for the future of transportation and now, more than ever, how AI is playing a part. To get this in your inbox, sign up here for free — just click 
TechCrunch Mobility
!

I am back from vacation. What did I miss? Turns out, quite a lot — including the end of the 
Uber-Waymo
 
partnership in Phoenix
. Uber and Waymo still have robotaxi service partnerships in Atlanta and Austin. The question is not 
if
, but 
when
 will these agreements end? But that isn’t the most intriguing question, in my opinion. I am far more intrigued by how these two companies will behave once the remaining partnerships end. 

There is already tension with Uber executives taking not-so-subtle shots at Waymo. I expect that once the partnerships end, these thinly veiled barbs will be replaced with more direct action. One battleground will be policy, specifically markets where robotaxi companies are angling to get access. 

This week, we saw another interesting development in the autonomous vehicle industry on the federal stage. 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
 administrator 
Jonathan Morrison
 issued a directive to autonomous vehicle developers, stating that it is unacceptable for their vehicles to interfere with first responders or law enforcement.

The money quote: “Let me be clear: the inability to detect and appropriately respond to such situations represents a functional insufficiency. Emergency scenes are not rare or extreme ‘edge cases.’ As such, NHTSA is today issuing a call to action for AV developers and operators to immediately focus their resources on fixing this issue.”

Morrison’s letter never calls out any one robotaxi company and it was sent to every AV developer listed in the Department of Transportation’s 
Standing General Order
. But it sure seems like Morrison is directing the agency’s ire at Waymo.

A previous 
TechCrunch investigation
 found that Waymo — which operates the largest robotaxi fleet in the United States, with vehicles in cities such as Los Angeles, Phoenix, and San Francisco — has had repeated run-ins with first responders. And just this week, San Francisco supervisor 
Bilal Mahmood 
said he plans to 
submit a letter of inquiry
 to examine how autonomous vehicles affected public transit services and emergency responders following a July 4 fireworks show that resulted in massive gridlock. Local news outlets reported that 
numerous Waymo robotaxis had to be towed
 after running out of power during the lengthy traffic jam.

Morrison’s letter has gravitas. But will there be substantive consequences for AV developers? It’s hard to tell at this point. For now, the NHTSA has demanded companies present the agency with “solutions” by the end of the month.

One more news item from the feds. Take a look at the new 
2026 Regulatory Plan and Unified Agenda
, which was updated last week. It contains a long list of proposed changes to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) requirements, which govern vehicle design and equipment requirements. These proposed changes could help autonomous vehicle companies like 
Tesla
 and 
Zoox
, which are developing vehicles without steering wheels, pedals, or other features required on human-driven cars.

A little bird

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Got a tip for us? Email Kirsten Korosec at 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or my Signal at kkorosec.07, or email Sean O’Kane at 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
.

Deals!

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

We usually focus on venture deals, but this week I wanted to highlight 
Rivian
 and the sale of 86.25 million Class A common shares priced at $15.50 each (that includes an added 11.25 million in additional shares that underwriters opted to buy).

In all, Rivian said it expects to 
raise $1.32 billion
 in new capital. The raise comes at a notable time for the EV maker. The company started delivering its new R2 SUV last month and recently 
raised its sales forecast
 for 2026. The company said it now expects to deliver between 65,000 and 70,000 vehicles after outperforming its own expectations in the second quarter due to robust growth quarter-over-quarter in EDV and R1, coupled with the introduction of R2 deliveries. 

The company didn’t explain the reason for the raise. But as a reminder, Rivian is not yet profitable and scaling up production of the R2 — or any vehicle for that matter — isn’t cheap!

Other deals that got my attention …

Bidbus
, a Los Angeles-based startup that built a digital marketplace where multiple dealers can bid on a car, 
raised $15 million
 in a Series A funding round led by Ibex Investors. Mucker Capital, FJ Labs, Motley Fool Ventures, Data Point Capital, Walter Ventures, and the Car Dealership Guy’s Yossi Levi also participated.

Lyft
 said it plans to 
acquire
 Serveo’s bike-share business in Spain. Terms weren’t disclosed, but the ride-hailing company said it is expected to close this year.

TaiSan
, a U.K. battery startup, 
raised £4.65 million
 in a seed funding round co-led by Eos Advisory and the Midlands Engine Investment Fund II. InnoEnergy, AFI Ventures, EverQuest Capital Partners, Exergon, Heartfelt Ventures, Adeline Arts & Science, Techmind, angel investor François Badelon, and matched funding from Innovate UK also participated.

Notable reads and other tidbits

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

AssuranceAmerica
, a U.S. insurance provider, confirmed a 
data breach
 that affected the personal information and driver’s license numbers of 6.9 million people, making it the largest known spill of Americans’ driver’s license information this year.

Beta Technologies
, the electric vehicle takeoff and landing developer, completed 
operational flights
 conducted under the U.S. Department of Transportation and Federal Aviation Administration’s new eVTOL Integration Pilot Program. The flights covered about 275 nautical miles covering Virginia and Maryland. 

Longtime followers of 
Tesla
 will remember the heady days when 
Elon Musk
 battled various short sellers of the company’s stock. Musk is more polarizing than ever, and one exchange-traded fund creator has found a way to tap into that negative sentiment with two new 
anti-Elon exchange-traded funds
. 

GM
 brand Chevrolet built an all-American EV truck. Senior reporter Tim De Chant asks, 
Why is nobody buying it
? 

Manna Aero
, the Ireland-based autonomous drone delivery startup, is 
scaling up
 in the United States with a factory and operations center in Tulsa, Oklahoma, that it says will employ 1,000 in the next few years. 

Slate Auto
 teamed up with 
Crayola
 to offer its EV truck and SUV customers vehicle wraps in 
five crayon colors
. (Reminder: The basic Slate EV vehicle isn’t painted. Instead, it comes in a gray composite material that can be customized with a vehicle wrap. The company has hundreds of options to choose from.)

One more thing …

TechCrunch podcast
 Build Mode
 just launched its third season, and it’s a banger. Build Mode is hosted by Isabelle Johannessen, who heads TechCrunch’s Startup Battlefield program. Unlike Equity — the TC podcast I co-host along with Anthony Ha and Sean O’Kane — Build Mode is designed to help early-stage founders. 

The new season kicks off with 
Precursor Ventures
 founder and managing partner 
Charles Hudson
, who talks about what early-stage founders need to know before raising their first institutional round.

Check it out: 
The new rules of early-stage fundraising with Charles Hudson
.

Topics

Elon Musk
, 
Rivian
, 
robotaxi
, 
techcrunch mobility
, 
Transportation
, 
Uber
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Meta just launched a new AI generator, Muse Image, and users are already pushing back over use of their photos

Lucas Ropek

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling
