Welcome back to 
TechCrunch Mobility
, your hub for the future of transportation and now, more than ever, the role AI is playing in it. To get this in your inbox, sign up here for free — just click 
TechCrunch Mobility
!

In just a few days, Amazon-owned 
Zoox
 will 
start charging for robotaxi rides
. This might not seem like a big deal; the company’s custom-built robotaxis are already giving rides to passengers in Las Vegas and San Francisco, after all. And it’s opening up an early rider program in 
Miami and Austin
 too. 

None of this matters — in a business sense — until the company can operate commercially. 

And now it can, starting August 10, thanks to an exemption issued by the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
 (NHTSA). Because Zoox vehicles lack many of the traditional controls required under federal law, such as a steering wheel and pedals, it needed an exemption from federal motor vehicle standards in order to operate. It had an exemption that allowed it to demonstrate the technology; this one allows Zoox to operate a fleet of up to 2,500 vehicles commercially for two years. 

The exemption is a win for Zoox, but it also paves the way for any other autonomous vehicle developer that wants to launch a robotaxi that lacks a steering wheel, pedals, or other requirements that might not be needed in a vehicle with no human driver. For instance, a robotaxi really doesn’t need a rearview mirror; it already achieves that kind of visibility with sensors on the exterior of the vehicle. 

Tesla
 is the obvious beneficiary here since it is developing its two-seater Cybercab. But there will be others as well.

In other news, you might have missed my comprehensive assessment of 
Uber’s autonomous vehicle empire
. Check it out; it offers a complete rundown of every company that Uber has partnered with (and in some cases invested in). And I hear more are coming. 

You might recall that the Financial Times did its own calculus of how much Uber was investing in AVs. The outlet determined it was about $10 billion. And what do you know? That is exactly the number Uber CEO 
Dara Khosrowshahi 
shared during the company’s earnings call. He said the company would 
commit $10 billion “over the coming years”
 to deploy 120,000 driverless vehicles.

Deals!

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Moove
 started out as an African fintech company that provided vehicle financing for app drivers. While Moove remains in the mobility sector, it has evolved into a mega ride-hail fleet owner (42,000 vehicles and growing) across 13 countries. 

It has also added a new business division focused on autonomous vehicles. Moove got an early win and is now the fleet operator for Waymo in Phoenix, Miami, and Las Vegas, and in the future, London. But co-CEO 
Ladi Delano
 clearly has grander ambitions for Moove — and now he has the fresh capital to try. 

The startup, now based in Dubai, 
raised $250 million
 in a Series C round led by Mubadala Investment Company with Woven Capital and Ion Pacific as co-leads. Moove, which is now valued at $2.1 billion, plans to use the funds to scale its autonomous vehicle fleet management business, including hiring about 350 people. 

One interesting item of note: Moove plans to buy Waymo robotaxis and already owns the robotaxi assets of another unnamed company.

Other deals that got my attention this week …

Accell Group Holding
, the Dutch bike maker behind brands like Lapierre, Raleigh, and Sparta, was granted a 
suspension of payments
, kicking off an insolvency process. In 2022, a consortium led by KKR bought the firm for 1.56 billion euros ($1.77 billion at the time).

Advanced Electric Machines Group
, a U.K.-based manufacturer of rare earth and magnet-free electric motors, 
raised £16 million
 ($21.5 million) in a round led by Barclays Climate Ventures, PXN Ventures, Northstar Ventures, and the Low Carbon Innovation Fund. The funding round was complemented by loan support from Innovate UK.

Chargepoly
, a French company specializing in the electrification of heavy-duty and commercial vehicle fleets, 
raised €23 million
 ($26 million) in a round led by Meridiam.

Hadrian
, a defense tech company building automated manufacturing facilities, raised a 
$1.37 billion round
 at a valuation of $7.87 billion. The lead investors in the round include WCM Investment Management, Washington Harbour Partners, Valor Equity Partners, 137 Ventures, and Baillie Gifford.

Matel Motion & Energy Solutions
, an India-based company developing energy-efficient motors, motor controllers, and integrated powertrains, raised INR 130 crore ($13.6 million) in a 
Series B funding round
 led by UC Impower. 

River
, the Indian electric vehicle startup, 
raised $120 million
 in a Series C funding round led by Elev8 Venture Partners and Claypond Capital. Other investors included Singularity AMC, Anicut Capital, 360 ONE Asset, JIF Capital, HDFC AMC, along with existing backers Yamaha Motors, Al-Futtaim Group, and Mitsui.

Notable reads and other tidbits

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Ford
 has a name and a number for its new midsize EV. It will be called 
Fathom
 and will 
start at $28,350
 when it goes on sale in 2027. TechCrunch climate tech reporter and long-time EV owner Tim De Chant argues that 
Ford needs another Taurus
, and the Fathom isn’t it. What do you think? 

Joby Aviation
, the electric vertical takeoff and landing company, 
reported earnings
 this week. Revenue is up compared with the same quarter last year, thanks to its acquisition of Blade Air Mobility. Net losses shrank a bit to $245 million. One of the more interesting announcements this week, though, was Joby’s partnership with 
Atoms
, Travis Kalanick’s AI and industrial automation startup. The partnership will develop and finance a network of transportation hubs serving air taxis and autonomous ground vehicles with an initial focus on Florida, New York, and Texas, as well as California, according to Joby.

Lucid Motors’
 second-quarter earnings struck a somber it’s-time-to-get-down-to-business tone. And that comes with a cost. New CEO Silvio Napoli outlined four must-win priorities that include a 
$1.4 billion cost savings plan
. It’s also banking on a successful robotaxi program with Uber and Nuro and launching its midsize Cosmos EV, which has now 
been delayed
 until the second half of 2027. 

Nvidia 
has released its 
Alpamayo 2 Super
 for commercial use — an AI model designed for autonomous driving. The model is available on Hugging Face, and the open license covers commercial redistribution and derivative models that allow AV developers, automakers, and others to adapt Alpamayo to their own data, driving policies, and deployment strategies, the company said.

Teamsters California
 
sued the California Department of Motor Vehicles
, alleging that the agency did not properly study and disclose the economic impacts of allowing self-driving heavy-duty trucks on the state’s roads. I reached out to a few AV developers and all declined to comment. However, the Autonomous Vehicle Industry Association did issue a statement: “This lawsuit from the Teamsters sets a new standard in abusive and frivolous litigation and cannot be taken seriously.”

TechCrunch
 teamed up with New York-based financial research firm 
Hudson Labs
 again. This time to map what 
Elon Musk
 and Tesla’s other executives have spent the last seven years talking about on the company’s quarterly earnings calls. 
Check out the full story
 for graphs and complete findings. Here is a taste: Musk now speaks about artificial intelligence, along with robotaxis and Full Self-Driving software, nearly 50% of the time.

Speaking of Elon Musk, his companies had a newsy week. 
SpaceX
 reported its first earnings report as a publicly traded company. The TL;DR: The company 
doubled its revenue
 compared to last year, in large part thanks to the growth of its Starlink satellite internet service and deals it struck to rent out computing power to Anthropic and Google. And 
during the earnings call
, Musk made some out-of-this-world claims about the company’s business and future prospects, while his fellow executives tried to bring his ideas closer to Earth.

Meanwhile, 
Tesla
 and SpaceX said that “
Terafab
,” the advanced chip factory they are jointly developing, will be built in Grimes County, Texas, outside Houston, and that they will make an 
initial investment of $16.8 billion
 in the project.

The New York Times published an investigation on 
Uber’s defense strategy
 against more than 4,000 lawsuits filed by passengers who allege the company failed to protect them from sexual violence. 

Waymo
 
dropped the waitlist
 for its robotaxi service in Dallas, opening it up to all residents and visitors.

One more thing …

Travis Kalanick
, and his AI and industrial automation startup 
Atoms
, is popping up everywhere these days (see that Joby partnership above). Kalanick isn’t just making deals — although remember he did just raise $1.7 billion. The former Uber CEO also appears to be 
getting the band back together
 and bringing on former engineers and executives he once worked with. 

For instance, 
Gautam Gupta
, the former finance chief under Kalanick, has joined Atoms as chief financial officer. Gupta spent more than four years at Uber until he left in July 2017, just a few weeks after Kalanick resigned as CEO. 

Topics

Elon Musk
, 
techcrunch mobility
, 
Tesla
, 
Transportation
, 
zoox

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort
