Welcome back to 
TechCrunch Mobility
, your hub for the future of transportation and now, more than ever, the role AI is playing in it. To get this in your inbox, sign up here for free — just click 
TechCrunch Mobility
!

TechCrunch covered a couple of stories this week that illustrate the countervailing forces at play within the autonomous vehicle industry. The federal government is hitting the accelerator while state and local officials are pumping the brakes on autonomous vehicles. 

The 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
 made a series of autonomous vehicle technology announcements designed to cut red tape and accelerate the development and deployment of this technology (my article describes many of its actions). The one that got the most attention was the agency’s decision to give Zoox a 
temporary exemption
 from eight federal motor vehicle safety standards, which will finally allow the company to charge customers for rides in its custom-built robotaxi.

The importance of this can’t be understated. This was one of the last remaining regulatory hurdles Zoox needed to clear before launching a commercial robotaxi service. And according to the company, paid rides are imminent. The company will start charging for rides in Las Vegas first.

Meanwhile, 
Waymo 
and other robotaxi operators are facing 
increased scrutiny
 over how their autonomous vehicles interact with emergency responders, a regulatory risk that’s becoming harder for the industry to shrug off. As I have noted before, San Francisco mayor Daniel Lurie asked state regulators to bolster rules for autonomous vehicles nearly two weeks after Waymo robotaxis became immobile in heavy July 4 traffic, ran out of power, and blocked key streets, further compounding the gridlock.

This week, 
Rep.
 
Kevin Mullin
 (D-Calif.) proposed a bill that would direct federal regulators to establish minimum national safety standards for autonomous vehicle operators. 

“We have seen disturbing, and frankly, an unacceptable number of incidents where autonomous vehicles inadvertently interfere with emergency responders,” Mullin said during the press conference, which Lurie also spoke at.

So here we are, a push forward, and nope, a pull back. And in the middle is the AV industry.

What do you think? Send me an email with your view at 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com.

Deals!

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Lucid
 has landed more Saudi money, this time from Prince Al Waleed bin Talal Al Saud, a member of the Saudi royal family. The billionaire prince purchased a little more than 
19 million shares,
 or about 5%, of Lucid Motors, according to a regulatory filing. 

Elon Musk’s
 tunneling startup The Boring Company is in talks to raise a 
$4 billion funding round
 at a valuation of $20 billion.

Terminal
, a Toronto-based startup that provides telematics data infrastructure for the commercial fleet industry, 
raised $20 million
 in a Series A round led by Battery Ventures. New strategic investors Intact Private Capital and Penske, as well as returning backers Y Combinator and Wayfinder Ventures, also participated.

Notable reads and other tidbits

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Alaska Airlines
 CEO and president Ben Minicucci joined Lyft’s 
board of directors
.

The nascent on-demand drone-delivery industry had a busy week. 
Walmart
 and Alphabet’s 
Wing
 drone delivery started service across Central Florida, and 
Flytrex
 announced a partnership with autonomic logistics platform 
Nash
. But the biggest announcement was about 
DoorDash
, which said it was building a 
drone delivery business
, including its own aircraft, as part of an effort developed by its robotics and autonomy team. This will eventually operate within the company’s delivery app.

Ferrari
 might have received a lot of hate for its first all-electric vehicle, the Luce, but the criticism didn’t dampen sales. Ferrari hit 
this year’s sales target
 for the Luce in just two months.

Florida
 was 
awarded $200 million
 under the federal National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure program, but the money never made it to charging infrastructure for electric cars. Instead, the state is using the money to build 32 landing pads with charging stations for electric vertical take-off and landing aircraft, or eVTOLs.  

London
 is shaping up to be the next robotaxi battleground. 
Baidu
 has started 
testing autonomous vehicles
 in London as part of its partnership with 
Lyft
 and 
Freenow
, the taxi and multi-mobility app that the ride-hailing company now owns. The companies plan to invite the public to hail their robotaxis in 2027. Meanwhile, others are also preparing to launch. In April, 
Waymo
 began testing its autonomous vehicles with human safety operators in the city. 
Uber
 and its self-driving tech partner, 
Wayve
, also announced plans to launch a robotaxi service in London this year.

Rivian
 spinoff 
Also
 will finally start delivering its 
first e-bikes 
to customers next week, after months of delays related to unspecified supply chain issues.

In yet another hint that a 
Tesla-SpaceX 
merger is imminent,
the EV maker
is considering 
selling off its China business
 ahead of a SpaceX merger, according to the Wall Street Journal. Meanwhile, Tesla hit a new milestone and built its 
10 millionth EV
.

Waymo
 robotaxis started to 
return to freeways
, more than two months after the company stopped driving these high-speed roads over concerns about how its autonomous vehicles behaved near construction zones.

One more thing …

There was a time when this newsletter was chock-full of electric vehicle news, much of it centered on ambitious plans from U.S. automakers 
GM
 and 
Ford
. Both companies ramped up spending and formed joint ventures to build battery and EV factories, in an effort to shift their portfolios to ones filled with electric cars, trucks, and SUVs. But as those plans have retreated, so has the talk. 

TechCrunch teamed up with 
Hudson Labs
, a New York-based financial research firm, to analyze the last seven years of GM and Ford quarterly earnings calls and found that 
both companies are talking about EVs
 at a lower rate than they did before the pandemic.

The upshot: While GM and Ford still sell EVs and have new models in their product pipelines, their collective focus has shifted, and it shows in the data. Check out the story, which includes two interactive graphs.

Topics

robotaxis
, 
Tesla
, 
Transportation
, 
Uber
, 
Waymo
, 
wayve

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Data centers may face temporary power cuts to prevent blackouts on largest US grid

Tim De Chant

PSA: Your Claude shared chats and Artifacts may have ended up on Google

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
