Welcome back to 
TechCrunch Mobility
, your hub for the future of transportation and now, more than ever, how AI is playing a part. To get this in your inbox, sign up here for free — just click 
TechCrunch Mobility
!

Last week, I 
wrote about
 
Uber
 and 
Waymo
 and how their partnership appears to be deteriorating. I predicted the two companies would end up on opposing sides of autonomous vehicle policy. That wasn’t a guess.

For the past several weeks, I’ve been talking to sources and digging through correspondence Uber sent to the 
D.C. Council
, which is evaluating a proposed bill that would allow autonomous vehicles to operate in Washington, D.C.

What I found
: Uber and Waymo are already on opposite sides of the proposal, sparring behind the scenes and in public. Uber has made a particularly interesting argument in its effort to shape the rules that govern autonomous vehicles.

Uber, which opposes the D.C. bill, argues it would displace for-hire human drivers and hand Waymo a de facto monopoly. Instead, it has lobbied for a system that would require robotaxis to operate on a ride-hailing network alongside human drivers.

Insiders tell me the “hybrid” approach has little chance of becoming law. But if it did, it would leave AV developers like Waymo with two suboptimal choices: either put their robotaxis on ride-hailing apps like Uber or employ human drivers alongside fleets of robotaxis that took years and hundreds of millions of dollars to develop.

A D.C. Council hearing on Monday drew representatives from 
Lyft
, 
Tesla
, Uber, and Waymo, along with dozens of disability rights and accessibility advocates, local business and industry groups, highway safety organizations, government officials, labor unions, and think tanks.

My takeaway — based on the public testimony and the calls and texts I received afterward — is that Waymo is one of the few companies that generally likes the bill. Much of the rest of the industry does not.

Tesla’s senior policy adviser, 
India Herdman
, echoed concerns I’ve heard from multiple AV developers, including objections to the 180-day, 250,000-mile mandatory testing requirement; the $1 million application fee; the $5 million permit fee; and the $0.15-per-mile tax. Tesla, along with other companies, argued that testing miles accumulated in other jurisdictions should count toward the mileage threshold.

Waymo, which has been testing its AVs with human safety operators in Washington, D.C., has already surpassed the 180-day and 250,000-mile requirements. That means if the bill passed as written today, Waymo would enter the market with at least a six-month head start.

Deals!

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Uber 
is considered a ride-hailing and delivery giant. It is now cementing that status through a 
$14.8 billion deal 
to acquire Germany’s Delivery Hero. 

If the deal closes — and it will absolutely take time to overcome the regulatory hurdles — Uber will get access to nearly 100 markets across Europe, the Middle East, Latin America, and Asia. The upshot: Uber’s delivery footprint will double.

Delivery Hero also made a separate agreement to sell its business in 14 markets, where Uber Eats is already operating, to New York-based investment firm SSW Partners for $1.6 billion.

Other deals that got my attention …

Self Inspection
, a San Diego-based startup trying to disrupt the vehicle inspection process, 
raised $10 million
 in a round led by the family office of Sheryl Sandberg. Tire distributor U.S. AutoForce and automotive lender Westlake Financial made strategic investments. Early-stage funds Costanoa Ventures, Rebellion Ventures, and BrightCap Ventures also invested.

Senra,
 a startup modernizing how wire harnesses are made, 
raised $65 million
 in a Series B round co-led by Lowercarbon and Interlagos with participation from General Catalyst, Sequoia Capital, Andreessen Horowitz, and Founders Fund, among others.

Zepto
, the Indian fast-delivery company, is seeking a valuation in an initial public offering well below its $7 billion peak, 
Bloomberg reported
, citing anonymous sources.

Notable reads and other tidbits

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Chip Motors
, a Miami-based startup, revealed a 
low-speed small EV
 designed for short errands and families, and with some automated driving capabilities.

The
 Los Angeles Police Department
 is reportedly 
ending its deal
 with Flock Safety, a surveillance company that helps law enforcement track vehicles using thousands of its license plate cameras placed across the United States.

Lucid Motors 
is pushing back — and hard — on a report that claimed the EV maker was weighing whether to file for 
Chapter 11 bankruptcy
. The company’s comms team, its CEO, and a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission all say the same thing: The rumors are false. The initial report sent the company’s stock down more than 50% on Tuesday, its biggest intra-day drop ever. The stock has since recovered and is now trading about 28% higher than it was prior to the big drop. 

Lyft
 CEO 
David Risher
 says it’s the “Good Uber,” 
per Wired
.

Manual, or standard, transmission vehicles
 are a dying breed, according to preliminary government data that shows just 0.6% of new vehicles made for the U.S. in 2025 had stick shifts, the 
Washington Post reported
. I own two manual vehicles. Does that make me a driving unicorn?

The 
National Transportation Safety Board
 said the driver of a 
Tesla
 who crashed into a house in June had 
pressed the accelerator pedal
 to 100%, overriding the company’s Full Self-Driving (Supervised) software.

San Francisco
 mayor 
Daniel Lurie
 has urged state regulators to 
toughen rules on autonomous vehicles
 after Waymo robotaxis became immobile in heavy July 4 traffic, ran out of power, and blocked key streets, further compounding the gridlock. In a letter (parts of which are excerpted here) Lurie outlined four core requirements he would like to see enacted to ensure robotaxi companies can “perform reliably” during extraordinary events. 

SpaceX
 
abruptly aborted
 the second attempted launch of its upgraded Starship rocket system on Thursday, just moments after the booster ignited at the company’s complex in South Texas.

Zoox
 issued a software recall after one of its robotaxis 
got confused
 by smoke emitting from an emergency fire scene in June.

One more thing …

Uber
 chief product officer 
Sachin Kansal
 talks to TechCrunch EIC 
Connie Loizos
 about travel, AI agents, and playing both sides of the robotaxi race, in the latest 
Strictly VC podcast episode
. If you’d rather read the interview, 
check out the Q&A
.

Topics

techcrunch mobility
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh
