Welcome back to TechCrunch Mobility, your hub for the future of transportation and now, more than ever, how AI is playing a part. To get this in your inbox, sign up here for free — just click 
TechCrunch Mobility
!

I won’t spend too much time rehashing the 
SpaceX IPO
 — every media outlet, including TechCrunch, has spilled enormous amounts of digital ink on the company’s first day of trading. But there are two important data points to note for anyone who closely watches the “future of transportation” industry.

As of market close Friday, SpaceX has a market cap of $2.1 trillion, rocketing past Musk’s other publicly traded company, Tesla. SpaceX is currently the sixth most valuable U.S.-listed company, behind Nvidia, Apple, Alphabet, Microsoft, and Amazon. Tesla’s market cap was $1.52 trillion as of market close.

These two companies could soon become one. There have been plenty of hints and speculation. Last week, senior reporter 
Sean O’Kane
 spotted new language in SpaceX’s S-1 document that warns investors of future dilution. The additional sentence reads, “We may issue a significant amount of equity in connection with future transactions.” This isn’t a forecast of some small-scale deal; it likely means Tesla.

On opening day, SpaceX president and COO Gwynne Shotwell added fuel to the speculative fire. During an interview with CNBC, Shotwell seemed open to the idea and said a merger 
“might make Elon’s life a little easier.”

And if you do want to read more, we have 
conveniently packed everything together
 in a single spot, including stories on who wins (Elon Musk) and who might not (lower-tier SPV investors).

A little bird

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Senior reporter 
Tim De Chant
 heard from a little bird who is familiar with GM and its inner workings that a “foreign supplier” is providing lithium-iron-phosphate (LFP) cells for the 
2027 Chevrolet Bolt
 — and that the automaker currently has no plans to make LFPs for its EVs.
Previously, a Wall Street Journal 
report
 said the arrangement with the foreign supplier — identified as Chinese battery manufacturer CATL — was a temporary stopgap. De Chant heard that GM is starting production of LFP at an Ultium plant in the coming weeks, but those cells are destined for energy-storage systems made by LG Energy Solution. The automaker hasn’t yet decided whether LFP has a future in an EV beyond the Bolt.

Meanwhile, EV maker 
Lucid Motors
 is going through a bit of executive-level disruption. 
Emad Dlala
, a top executive at Lucid, has 
left the company
 just months after being promoted to a leading role, TechCrunch has learned. Dlala’s exit is the first major executive departure since Lucid Motors named 
Silvio Napoli
 as its new CEO in April. And we hear there may be more coming.

Got a tip for us? Email Kirsten Korosec at 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or my Signal at kkorosec.07, or email Sean O’Kane at 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
.

Deals!

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

We can officially say goodbye to the 
Apple
 car. Yeah, I know that special project was 
shut down
 in 2024. But now there is further proof that Apple has moved well beyond autonomous cars. 

After a tip and some document scouring, we found that 
Waymo
 acquired a massive 5,500-acre proving ground in Arizona owned by Route 14 Investment Partners LLC, a Delaware shell company associated with Apple. Waymo 
acquired the property for $220 million
, according to the filing. 

The acquisition is the latest evidence that Waymo is trying to scale up its operations.

Other deals that got more attention …

CameraMatics
, an Irish company that uses AI-powered video telematics to help make fleets safer, 
raised €49 million
 from a consortium led by U.K. investment firm Blume Equity, the Ireland Strategic Investment Fund, and Goodbody Capital Partners.

Clear Robotics
, an Indian tech company developing autonomous ships, 
raised a $1.75 million
 pre-Series A funding round led by maritime-focused Shipsfocus Ventures. Katapult Ocean, SGInnovate, M7 Holdings MGS Ventures, and other strategic partners also joined the round.

Evotrex
, a startup developing hybrid RV travel trailers, 
raised $30 million
 in a Series A funding round. Funding came from a consortium of Chinese and Hong Kong-based investment firms, like GSR United Capital, Forebright Concerto Capital, TTGG Ventures, and Pegasus Capital, among others. Anker, the consumer electronics company, is among its seed investors.

Volteum
, a startup that developed fleet management software for electric and mixed fleets, 
raised €2.5 million
 in a round led by Movens Capital. WakeUp Capital and Aidiom, as well as existing backers DayOne Capital, Techstars, and Nesprit also participated.

Zepto
, the Indian quick-commerce delivery startup, unveiled plans for an 
initial public offering
 that could be valued at about $1 billion.

Zūm
, a startup that provides transportation services (typically in electric buses) for school-age children, is interviewing banks about a possible IPO, 
The Information reported
.

Notable reads and other tidbits

Image Credits:
Bryce Durbin

Decart
, an AI startup, unveiled an interactive world model called Oasis 3 that can generate photorealistic driving environments in real time. The startup is initially targeting autonomous vehicle companies that need to simulate rare driving scenarios at scale and plans to expand into robotics and other physical AI applications, senior reporter 
Rebecca Bellan reported
. 

General Motors
 is pushing deep into batteries — and not for EVs. We covered some of GM’s battery plans last week, but there is more to share. GM announced plans to sell a commercial energy-storage system for 
AI data centers and the grid
. It is partnering with energy-storage startup Peak Energy and will be developing an entirely new sodium-ion battery chemistry tailored for grid-scale deployments. With GM and 
Ford
 chasing energy storage — plus a number of startups like Redwood Energy piling in — it seems like 
everyone wants a piece of Tesla’s battery business
. 

Rivian
 
started deliveries
 of its all-important R2 SUV.

Uber
, U.K. startup 
Wayve
, and 
Waymo
 are headed toward a robotaxi showdown in London. 
Here’s why
. 

Waymo
 launched a 
loyalty program
 called Waymo Premier, which will offer frequent robotaxi riders a number of perks in exchange for $29.99 per month. The company also released details on a new computer model it created that is designed to more accurately answer a fundamental question: 
How does its autonomous driving software stack up against humans?

Wing
, the Alphabet-owned autonomous drones company, is pushing into 
seven more U.S. cities
 through its partnership with Walmart. Wing isn’t the only company using drones to autonomously deliver groceries, and while it’s certainly not mainstream yet, it isn’t a novelty anymore in certain markets.

One more thing …

Since the 
SpaceX
 IPO has just wrapped, I thought I would share some initial reactions from our TechCrunch staff. Senior reporter Sean O’Kane and AI editor Russell Brandom recorded a special episode of the Equity podcast Friday to give first impression. I suggest a listen!

The SpaceX IPO has finally arrived — here’s what TechCrunch editors think so far.

Topics

Apple
, 
General Motors
, 
Lucid Motors
, 
SpaceX
, 
techcrunch mobility
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort
