A domain used by the messaging app Telegram mysteriously dropped offline on Monday, with the app’s founder, Pavel Durov, saying in 
an X post
 that 
t.me
 links had “stopped working.”

The outage prevented users from accessing the 
t.me
 domain shortlink, used by the messaging app to allow users to share one-click links for joining public groups.

The domain is now back online, according to the Montenegro-based domain registrar DomainME, which manages the
 .me
 top-level domain.

“The 
t.me
 domain is back online. We will be issuing an official statement shortly,” said Predrag Lešić, the chief executive of DomainME, in an email to TechCrunch.

In a post on X responding to Durov, DomainME 
said
 that Telegram’s 
t.me
 domain was “on hold due to the OFAC compliance, but it is back online now.” OFAC refers to the U.S. Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control, which imposes economic sanctions on overseas companies and individuals who pose economic national security risk to the United States.

Telegram’s 
t.me
 domain went offline after a “serverhold” block was put on the domain. A “serverhold” 
typically means
 that the domain registrar locked the domain for some reason, which tends to knock the domain offline. The “serverhold” was lifted early on Tuesday, per the site’s public internet records.

As noted by technologist 
Jonah Aragon
, the domain was suspended on the same day that 
the U.S. Treasury imposed sanctions
 on a VPN provider called First VPN, which authorities said was used by cybercriminals to launch ransomware attacks. U.S. authorities 
shut down the site earlier this year
. 

The Treasury’s 
sanctions listing
 for First VPN, published Monday, contains a link to the full web address of the VPN provider’s public group on Telegram using the shortened 
t.me
 domain.

It’s likely that the domain registrar suspended Telegram’s entire 
t.me
 domain to comply with the new sanctions, rather than restricting the specific web address that links to the Telegram group in the Treasury’s sanctions listing.

U.S. companies, including domain registrars, that do not adhere to U.S. sanctions laws can face heavy fines.

Another domain used by Telegram, 
telegram.me
, was not listed in the sanctions file and was operational at the time of writing.

A spokesperson for Telegram did not respond to a request for comment.

Topics

Apps
, 
cybersecurity
, 
Sanctions
, 
Security
, 
Telegram
, 
treasury
, 
vpn

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
