Nuclear power startups have been pitching themselves as the antidote to what ails AI data centers: power that’s always available. Bill Gates-founded 
TerraPower
 is one of the latest to throw its hat that into that ring, with Bloomberg 
reporting
 that the startup plans to announce its first data center project this year.

TerraPower did not say who the customer will be, though in January, it announced that Meta had 
agreed to buy
 eight of its Natrium power plants. The data center project, expected to break ground in 2027, would be the company’s second power plant, with its first already 
under construction
 in Wyoming.

Not every nuclear reactor is suited to data center duty, but TerraPower possesses one key advantage — energy storage — that promises to give it an edge over competitors. And it’s all thanks to renewable power sources like wind and solar.

Nuclear reactors, TerraPower’s included, work best when they’re running at full tilt. Of all the different types of power plants, nuclear reactors have the highest capacity factor — 
92.5% of the time
, they generate at maximum power in the U.S. But in a way, they need to be. Existing reactors are slow to ramp up and down, capable of increasing or decreasing only about 5% of their total rated output per minute, 
according
 to the National Laboratory of the Rockies. 

New small modular reactors (SMRs), which many startups are pursuing, can react faster, about 10% of their rated output per minute, per NRL. But running at reduced capacity isn’t ideal — it’s hard to make money when you’re not generating electrons. 

That’s true of any power plant, but it’s especially true of nuclear, which has the 
highest capital expenditures
 of any generating technology. Startups are hoping that mass manufacturing of SMRs will bring capex down, but that has yet to be proven. And if it does work, it could take a 
decade or more
 to reap the benefits. Every startup acknowledges that its early power plants will be expensive, so it makes sense to operate it them at peak capacity as often as possible.

For data centers, especially those that rely on behind-the-meter power, that poses a challenge. Their loads, especially when training AI or responding to prompts, can sink and soar quickly as GPUs respond to the tasks. The swings are so demanding that natural gas turbines 
have been breaking under the stress
. To smooth the curve, they need to use large banks of batteries, which increase costs further.

TerraPower designed its 345-megawatt molten salt-cooled reactor to work around those challenges. One of the key considerations was ensuring the reactor could complement intermittent sources of electricity like wind and solar — the power plant needed to ramp up and down quickly. While TerraPower had renewable power, not data centers, in mind when it sketched its plans, the two are similarly intermittent, just on different sides of the equation.

To ramp quickly, TerraPower doesn’t increase or decrease the power output of its reactor. Rather, it keeps on splitting atoms, and the extra heat gets stored in a giant vat of molten sodium. When power demand spikes, the power plant can tap that reservoir to generate more steam to spin the turbines. The expensive equipment keeps working even when demand is low, allowing the company to amortize its investment over more operational hours.

The approach takes the best of nuclear power — high capacity factor — and pairs it with an energy storage technology that allows TerraPower to play nicely on a renewable-heavy grid or when connected to an data center. It’s a flexible approach that could give the startup an advantage in the race to power AI.

Topics

AI
, 
Climate
, 
data centers
, 
nuclear power
, 
terrapower

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic set AI agents loose on the same task. They started a turf war.

Rebecca Bellan

Instagram introduces a redesigned wordmark

Sarah Perez
