Tesla has built its 10 millionth electric vehicle, according to a social media 
post
 by the company early on Thursday. The milestone comes six years after the company built its one millionth vehicle.

Crossing the 10 million mark means Tesla is halfway to reaching one of the four core “product goals” that unlocks the full value of CEO Elon Musk’s 
$1 trillion pay package
, which shareholders approved last year. By 2035, Musk has to ensure the company builds 20 million vehicles, reaches 10 million active subscriptions for its “Full Self-Driving” software, delivers one million “bots,” and puts one million robotaxis on the road.

Despite a few years of intense growth on the backs of the Model 3 and Model Y, Tesla has not been able to sell 2 million vehicles in a single year. If it keeps up that pace, or slows further, it will take the company until at least the early 2030s to hit the 20 million mark.

Tesla has less competition in the United States now, though, as major automakers have pulled back from the electric vehicle market, and startups like Rivian and Lucid Motors have struggled to reach scale. Nevertheless, Tesla is still struggling in its home market. Its 
U.S. sales fell 13% year-over-year
 in the second quarter, and the company 
had to look to newer markets
 like Japan, Australia and Lithuania to court buyers.

Musk used to promise that Tesla would make 20 million cars per year by 2030, but he abandoned that idea a few years ago as the company’s sales slowed down. Still, of the four product goals, this is the one Tesla is closest to achieving. 

The company recently reported just shy of 1.5 million FSD subscribers, though it’s not clear if it is counting free trials — those would not count towards the official product goal laid out by Tesla’s board of directors last year. The carmaker is only in the earliest stages of building robots and robotaxis.

Musk also has to increase the company’s profit (adjusted EBITDA) to $400 billion by 2035 in order to access the full share package. That looks challenging at the moment, too, as the company’s adjusted EBITDA currently hovers around $3.27 billion, and has been shrinking lately thanks to heavy discounts, the loss of saleable regulatory credits, as well as a dramatic increase in 
spending
 on new efforts like AI and robotics. 

As for the competition, the only other company at the same level is China’s BYD, which recently crossed 17 million “new energy vehicles” built and sold, roughly half of which were hybrids.

Topics

Elon Musk
, 
Tesla
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer
