Tech companies and developers have been scouring the U.S. for places to build data centers, and they’ve been drawn to Texas’s loose regulations and seemingly abundant power supply. Only Virginia 
hosts more data centers
 than Texas.

But even Texas can be pushed to the brink. Governor Greg Abbott announced Monday that all new data center projects will need to be audited by both the Public Utility Commission of Texas (PUCT) and the state’s grid operator, the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT).

The size of ERCOT’s interconnection queue has grown dramatically this year. In January, ERCOT had 233 gigawatts of projects waiting to connect to its grid. In 
less than six months
, that figure had more than doubled. Today, Abbott’s office 
said
 ERCOT is tracking 474 gigawatts of new connection requests. About 90% of those are data centers, according to the grid operator.

Some of those projects are simply paper proposals at this point. Because queues for grid connections have grown so long, the first action many developers take is to get in line. Many projects fizzle out as they progress.

If even a fraction of those proposed projects come to fruition, they could overwhelm the Texas grid. The interconnection queue today represents more than five times ERCOT’s 
total peak demand
. 

While many data center operators, including 
Google
 and 
Microsoft
, have been drawn to Texas for its ample natural gas reserves, wind and solar have 
helped ERCOT keep pace
 with growing electricity demand, according to the Energy Information Administration (EIA). Utility-scale solar capacity grew fourfold between 2021 and 2025. Meanwhile, electricity prices declined over much of that time, according to a 
report
 from Amperon.

Electricity prices in Texas are relatively affordable 
compared with other states
, but they have been rising. Data centers and crypto mining facilities have pushed prices higher, 
according
 to the EIA. 

Abbott clearly wants to head off that trend. The governor has directed PUCT and ERCOT to collect a range of information about proposed data centers, including their on- and off-site demand for electricity and water, noise mitigation efforts, light controls, use of tax incentives, and ownership details.

Historically, Texas has favored lighter regulation than many other states when it comes to development. Houston famously 
lacks a zoning code
, and the state has a 
business-friendly regulatory environment
. But data centers have 
become a flash point
 across the country, including in Texas. Abbott had previously tried to coax data centers into providing more information through a voluntary survey. 
Most didn’t respond
, so he’s taking a heavier hand to compel compliance. 

Depending on what emerges from the audits, Texas’s days as a data center mecca may be coming to a close.

Topics

AI
, 
Climate
, 
data centers
, 
texas

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec
