TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
 is built around one question: How do you build an enduring company in the AI era? Our programming and speaker lineup reflect that, based on the feedback we’ve gotten from the community and the reality on the ground.

Last year at Disrupt, we spoke with founders about their experiences and discovered the results of their attendance firsthand. One founder saw a 3x oversubscription rate after their confirmation for 
Startup Battlefield
 and more than 100 investor inbounds helping fuel conversations about a future fundraising round. Another founder had nearly 30 back-to-back conversations with investors who flocked to them after a pitch onstage and followed them to their 
booth
.

That’s not the exception at Disrupt — that’s the point. And those opportunities aren’t just available for Battlefield finalists. Every conversation in the 
Expo Hall
 or in a 
Side Event
 can create an opportunity for your startup. For years, whether it’s been held in New York, San Francisco, or elsewhere, Disrupt has brought together thousands of founders, investors, startup team members, and tech leaders.  

We’re keeping that mission alive at SF’s Moscone West, this October 13-15
 with a packed lineup of speakers, more than 200 expert sessions, a wealth of organized and serendipitous networking opportunities, and most of all, the chance to be in the same room as the person who could change your nascent idea for a company or your current startup’s trajectory.

This guide is for the founders out there who are just learning about Disrupt, who need a refresher, or are skeptical of whether it’s worth it. TechCrunch has been around for more than 20 years; we can take it.

Image Credits:
TechCrunch / Slava Blazer Photography

The reality of what makes Disrupt, Disrupt 

If you’re asking Claude or ChatGPT if TechCrunch Disrupt is worth it, you’re not alone. The reality is that Disrupt is a unique event, and it’s happening at a unique time for the startup community.

This year’s Disrupt isn’t about predicting the future of AI; it’s about building companies in it. Across six editorially curated stages, founders will hear practical lessons from the CEOs, investors, engineers, and operators shaping the next decade of technology.  

Whether you’re raising your first round, scaling your team, or deciding how AI changes your product, every session is designed to answer one question: “What can I take back to my company on Monday morning?”

The founders Disrupt empowers 

Disrupt works a bit differently, depending on where you are in your founding journey, with different tracks you can follow to make the most of the three days:

Pre-seed and idea stages 

You’re here to pressure-test your thesis, meet your first angel or pre-seed investors, and figure out who else is building in your space. 
Prioritize the Builders Stage
, the Startup Battlefield semifinalist pitches, and the Expo Hall, along with roundtables tied to your industry and conversations you’ll want to learn more from.

Early revenue or actively raising 

You’re here for capital and validation above all else, and your time is valuable. Prioritize our investor-matchmaking tools and the connections that come with your Founder Pass, including the networking tools in our app. You also get access to the Deal Flow Café, where we foster one-on-one conversations between founders and investors.  

And when your schedule isn’t packed with dealmaking, learn from VC perspectives and fundraising-focused sessions at the 
Builders Stage
.

Scaling, hiring, in search of partnerships 

You’re here in search of talent, strategic partners, and market visibility. Those same networking tools and opportunities can help you meet potential hires and partners and deepen those connections or make new ones. 
Disrupt’s Side Events aren’t to be missed
 — there’s one for every industry, interest, or post-event vibe you could be looking to find.

Startup Battlefield: The most iconic pitch competition 

The Startup Battlefield winner’s reveal packs the Disrupt stage
 and is each year’s capstone event. But it’s the lead-up to that $100,000 check and the deluge of attention the winner receives that’s the most valuable for founders attending Disrupt.

The 200 startups chosen on August 20 to compete go through a rigorous prep process and get the opportunity to pitch onstage in front of top-tier VCs and the Disrupt crowds. You’ll also get to watch those pitches, take notes, learn from the peaks and valleys, and potentially meet the teams behind the ideas and innovations. It could be in a follow-up meeting or just walking through the halls of Moscone.  

And if that all leaves you inspired, here’s an insider tip: Most Battlefield participants, and several winners, have gone through the process multiple times. We’re no longer taking applications for 2026’s competition, but we’re 
expanding
 the 
program
 to 
more international
 markets, and the 2027 process will be 
similar to this year’s
, so take note for the future!

The founder-focused programming 

Disrupt 2026 spans several stages
, each built around a different founder need:

Disrupt Stage: 
The biggest conversations in technology, featuring the founders, CEOs, and industry leaders defining what’s next. These are the conversations you’ll be talking about long after Disrupt ends.

Builders Stage: 
The tactical playbook for building a startup. From fundraising and hiring to GTM, product, and scaling, every session is designed to give founders practical advice they can put to work immediately.

AI Stage: 
AI isn’t the future — it’s the present. Learn how the fastest-growing startups are building, deploying, and monetizing AI, with practical lessons on agents, models, infrastructure, and what it takes to win in the AI era.

Real World AI Stage:
 AI is moving beyond the screen and into the physical world. Explore how robotics, autonomous systems, manufacturing, healthcare, and defense are turning AI breakthroughs into real-world products and businesses.

Smart Money Stage: 
Follow the money. From fintech and stablecoins to payments, embedded finance, and AI-driven financial services, this stage explores how technology is reshaping the movement of capital.

Smart Systems Stage:
 Every AI breakthrough depends on the infrastructure behind it. Discover the innovations in chips, compute, energy, networking, and data centers that will determine the next generation of technology companies.

Image Credits:
TechCrunch / Slava Blazer Photography

Conversations you can only get at Disrupt 

RJ Scaringe (Rivian): Building a generational company. 

Panos Panay (Amazon): Designing products people love. 

Paolo Ardoino (Tether): Money, AI, and infrastructure. 

Toni Schneider and Rose Wang (Bluesky): Can social start over? 

Amjad Masad (Replit): Every founder becomes technical. 

Andrew Feldman (Cerebras): Winning the AI compute race. 

And that’s just the beginning — we’ll have more speakers to announce as we get closer to Disrupt. 
Check out the full lineup of speakers across all stages and events here
.

How to get the most bang for your buck at Disrupt 

Disrupt’s prices increase as we get closer to the event, and founder tickets are currently $300 off their final price until August 21. 
But if you make the call to attend Disrupt before 11:59 p.m. PT August 7 via this link
, you’ll save an additional $100!  

If you want to bring a co-founder, you can get a 10% discount on that second ticket. For larger teams, we have additional per-ticket discounts available.  

San Francisco might be the hotbed of the startup community and an AI epicenter, but we all know it’s caused prices to spike in the Bay. We’ve partnered with some excellent nearby hotel options to keep accommodation costs as low as possible. 
Check out our four partner hotels right here
.

Your time at Disrupt is valuable, too, so before you head there, check on our regularly updated schedule of speakers and Side Events, get ahead of competitors’ schedules by booking your networking opportunities in advance, and get your own elevator pitches in order to make the most of those magical Disrupt moments that can come at any point October 13-15!

Topics

Startups
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha
