After testing the 
Kindle Scribe Colorsoft
 for two months, I found that it was made for a very specific kind of note-taker and reader. While the device is pretty and lightweight, it’s not something the everyday person needs due to its hefty price tag and size. 

However, for those who have been waiting for a color Kindle that doubles as a digital notebook, the Kindle Scribe Colorsoft is worth considering. 

The device starts at a steep $630 and is available in two colors: Black and Fig, a pretty purple shade. It weighs just 400 grams and features an 11-inch display that makes it similar in size to a traditional sheet of paper.

Its thin design is impressive, but its larger size means it’s not exactly something you can hold comfortably with one hand. I found it most comfortable to use when it was propped up against my knees while sitting on a bed or placed flat on a desk.

One thing I like about e-readers is that they’re usually quite portable, so I can easily pop one into my purse when I’m on the go. That wasn’t the case with the Kindle Scribe Colorsoft because its size meant I never ended up taking it out of the house. However, if you’re an avid note-taker or researcher, I could see why you’d want to put it in your work bag to take with you to the office or to a coffee shop to get some work done. Beyond those situations, it’s not a device I’d reach for during a quick trip in an Uber or while waiting at a doctor’s office.

The larger size does mean that there’s more room for writing and note-taking, or even sketches and diagrams. And of course, the larger display makes reading PDFs and other documents easier. 

When it comes to reading, the larger screen has both benefits and drawbacks, as the extra space is helpful when reading books with charts or maps, but the size also gets rid of the cozy feeling that makes smaller Kindles appealing.

Image Credits:
TechCrunch /

What I liked about the larger size was that I was able to create an easy-to-read color-coded digital planner and reading journal, especially since the device comes with templates for daily, weekly, and monthly planners. And as someone who normally has a physical reading journal, I found it quite efficient to be able to finish a book and then open up a digital notebook on the same device to log my reading. 

The device comes with a Kindle Scribe Pen that attaches magnetically to the side of the e-reader. The pen feels nice in your hand and can be programmed for various actions. The eraser works smoothly and responds almost instantly. 

While the color display is fun, it’s important to recognize that colors look more like soft highlighter shades rather than the vibrant tones you see on a regular tablet. That’s not necessarily an issue for note-taking, but it does mean that comics and other visual content won’t look as rich as the original colors. 

The device’s color options were useful when highlighting books because I could assign specific colors to different types of notes. For example, while reading a twisty thriller, I used blue to mark details I thought I might need to remember later and red for quotes I enjoyed and wanted to note. It’s also easy to quickly switch between the different colors thanks to the device’s fast refresh rate. 

As for battery life, I found it to be excellent. I only had to charge the device twice over the course of two months. It is worth noting, however, that writing uses more power than reading.

All in all, the Kindle Scribe Colorsoft makes the most sense for students, researchers, and journalers who want one device for reading, annotating, and organizing handwritten notes. For everyone else, the steep cost is hard to justify. 

If you’re simply looking to upgrade an older Kindle, I don’t think the Kindle Scribe Colorsoft is worth the investment, as you’d be better off with the more reasonably priced 
Kindle Paperwhite
, which starts at $159.99.

Topics

Gadgets
, 
Hardware
, 
Kindle

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort
