SpaceX is coming to market on Friday, and investors can barely contain their excitement. The $75 billion stock offering is reportedly 
deeply over-subscribed
, with some institutional investors ponying up for 
$10 billion blocks
 of Elon Musk’s empire.

There are lots of reasons to be skeptical of the investment — big IPOs tend to sink, the company is losing money, and Musk’s erratic online behavior would be terrifying coming from any other tech CEO — but it doesn’t seem to be slowing anyone down. Tech investors have learned to never bet against Elon, whatever the business logic indicates.

But a dispassionate look at SpaceX’s financial plans can still tell us a lot about what they’re betting on: A business centered around orbital data centers that emerged in the last 18 months as Musk 
sought a vision
 that would unite his conglomerate ahead of its IPO.

In true Musk style, it’s a bold scheme, and one that requires at least three near-impossible feats of engineering: a reusable rocket, a brand-new American chip foundry, and a sprint to build satellites faster than ever before. 

That kind of business plan can be difficult to score. This week, two analyses tried to offer a more a sober assessment of SpaceX’s plan — one from Morningstar, the financial research firm, and another from Aswath Damodaran, a New York University finance professor who takes a special interest in corporate valuation. Both exercises find SpaceX significantly less valuable than the nearly $1.8 trillion assessment proffered by the company’s bankers. Morningstar 
assigns a value
 of about $825 billion, while Damodaran 
suggests
 the company is worth $1.2 trillion.

The significant difference is, in many ways, the result of bolting a world-beating space monopoly to a far riskier AI business. Morningstar’s analyst characterizes the difference between their assessment of a fair value of $63 a share, and SpaceX’s offering price of $135, as a $72 call option on the company’s ability to deliver orbital data centers at the rate and capability that Musk believes is possible.

In both analyses, the high margins of the company’s space launch business and its satellite internet network are the most attractive things about the company, while its AI business is the most uncertain.

To cloud or not to cloud?

Part of the question is, what is SpaceX’s AI business? In the company’s 
S-1
 market analysis, it frames its largest opportunity in enterprise AI — that its models will power coding tools built by the team it acqui-hired from Cursor, or the company’s Macrohard project, which is intended to equip digital agents with the capabilities to perform white-collar labor. SpaceX assessed the total market for that business as $22.7 trillion, compared to $2.4 trillion for AI infrastructure and just under $2 trillion for the company’s space efforts.

But that contradicts the company’s recent deals to sell significant amounts of compute to 
Anthropic
 and 
Google
, ostensible competitors in the model business. That’s not out of place for a Musk company; SpaceX frequently launches satellites operated by competitors to its Starlink network. It just usually does that from a place of strength, not while playing catch-up.

Acting like a neocloud might be good near-term business, but it raises the question of where value will accrue in the AI tech stack: Is it better to be a compute provider or a model-builder, if you can’t be both?

The scaling logic that dominates the AI business demands that serious frontier labs constantly train new and more powerful models (or, as Musk 
admitted
 in his recent lawsuit against Sam Altman, by distilling capabilities from other companies’ models). Any competitor not rushing ahead is likely to fall behind, although the rising abilities of cheaper open source models might undermine that dynamic.

Space data centers are one way to square the circle, providing so much compute that SpaceX could effectively do both.

Musk’s space data center architecture

In a 
video interview
 released by SpaceX this week, Musk laid out the logic for why SpaceX is best positioned to deliver on data centers. The core of the argument was that SpaceX is the only company capable of putting a lot of mass on orbit cheaply, building a lot of solar panels, and building a lot of chips. In general, industry experts see space data centers at scale being about a decade away, but Musk argued (with a lot of caveats) that they are much closer.

“This is not a promise of what we’ll do,” Musk said in the video. “This is what we are going to try to do, and think we probably can do, which is to get to roughly an annualized rate of a gigawatt per year by the end of next year, in terms of space AI compute.”

Based on his expected maximum power delivery of 150 kW per satellite, that’s a production rate of 6,666 satellites a year, or about 556 a month. That’s roughly twice the reported current production rate of Starlink satellites, which is just 70 a week. Though Musk says that the AI satellites are simpler in architecture, that’s a lot to ask for a production facility that hasn’t been built yet. The company is also still building out its solar panel production facility.

That’s before we get to Terafab, the company’s much-discussed chip foundry, which Musk sees feeding into the later stages of this product as the company tries to scale up to a terawatt of annual compute production. Chip fabs are some of the hardest modern industrial projects, typically costing billions of dollars and taking as long as a decade to build.

Then there’s the most vital question: What about Starship, the key to SpaceX’s ability to economically put all those chips in orbit? 

A recent test flight went well enough, but it didn’t suggest that rapid reusability is right around the corner. SpaceX may end up reusing 
just the booster
 at first, which would raise the costs of the space data center roll-out. For now, the company is still undergoing a mishap investigation for the FAA to understand why the booster stage failed to make a controlled reentry as planned. SpaceX hasn’t responded to questions about when the vehicle will fly again, thought it has said it expects to begin launching Starlink satellites with it by the end of this year.

But take that with a grain of salt: Consider that NASA, which has a nearly $4 billion contract with SpaceX to use Starship as a moon lander, still isn’t ready to commit to a test mission with the vehicle scheduled for late 2027.

Buyer Beware

As public investors get their hands on SpaceX shares, they’ll find themselves owning a near-monopoly on access to space in the U.S. and Europe, a world-spanning communications network, and a wager on the most ambitious infrastructure project of the AI era.

Those projects depend on SpaceX creating something never seen before — a fully reusable rocket. The company will also need to build a high-rate production facility for AI satellites, but do so in 18 months, not the decade it took to develop its Starlink manufacturing. Finally, it will need to build a chip foundry in the U.S., something even dedicated silicon firms are reluctant to take on. Musk is right that SpaceX is the only company positioned to build any of this anytime soon, but that speaks to the magnitude of the challenge as much as the company’s likelihood of achieving it.

Musk used to say he wouldn’t take SpaceX public until he reached Mars, since fickle investors might lose faith along the way. Those plans may have been put on hold, but what he’s laid out ahead of the company’s IPO could be just as difficult.

Topics

AI
, 
IPO
, 
orbital data centers
, 
Space
, 
SpaceX

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim Fernholz	

Senior Reporter

		Tim Fernholz is a journalist who writes about technology, finance and public policy. He has closely covered the rise of the private space industry and is the author of 
 Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and the New Space Race.
 Formerly, he was a senior reporter at Quartz, the global business news site, for more than a decade, and began his career as a political reporter in Washington, D.C. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing tim.fernholz@techcrunch.com or via an encrypted message to tim_fernholz.21 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
