As companies old and new rush to capitalize on AI, many AI startups say that their revenue is not just growing, but also rapidly accelerating, hitting their next milestones in shorter timeframes.

The following list of startups have reported a pattern of such flywheel growth. One thing to note is that the underlying metrics used by these companies differ, even if they are using the term “ARR.” Some may be referring to 
annualized recurring revenue (ARR),
 or revenue under contract from a paying customer but not yet billed. Some are referring to annualized run-rate revenue, or projecting annual income by calculating 12 months of revenue that continues at the rate of the most recent month. Others are referring to “committed ARR,” or signed contracts from customers that are not onboarded yet. In the case of Gusto, it reported actual 
trailing 12-month revenue
.

Nevertheless, each of these startups, listed in reverse chronological order to when their ARR growth was made public, reports that their revenue growth is accelerating, however they are defining it. To be sure, there are many more fast-growing AI startups than we’re naming here, but we are limiting this list to the companies hitting revenue milestones at ever-faster rates.

Mercor:
 On Monday, Brendan Foody, co-founder and CEO of Mercor, 
announced
 that the company has crossed $2 billion in gross annualized revenue as of June — just four months after reaching the $1 billion milestone. The less-than-three-year-old firm, which hires domain experts to train and refine AI models, 
said
 that it reached a $500 million run rate in September.

Anthropic: 
In recent months, this model maker’s revenue has been at such a historic velocity that it has mesmerized the entire AI sector. In late May, Anthropic announced that it 
crossed $47 billion
 in revenue run rate, a milestone that came less than two months after the company reported that its revenue run rate surpassed 
$30 billion
. The company said it reached a 
$9 billion
 revenue run rate in late 2025, up from a reported 
$4 billion
 in July 2025.

Sierra:
 After reaching its first 
$100 million
 in ARR in seven quarters, Sierra — which builds customer service AI agents for enterprises — says it took just two more quarters to add another $100 million, co-founder and CEO Bret Taylor 
announced
 in late May.

Glean: 
In May, 
Glean announced
 that it crossed $300 million in ARR. While it took the seven-year-old enterprise AI startup 
nine months to double
 its ARR from $100 million to $200 million, the company says it needed just six months to grow that metric from $200 million to $300 million.

Gusto:
 The 14-year-old HR tech startup announced in May that its revenue accelerated in each of the last five quarters. The company, which was last valued at $9.3 billion in early 2022, also reported that it surpassed 
$1 billion
 in trailing 12-month revenue. Gusto’s revenue surge shows that it’s not only AI-native companies that are seeing their top-line growth supercharged by integrating the technology.

Clio:
 This 18-year-old provider of legal practice management software saw its revenue take off sharply after embedding AI into its 
offering in 2023
. The company surpassed $200 million in ARR in mid-2024, doubled that figure by late last year, and recently announced that its ARR reached 
$500 million
.

Topics

AI
, 
Anthropic
, 
Clio
, 
evergreen
, 
Glean
, 
Gusto
, 
Mercor
, 
revenue
, 
Sierra Ai
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Marina Temkin	

Reporter, Venture

Marina Temkin is a venture capital and startups reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she wrote about VC for PitchBook and Venture Capital Journal. Earlier in her career, Marina was a financial analyst and earned a CFA charterholder designation.

You can contact or verify outreach from Marina by emailing 
marina.temkin@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at +1 347-683-3909 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If you use Google, you’re training its AI. Here’s how to opt out.

Sarah Perez

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort
