Over the past months, many countries have announced plans to restrict social media access for children and teens. Australia 
became the first
 to implement such measures at the end of last year, setting a precedent that other countries are now closely watching. The U.K. is the latest country to announce that it will 
impose a ban on social media
 use for children. U.K. prime minister Keir Starmer the ban on June 15.

The regulations and proposals being brought forth by governments around the world aim to reduce the pressures and risks that young users may face on social media, which include cyberbullying, addiction, mental health issues, and exposure to predators. 

Of course, there are concerns about privacy regarding invasive age verification and excessive government intervention. Critics, including 
Amnesty Tech
, have said such bans are ineffective and that they ignore the realities of younger generations. Despite this, many nations are moving ahead with proposed legislation. 

We’ve compiled a list of countries that are considering or have already moved forward with bans on social media for young users.

Australia

Australia became the world’s first country to 
ban social media
 for children under 16 in December 2025. The ban blocks children from using Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, Threads, TikTok, X, YouTube, Reddit, Twitch, and Kick. It notably doesn’t include WhatsApp or YouTube Kids. 

The Australian government has said these social media companies must take steps to keep children off their services. Companies that fail to comply may face penalties of up to $49.5 million AUD ($34.4 million USD).

The government says these platforms should use multiple verification methods to ensure that people using their services are older than 16. It also notes that they can’t rely on users simply entering their own age. 

Austria

Austria said in late March that it will 
ban social media
 for children up to the age of 14. Draft legislation for the ban is expected to be finalized by June.

Canada

The Canadian government 
introduced a digital safety bill
 in early June that would ban social media for children under 16. Under the legislation, social media giants could sidestep the ban if they demonstrate they have policies to protect young users. Officials have said it could take a year for the bill to pass.

Denmark

Denmark is 
set to ban
 social media platforms for children under 15. The Danish government announced in November 2025 that it had secured support  for the ban from three governing coalition parties and two opposition parties in parliament.

The government’s plans could become law as soon as mid-2026, according to the Associated Press. The Danish digital affairs ministry is also launching a “digital evidence” app that includes age verification tools that may be used as part of the ban. 

France

In late January, French lawmakers 
passed a bill
 that would ban social media for kids under 15. President Emmanuel Macron has supported the measure as a way to protect children from excessive screen time. 

The bill still has to get through the country’s Senate before a final vote in the lower house.

Germany

In early February, German Chancellor Friedrich Merz’s conservatives discussed a 
proposal to bar
 children under 16 from using social media, Reuters reported. However, there were signs that his center-left coalition partners were hesitant to support an outright ban.

Greece

Greek prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announced in April that the country is going to 
ban access to social media
 for children under 15 starting January 2027. Mitsotakis says the move is aimed at tackling rising anxiety and sleep problems among children, as well as the addictive design of social media.

Indonesia

Indonesia said in early March that it’s 
banning children under the age of 16
 from using social media and other popular online platforms. The country plans to start with platforms such as YouTube, TikTok, Facebook, Instagram, Threads, X, Bigo Live, and Roblox.

Malaysia 

The Malaysian government said in November 2025 that it plans to 
ban social media
 for children under 16. The country plans to implement the ban this year. 

Poland

Poland’s ruling party is drafting new legislation that would 
ban children under 15
 from using social media, Bloomberg reported in February.

Slovenia

Slovenia is 
drafting legislation
 to prohibit children under 15 from accessing social media, the country’s deputy prime minister announced in early February. The government wants to regulate social networks where content is shared, citing platforms such as TikTok, Snapchat, and Instagram.

Spain

Spain’s prime minister announced in early February that the country 
plans to ban
 social media for children under the age of 16. The ban still needs parliamentary approval. The Spanish government is also seeking to create a law that would make social media executives personally accountable for hate speech on their platforms.

Turkey

The Turkish parliament in April 
passed a bill
 to restrict social media access for children under 15. Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan must now accept the bill for it to pass into law.

UK

U.K. prime minister Keir Starmer 
announced
 on June 15 that his government will impose a ban on social media use for children under 16 years of age. The ban would apply to a range of social media platforms, including Snapchat, TikTok, YouTube, Instagram, Facebook, and X.

Messaging services like WhatsApp and Signal will not be included in the ban. There are also going to be limitations on AI tools, as AI “romantic companion” chatbots will have to ensure they are only usable by people over 18.

Experts have questioned whether a blanket ban would be effective. Starmer has acknowledged the challenges but said he believes it’s possible to enforce it. He said a ban could be in place by spring 2027.

This story was originally published in February 2026 and is updated regularly with new information.

Topics

Apps
, 
evergreens
, 
Government & Policy
, 
Social
, 
social media bans

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort
