Meta is bringing parental supervision tools to Threads, the company announced on Tuesday. With the new tools, parents and guardians will be able to view their teen’s time spent on Threads, set daily time limits, adjust sleep mode, and manage their privacy settings through Family Center, Meta’s hub for parental controls across its apps. 

The rollout follows growing pressure on Meta from regulators and lawmakers to better protect young users online. The company has spent the last several years expanding parental controls across its apps in response to concerns over excessive screen time, harmful content, and teen safety, and is now bringing similar controls to Threads. It’s also worth noting that Meta, alongside other social media giants, is currently facing 
numerous
 
lawsuits
 related to child safety.

Given these factors, it’s not surprising that Meta is finally introducing parental supervision tools to Threads, a platform with 
500 million monthly users
. The rollout comes three years after Threads’ launch in July 2023.

Image Credits:
Meta

Parents and guardians will now be able to view how much time their teen spent on the platform each day for the past week, including their average daily time spent for the week. They will also be able to set a daily time limit and block access during select days and hours. If a teen uses Threads across multiple devices, like their phone and laptop, the time limit will apply to the total time spent using Threads.

Additionally, parents can limit or block their teen’s access to Threads at night, with notifications muted and auto-replies already on by default for all teens from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. Parents also have the option to control who can tag their teen in posts on the platform.

Meta notes that teens on Threads already have built-in protections like private accounts and limits on the content they see. However, parents can now decide if teens under 16 can change any of these automatic settings to be less strict, the company says. 

The parental supervision controls are rolling out next week in the U.S. Meta is planning to bring parental supervision on Threads globally by the end of the year, a spokesperson told TechCrunch.

Topics

Apps
, 
Meta
, 
Social
, 
Threads

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Judge pauses $110B Paramount-Warner Bros. merger

Aisha Malik

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Microsoft patches bug in video game Age of Empires II

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan
