Meta’s Threads is adding new capabilities to its recently launched 
Live Chats feature
 while expanding access to more users, the company announced on Tuesday. The updates include support for translations, new tools for chat hosts, and more.

With support for translations, conversations in chats become more accessible to users around the world. Threads is also expanding the ability to start Live Chats to all “Community Champions,” which the company describes as users who are highly followed within their communities, regularly post in those communities, and keep conversations active.

Hosts can now also invite up to three co-hosts into their Live Chat to make it easier to manage conversations. Threads says this new capability is the equivalent of having a guest on your show or another voice to moderate a conversation. Additionally, hosts can now delete messages for everyone, and the platform is testing ways to make host messages appear more visually prominent in chats.

When Threads first launched, it struggled to compete with X as a destination for real-time conversations as it lacked key features like robust search, hashtags, and a chronological feed. Since then, Threads has added these capabilities and is now further differentiating itself with Live Chats, a feature designed for real-time engagement that even X doesn’t have.

The idea behind Live Chats is to help make Threads feel more timely and relevant. Since the feature’s launch, Threads says it has seen hundreds of chats hosted almost daily with thousands of users joining. The features added today are in response to what creators have been requesting, Threads says.

With Live Chats, users can send messages, photos, videos, links, and emoji reactions. Up to 150 participants can actively send messages in a chat. Once this limit is reached, additional users can still view the conversation, react to messages, and participate in polls in “spectator” mode.

Threads also teased today that desktop support is coming soon and that pinned messages are in the works, both of which have been highly requested by creators.

Earlier this month, 
Threads reached 500 million monthly active users
, nearly three years after launching as a competitor to X. Threads has introduced numerous new features over the past year, such as 
DMs
, 
ghost posts
, and 
desktop messaging
, helping drive the platform’s growth.

Topics

Apps
, 
Meta
, 
Social
, 
social media
, 
Threads

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

If you want to cut your screen time, just get a Brick

Amanda Silberling
