Nearly three years after launching as a competitor to Twitter (now X), Threads has reaches 500 million monthly active users, the company announced Tuesday. The Meta-owned social platform also announced a series of new features launching today, including a “Your Algo” tool that lets users control what they see in their feed.

The new Your Algo feature builds on the platform’s “
Dear Algo
” tool launched in February, which lets users tell Threads what they want to see more or less of in their feed by posting a public post such as, “Dear Algo, show me more posts about podcasts.” With the new Your Algo feature, users can privately control what they see in their feed without having to share a public post. 

You can tell Threads you want to see more or less of certain topics and choose how long the request lasts: one, three, or seven days. Only you can see the requests. 

Your Algo is rolling out today in the U.S., Canada, UK, Australia, and New Zealand.

Image Credits:
Threads

By allowing users to temporarily influence what appears on their feeds, Threads gains an edge over X and other competitors by offering a feature that isn’t available on rival platforms.

Threads is also bringing “Communities” out of beta and adding new requested features for it. 
Launched last year
 as a way to take on X, the feature give users dedicated spaces within the app where they can delve deeper into conversations on topics that matter to them like basketball, television, K-pop, books, and more. Now, users will be able to find communities through a new “Communities Hub.” Additionally, communities now have their own distinct icons to make it easier to spot and recognize them.

“The Discovery Hub is a way for us to try to get communities in front of more people,” Instagram head Connor Hayes told TechCrunch. “We noticed that when folks use the app with a clear purpose and they find their people in the app quickly, it’s just a better experience for them. One of the challenges that they’ve had since we launched that feature over the last year was that it’s hard to organically find the communities that matter to you sometimes. So, the Discovery Hub is a big one.”

Image Credits:
Threads

Threads also announced that it’s expanding Live Chats to more communities alongside the ability to co-host chats and quote moments to your feed. Launched in April, 
Live Chats
 allow for real-time conversations during cultural events like the Fifa World Cup. By July, all communities will be able to start Live Chats. 

“One of the positive pieces of feedback that we get from a lot of people about Threads is that they appreciate the quietness of the app in a world where a lot of social is video-centric and loud. And so these Live Chats have been a nice second screen companion experience for people that are watching stuff, but want to follow along with commentary while they do so,” Hayes said.

The expansion of Live Chats will help Threads close the gap with X when it comes to real-time conversations. Unlike X, which has long served as a global “town square” of sorts for breaking news and live events, Threads lagged behind X in terms of relevance and timeliness when it first launched because it lacked many of the features that X had, such as robust search, hashtags, and a chronological feed. However, it has added these features over time, and is now looking to better compete with X through the addition of a feature that even the Elon Musk-owned app doesn’t have.

In terms of the new MAU milestone, it shows that Threads was able to add 100 million monthly users in the past 10 months, as the company said in August 2025 that it had 
400 million monthly active users
.

Threads’ growth comes as the platform has shipped numerous new features over the past year, such as 
DMs
, 
ghost posts
, 
desktop messaging
, and more. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Social
, 
Threads

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos
