In Brief

Posted:

9:45 AM PDT · July 27, 2026

Image Credits:
Matthias Balk/picture alliance 
(opens in a new window)
 / Getty Images

Aisha Malik

Threads users can now chat with Meta AI in their DMs

Meta on Monday said it is rolling out its Meta AI chatbot within Threads’ DMs, giving users a way to chat with the AI assistant. 

Although Threads users in select markets could already 
interact with Meta AI
 in public posts, like people can with Grok on X, this new integration lets users talk with the AI assistant privately.

By giving users an easier way to talk to an AI chatbot, Meta is looking to keep users within its ecosystem, with an eye toward discouraging them from using third-party assistants like OpenAI’s ChatGPT or Google Gemini.

Meta AI is already available within DMs on Meta’s other platforms, including Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp.

Image Credits:
Meta

The new integration lets users share Threads posts, images, links, and videos directly with Meta AI. You can ask follow-up questions and dive deeper into topics, too. 

The update will be rolled out globally starting Monday, the company says.

Meta noted it’s continuing to test Meta AI in Threads’ public feeds in a handful of global markets and is considering feedback before expanding availability more broadly. Users who want to see fewer Meta AI replies in their feed can mute @meta.ai, use the “Not interested” option on any Meta AI post, or hide Meta AI replies that appear on their post.

By further integrating Meta AI into Threads, Meta is positioning its X rival as a place where you can get information and recommendations without having to leave the app.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
In Brief
, 
meta ai
, 
Threads

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Fundraising

Fish Audio raises $52M seed to build AI voice models for creators and enterprises

Ivan Mehta

	1 hour ago

AI

Anthropic’s Dario Amodei responds: doesn’t oppose open-weight models, but fears Chinese AI

Julie Bort

	15 hours ago

Robotics

Are brain waves the next unlock for physical AI?

Tim Fernholz

	2 days ago

Latest in Apps

In Brief

Elon Musk’s X Money app is rolling out in the U.S.

Amanda Silberling

	25 minutes ago

In Brief

WhatsApp now lets you make calls using its web app

Ivan Mehta

	29 minutes ago

Apps

Granola launches an Apple Watch app

Ivan Mehta

	2 hours ago
