Music streaming service 
TIDAL
 is the latest to take aim at AI-generated music with the introduction of 
a new policy
 that will prevent fully AI-generated music from making money on its platform. In addition, TIDAL will use automated tools to remove AI-generated music that attempts to impersonate an artist or a group, the company said.

“We are committed to protecting and rewarding organic creativity to avoid compromising an artist’s ability to connect with and build their fandom from TIDAL subscribers. Many have told us they do not want to be exposed to — or prompted to listen to — wholly AI-generated music,” wrote 
Tony 
Gervino
, TIDAL EVP and editor-in-chief, in an 
announcement
.

He clarified that TIDAL’s new policy was not meant to “bash technological advancement,” but rather focuses on protecting and rewarding “organic creativity” from artists. 

With the changes, fully AI-generated music on TIDAL will be identified and tagged as such, allowing listeners to see an “AI” badge next to any tracks deemed to be 100% AI. These tunes will not be able to be monetized or collect royalties, and will not be eligible for direct-to-fan sales, the company noted.

TIDAL’s policy joins others in the streaming music space, where services like Spotify, Apple Music, Deezer, and 
Qobuz
 have developed their own policies to address the growing number of AI-generated tracks filling their services. Spotify last year 
revamped its policies to label AI music
 and better filter spam, while still acknowledging that AI tools would be used in the music-creation process to varying degrees. Apple Music also 
took the tagging approach
.

Deezer, which said that 
44% of all new music
 uploaded to its platform daily is AI-generated, has taken a tougher position. It actively removes AI tracks from recommendations and excludes them from editorial playlists. It also 
offers its AI-detection technology to rivals
 and 
provides a consumer-facing tool
 that lets you see if AI music has slipped into your playlists on competing services.

TIDAL’s policy could be an interesting test to see if demonetization could be the thing to slow the deluge of AI music, which many listeners aren’t interested in. 

“Regardless of what you are reading elsewhere, AI’s takeover of the music industry (and your recommendations) isn’t inevitable if we take even greater steps now to monitor and control it,” noted Gervino. 

The company said the new policy is a “living document,” meaning it’s open to changes as the space evolves. It goes into effect on July 15, 2026. 

Topics

AI
, 
ai music
, 
Apps
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Music
, 
streaming music
, 
tidal

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis
