We heard the feedback, and we’ve extended the window for the lowest prices for 
TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
 a bit further, with the current prices now ending at 11:59 pm PT Tuesday, August 25. Once that window closes, your chance to 
save up to $300 on your pass
, or get an even larger discount on group pricing, will come to an end. 

For everyone who was looking for an extension, 
your chance is now
! Start getting ready to join the rest of the startup community gathering in San Francisco from October 13-15 at Moscone West to learn from speakers from OpenAI, Anthropic, Replit, Amazon, Databricks and more.  

If Disrupt has been on your radar, 
now is the time to lock in your pass
 before tomorrow’s deadline.

TechCrunch Disrupt: Where the startup ecosystem moves forward

Each year, TechCrunch Disrupt brings together more than 10,000 founders, investors, and startup community members, driving innovation forward. And for our event this year, you’ll find a keen focus on building and developing in the AI era across all of our stages of programming. If you want to be on the cutting edge running into 2027, this is the event for you.

And you don’t have to be a founder to get value out of Disrupt. Whether you’re raising capital, scouting investments, hiring talent, launching a startup, or building strategic partnerships, Disrupt puts you in the middle of the conversations shaping what’s next and can help you make the connections that propel your next year of growth. 

Here’s just a glimpse of what you gain by attending:

Actionable insights
 from founders, operators, and VCs actively building and investing in today’s market. Our agenda features a wide range of topics, curated to focus on insights that lead to action.

Direct access to investors
 looking for their next portfolio company and founders seeking the right partners. Plus, you can get AI-powered networking opportunities through our app or take deeper dives through our many Side Events.

Early visibility
 into emerging technologies and startups before they break into the mainstream through our Exhibit Hall.

High-value connections
 that lead to funding, partnerships, customers, and career opportunities. Disrupt is about growth, both for startups and yourself!

What’s new at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Keeping that focus on building companies in the AI era in mind, 
we have a great slate of new stages and programming
 to inspire and educate:

Real World AI Stage
: 
AI is moving beyond the screen and into the physical world. Explore how robotics, autonomous systems, manufacturing, healthcare, and defense are turning AI breakthroughs into real-world products and businesses.

Smart Money Stage
: 
Follow the money. From fintech to stablecoins to payments, embedded finance, and AI-driven financial services, this stage explores how technology is reshaping the movement of capital.

Smart Systems Stage
:
 Every AI breakthrough depends on the infrastructure behind it. Discover the innovations in chips, compute, energy, networking, and data centers that will determine the next generation of technology companies.

Our 
Disrupt
, 
AI
, and 
Builders
 Stages are also returning this year, and we have excellent speakers joining us across them all: 

Rivian CEO and founder RJ Scaringe

Amazon SVP of Devices, Alexa and Leo, Panos Panay

Bluesky CEO Toni Schneider and COO Rose Wang

You can 
explore the rest of our extensive speaker lineup right here
! 

Don’t miss out on the best TechCrunch Disrupt’s prices!

This is your last chance to save before rates increase, so 
lock in your pass before Tuesday, August 25 at 11:59 p.m. PT to get the best prices
, whether you’re a student looking to get their introduction to the community or an established investor in search of an untapped opportunity. 

Topics

Startups
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tonight marks your last chance to save up to $300 on a TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 pass

TechCrunch Events

Claude Cowork finally remembers what you told the app in chat

Sarah Perez

Waymo robotaxis are headed to Munich

Kirsten Korosec

Life360 expands pet tracking with new $8 scannable tags and zoomie alerts

Sarah Perez

That fake Grand Theft Auto VI demo is actually just malware

Amanda Silberling

Pacific Fusion’s next fusion machine could clear a key hurdle to commercial power

Tim De Chant

Gamma acquires Accel-backed design startup Lica

Ivan Mehta
