Emad Dlala, a top executive at EV-maker Lucid Motors, has left the company just months after being 
promoted to a leading role
, TechCrunch has learned.

Dlala’s exit is the first major executive departure since Lucid Motors selected 
Silvio Napoli as its new CEO in April
. Napoli joined Lucid after spending a career in various leadership positions at escalator and elevator company Schindler Group. He formally started in the CEO role 
just last week
.

In a statment to TechCrunch, Lucid Motors confirmed Dlala’s departure and said the company is “transforming its organization to accelerate innovation and strengthen execution under CEO Silvio Napoli.” 

As part of that transformation, Lucid Motors said that Vivek Attaluri, the company’s vice president of vehicle engineering, and Marc Solsona Palomar, its vice president of software, will now report directly to Napoli. 

“Emad Dlala has elected to leave the company to pursue other opportunities. We thank Emad for his many contributions over the years and wish him continued success in his future endeavors. Lucid remains focused on streamlining our organization and processes to fully leverage the strength of our team and will communicate further actions soon,” the company said in a statement. 

Dlala declined to comment.

Dlala had been with Lucid Motors for more than a decade, making him one of the company’s longest-serving employees and executives. Over the last five years, he was both Lucid Motors’ vice president and senior vice president of the company’s powertrain team. 

In November, he was 
elevated
 to a role overseeing all of “Engineering and Digital” at the same time that Lucid Motors parted ways with its long-time chief engineer Eric Bach. Bach has 
since sued
 Lucid Motors for wrongful termination — though that lawsuit was recently stayed pending arbitration, according to federal court records. 

The company have been in flux in the months since. Lucid Motors laid off 12% of its workforce in February, 
as TechCrunch first reported
. It then completed its search for a new CEO after spending a year trying to replace Peter Rawlinson, who 
suddenly departed in early 2025
.

The departure of Dlala comes just a few months ahead of the launch of Lucid Motors’ first mass-market vehicle built on its mid-sized platform, called Cosmos. This EV is supposed to start below $50,000 and finally give the Saudi-owned company a chance at delivering a more affordable, widely-adopted car. 

This next-generation EV is also now a cornerstone of Lucid’s 
deal to provide robotaxis to Uber
. Lucid Motors has agreed to develop robotaxis with autonomous vehicle company Nuro, starting with its Gravity SUV. The self-driving Gravity is supposed to hit the road in San Francisco by the end of this year. 

Topics

electric vehicles
, 
EVs
, 
Exclusive
, 
Transportation

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
