Hopper
, the travel app known for its AI-driven flight and hotel price predictions, has agreed to a 
$35 million settlement 
following a lawsuit brought by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC). The lawsuit accused the company of misleading users by imposing hidden fees and misrepresenting the total costs of Hopper’s services. 

The case is another example of regulators targeting the use of “
dark patterns,
” or interface designs that manipulate users into making choices they might not otherwise have made, including those that hide charges, pre-select optional add-ons, or make it difficult to understand the true cost of a service. It follows similar FTC settlements aimed at other companies, like 
Match
, 
StubHub
, neobank 
Dave
, 
Fortnite
, and 
others
.

The FTC alleged that Hopper deceived consumers regarding the benefits of its “VIP Support” and “Price Freeze” services. Many users were led to believe that these features would enhance their booking experience, only to find themselves facing additional costs and limited access to customer support. 

The FTC also found that users were charged for “Tip” and VIP Support fees that were presented as optional, yet were often pre-selected and hidden within the app’s interface. As a result, users found themselves facing charges that they believed they had not consented to, as these fees were typically only visible when users scrolled down on the app screen.

The allegations extend to the “Price Freeze” or “Hold the Room” offering, which Hopper claimed would allow consumers to hold their travel booking price for a designated period. However, the FTC notes that the app failed to clearly communicate restrictions associated with this service. For instance, the Price Freeze only secures the rate up to a specific limit and only if the booking remains available. 

The settlement amount is set to be used for “consumer redress,” with Hopper now prohibited from misrepresenting any pricing structures, according to today’s release. It’s required that Hopper clearly disclose all fees, ensuring that users are fully aware of the total cost of any transactions before completing their bookings.

“We decided to settle because the claims at issue are outdated and have no bearing on our business,” a company spokesperson said in a provided statement to TechCrunch. “Pursuing years of litigation over outdated, ticky-tacky issues would distract us from our current customers and partners… The settlement amount does not reflect the merit of the claims. It reflects our decision to move forward.”

The spokesperson added that, after reviewing millions of company files dating back to 2021, the FTC’s allegations focused on “primarily outdated display practices implemented during the pandemic, limited to the Hopper app, and discontinued by Hopper in mid-2023, prior to the start of the FTC’s inquiry.”

Before Hopper, the FTC’s most recent crackdown on “junk fees” was its case with 
StubHub
, which agreed to pay $10 million to customers and change its ticket price displays. 
Booking Holdings
 settled for $9.5 million after a lawsuit from Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton, which claimed that it misled customers by showing low room rates while hiding important fees until the checkout process.

Hopper 
launched
 its travel app back in 2014 and surpassed 
120 million lifetime downloads
 worldwide in 2024.

This story was updated with a statement from Hopper.

Topics

Apps
, 
Federal Trade Commission
, 
Hopper
, 
Settlements
, 
travel app

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

Flipper Device’s new Busy Bar is a customizable display for productivity

Ivan Mehta

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

FTC gives Musk the OK to acquire SpaceX alumni startup Mesh

Marina Temkin

Corgi, the buzzy Y Combinator-backed insurance tech startup, says it didn’t steal an open source product

Julie Bort
