In Brief

Posted:

1:29 PM PDT · July 5, 2026

Image Credits:
Mandel NGAN/AFP / Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Trump memecoin investors lost $3.8 billion, analysis finds

Nearly 1 million people have lost a total of $3.8 billion after buying President Donald Trump’s $TRUMP memecoin, according to cryptocurrency analytics firm Nansen.

The New York Times reports
 that Nansen’s analysis is based on transactions that are publicly visible on the blockchain, showing that 988,905 accounts had lost money on the memecoin as of the end of June. That represents around two out of three $TRUMP buyers.

On Sunday, 
$TRUMP was trading at $1.69
, down nearly 98% from its high of $75.35.

Trump announced the memecoin three days before his inauguration in 2025. He’d previously co-founded a crypto startup, World Liberty Financial, with his sons. The $WLFI coin has also declined significantly in value.

In a recent financial disclosure, the president revealed that 
he made $636 million from the  $TRUMP memecoin
, accounting for nearly half of the $1.4 billion that the president made from the crypto industry last year.

Under the Trump administration, the Securities and Exchange Commission has said 
it will not regulate memecoins as securities
 and has 
dropped a number of lawsuits against crypto companies
. A White House spokesperson told the NYT, “President Trump proudly made the United States the crypto capital of the world.”

Topics

$trump
, 
Crypto
, 
Donald Trump
, 
Government & Policy
, 
memecoins

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Latest in Crypto

In Brief

Trump memecoin investors lost $3.8 billion, analysis finds

Anthony Ha

	2 hours ago

AI

Venice AI becomes a unicorn with $65M Series A as its privacy-first AI platform takes off

Ram Iyer

	4 days ago

TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

Builders Stage agenda revealed: Practical strategies for scaling startups at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026

TechCrunch Events

	4 days ago
