Permitting delays pushed by the Trump administration threaten to derail 92 gigawatts of clean power, even as electricity demand from AI data centers skyrockets.

Already, permitting changes and federal funding withdrawals have led to the cancellation of 7 gigawatts of generating capacity on federal land in 2025, according to a new 
study
 from consulting firm Wood Mackenzie. The additional scrutiny could cancel another 12 gigawatts on federal land and 80 gigawatts on private property.

The federal challenges affect more than $121 billion in investment in the energy space, the report noted. 

Demand for electricity has been climbing in recent years after two decades of zero growth, driven in part by the expansion of data centers to feed the AI boom. Data centers are expected to grow in number and scale in the coming decade, according to market forecasters at BloombergNEF, which in turn pushes up their electricity use 
nearly threefold by 2035
.

Meanwhile, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is requiring grid operators to offer a 
fast lane for grid connections
, though it has done little to address the bottleneck in new generating capacity, which is close to crisis proportions in some regions. In the largest grid in the U.S., which also hosts the most data centers, grid operators spent the last four years 
preventing new generating sources from connecting
, effectively freezing supply at a time of rising demand. No wonder 
the general public is unhappy
, and tech companies are 
forging their own paths
 by building their own power plants on-site.

Where the U.S. has been able to add new power plants, renewables have been the largest contributor. Solar, batteries, and wind represented 
nearly 90%
 of the 
record 53 GW
 of new generating capacity added in 2025.

The increased permitting friction stems from an August 2025 
order
 from Doug Burgum, U.S. Secretary of the Interior, which sought to “rein in environmentally damaging wind and solar projects.” 

While wind and solar have been the main targets, energy storage projects have been canceled, too, the Wood Mackenzie report found. Most of the permitting woes are concentrated in Oregon, Alabama, Maine, Minnesota, and Montana.

Solar projects sited on or near private wetlands appear to be most at risk, while wind farms have been scrutinized under airspace regulations. It’s unclear how solar projects will be affected in the coming years given the Trump administration’s recent decision to 
lift protections for 80% of U.S. wetlands
. 

Burgum’s order is a marked shift from his previous tenure as governor of North Dakota, during which he oversaw an expansion of wind power within the state and set a target for it to reach net zero carbon emissions by 2030. As recently as 2024, he was 
boasting about
 North Dakota’s rich wind resources, which produced a third of the state’s electricity in 2022.

Topics

Climate
, 
data centers
, 
electricity
, 
renewable energy
, 
Trump Administration

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis
