The Trump administration did not have the authority to terminate and claw back funding that had already been disbursed to climate nonprofits, an appeals court ruled on Tuesday.

Eight nonprofit groups have been seeking to regain access to billions of dollars that had been deposited in their bank accounts after EPA Administrator Lee Zeldin, along with the FBI and the Treasury Department, 
ordered Citibank to freeze their accounts
 in February 2025.

The decision gives the groups access to their funding while the EPA decides whether to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court. However, many of the organizations have had to enact significant cuts while their accounts were frozen.

The 
judgment
 upholds an injunction preventing the EPA from taking back money that had already been disbursed to the nonprofits’ bank accounts. Six of 10 judges on the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit supported lifting the injunction.

The judges said that the EPA was attempting to claw back the funding “solely on a policy disagreement.” The move unlawfully withheld funding that had been appropriated by the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) to create the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund, a $20 billion program to spur clean energy development. 

Much of the funding would have created 
debt facilities
 that would help businesses and communities wean themselves off fossil fuels. Such loans have delinquency rates 
similar
 to those of commercial lenders.

The Trump EPA had argued that it had the authority to claw back funding because the One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA) repealed the part of the IRA that created the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund.

But the assenting judges said that because funds were already obligated and disbursed into the nonprofits’ accounts, the OBBBA didn’t have grounds to claw back the money. In other words, the government can’t make a new law to take back money it had already sent out.

While nonprofits celebrated the decision, it might be too little, too late for some of them.

Climate United’s CEO left in March and hasn’t been replaced, while Power Forward Communities only has two employees left, The New York Times 
reported
. Others have had to lay off workers.

The EPA has seven days to file an appeal to the Supreme Court.

Topics

Climate
, 
Environmental Protection Agency
, 
Government & Policy
, 
inflation reduction act
, 
one big beautiful bill

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim De Chant	

Senior Reporter, Climate

Tim De Chant is a senior climate reporter at TechCrunch. He has written for a wide range of publications, including Wired magazine, the Chicago Tribune, Ars Technica, The Wire China, and NOVA Next, where he was founding editor. 

De Chant is also a lecturer in MIT’s Graduate Program in Science Writing, and he was awarded a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT in 2018, during which time he studied climate technologies and explored new business models for journalism. He received his PhD in environmental science, policy, and management from the University of California, Berkeley, and his BA degree in environmental studies, English, and biology from St. Olaf College.

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing 
tim.dechant@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
