Bingers, a new TV show and movie-tracking app, has arrived to fill the hole that 
TV Time’s closure
 left. The new app is developed by one of TV Time’s original founders, Antonio Pinto, who 
said last month
 he would attempt to rebuild the best features of TV Time after its owner, Whip Media, decided to shut down the product to focus on AI efforts instead.

Whip Media’s exit from the space surprised and upset TV Time’s loyal user base. The app had been installed more than 26.4 million times when it was shut down, decent traction for an app of this nature.

Angered by the news of the closure, 
more than 28,000 users signed a petition
 begging Whip Media to save TV Time by offering support for crowdfunding donations or subscriptions. However, the app was shut down as planned.

Image Credits:
Bingers

Unlike other trackers that let you simply mark whether you’ve watched a show or movie, users resonated with TV Time’s forum that let them socialize around the latest episode of their favorite content. That social element allowed users to make connections with other fans, leave posts and comments detailing their theories, make memes, and more.

“I believe TV Time was a diamond in the rough that kind of lost its way,” Pinto told TechCrunch. “I was stunned to see that the community stayed so active and so big even after the app was neglected for years and received no updates. To me, that was the sign that TV Time had something unique that no other social platform has.”

With Bingers, Pinto aims to bring back that social element. It also offers a way to import data from TV Time’s archives. (TV Time provided a GDPR-compliant export tool before its removal from the app stores on July 15, 2026, which Bingers has offered to re-upload.)

Image Credits:
Bingers

Bingers has three main components: a tool that lets you track the shows and movies you watch or want to watch; a way to discover new things to watch; and a social network of sorts. 

Like TV Time, fans can create profiles and comment on shows and movies, including by adding media like photos and GIFs. They can also rate episodes, express their opinions with emojis, and vote on favorite characters — fun, interactive features that few TV trackers offer.

Meanwhile, to address the issues around the financial costs that contributed to TV Time’s closure, Bingers has been designed to load users’ libraries on their phones, which allows the app to offload heavy processing, like your viewing calendar and watchlist, to users’ devices instead of the company’s servers, Pinto says.

Bingers will initially monetize by letting users contribute directly to aid with server costs, as they had petitioned TV Time to do. Longer term, Pinto has ideas around a business model that would bring people together in real life but isn’t sharing further details just yet.

The new app is available for both 
iOS
 and 
Android
.

Topics

Apps
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
TV Time

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec
