Uber revealed on Wednesday a prototype car that it plans to use to scoop up real-world driving data for its growing roster of autonomous vehicle partners, including Avride, Waymo, and WeRide.

The vehicle is not some radical design. Rather, it’s a Hyundai Ioniq 5 fitted with an incredible number of sensors on the top and sides, as the company first told TechCrunch 
back in January
. The sensor-laden vehicle may not look particularly groundbreaking, but it does mark a few milestones for the company. 

This is the first vehicle Uber has assembled itself (with help from a partner) since the company 
sold its autonomous vehicle division to Aurora
 in 2020. It also represents progress on Uber’s new AV Labs division, which launched earlier this year to use sensor-equipped Uber cars to collect and then share data with its 30-and-counting autonomous vehicle technology partners. 

Uber said Wednesday that it plans to roll out 500 of these kitted-out Hyundai EVs globally this year. That fleet will be able to collect “2 million miles per month of high-fidelity data” for robotaxis. Uber expects 50 of these vehicles to be on the road by the summer.

The Ioniqs are fitted with 14 cameras, eight solid-state lidar sensors, and nine radars through a partnership with Roush Performance, which will handle the vehicle retrofits. All of that data will be routed through Nvidia’s Dual Drive Thor autonomous vehicle computer. Uber appears open to changing that sensor suite, noting that it will continue to update it as its partners’ needs evolve. 

This isn’t just a transfer of raw data, however. Uber said its aim is to develop the world’s most geographically diverse set of training data specifically geared towards autonomous driving. If successful, this dataset will give its AV partners a 360-degree, time synchronized stitched view that can be used to train self-driving software.

The company already has a head start. Uber told TechCrunch it has collected data from thousands of vehicles equipped with outward-facing cameras in dozens of cities that are operated by its fleet partners. Uber has also captured data from hundreds of Lucid Air vehicles used by its fleet partners in the U.S. and Europe over the past two years. 

Uber’s AV Labs division is analyzing these two tranches of data and is preparing to collect even more with its modified Ioniq 5 vehicles, which will be used by its fleet partners.  

The AV Labs division is one component of Uber’s broader ambitions for autonomous vehicles. The company launched in February a division called 
Uber Autonomous Solutions
 that is designed to handle the day-to-day operations at a robotaxi, self-driving truck, or sidewalk delivery robot business. 

Topics

autonomous vehicles
, 
AV Labs
, 
avs
, 
Exclusive
, 
self driving cars
, 
Transportation
, 
Uber

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Hackers hijacked Instagram accounts by tricking Meta AI support chatbot into granting access

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic files to go public

Kirsten Korosec

Strava declares war on scrapers ahead of IPO

Ivan Mehta

‘What a joke’: GitHub Copilot’s new token-based billing spurs consternation among devs

Lucas Ropek

I put Google’s 24/7 AI assistant Gemini Spark to work, and it’s actually pretty useful

Sarah Perez

Microsoft under fire for threatening security researcher with criminal investigation

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
