In Brief

Posted:

2:35 PM PDT · July 5, 2026

Image Credits:
Jakub Porzycki/NurPhoto / Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Uber’s European expansion plans may have hit a speed bump

Back in February, 
Uber announced ambitious plans
 to launch in seven new European markets in 2026 — but now 
the Financial Times reports
 that five of those launches are on hold. Country launches that have been paused include Austria, Norway, and Greece.

Uber seemed to confirm the decision to the FT, saying that recent launches in Finland and Denmark had been a “huge success,” so now it wants to “focus on continuing the momentum” in existing markets.

Another likely factor in the decision: Uber’s continuing efforts to acquire Delivery Hero, a European company that 
rejected Uber’s 10 billion euro takeover bid
 in May.

It seems Uber is still hoping to make the deal a reality. An industry source said that putting a pause on further expansion could help alleviate antitrust concerns around a potential acquisition, especially since Delivery Hero operates delivery services in several of the target countries.

Topics

Apps
, 
Commerce
, 
Delivery Hero
, 
Startups
, 
Uber

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

	4 hours ago

Media & Entertainment

New Google commercial imagines a Declaration of Independence written with help from AI

Anthony Ha

	1 day ago

AI

Midjourney wants Hollywood studios to reveal the details of their AI usage

Anthony Ha

	1 day ago

Latest in Apps

In Brief

Uber’s European expansion plans may have hit a speed bump

Anthony Ha

	32 minutes ago

Apps

The browser wars aren’t about search anymore — here are the best alternatives to Chrome and Safari

Lauren Forristal

	2 days ago

Gaming

Meta quietly launches vibe-coded gaming app Pocket

Sarah Perez

	3 days ago
