Uber plans to launch a premium robotaxi service in Houston by mid-2027, making it the second U.S. market under its partnership with EV maker Lucid and autonomous vehicle startup Nuro.

The announcement follows a flurry of activity in the San Francisco Bay Area, as the trio of companies prepare to offer a robotaxi service there later this year. Uber says it will eventually take the robotaxi program to “dozens of cities” in the coming years.

For now, the focus is on San Francisco and then Houston — both markets where Uber will go head-to-head with rival Waymo, the Alphabet-owned autonomous vehicle company that currently operates commercial robotaxi services in both cities.

Nuro has spent months testing Lucid Gravity SUVs equipped with its self-driving system in San Francisco and has made progress on that front, including giving 
Uber employees
 the ability to hail the Lucid robotaxis. But these vehicles still aren’t driverless, despite Nuro receiving a permit last month from the California Department of Motor Vehicles that would allow it to remove the safety driver from the vehicle.

Uber and Nuro’s combined engineering fleet of 100 autonomous vehicles is testing on public roads with safety operators behind the wheel in Houston as well. Nuro is also using closed courses and simulation to validate the self-driving system before opening the robotaxis to the public. The test fleet is expected to expand in the coming weeks as Lucid begins manufacturing the first production versions of the robotaxis at its Arizona factory.

The Lucid Gravity robotaxi, 
unveiled in January
, is outfitted with high-resolution cameras, solid-state lidar sensors, and radars that help the self-driving system perceive the real-world environment and operate in it. Uber, which will own and operate the fleet, has focused its efforts on the in-cabin experience, including how riders will interact with the vehicle.

Uber is also expanding its physical footprint in Houston in preparation for the robotaxi launch there. The company now has a 50,000-square-foot depot and dedicated charging pitstop that will act as its operations hub in the city.

The robotaxi deal has provided a boost to Nuro, a buzzy autonomous vehicle startup that made a 
major pivot
 in 2024 away from building its own delivery robots to licensing its self-driving tech to automakers and other partners. It has also helped Lucid, which has struggled to sell its EVs at scale — a challenge familiar to most EV startups competing in a market still dominated by Tesla.

Uber has made direct investments in both Nuro — 
about $500 million
 as first reported by TechCrunch in May — and in Lucid. The ride-hailing giant has committed to 
invest $500 million
 in Lucid, committing to invest $500 million in the EV maker and buy a minimum of 35,000 robotaxi-ready Lucid vehicles.

Topics

lucid
, 
nuro
, 
Transportation
, 
Uber

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

SpaceX to acquire Cursor for $60B in stock, days after blockbuster IPO

Sean O'Kane

The US government’s Anthropic models ban was never about an AI jailbreak

Zack Whittaker

The AI layoff wave is becoming a powder keg

Connie Loizos

Amazon CEO reportedly raised Anthropic model concerns before government crackdown

Anthony Ha

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin
