U.K police said on Thursday that the jailing of two teenage hackers has “severely” hampered the activities of the infamous cybercrime group known as 
Scattered Spider
.

Owen Flowers, 18, and Thalha Jubair, 20, pleaded guilty earlier this year to hacking Transport of London (TfL), the government body overseeing the U.K. capital’s public transit system in 2024. The two were sentenced to five years and six months in prison on Thursday. 

The jailing of Flowers and Jubair is a reminder that, sometimes, the most dangerous and effective hackers don’t work for sophisticated government agencies with millions of dollars of budget. More often, 
they are rather very young and smart hackers
 motivated by money and infamy among their peers. 

Groups such as Scattered Spider, as well as 
ShinyHunters
, another cybercriminal collective, often target and exploit employees and individuals rather than computer systems, a strategy that’s both effective and hard to counter.

While hacking groups’ members tend to come and go, the groups themselves can rebrand. But British authorities are convinced the jailing of Flowers and Jubair represents a significant blow to Scattered Spider, an amorphous group that’s been linked to dozens of high-profile attacks, such as those against 
casino giant MGM
, 
airline WestJet
, and 
cybersecurity firm Okta
. These attacks in turn gave the hackers access to several of these companies customers. 

“Scattered Spider has been the most significant cybercrime threat to the U.K. in recent years. Through this investigation, we have severely disrupted that threat and brought key offenders to justice,” said Paul Foster, the head of the U.K. National Crime Agency’s National Cyber Crime Unit. 

Two young men have been sentenced for launching a cyber attack on Transport for London (TfL) which cost tens of millions of pounds in losses and inconvenienced thousands of customers.
Thalha Jubair and Owen Flowers were identified by the NCA and 
@CityPolice
 following the attack… 
pic.twitter.com/ZJdmdZhXRJ
— National Crime Agency (NCA) (@NCA_UK) 
July 16, 2026

The two hackers were behind 
the cyberattack against TfL
 in summer 2024, which took the system’s infrastructure offline, including the ticketing system, and the online real-time train arrival information system. The disruptions 
lasted for weeks
. 

Flowers and Jubair 
were arrested
 a year later. At the time, the FBI accused Jubair of being involved in attacks on more than 120 companies using 
social engineering
 tactics. 

Authorities said the attack against TfL resulted in losses of around £29 million (around $47 million). The two hackers had such deep access to TfL systems that they “could have shut out and shut down TfL completely,” and held “the keys to the kingdom” to the company’s systems, 
according to the Guardian
.

Topics

cyberattack
, 
cybercrime
, 
cybersecurity
, 
London Underground
, 
Scattered Spider
, 
Security
, 
transport for london

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez
