U.K. Prime Minister Keir Starmer is about to announce a ban on social media usage for children under the age of 16, according to multiple reports.

While the government had previously 
revealed that it was studying options around a ban
, both 
the Guardian
 and the 
Financial Times
 said that Starmer is now ready to unveil the policy in a speech on Monday.

Government sources told the Guardian that the U.K. ban will cover a similar range of social platforms 
as Australia
, where TikTok, YouTube, Instagram, Reddit, Facebook, X, Threads, Snapchat, Twitch, and Kick are all banned for users under 16.

Other products, such as gaming apps, would not be banned outright, but for their younger users, they’d need to remove features like the ability to chat with strangers. The policy would also prohibit users under 18 from accessing romantic and sexual chatbots and seek to prevent late-night scrolling.

The government can use its existing regulatory powers to enforce some aspects of a ban, but new legislation may also be required, the Guardian said.

The U.K. is one of 
a number of countries following Australia’s lead by considering bans on social media use
 by children. The U.K. already passed an 
age verification law
 that was similarly touted as protecting the safety of children online.

These bans come amidst growing discussion around 
the effect of social media usage on teens and children
 — for example, the mother of murdered teen Brianna Ghey has
 called for a teen social media ban in the U.K.
 and said her daughter’s eating order and self-harming behavior were “significantly exacerbated by the harmful content she was consuming online.”

At the same time, these bans have been criticized for potentially violating user privacy and isolating children, while offering 
unproven benefits to their mental health.

Age verification laws — which, unlike outright bans, have taken effect in multiple U.S. states — have also been criticized as threats to online privacy and anonymity. And 
the verification methods aren’t exactly foolproof
.

Topics

Government & Policy
, 
keir starmer
, 
Social
, 
UK

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Anthony Ha	

Anthony Ha is TechCrunch’s weekend editor. Previously, he worked as a tech reporter at Adweek, a senior editor at VentureBeat, a local government reporter at the Hollister Free Lance, and vice president of content at a VC firm. He lives in New York City.

You can contact or verify outreach from Anthony by emailing 
anthony.ha@techcrunch.com
.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort
