U.K. prime minister Keir Starmer 
announced
 on Monday that his government will impose a ban on social media use for children under 16 years of age. The ban would apply to a range of social media platforms, including Snapchat, TikTok, YouTube, Instagram, Facebook, and X.

Messaging services like WhatsApp and Signal will not be included in the ban. There are also going to be limitations on AI tools, as AI “romantic companion” chatbots will have to ensure they are only usable by people over 18.

The U.K. government has said its ban will go further than any other country’s. Starmer said a ban could be in place by next spring. 

The U.K. joins a 
growing number of countries
 looking to safeguard kids online. Australia became the first to impose such a ban late last year, and other countries, including Canada, France, and Denmark, have started developing their own bans.

The sweeping changes are designed to “put power back in parents’ hands and give kids the childhood they deserve,” the British government wrote in a 
press release
.

Experts have questioned whether a blanket ban would be effective. Starmer has acknowledged the challenges but said he believes it’s possible to enforce it.

“Every parent can see it with their own eyes, social media is making children unhappy,” Starmer said during a press conference. “It’s making it easier for bullies to harass and abuse them, and it could even be harming their mental health, exposing them to content that is dangerous because that’s what grabs the attention. It’s designed to be addictive, of course it is. Features like the infinite scroll, they’re designed to lock you in for hours.”

He went on to argue that social media is taking away from activities that help children develop into adults, such as going to bed on time, reading, playing outside, and more. 

The announcement comes as the British government had said earlier this year that it would consult parents, young people, and civil society for their views to determine whether a ban would be effective. More than 83% of parents who participated 
in the consultation
 said that social media’s risks outweigh its benefits. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Facebook
, 
Government & Policy
, 
Instagram
, 
Snapchat
, 
Social
, 
Social media ban
, 
TikTok
, 
X
, 
YouTube

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

The FBI built its own replica small town to simulate real-world cyberattacks

Zack Whittaker

Meta’s months-old AI unit is a soul-crushing gulag, say the engineers stuck inside it

Connie Loizos

Jeff Bezos’s Prometheus raises $12B to build an ‘artificial general engineer’ for the physical world

Marina Temkin

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort
