U.S. prosecutors have 
charged three Russian nationals and two web hosts
 with hacking, conspiracy, and money laundering over their alleged roles in hosting cyberattacks that caused tens of millions of dollars in damages to U.S. businesses.

The three Russians, Alexander Volosovik, Kirill Zatolokin, and Yulia Pankova, who reside in St. Petersburg, are accused of owning and running two web hosts, Media Land and ML.Cloud, which allegedly provided criminals and state-backed hackers with web hosting and infrastructure support for carrying out cyberattacks.

The Russians were first charged in 2024, but the indictment was unsealed this week. The U.S. Treasury previously 
sanctioned
 Medialand and ML.Cloud for allowing ransomware gangs, including 
LockBit
, 
BlackSuit
, and 
Play
, to use their infrastructure. Economic sanctions bar Americans and U.S. businesses from transacting with the Russians or their companies.

Prosecutors said that hackers used the web hosts to launch distributed denial-of-service attacks designed to knock websites and services offline, launch phishing attacks, and carry out cyberattacks on critical infrastructure in the United States.

Hackers used the companies to launch attacks on dozens of U.S. businesses across more than 20 states, netting some $62 million in proceeds from cybercrime.

According to the Justice Department, by offering their services as a “bulletproof” web host, the companies deliberately aimed to shield their customers from law enforcement demands and takedowns.

The web host suspects are unlikely to be captured, given that the hackers are located in Russia and extraditions to the U.S. are rare. Russia is known to shield its citizens from overseas extradition requests, but law enforcement have previously 
arrested high-value suspects
 when they travel to countries with diplomatic agreements with the United States.

In a statement, U.S. Assistant Attorney General A. Tysen Duva said the actions of the web hosts “put the American public at risk,” adding: “We will continue to dismantle these networks and protect our critical infrastructure from cybercriminals at home and abroad,” said Duva.

Topics

bulletproof web host
, 
cyberattacks
, 
cybersecurity
, 
ransomware
, 
russia
, 
Sanctions
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
