The Trump administration is banning the import of new foreign-made humanoid robots, robot dogs, and power inverters, citing an “unacceptable” threat to national security. The move largely affects imports from China, which currently has the vast majority of the global market share. 

The U.S. Federal Communications Commission 
announced the ban
 on Tuesday, saying that devices made overseas could be remotely controlled or used for surveillance by foreign governments, or otherwise used in cyberattacks.

The FCC said that exceptions would be granted if the government finds that a device does not pose a risk to U.S. national security.

The U.S. government has long accused China of hacking into U.S. businesses to steal data, and 
preparing to launch future cyberattacks
 for its own military gains, such as an anticipated invasion of Taiwan. But the U.S. has also long warned that the risk of Chinese ownership alone could allow Beijing to force a company to spy on Americans or remotely tamper with their products. The U.S. government has 
similar legal powers
.

Humanoid robots, the class of robots that move similarly to humans, are far from mainstream and are 
still in early development
. There have been 
around
 15,000 humanoid robots shipped worldwide in 2025, with each of China’s two largest robot makers accounting for the majority of those shipments.

Power inverters
 are far more commonly used in U.S. households that connect solar and other renewable energy systems to the wider power grid. Existing devices in homes and installations are unaffected by the ban, the FCC said.

The ban is the latest in a series of actions taken by the U.S. government against China in recent years, including 
a U.S. government ban on TikTok
 that forced it into the hands of U.S. investors, plus bans on a broad swath of 
foreign-made consumer routers
, and Chinese surveillance equipment makers Hikvision and Dahua, which have 
been linked to human rights abuses
.

Beijing rebuffed the FCC’s ban, with a Foreign Ministry spokesperson quoted by 
the Associated Press
 as saying that China will use “all measures necessary” to protect China’s businesses. 

Chinese Premier Xi Jinping is expected to meet President Donald Trump in Washington, D.C. during a planned state visit in September.

Topics

China
, 
cybersecurity
, 
FCC
, 
power inverters
, 
Security
, 
Trump Administration

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

OpenAI makes ChatGPT Health available to all US users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane
