South Korean memory chipmaker SK Hynix, rival to Samsung and U.S.-based 
Micron
, is planning to sell nearly 17.8 million shares in a U.S. IPO, the company 
said on Monday
. Should its shares sell well (and there’s indication that they will), the company could raise around $28 billion, based on SK Hynix’s closing share price last Friday in Seoul, 
Bloomberg reports
.

SK Hynix will be offering American depositary receipts (ADRs), a type of certificate that lets U.S. investors buy a foreign stock without trading directly on an overseas exchange. Each ADR will represent a tenth of a common share. It is expected to price those securities on Thursday and begin trading on Friday.

Like Micron, SK Hynix is riding an AI-fueled boom credited to AI in both sales and stock price. Its first-quarter revenues were up nearly 200% over the same quarter last year, it said, and its stock is up about 260% so far this year. This is because systems that run AI are very memory intensive. As hyperscalers like Amazon, Microsoft, Google, and Oracle race to build out so-called AI factories, and as new AI data centers multiply nationwide, demand has outpaced supply, creating a shortage of memory chips — including high-bandwidth memory (HBM), DRAM, and NAND (the different types of chips that store and move data inside AI systems). The situation has been called “
RAMageddon
.” Apple executives said the shortage is forcing it to raise 
prices on Mac computers and iPads
.

South Korean tech companies, led by SK Hynix and Samsung, have vowed 
to spend over $550 billion
 on building out new manufacturing capacity to keep up. That’s actually a risky venture. By the time those facilities are built, memory needs for AI may change, leaving them with more supply than the market wants and, potentially, crashing prices. But for now, Wall Street is looking for another Nvidia, and 
memory chipmakers are among the closest options
 that they have.

Micron, the closest U.S. comparison, has shot up nearly 700% over the past year to a more than $1 trillion valuation, fueled by record AI-driven memory demand and revenue.

Topics

AI
, 
Hardware
, 
memory
, 
RAM
, 
SK Hynix

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Julie Bort	

Venture Editor

		Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing 
julie.bort@techcrunch.com
 or via 
@Julie188
 on X.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek
