The FBI has seized a series of domains that were used by a large-scale botnet to coordinate and launch China-backed cyberattacks against American targets.

According to 
the Justice Department’s statement
 on Wednesday, the seizures of the botnet’s domains deny the operators access to the platforms. The botnet was allegedly used by the Chinese government to break into computers across the United States, including systems at hospitals, defense contractors, and several federal government departments.

Prosecutors said the China state-sponsored group, known as QTFY, was run by a Chinese company called Nanjing Xinjiuwei Network Tech, which created and operated the botnet of thousands of compromised internet-connected devices. The botnet aimed to serve as obfuscation networks, which hide the malicious traffic of hackers to make their activity more difficult to detect.

Per the Justice Department, QTFY offers computer hacking services to its customers, who include Chinese government hackers working for the Ministry of State Security, and allows them to use the botnet.

The hacks date back to 2018 and affected NASA, the Federal Reserve, and the Departments of Energy, Justice, and Health and Human Services. The U.S. Senate was compromised as recently as 2026, according to the 
government’s affidavit
 seeking a court order to seize the botnet’s domains filed earlier this week.

The Justice Department said that the domain seizures made the botnet and its command and control servers “inoperable,” as the domains were hardcoded into the botnet’s code and were critical for the botnet’s communication and essential operations.

Network giant Lumen 
said in a blog post
 that it had observed the hackers profiling and targeting government agencies, the defense and aerospace sectors, and others for the past year, and shared threat intelligence with the FBI.

Image Credits:
TechCrunch / screenshot.rocks

Topics

botnets
, 
China
, 
cyberattacks
, 
cybersecurity
, 
Security
, 
us government

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out
. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Fitbit founders launch Luffu Link, an LTE health and safety band

Aisha Malik

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik
