Amidst a spate of ongoing cyberattacks targeting water systems across the country, the U.S. government’s security agencies are warning that hackers are actively breaking into Siemens devices used in critical infrastructure.

U.S. cybersecurity agency CISA, the FBI, and the National Security Agency, among others, said 
on Wednesday
 that hackers are targeting “all” Siemens S7 programmable logic controllers, which are devices used for controlling automated physical processes in energy, water systems, manufacturing, and agriculture.

CISA said the attacks are part of broader activity 
targeting water supply and wastewater systems
 around the United States. The agency said that the disruption could result in downtime, safety incidents, or equipment damage to critical infrastructure that relies on these devices.

The agencies said the hackers are using AI to generate exploit scripts that rely on publicly available information to find and exploit vulnerable programmable logic controllers that are running out-of-date software or are otherwise poorly secured. 

CISA has 
long warned
 owners of critical infrastructure to keep these devices disconnected from the internet, and officials have acknowledged that rural communities are often the most affected because these systems service large geographic areas.

An incident response professional who works with critical infrastructure told TechCrunch that it was noteworthy that the hackers are using AI to identify and target vulnerable programmable logic controllers, as well as to understand how these devices work. But he cautioned that these devices are already highly vulnerable to begin with.

This is the latest warning from CISA following a series of cyberattacks by 
suspected Iranian hackers
 targeting U.S. water suppliers and wastewater providers in recent months. CISA said the attacks have escalated since Iranian hackers first targeted internet-connected systems used in critical infrastructure.

Officials across the U.S. have reported intrusions at water facilities in 
Minnesota
 and 
Michigan
, as well as 
Arkansas
, 
Georgia
, and 
New Jersey
.

Topics

CISA
, 
critical infrastructure
, 
cyberattack
, 
cybersecurity
, 
Security
, 
Water

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker
