The House of Representatives has failed to renew the U.S. government’s warrant-less surveillance law before it is due to expire on Friday, all but guaranteeing that it will lapse for the first time, as lawmakers protest the appointment of a controversial Trump ally to oversee U.S. intelligence agencies.

The House voted 218-198 on the bill, which needed a two-thirds majority to pass; 19 Republican lawmakers voted against it. According to Politico, the next vote is 
scheduled for June 23
.

The spy law, officially dubbed the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA), broadly allows U.S. intelligence agencies to collect vast amounts of information, including on Americans, to identify foreign hackers, spies and potential terrorists. Also known as Section 702 for its place in the law books, the regulation has been considered critical to national security by both Democrats and Republicans for years.

Bipartisan efforts to renew the decades-old spy law stalled over recent weeks, and lawmakers were only able to pass short-term extensions to continue negotiations.

Critics have been calling for 
overwhelming reform of FISA
, citing abuses of the law by multiple past U.S. administrations. Lawmakers from both parties had sought provisions that would require spy agencies to first obtain a court-approved warrant before being allowed to access the private communications of Americans, though the Trump government had been calling for a clean re-authorization of the law. 

But a new obstacle sprung up last week for the Trump administration, when the 
President appointed one of his allies, Bill Pulte
, as the acting U.S. director of national intelligence. The cabinet-level position oversees the government’s dozen-plus spy agencies, including the Central Intelligence Agency and the National Security Agency.

The appointment stoked fears that Pulte would use the position to 
attack Trump’s political opponents
 and 
gut the top intelligence office
 that he would oversee. Politico reports Pulte’s appointment was a “clear sign of the recent mood” inside The White House, and 
described Trump
 as having become increasingly isolated and driven by grievances. 

Democrats had warned that Pulte’s appointment would be a greater risk to U.S. national security than allowing the law to expire, according to 
The Washington Post
. 

Pulte, who has no intelligence or national security experience, was set to 
start on the job on June 19
, alongside his current role heading a U.S. federal housing agency. But on Thursday, the administration pulled Pulte’s nomination, and replaced him in the role with Jay Clayton, who 
currently serves
 as the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, and was previously the head of the Securities and Exchange Commission.

But by the time news of Clayton’s appointment broke, many lawmakers had already left the capital for a week-long break, making any last-minute deal to salvage FISA unlikely.

Tapping fiber cables and tech titans

Section 702 of FISA came to mainstream attention during a surveillance scandal in 2013 that embroiled the National Security Agency and several close U.S. allies. Former NSA contractor-turned-whistleblower Edward Snowden leaked thousands of documents to journalists, revealing the scope of U.S.’ global surveillance operations, which also included Americans even though they are meant to be largely constitutionally exempt from U.S. surveillance. 

Using programs authorized under Section 702, the NSA used these legal powers to collect 
large amounts of the world’s communications
 flowing through undersea fiber optic cables, which make up the backbone of the internet. The NSA also accessed broad swathes of user data from tech giants such as Apple, Facebook, Google and Microsoft under a program dubbed PRISM.

While the law itself will expire on Friday, the U.S. government’s spy powers or programs are unlikely to cease any time soon.

The spy programs authorized under FISA were already approved in March as part of an annual certification process by the Washington D.C.-based Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, or FISC, which oversees the government’s surveillance programs and hears applications for surveillance in secret. U.S. authorities can still use its surveillance tools under FISA until March 2027, allowing much of the government’s mass surveillance programs to continue operating.

But phone companies that 
provide rolling logs of calls made by their customers to the government
 may be unwilling to share this information without a clear law allowing them to do so, according to Reuters.

Still, the U.S. government has other surveillance avenues it can fall back on, such as Executive Order 12333, which allows the government 
near-unfettered powers
 to conduct surveillance around the world.

Bipartisan lawmakers continue to warn of FISA abuses regardless. Earlier this year, Sen. Ron Wyden, a senior Democrat who has long served on the Senate Intelligence Committee, warned that FISA is still being actively used to secretly violate Americans’ constitutional rights. 

Wyden, who is read in on classified matters but can’t discuss them publicly, said lawmakers are likely unaware that multiple U.S. administrations have 
relied on a secret interpretation of Section 702
, which “directly affects the privacy rights of Americans.”

Topics

cia
, 
fisa
, 
foreign intelligence surveillance act
, 
Government & Policy
, 
NSA
, 
Section 702
, 
Security

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Zack Whittaker	

Security Editor

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, 
this week in security
. 

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at 
zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com
. 

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Cybersecurity researchers aren’t happy about the guardrails on Anthropic’s Fable

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane
