New York-based General Intuition, the startup building a foundation model that trains generalized AI agents to move through space and time, is in talks to raise funding at a $6 billion pre-money valuation from new investors including Valor Equity Partners, Point72 Ventures, and Seven Seven Six, according to sources familiar with the matter.

Existing investors including Khosla Ventures and General Catalyst are also participating in the round. The fresh funds would come just weeks after General Intuition raised 
$320 million at a $2.3 billion valuation
.

The news confirms 
earlier reporting
 on the deal for what is becoming one of the hottest startups tackling physical AI. 

CEO Pim de Witte 
spun out General Intuition last October
 from his video game clip-sharing platform Medal, using its hundreds of millions of hours of gameplay and “action labels” — records of what buttons a player pressed and when — as an initial dataset.

Investor Vinod Khosla 
recently told TechCrunch
 that he believes those action labels will be a key part of the “emergence of intuition,” or the ability for a model to truly generalize across tasks that it wasn’t explicitly trained on. 

General Intuition is still finalizing the round, and a source close to the deal said that it is oversubscribed as the startup continues to field interest from investors. The company intends to use the funds to focus to improve its general model with a focus on robotic embodiments. That means spending more on compute infrastructure (the company has a partnership with neolab CoreWeave) and hiring more talent.

Valor Equity Partners is known for backing SpaceX. TechCrunch has reached out to confirm its investment in General Intuition, which would be the first AI lab the fund has invested in since SpaceX. 
This story is developing. Please check back in for updates.

Topics

AI
, 
Exclusive
, 
Fundraising
, 
general intuition
, 
Point72 Ventures
, 
robotics
, 
valor equity partners
, 
Venture

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Rebecca Bellan	

Senior Reporter

Rebecca Bellan is a senior reporter at TechCrunch where she covers the business, policy, and emerging trends shaping artificial intelligence. Her work has also appeared in Forbes, Bloomberg, The Atlantic, The Daily Beast, and other publications. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Rebecca by emailing 
rebecca.bellan@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at rebeccabellan.491 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
