Build a new kind of rocket engine, and the world will beat a path to your door. Or at least that’s how it’s worked out for 
Venus Aerospace
 and its Rotating Detonation Rocket Engine (RDRE), an ultra-efficient way to hurl stuff into the sky.

The company was 
founded in 2020
 by husband-and-wife duo, CEO Sassie Duggleby and CTO Andrew Duggleby, with the idea of developing clean-flying hypersonic jets for passenger travel. But after successfully demonstrating the engine last year, their plans changed.

“What happened when we flew last May is the world looked at us and said, ‘oh my gosh, you have a working RDRE, would you sell us one?’ And that wasn’t what we were expecting,” Sassie Duggleby told TechCrunch.

Now, the company is focused on hypersonic weapons development, replacing the solid rocket motors that power many missiles with its own thruster, and high-speed space vehicles that appeal to the military.

“Our propulsion architecture combines efficiency, throttling, reusability and manufacturability in a way that
customers need for real defense and space missions,” Andrew Duggleby said in a statement. “We are focused on translating technical progress into reliable systems for operational use.”

Venus announced a $90 million Series B round today that aims to put the company in a position to do just that by funding testing and development work on specific vehicle designs with potential customers. The funding round was led by Mercury Fund and saw participation from Lockheed Martin Ventures, MESH, PEAK6, Draper
Associates, Starboard Star Venture Capital, and Green Sands Equity.

The RDRE was dreamed up in the mid-20th century as a theoretically more efficient way to launch rockets; instead of burning propellants in a round chamber, the engine creates a continual supersonic wave of combustion that rotates through a circular channel. (Here’s 
a visualization
.) The idea promised to waste less propellant, but the complex physics proved tricky to understand and control.

That’s changed in recent years, with the advent of 3D printing and better simulations. The first working test took place in 2020 at the University of Central Florida. NASA 
demonstrated
 an RDRE on the ground for the first time in 2022, while Japan’s space agency JAXA 
fired one
 for a few seconds in space in 2021. Venus’ 2025 test was the first time an RDRE launched a rocket into flight.

“When we first started Venus, the entire story was there’s a new type of rocket engine, we think it’s going to put out more heat and more thrust and be more efficient, but we think we know how to keep it from melting,” Sassie Duggleby said. “That’s been a lot of what our work has been over the last four years — how do we keep this engine from melting — and we’ve solved that.”

This year, the company was awarded a grant from the Texas Space Commission to build a new, larger test stand. That will be key for Venus: The longest it has fired its engine during 600 tests is 32 seconds, but it will likely need to burn for at least 6 to 15 minutes to meet the goals of its customers.

Topics

Fundraising
, 
Mercury Fund
, 
rockets
, 
Space
, 
Space

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim Fernholz	

Senior Reporter

		Tim Fernholz is a journalist who writes about technology, finance and public policy. He has closely covered the rise of the private space industry and is the author of 
 Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and the New Space Race.
 Formerly, he was a senior reporter at Quartz, the global business news site, for more than a decade, and began his career as a political reporter in Washington, D.C. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing tim.fernholz@techcrunch.com or via an encrypted message to tim_fernholz.21 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Reddit is using LLMs to solve a problem LLMs largely created

Amanda Silberling

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim
