Base44
, the vibe coding platform that 
Wix acquired for $80 million
 just one year ago — when the company was barely six moths old and had a team of eight — has started rolling out its own AI model to support its users in creating apps with natural language.

The move comes as the discussion in AI circles has intensified over whether frontier models are best suited for all use cases. A related question is whether businesses built on top of someone else’s models are truly defensible long-term. The latest move of Base44, based in the Bay Area, speaks to both.

While its custom LLM is only just rolling out, Base44 hopes that it will eventually outperform frontier models. According to its founder, Maor Shlomo, “training and owning the model as part of [our] entire stack allows us a lot more optimizations on latency, cost, and efficiency.”

At first glance, this could be a way to stay ahead of competitors such as 
Swedish startup Lovable
, which reached 
unicorn status
 in its Series A round last summer and that 
relies on external LLMs
. However, Shlomo expects that others will train their own models — “at least the players that have gotten enough scale and velocity to have enough data.” 

According to Jonathan Userovici, a general partner at VC firm Headline — whose portfolio includes AI companies like Mistral AI, but not Base44 — data is one of three key ingredients of defensibility for AI startups, alongside distribution and tech stack. 

The upshot is that players with strong brands are now leaning into their data and infrastructure to increase their defensibility, and Base44 fits that pattern. The company says the first iteration of its LLM, Base1, was developed and trained on a dataset generated from “tens of millions of real user interactions on the platform.” 

This dataset will keep on growing with the company; but so will its rivals’. The bigger competition may not be vibe-coding startups at all but instead come from frontier AI labs that are getting closer to Base44’s home turf — Cursor and Grok’s parent company xAI now both 
belong to SpaceX
, and Claude Code has become a vibe coding player in its own right. 

This gives Anthropic and other foundational AI providers access to data and feedback loops they can use to improve models for app creation, but Shlomo thinks specialization gives Base44 a leg up. “Models are progressing, but they’ll stay very general in what they can do,” he predicted.

Userovici, for his part, cautioned against underestimating frontier models, citing the example of the legal tech startup Harvey, which abandoned plans to train its own model. He doesn’t expect applied AI companies to become frontier labs en masse but frames Base44’s move in a broader context — one in which inference costs have become a meaningful part of the equation.

That cost pressure, Userovici says, has driven change that enterprise customers are now demanding. “They don’t necessarily see a [return on investment] when using the latest models for all use cases, so an entire infrastructure is being set up to do orchestration and optimization to select the right models for them so that costs don’t skyrocket while maintaining the same or similar performance across the majority of use cases.”

Enterprise companies still are a minority among the audience of the vibe coding platforms, but they represent a growing share of platform revenue, and users of all sizes are starting to express concerns over the cost of using AI. Base44’s decision to develop its own LLM stemmed from multiple factors, but cost reduction is likely among the benefits.

“We want to get a model that is going to be more aligned to what we think is the right thing, is going to be more optimized to what we see users like in terms of the results we’re getting, and is going to be faster and cheaper for customers eventually than using the frontier models like Opus,” Shlomo said.

As for Base44 itself, cost reduction isn’t as clear cut. In a press release, the company explained that “ownership of the model gives Base44 direct control over compute and inference spend, expected to result in a structurally stronger margin profile over time.” 

Even with a delayed payoff, improved margins would be good news for Base44’s parent company, which recently announced it would 
lay off 20% of its workforce
. In contrast, Base44 has been growing in headcount since the acquisition — and announced it had 
passed $100 million in annual recurring revenue
 a few months ago.

That’s still less than Lovable, which said it 
hit $500 million in ARR earlier this month
. But Shlomo is betting that the “huge engineering effort” to develop Base1 will cement Base44’s positioning as the “only vertically integrated vibe-coding application — meaning, in Userovici’s terms, a player that owns its distribution, data, and infrastructure all at once.

Topics

AI
, 
Base44
, 
Israel
, 
LLMs
, 
Wix

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Anna Heim	

Freelance Reporter

Anna Heim is a writer and editorial consultant.

You can contact or verify outreach from Anna by emailing annatechcrunch [at] gmail.com.

As a freelance reporter at TechCrunch since 2021, she has covered a large range of startup-related topics including AI, fintech & insurtech, SaaS & pricing, and global venture capital trends.

As of May 2025, her reporting for TechCrunch focuses on Europe’s most interesting startup stories.

Anna has moderated panels and conducted onstage interviews at industry events of all sizes, including major tech conferences such as TechCrunch Disrupt, 4YFN, South Summit, TNW Conference, VivaTech, and many more.

A former LATAM & Media Editor at The Next Web, startup founder and Sciences Po Paris alum, she’s fluent in multiple languages, including French, English, Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis
