Vint Cerf says his favorite place is where he’s never been before.

One of the architects of the protocols behind the open internet, Cerf 
left Google
 after 20 years last week, but he’s not done thinking about the digital future. Starting today, he’s advising Innovation Labs, an organization trying to create the open architecture for AI agents to identify themselves.

Innovation Labs is a subsidiary of Identity Digital, a DNS registry company, which sees domain-name infrastructure as a practical way to hold AI agents accountable and position itself for a future where more online interaction happens between agents than people. Cerf joins 
a handful
 of other internet luminaries lending their names to the effort.

Most AI agents today stay within proprietary systems, calling on internal resources for specific purposes. But businesses are already envisioning a world where they operate far more autonomously across the internet and interact directly with other agents. So far, a key road block has been a lack of a shared standard for identifying and auditing agents.

A variety of standards are beginning to emerge, and Innovation Labs has proposed 
DNSid
, a 
registry for agent identification
 that links each one to an existing internet domain name and uses cryptographic proofs to log its registration over time. Innovation Labs’ interim CEO Allie Kline says the company is trialing the standards with several unnamed hyperscalers and identity companies.

“I felt like I might be able to help them in a period of time when naming and identification is becoming increasingly important,” Cerf told TechCrunch. “This is largely triggered by the notion of AI agents and the question of what authorities they have, where they have derived those authorities, who is accountable for the behavior of an agent in this context, and where and how its identity is established, and why [you’d] trust it.”

Those questions promise to be thorny, Cerf says, because AI agents are so much more active than domains, and it’s not yet clear what commitment an organization is making when they register one.

“It’s going to be a fascinating—and at the same time maybe even exasperating—period in the in the evolution of the internet and the things that depend on it, because the functionality is so dramatically powerful,” Cerf said.

With multiple solutions to the problem under consideration, Cerf says the key to a wide adoption of any protocol will be its functionality. 

“Company X uses agent Y’s technology, and company A uses agent C’s technology, and then they don’t interwork with each other,” Cerf said. “Nobody can do everything that you might want every agent to do… and so we’re going to have to rely on the pressure coming from the users. This is what happened with TCP/IP.”

One key to Innovation Labs’ proposal is that it does not come with broader plans to do other kinds of AI business or own the registration data, Kline says. “I think there’s a lot of organ rejection to a hyperscaler releasing [a standard] and having that proprietary data,” she told TechCrunch. 

And does Cerf think the agentic economy is the internet’s destiny?

“I don’t think it’s inevitable,” he said. “But what I do think is inevitable is that people will try to do that. We are fundamentally lazy creatures, and if we find a way to have an an agent do something for us, we’re very likely to choose to do that because [it’s] just easier.”

Topics

AI
, 
Exclusive

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Tim Fernholz	

Senior Reporter

		Tim Fernholz is a journalist who writes about technology, finance and public policy. He has closely covered the rise of the private space industry and is the author of 
 Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and the New Space Race.
 Formerly, he was a senior reporter at Quartz, the global business news site, for more than a decade, and began his career as a political reporter in Washington, D.C. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Tim by emailing tim.fernholz@techcrunch.com or via an encrypted message to tim_fernholz.21 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal
