Apparently, hell has frozen over. Walmart on Friday 
said
 it will finally accept payments via both Apple Pay and 
Google Pay
 at its stores, including Walmart and Sam’s Club.

The retail giant says that beginning August 24, it will begin adding Tap to Pay to its payment options at select Walmart stores and Sam’s Club locations. It expects the feature to reach all stores and clubs by the end of the year, and will then roll it out to all its fuel stations by the middle of 2027.

The news is a surprise, as Walmart has long refused to adopt the ubiquitous payment technology to instead promote its own in-house solutions, like Walmart Pay and Scan-and-Go. In years past, Walmart even teamed up with other big retailers in an attempt to take down Apple Pay entirely with an alternative mobile payment system of their own, called 
CurrentC
. The effort 
failed
 and was shut down back in 2016.

All the while, Walmart customers have begged the company to support modern tap-and-pay technology, like Apple Pay, which is now 
accepted
 at 85% of retailers across the U.S., including most larger stores.

For Walmart, the decision reads as a defeat. As one of the world’s largest retailers, it believed it could push customers to its own payment solutions despite the growing adoption of Apple Pay and others of its kind. Ultimately, it had to admit that it was disadvantaging its own customers in the process.

The company is trying to spin the news as giving consumers more choice.

“Tap to Pay is a great addition to the other payment options already offered like cash, credit card or Walmart Pay…,” the company’s announcement stated. “And giving customers and members more choice at checkout is part of a broader effort to make managing and using their money easier.”

Topics

Apple Pay
, 
Commerce
, 
Fintech
, 
Google Pay
, 
payments
, 
Tap to pay
, 
Walmart

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Etched’s valuation doubles to $21B in a month

Julie Bort

AI automation startup Relay shuts down, staff joins Google’s Chrome team

Lucas Ropek

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik
