In Brief

Posted:

8:38 AM PDT · August 4, 2026

Image Credits:
Scott Olson / Getty Images

Aisha Malik

Walmart completes its acquisition of TV advertising company Vibe.co

Walmart 
announced
 on Tuesday that it has completed its acquisition of self-service streaming TV advertising platform Vibe.co. The acquisition, which was first announced in June, brings Vibe.co into Walmart Connect, the retailer’s connected TV advertising platform.

The Wall Street Journal
 previously reported that Walmart was paying $1.4 billion for the acquisition. 

Vibe.co’s platform enables small- and medium-sized brands to launch streaming TV campaigns across publishers. By combining Vibe.co’s platform with Walmart Connect, Walmart is expanding its connected TV advertising business and gaining new ways to reach customers.

“Vibe has built an exceptional platform that makes streaming TV advertising simple and accessible for businesses of all sizes,” said Ryan Mayward, GM and Senior Vice President of Walmart Connect, in a press release. “Together, we’ll build on that foundation to help advertisers connect with customers more seamlessly across streaming, shopping and the broader commerce journey while making advertising more measurable, effective and accessible.”

Walmart made its last major acquisition in 2024 when it purchased TV maker Vizio for $2.3 billion to strengthen its advertising business.

Topics

Media & Entertainment
, 
Walmart

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Fintech

India moves to give its instant payments network a business model

Jagmeet Singh

	3 hours ago

Apps

Snap CEO sidesteps Specs preorder questions on Q2 earnings call

Aisha Malik

	18 hours ago

Hardware

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

	1 day ago

Latest in Media & Entertainment

AI

Spotify expands AI remix and covers project with Merlin partnership

Sarah Perez

	19 minutes ago

In Brief

Walmart completes its acquisition of TV advertising company Vibe.co

Aisha Malik

	30 minutes ago

In Brief

Spotify now has over 300M subscribers

Ivan Mehta

	2 hours ago
