In Brief

Posted:

1:55 PM PDT · July 25, 2026

Image Credits:
Victor J. Blue/Bloomberg / Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Warner Bros. lawsuit accuses Amazon of illegally poaching executives

Warner Bros. Discovery filed a lawsuit this week accusing Amazon of interference with contractual relations, breach of contract, and unfair competition.

As reported by Deadline
, the 
lawsuit
 alleges Amazon has been “hurriedly seeking to pirate away a number of contracted employees,” including Pia Barlow, an HBO Max marketing executive who recently joined Amazon MGM Studios. Warner Bros. (whose pending acquisition by Paramount has been 
paused for at least a few months
) said Barlow’s employment contract was “not set to expire until October 31, 2027.”

“In blatant disregard of established California law, Amazon has gone rogue by attempting to induce Plaintiffs’ employees with term employment agreements to breach those agreements with impunity, backed up with the ready assurance that Amazon will defend and indemnify them should they be held to account for their blatantly unlawful acts,” Warner Bros. said.

The company also accused Amazon of seeking to “tortiously induce another WBD employee to breach their term employment agreement, which was not set to expire until December 2027,” although that executive (believed to be HBO programming executive Francesca Orsi) ultimately stayed at Warner Bros.

Deadline noted that this lawsuit is likely to renew debates about whether term employment agreements are actually enforceable under California law.

Amazon MGM Studios declined to comment.

Topics

Amazon
, 
Government & Policy
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Warner Bros Discovery

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Startups

Build in public, fail in public: what it’s like to be a founder under 20 right now 

Dominic-Madori Davis

	1 day ago

Gaming

Amazon is bringing games to Prime Video

Aisha Malik

	2 days ago

AI

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

	Jul 5, 2026

Latest in Government & Policy

In Brief

Warner Bros. lawsuit accuses Amazon of illegally poaching executives

Anthony Ha

	1 hour ago

Government & Policy

Vietnam is looking to restrict social media for kids; here are the growing number of other countries doing the same

Aisha Malik

	1 day ago

Security

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

	1 day ago
