theWarner Music Music (WMG) 
announced
 on Wednesday that it’s acquiring AI attribution startup Sureel AI. Sureel’s patented technology creates “AI DNA” for songs and breaks them down into component parts to trace how AI models use those elements.

Through the acquisition, WMG aims to better track when its artists’ and songwriters’ work is used in AI-generated content or for training AI models.

“Bringing Sureel into WMG strengthens our capability for protection, control and monetization and ensures that the creative community remains in control of its intellectual property, name, image, likeness, and voice,” said WMG chief executive Robert Kyncl in the press release.

The financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. 

Founded in 2022, Sureel also offers intellectual property provenance, audit and compliance reporting, model optimization, and AI business intelligence. The startup also has a name, image, and likeness (NIL) attribution suite to track how artist voices, likenesses, and performance identities are used in AI training and generation. This includes voice clones, AI-generated avatars, and style replication. 

The startup will continue to operate as a stand-alone platform serving the broader music and AI ecosystem, WMG says.

“Rightsholders deserve to know how AI interacts with their work, and to share fairly in the value it creates,” Sureel founder and chief executive Tamay Aykut said in remarks. “Sureel was built to make that possible, and with WMG’s backing, we can deliver on our mission at scale, building a more transparent and fair future and driving value growth for the whole music and entertainment ecosystem.”

WMG has embraced AI after initially opposing it, as the company originally sued music-generation startup Suno in 2024 and later 
signed a licensing deal
 with the company last year. WMG said at the time that artists and songwriters would have full control over whether and how their names, images, likenesses, voices, and compositions are used in new AI-generated music.

It’s worth noting that Sony Music Entertainment and Universal Music Group are still pursuing massive copyright infringement claims against the AI music startup. 

WMG last year also settled its lawsuit against AI music startup Udio and 
reached a licensing deal
 with the company. 

Topics

AI
, 
AI startups
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Mergers and Acquisitions
, 
Startups
, 
warner music

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
