Another challenge to the Amazon Kindle-Goodreads book tracking empire has emerged. 

On Monday, the reading tracker 
StoryGraph
 teamed up with Rakuten’s 
Kobo
, the maker of a more open eReader (and Kindle alternative), allowing book lovers to automatically track their reading habits. 

The integration was 
first
 announced in May, and is now live for all Kobo account-based content. 

This makes the Kobo the first eReader to integrate with StoryGraph’s book community platform, and serves as another way to chip away at Amazon’s dominance in the digital books market. Traditionally, Amazon has managed to retain its readers by offering low prices on books and ebooks and combining that with a robust online reading community and social network, Goodreads. 

While many Goodreads competitors emerged over the years, few have been able to establish a solid footprint because they lacked the ability to integrate with customers’ e-reading devices, as Goodreads does with Kindle devices. 

The StoryGraph-Kobo 
integration
 changes that, as it will now automatically sync a user’s reading progress with their StoryGraph account. That means when you finish a book on your Kobo eReader, it will automatically be marked as “Read” on StoryGraph, keeping your reading stats up-to-date. The feature will work with both ebooks and audiobooks, the companies said, and it works with any Kobo device and Kobo’s apps. 

Book trackers like StoryGraph are popular because they offer an easy way for people to keep a record of their reading history, favorite books, and offer ways to discover recommendations based on what others are reading. As StoryGraph’s name implies, its analytics tend to go deeper, offering readers detailed charts about their reading moods, pace, and more, to improve reading habits. 

It also offers an online community where you can participate in reading challenges and join book clubs, while staying motivated to read by earning “streaks.” (Typically, we don’t like addictive gamification measures in social apps, but for encouraging reading, we’ll make an exception.)

Nadia Odunayo, Founder & CEO, The StoryGraph
Image Credits:
StoryGraph

Founded by 
Black British engineer Nadia Odunayo and CTO Rob Frelow
 in 2019, StoryGraph began as a side project and didn’t take in outside funding. It has since evolved into a community of over 5 million readers. The Kobo integration will now put the app in front of the eReader maker’s 12 million users in 190 countries. 

Kobo and StoryGraph aren’t alone in capitalizing on the cultural revival of reading, driven by online communities like #booktok and reading apps. According to Pew Research, around three-in-ten U.S. adults (31%) reported reading an ebook in the past year, up from 17% in 2011. 

The startup Everand, which offers a marketplace for ebooks and audiobooks, also recently bought the digital book community app maker Fable 
to offer a similar integration
 — without the hardware. (Perhaps Kobo could be eyeing StoryGraph for its own M&A in the future, we have to wonder?)

The new Kobo-StoryGraph integration doesn’t require a subscription, though the StoryGraph app does offer a $5 per month Plus subscription that adds deeper stats, filters, custom charts, and comparison tools. 

Topics

Apps
, 
books
, 
Kobo
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
reading
, 
storygraph

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis
