The debate over where the line should be drawn between privacy and public safety has only intensified in the AI era. And 
Flock Safety
, a company that has seen both an influx of investment and an intense public backlash, sits right at the center of that debate. 

That’s why at 
TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
, we’re bringing Flock’s founder and CEO Garrett Langley to the stage to speak about those very issues. Disrupt has always had its fair share of hard-hitting conversations, and you should expect no less from this session. 

And Langley’s discussion of AI, surveillance, and the future of public safety is just one of the many compelling conversations happening at Disrupt this year, which will take place October 13-15 at San Francisco’s Moscone Center. You can dive into 
the programming we’ve announced so far here
, or take advantage of lower, 
early ticket prices right here
. 

How Flock Safety, and Langley, got to Disrupt 2026 

Atlanta-based Flock Safety isn’t Langley’s first experience within the startup space. In past roles, he worked on the car subscription service Clutch and the platform Experience, where he oversaw several teams, including engineering and design prior to its sale to Cox Enterprises for $200 million in 2014.  

Flock started in 2017, with Langley partnering with co-founders Matt Feury and Paige Todd, going through Y Combinator before experiencing significant success selling its surveillance technology to businesses and law enforcement agencies. You may associate the company with license place recognition, though it has more general surveillance use cameras and has been developing drone first responders 
following its acquisition of Aerodome
. 

The company’s most recent fundraise last year, a $275 million round, 
placed Flock at a $7.5 billion valuation
, which was a sharp increase from the prior year’s $4.8 billion valuation. Altogether, the outfit has secured $950 million in total funding since inception. 

Flock’s business success has been paired with pushback from privacy advocates like the ACLU and members of the general public, with some people going so far as 
destroying Flock’s surveillance cameras
 as it continues to offer its cameras and databases to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement in particular. Among the biggest apparent setbacks for Flock, 
Amazon’s Ring recently ended a partnership
 with the company, and the LAPD let its deal with Flock 
lapse this month
.  

Langley will discuss the company’s approach to the increasingly interwoven nature of AI and the surveillance industry in a discussion that’s certain to prove illuminating to Flock’s supporters and its critics. 

To watch the discussion in person and join the other 10,000 founders, investors, tech enthusiasts, and innovators who will be 
flocking to San Francisco for TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 on October 13-15
 for a wide array of workshops, speaker talks, after-parties, and networking, snag a ticket at 
the best price you’ll be seeing for the rest of the year right here
. 

Topics

Flock
, 
Hardware
, 
Security
, 
Startups
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek
