Waymo is slowly adding freeway routes back to its service area more than two months after the company stopped driving these high-speed roads over how its rovotaxis behaved near construction zones.

Waymo announced Wednesday in a 
post on X
 that it would gradually add freeway routes, starting with Phoenix — the company’s first driverless ride-hailing market. More cities, including Los Angeles and the San Francisco Bay Area, would follow in the coming days, a Waymo spokesperson told TechCrunch. 

In an emailed statement, Waymo said it was “resuming freeway operations across its entire service area, including areas with construction, after implementing software updates designed to improve performance around freeway construction zones.”

Those software updates improved performance around construction zones through enhanced scene recognition and routing, according to the company. 

The freeway pause — and its restart — comes amid increased scrutiny into Waymo and other robotaxi operators, particularly over how these self-driving vehicles behave in certain high-traffic situations and around emergency responders. Earlier this week, Rep. Kevin Mullin (D-Calif.) 
proposed a bill
 that would direct federal regulators to establish minimum national safety standards for autonomous vehicle operators following a number of incidents in which autonomous vehicles blocked ambulances and fire trucks, drove into active crime scenes, and failed to recognize safety signals such as traffic cones and flares.

Waymo started offering robotaxi rides that used freeways across 
San Francisco, Phoenix, and Los Angeles
 in November 2025, a critical expansion for the company as it sought to attract riders with shorter commute times and faster access to airports. It would later add freeway routes in Miami.

The expansion proved to be popular, and when it suddenly disappeared in May, riders took to social media to ask why. At the time, Waymo told TechCrunch it wanted to improve the performance of its robotaxis in construction zones, noting that it was in the process of integrating “recent technical learnings into our software and expect to resume these routes soon.” 

Weeks later, Waymo voluntarily 
recalled its fleet
 of nearly 4,000 robotaxis after identifying at least 13 instances of its robotaxis driving into highway sections that were closed for construction, according to a filing submitted in June with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. A Waymo spokesperson said there were no injuries or collisions reported in connection with these events. However, after reviewing the incidents, the company said it decided to temporarily restrict freeway operations.

This was Waymo’s sixth recall of its robotaxis. Previous recalls included software fixes after its robotaxis 
drove into flooded roads
 and behaved illegally around 
school buses
. 

Topics

autonomous vehicles
, 
robotaxis
, 
TC
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

OpenAI makes ChatGPT Health available to all US users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane
