Waymo has responded to questions from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) as part of the regulator’s investigation into a January crash in which a robotaxi struck a child at low speed.

An initial batch of documents was posted to NHTSA’s 
website
 on Friday morning after TechCrunch inquired about them earlier in the week. The agency told TechCrunch that it is “reviewing other responses and will publish them in the investigation file upon completion.”

The responses from Waymo that were available at the time this article was published were entirely redacted, citing “confidential business information.” While the information is redacted, the posted responses signal that the investigation is progressing after Waymo was granted extra time to prepare them.

NHTSA asked for a wide swath of information about how Waymo determines speed limits in school zones, whether the company has received any complaints about how its robotaxis behave around schools, and for documentation about Waymo’s software, among other things.

The crash in question occurred on January 23 in Santa Monica, California. One of Waymo’s Jaguar I-Pace robotaxis was traveling near a school when a nine-year-old girl stepped into the street. The robotaxi was traveling 17 miles per hour, but it braked and reduced its speed to six miles per hour before colliding with the student “near its front-right headlight assembly,” according to a preliminary 
report
 from the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) released in March.

The child fell, then walked to the curb and reported minor injuries, according to that report. She did not need medical transport. The NTSB’s investigation is separate from the one being performed by NHTSA. It typically releases a final, more detailed report after 12 months.

NHTSA announced it was investigating the crash one week after it happened, and the regulator sent 12 questions (some with sub-questions) to Waymo on March 23. Waymo’s initial deadline to respond to questions from NHTSA’s Office of Defects Investigation (ODI) was May 8, but the documents posted Friday show the company asked for an extension in a letter dated May 1.

“Our mutual goal is for Waymo to provide relevant information that facilitates ODI’s investigation, while avoiding extraordinary production and review burdens for Waymo and NHTSA ODI that would otherwise not benefit the agency’s investigation,” Matthew Schwall, Waymo’s senior director of safety, 
wrote
 in the letter.

Waymo asked NHTSA to clarify some of the questions in its May 1 letter while asking for an extension. Waymo provided responses to some of the questions in 
a second letter dated July 8
. NHTSA granted Waymo additional time to answer 10 of its 12 questions. Waymo told TechCrunch on Thursday that it has completed its submissions.

Topics

autonomous vehicles
, 
Exclusive
, 
nhtsa
, 
robotaxis
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant

Cursor capitalizes on GitHub frustration, launches rival hosting platform

Lucas Ropek

Etched’s valuation doubles to $21B in a month

Julie Bort

AI automation startup Relay shuts down, staff joins Google’s Chrome team

Lucas Ropek

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

7 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik
