Waymo is launching a loyalty program called Waymo Premier, which will offer frequent robotaxi riders a number of perks in exchange for $29.99 per month. 

Premier members will be able to skip the virtual line and earn 10% cash back on every trip (and “even more during busy times,” according to Waymo). They’ll also get five free ride cancellations every month, and Waymo says Premier members will even be able to hail a robotaxi in cities where the service still has a waitlist.

Waymo Premier will not be available to riders in Austin or Atlanta, the company told TechCrunch, because its robotaxis are only available via the Uber app in those cities. 

The loyalty program is launching as Waymo ramps up its expansion in the U.S., and prepares for an international launch later this year. Waymo is also 
starting to roll out
 its newest vehicle, the Zeekr-built van that it calls “Ojai,” in Los Angeles, Phoenix, and San Francisco.

The Premier program could also be the start of a new line of business for Waymo as it scales. 

The company’s biggest partner, Uber, has built a sizable revenue-generator with its own program, Uber One. The ride-hail giant said in May that 
more than 50 million people
 now pay $9.99 per month (or $96 per year) for a membership. In exchange, Uber offers perks like 10% off of Uber Eats orders or hotel bookings, waived delivery fees, and other third-party discounts and promotions.

Loyalty programs are an even bigger business for airlines. The four biggest U.S. airlines would have each operated at a loss in 2024 if not for 
their money-printing memberships
. The airlines have also shown how loyalty programs can provide value beyond the revenue they generate: During the pandemic, many of them 
used the programs as collateral
 to back emergency loans from the federal government.

Waymo said it arrived at the $29.99 monthly price and accompanying perks after considering “direct feedback from our riders on what they want out of a membership.” While it may be three times the cost of Uber One, rider data has shown that people are willing to 
pay more
 for Waymo robotaxis than for traditional ride-hail options.

Topics

loyalty programs
, 
robotaxis
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Google just fired a warning shot in the AI subscription price wars

Lucas Ropek

Connie Loizos

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence, and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Anthropic’s Claude Fable 5 is a version of Mythos the public can access today

Rebecca Bellan

It’s not FAANG anymore. It’s MANGOS.

Julie Bort

Microsoft’s open source tools were hacked to steal passwords of AI developers

Zack Whittaker

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos
