In Brief

Posted:

12:30 PM PDT · July 18, 2026

Image Credits:
Heather Diehl / Getty Images / Heather Diehl/Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Waymo says San Francisco service has resumed after one-hour pause

Waymo says robotaxi service has resumed after it made  “temporary adjustments” in San Francisco amidst a power outage that appears to have 
affected around 7,000 PG&E customers
 in the city.

According to a screenshot 
posted on social media
, Waymo told SF customers that service was “temporarily paused” and that “freeway routes are unavailable.”

When TechCrunch reached out to the Alphabet-owned company for comment, a spokesperson said in a statement, “We are making temporary adjustments to our service while we monitor local conditions. We know riders depend on us, and we will return to normal operations as soon as possible.”

Following the initial publication of this article, a Waymo spokesperson added that the company “decided to pause service for approx. one hour to assess the scale of the power outage affecting a large portion of San Francisco and coordinate with local officials.”

Power outages have affected Waymo service in the past, for example when a number of Waymo vehicles 
stalled on city streets during a blackout in December
, and when a similar incident paralyzed traffic during a Golden Gate Bridge fireworks show on the Fourth of July.

As a result, San Francisco Mayor Daniel Lurie has 
called for tougher state regulations
 to “adequately address how autonomous vehicles operate during major incidents, planned or not.”

This post has been updated with additional comment from Waymo reflecting that service has resumed.

Topics

Government & Policy
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

Zoox issues software recall after a robotaxi got confused by heavy smoke

Sean O'Kane

	1 day ago

Transportation

San Francisco mayor pushes for tougher rules after the Waymo traffic fiasco

Kirsten Korosec

	2 days ago

Transportation

Uber’s robotaxi lobbying effort puts it on a collision course with Waymo

Kirsten Korosec

	Jul 13, 2026

Latest in Transportation

In Brief

Waymo says San Francisco service has resumed after one-hour pause

Anthony Ha

	56 minutes ago

Transportation

All the EVs that were discontinued or killed off in the U.S. this year

Kirsten Korosec

	4 hours ago

Transportation

A 600-mile road trip (and data) proves EV charging doesn’t suck anymore

Tim De Chant

	6 hours ago
