Waymo has acquired a massive 5,500-acre proving ground in Arizona owned by Route 14 Investment Partners LLC, a Delaware shell company associated with Apple, according to documents filed with Maricopa County.

Waymo acquired the property, which is located near other proving grounds in Wittman, Arizona, for $220 million, 
according to the filing
. The sale was recorded June 5. Waymo confirmed the sale to TechCrunch.

The purchase rounds out Waymo’s already robust network of closed test courses. The Alphabet-owned company still uses the Castle Proving Ground in California as well as the Transportation Research Center in Ohio. Both of these are dwarfed by the Arizona location. 

The Arizona location includes a 115-acre city course, a 35-acre vehicle dynamics area, a 4-mile oval track, and a freeway course purpose-built for autonomous vehicle testing. A Waymo spokesperson told TechCrunch the facility will be used to simulate driving scenarios in a controlled environment to continuously test and improve the performance of its self-driving system. Specifically, the company will support rider-only testing, motion control testing, operational training workflows, and future testing expansion over time.

Apple purchased the property in 2021 for $125 million after 
renting access to it for years
. The facility had previously been used as a test facility for Fiat Chrysler. It features different road surfaces, a high-speed oval, and helped the Detroit automaker test cars and their components in hot weather.

Apple used it to put prototype vehicles through their paces as the tech company oscillated through different variations of its car project. That effort — known as Project Titan — was ultimately 
scuttled in early 2024 after
 Apple had spent billions of dollars on it.

The Phoenix Business Journal was the first to spot the document. 

Waymo is in the middle of a dramatic expansion of its fleet, which currently stands at close to 4,000 vehicles. The company recently started offering the first rides in its new van, which is made by Zeekr. Waymo has said it wants to make tens of thousands of robotaxis per year, including the Zeekr van and the Hyundai Ioniq 5.

The Zeekr vehicles are sent to Waymo’s Arizona factory, where they are then outfitted with the company’s self-driving system. 

Waymo has a growing commercial footprint in Phoenix and Maricopa County. The company began testing its autonomous vehicle technology in the Phoenix suburb of Chandler back in 2017. The area would be Waymo’s first market to offer a commercial robotaxi service. 

Waymo has since expanded to more than 10 U.S. cities, including Los Angeles, the San Francisco Bay Area, Austin, and Atlanta.

Topics

Apple
, 
autonomous vehicles
, 
Exclusive
, 
Mergers and Acquisitions
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WWDC 2026: Everything announced on Siri AI, iOS 27, Apple Intelligence and more

Morgan Little

Aisha Malik

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
