Autonomous car maker Waymo has dropped the waitlist for its robotaxi service in Dallas, opening it up to all residents and visitors. This is the latest step in the Alphabet-owned company’s bid to scale its self-driving technology across Europe, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

Waymo 
said
 Tuesday that anyone can now download the app and immediately hail one of its robotaxis in Dallas.

For now, riders won’t be able to hail a ride to Dallas Love Field Airport. The company said it continues to test its self-driving vehicles at the airport and expects to serve riders there “soon.”

The company has had a presence in Dallas since last year, when it began testing its technology on public streets and announced plans to 
launch the service
 there in 2026. At the time, the company said it would partner with Avis Budget Group to manage its fleet of all-electric autonomous Jaguar I-Pace vehicles. Avis handles general depot operations, including charging and maintaining the vehicles. 

Waymo opened the service to the public in February, but initially limited access through a waitlist. Waymo said about 150,000 riders used the Waymo app during this period. Waymo no longer has the waitlist, following a robotaxi playbook that it has used in every other market, including Phoenix, Los Angeles, and 
San Francisco
.

The company’s entry into Dallas had some early hiccups. In May, Waymo 
paused its service
 in Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio, Texas, as well as Atlanta, due to problems with how its robotaxis handled heavy rain and flooded roads. 

While robotaxi services have resumed in these cities, Waymo said it may adjust or temporarily pause operations based on severe weather, flood warnings, and real-time conditions in the future. A Waymo spokesperson said riders can check the status of its service via the Waymo app.

Topics

robotaxis
, 
Transportation
, 
Waymo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec
