Waze, the Google-owned navigation app, is getting new 
AI-powered features and customization updates
, including the ability to report road updates conversationally and get personalized navigation. 

Some of the new features are powered by Google’s Gemini AI assistant, which reflects the tech giant’s broader push to integrate Gemini across its products while also better positioning Waze to compete with rival services such as Apple Maps.

The app now suggests routes based on both a user’s trip history and its understanding of a city’s traffic patterns. For example, if a user prefers driving on highways over local streets, they will see those suggested first. If users don’t want personalized routes, they can choose alternate routes or turn off personalization altogether in their settings. Personalized navigation is rolling out now globally on Android and iOS.

Users can now also use Gemini to find their destination through a quick chat when they know what they need but aren’t sure exactly where to go. Users can tap the search voice icon to ask questions like “Find me a coffee shop that’s open right now,” “Find me parking close to Grand Mall,” or “Find me a gas station nearby with the lowest prices.” Waze will then respond with a list of options.

The ability to find your destination with Gemini capabilities is rolling out now to the Waze beta community globally on Android and iOS.

Image Credits:
Waze

Additionally, Waze is introducing a new Motorcycle mode that uses AI to account for two-wheeler-specific shortcuts and road restrictions to help riders find the best route and receive more accurate ETAs. It also shows hazards that could be tricky for riders, like potholes, speed bumps, raised crosswalks, shoulder endings, and narrow bridges. 

Motorcycle mode is rolling out now in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, and the Philippines on Android and iOS, with more countries on the way, Waze says.

Image Credits:
Waze

While Waze already lets users report traffic incidents, such as slowdowns, using natural speech, it now also allows them to suggest map updates the same way, including reporting road closures or outdated addresses.

For example, you could say “The road is closed here,” and Waze will send these details to local map editors. The option to report road updates conversationally is rolling out now globally on Android and iOS.

There’s also a new “less chatty” mode that features fewer interruptions on your drive when you want to focus on your music or a podcast. When you toggle on the setting, Waze minimizes the number of voice prompts and keeps them short. You’ll still be alerted to hazards and turns, but you’ll get them less frequently. Less chatty mode is rolling out now globally on Android and iOS.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Google
, 
Maps
, 
navigation
, 
waze

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Reed Jobs would rather talk about curing cancer than his last name

Connie Loizos

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez

Elon Musk praises Mythos/Fable, promises not to ‘cut off’ Anthropic

Julie Bort

Instagram users: Here’s how to stop Meta’s AI from using your photos

Lauren Forristal

Feds demand autonomous vehicle companies stop interfering with first responders

Kirsten Korosec

Figma acquires team behind a vibe-coding app

Ivan Mehta
