WhatsApp announced Tuesday that it’s launching new security features and updates to help users keep their accounts secure, including stronger two-step verification and the ability to add more than one passkey to your account. The Meta-owned app is also adding context to calls from unknown numbers.

The updates come as WhatsApp and other messaging apps, such as 
Signal
 and 
Telegram
, look to make account security easier and more accessible for everyday users, especially as phishing and hacking attempts have become more sophisticated over the years.

Until now, WhatsApp’s two-step verification has used a six-digit PIN as an extra layer of protection to prevent someone from taking over an account even if they’re able to obtain the user’s one-time passcode. Now, users can choose a longer, alphanumeric password with special characters to make the PIN harder to guess. 

As for passkeys, users can now add more than one passkey to their account, which WhatsApps says will be useful if a person uses both iOS and Android. 

Image Credits:
WhatsApp

Passkeys, which WhatsApp 
launched support for in 2024
, are far stronger than passwords and allow users to log in to their accounts using Face ID or their fingerprint. Passkeys remove the need to rely on username and password combinations, which are ordinarily susceptible to phishing attacks. Passkey logins make it harder for bad actors to remotely access your accounts, as an attacker would need physical access to a person’s device that stores the user’s part of the passkey.

Additionally, Android users will now see more information when they’re getting a call from someone who isn’t in their contacts, like whether the number is from a different country and if they have any groups in common with the caller. 

The latest features join the growing list of updates WhatsApp has rolled out in recent months. The company 
launched usernames
 in late June to allow people to share their profiles without disclosing their phone number. In late May, Meta launched a 
subscription plan
 for the messaging app that unlocks extra features, like profile customization, super reactions, story insights, and more. 

The WhatsApp Plus plan launched alongside similar “Plus” offerings for Instagram and Facebook.

Topics

Apps
, 
Security
, 
WhatsApp

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
