Following the Trump directive that led Anthropic to 
pull its latest AI models offline
 and growing calls for 
sovereign tech that reduces reliance on the U.S.
, 
Mistral AI
 has been caught in a whirlwind of attention. But the French AI darling is often misunderstood, and the fact that it develops large language models (LLMs) has muddied the picture. 

Anyone who judges Mistral by how close it is to becoming ‘the OpenAI from Europe’ is in for disappointment. Its chat and agent Vibe, formerly 
Le Chat
, only has an ounce of ChatGPT’s brand recognition, and Claude is more popular than Mistral’s models 
even among founders based at Station F, Paris’ startup campus
.

On the other hand, casual observers tend to miss that the French decacorn is following the Palantir playbook, with forward-deployed engineers that help governments and large corporations adopt AI and tailor it for their use cases.

This approach is also better suited for Mistral’s means. While the company is rumored to be raising 
some $3.5 billion at a $23.15 billion valuation
, nearly doubling its current valuation, that’s still far less than U.S. frontier labs. But its revenues have also ramped up; in February, it disclosed that its annual recurring revenue was now 
above $400 million
, up from $20 million just one year earlier, and claimed it was on track to surpass $1 billion in ARR this year.

This has helped Mistral gain a seat at the table in places like Davos, and even in rooms where tech CEOs have a hard time getting their message across, such as 
the French Parliament
. Mistral CEO Arthur Mensch has become 
a public ambassador for a certain vision of AI
, but he still has some evangelizing to do when it comes to explaining his own company.

In a lengthy 
LinkedIn post
, Mensch broke down what the Paris-based company has been doing “for a living” — deploying its models and agent platform on the infrastructure of its Enterprise customers, and helping them build custom models with 
Forge
, a platform that lets them use their own data for training.

However, misunderstandings and bigger hopes around Mistral don’t stem out of thin air. Named after a wind, the company pursues a grand vision. “We exist to make sure that everyone gets access to the best AI systems, outside of centralized control exercised by states or corporations that feel the need to control in-fine deployment of AI,” Mensch wrote.

This vision means that Mistral is looking beyond the enterprise. It also aims to keep on making big investments into research to keep up with foundational AI rivals — and Mensch’s post also covered where he thinks the company stands in that regard.

“Today, we do not yet own the best language models, but we’ve constantly reduced that gap. We have a very exciting model to come this summer – it will be open-weight, and we’re opening early access to it in July. In domains that are less compute bound, e.g. voice, vision and document processing, we have state-of-the-art solutions,” Mensch claimed.

Mistral’s upcoming model has already generated 
some buzz on X
, where Mensch and Mistral backer Marc Andreessen have 
engaged with jokes
 and amplified memes on what we now know won’t be called “Le Chaton Fat.” That’s another sign that the world — especially “the rest of the world” — is keeping an eye out for whatever Mistral has in its bag.

The most interesting part may be happening behind the scenes. Earlier this year, Mistral 
acquired infrastructure startup Koyeb
 to further boost its plans to build “a true AI cloud. The company also announced a 
€4 billion investment strategy
 (around $4.56 billion) to build data centers in France and Sweden — and the sovereignty undertones are never very far.

“We’re building under the premise that AI technology is a commodity technology that every organization needs a secured and affordable supply of,” Mensch wrote. If you are curious to learn more, keep on reading.

Who are Mistral AI’s founders?

Mistral’s three founders share a background in AI research at major U.S. tech companies that have operations in Paris. Before becoming Mistral’s CEO, Mensch used to work at Google’s DeepMind; CTO Timothée Lacroix and chief scientist officer Guillaume Lample are former Meta staffers.

Mistral also granted the title of co-founding advisers to the cofounders of health insurance startup 
Alan
, Charles Gorintin and 
Jean-Charles Samuelian-Werve
 (also a board member). In addition, it recently appointed three new executives to support its growth: Johan Bergqvist as Chief Financial Officer, Brian Hall as Chief Marketing Officer and Kamal Brar as SVP, Partners & Alliances.

What are Mistral AI’s main models?

Mistral has developed a 
broad suite of models
 ranging from LLMs to multimodal, reasoning, audio and 
OCR
 models. Not all of its models emphasize size; there’s the tellingly named Mistral Small 4 and “Les Ministraux,” a family of models 
optimized for edge devices
 such as phones. Some are open weights, and it also 
made code agent Leanstral open source
.

What partnerships has Mistral AI closed?

In 2024, Mistral 
signed a deal with Microsoft
 that included a €15 million investment and a strategic partnership for distributing the French company’s AI models through Microsoft’s Azure platform.

In May 2025, Mistral said it would participate in the creation of 
an AI Campus in the Paris region
, as part of a joint venture with UAE investment firm MGX, NVIDIA, and France’s state-owned investment bank 
Bpifrance
.

In June 2025, Mistral said it would launch a European platform dedicated to AI and powered by Nvidia processors, 
Mistral Compute
, in 2026. The initiative was 
hailed as “historic”
 by France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, who shared the stage with Mensch and Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang at the VivaTech conference shortly after the announcement.

In July 2025, Mistral launched 
AI for Citizens
, an initiative that the company claimed could “help States and public institutions strategically harness AI for their people by transforming public services.”

In September 2025, Mistral and chip company ASML 
struck a partnership
 “to explore the use of AI models across ASML’s product portfolio as well as research, development and operations.”

Mistral also secured strategic partnerships with the likes of 
Accenture
, 
press agency Agence France-Presse
, France’s 
army
 and 
job agency
, 
Luxembourg
, 
shipping giant CMA
, German defense tech startup 
Helsing
, 
IBM
, 
Orange
, and 
Stellantis
.

How much funding has Mistral AI raised to date?

Most of Mistral AI’s funding to date was 
debt financing
, but the company has also raised several venture funding rounds, with a grand total around $4 billion, according to 
Crunchbase
.

In June 2023, just one month after being founded, Mistral AI raised a 
record $113 million seed round
 led by Lightspeed Venture Partners. Sources at the time said the seed round, 
Europe’s largest ever
, valued the startup at $260 million. 

Other investors in that round included Bpifrance, Eric Schmidt, Exor Ventures, First Minute Capital, Headline, JCDecaux Holding, La Famiglia, LocalGlobe, Motier Ventures, Rodolphe Saadé, Sofina, and Xavier Niel.

Six months later, Mistral closed a 
€385 million Series A
 ($415 million at the time), at a reported valuation of $2 billion. The round was led by Andreessen Horowitz (a16z) and saw participation from Lightspeed, as well as BNP Paribas, CMA-CGM, Conviction, Elad Gil, General Catalyst, and Salesforce.

Microsoft’s 
$16.3 million convertible investment
 in Mistral as part of a partnership announced in February 2024 was presented as a Series A extension, implying an unchanged valuation.

In June 2024, Mistral raised 
€600 million (about $640 million) in a mix of equity and debt
. The 
long-rumored round
 was led by General Catalyst at a $6 billion valuation, with notable investors including Cisco, IBM, Nvidia, and Samsung Venture Investment Corporation participating.

In September 2025, Mistral closed a €1.7 billion Series C round (about $2 billion) led by ASML at a €11.7 billion valuation (approximately $13.8 billion), with participation from existing backers DST Global, a16z, Bpifrance, General Catalyst, Index Ventures, Lightspeed, and Nvidia.

What companies has Mistral AI acquired?

In addition to 
infrastructure startup Koyeb
, Mistral has also bought 
Emmi
, an Austrian startup focusing on physics AI, with the ambition to better support industrial enterprises in their AI transformation.

Will Mistral AI make its own chips?

While Mistral has yet to design its own chips, Mensch 
isn’t ruling it out
. “Owning the chips may come, I think it should come at some point, but for now we are relying on Nvidia, which is a great partner to us, and we’re testing a few things here and there,” he told CNBC. 

What could a Mistral AI exit look like?

Mistral is “not for sale,”
 Mensch said in January 2025 at the World Economic Forum in Davos. “Of course, [an IPO is] the plan.” 

This makes sense, given how much the startup has raised so far: Even a sale to a 
rumored prospective buyer like Apple
 may not provide high enough multiples for its investors, not to mention sovereignty concerns depending on the acquirer. 

This story was originally published on February 28, 2025, and will be regularly updated
.

Topics

AI
, 
Europe
, 
evergreens
, 
France
, 
mistral
, 
Mistral AI
, 
Startups

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Anna Heim	

Freelance Reporter

Anna Heim is a writer and editorial consultant.

You can contact or verify outreach from Anna by emailing annatechcrunch [at] gmail.com.

As a freelance reporter at TechCrunch since 2021, she has covered a large range of startup-related topics including AI, fintech & insurtech, SaaS & pricing, and global venture capital trends.

As of May 2025, her reporting for TechCrunch focuses on Europe’s most interesting startup stories.

Anna has moderated panels and conducted onstage interviews at industry events of all sizes, including major tech conferences such as TechCrunch Disrupt, 4YFN, South Summit, TNW Conference, VivaTech, and many more.

A former LATAM & Media Editor at The Next Web, startup founder and Sciences Po Paris alum, she’s fluent in multiple languages, including French, English, Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz

OpenClaw is finally available on Android and iOS

Lucas Ropek

Flipper Device’s new Busy Bar is a customizable display for productivity

Ivan Mehta

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik
