For nearly 20 years, the smartphone has been at the center of hardware and software development. But with AI moving from stand-alone apps to being interwoven in our go-to platforms, and then into the operating system of our devices, the shape of the next generation of hardware devices is still being developed.  

And Amazon SVP of Devices and Services, Panos Panay, is as close to that development as anyone can get. He will be 
speaking at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
 to deliver exclusive insights about how he sees the evolution of hardware progressing.

Disrupt has long been a place where the incumbents share where they’re placing their bets, and what impacts and opportunities startups need to know about. Your chance to get a jump-start on the competition 
starts October 13-15 at San Francisco’s Moscone West
. Before we dig into Panay and his upcoming talk, 
you should consider locking in today’s ticket pricing before our next tier goes live
. Our discounts won’t last much longer!

Why Panay brings a unique perspective to Disrupt 2026 

Panay isn’t new to reinventing hardware categories under pressure. He spent more than 19 years at Microsoft, most notably working as their EVP and chief product officer, overseeing the development of a wide range of Surface devices, from to the 
original Surface Laptop from 2017
 to 
the foldable Duo
. While there, he also oversaw the development of Windows 11, in an overlap of software and hardware that’s becoming a mainstay in the AI era.

His departure from Microsoft was swiftly followed by the news 
he was joining Amazon
, taking over from 
longtime consumer devices leader David Limp
. Whereas Amazon had previously been very focused on the expansion of hardware through the home, Panay has been building around the generative AI revamp of Alexa, 
with the rollout of Alexa+ across several tiers of access in the U.S. earlier this year
.

And at Disrupt, Panay will dive deeper into what’s coming up next for Amazon and Alexa+. As we potentially move into a world in which your daily routine doesn’t revolve around the phone in your hand, but on an assistant, a pair of glasses, or whatever form factor OpenAI is leaning into, the possibilities are endless! And that kind of future-forward thinking is 
available only at Disrupt
.

Join us and hear Panay, and our many other excellent speakers, along with more than 10,000 founders, investors, and startup community members gathering in San Francisco. 
Remember to grab your ticket today
, or dive deeper into our other Disrupt highlights as we get closer to the event.

Learn more about Disrupt 2026 

Check out Disrupt’s headline speakers

Everything founders should know about Disrupt

Get the best hotel deals ahead of Disrupt

How to host your own Side Event at Disrupt

Take part in Disrupt and learn how to exhibit your startup

Topics

Hardware
, 
TechCrunch Disrupt

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			TechCrunch Events	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

YouTube now requires creators to have twice as many watch hours to start earning money

Aisha Malik

This ‘adversarial’ pattern can prevent surveillance cameras from detecting you

Zack Whittaker

Cloudflare launches Kitesurf, a browser built for AI agents

Sarah Perez

ChatGPT brings unlimited text chats to free users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla and SpaceX will invest $16.8B to start building ‘Terafab’ chip factory in Texas

Sean O'Kane

Amid legal battles, Suno says it will start watermarking songs

Ivan Mehta

Ford’s new electric truck, ‘Fathom,’ starts at $28,350

Sean O'Kane
