WhatsApp today announced a much-awaited feature: usernames, which will allow users to share their profiles without disclosing their phone number. However, WhatsApp will still require a phone number to create an account on the chat app.

WhatsApp has been working on adding 
usernames
 
for a few years
, and it is finally ready to detail how they work.

Starting today, the Meta-owned company will let users reserve usernames, which will officially roll out later this year. People can choose any username with 3 to 35 characters. The company said it’s reserving usernames for top celebrities, VIPs, and organizations. Besides that, there aren’t any restrictions on choosing a username, as long as it doesn’t violate the company’s policies. Meta said that if businesses and creators want to maintain uniformity, they can claim their Facebook or Instagram username as their WhatsApp username.

Users will receive a notification once the username reservation option is available in their country. After that, they can go to Settings > Account > Username to choose their username. WhatsApp will also provide an option for users to set a username key that others will need to know to message them.

Loading the player…

Meta noted that the reason for the reservation process is to avoid duplication for its user base of 
over 3 billion
. The company said that usernames will not be searchable on the app, and only people who know your exact username will be able to contact you. Plus, you can turn off the feature or change your username at any point.

“When you meet someone new, whether it’s a classmate, a neighbour, or someone you met at an event, sharing your phone number can feel like a big step. Your phone number is personal, and it’s tied to so many other parts of your life,” Alice Newton-Rex, vice president and head of Product at WhatsApp, said in a briefing. “So usernames are designed to give you control of who gets to see your phone number in the first place.”

At the moment, users will need to share their username verbally or by text. There is no option to scan a QR code to contact a person without knowing their phone number.

Rival messaging apps, including 
Telegram
, 
Signal
, and 
Wire
, have had usernames for a few years now, allowing people to keep their phone numbers private. WhatsApp, 
which changed its leadership in the past week
, is finally rolling out the feature.

The story is updated to reflect that usernames are between 3 and 35 characters. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Mark Zuckerberg
, 
Meta
, 
Social
, 
usernames
, 
WhatsApp

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

HaloBraid raises $7M from Seven Seven Six to end the six-hour hair salon appointment

Dominic-Madori Davis
