WhatsApp said that it disrupted a new hacking campaign linked to 
NSO Group
, a spyware maker that has been ensnared in 
countless cases of abuse
 all over the world. The messaging app maker accused NSO of violating an earlier court order that bars the company from targeting WhatsApp and its users with its spyware, and is seeking to hold NSO in contempt of court. 

On Monday, the Meta-owned chat app 
announced
 that it “caught and disrupted spear phishing attempts linked to NSO” after an investigation prompted by user reports. “They tried to trick people into clicking on malicious links to drive them to external websites outside of WhatsApp,” the company wrote. “We also caught them creating test accounts and groups on WhatsApp, which we took down.”

WhatsApp said that the attacks were similar to another phishing campaign that relied on users clicking on malicious links, which would then lead to the targets being infected with NSO’s spyware Pegasus, a campaign that 
was reported in Jordan in 2024
.

NSO did not respond to TechCrunch’s request for comment.

Contact Us

			Do you have more information about NSO Group? Or other spyware makers? We’d love to hear from you. From a non-work device and network, you can contact Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai securely on Signal at +1 917 257 1382, or via Telegram and Keybase @lorenzofb, or 
email
.

Last year, as part of a years-long lawsuit launched by WhatsApp against NSO, 
a court ordered the spyware maker to stop targeting WhatsApp and its users
. WhatsApp claimed that the new phishing campaign revealed on Monday violated this permanent injunction, and as such filed a contempt order against NSO. 

The injunction stems from a 2019 mass-hacking campaign by NSO that targeted more than 1,400 WhatsApp users. Following the discovery, WhatsApp notified the victims and 
sued the spyware maker
. A jury 
ordered NSO to pay $167 million in damages
, which were later lowered to $4 million. 

Over the last decade, security researchers, journalists, and tech companies like WhatsApp, have documented dozens of cases where government hackers used NSO’s spyware to target and hack the phones of journalists, dissidents, human rights workers, and political opponents. Tech companies have responded in several ways: 
exposing these hacking campaigns
 publicly, 
notifying victims
, filing lawsuits against the spyware makers, and launching 
new special opt-in security features
 designed to make devices and apps harder to hack, specifically by government customers armed with powerful spyware, like NSO’s Pegasus.

At the same time, the U.S. government has also put pressure on NSO by 
putting it on a blocklist
, and 
imposed sanctions
 on 
other spyware makers
 like 
Intellexa
 and its founder.

Last year, 
a group of U.S. investors purchased NSO
 with the hopes of cleaning up the company’s reputation, as well as 
lobbying
 the U.S. government to lift its measures against the company. 

While NSO continues with its plan to enter the American market, the U.S. government has yet to remove NSO from the U.S. Commerce Department blocklist.

Topics

cybersecurity
, 
hackers
, 
hacking
, 
Meta
, 
NSO
, 
NSO Group
, 
phishing
, 
privacy
, 
Security
, 
Spyware
, 
surveillance
, 
WhatsApp

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai	

Senior Reporter, Cybersecurity

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai is a Senior Writer at TechCrunch, where he covers hacking, cybersecurity, surveillance, and privacy. 

You can contact or verify outreach from Lorenzo by emailing 
lorenzo@techcrunch.com
, via encrypted message at +1 917 257 1382 on Signal, and @lorenzofb on Keybase/Telegram.

View Bio 

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Is this the dawn of the Tokenpocalypse?

Anthony Ha

Founders share VC horror stories, and some are naming names

Julie Bort

Google will pay SpaceX $920M per month for compute

Sean O'Kane

Mira Murati steps back into the spotlight, carefully

Connie Loizos

Ahead of its IPO, Anthropic’s Daniela Amodei shrugs off doubts about AI’s returns

Marina Temkin

Microsoft launches Scout, an OpenClaw-inspired personal assistant

Russell Brandom

Ex-Anduril engineer raises $42M to build the Amazon of composite parts

Sean O'Kane
