It’s summer. You are sweaty. There’s some unprecedented heat wave that’s even worse than the last unprecedented heat wave. You are uncomfortable. You’re getting sweatier by the second. What do you do?

This predicament — one that’s becoming more and more common — just flat out sucks. But if you have a handheld mini fan on you, the situation can change from “actively horrific” to “less than ideal.” In sweaty circumstances, that’s a miracle. 

Over the last few summers, I’ve bought a handful of random mini fans on Amazon or TikTok Shop. While those $10 to $15 devices have become staples in my summer purse, I noticed that premium brands like Shark and Dyson were rolling out their own handheld fans at much higher price points ($100 to $150). As someone who suffers from the SSRI sweats — if you know, you know — I was curious whether these higher-end products are really that much better than the drop-shipped fans I’d bought in summers past.

The verdict is: they’re all pretty good in their own way! But the best one for you depends on your budget, the size of your go-to summer bag (or pockets), and your tolerance for drawing attention to yourself with a large device blowing air in your face.

Image Credits:
TechCrunch

Most powerful: Dyson HushJet ($99)

I wasn’t surprised to find that the 
Dyson HushJet
 is an exceptionally powerful mini fan — this company is best known for vacuums, air purifiers, and hair dryers. Dyson knows how to make stuff that blows air! But at about 7 inches tall, the HushJet is the tallest and heaviest device I tried. It will still fit in most purses, but it’s not pocketable.

The HushJet comes with a travel bag, a charging/desktop stand, a neck lanyard, and a USB-C charger (all of these fans charge via USB-C — woohoo!).

If my desk weren’t directly below an air vent, I could see myself using this while I work, since it functions so well on a desktop. The neck lanyard looks a little dorky, and I imagined myself wearing it while pushing a stroller at Disney World. This is an odd image, since I don’t have children, but maybe the reason I envisioned a hot day out with kids is because the lanyard frees up your hands? Or, maybe it’s because if I had to give one of these devices to a kid and bet they wouldn’t break it, I’d say the Dyson is the most kid-proof? Unfortunately, the lanyard doesn’t really help the fan blow air at you while you wear it — you still have to pick it up to direct it at your face.

The HushJet is more powerful than any other mini fan I tried, but that power comes with some noise. Luckily, it has five different power settings, and the lower ones are quieter.

Dyson HushJet
Image Credits:
TechCrunch

Most versatile: Shark ChillPill ($149)

The 
Shark ChillPill
 is the most expensive fan of the bunch, but to be fair, it also does the most. The ChillPill comes with three attachments: a fan, a water mister, and a cooling plate that you touch to your wrist or temple to help you cool down. Like the Dyson HushJet, the ChillPill can sit up on its own for desktop use. It’s about 4 inches long and about double the width of the other options because of its dual-cylinder design.

I chose to bring the ChillPill with me to a softball tournament, since I knew I’d already be sweaty enough that a mister would benefit me without making me look unnecessarily damp (there is no universe in which I would not appear damp at an all-day outdoor event in the summer). 

You just have to pour a tiny bit of water into the attachment and it works great. The cooling plate is interesting, but I personally found the fan more immediately effective — plus, it has ten speeds!

I might be more inspired to bring the ChillPill with me in my bag if it came with a case for all of its accessories — I wasn’t really sure what to do with the extra little components. I mostly used the ChillPill with its fan attachment, but I was impressed by the product design when it comes to changing out attachments. There’s a locking mechanism, which you toggle when you want to remove or add a new attachment. It feels secure enough that it would be pretty difficult for an attachment to accidentally fall off or something.

I understand why the ChillPill is as wide as it is — there’s probably a lot of technical components in there that make the 3-in-1 design possible. The design works for outdoor events like music festivals, sports games, or beach days, but I prefer smaller fans for other circumstances, like when you’re the only one at the bar who thinks it’s a little hot inside, and you feel weird about that.

Shark ChillPill
Image Credits:
TechCrunch

Good enough: JISULIFE 3-in-1 Portable Fan ($13)

The 
JISULIFE 3-in-1 Portable Fan
 was the first mini fan I ever bought, and it’s served me well for the last three years — it still works just as good as new. I’ve taken it on vacations without AC and found it endlessly valuable. It has a flashlight, though not one that’s any better than your phone flashlight, and a USB plug-in to charge your phone. Of all the fans I tested, the JISULIFE is the weakest (though still decent), and it can be kind of annoying to flip open. Then again, it has little bear ears on it. Does Dyson randomly put little bear ears on its fans? I didn’t think so.

This product isn’t going to knock your socks off. The charging is slow, yet effective. The fan is fine. The light is kind of dim. But it gets the job done well enough that it’s accompanied me on a few “glamping” trips and a trip to Paris during a heat wave. Sure, those trips all took place before I had tried any of these other fans, but I wasn’t sitting around thinking, “Gee, I sure wish I had a better fan.” (Rather, I was reflecting on how the most American thing about me is that I love AC.)

The fan is about 4.5 inches when folded, and about 8 inches when using the fan.

JISULIFE Fan
Image Credits:
TechCrunch

Best overall: This random fan from Amazon ($15)

While over $250 worth of review unit mini fans sat at home, I couldn’t stop reaching for this random 
MACMORE fan
 from Amazon when I went out. It’s definitely some sort of sketchy drop-shipping situation — the images on the listing all look very obviously edited. The company, MACMORE, only lists two products (both mini fans) on Amazon. But what can I say? I love this little thing. I even bedazzled it. (Bedazzling kit sold separately, but highly recommended to maximize whimsy.)

At 4 inches tall, this fan is both the smallest and lightest one I tried. It’s not as strong as the Shark or Dyson fans, but it works well enough that I’m not wishing the fan were stronger. It comes with a removable clip, so you can attach it to your shirt or the strap of a crossbody bag to keep cool, hands-free. Like every other fan, it makes 
some
 sound, but it’s small and quiet enough that I don’t feel like I’m drawing attention to myself when I use it in public.

When it comes down to it, the size (and low price) is probably what makes me love this fan so much. It takes up less space in my purse than my keys, and it fits in a pocket too, so it’s become a staple. But really, this all comes down to personal preference. I’m optimizing for discretion, but maybe you’ll choose to optimize for a fan with the most features or that has little bear ears on it.

MACMORE Fan
Image Credits:
TechCrunch

Topics

dyson
, 
Exclusive
, 
Gadgets
, 
Gadgets
, 
Hardware

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh

Spotify adds a running mode to its app

Ivan Mehta

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort

DoorDash is building its own drone delivery business

Kirsten Korosec

Sam Altman is ready to decelerate

Tim Fernholz

Data centers may face temporary power cuts to prevent blackouts on largest US grid

Tim De Chant

PSA: Your Claude shared chats and Artifacts may have ended up on Google

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai
