In Brief

Posted:

1:01 PM PDT · August 23, 2026

Image Credits:
Getty Images

Anthony Ha

Who’s behind the new ‘stealth model’ Ox Alpha?

A mysterious new AI model called Ox Alpha has driven certain corners of the internet into a frenzy of speculation about who actually built it.

The free model was 
released on OpenRouter
 on Thursday, where it was described as “a reasoning model designed for coding, sustained agentic work, and production workload.” On X, Stripe CEO Patrick Collison (whose company 
is acquiring OpenRouter
) 
described Ox Alpha
 as “very impressive.”

So who’s actually behind Ox Alpha? The OpenRouter listing described it as a “stealth model” and said it was “developed and operated by a third-party provider who has chosen to remain anonymous during this preview.”

Unsurprisingly
, much of the speculation has revolved around China. AI analyst Andrew Curran 
posted on Friday
 that the initial speculation focused on the GLM models developed by Chinese company 
Z.ai
, but “this morning people seem less sure of anything.”

Similarly, 
an article on Wccftech
 first suggested that the evidence pointed to GLM, but an update suggested that Ox Alpha could be an unreleased version of Microsoft’s MAI. And on Reddit, there’s at least 
one post
 declaring that Ox Alpha “can’t be the Chinese,” while 
another expressed “high confidence”
 that it is, in fact, Chinese.

Topics

AI
, 
openrouter

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Government & Policy

Uber faces fine of nearly $1B over automated driver suspensions

Anthony Ha

	32 minutes ago

Gadgets

Linkdaze’s smart calendar is built to run a household, not just track a schedule

Lauren Forristal

	48 minutes ago

Transportation

TechCrunch Mobility: The custom chip driving Waymo’s robotaxi ambitions

Kirsten Korosec

	4 hours ago

Latest in AI

In Brief

Who’s behind the new ‘stealth model’ Ox Alpha?

Anthony Ha

	8 seconds ago

Gadgets

Linkdaze’s smart calendar is built to run a household, not just track a schedule

Lauren Forristal

	48 minutes ago

Hardware

Flock CEO calls for ‘compromise’ as surveillance company faces growing backlash

Anthony Ha

	5 hours ago
