Long before Spotify, Winamp was the music player of choice for millions of music fans. Now, the nostalgic brand is preparing for yet another comeback.

Winamp and Deezer 
announced
 a partnership on Wednesday that will see Deezer power Winamp’s upcoming premium music subscription service. Under the agreement, Winamp will leverage Deezer’s white-label technology and global licensed music catalog while maintaining its own branding and user experience.

The partnership is part of a larger relaunch centered around the next-generation Winamp Player, scheduled to arrive in the first half of 2027. According to the companies, the new player is designed to “reinvent the music player for the streaming era” by combining premium music streaming with users’ local music libraries, internet radio stations, podcasts, personal cloud-based collections, and other audio sources within a single app.

While a lot of the details remain under wraps, Winamp promises an emphasis on personalization through a customizable interface, social features, and ways to discover, organize, and enjoy music. The company asserts that its subscription service will “deliver a fundamentally different experience from today’s traditional digital streaming platforms.”

Though loyal Winamp users who grew up during the MP3 boom are likely to be excited by this news, it’s unclear whether many people will choose to pay for yet another music subscription. The streaming market is already saturated with giants like Spotify, Apple Music, and YouTube Music. However, Winamp touts that its free desktop player is actively used by more than 40 million users.

The announcement also reflects a resurgence of 
retro tech
. Cassette tapes, MP3 players, and even 
iPods
 have all seen renewed interest recently as users embrace more nostalgic ways to experience music. Winamp is betting that its music player can make a comeback with modern streaming built in.

While Winamp has undergone several revamps over the years, this may be its most deliberate return to its core audience. During the web3 boom, it explored 
NFT integration
, enabling users to link music-related NFTs to their player. 
Previous plans
 included transforming Winamp into a cross-platform mobile audio app. More recently, the company has pivoted toward supporting creators, launching tools for 
artists
, including monetization, fan engagement, and music distribution services.

Topics

Apps
, 
Apps
, 
Deezer
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
streaming
, 
Winamp

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Librarians are hosting viral ‘Avoiding AI’ workshops for people who are fed up with Big Tech

Amanda Silberling

SpaceX launches new V3 Starlink satellites but suffers another booster failure

Sean O'Kane

Prentis, new AI lab co-founded by Reid Hoffman, Mark Pincus in talks to raise $100M

Marina Temkin

US accuses American of allegedly wiping his phone using a ‘duress’ password during border search

Zack Whittaker

Anduril reportedly in talks to raise funding at $100B valuation, more than 3x last year’s mark

Ram Iyer

OpenAI makes ChatGPT Health available to all US users

Ivan Mehta

Tesla’s robotaxis are moving in reverse

Sean O'Kane
