In Brief

Posted:

12:52 PM PDT · June 10, 2026

Image Credits:
Ethan Good/AP Content Services for Wing Drone Delivery

Kirsten Korosec

Wing drone delivery might not be a novelty anymore

Wing
, the Alphabet-owned company that 
delivers groceries
 and even coffee using autonomous drones, is pushing into seven more U.S. cities through its partnership with Walmart.

The expansion is part of a broader plan to build a drone-delivery network of more than 270 Walmart locations by next year. The new markets include Memphis, New Orleans, Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Diego, the San Francisco Bay Area, and Salt Lake City, bringing Wing and Walmart’s total service footprint to nearly 20 U.S. markets.

Wing is already delivering Walmart goods to customers in Atlanta, Dallas-Fort Worth, and Greater Houston. The company has announced plans to expand to Orlando, Tampa, Charlotte, St. Louis, Cincinnati, Los Angeles, and Miami as well.

Walmart has experimented with drone delivery for years. But after successful deployments with Wing in 
Dallas-Fort Worth
 and Atlanta, it upsized its commitment. In January, the companies announced plans to bring the on-demand drone-delivery service to an 
additional 150 Walmart stores
.

The upshot: Consumers are using drone delivery more than you might think. Wing has completed more than 1 million commercial deliveries through its partnership with Walmart.

Wing’s chief business officer, Heather Rivera, 
told
 TechCrunch back in January that its top 25% of customers use the service three times a week.

“Our work with Walmart has shown that drone delivery isn’t just a novelty, it’s a service many customers count on multiple times per week,” Rivera said in a statement announcing the new markets. 

Topics

autonomous drones
, 
Commerce
, 
drone
, 
e-commerce
, 
In Brief
, 
Transportation
, 
Walmart
, 
wing

June 18

Los Angeles

Get an inside look at what it takes to scale and succeed from leaders at Mach Industries, Founders Fund, and Shinkei Systems. Through candid fireside chats and high-impact networking, you’ll walk away with valuable insights and new connections.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

AI

The three hard-tech moonshots fueling SpaceX’s unbelievable IPO

Tim Fernholz

	5 hours ago

Transportation

Rivian starts deliveries of its all-important R2 SUV

Sean O'Kane

	1 day ago

Commerce

Zepto’s IPO filing reveals fast growth, bigger losses, and a valuation question nobody’s answered yet

Jagmeet Singh

	2 days ago

Latest in Transportation

In Brief

Wing drone delivery might not be a novelty anymore

Kirsten Korosec

	22 minutes ago

AI

Decart’s new world model can simulate hours of photorealistic driving — with some caveats

Rebecca Bellan

	7 hours ago

Climate

Why everyone’s an energy company now

Tim De Chant

	7 hours ago
