Update August 5, 12.10 am PT: Wispr Flow has officially launched its 
notetaker for Mac
. The notetaker, similar to the one of Granola’s, uses system audio to transcribe a meeting without joining one. It also cleans up transcripts, creates action items, and lets users query across meeting history with the help of AI.
 
Users can see a live transcript and ask AI to catch them up as well.

Our original reporting based on Wispr Flow’s terms change is below

Dictation app 
Wispr Flow
 is preparing to launch a meeting notetaker, according to the tool’s updated 
Terms of Service
.

The company also sent an email to its customers about the change in both its terms and its privacy policy to accommodate related features.

Upon investigation, the 
refreshed terms
 have added sections about the use of meeting data and the notetaker. The company said the notetaker will generate transcripts, summaries, actions, and insights, writing:

For Notetaker, Input may also include Meeting Data, including meeting audio, participant information, meeting metadata, speaker labels, meeting transcripts, and other information processed in connection with a meeting. Output may include AI-generated meeting transcripts, summaries, action items, meeting insights, speaker attribution, and other meeting-related content.

With the launch, the startup will take on other meeting notetakers such as 
Granola
, 
Fireflies
, 
Read AI
, 
Otter
, and 
Fathom
. Wispr Flow’s co-founder Tanay Kothari had previously talked about building an AI assistant 
in interviews
. With a meeting notetaker, Wispr Flow would gain additional context about its users and could automate more tasks beyond cleaning up spoken sentences.

It’s not clear if the startup wants to launch a Granola-style notetaker that relies on system audio and transcribes the meeting without keeping a recording, or build a full-fledged meeting recording tool. 

To date, Wispr Flow has raised 
more than $81 million
, with the company valued at $700 million at its last round. In May, 
Bloomberg
 reported that the company was in talks for a new round, valuing it at $2 billion.

Wispr Flow didn’t respond to our request for further comment. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Meeting notetakers
, 
Wispr flow

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh

Claude Opus 5 became downright ruthless when tasked with running a vending machine

Julie Bort
