Wispr
, a startup known for its AI dictation tool, raised $280 million in Series B funding, led by Menlo Ventures, at a $2 billion valuation, the company announced on Monday. The funds will allow Wispr to increase its footprint as it ventures into new areas, such as meetings, with its newly released note-taker tool.

With this latest round, the company has raised $361 million to date. Its last round 
was less than 10 months ago.

The new capital comes at a time when there is increased competition in the dictation space from apps like 
Willow, Monolouge, Aqua, and Superwhisper
, among others. In addition, several developers are creating free or lower-priced tools for prosumers. 

Existing investors, including Notable Capital, NEA, Neo Ventures, 8VC, and MVP Ventures, doubled down in the latest round. The company also gained new investors such as Acrew, Forerunner, Goodwater, Peak XV, Together Fund, and PLUS Capital.

Alongside the funding news, Wispr announced it’s launching a new model to improve the quality of speech understanding. For the last few weeks, 
several
 
users
 have complained about a quality dip in Wispr Flow’s dictation output. The company said its new model, called Canto, will reduce error rates from 30% to less than 10%.

Since last November, Wispr has released its 
dictation app on Android
 and has scaled its go-to-market teams in regions like India and the U.K.

It’s also partnering with hardware makers, like the 
Oasis ring
, to let customers dictate on their devices without speaking loudly. Separately, with its meeting notetaker, it’s taking on others in the space like Granola, Fireflies, and Read AI. While Wispr’s notetaker can display summaries and action items, there is scope for it to integrate with other tools and make updates or create documents or email drafts.

Last month, the startup announced Wispr Interface Labs under Ariya Rastrow, who was one of the people to work on Amazon Alexa in its early days. With this lab, Wispr aims to 
explore new interfaces
 for human-computer interaction.

Topics

AI
, 
AI
, 
Funding
, 
Fundraising
, 
Wispr

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Ivan Mehta	

Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.

You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing 
im@ivanmehta.com
 or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Everything announced at Made by Google ’26: Pixel 11, Pixel Watch 5, Pixel Tag, and tons of Gemini features

Lauren Forristal

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta
