WordPress.com maker Automattic 
is expanding into education
 with a new, free product designed for teachers and their classes called 
WordPress.com Education
. The suite for classrooms includes a full WordPress.com domain for each student, plus free domain names (on the .blog or .art domains) and plug-in support.

Teachers can provide students with access to the program for free for the first year, without having to put a credit card down or enter a trial.

This allows teachers to use the technology in courses that teach students how to build websites, or for other classroom needs such as group projects that incorporate website-building.

Unveiling the product at its annual WordCamp US conference on Monday, the company noted that the new 
Student plan
 isn’t a stripped-down version of its product. It includes 6 GB of storage, backups, staging sites, and other tools, as well as support for plugins, SFTP/SSH, phpMyAdmin, and Studio Sync.

Image Credits:
Automattic/WordPress.com

Automattic’s best known for its website and blog hosting service, WordPress.com, which runs the open-source WordPress software that powers about 43% of all sites on the Internet. Despite its ubiquity, though, WordPress is not necessarily the go-to platform of choice these days for young people establishing their web presence for the first time. Instead, those users often opt to simply set up social media profiles.

More importantly for Automattic, the student plan will let WordPress be integrated into the classroom to train the next generation of website professionals. And, because it’s free, it can make inroads in underfunded schools as well.

When the first year of use has ended, students can choose to subscribe to the service for $2 per month ($24/year). If they don’t, their work won’t disappear; their site will just drop down to a free WordPress.com site on a free domain. All their web pages, posts, comments, and uploaded media will stay intact.

The company says it piloted the program with 5,000 students across 27 countries, and the majority of educators (88.9%) said access to the program improved their students’ employability. A further 81.5% apparently said the program improved students’ entrepreneurial capacity.

Topics

Apps
, 
Commerce
, 
students
, 
WordPress
, 
wordpress.com

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Everything announced at Made by Google ’26: Pixel 11, Pixel Watch 5, Pixel Tag, and tons of Gemini features

Lauren Forristal

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta
