X, the social network that can’t seem to win its perennial battle with bots, is introducing new video editing and recording features in hopes of encouraging creators to publish original content on its platform instead of recycling others’ material. 

The update will bring new features, including the ability to overlay video captions in multiple languages and customize their look, as well as green-screen tools that work with photos from your phone’s camera roll or other X posts.

“One of our biggest priorities is to give creators the tools to create original content [and] reward those creators,” X’s head of product, Nikita Bier, 
wrote
 in a post. “We have plenty more updates coming to the video editor in the coming weeks.”

Today we're launching a brand new Video Editor and Recorder in the iOS app.
This includes some long-awaited features:
• Overlay captions in multiple languages and customize their look
• Green Screen—Add custom backgrounds using posts or photos from your camera roll
One of… 
pic.twitter.com/d9gNKqpTTw
— Nikita Bier (@nikitabier) 
July 6, 2026

The idea, Bier says, is to provide a “functional” video editor so some videos on X can “finally be original content that doesn’t exist on other platforms.” He noted that many posts from top accounts on X contain stolen material, sometimes five years after the content originally went viral.

Recycled content has always been a popular shortcut to virality on social platforms, especially because 
real money is involved
. A video editor alone won’t solve that.

To encourage a thriving creator ecosystem, X must ensure that creators can reach a broad and scalable audience of real people to effectively monetize their work. To post exclusively on X, creators would need more incentives, given that its competitors like TikTok, Meta, and YouTube have established fleshed-out ecosystems with consistent, reliable payouts.

X may need to revamp its creator relations, too: Bier 
recently criticized
 one of YouTube’s biggest creators, MrBeast, for the nature of his video content.

For the love of God, make a single piece of content without financial bait
— Nikita Bier (@nikitabier) 
July 5, 2026

X also lacks built-in tools that creators can use to report their work if it’s stolen and take action, similar to the 
protections Meta offers Reels creators
. Meta, for instance, allows the original creator owner to either block their stolen content’s visibility or to add attribution links to monetize it. YouTube 
has also long offered tools 
for finding and removing unauthorized re-uploads.

Most importantly, X must deal with its overwhelming populations of bots, as they can inflate views in addition to scraping and stealing content. In April, 
Bier said
 that X was identifying and suspending “208 bots per minute and growing,” to give a sense of the problem’s scale. Before that, 
he said
 that half the product team was focused on developing features to mitigate spam.

Bier 
offered
 other reasons for the upgrade, beyond the fact that recycled content has a “negative impact on the user experience and the business.” He said posts on X that contain videos already make up close to half of the impressions on the social network, so this is more than just a case of X trying to be TikTok.

To be fair, X is far from the only social network plagued by growing amounts of spam in the AI era. Reddit, for instance, just 
said it is implementing AI tools
 to address the increasing amount of spam and bot content made possible by the rise of large language models (LLMs). 

Digg, a would-be Reddit competitor, 
shut down its app earlier this year,
 saying it didn’t have the means to fight the overwhelming amount of spam as a new startup.

Bier said its video editor and recorder are initially available in its iOS app, as the Android app is still being rebuilt.

Topics

Apps
, 
Creators
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
Social
, 
social media
, 
X

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Amazon will stop accepting new customers for Mechanical Turk

Anthony Ha

5 desk gadgets that can make your workday better

Aisha Malik

Chevy built an all-American EV truck — why is nobody buying it?

Tim De Chant

Mark Zuckerberg tells staff that AI agents haven’t progressed as quickly as he’d hoped

Lucas Ropek

Jersey Mike’s IPO illustrates how bad the AI hype has become

Julie Bort

After $18B IPO, Bending Spoons founder says success comes from minimizing luck

Anna Heim

The ‘Father of the Internet’ is finally retiring

Tim Fernholz
