X is taking a tougher stance against people who try to abuse its 
creator revenue-sharing program
 by soliciting engagement and stealing content from others.

It’s common for viral content to be recirculated, especially on platforms like X, where that content can be rewarded with likes, follows, and, in some cases, 
cold, hard cash
. Instagram, Facebook, and Reddit also deal with this problem, and have implemented some technical measures to discourage such behavior — for instance, tools that 
detect when a user has reposted
 someone else’s work without giving them credit.

X recently tried its hand at this, too, adding 
an improved video editor and recorder
 to its platform in an effort to encourage creators to post using X’s own tools instead of stealing others’ content.

Now, Nikita Bier said X’s newest version of the Grok AI model can detect duplicated content at thrice the rate of its previous version. Plus, adding watermarks, intros, and other edits meant to fool people into thinking stolen content is your own will result in sending the monetized impressions to the original uploader. This will also include copies of viral text posts. (Bier says the most common of this kind is, “Twitter is like the smoking section of the internet” — proof that people are still calling the app Twitter!)

Bier said the company has detected 1.5 million posts that were stolen in its latest cycle, though he didn’t mention over what period that cycle took place. 

He noted, however, that with the changes, over $1 million in creator payouts will now be given back to the original creators of the stolen content. 

Because many such problems are enabled by AI, X has been working to suspend bots more quickly, too. In April, 
Bier said
 the platform was identifying and suspending “208 bots per minute and growing.”

X now says repeated or intentional attempts to circumvent its new policy will result in users being removed from the creator program, as will efforts to solicit engagement and follows. In terms of the latter, if a user is busted three times or more (e.g., by saying something like “I’ll follow everyone who replies”), their account will be removed from the creator program and forwarded to the platform’s policy team for suspension.

Bier has complained about engagement bait on the platform before, and 
even went after top creator MrBeast 
for always using financial bait to get people to watch his videos.

Topics

Creators
, 
Social
, 
social media
, 
X

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek

Apple sues OpenAI over alleged trade secret theft

Sarah Perez
