In Brief

Posted:

4:58 PM PDT · July 13, 2026

Image Credits:
Getty Images

Lucas Ropek

X just tweaked its algorithm to make it more friendly, less battleground

X has made a “tweak” to its algorithm to boost the visibility of posts to users’ “mutuals” — the people they follow who follow them back, head of product, Nikita Bier, 
said
 Monday.

“We noticed this data was missing from the algo and it made your friends appear less in your replies. This resulted in the reply section feeling more like a battleground with people you don’t recognize.” 

The change may not drastically revamp the site’s user experience, but may make X feel a little bit more like a community rather than a torrent of disparate voices shouting into the digital abyss.

Bier noted that the change would also “help clusters form around interests more easily, which many people have asked for.” 

X has introduced a number of changes lately — many of which seem designed to make the site a bigger hub for creators. Earlier this year, the site 
changed how it compensates accounts
 in an effort to incentivize original content rather than mere aggregation, and, earlier this month, it also introduced 
a video editor
 designed to make it easier for users to work on the platform.

This tweak follows changes that Meta’s Threads has been making to its algorithm aimed at creating communities, largely as a differentiation from its main rival X. For instance, last month Threads rolled out a 
Your Algo feature
, which lets users privately control what they see in their feed. It also 
reached 500 million monthly active users
.

Topics

In Brief
, 
Social
, 
Threads
, 
twitter/x

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Newsletters

See More

Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news

Related

Transportation

Uber’s product chief on hotels, robotaxis, and why the company doesn’t want to be “everything for everyone”

Connie Loizos

	1 hour ago

AI

Video-generation startup PixVerse raises $439M, valuation soars past $2B

Ivan Mehta

	2 hours ago

Venture

Hermes agent maker Nous Research in talks for new funding at $1.5B valuation

Ivan Mehta

Marina Temkin

	3 hours ago

Latest in Social

In Brief

X just tweaked its algorithm to make it more friendly, less battleground

Lucas Ropek

	2 hours ago

Apps

As TV-tracking app TV Time shuts down, its founder builds Bingers, a new home for fans

Sarah Perez

	10 hours ago

Social

Bluesky’s interim CEO, Toni Schneider, drops the ‘interim’

Lucas Ropek

	3 days ago
