X is making it easier for AI assistants like Claude, Cursor, Grok Build, and other MCP-compatible apps to connect directly to the platform through a new hosted MCP server. 

On Monday, the Elon Musk-owned social network 
unveiled
 a 
hosted Model Context Protocol (MCP) server
 that lets AI tools communicate with the X API using a user’s own account permissions.

MCP, for context, is an open standard that defines a common way for AI models to connect to external tools and services. Previously, if developers wanted an AI assistant like Claude or Cursor to access X, they would have to build their own MCP server, host it, connect to the X API, and handle the authentication. Now, X hosts the MCP, and users authenticate with their own X account’s permissions.

This allows developers to save the time spent on integration work to focus on whatever it is they’re actually building. 

Developers have long been able to search X, read posts, look up users, analyze conversations and trends, and do more using the platform’s API. The hosted MCP doesn’t add new capabilities on that front; it just makes them easier to expose to AI applications. By doing so, X can position itself as an information network filled with real-time data to retrieve and analyze, rather than just a social hangout.

The move sees X joining a growing number of companies that now offer their own official MCP servers or endpoints, like 
GitHub
, 
Slack
, 
Notion
, 
Stripe
 and 
Salesforce
.

Of course, there’s always concern that by removing an infrastructure hurdle, X is opening itself up to more automated posting or spam. 

It’s worth noting that the hosted MCP isn’t bypassing X’s API rules, which 
continue to restrict its use
 if the company detects spammy behavior. 

X also updated its 
API v2 earlier this year
 to address the issue of AI-generated spam, particularly programmatic replies to conversations. Plus, it recently updated its API pricing, 
increasing the cost for publishing posts
 to $0.015, and posting links 
to $0.20
. The price increases were designed to “curb vectors of misuse,” X said at the time — meaning it’s at least getting more expensive to spam X.

Topics

AI
, 
Apps
, 
Model Context Protocol
, 
Social
, 
X

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Ford rehires ‘gray beard’ engineers after AI falls short

Anthony Ha

Govee’s smart nugget ice maker makes every iced drink feel like a luxury

Aisha Malik

Asian AI startups launch Mythos-like  models as Anthropic’s export ban drags on

Kate Park

Trump administration proposes axing brake-pedal requirement for AVs in a boost for Tesla

Sean O'Kane

Former Infosys chief has a new startup that wants to challenge the IT services world

Jagmeet Singh

OpenAI unveils its first custom chip, built by Broadcom

Russell Brandom

If you want to cut your screen time, just get a Brick

Amanda Silberling
