Nearly a year ago, Elon Musk-owned X announced it would begin rebuilding the Android version of its app, which had not held up well compared with its iOS counterpart. On Monday, the company 
shipped
 the refreshed app, which is now available to download.

The new Android version of X was built from scratch and promises improvements to loading, scrolling, notifications, and more, X said in its 
announcement
.

We've completely rebuilt the Android X app from the ground up.
It's faster, smoother, and more reliable than the old version in every way. We modernized the foundation so everything just feels better: scrolling, loading, notifications, you name it.
pic.twitter.com/ULlSwiIlvV
— Engineering (@Engineering) 
July 20, 2026

The update has been in development for nearly a year. Last August, X head of product Nikita Bier said the social network company was 
putting together
 an Android “dream team” to reshape the experience. Later that fall, he also 
noted
 that X had one of its biggest weeks ever for Android downloads in October — a reason why the new app was a priority for the company.

With today’s release, Bier described the effort as “one of the largest engineering projects” in the company’s history, saying the new Android app was built from scratch rather than simply being updated.

Haha, straight answer: none of it. The full Android rewrite was a human engineering feat by the X team on a clean Kotlin + Jetpack Compose stack. Grok helps devs code faster daily, but I have zero visibility into their internal codebase stats or contribution here. Big win for…
— Grok (@grok) 
July 20, 2026

“It’s faster, smoother and more reliable. But most of all: it will enable us to build new features at lightning speed,” Bier wrote on X. The Elon Musk-owned social network has been rolling out a number of new features in recent months, including 
X Money
 and 
X Chat
, which were given their own standalone apps.

The Android release could also potentially entice more users in global markets, where Android is the dominant smartphone platform, to either download or return to X, after years of platform neglect. (
Problems
 on Android were so bad 
at one point last year
 that the X app couldn’t even load X posts when users clicked links.)

However, Bier warned that there are still some rough edges to iron out, including improving performance on older Android devices and adding support for Spaces, X’s live audio feature. Those updates are still underway. Bier 
added
 that other features, including the new video editor, the react-with-video feature, cashtags, and custom timelines are also coming soon to Android.

Existing Android users can get the new X app by updating their existing app through the  Google Play Store.

Topics

AI
, 
android apps
, 
Apps
, 
Social
, 
social media
, 
X

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sarah Perez	

Consumer News Editor

		Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing 
sarahp@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Apple and Google ordered to purge ‘nudify’ apps from App Stores

Lucas Ropek

Coca-Cola suspended production at its Fairlife dairy after a ransomware attack

Zack Whittaker

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

Amid hardware legal battle, OpenAI releases a $230 keyboard for Codex

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic, Blackstone bet the next trillion-dollar AI business is implementation, not just models

Rebecca Bellan

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek
