College is a constellation of Venmo requests — your roommate’s cut of the utilities, your half of an Uber ride, the ticket to your friend’s a capella performance that you don’t actually want to go to. On Wednesday, Venmo’s parent company PayPal announced that you will now be able to use its services to pay your tuition.

Venmo and PayPal are partnering with the education payment platforms Illumia, Nelnet Campus Commerce, and TouchNet, which collectively serve thousands of colleges and universities, giving students and families another way to pay their tuition. 

Yes, you can make one of the largest payments of your life on the same app where you can see that someone from high school is paying for “leaf emoji, fire emoji, smoke emoji,” whatever that could possibly mean. You might open the Venmo app when your friend gets you a latte, then think, “Oh, right, I haven’t paid my tuition yet! Let me do that real quick.”

“For students and families, tuition is the single biggest financial decision they’ll navigate for higher education,” said Nelnet Campus Commerce president Jackie Strohbehn in a statement. “Every payment option we add, including PayPal and Venmo, is about meeting them at that moment with more flexibility and less friction, so affordability isn’t a barrier to staying enrolled.”

Finally, someone said it! When eighteen-year-olds who make $10 per hour at the campus library confront their five-figure tuition bills, they’re really just wishing that someone would meet them at that moment with more flexibility and less friction.

Kids these days don’t know how good they have it. We used to go into debt via unfamiliar payment portals, but now, you can deplete your bank account within the comfort of the Venmo or PayPal app. 

Back in my day, we didn’t have an “integration [that] enables institutions to broaden choice and create a more frictionless payment experience for students and families,” to borrow TouchNet president Jeremy Loch’s phrasing. Gone are the days when students will lack access to “a seamless experience that delivers value for both tuition payers and institutions.”

Topics

Apps
, 
PayPal
, 
Venmo

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Amanda Silberling	

Senior Writer

Amanda Silberling is a senior writer at TechCrunch covering the intersection of technology and culture. She has also written for publications like Polygon, MTV, the Kenyon Review, NPR, and Business Insider. She is the co-host of Wow If True, a podcast about internet culture, with science fiction author Isabel J. Kim. Prior to joining TechCrunch, she worked as a grassroots organizer, museum educator, and film festival coordinator. She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Pennsylvania and served as a Princeton in Asia Fellow in Laos.

You can contact or verify outreach from Amanda by emailing amanda@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at @amanda.100 on Signal. 

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

Anthropic shares more details about how Claude’s new watermarks will work

Anthony Ha

Apple proposes to take a 15% cut of purchases made outside the App Store

Sarah Perez

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Anthropic set AI agents loose on the same task. They started a turf war.

Rebecca Bellan

Instagram introduces a redesigned wordmark

Sarah Perez

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek
