YouTube announced on Monday that it’s changing how views are counted on its platform, with a view now counting as soon as a video starts playing or someone enters a live broadcast. Although the Google-owned platform never disclosed how it previously counted views, it was generally understood that a view was counted after a user watched 
at least 30 seconds
 of a video.

The change comes a year after YouTube applied the same approach to counting views on 
Shorts videos
. It’s worth noting that rivals TikTok and Instagram also count views as soon as a video starts playing. 

“Historically, we’ve used multiple view counting systems across different formats,” the company wrote in a 
YouTube Community post
. “However, we’ve heard that creators want to eliminate this metric confusion and accurately understand their true exposure, which is why we’re making this update.”

The shift could lead to significantly increased YouTube view counts, especially for videos that only briefly capture viewers’ attention. That means public view counts may no longer be a useful tool for creators and advertisers to determine how popular a video may be.

YouTube says it will keep the original view metric, now called “Engaged views,” accessible to creators through its Analytics tools to allow them to see how many viewers chose to continue watching their videos.

The company notes that the change won’t impact creators’ earnings or how they become eligible for monetization through the YouTube Partner Program.

The update, which goes into effect on August 24, comes a week after YouTube made another creator-focused change, announcing that new creators will have to 
meet higher thresholds
 to begin earning money from ads and subscriptions starting next year. 

Creators who want to start earning on the platform will need at least 8,000 qualified watch hours over the past year or 20 million qualified Shorts views in the last 90 days. Currently, creators need 1,000 subscribers and 4,000 watch hours over the past year or 1,000 subscribers and 10 million Shorts views over the past 90 days. Additionally, creators need to maintain 10 million Shorts views over a 90-day period to earn money.

The decision has 
drawn backlash
 from users, as it will make it harder for creators to enter and remain in YouTube’s monetization program. 

Topics

Apps
, 
Creators
, 
Google
, 
Media & Entertainment
, 
videos
, 
YouTube

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Aisha Malik	

Consumer News Reporter

Aisha is a consumer news reporter at TechCrunch. Prior to joining the publication in 2021, she was a telecom reporter at MobileSyrup. Aisha holds an honours bachelor’s degree from University of Toronto and a master’s degree in journalism from Western University.

You can contact or verify outreach from Aisha by emailing 
aisha@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at aisha_malik.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $300 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Stripe will reportedly acquire AI gateway startup OpenRouter for $7B+

Anthony Ha

If Apple sends you a push notification alerting you to a spyware attack, take it seriously

Zack Whittaker

Some Claude users are mad that Anthropic’s new watermarks will catch them using it at their jobs, classes

Lucas Ropek

After Microsoft threatened legal action, a security researcher publishes a new Windows zero-day bug

Zack Whittaker

Phoebe Gates and Sophia Kianni reportedly knew Phia was ‘cookie stuffing’ for months

Dominic-Madori Davis

Delta investigating after someone set up fake Wi-Fi network mid-flight

Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai

Anthropic says it will watermark text generated by its AI models

Ivan Mehta
