Zillow and Redfin have reached a 
settlement 
with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and five states, ending a 
legal fight
 over a 2025 partnership that the FTC claimed hurt competition in the rental-listing market. The settlement was announced on Monday, just as the case was scheduled to head toward trial this morning. 

The case stems from a deal announced last year in which Redfin agreed to display Zillow’s rental listings on its websites rather than compete directly with Zillow for rental advertisers. The arrangement could have kept Redfin out of the rental advertising business for as long as nine years. Redfin owns Rent.com and ApartmentGuide.com, two major rental-listing platforms. 

According to the FTC and attorneys general from Arizona, Connecticut, New York, Virginia, and Washington, Zillow agreed to pay Redfin $100 million to keep Redfin from competing with Zillow.

The companies defended the partnership as a way to give renters access to a larger pool of listings. The FTC, however, argued that Zillow was paying one of its largest competitors to stop competing, potentially allowing the company to charge higher prices and provide less favorable terms to property managers. It could have also reduced the quality of rental listings available to consumers.

Under the proposed settlement, Redfin will be required to reenter the rental advertising business. The order also removes restrictions that previously limited Redfin’s ability to compete independently for property-management customers.

The settlement doesn’t completely end the relationship between the two companies. Redfin can continue displaying Zillow’s rental listings, but it will once again be able to compete for its own customers. Redfin will be able to sell advertising, display listings from its own clients, and pursue new rental customers without being required to share sensitive business information with Zillow.

The Zillow-Redfin case comes just months after 
the DOJ’s settlement with Ticketmaster
, another antitrust case involving allegations that a dominant company used its power to suppress competition. However, 26 of the 30 state attorneys general who initially sued Live Nation alongside the DOJ chose to
 continue pursuing the case
 and won their lawsuit in April.

Topics

Apps
, 
Government & Policy
, 
Real estate
, 
rental marketplace
, 
Zillow

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Lauren Forristal	

Lauren covers media, streaming, apps and platforms at TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Lauren by emailing 
laurenf.techcrunch@gmail.com
 or via encrypted message at laurenforris22.25 on Signal.

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

In less than 48 hours, your chance to save up to $300 on your tickets will end!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Home batteries are suddenly cheap and everywhere. Here’s why.

Tim De Chant
