Nearly a year ago, Zoox opened its robotaxi service to the public in Las Vegas. Now, it is ready to start charging for those rides.

The Amazon-owned autonomous vehicle technology company said that it will start charging for rides in Las Vegas starting August 10, marking the launch of its commercial operations. The company has spent years working towards this moment.

The Silicon Valley startup was founded in 2014 with a plan to develop a custom-built electric vehicle and the self-driving stack that would drive it, as well as an on-demand ride-sharing app. The company was acquired by Amazon in 2020, and later that year 
unveiled its robotaxi
, a cube-like vehicle equipped with a self-driving system, loads of sensors, and a moonroof, but no steering wheel or pedals. Zoox has spent the past six years testing the vehicle and updating the hardware.

Zoox has faced a number of hurdles over its 12 years, spanning funding, technical development, securing the proper permits for testing, and even 
several recalls
. One major obstacle was lifted last week, when federal safety regulators gave Zoox a 
temporary exemption
 from certain federal motor vehicle safety standards.

The exemption, issued by National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), allows the company to charge customers for rides in its robotaxi. Because Zoox vehicles lack many of the traditional controls required under federal law, it needed an exemption in order to operate. 

Zoox received an exemption last year that allowed it to demonstrate its robotaxis, but not charge. The commercial exemption, which lasts two years and allows Zoox to deploy up to 2,500 vehicles, spans eight federal motor vehicle standards, including windshield defrosting and light vehicle braking systems.

The startup also offers robotaxis in other markets, such as San Francisco and Austin, but it will have to offer them for free for now. In California, Zoox still needs two more permits to operate commercially.

Zoox said robotaxi fares will be calculated based on a base fare, plus distance and time traveled from pick-up to drop-off. The company said the final fee will be calculated based on the best route, and be visible before booking. That fare will not change even if the Zoox robotaxi ends up taking a different route.

Destination fees, such as trips to or from the airport, or a high-traffic event at the Sphere or T-Mobile Arena may also be included in the pricing, the company said. Zoox said it is trying to be competitive with the “comfort” pricing levels offered by traditional ride-hail services.

Topics

robotaxis
, 
Transportation
, 
zoox

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Scale faster. Grow your portfolio. Gain practical expertise. No matter your goal, Disrupt can empower you.
Save up to $330 toda
y!

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Bending Spoons to buy Airtable for $1.28B

Ivan Mehta

Influencers draw backlash for attending OpenAI’s first luxury trip

Dominic-Madori Davis

Sequoia’s Shaun Maguire leads $1B round for nuclear startup Valar Atomics

Julie Bort

Malaysia is reportedly shutting down Balaji Srinivasan’s Network School

Anthony Ha

YouTuber Hank Green says his AI usage is ‘not healthy’

Anthony Ha

WhatsApp is testing a new folder for messages from large businesses

Ivan Mehta

Okta buys AI security startup Permiso — source says for about $200M

Jagmeet Singh
