Zoox has 
issued a software recall
 after one of its robotaxis struggled to navigate a smoke-filled emergency fire scene in June.

The Amazon-owned company said Friday that it has shipped to its fleet of 105 vehicles a software update that should address the issue. Zoox told TechCrunch in a statement that the software update “enhances the existing capability of detecting active [emergency] scenes by adding the ability to detect and respond to heavy smoke in certain situations.”

Nobody was on board the vehicle during the June incident, and Zoox told the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) that it is not aware of injuries associated with the problem. The NHTSA’s report doesn’t state where the June incident took place, and Zoox declined to say.

Zoox’s recall comes just a week after NHTSA administrator Jonathan Morrison 
sent a letter to self-driving car companies
 warning them to stop interfering with first responders.

“Let me be clear: the inability to detect and appropriately respond to such situations represents a functional insufficiency,” he wrote. “Emergency scenes are not rare or extreme ‘edge cases.’ As such, NHTSA is today issuing a call to action for AV developers and operators to immediately focus their resources on fixing this issue.”

TechCrunch 
previously reported
 on how Waymo has had repeated run-ins with first responders as it expands into new cities. The company had at least six incidents as of March of this year in which first responders had to physically move robotaxis from an emergency scene.

NHTSA said in its report describing the recall that, on June 20, a Zoox robotaxi “encountered heavy smoke that obscured an active emergency fire scene that was not cordoned off with cones.” The Zoox vehicle “braked hard while attempting to steer away before coming to a stop.” A Zoox teleoperator was able to reverse the vehicle away from the scene, allowing first responders to place traffic cones. 

Zoox told NHTSA that it conducted an investigation to determine the root cause and identify any similar incidents. The company said “this is the only event of this kind that Zoox has experienced,” and that through late June and early July, it had multiple conversations with the safety regulator about the “severity, frequency, and root causes.” Zoox decided to issue the recall on July 7, one day before Morrison’ letter.

This is not Zoox’s first recall. The company voluntarily 
recalled the software on its vehicles
 in March 2025 to resolve a hard-braking issue that NHTSA had been investigating since 2024. It issued 
two more recalls in May 2025
 after a collision with a passenger car, and an incident where a Zoox vehicle was struck by an e-scooter rider.

Zoox has been steadily expanding its testing to new cities, and is offering free rides in Las Vegas and San Francisco, ahead of 
a planned commercial launch
. That launch is dependent on the NHTSA granting the company an exemption to certain Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, because Zoox’s robotaxis don’t have a steering wheel or pedals. The NHTSA also recently proposed 
removing the brake-pedal requirement
 for vehicles that are built to be fully autonomous.

This story has been updated with a statement from Zoox.

Topics

autonomous vehicles
, 
robotaxis
, 
self-driving cars
, 
Transportation
, 
zoox

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Sean O'Kane	

Sr. Reporter, Transportation

Sean O’Kane is a reporter who has spent a decade covering the rapidly-evolving business and technology of the transportation industry, including Tesla and the many startups chasing Elon Musk. Most recently, he was a reporter at Bloomberg News where he helped break stories about some of the most notorious EV SPAC flops. He previously worked at The Verge, where he also covered consumer technology, hosted many short- and long-form videos, performed product and editorial photography, and once nearly passed out in a Red Bull Air Race plane.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sean by emailing 
sean.okane@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at okane.01 on Signal.

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Tesla driver in fatal Texas crash pressed accelerator 100%, NTSB confirms

Sean O'Kane

OpenAI’s first hardware device is reportedly a screenless speaker that can move

Lucas Ropek

Anthropic’s newest ad is creeping people out

Lucas Ropek

Satya Nadella has issued a shocking warning to companies using AI

Julie Bort

The wildest allegations in Apple’s trade secrets lawsuit against OpenAI

Sarah Perez

Anthropic starts localizing Claude pricing for India, its biggest market after the US

Jagmeet Singh

Meta removes controversial AI feature on Instagram after backlash

Lucas Ropek
