Zoox has given its custom-built robotaxi a makeover — and not just to make it look sharper. The Amazon-owned company revealed Wednesday a series of upgrades to the comfort and function of its electric, autonomous vehicle based on rider feedback and ahead of what it hopes will be a commercial launch later this year.

The core features of the 
Zoox robotaxi
 remain. The cube-like electric, autonomous robotaxi still lacks a steering wheel and other controls. The company kept the moonroof and starry night lights as well as the 40 cameras, radars, lidars, and infrared sensors, which help the robotaxi perceive the environment around it. And the vehicle still drives bidirectionally, has four-wheel steering, and can transport four people at speeds of up to 75 miles per hour.

Instead, Zoox has made a series of design and product tweaks required for a robotaxi that shuttles thousands of  riders. At least, that is Zoox’s hope. 

Image Credits:
Zoox

On the inside, Zoox has added more padding and ergonomic curves to both the seats and headrests, and updated the color, material, and finish with a lighter palette of aloe-green seating and stone-grey flooring and trim.

The lighter color palette creates a calmer environment, according to Zoox.

It also provides the kind of contrasting backdrop that makes it easy to spot common objects, like smartphones. Other interior changes include adding fluting on the charging pad to keep phones in place, enlarging the cupholders, and a more visible touchscreen.

Image Credits:
Zoox

On the outside, Zoox has relocated its bidirectional reflectors for better visibility and added a new speaker and microphone to the door interface as well as two-way audio capabilities. The company said the upgrades will improve communication with riders and other road users, as well as between Zoox Support and first responders.

The idea, according to Chris Stoffel, director of robot industrial design and studio engineering at Zoox, is for a simple elevated interior design that doesn’t demand a rider’s attention like so many of the features found in today’s passenger cars.

“The updates we’ve made to this iteration of our purpose-built robotaxi continue to further distinguish the Zoox experience from anything else available today,” he said in a statement. 

Image Credits:
Zoox

There are practical reasons for the design changes as well. 

Last year, Zoox 
opened a production facility
 in Hayward, California, where the company expects to one day build 10,000 robotaxis per year. The improvements were made in preparation of volume production, which Zoox says can reach up to 100 vehicles a week.

Zoox still has one major hurdle to pass before it will launch production in earnest — or offer paid rides. 

The company has requested a commercial exemption for its robotaxi since its lacks standard controls mandated by federal law. A public comment period has closed and Zoox is awaiting a decision by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, which gave the company an exemption in August 2025 to demonstrate its custom-built robotaxis on public roads.

If it receives approval, Zoox will introduce paid rides, the company said.

For now, the company is testing and 
offering free rides
 in Austin, Texas; San Francisco; Las Vegas; and Miami, Florida.

Topics

robotaxi
, 
robotaxis
, 
Transportation
, 
zoox

When you purchase through links in our articles, 
we may earn a small commission
. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

			Kirsten Korosec	

Transportation Editor

		Kirsten Korosec is a reporter and editor who has covered the future of transportation from EVs and autonomous vehicles to urban air mobility and in-car tech for more than a decade. She is currently the transportation editor at TechCrunch and co-host of TechCrunch’s Equity podcast. She is also co-founder and co-host of the podcast, “The Autonocast.” She previously wrote for Fortune, The Verge, Bloomberg, MIT Technology Review and CBS Interactive.

You can contact or verify outreach from Kirsten by emailing 
kirsten.korosec@techcrunch.com
 or via encrypted message at kkorosec.07 on Signal.	

View Bio 

November 4

Boston

Last chance to save up to $190 on TechCrunch Founder Summit. Join 1,000+ founders and VCs at all stages for real-world scaling insights and connections that move the needle.
Savings end June 26, 11:59 p.m. PT
.

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

WhatsApp gets new chief as Meta taps India’s CRED founder Kunal Shah and invests $900M in startup

Jagmeet Singh

Every new iOS 27 feature that’s worth knowing about

Lauren Forristal

Aura’s impressive e-ink photo frame doesn’t even look digital

Amanda Silberling

The CEO of Allbirds’ new AI biz has a plan. Now she needs a “brand-new team”

Tim Fernholz

The US says ASML’s top chip tool may be in China, but how?

Connie Loizos

The 11 standout startups from YC’s Demo Day, according to VCs

Marina Temkin

Dominic-Madori Davis

NASA picks Eric Schmidt’s rocket company for Mars mission, setting up a race with SpaceX

Tim Fernholz
