>  V 

ii 


Mark  Twain,  a  biography 

Albert  Bigelow  Paine,  Roy  J.  Friedman  Mark  Twain 
Collection  (Library  of  Congress) 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


ARK  TWAIN 

A  BIOGRAPHY 


Digitized 


X 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Goo 


MARK    TWAIN    IN     His    LIBRARY    AT  STORMFIELD 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

A  BIOGRAPHY 

THE  PERSONAL  AND  LITERARY  LIFE  OF 

SAMUEL  LANGHORNE  CLEMENS 


BY 

ALBERT  BIGELOW  PAINE 

WITH  I.F.TTPKS.  COMMENTS  ANI»  INCIDENTAL 
WRITINGS  III  rttKRTO  I'NWRUSHED:  AI„SO 
m:\v  i.nsoDhs.  amcdotks.  utc. 


THREE  VOLUMES 
FULLY  ILLUSTRATED 


VOLUME  III 


•  * 


•  •  • 

• 4  - 

•  •  • 

•  •  •  • 

•  •  • 

Vi 

: 

-  -  • 
•  •  • 

HARPER  &  BROTHERS  PUBLISHERS 
NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 
MCMXII 


f  'J 


CORYRIOHT.  »ta.  RY  HAMPER  •  MOTHERS 

PRINTED  IN  THI  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 
PUOLISHEO  SEPTEMBER.  (SIX 


254679 


•  »  -  • 
- »  *  .  .  . 


•  •  • 

•  » . . 


I  M 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS 

CHAFj  EAGE 

CCXII.  The  Return  of  the  Conqueror  .   .  .   .  im 

CCXHI.  Mark  Twain — CiF.nf.rai.  Spokesman   .  .  .  II2Q 

CCXIV.        Mark  Twain  and  the  Missionaries  .   .   .  1135 

CCXV.  Summer  at  "The  Lair"   1 135 

CCXVI.  Riverdale.    A  Yale  Degree   1 141 

CCXVII.       Mark  Twain  in  Politics   iu.s 

CCXVIII.     New  Interests  and  Investments  ....  1149 

CCXIX.        Yachting  and  Theology   11 56 

CCXX.  Mark  Twain  and  the  Philippines    .    .    .  1164 

CCXXI.  The  Return  of  the  Native  .  .  .  .  .  LL66 

CCXXII.       A  Prophet  Honored  in  His  Country    .    .  11 72 

CCXXIII.     At  York  Harbor    1176 

CCXXIV.  The  Sixty-seventh  Birthday  Dinner  .  .  1 182 

CCXXV.       Christian  Science  Controversies     .    .    .  1186 

CCXXVI.      "Was  It  Heaven?  or  Hell?"   ii8q 

CCXXVII.     The  Second  Rivkrdale  Winter    ....  1194 

CCXXVIH.    Prqffe red  Honors   1201 

CCXXIX.     The  Last  Summer  at  Elmira   120s 

CCXXX.       The  Return  to  Florence   1209 

CCXXXI.  The  Close  of  a  Beautiful  Life  .  ,  ,  .  L2_l6_ 

CCXXXH.    The  Sad  Journey  Home   1220 

CCXXXHI.  Beginning  Another  Home   1224 

CCXXXI V.   Life  at  21  Fifth  Avenue   1227 

CCXXX V.     A  Summer  in  New  Hampshire   1237 

CCXXXVI.   At  Pier  70   1249 

CCXXX VII.  Aftermath   1253 


: 

> 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

CCXXXVIII.  The  Writer  Meets  Mark  Twain    .    .    .  1257 

CCXXXIX.    Working  with  Mark  Twain   1266 

CCXL.  The  Definition  of  a  Gentleman    .   .   .  1272 

CCXLI.  Gorky,  Howblls,  and  Mark  Twain    .   .  1279 

CCXLII.  Mark  Twain's  Good-by  to  the  Platform  1287  ' 

CCXLIII.      An  Investment  in  Redding   12Q1 

CCXLI V.        Traits  and  Philosophies   1295 

CCXLV.  In  the  Day's  Round   12QQ 

CCXLVI.       The  Second  Summer  at  Dublin  ....  1307 

CCXLVIL      Dublin,  Continued   13 15 

CCXLVIII.     "What  Is  Man?"  and  the  Autobiography  1321 

CCXLIX.       Billiards   1324 

CCL.  Philosophy  and  Pessimism   1333 

CCLI.  A  Lobbying  Expedition   1339 

CCLII.  Theology  and  Evolution   1352  I 

CCLIII.  An  Evening  with  Helen  Keller    .   .   .  1364 

CCLIV.  Billiard-room  Notes   1366 

CCLV.  Further  Personalities   1371 

CCLVI.  Honors  from  Oxford   1376  ^ 

CCL VI I.  A  Tri  e  English  Welcome   1380 

CCLVIII.       Doctor  of  Literature,  Oxford  ....  1392 

CCLIX.  London  Social  Honors   1397 

CCLX.  Matters  Psychic  and  Otherwise    .    .    .  1405 

CCLXI.  Minor  Events  and  Diversions    ....  1411 

CCLXII.  From  Mark  Twain's  Mail   1418  1 

CCLXIII.       Some  Literary  Luncheons   1425 

CCLXI V.       "Captain  Stormfield"  in  Print     .   .   .  1430 

CCLXV.  Lotos  Club  Honors   1432 

CCLXVI.        A  Winter  in  Bermuda   1434 

CCLXVII.      Views  and  Addresses    1442 

CCLXVIIL     Redding   1446 

CCLXIX.        First  Days  at  Stokmiteld   1452 

CCLXX.  The  Aldrich  Memorial    u.5.5 

_  • 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PACK 

CCLXXT.         Death  of  "Sam"  Moffett   1458 

CCLXXII.       Stormfteld  Adventures   1460 

CCLXXIIL      Stormfield  Philosophies   1464 

CCLXXIV.      Citizen  and  Farmer    1470 

CCLXXV.        A  Mantel  and  a  Baby  Elephant     .   .  1474 

CCLXXVI.       Shakespeare-Bacon  Talk   1478 

CCLXXVII.      "Is  Shakespeare  Dead?"   1484 

CCLXXVIII.     The  Death  of  Henry  Rogers  ....  1490 

CCLXXIX.      An  Extension  of  Copyright     ....  1493 

CCLXXX.        A  Warning   1496 

CCLXXXI.       The  Last  Si  mmer  at  Stormfield  .    .    .  1503 

CCLXXXIT.      Personal  Memoranda   1506 

CCLXXXIII.    Astronomy  and  Dreams   1516 

CCLXXXIV.    A  Library  Concert   1521 

CCLXXXV.     A  Wedding  at  Stormfield   1523 

CCLXXXVI.    Autumn  Days   1526 

CCLXXXVII.    Mark  Twain's  Reading   1536 

CCLXXXVI  1 1.  A  Bermuda  Birthday   1541 

CCLXXXIX.    The  Death  of  Jean   1547 

CCXC.  The  Return  to  Bermuda   1555 

CCXCI.  Letters  from  Bermuda   i.s.sH 

CCXCII.  The  Voyage  Home   1564 

CCXCTII.  The  Return  to  the  Invisible  ....  1575 

CCXCI V.         The  Last  Rites   1579 

CCXCV.  Mark  Twain's  Religion   1581 

CCXCVI.        Postscript   is86 

Appendix  A.  Letter  from  Orion  Clemens  to  Miss 

Wood  Concerning  Henry  Clemens  1591 
Appendix  B.     Mark  Twain's  Burlesque  of  Captain- 
Isaiah  Sellers   1593 

Appendix  C.     I — Mark  Twain's  Empire  City  Hoax. 

II — News  -  gathering   with  Mark 

Twain   1597 

•  • 

Vll 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  fAGK 

Appendix  D.  From  Mark  Twain's  First  Lecture    .   .  ifioi 

Appendix  E.   From  "The  Jumping  Frog"  Book    .    .    .  1605 

Appendix  F.    "The  Innocents  Abroad"   i6oq 

Appendix  G.  Mark  Tw ain  at  the  Correspondents  Club, 

Washington   161 2 

Appendix  H.  Announcement  for  Lecture  of  July  2, 1868  1614 

Appendix  I.  Mark  Twain's  Championship  of  Thomas  K. 

Beecher   1618 

Apfendix  J.    The  Indignity  Pitt  upon  the  Remains  of 

Ororoe  Holland  by  the  Rrv.  Mb. 

Sabine   1624 

Appendix  K.  A  Substitute  for  Ruloff   1628 

Appendix  L.   About  London   1630 

Appendix  M.  Letter  Written  to  Mrs.  Clemens  Prophe- 
sying a  Monarchy   1633 

Appendix  N.  Mark  Twain  and  Copyright   1637 

Appendix  0.   Address  at  Whittier  Birthday  Dinner  .  1643 

Appendix  P.   The  Adam  Monument  Petition  ....  1648 

Appendix  Q.  General  Grant's  Grammar   i6si 

Appendix  R.   Party  Allegiance   1653 

AppRNntY  S.  Original   Puffapk  fob   "A  Cn^rtitrrjrnT 

Yankee  in  King  Arthur's  Coiht"   .  1656 

Appendix  T.    A  Tribute  to  Henry  H.  Rogers     .    .    .  1658 

Apprnmx  U.   From  Mark  Twain's  Last  Porm  .  .  .  1660 

Appendix  V.    Selections  from  an  Unfinished  Rook    .  1663 

Appendix  W.  Little  Bessie  Would  Assist  Providence  .  1671 
Appendix  X.  A  Chronological  List  of  Mark  Twain's 

Works   1674 

INDEX   1685 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


MARK  TWAIN  IN  HIS  LIBRARY  AT  STORMFIELD       .     .     .  Frontier* 


MARK  TWAIN  AS  HUCK  FINN  Pacing  p.  II30 

THE  RETURN  OF  THE  NATIVE  "  Il68 

CLARA  CLEMENS   "  II92 

A  CORNER  OF  VILLA  QUARTO  GARDEN  "  I2IO 

A  MARK  TWAIN  NOTE  CONCERNING  CERTAIN  WRITINGS 
INTENDED  FOR  PUBLICATION  ONLY  AFTER  HIS  LIFE- 
TIME  Pag*  1236 

MARK  TWAIN'S  SUGGESTED  TITLE-PAGE  FOR  HIS  MICROBE 

BOOK  "  I239 

THE  SEVENTIETH  BIRTHDAY  DINNER  GROUP  .  .  .  .  Facing  p.  12 $0 
HANDBILL  OF  MARK  TWAIN'S  "FAREWELL  LECTURE"  .  Page  1 288 
A  PAGE  OF  MARK  TWAIN's  LECTURE  NOTES     ....      "  I290 

MARK  TWAIN  DICTATING  Facing  p.  1 292 

MARK  TWAIN  DICTATING  AT  DUBLIN  "  I3IO 

IN  THE  BILLIARD-ROOM  "       1 326 

DOCTOR  OF  LETTERS,  OXFORD  "       1 394 

THE  "PUNCH"  CARTOON,  I907  "  I4OO 

THE  "CRIME"  OF  SIMPLIFIED  SPELLING  Page  I417 

A  LAKE  WOOD  GROUP: 

W.  D.  HOWELLS,  MARK  TWAIN,  GEORGE  HARVEY,  HY. 

M.  ALDEN,  DAVID  A.  MUNRO,  MAYO  W.  HAZELTINE  .  Facing  p.  1 428 

STORMFIELD  "  I45O 

THE  FIRST  WEEK  IN  REDDING,  I908  "  I454 

PART  OF  MARK  TWAIN's  "LIGHT-YEAR "  CALCULATION  .     Page  1510 

ONE  OF  MARK  TWAIN's  MEMORANDA   1 5 13 

MR.  AND  MRS.  GABRILOWITSCH  Facing  p.  1524 

AFTER  THE  WEDDING  "       1 524 

BERMUDA—ON  DEVONSHIRE  BAY  "  I544 

JEAN  CLEMENS  "       1 552 

SEATING   PLAN   OF   THE   WHITTIER   BIRTHDAY   DINNER      "  1646 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

A  BIOGRAPHY 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

A  BIOGRAPHY 


CCXII 

THE  RETURN  OP  THE  CONQUEROR 

IT  would  be  hard  to  exaggerate  the  stir  which  the  news- 
papers and  the  public  generally  made  over  the  home- 
coming of  Mark  Twain.  He  had  left  America  stagger- 
ing under  heavy  obligation  and  set  out  on  a  pilgrimage 
of  redemption.  At  the  moment  when  this  Mecca  was 
in  view  a  great  sorrow  had  befallen  him  and  stirred 
a  world-wide  and  soul-deep  tide  of  human  sympathy. 
Then  there  had  followed  such  ovation  as  has  seldom  been 
conferred  upon  a  private  citizen,  and  now  approaching 
old  age,  still  in  the  fullness  of  his  mental  vigor,  he  had 
returned  to  his  native  soil  with  the  prestige  of  these 
honors  upon  him  and  the  vast  added  glory  of  having 
made  his  financial  fight  single-handed — and  won. 

He  was  heralded  literally  as  a  conquering  hero.  Every 
paper  in  the  land  had  an  editorial  telling  the  story  of  his 
debts,  his  sorrow,  and  his  triumphs. 

"He  had  behaved  like  Walter  Scott,"  says  Howells, 
"as  millions  rejoiced  to  know  who  had  not  known  how 
Walter  Scott  had  behaved  till  they  knew  it  was  like 
Clemens." 

Howells  acknowledges  that  he  had  some  doubts  as  to  the 
permanency  of  the  vast  acclaim  of  the  American  public, 
remembering,  or  perhaps  assuming,  a  national  fickleness. 
Says  Howells: 

He  had  hitherto  been  more  intelligently  accepted  or  more 
largely  imagined  in  Europe,  and  I  suppose  it  was  my  sense  of 
this  that  inspired  the  stupidity  of  my  saying  to  him  when  we 

mi 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


came  to  consider  "the  state  of  polite  learning"  among  us, 
"You  mustn't  expect  people  to  keep  it  up  here  as  they  do  in 
England."  But  it  appeared  that  his  countrymen  were  only 
wanting  the  chance,  and  they  kept  it  up  in  honor  of  him  past 
all  precedent. 

Clemens  went  to  the  Earlington  Hotel  and  began  search 
for  a  furnished  house  in  New  York.  They  would  not 
return  to  Hartford — at  least  not  yet.  The  associations 
there  were  still  too  sad,  and  they  immediately  became 
more  so.  Five  days  after  Mark  Twain's  return  to  Amer- 
ica, his  old  friend  and  co-worker,  Charles  Dudley  Warner, 
died.  Clemens  went  to  Hartford  to  act  as  a  pall-bearer 
and  while  there  looked  into  the  old  home.  To  Sylvester 
Baxter,  of  Boston,  who  had  been  present,  he  wrote  a  few 
days  later: 

It  was  a  great  pleasure  to  me  to  renew  the  other  days  with 
you,  &  there  was  a  pathetic  pleasure  in  seeing  Hartford  &  the 
house  again;  but  I  realized  that  if  we  ever  enter  the  house  again 
to  live  our  hearts  will  break.  I  am  not  sure  that  we  shall  ever 
be  strong  enough  to  endure  that  strain. 

Even  if  the  surroundings  had  been  less  sorrowful  it  is 
not  likely  that  Clemens  would  have  returned  to  Hartford 
at  this  time.  He  had  become  a  world-character,  a  dweller 
in  capitals.  Everywhere  he  moved  a  world  revolved 
about  him.  Such  a  figure  in  Germany  would  live  natu- 
rally in  Berlin;  in  England,  London;  in  France,  Paris;  in 
Austria,  Vienna;  in  America  his  headquarters  could  only 
be  New  York. 

Clemens  empowered  certain  of  his  friends  to  find  a  home 
for  him,  and  Mr.  Frank  N.  Doubleday  discovered  an 
attractive  and  handsomely  furnished  residence  at  14  West 
Tenth  Street,  which  was  promptly  approved.  Doubleday, 
who  was  going  to  Boston,  left  orders  with  the  agent  to 
draw  the  lease  and  take  it  up  to  the  new  tenant  for  signa- 
ture.   To  Clemens  he  said: 

1112 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  CONQUEROR 


"The  house  is  as  good  as  yours.  All  you've  got  to  do 
is  to  sign  the  lease.    You  can  consider  it  all  settled." 

When  Doubleday  returned  from  Boston  a  few  days 
later  the  agent  called  on  him  and  complained  that  he 
couldn't  find  Mark  Twain  anywhere.  It  was  reported  at 
his  hotel  that  he  had  gone  and  left  no  address.  Doubleday 
was  mystified ;  then,  reflecting,  he  had  an  inspiration.  He 
walked  over  to  14  West  Tenth  Street  and  found  what  he 
had  suspected — Mark  Twain  had  moved  in.  He  had  con- 
vinced the  caretaker  that  everything  was  all  right  and  he 
was  quite  at  home.    Doubleday  said : 

"Why,  you  haven't  executed  the  lease  yet." 

"No,"  said  Clemens,  "but  you  said  the  house  was  as 
good  as  mine,"  to  which  Doubleday  agreed,  but  suggested 
that  they  go  up  to  the  real-estate  office  and  give  the  agent 
notice  that  he  was  in  possession  of  the  premises. 

Doubleday's  troubles  were  not  quite  over,  however. 
Clemens  began  to  find  defects  in  his  new  home  and  as- 
sumed to  hold  Doubleday  responsible  for  them.  He  sent 
a  daily  postal  card  complaining  of  the  windows,  furnace, 
the  range,  the  water — whatever  he  thought  might  lend 
interest  to  Doubleday's  life.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  was 
pleased  with  the  place.    To  MacAlister  he  wrote: 

We  were  very  lucky  to  get  this  big  house  furnished.  There 
was  not  another  one  in  town  procurable  that  would  answer  us, 
but  this  one  is  all  right — space  enough  in  it  for  several  families, 
the  rooms  all  old-fashioned,  great  size. 

The  house  at  14  West  Tenth  Street  became  suddenly 
one  of  the  most  conspicuous  residences  in  New  York. 
The  papers  immediately  made  its  appearance  familiar. 
Many  people  passed  down  that  usually  quiet  street, 
stopping  to  observe  or  point  out  where  Mark  Twain 
lived.  There  was  a  constant  procession  of  callers  of 
every  kind.  Many  were  friends,  old  and  new,  but  there 
was  a  multitude  of  strangers.   Hundreds  came  merely  to 

1 1 13 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


express  their  appreciation  of  his  work,  hoping  for  a  per- 
sonal word  or  a  hand-shake  or  an  autograph;  but  there 
were  other  hundreds  who  came  with  this  thing  and  that 
thing — axes  to  grind — and  there  were  newspaper  reporters 
to  ask  his  opinion  on  politics,  or  polygamy,  or  woman's 
suffrage;  on  heaven  and  hell  and  happiness;  on  the  latest 
novel;  on  the  war  in  Africa,  the  troubles  in  China;  on  any- 
thing under  the  sun,  important  or  unimportant,  interest- 
ing or  inane,  concerning  which  one  might  possibly  hold 
an  opinion.  He  was  unfailing  "copy"  if  they  could  but 
get  a  word  with  him.  Anything  that  he  might  choose  to 
say  upon  any  subject  whatever  was  seized  upon  and  mag- 
nified and  printed  with  head-lines.  Sometimes  opinions 
were  invented  for  him.  If  he  let  fall  a  few  words  they 
were  multiplied  into  a  column  interview. 

"That  reporter  worked  a  miracle  equal  to  the  loaves 
and  fishes,"  he  said  of  one  such  performance. 

Many  men  would  have  become  annoyed  and  irritable 
as  these  things  continued;  but  Mark  Twain  was  greater 
than  that.  Eventually  he  employed  a  secretary  to  stand 
between  him  and  the  wash  of  the  tide,  as  a  sort  of 
breakwater;  but  he  seldom  lost  his  temper  no  matter 
what  was  the  request  which  was  laid  before  him,  for 
he  recognized  underneath  it  the  great  tribute  of  a  great 
nation. 

Of  course  his  literary  valuation  would  be  affected  by 
the  noise  of  the  general  applause.  Magazines  and  syndi- 
cates besought  him  for  manuscripts.  He  was  offered  fifty 
cents  and  even  a  dollar  a  word  for  whatever  he  might  give 
them.  He  felt  a  child-like  gratification  in  these  evidences 
of  his  market  advancement,  but  he  was  not  demoralized 
by  them.  He  confined  his  work  to  a  few  magazines,  and 
in  November  concluded  an  arrangement  with  the  new 
management  of  Harper  &  Brothers,  by  which  that  firm 
was  to  have  the  exclusive  serial  privilege  of  what- 
ever he  might  write  at  a  fixed  rate  of  twenty  cents  per 

1114 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  CONQUEROR 


word — a  rate  increased  to  thirty  cents  by  a  later  con- 
tract, which  also  provided  for  the  publication  of  his 
books. 

The  United  States,  as  a  nation,  does  not  confer  any 
special  honors  upon  private  citizens.  We  do  not  have 
decorations  and  titles,  even  though  there  are  times  when 
it  seems  that  such  things  might  be  not  inappropriately 
conferred.  Certain  of  the  newspapers,  more  lavish  in 
their  enthusiasm  than  others,  were  inclined  to  propose,  as 
one  paper  phrased  it,  "Some  peculiar  recognition — some- 
thing that  should  appeal  to  Samuel  L.  Clemens,  the  man, 
rather  than  to  Mark  Twain,  the  literate.  Just  what  form 
this  recognition  should  take  is  doubtful,  for  the  case  has 
no  exact  precedent." 

Perhaps  the  paper  thought  that  Mark  Twain  was  en- 
titled— as  he  himself  once  humorously  suggested — to  the 
"thanks  of  Congress"  for  having  come  home  alive  and 
out  of  debt,  but  it  is  just  as  well  that  nothing  of  the  sort 
was  ever  seriously  considered.  The  thanks  of  the  public 
at  large  contained  more  substance,  and  was  a  tribute  much 
more  to  his  mind.  The  paper  above  quoted  ended  by  sug- 
gesting a  very  large  dinner  and  memorial  of  welcome  as 
being  more  in  keeping  with  the  republican  idea  and  the 
American  expression  of  good-will. 

But  this  was  an  unneeded  suggestion.  If  he  had  eaten 
all  the  dinners  proposed  he  would  not  have  lived  to  enjoy 
his  public  honors  a  month.  As  it  was,  he  accepted  many 
more  dinners  than  he  could  eat,  and  presently  fell  into 
the  habit  of  arriving  when  the  banqueting  was  about  over 
and  the  after-dinner  speaking  about  to  begin.  Even  so 
the  strain  told  on  him. 

"  His  friends  saw  that  he  was  wearing  himself  out,"  says 
Howells,  and  perhaps  this  was  true,  for  he  grew  thin  and 
pale  and  contracted  a  hacking  cough.  He  did  not  spare 
himself  as  often  as  he  should  have  done.  Once  to  Richard 
Watson  Gilder  he  sent  this  line  of  regrets: 

IXI5 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


In  bed  with  a  chest  cold  and  other  company— Wednesday. 

Dear  Gilder,— I  can't.   If  I  were  a  well  man  I  could  explain 

with  this  pencil,  but  in  the  cir  ces  I  will  leave  it  all  to  your 

imagination. 

Was  it  Grady  who  killed  himself  trying  to  do  all  the  dining  and 
speeching? 

No,  old  man,  no,  no!  Ever  yours,  Mark. 

He  became  again  the  guest  of  honor  at  the  Lotos  Club, 
which  had  dined  him  so  lavishly  seven  years  before,  just 
previous  to  his  financial  collapse.  That  former  dinner  had 
been  a  distinguished  occasion,  but  never  before  had  the 
Lotos  Club  been  so  brimming  with  eager  hospitality  as 
on  the  second  great  occasion.  In  closing  his  introductory 
speech  President  Frank  Lawrence  said,  "We  hail  him  as 
one  who  has  borne  great  burdens  with  manliness  and 
courage,  who  has  emerged  from  great  struggles  victorious," 
and  the  assembled  diners  roared  out  their  applause. 
Clemens  in  his  reply  said: 

Your  president  has  referred  to  certain  burdens  which  I  was 
weighted  with.  I  am  glad  he  did,  as  it  gives  me  an  opportunity 
which  I  wanted — to  speak  of  those  debts.  You  all  knew  what 
he  meant  when  he  referred  to  it,  &  of  the  poor  bankrupt  firm  of 
C.  L.  Webster  &  Co.  No  one  has  said  a  word  about  those 
creditors.  There  were  ninety-six  creditors  in  all,  &  not  by  a 
finger's  weight  did  ninety-five  out  of  the  ninety-six  add  to  the 
burden  of  that  time.  They  treated  me  well;  they  treated  me 
handsomely.  I  never  knew  I  owed  them  anything;  not  a  sign 
came  from  them. 

It  was  like  him  to  make  that  public  acknowledgment. 
He  could  not  let  an  unfair  impression  remain  that  any  man 
or  any  set  of  men  had  laid  an  unnecessary  burden  upon 
him — his  sense  of  justice  would  not  consent  to  it.  He  also 
spoke  on  that  occasion  of  certain  national  changes. 

How  many  things  have  happened  in  the  seven  years  I  have 
been  away  from  home!  We  have  fought  a  righteous  war,  and 
a  righteous  war  is  a  rare  thing  in  history.   We  have  turned 

ii  i6 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  OP  THE  CONQUEROR 


aside  from  our  own  comfort  and  seen  to  it  that  freedom  should 
exist,  not  only  within  our  own  gates,  but  in  our  own  neighbor- 
hood. We  have  set  Cuba  free  and  placed  her  among  the  galaxy 
of  free  nations  of  the  world.  We  started  out  to  set  those  poor 
Filipinos  free,  but  why  that  righteous  plan  miscarried  perhaps 
I  shall  never  know.  We  have  also  been  making  a  creditable 
showing  in  China,  and  that  is  more  than  all  the  other  powers 
can  say.  The  "Yellow  Terror"  is  threatening  the  world,  but 
no  matter  what  happens  the  United  States  says  that  it  has  had 
no  part  in  it. 

Since  I  have  been  away  we  have  been  nursing  free  silver. 
We  have  watched  by  its  cradle,  we  have  done  our  best  to  raise 
that  child,  but  every  time  it  seemed  to  be  getting  along  nicely 
along  came  some  pestiferous  Republican  and  gave  it  the  measles 
or  something.   I  fear  we  will  never  raise  that  child. 

We've  done  more  than  that.  We  elected  a  President  four 
years  ago.  We've  found  fault  and  criticized  him,  and  here  a 
day  or  two  ago  we  go  and  elect  him  for  another  four  years,  with 
votes  enough  to  spare  to  do  it  over  again. 

One  club  followed  another  in  honoring  Mark  Twain — 
the  Aldine,  the  St.  Nicholas,  the  Press  clubs,  and  other 
associations  and  societies.  His  old  friends  were  at  these 
dinners— Howells,  Aldrich,  Depew,  Rogers,  ex-Speaker 
Reed— and  they  praised  him  and  gibed  him  to  his  and 
their  hearts'  content. 

It  was  a  political  year,  and  he  generally  had  some- 
thing to  say  on  matters  municipal,  national,  or  interna- 
tional; and  he  spoke  out  more  and  more  freely,  as  with 
each  opportunity  he  warmed  more  righteously  to  his 
subject. 

At  the  dinner  given  to  him  by  the  St.  Nicholas  Club 
he  said,  with  deep  irony: 

Gentlemen,  you  have  here  the  best  municipal  government 
in  the  world,  and  the  most  fragrant  and  the  purest.  The  very 
angels  of  heaven  envy  you  and  wish  they  had  a  government 
like  it  up  there.  You  got  it  by  your  noble  fidelity  to  civic  duty; 
by  the  stern  and  ever  watchful  exercise  of  the  great  powers 

1 1 1 7 


Digitized  bf  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

lodged  in  you  as  lovers  and  guardians  of  your  city;  by  your 
manly  refusal  to  sit  inert  when  base  men  would  have  invaded 
her  high  places  and  possessed  them;  by  your  instant  retaliation 
when  any  insult  was  offered  you  in  her  person,  or  any  assault 
was  made  upon  her  fair  fame.  It  is  you  who  have  made  this 
government  what  it  is,  it  is  you  who  have  made  it  the  envy  and 
despair  of  the  other  capitals  of  the  world— and  God  bless  you  for 
it,  gentlemen,  God  bless  you  I  And  when  you  get  to  heaven  at 
last  they'll  say  with  joy,  "Oh,  there  they  come,  the  representa- 
tives of  the  perfectest  citizenship  in  the  universe — show  them 
the  archangel's  box  and  turn  on  the  limelight  1" 

Those  hearers  who  in  former  years  had  been  indifferent 
to  Mark  Twain's  more  serious  purpose  began  to  realize 
that,  whatever  he  may  have  been  formerly,  he  was  by  no 
means  now  a  mere  fun-maker,  but  a  man  of  deep  and  grave 
convictions,  able  to  give  them  the  fullest  and  most  forcible 
expression.  He  still  might  make  them  laugh,  but  he  also 
made  them  think,  and  he  stirred  them  to  a  truer  gospel 
of  patriotism.  He  did  not  preach  a  patriotism  that  meant 
a  boisterous  cheering  of  the  Stars  and  Stripes  right  or 
wrong,  but  a  patriotism  that  proposed  to  keep  the  Stars 
and  Stripes  clean  and  worth  shouting  for.  In  an  article, 
perhaps  it  was  a  speech,  begun  at  this  time  he  wrote: 

We  teach  the  boys  to  atrophy  their  independence.  We  teach 
them  to  take  their  patriotism  at  second-hand;  to  shout  with  the 
largest  crowd  without  examining  into  the  right  or  wrong  of  the 
matter — exactly  as  boys  under  monarchies  are  taught  and  have 
always  been  taught.  We  teach  them  to  regard  as  traitors,  and 
hold  in  aversion  and  contempt,  such  as  do  not  shout  with  the 
crowd,  &  so  here  in  our  democracy  we  are  cheering  a  thing  which 
of  all  things  is  most  foreign  to  it  &  out  of  place — the  delivery  of 
our  political  conscience  into  somebody  else's  keeping.  This  is 
patriotism  on  the  Russian  plan. 

Howells  tells  of  discussing  these  vital  matters  with  him 
in  "an  upper  room,"  looking  south  over  a  quiet,  open 
space  of  back  yards  where,"  he  says,  "we  fought  our 

1118 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  CONQUEROR 


battles  in  behalf  of  the  Filipinos  and  Boers,  and  he  car- 
ried on  his  campaign  against  the  missionaries  in  China." 

Howells  at  the  time  expressed  an  amused  fear  that 
Mark  Twain's  countrymen,  who  in  former  years  had 
expected  him  to  be  merely  a  humorist,  should  now,  in 
the  light  of  his  wider  acceptance  abroad,  demand  that  he 
be  mainly  serious. 

But  the  American  people  were  quite  ready  to  accept 
him  in  any  of  his  phases,  fully  realizing  that  whatever 
his  philosophy  or  doctrine  it  would  have  somewhat  of 
the  humorous  form,  and  whatever  his  humor,  there 
would  somewhere  be  wisdom  in  it.  He  had  in  reality 
changed  little;  for  a  generation  he  had  thought  the  sort  of 
things  which  he  now,  with  advanced  years  and  a  different 
audience,  felt  warranted  in  uttering  openly.  The  man 
who  in  '64  had  written  against  corruption  in  San  Fran- 
cisco, who  a  few  years  later  had  defended  the  emigrant 
Chinese  against  persecution,  who  at  the  meetings  of  the 
Monday  Evening  Club  had  denounced  hypocrisy  in 
politics,  morals,  and  national  issues,  did  not  need  to  change 
to  be  able  to  speak  out  against  similar  abuses  now.  And 
a  newer  generation  as  willing  to  herald  Mark  Twain  as 
a  sage  as  well  as  a  humorist,  and  on  occasion  to  quite 
overlook  the  absence  of  the  cap  and  bells. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ccxin 


MARK  TWAIN — GENERAL  SPOKESMAN 

CLEMENS  did  not  confine  his  speeches  altogether  to 
matters  of  reform.  At  a  dinner  given  by  the 
Nineteenth  Century  Club  in  November,  1900,  he  spoke 
on  the  "Disappearance  of  Literature,"  and  at  the  close  of 
tTie  discussion  of  that  subject,  referring  to  Milton  and 
Scott,  he  said: 

Professor  Winchester  also  said  something  about  there  being 
no  modern  epics  like  "Paradise  Lost."  I  guess  he's  right.  He 
talked  as  if  he  was  pretty  familiar  with  that  piece  of  literary 
work,  and  nobody  would  suppose  that  he  never  had  read  it. 
I  don't  believe  any  of  you  have  ever  read  "Paradise  Lost," 
and  you  don't  want  to.  That's  something  that  you  just  want 
to  take  on  trust.  It's  a  classic,  just  as  Professor  Winchester 
says,  and  it  meets  his  definition  of  a  classic — something  that 
everybody  wants  to  have  read  and  nobody  wants  to  read. 

Professor  Trent  also  had  a  good  deal  to  say  about  the  dis- 
appearance of  literature.  He  said  that  Scott  would  outlive  all 
his  critics.  I  guess  that's  true.  That  fact  of  the  business  is 
you've  got  to  be  one  of  two  ages  to  appreciate  Scott.  When 
you're  eighteen  you  can  read  Ivanhoe,  and  you  want  to  wait 
until  you're  ninety  to  read  some  of  the  rest.  It  takes  a  pretty 
well-regulated  abstemious  critic  to  live  ninety  years. 

But  a  few  days  later  he  was  back  again  in  the  forefront 
of  reform,  preaching  at  the  Berkeley  Lyceum  against 
foreign  occupation  in  China.  It  was  there  that  he  de- 
clared himself  a  Boxer. 

1120 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN— GENERAL  SPOKESMAN 


Why  should  not  China  be  free  from  the  foreigners,  who  are 
only  making  trouble  on  her  soil?  If  they  would  only  all  go 
home  what  a  pleasant  place  China  would  be  for  the  Chinese! 
We  do  not  allow  Chinamen  to  come  here,  and  I  say,  in  all 
seriousness,  that  it  would  be  a  graceful  thing  to  let  China  decide 
who  shall  go  there. 

China  never  wanted  foreigners  any  more  than  foreigners 
wanted  Chinamen,  and  on  this  question  I  am  with  the  Boxers 
every  time.  The  Boxer  is  a  patriot.  He  loves  his  country 
better  than  he  does  the  countries  of  other  people.  I  wish  him 
success.  We  drive  the  Chinaman  out  of  our  country;  the  Boxer 
believes  in  driving  us  out  of  his  country.  I  am  a  Boxer,  too, 
on  those  terms. 

Introducing  Winston  Churchill,  of  England,  at  a  dinner 
some  weeks  later,  he  explained  how  generous  England  and 
America  had  been  in  not  requiring  fancy  rates  for  "ex- 
tinguished missionaries"  in  China  as  Germany  had  done. 
Germany  had  required  territory  and  cash,  he  said,  in 
payment  for  her  missionaries,  while  the  United  States 
and  England  had  been  willing  to  settle  for  produce — fire- 
crackers and  tea. 

The  Churchill  introduction  would  seem  to  have  been 
his  last  speech  for  the  year  1900,  and  he  expected  it,  with 
one  exception,  to  be  the  last  for  a  long  time.  He  realized 
that  he  was  tired  and  that  the  strain  upon  him  made  any 
other  sort  of  work  out  of  the  question.  Writing  to 
MacAlister  at  the  end  of  the  year,  he  said, "  I  seem  to  have 
made  many  speeches,  but  it  is  not  so.  It  is  not  more  than 
ten,  I  think."  Still,  a  respectable  number  in  the  space 
of  two  months,  considering  that  each  was  carefully  written 
and  committed  to  memory,  and  all  amid  crushing  social 
pressure.   Again  to  MacAlister: 

I  declined  7  banquets  yesterday  (which  is  double  the  daily 
average)  &  answered  29  letters.  I  have  slaved  at  my  mail  every 
day  since  we  arrived  in  mid-October,  but  Jean  is  learning  to  type- 
write &  presently  I'll  dictate  &  thereby  save  some  scraps  of  time. 

1121 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


He  added  that  after  January  4th  he  did  not  intend  to 
speak  again  for  a  year — that  he  would  not  speak  then 
only  that  the  matter  concerned  the  reform  of  city  govern- 
ment. 

The  occasion  of  January  4,  1901,  was  a  rather  important 
one.  It  was  a  meeting  of  the  City  Club,  then  engaged  in 
the  crusade  for  municipal  reform.  Wheeler  H.  Peckham 
presided,  and  Bishop  Potter  made  the  opening  address.  It 
all  seems  like  ancient  history  now,  and  perhaps  is  not 
very  vital  any  more ;  but  the  movement  was  making  a  great 
stir  then,  and  Mark  Twain's  declaration  that  he  believed 
forty-nine  men  out  of  fifty  were  honest,  and  that  the 
forty-nine  only  needed  to  organize  to  disqualify  the  fiftieth 
man  (always  organized  for  crime),  was  quoted  as  a  sort  of 
slogan  for  reform. 

Clemens  was  not  permitted  to  keep  his  resolution  that 
he  wouldn't  speak  again  that  year.  He  had  become  a  sort 
of  general  spokesman  on  public  matters,  and  demands 
were  made  upon  him  which  could  not  be  denied.  He  de- 
clined a  Yale  alumni  dinner,  but  he  could  not  refuse  to 
preside  at  the  Lincoln  Birthday  celebration  at  Carnegie 
Hall,  February  nth,  where  he  must  introduce  Watterson 
as  the  speaker  of  the  evening. 

"Think  of  it!"  he  wrote  Twichell.  "Two  old  rebels 
functioning  there:  I  as  president  and  Watterson  as  orator 
of  the  day !  Things  have  changed  somewhat  in  these  forty 
years,  thank  God!" 

The  Watterson  introduction  is  one  of  the  choicest  of 
Mark  Twain's  speeches — a  pure  and  perfect  example  of 
simple  eloquence,  worthy  of  the  occasion  which  gave  it 
utterance,  worthy  in  spite  of  its  playful  paragraphs  (or 
even  because  of  them,  for  Lincoln  would  have  loved  them), 
to  become  the  matrix  of  that  imperishable  Gettysburg 
phrase  with  which  he  makes  his  climax.  He  opened  by 
dwelling  for  a  moment  on  Colonel  Watterson  as  a  soldier, 
journalist,  orator,  statesman,  and  patriot;  then  he  said: 

1122 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN— GENERAL  SPOKESMAN 


It  is  a  curious  circumstance  that  without  collusion  of  any 
kind,  but  merely  in  obedience  to  a  strange  and  pleasant  and 
dramatic  freak  of  destiny,  he  and  I,  kinsmen  by  blood  1 — for  we 
are  that — and  one-time  rebels— for  we  were  that — should  be 
chosen  out  of  a  million  surviving  quondam  rebels  to  come  here 
and  bare  our  heads  in  reverence  and  love  of  that  noble  soul  whom 
40  years  ago  we  tried  with  all  our  hearts  and  all  our  strength 
to  defeat  and  dispossess — Abraham  Lincoln!  Is  the  Rebellion 
ended  and  forgotten?  Are  the  Blue  and  the  Gray  one  to-day? 
By  authority  of  this  sign  we  may  answer  yes;  there  was  a  Re- 
bellion—that incident  is  closed. 

I  was  born  and  reared  in  a  slave  State,  my  father  was  a  slave- 
owner; and  in  the  Civil  War  I  was  a  second  lieutenant  in  the 
Confederate  service.  For  a  while.  This  second  cousin  of  mine, 
Colonel  Watterson,  the  orator  of  this  present  occasion,  was  born 
and  reared  in  a  slave  State,  was  a  colonel  in  the  Confederate 
service,  and  rendered  me  such  assistance  as  he  could  in  my  self- 
appointed  great  task  of  annihilating  the  Federal  armies  and 
breaking  up  the  Union.  I  laid  my  plans  with  wisdom  and  fore- 
sight, and  if  Colonel  Watterson  had  obeyed  my  orders  I  should 
have  succeeded  in  my  giant  undertaking.  It  was  my  intention 
to  drive  General  Grant  into  the  Pacific — if  I  could  get  transpor- 
tation— and  I  told  Colonel  Watterson  to  surround  the  Eastern 
armies  and  wait  till  I  came.  But  he  was  insubordinate,  and 
stood  upon  a  punctilio  of  military  etiquette;  he  refused  to  take 
orders  from  a  second  lieutenant — and  the  Union  was  saved. 
This  is  the  first  time  that  this  secret  has  been  revealed.  Until 
now  no  one  outside  the  family  has  known  the  facts.  But  there 
they  stand:  Watterson  saved  the  Union.  Yet  to  this  day  that 
man  gets  no  pension.  Those  were  great  days,  splendid  days. 
What  an  uprising  it  was!  For  the  hearts  of  the  whole  nation, 
North  and  South,  were  in  the  war.  We  of  the  South  were  not 
ashamed;  for,  like  the  men  of  the  North,  we  were  fighting  for 
flags  we  loved;  and  when  men  fight  for  these  things,  and  under 
these  convictions,  with  nothing  sordid  to  tarnish  their  cause, 
that  cause  is  holy,  the  blood  spilt  for  it  is  sacred,  the  life  that  is 
laid  down  for  it  is  consecrated.  To-day  we  no  longer  regret 

1  Colonel  Watterson 's  forebears  had  intermarried  with  the 
Lamptons. 

1123 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


the  result,  to-day  we  are  glad  it  came  out  as  it  did,  but  we  are 
not  ashamed  that  we  did  our  endeavor;  we  did  our  bravest  best, 
against  despairing  odds,  for  the  cause  which  was  precious  to  us 
and  which  our  consciences  approved;  and  we  are  proud — and 
you  are  proud— the  kindred  blood  in  your  veins  answers  when  I 
say  it— you  are  proud  of  the  record  we  made  in  those  mighty 
collisions  in  the  fields. 

What  an  uprising  it  was!  We  did  not  have  to  supplicate  for 
soldiers  on  either  side.  "  We  are  coming,  Father  Abraham,  three 
hundred  thousand  strong!'1  That  was  the  music  North  and 
South.  The  very  choicest  young  blood  and  brawn  and  brain 
rose  up  from  Maine  to  the  Gulf  and  flocked  to  the  standards — 
just  as  men  always  do  when  in  their  eyes  their  cause  is  great 
and  fine  and  their  hearts  are  in  it;  just  as  men  flocked  to  the 
Crusades,  sacrificing  all  they  possessed  to  the  cause,  and  entering 
cheerfully  upon  hardships  which  we  cannot  even  imagine  in  this 
age,  and  upon  toilsome  and  wasting  journeys  which  in  our  time 
would  be  the  equivalent  of  circumnavigating  the  globe  five  times 
over. 

North  and  South  we  put  our  hearts  into  that  colossal  struggle, 
and  out  of  it  came  the  blessed  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  the 
immortal  Gettysburg  speech  which  said:  "We  here  highly  re- 
solve that  these  dead  shall  not  have  died  in  vain;  that  this 
nation,  under  God,  shall  have  a  new  birth  of  freedom;  and  that 
a  government  of  the  people,  by  the  people,  for  the  people,  shall 
not  perish  from  the  earth." 

We  are  here  to  honor  the  birthday  of  the  greatest  citizen,  and 
the  noblest  and  the  best,  after  Washington,  that  this  land  or  any 
other  has  yet  produced.  The  old  wounds  are  healed,  you  and 
we  are  brothers  again;  you  testify  it  by  honoring  two  of  us, 
once  soldiers  of  the  Lost  Cause,  and  foes  of  your  great  and  good 
leader — with  the  privilege  of  assisting  here;  and  we  testify  it 
by  laying  our  honest  homage  at  the  feet  of  Abraham  Lincoln, 
and  in  forgetting  that  you  of  the  North  and  we  of  the  South 
were  ever  enemies,  and  remembering  only  that  we  are  now 
indistinguishably  fused  together  and  nameable  by  one  common 
great  name — Americans! 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXIV 


MARK  TWAIN  AND  THE  MISSIONARIES 

MARK  TWAIN  had  really  begun  his  crusade  for  re- 
L  form  soon  after  his  arrival  in  America  in  a  practical 
hand-to-hand  manner.  His  housekeeper,  Katie  Leary,  one 
night  employed  a  cabman  to  drive  her  from  the  Grand 
Central  Station  to  the  house  at  14  West  Tenth  Street. 
No  contract  had  been  made  as  to  price,  and  when  she 
arrived  there  the  cabman's  extortionate  charge  was  re- 
fused. He  persisted  in  it,  and  she  sent  into  the  house  for 
her  employer.  Of  all  men,  Mark  Twain  was  the  last  one 
to  countenance  an  extortion.  He  reasoned  with  the  man 
kindly  enough  at  first;  when  the  driver  at  last  became 
abusive  Clemens  demanded  his  number,  which  was  at 
first  refused.  In  the  end  he  paid  the  legal  fare,  and 
in  the  morning  entered  a  formal  complaint,  something 
altogether  unexpected,  for  the  American  public  is  accus- 
tomed to  suffering  almost  any  sort  of  imposition  to  avoid 
trouble  and  publicity. 

In  some  notes  which  Clemens  had  made  in  London 
four  years  earlier  he  wrote: 

If  you  call  a  policeman  to  settle  the  dispute  you  can  depend  on 
one  thing— he  will  decide  it  against  you  every  time.  And  so  will 
the  New  York  policeman.  In  London  if  you  carry  your  case 
into  court  the  man  that  is  entitled  to  win  it  will  win  it.  In 
New  York — but  no  one  carries  a  cab  case  into  court  there.  It  is 
my  impression  that  it  is  now  more  than  thirty  years  since  any 
one  has  carried  a  cab  case  into  court  there. 

1125 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Nevertheless,  he  was  promptly  on  hand  when  the  case 
was  called  to  sustain  the  charge  and  to  read  the  cab- 
drivers'  union  and  the  public  in  general  a  lesson  in  good- 
citizenship.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing,  to  a  representative 
of  the  union  he  said : 

"This  is  not  a  matter  of  sentiment,  my  dear  sir.  It  is 
simply  practical  business.  You  cannot  imagine  that  I 
am  making  money  wasting  an  hour  or  two  of  my  time 
prosecuting  a  case  in  which  I  can  have  no  personal 
interest  whatever.  I  am  doing  this  just  as  any  citizen 
should  do.  He  has  no  choice.  He  has  a  distinct  duty. 
He  is  a  non-classified  policeman.  Every  citizen  is  a  police- 
man, and  it  is  his  duty  to  assist  the  police  and  the 
magistracy  in  every  way  he  can,  and  give  his  time,  if 
necessary,  to  do  so.  Here  is  a  man  who  is  a  perfectly 
natural  product  of  an  infamous  system  in  this  city — a 
charge  upon  the  lax  patriotism  in  this  city  of  New  York 
that  this  thing  can  exist.  You  have  encouraged  him  in 
every  way  you  know  how  to  overcharge.  He  is  not  the 
criminal  here  at  all.  The  criminal  is  the  citizen  of  New 
York  and  the  absence  of  patriotism.  I  am  not  here  to 
avenge  myself  on  him.  I  have  no  quarrel  with  him.  My 
quarrel  is  with  the  citizens  of  New  York,  who  have  en- 
couraged him,  and  who  created  him  by  encouraging  him 
to  overcharge  in  this  way." 

The  driver's  license  was  suspended.  The  case  made  a 
stir  in  the  newspapers,  and  it  is  not  likely  that  any  one 
incident  ever  contributed  more  to  cab-driving  morals  in 
New  York  City. 

But  Clemens  had  larger  matters  than  this  in  prospect. 
His  many  speeches  on  municipal  and  national  abuses  he 
felt  were  more  or  less  ephemeral.  He  proposed  now  to 
write  himself  down  more  substantially  and  for  a  wider 
hearing.  The  human  race  was  behaving  very  badly:  un- 
speakable corruption  was  rampant  in  the  city;  the  Boers 
were  being  oppressed  in  South  Africa;  the  natives  were 

1126 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN  AND  THE  MISSIONARIES 


being  murdered  in  the  Philippines;  Leopold  of  Belgium 
was  massacring  and  mutilating  the  blacks  in  the  Congo, 
and  the  allied  powers,  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  were  slaugh- 
tering the  Chinese.  In  his  letters  he  had  more  than  once 
boiled  over  touching  these  matters,  and  for  New-Year's 
Eve,  1900,  had  written: 

A  GREETING  FROM  THE  NINETEENTH  TO  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY 

I  bring  you  the  stately  nation  named  Christendom,  returning, 
bedraggled,  besmirched,  and  dishonored,  from  pirate  raids  in 
Kiao-Chou,  Manchuria,  South  Africa,  and  the  Philippines,  with 
her  soul  full  of  meanness,  her  pocket  full  of  boodle,  and  her 
mouth  full  of  pious  hypocrisies.  Give  her  soap  and  towel,  but 
hide  the  looking-glass.1 

This  was  a  sort  of  preliminary.  Then,  restraining  him- 
self no  longer,  he  embodied  his  sentiments  in  an  article  for 
the  North  American  Review  entitled,  "  To  the  Person  Sitting 
in  Darkness."  There  was  crying  need  for  some  one  to 
speak  the  right  word.  He  was  about  the  only  one  who 
could  do  it  and  be  certain  of  a  universal  audience.  He 
took  as  his  text  some  Christmas  Eve  clippings  from  the 
New  York  Tribune  and  Sun  which  he  had  been  saving  for 
this  purpose.    The  Tribune  clipping  said: 

Christmas  will  dawn  in  the  United  States  over  a  people  full 
of  hope  and  aspiration  and  good  cheer.  Such  a  condition  means 
contentment  and  happiness.  The  carping  grumbler  who  may 
here  and  there  go  forth  will  find  few  to  listen  to  him.  The 
majority  will  wonder  what  is  the  matter  with  him,  and  pass  on. 

A  Sun  clipping  depicted  the  "terrible  offenses  against 
humanity  committed  in  the  name  of  politics  in  some  of 

1  Prepared  for  Red  Cross  Society  watch-meeting,  which  was  post- 
poned until  March.  Clemens  recalled  his  "Greeting"  for  that 
reason  and  for  one  other,  which  he  expressed  thus: 

"The  list  of  greeters  thus  far  issued  by  you  contains  only  vague 
generalities  and  one  definite  name — mine:  'Some  kings  and  queens 
and  Mark  Twain.'  Now  I  am  not  enjoying  this  sj>arkling  solitude  and 
distinction.    It  makes  me  feel  like  a  circus-poster  in  a  graveyard." 

1127 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


the  most  notorious  East  Side  districts" — the  unmission- 
aried,  unpoliced  darker  New  York.  The  Sun  declared 
that  they  could  not  be  pictured  even  verbally.  But  it 
suggested  enough  to  make  the  reader  shudder  at  the 
hideous  depths  of  vice  in  the  sections  named.  Another 
clipping  from  the  same  paper  reported  the  "Rev.  Mr. 
Ament,  of  the  American  Board  of  Foreign  Missions,"  as 
having  collected  indemnities  for  Boxer  damages  in  China 
at  the  rate  of  three  hundred  taels  for  each  murder,  "full 
payment  for  all  destroyed  property  belonging  to  Christians, 
and  national  fines  amounting  to  thirteen  times  the  indem- 
nity." It  quoted  Mr.  Ament  as  saying  that  the  money 
so  obtained  was  used  for  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel, 
and  that  the  amount  so  collected  was  moderate  when 
compared  with  the  amount  secured  by  the  Catholics,  who 
had  demanded,  in  addition  to  money,  life  for  life,  that 
is  to  say,  "head  for  head" — in  one  district  six  hundred 
and  eighty  heads  having  been  so  collected. 

The  despatch  made  Mr.  Ament  say  a  great  deal  more 
than  this,  but  the  gist  here  is  enough.  Mark  Twain,  of 
course,  was  fiercely  stirred.  The  missionary  idea  had 
seldom  appealed  to  him,  and  coupled  with  this  business 
of  bloodshed,  it  was  less  attractive  than  usual.  He  printed 
the  clippings  in  full,  one  following  the  other;  then  he  said: 

By  happy  luck  we  get  all  these  glad  tidings  on  Christmas  Eve 
— just  the  time  to  enable  us  to  celebrate  the  day  with  proper 
gaiety  and  enthusiasm.  Our  spirits  soar  and  we  find  we  can 
even  make  jokes;  taels  I  win,  heads  you  lose. 

He  went  on  to  score  Ament,  to  compare  the  missionary 
policy  in  China  to  that  of  the  Pawnee  Indians,  and  to 
propose  for  him  a  monument — subscriptions  to  be  sent  to 
the  American  Board.  He  denounced  the  national  policies 
in  Africa,  China,  and  the  Philippines,  and  showed  by  the 
reports  and  by  the  private  letters  of  soldiers  home,  how 

1128 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN  AND  THE  MISSIONARIES 


cruel  and  barbarous  and  fiendish  had  been  the  warfare 
made  by  those  whose  avowed  purpose  was  to  carry  the 
blessed  light  of  civilization  and  Gospel  "to  the  benighted 
native" — how  in  very  truth  these  priceless  blessings  had 
been  handed  on  the  point  of  a  bayonet  to  the  "Person 
Sitting  in  Darkness." 

Mark  Twain  never  wrote  anything  more  scorching, 
more  penetrating  in  its  sarcasm,  more  fearful  in  its  revela- 
tion of  injustice  and  hypocrisy,  than  his  article  "To  the 
Person  Sitting  in  Darkness."  He  put  aquafortis  on  all 
the  raw  places,  and  when  it  was  finished  he  himself  doubted 
the  wisdom  of  printing  it.  Howells,  however,  agreed  that 
it  should  be  published,  and  "it  ought  to  be  illustrated  by 
Dan  Beard,"  he  added,  "  with  such  pictures  as  he  made  for 
the  Yankee  in  King  Arthur's  Court,  but  you'd  better  hang 
yourself  afterward." 

Meeting  Beard  a  few  days  later,  Clemens  mentioned  the 
matter  and  said: 

"So  if  you  make  the  pictures,  you  hang  with  me." 

But  pictures  were  not  required.  It  was  published  in 
the  North  American  Review  for  February,  1901,  as  the 
opening  article;  after  which  the  cyclone.  Two  storms 
moving  in  opposite  directions  produce  a  cyclone,  and  the 
storms  immediately  developed;  one  all  for  Mark  Twain  and 
his  principles,  the  other  all  against  him.  Every  paper  in 
England  and  America  commented  on  it  editorially,  with 
bitter  denunciations  or  with  eager  praise,  according  to 
their  lights  and  convictions. 

At  14  West  Tenth  Street  letters,  newspaper  clippings, 
documents  poured  in  by  the  bushel — laudations,  vitupera- 
tions, denunciations,  vindications;  no  such  tumult  ever 
occurred  in  a  peaceful  literary  home.  It  was  really  as  if 
he  had  thrown  a  great  missile  into  the  human  hive,  one- 
half  of  which  regarded  it  as  a  ball  of  honey  and  the 
remainder  as  a  cobblestone.  Wliatever  other  effect  it  may 
have  had,  it  left  no  thinking  person  una  wakened. 

1129 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Clemens  reveled  in  it.  W.  A.  Rogers,  in  Harper's 
Weekly,  caricatured  him  as  Tom  Sawyer  in  a  snow  fort, 
assailed  by  the  shower  of  snowballs,  "having  the  time  of 
his  life."  Another  artist,  Fred  Lewis,  pictured  him  as 
Huck  Finn  with  a  gun. 

The  American  Board  was  naturally  disturbed.  The 
Ament  clipping  which  Clemens  had  used  had  been  public 
property  for  more  than  a  month — its  authenticity  never 
denied;  but  it  was  immediately  denied  now,  and  the 
cable  kept  hot  with  inquiries. 

The  Rev.  Judson  Smith,  one  of  the  board,  took  up  the 
defense  of  Dr.  Ament,  declaring  him  to  be  one  who  had 
suffered  for  the  cause,  and  asked  Mark  Twain,  whose 
"brilliant  article,"  he  said,  "would  produce  an  effect  quite 
beyond  the  reach  of  plain  argument,"  not  to  do  an  inno- 
cent man  an  injustice.  Clemens  in  the  same  paper  replied 
that  such  was  not  his  intent,  that  Mr.  Ament  in  his  report 
had  simply  arraigned  himself. 

Then  it  suddenly  developed  that  the  cable  report  had 
"grossly  exaggerated"  the  amount  of  Mr.  Ament's  collec- 
tions. Instead  of  thirteen  times  the  indemnity  it  should 
have  read  "one  and  a  third  times"  the  indemnity;  where- 
upon, in  another  open  letter,  the  board  demanded  retrac- 
tion and  apology.  Clemens  would  not  fail  to  make  the 
apology — at  least  he  would  explain.  It  was  precisely  the 
kind  of  thing  that  would  appeal  to  him  —  the  delicate 
moral  difference  between  a  demand  thirteen  times  as  great 
as  it  should  be  and  a  demand  that  was  only  one  and  a 
third  times  the  correct  amount.  "To  My  Missionary 
Critics,"  in  the  North  American  Review  for  April  (iqoi), 
was  his  formal  and  somewhat  lengthy  reply. 

"I  have  no  prejudice  against  apologies,"  he  wrote. 
"  I  trust  I  shall  never  withhold  one  when  it  is 
due." 

He  then  proceeded  to  make  out  his  case  categorically. 
Touching  the  exaggerated  indemnity,  he  said: 

1130 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN  AS  HICK  FINN 


Google 


MARK  TWAIN  AND  THE  MISSIONARIES 


To  Dr.  Smith  the  "  thirteen-f old-extra"  clearly  stood  for  "theft 
and  extortion,"  and  he  was  right,  distinctly  right,  indisputably 
right.  He  manifestly  thinks  that  when  it  got  scaled  away  down 
to  a  mere  "one-third"  a  little  thing  like  that  was  some  other 
than  "theft  and  extortion."   Why,  only  the  board  knows  I 

I  will  try  to  explain  this  difficult  problem  so  that  the  board 
can  get  an  idea  of  it.  If  a  pauper  owes  me  a  dollar  and  I  catch 
him  unprotected  and  make  him  pay  me  fourteen  dollars  thirteen 
of  it  is  "theft  and  extortion."  If  I  make  him  pay  only  one 
dollar  thirty-three  and  a  third  cents  the  thirty-three  and  a  third 
cents  are  "theft  and  extortion, "  just  the  same. 

I  will  put  it  in  another  way  still  simpler.  If  a  man  owes  me 
one  dog — any  kind  of  a  dog,  the  breed  is  of  no  consequence — and 
I — but  let  it  go;  the  board  would  never  understand  it.  It  can't 
understand  these  involved  and  difficult  things. 

He  offered  some  further  illustrations,  including  the 
"Tale  of  a  King  and  His  Treasure"  and  another  tale 
entitled  "The  Watermelons." 

I  have  it  now.  Many  years  ago,  when  I  was  studying  for 
the  gallows,  I  had  a  dear  comrade,  a  youth  who  was  not  in  my 
line,  but  still  a  scrupulously  good  fellow  though  devious.  He 
was  preparing  to  qualify  for  a  place  on  the  board,  for  there  was 
going  to  be  a  vacancy  by  superannuation  in  about  five  years. 
This  was  down  South,  in  the  slavery  days.  It  was  the  nature 
of  the  negro  then,  as  now,  to  steal  watermelons.  They  stole 
three  of  the  melons  of  an  adoptive  brother  of  mine,  the  only  good 
ones  he  had.  I  suspected  three  of  a  neighbor's  negroes,  but 
there  was  no  proof,  and,  besides,  the  watermelons  in  those  negroes' 
private  patches  were  all  green  and  small  and  not  up  to  indemnity 
standard.  But  in  the  private  patches  of  three  other  negroes 
there  was  a  number  of  competent  melons.  I  consulted  with  my 
comrade,  the  understudy  of  the  board.  He  said  that  if  I  would 
approve  his  arrangements  he  would  arrange.  I  said,  "Consider 
me  the  board;  I  approve;  arrange."  So  he  took  a  gun  and 
went  and  collected  three  large  melons  for  my  brother-on-the-half- 
shell,  and  one  over.   I  was  greatly  pleased  and  asked: 

"Who  gets  the  extra  one?" 

"Widows  and  orphans." 

1131 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"A  good  idea,  too.   Why  didn't  you  take  thirteen?" 
"It  would  have  been  wrong;  a  crime,  in  fact— theft  and  ex- 
tortion." 

"What  is  the  one-third  extra — the  odd  melon — the  same?" 

It  caused  him  to  reflect.   But  there  was  no  result. 

The  justice  of  the  peace  was  a  stern  man.  On  the  trial  he 
found  fault  with  the  scheme  and  required  us  to  explain  upon 
what  we  based  our  strange  conduct — as  he  called  it.  The  under- 
study said: 

"On  the  custom  of  the  niggers.   They  all  do  it." 1 

The  justice  forgot  his  dignity  and  descended  to  sarcasm. 

"Custom  of  the  niggers!  Are  our  morals  so  inadequate  that 
we  have  to  borrow  of  niggers?" 

Then  he  said  to  the  jury:  "Three  melons  were  owing;  they 
were  collected  from  persons  not  proven  to  owe  them:  this  is 
theft;  they  were  collected  by  compulsion:  this  is  extortion.  A 
melon  was  added  for  the  widows  and  orphans.  It  was  owed 
by  no  one.  It  is  another  theft,  another  extortion.  Return  it 
whence  it  came,  with  the  others.  It  is  not  permissible  here  to 
apply  to  any  purpose  goods  dishonestly  obtained;  not  even  to 
the  feeding  of  widows  and  orphans,  for  this  would  be  to  put  a 
shame  upon  charity  and  dishonor  it." 

He  said  it  in  open  court,  before  everybody,  and  to  me  it  did 
not  seem  very  kind. 

It  was  in  the  midst  of  the  tumult  that  Clemens,  perhaps 
feeling  the  need  of  sacred  melody,  wrote  to  Andrew  Carnegie : 

Dear  Sir  &  Friend, — You  seem  to  be  in  prosperity.  Could 
you  lend  an  admirer  $1.50  to  buy  a  hymn-book  with?  God  will 
bless  you.    I  feel  it;  I  know  it. 

N.  B. — If  there  should  be  other  applications,  this  one  not  to 
count.  Yours,  Mark. 

P.  S.— Don't  send  the  hymn-book;  send  the  money;  I  want 
to  make  the  selection  myself. 

1  The  point  had  been  made  by  the  board  that  it  was  the  Chinese 
custom  to  make  the  inhabitants  of  a  village  responsible  for  individual 
crimes;  and  custom,  likewise,  to  collect  a  third  in  excess  of  the 
damage,  such  surplus  having  been  applied  to  the  support  of  widows 
and  orphans  of  the  slain  converts. 

1132 


Digitized  by  Go 


MARK  TWAIN  AND  THE  MISSIONARIES 


Carnegie  answered: 

Nothing  less  than  a  two-dollar  &  a  half  hymn-book  gilt  will 
do  for  you.  Your  place  in  the  choir  (celestial)  demands  that 
&  you  shall  have  it. 

There's  a  new  Gospel  of  Saint  Mark  in  the  North  American 
which  I  like  better  than  anything  I've  read  for  many  a  day. 

I  am  willing  to  borrow  a  thousand  dollars  to  distribute  that 
sacred  message  in  proper  form,  &  if  the  author  don't  object  may 
I  send  that  sum,  when  I  can  raise  it,  to  the  Anti-Imperialist 
League,  Boston,  to  which  I  am  a  contributor,  the  only  missionary 
work  I  am  responsible  for. 

Just  tell  me  you  are  willing  &  many  thousands  of  the  holy 
little  missals  will  go  forth.  This  inimitable  satire  is  to  become 
a  classic.  I  count  among  my  privileges  in  life  that  I  know  you, 
the  author. 

Perhaps  a  few  more  of  the  letters  invited  by  Mark 
Twain's  criticism  of  missionary  work  in  China  may  still 
be  of  interest  to  the  reader:  Frederick  T.  Cook,  of  the 
Hospital  Saturday  and  Sunday  Association,  wrote:  "I 
hail  you  as  the  Voltaire  of  America.  It  is  a  noble  dis- 
tinction. God  bless  you  and  see  that  you  weary  not  in 
well-doing  in  this  noblest,  sublimest  of  crusades.' * 

Ministers  were  by  no  means  all  against  him.  The  as- 
sociate pastor  of  the  E very-day  Church,  in  Boston,  sent 
this  line:  "  I  want  to  thank  you  for  your  matchless  article 
in  the  current  North  American.  It  must  make  converts 
of  well-nigh  all  who  read  it." 

But  a  Boston  school-teacher  was  angry.  "  I  have  been 
reading  the  North  American"  she  wrote,  "and  I  am  filled 
with  shame  and  remorse  that  I  have  dreamed  of  asking 
you  to  come  to  Boston  to  talk  to  the  teachers." 

On  the  outside  of  the  envelope  Clemens  made  this 
pencil  note: 

"Now,  I  suppose  I  offended  that  young  lady  by  having 
an  opinion  of  my  own,  instead  of  waiting  and  copying 
hers.   I  never  thought.    I  suppose  she  must  be  as  much 
in.— 2  1 133 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


as  twenty-five,  and  probably  the  only  patriot  in  the 
country." 

A  critic  with  a  sense  of  humor  asked:  "Please  excuse 
seeming  impertinence,  but  were  you  ever  adjudged  insane? 
Be  honest.  How  much  money  does  the  devil  give  you 
for  arraigning  Christianity  and  missionary  causes?" 

But  there  were  more  of  the  better  sort.  Edward  S. 
Martin,  in  a  grateful  letter,  said:  "How  gratifying  it  is 
to  feel  that  we  have  a  man  among  us  who  understands  the 
rarity  of  the  plain  truth,  and  who  delights  to  utter  it,  and 
has  the  gift  of  doing  so  without  cant  and  with  not  too 
much  seriousness." 

Sir  Hiram  Maxim  wrote :  "I  give  you  my  candid  opinion 
that  what  you  have  done  is  of  very  great  value  to  the 
civilization  of  the  world.  There  is  no  man  living  whose 
words  carry  greater  weight  than  your  own,  as  no  one's 
writings  are  so  eagerly  sought  after  by  all  classes." 

Clemens  himself  in  his  note-book  set  down  this  aphorism : 

"Do  right  and  you  will  be  conspicuous." 


Digitized  by  Google 


ccxv 


SUMMER  AT  "THE  LAIR" 

IN  June  Clemens  took  the  family  to  Saranac  Lake,  to 
Ampersand.  They  occupied  a  log  cabin  which  he 
called  "The  Lair,"  on  the  south  shore,  near  the  water's 
edge,  a  remote  and  beautiful  place  where,  as  had  happened 
before,  they  were  so  comfortable  and  satisfied  that  they 
hoped  to  return  another  summer.  There  were  swirnming 
and  boating  and  long  walks  in  the  woods;  the  worry 
and  noise  of  the  world  were  far  away.  They  gave  little 
enough  attention  to  the  mails.  They  took  only  a  weekly 
paper,  and  were  likely  to  allow  it  to  lie  in  the  post- 
office  uncalled  for.  Clemens,  especially,  loved  the  place, 
and  wrote  to  Twichell : 

I  am  on  the  front  porch  (lower  one — main  deck)  of  our  little 
bijou  of  a  dwelling-house.  The  lake  edge  (Lower  Saranac)  is 
so  nearly  under  me  that  I  can't  see  the  shore,  but  only  the  water, 
smallpoxed  with  rain  splashes — for  there  is  a  heavy  down- 
pour. It  is  charmingly  like  sitting  snuggled  up  on  a  ship's  deck 
with  the  stretching  sea  all  around  but  very  much  more  satis- 
factory, for  at  sea  a  rainstorm  is  depressing,  while  here  of  course 
the  effect  engendered  is  just  a  deep  sense  of  comfort  &  content- 
ment. The  heavy  forest  shuts  us  solidly  in  on  three  sides — there 
are  no  neighbors.  There  are  beautiful  little  tan-colored  im- 
pudent squirrels  about.  They  take  tea  5  p.m.  (not  invited)  at 
the  table  in  the  woods  where  Jean  does  my  typewriting,  &  one 
of  them  has  been  brave  enough  to  sit  upon  Jean's  knee  with  his 
tail  curved  over  his  back  &  munch  his  food.  They  come  to 
dinner  7  p.m.  on  the  front  porch  (not  invited),  but  Clara  drives 
them  away.   It  is  an  occupation  which  requires  some  industry 

ii35 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


&  attention  to  business.  They  all  have  the  one  name — Blenner- 
h asset,  from  Burr's  friend — &  none  of  them  answers  to  it  except 
when  hungry. 

Clemens  could  work  at  "The  Lair,"  often  writing  in 
shady  seclusions  along  the  shore,  and  he  finished  there 
the  two-part  serial,1  "The  Double-Barrelled  Detective 
Story,"  intended  originally  as  a  burlesque  on  Sherlock 
Holmes.  It  did  not  altogether  fulfil  its  purpose,  and  is 
hardly  to  be  ranked  as  one  of  Mark  Twain's  successes. 
It  contains,  however,  one  paragraph  at  least  by  which  it 
is  likely  to  be  remembered,  a  hoax — his  last  one — on  the 
reader.    It  runs  as  follows: 

It  was  a  crisp  and  spicy  morning  in  early  October.  The 
lilacs  and  laburnums,  lit  with  the  glory-fires  of  autumn,  hung 
burning  and  flashing  in  the  upper  air,  a  fairy  bridge  provided 
by  kind  nature  for  the  wingless  wild  things  that  have  their  home 
in  the  tree-tops  and  would  visit  together;  the  larch  and  the 
pomegranate  flung  their  purple  and  yellow  flames  in  brilliant 
broad  splashes  along  the  slanting  sweep  of  woodland,  the  sensu- 
ous fragrance  of  innumerable  deciduous  flowers  rose  upon  the 
swooning  atmosphere,  far  in  the  empty  sky  a  solitary  oesopha- 
gus slept  upon  motionless  wing;  everywhere  brooded  stillness, 
serenity,  and  the  peace  of  God. 

The  warm  light  and  luxury  of  this  paragraph  are  facti- 
tious. The  careful  reader  will  note  that  its  various  acces- 
sories are  ridiculously  associated,  and  only  the  most  care- 
less reader  will  accept  the  oesophagus  as  a  bird.  But  it 
disturbed  a  great  many  admirers,  and  numerous  letters 
of  inquiry  came  wanting  to  know  what  it  was  all  about. 
Some  suspected  the  joke  and  taunted  him  with  it;  one 
such  correspondent  wrote: 

My  dear  Mark  Twain, — Reading  your  "Double-Barrelled 
Detective  Story"  in  the  January  Harper's  late  one  night  I  came 

1  Published  in  Harper's  Magazine  for  January  and  February, 
1902. 

1 136 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUMMER  AT  "THE  LAIR" 


to  the  paragraph  where  you  so  beautifully  describe  "a  crisp  and 
spicy  morning  in  early  October."  I  read  along  down  the  para- 
graph, conscious  only  of  its  woozy  sound,  until  I  brought  up  with 
a  start  against  your  oesophagus  in  the  empty  sky.  Then  I  read 
the  paragraph  again.  Oh,  Mark  Twain!  Mark  Twain!  How 
could  you  do  it?  Put  a  trap  like  that  into  the  midst  of  a  tragical 
story?  Do  serenity  and  peace  brood  over  you  after  you  have 
done  such  a  thing? 

Who  lit  the  lilacs,  and  which  end  up  do  they  hang?  When 
did  larches  begin  to  flame,  and  who  set  out  the  pomegranates 
in  that  canyon?  What  are  deciduous  flowers,  and  do  they 
always  "bloom  in  the  fall,  tra  la"? 

I  have  been  making  myself  obnoxious  to  various  people  by 
demanding  their  opinion  of  that  paragraph  without  telling  them 
the  name  of  the  author.  They  say,  "Very  well  done."  "The 
alliteration  is  so  pretty."  "What's  an  oesophagus,  a  bird?" 
"What's  it  all  mean,  anyway?"  I  tell  them  it  means  Mark 
Twain,  and  that  an  oesophagus  is  a  kind  of  swallow.  Am  I 
right?   Or  is  it  a  gull?   Or  a  gullet? 

Hereafter  if  you  must  write  such  things  won't  you  please  be 
so  kind  as  to  label  them? 

Very  sincerely  yours, 

Alletta  F.  Dean. 

Mark  Twain  to  Miss  Dean: 

Don't  you  give  that  oesophagus  away  again  or  I'll  never 
trust  you  with  another  privacy  I 

So  many  wrote,  that  Clemens  finally  felt  called  upon 
to  make  public  confession,  and  as  one  searching  letter  had 
been  mailed  from  Springfield,  Massachusetts,  he  made 
his  reply  through  the  Republican  of  that  city.  After  some 
opening  comment  he  said: 

I  published  a  short  story  lately  &  it  was  in  that  that  I  put 
the  oesophagus.  I  will  say  privately  that  I  expected  it  to  bother 
some  people — in  fact,  that  was  the  intention — but  the  harvest 
has  been  larger  than  I  was  calculating  upon.  The  oesophagus 
has  gathered  in  the  guilty  and  the  innocent  alike,  whereas  I  was 
only  fishing  for  the  innocent — the  innocent  and  confiding. 

ii37 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


He  quoted  a  letter  from  a  schoolmaster  in  the  Philip- 
pines who  thought  the  passage  beautiful  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  curious  creature  which  "slept  upon  motionless 
wings."   Said  Clemens: 

Do  you  notice?  Nothing  in  the  paragraph  disturbed  him  but 
that  one  word.  It  shows  that  that  paragraph  was  most  ably 
constructed  for  the  deception  it  was  intended  to  put  upon  the 
reader.  It  was  my  intention  that  it  should  read  plausibly,  and 
it  is  now  plain  that  it  does;  it  was  my  intention  that  it  should 
be  emotional  and  touching,  and  you  see  yourself  that  it  fetched 
this  public  instructor.  Alas  1  if  I  had  but  left  that  one  treacherous 
word  out  I  should  have  scored,  scored  everywhere,  and  the 
paragraph  would  have  slidden  through  every  reader's  sensibili- 
ties like  oil  and  left  not  a  suspicion  behind. 

The  other  sample  inquiry  is  from  a  professor  in  a  New  England 
university.  It  contains  one  naughty  word  (which  I  cannot  bear 
to  suppress),  but  he  is  not  in  the  theological  department,  so  it 
is  no  harm: 

"Dear  Mr.  Clemens, — 'Far  in  the  empty  sky  a  solitary 
oesophagus  slept  upon  motionless  wing.' 

"  It  is  not  often  I  get  a  chance  to  read  much  periodical  litera- 
ture, but  I  have  just  gone  through  at  this  belated  period,  with 
much  gratification  and  edification,  your  'Double-Barrelled 
Detective  Story.' 

"But  what  in  hell  is  an  oesophagus?  I  keep  one  myself,  but 
it  never  sleeps  in  the  air  or  anywhere  else.  My  profession  is  to 
deal  with  words,  and  oesophagus  interested  me  the  moment  I 
lighted  upon  it.  But,  as  a  companion  of  my  youth  used  to  say. 
'Ill  be  eternally,  co-eternally  cussed'  if  I  can  make  it  out.  Is 
it  a  joke  or  am  I  an  ignoramus?" 

Between  you  and  me,  I  was  almost  ashamed  of  having  fooled 
that  man,  but  for  pride's  sake  I  was  not  going  to  say  so.  I  wrote 
and  told  him  it  was  a  joke — and  that  is  what  I  am  now  saying 
to  my  Springfield  inquirer.  And  I  told  him  to  carefully  read  the 
whole  paragraph  and  he  would  find  not  a  vestige  of  sense  in 
any  detail  of  it.  This  also  I  recommend  to  my  Springfield  in- 
quirer. 

I  have  confessed.   I  am  sorry — partially.    I  will  not  do  so 

1 138 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUMMER  AT  "THE  LAIR" 


any  more — for  the  present.  Don't  ask  me  any  more  questions; 
let  the  oesophagus  have  a  rest—on  his  same  old  motionless  wing. 

He  wrote  Twichell  that  the  story  had  been  a  six-day 
tour  de  farce,  twenty-five  thousand  words,  and  he  adds: 

How  long  it  takes  a  literary  seed  to  sprout  sometimes!  This 
seed  was  planted  in  your  house  many  years  ago  when  you  sent 
me  to  bed  with  a  book  not  heard  of  by  me  until  then — Sherlock 
Holmes.  .  .  . 

I've  done  a  grist  of  writing  here  this  summer,  but  not  for 
publication  soon,  if  ever.  I  did  write  two  satisfactory  articles 
for  early  print,  but  I've  burned  one  of  them  &  have  buried  the 
other  in  my  large  box  of  posthumous  stuff.  I've  got  stacks  of 
literary  remains  piled  up  there. 

Early  in  August  Clemens  went  with  H.  H.  Rogers  in  his 
yacht  Kanawha  on  a  cruise  to  New  Brunswick  and  Nova 
Scotia,  Rogers  had  made  up  a  party,  including  ex-Speaker 
Reed,  Dr.  Rice,  and  Col.  A.  G.  Paine.  Young  Harry  Rogers 
also  made  one  of  the  party.  Clemens  kept  a  log  of  the 
cruise,  certain  entries  of  which  convey  something  of  its 
spirit.   On  the  i ith,  at  Yarmouth,  he  wrote: 

Fog-bound.  The  garrison  went  ashore.  Officers  visited  the 
yacht  in  the  evening  &  said  an  anvil  had  been  missed.  Mr. 
Rogers  paid  for  the  anvil. 

August  13th.  There  is  a  fine  picture-gallery  here;  the  sheriff 
photographed  the  garrison,  with  the  exception  of  Harry  (Rogers) 
and  Mr.  Clemens. 

August  14th.  Upon  complaint  of  Mr.  Reed  another  dog  was 
procured.  He  said  he  had  been  a  sailor  all  his  life,  and  considered 
it  dangerous  to  trust  a  ship  to  a  dog-watch  with  only  one  dog 
in  it. 

Poker,  for  a  change. 

August  1 5th.  To  Rockland,  Maine,  in  the  afternoon,  arriving 
about  6  p.m.  In  the  night  Dr.  Rice  baited  the  anchor  with  his 
winnings  &  caught  a  whale  90  feet  long.  He  said  so  himself. 
It  is  thought  that  if  there  had  been  another  witness  like  Dr.  Rice 
the  whale  would  have  been  longer. 

"39 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


August  1 6th.  We  could  have  had  a  happy  time  in  Bath  but  for 
the  interruptions  caused  by  people  who  wanted  Mr.  Reed  to 
explain  votes  of  the  olden  time  or  give  back  the  money.  Mr. 
Rogers  recouped  them. 

Another  anvil  missed.  The  descendant  of  Captain  Kidd  is 
the  only  person  who  does  not  blush  for  these  incidents.  Harry 
and  Mr.  Clemens  blush  continually.  It  is  believed  that  if  the 
rest  of  the  garrison  were  like  these  two  the  yacht  would  be  wel- 
come everywhere  instead  of  being  quarantined  by  the  police 
in  all  the  ports.  Mr.  Clemens  &  Harry  have  attracted  a  great 
deal  of  attention,  &  men  have  expressed  a  resolve  to  turn  over  a 
new  leaf  &  copy  after  them  from  this  out. 

Evening.  Judge  Cohen  came  over  from  another  yacht  to  pay 
his  respects  to  Harry  and  Mr.  Clemens,  he  having  heard  of  their 
reputation  from  the  clergy  of  these  coasts.  He  was  invited  by 
the  gang  to  play  poker  apparently  as  a  courtesy  &  in  a  spirit  of 
seeming  hospitality,  he  not  knowing  them  &  taking  it  all  at 
par.   Mr.  Rogers  lent  him  clothes  to  go  home  in. 

August  17th.  The  Reformed  Statesman  growling  and  com- 
plaining again— not  in  a  frank,  straightforward  way,  but  talking 
at  the  Commodore,  while  letting  on  to  be  talking  to  himself.  This 
time  he  was  dissatisfied  about  the  anchor  watch;  said  it  was  out 
of  date,  untrustworthy,  &  for  real  efficiency  didn't  begin  with  the 
Waterbury,  &  was  going  on  to  reiterate,  as  usual,  that  he  had 
been  a  pilot  all  his  life  &  blamed  if  he  ever  saw,  etc.,  etc.,  etc. 

But  he  was  not  allowed  to  finish.  We  put  him  ashore  at 
Portland. 

That  is  to  say,  Reed  landed  at  Portland,  the  rest  of 
the  party  returning  with  the  yacht. 

"We  had  a  noble  good  time  in  the  yacht,"  Clemens 
wrote Twicheli  on  their  return.  "We  caught  a  Chinee 
missionary  and  drowned  him. 

Twicheli  had  been  invited  to  make  one  of  the  party, 
and  this  letter  was  to  make  him  feel  sorry  he  had  not 
accepted. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXVI 


RIVE RD ALE.     A  YALE  DEGREE 

THE  Clemens  household  did  not  return  to  14  West 
Tenth  Street.  They  spent  a  week  in  Elmira  at  the 
end  of  September,  and  after  a  brief  stop  in  New  York  took 
up  their  residence  on  the  northern  metropolitan  boundary, 
at  Riverdale-on-the-Hudson,  in  the  old  Appleton  home. 
They  had  permanently  concluded  not  to  return  to  Hart- 
ford. They  had  put  the  property  there  into  an  agent's 
hands  for  sale.  Mrs.  Clemens  never  felt  that  she  had  the 
strength  to  enter  the  house  again. 

They  had  selected  the  Riverdale  place  with  due  consid- 
eration. They  decided  that  they  must  have  easy  access 
to  the  New  York  center,  but  they  wished  also  to  have 
the  advantage  of  space  and  spreading  lawn  and  trees,  large 
rooms,  and  light.  The  Appleton  homestead  provided  these 
things.  It  was  a  house  built  in  the  first  third  of  the  last 
century  by  one  of  the  Morris  family,  so  long  prominent  in 
New  York  history.  On  passing  into  the  Appleton  owner- 
ship it  had  been  enlarged  and  beautified  and  named 
"Holbrook  Hall."  It  overlooked  the  .Hudson  and  the 
Palisades.  It  had  associations :  the  Roosevelt  family  had 
once  lived  there,  Huxley,  Darwin,  Tyndall,  and  others  of 
their  intellectual  rank  had  been  entertained  there  during 
its  occupation  by  the  first  Appleton,  the  founder  of  the 
publishing  firm.  The  great  hall  of  the  added  wing  was 
its  chief  feature.    Clemens  once  remembered: 

"We  drifted  from  room  to  room  on  our  tour  of  inspec- 
tion, always  with  a  growing  doubt  as  to  whether  we  wanted 

1141 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


that  house  or  not ;  but  at  last,  when  we  arrived  in  a  dining- 
room  that  was  60  feet  long,  30  feet  wide,  and  had  two  great 
fireplaces  in  it,  that  settled  it." 

There  were  pleasant  neighbors  at  Riverdale,  and  had 
it  not  been  for  the  illnesses  that  seemed  always  read}'  to 
seize  upon  that  household  the  home  there  might  have  been 
ideal.  They  loved  the  place  presently,  so  much  so  that 
they  contemplated  buying  it,  but  decided  that  it  was  too 
costly.  They  began  to  prospect  for  other  places  along 
the  Hudson  shore.  They  were  anxious  to  have  a  home 
again — one  that  they  could  call  their  own. 

Among  the  many  pleasant  neighbors  at  Riverdale  were 
the  Dodges,  the  Quincy  Adamses,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Car- 
stensen,  a  liberal-minded  minister  with  whom  Clemens 
easily  affiliated.  Clemens  and  Carstensen  visited  back  and 
forth  and  exchanged  views.  Once  Mr.  Carstensen  told 
him  that  he  was  going  to  town  to  dine  with  a  party  which 
included  the  Reverend  Gottheil,  a  Catholic  bishop,  an 
Indian  Buddhist,  and  a  Chinese  scholar  of  the  Confucian 
faith,  after  which  they  were  all  going  to  a  Yiddish  theater. 
Clemens  said: 

"Well,  there's  only  one  more  thing  you  need  to  make 
the  party  complete — that  is,  either  Satan  or  me." 

Howells  often  came  to  Riverdale.  He  was  living  in  a 
New  York  apartment,  and  it  was  handy  and  made  an 
easy  and  pleasant  outing  for  him.   He  says: 

"  I  began  to  see  them  again  on  something  like  the 
sweet  old  terms.  They  lived  far  more  unpretentiously 
than  they  used,  and  I  think  with  a  notion  of  economy, 
which  they  had  never  very  successfully  practised.  I 
recall  that  at  the  end  of  a  certain  year  in  Hartford,  when 
they  had  been  saving  and  paying  cash  for  everything, 
Clemens  wrote,  reminding  me  of  their  avowed  experi- 
ment, and  asking  me  to  guess  how  many  bills  they  had 
at  New- Year's;  he  hastened  to  say  that  a  horse-car  would 
not  have  held  them.    At  Riverdale  they  kept  no  car- 

1142 


Digitized  by  Google 


RIVERDALE.    A  YALE  DEGREE 


riage,  and  there  was  a  snowy  night  when  I  drove  up  to 
their  handsome  old  mansion  in  the  station  carryall,  which 
was  crusted  with  mud,  as  from  the  going  down  of  the 
Deluge  after  transporting  Noah  and  his  family  from  the 
Ark  to  whatever  point  they  decided  to  settle  provision- 
ally. But  the  good  talk,  the  rich  talk,  the  talk  that 
could  never  suffer  poverty  of  mind  or  soul  was  there, 
and  we  jubilantly  found  ourselves  again  in  our  middle 
youth." 

Both  Howells  and  Clemens  were  made  doctors  of  letters 
by  Yale  that  year  and  went  over  in  October  to  receive 
their  degrees.  It  was  Mark  Twain's  second  Yale  degree, 
and  it  was  the  highest  rank  that  an  American  institution 
of  learning  could  confer. 

Twichell  wrote: 

• 

I  want  you  to  understand,  old  fellow,  that  it  will  be  in  its 
intention  the  highest  public  compliment,  and  emphatically  so 
in  your  case,  for  it  will  be  tendered  you  by  a  corporation  of 
gentlemen,  the  majority  of  whom  do  not  at  all  agree  with  the 
views  on  important  questions  which  you  have  lately  promul- 
gated in  speech  and  in  writing,  and  with  which  you  are  identified 
to  the  public  mind.  They  grant,  of  course,  your  right  to  hold 
and  express  those  views,  though  for  themselves  they  don't  like 
'em;  but  in  awarding  you  the  proposed  laurel  they  will  make  no 
count  of  that  whatever.  Their  action  will  appropriately  signify 
simply  and  solely  their  estimate  of  your  merit  and  rank  as  a 
man  of  Utters,  and  so,  as  I  say,  the  compliment  of  it  will  be  of  the 
pure,  unadulterated  quality. 

Howells  was  not  especially  eager  to  go,  and  tried  to  con- 
spire with  Clemens  to  arrange  some  excuse  which  would 
keep  them  at  home. 

I  remember  with  satisfaction  [he  wrote]  our  joint  success  in 
keeping  away  from  the  Concord  Centennial  in  1875,  and  I  have 
been  thinking  we  might  help  each  other  in  this  matter  of  the 
Yale  Anniversary.  What  are  your  plans  for  getting  left,  or 
shall  you  trust  to  inspiration? 

1 143 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Their  plans  did  not  avail.  Both  Howells  and  Clemens 
went  to  New  Haven  to  receive  their  honors. 

When  they  had  returned,  Howells  wrote  formally,  as 
became  the  new  rank : 

Dear  Sir, — I  have  long  been  an  admirer  of  your  complete 
works,  several  of  which  I  have  read,  and  I  am  with  you  shoulder 
to  shoulder  in  the  cause  of  foreign  missions.  I  would  respect- 
fully request  a  personal  interview,  and  if  you  will  appoint  some 
day  and  hour  most  inconvenient  to  you  I  will  call  at  your 
baronial  hall.  I  cannot  doubt,  from  the  account  of  your  courtesy 
given  me  by  the  Twelve  Apostles,  who  once  visited  you  in  your 
Hartford  home  and  were  mistaken  for  a  syndicate  of  lightning- 
rod  men,  that  our  meeting  will  be  mutually  agreeable. 

Yours  truly, 

W.  D.  Howells. 

Dr.  Clemens. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXVII 

MARK  TWAIN  IN  POLITICS 

THERE  was  a  campaign  for  the  mayoralty  of  New  York 
City  that  fall,  with  Seth  Low  on  the  Fusion  ticket 
against  Edward  M.  Shepard  as  the  Tammany  candidate. 
Mark  Twain  entered  the  arena  to  try  to  defeat  Tammany 
Hall.  He  wrote  and  he  spoke  in  favor  of  clean  city 
government  and  police  reform.  He  was  savagely  in  earnest 
and  openly  denounced  the  clan  of  Croker,  individually  and 
collectively.  He  joined  a  society  called  The  Acorns;  and 
on  the  17th  of  October,  at  a  dinner  given  by  the  order  at 
the  Waldorf-Astoria,  delivered  a  fierce  arraignment,  in 
which  he  characterized  Croker  as  the  Warren  Hastings 
of  New  York.  His  speech  was  really  a  set  of  extracts 
from  Edmund  Burke's  great  impeachment  of  Hastings, 
substituting  always  the  name  of  Croker,  and  paralleling 
his  career  with  that  of  the  ancient  boss  of  the  East  India 
Company. 

It  was  not  a  humorous  speech.  It  was  too  denunciatory 
for  that.  It  probably  contained  less  comic  phrasing  than 
any  former  effort.  There  is  hardly  even  a  suggestion  of 
humor  from  beginning  to  end.  It  concluded  with  this 
paraphrase  of  Burke's  impeachment: 

I  impeach  Richard  Croker  of  high  crimes  and  misdemeanors. 
I  impeach  him  in  the  name  of  the  people,  whose  trust  he  has 
betrayed. 

I  impeach  him  in  the  name  of  all  the  people  of  America,  whose 
national  character  he  has  dishonored. 

I  impeach  him  in  the  name  and  by  virtue  of  those  eternal  laws 
of  justice  which  he  has  violated. 

1 145 


f 

Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


I  impeach  him  in  the  name  of  human  nature  itself,  which  he 
has  cruelly  outraged,  injured,  and  oppressed,  in  both  sexes,  in 
every  age,  rank,  situation,  and  condition  of  life. 

The  Acorn  speech  was  greatly  relied  upon  for  damage  to 
the  Tammany  ranks,  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of  copies 
of  it  were  printed  and  circulated.1 

Clemens  was  really  heart  and  soul  in  the  campaign.  He 
even  joined  a  procession  that  marched  up  Broadway,  and 
he  made  a  speech  to  a  great  assemblage  at  Broadway  and 
Leonard  Street,  when,  as  he  said,  he  had  been  sick  abed 
two  days  and,  according  to  the  doctor,  should  be  in  bed 
then. 

But  I  would  not  stay  at  home  for  a  nursery  disease,  and  that's 
what  I've  got.  Now,  don't  let  this  leak  out  atl  over  town, 
but  I've  been  doing  some  indiscreet  eating — that's  all.  It 
wasn't  drinking.  If  it  had  been  I  shouldn't  have  said  any- 
thing about  it. 

I  ate  a  banana.  I  bought  it  just  to  clinch  the  Italian  vote  for 
fusion,  but  I  got  hold  of  a  Tammany  banana  by  mistake.  Just 
one  little  nub  of  it  on  the  end  was  nice  and  white.  That  was  the 
Shepard  end.  The  other  nine-tenths  were  rotten.  Now  that 
little  white  end  won't  make  the  rest  of  the  banana  good.  The 
nine-tenths  will  make  that  little  nub  rotten,  too. 

We  must  get  rid  of  the  whole  banana,  and  our  Acorn  Society 
is  going  to  do  its  share,  for  it  is  pledged  to  nothing  but  the  sup- 
port of  good  government  all  over  the  United  States.  We  will  elect 
the  President  next  time. 

It  won't  be  I,  for  I  have  ruined  my  chances  by  joining  the 
Acorns,  and  there  can  be  no  office-holders  among  us. 

There  was  a  movement  which  Clemens  early  nipped  in 
the  bud — to  name  a  political  party  after  him. 

"I  should  be  far  from  willing  to  have  a  political  party 
named  after  me,"  he  wrote,  "and  I  would  not  be  willing 

^he  "Edmund  Burke  on  Croker  and  Tammany"  speech  had 
originally  been  written  as  an  article  for  the  North  American  Revirut. 

1 146 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN  IN  POLITICS 


to  belong  to  a  party  which  allowed  its  members  to  have 
political  aspirations  or  push  friends  forward  for  political 
preferment." 

In  other  words,  he  was  a  knight-errant;  his  sole  purpose 
for  being  in  politics  at  all — something  he  always  detested — 
was  to  do  what  he  could  for  the  betterment  of  his  people. 

He  had  his  reward,  for  when  Election  Day  came,  and 
the  returns  were  in,  the  Fusion  ticket  had  triumphed 
and  Tammany  had  fallen.  Clemens  received  his  share 
of  the  credit.    One  paper  celebrated  him  in  verse: 

Who  killed  Croker? 
I,  said  Mark  Twain, 
I  killed  Croker, 
I,  the  Jolly  Joker! 

Among  Samuel  Clemens's  literary  remains  there  is  an 
outline  plan  for  a  "Casting- Vote  party,"  whose  main 
object  was  "to  compel  the  two  great  parties  to  nominate 
their  best  man  always."  It  was  to  be  an  organization  of 
an  infinite  number  of  clubs  throughout  the  nation,  no 
member  of  which  should  seek  or  accept  a  nomination 
for  office  in  any  political  appointment,  but  in  each  case 
should  cast  its  vote  as  a  unit  for  the  candidate  of  one  of 
the  two  great  political  parties,  requiring  that  the  man  be 
of  clean  record  and  honest  purpose. 

From  constable  up  to  President  [runs  his  final  clause]  there 
is  no  office  for  which  the  two  great  parties  cannot  furnish  able, 
clean,  and  acceptable  men.  Whenever  the  balance  of  power 
shall  be  lodged  in  a  permanent  third  party,  with  no  candidate 
of  its  own  and  no  function  but  to  cast  its  whole  tote  for  the  best 
man  put  forward  by  the  Republicans  and  Democrats,  these 
two  parties  will  select  the  best  man  they  have  in  their  ranks.  Good 
and  clean  government  will  follow,  let  its  party  complexion  be 
what  it  may,  and  the  country  will  be  quite  content. 

It  was  a  Utopian  idea,  very  likely,  as  human  nature  is 
made;  full  of  that  native  optimism  which  was  always 

1147 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


overflowing  and  drowning  his  gloomier  logic.  Clearly 
he  forgot  his  despair  of  humanity  when  he  formulated  that 
document,  and  there  is  a  world  of  unselfish  hope  in  these 
closing  lines: 

If  in  the  hands  of  men  who  regard  their  citizenship  as  a  high 
trust  this  scheme  shall  fail  upon  trial  a  better  must  be  sought, 
a  better  must  be  invented;  for  it  cannot  be  well  or  safe  to  let 
the  present  political  conditions  continue  indefinitely.  They  can 
be  improved,  and  American  citizenship  should  arouse  up  from 
its  disheartenment  and  see  that  it  is  done. 

Had  this  document  been  put  into  type  and  circulated 
it  might  have  founded  a  true  Mark  Twain  party. 

Clemens  made  not  many  more  speeches  that  autumn, 
closing  the  year  at  last  with  the  " Founder's  Night"  speech 
at  The  Players,  the  short  address  which,  ending  on  the 
stroke  of  midnight,  dedicates  each  passing  year  to  the 
memory  of  Edwin  Booth,  and  pledges  each  new  year  in 
a  loving-cup  passed  in  his  honor. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXVIII 


NEW  INTERESTS  AND  INVESTMENTS 

THE  spirit  which  a  year  earlier  had  prompted  Mark 
Twain  to  prepare  his  "Salutation  from  the  Nineteenth 
to  the  Twentieth  Century"  inspired  him  now  to  conceive 
the  "Stupendous  International  Procession,"  a  gruesome 
pageant  described  in  a  document  (unpublished)  of  twenty- 
two  typewritten  pages  which  begin: 

THE  STUPENDOUS  PROCESSION 

At  the  appointed  hour  it  moved  across  the  world  in  the 
following  order: 

The  Twentieth  Century 

A  fair  young  creature,  drunk  and  disorderly,  borne  in  the  arms 
of  Satan.  Banner  with  motto,  "Get  What  You  Can,  Keep 
What  You  Get." 

Guard  of  Honor — Monarchs,  Presidents,  Tammany  Bosses, 
Burglars,  Land  Thieves,  Convicts,  etc.,  appropriately  clothed 
and  bearing  the  symbols  of  their  several  trades. 

Christendom 

A  majestic  matron  in  flowing  robes  drenched  with  blood. 
On  her  head  a  golden  crown  of  thorns;  impaled  on  its  spines 
the  bleeding  heads  of  patriots  who  died  for  their  countries — 
Boers,  Boxers,  Filipinos;  in  one  hand  a  slung-shot,  in  the  other 
a  Bible,  open  at  the  text  "Do  unto  others,"  etc.  Protruding 
from  pocket  bottle  labeled  "We  bring  you  the  blessings  of 
civilization."  Necklace — handcuffs  and  a  burglar's  jimmy. 

Supporters — At  one  elbow  Slaughter,  at  the  other  Hypocrisy. 

Banner  with  motto— "Love  Your  Neighbor's  Goods  as 
Yourself." 

"49 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Ensign— The  Black  Flag. 

Guard  of  Honor— Missionaries  and  German,  French,  Russian, 
and  British  soldiers  laden  with  loot. 

And  so  on,  with  a  section  for  each  nation  of  the  earth, 
headed  each  by  the  black  flag,  each  bearing  horrid 
emblems,  instruments  of  torture,  mutilated  prisoners, 
broken  hearts,  floats  piled  with  bloody  corpses.  At  the 
end  of  all,  banners  inscribed: 

"All  White  Men  are  Born  Free  and  Equal." 

"Christ  died  to  make  men  holy, 
Christ  died  to  make  men  free." 

with  the  American  flag  furled  and  draped  in  crepe,  and 
the  shade  of  Lincoln  towering  vast  and  dim  toward  the 
sky,  brooding  with  sorrowful  aspect  over  the  far-reaching 
pageant.  With  much  more  of  the  same  sort.  It  is  a 
fearful  document,  too  fearful,  we  may  believe,  for  Mrs. 
Clemens  ever  to  consent  to  its  publication. 

Advancing  years  did  little  toward  destroying  Mark 
Twain's  interest  in  human  affairs.  At  no  time  in  his  life 
was  he  more  variously  concerned  and  employed  than  in 
his  sixty-seventh  year — matters  social,  literary,  political, 
religious,  financial,  scientific.  He  was  always  alive,  young, 
actively  cultivating  or  devising  interests — valuable  and 
otherwise,  though  never  less  than  important  to  him. 

He  had  plenty  of  money  again,  for  one  thing,  and  he 
liked  to  find  dazzlingly  new  ways  for  investing  it.  As 
in  the  old  days,  he  was  always  putting  "twenty-five  or 
forty  thousand  dollars,"  as  he  said,  into  something  that 
promised  multiplied  returns.  Howells  tells  how  he  found 
him  looking  wonderfully  well,  and  when  he  asked  the  name 
of  his  elixir  he  learned  that  it  was  plasmon. 

I  did  not  immediately  understand  that  plasmon  was  one  of 
the  investments  which  he  had  made  from  "the  substance  of 

1 1 50 


Digitized  by  Google 


NEW  INTERESTS  AND  INVESTMENTS 


things  hoped  for,"  and  in  the  destiny  of  a  disastrous  disappoint- 
ment. But  after  paying  off  the  creditors  of  his  late  publishing 
firm  he  had  to  do  something  with  his  money,  and  it  was  not  his 
fault  if  he  did  not  make  a  fortune  out  of  plasmon. 

It  was  just  at  this  period  (the  beginning  of  1902)  that 
he  was  promoting  with  his  capital  and  enthusiasm  the 
plasmon  interests  in  America,  investing  in  it  one  of  the 
44  usual  amounts,"  promising  to  make  Howells  over  again 
body  and  soul  with  the  life-giving  albuminate.  Once  he 
wrote  him  explicit  instructions: 

Yes — take  it  as  a  medicine — there  is  nothing  better,  nothing 
surer  of  desired  results.  If  you  wish  to  be  elaborate — which 
isn't  necessary — put  a  couple  of  heaping  teaspoonfuls  of  the 
powder  in  an  inch  of  milk  &  stir  until  it  is  a  paste;  put  in  some 
more  milk  and  stir  the  paste  to  a  thin  gruel ;  then  fill  up  the  glass 
and  drink. 

Or,  stir  it  into  your  soup. 

Or,  into  your  oatmeal. 

Or,  use  any  method  you  like,  so's  you  %et  it  down — that  is  the 
only  essential. 

He  put  another  4 4 usual  sum"  about  this  time  in  a 
patent  cash  register  which  was  acknowledged  to  be  44 a 
promise  rather  than  a  performance,"  and  remains  so  until 
this  day. 

He  capitalized  a  patent  spiral  hat-pin,  warranted  to 
hold  the  hat  on  in  any  weather,  and  he  had  a  number  of 
the  pins  handsomely  made  to  present  to  visitors  of  the 
sex  naturally  requiring  that  sort  of  adornment  and  pro- 
tection. It  was  a  pretty  and  ingenious  device  and  ap- 
parently effective  enough,  though  it  failed  to  secure  his 
invested  thousands. 

He  invested  a  lesser  sum  in  shares  of  the  Booklover's 
Library,  which  was  going  to  revolutionize  the  reading 
world,  and  which  at  least  paid  a  few  dividends.  Even  the 
old  Tennessee  land  will-o'-the-wisp — long  since  repudiated 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


and  forgotten — when  it  appeared  again  in  the  form  of  a 
possible  equity  in  some  overlooked  fragment,  kindled  a 
gentle  interest,  and  was  added  to  his  list  of  ventures. 

He  made  one  substantial  investment  at  this  period. 
They  became  more  and  more  in  love  with  the  Hudson 
environment,  its  beauty  and  its  easy  access  to  New  York. 
Their  house  was  what  they  liked  it  to  be — a  gathering- 
place  for  friends  and  the  world's  notables,  who  could  reach 
it  easily  and  quickly  from  New  York.  They  had  a  steady 
procession  of  company  when  Mrs.  Clemens's  health  would 
permit,  and  during  a  single  week  in  the  early  part  of  this 
year  entertained  guests  at  no  less  than  seventeen  out  of 
their  twenty-one  meals,  and  for  three  out  of  the  seven 
nights — not  an  unusual  week.  Their  plan  for  buying  a 
home  on  the  Hudson  ended  with  the  purchase  of  what 
was  known  as  Hillcrest,  or  the  Casey  place,  at  Tarry  town, 
overlooking  that  beautiful  stretch  of  river,  the  Tappan 
Zee,  close  to  the  Washington  Irving  home.  The  beauty  of 
its  outlook  and  surroundings  appealed  to  them  all.  The 
house  was  handsome  and  finely  placed,  and  they  planned 
to  make  certain  changes  that  would  adapt  it  to  their 
needs.  The  price,  which  was  less  than  fifty  thousand 
dollars,  made  it  an  attractive  purchase;  and  without 
doubt  it  would  have  made  them  a  suitable  and  happy 
home  had  it  been  written  in  the  future  that  they  should 
so  inherit  it. 

Clemens  was  writing  pretty  steadily  these  days.  The 
human  race  was  furnishing  him  with  ever  so  many  inspiring 
subjects,  and  he  found  time  to  touch  more  or  less  on  most 
of  them.  He  wreaked  his  indignation  upon  the  things 
which  exasperated  him  often — even  usually — without  the 
expectation  of  print;  and  he  delivered  himself  even  more 
inclusively  at  such  times  as  he  walked  the  floor  between  the 
luncheon  or  dinner  courses,  amplifying  on  the  poverty  of 
an  invention  that  had  produced  mankind  as  a  supreme 
handiwork.    In  a  letter  to  Howells  he  wrote: 

1152 


Digitized  by  Google 


NEW  INTERESTS  AND  INVESTMENTS 


Your  comments  on  that  idiot's  "Ideals"  letter  reminds  me 
that  I  preached  a  good  sermon  to  my  family  yesterday  on  his 
particular  layer  of  the  human  race,  that  grotesquest  of  all  the 
inventions  of  the  Creator.  It  was  a  good  sermon,  bub  coldly 
received,  &  it  seemed  best  not  to  try  to  take  up  a  collection. 

He  once  told  Howells,  with  the  wild  joy  of  his  boyish 
heart,  how  Mrs.  Clemens  found  some  compensation,  when 
kept  to  her  room  by  illness,  in  the  reflection  that  now  she 
would  not  hear  so  much  about  the  •'damned  human  race." 

Yet  he  was  always  the  first  man  to  champion  that  race, 
and  the  more  unpromising  the  specimen  the  surer  it  was 
of  his  protection,  and  he  never  invited,  never  expected 
gratitude. 

One  wonders  how  he  found  time  to  do  all  the  things  that 
he  did.  Besides  his  legitimate  literary  labors  and  his 
preachments,  he  was  always  writing  letters  to  this  one  and 
that,  long  letters  on  a  variety  of  subjects,  carefully  and 
picturesquely  phrased,  and  to  people  of  every  sort.  He 
even  formed  a  curious  society,  whose  members  were 
young  girls — one  in  each  country  of  the  earth .  They  were 
supposed  to  write  to  him  at  intervals  on  some  subject 
likely  to  be  of  mutual  interest,  to  which  letters  he  agreed 
to  reply.  He  furnished  each  member  with  a  typewritten 
copy  of  the  constitution  and  by-laws  of  the  Juggernaut 
Club,  as  he  called  it,  and  he  apprised  each  of  her  election, 
usually  after  this  fashion: 

I  have  a  club — a  private  club,  which  is  all  my  own.  I  appoint 
the  members  myself,  &  they  can't  help  themselves,  because  I 
don't  allow  them  to  vote  on  their  own  appointment  &  I  don't 
allow  them  to  resign!  They  are  all  friends  whom  I  have  never 
seen  (save  one),  but  who  have  written  friendly  letters  to  me. 
By  the  laws  of  my  club  there  can  be  only  one  member  in  each 
country,  &  there  can  be  no  male  member  but  myself.  Some  day 
I  may  admit  males,  but  I  don't  know — they  are  capricious  & 
inharmonious,  &  their  ways  provoke  me  a  good  deal.  It  is  a 
matter  which  the  club  shall  decide.    I  have  made  four  appoint- 

"53 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


merits  in  the  past  three  or  four  months:  You  as  a  member  for 
Scotland — oh,  this  good  while!;  a  young  citizeness  of  Joan  of 
Arc's  home  region  as  a  member  for  France;  a  Mohammedan  girl 
as  member  for  Bengal;  &  a  dear  &  bright  young  niece  of  mine 
as  member  for  the  United  States— for  I  do  not  represent  a  country 
myself,  but  am  merely  member-at-large  for  the  human  race. 
You  must  not  try  to  resign,  for  the  laws  of  the  club  do  not  allow 
that.  You  must  console  yourself  by  remembering  that  you  are 
in  the  best  company;  that  nobody  knows  of  your  membership 
except  yourself;  that  no  member  knows  another's  name,  but 
only  her  country;  that  no  taxes  are  levied  and  no  meetings  held 
(but  how  dearly  I  should  like  to  attend  one!).  One  of  my  mem- 
bers is  a  princess  of  a  royal  house,  another  is  the  daughter  of  a 
village  bookseller  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  for  the  only 
qualification  for  membership  is  intellect  &  the  spirit  of  good-will; 
other  distinctions,  hereditary  or  acquired,  do  not  count.  May  I 
send  you  the  constitution  &  laws  of  the  club?  I  shall  be  so  glad 
if  I  may. 

It  was  just  one  of  his  many  fancies,  and  most  of  the 
active  memberships  would  not  long  be  maintained ;  though 
some  continued  faithful  in  their  reports,  as  he  did  in  his 
replies,  to  the  end. 

One  of  the  more  fantastic  of  his  conceptions  was  a  plan 
to  advertise  for  ante-mortem  obituaries  of  himself — in 
order,  as  he  said,  that  he  might  look  them  over  and  enjoy 
them  and  make  certain  corrections  in  the  matter  of  detail. 
Some  of  them  he  thought  might  be  appropriate  to  read 
from  the  platform. 

I  will  correct  them — not  the  facts,  but  the  verdicts — striking 
out  such  clauses  as  could  have  a  deleterious  influence  on  the 
other  side,  and  replacing  them  with  clauses  of  a  more  judicious 
character. 

He  was  much  taken  with  the  new  idea,  and  his  request 
for  such  obituaries,  with  an  offer  of  a  prize  for  the  best 
— a  portrait  of  himself  drawn  by  his  own  hand — really  ap- 
I^eared  in  Harper's  Weekly  later  in  the  year.    Naturally  he 

ii54 


Digitized  by  Google 


NEW  INTERESTS  AND  INVESTMENTS 


got  a  shower  of  responses — serious,  playful,  burlesque. 
Some  of  them  were  quite  worth  while. 

The  obvious  "Death  loves  a  shining  Mark"  was  of 
course  numerously  duplicated,  and  some  varied  it  "  Death 
loves  an  Easy  Mark,"  and  there  was  44  Mark,  the  perfect 
man." 

The  two  that  follow  gave  him  especial  pleasure. 

OBITUARY  FOR  "MARK  TWAIN " 

Worthy  of  his  portrait,  a  place  on  his  monument,  as  well  as  a 
place  among  his  "perennial-consolation  heirlooms": 

"Got  up;  washed;  went  to  bed." 

The  subject's  own  words  (see  Innocents  Abroad).  Can't  go 
back  on  your  own  words,  Mark  Twain.  There's  nothing  "to 
strike  out";  nothing  "to  replace."  What  more  could  be  said  of 
any  one? 

"Got  up!"— Think  of  the  fullness  of  meaning!  The  possibil- 
ities of  life,  its  achievements — physical,  intellectual,  spiritual. 
Got  up  to  the  top! — the  climax  of  human  aspiration  on  earth! 

"  Washed  " — Every  whit  clean ;  purified — body,  soul,  thoughts, 
purposes. 

"Went  to  bed"— Work  all  done— to  rest,  to  sleep.   The  cul- 
mination of  the  day  well  spent! 
God  looks  after  the  awakening. 

Mrs.  S.  A.  Oren-Haynes. 

Mark  Twain  was  the  only  man  who  ever  lived,  so  far  as  we 
know,  whose  lies  were  so  innocent,  and  withal  so  helpful,  as  to 
make  them  worth  more  than  a  whole  lot  of  fossilized  priests' 
eternal  truths. 

D.  H.  Kenner. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXIX 

YACHTING  AND  THEOLOGY 

CLEMENS  made  fewer  speeches  during  the  Riverdale 
period.  He  was  as  frequently  demanded,  but  he  had 
a  better  excuse  for  refusing,  especially  the  evening  func- 
tions. He  attended  a  good  many  luncheons  with  friendly 
spirits  like  Howells,  Matthews,  James  L.  Ford,  and  Hamlin 
Garland.  At  the  end  of  February  he  came  down  to  the 
Mayor's  dinner  given  to  Prince  Henry  of  Prussia,  but 
he  did  not  speak.  Clemens  used  to  say  afterward  that 
he  had  not  been  asked  to  speak,  and  that  it  was  probably 
because  of  his  supposed  breach  of  etiquette  at  the  Kaiser's 
dinner  in  Berlin;  but  the  fact  that  Prince  Henry  sought 
him  out,  and  was  most  cordially  and  humanly  attentive 
during  a  considerable  portion  of  the  evening,  is  against  the 
supposition. 

Clemens  attended  a  Yale  alumni  dinner  that  winter  and 
incidentally  visited  Twichell  in  Hartford.  The  old  ques- 
tion of  moral  responsibility  came  up  and  Twichell  lent  his 
visitor  a  copy  of  Jonathan  Edwards's  Freedom  of  the  Will 
for  train  perusal.  Clemens  found  it  absorbing.  Later  he 
'wrote  Twichell  his  views. 

Dear  Joe, — (After  compliments.)1  From  Bridgeport  to  New 
York,  thence  to  home,  &  continuously  until  near  midnight 

1  Meaning  "  What  a  good  time  you  gave  me;  what  a  happiness 
it  was  to  be  under  your  roof  again,"  etc.  See  opening  sentence 
of  all  translations  of  letters  passing  between  Lord  Roberts  and 
Indian  princes  and  rulers. 

1156 


Digitized  by  Google 


YACHTING  AND  THEOLOGY 


I  wallowed  &  reeked  with  Jonathan  in  his  insane  debauch ;  rose 
immensely  refreshed  &  fine  at  ten  this  morning,  but  with  a 
strange  &  haunting  sense  of  having  been  on  a  three  days*  tear 
with  a  drunken  lunatic.  It  is  years  since  I  have  known  these 
sensations.  All  through  the  book  is  the  glare  of  a  resplendent 
intellect  gone  mad — a  marvelous  spectacle.  No,  not  all  through 
the  book — the  drunk  does  not  come  on  till  the  last  third,  where 
what  I  take  to  be  Calvinism  &  its  God  begins  to  show  up  & 
shine  red  &  hideous  in  the  glow  from  the  fires  of  hell,  their  only 
right  and  proper  adornment. 

Jonathan  seems  to  hold  (as  against  the  Armenian  position) 
that  the  man  (or  his  soul  or  his  will)  never  creates  an  impulse 
itself,  but  is  moved  to  action  by  an  impulse  back  of  it.  That's 
sound! 

Also,  that  of  two  or  more  things  offered  it,  it  infallibly  chooses 
the  one  which  for  the  moment  is  most  pleasing  to  itself.  Per- 
fectly correct  I  An  immense  admission  for  a  man  not  otherwise 
sane. 

Up  to  that  point  he  could  have  written  Chapters  III  &  IV 
of  my  suppressed  Gospel.  But  there  we  seem  to  separate.  He 
seems  to  concede  the  indisputable  &  unshaken  dominion  of 
Motive  &  Necessity  (call  them  what  he  may,  these  are  exterior 
forces  &  not  under  the  man's  authority,  guidance,  or  even  sug- 
gestion); then  he  suddenly  flies  the  logical  track  &  (to  all 
seeming)  makes  the  man  &  not  those  exterior  forces  respon- 
sible to  God  for  the  man's  thoughts,  words,  &  acts.  It  is  frank 
insanity. 

I  think  that  when  he  concedes  the  autocratic  dominion  of 
Motive  and  Necessity  he  grants  a  third  position  of  mine— that  a 
man'smind  is  a  mere  machine — an  automatic  machine — which  is 
handled  entirely  from  the  outside,  the  man  himself  furnishing 
it  absolutely  nothing;  not  an  ounce  of  its  fuel,  &  not  so  much  as 
a  bare  suggestion  to  that  exterior  engineer  as  to  what  the  machine 
shall  do  nor  how  it  shall  do  it  nor  when. 

After  that  concession  it  was  time  for  him  to  get  alarmed  & 
shirk — for  he  was  pointed  straight  for  the  only  rational  &  pos- 
sible next  station  on  that  piece  of  road — the  irresponsibility  of 
man  to  God. 

And  so  he  shirked.  Shirked,  and  arrived  at  this  handsome 
result: 

ri57 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Man  is  commanded  to  do  so  &  so. 

It  has  been  ordained  from  the  beginning  of  time  that  some  men 
sha'n't  &  others  can't. 

These  are  to  blame:  let  them  be  damned. 

I  enjoy  the  Colonel  very  much,  &  shall  enjoy  the  rest  of  him 
with  an  obscene  delight. 

Joe,  the  whole  tribe  shout  love  to  you  &  yours!  Mark. 

Clemens  was  moved  to  set  down  some  theology  of  his 
own,  and  did  so  in  a  manuscript  which  he  entitled,  "If 
I  Could  Be  There."  It  is  in  the  dialogue  form  he  often 
adopted  for  polemic  writing.  It  is  a  colloquy  between  the 
Master  of  the  Universe  and  a  Stranger.    It  begins: 

I 

If  I  could  be  there,  hidden  under  the  steps  of  the  throne,  I 
should  hear  conversations  like  this: 

A  Stranger.  Lord,  there  is  one  who  needs  to  be  punished, 
and  has  been  overlooked.    It  is  in  the  record.    I  have  found  it. 

Lord.  By  searching? 

S.  Yes,  Lord. 

L.  Who  is  it?   What  is  it? 

S.  A  man. 

L.  Proceed. 

S.  He  died  in  sin.   Sin  committed  by  his  great-grandfather. 

L.  When  was  this? 

S.  Eleven  million  years  ago. 

L.  Do  you  know  what  a  microbe  is? 

S.  Yes,  Lord.  It  is  a  creature  too  small  to  be  detected  by  my 
eye. 

L.  He  commits  depredations  upon  your  blood? 
S.  Yes,  Lord. 

L.  I  give  you  leave  to  subject  him  to  a  billion  years  of  misery 
for  this  offense.   Go!   Work  your  will  upon  him. 

S.  But,  Lord,  I  have  nothing  against  him;  I  am  indifferent 
to  him. 

L.  Why? 

S.  He  is  so  infinitely  small  and  contemptible.  I  am  to  him 
as  is  a  mountain-range  to  a  grain  of  sand. 

1158 


Digitized  by  Google 


YACHTING  AND  THEOLOGY 


L.  What  am  I  to  man? 
S.  (Silent.) 

L.  Am  I  not,  to  a  man,  as  is  a  billion  solar  systems  to  a  grain 
of  sand? 
S.  It  is  true,  Lord. 

L.  Some  microbes  are  larger  than  others.  Does  man  regard 
the  difference? 

S.  No,  Lord.  To  him  there  is  no  difference  of  consequence. 
To  him  they  are  all  microbes,  all  infinitely  little  and  equally 
inconsequential. 

L.  To  me  there  is  no  difference  of  consequence  between  a  man 
&  a  microbe.  Man  looks  down  upon  the  speck  at  his  feet  called 
a  microbe  from  an  altitude  of  a  thousand  miles,  so  to  speak,  and 
regards  him  with  indifference ;  I  look  down  upon  the  specks  called 
a  man  and  a  microbe  from  an  altitude  of  a  billion  leagues,  so  to 
speak,  and  to  me  they  are  of  a  size.  To  me  both  are  inconse- 
quential.   Man  kills  the  microbes  when  he  can? 

S.  Yes,  Lord. 

L.  Then  what?   Does  he  keep  him  in  mind  years  and  years 
and  go  on  contriving  miseries  for  him? 
S.  No,  Lord. 
L.  Does  he  forget  him? 
S.  Yes,  Lord. 
L.  Why? 

S.  He  cares  nothing  more  about  him. 

L.  Employs  himself  with  more  important  matters? 

S.  Yes,  Lord. 

L.  Apparently  man  is  quite  a  rational  and  dignified  person, 
and  can  divorce  his  mind  from  uninteresting  trivialities.  Why 
does  he  affront  me  with  the  fancy  that  I  interest  Myself  in 
trivialities — like  men  and  microbes? 

II 

L.  Is  it  true  the  human  race  thinks  the  universe  was  created 
for  its  convenience? 
S.  Yes,  Lord. 

L.  The  human  race  is  modest.   Speaking  as  a  member  of  it, 
what  do  you  think  the  other  animals  are  for? 
S.  To  furnish  food  and  labor  for  man. 

"59 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


L.  What  is  the  sea  for? 

S.  To  furnish  food  for  man.  Fishes. 

L.  And  the  air? 

S.  To  furnish  sustenance  for  man.   Birds  and  breath. 
L.  How  many  men  are  there? 
S.  Fifteen  hundred  millions. 

L.  (Referring  to  notes.)  Take  your  pencil  and  set  down  some 
statistics.  In  a  healthy  man's  lower  intestine  28,000,000  mi- 
crobes are  born  daily  and  die  daily.  In  the  rest  of  a  man's  body 
122,000,000  microbes  are  born  daily  and  die  daily.  The  two 
sums  aggregate— what? 

S.  About  150,000,000. 

L.  In  ten  days  the  aggregate  reaches  what? 

S.  Fifteen  hundred  millions. 

L.  It  is  for  one  person.  What  would  it  be  for  the  whole  human 
population? 

S.  Alas,  Lord,  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  figures  to  set  down 
that  multitude.  It  is  billions  of  billions  multiplied  by  billions 
of  billions,  and  these  multiplied  again  and  again  by  billions  of 
billions.  The  figures  would  stretch  across  the  universe  and  hang 
over  into  space  on  both  sides. 

L.  To  what  intent  are  these  uncountable  microbes  intro- 
duced into  the  human  race? 

S.  That  they  may  eat. 

L.  Now  then,  according  to  man's  own  reasoning,  what  is  man 
for? 

S.  Alas — alas — 

L.  What  is  he /or? 
—  S.  To — to — furnish  food  for  microbes. 

L.  Manifestly.  A  child  could  see  it.  Now  then,  with  this 
common-sense  light  to  aid  your  perceptions,  what  are  the  air, 
the  land,  and  the  ocean  for? 

S.  To  furnish  food  for  man  so  that  he  may  nourish,  support, 
and  multiply  and  replenish  the  microbes. 

L.  Manifestly.  Does  one  build  a  boarding-house  for  the  sake 
of  the  boarding-house  itself  or  for  the  sake  of  the  boarders? 

S.  Certainly  for  the  sake  of  the  boarders. 

L.  Man's  a  boarding-house. 

S.  I  perceive  it,  Lord. 

L.  He  is  a  boarding-house.   He  was  never  intended  for  any- 

11 60 


Digitized  by  Google 


YACHTING  AND  THEOLOGY 


tiling  else.  If  he  had  had  less  vanity  and  a  clearer  insight  into 
the  great  truths  that  lie  embedded  in  statistics  he  would  have 
found  it  out  early.  As  concerns  the  man  who  has  gone  un- 
punished eleven  million  years,  is  it  your  belief  that  in  life  he 
did  his  duty  by  his  microbes? 

S.  Undoubtedly,  Lord.    He  could  not  help  it. 

L.  Then  why  punish  him?  He  had  no  other  duty  to  perform. 

Whatever  else  may  be  said  of  this  kind  of  doctrine,  it 
is  at  least  original  and  has  a  conclusive  sound.  Mark 
Twain  had  very  little  use  for  orthodoxy  and  conservatism. 
When  it  was  announced  that  Dr.  Jacques  Loeb,  of  the 
University  of  California,  had  demonstrated  the  creation 
of  life  by  chemical  agencies  he  was  deeply  interested. 
When  a  newspaper  writer  commented  that  a  "consensus 
of  opinion  among  biologists"  would  probably  rate  Dr.  Loeb 
as  a  man  of  lively  imagination  rather  than  an  inerrant 
investigator  of  natural  phenomena,  he  felt  called  to  chaff 
the  consensus  idea. 

I  wish  I  could  be  as  young  as  that  again.  Although  I  seem 
so  old  now  I  was  once  as  young  as  that.  I  remember,  as  if  it 
were  but  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  how  a  paralyzing  consensus 
of  opinion  accumulated  from  experts  a-setting  around  about 
brother  experts  who  had  patiently  and  laboriously  cold-chiseled 
their  way  into  one  or  another  of  nature's  safe-deposit  vaults  and 
were  reporting  that  they  had  found  something  valuable  was 
plenty  for  me.   It  settled  it. 

But  it  isn't  so  now — no.  Because  in  the  drift  of  the  years  I 
by  and  by  found  out  that  a  Consensus  examines  a  new  thing 
with  its  feelings  rather  oftener  than  with  its  mind. 

There  was  that  primitive  steam-engine — ages  back,  in  Greek 
times:  a  Consensus  made  fun  of  it.  There  was  the  Marquis 
of  Worcester's  steam-engine  250  years  ago:  a  Consensus  made 
fun  of  it.  There  was  Fulton's  steamboat  of  a  century  ago:  a 
French  Consensus,  including  the  great  Napoleon,  made  fun  of  it. 
There  was  Priestley,  with  his  oxygen:  a  Consensus  scoffed  at 
him,  mobbed  him,  burned  him  out,  banished  him.  While  a 
Consensus  was  proving,  by  statistics  and  things,  that  a  steam- 
ship could  not  cross  the  Atlantic,  a  steamship  did  it. 

1161 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


And  so  on  through  a  dozen  pages  or  more  of  lively 
satire,  ending  with  an  extract  from  Adam's  Diary. 

Then  there  was  a  Consensus  about  it.  It  was  the  very  first 
one.  It  sat  six  days  and  nights.  It  was  then  delivered  of  the 
verdict  that  a  world  could  not  be  made  out  of  nothing;  that 
such  small  things  as  sun  and  moon  and  stars  might,  maybe, 
but  it  would  take  years  and  years  if  there  was  considerable 
many  of  them.  Then  the  Consensus  got  up  and  looked  out 
of  the  window,  and  there  was  the  whole  outfit,  spinning  and 
sparkling  in  space!   You  never  saw  such  a  disappointed  lot. 

Adam. 

He  was  writing  much  at  this  time,  mainly  for  his  own 
amusement,  though  now  and  then  he  offered  one  of  his 
reflections  for  print.  That  beautiful  fairy  tale,  "  The  Five 
Boons  of  Life,"  of  which  the  most  precious  is  "  Death, " 
was  written  at  this  period.  Maeterlinck's  lovely  story  of 
the  bee  interested  him;  he  wrote  about  that.  Somebody 
proposed  a  Martyrs'  Day;  he  wrote  a  paper  ridiculing  the 
suggestion.  In  his  note-book,  too,  there  is  a  memorandum 
for  a  love-story  of  the  Quarternary  Epoch  which  would 
begin,  "On  a  soft  October  afternoon  2,000,000  years 
ago."  John  Fiske's  Discovery  of  America,  Volume  I,  he 
said,  was  to  furnish  the  animals  and  scenery,  civilization 
and  conversation  to  be  the  same  as  to-day;  but  appar- 
ently this  idea  was  carried  no  further.  He  ranged  through 
every  subject  from  protoplasm  to  infinity,  exalting,  con- 
demning, ridiculing,  explaining;  his  brain  was  always  busy 
— a  dynamo  that  rested  neither  night  nor  day. 

In  April  Clemens  received  notice  of  another  yachting 
trip  on  the  Kanawha,  which  this  time  would  sail  for  the 
Bahama  and  West  India  islands.  The  guests  were  to 
be  about  the  same.1 

,The  invited  ones  of  the  party  were  Hon.  T.  B.  Reed,  A.  G. 
Paine,  Laurence  Hutton,  Dr.  C.  C.  Rice,  W.  T.  Foote,  and  S.  L. 
Clemens.  "  Owners  of  the  yacht,"  Mr.  Rogers  called  them,  sign- 
ing himself  as  "  Their  Guest." 

1162 


Digitized  by  Google 


YACHTING  AND  THEOLOGY 


He  sent  this  telegram: 

H.  H.  Rogers, 

Fairhaven,  Mass. 
Can't  get  away  this  week.   I  have  company  here  from  to- 
night till  middle  of  next  week.   Will  Kanawha  be  sailing  after 
that  &  can  I  go  as  Sunday-school  superintendent  at  half  rate? 
Answer  and  prepay.  Dr.  Clemens. 

The  sailing  date  was  conveniently  arranged  and  there 
followed  a  happy  cruise  among  those  balmy  islands. 
Mark  Twain  was  particularly  fond  of  "Tom"  Reed,  who 
had  been  known  as  "Czar"  Reed  in  Congress,  but  was 
delightfully  human  in  his  personal  life.  They  argued 
politics  a  good  deal,  and  Reed,  with  all  his  training  and 
intimate  practical  knowledge  of  the  subject,  confessed 
that  he  "couldn't  argue  with  a  man  like  that." 

"Do  you  believe  the  things  you  say?"  he  asked  once, 
in  his  thin,  falsetto  voice. 

"Yes,"  said  Clemens.    "Some  of  them." 

"Well,  you  want  to  look  out.  If  you  go  on  this  way, 
by  and  by  you'll  get  to  believing  nearly  everything  you 
say." 

Draw  poker  appears  to  have  been  their  favorite  diver- 
sion. Clemens  in  his  notes  reports  that  off  the  coast  of 
Florida  Reed  won  twenty-three  pots  in  succession.  It 
was  said  afterward  that  they  made  no  stops  at  any  harbor; 
that  when  the  chief  officer  approached  the  poker-table 
and  told  them  they  were  about  to  enter  some  important 
port  he  received  peremptory  orders  to  "sail  on  and  not 
interrupt  the  game."  This,  however,  may  be  regarded  as 
more  or  less  founded  on  fiction. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ccxx 


MARK  TWAIN  AND  THE  PHILIPPINES 

AMONG  the  completed  manuscripts  of  the  early  part  of 
i  1902  was  a  North  American  Review  article  (published 
in  April) — "Does  the  Race  of  Man  Love  a  Lord?" — a 
most  interesting  treatise  on  snobbery  as  a  universal 
weakness.  There  were  also  some  papers  on  the  Philippine 
situation.    In  one  of  these  Clemens  wrote: 

We  have  bought  some  islands  from  a  party  who  did  not  own 
them;  with  real  smartness  and  a  good  counterfeit  of  disinterested 
friendliness  we  coaxed  a  confiding  weak  nation  into  a  trap  and 
closed  it  upon  them;  we  went  back  on  an  honored  guest  of  the 
Stars  and  Stripes  when  we  had  no  further  use  for  him  and  chased 
him  to  the  mountains;  we  are  as  indisputably  in  possession  of 
a  wide-spreading  archipelago  as  if  it  were  our  property;  we  have 
pacified  some  thousands  of  the  islanders  and  buried  them; 
destroyed  their  fields;  burned  their  villages,  and  turned  their 
widows  and  orphans  out-of-doors;  furnished  heartbreak  by 
exile  to  some  dozens  of  disagreeable  patriots;  subjugated  the 
remaining  ten  millions  by  Benevolent  Assimilation,  which  is  the 
pious  new  name  of  the  musket;  we  have  acquired  property  in  the 
three  hundred  concubines  and  other  slaves  of  our  business 
partner,  the  Sultan  of  Sulu,  and  hoisted  our  protecting  flag  over 
that  swag. 

And  so,  by  these  Providences  of  God— the  phrase  is  the 
government's,  not  mine— we  are  a  World  Power;  and  are  glad 
and  proud,  and  have  a  back  seat  in  the  family.  With  tacks  in 
it.  At  least  we  are  letting  on  to  be  glad  and  proud;  it  is  the  best 
way.  Indeed,  it  is  the  only  way.  We  must  maintain  our 
dignity,  for  people  are  looking.  We  are  a  World  Power;  we 
cannot  get  out  of  it  now,  and  we  must  make  the  best  of  it. 

1164 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN  AND  THE  PHILIPPINES 


And  again  he  wrote: 

I  am  not  finding  fault  with  this  use  of  our  flag,  for  in  order 
not  to  seem  eccentric  I  have  swung  around  now  and  joined  the 
nation  in  the  conviction  that  nothing  can  sully  a  flag.  I  was 
not  properly  reared,  and  had  the  illusion  that  a  flag  was  a 
thing  which  must  be  sacredly  guarded  against  shameful  uses 
and  unclean  contacts  lest  it  suffer  pollution ;  and  so  when  it  was 
sent  out  to  the  Philippines  to  float  over  a  wanton  war  and  a 
robbing  expedition  I  supposed  it  was  polluted,  and  in  an  ignorant 
moment  I  said  so.  But  I  stand  corrected.  I  concede  and 
acknowledge  that  it  was  only  the  government  that  sent  it  on 
such  an  errand  that  was  polluted.  Let  us  compromise  on  that. 
I  am  glad  to  have  it  that  way.  For  our  flag  could  not  well  stand 
pollution,  never  having  been  used  to  it,  but  it  is  different  with 
the  administration. 

But  a  much  more  conspicuous  comment  on  the  Philip- 
pine policy  was  the  so-called  "Defense  of  General  Fun- 
ston"  for  what  Funston  himself  referred  to  as  a  "dirty 
Irish  trick";  that  is  to  say,  deception  in  the  capture  of 
Aguinaldo.  Clemens,  who  found  it  hard  enough  to  rec- 
oncile himself  to  any  form  of  warfare,  was  especially 
bitter  concerning  this  particular  campaign.  The  article 
appeared  in  the  North  American  Review  for  May,  1902, 
and  stirred  up  a  good  deal  of  a  storm.  He  wrote  much 
more  on  the  subject — very  much  more — but  it  is  still 
unpublished. 

hi. — 4 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXI 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  NATIVE 

ONE  day  in  April,  1902,  Samuel  Clemens  received  the 
following  letter  from  the  president  of  the  University 
of  Missouri: 

My  dear  Mr.  Clemens, — Although  you  received  the  degree 
of  doctor  of  literature  last  fall  from  Yale,  and  have  had  other 
honors  conferred  upon  you  by  other  great  universities,  we  want 
to  adopt  you  here  as  a  son  of  the  University  of  Missouri.  In 
asking  your  permission  to  confer  upon  you  the  degree  of  LL.D. 
the  University  of  Missouri  does  not  aim  to  confer  an  honor  upon 
you  so  much  as  to  show  her  appreciation  of  you.  The  rules 
of  the  University  forbid  us  to  confer  the  degree  upon  any  one  in 
absentia.  I  hope  very  much  that  you  can  so  arrange  your  plans 
as  to  be  with  us  on  the  fourth  day  of  next  June,  when  we  shall 
hold  our  Annual  Commencement. 

Very  truly  yours, 

R.  H.  Jesse. 

Clemens  had  not  expected  to  make  another  trip  to  the 
West,  but  a  proffered  honor  such  as  this  from  one's  native 
State  was  not  a  thing  to  be  declined. 

It  was  at  the  end  of  May  when  he  arrived  in  St.  Louis, 
and  he  was  met  at  the  train  there  by  his  old  river  instructor 
and  friend,  Horace  Bixby — as  fresh,  wiry,  and  capable 
as  he  had  been  forty-five  years  before. 

"I  have  become  an  old  man.    You  are  still  thirty- 
five,"  Clemens  said. 

They  went  to  the  Planters  Hotel,  and  the  news  presently 
got  around  that  Mark  Twain  was  there.    There  followed  * 

1 166 


Digitized  by  Go 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  NATIVE 


a  sort  of  reception  in  the  hotel  lobby,  after  which  Bixby 
took  him  across  to  the  rooms  of  the  Pilots  Association, 
where  the  rivermen  gathered  in  force  to  celebrate  his 
return.  A  few  of  his  old  comrades  were  still  alive,  among 
them  Beck  Jolly.  The  same  afternoon  he  took  the  train 
for  Hannibal. 

It  was  a  busy  five  days  that  he  had  in  Hannibal.  High- 
school  commencement  day  came  first.  He  attended,  and 
willingly,  or  at  least  patiently,  sat  through  the  various 
recitals  and  orations  and  orchestrations,  dreaming  and 
remembering,  no  doubt,  other  high-school  commencements 
of  more  than  half  a  century  before,  seeing  in  some  of  those 
young  people  the  boys  and  girls  he  had  known  in  that 
vanished  time.  A  few  friends  of  his  youth  were  still 
there,  but  they  were  among  the  audience  now,  and  no 
longer  fresh  and  looking  into  the  future.  Their  heads  were 
white,  and,  like  him,  they  were  looking  down  the  recorded 
years.  Laura  Hawkins  was  there  and  Helen  Kercheval 
(Mrs.  Frazer  and  Mrs.  Garth  now),  and  there  were  others, 
but  they  were  few  and  scattering. 

He  was  added  to  the  program,  and  he  made  himself  as 
one  of  the  graduates,  and  told  them  some  things  of  the 
young  people  of  that  earlier  time  that  brought  their 
laughter  and  their  tears. 

He  was  asked  to  distribute  the  diplomas,  and  he  under- 
took the  work  in  his  own  way.  He  took  an  armful  of 
them  and  said  to  the  graduates: 

"Take  one.  Pick  out  a  good  one.  Don't  take  two, 
but  be  sure  you  get  a  good  one." 

So  each  took  one  "unsight  and  unseen"  and  made  the 
more  exact  distributions  among  themselves  later. 

Next  morning — it  was  Saturday — he  visited  the  old 
home  on  Hill  Street,  and  stood  in  the  doorway  all  dressed 
in  white  while  a  battalion  of  photographers  made  pictures 
of  "this  return  of  the  native"  to  the  threshold  of  his 
youth. 

1167 


Digitized^  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


*'It  all  seems  so  small  to  me,"  he  said,  as  he  looked 
through  the  house;  "a  boy's  home  is  a  big  place  to  him. 
I  suppose  if  I  should  come  back  again  ten  years  from  now 
it  would  be  the  size  of  a  bird-house." 

He  went  through  the  rooms  and  up-stairs  where  he  had 
slept  and  looked  out  the  window  down  in  the  back  yard 
where,  nearly  sixty  years  before,  Tom  Sawyer,  Huck 
Finn,  Joe  Harper,  and  the  rest — that  is  to  say,  Tom 
Blankenship,  John  Briggs,  Will  Pitts,  and  the  Bowen  boys 
— set  out  on  their  nightly  escapades.  Of  that  lightsome 
band  Will  Pitts  and  John  Briggs  still  remained,  with  half 
a  dozen  others — schoolmates  of  the  less  adventurous  sort. 
Buck  Brown,  who  had  been  his  rival  in  the  spelling  con- 
tests, was  still  there,  and  John  Robards,  who  had  worn 
golden  curls  and  the  medal  for  good  conduct,  and  Ed 
Pierce.  And  while  these  were  assembled  in  a  little  group 
on  the  pavement  outside  the  home  a  small  old  man  came 
up  and  put  out  his  hand,  and  it  was  Jimmy  MacDaniel,  to 
whom  so  long  before,  sitting  on  the  river-bank  and  eating 
gingerbread,  he  had  first  told  the  story  of  Jim  Wolfe  and 
the  cats. 

They  put  him  into  a  carriage,  drove  him  far  and  wide, 
and  showed  the  hills  and  resorts  and  rendezvous  of  Tom 
Sawyer  and  his  marauding  band. 

He  was  entertained  that  evening  by  the  Labinnah  Club 
(whose  name  was  achieved  by  a  backward  spelling  of 
Hannibal),  where  he  found  most  of  the  survivors  of  his 
youth.  The  news  report  of  that  occasion  states  that 
he  was  introduced  by  Father  McLoughlin,  and  that  he 
"responded  in  a  very  humorous  and  touchingly  pathetic 
way,  breaking  down  in  tears  at  the  conclusion.  Com- 
menting on  his  boyhood  days  and  referring  to  his  mother 
was  too  much  for  the  great  humorist.  Before  him  as  he 
spoke  were  sitting  seven  of  his  boyhood  friends." 

On  Sunday  morning  Col.  John  Robards  escorted  him  to 
the  various  churches  and  Sunday-schools.   They  were  all 

1168  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  NATIVE 


new  churches  to  Samuel  Clemens,  but  he  pretended  not 
to  recognize  this  fact.  In  each  one  he  was  asked  to  speak 
a  few  words,  and  he  began  by  saying  how  good  it  was  to 
be  back  in  the  old  home  Sunday-school  again,  which  as  a 
boy  he  had  always  so  loved,  and  he  would  go  on  and  point 
out  the  very  place  he  had  sat,  and  his  escort  hardly  knew 
whether  or  not  to  enjoy  the  proceedings.  At  one  place  he 
told  a  moral  story.    He  said: 

Little  boys  and  girls,  I  want  to  tell  you  a  story  which  illus- 
trates the  value  of  perseverance— of  sticking  to  your  work,  as  it 
were.  It  is  a  story  very  proper  for  a  Sunday-school.  When  I 
was  a  little  boy  in  Hannibal  I  used  to  play  a  good  deal  up  here 
on  Holliday's  Hill,  which  of  course  you  all  know.  John  Briggs 
and  I  played  up  there.  I  don't  suppose  there  are  any  little  boys 
as  good  as  we  were  then,  but  of  course  that  is  not  to  be  ex- 
pected. Little  boys  in  those  days  were  'most  always  good  little 
boys,  because  those  were  the  good  old  times  when  everything 
was  better  than  it  is  now,  but  never  mind  that.  Well,  once  upon 
a  time,  on  Holliday's  Hill,  they  were  blasting  out  rock,  and  a 
man  was  drilling  for  a  blast.  He  sat  there  and  drilled  and  drilled 
and  drilled  perseveringly  until  he  had  a  hole  down  deep  enough 
for  the  blast.  Then  he  put  in  the  powder  and  tamped  and  tamped 
it  down,  but  maybe  he  tamped  it  a  little  too  hard,  for  the  blast 
went  off  and  he  went  up  into  the  air,  and  we  watched  him.  He 
went  up  higher  and  higher  and  got  smaller  and  smaller.  First  he 
looked  as  big  as  a  child,  then  as  big  as  a  dog,  then  as  big  as  a 
kitten,  then  as  big  as  a  bird,  and  finally  he  went  out  of  sight. 
John  Briggs  was  with  me,  and  we  watched  the  place  where  he 
went  out  of  sight,  and  by  and  by  we  saw  him  coming  down — 
first  as  big  as  a  bird,  then  as  big  as  a  kitten,  then  as  big  as  a  dog, 
then  as  big  as  a  child,  and  then  he  was  a  man  again,  and  landed 
right  in  his  seat  and  went  to  drilling — just  persevering,  you  see, 
and  sticking  to  his  work.  Little  boys  and  girls,  that's  the 
secret  of  success,  just  like  that  poor  but  honest  workman  on 
Holliday's  Hill.  Of  course  you  won't  always  be  appreciated. 
He  wasn't.  His  employer  was  a  hard  man,  and  on  Saturday  night 
when  he  paid  him  he  docked  him  fifteen  minutes  for  the  time 
he  was  up  in  the  air— but  never  mind,  he  had  his  reward. 

1 169 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


He  told  all  this  in  his  solemn,  grave  way,  though  the 
Sunday-school  was  in  a  storm  of  enjoyment  when  he 
finished.  There  still  remains  a  doubt  in  Hannibal  as  to 
its  perfect  suitability,  but  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  its 
acceptability. 

That  Sunday  afternoon,  with  John  Briggs,  he  walked 
over  Holliday's  Hill — the  Cardiff  Hill  of  Tom  Sawyer.  It 
was  just  such  a  Sunday  as  that  one  when  they  had  so 
nearly  demolished  the  negro  driver  and  had  damaged  a 
cooper-shop.  They  calculated  that  nearly  three  thousand 
Sundays  had  passed  since  then,  and  now  here  they  were 
once  more,  two  old  men  with  the  hills  still  fresh  and  green, 
the  river  still  sweeping  by  and  rippling  in  the  sun.  Stand- 
ing there  together  and  looking  across  to  the  low-lying 
Illinois  shore,  and  to  the  green  islands  where  they  had 
played,  and  to  Lover's  Leap  on  the  south,  the  man  who 
had  been  Sam  Clemens  said: 

"John,  that  is  one  of  the  loveliest  sights  I  ever  saw. 
Down  there  by  the  island  is  the  place  we  used  to  swim, 
and  yonder  is  where  a  man  was  drowned,  and  there's  where 
the  steamboat  sank.  Down  there  on  Lover's  Leap  is 
where  the  Millerites  put  on  their  robes  one  night  to  go  to 
heaven.  None  of  them  went  that  night,  but  I  suppose 
most  of  them  have  gone  now." 

John  Briggs  said: 

"Sam,  do  you  remember  the  day  we  stole  the  peaches 
from  old  man  Price  and  one  of  his  bow-legged  niggers 
came  after  us^  with  the  dogs,  and  how  we  made  up  our 
minds  that  we'd  catch  that  nigger  and  drown  him?" 

They  came  to  the  place  where  they  had  pried  out  the 
great  rock  that  had  so  nearly  brought  them  to  grief.  Sam 
Clemens  said: 

"John,  if  we  had  killed  that  man  we'd  have  had  a  dead 
nigger  on  our  hands  without  a  cent  to  pay  for  him." 

And  so  they  talked  on  of  this  thing  and  that,  and  by  and 
by  they  drove  along  the  river,  and  Sam  Clemens  pointed 

1 170 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  NATIVE 


out  the  place  where  he  swam  it  and  was  taken  with  a 
cramp  on  the  return  swim,  and  believed  for  a  while  that 
his  career  was  about  to  close. 

"Once,  near  the  shore,  I  thought  I  would  let  down," 
he  said,  "but  was  afraid  to,  knowing  that  if  the  water 
was  deep  I  was  a  goner,  but  finally  my  knees  struck  the 
sand  and  I  crawled  out.  That  was  the  closest  call  I 
ever  had." 

They  drove  by  the  place  where  the  haunted  house  had 
stood.  They  drank  from  a  well  they  had  always  known, 
and  from  the  bucket  as  they  had  always  drunk,  talking  and 
always  talking,  fondling  lovingly  and  lingeringly  that  most 
beautiful  of  all  our  possessions,  the  past. 

"Sam,"  said  John,  when  they  parted,  "this  is  probably 
the  last  time  we  shall  meet  on  this  earth.  God  bless  you. 
Perhaps  somewhere  we  shall  renew  our  friendship." 

"John,"  was  the  answer,  "this  day  has  been  worth 
thousands  of  dollars  to  me.  We  were  like  brothers  once, 
and  I  feel  that  we  are  the  same  now.  Good-by,  John. 
1*11  try  to  meet  you — somewhere." 


CCXXII 


A  PROPHBT  HONORED  IN  HIS  COUNTRY 

CLEMENS  left  next  day  for  Columbia.  Committees 
met  him  at  Rensselaer,  Monroe  City,  Clapper, 
Stoutsville,  Paris.  Madison,  Moberly — at  every  station 
along  the  line  of  his  travel.  At  each  place  crowds  were 
gathered  when  the  train  pulled  in,  to  cheer  and  wave  and 
to  present  him  with  flowers.  Sometimes  he  spoke  a  few 
words;  but  oftener  his  eyes  were  full  of  tears — his  voice 
would  not  come. 

There  is  something  essentially  dramatic  in  official 
recognition  by  one's  native  State — the  return  of  the  lad 
who  has  set  out  unknown  to  battle  with  life,  and  who, 
having  conquered,  is  invited  back  to  be  crowned.  No 
other  honor,  however  great  and  spectacular,  is  quite  like 
that,  for  there  is  in  it  a  pathos  and  a  completeness  that 
are  elemental  and  stir  emotions  as  old  as  life  itself. 

It  was  on  the  4th  of  June,  1902,  that  Mark  Twain  re- 
ceived his  doctor  of  laws  degree  from  the  State  University 
at  Columbia,  Missouri.  James  Wilson,  Secretary  of 
Agriculture,  and  Ethan  Allen  Hitchcock,  Secretary  of  the 
Interior,  were  among  those  similarly  honored.  Mark 
Twain  was  naturally  the  chief  attraction.  Dressed  in  his 
Yale  scholastic  gown  he  led  the  procession  of  graduating 
students,  and,  as  in  Hannibal,  awarded  them  their  diplo- 
mas. The  regular  exercises  were  made  purposely  brief 
in  order  that  some  time  might  be  allowed  for  the  con- 
ferring of  the  degrees.  This  ceremony  was  a  peculiarly 
impressive  one.    Gardner  Lathrop  read  a  brief  state- 

1 172 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  PROPHET  HONORED  IN  HIS  COUNTRY 


ment  introducing  "America's  foremost  author  and  best- 
loved  citizen,  Samuel  Langhorne  Clemens — Mark  Twain." 

Clemens  rose,  stepped  out  to  the  center  of  the  stage, 
and  paused.  He  seemed  to  be  in  doubt  as  to  whether  he 
should  make  a  speech  or  simply  express  his  thanks  and 
retire.  Suddenly,  and  without  a  signal,  the  great  audience 
rose  as  one  man  and  stood  in  silence  at  his  feet.  He 
bowed,  but  he  could  not  speak.  Then  that  vast  as- 
sembly began  a  peculiar  chant,  spelling  out  slowly  the 
word  Missouri,  with  a  pause  between  each  letter.  It  was 
dramatic;  it  was  tremendous  in  its  impressiveness.  He 
had  recovered  himself  when  they  finished.  He  said  he 
didn't  know  whether  he  was  expected  to  make  a  speech 
or  not.  They  did  not  leave  him  in  doubt.  They  cheered 
and  demanded  a  speech,  a  speech,  and  he  made  them  one — 
one  of  the  speeches  he  could  make  best,  full  of  quaint 
phrasing,  happy  humor,  gentle  and  dramatic  pathos.  He 
closed  by  telling  the  watermelon  story  for  its  "moral 
effect." 

He  was  the  guest  of  E.  W.  Stevens  in  Columbia,  and  a 
dinner  was  given  in  his  honor.  They  would  have  liked 
to  keep  him  longer,  but  he  was  due  in  St.  Louis  again  to 
join  in  the  dedication  of  the  grounds,  where  was  to  be 
held  a  World's  Fair,  to  celebrate  the  Louisiana  Purchase. 
Another  ceremony  he  attended  was  the  christening  of  the 
St.  Louis  harbor-boat,  or  rather  the  rechristening,  for  it 
had  been  decided  to  change  its  name  from  the  St.  Louis  1 
to  the  Mark  Twain.  A  short  trip  was  made  on  it  for  the 
ceremony.  Governor  Francis  and  Mayor  Wells  were  of 
the  party,  and  Count  and  Countess  Rochambeau  and 
Marquis  de  Lafayette,  with  the  rest  of  the  French  group 
that  had  come  over  for  the  dedication  of  the  World's  Fair 
grounds. 

Mark  Twain  himself  was  invited  to  pilot  the  harbor- 

1  Originally  the  Eton  G.  Smith,  built  in  1873. 

ii73 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


boat,  and  so  returned  for  the  last  time  to  his  old  place  at 
the  wheel.  They  all  collected  in  the  pilot-house  behind 
him,  feeling  that  it  was  a  memorable  occasion.  They 
were  going  along  well  enough  when  he  saw  a  little  ripple 
running  out  from  the  shore  across  the  bow.  In  the  old 
days  he  could  have  told  whether  it  indicated  a  bar  there 
or  was  only  caused  by  the  wind,  but  he  could  not  be  sure 
any  more.    Turning  to  the  pilot  languidly,  he  said: 

"I  feel  a  little  tired.  I  guess  you  had  better  take  the 
wheel." 

Luncheon  was  served  aboard,  and  Mayor  Wells  made 
the  christening  speech;  then  the  Countess  Rochambeau 
took  a  bottle  of  champagne  from  the  hand  of  Governor 
Francis  and  smashed  it  on  the  deck,  saying,  "I  christen 
thee,  good  boat,  Mark  Twain**  So  it  was,  the  Mississippi 
joined  in  according  him  honors.  In  his  speech  of  reply 
he  paid  tribute  to  those  illustrious  visitors  from  France 
and  recounted  something  of  the  story  of  French  explora- 
tion along  that  great  river. 

"The  name  of  La  Salle  will  last  as  long  as  the  river 
itself,"  he  said;  "will  last  until  commerce  is  dead.  We 
have  allowed  the  commerce  of  the  river  to  die,  but  it 
was  to  accommodate  the  railroads,  and  we  must  be 
grateful." 

Carriages  were  waiting  for  them  when  the  boat  landed 
in  the  afternoon,  and  the  party  got  in  and  were  driven 
to  a  house  which  had  been  identified  as  Eugene  Field's 
birthplace.  A  bronze  tablet  recording  this  fact  had  been 
installed,  and  this  was  to  be  the  unveiling.  The  place 
was  not  in  an  inviting  quarter  of  the  town.  It  stood  in 
what  is  known  as  Walsh's  Row — was  fashionable  enough 
once,  perhaps,  but  long  since  fallen  into  disrepute.  Ragged 
children  played  in  the  doorways,  and  thirsty  lodgers  were 
making  trips  with  tin  pails  to  convenient  bar-rooms. 
A  curious  nondescript  audience  assembled  around  the 
little  group  of  dedicators,  wondering  what  it  was  all 

1174 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  PROPHET  HONORED  IN  HIS  COUNTRY 

about.  The  tablet  was  concealed  by  the  American  flag, 
which  could  be  easily  pulled  away  by  an  attached  cord. 

Governor  Francis  spoke  a  few  words,  to  the  effect  that 
they  had  gathered  here  to  unveil  a  tablet  to  an  American 
poet,  and  that  it  was  fitting  that  Mark  Twain  should  do 
this.  They  removed  their  hats,  and  Clemens,  his  white 
hair  blowing  in  the  wind,  said: 

"My  friends,  we  are  here  with  reverence  and  respect 
to  commemorate  and  enshrine  in  memory  the  house 
where  was  born  a  man  who,  by  his  life,  made  bright  the 
lives  of  all  who  knew  him,  and  by  his  literary  efforts 
cheered  the  thoughts  of  thousands  who  never  knew  him. 
I  take  pleasure  in  unveiling  the  tablet  of  Eugene  Field." 

The  flag  fell  and  the  bronze  inscription  was  revealed. 
By  this  time  the  crowd,  generally,  had  recognized  who  it 
was  that  was  speaking.  A  working-man  proposed  three 
cheers  for  Mark  Twain,  and  they  were  heartily  given. 
Then  the  little  party  drove  away,  while  the  neighborhood 
collected  to  regard  the  old  house  with  a  new  interest. 

It  was  reported  to  Clemens  later  that  there  was  some 
dispute  as  to  the  identity  of  the  Field  birthplace.  He 
said: 

"Never  mind.  It  is  of  no  real  consequence  whether 
it  is  his  birthplace  or  not.  A  rose  in  any  other  garden 
will  bloom  as  sweet." 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXIII 


AT  YORK  HARBOR 

THEY  decided  to  spend  the  summer  at  York  Har- 
bor, Maine.  They  engaged  a  cottage  there,  and 
about  the  end  of  June  Mr.  Rogers  brought  his  yacht 
Kanawha  to  their  water-front  at  Riverdale,  and  in  per- 
fect weather  took  them  to  Maine  by  sea.  They  landed 
at  York  Harbor  and  took  possession  of  their  cottage, 
The  Pines,  one  of  their  many  attractive  summer  lodges. 
Howells,  at  Kittery  Point,  was  not  far  away,  and  every- 
thing promised  a  happy  summer. 
Mrs.  Clemens  wrote  to  Mrs.  Crane: 

We  are  in  the  midst  of  pines.  They  come  up  right  about  us, 
and  the  house  is  so  high  and  the  roots  of  the  trees  are  so  far 
below  the  veranda  that  we  are  right  in  the  branches.  We  drove 
over  to  call  on  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howells.  The  drive  was  most 
beautiful,  and  never  in  my  life  have  I  seen  such  a  variety  of  wild 
flowers  in  so  short  a  space. 

Howells  tells  us  of  the  wide,  low  cottage  in  a  pine  grove 
overlooking  York  River,  and  how  he  used  to  sit  with 
Clemens  that  summer  at  a  corner  of  the  veranda  farthest 
away  from  Mrs.  Clemens's  window,  where  they  could 
read  their  manuscripts  to  each  other,  and  tell  their  stories 
and  laugh  their  hearts  out  without  disturbing  her. 

Clemens,  as  was  his  habit,  had  taken  a  work-room  in  a 
separate  cottage  "  in  the  house  of  a  friend  and  neighbor, 
a  fisherman  and  a  boatman  " : 

1176 


Digitized  by  Google 


AT  YORK  HARBOR 


There  was  a  table  where  he  could  write,  and  a  bed  where  he 
could  lie  down  and  read;  and  there,  unless  my  memory  has 
played  mc  one  of  those  constructive  tricks  that  people's  memories 
indulge  in,  he  read  me  the  first  chapters  of  an  admirable  story. 
The  scene  was  laid  in  a  Missouri  town,  and  the  characters  such  as 
he  had  known  in  boyhood;  but  often  as  I  tried  to  make  him  own 
it,  he  denied  having  written  any  such  story;  it  is  possible  that 
I  dreamed  it,  but  I  hope  the  MS.  will  yet  be  found. 

Howells  did  not  dream  it;  but  in  one  way  his  memory 
misled  him.  The  story  was  one  which  Clemens  had  heard 
in  Hannibal,  and  he  doubtless  related  it  in  his  vivid  way. 
Howells,  writing  at  a  later  time,  quite  naturally  included 
it  among  the  several  manuscripts  which  Clemens  read 
aloud  to  him.  Clemens  may  have  intended  to  write  the 
tale,  may  even  have  begun  it,  though  this  is  unlikely. 
The  incidents  were  too  well  known  and  too  notorious  in 
his  old  home  for  fiction. 

Among  the  stories  that  Clemens  did  show,  or  read,  to 
Howells  that  summer  was  "The  Belated  Passport,"  a 
strong,  intensely  interesting  story  with  what  Howells  in 
a  letter  calls  a  "goat's  tail  ending,"  perhaps  meaning  that 
it  stopped  with  a  brief  and  sudden  shake — with  a  joke, 
in  fact,  altogether  unimportant,  and  on  the  whole  dis- 
appointing to  the  reader.  A  far  more  notable  literary 
work  of  that  summer  grew  out  of  a  true  incident  which 
Howells  related  to  Clemens  as  they  sat  chatting  together 
on  the  veranda  overlooking  the  river  one  summer  after- 
noon. It  was  a  pathetic  episode  in  the  life  of  some  former 
occupants  of  The  Pines — the  tale  of  a  double  illness  in 
the  household,  where  a  righteous  deception  was  carried 
on  during  several  weeks  for  the  benefit  of  a  life  that  was 
about  to  slip  away.  Out  of  this  grew  the  story,  "Was  it 
Heaven?  or  Hell?"  a  heartbreaking  history  which  probes 
the  very  depths  of  the  human  soul.  Next  to  "Hadley- 
burg,"  it  is  Mark  Twain's  greatest  fictional  sermon. 

Clemens  that  summer  wrote,  or  rather  finished,  his  most 

1177 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


pretentious  poem.  One  day  at  Riverdale,  when  Mrs. 
Clemens  had  been  with  him  on  the  lawn,  they  had  re- 
membered together  the  time  when  their  family  of  little 
folks  had  filled  their  lives  so  full,  conjuring  up  dream-like 
glimpses  of  them  in  the  years  of  play  and  short  frocks  and 
hair-plaits  down  their  backs.  It  was  pathetic,  heart- 
wringing  fancying;  and  later  in  the  day  Clemens  con- 
ceived and  began  the  poem  which  now  he  brought  to 
conclusion.  It  was  built  on  the  idea  of  a  mother  who 
imagines  her  dead  child  still  living,  and  describes  to  any 
listener  the  pictures  of  her  fancy.  It  is  an  impressive 
piece  of  work;  but  the  author,  for  some  reason,  did  not 
offer  it  for  publication.1 

Mrs.  Clemens,  whose  health  earlier  in  the  year  had  been 
delicate,  became  very  seriously  ill  at  York  Harbor.  . 
Howells  writes: 

At  first  she  had  been  about  the  house,  and  there  was  one 
gentle  afternoon  when  she  made  tea  for  us  in  the  parlor,  but  that 
was  the  last  time  I  spoke  with  her.  After  that  it  was  really  a 
question  of  how  soonest  and  easiest  she  could  be  got  back  to 
Riverdale. 

She  had  seemed  to  be  in  fairly  good  health  and  spirits 
for  several  weeks  after  the  arrival  at  York.  Then,  early 
in  August,  there  came  a  great  celebration  of  some  muni- 
cipal anniversary,  and  for  two  or  three  days  there  were 
processions,  mass-meetings,  and  so  on  by  day,  with  fire- 
works at  night.  Mrs.  Clemens,  always  young  in  spirit, 
was  greatly  interested.  She  went  about  more  than  her 
strength  warranted,  seeing  and  hearing  and  enjoying  all 
that  was  going  on.  She  was  finally  persuaded  to  forego 
the  remaining  ceremonies  and  rest  quietly  on  the  pleasant 
veranda  at  home;  but  she  had  overtaxed  herself  and 

1  This  poem  was  completed  on  the  anniversary  of  Susy's  death 
and  is  of  considerable  length.  Some  selections  from  it  will  be 
found  under  Appendix  U,  at  the  end  of  this  work. 

1 1  78 


Digitized  by  Google 


AT  YORK  HARBOR 


a  collapse  was  inevitable.  Howells  and  two  friends  called 
one  afternoon,  and  a  friend  of  the  Queen  of  Rumania,  a 
Madame  Hartwig,  who  had  brought  from  that  gracious 
sovereign  a  letter  which  closed  in  this  simple  and  modest 
fashion: 

I  beg  your  pardon  for  being  a  bore  to  one  I  so  deeply  love  and 
admire,  to  whom  I  owe  days  and  days  of  forgetfulness  of  self 
and  troubles,  and  the  intensest  of  all  joys — hero- worship  1 
People  don't  always  realize  what  a  happiness  that  is!  God  bless 
you  for  every  beautiful  thought  you  poured  into  my  tired  heart, 
and  for  every  smile  on  a  weary  way.  Carmen  Sylva. 

This  was  the  occasion  mentioned  by  Howells  when  Mrs. 
Clemens  made  tea  for  them  in  the  parlor  for  the  last  time. 
Her  social  life  may  be  said  to  have  ended  that  afternoon. 
Next  morning  the  break  came.  Clemens,  in  his  note- 
book for  that  day,  writes: 

Tuesday,  August  12,  1002.  At  7  a.m.  Livy  taken  violently 
ill.  Telephoned  and  Dr.  Lambert  was  here  in  %  hour.  She 
could  not  breathe — was  likely  to  stifle.  Also  she  had  severe 
palpitation.    She  believed  she  was  dying.    I  also  believed  it. 

Nurses  were  summoned,  and  Mrs.  Crane  and  others 
came  from  Elmira.  Clara  Clemens  took  charge  of  the 
household  and  matters  generally,  and  the  patient  was 
secluded  and  guarded  from  every  disturbing  influence. 
Clemens  slipped  about  with  warnings  of  silence.  A 
visitor  found  notices  in  Mark  Twain's  writing  pinned  to 
the  trees  near  Mrs.  Clemens's  window  warning  the  birds 
not  to  sing  too  loudly. 

The  patient  rallied,  but  she  remained  very  much  de- 
bilitated.   On  September  3d  the  note-book  says: 

Always  Mr.  Rogers  keeps  his  yacht  Kanawha  in  commission 
&  ready  to  fly  here  and  take  us  to  Riverdale  on  telegraphic 
notice. 

1170 


Digitized  by  Go( 


MARK  TWAIN 


But  Mrs.  Clemens  was  unable  to  return  by  sea.  When 
it  was  decided  at  last,  in  October,  that  she  could  be  re- 
moved to  Riverdale,  Clemens  and  Howells  went  to 
Boston  and  engaged  an  invalid  car  to  make  the  journey 
from  York  Harbor  to  Riverdale  without  change.  Howells 
tells  us  that  Clemens  gave  his  strictest  personal  attention 
to  the  arrangement  of  these  details,  and  that  they  ab- 
sorbed him. 

There  was  no  particular  of  the  business  which  he  did  not 
scrutinize  and  master.  .  .  .  With  the  inertness  that  grows  upon 
an  aging  man  he  had  been  used  to  delegate  more  and  more 
things,  but  of  that  thing  I  perceived  that  he  would  not  delegate 
the  least  detail. 

They  made  the  journey  on  the  16th,  in  nine  and  a  half 
hours.  With  the  exception  of  the  natural  weariness  due 
to  such  a  trip,  the  invalid  was  apparently  no  worse  on 
their  arrival.  The  stout  English  butler  carried  her  to 
her  room.  It  would  be  many  months  before  she  would 
leave  it  again.    In  one  of  his  memoranda  Clemens  wrote: 

Our  dear  prisoner  is  where  she  is  through  overwork— day  & 
night  devotion  to  the  children  &  me.  We  did  not  know  how 
to  value  it.   We  know  now. 

And  in  a  notation,  on  a  letter  praising  him  for  what 
he  had  done  for  the  world's  enjoyment,  and  for  his  splen- 
did triumph  over  debt,  he  said: 

Livy  never  gets  her  share  of  these  applauses,  but  it  is  because 
the  people  do  not  know.   Yet  she  is  entitled  to  the  lion's  share. 

He  wrote  Twichell  at  the  end  of  October: 

Livy  drags  along  drearily.  It  must  be  hard  times  for  that 
turbulent  spirit.  It  will  be  a  long  time  before  she  is  on  her 
feet  again.    It  is  a  most  pathetic  case.    I  wish  I  could  transfer 

1180 


Digitized  by  Go< 


AT  YORK  HARBOR 


it  to  myself.  Between  ripping  &  raging  &  smoking  &  reading 
I  could  get  a  good  deal  of  holiday  out  of  it.  Clara  runs  the  house 
smoothly  &  capitally. 

Heavy  as  was  the  cloud  of  illness,  he  could  not  help 
pestering  Twichell  a  little  about  a  recent  mishap — a 
sprained  shoulder: 

I  should  like  to  know  how  &  where  it  happened.  In  the  pulpit, 
as  like  as  not,  otherwise  you  would  not  be  taking  so  much  pains 
to  conceal  it.  This  is  not  a  malicious  suggestion,  &  not  a 
personally  invented  one:  you  told  me  yourself  once  that  you 
threw  artificial  power  &  impressiveness  in  your  sermons  where 
needed  by  "banging  the  Bible" — (your  own  words).  You  have 
reached  a  time  of  life  when  it  is  not  wise  to  take  these  risks. 
You  would  better  jump  around.  We  all  have  to  change  our 
methods  as  the  infirmities  of  age  creep  upon  us.  Jumping  around 
will  be  impressive  now,  whereas  before  you  were  gray  it  would 
have  excited  remark. 

Mrs.  Clemens  seemed  to  improve  as  the  weeks  passed, 
and  they  had  great  hopes  of  her  complete  recovery. 
Clemens  took  up  some  work— a  new  Huck  Finn  story, 
inspired  by  his  trip  to  Hannibal.  It  was  to  have  two 
parts — Huck  and  Tom  in  youth,  and  then  their  return 
in  old  age.  He  did  some  chapters  quite  in  the  old  vein, 
and  wrote  to  Howells  of  his  plan.    Howells  answered: 

It  is  a  great  lay-out:  what  I  shall  enjoy  most  will  be  the  re- 
turn of  the  old  fellows  to  the  scene  and  their  tall  lying.  There 
is  a  matchless  chance  there.  I  suppose  you  will  put  in  plenty 
of  pegs  in  this  prefatory  part. 

But  the  new  story  did  not  reach  completion.  Huck 
and  Tom  would  not  come  back,  even  to  go  over  the  old 
scenes. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXIV 


THE  SIXTY-SEVENTH  BIRTHDAY  DINNER 

IT  was  on  the  evening  of  the  27th  of  November,  1902, 
at  the  Metropolitan  Club,  New  York  City,  that  Col. 
George  Harvey,  president  of  the  Harper  Company,  gave 
Mark  Twain  a  dinner  in  celebration  of  his  sixty-seventh 
birthday.  The  actual  date  fell  three  days  later;  but 
that  would  bring  it  on  Sunday,  and  to  give  it  on  Saturday 
night  would  be  more  than  likely  to  carry  it  into  Sabbath 
morning,  and  so  the  27th  was  chosen.  Colonel  Harvey 
himself  presided,  and  Howells  led  the  speakers  with  a 
poem,  "A  Double-Barreled  Sonnet  to  Mark  Twain," 
which  closed: 

Still,  to  have  everything  beyond  cavil  right, 
We  will  dine  with  you  here  till  Sunday  night. 

Thomas  Brackett  Reed  followed  with  what  proved  to 
be  the  last  speech  he  would  ever  make,  as  it  was  also  one 
of  his  best.  All  the  speakers  did  well  that  night,  and  they 
included  some  of  the  country's  foremost  in  oratory: 
Chauncey  Depew,  St.  Clair  McKelway,  Hamilton  Mabie, 
and  Wayne  MacVeagh.  Dr.  Henry  van  Dyke  and  John 
Kendrick  Bangs  read  poems.  The  chairman  constantly 
kept  the  occasion  from  becoming  too  serious  by  main- 
taining an  attitude  of  "thinking  ambassador"  for  the 
guest  of  the  evening,  gently  pushing  Clemens  back  in 
his  seat  when  he  attempted  to  rise  and  expressing  for  him 
an  opinion  of  each  of  the  various  tributes. 

"The  limit  has  been  reached,"  he  announced  at  the 

1182 


Digitized  by  Go< 


SIXTY-SEVENTH  BIRTHDAY  DINNER 


close  of  Dr.  van  Dyke's  poem.  "More  that  is  better 
could  not  be  said.    Gentlemen,  Mr.  Clemens." 

It  is  seldom  that  Mark  Twain  has  made  a  better  after- 
dinner  speech  than  he  delivered  then.  He  was  sur- 
rounded by  some  of  the  best  minds  of  the  nation,  men 
assembled  to  do  him  honor.  They  expected  much  of 
him — to  Mark  Twain  always  an  inspiring  circumstance. 
He  was  greeted  with  cheers  and  hand-clapping  that  came 
volley  after  volley,  and  seemed  never  ready  to  end.  When 
it  had  died  away  at  last  he  stood  waiting  a  little  in  the 
stillness  for  his  voice;  then  he  said,  "  I  think  I  ought  to  be 
allowed  to  talk  as  long  as  I  want  to,"  and  again  the  storm 
broke. 

It  is  a  speech  not  easy  to  abridge — a  finished  and  per- 
fect piece  of  after-dinner  eloquence,1  full  of  humorous 
stories  and  moving  references  to  old  friends — to  Hay,  and 
Reed,  and  Twichell,  and  Howells,  and  Rogers,  the  friends 
he  had  known  so  long  and  loved  so  well.  He  told  of  his 
recent  trip  to  his  boyhood  home,  and  how  he  had  stood 
with  John  Briggs  on  Holliday's  Hill  and  they  had  pointed 
out  the  haunts  of  their  youth.  Then  at  the  end  he  paid 
a  tribute  to  the  companion  of  his  home,  who  could  not 
be  there  to  share  his  evening's  triumph.  This  peroration 
— a  beautiful  heart-offering  to  her  and  to  those  that  had 
shared  in  long  friendship — demands  admission: 

Now,  there  is  one  invisible  guest  here.  A  part  of  me  is  not 
present;  the  larger  part,  the  better  part,  is  yonder  at  her  home; 
that  is  my  wife,  and  she  has  a  good  many  personal  friends  here, 
and  I  think  it  won't  distress  any  one  of  them  to  know  that, 
although  she  is  going  to  be  confined  to  her  bed  for  many  months 
to  come  from  that  nervous  prostration,  there  is  not  any  danger 
and  she  is  coming  along  very  well — and  I  think  it  quite  appro- 
priate that  I  should  speak  of  her.  I  knew  her  for  the  first 
time  just  in  the  same  year  that  I  first  knew  John  Hay  and 

1  The  "Sixty-seventh  Birthday  Speech"  entire  is  included  in  the 
volume  Mark  Twain's  Speeches. 

1183 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Tom  Reed  and  Mr.  Twichell — thirty-six  years  ago — and  she  has 
been  the  best  friend  I  have  ever  had,  and  that  is  saying  a  good 
deal — she  has  reared  me — she  and  Twichell  together — and  what 
I  am  I  owe  to  them.  Twichell— why,  it  is  such  a  pleasure  to 
look  upon  TwichelTs  face!  For  five  and  twenty  years  I  was 
under  the  Rev.  Mr.  Twichell's  tuition,  I  was  in  his  pastorate 
occupying  a  pew  in  his  church  and  held  him  in  due  reverence. 
That  man  is  full  of  all  the  graces  that  go  to  make  a  person  com- 
panionable and  beloved;  and  wherever  Twichell  goes  to  start 
a  church  the  people  flock  there  to  buy  the  land;  they  find  real 
estate  goes  up  all  around  the  spot,  and  the  envious  and  the 
thoughtful  always  try  to  get  Twichell  to  move  to  their  neigh- 
borhood and  start  a  church;  and  wherever  you  see  him  go  you 
can  go  and  buy  land  there  with  confidence,  feeling  sure  that 
there  will  be  a  double  price  for  you  before  very  long. 

I  have  tried  to  do  good  in  this  world,  and  it  is  marvelous 
in  how  many  different  ways  I  have  done  good,  and  it  is  comfort- 
able to  reflect — now,  there's  Mr.  Rogers — just  out  of  the  af- 
fection I  bear  that  man  many  a  time  I  have  given  him  points 
in  finance  that  he  had  never  thought  of— and  if  he  could  lay 
aside  envy,  prejudice,  and  superstition,  and  utilize  those  ideas 
in  his  business,  it  would  make  a  difference  in  his  bank-account. 

Well,  I  liked  the  poetry.  I  liked  all  the  speeches  and  the 
poetry,  too.  I  liked  Dr.  van  Dyke's  poem.  I  wish  I  could 
return  thanks  in  proper  measure  to  you,  gentlemen,  who  have 
spoken  and  violated  your  feelings  to  pay  me  compliments;  some 
were  merited  and  some  you  overlooked,  it  is  true;  and  Colonel 
Harvey  did  slander  every  one  of  you,  and  put  things  into  my 
mouth  that  I  never  said,  never  thought  of  at  all. 

And  now  my  wife  and  I,  out  of  our  single  heart,  return  you 
our  deepest  and  most  grateful  thanks,  and— yesterday  was  her 
birthday. 

The  sixty-seventh  birthday  dinner  was  widely  cele- 
brated by  the  press,  and  newspaper  men  generally  took 
occasion  to  pay  brilliant  compliments  to  Mark  Twain. 
Arthur  Brisbane  wrote  editorially: 

For  more  than  a  generation  he  has  been  the  Messiah  of  a 
genuine  gladness  and  joy  to  the  millions  of  three  continents. 

1184 


Digitized  by  Google 


SIXTY-SEVENTH  BIRTHDAY  DINNER 


It  was  little  more  than  a  week  later  that  one  of  the  old 
friends  he  had  mentioned,  Thomas  Brackett  Reed,  ap- 
parently well  and  strong  that  birthday  evening,  passed 
from  the  things  of  this  world.  Clemens  felt  his  death 
keenly,  and  in  a  "good-by"  which  he  wrote  for  Harper's 
Weekly  he  said: 

His  was  a  nature  which  invited  affection — compelled  it,  in 
fact — and  met  it  half-way.  Hence,  he  was  "Tom"  to  the  most 
of  his  friends  and  to  half  of  the  nation.  .  .  . 

I  cannot  remember  back  to  a  time  when  he  was  not  "Tom" 
Reed  to  me,  nor  to  a  time  when  he  could  have  been  offended  at 
being  so  addressed  by  me.  I  cannot  remember  back  to  a  time 
when  I  could  let  him  alone  in  an  after-dinner  speech  if  he  was 
present,  nor  to  a  time  when  he  did  not  take  my  extravagance 
concerning  him  and  misstatements  about  him  in  good  part,  nor 
yet  to  a  time  when  he  did  not  pay  them  back  with  usury  when 
his  turn  came.  The  last  speech  he  made  was  at  my  birthday 
dinner  at  the  end  of  November,  when  naturally  I  was  his  text; 
my  last  word  to  him  was  in  a  letter  the  next  day;  a  day  later  I 
was  illustrating  a  fantastic  article  on  art  with  his  portrait  among 
others — a  portrait  now  to  be  laid  reverently  away  among  the 
jests  that  begin  in  humor  and  end  in  pathos.  These  things 
happened  only  eight  days  ago,  and  now  he  is  gone  from  us, 
and  the  nation  is  speaking  of  him  as  one  who  was.  It  seems 
incredible,  impossible.  Such  a  man,  such  a  friend,  seems  to  us 
a  permanent  possession;  his  vanishing  from  our  midst  is  un- 
thinkable, as  was  the  vanishing  of  the  Campanile,  that  had 
stood  for  a  thousand  years  and  was  turned  to  dust  in  a 
moment. 

The  appreciation  closes: 

I  have  only  wished  to  say  how  fine  and  beautiful  was  his  life 
and  character,  and  to  take  him  by  the  hand  and  say  good-by, 
as  to  a  fortunate  friend  who  has  done  well  his  work  and  goes 
a  pleasant  journey. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ccxxv 


CHRISTIAN  SCIENCE  CONTROVERSIES 

THE  North  American  Review  for  December  (1902)  con- 
tained an  instalment  of  the  Christian  Science  series 
which  Mark  Twain  had  written  in  Vienna  several  years 
before.  He  had  renewed  his  interest  in  the  doctrine,  and 
his  admiration  for  Mrs.  Eddy's  peculiar  abilities  and  his 
antagonism  toward  her  had  augmented  in  the  mean  time. 
Howells  refers  to  the  "mighty  moment  when  Clemens 
was  building  his  engines  of  war  for  the  destruction  of 
Christian  Science,  which  superstition  nobody,  and  he  least 
of  all,  expected  to  destroy  " : 

He  believed  that  as  a  religious  machine  the  Christian  Science 
Church  was  as  perfect  as  the  Roman  Church,  and  destined  to  be 
more  formidable  in  its  control  of  the  minds  of  men.  .  .  . 

An  interesting  phase  of  his  psychology  in  this  business  was 
not  only  his  admiration  for  the  masterly  policy  of  the  Christian 
Science  hierarchy,  but  his  willingness  to  allow  the  miracles  of 
its  healers  to  be  tried  on  his  friends  and  family  if  they  wished  it. 
He  had  a  tender  heart  for  the  whole  generation  of  empirics,  as 
well  as  the  newer  sorts  of  scienticians,  but  he  seemed  to  base 
his  faith  in  them  largely  upon  the  failure  of  the  regulars,  rather 
than  upon  their  own  successes,  which  also  he  believed  in.  He 
was  recurrently,  but  not  insistently,  desirous  that  you  should 
try  their  strange  magics  when  you  were  going  to  try  the  familiar 
medicines. 

Clemens  never  had  any  quarrel  with  the  theory  of 
Christian  Science  or  mental  healing,  or  with  any  of  the 
empiric  practices.    He  acknowledged  good  in  all  of  them, 

1 186 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHRISTIAN  SCIENCE  CONTROVERSIES 


and  he  welcomed  most  of  them  in  preference  to  materia 
medic  a.  It  is  true  that  his  animosity  for  the  founder  of 
the  Christian  Science  cult  sometimes  seems  to  lap  over 
and  fringe  the  religion  itself;  but  this  is  apparent  rather 
than  real.  Furthermore,  he  frequently  expressed  a  deep 
obligation  which  humanity  owed  to  the  founder  of  the 
faith,  in  that  she  had  organized  a  healing  element  igno- 
rantly  and  indifferently  employed  hitherto.  His  quarrel 
with  Mrs.  Eddy  lay  in  the  belief  that  she  herself,  as 
he  expressed  it,  was  "a  very  unsound  Christian  Scien- 


I  believe  she  has  a  serious  malady — self -edification — and  that 
it  will  be  well  to  have  one  of  the  experts  demonstrate  over  her. 
[But  he  added):  Closely  examined,  painstakingly  studied,  she  is 
easily  the  most  interesting  person  on  the  planet,  and  in  several 
ways  as  easily  the  most  extraordinary  woman  that  was  ever 
born  upon  it. 

Necessarily,  the  forces  of  Christian  Science  were  aroused 
by  these  articles,  and  there  were  various  replies,  among 
them,  one  by  the  founder  herself,  a  moderate  rejoinder  in 
her  usual  literary  form. 

"Mrs.  Eddy  in  Error,"  in  the  North  American  Review 
for  April,  1903,  completed  what  Clemens  had  to  say  on 
the  matter  for  this  time. 

He  was  putting  together  a  book  on  the  subject,  com- 
prised of  his  various  published  papers  and  some  added 
chapters.  It  would  not  be  a  large  volume,  and  he  offered 
to  let  bis  Christian  Science  opponents  share  it  with  him, 
stating  their  side  of  the  case.  Mr.  William  D.  McCrackan, 
one  of  the  church's  chief  advocates,  was  among  those 
invited  to  participate.  McCrackan  and  Clemens,  from 
having  begun  as  enemies,  had  become  quite  friendly,  and 
had  discussed  their  differences  face  to  face  at  considerable 
length.  Early  in  the  controversy  Clemens  one  night 
wrote  McCrackan  a  pretty  savage  letter.    He  threw  it 


tist. 


>  • 


1 187 


MARK  TWAIN 


on  the  hall  table  for  mailing,  but  later  got  out  of  bed  and 
slipped  down-stairs  to  get  it.  It  was  too  late — the  let- 
ters had  been  gathered  up  and  mailed.  Next  evening  a 
truly  Christian  note  came  from  McCrackan,  returning  the 
hasty  letter,  which  he  said  he  was  sure  the  writer  would 
wish  to  recall.  Their  friendship  began  there.  For  some 
reason,  however,  the  collaborated  volume  did  not  material- 
ize. In  the  end,  publication  was  delayed  a  number  of 
years,  by  which  time  Clemens's  active  interest  was  a 
good  deal  modified,  though  the  practice  itself  never  failed 
to  invite  his  attention. 

Howells  refers  to  his  anti-Christian  Science  rages, 
which  began  with  the  postponement  of  the  book,  and  these 
Clemens  vented  at  the  time  in  another  manuscript  en- 
titled, "Eddypus,"  an  imaginary  history  of  a  thousand 
years  hence,  when  Eddyism  should  rule  the  world.  By 
that  day  its  founder  would  have  become  a  deity,  and  the 
calendar  would  be  changed  to  accord  with  her  birth. 
It  was  not  publishable  matter,  and  really  never  intended 
as  such.  It  was  just  one  of  the  things  which  Mark  Twain 
wrote  to  relieve  mental  pressure. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXVI 
•'was  it  heaven?  or  hell?" 


THE  Christmas  number  of  Harper's  Magazine  for  1902 
contained  the  story,  "Was  it  Heaven?  or  Hell?"  and 
it  immediately  brought  a  flood  of  letters  to  its  author 
from  grateful  readers  on  both  sides  of  the  ocean.  An 
Englishman  wrote:  "I  want  to  thank  you  for  writing 
so  pathetic  and  so  profoundly  true  a  story";  and  an 
American  declared  it  to  be  the  best  short  story  ever 
written.    Another  letter  said: 

I  have  learned  to  love  those  maiden  liars — love  and  weep  over 
them— then  put  them  beside  Dante's  Beatrice  in  Paradise. 

There  were  plenty  of  such  letters;  but  there  was  one 
of  a  different  sort.  It  was  a  letter  from  a  man  who  had 
but  recently  gone  through  almost  precisely  the  experi- 
ence narrated  in  the  tale.  His  dead  daughter  had  even 
borne  the  same  name — Helen.  She  had  died  of  typhus 
while  her  mother  was  prostrated  with  the  same  malady, 
and  the  deception  had  been  maintained  in  precisely  the 
same  way,  even  to  the  fictitiously  written  letters.  Clemens 
replied  to  this  letter,  acknowledging  the  striking  nature 
of  the  coincidence  it  related,  and  added  that,  had  he  in- 
vented the  story,  he  would  have  believed  it  a  case  of 
mental  telegraphy. 

I  was  merely  telling  a  true  story  just  as  it  had  been  told  to  me 
by  one  who  well  knew  the  mother  and  the  daughter  &  all  the 
beautiful  &  pathetic  details.   I  was  living  in  the  house  where  it 

1189 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


had  happened,  three  years  before,  &  I  put  it  on  paper  at  once 
while  it  was  fresh  in  my  mind,  &  its  pathos  still  straining  at  my 
heartstrings. 

Clemens  did  not  guess  that  the  coincidences  were  not 
yet  complete,  that  within  a  month  the  drama  of  the  tale 
would  be  enacted  in  his  own  home.  In  his  note-book, 
under  the  date  of  December  24  (1902),  he  wrote: 

Jean  was  hit  with  a  chill:  Clara  was  completing  her  watch 
in  her  mother's  room  and  there  was  no  one  able  to  force  Jean 
to  go  to  bed.  As  a  result  she  is  pretty  ill  to-day— fever  &  high 
temperature. 

Three  days  later  he  added: 

It  was  pneumonia.  For  5  days  Jean's  temperature  ranged 
between  103  7  &  1047,  till  this  morning,  when  it  got  down  to 
10 1.  She  looks  like  an  escaped  survivor  of  a  forest  fire.  For  6 
days  now  my  story  in  the  Christmas  Harper 's — "  Was  it  Heaven? 
or  Hell?" — has  been  enacted  in  this  household.  Every  day 
Clara  &  the  nurses  have  lied  about  Jean  to  her  mother,  describ- 
ing the  fine  times  she  is  having  outdoors  in  the  winter  sports. 

That  proved  a  hard,  trying  winter  in  the  Clemens 
home,  and  the  burden  of  it  fell  chiefly,  indeed  almost 
entirely,  upon  Clara  Clemens.  Mrs.  Clemens  became  still 
more  frail,  and  no  other  member  of  the  family,  not  even 
her  husband,  was  allowed  to  see  her  for  longer  than  the 
briefest  interval.  Yet  the  patient  was  all  the  more 
anxious  to  know  the  news,  and  daily  it  had  to  be  pre- 
pared— chiefly  invented — for  her  comfort.  In  an  account 
which  Clemens  once  set  down  of  the  "Siege  and  Season 
of  Unveracity,"  as  he  called  it,  he  said: 

Clara  stood  a  daily  watch  of  three  or  four  hours,  and  hers  was 
a  hard  office  indeed.  Daily  she  sealed  up  in  her  heart  a  dozen 
dangerous  truths,  and  thus  saved  her  mother's  life  and  hope 
and  happiness  with  holy  lies.    She  had  never  told  her  mother  a 

1100 


Digitized  by  Google 


"WAS  IT  HEAVEN?  OR  HELL?" 

lie  in  her  life  before,  and  I  may  almost  say  that  she  never  told 
her  a  truth  afterward.  It  was  fortunate  for  us  all  that  Clara's 
reputation  for  truthfulness  was  so  well  established  in  her  mother's 
mind.  It  was  our  daily  protection  from  disaster.  The  mother 
never  doubted  Clara's  word.  Clara  could  tell  her  large  im- 
probabilities without  exciting  any  suspicion,  whereas  if  I  tried 
to  market  even  a  small  and  simple  one  the  case  would  have  been 
different.    I  was  never  able  to  get  a  reputation  like  Clara's. 

Mrs.  Clemens  questioned  Clara  every  day  concerning  Jean's 
health,  spirits,  clothes,  employments,  and  amusements,  and  how 
she  was  enjoying  herself;  and  Clara  furnished  the  information 
right  along  in  minute  detail — every  word  of  it  false,  of  course. 
Every  day  she  had  to  tell  how  Jean  dressed,  and  in  time  she 
got  so  tired  of  using  Jean's  existing  clothes  over  and  over  again, 
and  trying  to  get  new  effects  out  of  them,  that  finally,  as  a 
relief  to  her  hard-worked  invention,  she  got  to  adding  imaginary 
clothes  to  Jean's  wardrobe,  and  probably  would  have  doubled 
it  and  trebled  it  if  a  warning  note  in  her  mother's  comments 
had  not  admonished  her  that  she  was  spending  more  money  on 
these  spectral  gowns  and  things  than  the  family  income  justified. 

Some  portions  of  detailed  accounts  of  Clara's  busy 
days  of  this  period,  as  written  at  the  time  by  Clemens  to 
Twichell  and  to  Mrs.  Crane,  are  eminently  worth  pre- 
serving.   To  Mrs.  Crane: 

Clara  does  not  go  to  her  Monday  lesson  in  New  York  today 
[her  mother  having  seemed  not  so  well  through  the  night],  but 
forgets  that  fact  and  enters  her  mother's  room  (where  she  has 
no  business  to  be)  toward  train-time  dressed  in  a  wrapper. 

LrvY.  Why,  Clara,  aren't  you  going  to  your  lesson? 

Claba  (almost  caught).  Yes. 

L.  In  that  costume? 

Cl.  Oh  no. 

L.  Well,  you  can't  make  your  train;  it's  impossible. 
Cl.  I  know,  but  I'm  going  to  take  the  other  one. 
L.  Indeed  that  won't  do — you'll  be  ever  so  much  too  late  for 
your  lesson. 

Cl.  No,  the  lesson-time  has  been  put  an  hour  later. 

1191 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


L.  (satisfied,  then  suddenly).  But,  Clara,  that  train  and  the 
late  lesson  together  will  make  you  late  to  Mrs.  Hapgood 's 
luncheon. 

Cl.  No,  the  train  leaves  fifteen  minutes  earlier  than  it  used  to. 

L.  (satisfied).  Tell  Mrs.  Hapgood,  etc.,*etc.,  etc.  (which  Clara 
promises  to  do).  Clara,  dear,  after  the  luncheon— I  hate  to  put 
this  on  you— but  could  you  do  two  or  three  little  shopping- 
errands  for  me? 

Cl.  Oh,  it  won't  trouble  me  a  bit — I  can  do  it.  (Takes  a  list 
of  the  things  she  is  to  buy — a  list  which  she  will  presently  hand  to 
another.) 

At  3  or  4  p.m.  Clara  takes  the  things  brought  from  New  York, 
studies  over  her  part  a  little,  then  goes  to  her  mother's  room. 

Livy.  It's  very  good  of  you,  dear.  Of  course,  if  I  had  known 
it  was  going  to  be  so  snowy  and  drizzly  and  sloppy  I  wouldn't 
have  asked  you  to  buy  them.    Did  you  get  wet? 

Cl.  Oh,  nothing  to  hurt. 

L.  You  took  a  cab  both  ways? 

Cl.  Not  from  the  station  to  the  lesson — the  weather  was  good 
enough  till  that  was  over. 

L.  Well,  now,  tell  me  everything  Mrs.  Hapgood  said. 

Clara  tells  her  a  long  yarn— avoiding  novelties  and  surprises 
and  anything  likely  to  inspire  questions  difficult  to  answer;  and 
of  course  detailing  the  menu,  for  if  it  had  been  the  feeding  of 
the  5,000  Livy  would  have  insisted  on  knowing  what  kind  of 
bread  it  was  and  how  the  fishes  were  served.  By  and  by,  while 
talking  of  something  else: 

Livy.  Clams  1 — in  the  end  of  December.  Are  you  sure  it  was 
clams? 

Cl.  I  didn't  say  cl —   I  meant  Blue  Points. 
L.  (tranquilized).  It  seemed  odd.    What  is  Jean  doing? 
Cl.  She  said  she  was  going  to  do  a  little  typewriting. 
L.  Has  she  been  out  to-day? 

Cl.  Only  a  moment,  right  after  luncheon.  She  was  deter- 
mined to  go  out  again,  but — 

L.  How  did  you  know  she  was  out? 

Cl.  (saving  herself  in  time).  Katie  told  me.  She  was  deter- 
mined to  go  out  again  in  the  rain  and  snow,  but  I  persuaded  her 
to  stay  in. 

L.  (with  moving  and  grateful  admiration).  Clara,  you  are 

1102 


Digitized  by  Go< 


Digitized  by  Google 


"WAS  IT  HEAVEN?  OR  HELL?" 


wonderful!  the  wise  watch  you  keep  over  Jean,  and  the  in- 
fluence you  have  over  her;  it's  so  lovely  of  you,  and  I  tied  here 
and  can't  take  care  of  her  myself.  (And  she  goes  on  with  these 
undeserved  praises  till  Clara  is  expiring  with  shame.) 

To  Twichell: 

I  am  to  see  Livy  a  moment  every  afternoon  until  she  has 
another  bad  night;  and  I  stand  in  dread,  for  with  all  my  prac- 
tice I  realize  that  in  a  sudden  emergency  I  am  but  a  poor,  clumsy 
liar,  whereas  a  fine  alert  and  capable  emergency  liar  is  the  only 
sort  that  is  worth  anything  in  a  sick-chamber. 

Now,  Joe,  just  see  what  reputation  can  do.  All  Clara's  life 
she  has  told  Livy  the  truth  and  now  the  reward  comes;  Clara 
lies  to  her  three  and  a  half  hours  every  day,  and  Livy  takes  it 
all  at  par,  whereas  even  when  I  tell  her  a  truth  it  isn't  worth 
much  without  corroboration.  .  .  . 

Soon  my  brief  visit  is  due.  I've  just  been  up  listening  at 
Livy's  door. 

5  p.m.  A  great  disappointment.  I  was  sitting  outside  Livy's 
door  waiting.  Clara  came  out  a  minute  ago  and  said  Livy  is 
not  so  well,  and  the  nurse  can't  let  me  see  her  to-day. 

That  pathetic  drama  was  to  continue  in  some  degree 
for  many  a  long  month.  All  that  winter  and  spring  Mrs. 
Clemens  kept  but  a  frail  hold  on  life.  Clemens  wrote 
little,  and  refused  invitations  everywhere  he  could.  He 
spent  his  time  largely  in  waiting  for  the  two-minute  period 
each  day  when  he  could  stand  at  the  bed-foot  and  say  a 
few  words  to  the  invalid,  and  he  confined  his  writing 
mainly  to  the  comforting,  affectionate  messages  which 
he  was  allowed  to  push  under  her  door.  He  was  always 
waiting  there  long  before  the  moment  he  was  permitted 
to  enter.  Her  illness  and  her  helplessness  made  mani- 
fest what  Howells  has  fittingly  characterized  as  his  "beau- 
tiful and  tender  loyalty  to  her,  which  was  the  most  moving 
quality  of  his  most  faithful  soul." 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXVII 


THE  SECOND  RIVERDALE  WINTER 

MOST  of  Mark  Twain's  stories  have  been  dramatized 
,  at  one  time  or  another,  and  with  more  or  less  success. 
He  had  two  plays  going  that  winter,  one  of  them  the  lit- 
tle "Death  Disk,"  which  in  story  form  had  appeared  a 
year  before  in  Harper's  Magazine.  It  was  put  on  at  the 
Carnegie  Lyceum  with  considerable  effect,  but  it  was  not 
of  sufficient  importance  to  warrant  a  long  continuance. 

Another  play  of  that  year  was  a  dramatization  of 
Huckleberry  Finn,  by  Lec  Arthur.  This  was  played  with 
a  good  deal  of  success  in  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  and 
elsewhere,  the  receipts  ranging  from  three  hundred  to 
twenty-one  hundred  dollars  per  night,  according  to  the 
weather  and  locality.  Why  the  play  was  discontinued 
is  not  altogether  apparent;  certainly  many  a  dramatic 
enterprise  has  gone  further,  faring  worse. 

Huck  in  book  form  also  had  been  having  adventures 
a  little  earlier,  in  being  tabooed  on  account  of  his  morals 
by  certain  librarians  of  Denver  and  Omaha.  It  was  years 
since  Huck  had  been  in  trouble  of  that  sort,  and  he  ac- 
quired a  good  deal  of  newspaper  notoriety  in  consequence. 

Certain  entries  in  Mark  Twain's  note-book  reveal  some- 
what of  his  life  and  thought  at  this  period.  We  find  such 
entries  as  this: 

Saturday ,  January  3,  1903.  The  offspring  of  riches:  Pride, 
vanity,  ostentation,  arrogance,  tyranny. 

Sunday,  January  4,  1903.  The  offspring  of  poverty:  Greed, 
sordidness,  envy,  hate,  malice,  cruelty,  meanness,  lying,  shirk- 
ing, cheating,  stealing,  murder. 

1 194 


Digitized  by  Go< 


THE  SECOND  RIVERDALE  WINTER 


Monday,  February  2,  1903.  33d  wedding  anniversary.  I  was 
allowed  to  see  Livy  5  minutes  this  morning  in  honor  of  the  day. 
She  makes  but  little  progress  toward  recovery,  still  there  is  cer- 
tainly some,  we  are  sure. 

Sunday,  March  1,  1003.  We  may  not  doubt  that  society  in 
heaven  consists  mainly  of  undesirable  persons. 

Thursday,  March  19,  1903.  Susy's  birthday.  She  would  be 
31  now. 

The  family  illnesses,  which  presently  included  an  allot- 
ment for  himself,  his  old  bronchitis,  made  him  rage  more 
than  ever  at  the  imperfections  of  the  species  which  could 
be  subject  to  such  a  variety  of  ills.    Once  he  wrote: 

Man  was  made  at  the  end  of  the  week's  work  when  God  was 
tired. 

And  again: 

Adam,  man's  benefactor— he  gave  him  all  that  he  has  ever 
received  that  was  worth  having— death. 

The  Riverdale  home  was  in  reality  little  more  than  a 
hospital  that  spring.  Jean  had  scarcely  recovered  her 
physical  strength  when  she  was  attacked  by  measles, 
and  Clara  also  fell  a  victim  to  the  infection.  Fortunately 
Mrs.  Clemens 's  health  had  somewhat  improved. 

It  was  during  this  period  that  Clemens  formulated  his 
eclectic  therapeutic  doctrine.  Writing  to  Twichell  April 
4,  1903,  he  said: 

Livy  does  make  a  little  progress  these  past  3  or  4  days,  progress 
which  is  visible  to  even  the  untrained  eye.  The  physicians  are 
doing  good  work  for  her,  but  my  notion  is,  that  no  art  of  healing 
is  the  best  for  all  ills.  I  should  distribute  the  ailments  around: 
surgery  cases  to  the  surgeon;  lupus  to  the  actinic-ray  specialist; 
nervous  prostration  to  the  Christian  Scientist;  most  ills  to  the 
allopath  &  the  homeopath;  &  (in  my  own  particular  case) 
rheumatism,  gout,  &  bronchial  attack  to  the  osteopathist. 

ii95 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


He  had  plenty  of  time  to  think  and  to  read  during  those 
weeks  of  confinement,  and  to  rage,  and  to  write  when  he 
felt  the  need  of  that  expression,  though  he  appears  to 
have  completed  not  much  for  print  beyond  his  reply  to 
Mrs.  Eddy,  already  mentioned,  and  his  burlesque,  "In- 
structions in  Art,"  with  pictures  by  himself,  published  in 
the  Metropolitan  for  April  and  May. 

Howells  called  his  attention  to  some  military  outrages 
in  the  Philippines,  citing  a  case  where  a  certain  lieutenant1 
had  tortured  one  of  his  men,  a  mild  offender,  to  death 
out  of  pure  deviltry,  and  had  been  tried  but  not  punished 
for  his  fiendish  crime. 

Clemens  undertook  to  give  expression  to  his  feelings 
on  this  subject,  but  he  boiled  so  when  he  touched  pen 
to  paper  to  write  of  it  that  it  was  simply  impossible  for 
him  to  say  anything  within  the  bounds  of  print.  Then 
his  only  relief  was  to  rise  and  walk  the  floor,  and  curse 
out  his  fury  at  the  race  that  had  produced  such  a 
specimen. 

Mrs.  Clemens,  who  perhaps  got  some  drift  or  the  echo 
of  these  tempests,  now  and  then  sent  him  a  little  ad- 
monitory, affectionate  note. 

Among  the  books  that  Clemens  read,  or  tried  to  read, 
during  his  confinement  were  certain  of  the  novels  of  Sir 
Walter  Scott.  He  had  never  been  able  to  admire  Scott, 
and  determined  now  to  try  to  understand  this  author's 
popularity  and  his  standing  with  the  critics;  but  after 
wading  through  the  first  volume  of  one  novel,  and  be- 
ginning another  one,  he  concluded  to  apply  to  one  who 

1  The  torture  to  death  of  Private  Edward  C.  Richter,  an  American 
soldier,  by  orders  of  a  commissioned  officer  of  the  United  States 
army  on  the  night  of  February  7,  1902.  Private  Richter  was 
bound  and  gagged  and  the  gag  held  in  his  mouth  by  means  of  a 
club  while  ice- water  was  slowly  poured  into  his  face,  a  dipper  full 
at  a  time,  for  two  hours  and  a  half,  until  life  became  extinct. 

1 196 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SECOND  RIVERDALE  WINTER 


could  speak  as  having  authority.  He  wrote  to  Brander 
Matthews: 

Dear  Brander, — I  haven't  been  out  of  my  bed  for  4  weeks, 
but — well,  I  have  been  reading  a  good  deal,  &  it  occurs  to  me 
to  ask  you  to  sit  down,  some  time  or  other  when  you  have  8  or 
9  months  to  spare,  &  jot  me  down  a  certain  few  literary  particu- 
lars for  my  help  &  elevation.  Your  time  need  not  be  thrown 
away,  for  at  your  further  leisure  you  can  make  Columbian 
lectures  out  of  the  results  &  do  your  students  a  good  turn. 

1.  Are  there  in  Sir  Walter's  novels  passages  done  in  good 
English — English  which  is  neither  slovenly  nor  involved? 

2.  Are  there  passages  whose  English  is  not  poor  &  thin  & 
commonplace,  but  is  of  a  quality  above  that? 

3.  Are  there  passages  which  burn  with  real  fire — not  punk, 
fox-fire,  make-believe? 

4.  Has  he  heroes  &  heroines  who  are  not  cads  and  cadesses? 

5.  Has  he  personages  whose  acts  &  talk  correspond  with 
their  characters  as  described  by  him? 

6.  Has  he  heroes  &  heroines  whom  the  reader  admires — 
admires  and  knows  why? 

7.  Has  he  funny  characters  that  are  funny,  and  humorous 
passages  that  are  humorous? 

8.  Does  he  ever  chain  the  reader's  interest  &  make  him  re- 
luctant to  lay  the  book  down? 

9.  Are  there  pages  where  he  ceases  from  posing,  ceases  from 
admiring  the  placid  flood  &  flow  of  his  own  dilution,  ceases  from 
being  artificial,  &  is  for  a  time,  long  or  short,  recognizably  sincere 
&  in  earnest? 

10.  Did  he  know  how  to  write  English,  &  didn't  do  it  be- 
cause he  didn't  want  to? 

11.  Did  he  use  the  right  word  only  when  he  couldn't  think 
of  another  one,  or  did  he  run  so  much  to  wrong  words  because 
he  didn't  know  the  right  one  when  he  saw  it? 

12.  Can  you  read  him  and  keep  your  respect  for  him?  Of 
course  a  person  could  in  his  day — an  era  of  sentimentality  & 
sloppy  romantics — but  land!  can  a  body  do  it  to-day? 

Brander,  I  lie  here  dying,  slowly  dying,  under  the  blight  of 
Sir  Walter.    I  have  read  the  first  volume  of  Rob  Roy,  &  as  far 
as  Chapter  XIX  of  Guy  Mannering,  &  1  can  no  longer  hold  my 
in.— o  1 197 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

head  up  or  take  my  nourishment.  Lord,  it's  all  so  juvenile  I 
so  artificial,  so  shoddy;  &  such  wax  figures  &  skeletons  &  spec- 
ters. Interest?  Why,  it  is  impossible  to  feel  an  interest  in 
these  bloodless  shams,  these  rnilk-&-water  humbugs.  And 
oh,  the  poverty  of  invention!  Not  poverty  in  inventing  situa- 
tions, but  poverty  in  furnishing  reasons  for  them.  Sir  Walter 
usually  gives  himself  away  when  he  arranges  for  a  situation- 
elaborates  &  elaborates  &  elaborates  till,  if  you  live  to  get  to  it, 
you  don't  believe  in  it  when  it  happens. 

I  can't  find  the  rest  of  Rob  Roy,  I  can't  stand  any  more  Man- 
nering — I  do  not  know  just  what  to  do,  but  I  will  reflect,  &  not 
quit  this  great  study  rashly. . . . 

My,  I  wish  I  could  see  you  &  Leigh  Hunt! 

Sincerely  yours, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 

But  a  few  days  later  he  experienced  a  revelation.  It 
came  when  he  perseveringly  attacked  still  a  third  work 
of  Scott — Quentin  Durward.  Hastily  he  wrote  to  Mat- 
thews again: 

I'm  still  in  bed,  but  the  days  have  lost  their  dullness  since 
I  broke  into  Sir  Walter  &  lost  my  temper.  I  finished  Guy 
Manner  in  g — that  curious,  curious  book,  with  its  mob  of  squalid 
shadows  gibbering  around  a  single  flesh -&-blocxl  being — Dinmont ; 
a  book  crazily  put  together  out  of  the  very  refuse  of  the  romance 
artist's  stage  properties — finished  it  &  took  up  Qucntin  Durward 
&  finished  that. 

It  was  like  leaving  the  dead  to  mingle  with  the  living;  it  was 
like  withdrawing  from  the  infant  class  in  the  college  of  journal- 
ism to  sit  under  the  lectures  in  English  literature  in  Columbia 
University. 

I  wonder  who  wrote  Qucntin  Durward  ? 1 

Among  other  books  which  he  read  that  winter  and 
spring  was  Helen  Keller's  The  Story  of  My  Life,  then 

1  This  letter,  enveloped,  addressed,  and  stamped,  was  evidently 
mislaid.  It  was  found  and  mailed  seven  years  later,  June,  1910— 
a  message  from  the  dead. 

1198 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SECOND  RIVERDALE  WINTER 


recently  published  That  he  finished  it  in  a  mood  of 
sweet  gentleness  we  gather  from  a  long,  lovely  letter 
which  he  wrote  her — a  letter  in  which  he  said: 

I  am  charmed  with  your  book— enchanted.  You  are  a  won- 
derful creature,  the  most  wonderful  in  the  world — you  and  your 
other  half  together — Miss  Sullivan,  I  mean — for  it  took  the 
pair  of  you  to  make  a  complete  &  perfect  whole.  How  she 
stands  out  in  her  letters!  her  brilliancy,  penetration,  originality, 
wisdom,  character,  &  the  fine  literary  competencies  of  her  pen — 
they  are  all  there. 

When  reading  and  writing  failed  as  diversion,  Mark 
Twain  often  turned  to  mathematics.  With  no  special 
talent  for  accuracy  in  the  matter  of  figures,  he  had  a 
curious  fondness  for  calculations,  scientific  and  financial, 
and  he  used  to  cover  pages,  ciphering  at  one  thing  and 
another,  arriving  pretty  inevitably  at  the  wrong  results. 
When  the  problem  was  financial,  and  had  to  do  with  his 
own  fortunes,  his  figures  were  as  likely  as  not  to  leave  him 
in  a  state  of  panic.  The  expenditures  were  naturally  heavy 
that  spring;  and  one  night,  when  he  had  nothing  better 
to  do,  he  figured  the  relative  proportion  to  his  income. 
The  result  showed  that  they  were  headed  straight  for 
financial  ruin.  He  put  in  the  rest  of  the  night  fearfully 
rolling  and  tossing,  and  reconstructing  his  figures  that 
grew  always  worse,  and  next  morning  summoned  Jean 
and  Clara  and  petrified  them  with  the  announcement 
that  the  cost  of  living  was  one  hundred  and  twenty-five 
per  cent,  more  than  the  money-supply. 

Writing  to  MacAlister  three  days  later  he  said: 

i 

It  was  a  mistake.  When  I  came  down  in  the  morning,  a  gray 
and  aged  wreck,  I  found  that  in  some  unaccountable  way  (un- 
accountable to  a  business  man,  but  not  to  me)  I  had  multiplied 
the  totals  by  two.  By  God,  I  dropped  seventy-five  years  on 
the  floor  where  I  stood! 

1 199 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Do  you  know  it  affected  me  as  one  is  affected  when  one  wakes 
out  of  a  hideous  dream  &  finds  it  was  only  a  dream.  It  was  a 
great  comfort  &  satisfaction  to  me  to  call  the  daughters  to 
a  private  meeting  of  the  board  again.  Certainly  there  is  a 
blistering  &  awful  reality  about  a  well-arranged  unreality.  It 
is  quite  within  the  possibilities  that  two  or  three  nights  like 
that  of  mine  would  drive  a  man  to  suicide.  He  would  refuse 
to  examine  the  figures,  they  would  revolt  him  so,  &  he  would 
go  to  his  death  unaware  that  there  was  nothing  serious  about 
them.  I  cannot  get  that  night  out  of  my  head,  it  was  so  vivid,  so 
real,  so  ghastly.  In  any  other  year  of  these  thirty-three  the 
relief  would  have  been  simple:  go  where  you  can,  cut  your 
cloth  to  fit  your  income.  You  can't  do  that  when  your  wife 
can't  be  moved,  even  from  one  room  to  the  next. 

The  doctor  &  a  specialist  met  in  conspiracy  five  days  ago, 
&  in  their  belief  she  will  by  and  by  come  out  of  this  as  good  as 
new,  substantially.  They  ordered  her  to  Italy  for  next  winter — 
which  seems  to  indicate  that  by  autumn  she  will  be  able  to  un- 
dertake the  voyage.  So  Clara  is  writing  to  a  Florence  friend  to 
take  a  look  around  among  the  villas  for  us  in  the  regions  near 
that  city. 


Digitized  by  Google 


.   .  . 


CCXXVIII 

PROFPERBD  HONORS 

MARK  TWAIN  had  been  at  home  well  on  toward 
three  years;  but  his  popularity  showed  no  signs  of 
diminishing.  So  far  from  having  waned,  it  had  surged 
to  a  higher  point  than  ever  before.  His  crusade  against 
public  and  private  abuses  had  stirred  readers,  and  had  set 
them  to  thinking ;  the  news  of  illness  in  his  household ;  a  re- 
port that  he  was  contemplating  another  residence  abroad 
— these  things  moved  deeply  the  public  heart,  and  a  tide 
of  letters  flowed  in,  letters  of  every  sort — of  sympathy, 
of  love,  or  hearty  indorsement,  whatever  his  attitude  of 
reform. 

When  a  writer  in  a  New  York  newspaper  said,  "Let 
us  go  outside  the  realm  of  practical  politics  next  time  in 
choosing  our  candidates  for  the  Presidency,"  and  asked, 
"  Who  is  our  ablest  and  most  conspicuous  private  citizen  ?" 
another  editorial  writer,  Joseph  Hollister,  replied  that 
Mark  Twain  was  "the  greatest  man  of  his  day  in  private 
life,  and  entitled  to  the  fullest  measure  of  recognition." 

But  Clemens  was  without  political  ambitions.  He 
knew  the  way  of  such  things  too  well.  When  Hollister 
sent  him  the  editorial  he  replied  only  with  a  word  of 
thanks,  and  did  not,  even  in  jest,  encourage  that  tiny 
seed  of  a  Presidential  boom.  One  would  like  to  publish 
many  of  the  beautiful  letters  received  during  this  period, 
for  they  are  beautiful,  most  of  them,  however  illiterate  in 
form,  however  discouraging  in  length— beautiful  in  that 
they  overflow  with  the  writers*  sincerity  and  gratitude. 

1201 


Digitized  by  Google 


-    *„-•     •        ••••••      •          ..,•«,.  ... 

V  /:  -V.      >  Jtf  ztit.&Tiif: 
-  .  >  .  .  .  *  .... 

So  many  of  them  came  from  children,  usually  without  the 
hope  of  a  reply,  some  signed  only  with  initials,  that  the 
writers  might  not  be  open  to  the  suspicion  of  being  seekers 
for  his  autograph.  Almost  more  than  any  other  reward, 
Mark  Twain  valued  this  love  of  the  children. 

A  department  in  the  St.  Nicholas  Magazine  offered  a 
prize  for  a  caricature  drawing  of  some  well-known  man. 
There  were  one  or  two  of  certain  prominent  politicians 
and  capitalists,  and  there  was  literally  a  wheelbarrow 
load  of  Mark  Twain.  When  he  was  informed  of  this  he 
wrote: 

"No  tribute  could  have  pleased  me  more  than  that — 
the  friendship  of  the  children.1' 

Tributes  came  to  him  in  many  forms.  In  his  native 
State  it  was  proposed  to  form  a  Mark  Twain  Association, 
with  headquarters  at  Hannibal,  with  the  immediate  pur- 
pose of  having  a  week  set  apart  at  the  St.  Louis  World's 
Fair,  to  be  called  the  Mark  Twain  week,  with  a  special 
Mark  Twain  day,  on  which  a  national  literary  convention 
would  be  held.  But  when  his  consent  was  asked,  and 
his  co-operation  invited,  he  wrote  characteristically: 

It  is  indeed  a  high  compliment  which  you  offer  me,  in  naming 
an  association  after  me  and  in  proposing  the  setting  apart  of  a 
Mark  Twain  day  at  the  great  St.  Louis  Fair,  but  such  compli- 
ments are  not  proper  for  the  living;  they  are  proper  and  safe 
for  the  dead  only.  I  value  the  impulse  which  moves  you  to 
tender  me  these  honors.  I  value  it  as  highly  as  any  one  can, 
and  am  grateful  for  it,  but  I  should  stand  in  a  sort  of  terror 
of  the  honors  themselves.  So  long  as  we  remain  alive  we  are 
not  safe  from  doing  things  which,  however  righteously  and 
honorably  intended,  can  wreck  our  repute  and  extinguish  our 
friendships. 

I  hope  that  no  society  will  be  named  for  me  while  I  am  still 
alive,  for  I  might  at  some  time  or  other  do  something  which  would 
cause  its  members  to  regret  having  done  me  that  honor.  After 
I  shall  have  joined  the  dead  I  shall  follow  the  custom  of  those 

1202 


Digitized  by  Go< 


PROFFERED  HONORS 


people,  and  be  guilty  of  no  conduct  that  can  wound  any  friend; 
but  until  that  time  shall  come  I  shall  be  a  doubtful  quantity, 
like  the  rest  of  our  race. 

The  committee,  still  hoping  for  his  consent,  again 
appealed  to  him.    But  again  he  wrote: 

While  I  am  deeply  touched  by  the  desire  of  my  friends  of 
Hannibal  to  confer  these  great  honors  upon  me  I  must  still  for- 
bear to  accept  them.  Spontaneous  and  unpremeditated  honors, 
like  those  which  came  to  me  at  Hannibal,  Columbia,  St.  Louis, 
and  at  the  village  stations  all  down  the  line,  are  beyond  all 
price  and  are  a  treasure  for  life  in  the  memory,  for  they  are  a 
free  gift  out  of  the  heart  and  they  come  without  solicitation; 
but  I  am  a  Missourian,  and  so  I  shrink  from  distinctions  which 
have  to  be  arranged  beforehand  and  with  my  privity,  for  I 
then  become  a  party  to  my  own  exalting.  I  am  humanly  fond 
of  honors  that  happen,  but  chary  of  those  that  come  by  canvass 
and  intention. 

Somewhat  later  he  suggested  a  different  feature  for  the 
fair;  one  that  was  not  practical,  perhaps,  but  which  cer- 
tainly would  have  aroused  interest— that  is  to  say,  an 
old-fashioned  six-day  steamboat-race  from  New  Orleans 
to  St.  Louis,  with  the  old-fashioned  accessories,  such  as 
torch-baskets,  forecastle  crowds  of  negro  singers,  with 
a  negro  on  the  safety-valve.  In  his  letter  to  President 
Francis  he  said: 

As  to  particulars,  I  think  that  the  race  should  be  a  genuine 
reproduction  of  the  old-time  race,  not  just  an  imitation  of  it, 
and  that  it  should  cover  the  whole  course.  I  think  the  boats 
should  begin  the  trip  at  New  Orleans,  and  side  by  side  (not  an 
interval  between),  and  end  it  at  North  St.  Louis,  a  mile  or  two 
above  the  Big  Mound. 

In  a  subsequent  letter  to  Governor  Francis  he  wrote: 

It  has  been  a  dear  wish  of  mine  to  exhibit  myself  at  the  great 
Fair  &  get  a  prize,  but  circumstances  beyond  my  control  have 
interfered.  .  .  . 

1203 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


I  suppose  you  will  get  a  prize,  because  you  have  created  the 
most  prodigious  Pair  the  planet  has  ever  seen.  Very  well, 
you  have  indeed  earned  it,  and  with  it  the  gratitude  of  the 
State  and  the  nation. 

Newspaper  men  used  every  inducement  to  get  inter- 
views from  him  They  invited  him  to  name  a  price  for 
any  time  he  could  give  them,  long  or  short.  One  reporter 
offered  him  five  hundred  dollars  for  a  two-hour  talk. 
Another  proposed  to  pay  him  one  hundred  dollars  a  week 
for  a  quarter  of  a  day  each  week,  allowing  him  to  discuss 
any  subject  he  pleased.  One  wrote  asking  him  two  ques- 
tions: the  first,  "Your  favorite  method  of  escaping  from 
Indians";  the  second,  "Your  favorite  method  of  escaping 
capture  by  the  Indians  when  they  were  in  pursuit  of  you." 
They  inquired  as  to  his  favorite  copy-book  maxim;  as 
to  what  he  considered  most  important  to  a  young  man's 
success;  his  definition  of  a  gentleman.  They  wished  to 
know  his  plan  for  the  settlement  of  labor  troubles.  But 
they  did  not  awaken  his  interest,  or  his  cupidity.  To 
one  applicant  he  wrote: 

No,  there  are  temptations  against  which  we  are  fire-proof. 
Your  proposition  is  one  which  comes  to  me  with  considerable 
frequency,  but  it  never  tempts  me.  The  price  isn't  the  objec- 
tion; you  offer  plenty.  It  is  the  nature  of  the  work  that  is 
the  objection— a  kind  of  work  which  I  could  not  do  well  enough 
to  satisfy  me.  To  multiply  the  price  by  twenty  would  not 
enable  me  to  do  the  work  to  my  satisfaction,  &  by  consequence 
would  make  no  impression  upon  me. 

Once  he  allowed  himself  to  be  interviewed  for  the 
Herald,  when  from  Mr.  Rogers's  yacht  he  had  watched 
Sir  Thomas  Lipton's  Shamrock  go  down  to  defeat;  but 
this  was  a  subject  which  appealed  to  him — a  kind  of 
hot-weather  subject — and  he  could  be  as  light-minded 
about  it  as  he  chose. 

1204 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXIX 


THE  LAST  SUMMER  AT  BLMIRA 


HE  Clemenses  were  preparing  to  take  up  residence  in 


I  Florence,  Italy.  The  Hartford  house  had  been  sold 
in  May,  ending  forever  the  association  with  the  city  that 
had  so  long  been  a  part  of  their  lives.  The  Tarry  town 
place,  which  they  had  never  occupied,  they  also  agreed 
to  sell,  for  it  was  the  belief  now  that  Mrs.  Clemens's 
health  would  never  greatly  prosper  there.  Howells  says, 
or  at  least  implies,  that  they  expected  their  removal 
to  Florence  to  be  final.  He  tells  us,  too,  of  one  sunny 
afternoon  when  he  and  Clemens  sat  on  the  grass  before 
the  mansion  at  Riverdale,  after  Mrs.  Clemens  had  some- 
what improved,  and  how  they  "looked  up  toward  a  bal- 
cony where  by  and  by  that  lovely  presence  made  itself 
visible,  as  if  it  had  stooped  there  from  a  cloud.  A  hand 
frailly  waved  a  handkerchief;  Clemens  ran  over  the  lawn 
toward  it,  calling  tenderly."  It  was  a  greeting  to  Howells 
— the  last  he  would  ever  receive  from  her. 

Mrs.  Clemens  was  able  to  make  a  trip  to  Elrnira  by 
the  end  of  June,  and  on  the  ist  of  July  Mr.  Rogers 
brought  Clemens  and  his  wife  down  the  river  on  his  yacht 
to  the  Lackawanna  pier,  and  they  reached  Quarry  Farm 
that  evening.  She  improved  in  the  quietude  and  rest- 
fulness  of  that  beloved  place.  Three  weeks  later  Clemens 
wrote  to  Twichell: 

Livy  is  coming  along:  eats  well,  sleeps  some,  is  mostly  very 
gay,  not  very  often  depressed;  spends  all  day  on  the  porch, 
sleeps  there  a  part  of  the  night;  makes  excursions  in  carriage 


1205 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


&  in  wheel-chair;  &,  in  the  matter  of  superintending  everything 
&  everybody,  has  resumed  business  at  the  old  stand. 

During  three  peaceful  months  she  spent  most  of  her 
days  reclining  on  the  wide  veranda,  surrounded  by  those 
dearest  to  her,  and  looking  out  on  the  dreamlike  land- 
scape—the long,  grassy  slope,  the  drowsy  city,  and  the 
distant  hills — getting  strength  for  the  far  journey  by  sea. 
Clemens  did  some  writing,  occupying  the  old  octagonal 
study — shut  in  now  and  overgrown  with  vines — where 
during  the  thirty  years  since  it  was  built  so  many  of  his 
stories  had  been  written.  A  Dog's  Tale — that  pathetic 
anti-vivisection  story — appears  to  have  been  the  last 
manuscript  ever  completed  in  the  spot  consecrated  by 
Huck  and  Tom,  and  by  Tom  Canty  the  Pauper  and  the 
little  wandering  Prince. 

It  was  October  5th  when  they  left  Elmira.  Two  days 
earlier  Clemens  had  written  in  his  note-book: 

To-day  I  placed  flowers  on  Susy's  grave — for  the  last  time 
probably — &  read  words 

"Good-night,  dear  heart,  good-night." 

They  did  not  return  to  Riverdale,  but  went  to  the  Hotel 
Grosvenor  for  the  intervening  weeks.  They  had  en- 
gaged passage  for  Italy  on  the  Princess  Irene,  which  would 
sail  on  the  24th.  It  was  during  the  period  of  their 
waiting  that  Clemens  concluded  his  final  Harper  contract. 
On  that  day,  in  his  note-book,  he  wrote: 

THE  PROPHECY 

In  1895  Cheiro  the  palmist  examined  my  hand  &  said  that 
in  my  68th  year  (1903)  I  would  become  suddenly  rich.  I  was 
a  bankrupt  &  $94,000  in  debt  at  the  time  through  the  failure 
of  Charles  L.  Webster  &  Co.  Two  years  later — in  London — 
Cheiro  repeated  this  long-distance  prediction,  &  added  that 

1206 


Digitized  by  Go< 


THE  LAST  SUMMER  AT  ELMIRA 


the  riches  would  come  from  a  quite  unexpected  source.  I  am 
superstitious.  I  kept  the  prediction  in  mind  &  often  thought 
of  it.  When  at  last  it  came  true,  October  22,  1903,  there  was 
but  a  month  &  9  days  to  spare. 

The  contract  signed  that  day  concentrates  all  my  books  in 
Harper's  hands  &  now  at  last  they  are  valuable;  in  fact  they 
are  a  fortune.  They  guarantee  me  $25,000  a  year  for  5  years, 
and  they  will  yield  twice  as  much  as  that.1 

During  the  conclusion  of  this  contract  Clemens  made 
frequent  visits  to  Fairhaven  on  the  Kanawha.  Joe 
Goodman  came  from  the  Pacific  to  pay  him  a  good-by 
visit  during  this  period.  Goodman  had  translated  the 
Mayan  inscriptions,  and  his  work  had  received  official 
recognition  and  publication  by  the  British  Museum.  It 
was  a  fine  achievement  for  a  man  in  later  life  and  Clemens 
admired  it  immensely.  Goodman  and  Clemens  enjoyed 
each  other  in  the  old  way  at  quiet  resorts  where  they 
could  talk  over  the  old  tales.  Another  visitor  of  that 
summer  was  the  son  of  an  old  friend,  a  Hannibal  printer 
named  Daulton.  Young  Daulton  came  with  manuscripts 
seeking  a  hearing  of  the  magazine  editors,  so  Clemens 
wrote  a  letter  which  would  insure  that  favor: 

Introducing  Ma.  Geo.  Daulton 

To  Gilder,  Alden,  Harvey,  McClure,  Walker,  Page,  Bok, 
Collier,  and  such  other  members  of  the  sacred  guild  as 
privilege  me  to  call  them  friends — these: 

Although  I  have  no  personal  knowledge  of  the  bearer  of  this, 
I  have  what  is  better:  He  comes  recommended  to  me  by  his 
own  father — a  thing  not  likely  to  happen  in  any  of  your  families, 
I  reckon.   I  ask  you,  as  a  favor  to  me,  to  waive  prejudice  & 

1  In  earlier  note-books  and  letters  Clemens  more  than  once  refers 
to  this  prophecy  and  wonders  if  it  is  to  be  realized.  The  Harper 
contract,  which  brought  all  of  his  books  into  the  hands  of  one 
publisher  (negotiated  for  hira  by  Mr.  Rogers),  proved,  in  fact,  a 
fortune.  The  books  yielded  always  more  than  the  guarantee; 
sometimes  twice  that  amount,  as  he  had  foreseen. 

1207 


Digitized  by  Go< 


MARK  TWAIN 


superstition  for  this  once  &  examine  his  work  with  an  eye  to 
its  literary  merit,  instead  of  to  the  chastity  of  its  spelling.  I 
wish  to  God  you  cared  less  for  that  particular. 

I  set  (or  sat)  type  alongside  of  his  father,  in  Hannibal,  more 
than  50  years  ago,  when  none  but  the  pure  in  heart  were  in  that 
business.  A  true  man  he  was;  and  if  I  can  be  of  any  service  to  his 
son— and  to  you  at  the  same  time,  let  me  hope— I  am  here 
heartily  to  try. 

Yours  by  the  sanctions  of  time  &  deserving, 

Sincerely, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 

Among  the  kindly  words  which  came  to  Mark  Twain 
before  leaving  America  was  this  one  which  Rudyard 
Kipling  had  written  to  his  publisher,  Frank  Doubleday: 

I  love  to  think  of  the  great  and  godlike  Clemens.  He  is  the 
biggest  man  you  have  on  your  side  of  the  water  by  a  damn  sight, 
and  don't  you  forget  it.   Cervantes  was  a  relation  of  his. 

It  curiously  happened  that  Clemens  at  the  same  moment 
was  writing  to  Doubleday  about  Kipling: 

I  have  been  reading  "The  Bell  Buoy"  and  "The  Old  Man" 
over  and  over  again — my  custom  with  Kipling's  work — and 
saving  up  the  rest  for  other  leisurely  and  luxurious  meals.  A 
bell-buoy  is  a  deeply  impressive  fellow-being.  In  these  many 
recent  trips  up  and  down  the  Sound  in  the  Kanawha  he  has 
talked  to  me  nightly  sometimes  in  his  pathetic  and  melancholy 
way,  sometimes  with  his  strenuous  and  urgent  note,  and  I  got 
his  meaning — now  I  have  his  words  1  No  one  but  Kipling  could 
do  this  strong  and  vivid  thing.  Some  day  I  hope  to  hear  the 
poem  chanted  or  sung — with  the  bell-buoy  breaking  in  out  of  the 
distance. 

P.  S .— Your  letter  has  arrived.  It  makes  me  proud  and  glad— 
what  Kipling  says.  I  hope  Fate  will  fetch  him  to  Florence 
while  we  are  there.   I  would  rather  see  him  than  any  other 


Digitized  by  Go< 


ccxxx 


THE  RETURN  TO  FLORENCE 

Prom  the  note-book: 

Saturday,  October  24,  1903.  Sailed  in  the  Princess  Irene  for 
Genoa  at  11.  Flowers  &  fruit  from  Mrs.  Rogers  &  Mrs.  Coe. 
We  have  with  us  Katie  Leary  (in  our  domestic  service  23  years) 
&  Miss  Margaret  Sherry  (trained  nurse). 

Two  days  later  he  wrote: 

Heavy  storm  all  night.  Only  3  stewardesses.  Ours  served 
60  meals  in  rooms  this  morning. 

On  the  27th: 

Livy  is  enduring  the  voyage  marvelously  well.  As  well  as 
Clara  &  Jean,  I  think,  &  far  better  than  the  trained  nurse. 
She  has  been  out  on  deck  an  hour. 

November  2.  Due  at  Gibraltar  xo  days  from  New  York. 
3  days  to  Naples,  then  z  day  to  Genoa. 

At  supper  the  band  played  "Cavalleria  Rusticana,"  which  is 
forever  associated  in  my  mind  with  Susy.  I  love  it  better  than 
any  other,  but  it  breaks  my  heart. 

It  was  the  "Intermezzo"  he  referred  to,  which  had  been 
Susy's  favorite  music,  and  whenever  he  heard  it  he  re- 
membered always  one  particular  opera-night  long  ago, 
and  Susy's  face  rose  before  him. 

They  were  in  Naples  on  the  5th;  thence  to  Genoa, 
and  to  Florence,  where  presently  they  were  installed  in 

1209 


Digitized  by  Go< 


MARK  TWAIN 


the  Villa  Reale  di  Quarto,  a  fine  old  Italian  palace  built 
by  Cosimo  more  than  four  centuries  ago.  In  later  times 
it  has  been  occupied  and  altered  by  royal  families  of 
Wurtemberg  and  Russia.  Now  it  was  the  property 
of  the  Countess  Massiglia,  from  whom  Clemens  had 
leased  it. 

They  had  hoped  to  secure  the  Villa  Papiniano,  under 
Fiesole,  near  Professor  Fiske,  but  negotiations  for  it  had 
fallen  through.  The  Villa  Quarto,  as  it  is  usually  called, 
was  a  more  pretentious  place  and  as  beautifully  located, 
standing  as  it  does  in  an  ancient  garden  looking  out  over  . 
Florence  toward  Vallombrosa  and  the  Chianti  hills.  Yet 
now  in  the  retrospect,  it  seems  hardly  to  have  been  the 
retreat  for  an  invalid.  Its  garden  was  supernaturally 
beautiful,  all  that  one  expects  that  a  garden  of  Italy 
should  be — such  a  garden  as  Maxfield  Parrish  might 
dream;  but  its  beauty  was  that  which  comes  of  antiquity 
— the  accumulation  of  dead  years.  Its  funereal  cypresses, 
its  crumbling  walls  and  arches,  its  clinging  ivy  and  mold- 
ering  marbles,  and  a  clock  that  long  ago  forgot  the  hours, 
gave  it  a  mortuary  look.  In  a  way  it  suggested  Arnold 
Bocklin's  "Todteninsel,"  and  it  might  well  have  served 
as  the  allegorical  setting  for  a  gateway  to  the  bourne  of 
silence. 

The  house  itself,  one  of  the  most  picturesque  of  the  old 
Florentine  suburban  palaces,  was  historically  interesting, 
rather  than  cheerful.  The  rooms,  in  number  more  than 
sixty,  though  richly  furnished,  were  vast  and  barnlike, 
and  there  were  numbers  of  them  wholly  unused  and  never 
entered.  There  was  a  dearth  of  the  modern  improve- 
ments which  Americans  have  learned  to  regard  as  a  ne- 
cessity, and  the  plumbing,  such  as  it  was,  was  not  always 
in  order.  The  place  was  approached  by  narrow  streets, 
along  which  the  more  uninviting  aspects  of  Italy  were  not 
infrequent.  Youth  and  health  and  romance  might  easily 
have  reveled  in  the  place;  but  it  seems  now  not  to  have 

I2IO 


Digitized  by  Google 


3" 


Z  Z 


- 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  TO  FLORENCE 

cboicc  for  that  frail  inraSi-  -o  »t^_  ^ 
^^-.Slv-.-^s  ^1  fres==ess  and  the  kwBer  fer 
^d  ^^^vs  so  rcuch.1  Next 


Kope  cearr:  ^-  ^  tbey  had  booed  for. 


had  misled  them-    Tra<£taoo  to 

trarv!  Italy-or  at  least  ^T^teX^^^?'  h 
A-eam  of  slight.    1*  -  ^  A^ier 
is  Hkely  to  be  cold-   Writing  to  MacA*— 


FToreotzr^  J^""  ^7  _t  £  r^r  all  day- 
beavy  fog?  c"*^a"  *    _       +  -  j*^;  -i~q  I  ^^^*"<f  it 


~  ^  began  tfcas  ear.7  aol  rt  gre 
His  (Sssa^sfacCKXi  m  -  "^7^^  ^ 


ace  thmg  after                            a  %rJe,  ad  «s 
.  vt—   O^i^  seemec  ^   


Mrs.  C^J-J^  ^^.e  araxnt  oc  cocra^y— 
g^ad  to  see  ^"^^"^  .-yg-j^ 

to  brignteri  her  sarrt*f~^^  wrote  a  story  or  ' 

bC?t-I-  aboct  the  it^an 
tb«  f-^T  !fr^#irjed  progress: 


recorted 


I  V=t  NewYaac 


cvrr7  thiri         r*^^U  v.  cart  »rtcs  trce   ±  « 
the  £re  '^^L^^Je  £  sre  wCir*  -      -  &  ~' 
you  have  r=?~~         a  to-:  -s^ead  rz  ;~ 
re?r?aer£*  or--    "  , .-.^  -=rxca  & 

Bit  this  trre  -        **  /  *       ^-.ooc  -warts  —  25 

-i^  ~  «ci  case,    i  -—      ^*  ;  7T^  .  ,-,  » , 

start  rs^tt f         x  3-3- 

ir.z  day*;  fe  ^  r\LT  " 
t  ex  -i^t  resort 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  TO  FLORENCE 


been  the  best  choice  for  that  frail  invalid,  to  whom  cheer 
and  brightness  and  freshness  and  the  lovelier  things  of 
hope  meant  always  so  much.1  Neither  was  the  climate 
of  Florence  all  that  they  had  hoped  for.  Their  former 
sunny  winter  had  misled  them.  Tradition  to  the  con- 
trary, Italy— or  at  least  Tuscany — is  not  one  perpetual 
dream  of  sunlight.  It  is  apt  to  be  damp  and  cloudy;  it 
is  likely  to  be  cold.   Writing  to  MacAlister,  Clemens  said: 

Florentine  sunshine?  Bless  you,  there  isn't  any.  We  have 
heavy  fogs  every  morning  &  rain  all  day.  This  house  is  not 
merely  large,  it  is  vast— therefore  I  think  it  must  always  lack 
the  home  feeling. 

His  dissatisfaction  in  it  began  thus  early,  and  it  grew 
as  one  thing  after  another  went  wrong.  With  it  all,  how- 
ever, Mrs.  Clemens  seemed  to  gain  a  little,  and  was 
glad  to  see  company — a  reasonable  amount  of  company — 
to  brighten  her  surroundings. 

Clemens  began  to  work  and  wrote  a  story  or  two,  and 
those  lively  articles  about  the  Italian  language. 

To  Twichell  he  reported  progress: 

I  have  a  handsome  success  in  one  way  here.  I  left  New  York 
under  a  sort  of  half -promise  to  furnish  to  the  Harper  magazines 
30,000  words  this  year.  Magazining  is  difficult  work  because 
every  third  page  represents  two  pages  that  you  have  put  in 
the  fire  (you  are  nearly  sure  to  start  wrong  twice),  &  so  when 
you  have  finished  an  article  &  are  willing  to  let  it  go  to  print  it 
represents  only  10  cents  a  word  instead  of  30. 

But  this  time  I  had  the  curious  (&  unprecedented)  luck  to 
start  right  in  each  case.  I  turned  out  37,000  words  in  25  work- 
ing days;  &  the  reason  I  think  I  started  right  every  time  is,  that 
not  only  have  I  approved  and  accepted  the  several  articles,  but 
the  court  of  last  resort  (Livy)  has  done  the  same. 

1  Villa  Quarto  has  recently  been  purchased  by  Signor  P.  de  Ritter 
Lahony,  and  thoroughly  restored  and  refreshed  and  beautified  with- 
out the  sacrifice  of  any  of  its  romantic  features. 

1211 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


On  many  of  the  between -days  I  did  some  work,  but  only  of 
an  idle  &  not  necessarily  necessary  sort,  sine?  it  will  not  see  print 
until  I  am  dead.  I  shall  continue  this  (an  hour  per  day),  but 
the  rest  of  the  year  I  expect  to  put  in  on  a  couple  of  long  books 
(half -completed  ones).  No  more  magazine  work  hanging  over 
my  head. 

This  secluded  &  silent  solitude,  this  clean,  soft  air,  &  this 
enchanting  view  of  Florence,  the  great  valley  &  snow-moun- 
tains that  frame  it,  are  the  right  conditions  for  work.  They 
are  a  persistent  inspiration.  To-day  is  very  lovely;  when  the 
afternoon  arrives  there  will  be  a  new  picture  every  hour  till 
dark,  &  each  of  them  divine — or  progressing  from  divine  to 
diviner  &  divinest.  On  this  (second)  floor  Clara's  room  com- 
mands the  finest;  she  keeps  a  window  ten  feet  high  wide  open 
all  the  time  &  frames  it  in  that.  I  go  in  from  time  to  time  every 
day  &  trade  sass  for  a  look.  The  central  detail  is  a  distant  & 
stately  snow-hump  that  rises  above  &  behind  black-forested 
hills,  &  its  sloping  vast  buttresses,  velvety  &  sun-polished,  with 
purple  shadows  between,  make  the  sort  of  picture  we  knew  that 
time  we  walked  in  Switzerland  in  the  days  of  our  youth. 

From  this  letter,  which  is  of  January  7,  1004,  we  gather 
that  the  weather  had  greatly  improved,  and  with  it  Mrs. 
Clemens's  health,  notwithstanding  she  had  an  alarming 
attack  in  December.  One  of  the  stories  he  had  finished 
was  "The  $30,000  Bequest."  The  work  mentioned,  which 
would  not  see  print  until  after  his  death,  was  a  continua- 
tion of  those  autobiographical  chapters  which  for  years 
he  had  been  setting  down  as  the  mood  seized  him. 

He  exrjerimented  with  dictation,  which  he  had  tried 
long  before  with  Redpath,  and  for  a  time  now  found  it 
quite  to  his  liking.  He  dictated  some  of  his  copyright 
memories,  and  some  anecdotes  and  episodes;  but  his 
amanuensis  wrote  only  longhand,  which  perhaps  hampered 
him,  for  he  tired  of  it  by  and  by  and  the  dictations  were 
discontinued. 

Among  these  notes  there  is  one  elaborate  description 
of  the  Villa  di  Quarto,  dictated  at  the  end  of  the  winter, 

121 2 


Digitized  by  Go< 


THE  RETURN  TO  FLORENCE 


by  which  time  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  he  had  become 
much  attached  to  the  place.  The  Italian  spring  was  in 
the  air,  and  it  was  his  habit  to  grow  fond  of  his  surround- 
ings. Some  atmospheric  paragraphs  of  these  impressions 
invite  us  here: 

We  are  in  the  extreme  south  end  of  the  house,  if  there  is 
any  such  thing  as  a  south  end  to  a  house,  whose  orientation 
cannot  be  determined  by  me,  because  I  am  incompetent  in  all 
cases  where  an  object  does  not  point  directly  north  &  south. 
This  one  slants  across  between,  &  is  therefore  a  confusion. 
This  little  private  parlor  is  in  one  of  the  two  corners  of  what  I 
call  the  south  end  of  the  house.  The  sun  rises  in  such  a  way 
that  all  the  morning  it  is  pouring  its  light  through  the  33  glass 
doors  or  windows  which  pierce  the  side  of  the  house  which  looks 
upon  the  terrace  &  garden;  the  rest  of  the  day  the  light  floods 
this  south  end  of  the  house,  as  I  call  it;  at  noon  the  sun  is  di- 
rectly above  Florence  yonder  in  the  distance  in  the  plain,  di- 
rectly across  those  architectural  features  which  have  been  so 
familiar  to  the  world  in  pictures  for  some  centuries,  the  Duomo, 
the  Campanile,  the  Tomb  of  the  Medici,  &  the  beautiful  tower 
of  the  Palazzo  Vecchio;  in  this  position  it  begins  to  reveal  the 
secrets  of  the  delicious  blue  mountains  that  circle  around  into 
the  west,  for  its  light  discovers,  uncovers,  &  exposes  a  white  snow- 
storm of  villas  &  cities  that  you  cannot  train  yourself  to  have 
confidence  in,  they  appear  &  disappear  so  mysteriously,  as  if 
they  might  not  be  villas  &  cities  at  all,  but  the  ghosts  of  perished 
ones  of  the  remote  &  dim  Etruscan  times;  &  late  in  the  after- 
noon the  sun  sets  down  behind  those  mountains  somewhere,  at 
no  particular  time  &  at  no  particular  place,  so  far  as  I  can  see. 

Again  at  the  end  of  March  he  wrote: 

Now  that  we  have  lived  in  this  house  four  and  a  half  months 
my  prejudices  have  fallen  away  one  by  one  &  the  place  has 
become  very  homelike  to  me.  Under  certain  conditions  I  should 
like  to  go  on  living  in  it  indefinitely.  I  should  wish  the  Countess 
to  move  out  of  Italy,  out  of  Europe,  out  of  the  planet.  I  should 
want  her  bonded  to  retire  to  her  place  in  the  next  world  & 

1213 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


inform  me  which  of  the  two  it  was,  so  that  I  could  arrange  for 
my  own  hereafter. 

Complications  with  their  landlady  had  begun  early, 
and  in  time,  next  to  Mrs.  Clemens's  health,  to  which  it 
1x3 re  such  an  intimate  and  vital  relation,  the  indifference 
of  the  Countess  Massiglia  to  their  needs  became  the  su- 
preme and  absorbing  concern  of  life  at  the  villa,  and  led 
to  continued  and  almost  continuous  house-hunting. 

Days  when  the  weather  permitted,  Clemens  drove  over 
the  hills  looking  for  a  villa  which  he  could  lease  or  buy — 
one  with  conveniences  and  just  the  right  elevation  and 
surroundings.  There  were  plenty  of  villas;  but  some  of 
them  were  badly  situated  as  to  altitude  or  view;  some  were 
falling  to  decay,  and  the  search  was  rather  a  discouraging 
one.  Still  it  was  not  abandoned,  and  the  reports  of  these 
excursions  furnished  new  interest  and  new  hope  always 
to  the  invalid  at  home. 

"Even  if  we  find  it,"  he  wrote  Howells,  "I  am  afraid 
it  will  be  months  before  we  can  move  Mrs.  Clemens. 
Of  course  it  will.  But  it  comforts  us  to  let  on  that  we 
think  otherwise,  and  these  pretensions  help  to  keep  hope 
alive  in  her." 

She  had  her  bad  days  and  her  good  days,  days  when  it 
was  believed  she  had  passed  the  turning-point  and  was 
traveling  the  way  to  recovery;  but  the  good  days  were 
always  a  little  less  hopeful,  the  bad  days  a  little  more 
discouraging.  On  February  2 2d  Clemens  wrote  in  his 
note-book: 

At  midnight  Livy's  pulse  went  to  192  &  there  was  a  collapse. 
Great  alarm.   Subcutaneous  injection  of  brandy  saved  her. 

And  to  MacAlister  toward  the  end  of  March  : 

We  are  having  quite  perfect  weather  now  &  are  hoping  that 
it  will  bring  effects  for  Mrs.  Clemens. 

1214 


Digitized  by  Go< 


THE  RETURN  TO  FLORENCE 

But  a  few  days  later  he  added  that  he  was  watching 
the  driving  rain  through  the  windows,  and  that  it  was  bad 
weather  for  the  invalid.    "But  it  will  not  last,"  he  said. 

The  invalid  improved  then,  and  there  was  a  concert 
in  Florence  at  which  Clara  Clemens  sang.  Clemens  in 
his  note-book  says: 

April  8.  Clara's  concert  was  a  triumph.  Livy  woke  up  & 
sent  for  her  to  tell  her  all  about  it,  near  midnight. 

But  a  day  or  two  later  she  was  worse  again — then 
better.  The  hearts  in  that  household  were  as  pendulums, 
swinging  always  between  hope  and  despair. 

One  familiar  with  the  Clemens  history  might  well  have 
been  filled  with  forebodings.  Already  in  January  a 
member  of  the  family,  Mollie  Clemens,  Orion's  wife, 
died,  news  which  was  kept  from  Mrs.  Clemens,  as  was 
the  death  of  Aldrich's  son,  and  that  of  Sir  Henry  M. 
Stanley,  both  of  which  occurred  that  spring. 

Indeed,  death  harvested  freely  that  year  among  the 
Clemens  friendships.   Clemens  wrote  Twichell: 

Yours  has  just  this  moment  arrived — just  as  I  was  finishing 
a  note  to  poor  Lady  Stanley.  I  believe  the  last  country-house 
visit  we  paid  in  England  was  to  Stanley's.  Lord!  how  my 
friends  &  acquaintances  fall  about  me  now  in  my  gray-headed 
days!  Vereshchagin,  Mommsen,  Dvorak,  Lenbach,  &  J6kai,  all 
so  recently,  &  now  Stanley.  I  have  known  Stanley  37  years. 
Goodness,  who  is  there  I  haven't  known? 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXXI 


THE  CLOSE  OP  A  BEAUTIFUL  LIFE 

IN  one  of  his  notes  near  the  end  of  April  Clemens 
writes  that  once  more,  as  at  Riverdale,  he  has  been 
excluded  from  Mrs.  Clemens's  room  except  for  the  brief- 
est moment  at  a  time.  But  on  May  12th,  to  R.  W. 
Gilder,  he  reported: 

For  two  days  now  we  have  not  been  anxious  about  Mrs. 
Clemens  (unberufen).  After  20  months  of  bedridden  solitude 
&  bodily  misery  she  all  of  a  sudden  ceases  to  be  a  pallid,  shrunken 
shadow,  &  looks  bright  &  young  &  pretty.  She  remains  what 
she  always  was,  the  most  wonderful  creature  of  fortitude,  pa- 
tience, endurance,  and  recuperative  power  that  ever  was.  But 
ah,  dear!  it  won't  last;  this  fiendish  malady  will  play  new 
treacheries  upon  her,  and  I  shall  go  back  to  my  prayers  again — 
unutterable  from  any  pulpit  I 

May  13,  a.m.  I  have  just  paid  one  of  my  pair  of  permitted 
2 -minute  visits  per  day  to  the  sick-room.  And  found  what  I 
have  learned  to  expect — retrogression. 

There  was  a  day  when  she  was  brought  out  on  the  ter- 
race in  a  wheel-chair  to  see  the  wonder  of  the  early 
Italian  summer.  She  had  been  a  prisoner  so  long  that 
she  was  almost  overcome  with  the  delight  of  it  all — the 
more  so,  perhaps,  in  the  feeling  that  she  might  so  soon 
be  leaving  it. 

It  was  on  Sunday,  the  5th  of  June,  that  the  end  came. 
Clemens  and  Jean  had  driven  out  to  make  some  calls, 
and  had  stopped  at  a  villa  which  promised  to  fulfil  most 
of  the  requirements.   They  came  home  full  of  enthusiasm 

1216 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  CLOSE  OF  A  BEAUTIFUL  LIFE 


concerning  it,  and  Clemens,  in  his  mind,  had  decided  on 
the  purchase.    In  the  corridor  Clara  said: 

"She  is  better  to-day  than  she  has  been  for  three 
months." 

Then  quickly,  under  her  breath,  "  Unberufen,"  which 
the  others,  too,  added  hastily — superstitiously. 

Mrs.  Clemens  was,  in  fact,  bright  and  cheerful,  and 
anxious  to  hear  all  about  the  new  property  which  was  to 
become  their  home.  She  urged  him  to  sit  by  her  during 
the  dinner-hour  and  tell  her  the  details;  but  once,  when 
the  sense  of  her  frailties  came  upon  her,  she  said  they 
must  not  mind  if  she  could  not  go  very  soon,  but  be 
content  where  they  were.  He  remained  from  half  past 
seven  until  eight — a  forbidden  privilege,  but  permitted 
because  she  was  so  animated,  feeling  so  well.  Their  talk 
was  as  it  had  been  in  the  old  days,  and  once  during  it  he 
reproached  himself,  as  he  had  so  often  done,  and  asked 
forgiveness  for  the  tears  he  had  brought  into  her  life. 
When  he  was  summoned  to  go  at  last  he  chided  himself 
for  remaining  so  long;  but  she  said  there  was  no  harm, 
and  kissed  him,  saying:  "You  will  come  back,"  and  he 
answered,  "Yes,  to  say  good  night,"  meaning  at  half 
past  nine,  as  was  the  permitted  custom.  He  stood  a 
moment  at  the  door  throwing  kisses  to  her,  and  she 
returning  them,  her  face  bright  with  smiles. 

He  was  so  hopeful  and  happy  that  it  amounted  to 
exaltation.  He  went  to  his  room  at  first,  then  he  was 
moved  to  do  a  thing  which  he  had  seldom  done  since 
Susy  died.  He  went  to  the  piano  up-stairs  and  sang  the 
old  jubilee  songs  that  Susy  had  liked  to  hear  him  sing. 
Jean  came  in  presently,  listening.  She  had  not  done  this 
before,  that  he  could  remember.  He  sang  "Swing  Low, 
Sweet  Chariot,"  and  "  My  Lord  He  Calls  Me."  He  noticed 
Jean  then  and  stopped,  but  she  asked  him  to  go  on. 

Mrs.  Clemens,  in  her  room,  heard  the  distant  music, 
and  said  to  her  attendant: 

1217 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"He  is  singing  a  good-night  carol  to  me." 

The  music  ceased  presently,  and  then  a  moment  later 
she  asked  to  be  lifted  up.  Almost  in  that  instant  life 
slipped  away  without  a  sound. 

Clemens,  coming  to  say  good  night,  saw  a  little  group 
about  her  bed,  Clara  and  Jean  standing  as  if  dazed.  He 
went  and  bent  over  and  looked  into  her  face,  surprised 
that  she  did  not  greet  him.  He  did  not  suspect  what  had 
happened  until  he  heard  one  of  the  daughters  ask: 

"Katie,  is  it  true?   Oh,  Katie,  is  it  true?" 

He  realized  then  that  she  was  gone. 

In  his  note-book  that  night  he  wrote: 

At  a  quarter  past  9  this  evening  she  that  was  the  life  of  my 
life  passed  to  the  relief  &  the  peace  of  death  after  22  months 
of  unjust  &  unearned  suffering.  I  first  saw  her  near  37  years 
ago,  &  now  I  have  looked  upon  her  face  for  the  last  time.  Oh, 
so  unexpected !  -.  .  .  I  was  full  of  remorse  for  things  done  &  said 
in  these  34  years  of  married  life  that  hurt  Livy's  heart. 

He  envied  her  lying  there,  so  free  from  it  all,  with  the 
great  peace  upon  her  face.  He  wrote  to  Howells  and  to 
Twichell,  and  to  Mrs.  Crane,  those  nearest  and  dearest 
ones.   To  Twichell  he  said: 

How  sweet  she  was  in  death,  how  young,  how  beautiful,  how 
like  her  dear  girlish  self  of  thirty  years  ago,  not  a  gray  hair 
showing!  This  rejuvenescence  was  noticeable  within  two  hours 
after  her  death;  &  when  I  went  down  again  (2.30)  it  was  com- 
plete. In  all  that  night  &  all  that  day  she  never  noticed  my 
caressing  hand—it  seemed  strange. 

To  Howells  he  recalled  the  closing  scene: 

I  bent  over  her  &  looked  in  her  face  &  I  think  I  spoke — I  was 
surprised  &  troubled  that  she  did  not  notice  me.  Then  we  un- 
derstood &  our  hearts  broke.   How  poor  we  are  to-day! 

1 21S 


Digitized  by  Go< 


THE  CLOSE  OF  A  BEAUTIFUL  LIFE 


But  how  thankful  I  am  that  her  persecutions  are  ended!  I 
would  not  call  her  back  if  I  could. 

To-day,  treasured  in  her  worn,  old  Testament,  I  found  a  dear 
&  gentle  letter  from  you  dated  Far  Rockaway,  September  13, 
1806,  about  our  poor  Susy's  death.  I  am  tired  &  old;  I  wish  I 
were  with  Livy. 

And  in  a  few  days: 

It  would  break  Livy's  heart  to  see  Clara.  We  excuse  ourself 
from  all  the  friends  that  call — though,  of  course,  only  intimates 
come.  Intimates — but  they  are  not  the  old,  old  friends,  the 
friends  of  the  old,  old  times  when  we  laughed.  Shall  we  ever 
laugh  again?  If  I  could  only  see  a  dog  that  I  knew  in  the  old 
times  &  could  put  my  arms  around  his  neck  and  tell  him  all, 
everything,  &  ease  my  heart! 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXXII 


THE  SAD  JOURNEY  HOME 

A TIDAL  wave  of  sympathy  poured  in.  Noble  and 
commoner,  friend  and  stranger — humanity  of  every 
station — sent  their  messages  of  condolence  to  the  friend 
of  mankind.  The  cablegrams  came  first — bundles  of 
them  from  every  corner  of  the  world — then  the  letters,  a 
steady  inflow.  Howells,  Twichell,  Aldrich — those  oldest 
friends  who  had  themselves  learned  the  meaning  of  grief 
— spoke  such  few  and  futile  words  as  the  language  can 
supply  to  allay  a  heart's  mourning,  each  recalling  the 
rarity  and  beauty  of  the  life  that  had  slipped  away. 
Twichell  and  his  wife  wrote: 

Dear,  dear  Mark, — There  is  nothing  we  can  say.  What  is 
there  to  say?  But  here  we  are — with  you  all  every  hour  and 
every  minute — filled  with  unutterable  thoughts;  unutterable 
affection  for  the  dead  and  for  the  living. 

Harmony  and  Joe. 

Howells  in  his  letter  said: 

She  hallowed  what  she  touched  far  beyond  priests.  .  .  .  What 
are  you  going  to  do,  you  poor  soul? 

A  hundred  letters  crowd  in  for  expression  here,  but  must 
be  denied — not,  however,  the  beam  of  hope  out  of  Helen 
Keller's  illumined  night: 

Do  try  to  reach  through  grief  and  feel  the  pressure  of  her 
hand,  as  I  reach  through  darkness  and  feel  the  smile  on  my 
friends'  lips  and  the  light  in  their  eyes  though  mine  are  closed. 

1 220 


Digitized  by  Go< 


THE  SAD  JOURNEY  HOME 


They  were  adrift  again  without  plans  for  the  future. 
They  would  return  to  America  to  lay  Mrs.  Clemens  to 
rest  by  Susy  and  little  Langdon,  but  beyond  that  they 
could  not  see.  Then  they  remembered  a  quiet  spot  in 
Massachusetts,  Tyringham,  near  Lee,  where  the  Gilders 
lived,  and  so,  on  June  7th,  he  wrote: 

Dear  Gilder  Family, — I  have  been  worrying  and  worrying 
to  know  what  to  do;  at  last  I  went  to  the  girls  with  an  idea — 
to  ask  the  Gilders  to  get  us  shelter  near  their  summer  home. 
It  was  the  first  time  they  have  not  shaken  their  heads.  So 
to-morrow  I  will  cable  to  you  and  shall  hope  to  be  in  time. 

An  hour  ago  the  best  heart  that  ever  beat  for  me  and  mine 
was  carried  silent  out  of  this  house,  and  I  am  as  one  who  wanders 
and  has  lost  his  way.  She  who  is  gone  was  our  head,  she  was 
our  hands.  We  are  now  trying  to  make  plans — we:  we  who 
have  never  made  a  plan  before,  nor  ever  needed  to.  If  she 
could  speak  to  us  she  would  make  it  all  simple  and  easy  with  a 
word,  &  our  perplexities  would  vanish  away.  If  she  had  known 
she  was  near  to  death  she  would  have  told  us  where  to  go  and 
what  to  do,  but  she  was  not  suspecting,  neither  were  we.  She 
was  all  our  riches  and  she  is  gone;  she  was  our  breath,  she  was 
our  life,  and  now  we  are  nothing. 

We  send  you  our  love — and  with  it  the  love  of  you  that  was  in 
her  heart  when  she  died. 

S.  L.  Clemens. 

They  arranged  to  sail  on  the  Prince  Oscar  on  the  29th 
of  June.  There  was  an  earlier  steamer,  but  it  was  the 
Princess  Irene,  which  had  brought  them,  and  they  felt 
they  would  not  make  the  return  voyage  on  that  vessel. 
During  the  period  of  waiting  a  curious  thing  happened. 
Clemens  one  day  got  up  in  a  chair  in  his  room  on  the 
second  floor  to  pull  down  the  high  window-sash.  It  did 
not  move  easily  and  his  hand  slipped.  It  was  only  by 
the  merest  chance  that  he  saved  himself  from  falling  to 
the  ground  far  below.  He  mentions  this  in  his  note-book, 
and  once,  speaking  of  it  to  Frederick  Duneka,  he  said: 

1 221 


•k  Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"Had  I  fallen  it  would  probably  have  killed  me,  and 
in  my  bereaved  circumstances  the  world  would  have  been 
convinced  that  it  was  suicide.  It  was  one  of  those  curi- 
ous coincidences  which  are  always  happening  and  being 
misunderstood . ' ' 

The  homeward  voyage  and  its  sorrowful  conclusion  are 
pathetically  conveyed  in  his  notes: 

June  29,  1904.  Sailed  last  night  at  10.  The  bugle-call  to 
breakfast.  I  recognized  the  notes  and  was  distressed.  When 
I  heard  them  last  Livy  heard  them  with  me;  now  they  fall  upon 
her  ear  unheeded. 

In  my  life  there  have  been  68  Junes — but  how  vague  &  color- 
less 67  of  them  are  contrasted  with  the  deep  blackness  of  this  one ! 

July  1,  1904.  I  cannot  reproduce  Livy's  face  in  my  mind's 
eye — I  was  never  in  my  life  able  to  reproduce  a  face.  It  is  a 
curious  infirmity — &  now  at  last  I  realize  it  is  a  calamity. 

July  2,  1904.  In  these  34  years  we  have  made  many  voyages 
together,  Livy  dear — &  now  we  are  making  our  last ;  you  down 
below  &  lonely;  I  above  with  the  crowd  &  lonely. 

July  3,  1904.  Ship-time,  8  a.m.  In  13  hours  &  a  quarter  it 
will  be  4  weeks  since  Livy  died. 

Thirty-one  years  ago  we  made  our  first  voyage  together — & 
this  is  our  last  one  in  company.  Susy  was  a  year  old  then. 
She  died  at  24  &  had  been  in  her  grave  8  years. 

July  10,  1904.  To-night  it  will  be  5  weeks.  But  to  me  it 
remains  yesterday— as  it  has  from  the  first.  But  this  funeral 
march— how  sad  &  long  it  is! 

Two  days  more  will  end  the  second  stage  of  it. 

July  14,  1904  (Elmira).  Funeral  private  in  the  house  of 
Livy's  young  maidenhood.  Where  she  stood  as  a  bride  34 
years  ago  there  her  coffin  rested;  &  over  it  the  same  voice  that 
had  made  her  a  wife  then  committed  her  departed  spirit  to  God 
now. 

It  was  Joseph  Twichell  who  rendered  that  last  service. 
Mr.  Beecher  was  long  since  dead.  It  was  a  simple, 
touching  utterance,  closing  with  this  tender  word  of 
farewell: 

1222 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SAD  JOURNEY  HOME 


Robert  Browning,  when  he  was  nearing  the  end  of  his  earthly 
days,  said  that  death  was  the  thing  that  we  did  not  believe  in. 
Nor  do  we  believe  in  it.  We  who  journeyed  through  the  bygone 
years  in  companionship  with  the  bright  spirit  now  withdrawn 
are  growing  old.  The  way  behind  is  long;  the  way  before  is 
short.  The  end  cannot  be  far  off.  But  what  of  that?  Can 
we  not  say,  each  one : 

"So  long  that  power  hath  blessed  me,  sure  it  still 

Will  lead  me  on; 
O'er  moor  and  fen;  o'er  crag  and  torrent,  till 

The  night  is  gone; 
And  with  the  morn,  their  angel  faces  smile, 
Which  I  have  loved  long  since,  and  lost  awhile!" 

And  so  good-by.  Good-by,  dear  heart!  Strong,  tender,  and 
true.  Good-by  until  for  us  the  morning  break  and  these  shadows 
fly  away. 

Dr.  Eastman,  who  had  succeeded  Mr.  Beecher,  closed 
the  service  with  a  prayer,  and  so  the  last  office  we  can 
render  in  this  life  for  those  we  love  was  finished. 

Clemens  ordered  that  a  simple  marker  should  be 
placed  at  the  grave,  bearing,  besides  the  name,  the 
record  of  birth  and  death,  followed  by  the  German  line: 

Gott  set  dir  gnddig,  0  meine  Wonne! 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXXIII 


BEGINNING  ANOTHER  HOME 

THERE  was  an  extra  cottage  on  the  Gilder  place  at 
Tyringham,  and  this  they  occupied  for  the  rest  of 
that  sad  summer.  Clemens,  in  his  note-book,  has  pre- 
served some  of  its  aspects  and  incidents. 

July  34,  1904.  Rain— rain— rain.  Cold.  We  built  a  fire  in 
my  room.  Then  clawed  the  logs  out  &  threw  water,  remember- 
ing there  was  a  brood  of  swallows  in  the  chimney.  The  tragedy 
was  averted. 

July  31.  Lee,  Massachusetts  (Berkshire  Hills).  Last 
night  the  young  people  out  on  a  moonlight  ride.  Trolley  fright- 
ened Jean's  horse — collision — horse  killed.  Rodman  Gilder 
picked  Jean  up,  unconscious;  she  was  taken  to  the  doctor,  per 
the  car.  Face,  nose,  side,  back  contused;  tendon  of  left  ankle 
broken. 

August  10.  New  York.  Clara  here  sick — never  well  since 
June  5.  Jean  is  at  the  summer  home  in  the  Berkshire  Hills 
crippled. 

The  next  entry  records  the  third  death  in  the  Clemens 
family  within  a  period  of  eight  months— that  of  Mrs. 
Moffett,  who  had  been  Pamela  Clemens.  Clemens 

writes: 

September  1.   Died  at  Greenwich,  Connecticut,  my  sister, 
Pamela  Moffett,  aged  about  73. 
Death  dates  this  year  January  14,  June  5,  September  1. 

That  fall  they  took  a  house  in  New  York  City,  on 
the  corner  of  Ninth  Street  and  Fifth  Avenue,  No.  21, 

1224 


Digitized  by  Google 


BEGINNING  ANOTHER  HOME 


remaining  for  a  time  at  the  Grosvenor  while  the  new 
heme  was  being  set  in  order.  The  home  furniture  was 
brought  from  Hartford,  unwrapped,  and  established  in 
the  light  of  strange  environment.    Clemens  wrote: 

We  have  not  seen  it  for  thirteen  years.  Katie  Leary,  our 
old  housekeeper,  who  has  been  in  our  service  more  than  twenty- 
four  years,  cried  when  she  told  me  about  it  to-day.  She  said, 
"  I  had  forgotten  it  was  so  beautiful,  and  it  brought  Mrs. 
Clemens  right  back  to  me — in  that  old  time  when  she  was  so 
young  and  lovely." 

Clara  Clemens  had  not  recovered  from  the  strain  of 
her  mother's  long  illness  and  the  shock  of  her  death,  and 
she  was  ordered  into  retirement  with  the  care  of  a  trained 
nurse.  The  life  at  2 1  Fifth  Avenue,  therefore,  began  with 
only  two  remaining  members  of  the  broken  family — 
Clemens  and  Jean. 

Clemens  had  undertaken  to  divert  himself  with  work 
at  Tyringham,  though  without  much  success.  He  was 
not  well;  he  was  restless  and  disturbed;  his  heart  bleak 
with  a  great  loneliness.  He  prepared  an  article  on  Copy- 
right for  the  North  American  Review}  and  he  began,  or 
at  least  contemplated,  that  beautiful  fancy,  Eve's  Diary, 
which  in  the  widest  and  most  reverential  sense,  from 
the  first  word  to  the  last,  conveys  his  love,  his  worship, 
and  his  tenderness  for  the  one  he  had  laid  away.  Adam's 
single  comment  at  the  end,  "Wheresoever  she  was,  there 
was  Eden,"  was  his  own  comment,  and  is  perhaps  the 
most  tenderly  beautiful  line  he  ever  wrote.  These  two 
books,  Adam's  Diary  and  Eve's — amusing  and  sometimes 
absurd  as  they  are,  and  so  far  removed  from  the  literal — 
are  as  autobiographic  as  anything  he  has  done,  and  one  of 

1  Published  Jan.,  1005.  A  dialogue  presentation  of  copyright 
conditions,  addressed  to  Thorwald  Stolberg,  Register  of  Copy- 
rights, Washington,  D.  C.  One  of  the  best  of  Mark  Twain's 
papers  on  the  subject. 

1225 


Digitized  by  Go< 


MARK  TWAIN 


them  as  lovely  in  its  truth.  Like  the  first  Maker  of  men, 
Mark  Twain  created  Adam  in  his  own  image ;  and  his  rare 
Eve  is  no  less  the  companion  with  whom,  half  a  lifetime 
before,  he  had  begun  the  marriage  journey.  Only  here 
the  likeness  ceases.  No  Serpent  ever  entered  their  Eden. 
And  they  never  left  it;  it  traveled  with  them  so  long  as 
they  remained  together. 

In  the  Christmas  Harper  for  1904  was  published 
* 4 Saint  Joan  of  Arc" — the  same  being  the  Joan  intro- 
duction prepared  in  London  five  years  before.  Joan's 
proposed  beatification  had  stirred  a  new  interest  in  the 
martyred  girl,  and  this  most  beautiful  article  became  a 
sort  of  key-note  of  the  public  heart.  Those  who  read  it 
were  likely  to  go  back  and  read  the  Recollections,  and 
a  new  appreciation  grew  for  that  masterpiece.  In  his 
later  and  wider  acceptance  by  his  own  land,  and  by  the 
world  at  large,  the  book  came  to  be  regarded  with  a 
fresh  understanding.  Letters  came  from  scores  of  readers, 
as  if  it  were  a  newly  issued  volume.  A  distinguished 
educator  wrote: 

I  would  rather  have  written  your  history  of  Joan  of  Arc 
than  any  other  piece  of  literature  in  any  language. 

And  this  sentiment  grew.  The  demand  for  the  book  in- 
creased, and  has  continued  to  increase,  steadily  and 
rapidly.1  In  the  long  and  last  analysis  the  good  must 
prevail.  A  day  will  come  when  there  will  be  as  many 
readers  of  Joan  as  of  any  other  of  Mark  Twain's  works. 

1  The  growing  appreciation  of  Joan  is  shown  by  the  report  of  sales 
for  the  three  years  following  1904.  The  sales  for  that  year  in 
America  were  1,726;  for  1905,  2,445;  for  1906,  5,381;  for  1907, 
6,574.  At  this  point  it  passed  Pudd'nhead  Wilson,  the  Yankee, 
The  Gilded  Age,  Life  on  the  Mississippi,  overtook  the  Tramp  Abroad, 
and  more  than  doubled  The  American  Claimant.  Only  The  Inno- 
cents A  broad,  Huckleberry  Finn,  Tom  Sawyer,  and  Roughing  It  still 
ranged  ahead  of  it,  in  the  order  named. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXXIV 


LIFE  AT  21  FIFTH  AVENUE 

THE  house  at  21  Fifth  Avenue,  built  by  the  architect 
who  had  designed  Grace  Church,  had  a  distinctly 
ecclesiastical  suggestion  about  its  windows,  and  was  of 
fine  and  stately  proportions  within.  It  was  a  proper 
residence  for  a  venerable  author  and  a  sage,  and  with  the 
handsome  Hartford  furnishings  distributed  through  it, 
made  a  distinctly  suitable  setting  for  Mark  Twain.  But 
it  was  lonely  for  him.  It  lacked  soul.  He  added,  pres- 
ently, a  great  iEolian  Orchestrelle,  with  a  variety  of  music 
for  his  different  moods.  He  believed  that  he  would  play  it 
himself  when  he  needed  the  comfort  of  harmony,  and  that 
Jean,  who  had  not  received  musical  training,  or  his  secre- 
tary could  also  play  to  him.  He  had  a  passion  for  music, 
or  at  least  for  melody  and  stately  rhythmic  measures, 
though  his  ear  was  not  attuned  to  what  are  termed  the 
more  classical  compositions.  For  Wagner,  for  instance, 
he  cared  little,  though  in  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Crane  he  said: 

Certainly  nothing  in  the  world  is  so  solemn  and  impressive 
and  so  divinely  beautiful  as  "  Tannhauser."  It  ought  to  be 
used  as  a  religous  service. 

Beethoven's  sonatas  and  symphonies  also  moved  him 
deeply.   Once,  writing  to  Jean,  he  asked: 

What  is  your  favorite  piece  of  music,  dear?  Mine  is  Bee- 
thoven's Fifth  Symphony.  I  have  found  that  out  within  a 
day  or  two. 

It  was  the  majestic  movement  and  melodies  of  the  sec- 
ond part  that  he  found  most  satisfying;  but  he  oftener 

1227 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


inclined  to  the  still  tenderer  themes  of  Chopin's  noc- 
turnes and  one  of  Schubert's  impromptus,  while  the 
"Lorelei"  and  the  "Erlking"  and  the  Scottish  airs  never 
wearied  him.  Music  thus  became  a  chief  consolation 
during  these  lonely  days — rich  organ  harmonies  that  filled 
the  emptiness  of  his  heart  and  beguiled  from  dull,  ma- 
terial surroundings  back  into  worlds  and  dreams  that  he 
had  known  and  laid  away. 

He  went  out  very  little  that  winter — usually  to  the 
homes  of  old  and  intimate  friends.  Once  he  attended  a 
small  dinner  given  him  by  George  Smalley  at  the  Metro- 
politan Club;  but  it  was  a  private  affair,  with  only  good 
friends  present.  Still,  it  formed  the  beginning  of  his  re- 
turn to  social  life,  and  it  was  not  in  his  nature  to  retire 
from  the  brightness  of  human  society,  or  to  submerge 
himself  in  mourning.  As  the  months  wore  on  he  ap- 
peared here  and  there,  and  took  on  something  of  his  old- 
time  habit.  Then  his  annual  bronchitis  appeared,  and 
he  was  confined  a  good  deal  to  his  home,  where  he  wrote 
or  planned  new  reforms  and  enterprises. 

The  improvement  of  railway  service,  through  which 
fewer  persons  should  be  maimed  and  destroyed  each  year, 
interested  him.  He  estimated  that  the  railroads  and 
electric  lines  killed  and  wounded  more  than  all  of  the 
wars  combined,  and  he  accumulated  statistics  and  pre- 
pared articles  on  the  subject,  though  he  appears  to  have 
offered  little  of  such  matter  for  publication.  Once,  how- 
ever, when  his  sympathy  was  awakened  by  the  victim 
of  a  frightful  trolley  and  train  collision  in  Newark,  New 
Jersey,  he  wrote  a  letter  which  promptly  found  its  way 
into  print. 

Dear  Miss  Madeline, — Your  good  &  admiring  &  affectionate 
brother  has  told  me  of  your  sorrowful  share  in  the  trolley  disaster 
which  brought  unaccustomed  tears  to  millions  of  eyes  &  fierce 
resentment  against  those  whose  criminal  indifference  to  their 
responsibilities  caused  it,  &  the  reminder  has  brought  back  to 

1228 


Digitized  by  Google 


LIFE  AT  21  FIFTH  AVENUE 


me  a  pang  out  of  that  bygone  time.  I  wish  I  could  take  you 
sound  &  whole  out  of  your  bed  &  break  the  legs  of  those  officials 
&  put  them  in  it — to  stay  there.  For  in  my  spirit  I  am  merciful, 
and  would  not  break  their  necks  &  backs  also,  as  some  would 
who  have  no  feeling. 

It  is  your  brother  who  permits  me  to  write  this  line — &  so  it 
is  not  an  intrusion,  you  see. 

May  you  get  well— &  soon  1       Sincerely  yours, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 

A  very  little  later  he  was  writing  another  letter  on  a 
similar  subject  to  St.  Clair  McKelway,  who  had  narrowly 
escaped  injury  in  a  railway  accident. 

Dear  McKelway, — Your  innumerable  friends  are  grateful, 
most  grateful. 

As  I  understand  the  telegrams,  the  engineers  of  your  train  had 
never  seen  a  locomotive  before.  .  .  .  The  government's  official 
report,  showing  that  our  railways  killed  twelve  hundred  persons 
last  year  &  injured  sixty  thousand,  convinces  me  that  under 
present  conditions  one  Providence  is  not  enough  properly  & 
efficiently  to  take  care  of  our  railroad  business.  But  it  is  charac- 
teristically American— always  trying  to  get  along  short-handed 
&  save  wages. 

A  massacre  of  Jews  in  Moscow  renewed  his  animosity 
for  semi-barbaric  Russia.  Asked  for  a  Christmas  senti- 
ment, he  wrote: 

It  is  my  warm  &  world-embracing  Christmas  hope  that  all  of 
us  that  deserve  it  may  finally  be  gathered  together  in  a  heaven 
of  rest  &  peace,  &  the  others  permitted  to  retire  into  the  clutches 
of  Satan,  or  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  according  to  preference — if 
they  have  a  preference. 

An  article,  "The  Tsar's  Soliloquy,"  written  at  this 
time,  was  published  in  the  North  American  Review  for 
March  ( 1 905) .  He  wrote  much  more,  but  most  of  the  other 
matter  he  put  aside.  On  a  subject  like  that  he  always 
discarded  three  times  as  much  as  he  published,  and  it 
in.— 8  1229 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


was  usually  about  three  times  as  terrific  as  that  which 
found  its  way  into  type.  "The  Soliloquy,"  however,  is 
severe  enough.  It  represents  the  Tsar  as  contemplating 
himself  without  his  clothes,  and  reflecting  on  what  a  poor 
human  specimen  he  presents: 

Is  it  this  that  140,000,000  Russians  kiss  the  dust  before  and 
worship?— manifestly  not  I  No  one  could  worship  this  spectacle 
which  is  Me.  Then  who  is  it,  what  is  it,  that  they  worship? 
Privately,  none  knows  better  than  I:  it  is  my  clothes!  Without 
my  clothes  I  should  be  as  destitute  of  authority  as  any  other 
naked  person.  No  one  could  tell  me  from  a  parson  and  barber 
tutor.  Then  who  is  the  real  Emperor  of  Russia!  My  clothes! 
There  is  no  other. 

The  emperor  continues  this  fancy,  and  reflects  on  the 
fierce  cruelties  that  are  done  in  his  name.  It  was  a 
withering  satire  on  Russian  imperialism,  and  it  stirred  a 
wide  response.  This  encouraged  Clemens  to  something 
even  more  pretentious  and  effective  in  the  same  line. 
He  wrote  "King  Leopold's  Soliloquy,"  the  reflections  of 
the  fiendish  sovereign  who  had  maimed  and  slaughtered 
fifteen  millions  of  African  subjects  in  his  greed — gentle, 
harmless  blacks — men,  women,  and  little  children  whom 
he  had  butchered  and  mutilated  in  his  Congo  rubber- 
fields.  Seldom  in  the  history  of  the  world  have  there 
been  such  atrocious  practices  as  those  of  King  Leopold  in 
the  Congo,  and  Clemens  spared  nothing  in  his  picture  of 
them.  The  article  was  regarded  as  not  quite  suitable 
for  magazine  publication,  and  it  was  given  to  the  Congo 
Reform  Association  and  issued  as  a  booklet  for  distribu- 
tion, with  no  return  to  the  author,  who  would  gladly 
have  written  a  hundred  times  as  much  if  he  could  have 
saved  that  unhappy  race  and  have  sent  Leopold  to  the 
electric  chair.1 

1  The  book  was  price-marked  twenty-five  cents,  but  the  returns 
from  such  as  were  sold  went  to  the  cause.    Thousands  of  them  were 

1230 


Digitized  by  Go< 


LIFE  AT  21  FIFTH  AVENUE 


Various  plans  and  movements  were  undertaken  for 
Congo  reform,  and  Clemens  worked  and  wrote  letters  and 
gave  his  voice  and  his  influence  and  exhausted  his  rage, 
at  last,  as  one  after  another  of  the  half-organized  and 
altogether  futile  undertakings  showed  no  results.  His 
interest  did  not  die,  but  it  became  inactive.  Eventually 
he  declared:  "I  have  said  all  I  can  say  on  that  terrible 
subject.  I  am  heart  and  soul  in  any  movement  that 
will  rescue  the  Congo  and  hang  Leopold,  but  I  cannot 
write  any  more." 

His  fires  were  likely  to  burn  themselves  out,  they 
raged  so  fiercely.  His  final  paragraph  on  the  subject  was 
a  proposed  epitaph  for  Leopold  when  time  should  have 
claimed  him.    It  ran: 

Here  under  this  gilded  tomb  lies  rotting  the  body  of  one  the 
smell  of  whose  name  will  still  offend  the  nostrils  of  men  ages 
upon  ages  after  all  the  Qcsars  and  Washingtons  &  Napoleons 
shall  have  ceased  to  be  praised  or  blamed  &  been  forgotten — 
Leopold  of  Belgium. 

Clemens  had  not  yet  lost  interest  in  the  American  policy 
in  the  Philippines,  and  in  his  letters  to  Twichell  he  did  not 
hesitate  to  criticize  the  President's  attitude  in  this  and 
related  matters.  Once,  in  a  moment  of  irritation,  he  wrote : 

Dear  Joe, — I  knew  I  had  in  me  somewhere  a  definite  feeling 
about  the  President.  If  I  could  only  find  the  words  to  define 
it  with!   Here  they  are,  to  a  hair — from  Leonard  Jerome: 

"  For  twenty  years  I  have  loved  Roosevelt  the  man,  and  hated 
Roosevelt  the  statesman  and  politician." 

It's  mighty  good.   Every  time  in  twenty-five  years  that  I 

distributed  free.  The  Congo,  a  domain  four  times  as  large  as  the 
German  empire,  had  been  made  the  ward  of  Belgium  at  a  convention 
in  Berlin  by  the  agreement  of  fourteen  nations,  America  and  thirteen 
European  states.  Leopold  promptly  seized  the  country  for  his  per- 
sonal advantage  and  the  nations  apparently  found  themselves 
powerless  to  depose  him.  No  more  terrible  blunder  was  ever  com- 
mitted by  an  assemblage  of  civilized  people. 


I  23 1 


it  Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


have  met  Roosevelt  the  man  a  wave  of  welcome  has  streaked 
through  me  with  the  hand -grip;  but  whenever  (as  a  rule)  I  meet 
Roosevelt  the  statesman  &  politician  I  find  him  destitute  of 
morals  &  not  respect-worthy.  It  is  plain  that  where  his  political 
self  &  party  self  are  concerned  he  has  nothing  resembling  a  con- 
science; that  under  those  inspirations  he  is  naively  indifferent 
to  the  restraints  of  duty  &  even  unaware  of  them ;  ready  to  kick 
the  Constitution  into  the  back  yard  whenever  it  gets  in  his 
Wciy.  .  .  . 

But  Roosevelt  is  excusable — I  recognize  it  &  (ought  to)  con- 
cede it.  We  are  all  insane,  each  in  his  own  way,  &  with  insanity 
goes  irresponsibility.  Theodore  the  man  is  sane;  in  fairness  we 
ought  to  keep  in  mind  that  Theodore,  as  statesman  &  politician, 
is  insane  &  irresponsible. 

He  wrote  a  great  deal  more  from  time  to  time  on  this 
subject;  but  that  is  the  gist  of  his  conclusions,  and 
whether  justified  by  time,  or  otherwise,  it  expresses  to- 
day the  deduction  of  a  very  large  number  of  people.  It 
is  set  down  here,  because  it  is  a  part  of  Mark  Twain's 
history,  and  also  because  a  little  while  after  his  death 
there  happened  to  creep  into  print  an  incomplete  and 
misleading  note  (since  often  reprinted),  which  he  once 
made  in  a  moment  of  anger,  when  he  was  in  a  less  judicial 
frame  of  mind.  It  seems  proper  that  a  man's  honest  sen- 
timents should  be  recorded  concerning  the  nation's  servants. 

Clemens  wrote  an  article  at  this  period  which  he  called 
the  "War  Prayer."  It  pictured  the  young  recruits  about 
to  march  away  for  war — the  excitement  and  the  cele- 
bration— the  drum-beat  and  the  heart-beat  of  patriot- 
ism— the  final  assembly  in  the  church  where  the  minister 
utters  that  tremendous  invocation: 

God  the  all- terrible!   Thou  who  ordainest, 
Thunder,  Thy  clarion,  and  lightning,  Thy  sword! 

and  the  "long  prayer"  for  victory  to  the  nation's  armies. 
As  the  prayer  closes  a  white-robed  stranger  enters,  moves 

1232 


Digitized  by  Google 


LIFE  AT  21  FIFTH  AVENUE 


up  the  aisle,  and  takes  the  preacher's  place;  then,  after 
some  moments  of  impressive  silence,  he  begins: 

"  I  come  from  the  Throne— bearing  a  message  from  Almighty 
God !  .  .  .  He  has  heard  the  prayer  of  His  servant,  your  shepherd , 
&  will  grant  it  if  such  shall  be  your  desire  after  I  His  messenger 
shall  have  explained  to  you  its  import— that  is  to  say  its  full 
import.  For  it  is  like  unto  many  of  the  prayers  of  men  in  that 
it  asks  for  more  than  he  who  utters  it  is  aware  of — except  he 
pause  &  think. 

"  God's  servant  &  yours  has  prayed  his  prayer.  Has  he  paused 
&  taken  thought?  Is  it  one  prayer?  No,  it  is  two — one  uttered, 
the  other  not.  Both  have  reached  the  ear  of  Him  who  heareth 
all  supplications,  the  spoken  &  the  unspoken.  .  .  . 

"You  have  heard  your  servant's  prayer— the  uttered  part  of 
it.  I  am  commissioned  of  God  to  put  into  words  the  other  part 
of  it — that  part  which  the  pastor — and  also  you  in  your  hearts 
— fervently  prayed,  silently.  And  ignorantly  &  unthinkingly? 
God  grant  that  it  was  so!  You  heard  these  words:  'Grant  us 
the  victory,  O  Lord  our  God!'  That  is  sufficient.  The  whole 
of  the  uttered  prayer  is  completed  into  those  pregnant  words. 

"Upon  the  listening  spirit  of  God  the  Father  fell  also  the  un- 
spoken part  of  the  prayer.  He  commandeth  me  to  put  it  into 
words.  Listen! 

"O  Lord  our  Father,  our  young  patriots,  idols  of  our  hearts, 
go  forth  to  battle — be  Thou  near  them!  With  them — in  spirit — 
we  also  go  forth  from  the  sweet  peace  of  our  beloved  firesides  to 
smite  the  foe. 

"O  Lord  our  God,  help  us  to  tear  their  soldiers  to  bloody 
shreds  with  our  shells;  help  us  to  cover  their  smiling  fields  with 
the  pale  forms  of  their  patriot  dead ;  help  us  to  drown  the  thunder 
of  the  guns  with  the  wounded,  writhing  in  pain;  help  us  to  lay 
waste  their  humble  homes  with  a  hurricane  of  fire;  help  us  to 
wring  the  hearts  of  their  unoffending  widows  with  unavailing 
grief;  help  us  to  turn  them  out  roofless  with  their  little  children 
to  wander  unfriended  through  wastes  of  their  desolated  land  in 
rags  &  hunger  &  thirst,  sport  of  the  sun-flames  of  summer  & 
the  icy  winds  of  winter,  broken  in  spirit,  worn  with  travail, 
imploring  Thee  for  the  refuge  of  the  grave  &  denied  it— for  our 
sakes,  who  adore  Thee,  Lord,  blast  their  hopes,  blight  their 


i*33 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


lives,  protract  their  bitter  pilgrimage,  make  heavy  their  steps, 
water  their  way  with  their  tears,  stain  the  white  snow  with  the 
blood  of  their  wounded  feet!  We  ask  of  one  who  is  the  Spirit 
of  love  &  who  is  the  ever-faithful  refuge  &  friend  of  all  that  are 
sore  beset,  &  seek  His  aid  with  humble  &  contrite  hearts. 
Grant  our  prayer,  O  Lord,  &  Thine  shall  be  the  praise  &  honor 
&  glory  now  &  ever,  Amen." 

(After  a  pause.)  "Ye  have  prayed  it;  if  ye  still  desire  it, 
speak!— the  messenger  of  the  Most  High  waits." 

It  was  believed,  afterward,  that  the  man  was  a  lunatic,  be- 
cause there  was  no  sense  in  what  he  said. 

To  Dan  Beard,  who  dropped  in  to  see  him,  Clemens 
read  the  "War  Prayer,"  stating  that  he  had  read  it  to 
his  daughter  Jean,  and  others,  who  had  told  him  he  must 
not  print  it,  for  it  would  be  regarded  as  sacrilege. 

"Still  you  are  going  to  publish  it,  are  you  not?" 

Clemens,  pacing  up  and  down  the  room  in  his  dressing- 
gown  and  slippers,  shook  his  head. 

"No,"  he  said,  "I  have  told  the  whole  truth  in  that, 
and  only  dead  men  can  tell  the  truth  in  this  world.  It 
can  be  published  after  I  am  dead." 

He  did  not  care  to  invite  the  public  verdict  that  he 
was  a  lunatic,  or  even  a  fanatic  with  a  mission  to  destroy 
the  illusions  and  traditions  and  conclusions  of  mankind. 
To  Twichell  he  wrote,  playfully  but  sincerely: 

Am  I  honest?  I  give  you  my  word  of  honor  (privately)  I  am 
not.  For  seven  years  I  have  suppressed  a  book  which  my  con- 
science tells  me  I  ought  to  publish.  I  hold  it  a  duty  to  publish  it. 
There  are  other  difficult  duties  which  I  am  equal  to,  but  I  am 
not  equal  to  that  one.  Yes,  even  /  am  dishonest.  Not  in  many 
ways,  but  in  some.  Forty-one,  I  think  it  is.  We  are  certainly 
all  honest  in  one  or  several  ways — every  man  in  the  world — 
though  I  have  a  reason  to  think  I  am  the  only  one  whose  black- 
list runs  so  light.  Sometimes  I  feel  lonely  enough  in  this  lofty 
solitude. 

1234 


Digitized  by  Go< 


LIFE  AT  21  FIFTH  AVENUE 


It  was  his  Gospel  he  referred  to  as  his  unpublished 
book,  his  doctrine  of  Selfishness,  and  of  Man  the  irrespon- 
sible Machine.  To  Twichell  he  pretended  to  favor  war, 
which  he  declared,  to  his  mind,  was  one  of  the  very  best 
methods  known  of  diminishing  the  human  race. 

What  a  life  it  is!— this  one!  Everything  we  try  to  do,  some- 
body intrudes  &  obstructs  it.  After  years  of  thought  &  labor  I 
have  arrived  within  one  little  bit  of  a  step  of  perfecting  my 
invention  for  exhausting  the  oxygen  in  the  globe's  air  during  a 
stretch  of  two  minutes,  &  of  course  along  comes  an  obstructor  who 
is  inventing  something  to  protect  human  life.  Damn  such  a 
world  anyway. 

He  generally  wrote  Twichell  when  he  had  things  to 
say  that  were  outside  of  the  pale  of  print.  He  was  sure 
of  an  attentive  audience  of  one,  and  the  audience,  whether 
it  agreed  with  him  or  not,  would  at  least  understand  him 
and  be  honored  by  his  confidence.  In  one  letter  of  that 
year  he  said: 

I  have  written  you  to-day,  not  to  do  you  a  service,  but  to  do 
myself  one.  There  was  bile  in  me.  I  had  to  empty  it  or  lose 
my  day  to-morrow.  If  I  tried  to  empty  it  into  the  North 
American  Review— o\it  well,  I  couldn't  afford  the  risk.  No,  the 
certainty!  The  certainty  that  I  wouldn't  be  satisfied  with  the 
result;  so  I  would  burn  it,  &  try  again  to-morrow;  burn  that 
and  try  again  the  next  day.  It  happens  so  nearly  every  time. 
I  have  a  family  to  support,  &  I  can't  afford  this  kind  of  dissi- 
pation. Last  winter  when  I  was  sick  I  wrote  a  magazine  article 
three  times  before  I  got  it  to  suit  me.  I  put  $500  worth  of  work 
on  it  every  day  for  ten  days,  &  at  last  when  I  got  it  to  suit  me 
it  contained  but  3,000  words— $900.  I  burned  it  &  said  I  would 
reform. 

And  I  have  reformed.  I  have  to  work  my  bile  off  whenever 
it  gets  to  where  I  can't  stand  it,  but  I  can  work  it  off  on  you 
economically,  because  I  don't  have  to  make  it  suit  me.  It  may 
not  suit  you,  but  that  isn't  any  matter;  I'm  not  writing  it  for 
that.   I  have  used  you  as  an  equilibrium -restorer  more  than 

1235 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


once  in  my  time,  &  shall  continue,  I  guess.  I  would  like  to  use 
Mr.  Rogers,  &  he  is  plenty  good-natured  enough,  but  it  wouldn't 
be  fair  to  keep  him  rescuing  me  from  my  leather-headed  business 
snarls  &  make  him  read  interminable  bile-irruptions  besides;  I 
can't  use  Howells,  he  is  busy  &  old  &  lazy,  &  won't  stand  it; 
I  dasn't  use  Clara,  there's  things  I  have  to  say  which  she 
wouldn't  put  up  with— a  very  dear  little  ashcat,  but  has  claws. 
And  so — you're  It. 


A  MARK  TWAIN  NOTE  CONCERNING  CERTAIN  WRITINGS  INTENDED 
FOR  PUBLICATION  ONLY  AFTER  HIS  LIFETIME 


Digitized  by  Google 


ccxxxv 


A  SUMMER  IN  NEW  HAMPSHIRE 


E  took  for  the  summer  a  house  at  Dublin,  New 


1  1  Hampshire,  the  home  of  Henry  Copley  Greene, 
Lone  Tree  Hill,  on  the  Monadnock  slope.  It  was  in  a 
lovely  locality,  and  for  neighbors  there  were  artists,  liter- 
ary people,  and  those  of  kindred  pursuits,  among  them 
a  number  of  old  friends.  Colonel  Higginson  had  a  place 
near  by,  and  Abbott  H.  Thayer,  the  painter,  and  George 
de  Forest  Brush,  and  the  Raphael  Pumpelly  family,  and 
many  more. 

Colonel  Higginson  wrote  Clemens  a  letter  of  welcome 
as  soon  as  the  news  got  out  that  he  was  going  to  Dublin ; 
and  Clemens,  answering,  said: 

I  early  learned  that  you  would  be  my  neighbor  in  the  summer 
&  I  rejoiced,  recognizing  in  you  &  your  family  a  large  asset.  I 
hope  for  frequent  intercourse  between  the  two  households.  I 
shall  have  my  youngest  daughter  with  me.  The  other  one  will 
go  from  the  rest-cure  in  this  city  to  the  rest-cure  in  Norfolk, 
Connecticut,  &  we  shall  not  see  her  before  autumn.  We  have 
not  seen  her  since  the  middle  of  October. 

Jean,  the  younger  daughter,  went  to  Dublin  &  saw  the  house 
&  came  back  charmed  with  it.  I  know  the  Thayers  of  old — 
manifestly  there  is  no  lack  of  attractions  up  there.  Mrs.  Thayer 
and  I  were  shipmates  in  a  wild  excursion  perilously  near  40 
years  ago. 

Aldrich  was  here  half  an  hour  ago,  like  a  breeze  from  over 
the  fields,  with  the  fragrance  still  upon  his  spirit.  I  am  tired 
waiting  for  that  man  to  get  old. 


"37 


Digitized  by 


MARK  TWAIN 


They  went  to  Dublin  in  May,  and  became  at  once  a 
part  of  the  summer  colony  which  congregated  there. 
There  was  much  going  to  and  fro  among  the  different 
houses,  pleasant  afternoons  in  the  woods,  mountain-climb- 
ing for  Jean,  and  everywhere  a  spirit  of  fine,  unpretentious 
comradeship. 

The  Copley  Greene  house  was  romantically  situated, 
with  a  charming  outlook.   Clemens  wrote  to  Twichell: 

We  like  it  here  in  the  mountains,  in  the  shadows  of  Monadnock. 
It  is  a  woody  solitude.  We  have  no  near  neighbors.  We  have 
neighbors  and  I  can  see  their  houses  scattered  in  the  forest  dis- 
tances, for  we  live  on  a  hill.  I  am  astonished  to  find  that  I  have 
known  8  of  these  14  neighbors  a  long  time;  10  years  is  the 
shortest;  then  seven  beginning  with  25  years  &  running  up  to 
37  years'  friendship.  It  is  the  most  remarkable  thing  I  ever 
heard  of. 

This  letter  was  written  in  July,  and  he  states  in  it  that 
he  has  turned  out  one  hundred  thousand  words  of  a  large 
manuscript.  It  was  a  fantastic  tale  entitled  "  3,000  Years 
among  the  Microbes,"  a  sort  of  scientific  revel — or 
revelry — the  autobiography  of  a  microbe  that  had  been 
once  a  man,  and  through  a  failure  in  a  biological  experi- 
ment transformed  into  a  cholera  germ  when  the  experi- 
menter was  trying  to  turn  him  into  a  bird.  His  habitat 
was  the  person  of  a  disreputable  tramp  named  Blitzowski, 
a  human  continent  of  vast  areas,  with  seething  microbic 
nations  and  fantastic  life  problems.  It  was  a  satire,  of 
course — Gulliver's  Lilliput  outdone — a  sort  of  scientific, 
socialistic,  mathematical  jamboree. 

He  tired  of  it  before  it  reached  completion,  though  not 
before  it  had  attained  the  proportions  of  a  book  of  size. 
As  a  whole  it  would  hardly  have  added  to  his  reputation, 
though  it  is  not  without  fine  and  humorous  passages, 
and  certainly  not  without  interest.  Its  chief  mission 
was  to  divert  him  mentally  that  summer  during  those 

1238 


Digitized  by  Google 


A   SUMMER  IN  NEW  HAMPSHIRE 


3,000  Y**K* 


MARK  TWAIN'S  SUGGESTED  TITLE-PAGE  FOR  HIS  MICROBE  BOOK 

days  and  nights  when  he  would  otherwise  have  been  alone 
and  brooding  upon  his  loneliness.1 

His  inability  to  reproduce  faces  in  his  mind's  eye  he 
mourned  as  an  increasing  calamity.  Photographs  were 
lifeless  things,  and  when  he  tried  to  conjure  up  the  faces 
of  his  dead  they  seemed  to  drift  farther  out  of  reach; 

1  For  extracts  from  "3,000  Years  among  the  Microbes"  sec 
Appendix  V\  at  the  end  of  this  work. 

1239 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


but  now  and  then  kindly  sleep  brought  to  him  something 
out  of  that  treasure-house  where  all  our  realities  are  kept 
for  us  fresh  and  fair,  perhaps  for  a  day  when  we  may  claim 
them  again.   Once  he  wrote  to  Mrs.  Crane: 

Susy  dear, — I  have  had  a  lovely  dream.  Livy,  dressed  in 
black,  was  sitting  up  in  my  bed  (here)  at  my  right  &  looking 
as  young  &  sweet  as  she  used  to  when  she  was  in  health.  She 
said,"  What  is  the  name  of  your  sweet  sister?"  I  said,"  Pamela." 
"Oh  yes,  that  is  it,  1  thought  it  was— (naming  a  name  which 
has  escaped  me)  won't  you  write  it  down  for  me?"  I  reached 
eagerly  for  a  pen  &  pad,  laid  my  hands  upon  both,  then  said 
to  myself,  "It  is  only  a  dream,"  and  turned  back  sorrowfully 
&  there  she  was  still.  The  conviction  flamed  through  me  that 
our  lamented  disaster  was  a  dream,  &  this  a  reality.  I  said, 
"How  blessed  it  is,  how  blessed  it  is,  it  was  all  a  dream,  only  a 
dream!"  She  only  smiled  and  did  not  ask  what  dream  I  meant, 
which  surprised  me.  She  leaned  her  head  against  mine  &  kept 
saying,  "I  was  perfectly  sure  it  was  a  dream;  I  never  would  have 
believed  it  wasn't."  I  think  she  said  several  things,  but  if  so 
they  are  gone  from  my  memory.  I  woke  &  did  not  know  I  had 
been  dreaming.  She  was  gone.  I  wondered  how  she  could  go 
without  my  knowing  it,  but  I  did  not  spend  any  thought  upon 
that.  I  was  too  busy  thinking  of  how  vivid  &  real  was  the  dream 
that  we  had  lost  her,  &  how  unspeakably  blessed  it  was  to  find 
that  it  was  not  true  &  that  she  was  still  ours  &  with  us. 

He  had  the  orchestrelle  moved  to  Dublin,  although  it 
was  no  small  undertaking,  for  he  needed  the  solace  of  its 
harmonies;  and  so  the  days  passed  along,  and  he  grew 
stronger  in  body  and  courage  as  his  grief  drifted  farther 
behind  him.  Sometimes,  in  the  afternoon  or  in  the  eve- 
ning, when  the  neighbors  had  come  in  for  a  little  while, 
he  would  walk  up  and  down  and  talk  in  his  old,  marvelous 
way  of  all  the  things  on  land  and  sea,  of  the  past  and 
of  the  future,  "Of  Providence,  foreknowledge,  will,  and 
fate, "  of  the  friends  he  had  known  and  of  the  things  he 
had  done,  of  the  sorrow  and  absurdities  of  the  world. 

1240 


Digitized  by  Go< 


A  SUMMER  IN  NEW  HAMPSHIRE 


It  was  the  same  old  scintillating,  incomparable  talk  of 
which  Howells  once  said: 

"We  shall  never  know  its  like  again.  When  he  dies 
it  will  die  with  him." 

It  was  during  the  summer  at  Dublin  that  Clemens  and 
Rogers  together  made  up  a  philanthropic  ruse  on  Twichell. 
Twichell,  through  his  own  prodigal  charities,  had  fallen 
into  debt,  a  fact  which  Rogers  knew.  Rogers  was  a  man 
who  concealed  his  philanthropies  when  he  could,  and  he 
performed  many  of  them  of  which  the  world  will  never 
know.    In  this        he  said: 

"Clemens,  I  want  to  help  Twichell  out  of  his  financial 
difficulty.  I  will  supply  the  money  and  you  will  do  the 
giving.   Twichell  must  think  it  comes  from  you." 

Clemens  agreed  to  this  on  the  condition  that  he  be 
permitted  to  leave  a  record  of  the  matter  for  his  chil- 
dren, so  that  he  would  not  appear  in  a  false  light  to  them, 
and  that  Twichell  should  learn  the  truth  of  the  gift, 
sooner  or  later.  So  the  deed  was  done,  and  Twichell  and 
his  wife  lavished  their  thanks  upon  Clemens,  who,  with 
his  wife,  had  more  than  once  been  their  benefactors, 
making  the  deception  easy  enough  now.  Clemens  writhed 
under  these  letters  of  gratitude,  and  forwarded  them  to 
Clara  in  Norfolk,  and  later  to  Rogers  himself.  He  pre- 
tended to  take  great  pleasure  in  this  part  of  the  con- 
spiracy, but  it  was  not  an  unmixed  delight.  To  Rogers 
he  wrote: 

I  wanted  her  [Clara]  to  see  what  a  generous  father  she's  got. 
I  didn't  tell  her  it  was  you,  but  by  and  by  I  want  to  tell  her,  when 
I  have  your  consent;  then  I  shall  want  her  to  remember  the 
letters.  I  want  a  record  there,  for  my  Life  when  I  am  dead,  & 
must  be  able  to  furnish  the  facts  about  the  Relief -of-Lucknow- 
Twichell  in  case  I  fall  suddenly,  before  I  get  those  facts  with 
your  consent,  before  the  Twichells  themselves. 

I  read  those  letters  with  immense  pride!  I  recognized  that 
I  had  scored  one  good  deed  for  sure  on  my  halo  account.  I 

1241 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


haven't  had  anything  that  tasted  so  good  since  the  stolen 
watermelon. 

P.  S. — I  am  hurrying  them  off  to  you  because  I'dasn't  read  them 
again!  I  should  blush  to  my  heels  to  fill  up  with  this  unearned 
gratitude  again,  pouring  out  of  the  thankful  hearts  of  those 
poor  swindled  people  who  do  not  suspect  you,  but  honestly 
believe  I  gave  that  money. 

Mr.  Rogers  hastily  replied: 

Mv  dear  Clemens, — The  letters  are  lovely.  Don't  breathe. 
They  are  so  happy!  It  would  be  a  crime  to  let  them  think  that 
you  have  in  any  way  deceived  them.  I  can  keep  still.  You 
must.  I  am  sending  you  all  traces  of  the  crime,  so  that  you  may 
look  innocent  and  tell  the  truth,  as  you  usually  do  when  you  think 
you  can  escape  detection.    Don't  get  rattled. 

Seriously.  You  have  done  a  kindness.  You  are  proud  of  it, 
I  know.  You  have  made  your  friends  happy,  and  you  ought 
to  be  so  glad  as  to  cheerfully  accept  reproof  from  your  conscience. 
Joe  Wadsworth  and  I  once  stole  a  goose  and  gave  it  to  a  poor 
widow  as  a  Christmas  present.  No  crime  in  that.  I  always 
put  my  counterfeit  money  on  the  plate.  "The  passer  of  the 
sasser"  always  smiles  at  me  and  I  get  credit  for  doing  generous 
things.  But  seriously  again,  if  you  do  feel  a  little  uncomfortable 
wait  until  I  see  you  before  you  tell  anybody.  Avoid  cultivating 
misery.  I  am  trying  to  loaf  ten  solid  days.  We  do  hope  to  see 
you  soon. 

The  secret  was  kept,  and  the  matter  presently  (and 
characteristically)  passed  out  of  Clemens's  mind  alto- 
gether. He  never  remembered  to  tell  Twichell,  and  it 
is  revealed  here,  according  to  his  wish. 

The  Russian-Japanese  war  was  in  progress  that  sum- 
mer, and  its  settlement  occurred  in  August.  The  terms 
of  it  did  not  please  Mark  Twain.  When  a  newspaper 
correspondent  asked  him  for  an  expression  of  opinion  on 
the  subject  he  wrote: 

Russia  was  on  the  highroad  to  emancipation  from  an  insane 
and  intolerable  slavery.  I  was  hoping  there  would  be  no  peace 
until  Russian  liberty  was  safe.   I  think  that  this  was  a  holy 

1242 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  SUMMER  IN  NEW  HAMPSHIRE 


war,  in  the  best  and  noblest  sense  of  that  abused  term,  and  that 
no  war  was  ever  charged  with  a  higher  mission. 

I  think  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  that  mission  is  now  defeated 
and  Russia's  chain  riveted;  this  time  to  stay.  I  think  the  Tsar 
will  now  withdraw  the  small  humanities  that  have  been  forced 
from  him,  and  resume  his  medieval  barbarisms  with  a  relieved 
spirit  and  an  immeasurable  joy.  I  think  Russian  liberty  has  had 
its  last  chance  and  has  lost  it. 

I  think  nothing  has  been  gained  by  the  peace  that  is  remotely 
comparable  to  what  has  been  sacrificed  by  it.  One  more  battle 
would  have  abolished  the  waiting  chains  of  billions  upon  billions 
of  unborn  Russians,  and  I  wish  it  could  have  been  fought.  I 
hope  1  am  mistaken,  yet  in  all  sincerity  I  believe  that  this  peace 
is  entitled  to  rank  as  the  most  conspicuous  disaster  in  political 
history. 

It  was  the  wisest  public  utterance  on  the  subject — the 
deep,  resonant  note  of  truth  sounding  amid  a  clamor  of  fool- 
ish joy-bells.  It  was  the  message  of  a  seer — the  prophecy 
of  a  sage  who  sees  with  the  clairvoyance  of  knowledge 
and  human  understanding.  Clemens,  a  few  days  later, 
was  invited  by  Colonel  Harvey  to  dine  with  Baron  Rosen 
and  M.  Sergius  Witte;  but  an  attack  of  his  old  malady- 
rheumatism — prevented  his  acceptance.  His  telegram 
of  declination  apparently  pleased  the  Russian  officials, 
for  Witte  asked  permission  to  publish  it,  and  declared 
that  he  was  going  to  take  it  home  to  show  to  the  Tsar. 
It  was  as  follows: 

To  Colonel  Harvey, — I  am  still  a  cripple,  otherwise  I  should 
be  more  than  glad  of  this  opportunity  to  meet  the  illustrious 
magicians  who  came  here  equipped  with  nothing  but  a  pen,  & 
with  it  have  divided  the  honors  of  the  war  with  the  sword.  It 
is  fair  to  presume  that  in  thirty  centuries  history  will  not  get 
done  in  admiring  these  men  who  attempted  what  the  world  re- 
garded as  the  impossible  &  achieved  it.  Mark  Twain. 

But  this  was  a  modified  form.  His  original  draft  would 
perhaps  have  been  less  gratifying  to  that  Russian  em- 
bassy.  It  read: 

"43 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


To  Colonel  Harvey, — I  am  still  a  cripple,  otherwise  I  should 
be  more  than  glad  of  this  opportunity  to  meet  those  illustrious 
magicians  who  with  the  pen  have  annulled,  obliterated,  & 
abolished  every  high  achievement  of  the  Japanese  sword  and 
turned  the  tragedy  of  a  tremendous  war  into  a  gay  &  blithesome 
comedy.  If  I  may,  let  me  in  all  respect  and  honor  salute  them 
as  my  fellow-humorists,  I  taking  third  place,  as  becomes  one  who 
was  not  born  to  modesty,  but  by  diligence  &  hard  work  is 
acquiring  it.  Mark. 

There  was  still  another  form,  brief  and  expressive: 

Dear  Colonel, — No,  this  is  a  love-feast;  when  you  call  a 
lodge  of  sorrow  send  for  me.  Mark. 

Clemens's  war  sentiment  was  given  the  widest  news- 
paper circulation,  and  brought  him  many  letters,  most  of 
them  applauding  his  words.  Charles  Francis  Adams 
wrote  him: 

It  attracted  my  attention  because  it  so  exactly  expresses  the 
views  I  have  myself  all  along  entertained. 

And  this  was  the  gist  of  most  of  the  expressed  sentiments 
which  came  to  him. 

Clemens  wrote  a  number  of  things  that  summer,  among 
them  a  little  essay  entitled,  "The  Privilege  of  the  Grave" 
— that  is  to  say,  free  speech.  He  was  looking  forward, 
he  said,  to  the  time  when  he  should  inherit  that  privilege, 
when  some  of  the  things  he  had  said,  written  and  laid 
away,  could  be  published  without  damage  to  his  friends  or 
family.  An  article  entitled,  "  Interpreting  the  Deity,"  he 
counted  as  among  the  things  to  be  uttered  when  he  had 
entered  into  that  last  great  privilege.  It  is  an  article 
on  the  reading  of  signs  and  auguries  in  all  ages  to  discover 
the  intentions  of  the  Almighty,  with  historical  examples 
of  God's  judgments  and  vindications.  Here  is  a  fair 
specimen.  It  refers  to  the  chronicle  of  Henry  Hunting- 
ton: 

1244 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  SUMMER  IN  NEW  HAMPSHIRE 


All  through  this  book  Henry  exhibits  his  familiarity  with  the 
intentions  of  God  and  with  the  reasons  for  the  intentions. 
Sometimes — very  often,  in  fact — the  act  follows  the  intention 
after  such  a  wide  interval  of  time  that  one  wonders  how  Henry 
could  fit  one  act  out  of  a  hundred  to  one  intention,  and  get  the 
thing  right  every  time,  when  there  was  such  abundant  choice 
among  acts  and  intentions.  Sometimes  a  man  offends  the 
Deity  with  a  crime,  and  is  punished  for  it  thirty  years  later; 
meantime  he  has  committed  a  million  other  crimes:  no  matter, 
Henry  can  pick  out  the  one  that  brought  the  worms.  Worms 
were  generally  used  in  those  days  for  the  slaying  of  particularly 
wicked  people.  This  has  gone  out  now,  but  in  the  old  times  it 
was  a  favorite.  It  always  indicated  a  case  of  "wrath."  For 
instance: 

"The  just  God  avenging  Robert  Fitzhildebrand's  perfidity,  a 
worm  grew  in  his  vitals  which,  gradually  gnawing  its  way  through 
his  intestines,  fattened  on  the  abandoned  man  till,  tortured  with 
excruciating  sufferings  and  venting  himself  in  bitter  moans,  he 
was  by  a  fitting  punishment  brought  to  his  end"  (p.  400). 

It  was  probably  an  alligator,  but  we  cannot  tell;  we  only  know 
it  was  a  particular  breed,  and  only  used  to  convey  wrath.  Some 
authorities  think  it  was  an  ichthyosaurus,  but  there  is  much 
doubt. 

The  entire  article  is  in  this  amusing,  satirical  strain, 
and  might  well  enough  be  printed  to-day.  It  is  not 
altogether  clear  why  it  was  withheld,  even  then. 

He  finished  his  Eve's  Diary  that  summer,  and  wrote  a 
story  which  was  originally  planned  to  oblige  Mrs.  Minnie 
Maddera  Fiske,  to  aid  her  in  a  crusade  against  bull- 
fighting in  Spain.  Mrs.  Fiske  wrote  him  that  she  had  read 
his  dog  story,  written  against  the  cruelties  of  vivisection, 
and  urged  him  to  do  something  to  save  the  horses  that, 
after  faithful  service,  were  sacrificed  in  the  bull-ring. 
Her  letter  closed: 

I  have  lain  awake  nights  very  often  wondering  if  I  dare  ask 
you  to  write  a  story  of  an  old  horse  that  is  finally  given  over 
to  the  bull-ring.  The  story  you  would  write  would  do  more 
good  than  all  the  laws  we  are  trying  to  have  made  and  enforced 

1 245 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals  in  Spain.   We  would 
translate  and  circulate  the  story  in  that  country.   I  have  won- 
dered  if  you  would  ever  write  it. 
With  most  devoted  homage,  Sincerely  yours, 

Minnie  Maddern  Fiske. 

Clemens  promptly  replied: 

Dear  Mrs.  Fiske, — I  shall  certainly  write  the  story.  But  I 
may  not  get  it  to  suit  me,  in  which  case  it  will  go  in  the  fire. 
Later  I  will  try  it  again — &  yet  again — &  again.  I  am  used  to 
this.  It  has  taken  me  twelve  years  to  write  a  short  story — the 
shortest  one  I  ever  wrote,  I  think.1  So  do  not  be  discouraged;  I 
will  stick  to  this  one  in  the  same  way. 

Sincerely  yours, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 

It  was  an  inspiring  subject,  and  he  began  work  on  it 
immediately.  Within  a  month  from  the  time  he  received 
Mrs.  Fiske's  letter  he  had  written  that  pathetic,  heart- 
breaking little  story,  "A  Horse's  Tale,"  and  sent  it  to 
Harper's  Magazine  for  illustration.  In  a  letter  written 
to  Mr.  Duneka  at  the  time,  he  tells  of  his  interest  in  the 
narrative,  and  adds: 

This  strong  interest  is  natural,  for  the  heroine  is  my  small 
daughter  Susy,  whom  we  lost.  It  was  not  intentional — it  was  a 
good  while  before  I  found  it  out,  so  I  am  sending  you  her  picture 
to  use — &  to  reproduce  with  photographic  exactness  the  unsur- 
passable expression  &  all.  May  you  find  an  artist  who  has  lost 
an  idol. 

He  explains  how  he  had  put  in  a  good  deal  of  work, 
with  his  secretary,  on  the  orchestrelle  to  get  the  bugle-calls. 

We  are  to  do  these  theatricals  this  evening  with  a  couple  of 
neighbors  for  audience,  and  then  pass  the  hat. 

It  is  not  one  of  Mark  Twain's  greatest  stories,  but  its 
pathos  brings  the  tears,  and  no  one  can  read  it  without 

1  Probably  41  The  Death  Disk." 
1246 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  SUMMER  IN  NEW  HAMPSHIRE 


indignation  toward  the  custom  which  it  was  intended 
to  oppose.  When  it  was  published,  a  year  later,  Mrs. 
Fiske  sent  him  her  grateful  acknowledgments,  and  asked 
permission  to  have  it  printed  for  pamphlet  circulation 
in  Spain. 

A  number  of  more  or  less  notable  things  happened  in 
this,  Mark  Twain's  seventieth  year.  There  was  some 
kind  of  a  reunion  going  on  in  California,  and  he  was 
variously  invited  to  attend.  Robert  Fulton,  of  Nevada, 
was  appointed  a  committee  of  one  to  invite  him  to  Reno 
for  a  great  celebration  which  was  to  be  held  there.  Clem- 
ens replied  that  he  remembered,  as  if  it  were  but  yester- 
day, when  he  had  disembarked  from  the  Overland  stage 
in  front  of  the  Ormsby  Hotel,  in  Carson  City,  and  told 
how  he  would  like  to  accept  the  invitation. 

If  I  were  a  few  years  younger  I  would  accept  it,  and  promptly, 
and  I  would  go.  I  would  let  somebody  else  do  the  oration,  but 
as  for  me  I  would  talk — just  talk.  I  would  renew  my  youth; 
and  talk — and  talk— and  talk — and  have  the  time  of  my  life  I 
I  would  march  the  unforgotten  and  unforgetable  antiques  by, 
and  name  their  names,  and  give  them  reverent  hail  and  farewell 
as  they  passed — Goodman,  McCarthy,  Gillis,  Curry,  Baldwin, 
Winters,  Howard,  Nye,  Stewart,  Neely  Johnson,  Hal  Clayton, 
North,  Root — and  my  brother,  upon  whom  be  peace  1 — and  then 
the  desperadoes,  who  made  life  a  joy,  and  the  "slaughter-house," 
a  precious  possession:  Sam  Brown,  Farmer  Pete,  Bill  Mayfield, 
Six-fingered  Jake,  Jack  Williams,  and  the  rest  of  the  crimson 
discipleship,  and  so  on,  and  so  on.  Believe  me,  I  would  start 
a  resurrection  it  would  do  you  more  good  to  look  at  than  the 
next  one  will,  if  you  go  on  the  way  you  are  going  now. 

Those  were  the  days  I — those  old  ones.  They  will  come  no 
more;  youth  will  come  no  more.  They  were  so  full  to  the  brim 
with  the  wine  of  life;  there  have  been  no  others  like  them.  It 
chokes  me  up  to  think  of  them.  Would  you  like  me  to  come  out 
there  and  cry?   It  would  not  beseem  my  white  head. 

Good-by.  I  drink  to  you  all.  Have  a  good  time— and  take 
an  old  man's  blessing. 

1247 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

In  reply  to  another  invitation  from  H.  H.  Bancroft, 
of  San  Francisco,  he  wrote  that  his  wandering  days  were 
over,  and  that  it  was  his  purpose  to  sit  by  the  fire  for 
the  rest  of  his  "remnant  of  life." 

A  man  who,  like  me,  is  going  to  strike  70  on  the  30th  of  next 
November  has  no  business  to  be  flitting  around  the  way  Howells 
does — that  shameless  old  fictitious  butterfly.  (But  if  he  comes 
don't  tell  him  I  said  it,  for  it  would  hurt  him  &  I  wouldn't  brush 
a  flake  of  powder  from  his  wing  for  anything.  I  only  say  it  in 
envy  of  his  indestructible  youth  anyway.  Howells  will  be  88 
in  October.) 

And  it  was  either  then  or  on  a  similar  occasion  that  he 
replied  after  this  fashion: 

I  have  done  more  for  San  Francisco  than  any  other  of  its  old 
residents.   Since  I  left  there  it  has  increased  in  population  fully 

300,000.   I  could  have  done  more— I  could  have  gone  earlier  

it  was  suggested. 

Which,  by  the  way,  is  a  perfect  example  of  Mark 
Twain's  humorous  manner,  the  delicately  timed  pause, 
and  the  afterthought.  Most  humorists  would  have  been 
contented  to  end  with  the  statement,  "I  could  have  gone 
earlier."  Only  Mark  Twain  could  have  added  that  final 
exquisite  touch — "it  was  suggested." 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXXVI 


AT  PIER  70 

M\RK  TWAIN  was  nearing  seventy,  the  scriptural 
limitation  of  life,  and  the  returns  were  coming  in. 
Some  one  of  the  old  group  was  dying  all  the  time.  The 
roll-call  returned  only  a  scattering  answer.  Of  his  oldest 
friends,  Charles  Henry  Webb,  John  Hay,  and  Sir  Henry 
Irving,  all  died  that  year.  When  Hay  died  Clemens  gave 
this  message  to  the  press: 

I  am  deeply  grieved,  &  I  mourn  with  the  nation  this  loss  which 
is  irreparable.  My  friendship  with  Mr.  Hay  &  my  admiration 
of  him  endured  38  years  without  impairment. 

It  was  only  a  little  earlier  that  he  had  written  Hay  an 
anonymous  letter,  a  copy  of  which  he  preserved.  It  here 
follows: 

Dear  &  honored  Sir, — I  never  hear  any  one  speak  of  you 
&  of  your  long  roll  of  illustrious  services  in  other  than  terms 
of  pride  &  praise— &  out  of  the  heart.  I  think  I  am  right  in 
believing  you  to  be  the  only  man  in  the  civil  service  of  the 
country  the  cleanness  of  whose  motives  is  never  questioned  by 
any  citizen,  &  whose  acts  proceed  always  upon  a  broad  &  high 
plane,  never  by  accident  or  pressure  of  circumstance  upon  a 
narrow  or  low  one.  There  are  majorities  that  are  proud  of  more 
than  one  of  the  nation's  great  servants,  but  I  believe,  &  I  think 
I  know,  that  you  are  the  only  one  of  whom  the  entire  nation  is 
proud.   Proud  &  thankful. 

Name  &  address  are  lacking  here,  &  for  a  purpose:  to  leave 
you  no  chance  to  make  my  words  a  burden  to  you  and  a  reproach 

1249 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


to  me,  who  would  lighten  your  burdens  if  I  could,  not  add  to 
them. 

Irving  died  in  October,  and  Clemens  ordered  a  wreath 
for  his  funeral.    To  MacAlister  he  wrote: 

I  profoundly  grieve  over  Irving's  death.  It  is  another 
reminder.  My  section  of  the  procession  has  but  a  little  way  to 
go.   I  could  not  be  very  sorry  if  I  tried. 

Mark  Twain,  nearing  seventy,  felt  that  there  was  not 
much  left  for  him  to  celebrate;  and  when  Colonel  Harvey 
proposed  a  birthday  gathering  in  his  honor,  Clemens 
suggested  a  bohemian  assembly  over  beer  and  sandwiches 
in  some  snug  place,  with  Howells,  Henry  Rogers,  Twichell, 
Dr.  Rice,  Dr.  Edward  Quintard,  Augustus  Thomas,  and 
such  other  kindred  souls  as  were  still  left  to  answer  the 
call.  But  Harvey  had  something  different  in  view: 
something  more  splendid  even  than  the  sixty-seventh 
birthday  feast,  more  pretentious,  indeed,  than  any  former 
literary  gathering.  He  felt  that  the  attainment  of  seventy 
years  by  America's  most  distinguished  man  of  letters  and 
private  citizen  was  a  circumstance  which  could  not  be 
moderately  or  even  modestly  observed.  The  date  was  set 
five  days  later  than  the  actual  birthday — that  is  to  say, 
on  December  5th,  in  order  that  it  might  not  conflict 
with  the  various  Thanksgiving  holidays  and  occasions. 
Delmonico's  great  room  was  chosen  for  the  celebration 
of  it,  and  invitations  were  sent  out  to  practically  every 
writer  of  any  distinction  in  America,  and  to  many  abroad. 
Of  these  nearly  two  hundred  accepted,  while  such  as  could 
not  come  sent  pathetic  regrets. 

What  an  occasion  it  was!  The  flower  of  American 
literature  gathered  to  do  honor  to  its  chief.  The  whole 
atmosphere  of  the  place  seemed  permeated  with  his  pres- 
ence, and  when  Colonel  Harvey  presented  William  Dean 
Howells,  and  when  Howells  had  read  another  double- 

1250 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


AT  PIER  70 

barreled  sonnet,  and  introduced  the  guest  of  the  evening 
with  the  words,  "I  will  not  say,  'O  King,  live  forever,' 
but,  4 O  King,  live  as  long  as  you  like!' "  and  Mark  Twain 
rose,  his  snow-white  hair  gleaming  above  that  brilliant 
assembly,  it  seemed  that  a  world  was  speaking  out  in  a 
voice  of  applause  and  welcome.  With  a  great  tumult 
the  throng  rose,  a  billow  of  life,  the  white  handkerchiefs 
flying  foam-like  on  its  crest.  Those  who  had  gathered 
there  realized  that  it  was  a  mighty  moment,  not  only  in 
his  life  but  in  theirs.  They  were  there  to  see  this  supreme 
embodiment  of  the  American  spirit  as  he  scaled  the 
mountain-top.  He,  too,  realized  the  drama  of  that  mo- 
ment— the  marvel  of  it — and  he  must  have  flashed  a  swift 
panoramic  view  backward  over  the  long  way  he  had  come, 
to  stand,  as  he  had  himself  once  expressed  it,  "for  a  single, 
splendid  moment  on  the  Alps  of  fame  outlined  against 
the  sun."  He  must  have  remembered;  for  when  he  came 
to  speak  he  went  back  to  the  very  beginning,  to  his  very 
first  banquet,  as  he  called  it,  when,  as  he  said,  "I  hadn't 
any  hair;  I  hadn't  any  teeth;  I  hadn't  any  clothes." 
He  sketched  the  meagerness  of  that  little  hamlet  which 
had  seen  his  birth,  sketched  it  playfully,  delightfully,  so 
that  his  hearers  laughed  and  shouted;  but  there  was  al- 
ways a  tenderness  under  it  all,  and  often  the  tears  were 
not  far  beneath  the  surface.  He  told  of  his  habits  of  life, 
how  he  had  attained  seventy  years  by  simply  sticking 
to  a  scheme  of  living  which  would  kill  anybody  else; 
how  he  smoked  constantly,  loathed  exercise,  and  had  no 
other  regularity  of  habits.  Then,  at  last,  he  reached  that 
wonderful,  unforgetable  close: 

Threescore  years  and  tent 

It  is  the  scriptural  statute  of  limitations.  After  that  you  owe 
no  active  duties;  for  you  the  strenuous  life  is  over.  You  are  a 
time-expired  man,  to  use  Kipling's  military  phrase:  You  have 
served  your  term,  well  or  less  well,  and  you  are  mustered  out. 
You  are  become  an  honorary  member  of  the  republic,  you  are 

1251 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


emancipated,  compulsions  are  not  for  you,  nor  any  bugle-call 
but  "lights  out."  You  pay  the  time-worn  duty  bills  if  you 
choose,  or  decline  if  you  prefer — and  without  prejudice — for  they 
are  not  legally  collectable. 

The  previous-engagement  plea,  which  in  forty  years  has  cost 
you  so  many  twinges,  you  can  lay  aside  forever;  on  this  side  of 
the  grave  you  will  never  need  it  again.  If  you  shrink  at  thought 
of  night,  and  winter,  and  the  late  homecomings  from  the  ban- 
quet and  the  lights  and  laughter  through  the  deserted  streets — 
a  desolation  which  would  not  remind  you  now,  as  for  a  generation 
it  did,  that  your  friends  are  sleeping  and  you  must  creep  in 
a-tiptoe  and  not  disturb  them,  but  would  only  remind  you  that 
you  need  not  tiptoe,  you  can  never  disturb  them  more — if  you 
shrink  at  the  thought  of  these  things  you  need  only  reply,  "Your 
invitation  honors  me  and  pleases  me  because  you  still  keep  me 
in  your  remembrance,  but  I  am  seventy;  seventy,  and  would 
nestle  in  the  chimney-corner,  and  smoke  my  pipe,  and  read  my 
book,  and  take  my  rest,  wishing  you  well  in  all  affection,  and 
that  when  you  in  your  turn  shall  arrive  at  Pier  70  you  may 
step  aboard  your  waiting  ship  with  a  reconciled  spirit,  and  lay 
your  course  toward  the  sinking  sun  with  a  contented  heart." 

The  tears  that  had  been  lying  in  wait  were  not  restrained 
now.  If  there  were  any  present  who  did  not  let  them 
flow  without  shame,  who  did  not  shout  their  applause 
from  throats  choked  with  sobs,  the  writer  of  these  lines 
failed  to  see  them  or  to  hear  of  them.  There  was  not 
one  who  was  ashamed  to  pay  the  great  tribute  of  tears. 

Many  of  his  old  friends,  one  after  another,  rose  to  tell 
their  love  for  him — Brander  Matthews,  Cable,  Kate 
Douglas  Riggs,  Gilder,  Carnegie,  Bangs,  Bacheller— 
they  kept  it  up  far  into  the  next  morning.  No  other 
arrival  at  Pier  70  ever  awoke  a  grander  welcome. 


Digitized  by  Go< 


CCXXXVII 


AFTERMATH 


HE  announcement  of  the  seventieth  birthday  dinner 


1  had  precipitated  a  perfect  avalanche  of  letters,  which 
continued  to  flow  in  until  the  news  accounts  of  it  precipi- 
tated another  avalanche.  The  carriers'  bags  were  stuffed 
with  greetings  that  came  from  every  part  of  the  world, 
from  every  class  of  humanity.  They  were  all  full 
of  love  and  tender  wishes.  A  card  signed  only  with 
initials  said:  "God  bless  your  old  sweet  soul  for  having 


Aldrich,  who  could  not  attend  the  dinner,  declared  that 
all  through  the  evening  he  had  been  listening  in  his  mind 
to  a  murmur  of  voices  in  the  hall  at  Delmonico's.  A 
group  of  English  authors  in  London  combined  in  a  cable 
of  congratulations.  Anstey,  Alfred  Austin,  Balfour,  Bar- 
rie,  Bryce,  Chesterton,  Dobson,  Doyle,  Gosse,  Hardy, 
Hope,  Jacobs,  Kipling,  Lang,  Parker,  Tenniel,  Watson, 
and  Zangwill  were  among  the  signatures. 

Helen  Keller  wrote: 

And  you  are  seventy  years  old?  Or  is  the  report  exaggerated, 
like  that  of  your  death  ?  I  remember,  when  I  saw  you  last,  at  the 
house  of  dear  Mr.  Hutton,  in  Princeton,  you  said: 

"  If  a  man  is  a  pessimist  before  he  is  forty-eight  he  knows  too 
much.  If  he  is  an  optimist  after  he  is  forty-eight  he  knows  too 
little." 

Now  we  know  you  are  an  optimist,  and  nobody  would  dare  to 
accuse  one  on  the  "seven-terraced  summit"  of  knowing  little. 
So  probably  you  are  not  seventy  after  all,  but  only  forty-seven  1 


lived. 


1 253 


Digitized  by  Go< 


MARK  TWAIN 


Helen  Keller  was  right.  Mark  Twain  was  not  a 
pessimist  in  his  heart,  but  only  by  premeditation.  It  was 
his  observation  and  his  logic  that  led  him  to  write  those 
things  that,  even  in  their  bitterness,  somehow  conveyed 
that  spirit  of  human  sympathy  which  is  so  closely  linked 
to  hope.    To  Miss  Keller  he  wrote: 

"Oh,  thank  you  for  your  lovely  words!" 

He  was  given  another  birthday  celebration  that  month 
— this  time  by  the  Society  of  Illustrators.  Dan  Beard, 
president,  was  also  toast-master;  and  as  he  presented 
Mark  Twain  there  was  a  trumpet-note,  and  a  lovely  girl, 
costumed  as  Joan  of  Arc,  entered  and,  approaching  him, 
presented  him  with  a  laurel  wreath.  It  was  planned  and 
carried  out  as  a  surprise  to  him,  and  he  hardly  knew  for 
the  moment  whether  it  was  a  vision  or  a  reality.  He 
was  deeply  affected,  so  much  so  that  for  several  moments 
he  could  not  find  his  voice  to  make  any  acknowledg- 
ments. 

Clemens  was  more  than  ever  sought  now,  and  he  re- 
sponded when  the  cause  was  a  worthy  one.  He  spoke 
for  the  benefit  of  the  Russian  sufferers  at  the  Casino  on 
December  18th.  Madame  Sarah  Bernhardt  was  also 
there,  and  spoke  in  French.  He  followed  her,  declaring 
that  it  seemed  a  sort  of  cruelty  to  inflict  upon  an  audience 
our  rude  English  after  hearing  that  divine  speech  flowing 
in  that  lucid  Gallic  tongue. 

It  has  always  been  a  marvel  to  me — that  French  language; 
it  has  always  been  a  puzzle  to  me.  How  beautiful  that  language 
is!   How  expressive  it  seems  to  be!   How  full  of  grace  it  is  I 

And  when  it  comes  from  lips  like  those,  how  eloquent  and  how 
limpid  it  is!  And,  oh,  I  am  always  deceived — I  always  think 
I  am  going  to  understand  it. 

It  is  such  a  delight  to  me,  such  a  delight  to  me,  to  meet 
Madame  Bernhardt,  and  laugh  hand  to  hand  and  heart  to  heart 
with  her. 

I  have  seen  her  play,  as  we  all  have,  and,  oh,  that  is  divine; 

1254 


Digitized  by  Google 


AFTERMATH 


but  I  have  always  wanted  to  know  Madame  Bernhardt  herself 
— her  fiery  self.   I  have  wanted  to  know  that  beautiful  character. 

Why,  she  is  the  youngest  person  I  ever  saw,  except  myself — 
for  I  always  feel  young  when  I  come  in  the  presence  of  young 
people. 

And  truly,  at  seventy,  Mark  Twain  was  young,  his 
manner,  his  movement,  his  point  of  view — these  were 
all,  and  always,  young. 

A  number  of  palmists  about  that  time  examined  im- 
pressions of  his  hand  without  knowledge  as  to  the  owner, 
and  they  all  agreed  that  it  was  the  hand  of  a  man  with 
the  characteristics  of  youth,  with  inspiration,  and  en- 
thusiasm, and  sympathy — a  lover  of  justice  and  of  the 
sublime.  They  all  agreed,  too,  that  he  was  a  deep 
philosopher,  though,  alas!  they  likewise  agreed  that  he 
lacked  the  sense  of  humor,  which  is  not  as  surprising  as 
it  sounds,  for  with  Mark  Twain  humor  was  never  mere 
fun-making  nor  the  love  of  it;  rather  it  was  the  flower 
of  his  philosophy — its  bloom  and  fragrance. 

When  the  fanfare  and  drum-beat  of  his  birthday  honors 
had  passed  by,  and  a  moment  of  calm  had  followed,  Mark 
Twain  set  down  some  reflections  on  the  new  estate  he 
had  achieved.  The  little  paper,  which  forms  a  perfect 
pendant  to  the  "Seventieth  Birthday  Speech,'*  here 
follows: 

OLD  AGE 

I  think  it  likely  that  people  who  have  not  been  here  will  be 
interested  to  know  what  it  is  like.  I  arrived  on  the  thirtieth 
of  November,  fresh  from  carefree  &  frivolous  69,  &  was  disap- 
pointed. 

There  is  nothing  novel  about  it,  nothing  striking,  nothing  to 
thrill  you  &  make  your  eye  glitter  &  your  tongue  cry  out,  "Oh, 
it  is  wonderful,  perfectly  wonderful!"  Yes,  it  is  disappointing. 
You  say,  "Is  this  it? — this?  after  all  this  talk  and  fuss  of  a 
thousand  generations  of  travelers  who  have  crossed  this  frontier 

1255 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


&  looked  about  them  &  told  what  they  saw  &  felt?  Why,  it 
looks  just  like  69." 

And  that  is  true.  Also  it  is  natural,  for  you  have  not  come 
by  the  fast  express;  you  have  been  lagging  &  dragging  across 
the  world's  continents  behind  oxen;  when  that  is  your  pace  one 
country  melts  into  the  next  one  so  gradually  that  you  are  not 
able  to  notice  the  change;  70  looks  like  69;  69  looked  like  68; 
68  looked  like  67 — &  so  on  back  &  back  to  the  beginning.  If 
you  climb  to  a  summit  &  look  back — ah,  then  you  see! 

Down  that  far-reaching  perspective  you  can  make  out  each 
country  &  climate  that  you  crossed,  all  the  way  up  from  the  hot 
equator  to  the  ice-summit  where  you  are  perched.  You  can 
make  out  where  Infancy  verged  into  Boyhood;  Boyhood  into 
down-lipped  Youth;  Youth  into  bearded,  indefinite  Young- 
Manhood;  indefinite  Young-Manhood  into  definite  Manhood; 
definite  Manhood,  with  large,  aggressive  ambitions,  into  sobered 
&  heedful  Husbandhood  &  Fatherhood;  these  into  troubled  & 
foreboding  Age,  with  graying  hair;  this  into  Old  Age,  white- 
headed,  the  temple  empty,  the  idols  broken,  the  worshipers 
in  their  graves,  nothing  left  but  You,  a  remnant,  a  tradition, 
belated  fag-end  of  a  foolish  dream,  a  dream  that  was  so  in- 
geniously dreamed  that  it  seemed  real  all  the  time;  nothing  left 
but  You,  center  of  a  snowy  desolation,  perched  on  the  ice-sum- 
mit, gazing  out  over  the  stages  of  that  long  trek  &  asking 
Yourself,  "Would  you  do  it  again  if  you  had  the  chance?" 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXXVIII 


THE  WRITER  MEETS  MARK  TWAIN 

WE  have  reached  a  point  in  this  history  where  the 
narrative  becomes  mainly  personal,  and  where,  at 
the  risk  of  inviting  the  charge  of  egotism,  the  form  of  the 
telling  must  change. 

It  was  at  the  end  of  iooi  that  I  first  met  Mark  Twain 
—at  The  Players  Club  on  the  night  when  he  made  the 
Founder's  Address  mentioned  in  an  earlier  chapter. 

I  was  not  able  to  arrive  in  time  for  the  address,  but  as 
I  reached  the  head  of  the  stairs  I  saw  him  sitting  on  the 
couch  at  the  dining-room  entrance,  talking  earnestly  to 
some  one,  who,  as  I  remember  it,  did  not  enter  into  my 
consciousness  at  all.  I  saw  only  that  crown  of  white 
hair,  that  familiar  profile,  and  heard  the  slow  modulations 
of  his  measured  speech.  I  was  surprised  to  see  how  frail 
and  old  he  looked.  Prom  his  pictures  I  had  conceived 
him  different.  I  did  not  realize  that  it  was  a  temporary 
condition  due  to  a  period  of  poor  health  and  a  succession 
of  social  demands.  I  have  no  idea  how  long  I  stood  there 
watching  him.  He  had  been  my  literary  idol  from  child- 
hood, as  he  had  been  of  so  many  others;  more  than  that, 
for  the  personality  in  his  work  had  made  him  nothing 
less  than  a  hero  to  his  readers. 

He  rose  presently  to  go,  and  came  directly  toward  me. 
A  year  before  I  had  done  what  new  writers  were  always 
doing — I  had  sent  him  a  book  I  had  written,  and  he  had 
done  what  he  was  always  doing — acknowledged  it  with 
a  kindly  letter.   I  made  my  thanks  now  an  excuse  for 

1257 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


addressing  him.  It  warmed  me  to  hear  him  say  that  he 
remembered  the  book,  though  at  the  time  I  confess  I 
thought  it  doubtful.  Then  he  was  gone;  but  the  mind 
and  ear  had  photographed  those  vivid  first  impressions 
that  remain  always  clear. 

It  was  the  following  spring  that  I  saw  him  again — at 
an  afternoon  gathering,  and  the  memory  of  that  occasion 
is  chiefly  important  because  I  met  Mrs.  Clemens  there 
for  the  only  time,  and  like  all  who  met  her,  however 
briefly,  felt  the  gentleness  and  beauty  of  her  spirit.  I 
think  I  spoke  with  her  at  two  or  three  different  moments 
during  the  afternoon,  and  on  each  occasion  was  impressed 
with  that  feeling  of  acquaintanceship  which  we  immedi- 
ately experience  with  those  rare  beings  whose  souls  are 
wells  of  human  sympathy  and  free  from  guile.  Bret 
Harte  had  just  died,  and  during  the  afternoon  Mr. 
Clemens  asked  me  to  obtain  for  him  some  item  con- 
cerning the  obsequies. 

It  was  more  than  three  years  before  I  saw  him  again. 
Meantime,  a  sort  of  acquaintance  had  progressed.  I  had 
been  engaged  in  writing  the  life  of  Thomas  Nast,  the 
cartoonist,  and  I  had  found  among  the  material  a  number 
of  letters  to  Nast  from  Mark  Twain.  I  was  naturally 
anxious  to  use  those  fine  characteristic  letters,  and  I  wrote 
him  for  his  consent.  He  wished  to  see  the  letters,  and 
the  permission  that  followed  was  kindness  itself.  His 
admiration  of  Nast  was  very  great. 

It  was  proper,  under  the  circumstances,  to  send  him 
a  copy  of  the  book  when  it  appeared;  but  that  was  1904, 
his  year  of  sorrow  and  absence,  and  the  matter  was  post- 
poned. Then  came  the  great  night  of  his  seventieth 
birthday  dinner,  with  an  opportunity  to  thank  him  in 
person  for  the  use  of  the  letters.  There  was  only  a  brief 
exchange  of  words,  and  it  was  the  next  day,  I  think,  that 
I  sent  him  a  copy  of  the  book.  It  did  not  occur  to  me 
that  I  should  hear  of  it  again. 

1258 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  WRITER  MEETS  MARK  TWAIN 

We  step  back  a  moment  here.  Something  more  than  a 
year  earlier,  through  a  misunderstanding,  Mark  Twain's 
long  association  with  The  Players  had  been  severed.  It 
was  a  sorrow  to  him,  and  a  still  greater  sorrow  to  the 
club.  There  was  a  movement  among  what  is  generally 
known  as  the  "Round  Table  Group" — because  its  mem- 
bers have  long  had  a  habit  of  lunching  at  a  large,  round 
table  in  a  certain  window — to  bring  him  back  again. 
David  Munro,  associate  editor  of  the  North  American 
Review — "  David,"  a  man  well  loved  of  men — and  Robert 
Reid,  the  painter,  prepared  this  simple  document: 

To 

MARK  TWAIN 
from 

THE  CLANSMEN 

Will  ye  no  come  back  again? 
Will  ye  no  come  back  again? 
Better  lo'ed  ye  canna  be, 
Will  ye  no  come  back  again? 

It  was  signed  by  Munro  and  by  Reid  and  about  thirty 
others,  and  it  touched  Mark  Twain  deeply.  The  lines 
had  always  moved  him.   He  wrote: 

To  Robt.  Reid  &  the  others — 

Well-beloved,— Surely  those  lovely  verses  went  to  Prince 
Charlie's  heart,  if  he  had  one,  &  certainly  they  have  gone  to 
mine.  I  shall  be  glad  &  proud  to  come  back  again  after  such  a 
moving  &  beautiful  compliment  as  this  from  comrades  whom 
I  have  loved  so  long.  I  hope  you  can  poll  the  necessary  vote; 
I  know  you  will  try,  at  any  rate.  It  will  be  many  months  before 
I  can  foregather  with  you,  for  this  black  border  is  not  per- 
functory, not  a  convention;  it  symbolizes  the  loss  of  one  whose 
memory  is  the  only  thing  I  worship. 

It  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  thank  you — &  words  could  not 
deliver  what  I  feel,  anyway.  I  will  put  the  contents  of  your 
envelope  in  the  small  casket  where  I  keep  the  things  which  have 
become  sacred  to  me.  S.  L.  C. 

1259 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


So  the  matter  was  temporarily  held  in  abeyance  until 
he  should  return  to  social  life.  At  the  completion  of  his 
seventieth  year  the  club  had  taken  action,  and  Mark 
Twain  had  been  brought  back,  not  in  the  regular  order 
of  things,  but  as  an  honorary  life  member  without  dues 
or  duties.  There  was  only  one  other  member  of  this  class, 
Sir  Henry  Irving. 

The  Players,  as  a  club,  does  not  give  dinners.  What- 
ever is  done  in  that  way  is  done  by  one  or  more  of  the 
members  in  the  private  dining-room,  where  there  is  a 
single  large  table  that  holds  twenty-five,  even  thirty 
when  expanded  to  its  limit.  That  room  and  that  table 
have  mingled  with  much  distinguished  entertainment, 
also  with  history.  Henry  James  made  his  first  after- 
dinner  speech  there,  for  one  thing — at  least  he  claimed  it 
was  his  first,  though  this  is  by  the  way. 

A  letter  came  to  me  which  said  that  those  who  had 
signed  the  plea  for  the  Prince's  return  were  going  to  wel- 
come him  in  the  private  dining-room  on  the  5th  of  Jan- 
uary. It  was  not  an  invitation,  but  a  gracious  privilege. 
I  was  in  New  York  a  day  or  two  in  advance  of  the  date, 
and  I  think  David  Munro  was  the  first  person  I  met  at 
The  Players.  As  he  greeted  me  his  eyes  were  eager 
with  something  he  knew  I  would  wish  to  hear.  He  had 
been  delegated  to  propose  the  dinner  to  Mark  Twain, 
and  had  found  him  propped  up  in  bed,  and  noticed  on 
the  table  near  him  a  copy  of  the  Nast  book.  I  suspect 
that  Munro  had  led  him  to  speak  of  it,  and  that  the  result 
had  lost  nothing  filtered  through  that  radiant  benev- 
olence of  his. 

The  night  of  January  5,  1906,  remains  a  memory  apart 
from  other  dinners.  Brander  Matthews  presided,  and 
Gilder  was  there,  and  Frank  Millet  and  Willard  Metcalf 
and  Robert  Reid,  and  a  score  of  others;  some  of  them  are 
dead  now,  David  Munro  among  them.  It  so  happened  that 
my  seat  was  nearly  facing  the  guest  of  the  evening,  who, 

1260 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  WRITER  MEETS  MARK  TWAIN 


by  custom  of  The  Players,  is  placed  at  the  side  and  not 
at  the  end  of  the  long  table.  He  was  no  longer  frail  and 
thin,  as  when  I  had  first  met  him.  He  had  a  robust, 
rested  look;  his  complexion  had  the  tints  of  a  miniature 
painting.  Lit  by  the  glow  of  the  shaded  candles,  relieved 
against  the  dusk  richness  of  the  walls,  he  made  a  picture 
of  striking  beauty.  One  could  not  take  his  eyes  from 
it,  and  to  one  guest  at  least  it  stirred  the  farthest  mem- 
ories. I  suddenly  saw  the  interior  of  a  farm-house  sitting- 
room  in  the  Middle  West,  where  I  had  first  heard  uttered 
the  name  of  Mark  Twain,  and  where  night  after  night  a 
group  gathered  around  the  evening  lamp  to  hear  the  tale 
of  the  first  pilgrimage,  which,  to  a  boy  of  eight,  had  seemed 
only  a  wonderful  poem  and  fairy  tale.  To  Charles  Har- 
vey Genung,  who  sat  next  to  me,  I  whispered  something 
of  this,  and  how,  during  the  thirty-six  years  since  then, 
no  other  human  being  to  me  had  meant  quite  what  Mark 
Twain  had  meant — in  literature,  in  life,  in  the  ineffable 
thing  which  means  more  than  either,  and  which  we  call 
"inspiration,"  for 'lack  of  a  truer  word.  Now  here  he 
was,  just  across  the  table.  It  was  the  fairy  tale  come 
true. 
Genung  said: 

"  You  should  write  his  life." 

His  remark  seemed  a  pleasant  courtesy,  and  was  put 
aside  as  such.  When  he  persisted  I  attributed  it  to  the 
general  bloom  of  the  occasion,  and  a  little  to  the  wine, 
maybe,  for  the  dinner  was  in  its  sweetest  stage  just  then 
— that  happy,  early  stage  when  the  first  glass  of  cham- 
pagne, or  the  second,  has  proved  its  quality.  He  urged, 
in  support  of  his  idea,  the  word  that  Munro  had  brought 
concerning  the  Nast  book,  but  nothing  of  what  he  said 
kindled  any  spark  of  hope.  I  could  not  but  believe  that 
some  one  with  a  larger  equipment  of  experience,  personal 
friendship,  and  abilities  had  already  been  selected  for 
the  task.  By  and  by  the  speaking  began — delightful,  in- 
iii. — 10  1 261 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


timate  speaking  in  that  restricted  circle — and  the  matter 
went  out  of  my  mind. 

When  the  dinner  had  ended,  and  we  were  drifting  about 
the  table  in  general  talk,  I  found  an  opportunity  to  say  a 
word  to  the  guest  of  the  evening  about  his  Joan  of  Arc, 
which  I  had  recently  re-read.  To  my  happiness,  he  de- 
tained me  while  he  told  me  the  long-ago  incident  which 
had  led  to  his  interest,  not  only  in  the  martyred  girl,  but 
in  all  literature.  I  think  we  broke  up  soon  after,  and 
descended  to  the  lower  rooms.  At  any  rate,  I  presently 
found  the  faithful  Charles  Genung  privately  reasserting  to 
me  the  proposition  that  I  should  undertake  the  biography 
of  Mark  Twain.  Perhaps  it  was  the  brief  sympathy  es- 
tablished by  the  name  of  Joan  of  Arc,  perhaps  it  was  only 
Genung 's  insistent  purpose — his  faith,  if  I  may  be  per- 
mitted the  word.  Whatever  it  was,  there  came  an  im- 
pulse, in  the  instant  of  bidding  good-by  to  our  guest  of 
honor,  which  prompted  me  to  say: 

"May  I  call  to  see  you,  Mr.  Clemens,  some  day?" 

And  something — dating  from  the  primal  atom,  I  sup- 
pose— prompted  him  to  answer: 

"Yes,  come  soon." 

This  was  on  Wednesday  night,  or  rather  on  Thursday 
morning,  for  it  was  past  midnight,  and  a  day  later  I  made 
an  appointment  with  his  secretary  to  call  on  Saturday. 

I  can  say  truly  that  I  set  out  with  no  more  than  the 
barest  hope  of  success,  and  wondering  if  I  should  have 
the  courage,  when  I  saw  him,  even  to  suggest  the  thought 
in  my  mind.  I  know  I  did  not  have  the  courage  to  con- 
fide in  Genung  that  I  had  made  the  appointment — I  was 
so  sure  it  would  fail.  I  arrived  at  2 1  Fifth  Avenue  and 
was  shown  into  that  long  library  and  drawing-room  com- 
bined, and  found  a  curious  and  deep  interest  in  the  books 
and  ornaments  along  the  shelves  as  I  waited.  Then  I 
was  summoned,  and  I  remember  ascending  the  stairs, 
wondering  why  I  had  come  on  so  futile  an  errand,  and 

1262 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  WRITER  MEETS  MARK  TWAIN 


trying  to  think  of  an  excuse  to  offer  for  having  come 
at  all. 

He  was  propped  up  in  bed— in  that  stately  bed— sitting, 
as  was  his  habit,  with  his  pillows  placed  at  the  foot,  so 
that  he  might  have  always  before  him  the  rich,  carved 
beauty  of  its  headboard.  He  was  delving  through  a 
copy  of  Huckleberry  Finn,  in  search  of  a  paragraph  con- 
cerning which  some  random  correspondent  had  asked  ex- 
planation. He  was  commenting  unfavorably  on  this  corre- 
spondent and  on  miscellaneous  letter-writing  in  general. 
He  pushed  the  cigars  toward  me,  and  the  talk  of  these 
matters  ran  along  and  blended  into  others  more  or  less 
personal.  By  and  by  I  told  him  what  so  many  thousands 
had  told  him  before:  what  he  had  meant  to  me,  recalling 
the  childhood  impressions  of  that  large,  black-and-gilt- 
covered  book  with  its  wonderful  pictures  and  adventures 
— the  Mediterranean  pilgrimage.  Very  likely  it_bored  him 
— he  had  heard  it  so  often — and  he  was  willing  enough, 
I  dare  say,  to  let  me  change  the  subject  and  thank  him  for 
the  kindly  word  which  David  Munro  had  brought.  I  do 
not  remember  what  he  said  then,  but  I  suddenly  found  my- 
self suggesting  that  out  of  his  encouragement  had  grown 
a  hope — though  certainly  it  was  something  less — that  I 
might  some  day  undertake  a  book  about  himself.  I 
expected  the  chapter  to  end  at  this  point,  and  his  silence 
which  followed  seemed  long  and  ominous. 

He  said,  at  last,  that  at  various  times  through  his  life 
he  had  been  preparing  some  autobiographical  matter, 
but  that  he  had  tired  of  the  undertaking,  and  had  put 
it  aside.  He  added  that  he  had  hoped  his  daughters 
would  one  day  collect  his  letters;  but  that  a  biography — 
a  detailed  story  of  personality  and  performance,  of  suc- 
cess and  failure — was  of  course  another  matter,  and  that 
for  such  a  work  no  arrangement  had  been  made.  He  may 
have  added  one  or  two  other  general  remarks;  then,  turn- 
ing those  piercing  agate-blue  eyes  directly  upon  me,  he  said : 

1263 


Digitized  by  Go< 


MARK  TWAIN 


"When  would  you  like  to  begin?" 

There  was  a  dresser  with  a  large  mirror  behind  him. 
I  happened  to  catch  my  reflection  in  it,  and  I  vividly 
recollect  saying  to  it  mentally:  "This  is  not  true;  it 
is  only  one  of  many  similar  dreams."  But  even  in  a 
dream  one  must  answer,  and  I  said: 

"Whenever  you  like.    I  can  begin  now." 

He  was  always  eager  in  any  new  undertaking. 

"Very  good,"  he  said.  "The  sooner,  then,  the  better. 
Let's  begin  while  we  are  in  the  humor.  The  longer  you 
postpone  a  thing  of  this  kind  the  less  likely  you  are  ever 
to  get  at  it." 

This  was  on  Saturday,  as  I  have  stated.  I  mentioned 
that  my  family  was  still  in  the  country,  and  that  it  would 
require  a  day  or  two  to  get  established  in  the  city.  I 
asked  if  Tuesday,  January  9th,  would  be  too  soon  to 
begin.  He  agreed  that  Tuesday  would  do,  and  inquired 
something  about  my  plan  of  work.  Of  course  I  had 
formed  nothing  definite,  but  I  said  that  in  similar 
undertakings  a  part  of  the  work  had  been  done  with  a 
stenographer,  who  had  made  the  notes  while  I  prompted 
the  subject  to  recall  a  procession  of  incidents  and  episodes, 
to  be  supplemented  with  every  variety  of  material  ob- 
tainable— letters  and  other  documentary  accumulations. 
Then  he  said: 

"  I  think  I  should  enjoy  dictating  to  a  stenographer, 
with  some  one  to  prompt  me  and  to  act  as  audience. 
The  room  adjoining  this  was  fitted  up  for  my  study.  My 
manuscripts  and  notes  and  private  books  and  many  of 
my  letters  are  there,  and  there  are  a  trunkful  or  two  of 
such  things  in  the  attic.  I  seldom  use  the  room  myself. 
I  do  my  writing  and  reading  in  bed.  I  will  turn  that 
room  over  to  you  for  this  work.  Whatever  you  need  will 
be  brought  to  you.  We  can  have  the  dictation  here  in  the 
morning,  and  you  can  put  in  the  rest  of  the  day  to  suit  your- 
self. You  can  have  a  key  and  come  and  go  as  you  please." 

1264 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  WRITER  MEETS  MARK  TWAIN 


That  was  always  his  way.  He  did  nothing  by  halves; 
nothing  without  unquestioning  confidence  and  prodigality. 
He  got  up  and  showed  me  the  lovely  luxury  of  the  study, 
with  its  treasures  of  material.  I  did  not  believe  it  true 
yet.  It  had  all  the  atmosphere  of  a  dream,  and  I  have 
no  distinct  recollection  of  how  I  came  away.  When  I  re- 
turned to  The  Players  and  found  Charles  Harvey  Genung 
there,  and  told  him  about  it,  it  is  quite  certain  that  he 
perjured  himself  when  he  professed  to  believe  it  true  and 
pretended  that  he  was  not  surprised. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXXXIX 


WORKING  WITH  MARK  TWAIN 

ON  Tuesday,  January  9,  1906,  I  was  on  hand  with  a 
capable  stenographer — Miss  Josephine  Hobby,  who 
had  successively,  and  successfully,  held  secretarial  posi- 
tions with  Charles  Dudley  Warner  and  Mrs.  Mary  Mapes 
Dodge,  and  was  therefore  peculiarly  qualified  for  the  work 
in  hand. 

Clemens,  meantime,  had  been  revolving  our  plans  and 
adding  some  features  of  his  own.  He  proposed  to  double 
the  value  and  interest  of  our  employment  by  letting  his 
dictations  continue  the  form  of  those  earlier  autobio- 
graphical chapters,  begun  with  Redpath  in  1885,  and 
continued  later  in  Vienna  and  at  the  Villa  Quarto.  He 
said  he  did  not  think  he  could  follow  a  definite  chrono- 
logical program;  that  he  would  like  to  wander  about, 
picking  up  this  point  and  that,  as  memory  or  fancy 
prompted,  without  any  particular  biographical  order. 
It  was  his  purpose,  he  declared,  that  his  dictations  should 
not  be  published  until  he  had  been  dead  a  hundred  years 
or  more — a  prospect  which  seemed  to  give  him  an 
especial  gratification.1 

He  wished  to  pay  the  stenographer,  and  to  own  these 
memoranda,  he  said,  allowing  me  free  access  to  them  for 

1  As  early  as  October,  1900,  he  had  proposed  to  Harper  &  Brothers 
a  contract  for  publishing  his  personal  memoirs  at  the  expiration  of 
one  hundred  years  from  date,  and  letters  covering  the  details  were 
exchanged  with  Mr.  Rogers.  The  document,  however,  was  not 
completed. 

1266 


Digitized  by  Google 


WORKING  WITH  MARK  TWAIN 

any  material  I  might  find  valuable.  I  could  also  sug- 
gest subjects  for  dictation,  and  ask  particulars  of  any 
special  episode  or  period.  I  believe  this  covered  the 
whole  arrangement,  which  did  not  require  more  than  five 
minutes,  and  we  set  to  work  without  further  prologue. 

I  ought  to  state  that  he  was  in  bed  when  we  arrived, 
and  that  he  remained  there  during  almost  all  of  these 
earlier  dictations,  clad  in  a  handsome  silk  dressing-gown 
of  rich  Persian  pattern,  propped  against  great  snowy  pil- 
lows. He  loved  this  loose  luxury  and  ease,  and  found  it 
conducive  to  thought.  On  the  little  table  beside  him, 
where  lay  his  cigars,  papers,  pipes,  and  various  knick- 
knacks,  shone  a  reading-lamp,  making  more  brilliant  the 
rich  coloring  of  his  complexion  and  the  gleam  of  his 
shining  hair.  There  was  daylight,  too,  but  it  was  north 
light,  and  the  winter  days  were  dull.  Also  the  walls  of 
the  room  were  a  deep,  unreflecting  red,  and  his  eyes  were 
getting  old.  The  outlines  of  that  vast  bed  blending  into 
the  luxuriant  background,  the  whole  focusing  to  the 
striking  central  figure,  remain  in  my  mind  to-day — a 
picture  of  classic  value. 

He  dictated  that  morning  some  matters  connected  with 
the  history  of  the  Comstock  mine;  then  he  drifted  back 
to  his  childhood,  returning  again  to  the  more  modern 
period,  and  closed,  I  think,  with  some  comments  on 
current  affairs.  It  was  absorbingly  interesting ;  his  quaint, 
unhurried  fashion  of  speech,  the  unconscious  movement  of 
his  hands,  the  play  of  his  features  as  his  fancies  and 
phrases  passed  in  mental  review  and  were  accepted  or 
waved  aside.  We  were  watching  one  of  the  great  literary 
creators  of  his  time  in  the  very  process  of  his  architecture. 
We  constituted  about  the  most  select  audience  in  the 
world  enjoying  what  was,  likely  enough,  its  most  remark- 
able entertainment.  When  he  turned  at  last  and  in- 
quired the  time  we  were  all  amazed  that  two  hours  and 
more  had  slipped  away. 

1267 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"And  how  much  I  have  enjoyed  it!"  he  said.  "It  is 
the  ideal  plan  for  this  kind  of  work.  Narrative  writing 
is  always  disappointing.  The  moment  you  pick  up  a 
pen  you  begin  to  lose  the  spontaneity  of  the  personal 
relation,  which  contains  the  very  essence  of  interest. 
With  shorthand  dictation  one  can  talk  as  if  he  were  at 
his  own  dinner-table — always  a  most  inspiring  place.  I 
expect  to  dictate  all  the  rest  of  my  life,  if  you  good  people 
are  willing  to  come  and  listen  to  it." 

The  dictations  thus  begun  continued  steadily  from 
week  to  week,  and  always  with  increasing  charm.  We 
never  knew  what  he  was  going  to  talk  about,  and  it  was 
seldom  that  he  knew  until  the  moment  of  beginning; 
then  he  went  drifting  among  episodes,  incidents,  and 
periods  in  his  irresponsible  fashion;  the  fashion  of  table- 
conversation,  as  he  said,  the  methodless  method  of  the 
human  mind.  It  was  always  delightful,  and  always 
amusing,  tragic,  or  instructive,  and  it  was  likely  to  be 
one  of  these  at  one  instant,  and  another  the  next.  I  felt 
myself  the  most  fortunate  biographer  in  the  world,  as 
undoubtedly  I  was,  though  not  just  in  the  way  that  I  first 
imagined. 

It  was  not  for  several  weeks  that  I  began  to  realize 
that  these  marvelous  reminiscences  bore  only  an  atmos- 
pheric relation  to  history;  that  they  were  aspects  of 
biography  rather  than  its  veritable  narrative,  and  built 
largely — sometimes  wholly — from  an  imagination  that, 
with  age,  had  dominated  memory,  creating  details, 
even  reversing  them,  yet  with  a  perfect  sincerity 
of  purpose  on  the  part  of  the  narrator  to  set  down 
the  literal  and  unvarnished  truth.  It  was  his  constant 
effort  to  be  frank  and  faithful  to  fact,  to  record,  to 
confess,  and  to  condemn  without  stint.  If  you  wanted 
to  know  the  worst  of  Mark  Twain  you  had  only  to 
ask  him  for  it.  He  would  give  it,  to  the  last  syllable — 
worse  than  the  worst,  for  his  imagination  would  magnify 

1268 


Digitized  by  Google 


WORKING  WITH  MARK  TWAIN 


it  and  adorn  it  with  new  iniquities,  and  if  he  gave  it  again, 
or  a  dozen  times,  he  would  improve  upon  it  each  time, 
until  the  thread  of  history  was  almost  impossible  to  trace 
through  the  marvel  of  that  fabric;  and  he  would  do  the 
same  for  another  person  just  as  willingly.  Those  vividly 
real  personalities  that  he  marched  and  countermarched 
before  us  were  the  most  convincing  creatures  in  the  world, 
the  most  entertaining,  the  most  excruciatingly  humorous, 
or  wicked,  or  tragic;  but,  alas,  they  were  not  always  safe 
to  include  in  a  record  that  must  bear  a  certain  semblance 
to  history.  They  often  disagreed  in  their  performance, 
and  even  in  their  characters,  with  the  documents  in  the 
next  room,  as  I  learned  by  and  by  when  those  records, 
disentangled,  began  to  rebuild  the  structure  of  the  years. 

His  gift  of  dramatization  had  been  exercised  too  long 
to  be  discarded  now.  The  things  he  told  of  Mrs.  Clemens 
and  of  Susy  were  true — marvelously  and  beautifully  true, 
in  spirit  and  in  aspect — and  the  actual  detail  of  these  mat- 
tered little  in  such  a  record.  The  rest  was  history  only 
as  Roughing  It  is  history,  or  the  Tramp  Abroad;  that  is 
to  say,  it  was  fictional  history,  with  fact  as  a  starting- 
point.  In  a  prefatory  note  to  these  volumes  we  have 
quoted  Mark  Twain's  own  lovely  and  whimsical  admission, 
made  once  when  he  realized  his  deviations : 

"When  I  was  younger  I  could  remember  anything, 
whether  it  happened  or  not;  but  I  am  getting  old,  and  soon 
I  shall  remember  only  the  latter." 

At  another  time  he  paraphrased  one  of  Josh  Billings's 
sayings  in  the  remark:  "It  isn't  so  astonishing,  the  num- 
ber of  things  that  I  can  remember,  as  the  number  of 
things  I  can  remember  that  aren't  so." 

I  do  not  wish  to  say,  by  any  means,  that  his  so-called 
autobiography  is  a  mere  fairy  tale.  It  is  far  from  that. 
It  is  amazingly  truthful  in  the  character-picture  it  repre- 
sents of  the  man  himself.  It  is  only  not  reliable — and  it 
is  sometimes  even  unjust — as  detailed  history.    Yet,  curi- 

1269 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


ously  enough,  there  were  occasional  chapters  that  were 
photographically  exact,  and  fitted  precisely  with  the  more 
positive,  if  less  picturesque,  materials.  It  is  also  true  that 
such  chapters  were  likely  to  be  episodes  intrinsically  so 
perfect  as  to  not  require  the  touch  of  art. 

In  the  talks  which  we  usually  had,  when  the  dicta- 
tions were  ended  and  Miss  Hobby  had  gone,  I  gathered 
much  that  was  of  still  greater  value.  Imagination  was 
temporarily  dispossessed,  as  it  were,  and,  whether  ex- 
pounding some  theory  or  summarizing  some  event,  he 
cared  little  for  literary  effect,  and  only  for  the  idea  and 
the  moment  immediately  present. 

It  was  at  such  times  that  he  allowed  me  to  make  those 
inquiries  we  had  planned  in  the  beginning,  and  which 
apparently  had  little  place  in  the  dictations  themselves. 
Sometimes  I  led  him  to  speak  of  the  genesis  of  his  various 
books,  how  he  had  come  to  write  them,  and  I  think  there 
was  not  a  single  case  where  later  I  did  not  find  his  memory 
of  these  matters  almost  exactly  in  accord  with  the  let- 
ters of  the  moment,  written  to  Howells  or  Twichell,  or  to 
some  member  of  his  family.  Such  reminiscence  was 
usually  followed  by  some  vigorous  burst  of  human  phi- 
losophy, often  too  vigorous  for  print,  too  human,  but  as 
dazzling  as  a  search-light  in  its  revelation. 

1 1  was  during  this  earlier  association  that  he  propounded, 
one  day,  his  theory  of  circumstance,  already  set  down, 
that  inevitable  sequence  of  cause  and  effect,  beginning 
with  the  first  act  of  the  primal  atom.  He  had  been  dic- 
tating that  morning  his  story  of  the  clairvoyant  dream 
which  preceded  his  brother's  death,  and  the  talk  of  fore- 
knowledge had  continued.  I  said  one  might  logically 
conclude  from  such  a  circumstance  that  the  future  was 
a  fixed  quantity. 

"As  absolutely  fixed  as  the  past,"  he  said;  and  added 
the  remark  already  quoted.1  A  little  later  he  continued: 

'Chap,  lxxv,  p.  397. 
1270 


Digitized  by  Google 


WORKING  WITH  MARK  TWAIN 

^  "  Even  the  Almighty  Himself  cannot  check  or  change  that 
sequence  of  events  once  it  is  started.  It  is  a  fixed  quantity, 
and  a  part  of  the  scheme  is  a  mental  condition  during  cer- 
tain moments — usually  of  sleep — when  the  mind  may 
reach  out  and  grasp  some  of  the  acts  which  are  still  to 
come." 

It  was  a  new  angle  to  me — a  line  of  logic  so  simple  and 
so  utterly  convincing  that  I  have  remained  unshaken  in 
it  to  this  day.  I  have  never  been  able  to  find  any  answer 
to  it,  nor  any  one  who  could  even  attempt  to  show  that 
the  first  act  of  the  first  created  atom  did  not  strike  the 
key-note  of  eternity. 

At  another  time,  speaking  of  the  idea  that  God  works 
through  man,  he  burst  out: 

"Yes,  of  course,  just  about  as  much  as  a  man  works 
through  his  microbes!" 

He  had  a  startling  way  of  putting  things  like  that,  and 
it  left  not  much  to  say. 

I  was  at  this  period  interested  a  good  deal  in  mental 
healing,  and  had  been  treated  for  neurasthenia  with  grat- 
ifying results.  Like  most  of  the  world,  I  had  assumed, 
from  his  published  articles,  that  he  condemned  Christian 
Science  and  its  related  practices  out  of  hand.  When  I 
confessed,  rather  reluctantly,  one  day,  the  benefit  I  had 
received,  he  surprised  me  by  answering: 

44  Of  course  you  have  been  benefited.  Christian  Science 
is  humanity's  boon.  Mother  Eddy  deserves  a  place  in 
the  Trinity  as  much  as  any  member  of  it.  She  has 
organized  and  made  available  a  healing  principle  that  for 
two  thousand  years  has  never  been  employed,  except  as 
the  merest  kind  of  guesswork.  She  is  the  benefactor  of 
the  age." 

It  seemed  strange,  at  the  time,  to  hear  him  speak  in 
this  way  concerning  a  practice  of  which  he  was  generally 
regarded  as  the  chief  public  antagonist.  It  was  another 
angle  of  his  many-sided  character. 

1271 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXL 


THE  DEFINITION  OP  A  GENTLEMAN 

THAT  was  a  busy  winter  for  him  socially.  He  was 
constantly  demanded  for  this  thing  and  that — for 
public  gatherings,  dinners — everywhere  he  was  a  central 
figure.  Once  he  presided  at  a  Valentine  dinner  given  by 
some  Players  to  David  Munro.  He  had  never  presided 
at  a  dinner  before,  he  said,  and  he  did  it  in  his  own  way, 
which  certainly  was  a  taking  one,  suitable  to  that  carefree 
company  and  occasion — a  real  Scotch  occasion,  with  the 
Munro  tartan  everywhere,  the  table  banked  with  heather, 
and  a  wild  piper  marching  up  and  down  in  the  anteroom, 
blowing  savage  airs  in  honor  of  Scotland's  gentlest  son. 

An  important  meeting  of  that  winter  was  at  Carnegie 
Hall  —  a  great  gathering  which  had  assembled  for  the 
purpose  of  aiding  Booker  T.  Washington  in  his  work  for 
the  welfare  of  his  race.  The  stage  and  the  auditorium  were 
thronged  with  notables.  Joseph  H.  Choate  and  Mark 
Twain  presided,  and  both  spoke ;  also  Robert  C.  Ogden  and 
Booker  T.  Washington  himself.  It  was  all  fine  and  inter- 
esting. Choate's  address  was  ably  given,  and  Mark  Twain 
was  at  his  best.  He  talked  of  politics  and  of  morals — 
public  and  private — how  the  average  American  citizen 
was  true  to  his  Christian  principles  three  hundred  and 
sixty-three  days  in  the  year,  and  how  on  the  other  two 
days  of  the  year  he  left  those  principles  at  home  and  went 
to  the  tax-office  and  the  voting-booths,  and  did  his  best 
to  damage  and  undo  his  whole  year's  faithful  and  right- 
eous work. 

1272 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DEFINITION  OP  A  GENTLEMAN 


I  used  to  be  an  honest  man,  but  I  am  crumbling— no,  I  have 
crumbled.  When  they  assessed  me  at  $75,000  a  fortnight  ago 
I  went  out  and  tried  to  borrow  the  money  and  couldn't.  Then 
when  I  found  they  were  letting  a  whole  crowd  of  millionaires  live 
in  New  York  at  a  third  of  the  price- they  were  charging  me  I  was 
hurt,  I  was  indignant,  and  said,  this  is  the  last  feather.  I  am 
not  going  to  run  this  town  all  by  myself.  In  that  moment — 
in  that  memorable  moment,  I  began  to  crumble.  In  fifteen 
minutes  the  disintegration  was  complete.  In  fifteen  minutes 
I  was  become  just  a  mere  moral  sand-pile,  and  I  lifted  up  my 
hand,  along  with  those  seasoned  and  experienced  deacons,  and 
swore  off  every  rag  of  personal  property  I've  got  in  the  world. 

I  had  never  heard  iim  address  a  miscellaneous  audience. 
It  was  marvelous  to  see  how  he  convulsed  it,  and  silenced 
it,  and  controlled  it  at  will.  He  did  not  undertake  any 
special  pleading  for  the  negro  cause;  he  only  prepared 
the  way  with  cheerfulness. 

Clemens  and  Choate  joined  forces  again,  a  few  weeks 
later,  at  a  great  public  meeting  assembled  in  aid  of  the 
adult  blind.  Helen  Keller  was  to  be  present,  but  she  had 
fallen  ill  through  overwork.  She  sent  to  Clemens  one  of 
her  beautiful  letters,  in  which  she  said: 

I  should  be  happy  if  I  could  have  spelled  into  my  hand  the 
words  as  they  fall  from  your  lips,  and  receive,  even  as  it  is 
uttered,  the  eloquence  of  our  newest  ambassador  to  the  blind. 

Clemens,  dictating  the  following  morning,  told  of  his 
first  meeting  with  Helen  Keller  at  a  little  gathering  in 
Laurence  Hutton's  home,  when  she  was  about  the  age 
of  fourteen.  It  was  an  incident  that  invited  no  elabora- 
tion, and  probably  received  none. 

Henry  Rogers  and  I  went  together.  The  company  had  all 
assembled  and  had  been  waiting  a  while.  The  wonderful  child 
arrived  now  with  her  about  equally  wonderful  teacher,  Miss 
Sullivan,  and  seemed  quite  well  to  recognize  the  character  of  her 

1273 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


surroundings.  She  said,  "Oh,  the  books,  the  books,  so  many, 
many  books.    How  lovely!" 

The  guests  were  brought  one  after  another.  As  she  shook 
hands  with  each  she  took  her  hand  away  and  laid  her  fingers 
lightly  against  Miss  Sullivan's  lips,  who  spoke  against  them  the 
person's  name. 

Mr.  Howells  seated  himself  by  Helen  on  the  sofa,  and  she  put 
her  fingers  against  his  lips  and  he  told  her  a  story  of  consider- 
able length,  and  you  could  see  each  detail  of  it  pass  into  her 
mind  and  strike  fire  there  and  throw  the  flash  of  it  into  her 
face. 

After  a  couple  of  hours  spent  very  pleasantly  some  one  asked 
if  Helen  would  remember  the  feel  of  the  hands  of  the  company 
after  this  considerable  interval  of  time  and  be  able  to  discriminate 
the  hands  and  name  the  possessors  of  them.  Miss  Sullivan  said, 
"Oh,  she  will  have  no  difficulty  about  that."  So  the  company 
filed  past,  shook  hands  in  turn,  and  with  each  hand-shake  Helen 
greeted  the  owner  of  the  hand  pleasantly  and  spoke  the  name 
that  belonged  to  it  without  hesitation. 

By  and  by  the  assemblage  proceeded  to  the  dining-room  and 
sat  down  to  the  luncheon.  I  had  to  go  away  before  it  was  over, 
and  as  I  passed  by  Helen  I  patted  her  lightly  on  the  head  and 
passed  on.  Miss  Sullivan  called  to  me  and  said,  "Stop,  Mr. 
Clemens,  Helen  is  distressed  because  she  did  not  recognize  your 
hand.  Won't  you  come  back  and  do  that  again?"  I  went  back 
and  patted  her  lightly  on  the  head,  and  she  said  at  once,  "Oh, 
it's  Mr.  Clemens." 

Perhaps  some  one  can  explain  this  miracle,  but  I  have  never 
been  able  to  do  it.  Could  she  feel  the  wrinkles  in  my  hand 
through  her  hair?   Some  one  else  must  answer  this. 

It  was  three  years  following  this  dictation  that  the 
mystery  received  a  very  simple  and  rather  amusing  solu- 
tion. Helen  had  come  to  pay  a  visit  to  Mark  Twain's 
Connecticut  home,  Stormfield,  then  but  just  completed. 
He  had  met  her,  meantime,  but  it  had  not  occurred  to 
him  before  to  ask  her  how  she  had  recognized  him  that 
morning  at  Hutton's,  in  what  had  seemed  such  a  marvel- 
ous way.    She  remembered,  and  with  a  smile  said: 

1274 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DEFINITION  OP  A  GENTLEMAN 


"I  smelled  you."  Which,  after  all,  did  not  make  the 
incident  seem  much  less  marvelous. 

On  one  of  the  mornings  after  Miss  Hobby  had  gone 
Clemens  said: 

"A  very  curious  thing  has  happened — a  very  large- 
sized — joke."  He  was  shaving  at  the  time,  and  this 
information  came  in  brief  and  broken  relays,  suited  to 
a  performance  of  that  sort.  The  reader  may  perhaps 
imagine  the  effect  without  further  indication  of  it. 

"I  was  going  on  a  yachting  trip  once,  with  Henry 
Rogers,  when  a  reporter  stopped  me  with  the  statement 
that  Mrs.  Astor  had  said  that  there  had  never  been  a 
gentleman  in  the  White  House,  and  he  wanted  me  to 
give  him  my  definition  of  a  gentleman.  I  didn't  give  him 
my  definition;  but  he  printed  it,  just  the  same,  in  the 
afternoon  paper.  I  was  angry  at  first,  and  wanted  to 
bring  a  damage  suit.  When  I  came  to  read  the  definition 
it  was  a  satisfactory  one,  and  I  let  it  go.  Now  to-day 
comes  a  letter  and  a  telegram  from  a  man  who  has  made 
a  will  in  Missouri,  leaving  ten  thousand  dollars  to  provide 
tablets  for  various  libraries  in  the  State,  on  which  shall 
be  inscribed  Mark  Twain's  definition  of  a  gentleman.  He 
hasn't  got  the  definition — he  has  only  heard  of  it,  and 
he  wants  me  to  tell  him  in  which  one  of  my  books  or 
speeches  he  can  find  it.  I  couldn't  think,  when  I  read 
that  letter,  what  in  the  nation  the  man  meant,  but  shaving 
somehow  has  a  tendency  to  release  thought,  and  just 
now  it  all  came  to  me." 

It  was  a  situation  full  of  amusing  possibilities;  but  he 
reached  no  conclusion  in  the  matter.  Another  telegram 
was  brought  in  just  then,  which  gave  a  sadder  aspect  to 
his  thought,  for  it  said  that  his  old  coachman,  Patrick 
McAleer,  who  had  begun  in  the  Clemens  service  with  the 
bride  and  groom  of  thirty-six  years  before,  was  very  low, 
and  could  not  survive  more  than  a  few  days.  This  led 
him  to  speak  of  Patrick,  his  noble  and  faithful  nature,  and 

1275 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


how  he  always  claimed  to  be  in  their  service,  even  during 
their  long  intervals  of  absence  abroad.  Clemens  gave 
orders  that  everything  possible  should  be  done  for  Pat- 
rick's comfort.  When  the  end  'came,  a  few  days  later, 
he  traveled  to  Hartford  to  lay  flowers  on  Patrick's  bier, 
and  to  serve,  with  Patrick's  friends— neighbor  coachmen 
and  John  O'Neill,  the  gardener— as  pall-bearer,  taking 
his  allotted  place  without  distinction  or  favor. 

It  was  the  following  Sunday,  at  the  Majestic  Theater, 
in  New  York,  that  Mark  Twain  spoke  to  the  Young 
Men's  Christian  Association.  For  several  reasons  it  proved 
an  unusual  meeting.  A  large  number  of  free  tickets  had 
been  given  out,  far  more  than  the  place  would  hold;  and, 
further,  it  had  been  announced  that  when  the  ticket-holders 
had  been  seated  the  admission  would  be  free  to  the  public. 
The  subject  chosen  for  the  talk  was  ''Reminiscences." 

When  we  arrived  the  streets  were  packed  from  side  to 
side  for  a  considerable  distance  and  a  riot  was  in  progress. 
A  great  crowd  had  swarmed  about  the  place,  and  the 
officials,  instead  of  throwing  the  doors  wide  and  letting 
the  theater  fill  up,  regardless  of  tickets,  had  locked  them. 
As  a  result  there  was  a  shouting,  surging  human  mass 
that  presently  dashed  itself  against  the  entrance.  Win- 
dows and  doors  gave  way,  and  there  followed  a  wild 
struggle  for  entrance.  A  moment  later  the  house  was 
packed  solid.  A  detachment  of  police  had  now  arrived, 
and  in  time  cleared  the  street.  It  was  said  that  amid  the 
tumult  some  had  lost  their  footing  and  had  been  trampled 
and  injured,  but  of  this  we  did  not  learn  until  later. 
We  had  been  taken  somehow  to  a  side  entrance  and 
smuggled  into  boxes.1 

1  The  paper  next  morning  bore  the  head-lines:  "  10,000  Stampeded 
at  the  Mark  Twain  Meeting.  Well-dressed  Men  and  Women 
Clubbed  by  Police  at  Majestic  Theater."  In  this  account  the  paper 
stated  that  the  crowd  had  collected  an  hour  before  the  time  for 
opening;  that  nothing  of  the  kind  had  been  anticipated  and  no 
police  preparation  had  been  made. 

1276 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DEFINITION  OF  A  GENTLEMAN 


It  was  peaceful  enough  in  the  theater  until  Mark  Twain 
appeared  on  the  stage.  He  was  wildly  greeted,  and  when 
he  said,  slowly  and  seriously,  "I  thank  you  for  this  signal 
recognition  of  merit,"  there  was  a  still  noisier  outburst. 
In  the  quiet  that  followed  he  began  his  memories,  and 
went  wandering  along  from  one  anecdote  to  another  in 
the  manner  of  his  daily  dictations. 

At  last  it  seemed  to  occur  to  him,  in  view  of  the  char- 
acter of  his  audience,  that  he  ought  to  close  with  some- 
thing in  the  nature  of  counsel  suited  to  young  men. 

It  is  from  experiences  such  as  mine  [he  said]  that  we  get  our 
education  of  life.  We  string  them  into  jewels  or  into  tinware, 
as  we  may  choose.  I  have  received  recently  several  letters  ask- 
ing for  counsel  or  advice,  the  principal  request  being  for  some 
incident  that  may  prove  helpful  to  the  young.  It  is  my  mission 
to  teach,  and  I  am  always  glad  to  furnish  something.  There 
have  been  a  lot  of  incidents  in  my  career  to  help  me  along — 
sometimes  they  helped  me  along  faster  than  I  wanted  to  go. 

He  took  some  papers  from  his  pocket  and  started  to 
unfold  one  of  them;  then,  as  if  remembering,  he  asked 
how  long  he  had  been  talking.  The  answer  came, 
"  Thirty-five  minutes."  He  made  as  if  to  leave  the  stage, 
but  the  audience  commanded  him  to  go  on. 

"All  right,"  he  said,  "I  can  stand  more  of  my  own  talk 
than  any  one  I  ever  knew."  Opening  one  of  the  papers, 
a  telegram,  he  read: 

"  In  which  one  of  your  works  can  we  find  the  definition 
of  a  gentleman?"   Then  he  added: 

I  have  not  answered  that  telegram.  I  couldn't.  I  never 
wrote  any  such  definition,  though  it  seems  to  me  that  if  a  man 
has  just,  merciful,  and  kindly  instincts  he  would  be  a  gentleman, 
for  he  would  need  nothing  else  in  this  world. 

He  opened  a  letter.   "  From  Howells,"  he  said. 

My  old  friend,  William  Dean  Howells — Howells,  the  head  of 
American  literature.   No  one  is  able  to  stand  with  him.   He  is 

1277 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


an  old,  old  friend  of  mine,  and  he  writes  me,  "To-morrow  I  shall 
be  sixty-nine  years  old."  Why,  I  am  surprised  at  Howells 
writing  so.  I  have  known  him  myself  longer  than  that.  I  am 
sorry  to  see  a  man  trying  to  appear  so  young.  Let's  see. 
Howells  says  now,  "I  see  you  have  been  burying  Patrick.  I 
suppose  he  was  old,  too." 

The  house  became  very  still.  Most  of  them  had  read 
an  account  of  Mark  Twain's  journey  to  Hartford  and 
his  last  service  to  his  faithful  servitor.  The  speaker's 
next  words  were  not  much  above  a  whisper,  but  every 
syllable  was  distinct. 

No,  he  was  never  old — Patrick.  He  came  to  us  thirty-six 
years  ago.  He  was  our  coachman  from  the  day  that  I  drove 
my  young  bride  to  our  new  home.  He  was  a  young  Irishman, 
slender,  tall,  lithe,  honest,  truthful,  and  he  never  changed  in 
all  his  life.  He  really  was  with  us  but  twenty-five  years,  for 
he  did  not  go  with  us  to  Europe;  but  he  never  regarded  that 
a  separation.  As  the  children  grew  up  he  was  their  guide. 
He  was  all  honor,  honesty,  and  affection.  He  was  with  us  in 
New  Hampshire  last  summer,  and  his  hair  was  just  as  black, 
his  eyes  were  just  as  blue,  his  form  just  as  straight,  and  his 
heart  just  as  good  as  on  the  day  we  first  met.  In  all  the  long 
years  Patrick  never  made  a  mistake.  He  never  needed  an 
order;  he  never  received  a  command.  He  knew.  I  have  been 
asked  for  my  idea  of  an  ideal  gentleman,  and  I  give  it  to  you 
— Patrick  McAleer. 

It  was  the  sort  of  thing  that  no  one  but  Mark  Twain 
has  quite  been  able  to  do,  and  it  was  just  that  recognized 
quality  behind  it  that  had  made  crowds  jam  the  street 
and  stampede  the  entrance  to  be  in  his  presence — to 
see  him  and  to  hear  his  voice. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXLI 


GORKY,  HO  WELLS,  AND  MARK  TWAIN 


LEMENS  was  now  fairly  back  again  in  the  wash  of 


V_>  banquets  and  speech-making  that  had  claimed  him 
on  his  return  from  England,  five  years  before.  He  made 
no  less  than  a  dozen  speeches  altogether  that  win ter,  and 
he  was  continually  at  some  feasting  or  other,  where  he 
was  sure  to  be  called  upon  for  remarks.  He  fell  out  of 
the  habit  of  preparing  his  addresses,  relying  upon  the  in- 
spiration of  the  moment,  merely  following  the  procedure 
of  his  daily  dictations,  which  had  doubtless  given  him 
confidence  for  this  departure  from  his  earlier  method. 
There  was  seldom  an  afternoon  or  an  evening  that  he 
was  not  required,  and  seldom  a  morning  that  the  papers 
did  not  have  some  report  of  his  doings.  Once  more,  and 
in  a  larger  fashion  than  ever,  he  had  become  "the  belle 
of  New  York."  But  he  was  something  further.  An 
editorial  in  the  Evening  Mail  said: 

Mark  Twain,  in  his  "last  and  best  of  life  for  which  the  first 
was  made,"  seems  to  be  advancing  rapidly  to  a  position  which 
makes  him  a  kind  of  joint  Aristides,  Solon,  and  Themistocles 
of  the  American  metropolis — an  Aristides  for  justness  and  bold- 
ness as  well  as  incessancy  of  opinion,  a  Solon  for  wisdom  and 
cogency,  and  a  Themistocles  for  the  democracy  of  his  views  and 
the  popularity  of  his  person. 

Things  have  reached  the  point  where,  if  Mark  Twain  is  not  at 
a  public  meeting  or  banquet,  he  is  expected  to  console  it  with 
one  of  his  inimitable  letters  of  advice  and  encouragement.  If  he 
deigns  to  make  a  public  appearance  there  is  a  throng  at  the 


1 279 


Digitized  by  Goygle 


MARK  TWAIN 


doors  which  overtaxes  the  energy  and  ability  of  the  police.  We 
must  be  glad  that  we  have  a  public  commentator  like  Mark 
Twain  always  at  hand  and  his  wit  and  wisdom  continually  on 
tap.  His  sound,  breezy  Mississippi  Valley  Americanism  is  a 
corrective  to  all  sorts  of  snobbery.  He  cultivates  respect  for 
human  rights  by  always  making  sure  that  he  has  his  own. 

He  talked  one  afternoon  to  the  Barnard  girls,  and  an- 
other afternoon  to  the  Women's  University  Club,  illus- 
trating his  talk  with  what  purported  to  be  moral  tales. 
He  spoke  at  a  dinner  given  to  City  Tax  Ccmimissioner  Mr. 
Charles  Putzel;  and  when  he  was  introduced  there  as  the 
man  who  had  said,  "When  in  doubt  tell  the  truth,"  he 
replied  that  he  had  invented  that  maxim  for  others,  but 
that  when  in  doubt  himself,  he  used  more  sagacity. 

The  speeches  he  made  kept  his  hearers  always  in  good 
humor;  but  he  made  them  think,  too,  for  there  was  al- 
ways substance  and  sound  reason  and  searching  satire 
in  the  body  of  what  he  said. 

It  was  natural  that  there  should  be  reporters  calling 
frequently  at  Mark  Twain's  home,  and  now  and  then  the 
place  became  a  veritable  storm-center  of  news.  Such  a 
moment  arrived  when  it  became  known  that  a  public 
library  in  Brooklyn  had  banished  Huck  Finn  and  Tom 
Sawyer  from  the  children's  room,  presided  over  by  a 
young  woman  of  rather  severe  morals.  The  incident  had 
begun  in  November  of  the  previous  year.  One  of  the 
librarians,  Asa  Don  Dickinson,  who  had  vigorously  voted 
against  the  decree,  wrote  privately  of  the  matter.  Clemens 
had  replied: 

Dear  Sir, — I  am  greatly  troubled  by  what  you  say.  I 
wrote  Tom  Sawyer  &  Buck  Finn  for  adults  exclusively,  &  it 
always  distresses  me  when  I  find  that  boys  &  girls  have  been 
allowed  access  to  them.  The  mind  that  becomes  soiled  in  youth 
can  never  again  be  washed  clean.  I  know  this  by  my  own  experi- 
ence, &  to  this  day  I  cherish  an  unappeasable  bitterness  against 

1280 


Digitized  by  Google 


GORKY,  HOWELLS,  AND  MARK  TWAIN 


the  unfaithful  guardians  of  my  young  life,  who  not  only  per- 
mitted but  compelled  me  to  read  an  unexpurgated  Bible  through 
before  I  was  15  years  old.  None  can  do  that  and  ever  draw  a 
clean,  sweet  breath  again  this  side  of  the  grave.  Ask  that  young 
lady — she  will  tell  you  so. 

Most  honestly  do  I  wish  that  I  could  say  a  softening  word 
or  two  in  defense  of  Huck's  character  since  you  wish  it,  but 
really,  in  my  opinion,  it  is  no  better  than  those  of  Solomon, 
David,  &  the  rest  of  the  sacred  brotherhood. 

If  there  is  an  unexpurgated  in  the  Children's  Department, 
won't  you  please  help  that  young  woman  remove  Tom  &  Huck 
from  that  questionable  companionship? 

Sincerely  yours,         S.  L.  Clemens. 

I  shall  not  show  your  letter  to  any  one — it  is  safe  with  me. 

Mr.  Dickinson  naturally  kept  this  letter  from  the  pub- 
lic, though  he  read  it  aloud  to  the  assembled  librarians, 
and  the  fact  of  its  existence  and  its  character  eventually 
leaked  out.1  One  of  the  librarians  who  had  heard  it 
mentioned  it  at  a  theater-party  in  hearing  of  an  unrealized 
newspaper  man.  This  was  near  the  end  of  the  following 
March. 

The  "tip"  was  sufficient.  Telephone-bells  began  to 
jingle,  and  groups  of  newspaper  men  gathered  simultane- 
ously on  Mr.  Dickinson's  and  on  Mark  Twain's  door-steps. 
At  21  Fifth  Avenue  you  could  hardly  get  in  or  out,  for 
stepping  on  them.  The  evening  papers  surmised  details, 
and  Huck  and  Tom  had  a  perfectly  fresh  crop  of  adver- 
tising, not  only  in  America,  but  in  distant  lands.  Dickin- 
son wrote  Clemens  that  he  would  not  give  out  the  letter 
without  his  authority,  and  Clemens  replied: 

Be  wise  as  a  serpent  and  wary  as  a  dove!  The  newspaper  boys 
want  that  letter — don't  you  let  them  get  hold  of  it.  They  say 
you  refuse  to  allow  them  to  see  it  without  my  consent.  Keep 
on  refusing,  and  I'll  take  care  of  this  end  of  the  line. 

1  It  has  been  supplied  to  the  writer  by  Mr.  Dickinson,  and  is  pub- 
lished here  with  his  consent. 

1281 


Digitized 


MARK  TWAIN 


In  a  recent  letter  to  the  writer  Mr.  Dickinson  states 
that  Mark  Twain's  solicitude  was  for  the  librarian,  whom 
he  was  unwilling  to  involve  in  difficulties  with  his  official 
superiors,  and  he  adds: 

There  may  be  some  doubt  as  to  whether  Mark  Twain  was  or 
was  not  a  religious  man,  for  there  are  many  definitions  of  the 
word  religion.  He  was  certainly  a  hater  of  conventions,  had  no 
patience  with  sanctimony  and  bibliolatry,  and  was  perhaps 
irreverent.  But  any  one  who  reads  carefully  the  description  of 
the  conflict  in  Huck's  soul,  in  regard  to  the  betrayal  of  Jim,  will 
credit  the  creator  of  the  scene  with  deep  and  true  moral  feeling. 

The  reporters  thinned  out  in  the  course  of  a  few  days 
when  no  result  was  forthcoming;  but  they  were  all  back 
again  presently  when  the  Maxim  Gorky  fiasco  came  along. 
The  distinguished  revolutionist,  Tchaykoffsky,  as  a  sort 
of  advance  agent  for  Gorky,  had  already  called  upon 
Clemens  to  enlist  his  sympathy  in  their  mission,  which 
was  to  secure  funds  in  the  cause  of  Russian  emancipation. 
Clemens  gave  his  sympathy,  and  now  promised  his  aid, 
though  he  did  not  hesitate  to  discourage  the  mission. 
He  said  that  American  enthusiasm  in  such  matters  stopped 
well  above  their  pockets,  and  that  this  revolutionary 
errand  would  fail.  Howells,  too,  was  of  this  opinion.  In 
his  account  of  the  episode  he  says: 

I  told  a  valued  friend  of  his  and  mine  that  I  did  not  believe 
he  could  get  twenty-five  hundred  dollars,  and  I  think  now  I  set 
the  figure  too  high. 

Clemens's  interest,  however,  grew.  He  attended  a  din- 
ner given  to  Gorky  at  the  "A  Club,"  No.  3  Fifth  Avenue, 
and  introduced  Gorky  to  the  diners.  Also  he  wrote  a 
letter  to  be  read  by  Tchaykoffsky  at  a  meeting  held  at 
the  Grand  Central  Palace,  where  three  thousand  people 
gathered  to  hear  this  great  revolutionist  recite  the  story 
of  Russia's  wrongs.    The  letter  ran: 

1282 


Digitized  by  Google 


GORKY,  HOWELLS,  AND  MARK  TWAIN 

Dear  Mr.  Tchaykoffsky  — My  sympathies  are  with  the 
Russian  revolution,  of  course.  It  goes  without  saying.  I  hope 
it  will  succeed,  and  now  that  I  have  talked  with  you  I  take 
heart  to  believe  it  will.  Government  by  falsified  promises,  by 
lies,  by  treachery,  and  by  the  butcher-knife,  for  the  aggrandize- 
ment of  a  single  family  of  drones  and  its  idle  and  vicious  kin  has 
been  borne  quite  long  enough  in  Russia,  I  should  think.  And  it 
is  to  be  hoped  that  the  roused  nation,  now  rising  in  its  strength, 
will  presently  put  an  end  to  it  and  set  up  the  republic  in  its 
place.  Some  of  us,  even  the  white-headed,  may  live  to  see  the 
blessed  day  when  tsars  and  grand  dukes  will  be  as  scarce  there 
as  I  trust  they  are  in  heaven.       Most  sincerely  yours, 

Mark  Twain. 

Clemens  and  Howells  called  on  Gorky  and  agreed  to 
figure  prominently  in  a  literary  dinner  to  be  given  in  his 
honor.  The  movement  was  really  assuming  considerable 
proportions,  when  suddenly  something  happened  which 
caused  it  to  flatten  permanently,  and  rather  ridiculously. 

Arriving  at  21  Fifth  Avenue,  one  afternoon,  I  met 
Howells  <x>ming  out.  I  thought  he  had  an  unhappy, 
hunted  look.  I  went  up  to  the  study,  and  on  opening 
the  door  I  found  the  atmosphere  semi-opaque  with  cigar 
smoke,  and  Clemens  among  the  drifting  blue  wreaths 
and  layers,  pacing\ip  and  down  rather  fiercely.  He  turned, 
inquiringly,  as  I  entered.  I  had  clipped  a  cartoon  from 
a  morning  paper,  which  pictured  him  as  upsetting  the 
Tsar's  throne — the  kind  of  thing  he  was  likely  to  enjoy. 
I  said: 

"Here  is  something  perhaps  you  may  wish  to  see,  Mr. 
Clemens. ' ' 
He  shook  his  head  violently. 

"No,  I  can!t  see  anything  now,"  and  in  another  mo- 
ment had  disappeared  into  his  own  room.  Something 
extraordinary  had  happened.  I  wondered  if,  after  all 
their  lifelong  friendship,  he  and  Howells  had  quarreled. 
I  was  naturally  curious,  but  it  was  not  a  good  time  to 

1283 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

investigate.  By  and  by  I  went  down  on  the  street, 
where  the  newsboys  were  calling  extras.  When  I  had 
bought  one,  and  glanced  at  the  first  page,  I  knew.  Gorky 
had  been  expelled  from  his  hotel  for  having  brought  to 
America,  as  his  wife,  a  woman  not  so  recognized  by  the 
American  laws.  Madame  Andrcieva,  a  Russian  actress, 
was  a  leader  in  the  cause  of  freedom,  and  by  Russian  cus- 
tom her  relation  with  Gorky  was  recognized  and  respected; 
but  it  was  not  sufficiently  orthodox  for  American  con- 
ventions, and  it  was  certainly  unfortunate  that  an  apostle 
of  high  purpose  should  come  handicapped  in  that  way. 
Apparently  the  news  had  already  reached  Howells  and 
Clemens,  and  they  had  been  feverishly  discussing  what 
was  best  to  do  about  the  dinner. 

Within  a  day  or  two  Gorky  and  Madame  Andreieva 
were  evicted  from  a  procession  of  hotels,  and  of  course 
the  papers  rang  with  the  head-lines.  An  army  of  reporters 
was  chasing  Clemens  and  Howells.  The  Russian  revo- 
lution was  entirely  forgotten  in  this  more  lively,  more 
intimate  domestic  interest.  Howells  came  again,  the 
reporters  following  and  standing  guard  at  the  door  below. 
In  My  Mark  Twain  he  says: 

That  was  the  moment  of  the  great  Vesuvian  eruption,  and  we 
figured  ourselves  in  easy  reach  of  a  volcano  which  was  every 
now  and  then  "blowing  a  cone  off,"  as  the  telegraphic  phrase 
was.  The  roof  of  the  great  market  in  Naples  had  just  broken 
in  under  its  load  of  ashes  and  cinders,  and  crushed  hundreds  of 
people;  and  we  asked  each  other  if  we  were  not  sorry  we  had 
not  been  there,  where  the  pressure  would  have  been  far  less 
terrific  than  it  was  with  us  in  Fifth  Avenue.  The  forbidden 
butler  came  up  with  a  message  that  there  were  some  gentlemen 
below  who  wanted  to  see  Clemens. 

"How  many?"  he  demanded. 

"Five,"  the  butler  faltered. 

"Reporters?" 

The  butler  feigned  uncertainty. 

1284 


Digitized  by  Google 


GORKY,  HOWELLS,  AND  MARK  TWAIN 


"What  would  you  do?"  he  asked  me. 

"I  wouldn't  see  them,"  I  said,  and  then  Clemens  went  di- 
rectly down  to  them.  How  or  by  what  means  he  appeased 
their  voracity  I  cannot  say,  but  I  fancy  it  was  by  the  confession 
ofithe  exact  truth,  which  was  harmless  enough.  They  went 
away  joyfully,  and  he  came  back  in  radiant  satisfaction  with 
having  seen  them. 

It  is  not  quite  clear  at  this  time  just  what  word  was 
sent  to  Gorky;  but  the  matter  must  have  been  settled 
that  night,  for  Clemens  was  in  a  fine  humor  next  morning. 
It  was  before  dictation  time,  and  he  came  drifting  into 
the  study  and  began  at  once  to  speak  of  the  dinner  and 
the  impossibility  of  its  being  given  now.    Then  he  said: 

"American  public  opinion  is  a  delicate  fabric.  It 
shrivels  like  the  webs  of  morning  at  the  lightest  touch." 

Later  in  the  day  he  made  this  memorandum: 

Laws  can  be  evaded  and  punishment  escaped,  but  an  openly 
transgressed  custom  brings  sure  punishment.  The  penalty  may 
be  unfair,  unrighteous,  illogical,  and  a  cruelty;  no  matter,  it  will 
be  inflicted  just  the  same.  Certainly,  then,  there  can  be  but 
one  wise  thing  for  a  visiting  stranger  to  do — find  out  what  the 
country's  customs  are  and  refrain  from  offending  against  them. 

The  efforts  which  have  been  made  in  Gorky's  justification  are 
entitled  to  all  respect  because  of  the  magnanimity  of  the  motive 
back  of  them,  but  I  think  that  the  ink  was  wasted.  Custom 
is  custom:  it  is  built  of  brass,  boiler-iron,  granite;  facts,  reason- 
ings, arguments  have  no  more  effect  upon  it  than  the  idle  winds 
have  upon  Gibraltar.* 

The  Gorky  disturbance  had  hardly  begun  to  subside 
when  there  came  another  upheaval  that  snuffed  it  out 
completely.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  18th  of  April  I 
heard,  at  The  Players,  a  wandering  telephonic  rumor  that 
a  great  earthquake  was  going  on  in  San  Francisco.  Half 

lTo  Dan  Beard  he  said,  "Gorky  made  an  awful  mistake,  Dan. 
He  might  as  well  have  come  over  here  in  his  shirt-tail." 

128S  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


an  hour  later,  perhaps,  I  met  Clemens  coming  out  of 
No.  21.    He  asked: 

"Have  you  heard  the  news  about  San  Francisco?" 

I  said  I  had  heard  a  rumor  of  an  earthquake,  and  had 
seen  an  extra  with  big  scare-heads;  but  I  supposed  the 
matter  was  exaggerated. 

"No,"  he  said,  "I  am  afraid  it  isn't.  We  have  just 
had  a  telephone  message  that  it  is  even  worse  than  at 
first  reported.  A  great  fire  is  consuming  the  city.  Come 
along  to  the  news-stand  and  we'll  see  if  there  is  a  later 
edition." 

We  walked  to  Sixth  Avenue  and  Eighth  Street  and  got 
some  fresh  extras.  The  news  was  indeed  worse  than  at 
first  reported.  San  Francisco  was  going  to  destruction. 
Clemens  was  moved  deeply,  and  began  to  recall  this  old 
friend  and  that  whose  lives  and  property  might  be  in 
danger.  He  spoke  of  Joe  Goodman  and  the  Gillis  families, 
and  pictured  conditions  in  the  perishing  city. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXLII 

MARK  TWAIN'S  GOOD-BY  TO  THE  PLATFORM 

IT  was  on  April  19,  1906,  the  day  following  the  great 
earthquake,  that  Mark  Twain  gave  a  "Farewell 
Lecture"  at  Carnegie  Hall  for  the  benefit  of  the  Robert 
Fulton  Memorial  Association.  Some  weeks  earlier  Gen. 
Frederick  D.  Grant,  its  president,  had  proposed  to  pay 
one  thousand  dollars  for  a  Mark  Twain  lecture;  but 
Clemens  had  replied  that  he  was  permanently  out  of  the 
field,  and  would  never  again  address  any  audience  that 
had  to  pay  to  hear  him. 

"I  always  expect  to  talk  as  long  as  I  can  get  people  to 
listen  to  me,"  he  said, 4 4  but  I  never  again  expect  to  charge 
for  it."  Later  came  one  of  his  inspirations,  and  he 
wrote:  "I  will  lecture  for  one  thousand  dollars,  on  one 
condition:  that  it  will  be  understood  to  be  my  farewell 
lecture,  and  that  I  may  contribute  the  thousand  dollars 
to  the  Fulton  Association." 

It  was  a  suggestion  not  to  be  discouraged,  and  the  bills 
and  notices,  "Mark  Twain's  Farewell  Lecture,"  were 
published  without  delay. 

I  first  heard  of  the  matter  one  afternoon  when  General 
Grant  had  called.  Clemens  came  into  the  study  where 
I  was  working;  he  often  wandered  in  and  out — sometimes 
without  a  word,  sometimes  to  relieve  himself  concerning 
things  in  general.  But  this  time  he  suddenly  chilled  me 
by  saying: 

"I'm  going  to  deliver  my  farewell  lecture,  and  I  want 
you  to  appear  on  the  stage  and  help  me." 

1287 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


I  feebly  expressed  my  pleasure  at  the  prospect.  Then 
he  said: 

"I  am  going  to  lecture  on  Fulton — on  the  story  of  his 
achievements.    It  will  be  a  burlesque,  of  course,  and  I 


MARK  TWAIN 
Will  Deliver  His  Farewell  Lecture 

CARNEGIE  HALL 
APRIL  19th,  1906 

FOR   THE    BENEFIT  OF 
=  THE-  ~ 

Robert  Pulton  Memorial  Association 


q  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION  OLD  GUARD  IN 
FULL  DRESS  UNIFORM  WILL  BE  PRESENT 

qMUSIC  BY  OLD  GUARD  BAND 

q TICKETS  AND  BOXES  ON  SALE  AT  CAR- 
NEGIE   HALL  AND  WALDORF-ASTORIA 

SEATS   $1.50.    fl.OO.    5a  CENTS 
HANDBILL  OF  MARK  TWAIN'S  "FAREWELL  LECTURE" 

am  going  to  pretend  to  forget  my  facts,  and  I  want  you 
to  sit  there  in  a  chair.  Now  and  then,  when  I  seem  to 
get  stuck,  I'll  lean  over  and  pretend  to  ask  you  some- 
thing, and  I  want  you  to  pretend  to  prompt  me.  You 

1288 


Digitized  by  Google 


GOOD-BY  TO  THE  PLATFORM 


don't  need  to  laugh,  or  to  pretend  to  be  assisting  in  the 
performance  any  more  than  just  that." 

It  was  not  likely  that  I  should  laugh.  I  had  a  sinking 
feeling  in  the  cardiac  region  which  does  not  go  with  mirth. 
It  did  not  for  the  moment  occur  to  me  that  the  stage 
would  be  filled  with  eminent  citizens  and  vice-presidents, 
and  I  had  a  vision  of  myself  sitting  there  alone  in  the 
chair  in  that  wide  emptiness,  with  the  chief  performer  di- 
recting attention  to  me  every  other  moment  or  so,  for 
perhaps  an  hour.  Let  me  hurry  on  to  say  that  it  did  not 
happen.  I  dare  say  he  realized  my  unfitness  for  the 
work,  and  the  far  greater  appropriateness  of  conferring 
the  honor  on  General  Grant,  for  in  the  end  he  gave  him 
the  assignment,  to  my  immeasurable  relief. 

It  was  a  magnificent  occasion.  That  spacious  hall  was 
hung  with  bunting,  the  stage  was  banked  and  festooned 
with  decoration  of  every  sort.  General  Grant,  surrounded 
by  his  splendidly  uniformed  staff,  sat  in  the  foreground, 
and  behind  was  ranged  a  levee  of  foremost  citizens  of 
the  republic.  The  band  played  "America"  as  Mark 
Twain  entered,  and  the  great  audience  rose  and  roared 
out  its  welcome.  Some  of  those  who  knew  him  best  had 
hoped  that  on  this  occasion  of  his  last  lecture  he  would 
tell  of  that  first  appearance  in  San  Francisco,  forty  years 
before,  when  his  fortunes  had  hung  in  the  balance.  Per- 
haps he  did  not  think  of  it,  and  no  one  had  had  the  cour- 
age to  suggest  it.  At  all  events,  he  did  a  different  thing. 
He  began  by  making  a  strong  pica  for  the  smitten  city 
where  the  flames  were  still  raging,  urging  prompt  help  for 
those  who  had  lost  not  only  their  homes,  but  the  last  shred 
of  their  belongings  and  their  means  of  livelihood.  Then 
followed  his  farcical  history  of  Fulton,  with  General  Grant 
to  make  the  responses,  and  presently  he  drifted  into  the 
kind  of  lecture  he  had  given  so  often  in  his  long  trip 
around  the  world — retelling  the  tales  which  had  won 
him  fortune  and  friends  in  many  lands. 


1289 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


I  do  not  know  whether  the  entertainment  was  long  or 
short.  I  think  few  took  account  of  time.  To  a  letter 
of  inquiry  as  to  how  long  the  entertainment  would  last, 
he  had  replied: 

I  cannot  say  for  sure.  It  is  my  custom  to  keep  on  talking 
till  I  get  the  audience  cowed.  Sometimes  it  takes  an  hour  and 
fifteen  minutes,  sometimes  I  can  do  it  in  an  hour. 

There  was  no  indication  at  any  time  that  the  audience 
was  cowed.  The  house  was  packed,  and  the  applause 
was  so  recurrent  and  continuous  that  often  his  voice 
was  lost  to  those  in  its  remoter  corners.  It  did  not 
matter.  The  tales  were  familiar  to  his  hearers;  merely 
to  see  Mark  Twain,  in  his  old  age  and  in  that  splendid 
setting,  relating  them  was  enough.  The  audience  realized 
that  it  was  witnessing  the  close  of  a  heroic  chapter  in 
a  unique  career. 


A  PAGE  OF  MARK  TWAIN's  LECTURE  NOTES 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXLIII 


AN  INVESTMENT  IN  REDDING 


ANY  of  the  less  important  happenings  seem  worth 


the  Nast  auction,  of  the  Mark  Twain  letters,  already 
mentioned.  The  fact  that  these  letters  brought  higher 
prices  than  any  others  offered  in  this  sale  was  gratifying. 
Roosevelt,  Grant,  and  even  Lincoln  items  were  sold;  but 
the  Mark  Twain  letters  led  the  list.  One  of  them  sold  for 
forty-three  dollars,  which  was  said  to  be  the  highest  price 
ever  paid  for  the  letter  of  a  living  man.  It  was  the 
letter  written  in  1877,  quoted  earlier  in  this  work,  in  which 
Clemens  proposed  the  lecture  tour  to  Nast.  None  of  the 
Clemens-Nast  letters  brought  less  than  twenty-seven 
dollars,  and  some  of  them  were  very  brief.  It  was  a  new 
measurement  of  public  sentiment.  Clemens,  when  he 
heard  of  it,  said: 

"I  can't  rise  to  General  Grant's  lofty  place  in  the  esti- 
mation of  this  country;  but  it  is  a  deep  satisfaction  to  me 
to  know  that  when  it  comes  to  letter-writing  he  can't  sit 
in  the  front  seat  along  with  me.  That  forty-three-dollar 
letter  ought  to  be  worth  as  much  as  eighty-six  dollars 
after  I'm  dead." 

A  perpetual  string  of  callers  came  to  21  Fifth  Avenue, 
and  it  kept  the  secretary  busy  explaining  to  most  of  them 
why  Mark  Twain  could  not  entertain  their  propositions, 
or  listen  to  their  complaints,  or  allow  them  to  express  in 
person  their  views  on  public  questions.  He  did  see  a 
great  many  of  what  might  be  called  the  milder  type— 


Among  them  was  the  sale,  at 


1291 


MARK  TWAIN 


persons  who  were  evidently  sincere  and  not  too  heavily 
freighted  with  eloquence.  Of  these  there  came  one  day 
a  very  gentle-spoken  woman  who  had  promised  that  she 
would  stay  but  a  moment,  and  say  no  more  than  a  few 
words,  if  only  she  might  sit  face  to  face  with  the  great 
man.  It  was  in  the  morning  hour  before  the  dictations, 
and  he  received  her,  quite  correctly  clad  in  his  beautiful 
dressing-robe  and  propped  against  his  pillows.  She  kept 
her  contract  to  the  letter;  but  when  she  rose  to  go  she 
said,  in  a  voice  of  deepest  reverence: 
"May  I  kiss  your  hand?" 

It  was  a  delicate  situation,  and  might  easily  have  been 
made  ludicrous.  Denial  would  have  hurt  her.  As  it  was, 
he  lifted  his  hand,  a  small,  exquisite  hand  it  was,  with 
the  gentle  dignity  and  poise  of  a  king,  and  she  touched 
her  lips  to  it  with  what  was  certainly  adoration.  Then, 
as  she  went,  she  said: 

"How  God  must  love  you!" 

"I  hope  so,"  he  said,  softly,  and  he  did  not  even  smile; 
but  after  she  had  gone  he  could  not  help  saying,  in  a  quaint, 
half-pathetic  voice: 

"I  guess  she  hasn't  heard  of  our  strained  relations." 

Sitting  in  that  royal  bed,  clad  in  that  rich  fashion,  he 
easily  conveyed  the  impression  of  royalty,  and  watching 
him  through  those  marvelous  mornings  he  seemed  never 
less  than  a  king,  as  indeed  he  was— the  king  of  a  realm 
without  national  boundaries.  Some  of  those  nearest  to 
hit  fell  naturally  into  the  habit  of  referring  to  him  as 
"the  King,"  and  in  time  the  title  crept  out  of  the  im- 
mediate household  and  was  taken  up  by  others  who 
loved  him. 

He  had  been  more  than  once  photographed  in  his  bed; 
but  it  was  by  those  who  had  come  and  gone  in  a  brief 
time,  with  little  chance  to  study  his  natural  attitudes. 
I  had  acquired  some  knowledge  of  the  camera,  and  I 
obtained  his  permission  to  let  me  photograph  him— a 

1292 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN  DICTATINt. 


AN  INVESTMENT  IN  REDDING 


permission  he  seldom  denied  to  any  one.  We  had  no 
dictations  on  Saturdays,  and  I  took  the  pictures  on  one 
of  these  holiday  mornings.  He  was  so  patient  and  tract- 
able, and  so  natural  in  every  attitude,  that  it  was  a  de- 
light to  make  the  negatives.  I  was  afraid  he  would  be- 
come impatient,  and  made  fewer  exposures  than  I  might 
otherwise  have  done.  I  think  he  expected  very  little 
from  this  amateur  performance;  but,  by  that  happy  ele- 
ment of  accident  which  plays  so  large  a  part  in  photo- 
graphic success,  the  results  were  better  than  I  had  hoped 
for.  When  I  brought  him  the  prints,  a  few  days  later, 
he  expressed  pleasure  and  asked,  "Why  didn't  you  make 
more?" 

Among  them  was  one  in  an  attitude  which  had  grown 
so  familiar  to  us,  that  of  leaning  over  to  get  his  pipe  from 
the  smoking-table,  and  this  seemed  to  give  him  particu- 
lar satisfaction.  It  being  a  holiday,  he  had  not  donned 
his  dressing-gown,  which  on  the  whole  was  well  for  the 
photographic  result.  He  spoke  of  other  pictures  that  had 
been  made  of  him,  especially  denouncing  one  photograph, 
taken  some  twenty  years  before  by  Sarony,  a  picture,  as 
he  said,  of  a  gorilla  in  an  overcoat,  which  the  papers  and 
magazines  had  insisted  on  using  ever  since. 

"Sarony  was  as  enthusiastic  about  wild  animals  as  he 
was  about  photography,  and  when  Du  Chaillu  brought 
over  the  first  gorilla  he  sent  for  me  to  look  at  it  and  see 
if  our  genealogy  was  straight.  I  said  it  was,  and  Sarony 
was  so  excited  that  I  had  recognized  the  resemblance 
between  us,  that  he  wanted  to  make  it  more  complete, 
so  he  borrowed  my  overcoat  and  put  it  on  the  gorilla  and 
photographed  it,  and  spread  that  picture  out  over  the 
world  as  mine.  It  turns  up  every  week  in  some  news- 
paper or  magazine;  but  it's  not  my  favorite;  I  have 
tried  to  get  it  suppressed." 

Mark  Twain  made  his  first  investment  in  Redding  that 
spring.  I  had  located  there  the  autumn  before,  and 
in.— 12  1293 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


bought  a  vacant  old  house,  with  a  few  acres  of  land,  at 
what  seemed  a  modest  price.  I  was  naturally  enthusias- 
tic over  the  bargain,  and  the  beauty  and  salubrity  of  the 
situation.  His  interest  was  aroused,  and  when  he  learned 
that  there  was  a  place  adjoining,  equally  reasonable  and 
perhaps  even  more  attractive,  he  suggested  immediately 
that  I  buy  it  for  him;  and  he  wanted  to  write  a  check 
then  for  the  purchase  price,  for  fear  the  opportunity  might 
be  lost.  I  think  there  was  then  no  purpose  in  his  mind 
of  building  a  country  home;  but  he  foresaw  that  such  a 
site,  at  no  great  distance  from  New  York,  would  become 
more  valuable,  and  he  had  plenty  of  idle  means.  The 
purchase  was  made  without  difficulty — a  tract  of  seventy- 
five  acres,  to  which  presently  was  added  another  tract 
of  one  hundred  and  ten  acres,  and  subsequently  still  other 
parcels  of  land,  to  complete  the  ownership  of  the  hilltop, 
for  it  was  not  long  until  he  had  conceived  the  idea  of  a 
home.  He  was  getting  weary  of  the  heavy  pressure  of 
city  life.  He  craved  the  retirement  of  solitude — one  not 
too  far  from  the  maelstrom,  so  that  he  might  mingle 
with  it  now  and  then  when  he  chose.  The  country 
home  would  not  be  begun  for  another  year  yet,  but  the 
purpose  of  it  was  already  in  the  air.  No  one  of  the  family 
had  at  this  time  seen  the  location. 


Digitized  by 


ccxuv 


TRAITS  AND  PHILOSOPHIES 

I BROUGHT  to  the  dictation  one  morning  the  Omar 
Khayyam  card  which  Twichell  had  written  him  so 
long  ago;  I  had  found  it  among  the  letters.  It  furnished 
him  a  subject  for  that  morning.   He  said: 

How  strange  there  was  a  time  when  I  had  never  heard  of  Omar 
Khayyam!  When  that  card  arrived  I  had  already  read  the 
dozen  quatrains  or  so  in  the  morning  paper,  and  was  still  steeped 
in  the  ecstasy  of  delight  which  they  occasioned.  No  poem  had 
ever  given  me  so  much  pleasure  before,  and  none  has  given  me 
so  much  pleasure  since.  It  is  the  only  poem  I  have  ever  carried 
about  with  me.  It  has  not  been  from  under  my  hand  all  these 
years. 

P  He  had  no  general  fondness  for  poetry;  but  many 
poems  appealed  to  him,  and  on  occasion  he  liked  to  read 
them  aloud.  Once,  during  the  dictation,  some  verses 
were  sent  up  by  a  young  authoress  who  was  waiting  be- 
low for  his  verdict.  The  lines  pictured  a  phase  of  negro 
life,  and  she  wished  to  know  if  he  thought  them  worthy 
of  being  read  at  some  Tuskegee  ceremony.  He  did  not 
fancy  the  idea  of  attending  to  the  matter  just  then  and 
said: 

"Tell  her  she  can  read  it.  She  has  my  permission. 
She  may  commit  any  crime  she  wishes  in  my  name." 

It  was  urged  that  the  verses  were  of  high  merit  and 
the  author  a  very  cbiirming  young  lady. 

"I'm  very  glad,"  he  said,  "and  I  am  glad  the  Lord 

1295 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


made  her;  I  hope  He  will  make  some  more  just  like  her. 
I  don't  always  approve  of  His  handiwork,  but  in  this  case 
I  do." 

Then  suddenly  he  added: 

"Well,  let  me  see  it — no  time  like  the  present  to  get 
rid  of  these  things." 

He  took  the  manuscript  and  gave  such  a  rendition  of 
those  really  fine  verses  as  I  believe  could  not  be  improved 
upon.  We  were  held  breathless  by  his  dramatic  fervor 
and  power.  He  returned  a  message  to  that  young  as- 
pirant that  must  have  made  her  heart  sing.  When  the 
dictation  had  ended  that  day,  I  mentioned  his  dramatic 
gift. 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "it  is  a  gift,  I  suppose,  like  spelling  and 
punctuation  and  smoking.  I  seem  to  have  inherited  all 
those."  Continuing,  he  spoke  of  inherited  traits  in  gen- 
eral. 

"There  was  Paige,"  he  said;  "an  ignorant  man  who 
could  not  make  a  machine  himself  that  would  stand  up, 
nor  draw  the  working  plans  for  one;  but  he  invented  the 
eighteen  thousand  details  of  the  most  wonderful  machine 
the  world  has  ever  known.  He  watched  over  the  expert 
draftsmen,  and  superintended  the  building  of  that  marvel. 
Pratt  &  Whitney  built  it;  but  it  was  Paige's  machine, 
nevertheless — the  child  of  his  marvelous  gift.  We  don't 
create  any  of  our  traits;  we  inherit  all  of  them.  They 
have  come  down  to  us  from  what  we  impudently  call  the 
lower  animals.  Man  is  the  last  expression,  and  combines 
every  attribute  of  the  animal  tribes  that  preceded  him. 
One  or  two  conspicuous  traits  distinguish  each  family 
of  animals  from  the  others,  and  those  one  or  two  traits 
are  found  in  every  member  of  each  family,  and  are  so 
prominent  as  to  eternally  and  unchangeably  establish 
the  character  of  that  branch  of  the  animal  world.  In 
these  cases  we  concede  that  the  several  temperaments 
constitute  a  law  of  God,  a  command  of  God,  and  that 

1296  " 


Digitized  by  Google 


TRAITS  AND  PHILOSOPHIES 


whatsoever  is  done  in  obedience  to  that  law  is  blameless. 
Man,  in  his  evolution,  inherited  the  whole  sum  of  these 
numerous  traits,  and  with  each  trait  its  share  of  the  law 
of  God.  He  widely  differs  from  them  in  this:  that  he 
possesses  not  a  single  characteristic  that  is  equally  promi- 
nent in  each  member  of  his  race.  You  can  say  the  house- 
fly is  limitlessly  brave,  and  in  saying  it  you  describe  the 
whole  house-fly  tribe;  you  can  say  the  rabbit  is  limit- 
lessly timid,  and  by  the  phrase  you  describe  the  whole 
rabbit  tribe;  you  can  say  the  spider  and  the  tiger  are 
limitlessly  murderous,  and  by  that  phrase  you  describe 
the  whole  spider  and  tiger  tribes;  you  can  say  the  lamb 
is  limitlessly  innocent  and  sweet  and  gentle,  and  by  that 
phrase  you  describe  all  the  lambs.  There  is  hardly  a 
creature  that  you  cannot  definitely  and  satisfactorily  de- 
scribe by  one  single  trait — except  man.  Men  are  not  all 
cowards  like  the  rabbit,  nor  all  brave  like  the  house-fly, 
nor  all  sweet  and  innocent  and  gentle  like  the  lamb,  nor 
all  murderous  like  the  spider  and  the  tiger  and  the  wasp, 
nor  all  thieves  like  the  fox  and  the  bluejay,  nor  all  vain 
like  the  peacock,  nor  all  frisky  like  the  monkey.  These 
things  are  all  in  him  somewhere,  and  they  develop  ac- 
cording to  the  proportion  of  each  he  received  in  his  allot- 
ment. We  describe  a  man  by  his  vicious  traits  and  con- 
demn him;  or  by  his  fine  traits  and  gifts,  and  praise  him  and 
accord  him  high  merit  for  their  possession.  It  is  comical. 
He  did  not  invent  these  things;  he  did  not  stock  himself 
with  them.  God  conferred  them  upon  him  in  the  first 
instant  of  creation.  They  constitute  the  law,  and  he 
could  not  escape  obedience  to  the  decree  any  more  than 
Paige  could  have  built  the  type-setter  he  invented,  or  the 
Pratt  &  Whitney  machinists  could  have  invented  the 
machine  which  they  built." 

He  liked  to  stride  up  and  down,  smoking  as  he  talked, 
and  generally  his  words  were  slowly  measured,  with 
varying  pauses  between   them.    He  halted  in  the 

1297 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


midst  of  his  march,  and  without  a  suggestion  of  a  smile 
added: 

"What  an  amusing  creature  the  human  being  is!" 

It  is  absolutely  impossible,  of  course,  to  preserve  the 
atmosphere  and  personality  of  such  talks  as  this— the 
delicacies  of  his  speech  and  manner  which  carried  an 
ineffable  charm.  It  was  difficult,  indeed,  to  record  the 
substance.  I  did  not  know  shorthand,  and  I  should  not 
have  taken  notes  at  such  times  in  any  case;  but  I  had 
trained  myself  in  similar  work  to  preserve,  with  a  fair 
degree  of  accuracy,  the  form  of  phrase,  and  to  some 
extent  its  wording,  if  I  could  get  hold  of  pencil  and  paper 
soon  enough  afterward.  In  time  I  acquired  a  sort  of  phon- 
ographic faculty;  though  it  always  seemed  to  me  that  the 
bouquet,  the  subtleness  of  speech,  was  lacking  in  the 
result.  Sometimes,  indeed,  he  would  dictate  next  morn- 
ing the  substance  of  these  experimental  reflections;  or  I 
would  find  among  his  papers  memoranda  and  fragmentary 
manuscripts  where  he  had  set  them  down  himself,  either 
before  or  after  he  had  tried  them  verbally.  In  these 
cases  I  have  not  hesitated  to  amend  my  notes  where  it 
seemed  to  lend  reality  to  his  utterance,  though,  even  so, 
there  is  always  lacking — and  must  be — the  wonder  of 
his  personality. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXLV 

IN  THE  DAY'S  ROUND 

A NUMBER  of  dictations  of  this  period  were  about 
Susy,  her  childhood,  and  the  biography  she  had  writ- 
ten of  him,  most  of  which  he  included  in  his  chapters. 
More  than  once  after  such  dictations  he  reproached  him- 
self bitterly  for  the  misfortunes  of  his  house.  He  con- 
soled himself  a  little  by  saying  that  Susy  had  died  at  the 
right  time,  in  the  flower  of  youth  and  happiness;  but  he 
blamed  himself  for  the  lack  of  those  things  which  might 
have  made  her  childhood  still  more  bright.  Once  he  spoke 
of  the  biography  she  had  begun,  and  added: 

"Oh,  I  wish  I  had  paid  more  attention  to  that  little 
girl's  work!  If  I  had  only  encouraged  her  now  and 
then,  what  it  would  have  meant  to  her,  and  what  a  beau- 
tiful thing  it  would  have  been  to  have  had  her  story  of 
me  told  in  her  own  way,  year  after  year!  If  I  had  shown 
her  that  I  cared,  she  might  have  gone  on  with  it.  We  are 
always  too  busy  for  our  children ;  we  never  give  them  the 
time  nor  the  interest  they  deserve.  We  lavish  gifts  upon 
them;  but  the  most  precious  gift — our  personal  associa- 
tion, which  means  so  much  to  them — we  give  grudgingly 
and  throw  it  away  on  those  who  care  for  it  so  little." 
Then,  after  a  moment  of  silence:  "But  we  are  repaid  for 
it  at  last.  There  comes  a  time  when  we  want  their  com- 
pany and  their  interest.  We  want  it  more  than  anything 
in  the  world,  and  we  are  likely  to  be  starved  for  it,  just 
as  they  were  starved  so  long  ago.  There  is  no  apprecia- 
tion of  my  books  that  is  so  precious  to  me  as  appreciation 

1299 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


from  my  children.  Theirs  is  the  praise  we  want,  and  the 
praise  we  are  least  likely  to  get." 

His  moods  of  remorse  seemed  to  overwhelm  him  at 
times.  He  spoke  of  Henry's  death  and  little  Langdon's, 
and  charged  himself  with  both.  He  declared  that  for 
years  he  had  rilled  Mrs.  Clemens's  life  with  privations, 
that  the  sorrow  of  Susy's  death  had  hastened  her  own  end. 
How  darkly  he  painted  it!  One  saw  the  jester,  who  for 
forty  years  had  been  making  the  world  laugh,  performing 
always  before  a  background  of  tragedy. 

But  such  moods  were  evanescent.  He  was  oftener  gay 
than  somber.  One  morning  before  we  settled  down  to 
work  he  related  with  apparent  joy  how  he  had  made  a 
failure  of  story-telling  at  a  party  the  night  before.  An 
artist  had  told  him  a  yarn,  he  said,  which  he  had  con- 
sidered the  most  amusing  thing  in  the  world.  But  he  had 
not  been  satisfied  with  it,  and  had  attempted  to  improve 
on  it  at  the  party.  He  had  told  it  with  what  he  considered 
the  nicest  elaboration  of  detail  and  artistic  effect,  and 
when  he  had  concluded  and  expected  applause,  only  a 
sickening  silence  had  followed. 

"A  crowd  like  that  can  make  a  good  deal  of  silence 
when  they  combine,"  he  said,  "and  it  probably  lasted  as 
long  as  ten  seconds,  because  it  seemed  an  hour  and  a 
half.  Then  a  lady  said,  with  evident  feeling,  4  Lord,  how 
pathetic!'  For  a  moment  I  was  stupefied.  Then  the 
fountains  of  my  great  deeps  were  broken  up,  and  I  rained 
laughter  for  forty  days  and  forty  nights  during  as  much 
as  three  minutes.  By  that  time  I  realized  it  was  my 
fault.  I  had  overdone  the  thing.  I  started  in  to  deceive 
them  with  elaborate  burlesque  pathos,  in  order  to  magnify 
the  humorous  explosion  at  the  end;  but  I  had  constructed 
such  a  fog  of  pathos  that  when  I  got  to  the  humor  you 
couldn't  find  it." 

He  was  likely  to  begin  the  morning  with  some  such 
incident  which  perhaps  he  did  not  think  worth  while 

1300 


Digitized  by  Google 


IN  THE  DAY'S  ROUND 


to  include  in  his  dictations,  and  sometimes  he  interrupted 
his  dictations  to  relate  something  aside,  or  to  outline 
some  plan  or  scheme  which  his  thought  had  suggested. 

Once,  when  he  was  telling  of  a  magazine  he  had  pro- 
posed to  start,  the  Back  Number,  which  was  to  contain 
reprints  of  exciting  events  from  history — newspaper 
gleanings — eye-witness  narrations,  which  he  said  never 
lost  their  freshness  of  interest — he  suddenly  interrupted 
himself  to  propose  that  we  start  such  a  magazine  in  the 
near  future — he  to  be  its  publisher  and  I  its  editor.  I 
think  I  assented,  and  the  dictation  proceeded,  but  the 
scheme  disappeared  permanently. 

•  He  usually  had  a  number  of  clippings  or  slips  among 
the  many  books  on  the  bed  beside  him  from  which  he 
proposed  to  dictate  each  day,  but  he  seldom  could  find 
the  one  most  needed.  Once,  after  a  feverishly  impatient 
search  for  a  few  moments,  he  invited  Miss  Hobby  to 
leave  the  room  temporarily,  so,  as  he  said,  that  he  might 
swear.  He  got  up  and  we  began  to  explore  the  bed,  his 
profanity  increasing  amazingly  with  each  moment.  It 
was  an  enormously  large  bed,  and  he  began  to  disparage 
the  size  of  it. 

44  One  could  lose  a  dog  in  this  bed,"  he  declared. 

Finally  I  suggested  that  he  turn  over  the  clipping 
which  he  had  in  his  hand.  He  did  so,  and  it  proved  to 
be  the  one  he  wanted.  Its  discovery  was  followed  by  a 
period  of  explosions,  only  half  suppressed  as  to  volume. 
Then  he  said: 

"There  ought  to  be  a  room  in  this  house  to  swear 
in.  It's  dangerous  to  have  to  repress  an  emotion  like 
that." 

A  moment  later,  when  Miss  Hobby  returned,  he  was 
serene  and  happy  again.  He  was  usually  gentle  during 
the  dictations,  and  patient  with  those  around  him — re- 
markably so,  I  thought,  as  a  rule.  But  there  were  moments 
that  involved  risk.   He  had  requested  me  to  interrupt 

1301 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


his  dictation  at  any  time  that  I  found  him  repeating  or 
contradicting  himself,  or  misstating  some  fact  known 
to  me.  At  first  I  hesitated  to  do  this,  and  cautiously 
mentioned  the  matter  when  he  had  finished.  Then  he 
was  likely  to  say: 

"Why  didn't  you  stop  me?  Why  did  you  let  me  go 
on  making  a  jackass  of  myself  when  you  could  have 
saved  me?" 

So  then  I  used  to  take  the  risk  of  getting  struck  by 
lightning,  and  nearly  always  stopped  him  at  the  time. 
But  if  it  happened  that  I  upset  his  thought  the  thunder- 
bolt was  apt  to  fly.    He  would  say: 

"Now  you've  knocked  everything  out  of  my  head." 

Then,  of  course,  I  would  apologize  and  say  I  was  sorry, 
which  would  rectify  matters,  though  half  an  hour  later 
it  might  happen  again.  I  became  lightning-proof  at 
last;  also  I  learned  better  to  select  the  psychological  mo- 
ment for  the  correction. 

There  was  a  humorous  complexion  to  the  dictations 
which  perhaps  I  have  not  conveyed  to  the  reader  at 
all;  humor  was  his  natural  breath  and  life,  and  was  not 
wholly  absent  in  his  most  somber  intervals. 

But  poetry  was  there  as  well.  His  presence  was 
full  of  it:  the  grandeur  of  his  figure;  the  grace  of  his 
movement;  the  music  of  his  measured  speech.  Sometimes 
there  were  long  pauses  when  he  was  wandering  in  distant 
valleys  of  thought  and  did  not  speak  at  all.  At  such 
times  he  had  a  habit  of  folding  and  refolding  the  sleeve 
of  his  dressing-gown  around  his  wrist,  regarding  it  intent- 
ly, as  it  seemed.  His  hands  were  so  fair  and  shapely; 
the  palms  and  finger-tips  as  pink  as  those  of  a  child. 
Then  when  he  spoke  he  was  likely  to  fling  back  his  great, 
white  mane,  his  eyes  half  closed  yet  showing  a  gleam  of 
fire  between  the  lids,  his  clenched  fist  lifted,  or  his  index- 
finger  pointing,  to  give  force  and  meaning  to  his  words. 
I  cannot  recall  the  picture  too  often,  or  remind  myself 

1302 


Digitized  by  Google 


IN  THE  DAY'S  ROUND 


too  frequently  how  precious  it  was  to  be  there,  and  to  see 
him  and  to  hear  him.  I  do  not  know  why  I  have  not 
said  before  that  he  smoked  continually  during  these 
dictations — probably  as  an  aid  to  thought — though  he 
smoked  at  most  other  times,  for  that  matter.  His  cigars 
were  of  that  delicious  fragrance  which  characterizes 
domestic  tobacco;  but  I  had  learned  early  to  take  refuge 
in  another  brand  when  he  offered  me  one.  They  were 
black  and  strong  and  inexpensive,  and  it  was  only  his 
early  training  in  the  printing-office  and  on  the  river  that 
had  seasoned  him  to  tobacco  of  that  temper.  Rich,  ad- 
miring friends  used  to  send  him  quantities  of  expensive 
imported  cigars;  but  he  seldom  touched  them,  and  they 
crumbled  away  or  were  smoked  by  visitors.  Once,  to  a 
minister  who  proposed  to  send  him  something  very 
special,'  he  wrote: 

I  should  accept  your  hospitable  offer  at  once  but  for  the  fact 
that  I  couldn't  do  it  and  remain  honest.  That  is  to  say,  if  I 
allowed  you  to  send  me  what  you  believed  to  be  good  cigars  it 
would  distinctly  mean  that  I  meant  to  smoke  them,  whereas  I 
should  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  I  know  a  good  cigar  better  than 
you  do,  for  I  have  had  60  years'  experience. 

No,  that  is  not  what  I  mean;  I  mean  I  know  a  bad  cigar 
better  than  anybody  else.  I  judge  by  the  price  only;  if  it  costs 
above  5  cents  I  know  it  to  be  either  foreign  or  half  foreign  & 
unsmokable — by  me.  I  have  many  boxes  of  Havana  cigars, 
of  all  prices  from  20  cents  apiece  up  to  $1.66  apiece;  I  bought 
none  of  them,  they  were  all  presents;  they  are  an  accumulation 
of  several  years.  I  have  never  smoked  one  of  them  &  never 
shall;  I  work  them  off  on  the  visitor.  You  shall  have  a  chance 
when  you  come. 

He  smoked  a  pipe  a  good  deal,  and  he  preferred  it  to  be 
old  and  violent ;  and  once,  when  he  had  bought  a  new, 
expensive  English  brier-root  he  regarded  it  doubtfully 
for  a  time,  and  then  handed  it  over  to  me,  saying: 

1303 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"  I'd  like  to  have  you  smoke  that  a  year  or  two,  and  when 
it  gets  so  you  can't  stand  it,  maybe  it  will  suit  me." 

I  am  happy  to  add  that  subsequently  he  presented  me 
with  the  pipe  altogether,  for  it  apparently  never  seemed 
to  get  qualified  for  his  taste,  perhaps  because  the  tobacco 
used  was  too  mild. 

One  day,  after  the  dictation,  word  was  brought  up  that 
a  newspaper  man  was  down-stairs  who  wished  to  see 
him  concerning  a  report  that  Chauncey  Depew  was 
to  resign  his  Senatorial  seat  and  Mark  Twain  was  to 
be  nominated  in  his  place.  The  fancy  of  this  appealed 
to  him,  and  the  reporter  was  allowed  to  come  up.  He 
was  a  young  man,  and  seemed  rather  nervous,  and  did 
not  wish  to  state  where  the  report  had  originated.  His 
chief  anxiety  was  apparently  to  have  Mark  Twain's  com- 
ment on  the  matter.  Clemens  said  very  little  at  the  time. 
He  did  not  wish  to  be  a  Senator;  he  was  too  busy  just 
now  dictating  biography,  and  added  that  he  didn't 
think  he  would  care  for  the  job,  anyway.  When  the  re- 
porter was  gone,  however,  certain  humorous  possibilities 
developed.  The  Senatorship  would  be  a  stepping-stone 
to  the  Presidency,  and  with  the  combination  of  humorist, 
socialist,  and  peace-patriot  in  the  Presidential  chair  the 
nation  could  expect  an  interesting  time.  Nothing  further 
came  of  the  matter.  There  was  no  such  report.  The 
young  newspaper  man  had  invented  the  whole  idea  to 
get  a  "story"  out  of  Mark  Twain.  The  item  as  printed 
next  day  invited  a  good  deal  of  comment,  and  Collier's 
Weekly  made  it  a  text  for  an  editorial  on  his  mental 
vigor  and  general  fitness  for  the  place. 

If  it  happened  that  he  had  no  particular  engagement 
for  the  afternoon,  he  liked  to  walk  out,  especially  when 
the  pleasant  weather  came.  Sometimes  we  walked  up 
Fifth  Avenue,  and  I  must  admit  that  for  a  good  while  I 
could  not  get  rid  of  a  feeling  of  self-consciousness,  for 
most  people  turned  to  look,  though  I  was  fully  aware  that 

1304 


Digitized  by  Google 


IN  THE  DAY'S  ROUND 


I  did  not  in  the  least  come  into  their  scope  of  vision. 
They  saw  only  Mark  Twain.  The  feeling  was  a  more 
comfortable  one  at  The  Players,  where  we  sometimes 
went  for  luncheon,  for  the  acquaintance  there  and  the 
democracy  of  that  institution  had  a  tendency  to  elimi- 
nate contrasts  and  incongruities.  We  sat  at  the  Round 
Table  among  those  good  fellows  who  were  always  so  glad 
to  welcome  him. 

Once  we  went  to  the  "  Music  Master, "  that  tender  play 
of  Charles  Klein's,  given  by  that  matchless  interpreter, 
David  Warfield.  Clemens  was  fascinated,  and  said  more 
than  once: 

"It  is  as  permanent  as  'Rip  Van  Winkle.'  Warfield, 
like  Jefferson,  can  go  on  playing  it  all  his  life." 

We  went  behind  when  it  was  over,  and  I  could  see  that 
Warfield  glowed  with  Mark  Twain's  unstinted  approval. 
Later,  when  I  saw  him  at  The  Players,  he  declared  that 
no  former  compliment  had  ever  made  him  so  happy. 

There  were  some  billiard  games  going  on  between  the 
champions  Hoppe  and  Sutton,  at  the  Madison  Square 
Garden,  and  Clemens,  with  his  eager  fondness  for  the 
sport,  was  anxious  to  attend  them.  He  did  not  like  to  go 
anywhere  alone,  and  one  evening  he  invited  me  to  ac- 
company him.  Just  as  he  stepped  into  the  auditorium 
there  was  a  vigorous  round  of  applause.  The  players 
stopped,  somewhat  puzzled,  for  no  especially  brilliant  shot 
had  been  made.  Then  they  caught  the  figure  of  Mark 
Twain  and  realized  that  the  game,  for  the  moment,  was 
not  the  chief  attraction.  The  audience  applauded  again, 
and  waved  their  handkerchiefs.  Such  a  tribute  is  not 
often  paid  to  a  private  citizen. 

Clemens  had  a  great  admiration  for  the  young  cham- 
pion Hoppe,  which  the  billiardist's  extreme  youth  and 
brilliancy  invited,  and  he  watched  his  game  with  intense 
eagerness.  When  it  was  over  the  referee  said  a  few  words 
and  invited  Mark  Twain  to  speak.    He  rose  and  told 

1305 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


them  a  story — probably  invented  on  the  instant.  He 
said: 

"Once  in  Nevada  I  dropped  into  a  billiard-room  casu- 
ally, and  picked  up  a  cue  and  began  to  knock  the  balls 
around.  The  proprietor,  who  was  a  red-haired  man, 
with  such  hair  as  I  have  never  seen  anywhere  except 
on  a  torch,  asked  me  if  I  would  like  to  play.  I  said,  'Yes.' 
He  said,  '  Knock  the  balls  around  a  little  and  let  me  see 
how  you  can  shoot.'  So  I  knocked  them  around,  and 
thought  I  was  doing  pretty  well,  when  he  said,  'That's 
all  right;  I'll  play  you  left-handed.'  It  hurt  my  pride, 
but  I  played  him.  We  banked  for  the  shot  and  he  won 
it.  Then  he  commenced  to  play,  and  I  commenced  to 
chalk  my  cue  to  get  ready  to  play,  and  he  went  on  playing, 
and  I  went  on  chalking  my  cue;  and  he  played  and  I 
chalked  all  through  that  game.  When  he  had  run  his 
string  out  I  said: 

"'That's  wonderful!  perfectly  wonderful!  If  you  can 
play  that  way  left-handed  what  could  you  do  right- 
handed?' 

"'Couldn't  do  anything,'  he  said.  'I'm  a  left-handed 
man.'" 

How  it  delighted  them!  I  think  it  was  the  last  speech 
of  any  sort  he  made  that  season.  A  week  or  two  later 
he  went  to  Dublin,  New  Hampshire,  for  the  summer — 
this  time  to  the  Upton  House,  which  had  been  engaged 
a  year  before,  the  Copley  Greene  place  being  now  occu- 
pied by  its  owner. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXLVI 


THE  SECOND  SUMMER  AT  DUBLIN* 

THE  Upton  House  stands  on  the  edge  of  a  beautiful 
beech  forest  some  two  or  three  miles  from  Dublin, 
just  under  Monadnock — a  good  way  up  the  slope.  It  is 
a  handsome,  roomy  frame-house,  and  had  a  long  colon- 
naded veranda  overlooking  one  of  the  most  beautiful 
landscape  visions  on  the  planet:  lake,  forest,  hill,  and  a 
far  range  of  blue  mountains — all  the  handiwork  of  God 
is  there.  I  had  seen  these  things  in  paintings,  but  I  had 
not  dreamed  that  such  a  view  really  existed.  The  im- 
mediate foreground  was  a  grassy  slope,  with  ancient, 
blooming  apple-trees;  and  just  at  the  right  hand  Monad- 
nock rose,  superb  and  lofty,  sloping  down  to  the  panorama 
below  that  stretched  away,  taking  on  an  ever  deeper  blue, 
until  it  reached  that  remote  range  on  which  the  sky 
rested  and  the  world  seemed  to  end.  It  was  a  master- 
piece of  the  Greater  Mind,  and  of  the  highest  order,  per- 
haps, for  it  had  in  it  nothing  of  the  touch  of  man.  A 
church  spire  glinted  here  and  there,  but  there  was  never 
a  bit  of  field,  or  stone  wall,  or  cultivated  land.  It  was 
lonely;  it  was  unfriendly;  it  cared  nothing  whatever  for 
humankind;  it  was  as  if  God,  after  creating  all  the  world, 
had  wrought  His  masterwork  here,  and  had  been  so  en- 
grossed with  the  beauty  of  it  that  He  had  forgotten  to 
give  it  a  soul.  In  a  sense  this  was  true,  for  He  had  not 
made  the  place  suitable  for  the  habitation  of  men.  It 
lacked  the  human  touch,  the  human  interest,  and  I  could 
never  quite  believe  in  its  reality. 

1307 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


The  time  of  arrival  heightened  this  first  impression.  It 
was  mid-May  and  the  lilacs  were  prodigally  in  bloom; 
but  the  bright  sunlight  was  chill  and  unnatural,  and 
there  was  a  west  wind  that  laid  the  grass  flat  and  moaned 
through  the  house,  and  continued  as  steadily  as  if  it 
must  never  stop  from  year's  end  to  year's  end.  It 
seemed  a  spectral  land,  a  place  of  supernatural  beauty. 
Warm,  still,  languorous  days  would  come,  but  that 
first  feeling  of  unreality  would  remain  permanent.  I  be- 
lieve Jean  Clemens  was  the  only  one  who  ever  really 
loved  the  place.  Something  about  it  appealed  to  her 
elemental  side  and  blended  with  her  melancholy  moods. 
She  dressed  always  in  white,  and  she  was  tall  and  pale 
and  classically  beautiful,  and  she  was  often  silent,  like 
a  spirit.  She  had  a  little  retreat  for  herself  farther  up 
the  mountain-side,  and  spent  most  of  her  days  there 
wood-carving,  which  was  her  chief  diversion. 

Clara  Clemens  did  not  come  to  the  place  at  all.  She 
was  not  yet  strong,  and  went  to  Norfolk,  Connecticut, 
where  she  could  still  be  in  quiet  retirement  and  have 
her  physician's  care.  Miss  Hobby  came,  and  on  the 
21st  of  May  the  dictations  were  resumed.  We  began  in 
his  bedroom,  as  before,  but  the  feeling  there  was  de- 
pressing— the  absence  of  the  great  carved  bed  and  other 
furnishings,  which  had  been  so  much  a  part  of  the  pic- 
ture, was  felt  by  all  of  us.  Nothing  of  the  old  luxury  and 
richness  was  there.  It  was  a  summer-furnished  place, 
handsome  but  with  the  customary  bareness.  At  the 
end  of  this  first  session  he  dressed  in  his  snowy  flannels, 
which  he  had  adopted  in  the  place  of  linen  for  summer 
wear,  and  we  descended  to  the  veranda  and  looked  out 
over  that  wide,  wonderful  expanse  of  scenery. 

"I  think  I  shall  like  it,"  he  said,  "when  I  get  ac- 
quainted with  it,  and  get  it  classified  and  labeled,  and  I 
think  we'll  do  our  dictating  out  here  hereafter.  It 
ought  to  be  an  inspiring  place." 

1308 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SECOND  SUMMER  AT  DUBLIN 


So  the  dictations  were  transferred  to  the  long  veranda, 
and  he  was  generally  ready  for  them,  a  white  figure  pac- 
ing up  and  down  before  that  panoramic  background. 
During  the  earlier,  cooler  weeks  he  usually  continued 
walking  with  measured  step  during  the  dictations,  pausing 
now  and  then  to  look  across  the  far-lying  horizon.  When 
it  stormed  we  moved  into  the  great  living-room,  where 
at  one  end  there  was  a  fireplace  with  blazing  logs,  and  at 
the  other  the  orchestrelle,  which  had  once  more  been 
freighted  up  those  mountain  heights  for  the  comfort  of 
its  harmonies.  Sometimes,  when  the  wind  and  rain  were 
beating  outside,  and  he  was  striding  up  and  down  the 
long  room  within,  with  only  the  blurred  shapes  of  moun- 
tains and  trees  outlined  through  the  trailing  rain,  the 
feeling  of  the  unreality  became  so  strong  that  it  was  hard 
to  believe  that  somewhere  down  below,  beyond  the  rain 
and  the  woods,  there  was  a  literal  world — a  common- 
place world,  where  the  ordinary  things  of  life  were  going 
on  in  the  usual  way.  When  the  dictation  finished  early, 
there  would  be  music — the  music  that  he  loved  most — 
Beethoven's  symphonies,  or  the  Schubert  impromptu, 
or  the  sonata  by  Chopin.1  It  is  easy  to  understand  that 
this  carried  one  a  remove  farther  from  the  customary 
things  of  life.  It  was  a  setting  far  out  of  the  usual, 
though  it  became  that  unique  white  figure  and  his  occu- 
pation. In  my  notes,  made  from  day  to  day,  I  find  that 
I  have  set  down  more  than  once  an  impression  of  the 
curious  unreality  of  the  place  and  its  surroundings,  which 
would  show  that  it  was  not  a  mere  passing  fancy. 

I  had  lodgings  in  the  village,  and  drove  out  mornings 
for  the  dictations,  but  often  came  out  again  afoot  on 
pleasant  afternoons;  for  he  was  not  much  occupied  with 
social  matters,  and  there  was  opportunity  for  quiet,  in- 
forming interviews.    There  was  a  woods  path  to  the 

1  Schubert,  Op.  142,  No.  2;  Chopin,  Op.  37,  No.  2. 

I309 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Upton  place,  and  it  was  a  walk  through  a  fairyland.  A 
part  of  the  way  was  through  such  a  growth  of  beech 
timber  as  I  have  never  seen  elsewhere:  tall,  straight, 
mottled  trees  with  an  undergrowth  of  laurel,  the  sunlight 
sifting  through;  one  found  it  easy  to  expect  there  story- 
book ladies,  wearing  crowns  and  green  mantles,  riding  on 
white  palfreys.  Then  came  a  more  open  way,  an  aban- 
doned grass-grown  road  full  of  sunlight  and  perfume, 
and  this  led  to  a  dim,  religious  place,  a  natural  cathedral, 
where  the  columns  were  stately  pine-trees  branching  and 
meeting  at  the  top:  a  veritable  temple  in  which  it  always 
seemed  that  music  was  about  to  play.  You  crossed  a  brook 
and  climbed  a  little  hill,  and  pushed  through  a  hedge 
into  a  place  more  open,  and  the  house  stood  there  among 
the  trees. 

The  days  drifted  along,  one  a  good  deal  like  another, 
except,  as  the  summer  deepened,  the  weather  became 
warmer,  the  foliage  changed,  a  drowsy  haze  gathered 
along  the  valleys  and  on  the  mountain-side.  He  sat 
more  often  now  in  a  large  rocking-chair,  and  generally 
seemed  to  be  looking  through  half-closed  lids  toward 
the  Monadnock  heights,  that  were  always  changing  in 
aspect— in  color  and  in  form— as  cloud  shapes  drifted  by 
or  gathered  in  those  lofty  hollows.  White  and  yellow 
butterflies  hovered  over  the  grass,  and  there  were  some 
curious,  large  black  ants — the  largest  I  have  ever  seen 
and  quite  harmless — that  would  slip  in  and  out  of  the 
cracks  on  the  veranda  floor,  wholly  undisturbed  by  us. 
Now  and  then  a  light  flutter  of  wind  would  come  mur- 
muring up  from  the  trees  below,  and  when  the  apple- 
bloom  was  falling  there  would  be  a  whirl  of  white  and 
pink  petals  that  seemed  a  cloud  of  smaller  butterflies. 

On  June  ist  I  find  in  my  note-book  this  entry: 

Warm  and  pleasant.  The  dictation  about  Grant  continues; 
a  great  privilege  to  hear  this  foremost  man  of  letters  review 

1310 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SECOND  SUMMER  AT  DUBLIN 


his  associations  with  that  foremost  man  of  arms.  He  remained 
seated  to-day,  dressed  in  white  as  usual,  a  large  yellow  pansy  in 
his  buttonhole,  his  white  hair  ruffled  by  the  breeze.  He  wears 
his  worn  morocco  slippers  with  black  hose;  sits  in  the  rocker, 
smoking  and  looking  out  over  the  hazy  hills,  delivering  his  sen- 
tences with  a  measured  accuracy  that  seldom  calls  for  change. 
He  is  speaking  just  now  of  a  Grant  dinner  which  he  attended 
where  Depew  spoke.  One  is  impressed  with  the  thought  that 
we  are  looking  at  and  listening  to  the  war-worn  veteran  of  a 
thousand  dinners — the  honored  guest  of  many;  an  honored 
figure  of  all.  Earlier,  when  he  had  been  chastising  some 
old  offender,  he  added,  "However,  he's  dead,  and  I  forgive 
him."  Then,  after  a  moment's  reflection,  "  No;  strike  that  last 
sentence  out."  When  we  laughed,  he  added,  "We  can't  forgive 
him  yet." 

A  few  days  later — it  was  June  4th,  the  day  before  the 
second  anniversary  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  Clemens — we 
found  him  at  first  in  excellent  humor  from  the  long  dicta- 
tion of  the  day  before.  Then  his  mind  reverted  to  the 
tragedy  of  the  season,  and  he  began  trying  to  tell  of  it. 
It  was  hard  work.  He  walked  back  and  forth  in  the  soft 
sunlight,  saying  almost  nothing.  He  gave  it  up  at  last, 
remarking,  "We  will  not  work  to-morrow."  So  we  went 
away. 

He  did  not  dictate  on  the  5th  or  the  6th,  but  on  the 
7th  he  resumed  the  story  of  Mrs.  Clemens's  last  days  at 
Florence.  The  weather  had  changed:  the  sunlight  and 
warmth  had  all  gone;  a  chill,  penetrating  mist  was  on 
the  mountains;  Monadnock  was  blotted  out.  We  ex- 
pected him  to  go  to  the  fire,  but  evidently  he  could  not 
bear  being  shut  in  with  that  subject  in  his  mind.  A 
black  cape  was  brought  out  and  thrown  about  his  shoul- 
ders, which  seemed  to  fit  exactly  into  the  somberness  of 
the  picture.  For  two  hours  or  more  we  sat  there  in  the 
gloom  and  chill,  while  he  paced  up  and  down,  detailing 
as  graphically  as  might  be  that  final  chapter  in  the  life 
of  the  woman  he  had  loved. 

13" 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  beyond  the  dictation 
Clemens  did  very  little  literary  work  during  these  months. 
He  had  brought  his  "manuscript  trunk"  as  usual,  think- 
ing, perhaps,  to  finish  the  "microbe"  story  and  other  of 
the  uncompleted  things;  but  the  dictation  gave  him 
sufficient  mental  exercise,  and  he  did  no  more  than  look 
over  his  "stock  in  trade,"  as  he  called  it,  and  incor- 
porate a  few  of  the  finished  manuscripts  into  "auto- 
biography." Among  these  were  the  notes  of  his  trip  down 
the  Rhone,  made  in  1891,  and  the  old  Stormfield  story, 
which  he  had  been  treasuring  and  suppressing  so  long. 
He  wrote  Howells  in  June: 

The  dictating  goes  lazily  and  pleasantly  on.  With  inter- 
vals. I  find  that  I've  been  at  it,  off  &  on,  nearly  two  hours  for 
155  days  since  January  9.  To  be  exact,  I've  dictated  75  hours 
in  80  days  &  loafed  75  days.  I've  added  60,000  words  in  the 
month  that  I've  been  here;  which  indicates  that  I've  dictated 
during  20  days  of  that  time — 40  hours,  at  an  average  of  1,500 
words  an  hour.   It's  a  plenty,  &  I'm  satisfied. 

There's  a  good  deal  of  "  fat."  I've  dictated  (from  January  9) 
210,000  words,  &  the  "fat"  adds  about  50,000  more. 

The  "fat"  is  old  pigeonholed  things  of  the  years  gone  by 
which  I  or  editors  didn't  das't  to  print.  For  instance,  I  am 
dumping  in  the  little  old  book  which  I  read  to  you  in  Hartford 
about  30  years  ago  &  which  you  said  "publish  &  ask  Dean 
Stanley  to  furnish  an  introduction;  he'll  do  it"  (Captain 
Stormfield1  s  Visit  to  Heaven),  It  reads  quite  to  suit  me  with- 
out altering  a  word  now  that  it  isn't  to  see  print  until  I  am  dead. 

To-morrow  I  mean  to  dictate  a  chapter  which  will  get  my  heirs 
&  assigns  burned  alive  if  they  venture  to  print  it  this  side  of 
a.d.  2006 — which  I  judge  they  won't.  There'll  be  lots  of  such 
chapters  if  I  live  3  or  4  years  longer.  The  edition  of  a.d.  2006 
will  make  a  stir  when  it  comes  out.  I  shall  be  hovering  around 
taking  notice,  along  with  other  dead  pals.   You  are  invited. 

The  chapter  which  was  to  invite  death  at  the  stake  for 
his  successors  was  naturally  one  of  religions  heresies — 

1312 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  SECOND  SUMMER  AT  DUBLIN 


a  violent  attack  on  the  orthodox,  scriptural  God,  but 
really  an  expression  of  the  highest  reverence  for  the  God 
which,  as  he  said,  had  created  the  earth  and  sky  and  the 
music  of  the  constellations.  Mark  Twain  once  expressed 
himself  concerning  reverence  and  the  lack  of  it: 

"I  was  never  consciously  and  purposely  irreverent  in 
my  life,  yet  one  person  or  another  is  always  charging 
me  with  a  lack  of  reverence.  Reverence  for  what — for 
whom?  Who  is  to  decide  what  ought  to  command  my 
reverence — my  neighbor  or  I?  I  think  I  ought  to  do 
the  electing  myself.  The  Mohammedan  reveres  Moham- 
med— it  is  his  privilege;  the  Christian  doesn't — apparently 
that  is  his  privilege;  the  account  is  square  enough. 
They  haven't  any  right  to  complain  of  the  other,  yet  they 
do  complain  of  each  other,  and  that  is  where  the  unfair- 
ness comes  in.  Each  says  that  the  other  is  irreverent, 
and  both  are  mistaken,  for  manifestly  you  can't  have 
reverence  for  a  thing  that  doesn't  command  it.  If  you 
could  do  that  you  could  digest  what  you  haven't  eaten, 
and  do  other  miracles  and  get  a  reputation." 

He  was  not  reading  many  books  at  this  time — he  was 
inclined  rather  to  be  lazy,  as  he  said,  and  to  loaf  during 
the  afternoons;  but  I  remember  that  he  read  aloud 
After  the  Wedding  and  The  Mother — those  two  beautiful 
word-pictures  by  Howells — which  he  declared  sounded 
the  depths  of  humanity  with  a  deep-sea  lead.  Also  he  read 
a  book  by  William  Allen  White,  In  Our  Town,  a  collection 
of  tales  that  he  found  most  admirable.  I  think  he  took 
the  trouble  to  send  White  a  personal,  hand- written  letter 
concerning  them,  although,  with  the  habit  of  dictation, 
he  had  begun,  as  he  said,  to  "loathe  the  use  of  the  pen." 

There  were  usually  some  sort  of  mild  social  affairs 
going  on  in  the  neighborhood,  luncheons  and  afternoon 
gatherings  like  those  of  the  previous  year,  though  he  seems 
to  have  attended  fewer  of  them,  for  he  did  not  often 
leave  the  house.   Once,  at  least,  he  assisted  in  an  after- 

1313 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


noon  entertainment  at  the  Dublin  Club,  where  he  intro- 
duced his  invention  of  the  art  of  making  an  impromptu 
speech,  and  was  assisted  in  its  demonstration  by  George 
de  Forest  Brush  and  Joseph  Lindon  Smith,  to  the  very 
great  amusement  of  a  crowd  of  summer  visitors.  The 
"art"  consisted  mainly  of  having  on  hand  a  few  reliable 
anecdotes  and  a  set  formula  which  would  lead  directly 
to  them  from  any  given  subject. 

Twice  or  more  he  collected  the  children  of  the  neighbor- 
hood for  charades  and  rehearsed  them,  and  took  part  in 
the  performance,  as  in  the  Hartford  days.  Sometimes 
he  drove  out  or  took  an  extended  walk.  But  these  things 
were  seldom. 

Now  and  then  during  the  summer  he  made  a  trip  to 
New  York  of  a  semi-business  nature,  usually  going  by 
the  way  of  Fairhaven,  where  he  would  visit  for  a  few  days, 
journeying  the  rest  of  the  way  in  Mr.  Rogers's  yacht. 
Once  they  made  a  cruise  of  considerable  length  to  Bar 
Harbor  and  elsewhere.  Here  is  an  amusing  letter  which 
he  wrote  to  Mrs.  Rogers  after  such  a  visit: 

Dear  Mrs.  Rocers, — In  packing  my  things  in  your  house 
yesterday  morning  I  inadvertently  put  in  some  articles  that  was 
laying  around,  I  thinking  about  theollogy  &  not  noticing,  the 
way  this  family  does  in  similar  circumstances  like  these.  Two 
books,  Mr.  Rogers'  brown  slippers,  &  a  ham.  I  thought  it  was 
ourn,  it  looks  like  one  we  used  to  have.  I  am  very  sorry  it 
happened,  but  it  sha'n't  occur  again  &  don't  you  worry.  He  will 
temper  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb  &  I  will  send  some  of  the 
things  back  anyway  if  there  is  some  that  won't  keep. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXLVII 


DUBLIN,  CONTINUED* 

IN  time  Mark  Twain  became  very  lonely  in  Dublin. 
After  the  brilliant  winter  the  contrast  was  too  great. 
He  was  not  yet  ready  for  exile.  In  one  of  his  dictations 
he  said: 

The  skies  are  enchantingly  blue.  The  world  is  a  dazzle  of 
sunshine.  Monadnock  is  closer  to  us  than  usual  by  several 
hundred  yards.  The  vast  extent  of  spreading  valley  is  intensely 
green — the  lakes  as  intensely  blue.  And  there  is  a  new  horizon, 
a  remoter  one  than  we  have  known  before,  for  beyond  the  mighty 
half-circle  of  hazy  mountains  that  form  the  usual  frame  of  the 
picture  rise  certain  shadowy  great  domes  that  are  unfamiliar 
to  our  eyes.  .  .  . 

But  there  is  a  defect — only  one,  but  it  is  a  defect  which  almost 
entitles  it  to  be  spelled  with  a  capital  D.  This  is  the  defect 
of  loneliness.  We  have  not  a  single  neighbor  who  is  a  neighbor. 
Nobody  lives  within  two  miles  of  us  except  Franklin  MacVeagh, 
and  he  is  the  farthest  off  of  any,  because  he  is  in  Europe.  .  .  . 

I  feel  for  Adam  and  Eve  now,  for  I  know  how  it  was  with 
them.  I  am  existing,  broken-hearted,  in  a  Garden  of  Eden. .  . . 
The  Garden  of  Eden  I  now  know  was  an  unendurable  solitude.  I 
know  that  the  advent  of  the  serpent  was  a  welcome  change — 
anything  for  society.  .  .  . 

I  never  rose  to  the  full  appreciation  of  the  utter  solitude  of 
this  place  until  a  symbol  of  it — a  compact  and  visible  allegory 
of  it — furnished  me  the  lacking  lift  three  days  ago.  I  was  stand- 
ing alone  on  this  veranda,  in  the  late  afternoon,  mourning  over 
the  stillness,  the  far-spreading,  beautiful  desolation,  and  the 
absence  of  visible  life,  when  a  couple  of  shapely  and  graceful 
deer  came  sauntering  across  the  grounds  and  stopped,  and  at 

1315 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


their  leisure  impudently  looked  me  over,  as  if  they  had  an  idea 
of  buying  me  as  bric-a-brac.  Then  they  seemed  to  conclude 
that  they  could  do  better  for  less  money  elsewhere,  and  they 
sauntered  indolently  away  and  disappeared  among  the  trees. 
It  sized  up  this  solitude.  It  is  so  complete,  so  perfect,  that  even 
the  wild  animals  are  satisfied  with  it.  Those  dainty  creatures 
were  not  in  the  least  degree  afraid  of  me. 

This  was  no  more  than  a  mood— though  real  enough 
while  it  lasted — somber,  and  in  its  way  regal.  It  was 
the  loneliness  of  a  king — King  Lear.  Yet  he  returned 
gladly  enough  to  solitude  after  each  absence. 

It  was  just  before  one  of  his  departures  that  I  made 
another  set  of  pictures  of  him,  this  time  on  the  colonnaded 
veranda,  where  his  figure  had  become  so  familiar.  He 
had  determined  to  have  his  hair  cut  when  he  reached 
New  York,  and  I  was  anxious  to  get  the  pictures  before 
this  happened.  When  the  proofs  came — seven  of  them — 
he  arranged  them  as  a  series  to  illustrate  what  he  called 
"The  Progress  of  a  Moral  Purpose."  He  ordered  a 
number  of  sets  of  this  series,  and  he  wrote  a  legend  on 
each  photograph,  numbering  them  from  i  to  7,  laying 
each  set  in  a  sheet  of  letter-paper  which  formed  a  sort 
of  wrapper,  on  which  was  written: 

This  series  of  7  photographs  registers  with  scientific  precision, 
stage  by  stage,  the  progress  of  a  moral  purpose  through  the 
mind  of  the  human  race's  Oldest  Friend.  S.  L.  C. 

He  added  a  personal  inscription,  and  sent  one  to  each 
of  his  more  intimate  friends.  One  of  the  pictures  amused 
him  more  than  the  others,  because  during  the  exposure 
a  little  kitten,  unnoticed,  had  walked  into  it,  and  paused 
near  his  foot.  He  had  never  outgrown  his  love  for  cats, 
and  he  had  rented  this  kitten  and  two  others  for  the 
summer  from  a  neighbor.  He  didn't  wish  to  own  them, 
he  said,  for  then  he  would  have  to  leave  them  behind 

1316 


Digitized  by  Google 


DUBLIN,  CONTINUED 


uncared  for,  so  he  preferred  to  rent  them  and  pay  suffi- 
ciently to  insure  their  subsequent  care.  These  kittens 
he  called  Sackcloth  and  Ashes — Ashes  being  the  joint 
name  of  the  two  that  looked  exactly  alike,  and  so  did  not 
need  distinctive  titles.  Their  gambols  always  amused 
him.  He  would  stop  any  time  in  the  midst  of  dictation 
to  enjoy  them.  Once,  as  he  was  about  to  enter  the  screen- 
door  that  led  into  the  hall,  two  of  the  kittens  ran  up  in 
front  of  him  and  stood  waiting.  With  grave  politeness 
he  opened  the  door,  made  a  low  bow,  and  stepped  back 
and  said:  "Walk  in,  gentlemen.  I  always  give  precedence 
to  royalty."  And  the  kittens  marched  in,  tails  in  air.  All 
summer  long  they  played  up  and  down  the  wide  veranda, 
or  chased  grasshoppers  and  butterflies  down  the  clover 
slope.  It  was  a  never-ending  amusement  to  him  to  see 
them  jump  into  the  air  after  some  insect,  miss  it  and 
tumble  back,  and  afterward  jump  up,  with  a  surprised 
expression  and  a  look  of  disappointment  and  disgust.  I 
remember  once,  when  he  was  walking  up  and  down  dis- 
cussing some  very  serious  subject — and  one  of  the  kittens 
was  lying  on  the  veranda  asleep — a  butterfly  came  drift- 
ing along  three  feet  or  so  above  the  floor.  The  kitten 
must  have  got  a  glimpse  of  the  insect  out  of  the  corner 
of  its  eye,  and  perhaps  did  not  altogether  realize  its 
action.  At  all  events,  it  suddenly  shot  straight  up  into 
the  air,  exactly  like  a  bounding  rubber  ball,  missed  the 
butterfly,  fell  back  on  the  porch  floor  with  considerable 
force  and  with  much  surprise.  Then  it  sprang  to  its 
feet,  and,  after  spitting  furiously  once  or  twice,  bound- 
ed away.  Clemens  had  seen  the  performance,  and  it 
completely  took  his  subject  out  of  his  mind.  He 
laughed  extravagantly,  and  evidently  cared  more  for 
that  moment's  entertainment  than  for  many  philoso- 
phies. 

In  that  remote  solitude  there  was  one  important 
advantage — there  was  no  procession  of  human  beings 

1317 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


with  axes  to  grind,  and  few  curious  callers.  Occasionally 
an  automobile  would  find  its  way  out  there  and  make  a 
circuit  of  the  drive,  but  this  happened  too  seldom  to 
annoy  him.  Even  newspaper  men  rarely  made  the  long 
trip  from  Boston  or  New  York  to  secure  his  opinions,  and 
when  they  came  it  was  by  permission  and  appointment. 
Newspaper  telegrams  arrived  now  and  then,  asking  for 
a  sentiment  on  some  public  condition  or  event,  and  these 
he  generally  answered  willingly  enough.  When  the 
British  Premier,  Campbell-Bannerman,  celebrated  his 
seventieth  birthday,  the  London  Tribune  and  the  New 
York  Herald  requested  a  tribute.  He  furnished  it,  for 
Bannerman  was  a  very  old  friend.  He  had  known  him 
first  at  Marienbad  in  '91,  and  in  Vienna  in  '98,  in  daily 
intercourse,  when  they  had  lived  at  the  same  hotel.  His 
tribute  ran: 

To  His  Excellency  the  British  Premier, — Congratu- 
lations, not  condolences.  Before  seventy  we  are  merely  re- 
spected, at  best,  and  we  have  to  behave  all  the  time,  or  we  lose 
that  asset;  but  after  seventy  we  are  respected,  esteemed,  ad- 
mired, revered,  and  don't  have  to  behave  unless  we  want  to. 
When  I  first  knew  you,  Honored  Sir,  one  of  us  was  hardly  even 
respected.  Mark  Twain. 

He  had  some  misgivings  concerning  the  telegram  after 
it  had  gone,  but  he  did  not  recall  it. 

Clemens  became  the  victim  of  a  very  clever  hoax  that 
summer.  One  day  a  friend  gave  him  two  examples  of 
the  most  deliriously  illiterate  letters,  supposed  to  have 
been  written  by  a  woman  who  had  contributed  certain 
articles  of  clothing  to  the  San  Francisco  sufferers,  and 
later  wished  to  recall  them  because  of  the  protests  of 
her  household.  He  was  so  sure  that  the  letters  were 
genuine  that  he  included  them  in  his  dictations,  after 
reading  them  aloud  with  great  effect.  To  tell  the  truth, 
they  did  seem  the  least  bit  too  well  done,  too  literary 

1318 


Digitized  by  Google 


DUBLIN,  CONTINUED 


in  their  illiteracy;  but  his  natural  optimism  refused  to 
admit  of  any  suspicion,  and  a  little  later  he  incorporated 
one  of  the  Jennie  Allen  letters  in  a  speech  which  he  made 
at  a  Press  Club  dinner  in  New  York  on  the  subject  of 
simplified  spelling — offering  it  as  an  example  of  language 
with  phonetic  brevity  exercising  its  supreme  function, 
the  direct  conveyance  of  ideas.  The  letters,  in  the  end, 
proved  to  be  the  clever  work  of  Miss  Grace  Donworth, 
who  has  since  published  them  serially  and  in  book  form. 
Clemens  was  not  at  all  offended  or  disturbed  by  the 
exposure.  He  even  agreed  to  aid  the  young  author  in 
securing  a  publisher,  and  wrote  to  Miss  Stockbridge, 
through  whom  he  had  originally  received  the  documents: 

Dear  Miss  Stockbridge  (if  she  really  exists), 
257  Benefit  Street  (if  there  is  any  such  place): 

Yes,  I  should  like  a  copy  of  that  other  letter.  This  whole 
fake  is  delightful,  &  I  tremble  with  fear  that  you  are  a  fake  your- 
self &  that  I  am  your  guileless  prey.  (But  never  mind,  it  isn't 
any  matter.) 

Now  as  to  publication — 

He  set  forth  his  views  and  promised  his  assistance  when 
enough  of  the  letters  should  be  completed. 

Clemens  allowed  his  name  to  be  included  with  the  list 
of  spelling  reformers,  but  he  never  employed  any  of  the 
reforms  in  his  letters  or  writing.  His  interest  was 
mainly  theoretical,  and  when  he  wrote  or  spoke  on  the 
subject  his  remarks  were  not  likely  to  be  testimonials 
in  its  favor.  His  own  theory  was  that  the  alphabet 
needed  reform,  first  of  all,  so  that  each  letter  or  character 
should  have  one  sound,  and  one  sound  only;  and  he 
offered  as  a  solution  of  this  an  adaptation  of  shorthand. 
He  wrote  and  dictated  in  favor  of  this  idea  to  the  end  of 
his  life.    Once  he  said: 

"Our  alphabet  is  pure  insanity.  It  can  hardly  spell 
any  large  word  in  the  English  language  with  any  degree 

1310 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


of  certainty.  Its  sillinesses  are  quite  beyond  enumera- 
tion. English  orthography  may  need  reforming  and 
simplifying,  but  the  English  alphabet  needs  it  a  good 
many  times  as  much." 

He  would  naturally  favor  simplicity  in  anything.  I 
remember  him  reading,  as  an  example  of  beautiful  English, 
The  Death  of  King  Arthur,  by  Sir  Thomas  Malory,  and 
his  verdict: 

"That  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  things  ever  written 
in  English,  and  written  when  we  had  no  vocabulary." 
"A  vocabulary,  then,  is  sometimes  a  handicap?" 
"It  is  indeed." 

Still  I  think  it  was  never  a  handicap  with  him,  but 
rather  the  plumage  of  flight.  Sometimes,  when  just  the 
right  word  did  not  come,  he  would  turn  his  head  a 
little  at  different  angles,  as  if  looking  about  him  for  the 
precise  term.  He  would  find  it  directly,  and  it  was  in- 
variably the  word  needed.  Most  writers  employ,  now 
and  again,  phrases  that  do  not  sharply  present  the  idea — 
that  blur  the  picture  like  a  poor  opera-glass.  Mark 
Twain's  English  always  focused  exactly. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXLVIII 


"what  is  man?"  and  the  autobiography 

CLEMENS  decided  to  publish  anonymously,  or, 
rather,  to  print  privately,  the  Gospel,  which  he 
had  written  in  Vienna  some  eight  years  before  and  added 
to  from  time  to  time.  He  arranged  with  Frank  Double- 
day  to  take  charge  of  the  matter,  and  the  De  Vinne  Press 
was  engaged  to  do  the  work.  The  book  was  copyrighted 
in  the  name  of  J.  W.  Bothwell,  the  superintendent  of  the 
De  Vinne  company,  and  two  hundred  and  fifty  numbered 
copies  were  printed  on  hand-made  paper,  to  be  gradually 
distributed  to  intimate  friends.1  A  number  of  the  books 
were  sent  to  newspaper  reviewers,  and  so  effectually 
had  he  concealed  the  personality  of  his  work  that 
no  critic  seems  to  have  suspected  the  book's  author- 
ship. It  was  not  over-favorably  received.  It  was 
generally  characterized  as  a  clever,  and  even  brilliant, 
exposG  of  philosophies  which  were  no  longer  startlingly 
new.  The  supremacy  of  self-interest  and  "*  man,  the  it-  1 
responsible-jnachine  "  are  the  main  features  of  What  Is  \ 
Man?  and  both  of  these  and  all  the  rest  are  compre- 
hended  in  his  wider  and  mnrg  absolute  doctrine  of  that 
«Jnevi  tablet  lit  e-sequenoft  which  began  with  the  first  created 
spark.   There  can  be  no  training  of  the  ideals,  "upward 

lIn  an  introductory  word  (dated  February,  1905)  the  author 
states  that  the  studies  for  these  papers  had  been  made  twenty-five 
or  twenty-seven  years  before.  He  probably  referred  to  the  Mon- 
day Evening  Club  essay,  "What  Is  Happiness?"  (February, 
1883).   See  chap.  cxli. 

1321 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


and  still  upward,"  no  selfishness  and  unselfishness,  no 
atom  of  voluntary  effort  within  the  boundaries  of  that 
conclusion.  Once  admitting  the  postulate,  that  exist- 
ence is  merely  a  sequence  of  cause  and  effect  beginning 
with  the  primal  atom,  and  we  have  a  theory  that  must 
stand  or  fall  as  a  whole.  We  cannot  say  that  man  is  a 
creature  of  circumstance  and  then  leave  him  free  to 
select  his  circumstance,  even  in  the  minutest  fractional 
degree.  It  was  selected  for  him  with  his  disposition;  in 
that  first  instant  of  created  life.  Clemens  himself  re- 
peatedly emphasized  this  doctrine,  and  once,  when  it 
was  suggested  to  him  that  it  seemed  to  "surround  every- 
thing, like  the  sky,"  he  answered: 

"Yes,  like  the  sky;  you  can't  break  through  any- 
where." 

Colonel  Harvey  came  to  Dublin  that  summer  and  per- 
suaded Clemens  to  let  him  print  some  selections  from  the 
dictations  in  the  new  volume  of  the  North  American 
Review,  which  he  proposed  to  issue  fortnightly.  The 
matter  was  discussed  a  good  deal,  and  it  was  believed 
that  one  hundred  thousand  words  could  be  selected  which 
would  be  usable  forthwith,  as  well  as  in  that  long-deferred 
period  for  which  it  was  planned.  Colonel  Harvey  agreed 
to  take  a  copy  of  the  dictated  matter  and  make  the  selec- 
tions himself,  and  this  plan  was  carried  out.  It  may  be 
said  that  most  of  the  chapters  were  delightful  enough; 
though,  had  it  been  possible  to  edit  them  with  the  more 
positive  documents  as  a  guide,  certain  complications 
might  have  been  avoided.  It  does  not  matter  now,  and 
it  was  not  a  matter  of  very  wide  import  then. 

The  payment  of  these  chapters  netted  Clemens  thirty 
thousand  dollars — a  comfortable  sum,  which  he  promptly 
proposed  to  spend  in  building  on  the  property  at  Redding. 
He  engaged  John  Mead  Howells  to  prepare  some  pre- 
liminary plans. 

Clara  Clemens,  at  Norfolk,  was  written  to  of  the  matter. 

1322 


Digitized  by  Google 


"WHAT  IS  MAN?"— THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


A  little  later  I  joined  her  in  Redding,  and  she  was  the 
first  of  the  family  to  see  that  beautiful  hilltop.  She 
was  well  pleased  with  the  situation,  and  that  day  selected 
the  spot  where  the  house  should  stand.  Clemens  wrote 
Howells  that  he  proposed  to  call  it  "Autobiography 
House,"  as  it  was  to  be  built  out  of  the  Review  money, 
and  he  said: 

"  If  you  will  build  on  my  farm  and  live  there  it  will  set 
Mrs.  Howells's  health  up  for  sure.  Come  and  111  sell 
you  the  site  for  twenty-five  dollars.  John  will  tell  you 
it  is  a  choice  place." 

The  unusual  summer  was  near  its  close.  In  my  note- 
book, under  date  of  September  16th,  appears  this  entry: 

Windy  in  valleys  but  not  cold.  This  veranda  is  protected. 
It  is  peaceful  here  and  perfect,  but  we  are  at  the  summer's  end. 

This  is  my  last  entry,  and  the  dictations  must  have 
ceased  a  few  days  later.  I  do  not  remember  the  date  of 
the  return  to  New  York,  and  apparently  I  made  no 
record  of  it;  but  I  do  not  think  it  could  have  been  later 
than  the  20th.  It  had  been  four  months  since  the  day  of 
arrival,  a  long,  marvelous  summer  such  as  I  would  hardly 
know  again.  When  I  think  of  that  time  I  shall  always 
hear  the  ceaseless  slippered,  shuffling  walk,  and  see  the 
white  figure  with  its  rocking,  rolling  movement  passing 
up  and  down  the  long  gallery,  with  that  preternaturally 
beautiful  landscape  behind,  and  I  shall  hear  his  deliberate 
speech — always  deliberate,  save  at  rare  intervals;  al- 
ways impressive,  whatever  the  subject  might  be;  whether 
recalling  some  old  absurdity  of  youth,  or  denouncing 
orthodox  creeds,  or  detailing  the  shortcomings  of  human- 
kind. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXLIX 


BILLIARDS 


HE  return  to  New  York  marked  the  beginning  of  a 


not  meant  to  convey  up  to  this  time  that  there  was  between 
us  anything  resembling  a  personal  friendship.  Our  rela- 
tions were  friendly,  certainly,  but  they  were  relations  of 
convenience  and  mainly  of  a  business,  or  at  least  of  a 
literary  nature.  He  was  twenty-six  years  my  senior, 
and  the  discrepancy  of  experience  and  attainments  was 
not  measurable.  With  such  conditions  friendship  must 
be  a  deliberate  growth;  something  there  must  be  to 
bridge  the  dividing  gulf.  Truth  requires  the  confession 
that,  in  this  case,  the  bridge  took  a  very  solid,  material 
form,  it  being,  in  fact,  nothing  less  than  a  billiard-table.1 
It  was  a  present  from  Mrs.  Henry  H.  Rogers,  and  had 
been  intended  for  his  Christmas;  but  when  he  heard  of 
it  he  could  not  wait,  and  suggested  delicately  that  if  he 
had  it  "right  now"  he  could  begin  using  it  sooner.  So 
he  went  one  day  with  Mr.  Rogers  to  the  Balke-Collender 
Company,  and  they  selected  a  handsome  combination 
table  suitable  to  all  games — the  best  that  money  could 
buy.  He  was  greatly  excited  over  the  prospect,  and  his 
former  bedroom  was  carefully  measured,  to  be  certain 
that  it  was  large  enough  for  billiard  purposes.  Then  his 
bed  was  moved  into  the  study,  and  the  book-cases  and 
certain  appropriate  pictures  were  placed  and  hung  in 
the  billiard-room  to  give  it  the  proper  feeling. 

1  Clemens  had  been  without  a  billiard-table  since  1891,  the  old 
one  having  been  disposed  of  on  the  departure  from  Hartford. 


Mark  Twain.    I  have 


1324 


Digitized  by  Google 


BILLIARDS 


The  billiard-table  arrived  and  was  put  in  place,  the 
brilliant  green  cloth  in  contrast  with  the  rich  red  wall- 
paper and  the  bookbindings  and  pictures  making  the 
room  wonderfully  handsome  and  inviting. 

Meantime,  Clemens,  with  one  of  his  sudden  impulses, 
had  conceived  the  notion  of  spending  the  winter  in 
Egypt,  oh  the  Nile.  He  had  gone  so  far,  within  a  few 
hours  after  the  idea  developed,  as  to  plan  the  time  of  his 
departure,  and  to  partially  engage  a  traveling  secretary, 
so  that  he  might  continue  his  dictations.  He  was  quite 
full  of  the  idea  just  at  the  moment  when  the  billiard- 
table  was  being  installed.  He  had  sent  for  a  book  on  the 
subject — the  letters  of  Lady  Duff-Gordon,  whose  daughter, 
Janet  Ross,  had  become  a  dear  friend  in  Florence  during 
the  Viviani  days.  He  spoke  of  this  new  purpose  on  the 
morning  when  we  renewed  the  New  York  dictations,  a 
month  or  more  following  the  return  from  Dublin.  When 
the  dictation  ended  he  said: 

"Have  you  any  special  place  to  lunch  to-day?" 

I  replied  that  I  had  not. 

"Lunch  here,"  he  said,  "and  we'll  try  the  new  billiard- 
table." 

I  said  what  was  eminently  true — that  I  could  not  play 
— that]I  had  never  played  morejftan  a  few  games  of  pool, 
and  those  very  long  ago. 

"No  matter,"  he  answered;  "the  poorer  you  play,  the 
better  I  shall  like  it." 

So  I  remained  for  luncheon  and  we  began,  November 
2d,  the  first  game  ever  played  on  the  Christmas  table. 
We  played  the  English  game,  in  which  caroms  and 
pockets  both  count.  I  had  a  beginner's  luck,  on  the 
whole,  and  I  remember  it  as  a  riotous,  rollicking  game, 
the  beginning  of  a  closer  understanding  between  us — of  a 
distinct  epoch  in  our  association.  When  it  was  ended 
he  said: 

"  I'm  not  going  to  Egypt.    There  was  a  man  here  yes- 

III.— 14  1325 


■ 

MARK  TWAIN 


terday  afternoon  who  said  it  was  bad  for  bronchitis,  and, 
besides,  it's  too  far  away  from  this  billiard-table." 

He  suggested  that  I  come  back  in  the  evening  and 
play  some  more.  I  did  so,  and  the  game  lasted  until 
after  midnight.  He  gave  me  odds,  of  course,  and  my 
"nigger  luck,"  as  he  called  it,  continued.  It  kept  him 
sweating  and  swearing  feverishly  to  win.  Finally,  once  I 
made  a  great  fluke — a  carom,  followed  by  most  of  the  balls 
falling  into  the  pockets. 

"Well,"  he  said,  "when  you  pick  up  that  cue  this  damn 
table  drips  at  every  pore." 

After  that  the  morning  dictations  became  a  secondary 
interest.  Like  a  boy,  he  was  looking  forward  to  the  after- 
noon of  play,  and  it  never  seemed  to  come  quick  enough 
to  suit  him.  I  remained  regularly  for  luncheon,  and  he 
was  inclined  to  cut  the  courses  short,  that  he  might  the 
sooner  get  up-stairs  to  the  billiard-room.  His  earlier 
habit  of  not  eating  in  the  middle  of  the  day  continued; 
but  he  would  get  up  and  dress,  and  walk  about  the  dining- 
room  in  his  old  fashion,  talking  that  marvelous,  marvelous 
talk  which  I  was  always  trying  to  remember,  and  with 
only  fractional  success  at  best.  To  him  it  was  only  a 
method  of  killing  time.  I  remember  once,  when  he  had 
been  discussing  with  great  earnestness  the  Japanese  ques- 
tion, he  suddenly  noticed  that  the  luncheon  was  about 
ending,  and  he  said: 

"Now  we'll  proceed  to  more  serious  matters  —  it's 
your — shot."  And  he  was  quite  serious,  for  the  green 
cloth  and  the  rolling  balls  afforded  him  a  much  larger 
interest. 

To  the  donor  of  his  new  possession  Clemens  wrote: 

Dear  Mrs.  Rogers, — The  billiard-table  is  better  than  the 
doctors.  I  have  a  billianlist  on  the  premises,  &  walk  not 
less  than  ten  miles  every  day  with  the  cue  in  my  hand.  And 
the  walking  is  not  the  whole  of  the  exercise,  nor  the  most  health- 

1326 


Digitized  by  Google 


BILLIARDS 


giving  part  of  it,  I  think.  Through  the  multitude  of  the  posi- 
tions and  attitudes  it  brings  into  play  every  muscle  in  the  body 
&  exercises  them  all. 

The  games  begin  right  after  luncheons,  daily,  &  continue 
until  midnight,  with  2  hours'  intermission  for  dinner  &  music. 
And  so  it  is  9  hours'  exercise  per  day  &  10  or  12  on  Sunday. 
Yesterday  &  last  night  it  was  12 — &  I  slept  until  8  this  morning 
without  waking.  The  billiard-table  as  a  Sabbath-breaker  can 
beat  any  coal-breaker  in  Pennsylvania  &  give  it  30  in  the  game. 
If  Mr.  Rogers  will  take  to  daily  billiards  he  can  do  without  the 
doctors  &  the  massageur,  I  think. 

We  are  really  going  to  build  a  house  on  my  farm,  an  hour  & 
a  half  from  New  York.   It  is  decided. 

With  love  &  many  thanks.  S.  L.  C. 

Naturally  enough,  with  continued  practice  I  im- 
proved my  game,  and  he  reduced  my  odds  accordingly. 
He  was  willing  to  be  beaten,  but  not  too  often.  Like 
any  other  boy,  he  preferred  to  have  the  balance  in  his 
favor.  We  set  down  a  record  of  the  games,  and  he  went 
to  bed  happier  if  the  tally-sheet  showed  him  winner. 

It  was  natural,  too,  that  an  intimacy  of  association  and 
of  personal  interest  should  grow  under  such  conditions — to 
me  a  precious  boon — and  I  wish  here  to  record  my  own 
boundless  gratitude  to  Mrs.  Rogers  for  her  gift,  which, 
whatever  it  meant  to  him,  meant  so  much  more  to  me. 
The  disparity  of  ages  no  longer  existed;  other  discrep- 
ancies no  longer  mattered.  The  pleasant  land  of  play  is 
a  democracy  where  such  things  do  not  count. 

To  recall  all  the  humors  and  interesting  happenings  of 
those  early  billiard-days  would  be  to  fill  a  large  volume. 
I  can  preserve  no  more  than  a  few  characteristic  phases. 

He  was  not  an  even-tempered  player.  When  the  balls 
were  perverse  in  their  movements  and  his  aim  unsteady, 
he  was  likely  to  become  short  with  his  opponent — criti- 
cal and  even  faultfinding.  Then  presently  a  reaction 
would  set  in,  and  he  would  be  seized  with  remorse.  He 

1327 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


would  become  unnecessarily  gentle  and  kindly — even 
attentive — placing  the  balls  as  I  knocked  them  into  the 
pockets,  hurrying  from  one  end  of  the  table  to  render 
this  service,  endeavoring  to  show  in  every  way  except  by 
actual  confession  in  words  that  he  was  sorry  for  what 
seemed  to  him,  no  doubt,  an  unworthy  display  of  tem- 
per, unjustified  irritation. 

Naturally,  this  was  a  mood  that  I  enjoyed  less  than  that 
which  had  induced  it.  I  did  not  wish  him  to  humble 
himself;  I  was  willing  that  he  should  be  severe,  even 
harsh,  if  he  felt  so  inclined;  his  age,  his  jxjsition,  his  genius 
entitled  him  to  special  privileges;  yet  I  am  glad,  as  I  re- 
member it  now,  that  the  other  side  revealed  itself,  for  it 
completes  the  sum  of  his  great  humanity. 

Indeed,  he  was  always  not  only  human,  but  super- 
human; not  only  a  man,  but  superman.  Nor  does  this 
term  apply  only  to  his  psychology.  In  no  other  human 
being  have  I  ever  seen  such  physical  endurance.  I  was 
comparatively  a  young  man,  and  by  no  means  an  invalid ; 
but  many  a  time,  far  in  the  night,  when  I  was  ready  to 
drop  with  exhaustion,  he  was  still  as  fresh  and  buoyant 
and  eager  for  the  game  as  at  the  moment  of  beginning. 
He  smoked  and  smoked  continually,  and  followed  the 
endless  track  around  the  billiard-table  with  the  light  step 
of  youth.  At  three  or  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  he 
would  urge  just  one  more  game,  and  would  taunt  me  for 
my  weariness.  I  can  truthfully  testify  that  never  until 
the  last  year  of  his  life  did  he  willingly  lay  down  the 
billiard-cue,  or  show  the  least  suggestion  of  fatigue. 

He  played  always  at  high  pressure.  Now  and  then,  in 
periods  of  adversity,  he  would  fly  into  a  perfect  passion 
with  things  in  general.  But,  in  the  end,  it  was  a  sham 
battle,  and  he  saw  the  uselessness  and  humor  of  it,  even 
in  the  moment  of  his  climax.  Once,  when  he  found  it 
impossible  to  make  any  of  his  favorite  shots,  he  became 
more  and  more  restive,  the  lightning  became  vividly 

1328 


Digitized  by  Google 


BILLIARDS 


picturesque  as  the  clouds  blackened.  Finally,  with  a 
regular  thunder-blast,  he  seized  the  cue  with  both  hands 
and  literally  mowed  the  balls  across  the  table,  landing 
one  or  two  of  them  on  the  floor.  I  do  not  recall  his  exact 
remarks  during  the  performance;  I  was  chiefly  concerned 
in  getting  out  of  the  way,  and  those  sublime  utterances 
were  lost.  I  gathered  up  the  balls  and  we  went  on  play- 
ing as  if  nothing  had  happened,  only  he  was  very  gentle 
and  sweet,  like  the  sun  on  the  meadows  after  the  storm 
has  passed  by.    After  a  little  he  said: 

"This  is  a  most  amusing  game.  When  you  play  badly 
it  amuses  me,  and  when  I  play  badly  and  lose  my  temper 
it  certainly  must  amuse  you." 

His  enjoyment  of  his  opponent's  perplexities  was  very 
keen.  When  he  had  left  the  balls  in  some  unfortunate 
position  which  made  it  almost  impossible  for  me  to  score 
he  would  laugh  boisterously.  I  used  to  affect  to  be  in- 
jured and  disturbed  by  this  ridicule.  Once,  when  he  had 
made  the  conditions  unusually  hard  for  me,  and  was  en- 
joying the  situation  accordingly,  I  was  tempted  to  remark: 

"Whenever  I  see  you  laugh  at  a  thing  like  that  I  always 
doubt  your  sense  of  humor."  Which  seemed  to  add  to 
his  amusement. 

Sometimes,  when  the  balls  were  badly  placed  for  me, 
he  would  offer  ostensible  advice,  suggesting  that  I  should 
shoot  here  and  there — shots  that  were  possible,  perhaps, 
but  not  promising.  Often  I  would  follow  his  advice, 
and  then  when  I  failed  to  score  his  amusement  broke  out 
afresh. 

Other  billiardists  came  from  time  to  time:  Colonel 
Harvey,  Mr.  Duneka,  and  Major  Leigh,  of  the  Harper 
Company,  and  Peter  Finley  Dunne  (Mr.  Dooley) ;  but  they 
were  handicapped  by  their  business  affairs,  and  were  not 
dependable  for  daily  and  protracted  sessions.  Any  num- 
ber of  his  friends  were  willing,  even  eager,  to  come  for 
his  entertainment;   but  the  percentage  of  them  who 


i329 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


could  and  would  devote  a  number  of  hours  each  day  to 
being  beaten  at  billiards  and  enjoy  the  operation  dwindled 
down  to  a  single  individual.  Even  I  could  not  have  done 
it — could  not  have  afforded  it,  however  much  I  might 
have  enjoyed  the  diversion — had  it  not  been  contributory 
to  my  work.  To  me  the  association  was  invaluable;  it 
drew  from  him  a  thousand  long-forgotten  incidents;  it 
invited  a  stream  of  picturesque  comments  and  philoso- 
phies; it  furnished  the  most  intimate  insight  into  his 
character. 

He  was  not  always  glad  to  see  promiscuous  callers, 
even  some  one  that  he  might  have  met  pleasantly  else- 
where. One  afternoon  a  young  man  whom  he  had 
casually  invited  to  "drop  in  some  day  in  town"  hap- 
pened to  call  in  the  midst  of  a  very  close  series  of  after- 
noon games.  It  would  all  have  been  well  enough  if  the 
visitor  had  been  content  to  sit  quietly  on  the  couch  and 
"bet  on  the  game,"  as  Clemens  suggested,  after  the  greet- 
ings were  over;  but  he  was  a  very  young  man,  and  he 
felt  the  necessity  of  being  entertaining.  He  insisted  on 
walking  about  the  room  and  getting  in  the  way,  and  on 
talking  about  the  Mark  Twain  books  he  had  read,  and 
the  people  he  had  met  from  time  to  time  who  had  known 
Mark  Twain  on  the  river,  or  on  the  Pacific  coast,  or  else- 
where. I  knew  how  fatal  it  was  for  him  to  talk  to  Clemens 
during  his  play,  especially  concerning  matters  most  of 
which  had  been  laid  away.  I  trembled  for  our  visitor.  If 
I  could  have  got  his  ear  privately  I  should  have  said: 
"For  heaven's  sake  sit  down  and  keep  still  or  go  away! 
There's  going  to  be  a  combination  of  earthquake  and 
cyclone  and  avalanche  if  you  keep  this  thing  up." 

I  did  what  I  could.  I  looked  at  my  watch  every  other 
minute.  At  last,  in  desperation,  I  suggested  that  I  retire 
from  the  game  and  let  the  visitor  have  my  cue.  I  suppose 
I  thought  this  would  eliminate  an  element  of  danger.  He 
declined  on  the  ground  that  he  seldom  played,  and  con- 

1330 


Digitized  by  Google 


BILLIARDS 


tinued  his  deadly  visit.  I  have  never  been  in  an  atmos- 
phere so  fraught  with  danger.  I  did  not  know  how  the 
game  stood,  and  I  played  mechanically  and  forgot  to 
count  the  score.  Clemens's  face  was  grim  and  set  and 
savage.  He  no  longer  ventured  even  a  word.  By  and 
by  I  noticed  that  he  was  getting  white,  and  I  said,  pri- 
vately, "Now,  this  young  man's  hour  has  come." 

It  was  certainly  by  the  mercy  of  God  just  then  that  the 
visitor  said: 

"I'm  sorry,  but  I've  got  to  go.  I'd  like  to  stay  longer, 
but  I've  got  an  engagement  for  dinner." 

I  don't  remember  how  he  got  out,  but  I  know  that  tons 
lifted  as  the  door  closed  behind  him.  Clemens  made  his 
shot,  then  very  softly  said: 

"If  he  had  stayed  another  five  minutes  I  should  have 
offered  him  twenty-five  cents  to  go." 

But  a  moment  later  he  glared  at  me. 

"Why  in  nation  did  you  offer  him  your  cue?" 

"Wasn't  that  the  courteous  thing  to  do?"  I  asked. 

"No!"  he  ripped  out.  "The  courteous  and  proper  thing 
would  have  been  to  strike  him  dead.  Did  you  want  to 
saddle  that  disaster  upon  us  for  life?" 

He  was  blowing  off  steam,  and  I  knew  it  and  en- 
couraged it.  My  impulse  was  to  lie  down  on  the  couch 
and  shout  with  hysterical  laughter,  but  I  suspected  that 
would  be  indiscreet.  He  made  some  further  comment 
on  the  propriety  of  offering  a  visitor  a  cue,  and  suddenly 
began  to  sing  a  travesty  of  an  old  hymn: 

"How  tedious  are  they 
Who  their  sovereign  obey," 

and  so  loudly  that  I  said: 

"Aren't  you  afraid  he'll  hear  you  and  come  back?" 
Whereupon  he  pretended  alarm  and  sang  under  his 
breath,  and  for  the  rest  of  the  evening  was  in  boundless 
good -humor. 

1331 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


I  have  recalled  this  incident  merely  as  a  sample  of 
things  that  were  likely  to  happen  at  any  time  in  his  com- 
pany, and  to  show  the  difficulty  one  might  find  in  fitting 
himself  to  his  varying  moods.  He  was  not  to  be  learned 
in  a  day,  or  a  week,  or  a  month;  some  of  those  who  knew 
him  longest  did  not  learn  him  at  all. 

We  celebrated  his  seventy-first  birthday  by  playing 
billiards  all  day.  He  invented  a  new  game  for  the  occa- 
sion; inventing  rules  for  it  with  almost  every  shot. 

It  happened  that  no  member  of  the  family  was  at  home 
on  this  birthday.  Ill  health  had  banished  every  one, 
even  the  secretary.  Flowers,  telegrams,  and  congratu- 
lations came,  and  there  was  a  string  of  callers ;  but  he  saw 
no  one  beyond  some  intimate  friends — the  Gilders — late 
in  the  afternoon.  When  they  had  gone  we  went  down 
to  dinner.  We  were  entirely  alone,  and  I  felt  the  great 
honor  of  being  his  only  guest  on  such  an  occasion.  Once 
between  the  courses,  when  he  rose,  as  usual,  to  walk 
about,  he  wandered  into  the  drawing-room,  and  seating 
himself  at  the  orchestrelle  began  to  play  the  beautiful 
flower-song  from  "Faust."  It  was  a  thing  I  had  not  seen 
him  do  before,  and  I  never  saw  him  do  it  again.  When 
he  came  back  to  the  table  he  said: 

"Speaking  of  companions  of  the  long  ago,  after  fifty 
years  they  become  only  shadows  and  might  as  well  be 
in  the  grave.  Only  those  whom  one  has  really  loved 
mean  anything  at  all.  Of  my  playmates  I  recall  John 
Briggs,  John  Garth,  and  Laura  Hawkins— just  those 
three;  the  rest  I  buried  long  ago,  and  memory  cannot 
even  find  their  graves." 

He  was  in  his  loveliest  humor  all  that  day  and  evening; 
and  that  night,  when  he  stopped  playing,  he  said: 

"I  have  never  had  a  pleasanter  day  at  this  game." 

I  answered,  "I  hope  ten  years  from  to-night  we  shall 
still  be  playing  it." 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "still  playing  the  best  game  on  earth." 

1332 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCL 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  PESSIMISM 

In  a  letter  to  MacAlister,  written  at  this  time,  he  said: 

The  doctors  banished  Jean  to  the  country  5  weeks  ago;  they 
banished  my  secretary  to  the  country  for  a  fortnight  last  Satur- 
day; they  banished  Clara  to  the  country  for  a  fortnight  last 
Monday.  .  .  .  They  banished  me  to  Bermuda — to  sail  next 
Wednesday,  but  I  struck  and  sha'n't  go.  My  complaint  is 
permanent  bronchitis  &  is  one  of  the  very  best  assets  I've  got, 
for  it  excuses  me  from  every  public  function  this  winter — &  all 
other  winters  that  may  come. 

If  he  had  bronchitis  when  this  letter  was  written,  it 
must  have  been  of  a  very  mild  form,  for  it  did  not  inter- 
fere with  billiard  games,  which  were  more  protracted  and 
strenuous  than  at  almost  any  other  period.  I  conclude, 
therefore,  that  it  was  a  convenient  bronchitis,  useful  on 
occasion. 

For  a  full  ten  days  we  were  alone  in  the  big  house  with 
the  servants.  It  was  a  holiday  most  of  the  time.  We 
hurried  through  the  mail  in  the  morning  and  the  tele- 
phone calls;  then,  while  I  answered  such  letters  as  re- 
quired attention,  he  dictated  for  an  hour  or  so  to  Miss 
Hobby,  after  which,  billiards  for  the  rest  of  the  day  and 
evening.  When  callers  were  reported  by  the  butler,  I  went 
down  and  got  rid  of  them.  Clara  Clemens,  before  her  de- 
parture, had  pinned  up  a  sign,  "no  billiards  after  10 
p.m.,"  which  still  hung  on  the  wall,  but  it  was  outlawed. 
Clemens  occasionally  planned  excursions  to  Bermuda  and 

1333 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


other  places;  but,  remembering  the  billiard-table,  which 
he  could  not  handily  take  along,  he  abandoned  these 
projects.  He  was  a  boy  whose  parents  had  been  called 
away,  left  to  his  own  devices,  and  bent  on  a  good  time. 

There  were  likely  to  be  irritations  in  his  morning's 
mail,  and  more  often  he  did  not  wish  to  see  it  until  it 
had  been  pretty  carefully  sifted.  So  many  people  wrote 
who  wanted  things,  so  many  others  who  made  the  claim 
of  more  or  less  distant  acquaintanceship  the  excuse  for 
long  and  trivial  letters. 

"I  have  stirred  up  three  generations,"  he  said;  "first 
the  grandparents,  then  the  children,  and  now  the  grand- 
children; the  great-grandchildren  will  begin  to  arrive 
soon." 

His  mail  was  always  large;  but  often  it  did  not  look 
interesting.  One  could  tell  from  the  envelope  and  the 
superscription  something  of  the  contents.  Going  over 
one  assortment  he  burst  out: 

"Look  at  them!  Look  how  trivial  they  are!  Every 
envelope  looks  as  if  it  contained  a  trivial  human  soul." 

Many  letters  were  filled  with  fulsome  praise  and  com- 
pliment, usually  of  one  pattern.  He  was  sated  with 
such  things,  and  seldom  found  it  possible  to  bear  more 
than  a  line  or  two  of  them.  Yet  a  fresh,  well-expressed 
note  of  appreciation  always  pleased  him. 

"  I  can  live  for  two  months  on  a  good  compliment,"  he 
once  said. 

Certain  persistent  correspondents,  too  self-centered  to 
realize  their  lack  of  consideration,  or  the  futility  of  their 
purpose,  followed  him  relentlessly.  Of  one  such  he 
remarked: 

"That  woman  intends  to  pursue  me  to  the  grave.  I 
wish  something  could  be  done  to  appease  her." 
And  again: 

"Everybody  in  the  world  who  wants  something — 
something  of  no  interest  to  me — writes  to  me  to  get  it." 

1334 


Digitized  by  Google 


< 


PHILOSOPHY  AND  PESSIMISM 

These  morning  sessions  were  likely  to  be  of  great  in- 
terest. Once  a  letter  spoke  of  the  desirability  of  being 
an  optimist.  "That  word  perfectly  disgusts  me,"  he 
said,  and  his  features  materialized  the  disgust,  "just  as 
that  other  word,  pessimist,  does;  and  the  idea  that  one 
can,  by  any  effort  of  will,  be  one  or  the  other,  any  more 
than  he  can  change  the  color  of  his  hair.  The  reason 
why  a  man  is  a  pessimist  or  an  optimist  is  not  because 
he  wants  to  be,  but  because  he  was  born  so;  and  this 
man  [a  minister  of  the  Gospel  who  was  going  to  explain 
life  to  him]  is  going  to  tell  me  why  he  isn't  a  pessimist. 
Oh,  he'll  do  it,  but  he  won't  tell  the  truth;  he  won't 
make  it  short  enough." 

Yet  he  was  always  patient  with  any  one  who  came  with 
spiritual  messages,  theological  arguments,  and  consola- 
tions. He  might  have  said  to  them:  "Oh,  dear  friends, 
those  things  of  which  you  speak  are  the  toys  that  long 
ago  I  played  with  and  set  aside."  He  could  have  said 
it  and  spoken  the  truth;  but  I  believe  he  did  not  even 
think  it.  He  listened  to  any  one  for  whom  he  had  respect, 
and  was  grateful  for  any  effort  in  his  behalf. 

One  morning  he  read  aloud  a  lecture  given  in  London 
by  George  Bernard  Shaw  on  religion,  commenting  as  he 
read.    He  said: 

"This  letter  is  a  frank  breath  of  expression  [and  his 
comments  were  equally  frank].  There  is  no  such  thing  as 
morality;  it  is  not  immoral  for  the  tiger  to  eat  the  wolf, 
or  the  wolf  the  cat,  or  the  cat  the  bird,  and  so  on  down; 
that  is  their  business.  There  is  always  enough  for  each 
one  to  live  on.  It  is  not  immoral  for  one  nation  to  seize 
another  nation  by  force  of  arms,  or  for  one  man  to  seize 
another  man's  property  or  life  if  he  is  strong  enough  and 
wants  to  take  it.  It  is  not  immoral  to  create  the  human 
species — with  or  without  ceremony;  nature  intended 
exactly  these  things." 

At  one  place  in  the  lecture  Shaw  had  said:  "No  one 

1335 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

of  good  sense  can  accept  any  creed  to-day  without  reser- 
vation." 

"Certainly  not,"  commented  Clemens;  "the  reserva- 
tion is  that  he  is  a  d — d  fool  to  accept  it  at  all." 

He  was  in  one  of  his  somber  moods  that  morning.  I 
had  received  a  print  of  a  large  picture  of  Thomas  Nast — 
the  last  one  taken.  The  face  had  a  pathetic  expression 
which  told  the  tragedy  of  his  last  years.  Clemens  looked 
at  the  picture  several  moments  without  speaking.  Then 
he  broke  out: 

"Why  can't  a  man  die  when  he's  had  his  tragedy?  I 
ought  to  have  died  long  ago."  And  somewhat  later: 
"Once  Twichell  heard  me  cussing  the  human  race,  and 
he  said,  'Why,  Mark,  you  are  the  last  person  in  the 
world  to  do  that — one  selected  and  set  apart  as  you  are.' 
I  said  4  Joe,  you  don't  know  what  you  are  talking  about. 
I  am  not  cussing  altogether  about  my  own  little  troubles. 
Any  one  can  stand  his  own  misfortunes;  but  when  I  read 
in  the  papers  all  about  the  rascalities  and  outrages  going 
on  I  realize  what  a  creature  the  human  animal  is.  Don't 
you  care  more  about  the  wretchedness  of  others  than 
anything  that  happens  to  you?'  Joe  said  he  did,  and 
shut  up." 

It  occurred  to  me  to  suggest  that  he  should  not  read 
the  daily  papers. 

"No  difference,"  he  said.  "I  read  books  printed  two 
hundred  years  ago,  and  they  hurt  just  the  same." 

"Those  people  are  all  dead  and  gone,"  I  objected. 

"They  hurt  just  the  same,"  he  maintained. 

I  sometimes  thought  of  his  inner  consciousness  as  a 
pool  darkened  by  his  tragedies,  its  glassy  surface,  when 
calm,  reflecting  all  the  joy  and  sunlight  and  merriment 
of  the  world,  but  easily — so  easily — troubled  and  stirred 
even  to  violence.  Once  following  the  dictation,  when  I 
came  to  the  billiard-room  he  was  shooting  the  balls  about 
the  table,  apparently  much  depressed.    He  said: 

1336 


Digitized  by  Google 


PHILOSOPHY  AND  PESSIMISM 


"I  have  been  thinking  it  out — if  I  live  two  years  more 
I  will  put  an  end  to  it  all.    I  will  kill  myself." 
"You  have  much  to  live  for—" 

"But  I  am  so  tired  of  the  eternal  round,"  he  inter- 
rupted; "so  tired." 

And  I  knew  he  meant  that  he  was  ill  of  the  great 
loneliness  that  had  come  to  him  that  day  in  Florence, 
and  would  never  pass  away. 

I  referred  to  the  pressure  of  social  demands  in  the  city, 
and  the  relief  he  would  find  in  his  country  home.  He 
shook  his  head. 

"The  country  home  I  need,"  he  said,  fiercely,  "is  a 
cemetery." 

Yet  the  mood  changed  quickly  enough  when  the  play 
began.  He  was  gay  and  hilarious  presently,  full  of  the 
humors  and  complexities  of  the  game. 

H.  H.  Rogers  came  in  with  a  good  deal  of  frequency, 
seldom  making  very  long  calls,  but  never  seeming  to  have 
that  air  of  being  hurried  which  one  might  expect  to  find 
in  a  man  whose  day  was  only  twenty-four  hours  long,  and 
whose  interests  were  so  vast  and  innumerable.  He  would 
come  in  where  we  were  playing,  and  sit  down  and  watch 
the  game,  or  perhaps  would  pick  up  a  book  and  read, 
exchanging  a  remark  now  and  then.  More  often,  how- 
ever, he  sat  in  the  bedroom,  for  his  visits  were  likely  to 
be  in  the  morning.  They  were  seldom  business  calls,  or 
if  they  were,  the  business  was  quickly  settled,  and  then 
followed  gossip,  humorous  incident,  or  perhaps  Clemens 
would  read  aloud  something  he  had  written.  But  once, 
after  greetings,  he  began: 

"Well,  Rogers,  I  don't  know  what  you  think  of  it,  but 
I  think  I  have  had  about  enough  of  this  world,  and  I  wish 
I  were  out  of  it." 

Mr.  Rogers  replied,  "I  don't  say  much  about  it,  but 
that  expresses  my  view." 

This  from  the  foremost  man  of  letters  and  one  of  the 

1337 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


foremost  financiers  of  the  time  was  impressive.  Each 
at  the  mountain-top  of  his  career,  they  agreed  that  the 
journey  was  not  worth  while— that  what  the  world  had 
still  to  give  was  not  attractive  enough  to  tempt  them — 
to  prevent  a  desire  to  experiment  with  the  next  stage. 
One  could  remember  a  thousand  poor  and  obscure  men 
who  were  perfectly  willing  to  go  on  struggling  and  starv- 
ing, postponing  the  day  of  settlement  as  long  as  possible; 
but  perhaps,  when  one  has  had  all  the  world  has  to  give, 
when  there  are  no  new  worlds  in  sight  to  conquer,  one  has  a 
different  feeling. 

Well,  the  realization  lay  not  so  far  ahead  for  either  of 
them,  though  at  that  moment  they  both  seemed  full  of 
life  and  vigor — full  of  youth.  One  could  not  imagine 
the  day  when  for  them  it  would  all  be  over. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLI 


A  LOBBYING  EXPEDITION 

CLARA  CLEMENS  came  home  now  and  then  to  see 
how  matters  were  progressing,  and  very  properly, 
for  Clemens  was  likely  to  become  involved  in  social  in- 
tricacies which  required  a  directing  hand.  The  daughter 
inherited  no  little  of  the  father's  characteristics  of  thought 
and  phrase,  and  it  was  always  a  delight  to  see  them  to- 
gether when  one  could  be  just  out  of  range  of  the  cross- 
fire. I  remember  soon  after  her  return,  when  she  was 
making  some  searching  inquiries  concerning  the  billiard- 
room  sign,  and  other  suggested  or  instituted  reforms,  he 
said: 

"Oh  well,  never  mind,  it  doesn't  matter.  I'm  boss  in 
this  house." 

She  replied,  quickly:  "Oh  no,  you're  not.  You're 
merely  owner.  I'm  the  captain — the  commander-in- 
chief." 

One  night  at  dinner  she  mentioned  the  possibility  of 
going  abroad  that  year.  During  several  previous  sum- 
mers she  had  planned  to  visit  Vienna  to  see  her  old  music- 
master,  Leschetizky,  once  more  before  his  death.  She 
said: 

"Leschetizky  is  getting  so  old.  If  I  don't  go  soon 
I'm  afraid  I  sha'n't  be  in  time  for  his  funeral." 

"Yes,"  said  her  father,  thoughtfully,  "you  keep  rushing 
over  to  Leschetizky's  funeral,  and  you'll  miss  mine." 

He  had  made  one  or  two  social  engagements  without 
careful  reflection,  and  the  situation  would  require  some 

1339 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

delicacy  of  adjustment.  During  a  moment  between  the 
courses,  when  he  left  the  table  and  was  taking  his  exer- 
cise in  the  farther  room,  she  made  some  remark  which 
suggested  a  doubt  of  her  father's  gift  for  social  manage- 
ment.   I  said: 

"Oh,  well,  he  is  a  king,  you  know,  and  a  king  can  do  no 
wrong." 

"Yes,  I  know,"  she  answered.  "The  king  can  do  no 
wrong;  but  he  frightens  me  almost  to  death,  sometimes, 
he  comes  so  near  it." 

He  came  back  and  began  to  comment  rather  critically 
on  some  recent  performance  of  Roosevelt's,  which  had 
stirred  up  a  good  deal  of  newspaper  amusement — it  was 
the  Storer  matter  and'  those  indiscreet  letters  which 
Roosevelt  had  written  relative  to  the  ambassadorship 
which  Storer  so  much  desired.  Miss  Clemens  was  in- 
clined to  defend  the  President,  and  spoke  with  consider- 
able enthusiasm  concerning  his  elements  of  popularity, 
which  had  won  him  such  extraordinary  admiration. 

"Certainly  he  is  popular,"  Clemens  admitted,  "and 
with  the  best  of  reasons.  If  the  twelve  apostles  should 
call  at  the  White  House,  he  would  say,  'Come  in,  come 
in!  I  am  delighted  to  see  you.  I've  been  watching  your 
progress,  and  I  admired  it  very  much.'  Then  if  Satan 
should  come,  he  would  slap  him  on  the  shoulder  and  say, 
4  Why,  Satan,  how  do  you  do?  I  am  so  glad  to  meet  you. 
I've  read  all  your  works  and  enjoyed  every  one  of  them.' 
Anybody  could  be  popular  with  a  gift  like  that." 

It  was  that  evening  or  the  next,  perhaps,  that  he  said 
to' her: 

"Ben  [one  of  his  pet  names  for  her],  now  that  you  are 
here  to  run  the  ranch,  Paine  and  I  are  going  to  Washing- 
ton on  a  vacation.  You  don't  seem  to  admire  our  society 
much,  anyhow." 

There  were  still  other  reasons  for  the  Washington 
expedition.    There  was  an  important  bill  up  for  the  ex- 

1340 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  LOBBYING  EXPEDITION 


tension  of  the  book  royalty  period,  and  the  forces  of 
copyright  were  going  down  in  a  body  to  use  every  possible 
means  to  get  the  measure  through. 

Clemens,  during  Cleveland's  first  administration,  some 
nineteen  years  before,  had  accompanied  such  an  expedi- 
tion, and  through  S.  S.  ("Sunset")  Cox  had  obtained  the 
"privileges  of  the  floor"  of  the  House,  which  had  enabled 
him  to  canvass  the  members  individually.  Cox  assured 
the  doorkeeper  that  Clemens  had  received  the  thanks  of 
Congress  for  national  literary  service,  and  was  therefore 
entitled  to  that  privilege.  This  was  not  strictly  true; 
but  regulations  were  not  very  severe  in  those  days,  and 
the  ruse  had  been  regarded  as  a  good  joke,  which  had 
yielded  excellent  results.  Clemens  had  a  similar  scheme 
in  mind  now,  and  believed  that  his  friendship  with 
Speaker  Cannon — "Uncle  Joe" — would  obtain  for  him  a 
similar  privilege.  The  Copyright  Association  working  in 
its  regular  way  was  very  well,  he  said,  but  he  felt  he  could 
do  more  as  an  individual  than  by  acting  merely  as  a  unit 
of  that  body. 

"I  canvassed  the  entire  House  personally  that  other 
time,"  he  said.  "Cox  introduced  me  to  the  Democrats, 
and  John  D.  Long,  afterward  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
introduced  me  to  the  Republicans.  I  had  a  darling  time 
converting  those  members,  and  I'd  like  to  try  the  experi- 
ment again." 

I  should  have  mentioned  earlier,  perhaps,  that  at  this 
time  he  had  begun  to  wear  white  clothing  regularly,  re- 
gardless of  the  weather  and  season.  On  the  return  from 
Dublin  he  had  said: 

"  I  can't  bear  to  put  on  black  clothes  again.  I  wish  I 
could  wear  white  all  winter.  I  should  prefer,  of  course, 
to  wear  colors,  beautiful  rainbow  hues,  such  as  the  women 
have  monopolized.  Their  clothing  makes  a  great  opera 
audience  an  enchanting  spectacle,  a  delight  to  the  eye 
and  to  the  spirit — a  garden  of  Eden  for  charm  and  color. 

1341 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


The  men,  clothed  in  odious  black,  are  scattered  here  and 
there  over  the  garden  like  so  many  charred  stumps.  If 
we  are  going  to  be  gay  in  spirit,  why  be  clad  in  funeral 
garments?  I  should  like  to  dress  in  a  loose  and  flowing 
costume  made  all  of  silks  and  velvets  resplendent  with 
stunning  dyes,  and  so  would  every  man  I  have  ever 
known;  but  none  of  us  dares  to  venture  it.  If  I  should 
appear  on  Fifth  Avenue  on  a  Sunday  morning  clothed  as 
I  would  like  to  be  clothed  the  churches  would  all  be 
vacant  and  the  congregation  would  come  tagging  after 
me.  They  would  scoff,  of  course,  but  they  would  envy 
me,  too.  When  I  put  on  black  it  reminds  me  of  my 
funerals.  I  could  be  satisfied  with  white  all  the  year 
round." 

,  It  was  not  long  after  this  that  he  said: 

1    "  I  have  made  up  my  mind  not  to  wear  black  any  more, 

but  white,  and  let  the  critics  say  what  they  will." 

So  his  tailor  was  sent  for,  and  six  creamy  flannel  and 
serge  suits  were  ordered,  made  with  the  short  coats,  which 
he  preferred,  with  a  gray  suit  or  two  for  travel,  and  he 
did  not  wear  black  again,  except  for  evening  dress  and 
on  special  occasions.  It  was  a  gratifying  change,  and 
though  the  newspapers  made  much  of  it,  there  was  no 
one  who  was  not  gladdened  by  the  beauty  of  his  gar- 
ments and  their  general  harmony  with  his  person.  He 
had  never  worn  anything  so  appropriate  or  so  impressive. 

This  departure  of  costume  came  along  a  week  or  two 
before  the  Washington  trip,  and  when  his  bags  were  being 
packed  for  the  excursion  he  was  somewhat  in  doubt  as 
to  the  propriety  of  bursting  upon  Washington  in  December 
in  that  snowy  plumage.    I  ventured: 

"This  is  a  lobbying  expedition  of  a  peculiar  kind,  and 
does  not  seem  to  invite  any  half-way  measures.  I  should 
vote  in  favor  of  the  white  suit." 

I  think  Miss  Clemens  was  for  it,  too.  She  must  have 
been  or  the  vote  wouldn't  have  carried,  though  it  was 

1342 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  LOBBYING  EXPEDITION 


clear  he  strongly  favored  the  idea.  At  all  events,  the 
white  suits  came  along. 

We  were  off  the  following  afternoon:  Howells,  Robert 
Underwood  Johnson,  one  of  the  Appletons,  one  of  the 
Putnams,  George  Bowker,  and  others  were  on  the  train. 
On  the  trip  down  in  the  dining-car  there  was  a  discus- 
sion concerning  the  copyrighting  of  ideas,  which  finally 
resolved  itself  into  the  possibility  of  originating  a  new 
one.  Clemens  said: 

"There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  new  idea.  It  is  impossible. 
We  simply  take  a  lot  of  old  ideas  and  put  them  into  a  sort 
of  mental  kaleidoscope.  We  give  them  a  turn  and  they 
make  new  and  curious  combinations.  We  keep  on  turn- 
ing and  making  new  combinations  indefinitely;  but  they 
are  the  same  old  pieces  of  colored  glass  that  have  been 
in  use  through  all  the  ages." 

We  put  up  at  the  Willard,  and  in  the  morning  drove 
over  to  the  Congressional  Library,  where  the  copyright 
hearing  was  in  progress.  There  was  a  joint  committee  of 
the  two  Houses  seated  round  a  long  table  at  work,  and  a 
number  of  spectators  more  or  less  interested  in  the  bill, 
mainly,  it  would  seem,  men  concerned  with  the  protec- 
tion of  mechanical  music-rolls.  The  fact  that  this  feature 
was  mixed  up  with  literature  was  not  viewed  with  favor 
by  most  of  the  writers.  Clemens  referred  to  the  musical 
contingent  as  "those  hand-organ  men  who  ought  to  have 
a  bill  of  their  own." 

I  should  mention  that  early  that  morning  Clemens  had 
written  this  letter  to  Speaker  Cannon: 

December  7,  1906. 

Dear  Uncle  Joseph— Please  get  me  the  thanks  of  the  Con- 
gress—not next  week,  but  right  away.  It  is  very  necessary. 
Do  accomplish  this  for  your  affectionate  old  friend  right  away; 
by  persuasion,  if  you  can;  by  violence,  if  you  must,  for  it  is  im- 
peratively necessary  that  I  get  on  the  floor  for  two  or  three  hours 

1343 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


and  talk  to  the  members,  man  by  man,  in  behalf  of  the  support, 
encouragement,  and  protection  of  one  of  the  nation's  most 
valuable  assets  and  industries — its  literature.  I  have  arguments 
with  me,  also  a  barrel  with  liquid  in  it. 

Give  me  a  chance.  Get  me  the  thanks  of  Congress.  Don't 
wait  for  others— there  isn't  time.  I  have  stayed  away  and  let 
Congress  alone  for  seventy-one  years  and  I  am  entitled  to 
thanks.  Congress  knows  it  perfectly  well,  and  I  have  long  felt 
hurt  that  this  quite  proper  and  earned  expression  of  gratitude 
has  been  merely  felt  by  the  House  and  never  publicly  uttered. 
Send  me  an  order  on  the  Sergeant-at-Arms  quick.  When  shall 
I  come?  With  love  and  a  benediction,         Mark  Twain. 

We  went  over  to  the  Capitol  now  to  deliver  to  "Uncle 
Joe"  this  characteristic  letter.  We  had  picked  up  Clem- 
ens's  nephew,  Samuel  E.  Moffett,  at  the  Library,  and 
he  came  along  and  led  the  way  to  the  Speaker's  room. 
Arriving  there,  Clemens  laid  off  his  dark  overcoat  and 
stood  there,  all  in  white,  certainly  a  startling  figure  among 
those  clerks,  newspaper  men,  and  incidental  politicians. 
He  had  been  noticed  as  he  entered  the  Capitol,  and  a 
number  of  reporters  had  followed  close  behind.  Within 
less  than  a  minute  word  was  being  passed  through  the 
corridors  that  Mark  Twain  was  at  the  Capitol  in  his 
white  suit.  The  privileged  ones  began  to  gather,  and  a 
crowd  assembled  in  the  hall  outside. 

Speaker  Cannon  was  not  present  at  the  moment;  but 
a  little  later  he  "billowed"  in — which  seems  to  be  the 
word  to  express  it — he  came  with  such  a  rush  and  tide 
of  life.  After  greetings,  Clemens  produced  the  letter  and 
read  it  to  him  solemnly,  as  if  he  were  presenting  a  petition. 
Uncle  Joe  listened  quite  seriously,  his  head  bowed  a  little, 
as  if  it  were  really  a  petition,  as  in  fact  it  was.  He  smiled, 
but  he  said,  quite  seriously: 

"That  is  a  request  that  ought  to  be  granted;  but  the 
time  has  gone  by  when  I  am  permitted  any  such  liberties. 
Tom  Reed,  when  he  was  Speaker,  inaugurated  a  strict 

1344 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  LOBBYING  EXPEDITION 


precedent  excluding  all  outsiders  from  the  use  of  the  floor 
of  the  House." 

"I  got  in  the  other  time,"  Clemens  insisted. 

"Yes,"  said  Uncle  Joe;  "but  that  ain't  now.  Sunset 
Cox  could  let  you  in,  but  I  can't.  They'd  hang  me." 
He  reflected  a  moment,  and  added:  "I'll  tell  you  what 
I'll  do:  I've  got  a  private  room  down-stairs  that  I  never 
use.  It's  all  fitted  up  with  table  and  desk,  stationery, 
china  ware,  and  cutlery;  you  could  keep  house  there,  if 
you  wanted  to.  I'll  let  you  have  it  as  long  as  you  want 
to  stay  here,  and  I'll  give  you  my  private  servant,  Neal, 
who's  been  here  all  his  life  and  knows  every  official,  every 
Senator  and  Representative,  and  they  all  know  him. 
He'll  bring  you  whatever  you  want,  and  you  can  send  in 
messages  by  him.  You  can  have  the  members  brought 
down  singly  or  in  bunches,  and  convert  them  as  much  as 
you  please.  I'd  give  you  a  key  to  the  room,  only  I  haven't 
got  one  myself.  I  never  can  get  in  when  I  want  to,  but 
Neal  can  get  in,  and  he'll  unlock  it  for  you.  You  can  have 
the  room,  and  you  can  have  Neal.  Now,  will  that  do  you  ?" 

Clemens  said  it  would.  It  was,  in  fact,  an  offer  without 
precedent.  Probably  never  in  the  history  of  the  country 
had  a  Speaker  given  up  his  private  room  to  lobbyists. 
We  went  in  to  see  the  House  open,  and  then  went  down 
with  Neal  and  took  possession  of  the  room.  The  re- 
porters had  promptly  seized  upon  the  letter,  and  they 
now  got  hold  of  its  author,  led  him  to  their  own  quarters, 
and,  gathering  around  him,  fired  questions  at  him,  and 
kept  their  note-books  busy.  He  made  a  great  figure,  all 
in  white  there  among  them,  and  they  didn't  fail  to  realize 
the  value  of  it  as  "copy."  He  talked  about  copyright, 
and  about  his  white  clothes,  and  about  a  silk  hat  which 
Howells  wore. 

Back  in  the  Speaker's  room,  at  last,  he  began  laying 
out  the  campaign,  which  would  begin  next  day.  By  and 
by  he  said: 

1345 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"  Look  here!  I  believe  I've  got  to  speak  over  there  in 
that  committee-room  to-day  or  to-morrow.  I  ought  to 
know  just  when  it  is." 

I  had  not  heard  of  this  before,  and  offered  to  go  over 
and  see  about  it,  which  I  did  at  once.  I  hurried  back 
faster  than  I  had  gone. 

"Mr.  Clemens,  you  are  to  speak  in  half  an  hour,  and 
the  room  is  crowded  full;  people  waiting  to  hear  you." 

"The  devil!"  he  said.  "Well,  all  right;  Til  just  lie 
down  here  a  few  minutes  and  then  we'll  go  over.  Take 
paper  and  pencil  and  make  a  few  headings." 

There  was  a  couch  in  the  room.  He  lay  down  while 
I  sat  at  the  table  with  a  pencil,  making  headings  now  and 
then,  as  he  suggested,  and  presently  he  rose  and,  shoving 
the  notes  into  his  pocket,  was  ready.  It  was  half  past 
three  when  we  entered  the  committee-room,  which  was 
packed  with  people  and  rather  dimly  lighted,  for  it  was 
gloomy  outside.  Herbert  Putnam,  the  librarian,  led  us 
to  seats  among  the  literary  group,  and  Clemens,  remov- 
ing his  overcoat,  stood  in  that  dim  room  clad  as  in  white 
armor.  There  was  a  perceptible  stir.  Howells,  startled 
for  a  moment,  whispered: 

"What  in  the  world  did  he  wear  that  white  suit  for?" 
though  in  his  heart  he  admired  it  as  much  as  the 
others. 

I  don't  remember  who  was  speaking  when  we  came  in, 
but  he  was  saying  nothing  important.  Whoever  it  was, 
he  was  followed  by  Dr.  Edward  Everett  Hale,  whose  age 
always  commanded  respect,  and  whose  words  always  in- 
vited interest.  Then  it  was  Mark  Twain's  turn.  He  did 
not  stand  by  his  chair,  as  the  others  had  done,  but  walked 
over  to  the  Speaker's  table,  and,  turning,  faced  his  au- 
dience. I  have  never  seen  a  more  impressive  sight  than 
that  snow-white  figure  in  that  dim-lit,  crowded  room. 
He  never  touched  his  notes;  he  didn't  even  remember 
them.    He  began  in  that  even,  quiet,  deliberate  voice  of 

1346 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  LOBBYING  EXPEDITION 


his — the  most  even,  the  most  quiet,  the  most  deliberate 
voice  in  the  world — and,  without  a  break  or  a  hesitation 
for  a  word,  he  delivered  a  copyright  argument,  full  of 
humor  and  serious  reasoning,  such  a  speech  as  no  one 
in  that  room,  I  suppose,  had  ever  heard.  Certainly  it 
was  a  fine  and  dramatic  bit  of  impromptu  pleading. 
The  weary  committee,  which  had  been  tortured  all  day 
with  dull,  statistical  arguments  made  by  the  mechanical- 
device  fiends,  and  dreary  platitudes  unloaded  by  men 
whose  chief  ambition  was  to  shine  as  copyright  champions, 
suddenly  realized  that  they  were  being  rewarded  for  the 
long  waiting.  They  began  to  brighten  and  freshen,  and 
uplift  and  smile,  like  flowers  that  have  been  wilted  by 
a  drought  when  comes  the  refreshing  shower  that  means 
renewed  life  and  vigor.  Every  listener  was  as  if  standing 
on  tiptoe.  When  the  last  sentence  was  spoken  the  ap- 
plause came  like  an  explosion.1 

There  came  a  universal  rush  of  men  and  women  to  get 
near  enough  for  a  word  and  to  shake  his  hand.  But  he 
was  anxious  to  get  away.  We  drove  to  the  Willard  and 
talked  and  smoked,  and  got  ready  for  dinner.  He  was 
elated,  and  said  the  occasion  required  full-dress.  We 
started  down  at  last,  fronted  and  frocked  like  penguins. 

I  did  not  realize  then  the  fullness  of  his  love  for  theatrical 
effect.    I  supposed  he  would  want  to  go  down  with  as 

1  Howells  in  his  book  My  Mark  Twain  speaks  of  Clemens's  white 
clothing  as  "an  inspiration  which  few  men  would  have  had  the 
courage  to  act  upon."    He  adds: 

"  The  first  time  I  saw  him  wear  it  was  at  the  authors'  hearing  before 
the  Congressional  Committee  on  Copyright  in  Washington.  Noth- 
ing could  have  been  more  dramatic  than  the  gesture  with  which  he 
flung  off  jhis  long,  loose  overcoat  and  stood  forth  in  white  from  his 
feet  to  the  crown  of  his  silvery  head.  It  was  a  magnificent  coup, 
and  he  dearly  loved  a  coup;  but  the  magnificent  speech  which  he 
made,  tearing  to  shreds  the  venerable  farrago  of  nonsense  about  non- 
property  in  ideas  which  had  formed  the  basis  of  all  copyright  legisla- 
tion, made  you  forget  even  his  spectacularity." 

1347 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


little  ostentation  as  possible,  so  took  him  by  the  elevator 
which  enters  the  dining-room  without  passing  through  the 
long  corridor  known  as  "Peacock  Alley,"  because  of  its 
being  a  favorite  place  for  handsomely  dressed  fashion- 
ables of  the  national  capital.  When  we  reached  the  en- 
trance of  the  dining-room  he  said: 

"Isn't  there  another  entrance  to  this  place?" 

I  said  there  was,  but  that  it  was  very  conspicuous. 
We  should  have  to  go  down  the  long  corridor. 

"Oh,  well,"  he  said,  "I  don't  mind  that.  Let's  go 
back  and  try  it  over." 

So  we  went  back  up  the  elevator,  walked  to  the  other 
end  of  the  hotel,  and  came  down  to  the  F  Street  entrance. 
There  is  a  fine,  stately  flight  of  steps — a  really  royal 
stair — leading  from  this  entrance  down  into  "Peacock 
Alley."  To  slowly  descend  that  flight  is  an  impressive 
thing  to  do.  It  is  like  descending  the  steps  of  a  throne- 
room,  or  to  some  royal  landing-place  where  Cleopatra's 
barge  might  lie.  I  confess  that  I  was  somewhat  nervous 
at  the  awfulness  of  the  occasion,  but  I  reflected  that  I 
was  powerfully  protected;  so  side  by  side,  both  in  full- 
dress,  white  ties,  white-silk  waistcoats,  and  all,  we  came 
down  that  regal  flight. 

Of  course  he  was  seized  upon  at  once  by  a  lot  of 
feminine  admirers,  and  the  passage  along  the  corridor 
was  a  perpetual  gantlet.  I  realize  now  that  this  gave 
the  dramatic  finish  to  his  day,  and  furnished  him 
with  proper  appetite  for  his  dinner.  I  did  not  again 
make  the  mistake  of  taking  him  around  to  the  more 
secluded  elevator.  I  aided  and  abetted  him  every 
evening  in  making  that  spectacular  descent  of  the  royal 
stairway,  and  in  running  that  fair  and  frivolous  gantlet 
the  length  of  "Peacock  Alley."  The  dinner  was  a  con- 
tinuous reception.  No  sooner  was  he  seated  than  this 
Congressman  and  that  Senator  came  over  to  shake  hands 
with  Mark  Twain.    Governor  Francis  of  Missouri  also 

1343 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  LOBBYING  EXPEDITION 


came.  Eventually  Howells  drifted  in,  and  Clemens  re- 
viewed the  day,  its  humors  and  successes.  Back  in 
the  rooms  at  last  he  summed  up  the  progress  thus  far — 
smoked,  laughed  over  "Uncle  Joe's"  surrender  to  the 
"copyright  bandits,"  and  turned  in  for  the  night. 

We  were  at  the  Capitol  headquarters  in  Speaker  Cannon's 
private  room  about  eleven  o'clock  next  morning.  *  Clemens 
was  not  in  the  best  humor  because  I  had  allowed  him 
to  oversleep.  He  was  inclined  to  be  discouraged  at  the 
prospect,  and  did  not  believe  many  of  the  members  would 
come  down  to  see  him.  He  expressed  a  wish  for  some 
person  of  influence  and  wide  acquaintance,  and  walked 
up  and  down,  smoking  gloomily.  I  slipped  out  and  found 
the  Speaker's  colored  body-guard,  Neal,  and  suggested 
that  Mr.  Clemens  was  ready  now  to  receive  the  members. 

That  was  enough.  They  began  to  arrive  immediately. 
John  Sharp  Williams  came  first,  then  Boutell,  from  Illi- 
nois, Littlefield,  of  Maine,  and  after  them  a  perfect  pro- 
cession, including  all  the  leading  lights — Dalzell,  Champ 
Clark,  McCall — one  hundred  and  eighty  or  so  in  all  during 
the  next  three  or  four  hours. 

Neal  announced  each  name  at  the  door,  and  in  turn  I 
announced  it  to  Clemens  when  the  press  was  not  too  great. 
He  had  provided  boxes  of  cigars,  and  the  room  was  pres- 
ently blue  with  smoke,  Clemens  in  his  white  suit  in  the 
midst  of  it,  surrounded  by  those  darker  figures — shaking 
hands,  dealing  out  copyright  gospel  and  anecdotes — happy 
and  wonderfully  excited.  There  were  chairs,  but  usually 
there  was  only  standing  room.  He  was  on  his  feet  for 
several  hours  and  talked  continually;  but  when  at  last 
it  was  over,  and  Champ  Clark,  who  I  believe  remained 
longest  and  was  most  enthusiastic  in  the  movement,  had 
bade  him  good-by,  he  declared  that  he  was  not  a  par- 
ticle tired,  and  added: 

"I  believe  if  our  bill  could  be  presented  now  it  would 
pass." 

1349 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


He  was  highly  elated,  and  pronounced  everything  a 
perfect  success.  Neal,  who  was  largely  responsible  for 
the  triumph,  received  a  ten-dollar  bill. 

We  drove  to  the  hotel  and  dined  that  night  with  the 
Dodges,  who  had  been  neighbors  at  Riverdale.  Later, 
the  usual  crowd  of  admirers  gathered  around  him, 
among  them  I  remember  the  minister  from  Costa  Rica, 
the  Italian  minister,  and  others  of  the  diplomatic  ser- 
vice, most  of  whom  he  had  known  during  his  European 
residence.  Some  one  told  of  traveling  in  India  and 
China,  and  how  a  certain  Hindu  "god"  who  had  ex- 
changed autographs  with  Mark  Twain  during  his  sojourn 
there  was  familiar  with  only  two  other  American  names — 
George  Washington  and  Chicago;  while  the  King  of  Siam 
had  read  but  three  English  books — the  Bible,  Bryce's 
American  Commonwealth,  and  The  Innocents  Abroad. 

We  were  at  Thomas  Nelson  Page's  for  dinner  next 
evening — a  wonderfully  beautiful  home,  full  of  art  trea- 
sures. A  number  of  guests  had  been  invited.  Clemens 
naturally  led  the  dinner-talk,  which  eventually  drifted  to 
reading.  He  told  of  Mrs.  Clemens's  embarrassment  when 
Stepniak  had  visited  them  and  talked  books,  and  asked 
her  what  her  husband  thought  of  Balzac,  Thackeray,  and 
the  others.  She  had  been  obliged  to  say  that  he  had  not 
read  them. 

"'How  interesting!'  said  Stepniak.  But  it  wasn't  in- 
teresting to  Mrs.  Clemens.    It  was  torture." 

He  was  light-spirited  and  gay;  but  recalling  Mrs. 
Clemens  saddened  him,  perhaps,  for  he  was  silent  as  we 
drove  to  the  hotel,  and  after  he  was  in  bed  he  said,  with 
a  weary  despair  which  even  the  words  do  not  convey : 

"If  I  had  been  there  a  minute  earlier,  it  is  possible — it 
is  possible  that  she  might  have  died  in  my  arms.  Some- 
times I  think  that  perhaps  there  was  an  instant — a  single 
instant — when  she  realized  that  she  was  dying  and  that 
I  was  not  there." 

1350 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  LOBBYING  EXPEDITION 


In  New  York  I  had  once  brought  him  a  print  of 
the  superb  "Adams  Memorial,"  by  Saint-Gaudens — the 
bronze  woman  who  sits  in  the  still  court  in  the  Rock 
Creek  Cemetery  at  Washington. 

On  the  morning  following  the  Page  dinner  at  break- 
fast, he  said: 

"Engage  a  carriage  and  we  will  drive  out  and  see  the 
Saint-Gaudens  bronze." 

It  was  a  bleak,  dull  December  day,  and  as  we  walked 
down  through  the  avenues  of  the  dead  there  was  a  presence 
of  realized  sorrow  that  seemed  exactly  suited  to  such  a 
visit.  We  entered  the  little  inclosure  of  cedars  where 
sits  the  dark  figure  which  is  art's  supreme  expression  of 
the  great  human  mystery  of  life  and  death.  Instinctive- 
ly we  removed  our  hats,  and  neither  spoke  until  after 
we  had  come  away.   Then : 

"What  does  he  call  it?"  he  asked. 

I  did  not  know,  though  I  had  heard  applied  to  it  that 
great  line  of  Shakespeare's — "  the  rest  is  silence." 

"But  that  figure  is  not  silent,"  he  said. 

And  later,  as  we  were  driving  home: 

"It  is  in  deep  meditation  on  sorrowful  things." 

When  we  returned  to  New  York  he  had  the  little  print 
framed,  and  kept  it  always  on  his  mantelpiece. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLII 


THEOLOGY  AND  EVOLUTION 

CROM  the  Washington  trip  dates  a  period  of  still 
r  closer  association  with  Mark  Twain.  On  the  way 
to  New  York  he  suggested  that  I  take  up  residence  in  his 
house  —  a  privilege  which  I  had  no  wish  to  refuse. 
There  was  room  going  to  waste,  he  said,  and  it  would  be 
handier  for  the  early  and  late  billiard  sessions.  So,  after 
that,  most  of  the  days  and  nights  I  was  there. 

Looking  back  on  that  time  now,  I  see  pretty  vividly 
three  quite  distinct  pictures.  One  of  them,  the  rich,  red 
interior  of  the  billiard-room  with  the  brilliant,  green 
square  in  the  center,  on  which  the  gay  balls  are  rolling, 
and  bending  over  it  that  luminous  white  figure  in  the 
instant  of  play.  Then  there  is  the  long,  lighted  drawing- 
room  with  the  same  figure  stretched  on  a  couch  in  the 
corner,  drowsily  smoking,  while  the  rich  organ  tones  fill  the 
place  summoning  for  him  scenes  and  faces  which  others 
do  not  see.  This  was  the  hour  between  dinner  and  bil- 
liards— the  hour  which  he  found  most  restful  of  the  day. 
Sometimes  he  rose,  walking  the  length  of  the  parlors,  his 
step  timed  to  the  music  and  his  thought.  Of  medium 
height,  he  gave  the  impression  of  being  tall — his  head 
thrown  up,  and  like  a  lion's,  rather  large  for  his  body. 
But  oftener  he  lay  among  the  cushions,  the  light  flooding 
his  white  hair  and  dress  and  heightening  his  brilliant 
coloring. 

The  third  picture  is  that  of  the  dinner-table — always 
beautifully  laid,  and  always  a  shrine  of  wisdom  when  he 

1352 


Digitized  by  Google 


THEOLOGY  AND  EVOLUTION 


was  there.  He  did  not  always  talk;  but  it  was  his  habit 
to  do  so,  and  memory  holds  the  clearer  vision  of  him 
when,  with  eyes  and  face  alive  with  interest,  he  presented 
some  new  angle  of  thought  in  fresh  picturesqueness  of 
speech.  These  are  the  pictures  that  have  remained  to 
me  out  of  the  days  spent  under  his  roof,  and  they  will  not 
fade  while  memory  lasts. 

Of  Mark  Twain's  table  philosophies  it  seems  proper 
to  make  rather  extended  record.  They  were  usually 
unpremeditated,  and  they  presented  the  man  as  he  was, 
and  thought.  I  preserved  as  much  of  them  as  I  could, 
and  have  verified  phrase  and  idea,  when  possible,  from 
his  own  notes  and  other  unprinted  writings. 

This  dinner-table  talk  naturally  varied  in  character 
from  that  of  the  billiard-room.  The  latter  was  likely  to 
be  anecdotal  and  personal;  the  former  was  more  often 
philosophical  and  commentative,  ranging  through  a  great 
variety  of  subjects  scientific,  political,  sociological,  and 
religious.  His  talk  was  often  of  infinity — the  forces  of 
creation — and  it  was  likely  to  be  satire  of  the  orthodox 
conceptions,  intermingled  with  heresies  of  his  own  devising. 

Once,  after  a  period  of  general  silence,  he  said: 

"No  one  who  thinks  can  imagine  the  universe  made 
by  chance.  It  is  too  nicely  assembled  and  regulated. 
There  is,  of  course,  a  great  Master  Mind,  but  it  cares 
nothing  for  our  happiness  or  our  unhappiness." 

It  was  objected,  by  one  of  those  present,  that  as  the 
Infinite  Mind  suggested  perfect  harmony,  sorrow  and 
suffering  were  defects  which  that  Mind  must  feel  and 
eventually  regulate. 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "not  a  sparrow  falls  but  He  is  noticing, 
if  that  is  what  you  mean;  but  the  human  conception  of 
it  is  that  God  is  sitting  up  nights  worrying  over  the  in- 
dividuals of  this  infinitesimal  race." 

Then  he  recalled  a  fancy  which  I  have  since  found  among 
his  memoranda.    In  this  note  he  had  written: 

1353 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


The  suns  &  planets  that  form  the  constellations  of  a  billion 
billion  solar  systems  &  go  pouring,  a  tossing  flood  of  shining 
globes,  through  the  viewless  arteries  of  space  are  the  blood- 
corpuscles  in  the  veins  of  God;  &  the  nations  are  the  microbes 
that  swarm  and  wiggle  &  brag  in  each,  &  think  God  can  tell 
them  apart  at  that  distance  &  has  nothing  better  to  do  than  try. 
This — the  entertainment  of  an  eternity.  Who  so  poor  in  his 
ambitions  as  to  consent  to  be  God  on  those  terms?  Blasphemy? 
No,  it  is  not  blasphemy.  If  God  is  as  vast  as  that,  He  is  above 
blasphemy;  if  He  is  as  little  as  that,  He  is  beneath  it. 

"The  Bible,"  he  said,  "reveals  the  character  of  its 
God  with  minute  exactness.  It  is  a  portrait  of  a  man,  if 
one  can  imagine  a  man  with  evil  impulses  far  beyond 
the  human  limit.  In  the  Old  Testament  He  is  pictured 
as  unjust,  ungenerous,  pitiless,  and  revengeful,  punishing 
innocent  children  for  the  misdeeds  of  their  parents; 
punishing  unoffending  people  for  the  sins  of  their  rulers, 
even  descending  to  bloody  vengeance  upon  harmless  calves 
and  sheep  as  punishment  for  puny  trespasses  committed 
by  their  proprietors.  It  is  the  most  damnatory  biography 
that  ever  found  its  way  into  print.  Its  beginning  is  mere- 
ly childish.  Adam  is  forbidden  to  eat  the  fruit  of  a  cer- 
tain tree,  and  gravely  informed  that  if  he  disobeys  he 
shall  die.  How  could  that  impress  Adam?  He  could 
have  no  idea  of  what  death  meant.  He  had  never  seen 
a  dead  thing.  He  had  never  heard  of  one.  If  he  had  been 
told  that  if  he  ate  the  apples  he  would  be  turned  into  a 
meridian  of  longitude  that  threat  would  have  meant  just 
as  much  as  the  other  one.  The  watery  intellect  that  in- 
vented that  notion  could  be  depended  on  to  go  on  and 
decree  that  all  of  Adam's  descendants  down  to  the  latest 
day  should  be  punished  for  that  nursery  trespass  in  the 
beginning. 

"There  is  a  curious  poverty  of  invention  in  Bibles. 
Most  of  the  great  races  each  have  one,  and  they  all  show 
this  striking  defect.    Each  pretends  to  originality,  with- 

1354 


Digitized  by  Google 


THEOLOGY  AND  EVOLUTION 


out  possessing  any.  Each  of  them  borrows  from  the 
other,  confiscates  old  stage  properties,  puts  them  forth 
as  fresh  and  new  inspirations  from  on  high.  We  borrowed 
the  Golden  Rule  from  Confucius,  after  it  had  seen  service 
for  centuries,  and  copyrighted  it  without  a  blush.  We  went 
back  to  Babylon  for  the  Deluge,  and  are  as  proud  of  it 
and  as  satisfied  with  it  as  if  it  had  been  worth  the  trouble; 
whereas  we  know  now  that  Noah's  flood  never  happened, 
and  couldn't  have  happened — not  in  that  way.  The 
flood  is  a  favorite  with  Bible-makers.  Another  favorite 
with  the  founders  of  religions  is  the  Immaculate  Con- 
ception. It  had  been  worn  threadbare;  but  we  adopted 
it  as  a  new  idea.  It  was  old  in  Egypt  several  thousand 
years  before  Christ  was  born.  The  Hindus  prized  it 
ages  ago.  The  Egyptians  adopted  it  even  for  some  of 
their  kings.  The  Romans  borrowed  the  idea  from  Greece. 
We  got  it  straight  from  heaven  by  way  of  Rome.  We 
are  still  charmed  with  it." 

He  would  continue  in  this  strain,  rising  occasionally 
and  walking  about  the  room.  Once,  considering  the 
character  of  God — the  Bible  God — he  said: 

"We  haven't  been  satisfied  with  God's  character  as  it 
is  given  in  the  Old  Testament;  we  have  amended  it.  We 
have  called  Him  a  God  of  mercy  and  love  and  morals. 
He  didn't  have  a  single  one  of  those  qualities  in  the  be- 
ginning. He  didn't  hesitate  to  send  the  plagues  on  Egypt, 
the  most  fiendish  punishments  that  could  be  devised — 
not  for  the  king,  but  for  his  innocent  subjects,  the  women 
and  the  little  children,  and  then  only  to  exhibit  His  power 
— just  to  show  off — and  He  kept  hardening  Pharaoh's 
heart  so  that  He  could  send  some  further  ingenuity  of 
torture,  new  rivers  of  blood,  and  swarms  of  vermin  and 
new  pestilences,  merely  to  exhibit  samples  of  His  work- 
manship. Now  and  then,  during  the  forty  years'  wander- 
ing, Moses  persuaded  Him  to  be  a  little  more  lenient  with 
the  Israelites,  which  would  show  that  Moses  was  the 

1355 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


better  character  of  the  two.  That  Old  Testament  God 
never  had  an  inspiration  of  His  own." 

He  referred  to  the  larger  conception  of  God,  that  In- 
finite Mind  which  had  projected  the  universe.  He  said: 
44  In  some  details  that  Old  Bible  God  is  probably  a  more 
correct  picture  than  our  conception  of  that  Incomparable 
One  that  created  the  universe  and  flung  upon  its  horizon- 
/less  ocean  of  space  those  giant  suns,  whose  signal-lights 
are  so  remote  that  we  only  catch  their  flash  when  it  has 
been  a  myriad  of  years  on  its  way.  For  that  Supreme 
One  is  not  a  God  of  pity  or  mercy — not  as  we  recognize 
these  qualities.  Think  of  a  God  of  mercy  who  would 
create  the  typhus  germ,  or  the  house-fly,  or  the  centipede, 
or  the  rattlesnake,  yet  these  are  all  His  handiwork.  They 
are  a  part  of  the  Infinite  plan.  The  minister  is  careful 
:to  explain  that  all  these  tribulations  are  sent  for  a  good 


pose;  but  he  hires  a  doctor  to  destroy  the  fever  germ, 


and  he  kills  the  rattlesnake  when  he  doesn't  run  from  it, 
and  he  sets  paper  with  molasses  on  it  for  the  house-fly. 

"Two  things  are  quite  certain:  one  is  that  God,  the 
limitless  God,  manufactured  those  things,  for  no  man 
could  have  done  it.  The  man  has  never  lived  who  could 
create  even  the  humblest  of  God's  creatures.  The  other 
conclusion  is  that  God  has  no  special  consideration  for 
man's  welfare  or  comfort,  or  He  wouldn't  have  created 
those  things  to  disturb  and  destroy  him.  The  human 
conception  of  pity  and  morality  must  be  entirely  unknown 
to  that  Infinite  God,  as  much  unknown  as  the  conceptions 
of  a  microbe  to  man,  or  at  least  as  little  regarded. 

"If  God  ever  contemplates  those  qualities  in  man  He 
probably  admires  them,  as  we  always  admire  the  thing 
which  we  do  not  possess  ourselves;  probably  a  little 
grain  of  pity  in  a  man  or  a  little  atom  of  mercy  would 
look  as  big  to  Him  as  a  constellation.  He  could  create 
a  constellation  with  a  thought;  but  He  has  been  all  the 
measureless  ages,  and  He  has  never  acquired  those  quali- 


1356 


Digitized  by  Google 


THEOLOGY  AND  EVOLUTION 


i 

ties  that  we  have  named — pity  and  mercy  and  morality. 
He  goes  on  destroying  a  whole  island  of  people  with  an 
;  earthquake,  or  a  whole  cityful  with  a  plague,  when  we 
punish  a  man  in  the  electric  chair  for  merely  killing  the 
poorest  of  our  race.  The  human  being  needs  to  revise 
his  ideas  again  about  God.  Most  of  the  scientists  have 
<lone  it  already;  but  most  of  them  don't  dare  to  say  so." 

He  pointed  out  that  the  moral  idea  was  undergoing 
constant  change;  that  what  was  considered  justifiable 
in  an  earlier  day  was  regarded  as  highly  immoral  now. 
He  pointed  out  that  even  the  Decalogue  made  no  refer- 
ence to  lying,  except  in  the  matter  of  bearing  false  wit- 
ness against  a  neighbor.   Also,  that  there  was  a  command- 
ment against  covetousness,  though  covetousness  to-day 
was  the  basis  of  all  commerce.    The  general  conclu-A 
sion  being  that  the  morals  of  the  Lord  had  been  the/ 
morals  of  the  beginning;  the  morals  of  the  first-created?' 
man,  the  morals  of  the  troglodyte,  the  morals  of  necessity;] 
and -that  the  morals  of  mankind  had  kept  pace  with/ 
necessity,  whereas  those  of  the  Lord  had  remained  tuv) 
changed.    It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  no  one  ever 
undertook  to  contradict  any  statements  of  this  sort  from 
him.    In  the  first  place,  there  was  no  desire  to  do  so;  and 
in  the  second  place,  any  one  attempting  it  would  have 
cut  a  puny  figure  with  his  less  substantial  arguments  and 
his  less  vigorous  phrase.    It  was  the  part  of  wisdom  and 
immeasurably  the  part  of  happiness  to  be  silent  and 
listen. 

^  On  another  evening  he  began: 

"The  mental  evolution  of  the  species  proceeds  appar-) 
ently  by  regular  progress  side  by  side  with  the  physical^ 
development  until  it  comes  to  man,  then  there  is  a  long,( 
unexplained  gulf.  Somewhere  man  acquired  an  asset/ 
which  sets  him  immeasurably  apart  from  the  other* 
animals — his  imagination.  Out  of  it  he  created  for  him- 
self a  conscience,  and  clothes,  and  immodesty,  and  a 

m— 16  1357 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


hereafter,  and  a  soul.  I  wonder  where  he  got  that  asset. 
It  almost  makes  one  agree  with  Alfred  Russel  Wallace 
that  the  world  and  the  universe  were  created  just  for  his 
benefit,  that  he  is  the  chief  love  and  delight  of  God. 
Wallace  says  that  the  whole  universe  was  made  to  take 
care  of  and  to  keep  steady  this  little  floating  mote  in  the 
center  of  it,  which  we  call  the  world.  It  looks  like  a  good 
deal  of  trouble  for  such  a  small  result;  but  it's  dangerous 
to  dispute  with  a  learned  astronomer  like  Wallace.  Still, 
I  don't  think  we  ought  to  decide  too  soon  about  it — not 
until  the  returns  are  all  in.  There  is  the  geological  evi- 
dence, for  instance.  Even  after  the  universe  was  created, 
it  took  a  long  time  to  prepare  the  world  for  man.  Some 
of  the  scientists,  ciphering  out  the  evidence  furnished  by 
geology,  have  arrived  at  the  conviction  that  the  world 
is  prodigiously  old.  Lord  Kelvin  doesn't  agree  with 
them.  He  says  that  it  isn't  more  than  a  hundred  million 
years  old,  and  he  thinks  the  human  race  has  inhabited 
it  about  thirty  thousand  years  of  that  time.  Even  so,  it 
was  99,970,000  years  getting  ready,  impatient  as  the  Crea- 
tor doubtless  was  to  see  man  and  admire  him.  J~That  was 
because  God  first  had  to  make  the  oyster.  You  can't 
make  an  oyster  out  of  nothing,  nor  you  can't  do  it  in  a 
day.  You've  got  to  start  with  a  vast  variety  of  inverte- 
brates, belemnites,  trilobites,  jebusites,  amalekites,  and 
that  sort  of  fry,  and  put  them  into  soak  in  a  primary  sea 
and  observe  and  wait  what  will  happen.  Some  of  them 
will  turn  out  a  disappointment;  the  belemnites  and  the 
amalekites  and  such  will  be  failures,  and  they  will  die 
out  and  become  extinct  in  the  course  of  the  nineteen 
million  years  covered  by  the  experiment;  but  all  is  not 
lost,  for  the  amalekites  will  develop  gradually  into  en- 
crinites  and  stalactites  and  blatherskites,  and  one  thing 
and  another,  as  the  mighty  ages  creep  on  and  the  periods 
pile  their  lofty  crags  in  the  primordial  seas,  and  at  last 
the  first  grand  stage  in  the  preparation  of  the  world 

1358 


Digitized  by  Google 


THEOLOGY  AND  EVOLUTION 


for  man  stands  completed;  the  oyster  is  done.  Now 
an  oyster  has  hardly  any  more  reasoning  power  than  a 
man  has,  so  it  is  probable  this  one  jumped  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  nineteen  million  years  was  a  preparation 
for  him.  That  would  be  just  like  an  oyster,  and,  anyway, 
this  one  could  not  know  at  that  early  date  that  he  was  only 
an  incident  in  a  scheme,  and  that  there  was  some  more  to 
the  scheme  yet. 

"The  oyster  being  finished,  the  next  step  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  the  world  for  man  was  fish.  So  the  old  Silurian 
seas  were  opened  up  to  breed  the  fish  in.  It  took  twenty 
million  years  to  make  the  fish  and  to  fossilize  him  so  we'd 
have  the  evidence  later. 

"Then,  the  Paleozoic  limit  having  been  reached,  it  was 
necessary  to  start  a  new  age  to  make  the  reptiles.  Man 
would  have  to  have  some  reptiles — not  to  eat,  but  to 
develop  himself  from.  Thirty  million  years  were  re- 
quired for  the  reptiles,  and  out  of  such  material  as  was 
left  were  made  those  stupendous  saurians  that  used  to 
prowl  about  the  steamy  world  in  remote  ages,  with  their 
snaky  heads  forty  feet  in  the  air  and  their  sixty  feet  of 
body  and  tail  racing  and  thrashing  after  them.  They 
are  all  gone  now,  every  one  of  them;  just  a  few  fos- 
sil remnants  of  them  left  on  this  far-flung  fringe  of 
time. 

"It  took  all  those  years  to  get  one  of  those  creatures 
properly  constructed  to  proceed  to  the  next  step.  Then 
came  the  pterodactyl,  who  thought  all  that  preparation 
all  those  millions  of  years  had  been  intended  to  produce 
him,  for  there  wasnlt^anythmg  too  foolish  for  a  ptero- 
dactyl to  imagine.  IsupposeTie  dTcTattract  a  good  deal 
of  attention,  tor  even  the  least  observant  could  see  that 
there  was  the  making  of  a  bird  in  him,  also  the  making 
of  a  mammal,  in  the  course  of  time.  You  can't  say  too 
much  for  the  picturesqueness  of  the  pterodactyl — he  was 
the  triumph  of  his  period.    He  wore  wings  and  had  teeth, 

1359 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


and  was  a  starchy-looking  creature.    But  the  progression 
went  right  along. 

"During  the  next  thirty  million  years  the  bird  arrived, 
and  the  kangaroo,  and  by  and  by  the  mastodon,  and  the 
giant  sloth,  and  the  Irish  elk,  and  the  old  Silurian  ass,  and 
some  people  thought  that  man  was  about  due.  But  that 
was  a  mistake,  for  the  next  thing  they  knew  there  came 
a  great  ice-sheet,  and  those  creatures  all  escaped  across 
the  Bering  Strait  and  wandered  around  in  Asia  and  died, 
all  except  a  few  to  carry  on  the  preparation  with.  There 
were  six  of  those  glacial  periods,  with  two  million  years 
or  so  between  each.  They  chased  those  poor  orphans 
up  and  down  the  earth,  from  weather  to  weather,  from 
tropic  temperature  to  fifty  degrees  below.  They  never 
knew  what  kind  of  weather  was  going  to  turn  up  next, 
and  if  they  settled  any  place  the  whole  continent  sud- 
denly sank  from  under  them,  and  they  had  to  make  a 
scramble  for  dry  land.  Sometimes  a  volcano  would  turn 
itself  loose  just  as  they  got  located.  They  led  that  tin-" 
certain,  strenuous  existence  for  about  twenty-five  million  s 
years,  always  wondering  what  was  going  to  happen  next,  \ 
never  suspecting  that  it  was  just  a  preparation  for  man, 
who  had  to  be  done  just  so  or  there  wouldn't  be  any 
-  proper  or  harmonious  place  for  him  when  he  arrived,  and 

then  at  last  the  monkey  came,  and  everybody  could  see 
at  a  glance  that  man  wasn't  far  off  now,  and  that  was 
true  enough.   The  monkey  went  on  developing  for  close "\ 
upon  five  million  years,  and  then  he  turned  into  a  man— 
to  all  appearances. 

"It  does  look  like  a  lot  of  fuss  and  trouble  to  go  through 
to  build  anything,  especially  a  human  being,  and  no- 
where along  the  way  is  there  any  evidence  of  where  he 
picked  up  that  final  asset — his  imagination.  It  makes 
him  different  from  the  others — not  any  better,  but  cer-  ^ 
tainly  different.  Those  earlier  animals  didn't  have  it, 
and  the  monkey  hasn't  it  or  he  wouldn't  be  so  cheerful." 

1360 


Digitized  by  Google 


THEOLOGY  AND  EVOLUTION 


He  often  held  forth  on  the  shortcomings  of  the  human 
race — always  a  favorite  subject — the  incompetencies  and 
imperfections  of  this  final  creation,  in  spite  of,  or  because 
of,  his  great  attribute — the  imagination.  Once  (this  was 
in  the  billiard-room)  I  started  him  by  saying  that  what- 
ever the  conditions  in  other  planets,  there  seemed  no 
reason  why  life  should  not  develop  in  each,  adapted  as 
perfectly  to  prevailing  conditions  as  man  is  suited  to 
conditions  here.    He  said: 

"  Is  it  your  idea,  then,  that  man  is  perfectly  adapted  to 
the  conditions  of  this  planet?" 

I  began  to  qualify,  rather  weakly;  but  what  I  said  did 
not  matter.    He  was  off  on  his  favorite  theme. 

"  Man  adapted  to  the  earth  ?' '  he  said.  * '  Why,  he  can't 
sleep  out-of-doors  without  freezing  to  death  or  getting 
the  rheumatism  or  the  malaria;  he  can't  keep  his  nose 
under  water  over  a  minute  without  being  drowned;  he 
can't  climb  a  tree  without  falling  out  and  breaking  his 
neck.  Why,  he's  the  poorest,  clumsiest  excuse  of  all  the 
creatures  that  inhabit  this  earth.  He  has  got  to  be  cod- 
dled and  housed  and  swathed  and  bandaged  and  up- 
holstered to  be  able  to  live  at  all.  He  is  a  rickety  sort 
of  a  thing,  anyway  you  take  him,  a  regular  British  Mu- 
seum of  infirmities  and  inferiorities.  He  is  always  under- 
going repairs.  A  machine  that  is  as  unreliable  as  he  is 
WOUld  have  no  market.  Thfthjghpr  AnirQak  get  tfreir 
teeth  without  pain  or  inconvenience.  The  original  cave- 
man, the  troglodyte,  may  have  got  his  that  way.  But  now 
they  come  through  months  and  months  of  cruel  torture, 
and  at  a  time  of  life  when  he  is  least  able  to  bear  it.  As 
soon  as  he  gets  them  they  must  all  be  pulled  out  again, 
for  they  were  of  no  value  in  the  first  place,  not  worth 
the  loss  of  a  night's  rest.  The  second  set  will  answer  for 
a  while;  but  he  will  never  get  a  set  that  can  be  depended 
on  until  the  dentist  makes  one.  The  animals  are  not  much 
troubled  that  way.    In  a  wild  state,  a  natural  state,  they 

1361 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


have  few  diseases;  their  main  one  is  old  age.  But  man 
starts  in  as  a  child  and  lives  on  diseases  to  the  end  as  a 
regular  diet.  He  has  mumps,  measles,  whooping-cough, 
croup,  tonsilitis,  diphtheria,  scarlet-fever,  as  a  matter  of 
course.  Afterward,  as  he  goes  along,  his  life  continues 
to  be  threatened  at  every  turn  by  colds,  coughs,  asthma, 
bronchitis,  quinsy,  consumption,  yellow-fever,  blindness, 
influenza,  carbuncles,  pneumonia,  softening  of  the  brain, 
diseases  of  the  heart  and  bones,  and  a  thousand  other 
maladies  of  one  sort  and  another.  He's  just  a  basketful 
of  festering,  pestilent  corruption,  provided  for  the  sup- 
port and  entertainment  of  microbes.  Look  at  the  work- 
manship of  him  in  some  of  its  particulars.  What  are  his 
tonsils  for?  They  perform  no  useful  function;  they  have 
no  value.  They  are  but  a  trap  for  tonsilitis  and  quinsy. 
And  what  is  the  appendix  for?  It  has  no  value.  Its  sole 
interest  is  to  lie  and  wait  for  stray  grape-seeds  and  breed 
trouble.  What  is  his  beard  for?  It  is  just  a  nuisance. 
All  nations  persecute  it  with  the  razor.  Nature,  however, 
always  keeps  him  supplied  with  it,  instead  of  putting  it 
on  his  head,  where  it  ought  to  be.  You  seldom  see  a  man 
bald-headed  on  his  chin,  but  on  his  head.  A  man  wants 
to  keep  his  hair.  It  is  a  graceful  ornament,  a  comfort, 
the  best  of  all  protections  against  weather,  and  he  prizes 
it  above  emeralds  and  rubies,  and  Nature  half  the  time 
puts  it  on  so  it  won't  stay. 

"  Man's  sight  and  smell  and  hearing  are  all  inferior.  If 
he  were  suited  to  the  conditions  he  could  smell  an  enemy; 
he  could  hear  him;  he  could  see  him,  just  as  the  animals 
can  detect  their  enemies.  The  robin  hears  the  earth- 
worm bun*owing  his  course  under  the  ground;  the  blood- 
hound follows  a  scent  that  is  two  days  old.  Man  isn't 
even  handsome,  as  compared  with  the  birds;  and  as  for 
style,  look  at  the  Bengal  tiger — that  ideal  of  grace,  physi- 
cal perfection,  and  majesty.  Think  of  the  lion  and  the 
tiger  and  the  leopard,  and  then  think  of  man— that  poor 

1362 


Digitized  by  Google 


THEOLOGY  AND  EVOLUTION 


thing! — the  animal  of  the  wig,  the  ear- trumpet,  the  glass 
eye,  the  porcelain  teeth,  the  wooden  leg,  the  trepanned 
skull,  the  silver  wind-pipe — a  creature  that  is  mended 
and  patched  all  over  from  top  to  bottom.  If  he  can't 
get  renewals  of  his  bric-a-brac  in  the  next  world  what 
will  he  look  like?  He  has  just  that  one  stupendous 
superiority — his  imagination,  his  intellect.  It  makes  him 
supreme — the  higher  animals  can't  match  him  there. 
It'srvCTy_suxious. ' ' 

A  lettsfwhich  he  wrote  to  J.  Howard  Moore  concerning 
his  book  The  Universal  Kinship  was  of  this  period,  and 
seems  to  belong  here. 

Dear  Mr.  Moore —The  book  has  furnished  me  several  days 
of  deep  pleasure  &  satisfaction;  it  has  compelled  my  gratitude 
at  the  same  time,  since  it  saves  me  the  labor  of  stating  my  own 
long-cherished  opinions  &  reflections  &  resentments  by  doing 
it  lucidly  &  fervently  &  irascibly  for  me. 

There  is  one  thing  that  always  puzzles  me:  as  inheritors  of 
the  mentality  of  our  reptile  ancestors  we  have  improved  the 
inheritance  by  a  thousand  grades;  but  in  the  matter  of  the 
morals  which  they  left  us  we  have  gone  backward  as  many 
grades.  That  evolution  is  strange  &  to  me  unaccountable  & 
unnatural.  Necessarily  we  started  equipped  with  their  perfect 
and  blemishless  morals;  now  we  are  wholly  destitute;  we  have 
no  real  morals,  but  only  artificial  ones — morals  created  and  pre- 
served by  the  forced  suppression  of  natural  &  healthy  instincts. 
Yes,  we  are  a  sufficiently  comical  invention,  we  humans. 

Sincerely  yours, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLIII 


AN  EVENING  WITH  HELEN  KELLER 

{RECALL  two  pleasant  social  events  of  that  winter: 
one  a  little  party  given  at  the  Clemenses'  home  on 
New- Year's  Eve,  with  charades  and  story-telling  and 
music.  It  was  the  music  feature  of  this  party  that  was 
distinctive;  it  was  supplied  by  wire  through  an  inven- 
tion known  as  the  telharmonium  which,  it  was  believed, 
would  revolutionize  musical  entertainment  in  such  places 
as  hotels,  and  to  some  extent  in  private  houses.  The 
music  came  over  the  regular  telephone  wire,  and  was  de- 
livered through  a  series  of  horns  or  megaphones— similar 
to  those  used  for  phonographs — the  playing  being  done, 
meanwhile,  by  skilled  performers  at  the  central  station. 
Just  why  the  telharmonium  has  not  made  good  its  prom- 
ises of  popularity  I  do  not  know.  Clemens  was  filled 
with  enthusiasm  over  the  idea.  He  made  a  speech  a 
little  before  midnight,  in  which  he  told  how  he  had  gen- 
erally been  enthusiastic  about  inventions  which  had  turned 
out  more  or  less  well  in  about  equal  proportions.  He  did 
not  dwell  on  the  failures,  but  he  told  how  he  had  been 
the  first  to  use  a  typewriter  for  manuscript  work;  how  he 
had  been  one  of  the  earliest  users  of  the  fountain-pen; 
how  he  had  installed  the  first  telephone  ever  used  in  a 
private  house,  and  how  the  audience  now  would  have  a 
demonstration  of  the  first  telharmonium  music  so  em- 
ployed. It  was  just  about  the  stroke  of  midnight  when 
he  finished,  and  a  moment  later  the  horns  began  to  play 
chimes  and  "Auld  Lang  Syne"  and  "America." 

1364 


Digitized  by  Google 


AN  EVENING  WITH  HELEN  KELLER 


The  other  pleasant  evening  referred  to  was  a  little 
company  given  in  honor  of  Helen  Keller.  It  was  fas- 
cinating to  watch  her,  and  to  realize  with  what  a  store  of 
knowledge  she  had  lighted  the  black  silence  of  her  physi- 
cal life.  To  see  Mark  Twain  and  Helen  Keller  together 
was  something  not  easily  to  be  forgotten.  When  Mrs. 
Macy  (who,  as  Miss  Sullivan,  had  led  her  so  marvelously 
out  of  the  shadows)  communicated  his  words  to  her  with 
what  seemed  a  lightning  touch  of  the  fingers  her  face 
radiated  every  shade  of  his  meaning — humorous,  serious, 
pathetic.  Helen  visited  the  various  objects  in  the  room, 
and  seemed  to  enjoy  them  more  than  the  usual  ob- 
server of  these  things,  and  certainly  in  greater  detail. 
Her  sensitive  fingers  spread  over  articles  of  bric-a-brac, 
and  the  exclamations  she  uttered  were  always  fitting, 
showing  that  she  somehow  visualized  each  thing  in  all 
its  particulars.  There  was  a  bronze  cat  of  handsome 
workmanship  and  happy  expression,  and  when  she  had 
run  those  all-seeing  fingers  of  hers  over  it  she  said:  "It  is 
smiling.*' 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLIV 


BILLIARD-ROOM  NOTES 

THE  billiard  games  went  along  pretty  steadily  that 
winter.  My  play  improved,  and  Clemens  found 
it  necessary  to  eliminate  my  odds  altogether,  and  to 
change  the  game  frequently  in  order  to  keep  me  in  sub- 
jection. Frequently  there  were  long  and  apparently 
violent  arguments  over  the  legitimacy  of  some  particular 
shot  or  play — arguments  to  us  quite  as  enjoyable  as 
the  rest  of  the  game.  Sometimes  he  would  count  a 
shot  which  was  clearly  out  of  the  legal  limits,  and  then 
it  was  always  a  delight  to  him  to  have  a  mock-serious 
discussion  over  the  matter  of  conscience,  and  whether 
or  not  his  conscience  was  in  its  usual  state  of  repair. 
It  would  always  end  by  him  saying:  "  I  don't  wish  even 
to  seem  to  do  anything  which  can  invite  suspicion.  I 
refuse  to  count  that  shot,"  or  something  of  like  nature. 
Sometimes  when  I  had  let  a  questionable  play  pass  with- 
out comment,  he  would  watch  anxiously  until  I  had  made 
a  similar  one  and  then  insist  on  my  scoring  it  to  square 
accounts.    His  conscience  was  always  repairing  itself. 

He  had  experimented,  a  great  many  years  before,  with 
what  was  in  the  nature  of  a  trick  on  some  unsuspecting 
player.  It  consisted  in  turning  out  twelve  pool-balls 
on  the  table  with  one  cue  ball,  and  asking  his  guest  how 
many  caroms  he  thought  he  could  make  with  all  those 
twelve  balls  to  play  on.  He  had  learned  that  the  average 
player  would  seldom  make  more  than  thirty-one  counts, 
and  usually,  before  this  number  was  reached,  he  would 

1366 


Digitized  by  Google 


BILLIARD-ROOM  NOTES 


miss  through  some  careless  play  or  get  himself  into  a 
position  where  he  couldn't  play  at  all.  The  thing  looked 
absurdly  easy.  It  looked  as  if  one  could  go  on  playing 
all  day  long,  and  the  victim  was  usually  eager  to  bet  that 
he  could  make  fifty  or  perhaps  a  hundred;  but  for  more 
than  an  hour  I  tried  it  patiently,  and  seldom  succeeded 
in  scoring  more  than  fifteen  or  twenty  without  missing. 
Long  after  the  play  itself  ceased  to  be  amusing  to  me,  he 
insisted  on  my  going  on  and  trying  it  some  more,  and  he 
would  throw  himself  back  and  roar  with  laughter,  the 
tears  streaming  down  his  cheeks,  to  see  me  work  and  fume 
and  fail. 

It  was  very  soon  after  that  that  Peter  Dunne  ("Mr. 
Dooley")  came  down  for  luncheon,  and  after  several 
games  of  the  usual  sort,  Clemens  quietly — as  if  the  idea 
had  just  occurred  to  him — rolled  out  the  twelve  balls  and 
asked  Dunne  how  many  caroms  he  thought  he  could 
make  without  a  miss.  Dunne  said  he  thought  he  could 
make  a  thousand.  Clemens  quite  indifferently  said  that 
he  didn't  believe  he  could  make  fifty.  Dunne  offered  to 
bet  five  dollars  that  he  could,  and  the  wager  was  made. 
Dunne  scored  about  twenty-five  the  first  time  and  missed; 
then  he  insisted  on  betting  five  dollars  again,  and  his 
defeats  continued  until  Clemens  had  twenty-five  dollars 
of  Dunne's  money,  and  Dunne  was  sweating  and  swearing, 
and  Mark  Twain  rocking  with  delight.  Dunne  went 
away  still  unsatisfied,  promising  that  he  would  come  back 
and  try  it  again.  Perhaps  he  practised  in  his  absence, 
for  when  he  returned  he  had  learned  something.  He 
won  his  twenty-five  dollars  back,  and  I  think  something 
more  added.  Mark  Twain  was  still  ahead,  for  Dunne 
furnished  him  with  a  good  five  hundred  dollars'  worth 
of  amusement. 

Clemens  never  cared  to  talk  and  never  wished  to  be 
talked  to  when  the  game  was  actually  in  progress.  If 
there  was  anything  to  be  said  on  either  side,  he  would 

1367 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


stop  and  rest  his  cue  on  the  floor,  or  sit  down  on  the 
couch,  until  the  matter  was  concluded.  Such  interrup- 
tions happened  pretty  frequently,  and  many  of  the  bits 
of  personal  comment  and  incident  scattered  along  through 
this  work  are  the  result  of  those  brief  rests.  Some  shot, 
or  situation,  or  word  would  strike  back  through  the  past 
and  awaken  a  note  long  silent,  and  I  generally  kept  a  pad 
and  pencil  on  the  window-sill  with  the  score-sheet,  and 
later,  during  his  play,  I  would  scrawl  some  reminder  that 
would  be  precious  by  and  by. 

On  one  of  these  I  find  a  memorandum  of  what  he  called 
his  three  recurrent  dreams.  All  of  us  have  such  things, 
but  his  seem  worth  remembering. 

"There  is  never  a  month  passes,"  he  said,  "that  I  do 
not  dream  of  being  in  reduced  circumstances,  and  obliged 
to  go  back  to  the  river  to  earn  a  living.  It  is  never  a 
pleasant  dream,  either.  I  love  to  think  about  those  days; 
but  there's  always  something  sickening  about  the  thought 
that  I  have  been  obliged  to  go  back  to  them;  and  usually 
in  my  dream  I  am  just  about  to  start  into  a  black  shadow 
without  being  able  to  tell  whether  it  is  Selma  bluff,  or 
Hat  Island,  or  only  a  black  wall  of  night. 

"Another  dream  that  I  have  of  that  kind  is  being  com- 
pelled to  go  back  to  the  lecture  platform.  I  hate  that 
dream  worse  than  the  other.  In  it  I  am  always  getting 
up  before  an  audience  with  nothing  to  say,  trying  to  be 
funny;  trying  to  make  the  audience  laugh,  realizing  that 
I  am  only  making  silly  jokes.  Then  the  audience  realizes 
it,  and  pretty  soon  they  commence  to  get  up  and  leave. 
That  dream  always  ends  by  my  standing  there  in  the  semi- 
darkness  talking  to  an  empty  house. 

"My  other  dream  is  of  being  at  a  brilliant  gathering 
in  my  night-garments.  People  don't  seem  to  notice  me 
there  at  first,  and  then  pretty  soon  somebody  points  me 
out,  and  they  all  begin  to  look  at  me  suspiciously,  and  I 
can  see  that  they  are  wondering  who  I  am  and  why  I 

1368 


Digitized  by  Google 


BILLIARD. ROOM  NOTES 


am  there  in  that  costume.  Then  it  occurs  to  me  that  I 
can  fix  it  by  making  myself  known.  I  take  hold  of  some 
man  and  whisper  to  him,  'I  am  Mark  Twain';  but  that 
does  not  improve  it,  for  immediately  I  can  hear  him  whis- 
pering to  the  others, '  He  says  he  is  Mark  Twain,'  and  they 
all  look  at  me  a  good  deal  more  suspiciously  than  before, 
and  I  can  see  that  they  don't  believe  it,  and  that  it  was 
a  mistake  to  make  that  confession.  Sometimes,  in  that 
dream,  I  am  dressed  like  a  tramp  instead  of  being  in  my 
night-clothes;  but  it  all  ends  about  the  same — they  go 
away  and  leave  me  standing  there,  ashamed.  I  generally 
enjoy  my  dreams,  but  not  those  three,  and  they  are  the 
ones  I  have  oftenest." 

Quite  often  some  curious  episode  of  the  world's  history 
would  flash  upon  him — something  amusing,  or  coarse,  or 
tragic,  and  he  would  bring  the  game  to  a  standstill  and 
recount  it  with  wonderful  accuracy  as  to  date  and  cir- 
cumstance. He  had  a  natural  passion  for  historic  events 
and  a  gift  for  mentally  fixing  them,  but  his  memory  in 
other  ways  was  seldom  reliable.  He  was  likely  to  forget 
the  names  even  of  those  he  knew  best  and  saw  oftenest, 
and  the  small  details  of  life  seldom  registered  at  all. 

He  had  his  breakfast  served  in  his  room,  and  once,  on 
a  slip  of  paper,  he  wrote,  for  his  own  reminder: 

The  accuracy  of  your  forgetfulness  is  absolute — it  seems 
never  to  fail.  I  prepare  to  pour  my  coffee  so  it  can  cool  while 
I  shave — and  I  always  forget  to  pour  it. 

Yet,  very  curiously,  he  would  sometimes  single  out  a 
minute  detail,  something  every  one  else  had  overlooked, 
and  days  or  even  weeks  afterward  would  recall  it  vividly, 
and  not  always  at  an  opportune  moment.  Perhaps  this 
also  was  a  part  of  his  old  pilot-training.  Once  Clara 
Clemens  remarked: 

"It  always  amazes  me  the  things  that  father  does 

1369 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


and  does  not  remember.   Some  little  trifle  that  nobody 
else  would  notice,  and  you  are  hoping  that  he  didn't,  will 
suddenly  come  back  to  him  just  when  you  least  expect 
it  or  care  for  it." 
My  note-book  contains  the  entry: 

February  xi,  1907.   He  said  to-day: 

"A  blindfolded  chess-player  can  remember  every  play  and 
discuss  the  game  afterward,  while  we  can't  remember  from  one 
shot  to  the  next." 

I  mentioned  his  old  pilot-memory  as  an  example  of  what  he 
could  do  if  he  wished. 

"Yes,"  he  answered,  "those  are  special  memories;  a  pilot 
will  tell  you  the  number  of  feet  in  every  crossing  at  any  time, 
but  he  can't  remember  what  he  had  for  breakfast." 

"How  long  did  you  keep  your  pilot-memory?"  I  asked. 

"  Not  long ;  it  faded  out  right  away,  but  the  training  served  me, 
for  when  I  went  to  report  on  a  paper  a  year  or  two  later  I  never 
had  to  make  any  notes." 

"I  suppose  you  still  remember  some  of  the  river?" 

"Not  much.  Hat  Island,  Helena,  and  here  and  there  a  place; 
but  that  is  about  all." 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


CCLV 

PURTHER  PERSONALITIES 

LIKE  every  person  living,  Mark  Twain  had  some 
^  peculiar  and  petty  economies.  Such  things  in  great 
men  are  noticeable.  He  lived  extravagantly.  His  house- 
hold expenses  at  the  time  amounted  to  more  than  fifty  dol- 
lars a  day.  In  the  matter  of  food,  the  choicest  and  most 
expensive  the  market  could  furnish  was  always  served  in 
lavish  abundance.  He  had  the  best  and  highest-priced 
servants,  ample  as  to  number.  His  clothes  he  bought 
generously;  he  gave  without  stint  to  his  children;  his 
gratuities  were  always  liberal.  He  never  questioned  pe- 
cuniary outgoes — seldom  worried  as  to  the  state  of  his 
bank-account  so  long  as  there  was  plenty.  He  smoked 
cheap  cigars  because  he  preferred  their  flavor.  Yet  he 
had  his  economics.  I  have  seen  him,  before  leaving  a 
room,  go  around  and  carefully  lower  the  gas-jets,  to  pro- 
vide against  that  waste.  I  have  known  him  to  examine 
into  the  cost  of  a  cab,  and  object  to  an  apparent  over- 
charge of  a  few  cents. 

It  seemed  that  his  idea  of  economy  might  be  expressed 
in  these  words:  He  abhorred  extortion  and  visible  waste. 

Furthermore,  he  had  exact  ideas  as  to  ownership. 
One  evening,  while  we  were  playing  billiards,  I  noticed 
a  five-cent  piece  on  the  floor.    I  picked  it  up,  saying: 
"Here  is  five  cents;  I  don't  know  whose  it  is.*' 
He  regarded  the  coin  rather  seriously,  I  thought,  and 
said: 

44 1  don't  know,  either." 

I  laid  it  on  the  top  of  the  book-shelves  which  ran 

1371 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


around  the  room.  The  play  went  on,  and  I  forgot  the 
circumstance.  When  the  game  ended  that  night  I  went 
into  his  room  with  him,  as  usual,  for  a  good-night  word. 
As  he  took  his  change  and  keys  from  the  pocket  of  his 
trousers,  he  looked  the  assortment  over  and  said: 

"That  five-cent  piece  you  found  was  mine." 

T  brought  it  to  him  at  once,  and  he  took  it  solemnly, 
laid  it  with  the  rest  of  his  change,  and  neither  of  us  re- 
ferred to  it  again.  It  may  have  been  one  of  his  jokes, 
but  I  think  it  more  likely  that  he  remembered  having 
had  a  five-cent  piece,  probably  reserved  for  car  fare,  and 
that  it  was  missing. 

More  than  once,  in  Washington,  he  had  said: 

"  Draw  plenty  of  money  for  incidental  expenses.  Don't 
bother  to  keep  account  of  them." 

So  it  was  not  miserliness;  it  was  just  a  peculiarity, 
a  curious  attention  to  a  trifling  detail. 

He  had  a  fondness  for  riding  on  the  then  newly  com- 
pleted Subway,  which  he  called  the  Underground.  Some- 
times he  would  say: 

"I'll  pay  your  fare  on  the  Underground  if  you  want 
to  take  a  ride  with  me."  And  he  always  insisted  on  pay- 
ing the  fare ;  and  once  when  I  rode  far  up-town  with  him 
to  a  place  where  he  was  going  to  luncheon,  and  had  taken 
him  to  the  door,  he  turned  and  said,  gravely: 

"Here  is  five  cents  to  pay  your  way  home."  And  I 
took  it  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  it  had  been  offered. 
It  was  probably  this  trait  which  caused  some  one  oc- 
casionally to  claim  that  Mark  Twain  was  close  in  money 
matters.  Perhaps  there  may  have  been  times  in  his  life 
when  he  was  parsimonious;  but,  if  so,  I  must  believe 
that  it  was  when  he  was  sorely  pressed  and  exercising  the 
natural  instinct  of  self-preservation.  He  wished  to  re- 
ceive the  full  value  (who  does  not  ?)  of  his  labors  and  prop- 
erties. He  took  a  childish  delight  in  piling  up  money; 
but  it  became  greed  only  when  he  believed  some  one  with 

1372 


Digitized  by  Google 


FURTHER  PERSONALITIES 


whom  he  had  dealings  was  trying  to  get  an  unfair  di- 
vision of  profits.  Then  it  became  something  besides 
greed.  It  became  an  indignation  that  amounted  to 
malevolence.  I  was  concerned  in  a  number  of  dealings 
with  Mark  Twain,  and  at  a  period  in  his  life  when  human 
traits  are  supposed  to  become  exaggerated,  which  is  to 
say  old  age,  and  if  he  had  any  natural  tendency  to  be 
unfair,  or  small,  or  greedy  in  his  money  dealings  I  think 
I  should  have  seen  it.  Personally,  I  found  him  liberal 
to  excess,  and  I  never  observed  in  him  anything  less  than 
generosity  to  those  who  were  fair  with  him 

Once  that  winter,  when  a  letter  came  from  Steve  Gillis 
saying  that  he  was  an  invalid  now,  and  would  have  plenty 
of  time  to  read  Sam's  books  if  he  owned  them,  Clemens 
ordered  an  expensive  set  from  his  publishers,  and  did 
what  meant  to  him  even  more  than  the  cost  in  money — 
he  autographed  each  of  those  twenty-five  volumes.  Then 
he  sent  them,  charges  paid,  to  that  far  Calif orni  an  re- 
treat.   It  was  hardly  the  act  of  a  stingy  man. 

He  had  the  human  fondness  for  a  compliment  when  it 
was  genuine  and  from  an  authoritative  source,  and  I  re- 
member how  pleased  he  was  that  winter  with  Prof. 
William  Lyon  Phelps's  widely  published  opinion,  which 
ranked  Mark  Twain  as  the  greatest  American  novelist, 
and  declared  that  his  fame  would  outlive  any  American 
of  his  time.  Phelps  had  placed  him  above  Holmes, 
Howells,  James,  and  even  Hawthorne.  He  had  de- 
clared him  to  be  more  American  than  any  of  these — more 
American  even  than  Whitman.  Professor  Phelps's  posi- 
tion in  Yale  College  gave  this  opinion  a  certain  official 
weight;  but  I  think  the  fact  of  Phelps  himself  being  a 
writer  of  great  force,  with  an  American  freshness  of 
style,  gave  it  a  still  greater  value. 

Among  the  pleasant  things  that  winter  was  a  meet- 
ing with  Eugene  F.  Ware,  of  Kansas,  with  whose  pen- 
name — "IronquiU" — Clemens  had  long  been  familiar. 

1373 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

Ware  was  a  breezy  Western  genius  of  the  finest  type.  If 
he  had  abandoned  law  for  poetry,  there  is  no  telling 
how  far  his  fame  might  have  reached.  There  was  in 
his  work  that  same  spirit  of  Americanism  and  humor 
and  humanity  that  is  found  in  Mark  Twain's  writings, 
and  he  had  the  added  faculty  of  rhyme  and  rhythm, 
which  would  have  set  him  in  a  place  apart.  I  had  known 
Ware  personally  during  a  period  of  Western  residence, 
and  later,  when  he  was  Commissioner  of  Pensions  under 
Roosevelt.  I  usually  saw  him  when  he  came  to  New 
York,  and  it  was  a  great  pleasure  now  to  bring 
together  the  two  men  whose  work  I  so  admired.  They 
met  at  *a  small  private  luncheon  at  The  Players,  and 
Peter  Dunne  was  there,  and  Robert  Collier,  and  it  was 
such  an  afternoon  as  Howells  has  told  of  when  he  and 
Aldrich  and  Bret  Harte  and  those  others  talked  until 
the  day  faded  into  twilight,  and  twilight  deepened  into 
evening.  Clemens  had  put  in  most  of  the  day  before 
reading  Ware's  book  of  poems,  The  Rhymes  of  Ironquill, 
and  had  declared  his  work  to  rank  with  the  very  great- 
est of  American  poetry — I  think  he  called  it  the  most 
truly  American  in  flavor.  I  remember  that  at  the  lunch- 
eon he  noted  Ware's  big,  splendid  physique  and  his  West- 
ern liberties  of  syntax  with  a  curious  intentness.  I 
believe  he  regarded  him  as  being  nearer  his  own  type  in 
mind  and  expression  than  any  one  he  had  met  before. 

Among  Ware's  poems  he  had  been  especially  impressed 
with  the  "  Fables,"  and  with  some  verses  entitled  "Whist," 
which,  though  rather  more  optimistic,  conformed  to  his 
own  philosophy.  They  have  a  distinctly  "Western" 
feeling. 

whist 

Hour  after  hour  the  cards  were  fairly  shuffled, 
And  fairly  dealt,  and  still  I  got  no  hand; 

The  morning  came;  but  I,  with  mind  unruffled, 
Did  simply  say,  "I  do  not  understand." 

1374 


Digitized  by  Google 


FURTHER  PERSONALITIES 


Life  is  a  game  of  whist.    From  unseen  sources 

The  cards  are  shuffled,  and  the  hands  are  dealt. 
Blind  are  our  efforts  to  control  the  forces 
,   That,  though  unseen,  are  no  less  strongly  felt. 

I  do  not  like  the  way  the  cards  are  shuffled, 
But  still  I  like  the  game  and  want  to  play; 

And  through  the  long,  long  night  will  I,  unruffled. 
Play  what  I  get,  until  the  break  of  day. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLVI 


HONORS  PROM  OXFORD 

CLEMENS  made  a  brief  trip  to  Bermuda  during  the 
winter,  taking  Twichell  along;  their  first  return  to 
the  island  since  the  trip  when  they  had  promised  to  come 
back  so  soon — nearly  thirty  years  before.  They  had  been 
comparatively  young  men  then.  They  were  old  now,  but 
they  found  the  green  island  as  fresh  and  full  of  bloom  as 
ever.  They  did  not  find  their  old  landlady;  they  could 
not  even  remember  her  name  at  first,  and  then  Twichell 
recalled  that  it  was  the  same  as  an  author  of  certain  school- 
books  in  his  youth,  and  Clemens  promptly  said,  "Kirk- 
ham's  Grammar."  Kirkham  was  truly  the  name,  and  they 
went  to  find  her;  but  she  was  dead,  and  the  daughter, 
who  had  been  a  young  girl  in  that  earlier  time,  reigned 
in  her  stead  and  entertained  the  successors  of  her  mother's 
guests.  They  walked  and  drove  about  the  island,  and 
it  was  like  taking  up  again  a  long-discontinued  book  and 
reading  another  chapter  of  the  same  tale.  It  gave  Mark 
Twain  a  fresh  interest  in  Bermuda,  one  which  he  did  not 
allow  to  fade  again. 

Later  in  the  year  (March,  1907)  I  also  made  a  journey; 
it  having  been  agreed  that  I  should  take  a  trip  to  the 
Mississippi  and  to  the  Pacific  coast  to  see  those  old  friends 
of  Mark  Twain's  who  were  so  rapidly  passing  away. 
John  Briggs  was  still  alive,  and  other  Hannibal  school- 
mates; also  Joe  Goodman  and  Steve  Gillis,  and  a  few 
more  of  the  early  pioneers — all  eminently  worth  seeing 
jn  the  matter  of  such  work  as  I  had  in  hand.    The  bil- 

1376 


Digitized  by  Google 


HONORS  FROM  OXFORD 


Hard  games  would  be  interrupted;  but  whatever  reluct- 
ance to  the  plan  there  may  have  been  on  that  account 
was  put  aside  in  view  of  prospective  benefits.  Clemens, 
in  fact,  seemed  to  derive  joy  from  the  thought  that  he 
was  commissioning  a  kind  of  personal  emissary  to  his 
old  comrades,  and  provided  me  with  a  letter  of  credentials. 

It  was  a  long,  successful  trip  that  I  made,  and  it  was 
undertaken  none  too  soon.  John  Briggs,  a  gentle-hearted 
man,  was  already  entering  the  valley  of  the  shadow  as 
he  talked  to  me  by  his  fire  one  memorable  afternoon,  and 
reviewed  the  pranks  of  those  days  along  the  river  and  in 
the  cave  and  on  Holliday's  Hill.  I  think  it  was  six  weeks 
later  that  he  died;  and  there  were  others  of  that  scatter- 
ing procession  who  did  not  reach  the  end  of  the  year. 
Joe  Goodman,  still  full  of  vigor  (in  191 2),  journeyed  with 
me  to  the  green  and  dreamy  solitudes  of  Jackass  Hill 
to  see  Steve  and  Jim  Gillis,  and  that  was  an  unforge table 
Sunday  when  Steve  Gillis,  an  invalid,  but  with  the  fire 
still  in  his  eyes  and  speech,  sat  up  on  his  couch  in  his  little 
cabin  in  that  Arcadian  stillness  and  told  old  tales  and 
adventures.    When  I  left  he  said: 

"Tell  Sam  I'm  going  to  die  pretty  soon,  but  that  I 
love  him;  that  I've  loved  him  all  my  life,  and  I'll  love 
him  till  I  die.  This  is  the  last  word  I'll  ever  send  to 
him.''  Jim  Gillis,  down  in  Sonora,  was  already  lying  at 
the  point  of  death,  and  so  for  him  the  visit  was  too  late, 
though  he  was  able  to  receive  a  message  from  his  ancient 
mining  partner,  and  to  send  back  a  parting  word. 

I  returned  by  way  of  New  Orleans  and  the  Mississippi 
River,  for  I  wished  to  follow  that  abandoned  water 
highway,  and  to  visit  its  presiding  genius,  Horace  Bixby,1 
still  alive  and  in  service  as  pilot  of  the  government  snag- 
boat,  his  headquarters  at  St.  Louis. 

Coming  up  the  river  on  one  of  the  old  passenger  steam- 

*He  died  August  2,  1912,  at  the  age  of  86. 

1377 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


boats  that  still  exist,  I  noticed  in  a  paper  which  came 
aboard  that  Mark  Twain  was  to  receive  from  Oxford 
University  the  literary  doctor's  degree.  There  had  been 
no  hint  of  this  when  I  came  away,  and  it  seemed  rather 
too  sudden  and  too  good  to  be  true.  That  the  little  bare- 
foot lad  that  had  played  along  the  river-banks  at  Han- 
nibal, and  received  such  meager  advantages  in  the  way 
of  schooling — whose  highest  ambition  had  been  to  pilot 
such  a  craft  as  this  one — was  about  to  be  crowned  by  the 
world's  greatest  institution  of  learning,  to  receive  the  high- 
est recognition  for  achievement  in  the  world  of  letters,  was 
a  thing  which  would  not  be  likely  to  happen  outside  of 
a  fairy  tale. 

Returning  to  New  York,  I  ran  out  to  Tuxedo,  where 
he  had  taken  a  home  for  the  summer  (for  it  was  already 
May),  and  walking  along  the  shaded  paths  of  that  beau- 
tiful suburban  park,  he  told  me  what  he  knew  of  the 
Oxford  matter. 

Moberly  Bell,  of  the  London  Times,  had  been  over  in 
April,  and  soon  after  his  return  to  England  there  had 
come  word  of  the  proposed  honor.  Clemens  privately 
and  openly  (to  Bell)  attributed  it  largely  to  his  influence. 
He  wrote  to  him: 

Dear  Mr.  Bell, — Your  hand  is  in  it  &  you  have  my  best 
thanks.  Although  I  wouldn't  cross  an  ocean  again  for  the  price 
of  the  ship  that  carried  me  I  am  glad  to  do  it  for  an  Oxford  de- 
gree. I  shall  plan  to  sail  for  England  a  shade  before  the  middle 
of  June,  so  that  I  can  have  a  few  days  in  London  before  the  26th. 

A  day  or  two  later,  when  the  time  for  sailing  had  been 
arranged,  he  overtook  his  letter  with  a  cable: 

I  perceive  your  hand  in  it.  You  have  my  best  thanks.  Sail 
on  Minneapolis  June  8th.  Due  in  Southampton  ten  days 
later. 

Clemens  said  that  his  first  word  of  the  matter  had  been 

1378 


Digitized  by  Google 


HONORS  FROM  OXFORD 


a  newspaper  cablegram,  and  that  he  had  been  doubtful 
concerning  it  until  a  cablegram  to  himself  had  confirmed  it. 

"I  never  expected  to  cross  the  water  again,"  he  said; 
"but  I  would  be  willing  to  journey  to  Mars  for  that 
Oxford  degree." 

He  put  the  matter  aside  then,  and  fell  to  talking 
of  Jim  Gillis  and  the  others  I  had  visited,  dwelling  es- 
pecially on  Gillis' s  astonishing  faculty  for  improvising 
romances,  recalling  how  he  had  stood  with  his  back  to 
the  fire  weaving  his  endless,  grotesque  yarns,  with  no 
other  guide  than  his  fancy.  It  was  a  long,  happy  walk 
we  had,  though  rather  a  sad  one  in  its  memories;  and  he 
seemed  that  day,  in  a  sense,  to  close  the  gate  of  those 
early  scenes  behind  him,  for  he  seldom  referred  to  them 
afterward. 

He  was  back  at  21  Fifth  Avenue  presently,  arranging 
for  his  voyage.  Meantime,  cable  invitations  of  every 
sort  were  pouring  in,  from  this  and  that  society  and  dig- 
nitary; invitations  to  dinners  and  ceremonials,  and  what 
not,  and  it  was  clear  enough  that  his  English  sojourn  was 
to  be  a  busy  one.  He  had  hoped  to  avoid  this,  and  began 
by  declining  all  but  two  invitations — a  dinner-party 
given  by  Ambassador  Whitclaw  Reid  and  a  luncheon 
proposed  by  the  "Pilgrims."  But  it  became  clear  that 
this  would  not  do.  England  was  not  going  to  confer  its 
greatest  collegiate  honor  without  being  permitted  to  pay 
its  wider  and  more  popular  tribute. 

Clemens  engaged  a  special  secretary  for  the  trip — Mr. 
Ralph  W.  Ashcroft,  a  young  Englishman  familiar  with 
London  life.  They  sailed  on  the  8th  of  June,  by  a  curious 
coincidence  exactly  forty  years  from  the  day  he  had 
sailed  on  the  Quaker  City  to  win  his  great  fame.  I  went 
with  him  to  the  ship.  His  first  elation  had  passed  by 
this  time,  and  he  seemed  a  little  sad,  remembering,  I 
think,  the  wife  who  would  have  enjoyed  this  honor  with 
him  but  could  not  share  it  now. 

1379 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLVII 


A  TRUE  ENGLISH  WELCOME 


ARK  TWAIN'S  trip  across  the  Atlantic  would  seem 


a  fine,  big  ship,  and  there  was  plenty  of  company.  Prof. 
Archibald  Henderson,  Bernard  Shaw's  biographer,  was 
aboard;1  also  President  Patton,  of  the  Princeton  Theo- 
logical Seminary;  a  well-known  cartoonist,  Richards,  and 
some  very  attractive  young  people — school-girls  in  par- 
ticular, such  as  all  through  his  life  had  appealed  to  Mark 
Twain.  Indeed,  in  his  later  life  they  made  a  stronger 
appeal  than  ever.  The  years  had  robbed  him  of  his  own 
little  flock,  and  always  he  was  trying  to  replace  them. 
Once  he  said: 

"During  those  years  after  my  wife's  death  I  was  wash- 
ing about  on  a  forlorn  sea  of  banquets  and  speech-making 
in  high  and  holy  causes,  and  these  things  furnished  me 
intellectual  cheer  and  entertainment;  but  they  got  at 
my  heart  for  an  evening  only,  then  left  it  dry  and  dusty. 
I  had  reached  the  grandfather  stage  of  life  without 
grandchildren,  so  I  began  to  adopt  some." 

He  adopted  several  on  that  journey  to  England  and 
on  the  return  voyage,  and  he  kept  on  adopting  others 
during  the  rest  of  his  life.  These  companionships  became 
one  of  the  happiest  aspects  of  his  final  days,  as  we  shall 
see  by  and  by. 

1  Professor  Henderson  has  since  then  published  a  volume  on 
Mark  Twain — an  interesting  commentary  on  his  writings — mainly 
from  the  sociological  point  of  view. 

1380 


The  Minneapolis  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  TRUE  ENGLISH  WELCOME 


There  were  entertainments  on  the  ship,  one  of  them 
given  for  the  benefit  of  the  Seamen's  Orphanage.  One 
of  his  adopted  granddaughters — "Charley"  he  called 
her — played  a  violin  solo  and  Clemens  made  a  speech. 
Later  his  autographs  were  sold  at  auction.  Dr.  Patton 
was  auctioneer,  and  one  autographed  postal  card  brought 
twenty-five  dollars,  which  is  perhaps  the  record  price  for 
a  single  Mark  Twain  signature.  He  wore  his  white  suit 
on  this  occasion,  and  in  the  course  of  his  speech  referred 
to  it.  He  told  first  of  the  many  defects  in  his  behavior, 
and  how  members  of  his  household  had  always  tried  to 
keep  him  straight.  The  children,  he  said,  had  fallen  into 
the  habit  of  calling  it  "dusting  papa  off."  Then  he 
went  on: 

When  my  daughter  came  to  9ee  me  off  last  Saturday  at  the 
boat  she  slipped  a  note  in  my  hand  and  said,  "Read  it  when  you 
get  aboard  the  ship."  I  didn't  think  of  it  again  until  day  before 
yesterday,  and  it  was  a  "dusting  off."  And  if  I  carry  out  all 
the  instructions  that  I  got  there  I  shall  be  more  celebrated  in 
England  for  my  behavior  than  for  anything  else.  I  got  instruc- 
tions how  to  act  on  every  occasion.  She  underscored  "Now, 
don't  you  wear  white  clothes  on  ship  or  on  shore  until  you  get 
back,"  and  I  intended  to  obey.  I  have  been  used  to  obeying 
my  family  all  my  life,  but  I  wore  the  white  clothes  to-night 
because  the  trunk  that  has  the  dark  clothes  in  it  is  in  the  cellar. 
I  am  not  apologizing  for  the  white  clothes;  I  am  only  apologizing 
to  my  daughter  for  not  obeying  her. 

He  received  a  great  welcome  when  the  ship  arrived  at 
Tilbury.  A  throng  of  rapid-fire  reporters  and  photog- 
raphers immediately  surrounded  him,  and  when  he  left 
the  ship  the  stevedores  gave  him  a  round  of  cheers. 
It  was  the  beginning  of  that  almost  unheard-of  demon- 
stration of  affection  and  honor  which  never  for  a  moment 
ceased,  but  augmented  from  day  to  day  during  the  four 
weeks  of  his  English  sojourn. 

1381 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


In  a  dictation  following  his  return,  Mark  Twain  said: 

Who  began  it?  The  very  people  of  all  people  in  the  world 
whom  I  would  have  chosen :  a  hundred  men  of  my  own  class- 
grimy  sons  of  labor,  the  real  builders  of  empires  and  civiliza- 
tions, the  stevedores!  They  stood  in  a  body  on  the  dock  and 
charged  their  masculine  lungs,  and  gave  me  a  welcome  which 
went  to  the  marrow  of  me. 

J.  Y.  W.  MacAlister  was  at  the  St.  Pancras  railway 
station  to  meet  him,  and  among  others  on  the  platform 
was  Bernard  Shaw,  who  had  come  down  to  meet  Pro- 
fessor Henderson.  Clemens  and  Shaw  were  presented, 
and  met  eagerly,  for  each  greatly  admired  the  other.  A 
throng  gathered.  Mark  Twain  was  extricated  at  last, 
and  hurried  away  to  his  apartments  at  Brown's  Hotel, 
"a  placid,  subdued,  homelike,  old-fashioned  English 
inn,"  he  called  it,  "well  known  to  me  years  ago,  a  blessed 
retreat  of  a  sort  now  rare  in  England,  and  becoming  rarer 
every  year." 

But  Brown's  was  not  placid  and  subdued  during  his 
stay.  The  London  newspapers  declared  that  Mark 
Twain's  arrival  had  turned  Brown's  not  only  into  a 
royal  court,  but  a  post-office— that  the  procession  of 
visitors  and  the  bundles  of  mail  fully  warranted  this 
statement.  It  was,  in  fact,  an  experience  which  sur- 
passed in  general  magnitude  and  magnificence  anything 
he  had  hitherto  known.  His  former  London  visits,  be- 
ginning with  that  of  1872,  had  been  distinguished  by  high 
attentions,  but  all  of  them  combined  could  not  equal 
this.  When  England  decides  to  get  up  an  ovation,  her 
people  are  not  to  be  outdone  even  by  the  lavish  Ameri- 
cans. ( An  assistant  secretary  had  to  be  engaged  immedi- 
ately, and  it  sometimes  required  from  sixteen  to  twenty 
hours  a  day  for  two  skilled  and  busy  men  to  receive 
callers  and  reduce  the  pile  of  correspondence. 

A  pile  of  invitations  had  already  accumulated,  and 

1382 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  TRUE  ENGLISH  WELCOME 


others  flowed  in.  Lady  Stanley,  widow  of  Henry  M. 
Stanley,  wrote: 

You  know  I  want  to  see  you  and  join  right  hand  to  right  hand. 
I  must  see  your  dear  face  again.  .  .  .  You  will  have  no  peace, 
rest,  or  leisure  during  your  stay  in  London,  and  you  will  end  by 
hating  human  beings.   Let  me  come  before  you  feel  that  way. 

Mary  Cholmondeley,  the  author  of  Red  Pottage,  niece 
of  that  lovable  Reginald  Cholmondeley,  and  herself  an 
old  friend,  sent  greetings  and  urgent  invitations.  Arch- 
deacon Wilberforce  wrote: 

I  have  just  been  preaching  about  your  indictment  of  that 
scoundrel  king  of  the  Belgians  and  telling  my  people  to  buy  the 
book.  I  am  only  a  humble  item  among  the  very  many  who 
offer  you  a  cordial  welcome  in  England,  but  we  long  to  see  you 
again,  and  I  should  like  to  change  hats  with  you  again.  Do 
you  remember? 

The  Athenaeum,  the  Garrick,  and  a  dozen  other  London 
clubs  had  anticipated  his  arrival  with  cards  of  honorary 
membership  for  the  period  of  his  stay.  Every  leading 
photographer  had  put  in  a  claim  for  sittings.  It  was  such 
a  reception  as  Charles  Dickens  had  received  in  America 
in  1842,  and  again  in  1867.  A  London  paper  likened  it 
to  Voltaire's  return  to  Paris  in  1778,  when  France  went 
mad  over  him.  There  is  simply  no  limit  to  English  affec- 
tion and  hospitality  once  aroused.    Clemens  wrote: 

Surely  such  weeks  as  this  must  be  very  rare  in  this  world: 
I  had  seen  nothing  like  them  before;  I  shall  see  nothing  approach- 
ing them  again! 

Sir  Thomas  Lipton  and  Bram  Stoker,  old  friends,  were 
among  the  first  to  present  themselves,  and  there  was  no 
break  in  the  line  of  callers. 

Clemens's  resolutions  for  secluding  himself  were  swept 
away.    On  the  very  next  morning  following  his  arrival  he 

1383 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


breakfasted  with  J.  Henniker  Heaton,  father  of  Interna- 
tional Penny  Postage,  at  the  Bath  Club,  just  across 
Dover  Street  from  Brown's.  He  lunched  at  the  Ritz  with 
Marjorie  Bowcn  and  Miss  Bisland.  In  the  afternoon  he 
sat  for  photographs  at  Barnett's,  and  made  one  or  two 
calls.  He  could  no  more  resist  these  things  than  a 
debutante  in  her  first  season. 

He  was  breakfasting  again  with  Heaton  next  morning; 
lunching  with  "Toby,  M.P.,"  and  Mrs.  Lucy;  and  having 
tea  with  Lady  Stanley  in  the  afternoon,  and  being  elabo- 
rately dined  next  day  at  Dorchester  House  by  Ambassador 
and  Mrs.  Reid.  These  were  all  old  and  tried  friends. 
He  was  not  a  stranger  among  them,  he  said;  he  was  at 
home.  Alfred  Austin,  Conan  Doyle,  Anthony  Hope, 
Alma  Tadema,  E.  A.  Abbey,  Edmund  Goss,  George  Small- 
ey,  Sir  Norman  Lockyer,  Henry  W.  Lucy,  Sidney  Brooks, 
and  Brain  Stoker  were  among  those  at  Dorchester  House 
— all  old  comrades,  as  were  many  of  the  other  guests. 

"  I  knew  fully  half  of  those  present,"  he  said  afterward. 

Mark  Twain's  bursting  upon  London  society  naturally 
was  made  the  most  of  by  the  London  papers,  and  all  his 
movements  were  tabulated  and  elaborated,  and  when 
there  was  any  opportunity  for  humor  in  the  situation 
it  was  not  left  unimproved.  The  celebrated  Ascot  racing- 
cup  was  stolen  just  at  the  time  of  his  arrival,  and  the 
papers  suggestively  mingled  their  head-lines,  "Mark 
Twain  Arrives:  Ascot  Cup  Stolen,"  and  kept  the  joke 
going  in  one  form  or  another.  Certain  state  jewels  and 
other  regalia  also  disappeared  during  his  stay,  and  the 
news  of  these  burglaries  was  reported  in  suspicious  juxta- 
position with  the  news  of  Mark  Twain's  doings. 

English  reporters  adopted  American  habits  for  the 
occasion,  and  invented  or  embellished  when  the  demand 
for  a  new  sensation  was  urgent.  Once,  when  following 
the  custom  of  the  place,  he  descended  the  hotel  elevator 
in  a  perfectly  proper  and  heavy  brown  bath  robe,  and 

1384 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  TRUE  ENGLISH  WELCOME 


stepped  across  narrow  Dover  Street  to  the  Bath  Club, 
the  papers  flamed  next  day  with  the  story  that  Mark 
Twain  had  wandered  about  the  lobby  of  Brown's  and 
promenaded  Dover  Street  in  a  sky-blue  bath  robe  at- 
tracting wide  attention. 

Clara  Clemens,  across  the  ocean,  was  naturally  a  trifle 
disturbed  by  such  reports,  and  cabled  this  delicate 
"dusting  off": 

"Much  worried.    Remember  proprieties." 

To  which  he  answered: 

"They  all  pattern  after  me,"  a  reply  to  the  last  degree 
characteristic. 

It  was  on  the  fourth  day  after  his  arrival,  June  22d, 
that  he  attended  the  King's  garden-party  at  Windsor 
Castle.  There  were  eighty-five  hundred  guests  at  the 
King's  party,  and  if  we  may  judge  from  the  London 
newspapers,  Mark  Twain  was  quite  as  much  a  figure  in 
that  great  throng  as  any  member  of  the  royal  family. 
His  presentation  to  the  King  and  the  Queen  is  set  down 
as  an  especially  notable  incident,  and  their  conversation 
is  quite  fully  given.   Clemens  himself  reported: 

His  Majesty  was  very  courteous.  In  the  course  of  the  con- 
versation I  reminded  him  of  an  episode  of  fifteen  years  ago,  when 
I  had  the  honor  to  walk  a  mile  with  him  when  he  was  taking 
the  waters  at  Homburg,  in  Germany.  I  said  that  I  had  often 
told  about  that  episode,  and  that  whenever  I  was  the  historian 
I  made  good  history  of  it  and  it  was  worth  listening  to,  but  that 
it  had  found  its  way  into  print  once  or  twice  in  unauthentic 
ways  and  was  badly  damaged  thereby.  I  said  I  should  like  to 
go  on  repeating  this  history,  but  that  I  should  be  quite  fair  and 
reasonably  honest,  and  while  I  should  probably  never  tell  it 
twice  in  the  same  way  I  should  at  least  never  allow  it  to  de- 
teriorate in  my  hands.  His  Majesty  intimated  his  willingness 
that  I  should  continue  to  disseminate  that  piece  of  history;  and 
he  added  a  compliment,  saying  that  he  knew  good  and  sound 
history  would  not  suffer  at  my  hands,  and  that  if  this  good  and 

1385 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


sound  history  needed  any  improvement  beyond  the  facts  he 
would  trust  me  to  furnish  that  improvement. 

I  think  it  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  Queen  looked 
as  young  and  beautiful  as  she  did  thirty-five  years  ago  when  I 
saw  her  first.  I  did  not  say  this  to  her,  because  I  learned  long 
ago  never  to  say  the  obvious  thing,  but  leave  the  obvious  thing 
to  commonplace  and  inexperienced  people  to  say.  That  she  still 
looked  to  me  as  young  and  beautiful  as  she  did  thirty-five  years 
ago  is  good  evidence  that  ten  thousand  people  have  already 
noticed  this  and  have  mentioned  it  to  her.  I  could  have  said 
it  and  spoken  the  truth,  but  I  was  too  wise  for  that.  I  kept  the 
remark  unuttered  and  saved  her  Majesty  the  vexation  of  hearing 
it  the  ten-thousand -and-oneth  time. 

All  that  report  about  my  proposal  to  buy  Windsor  Castle  and 
its  grounds  was  a  false  rumor.    I  started  it  myself. 

One  newspaper  said  I  patted  his  Majesty  on  the  shoulder — 
an  impertinence  of  which  I  was  not  guilty;  I  was  reared  in  the 
most  exclusive  circles  of  Missouri  and  I  know  how  to  behave. 
The  King  rested  his  hand  upon  my  arm  a  moment  or  two  while 
we  were  chatting,  but  he  did  it  of  his  own  accord.  The  news- 
paper which  said  I  talked  with  her  Majesty  with  my  hat  on 
spoke  the  truth,  but  my  reasons  for  doing  it  were  good  and  suf- 
ficient— in  fact  unassailable.  Rain  was  threatening,  the  tem- 
perature had  cooled,  and  the  Queen  said,  "Please  put  your  hat 
on,  Mr.  Clemens."  I  begged  her  pardon  and  excused  myself 
from  doing  it.  After  a  moment  or  two  she  said,  "Mr.  Clemens, 
put  your  hat  on" — with  a  slight  emphasis  on  the  word  "on" — 
"I  can't  allow  you  to  catch  cold  here."  When  a  beautiful 
queen  commands  it  is  a  pleasure  to  obey,  and  this  time  I  obeyed 
— but  I  had  already  disobeyed  once,  which  is  more  than  a  sub- 
ject would  have  felt  justified  in  doing;  and  so  it  is  true,  as 
charged;  I  did  talk  with  the  Queen  of  England  with  my  hat 
on,  but  it  wasn't  fair  in  the  newspaper  man  to  charge  5t  upon  me 
as  an  impoliteness,  since  there  were  reasons  for  it  which  he 
could  not  know  of. 

Nearly  all  the  members  of  the  British  royal  family 
were  there,  and  there  were  foreign  visitors  which  included 
the  King  of  Siam  and  a  party  of  India  princes  in  their 

1386 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  TRUE  ENGLISH  WELCOME 


gorgeous  court  costumes,  which  Clemens  admired  openly 
and  said  he  would  like  to  wear  himself. 

The  English  papers  spoke  of  it  as  one  of  the  largest 
and  most  distinguished  parties  ever  given  at  Windsor. 
Clemens  attended  it  in  company  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J. 
Henniker  Heaton,  and  when  it  was  over  Sir  Thomas  Lip- 
ton  joined  them  and  motored  with  them  back  to  Brown's. 

He  was  at  Archdeacon  Wilberforce 's  next  day,  where 
a  curious  circumstance  developed.  When  he  arrived 
Wilberforce  said  to  him,  in  an  undertone: 

"Come  into  my  library.  I  have  something  to  show 
you." 

In  the  library  Clemens  was  presented  to  a  Mr.  Pole, 
a  plain-looking  man,  suggesting  in  dress  and  appearance 
the  English  tradesman.    Wilberforce  said: 

"Mr.  Pole,  show  to  Mr.  Clemens  what  you  have 
brought  here." 

Mr.  Pole  unrolled  a  long  strip  of  white  linen  and  brought 
to  view  at  last  a  curious,  saucer-looking  vessel  of  silver, 
very  ancient  in  appearance,  and  cunningly  overlaid  with 
green  glass.  The  archdeacon  took  it  and  handed  it  to 
Clemens  as  some  precious  jewel.    Clemens  said: 

"What  is  it r 

Wilberforce  impressively  answered: 

"It  is  the  Holy  Grail." 

Clemens  naturally  started  with  surprise. 

"You  may  well  start,"  said  Wilberforce;  "but  it's  the 
truth.    That  is  the  Holy  Grail." 

Then  he  gave  this  explanation:  Mr.  Pole,  a  grain  mer- 
chant of  Bristol,  had  developed  some  sort  of  clairvoyant 
power,  or  at  all  events  he  had  dreamed  several  times 
with  great  vividness  the  location  of  the  true  Grail.  An- 
other dreamer,  a  Dr.  Goodchild,  of  Bath,  was  mixed  up 
in  the  matter,  and  between  them  this  peculiar  vessel, 
which  was  not  a  cup,  or  a  goblet,  or  any  of  the  traditional 
things,  had  been  discovered.    Mr.  Pole  seemed  a  man 

1337 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


of  integrity,  and  it  was  clear  that  the  churchman  be- 
lieved the  discovery  to  be  genuine  and  authentic.  Of 
course  there  could  be  no  positive  proof.  It  was  a  thing 
that  must  be  taken  on  trust.  That  the  vessel  itself  was 
wholly  different  from  anything  that  the  generations  had 
conceived,  and  was  apparently  of  very  ancient  make, 
was  opposed  to  the  natural  suggestion  of  fraud. 

Clemens,  to  whom  the  whole  idea  of  the  Holy  Grail 
was  simply  a  poetic  legend  and  myth,  had  the  feeling  that 
he  had  suddenly  been  transmigrated,  like  his  own  Con- 
necticut Yankee,  back  into  the  Arthurian  days;  but  he 
made  no  question,  suggested  no  doubt.  Whatever  it 
was,  it  was  to  them  the  materialization  of  a  symbol  of 
faith  which  ranked  only  second  to  the  cross  itself,  and  he 
handled  it  reverently  and  felt  the  honor  of  having  been 
one  of  the  first  permitted  to  see  the  relic.  In  a  subse- 
quent dictation  he  said: 

I  am  glad  I  have  lived  to  see  that  half-hour — that  astonishing 
half -hour.  In  its  way  it  stands  alone  in  my  life's  experience.  In 
the  belief  of  two  persons  present  this  v/as  the  very  vessel  which 
was  brought  by  night  and  secretly  delivered  to  Nicodemus, 
nearly  nineteen  centuries  ago,  after  the  Creator  of  the  universe 
had  delivered  up  His  life  on  the  cross  for  the  redemption  of  the 
human  race;  the  very  cup  which  the  stainless  Sir  Galahad  had 
sought  with  knightly  devotion  in  far  fields  of  peril  and  adven- 
ture in  Arthur's  time,  fourteen  hundred  years  ago;  the  same  cup 
which  princely  knights  of  other  bygone  ages  had  laid  down  their 
lives  in  long  and  patient  efforts  to  find,  and  had  passed  from 
life  disappointed  —  and  here  it  was  at  last,  dug  up  by  a 
grain-broker  at  no  cost  of  blood  or  travel,  and  apparently  no 
purity  required  of  him  above  the  average  purity  of  the  twentieth- 
century  dealer  in  cereal  futures;  not  even  a  stately  name  re- 
quired— no  Sir  Galahad,  no  Sir  Bors  de  Ganis,  no  Sir  Lancelot 
of  the  Lake— nothing  but  a  mere  Mr.  Pole.1 

1  From  the  New  York  Sun  somewhat  later: 
"Mr.  Pole  communicated  the  discovery  to  a  dignitary  of  the 
Church  of  England,  who  summoned  a  number  of  eminent  persons, 

1388 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  TRUE  ENGLISH  WELCOME 


Clemens  saw  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rogers  at  Claridge's  Hotel 
that  evening;  lunched  with  his  old  friends  Sir  Norman 
and  Lady  Lockyer  next  day;  took  tea  with  T.  P.  O'Con- 
nor at  the  House  of  Commons,  and  on  the  day  following, 
which  was  June  25  th,  he  was  the  guest  of  honor  at  one 
of  the  most  elaborate  occasions  of  his  visit — a  luncheon 
given  by  the  Pilgrims  at  the  Savoy  Hotel.  It  would  be 
impossible  to  set  down  here  a  report  of  the  doings,  or  even 
a  list  of  the  guests,  of  that  gathering.  The  Pilgrims  is 
a  club  with  branches  on  both  sides  of  the  ocean,  and 
Mark  Twain,  on  either  side,  was  a  favorite  associate. 
At  this  luncheon  the  picture  on  the  bill  of  fare  represented 
him  as  a  robed  pilgrim,  with  a  great  pen  for  his  staff, 
turning  his  back  on  the  Mississippi  River  and  being  led 
along  his  literary  way  by  a  huge  jumping  frog,  to  which 
he  is  attached  by  a  string.    On  a  guest-card  was  printed: 

Pilot  of  many  Pilgrims  since  the  shout 

"Mark  Twain!" — that  serves  you  for  a  deathless  sign — 
On  Mississippi's  waterway  rang  out 

Over  the  plummet's  line — 

Still  where  the  countless  ripples  laugh  above 
The  blue  of  halcyon  seas  long  may  you  keep 

Your  course  unbroken,  buoyed  upon  a  love 
Ten  thousand  fathoms  deep! 

— 0.  S.  [Owen  Seaman]. 

Augustine  Birrell  made  the  speech  of  introduction, 
closing  with  this  paragraph: 

Mark  Twain  is  a  man  whom  Englishmen  and  Americans  do 
well  to  honor.  He  is  a  true  consolidator  of  nations.  His  de- 
including  psychologists,  to  see  and  discuss  it.  Forty  attended, 
including  some  peers  with  ecclesiastical  interests,  Ambassador 
Whitelaw  Reid,  Professor  Crookes,  and  ministers  of  various  re- 
ligious bodies,  including  the  Rev.  R.  J.  Campbell.  They  heard 
Mr.  Pole's  story  with  deep  attention,  but  be  could  not  prove  the 
genuineness  of  the  relic." 

in.— 18  1389 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


lightful  humor  is  of  the  kind  which  dissipates  and  destroys 
national  prejudices.  His  truth  and  his  honor — his  love  of  truth 
and  his  love  of  honor — overflow  all  boundaries.  He  has  made 
the  world  better  by  his  presence,  and  we  rejoice  to  see  him 
here.  Long  may  he  live  to  reap  a  plentiful  harvest  of  hearty 
honest  human  affection. 

The  toast  was  drunk  standing.  Then  Clemens  rose 
and  made  a  speech  which  delighted  all  England.  In  his 
introduction  Mr.  Birrell  had  happened  to  say,  "How  I 
came  here  I  will  not  ask!"  Clemens  remembered  this, 
and  looking  down  into  Mr.  Birrell's  wine-glass,  which 
was  apparently  unused,  he  said: 

"Mr.  Birrell  doesn't  know  how  he  got  here.  But  he 
will  be  able  to  get  away  all  right — he  has  not  drunk  any- 
thing since  he  came." 

He  told  stories  about  Howells  and  Twichell,  and  how 
Darwin  had  gone  to  sleep  reading  his  books,  and  then  he 
came  down  to  personal  things  and  company,  and  told 
them  how,  on  the  day  of  his  arrival,  he  had  been  shocked 
to  read  on  a  great  placard,  "Mark  Twain  Arrives:  Ascot 
Cup  Stolen." 

No  doubt  many  a  person  was  misled  by  those  sentences  joined 
together  in  that  unkind  way.  I  have  no  doubt  my  character 
has  suffered  from  it.  I  suppose  I  ought  to  defend  my  character, 
but  how  can  I  defend  it?  I  can  say  here  and  now  that  anybody 
can  see  by  my  face  that  I  am  sincere — that  I  speak  the  truth,  and 
that  I  have  never  seen  that  Cup.  I  have  not  got  the  Cup,  I  did 
not  have  a  chance  to  get  it.  I  have  always  had  a  good  character 
in  that  way.  I  have  hardly  ever  stolen  anything,  and  if  I  did 
steal  anything  I  had  discretion  enough  to  know  about  the  value 
of  it  first.  I  do  not  steal  things  that  are  likely  to  get  myself 
into  trouble.  I  do  not  think  any  of  us  do  that.  I  know  we  all 
take  things — that  is  to  be  expected;  but  really  I  have  never 
taken  anything,  certainly  in  England,  that  amounts  to  any 
great  thing.  I  do  confess  that  when  I  was  here  seven  years  ago 
I  stole  a  hat — but  that  did  not  amount  to  anything.    It  was  not 

1390 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  TRUE  ENGLISH  WELCOME 


a  good  hat — it  was  only  a  clergyman's  hat,  anyway.  I  was  at 
a  luncheon-party  and  Archdeacon  Wilberforce  was  there  also. 
I  dare  say  he  is  archdeacon  now— he  was  a  canon  then — and  he 
was  serving  in  the  Westminster  Battery,  if  that  is  the  proper 
term.  I  do  not  know,  as  you  mix  military  and  ecclesiastical 
things  together  so  much. 

He  recounted  the  incident  of  the  exchanged  hats;  then 
he  spoke  of  graver  things.    He  closed: 

I  cannot  always  be  cheerful,  and  I  cannot  always  be  chaffing. 
I  must  sometimes  lay  the  cap  and  bells  aside  and  recognize  that 
I  am  of  the  human  race.  I  have  my  cares  and  griefs,  and  I 
therefore  noticed  what  Mr.  Birrell  said— I  was  so  glad  to  hear 
him  say  it — something  that  was  in  the  nature  of  these  verses 
here  at  the  top  of  the  program: 

He  lit  our  life  with  shafts  of  sun 

And  vanquished  pain. 
Thus  two  great  nations  stand  as  one 

In  honoring  Twain. 

I  am  very  glad  to  have  those  verses.  I  am  very  glad  and  very 
grateful  for  what  Mr.  Birrell  said  in  that  connection.  I  have 
received  since  I  have  been  here,  in  this  one  week,  hundreds  of 
letters  from  all  conditions  of  people  in  England,  men,  women, 
and  children,  and  there  is  compliment,  praise,  and,  above  all, 
and  better  than  all,  there  is  in  them  a  note  of  affection. 

Praise  is  well,  compliment  is  well,  but  affection— that  is  the 
last  and  final  and  most  precious  reward  that  any  man  can  win, 
whether  by  character  or  achievement,  and  I  am  very  grateful 
to  have  that  reward.  All  these  letters  make  me  feel  that  here 
in  England,  as  in  America,  when  I  stand  under  the  English  or 
the  American  flag  I  am  not  a  stranger,  I  am  not  an  alien,  but 
at  home. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLVIII 


DOCTOR  OF  LITERATURE,  OXFORD 

HE  left,  immediately  following  the  Pilgrim  luncheon, 
with  Hon.  Robert  P.  Porter,  of  the  London  Times, 
for  Oxford,  to  remain  his  guest  there  during  the  various 
ceremonies.  The  encenia — the  ceremony  of  conferring 
the  degrees — occurred  at  the  Sheldonian  Theater  the 
following  morning,  June  26,  1907. 

It  was  a  memorable  affair.  Among  those  who  were  to 
receive  degrees  that  morning  besides  Samuel  Clemens 
were:  Prince  Arthur  of  Connaught;  Prime  Minister 
Campbell-Bannerman;  Whitelaw  Reid;  Rudyard  Kip- 
ling; Sidney  Lee;  Sidney  Colvin;  Lord  Archbishop  of 
Armagh,  Primate  of  Ireland;  Sir  Norman  Lockyer; 
Auguste  Rodin,  the  sculptor;  Saint-Saens,  and  Gen. 
William  Booth,  of  the  Salvation  Army — something  more 
than  thirty,  in  all,  of  the  world's  distinguished  citizens. 

The  candidates  assembled  at  Magdalen  College,  and 
led  by  Lord  Curzon,  the  Chancellor,  and  clad  in  their 
academic  plumage,  filed  in  radiant  procession  to  the 
Sheldonian  Theater,  a  group  of  men  such  as  the  world 
seldom  sees  collected  together.  The  London  Standard 
said  of  it: 

So  brilliant  and  so  interesting  was  the  list  of  those  who  had 
been  selected  by  Oxford  University  on  Convocation  to  receive 
degrees,  honoris  causa,  in  this  first  year  of  Lord  Curzon 's  chancel- 
lorship, that  it  is  small  wonder  that  the  Sheldonian  Theater  was 
besieged  to-day  at  an  early  hour. 

Shortly  after  1 1  o'clock  the  organ  started  playing  the  strains 

1392 


Digitized  by  Google 


DOCTOR  OF  LITERATURE,  OXFORD 


of  "God  Save  the  King,"  and  at  once  a  great  volume  of  sound 
arose  as  the  anthem  was  taken  up  by  the  undergraduates  and 
the  rest  of  the  assemblage.  Every  one  stood  up  as,  headed  by 
the  mace  of  office,  the  procession  slowly  filed  into  the  theater, 
under  the  leadership  of  Lord  Curzon,  in  all  the  glory  of  his  robes 
of  office,  the  long  black  gown  heavily  embroidered  with  gold, 
the  gold-tasseled  mortar-board,  and  the  medals  on  his  breast 
forming  an  admirable  setting,  thoroughly  in  keeping  with  the 
dignity  and  bearing  of  the  late  Viceroy  of  India.  Following  him 
came  the  members  of  Convocation,  a  goodly  number  consisting 
of  doctors  of  divinity,  whose  robes  of  scarlet  and  black  enhanced 
the  brilliance  of  the  scene.  Robes  of  salmon  and  scarlet — which 
proclaim  the  wearer  to  be  a  doctor  of  civil  law — were  also  seen 
in  numbers,  while  here  and  there  was  a  gown  of  gray  and  scarlet, 
emblematic  of  the  doctorate  of  science  or  of  letters. 

The  encenia  is  an  impressive  occasion;  but  it  is  not 
a  silent  one.  There  is  a  splendid  dignity  about  it;  but 
there  goes  with  it  all  a  sort  of  Greek  chorus  of  hilarity, 
the  time-honored  prerogative  of  the  Oxford  undergradu- 
ate, who  insists  on  having  his  joke  and  his  merriment 
at  the  expense  of  those  honored  guests.  The  degrees 
of  doctor  of  law  were  conferred  first.  Prince  Arthur 
was  treated  with  proper  dignity  by  the  gallery;  but  when 
Whitelaw  Reid  stepped  forth  a  voice  shouted,  "Where's 
your  Star-spangled  Banner?"  and  when  England's  Prime 
Minister — Campbell-Bannerman — came  forward  some  one 
shouted,  "What  about  the  House  of  Lords?"  and  so 
they  kept  it  up,  cheering  and  chaffing,  until  General  Booth 
was  introduced  as  the  "Passionate  advocate  of  the  dregs 
of  the  people,  leader  of  the  'submerged  tenth,"  and  general 
of  the  Salvation  Army,"  when  the  place  broke  into  a 
perfect  storm  of  applause,  a  storm  that  a  few  minutes 
later  became,  according  to  the  Daily  News,  "a  veritable 
cyclone,"  for  Mark  Twain,  clad  in  his  robe  of  scarlet  and 
gray,  had  been  summoned  forward  to  receive  the  highest 
academic  honors  which  the  world  has  to  give.  The 


1393 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


undergraduates  went  wild  then.  There  was  such  a 
mingling  of  yells  and  calls  and  questions,  such  as,  "Have 
you  brought  the  Jumping  Frog  with  you?"  "Where  is 
the  Ascot  Cup?"  "Where  are  the  rest  of  the  Innocents?" 
that  it  seemed  as  if  it  would  not  be  possible  to  present 
him  at  all ;  but,  finally,  Chancellor  Curzon  addressed  him 
(in  Latin),  "Most  amiable  and  charming  sir,  you  shake 
the  sides  of  the  whole  world  with  your  merriment,"  and 
the  great  degree  was  conferred. 

If  only  Tom  Sawyer  could  have  seen  him  then !  If  only 
Olivia  Clemens  could  have  sat  among  those  who  gave  him 
welcome!  But  life  is  not  like  that.  There  is  always  an  in- 
completeness somewhere,  and  the  shadow  across  the  path. 

Rudyard  Kipling  followed — another  supreme  favorite, 
who  was  hailed  with  the  chorus,  "For  he's  a  jolly  good 
fellow,"  and  then  came  Saint-Saens.  The  prize  poems  and 
essays  followed,  and  then  the  procession  of  newly  created 
doctors  left  the  theater  with  Lord  Curzon  at  their  head. 
So  it  was  all  over — that  for  which,  as  he  said,  he  would 
have  made  the  journey  to  Mars.  The  world  had  nothing 
more  to  give  him  now  except  that  which  he  had  already 
long  possessed — its  honor  and  its  love. 

The  newly  made  doctors  were  to  be  the  guests  of  Lord 
Curzon  at  All  Souls  College  for  luncheon.  As  they  left 
the  theater  (according  to  Sidney  Lee) : 

The  people  in  the  streets  singled  out  Mark  Twain,  formed  a 
vast  and  cheering  body-guard  around  him  and  escorted  him  to 
the  college  gates.  But  before  and  after  the  lunch  it  was  Mark 
Twain  again  whom  everybody  seemed  most  of  all  to  want  to 
meet.  The  Maharajah  of  Bikanir,  for  instance,  finding  himself 
seated  at  lunch  next  to  Mrs.  Riggs  (Kate  Douglas  Wiggin),  and 
hearing  that  she  knew  Mark  Twain,  asked  her  to  present  him — 
a  ceremony  duly  performed  later  on  the  quadrangle.  At  the 
garden-party  given  the  same  afternoon  in  the  beautiful  grounds 
of  St.  John's,  where  the  indefatigable  Mark  put  in  an  appear- 
ance, it  was  just  the  same — every  one  pressed  forward  for  an 

1394 


Digitized  by  Google 


DOCTOR  OF  LETTERS,  OXFORD 


DOCTOR  OP  LITERATURE,  OXFORD 


exchange  of  greetings  and  a  hand-shake.  On  the  following  day, 
when  the  Oxford  pageant  took  place,  it  was  even  more  so. 
"Mark  Twain's  Pageant,"  it  was  called  by  one  of  the  papers.1 

Clemens  remained  the  guest  of  Robert  Porter,  whose 
house  was  besieged  with  those  desiring  a  glimpse  of  their 
new  doctor  of  letters.  If  he  went  on  the  streets  he  was 
instantly  recognized  by  some  newsboy  or  cabman  or 
butcher-boy,  and  the  word  ran  along  like  a  cry  of  fire, 
while  the  crowds  assembled. 

At  a  luncheon  which  the  Porters  gave  him  the  pro- 
prietor of  the  catering  establishment  garbed  himself  as 
a  waiter  in  order  to  have  the  distinction  of  serving  Mark 
Twain,  and  declared  it  to  have  been  the  greatest  moment 
of  his  life.  This  gentleman — for  he  was  no  less  than  that 
— was  a  man  well-read,  and  his  tribute  was  not  inspired 
by  mere  snobbery.  Clemens,  learning  of  the  situation, 
later  withdrew  from  the  drawing-room  for  a  talk  with  him. 

"I  found,"  he  said,  "that  he  knew  about  ten  or  fifteen 
times  as  much  about  my  books  as  I  knew  about  them 
myself." 

Mark  Twain  viewed  the  Oxford  pageant  from  a  box 
with  Rudyard  Kipling  and  Lord  Curzon,  and  as  they  sat 
there  some  one  passed  up  a  folded  slip  of  paper,  on  the 
outside  of  which  was  written,  "Not  true."  Opening  it, 
they  read — 

East  is  East  and  West  is  West, 
And  never  the  Twain  shall  meet, 

— a  quotation  from  Kipling. 

They  saw  the  panorama  of  history  file  by,  a  wonderful 
spectacle  which  made  Oxford  a  veritable  dream  of  the 

1  There  was  a  dinner  that  evening  at  one  of  the  colleges  where, 
through  mistaken  information,  Clemens  wore  black  evening  dress 
when  he  should  have  worn  his  scarlet  gown.  "When  I  arrived," 
he  said,  "the  place  was  just  a  conflagration — a  kind  of  human 
prairie-fire.    I  looked  as  out  of  place  as  a  Presbyterian  in  hell." 

1395 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Middle  Ages.  The  lanes  and  streets  and  meadows  were 
thronged  with  such  costumes  as  Oxford  had  seen  in  its 
long  history.  History  was  realized  in  a  manner  which 
no  one  could  appreciate  more  fully  than  Mark  Twain. 

"I  was  particularly  anxious  to  see  this  pageant,"  he 
said,  "so  that  I  could  get  ideas  for  my  funeral  procession, 
which  I  am  planning  on  a  large  scale." 

He  was  not  disappointed;  it  was  a  realization  to  him 
of  all  the  gorgeous  spectacles  that  his  soul  had  dreamed 
from  youth  up. 

He  easily  recognized  the  great  characters  of  history  as 
they  passed  by,  and  he  was  recognized  by  them  in  turn; 
for  they  waved  to  him  and  bowed  and  sometimes  called 
his  name,  and  when  he  went  down  out  of  his  box,  by  and 
by,  Henry  VIII.  shook  hands  with  him,  a  monarch  he 
had  always  detested,  though  he  was  full  of  friendship  for 
him  now;  and  Charles  I.  took  off  his  broad,  velvet-plumed 
hat  when  they  met,  and  Henry  II.  and  Rosamond  and 
Queen  Elizabeth  all  saluted  him — ghosts  of  the  dead 
centuries. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLIX 


LONDON  SOCIAL  HONORS 

WE  may  not  detail  all  the  story  of  that  English  visit; 
even  the  path  of  glory  leads  to  monotony  at  last. 
We  may  only  mention  a  few  more  of  the  great  honors 
paid  to  our  unofficial  ambassador  to  the  world:  among 
them  a  dinner  given  to  members  of  the  Savage  Club  by 
the  Lord  Mayor  of  London  at  the  Mansion  House,  also  a 
dinner  given  by  the  American  Society  at  the  Hotel  Cecil  in 
honor  of  the  Fourth  of  July.  Clemens  was  the  guest  of 
honor,  and  responded  to  the  toast  given  by  Ambassador. 
Reid,  "The  Day  we  Celebrate."  He  made  an  amusing 
and  not  altogether  unserious  reference  to  the  American 
habit  of  exploding  enthusiasm  in  dangerous  fireworks. 

To  English  colonists  he  gave  credit  for  having  estab- 
lished American  independence,  and  closed: 

We  have,  however,  one  Fourth  of  July  which  is  absolutely 
our  own,  and  that  is  the  memorable  proclamation  issued  forty 
years  ago  by  that  great  American  to  whom  Sir  Mortimer  Durand 
paid  that  just  and  beautiful  tribute — Abraham  Lincoln:  a 
proclamation  which  not  only  set  the  black  slave  free,  but  set  his 
white  owner  free  also.  The  owner  was  set  free  from  that  burden 
and  offense,  that  sad  condition  of  things  where  he  was  in  so 
many  instances  a  master  and  owner  of  slaves  when  he  did  not 
want  to  be.  That  proclamation  set  them  all  free.  But  even 
in  this  matter  England  led  the  way,  for  she  had  set  her  slaves 
free  thirty  years  before,  and  we  but  followed  her  example.  We 
always  follow  her  example,  whether  it  is  good  or  bad.  And  it 
was  an  English  judge,  a  century  ago,  that  issued  that  other 

1397 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN- 


great  proclamation,  and  established  that  great  principle,  that 
when  a  slave,  let  him  belong  to  whom  he  may,  and  let  him  come 
whence  he  may,  sets  his  foot  upon  English  soil  his  fetters,  by 
that  act,  fall  away  and  he  is  a  free  man  before  the  world! 

It  is  true,  then,  that  all  our  Fourths  of  July,  and  we  have  five 
of  them,  England  gave  to  us,  except  that  one  that  I  have  men- 
tioned— the  Emancipation  Proclamation;  and  let  us  not  forget 
that  we  owe  this  debt  to  her.  Let  us  be  able  to  say  to  old 
England,  this  great-hearted,  venerable  old  mother  of  the  race, 
you  gave  us  our  Fourths  of  July,  that  we  love  and  that  we  honor 
and  revere;  you  gave  us  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  which 
is  the  charter  of  our  rights;  you,  the  venerable  Mother  of  Liber- 
ties, the  Champion  and  Protector  of  Anglo-Saxon  Freedom — 
you  gave  us  these  things,  and  we  do  most  honestly  thank  you 
for  them. 

It  was  at  this  dinner  that  he  characteristically  con- 
fessed, at  last,  to  having  stolen  the  Ascot  Cup. 

He  lunched  one  day  with  Bernard  Shaw,  and  the  two 
discussed  the  philosophies  in  which  they  were  mutually 
interested.  Shaw  regarded  Clemens  as  a  sociologist  be- 
fore all  else,  and  gave  it  out  with  great  frankness  that 
America  had  produced  just  two  great  geniuses — Edgar 
Allan  Poe  and  Mark  Twain.  Later  Shaw  wrote  him  a 
note,  in  which  he  said: 

I  am  persuaded  that  the  future  historian  of  America  will  find 
your  works  as  indispensable  to  him  as  a  French  historian  finds 
the  political  tracts  of  Voltaire.  I  tell  you  so  because  I  am  the 
author  of  a  play  in  which  a  priest  says,  "Telling  the  truth's  the 
funniest  joke  in  the  world,"  a  piece  of  wisdom  which  you  helped 
to  teach  me. 

Clemens  saw  a  great  deal  of  Moberly  Bell.  The 
two  lunched  and  dined  privately  together  when  there 
was  opportunity,  and  often  met  at  the  public  gath- 
erings. 

The  bare  memorandum  of  the  week  following  July 

1398 


Digitized  by  Google 


LONDON  SOCIAL  HONORS 


Fourth  will  convey  something  of  Mark  Twain's  London 
activities: 

Friday,  July  5.   Dined  with  Lord  and  Lady  Portsmouth. 

Saturday,  July  6.  Breakfasted  at  Lord  Avebury's.  Lord 
Kelvin,  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  and  Sir  Archibald  Geikie  were  there. 
Sat  22  times  for  photos,  16  at  Histed's.  Savage  Club  dinner 
in  the  evening.   White  suit.   Ascot  Cup. 

Sunday,  July  7.  Called  on  Lady  Langattock  and  others. 
Lunched  with  Sir  Norman  Lockyer. 

Monday,  July  8.  Lunched  with  Plasmon  directors  at  Bath 
Club.    Dined  privately  at  C.  F.  Moberly  Bell's. 

Tuesday,  July  o.  Lunched  at  the  House  with  Sir  Benjamin 
Stone.  Balfour  and  Komura  were  the  other  guests  of  honor. 
Punch  dinner  in  the  evening.    Joy  Agnew  and  the  cartoon. 

Wednesday,  July  10.  Went  to  Liverpool  with  Tay  Pay. 
Attended  banquet  in  the  Town  Hall  in  the  evening. 

Thursday,  July  11.  Returned  to  London  with  Tay  Pay. 
Calls  in  the  afternoon. 

The  Savage  Club  would  inevitably  want  to  entertain 
him  on  its  own  account,  and  their  dinner  of  July  6th  was 
a  handsome  affair.  He  felt  at  home  with  the  Savages, 
and  put  on  white  for  the  only  time  publicly  in  England. 
He  made  them  one  of  his  reminiscent  speeches,  recalling 
his  association  with  them  on  his  first  visit  to  London, 
thirty-seven  years  before.    Then  he  said: 

That  is  a  long  time  ago,  and  as  I  had  come  into  a  very  strange 
land,  and  was  with  friends,  as  I  could  see,  that  has  always  re- 
mained in  my  mind  as  a  peculiarly  blessed  evening,  since  it 
brought  me  into  contact  with  men  of  my  own  kind  and  my  own 
feelings.  I  am  glad  to  be  here,  and  to  see  you  all,  because  it  is 
very  likely  that  I  shall  not  see  you  again.  I  have  been  received, 
as  you  know,  in  the  most  delightfully  generous  way  in  England 
ever  since  I  came  here.  It  keeps  me  choked  up  all  the  time. 
Everybody  is  so  generous,  and  they  do  seem  to  give  you  such  a 
hearty  welcome.  Nobody  in  the  world  can  appreciate  it  higher 
than  I  do. 

13  99 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


The  club  gave  him  a  surprise  in  the  course  of  the  eve- 
ning. A  note  was  sent  to  him  accompanied  by  a  parcel, 
which,  when  opened,  proved  to  contain  a  gilded  plaster 
replica  of  the  Ascot  Gold  Cup.   The  note  said: 

Dere  Mark,  i  return  the  Cup.  You  couldn't  keep  your  mouth 
shut  about  it.  Tis  2  pretty  2  melt,  as  you  want  me  2;  next 
time  I  work  a  pinch  ile  have  a  pard  who  don't  make  after-dinner 
speeches. 

There  was  a  postcript  which  said :  "I  changed  the  acorn 
atop  for  another  nut  with  my  knife.*'  The  acorn  was,  in 
fact,  replaced  by  a  well-modeled  head  of  Mark  Twain. 

So,  after  all,  the  Ascot  Cup  would  be  one  of  the  trophies 
which  he  would  bear  home  with  him  across  the  Atlantic. 

Probably  the  most  valued  of  his  London  honors  was 
the  dinner  given  to  him  by  the  staff  of  Punch.  Punch  had 
already  saluted  him  with  a  front-page  cartoon  by  Bernard 
Partridge,  a  picture  in  which  the  presiding  genius  of  that 
paper,  Mr.  Punch  himself,  presents  him  with  a  glass  of 
the  patronymic  beverage  with  the  words,  "Sir,  I  honor 
myself  by  drinking  your  health.  Long  life  to  you — and 
happiness — and  perpetual  youth!" 

Mr.  Agnew,  chief  editor;  Linley  Sambourne,  Francis 
Burnand,  Henry  Lucy,  and  others  of  the  staff  welcomed 
him  at  the  Punch  offices  at  10  Bouverie  Street,  in  the  his- 
toric Punch  dining-room  where  Thackeray  had  sat,  and 
Douglas  Jerrold,  and  so  many  of  the  great  departed. 
Mark  Twain  was  the  first  foreign  visitor  to  be  so  honored 
— in  fifty  years  the  first  stranger  to  sit  at  the  sacred  board 
— a  mighty  distinction.  In  the  course  of  the  dinner  they 
gave  him  a  pretty  surprise,  when  little  Joy  Agnew  pre- 
sented him  with  the  original  drawing  of  Partridge's 
cartoon. 

Nothing  could  have  appealed  to  him  more,  and  the 
Punch  dinner,  with  its  associations  and  that  dainty  pres- 

1400 


Digitized  by  Google 


■SorVENlR  of  tk«  Dii»i>er  g«V* n  Vy  Hx  ^iV^prietert  of  9urKft 
At  thcirOfficc.  to.'S<»uv«rie5t."V\)ii1efri»r3.Tu<*Ju!v9 


To  ft  ?Aa$tek  ofhu  Art. 

71?  Puccp  (la  7^  ot<  ^uittJn)  "  5/-  <4,»(>*f 
y»*'  tZf**  —a*4 tyy* ,rrs  —tiJptnrfTmafjti-lf!  " 

|  Punch  J-"t  It  fO'J 


THE  "PINCH"  CARTOON,  I907 
(From  the  original,  presented  to  Mr.  Clemens  by  little  Joy  Agncw) 


Digitized  by  Google 


LONDON  SOCIAL  HONORS 


entation,  remained  apart  in  his  memory  from  all  other 
feastings. 

Clemens  had  intended  to  return  early  in  July,  but  so 
much  was  happening  that  he  postponed  his  sailing  until 
the  13th.  Before  leaving  America  he  had  declined  a 
dinner  offered  by  the  Lord  Mayor  of  Liverpool. 

Repeatedly  urged  to  let  Liverpool  share  in  his  visit, 
he  had  reconsidered  now,  and  on  the  day  following  the 
Punch  dinner,  on  July  10th,  they  carried  him,  with  T.  P. 
O'Connor  (Tay  Pay)  in  the  Prince  of  Wales's  special 
coach  to  Liverpool,  to  be  guest  of  honor  at  the  reception 
and  banquet  which  Lord  Mayor  Japp  tendered  him  at 
the  Town  Hall.  Clemens  was  too  tired  to  be  present 
while  the  courses  were  being  served,  but  arrived  rested 
and  fresh  to  respond  to  his  toast.  Perhaps  because  it 
was  his  farewell  speech  in  England,  he  made  that  night 
the  most  effective  address  of  his  four  weeks'  visit — one  of 
the  most  effective  of  his  whole  career.  He  began  by  some 
light  reference  to  the  Ascot  Cup  and  the  Dublin  Jewels 
and  the  State  Regalia,  and  other  disappearances  that  had 
been  laid  to  his  charge,  to  amuse  his  hearers,  and  spoke 
at  greater  length  than  usual,  and  with  even  greater  variety. 
Then  laying  all  levity  aside,  he  told  them,  like  the  Queen 
of  Sheba,  all  that  was  in  his  heart. 

.  .  .  Home  is  dear  to  us  all,  and  now  I  am  departing  to  my 
own  home  beyond  the  ocean.  Oxford  has  conferred  upon  me 
the  highest  honor  that  has  ever  fallen  to  my  share  of  this  life's 
prizes.  It  is  the  very  one  I  would  have  chosen,  as  outranking 
all  and  any  others,. the  one  more  precious  to  me  than  any  and 
all  others  within  the  gift  of  man  or  state.  During  my  four 
weeks'  sojourn  in  England  I  have  had  another  lofty  honor,  a 
continuous  honor,  an  honor  which  has  flowed  serenely  along, 
without  halt  or  obstruction,  through  all  these  twenty-six  days, 
a  most  moving  and  pulse-stirring  honor — the  heartfelt  grip  of 
the  hand,  and  the  welcome  that  does  not  descend  from  the  pale- 
gray  matter  of  the  brain,  but  rushes  up  with  the  red  blood  from 

1 401 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


the  heart.  It  makes  me  proud  and  sometimes  it  makes  me 
humble,  too.  Many  and  many  a  year  ago  I  gathered  an  in- 
cident from  Dana's  Two  Years  Before  tlie  Mast.  It  was  like  this: 
There  was  a  presumptuous  little  self-important  skipper  in  a 
coasting  sloop  engaged  in  the  dried-apple  and  kitchen-furniture 
trade,  and  he  was  always  hailing  every  ship  that  came  in  sight. 
He  did  it  just  to  hear  himself  talk  and  to  air  his  small  grandeur. 
One  day  a  majestic  Indiaman  came  plowing  by  with  course  on 
course  of  canvas  towering  into  the  sky,  her  decks  and  yards 
swarming  with  sailors,  her  hull  burdened  to  the  Plimsoll  line 
with  a  rich  freightage  of  precious  spices,  lading  the  breezes  with 
gracious  and  mysterious  odors  of  the  Orient.  It  was  a  noble 
spectacle,  a  sublime  spectacle!  Of  course  the  little  skipper 
popped  into  the  shrouds  and  squeaked  out  a  hail,  "Ship  ahoy! 
What  ship  is  that?  And  whence  and  whither?"  In  a  deep  and 
thunderous  bass  the  answer  came  back  through  the  speaking- 
trumpet,  "The  Begum,  of  Bengal — 142  days  out  from  Canton — 
homeward  bound!  What  ship  is  that?"  Well,  it  just  crushed 
that  poor  little  creature's  vanity  flat,  and  he  squeaked  back  most 
humbly,  "Only  the  Mary  Ann,  fourteen  hours  out  from  Boston, 
bound  for  Kittery  Point — with  nothing  to  speak  of!"  Oh,  what 
an  eloquent  word  that  "only,"  to  express  the  depths  of  his 
humbleness!  That  is  just  my  case.  During  just  one  hour  in 
the  twenty-four — not  more — I  pause  and  reflect  in  the  stillness 
of  the  night  with  the  echoes  of  your  English  welcome  still 
lingering  in  my  ears,  and  then  I  am  humble.  Then  I  am  properly 
meek,  and  for  that  little  while  I  am  only  the  Mary  Ann,  fourteen 
hours  out,  cargoed  with  vegetables  and  tinware;  but  during  all 
the  other  twenty-three  hours  my  vain  self-complacency  rides 
high  on  the  white  crests  of  your  approval,  and  then  I  am  a  stately 
Indiaman,  plowing  the  great  seas  under  a  cloud  of  canvas  and 
laden  with  the  kindest  words  that  have  ever  been  vouchsafed 
to  any  wandering  alien  in  this  world,  I  think;  then  my  twenty- 
six  fortunate  days  on  this  old  mother  soil  seem  to  be  multiplied 
by  six,  and  /  am  the  Begum,  of  Bengal,  142  days  out  from 
Canton — homeward  bound! 

He  returned  to  London,  and  with  one  of  his  young  ac- 
quaintances, an  American — he  called  her  Franceses — 
paid  many  calls.     It  took  the  dreariness  out  of  that 

1402 


Digitized  by  Google 


LONDON   SOCIAL  HONORS 


social  function  to  perform  it  in  that  way.  With  a  list 
of  the  calls  they  were  to  make  they  drove  forth  each 
day  to  cancel  the  social  debt.  They  paid  calls  in 
every  walk  of  life.  His  young  companion  was  privi- 
leged to  see  the  inside  of  London  homes  of  almost 
every  class,  for  he  showed  no  partiality;  he  went  to 
the  homes  of  the  poor  and  the  rich  alike.  One  day 
they  visited  the  home  of  an  old  bookkeeper  whom  he  had 
known  in  1S72  as  a  clerk  in  a  large  establishment,  earning 
a  salary  of  perhaps  a  pound  a  week,  who  now  had  risen 
mightily,  for  he  had  become  head  bookkeeper  in  that  es- 
tablishment on  a  salary  of  six  pounds  a  week,  and  thought 
it  great  prosperity  and  fortune  for  his  old  age. 

He  sailed  on  July  13  th  for  home,  besought  to  the  last 
moment  by  a  crowd  of  autograph-seekers  and  reporters 
and  photographers,  and  a  multitude  who  only  wished  to 
see  him  and  to  shout  and  wave  good-by.  He  was  sailing 
away  from  them  for  the  last  time.  They  hoped  he  would 
make  a  speech,  but  that  would  not  have  been  possible. 
To  the  reporters  he  gave  a  farewell  message:  "It  has 
been  the  most  enjoyable  holiday  I  have  ever  had,  and  I 
am  sorry  the  end  of  it  has  come.  I  have  met  a  hundred 
old  friends,  and  I  have  made  a  hundred  new  ones.  It  is 
a  good  kind  of  riches  to  have;  there  is  none  better,  I 
think."  And  the  London  Tribune  declared  that  "the 
ship  that  bore  him  away  had  difficulty  in  getting  clear, 
so  thickly  was  the  water  strewn  with  the  bay-leaves  of 
his  triumph.  For  Mark  Twain  has  triumphed,  and  in 
his  all-too-brief  stay  of  a  month  has  done  more  for  the 
cause  of  the  world's  peace  than  will  be  accomplished  by 
the  Hague  Conference.  He  has  made  the  world  laugh 
again." 

His  ship  was  the  Minnetonka,  and  there  were  some  little 
folks  aboard  to  be  adopted  as  grandchildren.  On  July 
15th,  in  a  fog,  the  Minnetonka  collided  with  the  bark 
Sterling,  and  narrowly  escaped  sinking  her.    On  the 

1403 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


whole,  however,  the  homeward  way  was  clear,  and  the 
vessel  reached  New  York  nearly  a  day  in  advance  of 
their  schedule.  Some  ceremonies  of  welcome  had  been 
prepared  for  him;  but  they  were  upset  by  the  early 
arrival,  so  that  when  he  descended  the  gang-plank  to  his 
native  soil  only  a  few  who  had  received  special  informa- 
tion were  there  to  greet  him.  But  perhaps  he  did  not 
notice  it.  He  seldom  took  account  of  the  absence  of 
such  things.  By  early  afternoon,  however,  the  papers 
rang  with  the  announcement  that  Mark  Twain  was 
home  again. 

It  is  a  sorrow  to  me  that  I  was  not  at  the  dock  to  wel- 
come him.  I  had  been  visiting  in  Elmira,  and  timed  my 
return  for  the  evening  of  the  2  2d,  to  be  on  hand  the  fol- 
lowing morning,  when  the  ship  was  due.  When  I  saw  the 
announcement  that  he  had  already  arrived  I  called  a 
greeting  over  the  telephone,  and  was  told  to  come  down 
and  play  billiards.  I  confess  I  went  with  a  certain  degree  of 
awe,  for  one  could  not  but  be  overwhelmed  with  the  echoes 
of  the  great  splendor  he  had  so  recently  achieved,  and 
I  prepared  to  sit  a  good  way  off  in  silence,  and  hear  some- 
thing of  the  tale  of  this  returning  conqueror;  but  when  I 
arrived  he  was  already  in  the  billiard-room  knocking  the 
balls  about — his  coat  off,  for  it  was  a  hot  night.  As  I 
entered  he  said: 

41  Get  your  cue.  I  have  been  inventing  a  new  game." 
And  I  think  there  were  scarcely  ten  words  exchanged 
before  we  were  at  it.  The  pageant  was  over;  the  cur- 
tain was  rung  down.  Business  was  resumed  at  the  old 
stand. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLX 


MATTERS  PSYCHIC  AND  OTHERWISE 

HE  returned  to  Tuxedo  and  took  up  his  dictations, 
and  mingled  freely  with  the  social  life;  but  the  con- 
trast between  his  recent  London  experience  and  his 
semi-retirement  must  have  been  very  great.  When  I 
visited  him  now  and  then,  he  seemed  to  me  lonely — not 
especially  for  companionship,  but  rather  for  the  life  that 
lay  behind  him— the  great  career  which  in  a  sense  now 
had  been  completed  since  he  had  touched  its  highest 
point.  There  was  no  billiard-table  at  Tuxedo,  and  he 
spoke  expectantly  of  getting  back  to  town  and  the  games 
there,  also  of  the  new  home  which  was  then  building  in 
Redding,  and  which  would  have  a  billiard-room  where 
we  could  assemble  daily — my  own  habitation  being  not 
far  away.  Various  diversions  were  planned  for  Redding; 
ampng  them  was  discussed  a  possible  school  of  philosophy, 
such  as  Hawthorne  and  Emerson  and  Alcott  had  estab- 
lished at  Concord. 

He  spoke  quite  freely  of  his  English  experiences,  but 
usually  of  the  more  amusing  phases.  He  almost  never 
referred  to  the  honors  that  had  been  paid  to  him,  yet  he 
must  have  thought  of  them  sometimes,  and  cherished 
them,  for  it  had  been  the  greatest  national  tribute  ever 
paid  to  a  private  citizen;  he  must  have  known  that  in  his 
heart.  He  spoke  amusingly  of  his  visit  to  Marie  Corelli, 
in  Stratford,  and  of  the  Holy  Grail  incident,  ending  the 
latter  by  questioning — in  words  at  least — all  psychic  mani- 
festations.   I  said  to  him: 

1405 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"But  remember  your  own  dream,  Mr.  Clemens,  which 
presaged  the  death  of  your  brother." 

He  answered:  "I  ask  nobody  to  believe  that  it  ever 
happened.  To  me  it  is  true;  but  it  has  no  logical  right 
to  be  true,  and  I  do  not  expect  belief  in  it."  Which  I 
thought  a  peculiar  point  of  view,  but  on  the  whole  charac- 
teristic. 

He  was  invited  to  be  a  special  guest  at  the  Jamestown 
Exposition  on  Fulton  Day,  in  September,  and  Mr.  Rogers 
lent  him  his  yacht  in  which  to  make  the  trip.  It  was  a 
break  in  the  summer's  monotonies,  and  the  Jamestown 
honors  must  have  reminded  him  of  those  in  London. 
When  he  entered  the  auditorium  where  the  services  were 
to  be  held  there  was  a  demonstration  which  lasted  more 
than  five  minutes.  Every  person  in  the  hall  rose  and 
cheered,  waving  handkerchiefs  and  umbrellas.  He  made 
them  a  brief,  amusing  talk  on  Fulton  and  other  matters, 
then  introduced  Admiral  Harrington,  who  delivered  a 
masterly  address  and  was  followed  by  Martin  W.  Little- 
ton, the  real  orator  of  the  day.  Littleton  acquitted  him- 
self so  notably  that  Mark  Twain  conceived  for  him  a  deep 
admiration,  and  the  two  men  quickly  became  friends. 
They  saw  each  other  often  during  the  remainder  of  the 
Jamestown  stay,  and  Clemens,  learning  that  Littleton 
lived  just  across  Ninth  Street  from  him  in  New  York, 
invited  him  to  come  over  when  he  had  an  evening  to  spare 
and  join  the  billiard  games. 

So  it  happened,  somewhat  later,  when  every  one  was 
back  in  town,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Littleton  frequently  came 
over  for  billiards,  and  the  games  became  three-handed 
with  an  audience; — very  pleasant  games  played  in  that 
way.  Clemens  sometimes  set  himself  up  as  umpire,  and 
became  critic  and  gave  advice,  while  Littleton  and  I 
played.  He  had  a  favorite  shot  that  he  frequently  used 
himself  and  was  always  wanting  us  to  try,  which  was  to 
drive  the  ball  to  the  cushion  at  the  beginning  of  the  shot. 

1406 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATTERS  PSYCHIC  AND  OTHERWISE 


He  played  it  with  a  good  deal  of  success,  and  achieved 
unexpected  results  with  it.  He  was  even  inspired  to 
write  a  poem  on  the  subject. 

"cushion  first" 

When  all  your  days  are  dark  with  doubt, 

And  dying  hope  is  at  its  worst; 
When  all  life's  balls  are  scattered  wide, 
With  not  a  shot  in  sight,  to  left  or  right, 
Don't  give  it  up; 

Advance  your  cue  and  shut  your  eyes, 
And  take  the  cushion  first. 

The  Harry  Thaw  trial  was  in  progress  just  then,  and 
Littleton  was  Thaw's  chief  attorney.  It  was  most  inter- 
esting to  hear  from  him  direct  the  day's  proceedings  and 
his  views  of  the  situation  and  of  Thaw. 

Littleton  and  billiards  recall  a  curious  thing  which  hap- 
pened one  afternoon.  I  had  been  absent  the  evening  be- 
fore, and  Littleton  had  been  over.  It  was  after  luncheon 
now,  and  Clemens  and  I  began  preparing  for  the  customary 
games.  We  were  playing  then  a  game  with  four  balls, 
two  white  and  two  red.  I  began  by  placing  the  red  balls 
on  the  table,  and  then  went  around  looking  in  the  pockets 
for  the  two  white  cue-balls.  When  I  had  made  the  round 
of  the  table  I  had  found  but  one  white  ball.  I  thought 
I  must  have  overlooked  the  other,  and  made  the  round 
again.    Then  I  said: 

"There  is  one  white  ball  missing." 

Clemens,  to  satisfy  himself,  also  made  the  round  of  the 
pockets,  and  said: 

"It  was  here  last  night."  He  felt  in  the  pockets  of 
the  little  white-silk  coat  which  he  usually  wore,  thinking 
that  he  might  unconsciously  have  placed  it  there  at  the 
end  of  the  last  game,  but  his  coat  pockets  were  empty. 

He  said:  "  I'll  bet  Littleton  carried  that  ball  home  with 
him." 

1407 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Then  I  suggested  that  near  the  end  of  the  game  it  might 
have  jumped  off  the  table,  and  I  looked  carefully  under 
the  furniture  and  in  the  various  corners,  but  without 
success.  There  was  another  set  of  balls,  and  out  of  it 
I  selected  a  white  one  for  our  play,  and  the  game  began. 
It  went  along  in  the  usual  way,  the  balls  constantly  fall- 
ing into  the  pockets,  and  as  constantly  being  replaced 
on  the  table.  This  had  continued  for  perhaps  half  an 
hour,  there  being  no  pocket  that  had  not  been  frequently 
occupied  and  emptied  during  that  time;  but  then  it  hap- 
pened that  Clemens  reached  into  the  middle  pocket,  and 
taking  out  a  white  ball  laid  it  in  place,  whereupon  we 
made  the  discovery  that  three  white  balls  lay  upon  the 
table.  The  one  just  taken  from  the  pocket  was  the  miss- 
ing ball.  We  looked  at  each  other,  both  at  first  too  aston- 
ished to  say  anything  at  all.  No  one  had  been  in  the 
room  since  we  began  to  play,  and  at  no  time  during  the 
play  had  there  been  more  than  two  white  balls  in  evidence, 
though  the  pockets  had  been  emptied  at  the  end  of  each 
shot.  The  pocket  from  which  the  missing  ball  had  been 
taken  had  been  filled  and  emptied  again  and  again.  Then 
Clemens  said: 

"We  must  be  dreaming." 

We  stopped  the  game  for  a  while  to  discuss  it,  but  we 
could  devise  no  material  explanation.  I  suggested  the 
kobold  —  that  mischievous  invisible  which  is  supposed 
to  play  pranks  by  carrying  off  such  things  as  pencils, 
letters,  and  the  like,  and  suddenly  restoring  them  almost 
before  one's  eyes.  Clemens,  who,  in  spite  of  his  material 
logic,  was  always  a  mystic  at  heart,  said: 

"But  that,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  never  happened  to 
more  than  one  person  at  a  time,  and  has  been  explained 
by  a  sort  of  temporary  mental  blindness.  This  thing  has 
happened  to  two  of  us,  and  there  can  be  no  question  as 
to  the  positive  absence  of  the  object." 

"How  about  dematerialization?" 

1408 


Digitized  by  Google 


MATTERS  PSYCHIC  AND  OTHERWISE 


"Yes,  if  one  of  us  were  a  medium  that  might  be  con- 
sidered an  explanation." 

He  went  on  to  recall  that  Sir  Alfred  Russel  Wallace 
had  written  of  such  things,  and  cited  instances  which 
Wallace  had  recorded.    In  the  end  he  said: 

"Well,  it  happened,  that's  all  we  can  say,  and  nobody 
can  ever  convince  me  that  it  didn't." 

We  went  on  playing,  and  the  ball  remained  solid  and 
substantial  ever  after,  so  far  as  I  know. 

I  am  reminded  of  two  more  or  less  related  incidents 
of  this  period.  Clemens  was,  one  morning,  dictating 
something  about  his  Christian  Union  article  concerning 
Mrs.  Clemens's  government  of  children,  published  in 
1885.  I  had  discovered  no  copy  of  it  among  the  materials, 
and  he  was  wishing  very  much  that  he  could  see  one. 
Somewhat  later,  as  he  was  walking  down  Fifth  Avenue, 
the  thought  of  this  article  and  his  desire  for  it  suddenly 
entered  his  mind.  Reaching  the  corner  of  Forty-second 
Street,  he  stopped  a  moment  to  let  a  jam  of  vehicles  pass. 
As  he  did  so  a  stranger  crossed  the  street,  noticed  him, 
and  came  dodging  his  way  through  the  blockade  and 
thrust  some  clippings  into  his  hand. 

"Mr.  Clemens,"  he  said,  "you  don't  know  me,  but 
here  is  something  you  may  wish  to  have.  I  have  been 
saving  them  for  more  than  twenty  years,  and  this  morn- 
ing it  occurred  to  me  to  send  them  to  you.  I  was  going 
to  mail  them  from  my  office,  but  now  I  will  give  them  to 
you,"  and  with  a  word  or  two  he  disappeared.  The 
clippings  were  from  the  Christian  Union  of  1885,  and 
were  the  much-desired  article.  Clemens  regarded  it  as 
a  remarkable  case  of  mental  telegraphy. 

"Or,  if  it  wasn't  that,"  he  said,  "it  was  a  most  remark- 
able coincidence." 

The  other  circumstance  has  been  thought  amusing.  I 
had  gone  to  Redding  for  a  few  days,  and  while  there,  one 
afternoon  about  five  o'clock,  fell  over  a  coal-scuttle  and 


1409 


MARK  TWAIN 


scarified  myself  a  good  deal  between  the  ankle  and  the 
knee.  I  mention  the  hour  because  it  seems  important. 
Next  morning  I  received  a  note,  prompted  by  Mr. 
Clemens,  in  which  he  said: 

Tell  Paine  I  am  sorry  he  fell  and  skinned  his  shin  at  five 
o'clock  yesterday  afternoon. 

I  was  naturally  astonished,  and  immediately  wrote: 

I  did  fall  and  skin  my  shin  at  five  o'clock  yesterday  after- 
noon, but  how  did  you  find  it  out? 

I  followed  the  letter  in  person  next  day,  and  learned 
that  at  the  same  hour  on  the  same  afternoon  Clemens 
himself  had  fallen  up  the  front  steps  and,  as  he  said, 
peeled  off  from  his  "starboard  shin  a  ribbon  of  skin  three 
inches  long."  The  disaster  was  still  uppermost  in  his 
mind  at  the  time  of  writing,  and  the  suggestion  of  my  own 
mishap  had  flashed  out  for  no  particular  reason. 

Clemens  was  always  having  his  fortune  told,  in  one  way 
or  another,  being  superstitious,  as  he  readily  confessed, 
though  at  times  professing  little  faith  in  these  prognostics. 
Once  when  a  clairvoyant,  of  whom  he  had  never  even 
heard,  and  whom  he  had  reason  to  believe  was  ignorant 
of  his  family  history,  told  him  more  about  it  than  he  knew 
himself,  besides  reading  a  list  of  names  from  a  piece  of 
paper  which  Clemens  had  concealed  in  his  vest  pocket, 
he  came  home  deeply  impressed.  The  clairvoyant  added 
that  he  would  probably  live  to  a  great  age  and  die  in  a 
foreign  land — a  prophecy  which  did  not  comfort  him. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXI 


MINOR  EVENTS  AND  DIVERSIONS 

MdRK  TWAIN  was  deeply  interested  during  the  au- 
tumn of  1907  in  the  Children's  Theater  of  the  Jewish 
Educational  Alliance,  on  the  lower  East  Side — a  most 
worthy  institution  which  ought  to  have  survived.  A 
Miss  Alice  M.  Herts,  who  developed  and  directed  it,  gave 
her  strength  and  health  to  build  up  an  institution  through 
which  the  interest  of  the  children  could  be  diverted  from 
less  fortunate  amusements.  She  had  interested  a  great 
body  of  Jewish  children  in  the  plays  of  Shakespeare, 
and  of  more  modern  dramatists,  and  these  they  had  per- 
formed from  time  to  time  with  great  success.  The  ad- 
mission fee  to  the  performance  was  ten  cents,  and  the 
theater  was  always  crowded  with  other  children — cer- 
tainly a  better  diversion  for  them  than  the  amusements 
of  the  street,  though  of  course,  as  a  business  enterprise, 
the  theater  could  not  pay.  It  required  patrons.  Miss 
Herts  obtained  permission  to  play  "The  Prince  and  the 
Pauper,"  and  Mark  Twain  agreed  to  become  a  sort  of 
chief  patron  in  using  his  influence  to  bring  together  an 
audience  who  might  be  willing  to  assist  financially  in 
this  worthy  work. 

"The  Prince  and  the  Pauper"  evening  turned  out  a  dis- 
tinguished affair.  On  the  night  of  November  19,  1907, 
the  hall  of  the  Educational  Alliance  was  crowded  with 
such  an  audience  as  perhaps  never  before  assembled  on  the 
East  Side;  the  finance  and  the  fashion  of  New  York  were 
there.    It  was  a  gala  night  for  the  little  East  Side  per- 

1411 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


formers.  Behind  the  curtain  they  whispered  to  each 
other  that  they  were  to  play  before  queens.  The  per- 
formance they  gave  was  an  astonishing  one.  So  fully 
did  they  enter  into  the  spirit  of  Tom  Canty  *s  rise  to 
royalty  that  they  seemed  absolutely  to  forget  that  they 
were  lowly-born  children  of  the  Ghetto.  They  had  be- 
come little  princesses  and  lords  and  maids-in- waiting , 
and  they  moved  through  their  pretty  tinsel  parts  as  if 
all  their  ornaments  were  gems  and  their  raiment  cloth 
of  gold.  There  was  no  hesitation,  no  awkwardness  of 
speech  or  gesture,  and  they  rose  really  to  sublime  heights 
in  the  barn  scene  where  the  little  Prince  is  in  the  hands 
of  the  mob.  Never  in  the  history  of  the  stage  has  there 
been  assembled  a  mob  more  wonderful  than  that.  These 
children  knew  mobs!  A  mob  to  them  was  a  daily  sight, 
and  their  reproduction  of  it  was  a  thing  to  startle  you  with 
its  realism.  Never  was  it  absurd;  never  was  there  a  single 
note  of  artificiality  in  it.   It  was  Hogarthian  in  its  bigness. 

Both  Mark  Twain  and  Miss  Herts  made  brief  addresses, 
and  the  audience  shouted  approval  of  their  words.  It 
seems  a  pity  that  such  a  project  as  that  must  fail,  and  I 
do  not  know  why  it  happened.  Wealthy  men  and  women 
manifested  an  interest;  but  there  was  some  hitch  some- 
where, and  the  Children's  Theater  exists  to-day  only  as 
history.1 

It  was  at  a  dinner  at  The  Players — a  small,  private 
dinner  given  by  Mr.  George  C.  Riggs — that  I  saw  Edward 
L.  Burlingame  and  Mark  Twain  for  the  only  time  to- 

1  In  a  letter  to  a  Mrs.  Amelia  Dunne  Hookway ,  who  had  conducted 
some  children's  plays  at  the  Howland  School,  Chicago,  Mark  Twain 
once  wrote:  "  If  I  were  going  to  begin  life  over  again  I  would  have  a 
children's  theater  and  watch  it,  and  work  for  it,  and  see  it  grow 
and  blossom  and  bear  its  rich  moral  and  intellectual  fruitage;  and 
I  should  get  more  pleasure  and  a  saner  and  healthier  profit  out 
of  my  vocation  than  I  should  ever  be  able  to  get  out  of  any  other, 
constituted  as  I  am.  Yes,  you  are  easily  the  most  fortunate  of 
women,  I  think." 

1412 


Digitized  by  Google 


MINOR  EVENTS  AND  DIVERSIONS 


gether.  They  had  often  met  during  the  forty-two  years 
that  had  passed  since  their  long-ago  Sandwich  Island 
friendship;  but  only  incidentally,  for  Mr.  Burlingame 
cared  not  much  for  great  public  occasions,  and  as  editor  of 
Scribner's  Magazine  he  had  been  somewhat  out  of  the 
line  of  Mark  Twain's  literary  doings. 

Howells  was  there,  and  Gen.  Stewart  L.  Woodford, 
and  David  Bispham,  John  Finley,  Evan  Shipman,  Nicholas 
Biddle,  and  David  Munro.  Clemens  told  that  night,  for 
the  first  time,  the  story  of  General  Miles  and  the  three- 
dollar  dog,  inventing  it,  I  believe,  as  he  went  along,  though 
for  the  moment  it  certainly  did  sound  like  history.  He 
told  it  oftan  after  that,  and  it  has  been  included  in  his 
book  of  speeches. 

Later,  in  the  cab,  he  said: 

"That  was  a  mighty  good  dinner.  Riggs  knows  how 
to  do  that  sort  of  thing.  I  enjoyed  it  ever  so  much. 
Now  we'll  go  home  and  play  billiards." 

We  began  about  eleven  o'clock,  and  played  until  after 
midnight.  I  happened  to  be  too  strong  for  him,  and  he 
swore  amazingly.  He  vowed  that  it  was  not  a  gentle- 
man's game  at  all,  that  Riggs's  wine  had  demoralized  the 
play.  But  at  the  end,  when  we  were  putting  up  the  cues, 
he  said: 

"Well,  those  were  good  games.  There  is  nothing  like 
billiards  after  all." 

We  did  not  play  billiards  on  his  birthday  that  year. 
He  went  to  the  theater  in  the  afternoon ;  and  it  happened 
that,  with  Jesse  Lynch  Williams,  I  attended  the  same  per- 
formance— the  "Toy-Maker  of  Nuremburg" — written  by 
Austin  Strong.  It  proved  to  be  a  charming  play,  and 
I  could  see  that  Clemens  was  enjoying  it.  He  sat  in  a 
box  next  to  the  stage,  and  the  actors  clearly  were  doing 
their  very  prettiest  for  his  benefit. 

When  later  I  mentioned  having  seen  him  at  the  play, 
he  spoke  freely  of  his  pleasure  in  it. 

1413 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"It  is  a  fine,  delicate  piece  of  work,"  he  said.  "I  wish 
I  could  do  such  things  as  that." 

"I  believe  you  are  too  literary  for  play- writing." 

"Yes,  no  doubt.  There  was  never  any  question  with 
the  managers  about  my  plays.  They  always  said  they 
wouldn't  act.  Howells  has  come  pretty  near  to  some- 
thing once  or  twice.  I  judge  the  trouble  is  that  the  literary 
man  is  thinking  of  the  style  and  quality  of  the  thing, 
while  the  playwright  thinks  only  of  how  it  will  play. 
One  is  thinking  of  how  it  will  sound,  the  other  of  how 
it  will  look." 

41 1  suppose,"  I  said,  "the  literary  man  should  have  a 
collaborator  with  a  genius  for  stage  mechanism.  John 
Luther  Long's  exquisite  plays  would  hardly  have  been 
successful  without  David  Belasco  to  stage  them.  Belasco 
cannot  write  a  play  himself,  but  in  the  matter  of  acting 
construction  his  genius  is  supreme." 

"Yes,  so  it  is;  it  was  Belasco  who  made  it  possible  to 
play  "The  Prince  and  the  Pauper" — a  collection  of  literary 
garbage  before  he  got  hold  of  it." 

Clemens  attended  few  public  functions  now.  He  was 
beset  with  invitations,  but  he  declined  most  of  them. 
He  told  the  dog  story  one  night  to  the  Pleiades  Club, 
assembled  at  the  Brevoort;  but  that  was  only  a  step  away, 
and  we  went  in  after  the  dining  was  ended  and  came 
away  before  the  exercises  were  concluded. 

He  also  spoke  at  a  banquet  given  to  Andrew  Car- 
negie— Saint  Andrew,  as  he  called  him — by  the  En- 
gineers Club,  and  had  his  usual  fun  at  the  chief  guest's 
expense. 

I  have  been  chief  guest  at  a  good  many  banquets  myself,  and 
I  know  what  brother  Andrew  is  feeling  like  now.  He  has  been 
receiving  compliments  and  nothing  but  compliments,  but  he 
knows  that  there  is  another  side  to  him  that  needs  censure. 

I  am  going  to  vary  the  complimentary  monotony.  While 
wc  have  all  been  listening  to  the  complimentary  talk  Mr.  Car- 

1414 


Digitized  by  Google 


MINOR  EVENTS  AND  DIVERSIONS 


negie's  face  has  scintillated  with  fictitious  innocence.  You'd 
think  he  never  committed  a  crime  in  his  life.    But  he  has. 

Look  at  his  pestiferous  simplified  spelling.  Imagine  the 
calamity  on  two  sides  of  the  ocean  when  he  foisted  his  simplified 
spelling  on  the  whole  human  race.  We've  got  it  all  now  so  that 
nobody  could  spell.  .  .  . 

If  Mr.  Carnegie  had  left  spelling  alone  we  wouldn't  have  had 
any  spots  on  the  sun,  or  any  San  Francisco  quake,  or  any  busi- 
ness depression. 

There,  I  trust  he  feels  better  now  and  that  he  has  enjoyed 
my  abuse  more  than  he  did  his  compliments.  And  now  that  I 
think  I  have  him  smoothed  down  and  feeling  comfortable  I 
just  want  to  say  one  thing  more — that  his  simplified  spelling  is 
all  right  enough,  but,  like  chastity,  you  can  carry  it  too  far. 

As  he  was  about  to  go,  Carnegie  called  his  attention  to 
the  beautiful  souvenir  bronze  and  gold-plated  goblets 
that  stood  at  each  guest's  plate.    Carnegie  said: 

"The  club  had  those  especially  made  at  Tiffany's  for 
this  occasion.    They  cost  ten  dollars  apiece." 

Clemens  said:  4 'Is  that  so?  Well,  I  only  meant  to 
take  my  own;  but  if  that's  the  case  Til  load  my  cab  with 
them." 

We  made  an  attempt  to  reform  on  the  matter  of  bil- 
liards. The  continued  strain  of  late  hours  was  doing 
neither  of  us  any  particular  good.  More  than  once  I 
journeyed  into  the  country  on  one  errand  and  another, 
mainly  for  rest ;  but  a  card  saying  that  he  was  lonely  and 
upset,  for  lack  of  his  evening  games,  quickly  brought  me 
back  again.  It  was  my  wish  only  to  serve  him;  it  was 
a  privilege  and  an  honor  to  give  him  happiness. 

Billiards,  however,  was  not  his  only  recreation  just 
then.  He  walked  out  a  good  deal,  and  especially  of  a 
pleasant  Sunday  morning  he  liked  the  stroll  up  Fifth 
Avenue.  Sometimes  we  went  as  high  as  Carnegie's,  on 
Ninety-second  Street,  and  rode  home  on  top  of  the  electric 
stage-— always  one  of  Mark  Twain's  favorite  diversions. 

1415 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


From  that  high  seat  he  liked  to  look  down  on  the  pano- 
rama of  the  streets,  and  in  that  free,  open  air  he  could 
smoke  without  interference.  Oftener,  however,  we  turned 
at  Fifty-ninth  Street,  walking  both  ways. 

When  it  was  pleasant  we  sometimes  sat  on  a  bench  in 
Central  Park;  and  once  he  must  have  left  a  handkerchief 
there,  for  a  few  days  later  one  of  his  handkerchiefs  came 
to  him  accompanied  by  a  note.  Its  finder,  a  Mr.  Lock- 
wood,  received  a  reward,  for  Mark  Twain  wrote  him: 

There  is  more  rejoicing  in  this  house  over  that  one  handker- 
chief that  was  lost  and  is  found  again  than  over  the  ninety  and 
nine  that  never  went  to  the  wash  at  all.  Heaven  will  reward 
you,  I  know  it  will. 

On  Sunday  mornings  the  return  walk  would  be  timed 
for  about  the  hour  that  the  churches  would  be  dismissed. 
On  the  first  Sunday  morning  we  had  started  a  little  early, 
and  I  thoughtlessly  suggested,  when  we  reached  Fifty-ninth 
Street,  that  if  we  returned  at  once  we  would  avoid  the 
throng.    He  said,  quietly: 

"I  like  the  throng/* 

So  we  rested  in  the  Plaza  Hotel  until  the  appointed 
hour.  Men  and  women  noticed  him,  and  came  over  to 
shake  his  hand.  The  gigantic  man  in  uniform,  in  charge 
of  the  carriages  at  the  door,  came  in  for  a  word.  He 
had  opened  carriages  for  Mr.  Clemens  at  the  Twenty- 
third  Street  station,  and  now  wanted  to  claim  that  honor. 
I  think  he  received  the  most  cordial  welcome  of  any  one 
who  came.  I  am  sure  he  did.  It  was  Mark  Twain's 
way  to  warm  to  the  man  of  the  lower  social  rank.  He 
was  never  too  busy,  never  too  preoccupied,  to  grasp  the 
hand  of  such  a  man;  to  listen  to  his  story,  and  to  say  just 
the  words  that  would  make  that  man  happy  remembering 
them. 

We  left  the  Plaza  Hotel  and  presently  were  amid 
the  throng  of  outpouring  congregations.    Of  course  he  was 

1416 


Digitized  by  Google 


MINOR  EVENTS  AND  DIVERSIONS 


the  object  on  which  every  passing  eye  turned;  the  pres- 
ence to  which  every  hat  was  lifted.  I  realized  that  this 
open  and  eagerly  paid  homage  of  the  multitude  was  still 
dear  to  him,  not  in  any  small  and  petty  way,  but  as  the 
tribute  of  a  nation,  the  expression  of  that  affection  which 
in  his  London  and  Liverpool  speeches  he  had  declared  to 
be  the  last  and  final  and  most  precious  reward  that  any 
man  can  win,  whether  by  character  or  achievement.  It 
was  his  final  harvest,  and  he  had  the  courage  to  claim  it 
— the  aftermath  of  all  his  years  of  honorable  labor  and 
noble  living. 


THE  "CRIME"  OF  SIMPLIFIED  SPELLING.     (BY  CESARE) 


CCLXII 

FROM  MARK  TWAIN's  MAIL 

IF  the  reader  has  any  curiosity  as  to  some  of  the  less 
usual  letters  which  a  man  of  wide  public  note  may  in- 
spire, perhaps  he  will  find  a  certain  interest  in  a  few  se- 
lected from  the  thousands  which  yearly  came  to  Mark 
Twain. 

For  one  thing,  he  was  constantly  receiving  prescrip- 
tions and  remedies  whenever  the  papers  reported  one  of 
his  bronchial  or  rheumatic  attacks.  It  is  hardly  necessary 
to  quote  examples  of  these,  but  only  a  form  of  his  occasional 
reply,  which  was  likely  to  be  in  this  wise: 

Dear  Sir  [or  Madam], — I  try  every  remedy  sent  to  me.  I 
am  now  on  No.  87.  Yours  is  2,653.  I  am  looking  forward  to 
its  beneficial  results. 

Of  course  a  large  number  of  the  nostrums  and  pallia- 
tives offered  were  preparations  made  by  the  wildest  and 
longest-haired  medical  cranks.  One  of  these  sent  an 
advertisement  of  a  certain  Elixir  of  Life,  which  was  guar- 
anteed to  cure  everything — to  "wash  and  cleanse  the  hu- 
man molecules,  and  so  restore  youth  and  preserve  life 
everlasting." 

Anonymous  letters  are  not  usually  popular  or  to  be 
encouraged,  but  Mark  Twain  had  an  especial  weakness 
for  compliments  that  came  in  that  way.  They  were  not 
mercenary  compliments.  The  writer  had  nothing  to 
gain.  Two  such  letters  follow— both  written  in  England 
just  at  the  time  of  his  return. 

1418 


Digitized  by  Google 


FROM  MARK  TWAIN'S  MAIL 


Mark  Twain. 

Dear  Sir, — Please  accept  a  poor  widow's  good-by  and  kindest 
wishes.  I  have  had  some  of  your  books  sent  to  me;  have  en- 
joyed them  very  much — only  wish  I  could  afford  to  buy  some. 

I  should  very  much  like  to  have  seen  you.  I  have  many 
photos  of  you  which  I  have  cut  from  several  papers  which  I 
read.  I  have  one  where  you  are  writing  in  bed,  which  I  cut 
from  the  Daily  News.  Like  myself,  you  believe  in  lots  of  sleep 
and  rest.  I  am  70  and  I  find  I  need  plenty.  Please  forgive  the 
liberty  I  have  taken  in  writing  to  you.  If  I  can't  come  to  your 
funeral  may  we  meet  beyond  the  river. 

May  God  guard  you,  is  the  wish  of  a  lonely  old  widow. 

Yours  sincerely, 

The  other  letter  also  tells  its  own  story: 

Dear,  kind  Mark  Twain, — For  years  I  have  wanted  to 
write  and  thank  you  for  the  comfort  you  were  to  me  once,  only 
I  never  quite  knew  where  you  were,  and  besides  I  did  not  want 
to  bother  you;  but  to-day  I  was  told  by  some  one  who  saw  you 
going  into  the  lift  at  the  Savoy  that  you  looked  sad  and  I  thought 
it  might  cheer  you  a  little  tiny  bit  to  hear  how  you  kept  a  poor 
lonely  girl  from  ruining  her  eyes  with  crying  every  night  for 
long  months. 

Ten  years  ago  I  had  to  leave  home  and  earn  my  living  as  a 
governess  and  Fate  sent  me  to  spend  a  winter  with  a  very  dull 
old  country  family  in  the  depths  of  Staffordshire.  According 
to  the  genial  English  custom,  after  my  five  charges  had  gone 
to  bed,  I  took  my  evening  meal  alone  in  the  school-room,  where 
"Henry  Tudor  had  supped  the  night  before  Bosworth,"  and 
there  I  had  to  stay  without  a  soul  to  speak  to  till  I  went  to  bed. 
At  first  I  used  to  cry  every  night,  but  a  friend  sent  me  a  copy  of 
your  Huckleberry  Finn  and  I  never  cried  any  more.  I  kept  him 
handy  under  the  copy-books  and  maps,  and  when  Henry  Tudor 
commenced  to  stretch  out  his  chilly  hands  toward  me  I  grabbed 
my  dear  Huck  and  he  never  once  failed  me;  I  opened  him  at 
random  and  in  two  minutes  I  was  in  another  world.  That's 
why  I  am  so  grateful  to  you  and  so  fond  of  you,  and  I  thought 
you  might  like  to  know;  for  it  is  yourself  that  has  the  kind  heart, 
as  is  easily  seen  from  the  way  you  wrote  about  the  poor  old 

1410 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


nigger.  I  am  a  stenographer  now  and  live  at  home,  but  I  shall 
never  forget  how  you  helped  me.  God  bless  you  and  spare  you 
long  to  those  you  are  dear  to. 

A  letter  which  came  to  him  soon  after  his  return  from 
England  contained  a  clipping  which  reported  the  good 
work  done  by  Christian  missionaries  in  the  Congo,  es- 
pecially among  natives  afflicted  by  the  terrible  sleeping 
sickness.  The  letter  itself  consisted  merely  of  a  line, 
which  said: 

Won't  you  give  your  friends,  the  missionaries,  a  good  mark 
for  this? 

The  writer's  name  was  signed,  and  Mark  Twain  an- 
swered: 

In  China  the  missionaries  are  not  wanted,  &  so  they  ought 
to  be  decent  &  go  away.  But  I  have  not  heard  that  in  the 
Congo  the  missionary  servants  of  God  are  unwelcome  to  the 
native. 

Evidently  those  missionaries  are  pitying,  compassionate,  kind. 
How  it  would  improve  God  to  take  a  lesson  from  them!  He 
invented  &  distributed  the  germ  of  that  awful  disease  among 
those  helpless,  poor  savages,  &  now  He  sits  with  His  elbows  on  the 
balusters  &  looks  down  &  enjoys  this  wanton  crime.  Con- 
fidently, &  between  you  &  me — well,  never  mind,  I  might  get 
struck  by  lightning  if  I  said  it. 

Those  are  good  and  kindly  men,  those  missionaries,  but  they 
are  a  measureless  satire  upon  their  Master. 

To  which  the  writer  answered: 

O  wicked  Mr.  Clemens!  I  have  to  ask  Saint  Joan  of  Arc  to 
pray  for  you ;  then  one  of  these  days,  when  we  all  stand  before 
the  Golden  Gates  and  we  no  longer  "see  through  a  glass  darkly 
and  know  only  in  part/'  there  will  be  a  struggle  at  the  heavenly 
portals  between  Joan  of  Arc  and  St.  Peter,  but  your  blessed 
Joan  will  conquer  and  she'll  lead  Mr.  Clemens  through  the  gates 
of  pearl  and  apologize  and  plead  for  him. 

1420 


Digitized  by  Google 


FROM  MARK  TWAIN'S  MAIL 


Of  the  letters  that  irritated  him,  perhaps  the  following 
is  as  fair  a  sample  as  any,  and  it  has  additional  interest 
in  its  sequel. 

Dear  Sir, — I  have  written  a  book — naturally — which  fact, 
however,  since  I  am  not  your  enemy,  need  give  you  no  occasion 
to  rejoice.  Nor  need  you  grieve,  though  I  am  sending  you  a 
copy.  If  I  knew  of  any  way  of  compelling  you  to  read  it  I  would 
do  so,  but  unless  the  first  few  pages  have  that  effect  I  can  do 
nothing.  Try  the  first  few  pages.  I  have  done  a  great  deal 
more  than  that  with  your  books,  so  perhaps  you  owe  me  some- 
thing—say ten  pages.  If  after  that  attempt  you  put  it  aside  I 
shall  be  sorry — for  you. 

I  am  afraid  that  the  above  looks  flippant — but  think  of  the 
twitterings  of  the  soul  of  him  who  brings  in  his  hand  an  un- 
bidden book,  written  by  himself.  To  such  a  one  much  is  due  in 
the  way  of  indulgence.  Will  you  remember  that?  Have  you 
forgotten  early  twitterings  of  your  own? 

In  a  memorandum  made  on  this  letter  Mark  Twain 
wrote: 

Another  one  of  those  peculiarly  depressing  letters— a  letter 
cast  in  artificially  humorous  form,  whilst  no  art  could  make  the 
subject  humorous — to  me. 

Commenting  further,  he  said: 

As  I  have  remarked  before  about  one  thousand  times  the  coat 
of  arms  of  the  human  race  ought  to  consist  of  a  man  with  an  ax 
on  his  shoulder  proceeding  toward  a  grindstone,  or  it  ought  to 
represent  the  several  members  of  the  human  race  holding  out 
the  hat  to  one  another;  for  we  are  all  beggars,  each  in  his  own 
way.  One  beggar  is  too  proud  to  beg  for  pennies,  but  will  beg 
for  an  introduction  into  society;  another  does  not  care  for 
society,  but  he  wants  a  postmastership;  another  will  inveigle  a 
lawyer  into  conversation  and  then  sponge  on  him  for  free  advice. 
The  man  who  wouldn't  do  any  of  these  things  will  beg  for  the 
Presidency.  Each  admires  his  own  dignity  and  greatly  guards 
it,  but  in  his  opinion  the  others  haven't  any. 
in.— 20  1 42 1 


MARK  TWAIN 


Mendicancy  is  a  matter  of  taste  and  temperament,  no  doubt, 
but  no  human  being  is  without  some  form  of  it.  I  know  my 
own  form,  you  know  yours.  Let  us  conceal  them  from  view 
and  abuse  the  others.  There  is  no  man  so  poor  but  what  at 
intervals  some  man  comes  to  him  with  an  ax  to  grind.  By  and 
by  the  ax's  aspect  becomes  familiar  to  the  proprietor  of  the 
grindstone.  He  perceives  that  it  is  the  same  old  ax.  If  you 
are  a  governor  you  know  that  the  stranger  wants  an  office. 
The  first  time  he  arrives  you  are  deceived;  he  pours  out  such 
noble  praises  of  you  and  your  political  record  that  you  are  moved 
to  tears;  there's  a  lump  in  your  throat  and  you  are  thankful  that 
you  have  lived  for  this  happiness.  Then  the  stranger  dis- 
closes his  ax,  and  you  are  ashamed  of  yourself  and  your  race. 
Six  repetitions  will  cure  you.  After  that  you  interrupt  the  com- 
pliments and  say,  "Yes,  yes,  that's  all  right;  never  mind  about 
that.   What  is  it  you  want?" 

But  you  and  I  are  in  the  business  ourselves.  Every  now  and 
then  we  carry  our  ax  to  somebody  and  ask  a  whet.  I  don't 
carry  mine  to  strangers — I  draw  the  line  there;  perhaps  that  is 
your  way.  This  is  bound  to  set  us  up  on  a  high  and  holy  pinnacle 
and  make  us  look  down  in  cold  rebuke  on  persons  who  carry 
their  axes  to  strangers. 

I  do  not  know  how  to  answer  that  stranger's  letter.  I  wish 
he  had  spared  me.  Never  mind  about  him — I  am  thinking 
about  myself.  I  wish  he  had  spared  me.  The  book  has  not 
arrived  yet;  but  no  matter,  I  am  prejudiced  against  it. 

It  was  a  few  days  later  that  he  added: 

I  wrote  to  that  man.  I  fell  back  upon  the  old  overworked, 
polite  lie,  and  thanked  him  for  his  book  and  said  I  was  promising 
myself  the  pleasure  of  reading  it.  Of  course  that  set  me  free;  I 
was  not  obliged  to  read  it  now  at  all,  and,  being  free,  my  preju- 
dice was  gone,  and  as  soon  as  the  book  came  I  opened  it  to  see 
what  it  was  like.  I  was  not  able  to  put  it  down  until  I  had 
finished.  It  was  an  embarrassing  thing  to  have  to  write  to  that 
man  and  confess  that  fact,  but  I  had  to  do  it.  That  first  letter 
was  merely  a  lie.  Do  you  think  I  wrote  the  second  one  to  give 
that  man  pleasure?   Well,  I  did,  but  it  was  second-hand  plea- 

1422 


Digitized  by  Google 


FROM   MARK  TWAIN'S  MAIL 


sure.  I  wrote  it  first  to  give  myself  comfort,  to  make  myself 
forget  the  original  lie. 

Mark  Twain's  interest  was  once  aroused  by  the  fol- 
lowing: 

Dear  Sir,— I  have  had  more  or  less  of  your  works  on  my 
shelves  for  years,  and  believe  I  have  practically  a  complete  set 
now.  This  is  nothing  unusual,  of  course,  but  I  presume  it 
will  seem  to  you  unusual  for  any  one  to  keep  books  constantly 
in  sight  which  the  owner  regrets  ever  having  read. 

Every  time  my  glance  rests  on  the  books  I  do  regret  having 
read  them,  and  do  not  hesitate  to  tell  you  so  to  your  face,  and 
care  not  who  may  know  my  feelings.  You,  who  must  be  kept 
busy  attending  to  your  correspondence,  will  probably  pay  little 
or  no  attention  to  this  small  fraction  of  it,  yet  my  reasons,  I 
believe,  are  sound  and  are  probably  shared  by  more  people  than 
you  are  aware  of. 

Probably  you  will  not  read  far  enough  through  this  to  see  who 
has  signed  it,  but  if  you  do,  and  care  to  know  why  I  wish  I  had 
left  your  work  unread,  I  will  tell  you  as  briefly  as  possible  if 
you  will  ask  me.  George  B.  Lauder. 

Clemens  did  not  answer  the  letter,  but  put  it  in  his 
pocket,  perhaps  intending  to  do  so,  and  a  few  days  later, 
in  Boston,  when  a  reporter  called,  he  happened  to  remem- 
ber it.  The  reporter  asked  permission  to  print  the  queer 
document,  and  it  appeared  in  his  Mark  Twain  interview 
next  morning.  A  few  days  later  the  writer  of  it  sent  a 
second  letter,  this  time  explaining: 

My  dear  Sir, — I  saw  in  to-day's  paper  a  copy  of  the  letter 
which  I  wrote  you  October  26th. 

I  have  read  and  re-read  your  works  until  I  can  almost  recall 
some  of  them  word  for  word.  My  familiarity  with  them  is  a 
constant  source  of  pleasure  which  I  would  not  have  missed, 
and  therefore  the  regret  which  I  have  expressed  is  more  than 
offset  by  thankfulness. 

Believe  me,  the  regret  which  I  feel  for  having  read  your  works 

1423 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


is  entirely  due  to  the  unalterable  fact  that  I  can  never  again  have 
the  pleasure  of  reading  them  for  the  first  time. 


Mark  Twain  promptly  replied  this  time: 

Dear  Sir, — You  fooled  me  completely;  I  didn't  divine  what 
the  letter  was  concealing,  neither  did  the  newspaper  men,  so  you 
are  a  very  competent  deceiver. 

Truly  yours, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 

It  was  about  the  end  of  1907  that  the  new  St.  Louis 
Harbor  boat  was  completed.  The  editor  of  the  St.  Louis 
Republic  reported  that  it  has  been  christened  44  Mark 
Twain,"  and  asked  for  a  word  of  comment.  Clemens  sent 
this  line: 

May  my  namesake  follow  in  my  righteous  footsteps,  then 
neither  of  us  will  need  any  fire  insurance. 


Your  sincere  admirer, 

George  B.  Lauder. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXIII 


SOME   LITERARY  LUNCHEONS 

HOWELLS,  in  his  book,  refers  to  the  Human  Race 
Luncheon  Club,  which  Clemens  once  organized  for 
the  particular  purpose  of  damning  the  species  in  concert. 
It  was  to  consist,  beside  Clemens  himself,  of  Howells, 
Colonel  Harvey,  and  Peter  Dunne;  but  it  somehow  never 
happened  that  even  this  small  membership  could  be 
assembled  while  the  idea  was  still  fresh,  and  therefore 
potent. 

Out  of  it,  however,  grew  a  number  of  those  private 
social  gatherings  which  Clemens  so  dearly  loved — small 
luncheons  and  dinners  given  at  his  own  table.  The  first 
of  these  came  along  toward  the  end  of  1907,  when  Howells 
was  planning  to  spend  the  winter  in  Italy. 

"Howells  is  going  away,"  he  said,  "and  I  should  like 
to  give  him  a  stag-party.  We'll  enlarge  the  Human  Race 
Club  for  the  occasion." 

So  Howells,  Colonel  Harvey,  Martin  Littleton,  Augustus 
Thomas,  Robert  Porter,  and  Paderewski  were  invited.  Pa- 
derewski  was  unable  to  come,  and  seven  in  all  assembled. 

Howells  was  first  to  arrive. 

"Here  comes  Howells,"  Clemens  said.  "Old  Howells 
— a  thousand  years  old." 

But  Howells  didn't  look  it.  His  face  was  full  of  good- 
nature and  apparent  health,  and  he  was  by  no  means 
venerable,  either  in  speech  or  action.  Thomas,  Porter, 
Littleton,  and  Harvey  drifted  in.  Cocktails  were  served 
and  luncheon  was  announced. 

1425 


Digitized  byi^OOgle 


MARK  TWAIN 


Claude,  the  butler,  had  prepared  the  table  with  fine 
artistry — its  center  a  mass  of  roses.  There  was  to  be 
no  woman  in  the  neighborhood — Clemens  announced  this 
fact  as  a  sort  of  warrant  for  general  freedom  of  expression. 

Thomas's  play,  "The  Witching  Hour,"  was  then  at  the 
height  of  its  great  acceptance,  and  the  talk  naturally 
began  there.  Thomas  told  something  of  the  difficulty 
which  he  found  in  being  able  to  convince  a  manager  that 
it  would  succeed,  and  declared  it  to  be  his  own  favorite 
work.  I  believe  there  was  no  dissenting  opinion  as  to 
its  artistic  value,  or  concerning  its  purpose  and  psychol- 
ogy, though  these  had  been  the  stumbling-blocks  from  a 
managerial  point  of  view. 

When  the  subject  was  concluded,  and  there  had  come 
a  lull,  Colonel  Harvey,  who  was  seated  at  Clemens's  left, 
said: 

"Uncle  Mark" — he  often  called  him  that — "Major 
Leigh  handed  me  a  report  of  the  year's  sales  just  as  I 
was  leaving.  It  shows  your  royalty  returns  this  year  to 
be  very  close  to  fifty  thousand  dollars.  I  don't  believe 
there  is  another  such  return  from  old  books  on  record." 

This  was  said  in  an  undertone,  to  Clemens  only,  but 
was  overheard  by  one  or  two  of  those  who  sat  nearest. 
Clemens  was  not  unwilling  to  repeat  it  for  the  benefit  of 
all,  and  did  so.   Howells  said: 

"A  statement  like  that  arouses  my  basest  passions. 
The  books  are  no  good;  it's  just  the  advertising  they 
get." 

Clemens  said:  "  Yes,  my  contract  compels  the  publisher 
to  advertise.  It  costs  them  two  hundred  dollars  every 
time  they  leave  the  advertisement  out  of  the  magazines." 

"And  three  hundred  every  time  we  put  it  in,"  said 
Harvey.  "We  often  debate  whether  it  is  more  profitable 
to  put  in  the  advertisement  or  to  leave  it  out." 

The  talk  switched  back  to  plays  and  acting.  Thomas 
recalled  an  incident  of  Becrbohm  Tree's  performance  of 

1426 


Digitized  by  Google 


SOME  LITERARY  LUNCHEONS 


"Hamlet."  W.  S.  Gilbert,  of  light-opera  celebrity,  was 
present  at  a  performance,  and  when  the  play  ended  Mrs. 
Tree  hurried  over  to  him  and  said: 

"Oh,  Mr.  Gilbert,  what  did  you  think  of  Mr.  Tree's 
rendition  of  Hamlet?" 

"Remarkable,"  said  Gilbert.  "Funny  without  being 
vulgar." 

It  was  with  such  idle  tales  and  talk-play  that  the 
afternoon  passed.  Not  much  of  it  all  is  left  to  me, 
but  I  remember  Howells  saying,  "  Did  it  ever  occur  to 
you  that  the  newspapers  abolished  hell?  Well,  they  did 
— it  was  never  done  by  the  church.  There  was  a  con- 
sensus of  newspaper  opinion  that  the  old  hell  with  its 
lake  of  fire  and  brimstone  was  an  antiquated  institution; 
in  fact  a  dead  letter."  And  again,  "I  was  coming  down 
Broadway  last  night,  and  I  stopped  to  look  at  one  of  the 
street-venders  selling  those  little  toy  fighting  roosters.  It 
was  a  bleak,  desolate  evening;  nobody  was  buying  any- 
thing, and  as  he  pulled  the  string  and  kept  those  little 
roosters  dancing  and  fighting  his  remarks  grew  more 
and  more  cheerless  and  sardonic. 

"  'Japanese  game  chickens,'  he  said;  'pretty  toys,  amuse 
the  children  with  their  antics.  Child  of  three  can  operate 
it.  Take  them  home  for  Christmas.  Chicken-fight  at 
your  own  fireside.'  I  tried  to  catch  his  eye  to  show  him 
that  I  understood  his  desolation  and  sorrow,  but  it  was 
no  use.  He  went  on  dancing  his  toy  chickens,  and 
saying,  over  and  over,  4  Chicken-fight  at  your  own  fire- 
side.'" 

The  luncheon  over,  we  wandered  back  into  the  draw- 
ing-room, and  presently  all  left  but  Colonel  Harvey. 
Clemens  and  the  Colonel  went  up  to  the  billiard-room  and 
engaged  in  a  game  of  cushion  caroms,  at  twenty-five 
cents  a  game.  I  was  umpire  and  stakeholder,  and  it  was 
a  most  interesting  occupation,  for  the  scries  was  close 
and  a  very  cheerful  one.    It  ended  the  day  much  to 

1427 


MARK  TWAIN 


Mark  Twain's  satisfaction,  for  he  was  oftenest  winner. 
That  evening  he  said: 

"We  will  repeat  that  luncheon;  we  ought  to  repeat  it 
once  a  month.  Howells  will  be  gone,  but  we  must  have 
the  others.    We  cannot  have  a  thing  like  that  too  often." 

There  was,  in  fact,  a  second  stag-luncheon  very  soon 
after,  at  which  George  Riggs  was  present  and  that  rare 
Irish  musician,  Denis  O'Sullivan.  It  was  another  choice 
afternoon,  with  a  mystical  quality  which  came  of  the 
music  made  by  O'Sullivan  on  some  Hindu  reeds — pipes 
of  Pan.  But  we  shall  have  more  of  O'Sullivan  presently 
— all  too  little,  for  his  days  were  few  and  fleeting. 

Howells  could  not  get  away  just  yet.  Colonel  Harvey, 
who,  like  James  Osgood,  would  not  fail  to  find  excuse  for 
entertainment,  chartered  two  drawing-room  cars,  and 
with  Mrs.  Harvey  took  a  party  of  fifty-five  or  sixty  con- 
genial men  and  women  to  Lake  wood  for  a  good-by 
luncheon  to  Howells.  It  was  a  day  borrowed  from  June, 
warm  and  beautiful. 

The  trip  down  was  a  sort  of  reception.  Most  of  the 
guests  were  acquainted,  but  many  of  them  did  not  often 
meet.  There  was  constant  visiting  back  and  forth  the 
full  length  of  the  two  coaches.  Denis  O'Sullivan  was 
among  the  guests.  He  looked  in  the  bloom  of  health,  and 
he  had  his  pipes  and  played  his  mystic  airs;  then  he 
brought  out  the  tin-whistle  of  Ireland,  and  blew  such 
rollicking  melodies  as  capering  fairies  invented  a  long 
time  ago.    This  was  on  the  train  going  down. 

There  was  a  brief  program  following  the  light-hearted 
feasting — an  informal  program  fitting  to  that  sunny  day. 
It  opened  with  some  recitations  by  Miss  Kitty  Chea- 
tham; then  Colonel  Harvey  introduced  Howells,  with 
mention  of  his  coming  journey.  As  a  rule,  Howells 
does  not  enjoy  speaking.  He  is  willing  to  read  an 
address  on  occasion,  but  he  has  owned  that  the  pros- 
pect of  talking  without  his  notes  terrifies  him.    This  time, 

1428 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


SOME  LITERARY  LUNCHEONS 


however,  there  was  no  reluctance,  though  he  had  pre- 
pared no  speech.  He  was  among  friends.  He  looked 
even  happy  when  he  got  on  his  feet,  and  he  spoke  like 
a  happy  man.  He  talked  about  Mark  Twain.  It  was 
all  delicate,  delicious  chaffing  which  showed  Howells  at  his 
very  best — all  too  short  for  his  listeners. 

Clemens,  replying,  returned  the  chaff,  and  rambled  amus- 
ingly among  his  fancies,  closing  with  a  few  beautiful 
words  of  "Godspeed  and  safe  return"  to  his  old  comrade 
and  friend. 

Then  once  more  came  Denis  and  his  pipes.  No  one 
will  ever  forget  his  part  of  the  program.  The  little 
samples  we  had  heard  on  the  train  were  expanded  and 
multiplied  and  elaborated  in  a  way  that  fairly  swept  his 
listeners  out  of  themselves  into  that  land  where  perhaps 
Denis  himself  wanders  playing  now;  for  a  month  later, 
strong  and  lusty  and  beautiful  as  he  seemed  that  day,  he 
suddenly  vanished  from  among  us  and  his  reeds  were 
silent.  It  never  occurred  to  us  then  that  Denis  could 
die;  and  as  he  finished  each  melody  and  song  there  was 
a  shout  for  a  repetition,  and  I  think  we  could  have  sat 
there  and  let  the  days  and  years  slip  away  unheeded,  for 
time  is  banished  by  music  like  that,  and  one  wonders  if 
it  might  not  even  divert  death. 

It  was  dark  when  we  crossed  the  river  homeward;  the 
myriad  lights  from  heaven-climbing  windows  made  an 
enchanted  city  in  the  sky.  Hie  evening,  like  the  day, 
was  warm,  and  some  of  the  party  left  the  ferry-cabin  to 
lean  over  and  watch  the  magic  spectacle,  the  like  of  which 
is  not  to  be  found  elsewhere  on  the  earth. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXIV 


"captain  stormfield"  in  print 

DURING  the  forty  years  or  so  that  had  elapsed  since 
the  publication  of  the  "Gates  Ajar"  and  the  per- 
petration of  Mark  Twain's  intended  burlesque,  built  on 
Captain  Ned  Wakeman's  dream,  the  Christian  religion 
in  its  more  orthodox  aspects  had  undergone  some  large 
modifications.  It  was  no  longer  regarded  as  dangerous 
to  speak  lightly  of  hell,  or  even  to  suggest  that  the  golden 
streets  and  jeweled  architecture  of  the  sky  might  be  re- 
garded as  symbols  of  hope  rather  than  exhibits  of  actual 
bullion  and  lapidary  construction.  Clemens  re-read  his 
extravaganza,  Captain  StormfieUVs  Visit  to  Heaven,  gave 
it  a  modernizing  touch  here  and  there,  and  handed  it 
to  his  publishers,  who  must  have  agreed  that  it  was  no 
longer  dangerous,  for  it  was  promptly  accepted  and  ap- 
peared in  the  December  and  January  numbers  (1907-8) 
of  Harper1  s  Magazine,  and  was  also  issued  as  a  small  book. 
If  there  were  any  readers  who  still  found  it  blasphemous, 
or  even  irreverent,  they  did  not  say  so;  the  letters  that 
came — and  they  were  a  good  many — expressed  enjoyment 
and  approval,  also  (some  of  them)  a  good  deal  of  satisfac- 
tion that  Mark  Twain  "  had  returned  to  his  earlier  form." 

The  publication  of  this  story  recalled  to  Clemens's 
mind  another  heresy  somewhat  similar  which  he  had 
written  during  the  winter  of  1891  and  1892  in  Berlin. 
This  was  a  dream  of  his  own,  in  which  he  had  set  out  on 
a  train  with  the  evangelist  Sam  Jones  and  the  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury  for  the  other  world.    He  had 

1430 


Digitized  by  Google 


"CAPTAIN  STORM  FIELD"  IN  PRINT 


noticed  that  his  ticket  was  to  a  different  destination  than 
the  Archbishop's,  and  so,  when  the  prelate  nodded  and 
finally  went  to  sleep,  he  changed  the  tickets  in  their  hats 
with  disturbing  results.  Clemens  thought  a  good  deal 
of  this  fancy  when  he  wrote  it,  and  when  Mrs.  Clemens 
had  refused  to  allow  it  to  be  printed  he  had  laboriously 
translated  it  into  German,  with  some  idea  of  publishing 
it  surreptitiously;  but  his  conscience  had  been  too  much 
for  him.  He  had  confessed,  and  even  the  German  version 
had  been  suppressed. 

Clemens  often  allowed  his  fancy  to  play  with  the  idea 
of  the  orthodox  heaven,  its  curiosities  of  architecture,  and 
its  employments  of  continuous  prayer,  psalm-singing,  and 
harpistry. 

"What  a  childish  notion  it  was,"  he  said,  "and  how 
curious  that  only  a  little  while  ago  human  beings  were 
so  willing  to  accept  such  fragile  evidences  about  a  place* 
of  so  much  importance.  If  we  should  find  somewhere 
to-day  an  ancient  book  containing  an  account  of  a  beauti- 
ful and  blooming  tropical  Paradise  secreted  in  the  center 
of  eternal  icebergs — an  account  written  by  men  who  did 
not  even  claim  to  have  seen  it  themselves — no  geographical 
society  on  earth  would  take  any  stock  in  that  book,  yet 
that  account  would  be  quite  as  authentic  as  any  we  have 
of  heaven.  If  God  has  such  a  place  prepared  for  us,  and 
really  wanted  us  to  know  it,  He  could  have  found  some 
better  way  than  a  book  so  liable  to  alterations  and  mis- 
interpretation. God  has  had  no  trouble  to  prove  to  man 
the  laws  of  the  constellations  and  the  construction  of  the 
world,  and  such  things  as  that,  none  of  which  agree  with 
His  so-called  book.  As  to  a  hereafter,  we  have  not  the 
slightest  evidence  that  there  is  any — no  evidence  that 
appeals  to  logic  and  reason.  I  have  never  seen  what  to 
me  seemed  an  atom  of  proof  that  there  is  a  future  life." 
Then,  after  a  long  pause,  he  added: 
"And  yet — I  am  strongly  inclined  to  expect  one." 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXV 


LOTOS  CLUB  HONORS 

IT  was  on  January  n,  1908,  that  Mark  Twain  was 
given  his  last  great  banquet  by  the  Lotos  Club.  The 
club  was  about  to  move  again,  into  splendid  new  quarters, 
and  it  wished  to  entertain  him  once  more  in  its  old  rooms. 

He  wore  white,  and  amid  the  throng  of  black-clad  men 
was  like  a  white  moth  among  a  horde  of  beetles.  The 
room  fairly  swarmed  with  them,  and  they  seemed  likely 
to  overwhelm  him. 

President  Lawrence  was  toast-master  of  the  evening, 
and  he  ended  his  customary  address  by  introducing 
Robert  Porter,  who  had  been  Mark  Twain's  host  at 
Oxford.  Porter  told  something  of  the  great  Oxford 
week,  and  ended  by  introducing  Mark  Twain.  It  had 
been  expected  that  Clemens  would  tell  of  his  London 
experiences.  Instead  of  doing  this,  he  said  he  had  started 
a  new  kind  of  collection,  a  collection  of  compliments. 
He  had  picked  up  a  number  of  valuable  ones  abroad  and 
some  at  home.  He  read  selections  from  them,  and  kept 
the  company  going  with  cheers  and  merriment  until 
just  before  the  close  of  his  speech.  Then  he  repeated, 
in  his  most  impressive  manner,  that  stately  conclusion 
of  his  Liverpool  speech,  and  the  room  became  still  and 
the  eyes  of  his  hearers  grew  dim.  It  may  have  been  even 
more  moving  than  when  originally  given,  for  now  the  closing 
words,  "homeward  bound,"  had  only  the  deeper  meaning. 

Dr.  John  MacArthur  followed  with  a  speech  that  was 
as  good  a  sermon  as  any  he  ever  delivered,  and  closed  it 
by  saying: 

1432 


Digitized  by  Google 


LOTOS  CLUB  HONORS 


"  I  do  not  want  men  to  prepare  for  heaven,  but  to  pre- 
pare to  remain  on  earth,  and  it  is  such  men  as  Mark  Twain 
who  make  other  men  not  fit  to  die,  but  fit  to  live." 

Andrew  Carnegie  also  spoke,  and  Colonel  Harvey,  and 
as  the  speaking  ended  Robert  Porter  stepped  up  behind 
Clemens  and  threw  over  his  shoulders  the  scarlet  Oxford 
robe  which  had  been  surreptitiously  brought,  and  placed 
the  mortar-board  cap  upon  his  head,  while  the  diners 
vociferated  their  approval.    Clemens  was  quite  calm. 

"I  like  this,"  he  said,  when  the  noise  had  subsided. 
"  I  like  its  splendid  color.  I  would  dress  that  way  all  the 
time,  if  I  dared." 

In  the  cab  going  home  I  mentioned  the  success  of  his 
speech,  how  well  it  had  been  received. 

"Yes,"  he  said;  "but  then  I  have  the  advantage  of 
knowing  now  that  I  am  likely  to  be  favorably  received, 
whatever  I  say.  I  know  that  my  audiences  are  warm  and 
responseful.  It  is  an  immense  advantage  to  feel  that. 
There  are  cold  places  in  almost  every  speech,  and  if  your 
audience  notices  them  and  becomes  cool,  you  get  a  chill 
yourself  in  those  zones,  and  it  is  hard  to  warm  up  again. 
Perhaps  there  haven't  been  so  many  lately;  but  I  have 
been  acquainted  with  them  more  than  once."  And  then 
I  could  not  help  remembering  that  deadly  Whittier 
birthday  speech  of  more  than  thirty  years  before — that 
bleak,  arctic  experience  from  beginning  to  end. 

"We  have  just  time  for  four  games,"  he  said,  as  we 
reached  the  billiard-room;  but  there  was  no  sign  of  stop- 
ping when  the  four  games  were  over.  We  were  winning 
alternately,  and  neither  noted  the  time.  I  was  leaving 
by  an  early  train,  and  was  willing  to  play  all  night. 
The  milk-wagons  were  rattling  outside  when  he  said: 

"Well,  perhaps  we'd  better  quit  now.  It  seems  pretty 
early,  though."  I  looked  at  my  watch.  It  was  quarter 
to  four,  and  we  said  good  night. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXVI 


A  WINTER  IN  BERMUDA 

EDMUND  CLARENCE  STEDMAN  died  suddenly 
at  his  desk,  January  18,  1908,  and  Clemens,  in  re- 
sponse to  telegrams,  sent  this  message: 

I  do  not  wish  to  talk  about  it.  He  was  a  valued  friend  from 
days  that  date  back  thirty-five  years.  His  loss  stuns  me  and 
unfits  me  to  speak. 

He  recalled  the  New  England  dinners  which  he  used 
to  attend,  and  where  he  had  often  met  Stedman. 

"Those  were  great  affairs,"  he  said.  "They  began 
early,  and  they  ended  early.  I  used  to  go  down  from 
Hartford  with  the  feeling  that  it  wasn't  an  all-night 
supper,  and  that  it  was  going  to  be  an  enjoyable  time. 
Choate  and  Depew  and  Stedman  were  in  their  prime  then 
— we  were  all  young  men  together.  Their  speeches  were 
always  worth  listening  to.  Stedman  was  a  prominent 
figure  there.  There  don't  seem  to  be  any  such  men 
now — or  any  such  occasions." 

Stedman  was  one  of  the  last  of  the  old  literary  group. 
Aldrich  had  died  the  year  before.  Howells  and  Clemens 
were  the  lingering  "last  leaves." 

Clemens  gave  some  further  luncheon  entertainments 
to  his  friends,  and  added  the  feature  of  "doe"  luncheons 
— pretty  affairs  where,  with  Clara  Clemens  as  hostess, 
were  entertained  a  group  of  brilliant  women,  such  as 
Mrs.  Kate  Douglas  Riggs,  Geraldine  Farrar,  Mrs.  Robert 
Collier,  Mrs.  Frank  Doubleday,  and  others.    I  cannot 

1434 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  WINTER  IN  BERMUDA 


report  those  luncheons,  for  I  was  not  present,  and  the  drift 
of  the  proceedings  came  to  me  later  in  too  fragmentary 
a  form  to  be  used  as  history ;  but  I  gathered  from  Clemens 
himself  that  he  had  done  all  of  the  talking,  and  I  think 
they  must  have  been  very  pleasant  afternoons.  Among 
the  acknowledgments  that  followed  one  of  these  affairs 
is  this  characteristic  word-play  from  Mrs.  Riggs: 

N.  B. — A  lady  who  is  invited  to  and  attends  a  doe  luncheon 
is,  of  course,  a  doe.  The  question  is,  if  she  attends  two  doe 
luncheons  in  succession  is  she  a  doe-doe?  If  so  is  she  extinct 
and  can  never  attend  a  third? 

Luncheons  and  billiards,  however,  failed  to  give  suffi- 
cient brightness  to  the  dull  winter  days,  or  to  insure  him 
against  an  impending  bronchial  attack,  and  toward  the 
end  of  January  he  sailed  away  to  Bermuda,  where  skies 
were  bluer  and  roadsides  gay  with  bloom.  His  sojourn 
was  brief  this  time,  but  long  enough  to  cure  him,  he  said, 
and  he  came  back  full  of  happiness.  He  had  been  driv- 
ing about  over  the  island  with  a  newly  adopted  grand- 
daughter, little  Margaret  Blackmer,  whom  he  had  met 
one  morning  in  the  hotel  dining-room.  A  part  of  his 
dictated  story  will  convey  here  this  pretty  experience. 

My  first  day  in  Bermuda  paid  a  dividend — in  fact  a  double 
dividend:  it  broke  the  back  of  my  cold  and  it  added  a  jewel 
to  my  collection.  As  I  entered  the  breakfast-room  the  first 
object  I  saw  in  that  spacious  and  far-reaching  place  was  a  little 
girl  seated  solitary  at  a  table  for  two.  I  bent  down  over  her  and 
patted  her  cheek  and  said: 

"I  don't  seem  to  remember  your  name;  what  is  it?" 

By  the  sparkle  in  her  brown  eyes  it  amused  her.    She  said : 

"Why,  you've  never  known  it,  Mr.  Clemens,  because  you've 
never  seen  me  before." 

"Why,  that  is  true,  now  that  I  come  to  think;  it  certainly  is 
true,  and  it  must  be  one  of  the  reasons  why  I  have  forgotten 
your  name.    But  I  rememter  it  now  perfectly— it's  Mary." 

1435 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


She  was  amused  again;  amused  beyond  smiling;  amused  to  a 
chuckle,  and  she  said: 

"Oh  no,  it  isn't;  it's  Margaret." 

I  feigned  to  be  ashamed  of  my  mistake  and  said: 

"Ah,  well,  I  couldn't  have  made  that  mistake  a  few  years  ago; 
but  I  am  old,  and  one  of  age's  earliest  infirmities  is  a  damaged 
memory;  but  I  am  clearer  now — clearer-headed— it  all  comes 
back  to  me  just  as  if  it  were  yesterday.    It's  Margaret  Holcomb." 

She  was  surprised  into  a  laugh  this  time,  the  rippling  laugh 
that  a  happy  brook  makes  when  it  breaks  out  of  the  shade  into 
the  sunshine,  and  she  said: 

"Oh,  you  are  wrong  again;  you  don't  get  anything  right. 
It  isn't  Holcomb,  it's  Blackmer." 

I  was  ashamed  again,  and  confessed  it;  then: 

"How  old  are  you,  dear?" 

"Twelve,  New-Year's.   Twelve  and  a  month." 

We  were  close  comrades — inseparables,  in  fact — for  eight  days. 
Every  day  we  made  pedestrian  excursions — called  them  that 
anyway,  and  honestly  they  were  intended  for  that,  and  that  is 
what  they  would  have  been  but  for  the  persistent  intrusion  of  a 
gray  and  grave  and  rough-coated  donkey  by  the  name  of  Maud.  , 
Maud  was  four  feet  long;  she  was  mounted  on  four  slender  little 
stilts,  and  had  ears  that  doubled  her  altitude  when  she  stood 
them  up  straight.  Her  tender  was  a  little  bit  of  a  cart  with 
seat  room  for  two  in  it,  and  you  could  fall  out  of  it  without 
knowing  it,  it  was  so  close  to  the  ground.  This  battery  was  in 
command  of  a  nice,  grave,  dignified,  gentle-faced  little  black 
boy  whose  age  was  about  twelve,  and  whose  name,  for  some 
reason  or  other,  was  Reginald.  Reginald  and  Maud — I  shall 
not  easily  forget  those  names,  nor  the  combination  they  stood 
for.  The  trips  going  and  coming  were  five  or  six  miles,  and  it 
generally  took  us  three  hours  to  make  it.  This  was  because 
Maud  set  the  pace.  Whenever  she  detected  an  ascending  grade 
she  respected  it;  she  stopped  and  said  with  her  ears: 

"This  is  getting  unsatisfactory.   We  will  camp  here." 

The  whole  idea  of  these  excursions  was  that  Margaret  and  I 
should  employ  them  for  the  gathering  of  strength,  by  walking, 
yet  we  were  oftener  in  the  cart  than  out  of  it.  She  drove  and 
I  superintended.  In  the  course  of  the  first  excursions  I  found 
a  beautiful  little  shell  on  the  beach  at  Spanish  Point;  its  hinge 

1436 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  WINTER  IN  BERMUDA 


was  old  and  dry,  and  the  two  halves  came  apart  in  my  hand.  I 
gave  one  of  them  to  Margaret  and  said: 

"  Now  dear,  sometime  or  other  in  the  future  I  shall  run  across 
you  somewhere,  and  it  may  turn  out  that  it  is  not  you  at  all, 
but  will  be  some  girl  that  only  resembles  you.  I  shall  be  saying 
to  myself  'I  know  that  this  is  a  Margaret  by  the  look  of  her, 
but  I  don't  know  for  sure  whether  this  is  my  Margaret  or  some- 
body else's';  but,  no  matter,  I  can  soon  find  out,  for  I  shall 
take  my  half  shell  out  of  my  pocket  and  say, '  I  think  you  are  my 
Margaret,  but  I  am  not  certain;  if  you  are  my  Margaret  you  can 
produce  the  other  half  of  this  shell.' " 

Next  morning  when  I  entered  the  breakfast-room  and  saw 
the  child  I  approached  and  scanned  her  searchingly  all  over,  then 
said,  sadly: 

"No,  I  am  mistaken;  it  looks  like  my  Margaret,  but  it  isn't, 
and  I  am  so  sorry.   I  shall  go  away  and  cry  now." 

Her  eyes  danced  triumphantly,  and  she  cried  out: 

"No,  you  don't  have  to.  Therel"  and  she  fetched  out  the 
identifying  shell. 

I  was  beside  myself  with  gratitude  and  joyful  surprise,  and 
revealed  it  from  every  pore.  The  child  could  not  have  enjoyed 
this  thrilling  little  drama  more  if  we  had  been  playing  it  on  the 
stage.  Many  times  afterward  she  played  the  chief  part  herself, 
pretending  to  be  in  doubt  as  to  my  identity  and  challenging  me 
to  produce  my  half  of  the  shell.  She  was  always  hoping  to 
catch  me  without  it,  but  I  always  defeated  that  game — wherefore 
she  came  to  recognize  at  last  that  I  was  not  only  old,  but  very 
smart. 

Sometimes,  when  they  were  not  walking  or  driving, 
they  sat  on  the  veranda,  and  he  prepared  history-lessons 
for  little  Margaret  by  making  grotesque  figures  on  cards 
with  numerous  legs  and  arms  and  other  fantastic  symbols 
and  features  to  fix  the  length  of  some  king's  reign.  For 
William  the  Conqueror,  for  instance,  who  reigned  twenty- 
one  years,  he  drew  a  figure  of  eleven  legs  and  ten  arms. 
It  was  the  proper  method  of  impressing  facts  upon  the 
mind  of  a  child.  It  carried  him  back  to  those  days  at 
Elmira  when  he  had  arranged  for  his  own  little  girls  the 

M37 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

game  of  kings.   A  Miss  Wallace,  a  friend  of  Margaret's, 
and  usually  one  of  the  pedestrian  party,  has  written  a 
dainty  book  of  those  Bermudian  days.1 
Miss  Wallace  says: 

Margaret  felt  for  him  the  deep  affection  that  children  have 
for  an  older  person  who  understands  them  and  treats  them 
with  respect.  Mr.  Clemens  never  talked  down  to  her,  but 
considered  her  opinions  with  a  sweet  dignity. 

There  were  some  pretty  sequels  to  the  shell  incident. 
After  Mark  Twain  had  returned  to  New  York,  and  Mar- 
garet was  there,  she  called  one  day  with  her  mother,  and 
sent  up  her  card.    He  sent  back  word,  saying: 

44 1  seem  to  remember  the  name;  but  if  this  is  really  the 
person  whom  I  think  it  is  she  can  identify  herself  by  a 
certain  shell  I  once  gave  her,  of  which  I  have  the  other 
half.  If  the  two  halves  fit,  I  shall  know  that  this  is 
the  same  little  Margaret  that  I  remember." 

The  message  went  down,  and  the  other  half  of  the  shell 
was  promptly  sent  up.  Mark  Twain  had  the  two  half- 
shells  incased  firmly  in  gold,  and  one  of  these  he  wore 
on  his  watch-fob,  and  sent  the  other  to  Margaret. 

He  afterward  corresponded  with  Margaret,  and  once 
wrote  her: 

I'm  already  making  mistakes.  When  I  was  in  New  York, 
six  weeks  ago,  I  was  on  a  corner  of  Fifth  Avenue  and  I  saw  a 
small  girl — not  a  big  one — start  across  from  the  opposite  corner, 
and  I  exclaimed  to  myself  joyfully,  "That  is  certainly  my  Mar- 
garet!" so  I  rushed  to  meet  her.  But  as  she  came  nearer  I 
began  to  doubt,  and  said  to  myself,  "It's  a  Margaret — that  is 
plain  enough — but  I'm  afraid  it  is  somebody  else's."  So  when 
I  was  passing  her  I  held  my  shell  so  she  couldn't  help  but  see  it. 
Dear,  she  only  glanced  at  it  and  passed  on !  I  wondered  if  she 
could  have  overlooked  it.  It  seemed  best  to  find  out;  so  I 
turned  and  followed  and  caught  up  with  her,  and  said,  deferen- 

1  Mark  Twain  and  the  Happy  Islands,  by  Elizabeth  Wallace. 

1438 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  WINTER  IN  BERMUDA 


tially,  "Dear  Miss,  I  already  know  your  first  name  by  the  look 
of  you,  but  would  you  mind  telling  me  your  other  one?"  She 
was  vexed  and  said  pretty  sharply,  "It's  Douglas,  if  you're  so 
anxious  to  know.  I  know  your  name  by  your  looks,  and  I'd 
advise  you  to  shut  yourself  up  with  your  pen  and  ink  and  write 
some  more  rubbish.  I  am  surprised  that  they  allow  you  to  run 
at  large.  You  are  likely  to  get  run  over  by  a  baby-carriage  any 
time.   Run  along  now  and  don't  let  the  cows  bite  you." 

What  an  ideal  There  aren't  any  cows  in  Fifth  Avenue.  But 
I  didn't  smile;  I  didn't  let  on  to  perceive  how  uncultured  she 
was.  She  was  from  the  country,  of  course,  and  didn't  know 
what  a  comical  blunder  she  was  making. 

Mr.  Rogers's  health  was  very  poor  that  winter,  and 
Clemens  urged  him  to  try  Bermuda,  and  offered  to  go 
back  with  him;  so  they  sailed  away  to  the  summer  island, 
and  though  Margaret  was  gone,  there  was  other  enter- 
taining company — other  granddaughters  to  be  adopted, 
and  new  friends  and  old  friends,  and  diversions  of  many 
sorts.  Mr.  Rogers's  son-in-law,  William  Evarts  Benjamin, 
came  down  and  joined  the  little  group.  It  was  one  of 
Mark  Twain's  real  holidays.  Mr.  Rogers's  health  im- 
proved rapidly,  and  Mark  Twain  was  in  fine  trim.  To 
Mrs.  Rogers,  at  the  end  of  the  first  week,  he  wrote: 

Dear  Mrs.  Rogers, — He  is  getting  along  splendidly  I  This 
was  the  very  place  for  him.  He  enjoys  himself  &  is  as  quarrel- 
some as  a  cat. 

But  he  will  get  a  backset  if  Benjamin  goes  home.  Benjamin 
is  the  brightest  man  in  these  regions,  &  the  best  company. 
Bright?  He  is  much  more  than  that,  he  is  brilliant.  He  keeps 
the  crowd  intensely  alive. 

With  love  &  all  good  wishes.  S.  L.  C. 

Mark  Twain  and  Henry  Rogers  were  much  together 
and  much  observed.  They  were  often  referred  to  as  "the 
King"  and  "the  Rajah,"  and  it  was  always  a  question 
whether  it  was  "  the  King  "  who  took  care  of  "  the  Rajah," 

1439 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


or  vice  versa.  There  was  generally  a  group  to  gather 
around  them,  and  Clemens  was  sure  of  an  attentive 
audience,  whether  he  wanted  to  air  his  philosophies,  his 
views  of  the  human  race,  or  to  read  aloud  from  the  verses 
of  Kipling. 

"I  am  not  fond  of  all  poetry,"  he  would  say;  "but 
there's  something  in  Kipling  that  appeals  to  me.  I  guess 
he's  just  about  my  level." 

Miss  Wallace  recalls  certain  Kipling  readings  in  his 
room,  when  his  friends  gathered  to  listen. 

On  those  Kipling  evenings  the  mise-en-sdnc  was  a  striking 
one.  The  bare  hotel  room,  the  pine  woodwork  and  pine  furni- 
ture, loose  windows  which  rattled  in  the  sea-wind.  Once  in  a 
while  a  gust  of  asthmatic  music  from  the  spiritless  orchestra 
downstairs  came  up  the  hallway.  Yellow,  unprotected  gas-lights 
burned  uncertainly,  and  Mark  Twain  in  the  midst  of  this  lay  on 
his  bed  (there  was  no  couch)  still  in  his  white  serge  suit,  with  the 
light  from  the  jet  shining  down  on  the  crown  of  his  silver  hair, 
making  it  gleam  and  glisten  like  frosted  threads. 

In  one  hand  he  held  his  book,  in  the  other  he  had  his  pipe, 
which  he  used  principally  to  gesture  with  in  the  most  dramatic 
passages. 

Margaret's  small  successors  became  the  earliest  mem- 
bers of  the  Angel  Fish  Club,  which  Clemens  concluded 
to  organize  after  a  visit  to  the  spectacular  Bermuda 
aquarium.  The  pretty  angel-fish  suggested  youth  and 
feminine  beauty  to  him,  and  his  adopted  granddaughters 
became  angel-fish  to  him  from  that  time  forward.  He 
bought  little  enamel  angel-fish  pins,  and  carried  a  num- 
ber of  them  with  him  most  of  the  time,  so  that  he  could 
create  membership  on  short  notice.  It  was  just  another 
of  the  harmless  and  happy  diversions  of  his  gentler  side. 
He  was  always  fond  of  youth  and  freshness.  He  regarded 
the  decrepitude  of  old  age  as  an  unnecessary  part  of  life. 
Often  he  said: 

"If  I  had  been  helping  the  Almighty  when  He  created 

1440 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  WINTER  IN  BERMUDA 


man,  I  would  have  had  Him  begin  at  the  other  end,  and 
start  human  beings  with  old  age.  How  much  better  it 
would  have  been  to  start  old  and  have  all  the  bitterness 
and  blindness  of  age  in  the  beginning!  One  would  not 
mind  then  if  he  were  looking  forward  to  a  joyful  youth. 
Think  of  the  joyous  prospect  of  growing  young  instead 
of  old!  Think  of  looking  forward  to  eighteen  instead  of 
eighty!  Yes,  the  Almighty  made  a  poor  job  of  it.  I 
wish  He  had  invited  my  assistance." 
To  one  of  the  angel-fish  he  wrote,  just  after  his  return: 

I  miss  you,  dear.  I  miss  Bermuda,  too,  but  not  so  much  as 
I  miss  you;  for  you  were  rare,  and  occasional  and  select,  and 
Ltd.,  whereas  Bermuda's  charms  and  graciousnesses  were  free 
and  common  and  unrestricted — like  the  rain,  you  know,  which 
falls  upon  the  just  and  the  unjust  alike;  a  thing  which  would 
not  happen  if  I  were  superintending  the  rain's  affairs.  No,  I 
would  rain  softly  and  sweetly  upon  the  just,  but  whenever  I 
caught  a  sample  of  the  unjust  outdoors  I  would  drown  him. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXVII 


VIEWS  AND  ADDRESSES 


S  I  am  beginning  this  chapter,  April  16,  1912,  the  news 


L  f\  comes  of  the  loss,  on  her  first  trip,  of  the  great  White  Star 
Line  steamer  Titanic,  with  the  destruction  of  many  passengers, 
among  whom  are  Frank  D.  Millet,  William  T.  Stead,  Isadore 
Straus,  John  Jacob  Astor,  and  other  distinguished  men.  They 
died  as  heroes,  remaining  with  the  ship  in  order  that  the  women 
and  children  might  be  saved. 

It  was  the  kind  of  death  Frank  Millet  would  have  wished  to 
die.  He  was  always  a  soldier — a  knight.  He  has  appeared 
from  time  to  time  in  these  pages,  for  he  was  a  dear  friend  of  the 
Clemens  household.  One  of  America's  foremost  painters;  at 
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  head  of  the  American  Academy  of 
Arts  in  Rome.] 

Mark  Twain  made  a  number  of  addresses  during  the 
spring  of  1908.  He  spoke  at  the  Cartoonists'  dinner,  very 
soon  after  his  return  from  Bermuda;  he  spoke  at  the 
Booksellers'  banquet,  expressing  his  debt  of  obligation 
to  those  who  had  published  and  sold  his  books;  he  de- 
livered a  fine  address  at  the  dinner  given  by  the  British 
Schools  and  University  Club  at  Delmonico's,  May  25th, 
in  honor  of  Queen  Victoria's  birthday.  In  that  speech 
he  paid  high  tribute  to  the  Queen  for  her  attitude  toward 
America  during  the  crisis  of  the  Civil  War,  and  to  her 
royal  consort,  Prince  Albert. 

What  she  did  for  us  in  America  in  our  time  of  storm  and  stress 
we  shall  not  forget,  and  whenever  we  call  it  to  mind  we  shall 
always  gratefully  remember  the  wise  and  righteous  mind  that 


1442 


Digitized  by  Google 


VIEWS  AND  ADDRESSES 


guided  her  in  it  and  sustained  and  supported  her— Prince 
Albert's.  We  need  not  talk  any  idle  talk  here  to-night  about 
either  possible  or  impossible  war  between  two  countries;  there 
will  be  no  war  while  we  remain  sane  and  the  son  of  Victoria  and 
Albert  sits  upon  the  throne.  In  conclusion,  I  believe  I  may 
justly  claim  to  utter  the  voice  of  my  country  in  saying  that  we 
hold  him  in  deep  honor,  and  also  in  cordially  wishing  him  a  long 
life  and  a  happy  reign. 

But  perhaps  his  most  impressive  appearance  was  at 
the  dedication  of  the  great  City  College  (May  14,  1908), 
where  President  John  Finley,  who  had  been  struggling 
along  with  insufficient  room,  was  to  have  space  at  last 
for  his  freer  and  fuller  educational  undertakings.  A  great 
number  of  honored  scholars,  statesmen,  and  diplomats 
assembled  on  the  college  campus,  a  spacious  open  court 
surrounded  by  stately  college  architecture  of  medieval 
design.  These  distinguished  guests  were  clad  in  their 
academic  robes,  and  the  procession  could  not  have  been 
widely  different  from  that  one  at  Oxford  of  a  year  before. 
But  there  was  something  rather  fearsome  about  it,  too. 
A  kind  of  scaffoiding  had  been  reared  in  the  center  of 
the  campus  for  the  ceremonies,  and  when  those  grave 
men  in  their  robes  of  state  stood  grouped  upon  it  the 
picture  was  strikingly  suggestive  of  one  of  George  Cruik- 
shank's  drawings  of  an  execution  scene  at  the  Tower  of 
London.  Many  of  the  robes  were  black — these  would 
be  the  priests — and  the  few  scarlet  ones  would  be  the 
cardinals  who  might  have  assembled  for  some  royal 
martyrdom.  There  was  a  bright  May  sunlight  over  it 
all,  one  of  those  still,  cool  brightnesses  which  served  to 
heighten  the  weird  effect.  I  am  sure  that  others  felt  it 
besides  myself,  for  everybody  seemed  wordless  and  awed, 
even  at  times  when  there  was  no  occasion  for  silence. 
There  was  something  of  another  age  about  the  whole 
setting,  to  say  the  least. 

We  left  the  place  in  a  motor-car,  a  crowd  of  boys  fol- 

1443 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


lowing  after.  As  Clemens  got  in  they  gathered  around 
the  car  and  gave  the  college  yell,  ending  with  "Twain! 
Twain!  Twain!"  and  added  three  cheers  for  Tom  Sawyer, 
Huck  Finn,  and  Pudd'nhcad  Wilson.  They  called  for 
a  speech,  but  he  only  said  a  few  words  in  apology  for 
not  granting  their  request.  He  made  a  speech  to  them 
that  night  at  the  Waldorf — where  he  proposed  for  the 
City  College  a  chair  of  citizenship,  an  idea  which  met 
with  hearty  applause. 

In  the  same  address  he  referred  to  the  "God  Trust" 
motto  on  the  coins,  and  spoke  approvingly  of  the  Presi- 
dent's order  for  its  removal. 

We  do  not  trust  in  God,  in  the  important  matters  of  life, 
and  not  even  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  will  take  any  coin  for  a 
cent  more  than  its  accepted  value  because  of  that  motto.  If 
cholera  should  ever  reach  these  shores  we  should  probably 
pray  to  be  delivered  from  the  plague,  but  we  would  put  our 
main  trust  in  the  Board  of  Health. 

Next  morning,  commenting  on  the  report  of  this  speech, 
he  said: 

"  If  only  the  reporters  would  not  try  to  improve  on  what 
I  say.  They  seem  to  miss  the  fact  that  the  very  art  of 
saying  a  thing  effectively  is  in  its  delicacy,  and  as  they 
can't  reproduce  the  manner  and  intonation  in  type  they 
make  it  emphatic  and  clumsy  in  trying  to  convey  it  to 
the  reader." 

I  pleaded  that  the  reporters  were  often  young  men, 
eager,  and  unmellowed  in  their  sense  of  literary  art. 

"Yes,"  he  agreed,  "they  are  so  afraid  their  readers 
won't  see  my  good  points  that  they  set  up  red  flags  to 
mark  them  and  beat  a  gong.  They  mean  well,  but  I  wish 
they  wouldn't  do  it." 

He  referred  to  the  portion  of  his  speech  concerning  the 
motto  on  the  coins.  He  had  freely  expressed  similar 
sentiments  on  other  public  occasions,  and  he  had  received 

1444 


Digitized  by  Google 


VIEWS  AND  ADDRESSES 


a  letter  criticizing  him  for  saying  that  we  do  not  really 
trust  in  God  in  any  financial  matter. 

"I  wanted  to  answer  it,"  he  said;  "but  I  destroyed 
it.    It  didn't  seem  worth  noticing." 

I  asked  how  the  motto  had  originated. 

"About  1853  some  idiot  in  Congress  wanted  to  an- 
nounce to  the  world  that  this  was  a  religious  nation,  and 
proposed  putting  it  there,  and  no  other  Congressman 
had  courage  enough  to  oppose  it,  of  course.  It  took 
courage  in  those  days  to  do  a  thing  like  that;  but  I  think 
the  same  thing  would  happen  to-day." 

I I  Still  the  country  has  become  broader.  It  took  a  brave  man 
before  the  Civil  War  to  confesshehad  read  the  Age  of  Reason.'* 

"So  it  did,  and  yet  that  seems  a  mild  book  now.  I 
read  it  first  when  I  was  a  cub  pilot,  read  it  with  fear  and 
hesitation,  but  marveling  at  its  fearlessness  and  won- 
derful power.  I  read  it  again  a  year  or  two  ago,  for  some 
reason,  and  was  amazed  to  see  how  tame  it  had  become. 
It  seemed  that  Paine  was  apologizing  everywhere  for 
hurting  the  feelings  of  the  reader." 

He  drifted,  naturally,  into  a  discussion  of  the  Knicker- 
bocker Trust  Company's  suspension,  which  had  tied  up 
some  fifty-five  thousand  dollars  of  his  capital,  and  won- 
dered how  many  were  trusting  in  God  for  the  return  of 
these  imperiled  sums.  Clemens  himself,  at  this  time,  did 
not  expect  to  come  out  whole  from  that  disaster.  He  had 
said  very  little  when  the  news  came,  though  it  meant 
that  his  immediate  fortunes  were  locked  up,  and  it  came 
near  stopping  the  building  activities  at  Redding.  It  was 
only  the  smaller  things  of  life  that  irritated  him.  He 
often  met  large  calamities  with  a  serenity  which  almost 
resembled  indifference.  In  the  Knickerbocker  situation 
he  even  found  humor  as  time  passed,  and  wrote  a  number 
of  gay  letters,  some  of  which  found  their  way  into  print. 

It  should  be  added  that  in  the  end  there  was  no  loss 
to  any  of  the  Knickerbocker  depositors. 

1445 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXVIII 


REDDING 

THE  building  of  the  new  home  at  Redding  had  been 
going  steadily  forward  for  something  more  than  a 
year.  John  Mead  Howelis  had  made  the  plans;  W.  W. 
Sunderland  and  his  son  Philip,  of  Danbury,  Connecticut, 
were  the  builders,  and  in  the  absence  of  Miss  Clemens, 
then  on  a  concert  tour,  Mark  Twain's  secretary,  Miss  I. 
V.  Lyon,  had  superintended  the  furnishing. 

"Innocence  at  Home,"  as  the  place  was  originally 
named,  was  to  be  ready  for  its  occupant  in  June,  with 
every  detail  in  place,  as  he  desired.  He  had  never  visited 
Redding;  he  had  scarcely  even  glanced  at  the  plans  or 
discussed  any  of  the  decorations  of  the  new  home.  He 
had  required  only  that  there  should  be  one  great  living- 
room  for  the  orchestrelle,  and  another  big  room  for  the 
billiard-table,  with  plenty  of  accommodations  for  guests. 
He  had  required  that  the  billiard-room  be  red,  for  some- 
thing in  his  nature  answered  to  the  warm  luxury  of  that 
color,  particularly  in  moments  of  diversion.  Besides,  his 
other  billiard-rooms  had  been  red,  and  such  association 
may  not  be  lightly  disregarded.  His  one  other  require- 
ment was  that  the  place  should  be  complete. 

"I  don't  want  to  see  it,"  he  said,  "until  the  cat  is  purr- 
ing on  the  hearth." 
Howelis  says: 

"  He  had  grown  so  weary  of  change,  and  so  indifferent 
to  it,  that  he  was  without  interest." 

But  it  was  rather,  I  think,  that  he  was  afraid  of  losing 

1446 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 


REDDING 

interest  by  becoming  wearied  with  details  which  were 
likely  to  exasperate  him;  also,  he  wanted  the  dramatic 
surprise  of  walking  into  a  home  that  had  been  conjured 
into  existence  as  with  a  word. 

It  was  expected  that  the  move  would  be  made  early 
in  the  month;  but  there  were  delays,  and  it  was  not  until 
the  1 8th  of  June  that  he  took  possession. 

The  plan,  at  this  time,  was  only  to  use  the  Redding 
place  as  a  summer  residence,  and  the  Fifth  Avenue  house 
was  not  dismantled.  A  few  days  before  the  18th  the 
servants,  with  one  exception,  were  taken  up  to  the  new 
house,  Clemens  and  myself  remaining  in  the  loneliness  of 
No.  2i,  attending  to  the  letters  in  the  morning  and  playing 
billiards  the  rest  of  the  time,  waiting  for  the  appointed 
day  and  train.  It  was  really  a  pleasant  three  days.  He 
invented  a  new  game,  and  we  were  riotous  and  laughed 
as  loudly  as  we  pleased.  I  think  he  talked  very  little  of 
the  new  home  which  he  was  so  soon  to  see.  It  was  re- 
ferred to  no  oftener  than  once  or  twice  a  day,  and  then  I 
believe  only  in  connection  with  certain  of  the  billiard- 
room  arrangements.  I  have  wondered  since  what  pic- 
ture of  it  he  could  have  had  in  his  mind,  for  he  had  never 
seen  a  photograph.  He  had  a  general  idea  that  it  was 
built  upon  a  hill,  and  that  its  architecture  was  of  the 
Italian  villa  order.  I  confess  I  had  moments  of  anxiety, 
for  I  had  selected  the  land  for  him,  and  had  been  more 
or  less  accessory  otherwise.  I  did  not  really  worry,  for 
I  knew  how  beautiful  and  peaceful  it  all  was;  also  some- 
thing of  his  taste  and  needs. 

It  had  been  a  dry  spring,  and  country  roads  were  dusty, 
so  that  those  who  were  responsible  had  been  praying 
for  rain,  to  be  followed  by  a  pleasant  day  for  his  arrival. 
Both  petitions  were  granted;  June  18th  would  fall  on 
Thursday,  and  Monday  night  there  came  a  good,  thorough, 
and  refreshing  shower  that  washed  the  vegetation  clean 
and  laid  the  dust.    The  morning  of  the  18th  was  bright 

1447 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


and  sunny  and  cool.  Clemens  was  up  and  shaved  by 
six  o'clock  in  order  to  be  in  time,  though  the  train  did  not 
leave  until  four  in  the  afternoon — an  express  newly  timed 
to  stop  at  Redding— its  first  trip  scheduled  for  the  day 
of  Mark  Twain's  arrival. 

We  were  still  playing  billiards  when  word  was  brought 
up  that  the  cab  was  waiting.  My  daughter,  Louise, 
whose  school  on  Long  Island  had  closed  that  day,  was 
with  us.  Clemens  wore  his  white  flannels  and  a  Panama 
hat,  and  at  the  station  a  group  quickly  collected,  re- 
porters and  others,  to  interview  him  and  speed  him  to 
his  new  home.  He  was  cordial  and  talkative,  and  quite 
evidently  full  of  pleasant  anticipation.  A  reporter  or  two 
and  a  special  photographer  came  along,  to  be  present  at 
his  arrival. 

The  new,  quick  train,  the  green,  flying  landscape,  with 
glimpses  of  the  Sound  and  white  sails,  the  hillsides  and 
clear  streams  becoming  rapidly  steeper  and  clearer  as  we 
turned  northward:  all  seemed  to  gratify  him,  and  when 
he  spoke  at  all  it  was  approvingly.  The  hour  and  a  half 
required  to  cover  the  sixty  miles  of  distance  seemed  very 
short.  As  the  train  slowed  down  for  the  Redding  station, 
he  said: 

"We'll  leave  this  box  of  candy" — he  had  bought  a 
large  box  on  the  way — "those  colored  porters  sometimes 
like  candy,  and  we  can  get  some  more." 

He  drew  out  a  great  handful  of  silver. 

"Give  them  something — give  everybody  liberally  that 
does  any  service." 

There  was  a  sort  of  open-air  reception  in  waiting. 
Redding  had  recognized  the  occasion  as  historic.  A 
varied  assemblage  of  vehicles  festooned  with  flowers  had 
gathered  to  offer  a  gallant  country  welcome. 

It  was  now  a  little  before  six  o'clock  of  that  long  June 
day,  still  and  dreamlike;  and  to  the  people  assembled 
there  may  have  been  something  which  was  not  quite 

1448 


Digitized  by  Google 


REDDING 


reality  in  the  scene.  There  was  a  tendency  to  be  very 
still.  They  nodded,  waved  their  hands  to  him,  smiled, 
and  looked  their  fill ;  but  a  spell  lay  upon  them,  and  they 
did  not  cheer.  It  would  have  been  a  pity  if  they  had  done 
so.   A  noise,  and  the  illusion  would  have  been  shattered. 

His  carriage  led  away  on  the  three-mile  drive  to  the 
house  on  the  hilltop,  and  the  floral  turnout  fell  in  behind. 
No  first  impression  of  a  fair  land  could  have  come  at  a 
sweeter  time.  Hillsides  were  green,  fields  were  white 
with  daisies,  dog-wood  and  laurel  shone  among  the 
trees.  And  over  all  was  the  blue  sky,  and  everywhere 
the  fragrance  of  June. 

He  was  very  quiet  as  we  drove  along.  Once  with  gentle 
humor,  looking  over  a  white  daisy  field,  he  said: 

"That  is  buckwheat.  I  always  recognize  buckwheat 
when  I  see  it.  I  wish  I  knew  as  much  about  other  things 
as  I  know  about  buckwheat.  It  seems  to  be  very  plenti- 
ful here;  it  even  grows  by  the  roadside."  And  a  little 
later:  "This  is  the  kind  of  a  road  I  like;  a  good  country 
road  through  the  woods." 

The  water  was  flowing  over  the  mill-dam  where  the 
road  crosses  the  Saugatuck,  and  he  expressed  approval 
of  that  clear,  picturesque  little  river,  one  of  those  charm- 
ing Connecticut  streams.  A  little  farther  on  a  brook 
cascaded  down  the  hillside,  and  he  compared  it  with 
some  of  the  tiny  streams  of  Switzerland,  I  believe  the 
Giessbach.  The  lane  that  led  to  the  new  home  opened 
just  above,  and  as  he  entered  the  leafy  way  he  said,  "This 
is  just  the  kind  of  a  lane  I  like,"  thus  completing  his 
acceptance  of  everything  but  the  house  and  the  location. 

The  last  of  the  procession  had  dropped  away  at  the 
entrance  of  the  lane,  and  he  was  alone  with  those  who 
had  most  anxiety  for  his  verdict.  They  had  not  long  to 
wait.  As  the  carriage  ascended  higher  to  the  open  view 
he  looked  away,  across  the  Saugatuck  Valley  to  the  nest- 
ling village  and  church-spire  and  farm-houses,  and  to  the 

1449 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


distant  hills,  and  declared  the  land  to  be  a  good  land  and 
beautiful — a  spot  to  satisfy  one's  soul.  Then  came  the 
house — simple  and  severe  in  its  architecture — an  Italian 
villa,  such  as  he  had  known  in  Florence,  adapted  now  to 
American  climate  and  needs.  The  scars  of  building  had 
not  all  healed  yet,  but  close  to  the  house  waved  green 
grass  and  bloorriing  flowers  that  might  have  been  there 
always.  Neither  did  the  house  itself  look  new.  The 
soft,  gray  stucco  had  taken  on  a  tone  that  melted  into 
the  sky  and  foliage  of  its  background.  At  the  entrance 
his  domestic  staff  waited  to  greet  him,  and  then  he  stepped 
across  the  threshold  into  the  wide  hall  and  stood  in  his 
own  home  for  the  first  time  in  seventeen  years.  It  was 
an  anxious  moment,  and  no  one  spoke  immediately.  But 
presently  his  eye  had  taken  in  the  satisfying  harmony  of 
the  place  and  followed  on  through  the  wide  doors  that 
led  to  the  dining-room — on  through  the  open  French 
windows  to  an  enchanting  vista  of  tree-tops  and  distant 
farmside  and  blue  hills.    He  said,  very  gently : 

"How  beautiful  it  ail  is!  I  did  not  think  it  could  be 
as  beautiful  as  this." 

He  was  taken  through  the  rooms;  the  great  living-room 
at  one  end  of  the  hall — a  room  on  the  walls  of  which  there 
was  no  picture,  but  only  color-harmony — and  at  the  other 
end  of  the  hall,  the  splendid,  glowing  billiard-room,  where 
hung  all  the  pictures  in  which  he  took  delight.  Then  to 
the  floor  above,  with  its  spacious  apartments  and  a  con- 
tinuation of  color-welcome  and  concord,  the  windows 
open  to  the  pleasant  evening  hills.  When  he  had  seen 
it  all— the  natural  Italian  garden  below  the  terraces;  the 
loggia,  whose  arches  framed  landscape  vistas  and  formed 
a  rare  picture-gallery;  when  he  had  completed  the  round 
and  stood  in  the  billiard-room — his  especial  domain — 
once  more  he  said,  as  a  final  verdict: 

"It  is  a  perfect  house — perfect,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  in 
every  detail.    It  might  have  been  here  always." 

1450 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


REDDING 


He  was  at  home  there  from  that  moment — absolutely, 
marvelously  at  home,  for  he  fitted  the  setting  perfectly, 
and  there  was  not  a  hitch  or  flaw  in  his  adaptation.  To 
see  him  over  the  billiard-table,  five  minutes  later,  one 
could  easily  fancy  that  Mark  Twain,  as  well  as  the  house, 
had  "been  there  always."  Only  the  presence  of  his 
daughters  was  needed  now  to  complete  his  satisfaction  in 
everything. 

There  were  guests  that  first  evening — a  small  home 
dinner-party — and  so  perfect  were  the  appointments  and 
service,  that  one  not  knowing  would  scarcely  have  im- 
agined it  to  be  the  first  dinner  served  in  that  lovely  room. 
A  little  later,  at  the  foot  of  the  garden  of  bay  and  cedar, 
neighbors,  inspired  by  Dan  Beard,  who  had  recently 
located  near  by,  set  ofT  some  fireworks.  Clemens  stepped 
out  on  the  terrace  and  saw  rockets  climbing  through  the 
summer  sky  to  announce  his  arrival. 

"I  wonder  why  they  all  go  to  so  much  trouble  for  me," 
he  said,  softly.  "I  never  go  to  any  trouble  for  anybody" 
— a  statement  which  all  who  heard  it,  and  all  his  multi- 
tude of  readers  in  every  land,  stood  ready  to  deny. 

That  first  evening  closed  with  billiards — boisterous, 
triumphant  billiards — and  when  with  midnight  the  day 
ended  and  the  cues  were  set  in  the  rack,  there  was 
none  to  say  that  Mark  Twain's  first  day  in  his  new 
home  had  not  been  a  happy  one. 


CCLXIX 


FIRST  DAYS  AT  STORMFIELD 

I WENT  up  next  afternoon,  for  I  knew  how  he  dreaded 
loneliness.  We  played  billiards  for  a  time,  then  set 
out  for  a  walk,  following  the  long  drive  to  the  leafy  lane 
that  led  to  my  own  property.    Presently  he  said: 

44  In  one  way  I  am  sorry  I  did  not  see  this  place  sooner. 
I  never  want  to  leave  it  again.  If  I  had  known  it  was  so 
beautiful  I  should  have  vacated  the  house  in  town  and 
moved  up  here  permanently." 

I  suggested  that  he  could  still  do  so,  if  he  chose,  and  he 
entered  immediately  into  the  idea.  By  and  by  we  turned 
down  a  deserted  road,  grassy  and  beautiful,  that  ran  along 
his  land.  At  one  side  was  a  slope  facing  the  west,  and 
dotted  with  the  slender,  cypress-like  cedars  of  New  Eng- 
land. He  had  asked  if  that  were  part  of  his  land,  and  on 
being  told  it  was  he  said: 

44 1  would  like  Howells  to  have  a  house  there.  We  must 
try  to  give  that  to  Howells." 

At  the  foot  of  the  hill  we  came  to  a  brook  and  followed 
it  into  a  meadow.  I  told  him  that  I  had  often  caught 
fine  trout  there,  and  that  soon  I  would  bring  in  some  for 
breakfast.    He  answered: 

"Yes,  I  should  like  that.  I  don't  care  to  catch  them 
any  more  myself.    I  like  them  very  hot." 

We  passed  through  some  woods  and  came  out  near  my 
own  ancient  little  house.    He  noticed  it  and  said: 

"The  man  who  built  that  had  some  memory  of  Greece 
in  his  mind  when  he  put  on  that  little  porch  with  those 
columns." 

1453 


Digitized  by  Google 


FIRST  DAYS  AT  STORM  FIELD 


My  second  daughter,  Frances,  was  coming  from  a  dis- 
tant school  on  the  evening  train,  and  the  carriage  was 
starting  just  then  to  bring  her.  I  suggested  that  per- 
haps he  would  find  it  pleasant  to  make  the  drive. 

"Yes,"  he  agreed,  "I  should  enjoy  that." 

So  I  took  the  reins,  and  he  picked  up  little  Joy,  who 
came  running  out  just  then,  and  climbed  into  the  back 
seat.  It  was  another  beautiful  evening,  and  he  was  in  a 
talkative  humor.  Joy  pointed  out  a  small  turtle  in  the 
road,  and  he  said: 

"That  is  a  wild  turtle.  Do  you  think  you  could  teach 
it  arithmetic?" 

Joy  was  uncertain. 

"Well,"  he  went  on,  "you  ought  to  get  an  arithmetic 
— a  little  ten-cent  arithmetic — and  teach  that  turtle." 

We  passed  some  swampy  woods,  rather  dim  and  jungle- 
like. 

"Those,"  he  said,  "are  elephant  woods." 
But  Joy  answered: 

"They  are  fairy  woods.  The  fairies  are  there,  but  you 
can't  see  them  because  they  wear  magic  cloaks." 

He  said:  "I  wish  I  had  one  of  those  magic  cloaks, 
sometimes.    I  had  one  once,  but  it  is  worn  out  now." 

Joy  looked  at  him  reverently,  as  one  who  had  once 
been  the  owner  of  a  piece  of  fairyland. 

It  was  a  sweet  drive  to  and  from  the  village.  There 
are  none  too  many  such  evenings  in  a  lifetime.  Colonel 
Harvey's  little  daughter,  Dorothy,  came  up  a  day  or  two 
later,  and  with  my  daughter  Louise  spent  the  first  week  with 
him  in  the  new  home.  They  were  created  "Angel-Fishes" — 
the  first  in  the  new  aquarium;  that  is  to  say,  the  billiard- 
room,  where  he  followed  out  the  idea  by  hanging  a  row 
of  colored  prints  of  Bermuda  fishes  in  a  sort  of  frieze 
around  the  walls.  Each  visiting  member  was  required  to 
select  one  as  her  particular  patron  fish  and  he  wrote  her 
name  upon  it.    It  was  his  delight  to  gather  his  juvenile 

III.-22  1453 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


guests  in  this  room  and  teach  them  the  science  of  billiard 
angles;  but  it  was  so  difficult  to  resist  taking  the  cue  and 
making  plays  himself  that  he  was  required  to  stand  on 
a  little  platform  and  give  instruction  just  out  of  reach. 
His  snowy  flannels  and  gleaming  white  hair,  against  those 
rich  red  walls,  with  those  small,  summer-clad  players,  made 
a  pretty  picture. 

The  place  did  not  retain  its  original  name.  He  de- 
clared that  it  would  always  be  "Innocence  at  Home"  to 
the  angel-fish  visitors,  but  that  the  title  didn't  remain 
continuously  appropriate.  The  money  which  he  had  de- 
rived from  Captain  Stormfield's  Visit  to  Heaven  had  been 
used  to  build  the  loggia  wing,  and  he  considered  the  name 
of  "Stormfield"  as  a  substitute.  When,  presently,  the 
summer  storms  gathered  on  that  rock-bound,  open  hill, 
with  its  wide  reaches  of  vine  and  shrub — wild,  fierce 
storms  that  bent  the  birch  and  cedar,  and  strained  at  the 
bay  and  huckleberry,  with  lightning  and  turbulent  wind 
and  thunder,  followed  by  the  charging  rain — the  name 
seemed  to  become  peculiarly  appropriate.  Standing  with 
his  head  bared  to  the  tumult,  his  white  hair  tossing  in 
the  blast,  and  looking  out  upon  the  wide  splendor  of  the 
spectacle,  he  rechristened  the  place,  and  "Stormfield"  it 
became  and  remained. 

The  last  day  of  Mark  Twain's  first  week  in  Redding, 
June  25th,  was  saddened  by  the  news  of  the  death  of 
Grover  Cleveland  at  his  home  in  Princeton,  New  Jersey. 
Clemens  had  always  been  an  ardent  Cleveland  admirer, 
and  to  Mrs.  Cleveland  now  he  sent  this  word  of  con- 
dolence: 

Your  husband  was  a  man  I  knew  and  loved  and  honored 
for  twenty-five  years.   I  mourn  with  you. 

And  once  during  the  evening  he  said: 
"  He  was  one  of  our  two  or  three  real  Presidents.  There 
is  none  to  take  his  place." 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXX 

THE  ALDRICH  MEMORIAL 

AT  the  end  of  June  came  the  dedication  at  Ports- 
f\  mouth,  New  Hampshire,  of  the  Thomas  Bailey 
Aldrich  Memorial  Museum,  which  the  poet's  wife  had 
established  there  in  the  old  Aldrich  homestead.  It  was 
hot  weather.  We  were  obliged  to  take  a  rather  poor 
train  from  South  Norwalk,  and  Clemens  was  silent  and 
gloomy  most  of  the  way  to  Boston.  Once  there,  however, 
lodged  in  a  cool  and  comfortable  hotel,  matters  improved. 
He  had  brought  along  for  reading  the  old  copy  of  Sir 
Thomas  Malory's  Arthur  Tales,  and  after  dinner  he  took 
off  his  clothes  and  climbed  into  bed  and  sat  up  and  read 
aloud  from  those  stately  legends,  with  comments  that  I 
wish  I  could  remember  now,  only  stopping  at  last  when 
overpowered  with  sleep. 

We  went  on  a  special  train  to  Portsmouth  next  morn- 
ing through  the  summer  heat,  and  assembled,  with  those 
who  were  to  speak,  in  the  back  portion  of  the  opera-house, 
behind  the  scenes.  Clemens  was  genial  and  good-natured 
with  all  the  discomfort  of  it;  and  he  liked  to  fancy,  with 
Howells,  who  had  come  over  from  Kittery  Point,  how 
Aldrich  must  be  amused  at  the  whole  circumstance  if 
he  could  see  them  punishing  themselves  to  do  honor  to 
his  memory.  Richard  Watson  Gilder  was  there,  and 
Hamilton  Mabie;  also  Governor  Floyd  of  New  Hamp- 
shire; Colonel  Higginson,  Robert  Bridges,  and  other 
distinguished  men.  We  got  to  the  more  open  atmos- 
phere of  the  stage  presently,  and  the  exercises  began. 
Clemens  was  last  on  the  program. 

1455 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


The  others  had  all  said  handsome,  serious  things,  and 
Clemens  himself  had  mentally  prepared  something  of  the 
sort;  but  when  his  turn  came,  and  he  rose  to  speak,  a 
sudden  reaction  must  have  set  in,  for  he  delivered  an 
address  that  certainly  would  have  delighted  Aldrich 
living,  and  must  have  delighted  him  dead,  if  he  could  hear 
it.  It  was  full  of  the  most  charming  humor,  delicate, 
refreshing,  and  spontaneous.  The  audience,  that  had  been 
maintaining  a  proper  gravity  throughout,  showed  its 
appreciation  in  ripples  of  merriment  that  grew  presently 
into  genuine  waves  of  laughter.  He  spoke  out  his  regret 
for  having  worn  black  clothes.  It  was  a  mistake,  he 
said,  to  consider  this  a  solemn  time — Aldrich  would  not 
have  wished  it  to  be  so  considered.  He  had  been  a  man 
who  loved  humor  and  brightness  and  wit,  and  had  helped 
to  make  life  merry  and  delightful.  Certainly,  if  he  could 
know,  he  would  not  wish  this  dedication  of  his  own  home 
to  be  a  lugubrious,  smilelcss  occasion. 

Outside,  when  the  services  were  ended,  the  venerable 
juvenile  writer,  J.  T.  Trowbridge,  came  up  to  Clemens 
with  extended  hand.    Clemens  said: 

"Trowbridge,  are  you  still  alive?  You  must  be  a 
thousand  years  old.  Why,  I  listened  to  your  stories  while 
I  was  being  rocked  in  the  cradle.'* 

Trowbridge  said: 

"  Mark,  there's  some  mistake.  My  earliest  infant  smile 
was  wakened  with  one  of  your  jokes." 

They  stood  side  by  side  against  a  fence  in  the  blazing 
sun  and  were  photographed — an  interesting  picture. 

We  returned  to  Boston  that  evening.  Clemens  did  not 
wish  to  hurry  in  the  summer  heat,  and  we  remained  an- 
other day  quietly  sight-seeing,  and  driving  around  and 
around  Commonwealth  Avenue  in  a  victoria  in  the  cool 
of  the  evening.   Once,  remembering  Aldrich,  he  said: 

"I  was  just  planning  Tom  Sawyer  when  he  was  begin- 
ning the  Story  of  a  Bad  Boy.    When  I  heard  that  he  was 

i4S6 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  ALDRICH  MEMORIAL 

writing  that  I  thought  of  giving  up  mine,  but  Aldrich 
insisted  that  it  would  be  a  foolish  thing  to  do.  He  thought 
my  Missouri  boy  could  not  by  any  chance  conflict  with 
his  boy  of  New  England,  and  of  course  he  was  right." 

He  spoke  of  how  great  literary  minds  usually  came 
along  in  company.    He  said : 

"Now  and  then,  on  the  stream  of  time,  small  gobs  of 
that  thing  which  we  call  genius  drift  down,  and  a  few 
of  these  lodge  at  some  particular  point,  and  others  col- 
lect about  them  and  make  a  sort  of  intellectual  island — a 
towhead,  as  they  say  on  the  river — such  an  accumulation 
of  intellect  we  call  a  group,  or  school,  and  name  it. 

* 1  Thirty  years  ago  there  was  the  Cambridge  group.  Now 
there's  been  still  another,  which  included  Aldrich  and 
Howells  and  Stedman  and  Cable.  It  will  soon  be  gone. 
I  suppose  they  will  have  to  name  it  by  and  by." 

He  pointed  out  houses  here  and  there  of  people  he  had 
known  and  visited  in  other  days.  The  driver  was  very 
anxious  to  go  farther,  to  other  and  more  distinguished 
sights.  Clemens  mildly  but  firmly  refused  any  variation 
of  the  program,  and  so  we  kept  on  driving  around  and 
around  the  shaded  loop  of  Beacon  Street  until  dusk  fell 
and  the  lights  began  to  twinkle  among  the  trees. 


Digitized  by  Google 


/ 


CCLXXI 

DEATH  OP  "SAM"  MOPPETT 

CLEMENS'S  next  absence  from  Redding  came  on 
August  i,  1908,  when  the  sudden  and  shocking  news 
was  received  of  the  drowning  of  his  nephew,  Samuel  E. 
Moffett,  in  the  surf  of  the  Jersey  shore.  Moffett  was  his 
nearest  male  relative,  and  a  man  of  fine  intellect  and 
talents.  He  was  superior  in  those  qualities  which  men 
love — he  was  large-minded  and  large-hearted,  and  of 
noble  ideals.  With  much  of  the  same  sense  of  humor 
which  had  made  his  uncle's  fame,  he  had  what  was  really 
an  abnormal  faculty  of  acquiring  and  retaining  encyclo- 
pedic data.  Once  as  a  child  he  had  visited  Hartford 
when  Clemens  was  laboring  over  his  history  game.  The 
boy  was  much  interested,  and  asked  permission  to  help. 
His  uncle  willingly  consented,  and  referred  him  to  the 
library  for  his  facts.  But  he  did  not  need  to  consult  the 
books;  he  already  had  English  history  stored  away,  and 
knew  where  to  find  every  detail  of  it.  At  the  time  of  his 
death  Moffett  held  an  important  editorial  position  on 
Collier's  Weekly. 

Clemens  was  fond  and  proud  of  his  nephew.  Return- 
ing from  the  funeral,  he  was  much  depressed,  and  a  day 
or  two  later  became  really  ill.  He  was  in  bed  for  a  few 
days,  resting,  he  said,  after  the  intense  heat  of  the  jour- 
ney. Then  he  was  about  again  and  proposed  billiards 
as  a  diversion.  We  were  all  alone  one  very  still,  warm 
August  afternoon  playing,  when  he  suddenly  said: 
"I  feel  a  little  dizzy;  I  will  sit  down  a  moment." 

1458 


Digitized  by  Google 


DEATH  OF  "SAM"  MOFFETT 


I  brought  him  a  glass  of  water  and  he  seemed  to  re- 
cover, but  when  he  rose  and  started  to  play  I  thought 
he  had  a  dazed  look.    He  said: 

"I  have  lost  my  memory.  I  don't  know  which  is  my 
ball.    I  don't  know  what  game  we  are  playing." 

But  immediately  this  condition  passed,  and  we  thought 
little  of  it,  considering  it  merely  a  phase  of  biliousness 
due  to  his  recent  journey.  I  have  been  told  since,  by 
eminent  practitioners,  that  it  was  the  first  indication  of 
a  more  serious  malady. 

He  became  apparently  quite  himself  again  and  showed 
his  usual  vigor — light  of  step  and  movement,  able  to  skip 
up  and  down  stairs  as  heretofore.  In  a  letter  to  Mrs. 
Crane,  August  12th,  he  spoke  of  recent  happenings: 

Dear  Aunt  Sue, — It  was  a  most  moving,  a  most  heart- 
breaking sight,  the  spectacle  of  that  stunned  &  crushed  &  in- 
consolable family.  I  came  back  here  in  bad  shape,  &  had  a 
bilious  collapse,  but  I  am  all  right  again,  though  the  doctor  from 
New  York  has  given  peremptory  orders  that  I  am  not  to  stir 
from  here  before  frost.  0  fortunate  Sam  Moffettl  fortunate 
Livy  Clemens!  doubly  fortunate  Susy!  Those  swords  go 
through  &  through  my  heart,  but  there  is  never  a  moment  that 
I  am  not  glad,  for  the  sake  of  the  dead,  that  they  have  escaped. 

How  Livy  would  love  this  place!  How  her  very  soul  would 
steep  itself  thankfully  in  this  peace,  this  tranquillity,  this  deep 
stillness,  this  dreamy  expanse  of  woodsy  hill  &  valley!  You 
must  come,  Aunt  Sue,  &  stay  with  us  a  real  good  visit.  Since 
June  26  we  have  had  2 1  guests,  &  they  have  all  liked  it  and  said 
they  would  come  again. 

To  Howells,  on  the  same  day,  he  wrote: 

Won't  you  &  Mrs,  Howells  &  Mildred  come  &  give  us  as  many 
days  as  you  can  spare  &  examine  John's  triumph?  It  is  the 
most  satisfactory  house  I  am  acquainted  with,  &  the  most 
satisfactorily  situated.  ...  I  have  dismissed  my  stenographer, 
&  have  entered  upon  a  holiday  whose  other  end  is  the  cemetery. 

1459 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXII 


STORMFIELD  ADVENTURES 


LEMENS  had  fully  decided,  by  this  time,  to  live  the 


V^rf  year  round  in  the  retirement  at  Stormfield,  and  the 
house  at  21  Fifth  Avenue  was  being  dismantled.  He 
had  also,  as  he  said,  given  up  his  dictations  for  the  time, 
at  least,  after  continuing  them,  with  more  or  less  regu- 
larity, for  a  period  of  two  and  a  half  years,  during  which 
he  had  piled  up  about  half  a  million  words  of  com- 
ment and  reminiscence.  His  general  idea  had  been 
to  add  portions  of  this  matter  to  his  earlier  books  as 
the  copyrights  expired,  to  give  them  new  life  and  interest, 
and  he  felt  that  he  had  plenty  now  for  any  such  purpose. 

He  gave  his  time  mainly  to  his  guests,  his  billiards,  and 
his  reading,  though  of  course  he  could  not  keep  from 
writing  on  this  subject  and  that  as  the  fancy  moved  him, 
and  a  drawer  in  one  of  his  dressers  began  to  accumulate 
fresh  though  usually  fragmentary  manuscripts.  He  read 
the  daily  paper,  but  he  no  longer  took  the  keen,  restless 
interest  in  public  affairs.  New  York  politics  did  not  con- 
cern him  any  more,  and  national  politics  not  much. 
When  the  Evening  Post  wrote  him  concerning  the  ad- 
visability of  renominating  Governor  Hughes  he  replied: 

If  you  had  asked  me  two  months  ago  my  answer  would 
have  been  prompt  &  loud  &  strong:  yes,  I  want  Governor 
Hughes  renominated.  But  it  is  too  late,  &  my  mouth  is  closed. 
I  have  become  a  citizen  &  taxpayer  of  Connecticut,  &  could  not 
now,  without  impertinence,  meddle  in  matters  which  are  none  of 
my  business.  I  could  not  do  it  with  impertinence  without  tres- 
passing on  the  monopoly  of  another. 


1460 


Digitized  by  Google 


STORM  FIELD  ADVENTURES 


Howells  speaks  of  Mark  Twain's  "absolute  content" 
with  his  new  home,  and  these  are  the  proper  words  to 
express  it.  He  was  like  a  storm-beaten  ship  that  had 
drifted  at  last  into  a  serene  South  Sea  haven. 

The  days  began  and  ended  in  tranquillity.  There  were 
no  special  morning  regulations.  One  could  have  his  break- 
fast at  any  time  and  at  almost  any  place.  He  could  have 
it  in  bed  if  he  liked,  or  in  the  loggia  or  living-room, 
or  billiard-room.  He  might  even  have  it  in  the  dining- 
room,  or  on  the  terrace,  just  outside.  Guests — there 
were  usually  guests — might  suit  their  convenience  in  this 
matter— also  as  to  the  forenoons.  The  afternoon  brought 
games  —  that  is,  billiards,  provided  the  guest  knew 
billiards,  otherwise  hearts.  Those  two  games  were  his 
safety-valves,  and  while  there  were  no  printed  require- 
ments relating  to  them  the  unwritten  code  of  Stormfield 
provided  that  guests,  of  whatever  age  or  previous  faith, 
should  engage  in  one  or  both  of  these  diversions. 

Clemens,  who  usually  spent  his  forenoon  in  bed  with 
his  reading  and  his  letters,  came  to  the  green  table  of  skill 
and  chance  eager  for  the  onset;  if  the  fates  were  kindly, 
he  approved  of  them  openly.  If  not — well,  the  fates  were 
old  enough  to  know  better,  and,  as  heretofore,  had  to 
take  the  consequences.  Sometimes,  when  the  weather 
was  fine  and  there  were  no  games  (this  was  likely  to  be 
on  Sunday  afternoons),  there  were  drives  among  the  hills 
and  along  the  Saugatuck  through  the  Redding  Glen. 

The  cat  was  always  "purring  on  the  hearth"  at  Storm- 
field — several  cats — for  Mark  Twain's  fondness  for  this 
clean,  intelligent  domestic  animal  remained,  to  the  end, 
one  of  his  happiest  characteristics.  There  were  never 
too  many  cats  at  Stormfield,  and  the  "hearth"  included 
the  entire  house,  even  the  billiard- table.  When,  as  was 
likely  to  happen  at  any  time  during  the  game,  the  kittens 
Sinbad,  or  Danbury,  or  Billiards  would  decide  to  hop  up 
and  play  with  the  balls,  or  sit  in  the  pockets  and  grab  at 

1461 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


them  as  they  went  by,  the  game  simply  added  this  element 
of  chance,  and  the  uninvited  player  was  not  disturbed. 
The  cats  really  owned  Stormfield ;  any  one  could  tell 
that  from  their  deportment.  Mark  Twain  held  the  title 
deeds;  but  it  was  Danbury  and  Sinbad  and  the  others 
that  possessed  the  premises.  They  occupied  any  portion 
of  the  house  or  its  furnishings  at  will,  and  they  never 
failed  to  attract  attention.  Mark  Twain  might  be  pre- 
occupied and  indifferent  to  the  comings  and  goings  of 
other  members  of  the  household;  but  no  matter  what  he 
was  doing,  let  Danbury  appear  in  the  offing  and  he  was 
observed  and  greeted  with  due  deference,  and  com- 
plimented and  made  comfortable.  Clemens  would  arise 
from  the  table  and  carry  certain  choice  food  out  on  the 
terrace  to  Tammany,  and  be  satisfied  with  almost  no 
acknowledgment  by  way  of  appreciation.  One  could  not 
imagine  any  home  of  Mark  Twain  where  the  cats  were  not 
supreme.  In  the  evening,  as  at  21  Fifth  Avenue,  there 
was  music— the  stately  measures  of  the  orchestrelle— while 
Mark  Twain  smoked  and  mingled  unusual  speculation 
with  long,  long  backward  dreams. 

It  was  three  months  from  the  day  of  arrival  in  Redding 
that  some  guests  came  to  Stormfield  without  invitation 
— two  burglars,  who  were  carrying  off  some  bundles  of 
silver  when  they  were  discovered.  Claude,  the  butler, 
fired,  a  pistol  after  them  to  hasten  their  departure,  and 
Clemens,  wakened  by  the  shots,  thought  the  family  was 
opening  champagne  and  went  to  sleep  again. 

It  was  far  in  the  night;  but  neighbor  H.  A.  Lounsbury 
and  Deputy-Sheriff  Banks  were  notified,  and  by  morning 
the  thieves  were  captured,  though  only  after  a  pretty 
desperate  encounter,  during  which  the  officer  received  a 
bullet-wound.  Lounsbury  and  a  Stormfield  guest  had 
tracked  them  in  the  dark  with  a  lantern  to  Bethel,  a  dis- 
tance of  some  seven  miles.    The  thieves,  also  their  pur- 

1462 


Digitized  by  Google 


STORM  FIE  LD  ADVENTURES 


suers,  had  boarded  the  train  there.  Sheriff  Banks  was 
waiting  at  the  West  Redding  station  when  the  train  came 
down,  and  there  the  capture  was  made.  It  was  a  remark- 
ably prompt  and  shrewd  piece  of  work.  Clemens  gave 
credit  for  its  success  chiefly  to  Lounsbury,  whose  talents 
in  many  fields  always  impressed  him.  The  thieves  were 
taken  to  the  Redding  Town  Hall  for  a  preliminary  hear- 
ing. Subsequently  they  received  severe  sentences. 
Clemens  tacked  this  notice  on  his  front  door: 

NOTICE 

TO  THE  NEXT  BURGLAR 

There  is  nothing  but  plated  ware  in  this  house  now  and 
henceforth. 

You  will  find  it  in  that  brass  thing  in  the  dining-room  over  in 
the  corner  by  the  basket  of  kittens. 

If  you  want  the  basket  put  the  kittens  in  the  brass  thing. 
Do  not  make  a  noise — it  disturbs  the  family. 

You  will  find  rubbers  in  the  front  hall  by  that  thing  which 
has  the\imbrellas  in  it,  chiffonnier,  I  think  they  call  it,  or  pergola, 
or  something  like  that. 

Please  close  the  door  when  you  go  away! 

Very  truly  yours, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXIII 


STORMFIELD  PHILOSOPHIBS 

NOW  came  the  tranquil  days  of  the  Connecticut 
autumn.  The  change  of  the  landscape  colors  was 
a  constant  delight  to  Mark  Twain.  There  were  several 
large  windows  in  his  room,  and  he  called  them  his  picture- 
gallery.  The  window-panes  were  small,  and  each  formed 
a  separate  picture  of  its  own  that  was  changing  almost 
hourly.  The  red  tones  that  began  to  run  through  the 
foliage;  the  red  berry  bushes;  the  fading  grass,  and  the 
little  touches  of  sparkling  frost  that  came  every  now  and 
then  at  early  morning;  the  background  of  distant  blue 
hills  and  changing  skies — these  things  gave  his  gallery 
a  multitude  of  variation  that  no  art-museums  could 
furnish.  He  loved  it  all,  and  he  loved  to  walk  out  in  it, 
pacing  up  and  down  the  terrace,  or  the  long  path  that 
led  to  the  pergola  at  the  foot  of  a  natural  garden.  If 
a  friend  came,  he  was  willing  to  walk  much  farther  ;  and 
we  often  descended  the  hill  in  one  direction  or  another, 
though  usually  going  toward  the  "gorge,"  a  romantic  spot 
where  a  clear  brook  found  its  way  through  a  deep  and 
rather  dangerous-looking  chasm.  Once  he  was  persuaded 
to  descend  into  this  fairy-like  place,  for  it  was  well  worth 
exploring;  but  his  footing  was  no  longer  sure  and  he  did 
not  go  far. 

He  liked  better  to  sit  on  the  grass-grown,  rocky  arch 
above  and  look  down  into  it,  and  let  his  talk  follow  his 
mood.  He  liked  to  contemplate  the  geology  of  his  sur- 
roundings, the  record  of  the  ageless  periods  of  construc- 

1464 


Digitized  by  Google 


STORMF I  ELD  PHILOSOPHIES 


tion  required  to  build  the  world.  The  marvels  of  science 
always  appealed  to  him.  He  reveled  in  the  thought  of 
the  almost  limitless  stretches  of  time,  the  millions  upon 
millions  of  years  that  had  been  required  for  this  stratum 
and  that — he  liked  to  amaze  himself  with  the  sounding 
figures.  I  remember  him  expressing  a  wish  to  see  the 
Grand  Canon  of  Arizona,  where,  on  perpendicular  walls 
six  thousand  feet  high,  the  long  story  of  geological  crea- 
tion is  written.  I  had  stopped  there  during  my  Western 
trip  of  the  previous  year,  and  I  told  him  something  of 
its  wonders.  I  urged  him  to  see  them  for  himself,  offering 
to  go  with  him.    He  said: 

"I  should  enjoy  that;  but  the  railroad  journey  is  so 
far  and  I  should  have  no  peace.  The  papers  would  get 
hold  of  it,  and  I  would  have  to  make  speeches  and  be 
interviewed,  and  I  never  want  to  do  any  of  those  things 
again." 

I  suggested  that  the  railroads  would  probably  be  glad 
to  place  a  private  car  at  his  service,  so  that  he  might 
travel  in  comfort;  but  he  shook  his  head. 

"That  would  only  make  me  more  conspicuous." 

"How  about  a  disguise?" 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "I  might  put  on  a  red  wig  and  false 
whiskers  and  change  my  name,  but  I  couldn't  disguise 
my  drawling  speech  and  they'd  find  me  out." 

It  was  amusing,  but  it  was  rather  sad,  too.  His  fame 
had  deprived  him  of  valued  privileges. 

He  talked  of  many  things  during  these  little  excursions. 
Once  he  told  how  he  had  successively  advised  his  nephew, 
Moffett,  in  the  matter  of  obtaining  a  desirable  position. 
Moffett  had  wanted  to  become  a  reporter.  Clemens  de- 
vised a  characteristic  scheme.    He  said: 

"I  will  get  you  a  place  on  any  newspaper  you  may 
select  if  you  promise  faithfully  to  follow  out  my  instruc- 
tions." 

The  applicant  agreed,  eagerly  enough.    Clemens  said: 

1465 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"Go  to  the  newspaper  of  your  choice.  Say  that  you 
are  idle  and  want  work,  that  you  are  pining  for  work — 
longing  for  it,  and  that  you  ask  no  wages,  and  will  sup- 
port yourself.  All  that  you  ask  is  work.  That  you  will 
do  anything,  sweep,  fill  the  inkstands,  mucilage-bottles, 
run  errands,  and  be  generally  useful.  You  must  never 
ask  for  wages.  You  must  wait  until  the  offer  of  wages 
comes  to  you.  You  must  work  just  as  faithfully  and  just 
as  eagerly  as  if  you  were  being  paid  for  it.  Then  see 
what  happens." 

The  scheme  had  worked  perfectly.  Young  Moffett  had 
followed  his  instructions  to  the  letter.  By  and  by  he 
attracted  attention.  He  was  employed  in  a  variety  of 
ways  that  earned  him  the  gratitude  and  the  confidence 
of  the  office.  In  obedience  to  further  instructions,  he 
began  to  make  short,  brief,  unadorned  notices  of  small 
news  matters  that  came  under  his  eye  and  laid  them  on 
the  city  editor's  desk.  No  pay  was  asked;  none  was  ex- 
pected. Occasionally  one  of  the  items  was  used.  Then, 
of  course,  it  happened,  as  it  must  [sooner  or  later  at  a 
busy  time,  that  he  was  given  a  small  news  assignment. 
There  was  no  trouble  about  his  progress  after  that.  He 
had  won  the  confidence  of  the  management  and  shown 
that  he  was  not  afraid  to  work. 

The  plan  had  been  variously  tried  since,  Clemens  said, 
and  he  could  not  remember  any  case  in  which  it  had 
failed.  The  idea  may  have  grown  out  of  his  own  pilot 
apprenticeship  on  the  river,  when  cub  pilots  not  only 
received  no  salary,  but  paid  for  the  privilege  of  learning. 

Clemens  discussed  public  matters  less  often  than  for- 
merly, but  they  were  not  altogether  out  of  his  mind.  He 
thought  our  republic  was  in  a  fair  way  to  become  a 
monarchy  —  that  the  signs  were  already  evident.  He 
referred  to  the  letter  which  he  had  written  so  long  ago 
in  Boston,  with  its  amusing  fancy  of  the  Archbishop  of 
Dublin  and  his  Grace  of  Ponkapog,  and  declared  that, 

1466 


Digitized  by  Google 


STORMFIELD  PHILOSOPHIES 


after  all,  it  contained  something  of  prophecy.1  He  would 
not  live  to  see  the  actual  monarchy,  he  said,  but  it  was 
coming. 

"I'm  not  expecting  it  in  my  time  nor  in  my  children's 
time,  though  it  may  be  sooner  than  we  think.  There  are 
two  special  reasons  for  it  and  one  condition.  The  first 
reason  is,  that  it  is  in  the  nature  of  man  to  want  a  definite 
something  to  love,  honor,  reverently  look  up  to  and  obey; 
a  God  and  King,  for  example.  The  second  reason  is,  that 
while  little  republics  have  lasted  long,  protected  by  their 
poverty  and  insignificance,  great  ones  have  not.  And  the 
condition  is,  vast  power  and  wealth,  which  breed  com- 
mercial and  political  corruptions,  and  incite  public  favor- 
ites to  dangerous  ambitions." 

He  repeated  what  I  had  heard  him  say  before,  that  in 
one  sense  we  already  had  a  monarchy;  that  is  to  say,  a 
ruling  public  and  political  aristocracy  which  could  create 
a  Presidential  succession.  He  did  not  say  these  things 
bitterly  now,  but  reflectively  and  rather  indifferently. 

He  was  inclined  to  speak  unhopefully  of  the  interna- 
tional plans  for  universal  peace,  which  were  being  agitated 
rather  persistently. 

"The  gospel  of  peace,"  he  said,  "is  always  making  a 
deal  of  noise,  always  rejoicing  in  its  progress  but  always 
neglecting  to  furnish  statistics.  There  are  no  peaceful 
nations  now.  All  Christendom  is  a  soldier-camp.  The 
poor  have  been  taxed  in  some  nations  to  the  starvation 
point  to  support  the  giant  armaments  which  Christian 
governments  have  built  up,  each  to  protect  itself  from 
the  rest  of  the  Christian  brotherhood,  and  incidentally 
to  snatch  any  scrap  of  real  estate  left  exposed  by  a  weaker 
owner.  King  Leopold  II.  of  Belgium,  the  most  intensely 
Christian  monarch,  except  Alexander  VI.,  that  has  escaped 
hell  thus  far,  has  stolen  an  entire  kingdom  in  Africa,  and 

'See  chap,  xcvii;  also  Appendix  M. 
1467 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


in  fourteen  years  of  Christian  endeavor  there  has  re- 
duced the  population  from  thirty  millions  to  fifteen  by 
murder  and  mutilation  and  overwork,  confiscating  the 
labor  of  the  helpless  natives,  and  giving  them  nothing 
in  return  but  salvation  and  a  home  in  heaven,  furnished 
at  the  last  moment  by  the  Christian  priest. 

"Within  the  last  generation  each  Christian  power  has 
turned  the  bulk  of  its  attention  to  finding  out  newer 
and  still  newer  and  more  and  more  effective  ways  of  kill- 
ing Christians,  and,  incidentally,  a  pagan  now  and  then; 
and  the  surest  way  to  get  rich  quickly  in  Christ's  earthly 
kingdom  is  to  invent  a  kind  of  gun  that  can  kill  more 
Christians  at  one  shot  than  any  other  existing  kind.  All 
the  Christian  nations  are  at  it.  The  more  advanced  they  are, 
the  bigger  and  more  destructive  engines  of  war  they  create." 

Once,  speaking  of  battles  great  and  small,  and  how 
important  even  a  small  battle  must  seem  to  a  soldier 
who  had  fought  in  no  other,  he  said: 

"To  him  it  is  a  mighty  achievement,  an  achievement 
with  a  big  A,  when  to  a  war-worn  veteran  it  would  be 
a  mere  incident.  For  instance,  to  the  soldier  of  one 
battle,  San  Juan  Hill  was  an  Achievement  with  an  A  as 
big  as  the  Pyramids  of  Cheops  ;  whereas,  if  Napoleon  had 
fought  it,  he  would  have  set  it  down  on  his  cuff  at  the 
time  to  keep  from  forgetting  it  had  happened.  But  that 
is  all  natural  and  human  enough.   We  are  all  like  that." 

The  curiosities  and  absurdities  of  religious  superstitions 
never  failed  to  furnish  him  with  themes  more  or  less 
amusing.  I  remember  one  Sunday,  when  he  walked  down 
to  have  luncheon  at  my  house,  he  sat  under  the  shade 
and  fell  to  talking  of  Herod's  slaughter  of  the  innocents, 
which  he  said  could  not  have  happened. 

"Tacitus  makes  no  mention  of  it,"  he  said,  "and  he 
would  hardly  have  overlooked  a  sweeping  order  like  that, 
issued  by  a  petty  ruler  like  Herod.  Just  consider  a  little 
king  of  a  corner  of  the  Roman  Empire  ordering  the 

1468 


Digitized  by  Google 


STORMFIELD  PHILOSOPHIES 


slaughter  of  the  first-born  of  a  lot  of  Roman  subjects. 
Why,  the  Emperor  would  have  reached  out  that  long  arm 
of  his  and  dismissed  Herod.  That  tradition  is  probably 
about  as  authentic  as  those  connected  with  a  number  of 
old  bridges  in  Europe  which  are  said  to  have  been  built 
by  Satan.  The  inhabitants  used  to  go  to  Satan  to  build 
bridges  for  them,  promising  him  the  soul  of  the  first  one 
that  crossed  the  bridge;  then,  when  Satan  had  the  bridge 
done,  they  would  send  over  a  rooster  or  a  jackass — a  cheap 
jackass;  that  was  for  Satan,  and  of  course  they  could 
fool  him  that  way  every  time.  Satan  must  have  been 
pretty  simple,  even  according  to  the  New  Testament,  or 
he  wouldn't  have  led  Christ  up  on  a  high  mountain  and 
offered  him  the  world  if  he  would  fall  down  and  worship 
him.  That  was  a  manifestly  absurd  proposition,  because 
Christ,  as  the  Son  of  God,  already  owned  the  world;  and, 
besides,  what  Satan  showed  him  was  only  a  few  rocky 
acres  of  Palestine.  It  is  just  as  if  some  one  should  try 
to  buy  Rockefeller,  the  owner  of  all  the  Standard  Oil 
Company,  with  a  gallon  of  kerosene." 

He  often  spoke  of  the  unseen  forces  of  creation,  the 
immutable  laws  that  hold  the  planet  in  exact  course  and 
bring  the  years  and  the  seasons  always  exactly  on  sched- 
ule time.  "The  Great  Law"  was  a  phrase  often  on  his 
lips.  The  exquisite  foliage,  the  cloud  shapes,  the  varieties 
of  color  everywhere:  these  were  for  him  outward  mani- 
festations of  the  Great  Law,  whose  principle  I  understood 
to  be  unity — exact  relations  throughout  all  nature ;  and  in 
this  I  failed  to  find  any  suggestion  of  pessimism,  but  only 
of  justice.    Once  he  wrote  on  a  card  for  preservation: 

From  everlasting  to  everlasting,  this  is  the  law:  the  sum  of 
wrong  &  misery  shall  always  keep  exact  step  with  the  sum  of 
human  blessedness. 

No  "civilization,"  no  "advance,"  has  ever  modified  these 
proportions  by  even  the  shadow  of  a  shade,  nor  ever  can,  while 
our  race  endures. 

1469 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXIV 


CITIZEN  AND  FARMER 


HE  procession  of  guests  at  Stormfield  continued 


visitors  set  down  their  names  and  the  dates  of  arrival  and 
departure,  and  when  they  failed  to  attend  to  these 
matters  he  diligently  did  it  himself  after  they  were 


Members  of  the  Harper  Company  came  up  with  their 
wives;  "angel-fish"  swam  in  and  out  of  the  aquarium; 
Bermuda  friends  came  to  see  the  new  home;  Robert  Col- 
lier, the  publisher,  and  his  wife — ' 4  Mrs.  Sally,"  as  Clemens 
liked  to  call  her — paid  their  visits;  Lord  Northcliffe,  who 
was  visiting  America,  came  with  Colonel  Harvey,  and 
was  so  impressed  with  the  architecture  of  Stormfield 
that  he  adopted  its  plans  for  a  country-place  he  was  about 
to  build  in  Newfoundland.  Helen  Keller,  with  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Macy,  came  up  for  a  week-end  visit.  Mrs.  Crane 
came  over  from  Elmira;  and,  behold!  one  day  came  the 
long-ago  sweetheart  of  his  childhood,  little  Laura  Hawkins 
— Laura  Frazer  now,  widowed  and  in  the  seventies,  with 
a  granddaughter  already  a  young  lady  quite  grown  up. 

That  Mark  Twain  was  not  wearying  of  the  new  con- 
ditions we  may  gather  from  a  letter  written  to  Mrs. 
Rogers  in  October: 

I've  grown  young  in  these  months  of  dissipation  here. 
And  I  have  left  off  drinking — it  isn't  necessary  now.  Society 
&  theology  are  sufficient  for  mc. 

1470 


Clemens  kept  a  book  in  which 


gone. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CITIZEN  AND  FARMER 


To  Helen  Allen,  a  Bermuda  "Angel-Fish,"  he  wrote: 

We  have  good  times  here  in  this  soundless  solitude  on  the 
hilltop.  The  moment  I  saw  the  house  I  was  glad  I  built  it, 
&  now  I  am  gladder  &  gladder  all  the  time.  I  was  not  dreaming 
of  living  here  except  in  the  summer-time — that  was  before  I  saw 
this  region  &  the  house,  you  see— but  that  is  all  changed  now; 
I  shall  stay  here  winter  &  summer  both  &  not  go  back  to  New 
York  at  all.  My  child,  it's  as  tranquil  &  contenting  as  Bermuda. 
You  will  be  very  welcome  here,  dear. 

He  interested  himself  in  the  affairs  and  in  the  people 
of  Redding.  Not  long  after  his  arrival  he  had  gathered 
in  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  country-side,  neighbors  of 
every  quality,  for  closer  acquaintance,  and  threw  open 
to  them  for  inspection  every  part  of  the  new  house.  He 
appointed  Mrs.  Lounsbury,  whose  acquaintance  was  very 
wide,  a  sort  of  committee  on  reception,  and  stood  at  the 
entrance  with  her  to  welcome  each  visitor  in  person. 

It  was  a  sort  of  gala  day,  and  the  rooms  and  the  grounds 
were  filled  with  the  visitors.  In  the  dining-room  there 
were  generous  refreshments.  Again,  not  long  afterward, 
he  issued  a  special  invitation  to  all  of  those— architects, 
builders,  and  workmen — who  had  taken  any  part,  how- 
ever great  or  small,  in  the  building  of  his  home.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Littleton  were  visiting  Stormfield  at  this  time, 
and  both  Clemens  and  Littleton  spoke  to  these  assembled 
guests  from  the  terrace,  and  made  them  feel  that  their 
efforts  had  been  worth  while. 

Presently  the  idea  developed  to  establish  something 
that  would  be  of  benefit  to  his  neighbors,  especially  to 
those  who  did  not  have  access  to  much  reading-matter. 
He  had  been  for  years  flooded  with  books  by  authors  and 
publishers,  and  there  was  a  heavy  surplus  at  his  home 
in  the  city.  When  these  began  to  arrive  he  had  a  large 
number  of  volumes  set  aside  as  the  nucleus  of  a  public 
library.    An  unused  chapel  not  far  away — it  could  be  seen 

1471 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


from  one  of  his  windows— was  obtained  for  the  purpose; 
officers  were  elected;  a  librarian  was  appointed,  and  so  the 
Mark  Twain  Library  of  Redding  was  duly  established. 
Clemens  himself  was  elected  its  first  president,  with  the 
resident  physician,  Eh*.  Ernest  H.  Smith,  vice-president, 
and  another  resident,  William  E.  Grumman,  librarian. 
On  the  afternoon  of  its  opening  the  president  made  a  brief 
address.    He  said: 

I  am  here  to  speak  a  few  instructive  words  to  my  fellow- 
farmers.  I  suppose  you  are  all  farmers.  I  am  going  to  put  in  a 
crop  next  year,  when  I  have  been  here  long  enough  and  know 
how.  I  couldn't  make  a  turnip  stay  on  a  tree  now  after  I  had 
grown  it.  I  like  to  talk.  It  would  take  more  than  the  Redding 
air  to  make  me  keep  still,  and  I  like  to  instruct  people.  It's 
noble  to  be  good,  and  it's  nobler  to  teach  others  to  be  good,  and 
less  trouble.  I  am  glad  to  help  this  library.  We  get  our  morals 
from  books.  I  didn't  get  mine  from  books,  but  I  know  that 
morals  do  come  from  books — theoretically  at  least.  NCr.  Beard 
or  Mr.  Adams  will  give  some  land,  and  by  and  by  we  are 
going  to  have  a  building  of  our  own. 

This  statement  was  news  to  both  Mr.  Beard  and  Mr. 
Adams  and  an  inspiration  of  the  moment;    but  Mr. 
•Theodore  Adams,  who  owned  a  most  desirable  site,  did 
in  fact  promptly  resolve  to  donate  it  for  library  pur- 
poses.   Clemens  continued : 

I  am  going  to  help  build  that  library  with  contributions — 
from  my  visitors.  Every  male  guest  who  comes  to  my  house 
will  have  to  contribute  a  dollar  or  go  away  without  his  baggage.1 
If  those  burglars  that  broke  into  my  house  recently  had  done 
that  they  would  have  been  happier  now,  or  if  they'd  have 
broken  into  this  library  they  would  have  read  a  few  books  and 
led  a  better  life.  Now  they  are  in  jail,  and  if  they  keep  on  they 
will  go  to  Congress.   When  a  person  starts  downhill  you  can 

1  A  characteristic  notice  to  guests  requiring  them  to  contribute 
a  dollar  to  the  Library  Building  Fund  was  later  placed  on  the 
billiard-room  mantel  at  Stormfield  with  good  results. 

1472 


Digitized  by  Google 


CITIZEN  AND  FARMER 


never  tell  where  he's  going  to  stop.  I  am  sorry  for  those  bur- 
glars. They  got  nothing  that  they  wanted  and  scared  away 
most  of  my  servants.  Now  we  are  putting  in  a  burglar-alarm 
instead  of  a  dog.  Some  advised  the  dog,  but  it  costs  even  more 
to  entertain  a  dog  than  a  burglar.  I  am  having  the  ground 
electrified,  so  that  for  a  mile  around  any  one  who  puts  his  foot 
across  the  line  sets  off  an  alarm  that  will  be  heard  in  Europe. 
Now  I  will  introduce  the  real  president  to  you,  a  man  whom  you 
know  already — Dr.  Smith. 

So  a  new  and  important  benefit  was  conferred  upon 
the  community,  and  there  was  a  feeling  that  Redding, 
besides  having  a  literary  colony,  was  to  be  literary  in  fact. 

It  might  have  been  mentioned  earlier  that  Redding 
already  had  literary  associations  when  Mark  Twain  ar- 
rived. As  far  back  as  Revolutionary  days  Joel  Barlow, 
a  poet  of  distinction,  and  once  Minister  to  France,  had 
been  a  resident  of  Redding,  and  there  were  still  Barlow 
descendants  in  the  township. 

William  Ed  gar  Grumman,  the  librarian,  had  written 
the  story  of  Redding's  share  in  the  Revolutionary  War — 
no  small  share,  for  Gen.  Israel  Putnam's  army  had  been 
quartered  there  during  at  least  one  long,  trying  winter. 
Charles  Burr  Todd,  of  one  of  the  oldest  Redding  families, 
himself  'still  a  resident,  was  also  the  author  of  a  Redding 
history. 

Of  literary  folk  not  native  to  Redding,  Dora  Reed 
Goodale  and  her  sister  Elaine,  the  wife  of  Dr.  Charles 
A.  Eastman,  had  long  been  residents  of  Redding  Center; 
Jeanette  L.  Gilder  and  Ida  M.  Tarbell  had  summer 
homes  on  Redding  Ridge;  Dan  Beard,  as  already  men- 
tioned, owned  a  place  near  the  banks  of  the  Saugatuck, 
while  Kate  V.  St.  Maur,  also  two  of  Nathaniel  Haw- 
thorne's granddaughters  had  recently  located  adjoining 
the  Stormfield  lands.  By  which  it  will  be  seen  that  Red- 
ding was  in  no  way  unsuitable  as  a  home  for  Mark  Twain. 


Digitized  by  google 


CCLXXV 


A  MANTEL  AND  A  BABY  ELEPHANT 


ARK  TWAIN  was  the  receiver  of  two  notable  pres- 


Hawaii,  presented  to  him  by  the  Hawaiian  Promotion 
Committee,  was  set  in  place  in  the  billiard-room  on  the 
morning  of  his  seventy-third  birthday.  This  committee 
had  written,  proposing  to  build  for  his  new  home  either  a 
mantel  or  a  chair,  as  he  might  prefer,  the  same  to  be 
carved  from  the  native  woods.  Clemens  decided  on  a 
billiard-room  mantel,  and  John  Howells  forwarded  the 
proper  measurements.  So,  in  due  time,  the  mantel 
arrived,  a  beautiful  piece  of  work  and  in  fine  condition, 
with  the  Hawaiian  word,  "Aloha,"  one  of  the  sweetest 
forms  of  greeting  in  any  tongue,  carved  as  its  central 
ornament. 

To  the  donors  of  the  gift  Clemens  wrote: 

The  beautiful  mantel  was  put  in  its  place  an  hour  ago,  &  its 
friendly  "Aloha"  was  the  first  uttered  greeting  received  on  my 
73d  birthday.  It  is  rich  in  color,  rich  in  quality,  &  rich  in 
decoration;  therefore  it  exactly  harmonized  with  the  taste  for 
such  things  which  was  born  in  me  &  which  I  have  seldom  been 
able  to  indulge  to  my  content.  It  will  be  a  great  pleasure  to  me, 
daily  renewed,  to  have  under  my  eye  this  lovely  reminder  of  the 
loveliest  fleet  of  islands  that  lies  anchored  in  any  ocean,  &  I 
beg  to  thank  the  committee  for  providing  me  that  pleasure. 

To  F.  N.  Otremba,  who  had  carved  the  mantel,  he  sent 
this  word: 


The  first  of  these,  a  mantel  from 


1474 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  MANTEL  AND  A  BABY  ELEPHANT 


I  am  grateful  to  you  for  the  valued  compliment  to  me  in  the 
labor  of  heart  and  hand  and  brain  which  you  have  put  upon  it. 
It  is  worthy  of  the  choicest  place  in  the  house  and  it  has  it. 

It  was  the  second  beautiful  mantel  in  Stormfield — the 
Hartford  library  mantel,  removed  when  that  house  was 
sold,  having  been  installed  in  the  Stormfield  living-room. 

Altogether  the  seventy-third  birthday  was  a  pleasant 
one.  Clemens,  in  the  morning,  drove  down  to  see  the 
library  lot  which  Mr.  Theodore  Adams  had  presented, 
and  the  rest  of  the  day  there  were  fine,  close  billiard 
games,  during  which  he  was  in  the  gentlest  and  happiest 
moods.  He  recalled  the  games  of  two  years  before,  and 
as  we  stopped  playing  I  said: 

"I  hope  a  year  from  now  we  shall  be  here,  still  play- 
ing the  great  game." 

And  he  answered,  as  then: 

"Yes,  it  is  a  great  game — the  best  game  on  earth." 
And  he  held  out  his  hand  and  thanked  me  for  coming, 
as  he  never  failed  to  do  when  we  parted,  though  it  always 
hurt  me  a  little,  for  the  debt  was  so  largely  mine. 

Mark  Twain's  second  present  came  at  Christmas-time. 
About  ten  days  earlier,  a  letter  came  from  Robert 
J.  Collier,  saying  that  he  had  bought  a  baby  elephant 
which  he  intended  to  present  to  Mark  Twain  as  a  Christ- 
mas gift.  He  added  that  it  would  be  sent  as  soon  as  he 
could  get  a  car  for  it,  and  the  loan  of  a  keeper  from  Bar- 
num  &  Bailey's  headquarters  at  Bridgeport. 

The  news  created  a  disturbance  in  Stormfield.  One 
could  not  refuse,  discourteously  and  abruptly,  a  costly 
present  like  that;  but  it  seemed  a  disaster  to  accept  it. 
An  elephant  would  require  a  roomy  and  warm  place,  also 
a  variety  of  attention  which  Stormfield  was  not  prepared 
to  supply.  The  telephone  was  set  going  and  certain 
timid  excuses  were  offered  by  the  secretary.  There  was 
no  good  place  to  put  an  elephant  in  Stormfield,  but 
Mr.  Collier  said,  quite  confidently: 

1475 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"Oh,  put  him  in  the  garage." 

"But  there's  no  heat  in  the  garage." 

"Well,  put  him  in  the  loggia,  then.  That's  closed  in, 
isn't  it,  for  the  winter?  Plenty  of  sunlight — just  the 
place  for  a  young  elephant." 

"  But  we  play  cards  in  the  loggia.  We  use  it  for  a  sort 
of  sun-parlor." 

"But  that  wouldn't  matter.  He's  a  kindly,  playful 
little  thing.  He'll  be  just  like  a  kitten.  I'll  send  the 
man  up  to  look  over  the  place  and  tell  you  just  how  to 
take  care  of  him,  and  I'll  send  up  several  bales  of  hay  in 
advance.  It  isn't  a  large  elephant,  you  know:  just  a 
little  one — a  regular  plaything." 

There  was  nothing  further  to  be  done;  only  to  wait 
and  dread  until  the  Christmas  present's  arrival. 

A  few  days  before  Christmas  ten  bales  of  hay  arrived 
and  several  bushels  of  carrots.  This  store  of  provender 
aroused  no  enthusiasm  at  Stormfield.  It  would  seem 
there  was  no  escape  now. 

On  Christmas  morning  Mr.  Lounsbury  telephoned  up 
that  there  was  a  man  at  the  station  who  said  he  was  an 
elephant- trainer  from  Barnum  &  Bailey's,  sent  by  Mr. 
Collier  to  look  at  the  elephant's  quarters  and  get  him 
settled  when  he  should  arrive.  Orders  were  given  to 
bring  the  man  over.    The  day  of  doom  was  at  hand. 

But  Lounsbury's  detective  instinct  came  once  more 
into  play.  He  had  seen  a  good  many  elephant-trainers  at 
Bridgeport,  and  he  thought  this  one  had  a  doubtful  look. 

"Where  is  the  elephant?"  he  asked,  as  they  drove 
along. 

"He  will  arrive  at  noon." 

"Where  are  you  going  to  put  him?" 

"In  the  loggia." 

"How  big  is  he?" 

"About  the  size  of  a  cow." 

"How  long  have  you  been  with  Barnum  and  Bailey?" 

1476 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  MANTEL  AND  A  BABY  ELEPHANT 


"Six  years/' 

"Then  you  must  know  some  friends  of  mine"  (naming 
two  that  had  no  existence  until  that  moment). 

"Oh  yes,  indeed.    I  know  them  well." 

Lounsbury  didn't  say  any  more  just  then,  but  he  had 
a  feeling  that  perhaps  the  dread  at  Stormfield  had  grown 
unnecessarily  large.  Something  told  him  that  this  man 
seemed  rather  more  like  a  butler,  or  a  valet,  than  an  ele- 
phant-trainer. They  drove  to  Stormfield,  and  the  trainer 
looked  over  the  place.  It  would  do  perfectly,  he  said. 
He  gave  a  few  instructions  as  to  the  care  of  this  new 
household  feature,  and  was  driven  back  to  the  station 
to  bring  it. 

Lounsbury  came  back  by  and  by,  bringing  the  elephant 
but  not  the  trainer.  It  didn't  need  a  trainer.  It  was  a 
beautiful  specimen,  with  soft,  smooth  coat  and  handsome 
trappings,  perfectly  quiet,  well-behaved  and  small — suited 
to  the  loggia,  as  Collier  had  said — for  it  was  only 
two  feet  long  and  beautifully  made  of  cloth  and  cotton — 
one  of  the  finest  toy  elephants  ever  seen  anywhere. 

It  was  a  good  joke,  such  as  Mark  Twain  loved — a  care- 
fully prepared,  harmless  bit  of  foolery.  He  wrote  Robert 
Collier,  threatening  him  with  all  sorts  of  revenge,  declar- 
ing that  the  elephant  was  devastating  Stormfield. 

"To  send  an  elephant  in  a  trance,  under  pretense  that 
it  was  dead  or  stuffed!"  he  said.  "The  animal  came  to 
life,  as  you  knew  it  would,  and  began  to  observe  Christ- 
mas, and  we  now  have  no  furniture  left  and  no  servants 
and  no  visitors,  no  friends,  no  photographs,  no  burglars 
— nothing  but  the  elephant.  Be  kind,  be  merciful,  be 
generous;  take  him  away  and  send  us  what  is  left  of  the 
earthquake." 

Collier  wrote  that  he  thought  it  unkind  of  him  to  look 
a  gift-elephant  in  the  trunk.  And  with  such  chaffing 
and  gaiety  the  year  came  to  an  end. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXVI 


SHAKESPEARE-BACON  TALK 

WHEN  the  bad  weather  came  there  was  not  much 
company  at  Stormfield,  and  I  went  up  regularly 
each  afternoon,  for  it  was  lonely  on  that  bleak  hill,  and 
after  his  forenoon  of  reading  or  writing  he  craved  di- 
version. My  own  home  was  a  little  more  than  a  half- 
mile  away,  and  I  enjoyed  the  walk,  whatever  the  weather. 
I  usually  managed  to  arrive  about  three  o'clock.  He 
would  watch  from  his  high  windows  until  he  saw  me 
raise  the  hilltop,  and  he  would  be  at  the  door  when  I 
arrived,  so  that  there  might  be  no  delay  in  getting  at  the 
games.  Or,  if  it  happened  that  he  wished  to  show  me 
something  in  his  room,  I  would  hear  his  rich  voice  sound- 
ing down  the  stair.  Once,  when  I  arrived,  I  heard  him 
calling,  and  going  up  I  found  him  highly  pleased  with 
the  arrangement  of  two  pictures  on  a  chair,  placed  so 
that  the  glasses  of  them  reflected  the  sunlight  on  the 
ceiling.   He  said: 

"They  seem  to  catch  the  reflection  of  the  sky  and  the 
winter  colors.  Sometimes  the  hues  are  wonderfully  irides- 
cent." 

He  pointed  to  a  bunch  of  wild  red  berries  on  the  mantel 
with  the  sun  on  them. 

"How  beautifully  they  light  up!"  he  said;  "some  of 
them  in  the  sunlight,  some  still  in  the  shadow." 

He  walked  to  the  window  and  stood  looking  out  on 
the  somber  fields. 

"The  lights  and  colors  are  always  changing  there,"  he 
said.   "I  never  tire  of  it." 

1478 


Digitized  by  Google 


SHAKESPEARE. BACON  TALK 


To  see  him  then  so  full  of  the  interest  and  delight  of 
the  moment,  one  might  easily  believe  he  had  never  known 
tragedy  and  shipwreck.  More  than  any  one  I  ever  knew, 
he  lived  in  the  present.  Most  of  us  are  either  dreaming 
of  the  past  or  anticipating  the  future — forever  beating 
the  dirge  of  yesterday  or  the  tattoo  of  to-morrow.  Mark 
Twain's  step  was  timed  to  the  march  of  the  moment. 
There  were  days  when  he  recalled  the  past  and  grieved 
over  it,  and  when  he  speculated  concerning  the  future; 
but  his  greater  interest  was  always  of  the  now,  and  of 
the  particular  locality  where  he  found  it.  The  thing 
which  caught  his  fancy,  however  slight  or  however  im- 
portant, possessed  him  fully  for  the  time,  even  if  never 
afterward. 

He  was  especially  interested  that  winter  in  the  Shake- 
speare-Bacon problem.  He  had  long  been  unable  to  be- 
lieve that  the  actor-manager  from  Stratford  had  written 
those  great  plays,  and  now  a  book  just  published,  The 
Shakespeare  Problem  Restated,  by  George  Greenwood,  and 
another  one  in  press,  Some  Characteristic  Signatures  of 
Francis  Bacon,  by  William  Stone  Booth,  had  added  the 
last  touch  of  conviction  that  Francis  Bacon,  and  Bacon 
only,  had  written  the  Shakespeare  dramas.  I  was  ardent- 
ly opposed  to  this  idea.  The  romance  of  the  boy,  Will 
Shakespeare,  who  had  come  up  to  London  and  began 
by  holding  horses  outside  of  the  theater,  and  ended  by 
winning  the  proudest  place  in  the  world  of  letters, 
was  something  I  did  not  wish  to  let  perish.  I  produced 
all  the  stock  testimony — Ben  Jonson's  sonnet,  the  in- 
ternal evidence  of  the  plays  themselves,  the  actors  who 
had  published  them — but  he  refused  to  accept  any  of  it. 
He  declared  that  there  was  not  a  single  proof  to  show  that 
Shakespeare  had  written  one  of  them. 

"Is  there  any  evidence  that  he  didn't?"  I  asked. 

"There's  evidence  that  he  couldn't,"  he  said.  "It  re- 
quired a  man  with  the  fullest  legal  equipment  to  have 

1479 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


written  them.  When  you  have  read  Greenwood's  book 
you  will  see  how  untenable  is  any  argument  for  Shake- 
speare's authorship." 

I  was  willing  to  concede  something,  and  offered  a  com- 
promise. 

"Perhaps,"  I  said,  "Shakespeare  was  the  Belasco  of 
that  day — the  managerial  genius,  unable  to  write  plays 
himself,  but  with  the  supreme  gift  of  making  effective 
drama  from  the  plays  of  others.  In  that  case  it  is  not 
unlikely  that  the  plays  would  be  known  as  Shakespeare's. 
Even  in  this  day  John  Luther  Long's  "Madam  Butter- 
fly"  is  sometimes  called  Belasco's  play,  though  it  is  doubt- 
ful if  Belasco  ever  wrote  a  line  of  it." 

He  considered  this  view,  but  not  very  favorably.  The 
Booth  book  was  at  this  time  a  secret,  and  he  had  not 
told  me  anything  concerning  it;  but  he  had  it  in  his  mind 
when  he  said,  with  an  air  of  the  greatest  conviction: 

"I  know  that  Shakespeare  did  not  write  those  plays, 
and  I  have  reason  to  believe  he  did  not  touch  the  text 
in  any  way." 

"How  can  you  be  so  positive?"  I  asked. 

He  replied: 

"  I  have  private  knowledge  from  a  source  that  cannot 
be  questioned." 

I  now  suspected  that  he  was  joking,  and  asked  if  he 
had  been  consulting  a  spiritual  medium;  but  he  was 
clearly  in  earnest. 

"It  is  the  great  discovery  of  the  age,"  he  said,  quite 
seriously.  "The  world  will  soon  ring  with  it.  I  wish  I 
could  tell  you  about  it,  but  I  have  passed  my  word.  You 
will  not  have  long  to  wait." 

I  was  going  to  sail  for  the  Mediterranean  in  February, 
and  I  asked  if  it  would  be  likely  that  I  would  know  this 
great  secret  before  I  sailed.  He  thought  not;  but  he  said 
that  more  than  likely  the  startling  news  would  be  given  to 
the  world  while  I  was  on  the  water,  and  it  might  come  to 

1480 


Digitized  by  Google 


SHAKESPEARE-BACON  TALK 


me  on  the  ship  by  wireless.  I  confess  I  was  amazed  and 
intensely  curious  by  this  time.  I  conjectured  the  dis- 
covery of  some  document — some  Bacon  or  Shakespeare 
private  paper  which  dispelled  all  the  mystery  of  the 
authorship.  I  hinted  that  he  might  write  me  a  letter 
which  I  could  open  on  the  ship;  but  he  was  firm  in  his 
refusal.  He  had  passed  his  word,  he  repeated,  and  the 
news  might  not  be  given  out  as  soon  as  that;  but  he 
assured  me  more  than  once  that  wherever  I  might  be,  in 
whatever  remote  locality,  it  would  come  by  cable,  and 
the  world  would  quake  with  it.  I  was  tempted  to  give 
up  my  trip,  to  be  with  him  at  Stormfield  at  the  time  of 
the  upheaval. 

Naturally  the  Shakespeare  theme  was  uppermost  dur- 
ing the  remaining  days  that  we  were  together.  He  had 
engaged  another  stenographer,  and  was  now  dictating, 
forenoons,  his  own  views  on  the  subject — views  co- 
ordinated with  those  of  Mr.  Greenwood,  whom  he  liber- 
ally quoted,  but  embellished  and  decorated  in  his  own 
gay  manner.  These  were  chapters  for  his  autobiography, 
he  said,  and  I  think  he  had  then  no  intention  of  making 
a  book  of  them.  I  could  not  quite  see  why  he  should 
take  all  this  argumentary  trouble  if  he  had,  as  he  said, 
positive  evidence  that  Bacon,  and  not  Shakespeare,  had 
written  the  plays.  I  thought  the  whole  matter  very 
curious. 

The  Shakespeare  interest  had  diverging  by-paths.  One 
evening,  when  we  were  alone  at  dinner,  he  said: 

"There  is  only  one  other  illustrious  man  in  history 
about  whom  there  is  so  little  known,"  and  he  added, 
"Jesus  Christ." 

He  reviewed  the  statements  of  the  Gospels  concerning 
Christ,  though  he  declared  them  to  be  mainly  traditional 
and  of  no  value.  I  agreed  that  they  contained  confusing 
statements,  and  conflicted  more  or  less  with  justice  and 
reason;  but  I  said  I  thought  there  was  truth  in  them,  too. 

1481 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"Why  do  you  think  so?"  he  asked. 

"Because  they  contain  matters  that  are  self-evident — 
things  eternally  and  essentially  just." 

"Then  you  make  your  own  Bible?" 

"Yes,  from  those  materials  combined  with  human 
reason." 

"Then  it  does  not  matter  where  the  truth,  as  you  call 
it,  comes  from?" 

I  admitted  that  the  source  did  not  matter;  that  truth 
from  Shakespeare,  Epictetus,  or  Aristotle  was  quite  as 
valuable  as  from  the  Scriptures.  We  were  on  common 
ground  now.  He  mentioned  Marcus  Aurelius,  the  Stoics, 
and  their  blameless  lives.  I,  still  pursuing  the  thought 
of  Jesus,  asked : 

"Do  you  not  think  it  strange  that  in  that  day  when 
Christ  came,  admitting  that  there  was  a  Christ,  such 
a  character  could  have  come  at  all — in  the  time  of  the 
Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees,  when  all  was  ceremony  and 
unbelief?" 

"I  remember,"  he  said,  "the  Sadducees  didn't  believe 
in  hell.    He  brought  them  one." 

"Nor  the  resurrection.    He  brought  them  that,  also." 

He  did  not  admit  that  there  had  been  a  Christ  with 
the  character  and  mission  related  by  the  Gospels. 

" It  is  all  a  myth,"  he  said.  "There  have  been  Saviours 
in  every  age  of  the  world.  It  is  all  just  a  fairy  tale,  like 
the  idea  of  Santa  Claus." 

"But,"  I  argued,  "even  the  spirit  of  Christmas  is  real 
when  it  is  genuine.  Suppose  that  we  admit  there  was 
no  physical  Saviour — that  it  is  only  an  idea — a  spiritual 
embodiment  which  humanity  has  made  for  itself  and  is 
willing  to  improve  upon  as  its  own  spirituality  improves, 
wouldn't  that  make  it  worthy?" 

"But  then  the  fairy  story  of  the  atonement  dissolves, 
and  with  it  crumbles  the  very  foundations  of  any  estab- 
lished church.    You  can  create  your  own  Testament, 

1482 


Digitized  by  Google 


SHAKESPEARE-BACON  TALK 


your  own  Scripture,  and  your  own  Christ,  but  you've 
got  to  give  up  your  atonement." 

"As  related  to  the  crucifixion,  yes,  and  good  riddance 
to  it;  but  the  death  of  the  old  order  and  the  growth  of 
spirituality  comes  to  a  sort  of  atonement,  doesn't  it?" 

He  said: 

"A  conclusion  like  that  has  about  as  much  to  do  with 
the  Gospels  and  Christianity  as  Shakespeare  had  to  do 
with  Bacon's  plays.  You  are  preaching  a  doctrine  that 
would  have  sent  a  man  to  the  stake  a  few  centuries  ago. 
I  have  preached  that  in  my  own  Gospel." 

I  remembered  then,  and  realized  that,  by  my  own 
clumsy  ladder,  I  had  merely  mounted  from  dogma  and 
superstition  to  his  platform  of  training  the  ideals  to  a 
higher  contentment  of  soul. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXVII 


"IS  SHAKESPEARE  DEAD?" 

I SET  out  on  my  long  journey  with  much  reluctance. 
However,  a  series  of  guests  with  various  diversions  had 
been  planned,  and  it  seemed  a  good  time  to  go.  Clemens 
gave  me  letters  of  introduction,  and  bade  me  Godspeed. 
It  would  be  near  the  end  of  April  before  I  should  see  him 
again. 

Now  and  then  on  the  ship,  and  in  the  course  of  my 
travels,  I  remembered  the  great  news  I  was  to  hear  co- 
cerning  Shakespeare.  In  Cairo,  at  Shepheard's,  I  looked 
eagerly  through  English  newspapers,  expecting  any  mo- 
ment to  come  upon  great  head-lines;  but  I  was  always 
disappointed.  Even  on  the  return  voyage  there  was  no 
one  I  could  find  who  had  heard  any  particular  Shake- 
speare news. 

Arriving  in  New  York,  I  found  that  Clemens  himself 
had  published  his  Shakespeare  dictations  in  a  little 
volume  of  his  own,  entitled,  Is  Shakespeare  Dead?  The 
title  certainly  suggested  spiritistic  matters,  and  I  got  a 
volume  at  Harpers',  and  read  it  going  up  on  the  train, 
hoping  to  find  somewhere  in  it  a  solution  of  the  great 
mystery.  But  it  was  only  matter  I  had  already  known; 
the  secret  was  still  unrevealed. 

At  Redding  I  lost  not  much  time  in  getting  up  to 
Stormfield.  There  had  been  changes  in  my  absence. 
Clara  Clemens  had  returned  from  her  travels,  and  Jean, 
whose  health  seemed  improved,  was  coming  home  to  be 
her  father's  secretary.    He  was  greatly  pleased  with 

1484 


Digitized  by  Google 


"IS  SHAKESPEARE  DEAD?" 


these  things,  and  declared  he  was  going  to  have  a  home 
once  more  with  his  children  about  him. 

He  was  quite  alone  that  day,  and  we  walked  up  and 
down  the  great  living-room  for  an  hour,  perhaps,  while 
he  discussed  his  new  plans.  For  one  thing,  he  had  in- 
corporated his  pen-name,  Mark  Twain,  in  order  that  the 
protection  of  his  copyrights  and  the  conduct  of  his  liter- 
ary business  in  general  should  not  require  his  personal 
attention.  He  seemed  to  find  a  relief  in  this,  as  he  always 
did  in  dismissing  any  kind  of  responsibility.  When  we 
went  in  for  billiards  I  spoke  of  his  book,  which  I  had  read 
on  the  way  up,  and  of  the  great  ^Shakespearian  secret 
which  was  to  astonish  the  world.  Then  he  told  me  that 
the  matter  had  been  delayed,  but  that  he  was  no  longer 
required  to  suppress  it;  that  the  revelation  was  in  the 
form  of  a  book — a  book  which  revealed  conclusively  to 
any  one  who  would  take  the  trouble  to  follow  the  direc- 
tions that  the  acrostic  name  of  Francis  Bacon  in  a  great 
variety  of  forms  ran  through  many — probably  through  all 
— of  the  so-called  Shakespeare  plays.  He  said  it  was  far 
and  away  beyond  anything  of  the  kind  ever  published; 
that  Ignatius  Donnelly  and  others  had  merely  glimpsed 
the  truth,  but  that  the  author  of  this  book,  William 
Stone  Booth,  had  demonstrated,  beyond  any  doubt  or 
question,  that  the  Bacon  signatures  were  there.  The 
book  would  be  issued  in  a  few  days,  he  said.  He  had 
seen  a  set  of  proofs  of  it,  and  while  it  had  not  been  pub- 
lished in  the  best  way  to  clearly  demonstrate  its  great 
revelation,  it  must  settle  the  matter  with  every  reasoning 
mind.  He  confessed  that  his  faculties  had  been  more  or 
less  defeated  in  attempting  to  follow  the  ciphers,  and  he 
complained  bitterly  that  the  evidence  had  not  been  set 
forth  so  that  he  who  merely  skims  a  book  might  grasp  it. 

He  had  failed  on  the  acrostics  at  first;  but  more  re- 
cently he  had  understood  the  rule,  and  had  been  able  to 
work  out  several  Bacon  signatures.  He  complimented  me 
in. — -'4  1485 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


by  saying  that  he  felt  sure  that  when  the  book  came  I 
would  have  no  trouble  with  it. 

Without  going  further  with  this  matter,  I  may  say 
here  that  the  book  arrived  presently,  and  between  us 
we  did  work  out  a  considerable  number  of  the  claimed 
acrostics  by  following  the  rules  laid  down.  It  was  cer- 
tainly an  interesting  if  not  wholly  convincing  occupation, 
and  it  would  be  a  difficult  task  for  any  one  to  prove  that 
the  ciphers  are  not  there.  Just  why  this  pretentious 
volume  created  so  little  agitation  it  would  be  hard  to 
say.  Certainly  it  did  not  cause  any  great  upheaval  in 
the  literary  world,  and  the  name  of  William  Shakespeare 
still  continues  to  be  printed  on  the  title-page  of  those 
marvelous  dramas  so  long  associated  with  his  name. 

Mark  Twain's  own  book  on  the  subject — Is  Shakespeare 
Dead? — found  a  wide  acceptance,  and  probably  convinced 
as  many  readers.  It  contained  no  new  arguments;  but 
it  gave  a  convincing  touch  to  the  old  ones,  and  it  was 
certainly  readable.1 

Among  the  visitors  who  had  come  to  Stormfield  was 
Howells.  Clemens  had  called  a  meeting  of  the  Human 
Race  Club,  but  only  Howells  was  able  to  attend.  We 
will  let  him  tell  of  his  visit: 

'  We  got  on  very  well  without  the  absentees,  after  finding  them 
in  the  wrong,  as  usual,  and  the  visit  was  like  those  I  used  to  have 
with  him  so  many  years  before  in  Hartford,  but  there  was  not  the 
old  ferment  of  subjects.  Many  things  had  been  discussed  and 
put  away  for  good,  but  we  had  our  old  fondness  for  nature  and 
for  each  other,  who  were  so  differently  parts  of  it.  He  showed 
his  absolute  content  with  his  house,  and  that  was  the  greater 

1  Mark  Twain  had  the  fullest  conviction  as  to  the  Bacon  authorship 
of  the  Shakespeare  plays.  One  evening,  with  Mr.  Edward  Loo  in  is, 
we  attended  a  fine  performance  of  "Romeo  and  Juliet"  given  by 
Sothern  and  Marlowe.  At  the  close  of  one  splendid  scene  he  said, 
quite  earnestly,  "That  is  about  the  best  play  that  Lord  Bacon  ever 
wrote." 

i486 


Digitized  by  Google 


"IS  SHAKESPEARE  DEAD?" 


pleasure  for  me  because  it  was  my  son  who  designed  it.  The 
architect  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to  be  able  to  plan  it  where 
a  natural  avenue  of  savins,  the  close-knit,  slender,  cypress-like 
cedars  of  New  England,  led  away  from  the  rear  of  the  villa 
to  the  little  level  of  a  pergola,  meant  some  day  to  be  wreathed 
and  roofed  with  vines.  But  in  the  early  spring  days  all  the 
landscape  was  in  the  beautiful  nakedness  of  the  Northern  winter. 
It  opened  in  the  surpassing  loveliness  of  wooded  and  meadowed 
uplands,  under  skies  that  were  the  first  days  blue,  and  the  last 
gray  over  a  rainy  and  then  a  snowy  floor.  We  walked  up  and 
down,  up  and  down,  between  the  villa  terrace  and  the  pergola, 
and  talked  with  the  melancholy  amusement,  the  sad  tolerance 
of  age  for  the  sort  of  men  and  things  that  used  to  excite  us  or 
enrage  us;  now  we  were  far  past  turbulence  or  anger.  Once 
we  took  a  walk  together  across  the  yellow  pastures  to  a  chasm al 
creek  on  his  grounds,  where  the  ice  still  knit  the  clayey  banks 
together  like  crystal  mosses;  and  the  stream  far  down  clashed 
through  and  over  the  stones  and  the  shards  of  ice.  Clemens 
pointed  out  the  scenery  he  had  bought  to  give  himself  elbow- 
room,  and  showed  me  the  lot  he  was  going  to  have  me  build 
on.  The  next  day  we  came  again  with  the  geologist  he  had 
asked  up  to  Stormfield  to  analyze  its  rocks.  Truly  he  loved  the 
place.  .  .  . 

My  visit  at  Stormfield  came  to  an  end  with  tender  relucting 
on  his  part  and  on  mine.  Every  morning  before  I  dressed  I 
heard  him  sounding  my  name  through  the  house  for  the  fun  of 
it  and  I  know  for  the  fondness,  and  if  I  looked  out  of  my  door 
there  he  was  in  his  long  nightgown  swaying  up  and  down  the 
corridor,  and  wagging  his  great  white  head  like  a  boy  that 
leaves  his  bed  and  comes  out  in  the  hope  of  frolic  with  some  one. 
The  last  morning  a  soft  sugar-snow  had  fallen  and  was  falling, 
and  I  drove  through  it  down  to  the  station  in  the  carriage  which 
had  been  given  him  by  his  wife's  father  when  they  were  first 
married,  and  had  been  kept  all  those  intervening  years  in 
honorable  retirement  for  this  final  use.1  Its  springs  had  not 
grown  yielding  with  time,  it  had  rather  the  stiffness  and  severity 

1  This  carriage— a  finely  built  coupe— had  been  presented  to 
Mrs.  Crane  when  the  Hartford  house  was  closed.  When  Stormfield 
was  built  she  returned  it  to  its  original  owner. 

1487 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


of  age;  but  for  him  it  must  have  swung  low  like  the  sweet  chariot 
of  the  negro  "spiritual"  which  I  heard  him  sing  with  such 
fervor  when  those  wonderful  hymns  of  the  slaves  began  to  make 
their  way  northward. 

Howells's  visit  resulted  in  a  new  inspiration.  Clemens 
started  to  write  him  one  night  when  he  could  not  sleep, 
and  had  been  reading  the  volume  of  letters  of  James  Rus- 
sell Lowell.  Then,  next  morning,  he  was  seized  with  the 
notion  of  writing  a  series  of  letters  to  such  friends  as 
Howells,  Twichell,  and  Rogers — letters  not  to  be  mailed, 
but  to  be  laid  away  for  some  future  public.  He  wrote 
two  of  these  immediately — to  Howells  and  to  Twichell. 
The  Howells  letter  (or  letters,  for  it  was  really  double) 
is  both  pathetic  and  amusing.    The  first  part  ran: 

3  in  the  morning,  April  17,  iqoq. 

My  pen  has  gone  dry  and  the  ink  is  out  of  reach.  Howells, 
did  you  write  me  day-before-day-before  yesterday  or  did  I 
dream  it?  In  my  mind's  eye  I  most  vividly  see  your  hand- 
write  on  a  square  blue  envelope  in  the  mail-pile.  I  have  hunted 
the  house  over,  but  there  is  no  such  letter.    Was  it  an  illusion? 

I  am  reading  Lowell's  letters  &  smoking.  I  woke  an  hour 
ago  &  am  reading  to  keep  from  wasting  the  time.  On  page  305, 
Vol.  I,  I  have  just  margined  a  note: 

"  Young  friend!    I  like  thai!    You  ought  to  sec  him  now." 

It  seemed  startlingly  strange  to  hear  a  person  call  you  young. 
It  was  a  brick  out  of  a  blue  sky,  &  knocked  me  groggy  for  a 
moment.  Ah  me,  the  pathos  of  it  is  that  we  were  young  then. 
And  he — why,  so  was  he,  but  he  didn't  know  it.  He  didn't  even 
know  it  9  years  later,  when  we  saw  him  approaching  and  you 
warned  me,  saying: 

"Don't  say  anything  about  age — he  has  just  turned  50  & 
thinks  he  is  old,  &  broods  over  it." 

Well,  Clara  did  sing!   And  you  wrote  her  a  dear  letter. 

Time  to  go  to  sleep. 

Yours  ever, 

Mark. 

1488 


Digitized  by  Google 


IS  SHAKESPEARE  DEAD?" 


The  second  letter,  begun  at  10  a.m.,  outlines  the  plan 
by  which  he  is  to  write  on  the  subject  uppermost  in  his 
mind  without  restraint,  knowing  that  the  letter  is  not  to 
be  mailed. 

.  .  .  The  scheme  furnishes  a  definite  target  for  each  letter,  & 
you  can  choose  the  target  that's  going  to  be  the  most  sympathetic 
for  what  you  are  hungering  &  thirsting  to  say  at  that  particular 
moment.  And  you  can  talk  with  a  quite  unallowable  frankness 
&  freedom  because  you  are  not  going  to  send  the  letter.  When 
you  are  on  fire  with  theology  you'll  not  write  it  to  Rogers,  who 
wouldn't  be  an  inspiration;  you'll  write  it  to  Twichell,  because 
it  will  make  him  writhe  and  squirm  &  break  the  furniture. 
When  you  are  on  fire  with  a  good  thing  that's  indecent  you 
won't  waste  it  on  Twichell;  you'll  save  it  for  Howells,  who  will 
love  it.  As  he  will  never  see  it  you  can  make  it  really  indecenter 
than  he  could  stand;  &  so  no  harm  is  done,  yet  a  vast  advantage 
is  gained. 

The  letter  was  not  finished,  and  the  scheme  perished 
there.  The  Twichell  letter  concerned  missionaries,  and 
added  nothing  to  what  he  had  already  said  on  the  subject. 

He  wrote  no  letter  to  Mr.  Rogers — perhaps  never  wrote 
to  him  again. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXVIII 


THE  DEATH  OF  HENRY  ROGERS 

CLEMENS,  a  little  before  my  return,  had  been  on  a 
trip  to  Norfolk,  Virginia,  to  attend  the  opening 
ceremonies  of  the  Virginia  Railway.  He  had  made  a 
speech  on  that  occasion,  in  which  he  had  paid  a  public 
tribute  to  Henry  Rogers,  and  told  something  of  his  per- 
sonal obligation  to  the  financier. 

He  began  by  telling  what  Mr.  Rogers  had  done  for 
Helen  Keller,  whom  he  called  "  the  most  marvelous  per- 
son of  her  sex  that  has  existed  on  this  earth  since  Joan 
of  Arc."   Then  he  said: 

That  is  not  all  Mr.  Rogers  has  done,  but  you  never  see  that 
side  of  his  character  because  it  is  never  protruding;  but  he  lends 
a  helping  hand  daily  out  of  that  generous  heart  of  his.  You 
never  hear  of  it.  He  is  supposed  to  be  a  moon  which  has  one 
side  dark  and  the  other  bright.  But  the  other  side,  though  you 
don't  see  it,  is  not  dark;  it  is  bright,  and  its  rays  penetrate,  and 
others  do  see  it  who  are  not  God. 

I  would  take  this  opportunity  to  tell  something  that  I  have 
never  been  allowed  to  tell  by  Mr.  Rogers,  either  by  my  mouth 
or  in  print,  and  if  I  don't  look  at  him  I  can  tell  it  now. 

In  1894,  when  the  publishing  company  of  Charles  L.  Webster, 
of  which  I  was  financial  agent,  failed,  it  left  me  heavily  in  debt. 
If  you  will  remember  what  commerce  was  at  that  time  you  will 
recall  that  you  could  not  sell  anything,  and  could  not  buy  any- 
thing, and  I  was  on  my  back;  my  books  were  not  worth  any- 
thing at  all,  and  I  could  not  give  away  my  copyrights.  Mr. 
Rogers  had  long-enough  vision  ahead  to  say,  "Your  books  have 
supported  you  before,  and  after  the  panic  is  over  they  will  sup- 

1490 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DEATH  OF  HENRY  ROGERS 


port  you  again,"  and  that  was  a  correct  proposition.  He  saved 
my  copyrights,  and  saved  me  from  financial  ruin.  He  it  was 
who  arranged  with  my  creditors  to  allow  me' to  roam  the  face  of 
the  earth  and  persecute  the  nations  thereof  with  lectures,  promis- 
ing at  the  end  of  four  years  I  would  pay  dollar  for  dollar.  That 
arrangement  was  made,  otherwise  I  would  now  be  living  out- 
of-doors  under  an  umbrella,  and  a  borrowed  one  at  that. 

You  see  his  white  mustache  and  his  hair  trying  to  get  white 
(he  is  always  trying  to  look  like  me — I  don't  blame  him  for  that). 
These  are  only  emblematic  of  his  character,  and  that  is  all.  I 
say,  without  exception,  hair  and  all,  he  is  the  whitest  man  I  have 
ever  known. 

This  had  been  early  in  April.  Something  more  than  a 
month  later  Clemens  was  making  a  business  trip  to  New 
York  to  see  Mr.  Rogers.  I  was  telephoned  early  to  go 
up  and  look  over  some  matters  with  him  before  he  started. 
I  do  not  remember  why  I  was  not  to  go  along  that  day, 
for  I  usually  made  such  trips  with  him.  I  think  it  was 
planned  that  Miss  Clemens,  who  was  in  the  city,  was  to 
meet  him  at  the  Grand  Central  Station.  At  all  events, 
she  did  meet  him  there,  with  the  news  that  during  the 
night  Mr.  Rogers  had  suddenly  died.  This  was  May 
20,  1909.   The  news 

I  had  lost  no  time  in  preparations  to  follow  by  the  next 
train.  I  joined  him  at  the  Grosvenor  Hotel,  on  Fifth 
Avenue  and  Tenth  Street.  He  was  upset  and  deeply 
troubled  by  the  loss  of  his  stanch  adviser  and  friend. 
He  had  a  helpless  look,  and  he  said  his  friends  were  dying 
away  from  him  and  leaving  him  adrift. 

"And  how  I  hate  to  do  anything,''  he  added,  "that  re- 
quires the  least  modicum  of  intelligence!" 

We  remained  at  the  Grosvenor  for  Mr.  Rogers's  funeral. 
Clemens  served  as  one  of  the  pall-bearers,  but  he  did  not 
feel  equal  to  the  trip  to  Fairhaven.  He  wanted  to  be 
very  quiet,  he  said.  He  could  not  undertake  to  travel 
that  distance  among  those  whom  he  knew  so  well,  and 

1491 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


with  whom  he  must  of  necessity  join  in  conversation; 
so  we  remained  in  the  hotel  apartment,  reading  and  saying 
very  little  until  bedtime.  Once  he  asked  me  to  write  a 
letter  to  Jean:  "Say,  'Your  father  says  every  little  while, 
"  How  glad  I  am  that  Jean  is  at  home  again!" '  for  that 
is  true  and  I  think  of  it  all  the  time." 

But  by  and  by,  after  a  long  period  of  silence,  he  said : 

"  Mr.  Rogers  is  under  the  ground  now." 

And  so  passed  out  of  earthly  affairs  the  man  who  had 
contributed  so  largely  to  the  comfort  of  Mark  Twain's 
old  age.  He  was  a  man  of  fine  sensibilities  and  generous 
impulses;  withal  a  keen  sense  of  humor. 

One  Christmas,  when  he  presented  Mark  Twain  with  a 
watch  and  a  match-case,  he  wrote: 

My  dear  Clemens, — For  many  years  your  friends  have  been 
complaining  of  your  use  of  tobacco,  both  as  to  quantity  and 
quality.  Complaints  are  now  coming  in  of  your  use  of  time. 
Most  of  your  friends  think  that  you  are  using  your  supply  some- 
what lavishly,  but  the  chief  complaint  is  in  regard  to  the  quality. 

I  have  been  appealed  to  in  the  mean  time,  and  have  concluded 
that  it  is  impossible  to  get  the  right  kind  of  time  from  a  blacking- 
box. 

Therefore,  I  take  the  liberty  of  sending  you  herewith  a  ma- 
chine that  will  furnish  only  the  best.  Please  use  it  with  the  kind 
wishes  of  Yours  truly,        H.  H.  Rogers. 

P.  S. — Complaint  has  also  been  made  in  regard  to  the  furrows 
you  make  in  your  trousers  in  scratching  matches.  You  will  find 
a  furrow  on  the  bottom  of  the  article  inclosed.  Please  use  it. 
Compliments  of  the  season  to  the  family. 

He  was  a  man  too  busy  to  write  many  letters,  but  when 
he  did  write  (to  Clemens  at  least)  they  were  always  playful 
and  unhurried.  One  reading  them  would  not  find  it  easy 
to  believe  that  the  writer  was  a  man  on  whose  shoulders 
lay  the  burdens  of  stupendous  finance — burdens  so  heavy 
that  at  last  he  was  crushed  beneath  their  weight. 

1492 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXIX 


AN  EXTENSION  OF  COPYRIGHT 

ONE  of  the  pleasant  things  that  came  to  Mark  Twain 
that  year  was  the  passage  of  a  copyright  bill,  which 
added  to  the  royalty  period  an  extension  of  fourteen 
years.  Champ  Clark  had  been  largely  instrumental  in  the 
success  of  this  measure,  and  had  been  fighting  for  it  steadily 
since  Mark  Twain's  visit  to  Washington  in  1906.  Follow- 
ing that  visit,  Clark  wrote: 

...  It  [the  original  bill)  would  never  pass  because  the  bill 
had  literature  and  music  all  mixed  together.  Being  a  Missouri  an 
of  course  it  would  give  me  great  pleasure  to  be  of  service  to 
you.  What  I  want  to  say  is  this:  you  have  prepared  a  simple 
bill  relating  only  to  the  copyright  of  books;  send  it  to  me  and 
I  will  try  to  have  it  passed. 

Clemens  replied  that  he  might  have  something  more  to 
say  on  the  copyright  question  by  and  by — that  he  had  in 
hand  a  dialogue 1  which  would  instruct  Congress,  but  this 
he  did  not  complete.  Meantime  a  simple  bill  was  pro- 
posed and  early  in  1909  it  became  a  law.  In  June  Clark 
wrote: 

Dr.  Samuel  L.  Clemens, 

Stormfield,  Redding,  Conn. 

My  dear  Doctor, — I  am  gradually  becoming  myself  again, 
after  a  period  of  exhaustion  that  almost  approximated  prostra- 

1  Similar  to  the  "Open  Letter  to  the  Register  of  Copyrights," 
North  American  Review,  January,  1905. 

1493 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


tion.  After  a  long  lecture  tour  last  summer  I  went  immediately 
into  a  hard  campaign;  as  soon  as  the  election  was  over,  and  I 
had  recovered  my  disposition,  I  came  here  and  went  into  those 
tariff  hearings,  which  began  shortly  after  breakfast  each  day, 
and  sometimes  lasted  until  midnight.  Listening  patiently  and 
meekly,  withal,  to  the  lying  of  tariff  barons  for  many  days  and 
nights  was  followed  by  the  work  of  the  long  session;  that  was 
followed  by  a  hot  campaign  to  take  Uncle  Joe's  rules  away  from 
him;  on  the  heels  of  that  "Campaign  that  Failed"  came  the 
tariff  fight  in  the  House.  I  am  now  getting  time  to  breathe 
regularly  and  I  am  writing  to  ask  you  if  the  copyright  law  is 
acceptable  to  you.  If  it  is  not  acceptable  to  you  I  want  to 
ask  you  to  write  and  tell  me  how  it  should  be  changed  and  I 
will  give  my  best  endeavors  to  the  work.  I  believe  that  your 
ideas  and  wishes  in  the  matter  constitute  the  best  guide  we 
have  as  to  what  should  be  done  in  the  case. 

Your  friend,        Champ  Clark. 

To  this  Clemens  replied: 

Stormtield,  Redding,  Conn.,  June  5,  /pop. 

Dear  Champ  Clark,— Is  the  new  copyright  law  acceptable 
to  me?  Emphatically  yes!  Clark,  it  is  the  only  sane  & 
clearly  defined  &  just  &  righteous  copyright  law  that  has  ever 
existed  in  the  United  States.  Whosoever  will  compare  it  with 
its  predecessors  will  have  no  trouble  in  arriving  at  that  decision. 

The  bill  which  was  before  the  committee  two  years  ago  when 
I  was  down  there  was  the  most  stupefying  jumble  of  conflicting 
&  apparently  irreconcilable  interests  that  was  ever  seen;  and 
we  all  said  "the  case  is  hopeless,  absolutely  hopeless — out  of 
this  chaos  nothing  can  be  built."  But  we  were  in  error;  out 
of  that  chaotic  mass  this  excellent  bill  has  been  constructed,  the 
warring  interests  have  been  reconciled,  and  the  result  is  as 
comely  and  substantial  a  legislative  edifice  as  lifts  its  domes 
and  towers  and  protective  lightning-rods  out  of  the  statute- 
book  I  think.  When  I  think  of  that  other  bill,  which  even  the 
Deity  couldn't  understand,  and  of  this  one,  which  even  I  can 
understand,  I  take  off  my  hat  to  the  man  or  men  who  devised 
this  one.  Was  it  R.  U.  Johnson?  Was  it  the  Authors'  League? 
Was  it  both  together?   I  don't  know,  but  I  take  off  my  hat, 

1494 


Digitized  by  Google 


AN  EXTENSION  OF  COPYRIGHT 


anyway.  Johnson  has  written  a  valuable  article  about  the  new 
law — I  inclose  it. 

At  last — at  last  and  for  the  first  time  in  copyright  history — 
we  are  ahead  of  England !  Ahead  of  her  in  two  ways:  by  length 
of  time  and  by  fairness  to  all  interests  concerned.  Does  this 
sound  like  shouting?  Then  I  must  modify  it:  all  we  possessed 
of  copyright  justice  before  the  4th  of  last  March  we  owed  to 
England's  initiative. 

Truly  yours, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 

Clemens  had  prepared  what  was  the  final  word  on  the 
subject  of  copyright  just  before  this  bill  was  passed — a 
petition  for  a  law  which  he  believed  would  regulate  the 
whole  matter.  It  was  a  generous,  even  if  a  somewhat 
Utopian,  plan,  eminently  characteristic  of  its  author. 
The  new  fourteen-year  extension,  with  the  prospect  of 
more,  made  this  or  any  other  compromise  seem  in- 
advisable.1 

1  The  reader  may  consider  this  last  copyright  document  by  Mark 
Twain  under  Appendix  N,  at  the  end  of  this  volume. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXX 


A  WARNING 

CLEMENS  had  promised  to  go  to  Baltimore  for  the 
graduation  of  "Francesca"  of  his  London  visit  in 
1907 — and  to  make  a  short  address  to  her  class. 

It  was  the  eighth  of  June  when  we  set  out  on  this 
journey,1  but  the  day  was  rather  bleak  and  there  was  a 
chilly  rain.  Clemens  had  a  number  of  errands  to  do  in 
New  York,  and  we  drove  from  one  place  to  another,  at- 
tending to  them.  Finally,  in  the  afternoon,  the  rain  ceased, 
and  while  I  was  arranging  some  matters  for  him  he  con- 
cluded to  take  a  ride  on  the  top  of  a  Fifth  Avenue  stage. 
It  was  fine  and  pleasant  when  he  started,  but  the  weather 
thickened  again  and  when  he  returned  he  complained  that 
he  had  felt  a  little  chilly.  He  seemed  in  fine  condition, 
however,  next  morning  and  was  in  good  spirits  all  the  way 
to  Baltimore.  Chauncey  Depew  was  on  the  train  and 
they  met  in  the  dining-car — the  last  time,  I  think,  they 
ever  saw  each  other.  He  was  tired  when  we  reached  the 
Belvedere  Hotel  in  Baltimore  and  did  not  wish  to  see  the 
newspaper  men.    It  happened  that  the  reporters  had  a 

1  The  reader  may  remember  that  it  was  the  8th  of  June,  1867, 
that  Mark  Twain  sailed  for  the  Holy  Land.  It  was  the  8th  of 
June,  1907,  that  he  sailed  for  England  to  take  his  Oxford  degree. 
This  8th  of  June,  1909,  was  at  least  slightly  connected  with  both 
events,  for  he  was  keeping  an  engagement  made  with  Francesca 
in  London,  and  my  notes  show  that  he  discussed,  on  the  way  to  the 
station,  some  incidents  of  his  Holy  Land  trip  and  his  attitude  at 
that  time  toward  Christian  traditions.  As  he  rarely  mentioned  the 
Quaker  City  trip,  the  coincidence  seems  rather  curious.  It  is  most 
unlikely  that  Clemens  himself  in  any  way  associated  the  two  dates. 

1496 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  WARNING 


special  purpose  in  coming  just  at  this  time,  for  it  had 
suddenly  developed  that  in  his  Shakespeare  book,  through 
an  oversight,  due  to  haste  in  publication,  full  credit  had 
not  been  given  to  Mr.  Greenwood  for  the  long  extracts 
quoted  from  his  work.  The  sensational  head-lines  in  a 
morning  paper,  "Is  Mark  Twain  a  Plagiarist?"  had 
naturally  prompted  the  newspaper  men  to  see  what 
he  would  have  to  say  on  the  subject.  It  was  a  simple 
matter,  easily  explained,  and  Clemens  himself  was  less 
disturbed  about  it  than  anybody.  He  felt  no  sense  of 
guilt,  he  said ;  and  the  fact  that  he  had  been  stealing  and 
caught  at  it  would  give  Mr.  Greenwood's  book  far  more 
advertising  than  if  he  had  given  him  the  full  credit  which 
he  had  intended.  He  found  a  good  deal  of  amusement  in 
the  situation,  his  only  worry  being  that  Clara  and  Jean 
would  see  the  paper  and  be  troubled. 

He  had  taken  off  his  clothes  and  was  lying  down, 
reading.  After  a  little  he  got  up  and  began  walking  up 
and  down  the  room.  Presently  he  stopped  and,  facing 
me,  placed  his  hand  upon  his  breast.    He  said: 

"I  think  I  must  have  caught  a  little  cold  yesterday  on 
that  Fifth  Avenue  stage.  I  have  a  curious  pain  in  my 
breast. 

I  suggested  that  he  lie  down  again  and  I  would  fill  his 
hot-water  bag.  The  pain  passed  away  presently,  and  he 
seemed  to  be  dozing.  I  stepped  into  the  next  room  and 
busied  myself  with  some  writing.  By  and  by  I  heard 
him  stirring  again  and  went  in  where  he  was.  He  was 
walking  up  and  down  and  began  talking  of  some  recent 
ethnological  discoveries  —  something  relating  to  prehis- 
toric man. 

"  What  a  fine  boy  that  prehistoric  man  must  have  been," 
he  said — ' '  the  very  first  one !  Think  of  the  gaudy  style  of 
him,  how  he  must  have  lorded  it  over  those  other  creatures, 
walking  on  his  hind  legs,  waving  his  arms,  practising  and 
getting  ready  for  the  pulpit." 

1497 


Digitized  by  Gotogle 


MARK  TWAIN 


The  fancy  amused  him,  but  presently  he  paused  in  his 
walk  and  again  put  his  hand  on  his  breast,  saying: 

"That  pain  has  come  back.  It's  a  curious,  sickening, 
deadly  kind  of  pain.    I  never  had  anything  just  like  it." 

It  seemed  to  me  that  his  face  had  become  rather  gray. 
I  said: 

"Where  is  it,  exactly,  Mr.  Clemens?" 

He  laid  his  hand  in  the  center  of  his  breast  and  said: 

"It  is  here,  and  it  is  very  peculiar  indeed." 

Remotely  in  my  mind  occurred  the  thought  that  he  had 
located  his  heart,  and  the  "peculiar  deadly  pain"  he  had 
mentioned  seemed  ominous.  I  suggested,  however,  that 
it  was  probably  some  rheumatic  touch,  and  this  opinion 
seemed  warranted  when,  a  few  moments  later,  the  hot 
water  had  again  relieved  it.  This  time  the  pain  had  ap- 
parently gone  to  stay,  for  it  did  not  return  while  we  were 
in  Baltimore.  It  was  the  first  positive  manifestation  of 
the  angina  which  eventually  would  take  him  from  us. 

The  weather  was  pleasant  in  Baltimore,  and  his  visit 
to  St.  Timothy's  School  and  his  address  there  were  the 
kind  of  diversions  that  meant  most  to  him.  The  flock  of 
girls,  all  in  their  pretty  commencement  dresses,  assembled 
and  rejoicing  at  his  playfully  given  advice :  not  to  smoke — 
to  excess;  not  to  drink — to  excess;  not  to  marry — to 
excess;  he  standing  there  in  a  garb  as  white  as  their  own 
— it  made  a  rare  picture — a  sweet  memory — and  it  was 
the  last  time  he  ever  gave  advice  from  the  platform  to 
any  one. 

Edward  S.  Martin  also  spoke  to  the  school,  and  then 
there  was  a  great  feasting  in  the  big  assembly-hall. 

It  was  on  the  lawn  that  a  reporter  approached  him 
with  the  news  of  the  death  of  Edward  Everett  Hale — 
another  of  the  old  group.  Clemens  said  thoughtfully, 
after  a  moment: 

"I  had  the  greatest  respect  and  esteem  for  Edward 
Everett  Hale,  the  greatest  admiration  for  his  work.  I 

1498 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  WARNING 


am  as  grieved  to  hear  of  his  death  as  I  can  ever  be  to 
hear  of  the  death  of  any  friend,  though  my  grief  is  always 
tempered  with  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  for  the 
one  that  goes,  the  hard,  bitter  struggle  of  life  is  ended." 

We  were  leaving  the  Belvedere  next  morning,  and  when 
the  subject  of  breakfast  came  up  for  discussion  he  said: 

"That  was  the  most  delicious  Baltimore  fried  chicken 
we  had  yesterday  morning.  I  think  we'll  just  repeat  that 
order.    It  reminds  me  of  John  Quarles's  farm." 

We  had  been  having  our  meals  served  in  the  rooms, 
but  we  had  breakfast  that  morning  down  in  the  dining- 
room,  and  44  Francesca  "  and  her  mother  were  there. 

As  he  stood  on  the  railway  platform  waiting  for  the 
train,  he  told  me  how  once,  fifty-five  years  before,  as  a  boy  of 
eighteen,  he  had  changed  cars  there  for  Washington  and  had 
barely  caught  his  train — the  crowd  yelling  at  him  as  he  ran. 

We  remained  overnight  in  New  York,  and  that  evening, 
at  the  Grosvenor,  he  read  aloud  a  poem  of  his  own  which 
I  had  not  seen  before.  He  had  brought  it  along  with 
some  intention  of  reading  it  at  St.  Timothy's,  he  said, 
but  had  not  found  the  occasion  suitable. 

44 1  wrote  it  a  long  time  ago  in  Paris.  I'd  been  reading 
aloud  to  Mrs.  Clemens  and  Susy — in  '93, 1  think — about 
Lord  Clive  and  Warren  Hastings,  from  Macaulay — 
how  great  they  were  and  how  far  they  fell.  Then  I  took 
an  imaginary  case — that  of  some  old  demented  man 
mumbling  of  his  former  state.  I  described  him,  and  re- 
peated some  of  his  mumblings.  Susy  and  Mrs.  Clemens 
said,  'Write  it' — so  I  did,  by  and  by,  and  this  is  it. 
I  call  it  4 The  Derelict.'" 

He  read  in  his  effective  manner  that  fine  poem,  the 
opening  stanza  of  which  follows: 

You  sneer,  you  ships  that  pass  me  by, 
Your  snow-pure  canvas  towering  proud  I 

You  traders  base! — why,  once  such  fry 
Paid  reverence,  when  like  a  cloud 
1499 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Storm-swept  I  drove  along, 

My  Admiral  at  post,  his  pennon  blue 
Faint  in  the  wilderness  of  sky,  my  long 

Yards  bristling  with  my  gallant  crew, 
My  ports  flung  wide,  my  guns  displayed, 

My  tall  spars  hid  in  bellying  sail! 
— You  struck  your  topsails  then,  and  made 

Obeisance — now  your  manners  fail. 

He  had  employed  rhyme  with  more  facility  than  was 
usual  for  him,  and  the  figure  and  phrasing  were  full  of 
vigor. 

"It  is  strong  and  fine,"  I  said,  when  he  had  finished. 

"Yes,"  he  assented.  "It  seems  so  as  I  read  it  now. 
It  is  so  long  since  I  have  seen  it  that  it  is  like  reading 
another  man's  work.    I  should  call  it  good,  I  believe." 

He  put  the  manuscript  in  his  bag  and  walked  up  and 
down  the  floor  talking. 

"There  is  no  figure  for  the  human  being  like  the  ship," 
he  said;  "no  such  figure  for  the  storm-beaten  human 
drift  as  the  derelict — such  men  as  Clive  and  Hastings 
could  only  be  imagined  as  derelicts  adrift,  helpless, 
tossed  by  every  wind  and  tide." 

We  returned  to  Redding  next  day.  On  the  train  going 
home  he  fell  to  talking  of  books  and  authors,  mainly  of 
the  things  he  had  never  been  able  to  read. 

"When  I  take  up  one  of  Jane  Austen's  books,"  he  said, 
"  such  as  Pride  and  Prejudice,  I  feel  like  a  barkeeper  en- 
tering the  kingdom  of  heaven.  I  know  what  his  sensa- 
tion would  be  and  his  private  comments.  He  would  not 
find  the  place  to  his  taste,  and  he  would  probably  say  so." 

He  recalled  again  how  Stepniak  had  come  to  Hartford, 
and  how  humiliated  Mrs.  Clemens  had  been  to  confess 
that  her  husband  was  not  familiar  with  the  writings  of 
Thackeray  and  others. 

"I  don't  know  anything  about  anything,"  he  said, 
mournfully,  "and  never  did."   My  brother  used  to  try 

1500 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  WARNING 


to  get  me  to  read  Dickens,  long  ago.  I  couldn't  do  it — 
I  was  ashamed;  but  I  couldn't  do  it.  Yes,  I  have  read 
The  Tale  of  Two  Cities,  and  could  do  it  again.  I  have 
read  it  a  good  many  times;  but  I  never  could  stand 
Meredith  and  most  of  the  other  celebrities." 

By  and  by  he  handed  me  the  Saturday  Times  Review, 
saying: 

"Here  is  a  fine  poem,  a  great  poem,  I  think.  I  can 
stand  that." 

It  was  "The  Palatine  (in  the  'Dark  Ages*),"  by  Willa 
Sibert  Cather,  reprinted  from  McClure*s.  The  reader 
will  understand  better  than  I  can  express  why  these 
lofty  opening  stanzas  appealed  to  Mark  Twain: 

THE  PALATINE 

"Have  you  been  with  the  King  to  Rome, 

Brother,  big  brother?" 
"I've  been  there  and  I've  come  home, 

Back  to  your  play,  little  brother." 

"Oh,  how  high  is  Caesar's  house, 

Brother,  big  brother?" 
"Goats  about  the  doorways  browse; 
Night-hawks  nest  in  the  burnt  roof -tree, 
Home  of  the  wild  bird  and  home  of  the  bee. 

A  thousand  chambers  of  marble  lie 

Wide  to  the  sun  and  the  wind  and  the  sky. 

Poppies  we  find  amongst  our  wheat 

Grow  on  Caesar's  banquet  seat. 

Cattle  crop  and  neatherds  drowse 

On  the  floors  of  Caesar's  house." 

"But  what  has  become  of  Caesar's  gold, 

Brother,  big  brother?" 
"The  times  are  bad  and  the  world  is  old— 
Who  knows  the  where  of  the  Caesar's  gold? 
Night  comes  black  on  the  Caesar's  hill; 
The  wells  are  deep  and  the  tales  are  ill. 

1501 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Fireflies  gleam  in  the  damp  and  mold, 
All  that  is  left  of  the  Caesar's  gold. 
Back  to  your  play,  little  brother." 

Farther  along  in  our  journey  he  handed  me  the  paper 
again,  pointing  to  these  lines  of  Kipling: 

How  is  it  not  good  for  the  Christian's  health 

To  hurry  the  Aryan  brown, 
For  the  Christian  riles  and  the  Aryan  smiles, 

And  he  weareth  the  Christian  down; 
And  the  end  of  the  fight  is  a  tombstone  white 

And  the  name  of  the  late  deceased: 
And  the  epitaph  drear:  "A  fool  lies  here 

Who  tried  to  hustle  the  East." 

"I  could  stand  any  amount  of  that,"  he  said,  and  pres- 
ently: "Life  is  too  long  and  too  short.  Too  long  for 
the  weariness  of  it;  too  short  for  the  work  to  be  done. 
At  the  very  most,  the  average  mind  can  only  master  a 
few  languages  and  a  little  history." 

I  said:  "Still,  we  need  not  worry.  If  death  ends  all 
it  does  not  matter;  and  if  life  is  eternal  there  will  be 
time  enough." 

"Yes,"  he  assented,  rather  grimly,  "that  optimism  of 
yours  is  always  ready  to  turn  hell's  back  yard  into  a 
playground." 

I  said  that,  old  as  I  was,  I  had  taken  up  the  study  of 
French,  and  mentioned  Bayard  Taylor's  having  begun 
Greek  at  fifty,  expecting  to  need  it  in  heaven. 

Clemens  said,  reflectively:  "Yes — but  you  see — that 
was  Greek." 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXXI 


THE  LAST  SUMMER  AT  STORMPIELD 

I WAS  at  Stormfield  pretty  constantly  during  the  rest 
of  that  year.  At  first  I  went  up  only  for  the  day;  but 
later,  when  his  health  did  not  improve,  and  when  he  ex- 
pressed a  wish  for  companionship  evenings,  I  remained 
most  of  the  nights  as  well.  Our  rooms  were  separated 
only  by  a  bath-room;  and  as  neither  of  us  was  much  given 
to  sleep,  there  was  likely  to  be  talk  or  reading  aloud  at 
almost  any  hour  when  both  were  awake.  In  the  very 
early  morning  I  would  usually  slip  in,  softly,  sometimes 
to  find  him  propped  up  against  his  pillows  sound  asleep, 
his  glasses  on,  the  reading-lamp  blazing  away  as  it  usually 
did,  day  or  night;  but  as  often  as  not  he  was  awake,  and 
would  have  some  new  plan  or  idea  of  which  he  was  eager 
to  be  delivered,  and  there  was  always  interest,  and  nearly 
always  amusement  in  it,  even  if  it  happened  to  be  three 
in  the  morning  or  earlier. 

Sometimes,  when  he  thought  it  time  for  me  to  be 
stirring,  he  would  call  softly,  but  loudly  enough  for  me  to 
hear  if  awake;  and  I  would  go  in,  and  we  would  settle 
again  problems  of  life  and  death  and  science,  or,  rather, 
he  would  settle  them  while  I  dropped  in  a  remark  here 
and  there,  merely  to  hold  the  matter  a  little  longer  in 

The  pains  in  his  breast  came  back,  and  with  a  good 
deal  of  frequency  as  the  summer  advanced;  also,  they 
became  more  severe.  Dr.  Edward  Quintard  came  up 
from  New  York,  and  did  not  hesitate  to  say  that  the 

1503 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


trouble  proceeded  chiefly  from  the  heart,  and  counseled 
diminished  smoking,  with  less  active  exercise,  advising 
particularly  against  Clemens's  lifetime  habit  of  lightly 
skipping  up  and  down  stairs. 

There  was  no  prohibition  as  to  billiards,  however,  or 
leisurely  walking,  and  we  played  pretty  steadily  through 
those  peaceful  summer  days,  and  often  took  a  walk  down 
into  the  meadows  or  perhaps  in  the  other  direction,  when 
it  was  not  too  warm  or  windy.  Once  we  went  as  far 
as  the  river,  and  I  showed  him  a  part  of  his  land  he 
had  not  seen  before — a  beautiful  cedar  hillside,  remote 
and  secluded,  a  place  of  enchantment.  On  the  way  I 
pointed  out  a  little  corner  of  land  which  earlier  he  had 
given  me  to  straighten  our  division  line.  I  told  him  I 
was  going  to  build  a  study  on  it,  and  call  it  "Markland." 
He  thought  it  an  admirable  building-site,  and  I  think  he 
was  pleased  with  the  name.    Later  he  said: 

"If  you  had  a  place  for  that  extra  billiard-table  of 
mine  [the  Rogers  table,  which  had  been  left  in  New  York] 
I  would  turn  it  over  to  you." 

I  replied  that  I  could  adapt  the  size  of  my  proposed 
study  to  fit  a  billiard-table,  and  he  said: 

"Now  that  will  be  very  good.  Then,  when  I  want 
exercise,  I  can  walk  down  and  play  billiards  with  you, 
and  when  you  want  exercise  you  can  walk  up  and  play 
billiards  with  me.    You  must  build  that  study." 

So  it  was  we  planned,  and  by  and  by  Mr.  Lounsbury 
had  undertaken  the  work. 

During  the  walks  Clemens  rested  a  good  deal.  There 
were  the  New  England  hills  to  climb,  and  then  he  found 
that  he  tired  easily,  and  that  weariness  sometimes  brought 
on  the  pain.  As  I  remember  now,  I  think  how  bravely 
he  bore  it.  It  must  have  been  a  deadly,  sickening, 
numbing  pain,  for  I  have  seen  it  crumple  him,  and  his 
face  become  colorless  while  his  hand  dug  at  his  breast; 
but  he  never  complained,  he  never  bewailed,  and  at 

1504 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  LAST  SUMMER  AT  STORMFIELD 


billiards  he  would  persist  in  going  on  and  playing  in  his 
turn,  even  while  he  was  bowed  with  the  anguish  of  the 
attack. 

We  had  found  that  a  glass  of  very  hot  water  relieved 
it,  and  we  kept  always  a  thermos  bottle  or  two  filled  and 
ready.  At  the  first  hint  from  him  I  would  pour  out 
a  glass  and  another,  and  sometimes  the  relief  came  quick- 
ly; but  there  were  times,  and  alas!  they  came  oftener, 
when  that  deadly  gripping  did  not  soon  release  him. 
Yet  there  would  come  a  week  or  a  fortnight  when  he  was 
apparently  perfectly  well,  and  at  such  times  we  dismissed 
the  thought  of  any  heart  malady,  and  attributed  the 
whole  trouble  to  acute  indigestion,  from  which  he  had 
always  suffered  more  or  less. 

We  were  alone  together  most  of  the  time.  He  did  not 
appear  to  care  for  company  that  summer.  Clara  Clemens 
had  a  concert  tour  in  prospect,  and  her  father,  eager  for 
her  success,  encouraged  her  to  devote  a  large  part  of  her 
time  to  study.  For  Jean,  who  was  in  love  with  every 
form  of  outdoor  and  animal  life,  he  had  established  head- 
quarters in  a  vacant  farm-house  on  one  corner  of  the 
estate,  where  she  had  collected  some  stock  and  poultry, 
and  was  overflowingly  happy.  Ossip  Gabrilowitsch  was 
a  guest  in  the  house  a  good  portion  of  the  summer,  but 
had  been  invalided  through  severe  surgical  operations, 
and  for  a  long  time  rarely  appeared,  even  at  meal-times. 
So  it  came  about  that  there  could  hardly  have  been  a 
closer  daily  companionship  than  was  ours  during  this  the 
last  year  of  Mark  Twain's  life.  For  me,  of  course,  noth- 
ing can  ever  be  like  it  again  in  this  world.  One  is  not 
likely  to  associate  twice  with  a  being  from  another  star. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXXII 


PERSONAL  MEMORANDA 

IN  the  notes  I  made  of  this  period  I  caught  a  little 
drift  of  personality  and  utterance,  and  I  do  not  know 
better  how  to  preserve  these  things  than  to  give  them 
here  as  nearly  as  may  be  in  the  sequence  and  in  the  form 
in  which  they  were  set  down. 

One  of  the  first  of  these  entries  occurs  in  June,  when 
Clemens  was  re-reading  with  great  interest  and  relish 
Andrew  D.  White's  Science  and  Theology,  which  he  called 
a  lovely  book.1 

June  21.  A  peaceful  afternoon,  and  we  walked  farther  than 
usual,  resting  at  last  in  the  shade  of  a  tree  in  the  lane  that  leads 
to  Jean's  farm-house.  I  picked  a  dandelion-ball,  with  some  re- 
mark about  its  being  one  of  the  evidences  of  the  intelligent 
principle  in  nature — the  seeds  winged  for  a  wider  distribution. 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "those  are  the  great  evidences;  no  one  who 
reasons  can  doubt  them." 

And  presently  he  added: 

"That  is  a  most  amusing  book  of  White's.  When  you  read 
it  you  see  how  those  old  theologians  never  reasoned  at  all. 
White  tells  of  an  old  bishop  who  figured  out  that  God  created 
the  world  in  an  instant  on  a  certain  day  in  October  exactly  so 
many  years  before  Christ,  and  proved  it.  And  I  knew  a  preacher 
myself  once  who  declared  that  the  fossils  in  the  rocks  proved 
nothing  as  to  the  age  of  the  world.  He  said  that  God  could 
create  the  rocks  with  those  fossils  in  them  for  ornaments  if  He 
wanted  to.  Why,  it  takes  twenty  years  to  build  a  little  island 
in  the  Mississippi  River,  and  that  man  actually  believed  that 

'  A  History  of  the  Warfare  of  Science  with  Theology  in  Christen- 
dom. 

1506 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERSONAL  MEMORANDA 


God  created  the  whole  world  and  all  that's  in  it  in  six  days. 
White  tells  of  another  bishop  who  gave  two  new  reasons  for 
thunder;  one  being  that  God  wanted  to  show  the  world  His 
power,  and  another  that  He  wished  to  frighten  sinners  to  repent. 
Now  consider  the  proportions  of  that  conception,  even  in  the 
pettiest  way  you  can  think  of  it.  Consider  the  idea  of  God 
thinking  of  all  that.  Consider  the  President  of  the  United 
States  wanting  to  impress  the  flies  and  fleas  and  mosquitoes, 
getting  up  on  the  dome  of  the  Capitol  and  beating  a  bass-drum 
and  setting  off  red  fire." 

He  followed  the  theme  a  little  further,  then  we  made  our 
way  slowly  back  up  the  long  hill,  he  holding  to  my  arm, 
and  resting  here  and  there,  but  arriving  at  the  house 
seemingly  fresh  and  ready  for  billiards. 

June  23.  I  came  up  this  morning  with  a  basket  of  straw- 
berries. He  was  walking  up  and  down,  looking  like  an  ancient 
Roman.    He  said: 

"Consider  the  case  of  Elsie  Sigel1 — what  a  ghastly  ending  to 
any  life!" 

Then  turning  upon  me  fiercely,  he  continued: 
"Anybody  that  knows  anything  knows  that  there  was  not  a 
single  life  that  was  ever  lived  that  was  worth  living.  Not  a 
single  child  ever  begotten  that  the  begetting  of  it  was  not  a 
crime.  Suppose  a  community  of  people  to  be  living  on  the 
slope  of  a  volcano,  directly  under  the  crater  and  in  the  path  of 
lava-flow;  that  volcano  has  been  breaking  out  right  along  for 
ages  and  is  certain  to  break  out  again.  They  do  not  know  when 
it  will  break  out,  but  they  know  it  will  do  it— that  much  can  be 
counted  on.  Suppose  those  people  go  to  a  community  in  a  far 
neighborhood  and  say,  'We'd  like  to  change  places  with  you. 
Come  take  our  homes  and  let  us  have  yours.'  Those  people 
would  say, '  Never  mind,  we  are  not  interested  in  your  country. 
We  know  what  has  happened  there,  and  what  will  happen  again.' 
We  don't  care  to  live  under  the  blow  that  is  likely  to  fall  at 
any  moment;  and  yet  every  time  we  bring  a  child  into  the  world 
we  are  bringing  it  to  a  country,  to  a  community  gathered  under 

1  Granddaughter  of  Gen.  Franz  Sigel.  She  was  mysteriously 
murdered  while  engaged  in  settlement  work  among  the  Chinese. 

1507 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

the  crater  of  a  volcano,  knowing  that  sooner  or  later  death  will 
come,  and  that  before  death  there  will  be  catastrophes  in- 
finitely worse.  Formerly  it  was  much  worse  than  now,  for  before 
the  ministers  abolished  hell  a  man  knew,  when  he  was  begetting 
a  child,  that  he  was  begetting  a  soul  that  had  only  one  chance 
in  a  hundred  of  escaping  the  eternal  fires  of  damnation.  He 
knew  that  in  all  probability  that  child  would  be  brought  to 
damnation — one  of  the  ninety-nine  black  sheep.  But  since  hell 
has  been  abolished  death  has  become  more  welcome.  I  wrote  a 
fairy  story  once.  It  was  published  somewhere.  I  don't  re- 
member just  what  it  was  now,  but  the  substance  of  it  was  that 
a  fairy  gave  a  man  the  customary  wishes.  I  was  interested  in 
seeing  what  he  would  take.  First  he  chose  wealth  and  went 
away  with  it,  but  it  did  not  bring  him  happiness.  Then  he  came 
back  for  the  second  selection,  and  chose  fame,  and  that  did  not 
bring  happiness  either.  Finally  he  went  to  the  fairy  and  chose 
death,  and  the  fairy  said,  in  substance, '  If  you  hadn't  been  a  fool 
you'd  have  chosen  that  in  the  first  place.' 

"The  papers  called  me  a  pessimist  for  writing  that  story. 
Pessimist  !  the  man  who  isn't  a  pessimist  is  a  d — d  fool." 

But  this  was  one  of  his  savage  humors,  stirred  by  tragic 
circumstance.  Under  date  of  July  5th  I  find  this  happier 
entry: 

We  have  invented  a  new  game,  three-ball  carom  billiards, 
each  player  continuing  until  he  has  made  five,  counting  the 
number  of  his  shots  as  in  golf,  the  one  who  finishes  in  the  fewer 
shots  wins.  It  is  a  game  we  play  with  almost  exactly  equal 
skill,  and  he  is  highly  pleased  with  it.    He  said  this  afternoon : 

"I  have  never  enjoyed  billiards  as  I  do  now.  I  look  forward 
to  it  every  afternoon  as  my  reward  at  the  end  of  a  good  day's 
work."1 

We  went  out  in  the  loggia  by  and  by  and  Clemens  read  aloud 
from  a  book  which  Professor  Zubelin  left  here  a  few  days  ago — 

1  His  work  at  this  time  was  an  article  on  Marjorie  Fleming,  the 
"  wonder  child,"  whose  quaint  writings  and  brief  little  life  had  been 
published  to  the  world  by  Dr.  John  Brown.  Clemens  always  adored 
the  thought  of  Marjorie,  and  in  this  article  one  can  see  that  she 
ranked  almost  next  to  Joan  of  Arc  in  his  affections. 

1508 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERSONAL  MEMORANDA 


The  Religion  of  a  Democrat.  Something  in  it  must  have  suggested 
to  Clemens  his  favorite  science,  for  presently  he  said: 

"I  have  been  reading  an  old  astronomy;  it  speaks  of  the 
perfect  line  of  curvature  of  the  earth  in  spite  of  mountains  and 
abysses,  and  I  have  imagined  a  man  three  hundred  thousand 
miles  high  picking  up  a  ball  like  the  earth  and  looking  at  it  and 
holding  it  in  his  hand.  It  would  be  about  like  a  billiard-ball 
to  him,  and  he  would  turn  it  over  in  his  hand  and  rub  it  with  his 
thumb,  and  where  he  rubbed  over  the  mountain  ranges  he  might 
say,  'There  seems  to  be  some  slight  roughness  here,  but  I  can't 
detect  it  with  my  eye;  it  seems  perfectly  smooth  to  look  at.' 
The  Himalayas  to  him,  the  highest  peak,  would  be  one-sixty- 
thousandth  of  his  height,  or  about  the  one-thousandth  part  of 
an  inch  as  compared  with  the  average  man." 

I  spoke  of  having  somewhere  read  of  some  very  tiny  satel- 
lites, one  as  small,  perhaps,  as  six  miles  in  diameter,  yet  a 
genuine  world. 

"Could  a  man  live  on  a  world  so  small  as  that?"  I  asked. 

"Oh  yes,"  he  said.  "The  gravitation  that  holds  it  together 
would  hold  him  on,  and  he  would  always  seem  upright,  the  same 
as  here.  His  horizon  would  be  smaller,  but  even  if  he  were  six 
feet  tall  he  would  only  have  one  foot  for  each  mile  of  that 
world's  diameter,  so  you  see  he  would  be  little  enough,  even  for 
a  world  that  he  could  walk  around  in  half  a  day." 

He  talked  astronomy  a  great  deal — marvel  astronomy. 
He  had  no  real  knowledge  of  the  subject,  and  I  had  none 
of  any  kind,  which  made  its  ungraspable  facts  all  the 
more  thrilling.  He  was  always  thrown  into  a  sort  of 
ecstasy  by  the  unthinkable  distances  of  space — the  su- 
preme drama  of  the  universe.  The  fact  that  Alpha 
Centauri  was  twenty-five  trillions  of  miles  away— two 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  times  the  distance  of  our 
own  remote  sun,  and  that  our  solar  system  was  travel- 
ing, as  a  whole,  toward  the  bright  star  Vega,  in  the  con- 
stellation of  Lyra,  at  the  rate  of  forty-four  miles  a  second, 
yet  would  be  thousands  upon  thousands  of  years  reach- 
ing its  destination,  fairly  enraptured  him. 

The  astronomical  light-year — that  is  to  say,  the  distance 

1509 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


■ 


I        11   *  3  •  °  " 

».   100,000,000  U9 

)  §0,000.  4d0,0iQ 
*4-  *--Ln^-A_    L  nnn  />Art'  kn.  ..v.  .  i  > 


t  ,o  o  o ,  o  o  o,  ft  o  oak^.  ^        .  «w>-  * 

A.  *         *  4 


PART  OK  MARK  TWAIN'S  "  LIGHT-YEAR  "  CALCULATION 


which  light  travels  in  a  year — was  one  of  the  things  which 
he  loved  to  contemplate;  but  he  declared  that  no  two 
authorities  ever  figured  it  alike,  and  that  he  was  going 
to  figure  it  for  himself.  I  came  in  one  morning,  to  find 
that  he  had  covered  several  sheets  of  paper  with  almost 
interminable  rows  of  ciphers,  and  with  a  result,  to  him 
at  least,  entirely  satisfactory.  I  am  quite  certain  that 
he  was  prouder  of  those  figures  and  their  enormous  aggre- 
gate than  if  he  had  just  completed  an  immortal  tale;  and 
when  he  added  that  the  nearest  fixed  star — Alpha  Cen- 
tauri — was  between  four  and  five  light-years  distant  from 
the  earth,  and  that  there  was  no  possible  way  to  think 
that  distance  in  miles  or  even  any  calculable  fraction 
of  it,  his  glasses  shone  and  his  hair  was  roached  up  as 
with  the  stimulation  of  these  stupendous  facts. 
By  and  by  he  said: 

1510 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERSONAL  MEMORANDA 

"I  came  in  with  Halley's  comet  in  1835.  It  is  coming 
again  next  year,  and  I  expect  to  go  out  with  it.  It 
will  be  the  greatest  disappointment  of  my  life  if  I  don't 
go  out  with  Halley's  comet.  The  Almighty  has  said, 
no  doubt:  'Now  here  are  these  two  unaccountable  freaks; 
they  came  in  together,  they  must  go  out  together.'  Oh !  I 
am  looking  forward  to  that."   And  a  little  later  he  added : 

"I've  got  some  kind  of  a  heart  disease,  and  Quintard 
won't  tell  me  whether  it  is  the  kind  that  carries  a  man  off 
in  an  instant  or  keeps  him  lingering  along  and  suffering 
for  twenty  years  or  so.  I  was  in  hopes  that  Quintard 
would  tell  me  that  I  was  likely  to  drop  dead  any  minute; 
but  he  didn't.  He  only  told  me  that  my  blood-pressure 
was  too  strong.  He  didn't  give  me  any  schedule;  but 
I  expect  to  go  with  Halley's  comet." 

I  seem  to  have  omitted  making  any  entries  for  a  few 
days;  but  among  his  notes  I  find  this  entry,  which  seems 
to  refer  to  some  discussion  of  a  favorite  philosophy,  and 
has  a  special  interest  of  its  own : 

July  14,  1909.  Yesterday's  dispute  resumed,  I  still  main- 
taining that,  whereas  we  can  think,  we  generally  don't  do  it. 
Don't  do  it,  &  don't  have  to  do  it:  we  are  automatic  machines 
which  act  unconsciously.  From  morning  till  sleeping-time,  all 
day  long.  All  day  long  our  machinery  is  doing  things  from 
habit  &  instinct,  &  without  requiring  any  help  or  attention  from 
our  poor  little  7-by-Q  thinking  apparatus.  This  reminded  me 
of  something:  thirty  years  ago,  in  Hartford,  the  billiard -room 
was  my  study,  &  I  wrote  my  letters  there  the  first  thing  every 
morning.  My  table  lay  two  points  off  the  starboard  bow  of 
the  billiard-table,  &  the  door  of  exit  and  entrance  bore  northeast- 
&-by-east-half-east  from  that  position,  consequently  you  could 
see  the  door  across  the  length  of  the  billiard-table,  but  you 
couldn't  see  the  floor  by  the  said  table.  I  found  I  was  always 
forgetting  to  ask  intruders  to  carry  my  letters  down-stairs  for 
the  mail,  so  I  concluded  to  lay  them  on  the  floor  by  the  door; 
then  the  intruder  would  have  to  walk  over  them,  &  that  would 
indicate  to  him  what  they  were  there  for.    Did  it?   No,  it 

15" 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


didn't.  He  was  a  machine,  &  had  habits.  Habits  take  prece- 
dence of  thought. 

Now  consider  this :  a  stamped  &  addressed  letter  lying  on  the 
floor — lying  aggressively  &  conspicuously  on  the  floor — is  an 
unusual  spectacle;  so  unusual  a  spectacle  that  you  would  think 
an  intruder  couldn't  see  it  there  without  immediately  divining 
that  it  was  not  there  by  accident,  but  had  been  deliberately 
placed  there  &  for  a  definite  purpose.  Very  well;  it  may  sur- 
prise you  to  learn  that  that  most  simple  &  most  natural  & 
obvious  thought  would  never  occur  to  any  intruder  on  this 
planet,  whether  he  be  fool,  half-fool,  or  the  most  brilliant  of 
thinkers.  For  he  is  always  an  automatic  machine  &  has  habits, 
&  his  habits  will  act  before  his  thinking  apparatus  can  get  a 
chance  to  exert  its  powers.  My  scheme  failed  because  every 
human  being  has  the  habit  of  picking  up  any  apparently  mis- 
placed thing  &  placing  it  where  it  won't  be  stepped  on. 

My  first  intruder  was  George.  He  went  and  came  without 
saying  anything.  Presently  I  found  the  letters  neatly  piled  up 
on  the  billiard-table.  I  was  astonished.  I  put  them  on  the 
floor  again.  The  next  intruder  piled  them  on  the  billiard-table 
without  a  word.  I  was  profoundly  moved,  profoundly  inter- 
ested. So  I  set  the  trap  again.  Also  again,  &  again,  &  yet  again 
— all  day  long.  I  caught  every  member  of  the  family,  &  every 
servant;  also  I  caught  the  three  finest  intellects  in  the  town. 
In  every  instance  old,  time-worn  automatic  habit  got  in  its  work 
so  promptly  that  the  thinking  apparatus  never  got  a  chance. 

I  do  not  remember  this  particular  discussion,  but  I 
do  distinctly  recall  being  one  of  those  whose  intelligence 
was  not  sufficient  to  prevent  my  picking  up  the  letter  he 
had  thrown  on  the  floor  in  front  of  his  bed,  and  being 
properly  classified  for  doing  it. 

Clemens  no  longer  kept  note-books,  as  in  an  earlier 
time,  but  set  down  innumerable  memoranda — comments, 
stray  reminders,  and  the  like — on  small  pads,  and  bunches 
of  these  tiny  sheets  accumulated  on  his  table  and  about 
his  room.  I  gathered  up  many  of  them  then  and  after- 
ward, and  a  few  of  these  characteristic  bits  may  be 
offered  here. 

1512 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERSONAL  MEMORANDA 


It  is  at  our  mother's  knee  that  we  acquire  our  noblest  &  truest 
&  highest  ideals,  but  there  is  seldom  any  money  in  them. 

JEHOVAH 

He  is  all -good.  He  made  man  for  hell  or  hell  for  man,  one 
or  the  other— take  your  choice.  He  made  it  hard  to  get  into 
heaven  and  easy  to  get  into  hell. 

He  commended  man  to  multiply  &  replenish — what?  Hell. 


MObtsry 

ANTEDATE'S  ClOT0£S 


ONE  OF  MARK 


TWAIN'S  MEMORANDA 
1513 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


MODESTY  ANTEDATES  CLOTHES 

&  will  be  resumed  when  clothes  are  no  more. 

[The  latter  part  of  this  aphorism  is  erased  and  underneath 
it  he  adds:] 

MODESTY  DIED 

when  clothes  were  born. 

MODESTY  DIED 

when  false  modesty  was  born. 

HISTORY 

A  historian  who  would  convey  the  truth  has  got  to  lie.  Often 
he  must  enlarge  the  truth  by  diameters,  otherwise  his  reader 
would  not  be  able  to  see  it. 

MORALS 

are  not  the  important  thing — nor  enlightenment — nor  civiliza- 
tion. A  man  can  do  absolutely  well  without  them,  but  he  can't 
do  without  something  to  eat.  The  supremest  thing  is  the  needs 
of  the  body,  not  of  the  mind  &  spirit. 

SUGGESTION 

There  is  conscious  suggestion  &  there  is  unconscious  sug- 
gestion— both  come  from  outside — whence  all  ideas  come. 

DUELS 

I  think  I  could  wipe  out  a  dishonor  by  crippling  the  other 
man,  but  I  don't  see  how  I  could  do  it  by  letting  him  cripple  me. 

I  have  no  feeling  of  animosity  toward  people  who  do  not 
believe  as  I  do;  I  merely  do  not  respect  'em.  In  some  serious 
matters  (relig.)  I  would  have  them  burnt. 

I  am  old  now  and  once  was  a  sinner.  I  often  think  of  it  with 
a  kind  of  soft  regret.  I  trust  my  days  are  numbered.  I  would 
not  have  that  detail  overlooked. 

She  was  always  a  girl,  she  was  always  young  because  her 
heart  was  young;  &  I  was  young  because  she  lived  in  my  heart 
&  preserved  its  youth  from  decay. 

1514 


Digitized  by  Google 


PERSONAL  MEMORANDA 


He  often  busied  himself  working  out  more  extensively 
some  of  the  ideas  that  came  to  him — moral  ideas,  he  called 
them.  One  fancy  which  he  followed  in  several  forms 
(some  of  them  not  within  the  privilege  of  print)  was  that 
of  an  inquisitive  little  girl,  Bessie,  who  pursues  her  mother 
with  difficult  questionings.1  He  read  these  aloud  as  he 
finished  them,  and  it  is  certain  that  they  lacked  neither 
logic  nor  humor. 

Sometimes  he  went  to  a  big  drawer  in  his  dresser, 
where  he  kept  his  finished  manuscripts,  and  took  them 
out  and  looked  over  them,  and  read  parts  of  them  aloud, 
and  talked  of  the  plans  he  had  had  for  them,  and  how  one 
idea  after  another  had  been  followed  for  a  time  and  had 
failed  to  satisfy  him  in  the  end. 

Two  fiction  schemes  that  had  always  possessed  him  he 
had  been  unable  to  bring  to  any  conclusion.  Both  of 
these  have  been  mentioned  in  former  chapters;  one  being 
the  notion  of  a  long  period  of  dream-existence  during  a 
brief  moment  of  sleep,  and  the  other  being  the  story 
of  a  mysterious  visitant  from  another  realm.  He  had 
experimented  with  each  of  these  ideas  in  no  less  than 
three  forms,  and  there  was  fine  writing  and  dramatic 
narrative  in  all;  but  his  literary  architecture  had  some- 
how fallen  short  of  his  conception.  "The  Mysterious 
Stranger"  in  one  of  its  forms  I  thought  might  be  satis- 
factorily concluded,  and  he  admitted  that  he  could  prob- 
ably end  it  without  much  labor.  He  discussed  something 
of  his  plans,  and  later  I  found  the  notes  for  its  conclusion. 
But  I  suppose  he  was  beyond  the  place  where  he  could 
take  up  those  old  threads,  though  he  contemplated,  fond- 
ly enough,  the  possibility,  and  recalled  how  he  had  read 
at  least  one  form  of  the  dream  tale  to  Howells,  who  had 
urged  him  to  complete  it. 

1  Under  Appendix  W,  at  the  end  of  this  volume,  the  reader  will 
find  one  of  the  "Bessie"  dialogues. 

ISI5 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXXIII 


ASTRONOMY  AND  DREAMS 

AUGUST  5,  1909.  This  morning  I  noticed  on  a  chair  a  copy 
xl  of  Flaubert's  Sal&mmbo  which  I  recently  lent  him.  I 
asked  if  he  liked  it. 

"No,"  he  said,  "I  didn't  like  any  of  it." 

"But  you  read  it?" 

"Yes,  I  read  every  line  of  it." 

"You  admitted  its  literary  art?" 

"Well,  it's  like  this:  If  I  should  go  to  the  Chicago  stock- 
yards and  they  should  kill  a  beef  and  cut  it  up  and  the  blood 
should  splash  all  over  everything,  and  then  they  should  take 
me  to  another  pen  and  kill  another  beef  and  the  blood  should 
splash  over  everything  again,  and  so  on  to  pen  after  pen,  I 
should  care  for  it  about  as  much  as  I  do  for  that  book." 

"But  those  were  bloody  days,  and  you  care  very  much  for 
that  period  in  history." 

"Yes,  that  is  so.  But  when  I  read  Tacitus  and  know  that  I 
am  reading  history  I  can  accept  it  as  such  and  supply  the 
imaginary  details  and  enjoy  it,  but  this  thing  is  such  a  con- 
tinuous procession  of  blood  and  slaughter  and  stench  it  wor- 
ries me.  It  has  great  art — I  can  see  that.  That  scene  of  the 
crucified  lions  and  the  death  canon  and  the  tent  scene  are 
marvelous,  but  I  wouldn't  read  that  book  again  without  a 
salary." 

August  16.  He  is  reading  Suetonius,  which  he  already  knows 
by  heart — so  full  of  the  cruelties  and  licentiousness  of  imperial 
Rome. 

This  afternoon  he  began  talking  about  Claudius. 

"They  called  Claudius  a  lunatic,"  he  said,  "but  just  see  what 
nice  fancies  he  had.  He  would  go  to  the  arena  between  times 
and  have  captives  and  wild  beasts  brought  out  and  turned  in 

1516 


Digitized  by  Google 


ASTRONOMY  AND  DREAMS 


together  for  his  special  enjoyment.  Sometimes  when  there  were 
no  captives  on  hand  he  would  say,  'Well,  never  mind;  bring  out 
a  carpenter.'  Carpentering  around  the  arena  wasn't  a  popular 
job  in  those  days.  He  went  visiting  once  to  a  province  and 
thought  it  would  be  pleasant  to  see  how  they  disposed  of  crim- 
inals and  captives  in  their  crude,  old-fashioned  way,  but  there 
was  no  executioner  on  hand.  No  matter;  the  Emperor  of  Rome 
was  in  no  hurry — he  would  wait.  So  he  sat  down  and  stayed 
there  until  an  executioner  came." 

I  said,  "How  do  you  account  for  the  changed  attitude  toward 
these  things?  We  are  filled  with  pity  to-day  at  the  thought  of 
torture  and  suffering." 

"Ah!  but  that  is  because  we  have  drifted  that  way  and 
exercised  the  quality  of  compassion.  Relax  a  muscle  and  it 
soon  loses  its  vigor;  relax  that  quality  and  in  two  generations — 
in  one  generation — we  should  be  gloating  over  the  spectacle  of 
blood  and  torture  just  the  same.  Why,  I  read  somewhere  a 
letter  written  just  before  the  Lisbon  catastrophe  in  1755  about 
a  scene  on  the  public  square  of  Lisbon:  A  lot  of  stakes  with  the 
fagots  piled  for  burning  and  heretics  chained  for  burning.  The 
square  was  crowded  with  men  and  women  and  children,  and 
when  those  fires  were  lighted,  and  the  heretics  began  to  shriek 
and  writhe,  those  men  and  women  and  children  laughed  so  they 
were  fairly  beside  themselves  with  the  enjoyment  of  the  scene. 
The  Greeks  don't  seem  to  have  done  these  things.  I  suppose 
that  indicates  earlier  advancement  in  compassion." 

Colonel  Harvey  and  Mr.  Duneka  came  up  to  spend  the  night. 
Mr.  Clemens  had  one  of  his  seizures  during  the  evening.  They 
come  oftener  and  last  longer.  One  last  night  continued  for  an 
hour  and  a  half.    I  slept  there. 

September  7.  To-day  news  of  the  North  Pole  discovered  by 
Peary.  Five  days  ago  the  same  discovery  was  reported  by 
Cook.  Clemens's  comment:  "It's  the  greatest  joke  of  the 
ages."  But  a  moment  later  he  referred  to  the  stupendous  fact 
of  Arcturus  being  fifty  thousand  times  as  big  as  the  sun. 

September  21.   This  morning  he  told  me,  with  great  glee,  the 
dream  he  had  had  just  before  wakening.   He  said: 
"I  was  in  an  automobile  going  slowly,  with  a  little  girl  beside 
in.— 26  1517 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


me,  and  some  uniformed  person  walking  along  by  us.  I  said, 
TU  get  out  and  walk,  too';  but  the  officer  replied,  'This  is  only- 
one  of  the  smallest  of  our  fleet.' 

"Then  I  noticed  that  the  automobile  had  no  front,  and  there 
were  two  cannons  mounted  where  the  front  should  be.  I 
noticed,  too,  that  we  were  traveling  very  low,  almost  down  on 
the  ground.  Presently  we  got  to  the  bottom  of  a  hill  and 
started  up  another,  and  I  found  myself  walking  ahead  of  the 
'mobile.  I  turned  around  to  look  for  the  little  girl,  and  instead 
of  her  I  found  a  kitten  capering  beside  me,  and  when  we  reached 
the  top  of  the  hill  we  were  looking  out  over  a  most  barren  and 
desolate  waste  of  sand-heaps  without  a  speck  of  vegetation  any- 
where, and  the  kitten  said,  'This  view  beggars  all  admiration.' 
Then  all  at  once  we  were  in  a  great  group  of  people  and  I  under- 
took to  repeat  to  them  the  kitten's  remark,  but  when  I  tried  to 
do  it  the  words  were  so  touching  that  I  broke  down  and  cried,  and 
all  the  group  cried,  too,  over  the  kitten's  moving  remark." 

The  joy  with  which  he  told  this  absurd  sleep  fancy  made  it 
supremely  ridiculous  and  we  laughed  until  tears  really  came. 

One  morning  he  said:  " I  was  awake  a  good  deal  in  the 
night,  and  I  tried  to  think  of  interesting  things.  I  got  to 
working  out  geological  periods,  trying  to  think  of  some 
way  to  comprehend  them,  and  then  astronomical  periods. 
Of  course  it's  impossible,  but  I  thought  of  a  plan  that 
seemed  to  mean  something  to  me.  I  remembered  that 
Neptune  is  two  billion  eight  hundred  million  miles  away. 
That,  of  course,  is  incomprehensible,  but  then  there  is  the 
nearest  fixed  star  with  its  twenty-five  trillion  miles — 
twenty-five  trillion — or  nearly  a  thousand  times  as  far,  and 
then  I  took  this  book  and  counted  the  lines  on  a  page  and 
I  found  that  there  was  an  average  of  thirty-two  lines  to  the 
page  and  two  hundred  and  forty  pages,  and  I  figured  out 
that,  counting  the  distance  to  Neptune  as  one  line,  there 
were  still  not  enough  lines  in  the  book  by  nearly  two 
thousand  to  reach  the  nearest  fixed  star,  and  somehow 
that  gave  me  a  sort  of  dim  idea  of  the  vastness  of  the 
distance  and  kind  of  a  journey  into  space." 

1518 


Digitized  by  Google 


ASTRONOMY  AND  DREAMS 


Later  I  figured  out  another  method  of  comprehending  a 
little  of  that  great  distance  by  estimating  the  existence  of 
the  human  race  at  thirty  thousand  years  (Lord  Kelvin's 
figures)  and  the  average  generation  to  have  been  thirty- 
three  years  with  a  world  population  of  1,500,000,000  souls. 
I  assumed  the  nearest  fixed  star  to  be  the  first  station  in 
Paradise  and  the  first  soul  to  have  started  thirty  thousand 
years  ago.  Traveling  at  the  rate  of  about  thirty  miles  a 
second,  it  would  just  now  be  arriving  in  Alpha  Centauri 
with  all  the  rest  of  that  buried  multitude  stringing  out 
behind  at  an  average  distance  of  twenty  miles  apart. 

Few  things  gave  him  more  pleasure  than  the  contem- 
plation of  such  figures  as  these.  We  made  occasional 
business  trips  to  New  York,  and  during  one  of  them 
visited  the  Museum  of  Natural  History  to  look  at  the 
brontosaur  and  the  meteorites  and  the  astronomical 
model  in  the  entrance  hall.  To  him  these  were  the  most 
fascinating  things  in  the  world.  He  contemplated  the 
meteorites  and  the  brontosaur,  and  lost  himself  in  strange 
and  marvelous  imaginings  concerning  the  far  reaches  of 
time  and  space  whence  they  had  come  down  to  us. 

Mark  Twain  lived  curiously  apart  from  the  actualities 
of  life.  Dwelling  mainly  among  his  philosophies  and 
speculations,  he  observed  vaguely,  or  minutely,  what 
went  on  about  him;  but  in  either  case  the  fact  took  a 
place,  not  in  the  actual  world,  but  in  a  world  within  his 
consciousness,  or  subconsciousness,  a  place  where  facts 
were  likely  to  assume  new  and  altogether  different  rela- 
tions from  those  they  had  borne  in  the  physical  occur- 
rence. It  not  infrequently  happened,  therefore,  when  he 
recounted  some  incident,  even  the  most  recent,  that  his- 
tory took  on  fresh  and  startling  forms.  More  than  once 
I  have  known  him  to  relate  an  occurrence  of  the  day 
before  with  a  reality  of  circumstance  that  carried  abso- 
lute conviction,  when  the  details  themselves  were  pre- 
cisely reversed.    If  his  attention  were  called  to  the  dis- 


1519 


MARK  TWAIN 


crepancy,  his  face  would  take  on  a  blank  look,  as  of  one 
suddenly  aroused  from  dreamland,  to  be  followed  by  an 
almost  childish  interest  in  your  revelation  and  ready 
acknowledgment  of  his  mistake.  I  do  not  think  such 
mistakes  humiliated  him;  but  they  often  surprised  and, 
I  think,  amused  him. 

Insubstantial  and  deceptive  as  was  this  inner  world 
of  his,  to  him  it  must  have  been  much  more  real  than 
the  world  of  flitting  physical  shapes  about  him.  He 
would  fix  you  keenly  with  his  attention,  but  you  realized, 
at  last,  that  he  was  placing  you  and  seeing  you  not  as 
a  part  of  the  material  landscape,  but  as  an  item  of  his 
own  inner  world — a  world  in  which  philosophies  and 
morals  stood  upright — a  very  good  world  indeed,  but 
certainly  a  topsyturvy  world  when  viewed  with  the  eye 
of  mere  literal  scrutiny.  And  this  was,  mainly,  of  course, 
because  the  routine  of  life  did  not  appeal  to  him.  Even 
members  of  his  household  did  not  always  stir  his  con- 
sciousness. 

He  knew  they  were  there;  he  could  call  them  by  name; 
he  relied  upon  them;  but  his  knowledge  of  them  always 
suggested  the  knowledge  that  Mount  Everest  might  have 
of  the  forests  and  caves  and  boulders  upon  its  slopes,  use- 
ful, perhaps,  but  hardly  necessary  to  the  giant's  existence, 
and  in  no  important  matter  a  part  of  its  greater  life. 


Digitized  by  Google 


r 


CCLXXXIV 

A  LIBRARY  CONCERT 

IN  a  letter  which  Clemens  wrote  to  Miss  Wallace  at 
this  time,  he  tells  of  a  concert  given  at  Stormfield  on 
September  21st  for  the  benefit  of  the  new  Redding  Li- 
brary. Gabrilowitsch  had  so  far  recovered  that  he  was 
up  and  about  and  able  to  play.  David  Bispham,  the 
great  barytone,  always  genial  and  generous,  agreed  to 
take  part,  and  Clara  Clemens,  already  accustomed  to 
.public  singing,  was  to  join  in  the  program.  The  letter 
to  Miss  Wallace  supplies  the  rest  of  the  history. 

We  had  a  grand  time  here  yesterday.  Concert  in  aid  of  the 
little  library. 

TEAM 

Gabrilowitsch,  pianist. 

David  Bispham,  vocalist. 

Clara  Clemens,  ditto. 

Mark  Twain,  introducer  of  team. 
Detachments  and  squads  and  groups  and  singles  came  from 
everywhere — Danbury,  New  Haven,  Norwalk,  Redding,  Red- 
ding Ridge,  Ridgefield,  and  even  from  New  York:  some  in  60- 
h.p.  motor-cars,  some  in  buggies  and  carriages,  and  a  swarm 
of  farmer-young-folk  on  foot  from  miles  around — 525  altogether. 

If  we  hadn't  stopped  the  sale  of  tickets  a  day  and  a  half 
before  the  performance  we  should  have  been  swamped.  We 
jammed  160  into  the  library  (not  quite  all  had  seats),  we  filled 
the  loggia,  the  dining-room,  the  hall,  clear  into  the  billiard-room, 
the  stairs,  and  the  brick-paved  square  outside  the  dining-room 
door. 

The  artists  were  received  with  a  great  welcome,  and  it  woke 

1521 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


them  up,  and  I  tell  you  they  performed  to  the  Queen's  taste! 
The  program  was  an  hour  and  three-quarters  long  and  the 
encores  added  a  half-hour  to  it.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  house 
was  hair-lifting.  They  all  stayed  an  hour  after  the  close  to 
shake  hands  and  congratulate. 

We  had  no  dollar  seats  except  in  the  library,  but  we  accu- 
mulated $372  for  the  Building  Fund.  We  had  tea  at  half  past 
six  for  a  dozen — the  Hawthorn es,  Jeannette  Gilder,  and  her 
niece,  etc.;  and  after  8-o'clock  dinner  we  had  a  private  concert 
and  a  ball  in  the  bare-stripped  library  until  10;  nobody  present 
but  the  team  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Paine  and  Jean  and  her  dog." 
And  me.  Bispham  did  "Danny  Deever"  and  the  "Erlkonig"  in 
his  majestic,  great  organ-tones  and  artillery,  and  Gabrilo- 
witsch  played  the  accompaniments  as  they  were  never  played 
before,  I  do  suppose. 

There  is  not  much  to  add  to  that  account.  Clemens, 
introducing  the  performers,  was  the  gay  feature  of  the 
occasion.  He  spoke  of  the  great  reputation  of  Bispham 
and  Gabrilowitsch;  then  he  said: 

"My  daughter  is  not  as  famous  as  these  gentlemen, 
but  she  is  ever  so  much  better-looking." 

The  music  of  the  evening  that  followed,  with  Gabrilo- 
witsch at  the  piano  and  David  Bispham  to  sing,  was  some- 
thing not  likely  ever  to  be  repeated.  Bispham  sang  the 
"Erlkonig"  and  " Killiecrankie "  and  the  "Grenadiers" 
and  several  other  songs.  He  spoke  of  having  sung  Wag- 
ner's arrangement  of  the  "Grenadiers"  at  the  composer's 
home  following  his  death,  and  how  none  of  the  family 
had  heard  it  before. 

There  followed  dancing,  and  Jean  Clemens,  fine  and 
handsome,  apparently  full  of  life  and  health,  danced  down 
that  great  living-room  as  care-free  as  if  there  was  no 
shadow  upon  her  life.  And  the  evening  was  distinguished 
in  another  way,  for  before  it  ended  Clara  Clemens  had 
promised  Ossip  Gabrilowitsch  to  become  his  wife. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXXV 

A  WEDDING  AT  STORMPIBLD 

THE  wedding  of  Ossip  Gabrilowitsch  and  Clara  Clem- 
ens was  not  delayed.  Gabrilowitsch  had  signed  for 
a  concert  tour  in  Europe,  and  unless  the  marriage  took 
place  forthwith  it  must  be  postponed  many  months.  It 
followed,  therefore,  fifteen  days  after  the  engagement 
They  were  busy  days.  Clemens,  enormously  excited  and 
pleased  over  the  prospect  of  the  first  wedding  in  his 
family,  personally  attended  to  the  selection  of  those  who 
were  to  have  announcement-cards,  employing  a  stenog- 
rapher to  make  the  list. 

October  6th  was  a  perfect  wedding-day.  It  was  one 
of  those  quiet,  lovely  fall  days  when  the  whole  world 
seems  at  peace.  Claude,  the  butler,  with  his  usual 
skill  in  such  matters,  had  decorated  the  great  liv- 
ing-room with  gay  autumn  foliage  and  flowers,  brought 
in  mainly  from  the  woods  and  fields.  They  blended 
perfectly  with  the  warm  tones  of  the  walls  and  furnish- 
ings, and  I  do  not  remember  ever  having  seen  a  more 
beautiful  room.  Only  relatives  and  a  few  of  the  nearest 
friends  were  invited  to  the  ceremony.  The  Twichells 
came  over  a  day  ahead,  for  Twichell,  who  had  assisted  in 
the  marriage  rites  between  Samuel  Clemens  and  Olivia 
Langdon,  was  to  perform  that  ceremony  for  their  daughter 
now.  A  fellow-student  of  the  bride  and  groom  when 
they  had  been  pupils  of  Leschetizky,  in  Vienna— Miss 
Ethel  Newcomb— was  at  the  piano  and  played  softly  the 
Wedding  March  from  tK  Tannhauser."  Jean  Clemens  was 

1523 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


the  only  bridesmaid,  and  she  was  stately  and  classi- 
cally beautiful,  with  a  proud  dignity  in  her  office. 
Jervis  Langdon,  the  bride's  cousin  and  childhood  play- 
mate, acted  as  best  man,  and  Clemens,  of  course,  gave 
the  bride  away.  By  request  he  wore  his  scarlet  Oxford 
gown  over  his  snowy  flannels,  and  was  splendid  beyond 
words.  I  do  not  write  of  the  appearance  of  the  bride  and 
groom,  for  brides  and  grooms  are  always  handsome  and 
always  happy,  and  certainly  these  were  no  exception. 
It  was  all  so  soon  over,  the  feasting  ended,  and  the  prin- 
cipals whirling  away  into  the  future.  I  have  a  picture 
in  my  mind  of  them  seated  together  in  the  automobile, 
with  Richard  Watson  Gilder  standing  on  the  step  for 
a  last  good-by,  and  before  them  a  wide  expanse  of  au- 
tumn foliage  and  distant  hills.  I  remember  Gilder's  voice 
saying,  when  the  car  was  on  the  turn,  and  they  were 
waving  back  to  us: 

"Over  the  hills  and  far  away, 
Beyond  the  utmost  purple  rim, 
Beyond  the  night,  beyond  the  day, 
Through  all  the  world  she  followed  him." 

The  matter  of  the  wedding  had  been  kept  from  the 
newspapers  until  the  eve  of  the  wedding,  when  the  Asso- 
ciated Press  had  been  notified.  A  representative  was 
there;  but  Clemens  had  characteristically  interviewed 
himself  on  the  subject,  and  it  was  only  necessary  to  hand 
the  reporter  a  typewritten  copy.  Replying  to  the  ques- 
tion (put  to  himself),  "Are  you  pleased  with  the  mar- 
riage?" he  answered: 

Yes,  fully  as  much  as  any  marriage  could  please  me  or 
any  other  father.  There  are  two  or  three  solemn  things  in 
life  and  a  happy  marriage  is  one  of  them,  for  the  terrors  of  life 
are  all  to  come.  I  am  glad  of  this  marriage,  and  Mrs.  Clemens 
would  be  glad,  for  she  always  had  a  warm  affection  for  Gabrilo- 
witsch. 

1524 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  WEDDING  AT  STORMFIELD 


There  was  another  wedding  at  Stormfield  on  the  fol- 
lowing afternoon — an  imitation  wedding.  Little  Joy  came 
up  with  me,  and  wished  she  could  stand  in  just  the  spot 
where  she  had  seen  the  bride  stand,  and  she  expressed 
a  wish  that  she  could  get  married  like  that.  Clemens 
said: 

"Frankness  is  a  jewel;  only  the  young  can  afford  it." 

Then  he  happened  to  remember  a  ridiculous  boy-doll 
— a  white-haired  creature  with  red  coat  and  green  trou- 
sers, a  souvenir  imitation  of  himself  from  one  of  the 
Rogerses'  Christmas  trees.  He  knew  where  it  was,  and 
he  got  it  out.    Then  he  said: 

"Now,  Joy,  we  will  have  another  wedding.  This  is 
Mr.  Colonel  Williams,  and  you  are  to  become  his  wedded 
wife." 

So  Joy  stood  up  very  gravely  and  Clemens  performed 
the  ceremony,  and  I  gave  the  bride  away,  and  Joy  to  him 
became  Mrs.  Colonel  Williams  thereafter,  and  entered 
happily  into  her  new  estate. 


Digitized  by  Google 


- 


CCLXXXVI 

.4 

AUTUMN  DAYS 

A HARVEST  of  letters  followed  the  wedding:  a  gen- 
eral congratulatory  expression,  mingled  with  admi- 
ration, affection,  and  good-will.  In  his  interview  Clem- 
ens had  referred  to  the  pain  in  his  breast;  and  many 
begged  him  to  deny  that  there  was  anything  serious  the 
matter  with  him,  urging  him  to  try  this  relief  or  that, 
pathetically  eager  for  his  continued  life  and  health.  They 
cited  the  comfort  he  had  brought  to  world-weary  human- 
ity and  his  unfailing  stand  for  human  justice  as  reasons 
why  he  should  live.  Such  letters  could  not  fail  to  cheer 
him. 

A  letter  of  this  period,  from  John  Bigelow,  gave  him 
a  pleasure  of  its  own.  Clemens  had  written  Bigelow, 
apropos  of  some  adverse  expression  on  the  tariff: 

Thank  you  for  any  hard  word  you  can  say  about  the  tariff. 
I  guess  the  government  that  robs  its  own  people  earns  the  future 
it  is  preparing  for  itself. 

Bigelow  was  just  then  declining  an  invitation  to  the 
annual  dinner  of  the  Chamber  of  Commerce.  In  sending 
his  regrets  he  said: 

The  sentiment  I  would  propose  if  I  dared  to  be  present  would 
be  the  words  of  Mark  Twain,  the  statesman: 

"  The  government  that  robs  its  own  people  earns  the  future  it  is 
preparing  for  itself." 

1526 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUTUMN  DAYS 

Now  to  Clemens  himself  he  wrote: 

Rochefoucault  never  said  a  cleverer  thing,  nor  Dr.  Franklin  a 
wiser  one.  ...  Be  careful,  or  the  Demos  will  be  running  you 
for  President  when  you  are  not  on  your  guard. 

Yours  more  than  ever, 

John  Bigelow. 

Among  the  tributes  that  came,  was  a  sermon  by  the 
Rev.  Fred  Winslow  Adams,  of  Schenectady,  New  York, 
with  Mark  Twain  as  its  subject.  Mr.  Adams  chose  for 
his  text,  "Take  Mark  and  bring  him  with  thee;  for  he 
is  profitable  for  the  ministry,"  and  he  placed  the  two 
Marks,  St.  Mark  and  Mark  Twain,  side  by  side  as  min- 
isters to  humanity,  and  characterized  him  as  "a  fearless 
knight  of  righteousness."  A  few  weeks  later  Mr.  Adams 
himself  came  to  Stormfield,  and,  like  all  open-minded 
ministers  of  the  Gospel,  he  found  that  he  could  get  on 
very  well  indeed  with  Mark  Twain. 

In  spite  of  the  good- will  and  the  good  wishes  Clemens's 
malady  did  not  improve.  As  the  days  grew  chillier  he 
found  that  he  must  remain  closer  indoors.  The  cold  air 
seemed  to  bring  on  the  pains,  and  they  were  gradually 
becoming  more  severe;  then,  too,  he  did  not  follow  the 
doctor's  orders  in  the  matter  of  smoking,  nor  altogether 
as  to  exercise. 

To  Miss  Wallace  he  wrote: 

I  can't  walk,  I  can't  drive,  I'm  not  down-stairs  much,  and  I 
don't  see  company,  but  I  drink  barrels  of  water  to  keep  the 
pain  quiet;  I  read,  and  read,  and  read,  and  smoke,  and  smoke, 
and  smoke  all  the  time  (as  formerly),  and  it's  a  contented  and 
comfortable  life. 

But  this  was  not  altogether  accurate  as  to  details.  He 
did  come  down-stairs  many  times  daily,  and  he  persisted 
in  billiards  regardless  of  the  paroxysms.   We  found,  too, 

1527 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


that  the  seizures  were  induced  by  mental  agitation.  One 
night  he  read  aloud  to  Jean  and  myself  the  first  chapter 
of  an  article,  "The  Turning-Point  in  My  Life,"  which  he 
was  preparing  for  Harper's  Bazar.  He  had  begun  it  with 
one  of  his  impossible  burlesque  fancies,  and  he  felt  our 
attitude  of  disappointment  even  before  any  word  had 
been  said.  Suddenly  he  rose,  and  laying  his  hand  on  his 
breast  said,  "I  must  lie  down,"  and  started  toward  the 
stair.  I  supported  him  to  his  room  and  hurriedly  poured 
out  the  hot  water.  He  drank  it  and  dropped  back  on 
the  bed. 

"Don't  speak  to  me,"  he  said;  "don't  make  me  talk." 

Jean  came  in,  and  we  sat  there  several  moments  in 
silence.  I  think  we  both  wondered  if  this  might  not  be 
the  end;  but  presently  he  spoke  of  his  own  accord,  de- 
claring he  was  better,  and  ready  for  billiards. 

We  played  for  at  least  an  hour  afterward,  and  he 
seemed  no  worse  for  the  attack.  It  is  a  curious  malady — 
that  angina;  even  the  doctors  are  acquainted  with  its 
manifestations,  rather  than  its  cause.  Clcmens's  general 
habits  of  body  and  mind  were  probably  not  such  as  to 
delay  its  progress;  furthermore,  there  had  befallen  him 
that  year  one  of  those  misfortunes  which  his  confiding 
nature  peculiarly  invited — a  betrayal  of  trust  by  those 
in  whom  it  had  been  boundlessly  placed — and  it  seems 
likely  that  the  resulting  humiliation  aggravated  his  com- 
plaint. The  writing  of  a  detailed  history  of  this  episode 
afforded  him  occupation  and  a  certain  amusement,  but 
probably  did  not  contribute  to  his  health.  One  day  he 
sent  for  his  attorney,  Mr.  Charles  T.  Lark,  and  made 
some  final  revisions  in  his  will.1 

1  Mark  Twain's  estate,  later  appraised  at  something  more  than 
$600,000,  was  left  in  the  hands  of  trustees  for  his  daughters.  The 
trustees  were  Edward  E.  Loomis,  Jervis  Langdon,  and  Zoheth  S. 
Freeman.  The  direction  of  his  literary  affairs  was  left  to  his 
daughter  Clara  and  the  writer  of  this  history. 

1528 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUTUMN  DAYS 


To  see  him  you  would  never  have  suspected  that  he 
was  ill.  He  was  in  good  flesh,  and  his  movement  was  as 
airy  and  his  eye  as  bright  and  his  face  as  full  of  bloom 
as  at  any  time  during  the  period  I  had  known  him; 
also,  he  was  as  light-hearted  and  full  of  ideas  and  plans, 
and  he  was  even  gentler — having  grown  mellow  with  age 
and  retirement,  like  good  wine. 

And  of  course  he  would  find  amusement  in  his  condi- 
tion.  He  said: 

"  I  have  always  pretended  to  be  sick  to  escape  visitors; 
now,  for  the  first  time,  I  have  got  a  genuine  excuse.  It 
makes  me  feel  so  honest." 

And  once,  when  Jean  reported  a  caller  in  the  living- 
room,  he  said: 

"Jean,  I  can't  see  her.  Tell  her  I  am  likely  to  drop 
dead  any  minute  and  it  would  be  most  embarrassing." 

But  he  did  see  her,  for  it  was  a  poet — Angela  Morgan 
— and  he  read  her  poem,  "God's  Man,"  aloud  with 
great  feeling,  and  later  he  sold  it  for  her  to  Collier's 
Weekly. 

He  still  had  violent  rages  now  and  then,  remembering 
some  of  the  most  notable  of  his  mistakes;  and  once,  after 
denouncing  himself,  rather  inclusively,  as  an  idiot,  he  said: 

"I  wish  to  God  the  lightning  would  strike  me;  but 
I've  wished  that  fifty  thousand  times  and  never  got  any- 
thing out  of  it  yet.  I  have  missed  several  good  chances. 
Mrs.  Clemens  was  afraid  of  lightning,  and  would  never 
let  me  bare  my  head  to  the  storm." 

The  element  of  humor  was  never  lacking,  and  the  rages 
became  less  violent  and  less  frequent. 

I  was  at  Stormfield  steadily  now,  and  there  was  a  regu- 
lar routine  of  afternoon  sessions  of  billiards  or  reading, 
in  which  we  were  generally  alone;  for  Jean,  occupied  with 
her  farming  and  her  secretary  labors,  seldom  appeared 
except  at  meal-times.  Occasionally  she  joined  in  the 
billiard  games;  but  it  was  difficult  learning  and  her  in- 

1529 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


terest  was  not  great.  She  would  have  made  a  fine 
player,  for  she  had  a  natural  talent  for  games,  as  she  had 
for  languages,  and  she  could  have  mastered  the  science 
of  angles  as  she  had  mastered  tennis  and  French  and 
German  and  Italian.  She  had  naturally  a  fine  intellect, 
with  many  of  her  father's  characteristics,  and  a  tender 
heart  that  made  every  dumb  creature  her  friend. 

Katie  Leary,  who  had  been  Jean's  nurse,  once  told  how, 
as  a  little  child,  Jean  had  not  been  particularly  interested 
in  a  picture  of  the  Lisbon  earthquake,  where  the  people 
were  being  swallowed  up;  but  on  looking  at  the  next 
page,  which  showed  a  number  of  animals  being  over- 
whelmed, she  had  said: 

"Poor  things!" 

Katie  said: 

"Why,  you  didn't  say  that  about  the  people!" 
But  Jean  answered: 
"Oh,  they  could  speak." 

One  night  at  the  dinner-table  her  father  was  saying 
how  difficult  it  must  be  for  a  man  who  had  led  a  busy 
life  to  give  up  the  habit  of  work. 

"That  is  why  the  Rogerses  kill  themselves,"  he  said. 
"They  would  rather  kill  themselves  in  the  old  tread- 
mill than  stop  and  try  to  kill  time.  They  have  forgot- 
ten how  to  rest.  They  know  nothing  but  to  keep  on 
till  they  drop." 

I  told  of  something  I  had  read  not  long  before.  It 
was  about  an  aged  lion  that  had  broken  loose  from  his 
cage  at  Coney  Island.  He  had  not  offered  to  hurt  any 
one;  but  after  wandering  about  a  little,  rather  aimlessly, 
he  had  come  to  a  picket-fence,  and  a  moment  later  began 
pacing  up  and  down  in  front  of  it,  just  the  length  of  his 
cage.  They  had  come  and  led  him  back  to  his  prison 
without  trouble,  and  he  had  rushed  eagerly  into  it.  I 
noticed  that  Jean  was  listening  anxiously,  and  when  I 
finished  she  said: 

iS3o 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUTUMN  DAYS 


"Is  that  a  true  story?" 

She  had  forgotten  altogether  the  point  in  illustration. 
She  was  concerned  only  with  the  poor  old  beast  that  had 
found  no  joy  in  his  liberty. 

Among  the  letters  that  Clemens  wrote  just  then  was 
one  to  Miss  Wallace,  in  which  he  described  the  glory  of 
the  fall  colors  as  seen  from  his  windows. 

The  autumn  splendors  passed  you  by?  What  a  pity  I  I  wish 
you  had  been  here.  It  was  beyond  words!  It  was  heaven  & 
hell  &  sunset  &  rainbows  &  the  aurora  all  fused  into  one  divine 
harmony,  &  you  couldn't  look  at  it  and  keep  the  tears  back. 

Such  a  singing  together,  &  such  a  whispering  together,  &  such 
a  snuggling  together  of  cozy,  soft  colors,  &  such  kissing  & 
caressing,  &  such  pretty  blushing  when  the  sun  breaks  out  & 
catches  those  dainty  weeds  at  it — you  remember  that  weed- 
garden  of  mine? — &  then— then  the  far  hills  sleeping  in  a  dim 
blue  trance— oh,  hearing  about  it  is  nothing,  you  should  be  here 
to  see  it! 

In  the  same  letter  he  refers  to  some  work  that  he 
was  writing  for  his  own  satisfaction — Letters  from  the 
Earth;  said  letters  supposed  to  have  been  written  by  an 
immortal  visitant  and  addressed  to  other  immortals  in 
some  remote  sphere. 

Ill  read  passages  to  you.  This  book  will  never  be  published 
— in  fact  it  couldn't  be,  because  it  would  be  felony  .  .  .  Paine 
enjoys  it,  but  Paine  is  going  to  be  damned  one  of  these  days,  I 
suppose. 

I  very  well  remember  his  writing  those  Letters  from 
the  Earth.  He  read  them  to  me  from  time  to  time  as 
he  wrote  them,  and  they  were  fairly  overflowing  with 
humor  and  philosophy  and  satire  concerning  the  human 
race.  The  immortal  visitor  pointed  out,  one  after  an- 
other, the  absurdities  of  mankind,  his  ridiculous  con- 
ception of  heaven,  and  his  special  conceit  in  believing 
that  he  was  the  Creator's  pet— the  particular  form  of 

i53i 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


life  for  which  all  the  universe  was  created.  Clemens 
allowed  his  exuberant  fancy  free  rein,  being  under 
no  restrictions  as  to  the  possibility  of  print  or  public 
offense.  He  enjoyed  them  himself,  too,  as  he  read  them 
aloud,  and  we  laughed  ourselves  weak  over  his  bold 
imaginings. 

One  admissible  extract  will  carry  something  of  the  flavor 
of  these  chapters.  It  is  where  the  celestial  correspond- 
ent describes  man's  religion. 

His  heaven  is  like  himself:  strange,  interesting,  astonishing, 
grotesque.  I  give  you  my  word  it  has  not  a  single  feature  in  it 
that  he  actually  values.  It  consists — utterly  and  entirely — of 
diversions  which  he  cares  next  to  nothing  about  here  in  the  earth, 
yet  he  is  quite  sure  he  will  like  in  heaven.  Isn't  it  curious? 
Isn't  it  interesting?  You  must  not  think  I  am  exaggerating, 
for  it  is  not  so.    I  will  give  you  the  details. 

Most  men  do  not  sing,  most  men  cannot  sing,  most  men  will 
not  stay  where  others  are  singing  if  it  be  continued  more  than 
two  hours.    Note  that. 

Only  about  two  men  in  a  hundred  can  play  upon  a  musical 
instrument,  and  not  four  in  a  hundred  have  any  wish  to  learn 
how.   Set  that  down. 

Many  men  pray,  not  many  of  them  like  to  do  it.  A  few  pray 
long,  the  others  make  a  short-cut. 

More  men  go  to  church  than  want  to. 

To  forty-nine  men  in  fifty  the  Sabbath  day  is  a  dreary,  dreary 
bore. 

Further,  all  sane  people  detest  noise. 

All  people,  sane  or  insane,  like  to  have  variety  in  their  lives. 
Monotony  quickly  wearies  them. 

Now  then,  you  have  the  facts.  You  know  what  men  don't 
enjoy.  Well,  they  have  invented  a  heaven,  out  of  their  own 
heads,  all  by  themselves;  guess  what  it  is  like?  In  fifteen  hun- 
dred years  you  couldn't  do  it.  They  have  left  out  the  very 
things  they  care  for  most — their  dearest  pleasures — and  replaced 
them  with  prayer! 

In  man's  heaven  everybody  sings.  There  are  no  exceptions. 
The  man  who  did  not  sing  on  earth  sings  there;  the  man  who 

1532 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUTUMN  DAYS 


could  not  sing  on  earth  sings  there.  Thus  universal  singing  is 
not  casual,  not  occasional,  not  relieved  by  intervals  of  quiet; 
it  goes  on  all  day  long  and  every  day  during  a  stretch  of  twelve 
hours.  And  everybody  stays  where  on  earth  the  place  would  be 
empty  in  two  hours.  The  singing  is  of  hymns  alone.  Nay,  it 
is  one  hymn  alone.  The  words  are  always  the  same— in  number 
they  are  only  about  a  dozen — there  is  no  rhyme — there  is  no 
poetry.  "Hosanna,  hosanna,  hosanna  unto  the  highest!"  and  a 
few  such  phrases  constitute  the  whole  service. 

Meantime,  every  person  is  playing  on  a  harp!  Consider  the 
deafening  hurricane  of  sound.  Consider,  further,  it  is  a  praise 
service — a  service  of  compliment,  flattery,  adulation.  Do  you 
ask  who  it  is  that  is  willing  to  endure  this  strange  compliment, 
this  insane  compliment,  and  who  not  only  endures  it  but  likes 
it,  enjoys  it,  requires  it,  commands  it?  Hold  your  breath:  It  is 
Godl   This  race's  God  I  mean— their  own  pet  invention. 

Most  of  the  ideas  presented  in  this  his  last  commentary 
on  human  absurdities  were  new  only  as  to  phrasing. 
He  had  exhausted  the  topic  long  ago,  in  one  way  or  an- 
other; but  it  was  one  of  the  themes  in  which  he  never 
lost  interest.  Many  subjects  became  stale  to  him  at  last; 
but  the  curious  invention  called  man  remained  a  novelty 
to  him  to  the  end. 

From  my  note-book: 

October  25.  I  am  constantly  amazed  at  his  knowledge  of 
history— all  history— religious,  political,  military.  He  seems  to 
have  read  everything  in  the  world  concerning  Rome,  France, 
and  England  particularly. 

Last  night  we  stopped  playing  billiards  while  he  reviewed,  in 
the  most  vivid  and  picturesque  phrasing,  the  reasons  of  Rome's 
decline.  Such  a  presentation  would  have  enthralled  any  au- 
dience— I  could  not  help  feeling  a  great  pity  that  he  had  not  de- 
voted some  of  his  public  effort  to  work  of  that  sort.  No  one 
could  have  equaled  him  at  it.  He  concluded  with  some  com- 
ments on  the  possibility  of  America  following  Rome's  example, 
though  he  thought  the  vote  of  the  people  would  always,  or  at 
least  for  a  long  period,  prevent  imperialism. 

1533 


Digitized  tty  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


November  i.  To-day  he  has  been  absorbed  in  his  old  interest 
in  shorthand.  "  It  is  the  only  rational  alphabet,"  he  declared. 
"All  this  spelling  reform  is  nonsense.  What  we  need  is  alphabet 
reform,  and  shorthand  is  the  thing.  Take  the  letter  M,  for  in- 
stance; it  is  made  with  one  stroke  in  shorthand,  while  in  long- 
hand it  requires  at  least  three.  The  word  Mephistopheles  can  be 
written  in  shorthand  with  one-sixth  the  number  of  strokes  that 
is  required  in  longhand.  I  tell  you  shorthand  should  be  adopted 
as  the  alphabet." 

I  said:  "  There  is  this  objection:  the  characters  are  so  slightly 
different  that  each  writer  soon  forms  a  system  of  his  own  and 
it  is  seldom  that  two  can  read  each  other's  notes." 

"You  are  talking  of  stenographic  reporting,"  he  said,  rather 
warmly.  "  Nothing  of  the  kind  is  true  in  the  case  of  the  regular 
alphabet.    It  is  perfectly  clear  and  legible." 

"Would  you  have  it  in  the  schools,  then?" 

"Yes,  it  should  be  taught  in  the  schools,  not  for  stenographic 
purposes,  but  only  for  use  in  writing  to  save  time." 

He  was  very  much  in  earnest,  and  said  he  had  undertaken  an 
article  on  the  subject. 

November  3.  He  said  he  could  not  sleep  last  night,  for  think- 
ing what  a  fool  he  had  been  in  his  various  investments. 

"I  have  always  been  the  victim  of  somebody,"  he  said,  "and 
always  an  idiot  myself,  doing  things  that  even  a  child  would 
not  do.  Never  asking  anybody's  advice — never  taking  it  when 
it  was  offered.  I  can't  see  how  anybody  could  do  the  things 
I  have  done  and  have  kept  right  on  doing." 

I  could  see  that  the  thought  agitated  him,  and  I  suggested 
that  we  go  to  his  room  and  read,  which  we  did,  and  had  a  riotous 
time  over  the  most  recent  chapters  of  the  Letters  from  the  Earth, 
and  some  notes  he  had  made  for  future  chapters  on  infant  dam- 
nation and  other  distinctive  features  of  orthodox  creeds.  He 
told  an  anecdote  of  an  old  minister  who  declared  that  Presby- 
terianism  without  infant  damnation  would  be  like  the  dog  on 
the  train  that  couldn't  be  identified  because  it  had  lost  its  tag. 

Somewhat  on  the  defensive  I  said,  "  But  we  must  admit  that 
the  so-called  Christian  nations  are  the  most  enlightened  and 
progressive." 

He  answered,  "Yes,  but  in  spite  of  their  religion,  not  because 

1534 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUTUMN  DAYS 


of  it.  The  Church  has  opposed  every  innovation  and  discovery 
from  the  day  of  Galileo  down  to  our  own  time,  when  the  use  of 
anesthetics  in  child-birth  was  regarded  as  a  sin  because  it  avoided 
the  biblical  curse  pronounced  against  Eve.  And  every  step  in 
astronomy  and  geology  ever  taken  has  been  opposed  by  bigotry 
and  superstition.  The  Greeks  surpassed  us  in  artistic  culture 
and  in  architecture  five  hundred  years  before  the  Christian  re- 
ligion was  born. 

"  I  have  been  reading  Gibbon's  celebrated  Fifteenth  Chapter," 
he  said  later,  "and  I  don't  see  what  Christians  found  against  it. 
It  is  so  mild — so  gentle  in  its  sarcasm."  He  added  that  he  had 
been  reading  also  a  little  book  of  brief  biographies  and  had  found 
in  it  the  saying  of  Darwin's  father,  "  Unitarianism  is  a  feather- 
bed to  catch  falling  Christians." 

"I  was  glad  to  find  and  identify  that  saying,"  he  said;  "it  is 
so  good." 

He  finished  the  evening  by  reading  a  chapter  from  Carlyle's 
French  Revolution — a  fine  pyrotechnic  passage — the  gathering  at 
Versailles.  I  said  that  Carlyle  somehow  reminded  me  of  a  fervid 
stump-speaker  who  pounded  his  fists  and  went  at  his  audience 
fiercely,  determined  to  convince  them. 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "but  he  is  the  best  one  that  ever  lived." 

November  10.  This  "morning  early  he  heard  me  stirring  and 
called.  I  went  in  and  found  him  propped  up  with  a  book,  as 
usual.    He  said: 

"I  seldom  read  Christmas  stories,  but  this  is  very  beautiful. 
It  has  made  me  cry.  I  want  you  to  read  it."  (It  was  Booth 
Tarkington's  Beaslt/s  Christmas  Party.)  "  Tarkington  has  the 
true  touch,"  he  said;  "his  work  always  satisfies  me."  Another 
book  he  has  been  reading  with  great  enjoyment  is  James  Branch 
Cabell's  Chivalry.  He  cannot  say  enough  of  the  subtle  poetic 
art  with  which  Cabell  has  flung  the  light  of  romance  about 
dark  and  sordid  chapters  of  history. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXXVII 


MARK  TWAIN'S  READING 

PERHAPS  here  one  may  speak  of  Mark  Twain's  read- 
ing in  general.  On  the  table  by  him,  and  on  his  bed, 
and  in  the  billiard-room  shelves  he  kept  the  books  he 
read  most.  They  were  not  many — not  more  than  a 
dozen — but  they  were  manifestly  of  familiar  and  frequent 
usage.  All,  or  nearly  all,  had  annotations — spontane- 
ously uttered  marginal  notes,  title  prefatories,  or  conclud- 
ing comments.  They  were  the  books  he  had  read  again 
and  again,  and  it  was  seldom  that  he  had  not  had  some- 
thing to  say  with  each  fresh  reading. 

There  were  the  three  big  volumes  by  Saint-Simon — 
the  Memoirs — which  he  once  told  me  he  had  read  no  less 
than  twenty  times.  On  the  fly-leaf  of  the  first  volume 
he  wrote: 

This,  &  Casanova  &  Pepys,  set  in  parallel  columns,  could 
afford  a  good  coup  d  'oeil  of  French  &  English  high  life  of  that 
epoch. 

All  through  those  finely  printed  volumes  are  his  com- 
mentaries, sometimes  no  more  than  a  word,  sometimes 
a  filled,  closely  written  margin.  He  found  little  to  ad- 
mire in  the  human  nature  of  Saint-Simon's  period — little 
to  approve  in  Saint-Simon  himself  beyond  his  unrestrained 
frankness,  which  he  admired  without  stint,  and  in  one 
paragraph  where  the  details  of  that  early  period  are  set 
down  with  startling  fidelity  he  wrote:  "Oh,  incomparable 
Saint-Simon!" 

IS36 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN'S  READING 


Saint-Simon  is  always  frank,  and  Mark  Twain  was 
equally  so.  Where  the  former  tells  one  of  the  unspeak- 
able compulsions  of  Louis  XIV.,  the  latter  has  commented: 

We  have  to  grant  that  God  made  this  royal  hog;  we  may 
also  be  permitted  to  believe  that  it  was  a  crime  to  do  so. 

And  on  another  page: 

In  her  memories  of  this  period  the  Duchesse  de  St.  Clair 
makes  this  striking  remark:  "  Sometimes  one  could  tell  a  gen- 
tleman, but  it  was  only  by  his  manner  of  using  his  fork." 

His  comments  on  the  orthodox  religion  of  Saint-Simon's 
period  are  not  marked  by  gentleness.  Of  the  author's 
reference  to  the  Edict  of  Nantes,  which  he  says  depopu- 
lated half  of  the  realm,  ruined  its  commerce,  and  "au- 
thorized torments  and  punishments  by  which  so  many 
innocent  people  of  both  sexes  were  killed  by  thousands," 
Clemens  writes: 

So  much  blood  has  been  shed  by  the  Church  because  of  an 
omission  from  the  Gospel:  "Ye  shall  be  indifferent  as  to  what 
your  neighbor's  religion  is."  Not  merely  tolerant  of  it,  but 
indifferent  to  it.  Divinity  is  claimed  for  many  religions;  but 
no  religion  is  great  enough  or  divine  enough  to  add  that  new  law 
to  its  code. 

In  the  place  where  Saint-Simon  describes  the  death  of 
Monseigneur,  son  of  the  king,  and  the  court  hypocrites 
are  wailing  their  extravagantly  pretended  sorrow,  Clem- 
ens wrote: 

It  is  all  so  true,  all  so  human.  God  made  these  animals.  He 
must  have  noticed  this  scene;  I  wish  I  knew  how  it  struck  Him. 

There  were  not  many  notes  in  the  Suetonius,  nor  in 
the  Carlyle  Revolution,  though  these  were  among  the 
volumes  he  read  oftenest.  Perhaps  they  expressed  for 
him  too  completely  and  too  richly  their  subject-matter 
to  require  anything  at  his  hand.   Here  and  there  are 

1537 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


marked  passages  and  occasional  cross-references  to  re- 
lated history  and  circumstance. 

There  was  not  much  room  for  comment  on  the  narrow 
margins  of  the  old  copy  of  Pepys,  which  he  had  read 
steadily  since  the  early  seventies;  but  here  and  there  a 
few  crisp  words,  and  the  underscoring  and  marked  pas- 
sages are  plentiful  enough  to  convey  his  devotion  to  that 
quaint  record  which,  perhaps  next  to  Suetonius,  was  the 
book  he  read  and  quoted  most. 

Francis  Parkman's  Canadian  Histories  he  had  read 
periodically,  especially  the  story  of  the  Old  Regime  and 
of  the  Jesuits  in  North  America.  As  late  as  January, 
1908,  he  wrote  on  the  title-page  of  the  Old  Regime: 

Very  interesting.  It  tells  how  people  religiously  and  other- 
wise insane  came  over  from  France  and  colonized  Canada. 

He  was  not  always  complimentary  to  those  who  under- 
took to  Christianize  the  Indians;  but  he  did  not  fail  to 
write  his  admiration  of  their  courage — their  very  will- 
ingness to  endure  privation  and  even  the  fiendish  savage 
tortures  for  the  sake  of  their  faith.  "What  manner  of 
men  are  these?"  he  wrote,  apropos  of  the  account  of 
Bressani,  who  had  undergone  the  most  devilish  inflictions 
which  savage  ingenuity  could  devise,  and  yet  returned 
maimed  and  disfigured  the  following  spring  to  "  dare  again 
the  knives  and  fiery  brand  of  the  Iroquois."  Clemens 
was  likely  to  be  on  the  side  of  the  Indians,  but  hardly  in 
their  barbarism.    In  one  place  he  wrote: 

That  men  should  be  willing  to  leave  their  happy  homes  and 
endure  what  the  missionaries  endured  in  order  to  teach  these 
Indians  the  road  to  hell  would  be  rational,  understandable,  but 
why  they  should  want  to  teach  them  a  way  to  heaven  is  a  thing 
which  the  mind  somehow  cannot  grasp. 

Other  histories,  mainly  English  and  French,  showed 
how  he  had  read  them — read  and  digested  every  word  and 

1538 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN'S  READING 


line.  There  were  two  volumes  of  Lecky,  much  worn ; 
Andrew  D.  White's  Science  and  Theology— &  chief  interest 
for  at  least  one  summer— and  among  the  collection  a  well- 
worn  copy  of  Modern  English  Literature— Its  Blemishes 
and  Defects,  by  Henry  H.  Breen.  On  the  title-page  of 
this  book  Clemens  had  written: 

Hartford,  1876.  Use  with  care,  for  it  is  a  scarce  book. 
England  had  to  be  ransacked  in  order  to  get  it — or  the  bookseller 
speaketh  falsely. 

He  once  wrote  a  paper  for  the  Saturday  Morning  Club, 
using  for  his  text  examples  of  slipshod  English  which 
Breen  had  noted. 

Clemens  had  a  passion  for  biography,  and  especially 
for  autobiography,  diaries,  letters,  and  such  intimate 
human  history.  Greville's  Journal  of  the  Reigns  of  George 
IV.  and  William  IV.  he  had  read  much  and  annotated 
freely.  Greville,  while  he  admired  Byron's  talents,  ab- 
horred the  poet's  personality,  and  in  one  place  con- 
demns him  as  a  vicious  person  and  a  debauchee.  He 
adds: 

Then  he  despises  pretenders  and  charlatans  of  all  sorts,  while 
he  is  himself  a  pretender,  as  all  men  are  who  assume  a  character 
which  does  not  belong  to  them  and  affect  to  be  something  which 
they  are  all  the  time  conscious  they  are  not  in  reality. 

Clemens  wrote  on  the  margin: 

Eut,  dear  sir,  you  are  forgetting  that  what  a  man  sees  in  the 
human  race  is  merely  himself  in  the  deep  and  honest  privacy 
of  his  own  heart.  Byron  despised  the  race  because  he  despised 
himself.  I  feel  as  Byron  did,  and  for  the  same  reason.  Do  you 
admire  the  race  (&  consequently  yourself)? 

A  little  further  along,  where  Greville  laments  that 

1539 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Byron  can  take  no  profit  to  himself  from  the  sinful 
characters  he  depicts  so  faithfully,  Clemens  commented: 

If  Byron— if  any  man— draws  50  characters,  they  are  all  him- 
self— 50  shades,  50  moods,  of  his  own  character.  And  when  the 
man  draws  them  well  why  do  they  stir  my  admiration?  Because 
they  are  me— I  recognize  myself. 

A  volume  of  Plutarch  was  among  the  biographies  that 
showed  usage,  and  the  Life  of  P.  T.  Barnum,  Written  by 
Himself.  Two  Years  Before  the  Mast  he  loved,  and  never 
tired  of.  The  more  recent  Memoirs  of  Andrew  D.  White 
and  Moncure  D.  Conway  both,  I  remember,  gave  him 
enjoyment,  as  did  the  Letters  of  Lowell.  A  volume  of  the 
Letters  of  Madame  de  Sevignv  had  some  annotated  margins 
which  were  not  complimentary  to  the  translator,  or  for 
that  matter  to  S<5vigne"  herself,  whom  he  once  designates 
as  a  "nauseating"  person,  many  of  whose  letters  had  been 
uselessly  translated,  as  well  as  poorly  arranged  for  read- 
ing. But  he  would  read  any  volume  of  letters  or  per- 
sonal memoirs;  none  were  too  poor  that  had  the  throb 
of  life  in  them,  however  slight. 

Of  such  sort  were  the  books  that  Mark  Twain  had 
loved  best,  and  such  were  a  few  of  his  words  concerning 
them.  Some  of  them  belong  to  his  earlier  reading,  and 
among  these  is  Darwin's  Descent  of  Man,  a  book  whose 
influence  was  always  present,  though  I  believe  he  did  not 
read  it  any  more  in  later  years.  In  the  days  I  knew  him 
he  read  steadily  not  much  besides  Suetonius  and  Pepys 
and  Carlyle.  These  and  his  simple  astronomies  and  geol- 
ogies and  the  Morte  Arthur e  and  the  poems  of  Kipling 
were  seldom  far  from  his  hand. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXXVIII 


A  BERMUDA  BIRTHDAY 

IT  was  the  middle  of  November,  1909,  when  Clemens  de- 
cided to  take  another  Bermuda  vacation,  and  it  was  the 
19th  that  we  sailed.  I  went  to  New  York  a  day  ahead 
and  arranged  matters,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  18th 
received  the  news  that  Richard  Watson  Gilder  had  sud- 
denly died. 

Next  morning  there  was  other  news.  Clemens's  old 
friend,  William  M.  Laffan,  of  the  Sun,  had  died  while 
undergoing  a  surgical  operation.  I  met  Clemens  at  the 
train.  He  had  already  heard  about  Gilder;  but  he  had 
not  yet  learned  of  Laffan's  death.    He  said: 

"That's  just  it.  Gilder  and  Laffan  get  all  the  good 
things  that  come  along  and  I  never  get  anything." 

Then,  suddenly  remembering,  he  added: 

"How  curious  it  is!  I  have  been  thinking  of  Laffan 
coming  down  on  the  train,  and  mentally  writing  a  letter 
to  him  on  this  Stetson-Eddy  affair." 

I  asked  when  he  had  begun  thinking  of  Laffan. 

He  said:  "Within  the  hour." 

It  was  within  the  hour  that  I  had  received  the  news, 
and  naturally  in  my  mind  had  carried  it  instantly  to  him. 
Perhaps  there  was  something  telepathic  in  it. 

He  was  not  at  all  ill  going  down  to  Bermuda,  which 
was  a  fortunate  thing,  for  the  water  was  rough  and 
I  was  quite  disqualified.  We  did  not  even  discuss 
astronomy,  though  there  was  what  seemed  most  im- 
portant news — the  reported  discovery  of  a  new  planet. 

1541 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


But  there  was  plenty  of  talk  on  the  subject  as  soon  as 
we  got  settled  in  the  Hamilton  Hotel.  It  was  windy  and 
rainy  out-of-doors,  and  we  looked  out  on  the  drenched 
semi-tropical  foliage  with  a  great  bamboo  swaying  and 
bending  in  the  foreground,  while  he  speculated  on  the 
vast  distance  that  the  new  planet  must  lie  from  our  sun, 
to  which  it  was  still  a  satellite.  The  report  had  said  that 
it  was  probably  four  hundred  billions  of  miles  distant, 
and  that  on  this  far  frontier  of  the  solar  system  the  sun 
could  not  appear  to  it  larger  than  the  blaze  of  a  tallow 
candle.  To  us  it  was  wholly  incredible  how,  in  that  dim 
remoteness,  it  could  still  hold  true  to  the  central  force 
and  follow  at  a  snail-pace,  yet  with  unvarying  exacti- 
tude, its  stupendous  orbit.  Clemens  said  that  heretofore 
Neptune,  the  planetary  outpost  of  our  system,  had  been 
called  the  tortoise  of  the  skies,  but  that  compara- 
tively it  was  rapid  in  its  motion,  and  had  become  a  near 
neighbor.  He  was  a  good  deal  excited  at  first,  having 
somehow  the  impression  that  this  new  planet  traveled 
out  beyond  the  nearest  fixed  star;  but  then  he  remem- 
bered that  the  distance  to  that  first  solar  neighbor  was 
estimated  in  trillions,  not  billions,  and  that  our  little 
system,  even  with  its  new  additions,  was  a  child's  hand- 
breadth  on  the  plane  of  the  sky.  He  had  brought  along 
a  small  book  called  The  Pith  of  Astronomy — a  fascinating 
little  volume — and  he  read  from  it  about  the  great  tem- 
pest of  fire  in  the  sun,  where  the  waves  of  flame  roll  up 
two  thousand  miles  high,  though  the  sun  itself  is  such  a 
tiny  star  in  the  deeps  of  the  universe. 

If  I  dwell  unwarrantably  on  this  phase  of  Mark  Twain's 
character,  it  is  because  it  was  always  so  fascinating  to 
me,  and  the  contemplation  of  the  drama  of  the  skies 
always  meant  so  much  to  him,  and  somehow  always 
seemed  akin  to  him  in  its  proportions.  He  had  been  born 
under  a  flaming  star,  a  wanderer  of  the  skies.  He  was 
himself,  to  me,  always  a  comet  rushing  through  space, 

1542 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  BERMUDA  BIRTHDAY 


from  mystery  to  mystery,  regardless  of  sun  and  sys- 
tems. 

It  is  not  likely  to  rain  long  in  Bermuda,  and  when  the 
sun  comes  back  it  brings  summer,  whatever  the  season. 
Within  a  day  after  our  arrival  we  were  driving  about 
those  coral  roads  along  the  beaches,  and  by  that  mar- 
velously  variegated  water.  We  went  often  to  the  south 
shore,  especially  to  Devonshire  Bay,  where  the  reefs  and 
the  sea  coloring  seem  more  beautiful  than  elsewhere. 
Usually,  when  we  reached  the  bay,  we  got  out  to  walk 
along  the  indurated  shore,  stopping  here  and  there  to 
look  out  over  the  jeweled  water — liquid  turquoise,  emerald 
lapis-lazuli,  jade,  the  imperial  garment  of  the  Lord. 

At  first  we  went  alone  with  only  the  colored  driver, 
Clifford  Trott,  whose  name  Clemens  could  not  recollect, 
though  he  was  always  attempting  resemblances  with 
ludicrous  results.  A  little  later  Helen  Allen,  an  early 
angel-fish  member  already  mentioned,  was  with  us  and 
directed  the  drives,  for  she  had  been  born  on  the  island 
and  knew  every  attractive  locality,  though,  for  that  mat- 
ter, it  would  be  hard  to  find  there  a  place  that  was  not 
attractive. 

Clemens,  in  fact,  remained  not  many  days  regularly 
at  the  hotel.  He  kept  a  room  and  his  wardrobe  there; 
but  he  paid  a  visit  to  Bay  House — the  lovely  and  quiet 
home  of  Helen's  parents — and  prolonged  it  from  day  to 
day,  and  from  week  to  week,  because  it  was  a  quiet  and 
peaceful  place  with  affectionate  attention  and  limitless 
welcome.  Clifford  Trott  had  orders  to  come  with  the 
carriage  each  afternoon,  and  we  drove  down  to  Bay 
House  for  Mark  Twain  and  his  playmate,  and  then 
went  wandering  at  will  among  the  labyrinth  of  blossom- 
bordered,  perfectly  kept  roadways  of  a  dainty  paradise, 
that  never,  I  believe,  becomes  quite  a  reality  even  to 
those  who  know  it  best. 

Clemens  had  an  occasional  paroxysm  during  these 

1543 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


weeks,  but  they  were  not  likely  to  be  severe  or  pro- 
tracted; and  I  have  no  doubt  the  peace  of  his  surround- 
ings, the  remoteness  from  disturbing  events,  as  well  as 
the  balmy  temperature,  all  contributed  to  his  improved 
condition. 

He  talked  pretty  continuously  during  these  drives, 
and  he  by  no  means  restricted  his  subjects  to  juvenile 
matters.  He  discussed  history  and  his  favorite  sciences 
and  philosophies,  and  I  am  sure  that  his  drift  was  rarely 
beyond  the  understanding  of  his  young  companion,  for 
it  was  Mark  Twain's  gift  to  phrase  his  thought  so  that 
it  commanded  not  only  the  respect  of  age,  but  the  com- 
prehension and  the  interest  of  youth. 

I  remember  that  once  he  talked,  during  an  afternoon's 
drive,  on  the  French  Revolution  and  the  ridiculous  epi- 
sode of  Anacharsis  Cloots,  "orator  and  advocate  of 
the  human  race,"  collecting  the  vast  populace  of  France 
to  swear  allegiance  to  a  king  even  then  doomed  to  the 
block.  The  very  name  of  Cloots  suggested  humor,  and 
nothing  could  have  been  more  delightful  and  graphic 
than  the  whole  episode  as  he  related  it. 

Helen  asked  if  he  thought  such  a  thing  as  that  could 
ever  happen  in  America. 

"No,"  he  said,  "the  American  sense  of  humor  would 
have  laughed  it  out  of  court  in  a  week;  and  the  French- 
man dreads  ridicule,  too,  though  he  never  seems  to  real- 
ize how  ridiculous  he  is — the  most  ridiculous  creature  in 
the  world." 

On  the  morning  of  his  seventy-fourth  birthday  he  was 
looking  wonderfully  well  after  a  night  of  sound  sleep, 
his  face  full  of  color  and  freshness,  his  eyes  bright  and 
keen  and  full  of  good-humor.  I  presented  him  with  a 
pair  of  cuff-buttons  silver-enameled  with  the  Bermuda 
lily,  and  I  thought  he  seemed  pleased  with  them. 

It  was  rather  gloomy  outside,  so  we  remained  indoors 
by  the  fire  and  played  cards,  game  after  game  of  hearts, 

1544 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  BERMUDA  BIRTHDAY 


at  which  he  excelled,  and  he  was  usually  kept  happy  by 
winning.  There  were  no  visitors,  and  after  dinner  Helen 
asked  him  to  read  some  of  her  favorite  episodes  from 
Tom  Sawyer,  so  he  read  the  whitewashing  scene,  Peter 
and  the  Pain-killer,  and  such  chapters  until  tea-time. 
Then  there  was  a  birthday  cake,  and  afterward  cigars  and 
talk  and  a  quiet  fireside  evening. 

Once,  in  the  course  of  his  talk,  he  forgot  a  word  and 
denounced  his  poor  memory: 

"I'll  forget  the  Lord's  middle  name  some  time,"  he 
declared,  "right  in  the  midst  of  a  storm,  when  I  need  all 
the  help  I  can  get." 

Later  he  said: 

"Nobody  dreamed,  seventy-four  years  ago  to-day,  that 
I  would  be  in  Bermuda  now."  And  I  thought  he  meant 
a  good  deal  more  than  the  words  conveyed. 

It  was  during  this  Bermuda  visit  that  Mark  Twain  added 
the  finishing  paragraph  to  his  article,  "The  Turning-Point 
in  My  Life,"  which,  at  Howells's  suggestion,  he  had  been 
preparing  for  Harper's  Bazar.  It  was  a  characteristic 
touch,  and,  as  the  last  summary  of  his  philosophy  of 
human  life,  may  be  repeated  here. 

Necessarily  the  scene  of  the  real  turning-point  of  my  life  (and 
of  yours)  was  the  Garden  of  Eden.  It  was  there  that  the  first 
link  was  forged  of  the  chain  that  was  ultimately  to  lead  to  the 
emptying  of  me  into  the  literary  guild.  Adam's  temperament 
was  the  first  command  the  Deity  ever  issued  to  a  human  being 
on  this  planet.  And  it  was  the  only  command  Adam  would 
never  be  able  to  disobey.  It  said,  "  Be  weak,  be  water,  be  char- 
acterless, be  cheaply  persuadable."  The  later  command,  to  let 
the  fruit  alone,  was  certain  to  be  disobeyed.  Not  by  Adam  him- 
self, but  by  his  temperament—which  he  did  not  create  and  had 
no  authority  over.  For  the  temperament  is  the  man;  the  thing 
tricked  out  with  clothes  and  named  Man  is  merely  its  Shadow, 
nothing  more.  The  law  of  the  tiger's  temperament  is,  Thou 
shalt  kill;  the  law  of  the  sheep's  temperament  is,  Thou  shalt 

1545 


MARK  TWAIN 


not  kill.  To  issue  later  commands  requiring  the  tiger  to  let 
the  fat  stranger  alone,  and  requiring  the  sheep  to  imbrue  its 
hands  in  the  blood  of  the  lion  is  not  worth  while,  for  those  com- 
mands can't  be  obeyed.  They  would  invite  to  violations  of  the 
law  of  temperament,  which  is  supreme,  and  takes  precedence  of 
all  other  authorities.  I  cannot  help  feeling  disappointed  in 
Adam  and  Eve.  That  is,  in  their  temperaments.  Not  in  them, 
poor  helpless  young  creatures — afflicted  with  temperaments  made 
out  of  butter,  which  butter  was  commanded  to  get  into  contact 
with  fire  and  be  melted.  What  I  cannot  help  wishing  is,  that 
Adam  and  Eve  had  been  postponed,  and  Martin  Luther  and  Joan 
of  Arc  put  in  their  place— that  splendid  pair  equipped  with  tem- 
peraments not  made  of  butter,  but  of  asbestos.  By  neither 
sugary  persuasions  nor  by  hell-fire  could  Satan  have  beguiled 
them  to  eat  the  apple. 

There  would  have  been  results!  Indeed  yes.  The  apple 
would  be  intact  to-day;  there  would  be  no  human  race;  there 
would  be  no  you;  there  would  be  no  me.  And  the  old,  old 
creation-dawn  scheme  of  ultimately  launching  me  into  the  liter- 
ary guild  would  have  been  defeated. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCLXXXIX 


THE  DEATH  OP  JEAN 

HE  decided  to  go  home  for  the  holidays,  and  how  for- 
_  tunate  it  seems  now  that  he  did  so!  We  sailed  for 
America  on  the  18th  of  December,  arriving  the  21st. 
Jean  was  at  the  wharf  to  meet  us,  blue  and  shivering  with 
the  cold,  for  it  was  wretchedly  bleak  there,  and  I  had 
the  feeling  that  she  should  not  have  come. 

She  went  directly,  I  think,  to  Stormfield,  he  following 
a  day  or  two  later.  On  the  23d  I  was  lunching  with  Jean 
alone.  She  was  full  of  interest  in  her  Christmas  prepara- 
tions. She  had  a  handsome  tree  set  up  in  the  loggia, 
and  the  packages  were  piled  about  it,  with  new  ones  con- 
stantly arriving.  With  her  farm  management,  her  house- 
keeping, her  secretary  work,  and  her  Christmas  prepara- 
tions, it  seemed  to  me  that  she  had  her  hands  overfull. 
Such  a  mental  pressure  could  not  be  good  for  her.  I 
suggested  that  for  a  time  at  least  I  might  assume  a 
part  of  her  burden. 

I  was  to  remain  at  my  own  home  that  night,  and  I 
think  it  was  as  I  left  Stormfield  that  I  passed  Jean  on 
the  stair.  She  said,  cheerfully,  that  she  felt  a  little 
tired  and  was  going  up  to  lie  down,  so  that  she  would  be 
fresh  for  the  evening.  I  did  not  go  back,  and  I  never 
saw  her  alive  again. 

I  was  at  breakfast  next  morning  when  word  was  brought 
in  that  one  of  the  men  from  Storm  field  WtlS  ou  ts  ide  and 
wished  to  see  me  immediately.  When  I  went  out  he  said: 
"Miss  Jean  is  dead.  They  have  just  found  her  in  her 
bath-room.    Mr.  Clemens  sent  me  to  bring  you." 

1547 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


It  was  as  incomprehensible  as  such  things  always  are. 
I  could  not  realize  at  all  that  Jean,  so  full  of  plans  and 
industries  and  action  less  than  a  day  before,  had  passed 
into  that  voiceless  mystery  which  we  call  death. 

Harry  lies  drove  me  rapidly  up  the  hill.  As  I  entered 
Clemens's  room  he  looked  at  me  helplessly  and  said: 

"Well,  I  suppose  you  have  heard  of  this  final  disaster." 

He  was  not  violent  or  broken  down  with  grief.  He 
had  come  to  that  place  where,  whatever  the  shock  or  the 
ill-turn  of  fortune,  he  could  accept  it,  and  even  in  that 
first  moment  of  loss  he  realized  that,  for  Jean  at  least, 
the  fortune  was  not  ill.  Her  malady  had  never  been 
cured,  and  it  had  been  one  of  his  deepest  dreads  that  he 
would  leave  her  behind  him.  It  was  believed,  at  first, 
that  Jean  had  drowned,  and  Dr.  Smith  tried  methods  of 
resuscitation;  but  then  he  found  that  it  was  simply  a  case 
of  heart  cessation  caused  by  the  cold  shock  of  her  bath. 

The  Gabrilowitsches  were  by  this  time  in  Europe,  and 
Clemens  cabled  them  not  to  come.  Later  in  the  day 
he  asked  me  if  we  would  be  willing  to  close  our  home 
for  the  winter  and  come  to  Stormfield.  He  said  that  he 
should  probably  go  back  to  Bermuda  before  long;  but 
that  he  wished  to  keep  the  house  open  so  that  it  would 
be  there  for  him  to  come  to  at  any  time  that  he  might 
need  it. 

We  came,  of  course,  for  there  was  no  thought  among 
any  of  his  friends  but  for  his  comfort  and  peace  of  mind. 
Jervis  Langdon  was  summoned  from  Elmira,  for  Jean 
would  lie  there  with  the  others. 

In  the  loggia  stood  the  half-trimmed  Christmas  tree, 
and  all  about  lay  the  packages  of  gifts,  and  in  Jean's 
room,  on  the  chairs  and  upon  her  desk,  were  piled  other 
packages.  Nobody  had  been  forgotten.  For  her  father 
she  had  bought  a  handsome  globe;  he  had  always  wanted 
one.    Once  when  I  went  into  his  room  he  said: 

"I  have  been  looking  in  at  Jean  and  envying  her.  I 

1548 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DEATH  OF  JEAN 


have  never  greatly  envied  any  one  but  the  dead.  I  al- 
ways envy  the  dead." 

He  told  me  how  the  night  before  they  had  dined  to- 
gether alone;  how  he  had  urged  her  to  turn  over  a  part 
of  her  work  to  me;  how  she  had  clung  to  every  duty  as 
if  now,  after  all  the  years,  she  was  determined  to  make 
up  for  lost  time. 

While  they  were  at  dinner  a  telephone  inquiry  had 
come  concerning  his  health,  for  the  papers  had  reported 
him  as  returning  from  Bermuda  in  a  critical  condition. 
He  had  written  this  playful  answer: 

Manager  Associated  Press, 
New  York. 

I  hear  the  newspapers  say  I  am  dying.  The  charge  is  not 
true.  I  would  not  do  such  a  thing  at  my  time  of  life.  I  am 
behaving  as  good  as  I  can. 

Merry  Christmas  to  everybody!  Mark  Twain. 

Jean  telephoned  it  for  him  to  the  press.  It  had  been 
the  last  secretary  service  she  had  ever  rendered. 

She  had  kissed  his  hand,  he  said,  when  they  parted, 
for  she  had  a  severe  cold  and  would  not  wish  to  impart 
it  to  him;  then  happily  she  had  said  good  night,  and  he 
had  not  seen  her  again.  The  reciting  of  this  was  good  to 
him,  for  it  brought  the  comfort  of  tears. 

Later,  when  I  went  in  again,  he  was  writing: 

"I  am  setting  it  down,"  he  said — ''everything.  It  is  a 
relief  to  me  to  write  it.  It  furnishes  me  an  excuse  for 
thinking.' ' 

He  continued  writing  most  of  the  day,  and  at  intervals 
during  the  next  day,  and  the  next. 

It  was  on  Christmas  Day  that  they  went  with  Jean  on  her 
last  journey.  Katie  Leary,  her  baby  nurse,  had  dressed 
her  in  the  dainty  gown  which  she  had  worn  for  Clara's 
wedding,  and  they  had  pinned  on  it  a  pretty  buckle 
which  her  father  had  brought  her  from  Bermuda,  and 
hi.— 28  1549 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


which  she  had  not  seen.  No  Greek  statue  was  ever  more 
classically  beautiful  than  she  was,  lying  there  in  the 
great  living-room,  which  in  its  brief  history  had  seen  so 
much  of  the  round  of  life. 

They  were  to  start  with  Jean  at  about  six  o'clock,  and 
a  little  before  that  time  Clemens  (he  was  unable  to  make 
the  journey)  asked  me  what  had  been  her  favorite  music. 
I  said  that  she  seemed  always  to  care  most  for  the  Schu- 
bert Impromptu.1   Then  he  said: 

"Play  it  when  they  get  ready  to  leave  with  her,  and 
add  the  Intermezzo  for  Susy  and  the  Largo  for  Mrs. 
Clemens.  When  I  hear  the  music  I  shall  know  that  they 
are  starting.  Tell  them  to  set  lanterns  at  the  door,  so 
I  can  look  down  and  see  them  go." 

So  I  sat  at  the  organ  and  began  playing  as  they  lifted 
and  bore  her  away.  A  soft,  heavy  snow  was  falling,  and 
the  gloom  of  those  shortest  days  was  closing  in.  There 
was  not  the  least  wind  or  noise,  the  whole  world  was 
muffled.  The  lanterns  at  the  door  threw  their  light  out 
on  the  thickly  falling  flakes.  I  remained  at  the  organ; 
but  the  little  group  at  the  door  saw  him  come  to  the  win- 
dow above — the  light  on  his  white  hair  as  he  stood  mourn- 
fully gazing  down,  watching  Jean  going  away  from  him 
for  the  last  time.  I  played  steadily  on  as  he  had  in- 
structed, the  Impromptu,  the  Intermezzo  from  "Caval- 
leria,"  and  Handel's  Largo.  When  I  had  finished  I 
went  up  and  found  him. 

"Poor  little  Jean,"  he  said;  "but  for  her  it  is  so  good 
to  go.'] 

In  his  own  story  of  it  he  wrote: 

From  my  windows  I  saw  the  hearse  and  the  carriages  wind 
along  the  road  and  gradually  grow  vague  and  spectral  in  the 
falling  snow,  and  presently  disappear.  Jean  was  gone  out  of 
my  life,  and  would  not  come  back  any  more.   The  cousin  she 

1  Op.  142,  No.  2. 
1550 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  DEATH  OF  JEAN 


had  played  with  when  they  were  babies  together — he  and  her 
beloved  old  Katie — were  conducting  her  to  her  distant  childhood 
home,  where  she  will  lie  by  her  mother's  side  once  more,  in  the 
company  of  Susy  and  Langdon. 

He  did  not  come  down  to  dinner,  and  when  I  went  up 
afterward  I  found  him  curiously  agitated.    He  said: 

"For  one  who  does  not  believe  in  spirits  I  have  had  a 
most  peculiar  experience.  I  went  into  the  bath-room 
just  now  and  closed  the  door.  You  know  how  warm  it 
always  is  in  there,  and  there  are  no  draughts.  All  at 
once  I  felt  a  cold  current  of  air  about  me.  I  thought  the 
door  must  be  open;  but  it  was  closed.  I  said,  'Jean,  is 
this  you  trying  to  let  me  know  you  have  found  the  others?' 
Then  the  cold  air  was  gone." 

I  saw  that  the  incident  had  made  a  very  great  impres- 
sion upon  him;  but  I  don't  remember  that  he  ever  men- 
tioned it  afterward. 

Next  day  the  storm  had  turned  into  a  fearful  blizzard; 
the  whole  hilltop  was  a  raging,  driving  mass  of  white. 
He  wrote  most  of  the  day,  but  stopped  now  and  then  to 
read  some  of  the  telegrams  or  letters  of  condolence  which 
came  flooding  in.  Sometimes  he  walked  over  to  the 
window  to  look  out  on  the  furious  tempest.  Once,  during 
the  afternoon,  he  said: 

"Jean  always  so  loved  to  see  a  storm  like  this,  and  just 
now  at  Elmira  they  are  burying  her." 

Later  he  read  aloud  some  lines  by  Alfred  Austin,  which 
Mrs.  Crane  had  sent  him — lines  which  he  had  remembered 
in  the  sorrow  for  Susy: 

When  last  came  sorrow,  around  barn  and  byre 
Wind-carven  snow,  the  year's  white  sepulchre,  lay. 

" Come  in,"  I  said,  "and  warm  you  by  the  fire ": 
And  there  she  sits  and  never  goes  away. 

It  was  that  evening  that  he  came  into  the  room  where 
Mrs.  Paine  and  I  sat  by  the  fire,  bringing  his  manuscript. 

iS5i 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"I  have  finished  my  story  of  Jean's  death,"  he  said. 
"It  is  the  end  of  my  autobiography.  I  shall  never  write 
any  more.  I  can't  judge  it  myself  at  all.  One  of  you 
read  it  aloud  to  the  other,  and  let  me  know  what  you 
think  of  it.  If  it  is  worthy,  perhaps  some  day  it  may  be 
published." 

It  was,  in  fact,  one  of  the  most  exquisite  and  tender 
pieces  of  writing  in  the  language.  He  had  ended  his  lit- 
erary labors  with  that  perfect  thing  which  so  marvelously 
speaks  the  loftiness  and  tenderness  of  his  soul.  It  was 
thoroughly  in  keeping  with  his  entire  career  that  he  should, 
with  this  rare  dramatic  touch,  bring  it  to  a  close.  A  para- 
graph which  he  omitted  may  be  printed  now: 

December  27.  Did  I  know  Jean's  value?  No,  I  only  thought 
I  did.  I  knew  a  ten-thousandth  fraction  of  it,  that  was  all.  It 
is  always  so,  with  us,  it  has  always  been  so.  We  are  like  the 
poor  ignorant  private  soldier — dead,  now,  four  hundred  years — 
who  picked  up  the  great  Sancy  diamond  on  the  field  of  the  lost 
battle  and  sold  it  for  a  franc.    Later  he  knew  what  he  had  done. 

Shall  I  ever  be  cheerful  again,  happy  again?  Yes.  And  soon. 
For  I  know  my  temperament.  And  I  know  that  the  tempera- 
ment is  master  of  the  man,  and  that  he  is  its  fettered  and  helpless 
slave  and  must  in  all  things  do  as  it  commands.  A  man's  tempera- 
ment is  born  in  him,  and  no  circumstances  can  ever  change  it. 

My  temperament  has  never  allowed  my  spirits  to  remain  de- 
pressed long  at  a  time. 

That  was  a  feature  of  Jean's  temperament,  too.  She  inherited 
it  from  me.   I  think  she  got  the  rest  of  it  from  her  mother. 

Jean  Clemens  had  two  natural  endowments:  the  gift 
of  justice  and  a  genuine  passion  for  all  nature.  In  a 
little  paper  found  in  her  desk  she  had  written: 

I  know  a  few  people  who  love  the  country  as  I  do,  but  not 
many.  Most  of  my  acquaintances  are  enthusiastic  over  the 
spring  and  summer  months,  but  very  few  care  much  for  it 
the  year  round.   A  few  people  are  interested  in  the  spring 

1552 


Digitized  by  Google 


JEAN  CLEMENS,  1 884 


JEAN  CLEMENS,  1 898 


THE  DEATH  OF  JEAN 


foliage  and  the  development  of  the  wild  flowers — nearly  all  enjoy 
the  autumn  colors — while  comparatively  few  pay  much  atten- 
tion to  the  coming  and  going  of  the  birds,  the  changes  in  their 
plumage  and  songs,  the  apparent  springing  into  life  on  some 
warm  April  day  of  the  chipmunks  and  woodchucks,  the  skurrying 
of  baby  rabbits,  and  again  in  the  fall  the  equally  sudden  dis- 
appearance of  some  of  the  animals  and  the  growing  shyness  of 
others.  To  me  it  is  all  as  fascinating  as  a  book — more  so,  since  I 
have  never  lost  interest  in  it. 

It  is  simple  and  frank,  like  Thoreau.  Perhaps,  had 
she  exercised  it,  there  was  a  third  gift — the  gift  of  writ- 
ten thought. 

Clemens  remained  at  Stormfield  ten  days  after  Jean 
was  gone.  The  weather  was  fiercely  cold,  the  landscape 
desolate,  the  house  full  of  tragedy.  He  kept  pretty  closely 
to  his  room,  where  he  had  me  bring  the  heaps  of  letters, 
a  few  of  which  he  answered  personally;  for  the  others 
he  prepared  a  simple  card  of  acknowledgment.  He  was 
for  the  most  part  in  gentle  mood  during  these  days,  though 
he  would  break  out  now  and  then,  and  rage  at  the  hard- 
ness of  a  fate  that  had  laid  an  unearned  burden  of  illness 
on  Jean  and  shadowed  her  life. 

They  were  days  not  wholly  without  humor — none  of 
his  days  could  be  altogether  without  that,  though  it  was 
likely  to  be  of  a  melancholy  sort 

Many  of  the  letters  offered  orthodox  comfort,  saying, 
in  effect:  "God  does  not  willingly  punish  us." 

When  he  had  read  a  number  of  these  he  said: 

"Well,  why  does  He  do  it  then?  We  don't  invite  it. 
Why  does  He  give  Himself  the  trouble?" 

I  suggested  that  it  was  a  sentiment  that  probably  gave 
comfort  to  the  writer  of  it. 

"So  it  does,"  he  said,  "and  I  am  glad  of  it — glad  of 
anything  that  gives  comfort  to  anybody." 

He  spoke  of  the  larger  God — the  God  of  the  great  un- 
varying laws,  and  by  and  by  dropped  off  to  sleep,  quite 

1553 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


peacefully,  and  indeed  peace  came  more  and  more  to 
him  each  day  with  the  thought  that  Jean  and  Susy  and 
their  mother  could  not  be  troubled  any  more.  To  Mrs. 
Gabrilowitsch  he  wrote: 

Redding,  Conn.,  December  29,  1909. 

O,  Clara,  Clara  dear,  I  am  so  glad  she  is  out  of  it  &  safe — safe! 
I  am  not  melancholy;  I  shall  never  be  melancholy  again,  I 
think. 

You  see,  I  was  in  such  distress  when  I  came  to  realize  that 
you  were  gone  far  away  &  no  one  stood  between  her  &  danger 
but  me — &  I  could  die  at  any  moment,  &  then — oh  then  what 
would  Income  of  her  I  For  she  was  wilful,  you  know,  &  would 
not  have  been  governable. 

You  can't  imagine  what  a  darling  she  was  that  last  two  or 
three  days;  &  how  fine,  &  good,  &  sweet,  &  noble — &  joyful, 
thank  Heaven! — &  how  intellectually  brilliant.  I  had  never 
been  acquainted  with  Jean  before.    I  recognized  that. 

But  I  mustn't  try  to  write  about  her— I  can't.  I  have  already 
poured  my  heart  out  with  the  pen,  recording  that  last  day  or  two. 
I  will  send  you  that — &  you  must  let  no  one  but  Ossip  read  it. 

Good-by.   I  love  you  sol  And  Ossip. 

Father. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ccxc 


THE  RETURN  TO  BERMUDA 

I DON'T  think  he  attempted  any  further  writing  for 
print.  His  mind  was  busy  with  ideas,  but  he  was 
willing  to  talk,  rather  than  to  write,  rather  even  than  to 
play  billiards,  it  seemed,  although  we  had  a  few  quiet 
games — the  last  we  should  ever  play  together.  Evenings 
he  asked  for  music,  preferring  the  Scotch  airs,  such  as 
""Bonnie  Doon"  and  "The  Campbells  are  Coming."  I 
remember  that  once,  after  playing  the  latter  for  him,  he 
told,  with  great  feeling,  how  the  Highlanders,  led  by  Gen. 
Colin  Campbell,  had  charged  at  Lucknow,  inspired  by 
that  stirring  air.  When  he  had  retired  I  usually  sat  with 
him,  and  he  drifted  into  literature,  or  theology,  or  science, 
or  history — the  story  of  the  universe  and  man. 

One  evening  he  spoke  of  those  who  had  written  but 
one  immortal  thing  and  stopped  there.  He  mentioned 
"Ben  Bolt." 

"I  met  that  man  once,"  he  said.  "In  my  childhood  I 
sang  'Sweet  Alice,  Ben  Bolt,'  and  in  my  old  age,  fifteen 
years  ago,  I  met  the  man  who  wrote  it.  His  name  was 
Brown.1  He  was  aged,  forgotten,  a  mere  memory.  I 
remember  how  it  thrilled  me  to  realize  that  this  was  the 
very  author  of  'Sweet  Alice,  Ben  Bolt.'  He  was  just  an 
accident.  He  had  a  vision  and  echoed  it.  A  good  many 
persons  do  that — the  thing  they  do  is  to  put  in  compact 

1  Thomas  Dunn  English.  Mr.  Clemens  apparently  remembered 
only  the  name  satirically  conferred  upon  him  by  Edgar  Allan  Poe, 
"Thomas  Dunn  Brown." 

1555 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


form  the  thing  which  we  have  all  vaguely  felt.  'Twenty 
Years  Ago'  is  just  like  it— 'I  have  wandered  through  the 
village,  Tom,  and  sat  beneath  the  tree ' — and  Holmes's 
'Last  Leaf'  is  another:  the  memory  of  the  hallowed 
past,  and  the  gravestones  of  those  we  love.  It  is  all 
so  beautiful — the  past  is  always  beautiful." 
He  quoted,  with  great  feeling  and  effect: 

The  mossy  marbles  rest 

On  the  lips  that  we  have  pressed 

In  their  bloom, 
And  the  names  we  love  to  hear 
Have  been  carved  for  many  a  year 

On  the  tomb. 

He  continued  in  this  strain  for  an  hour  or  more.  He 
spoke  of  humor,  and  thought  it  must  be  one  of  the  chief 
attributes  of  God.  He  cited  plants  and  animals  that  were 
distinctly  humorous  in  form  and  in  their  characteristics. 
These  he  declared  were  God's  jokes. 

"Why,"  he  said,  "humor  is  mankind's  greatest  bless- 

*  »t 
mg. 

"Your  own  case  is  an  example,"  I  answered.  "With- 
out it,  whatever  your  reputation  as  a  philosopher,  you 
could  never  have  had  the  wide-spread  affection  that  is 
shown  by  the  writers  of  that  great  heap  of  letters." 

"  Yes,"  he  said,  gently,  "  they  have  liked  to  be  amused." 

I  tucked  him  in  for  the  night,  promising  to  send  him 
to  Bermuda,  with  Claude  to  take  care  of  him,  if  he  felt 
he  could  undertake  the  journey  in  two  days  more. 

He  was  able,  and  he  was  eager  to  go,  for  he  longed  for 
that  sunny  island,  and  for  the  quiet  peace  of  the  Allen 
home.  His  niece,  Mrs.  Loo  mis,  came  up  to  spend  the  last 
evening  in  Stormfield,  a  happy  evening  full  of  quiet  talk, 
and  next  morning,  in  the  old  closed  carriage  that  had  been 
his  wedding-gift,  he  was  driven  to  the  railway  station. 
This  was  on  January  4,  19 10. 

1556 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  TO  BERMUDA 


He  was  to  sail  next  day,  and  that  night,  at  Mr.  Loomis's, 
Howells  came  in,  and  for  an  hour  or  two  they  reviewed 
some  of  the  questions  they  had  so  long  ago  settled,  or 
left  forever  unsettled,  and  laid  away.  I  remember  that 
at  dinner  Clemens  spoke  of  his  old  Hartford  butler, 
George,  and  how  he  had  once  brought  George  to  New 
York  and  introduced  him  at  the  various  publishing  houses 
as  his  friend,  with  curious  and  sometimes  rather  em- 
barrassing results. 

The  talk  drifted  to  sociology  and  to  the  labor-unions, 
which  Clemens  defended  as  being  the  only  means  by 
which  the  workman  could  obtain  recognition  of  his  rights. 

Howells  in  his  book  mentions  this  evening,  which  he 
says  "was  made  memorable  to  me  by  the  kind,  clear, 
judicial  sense  with  which  he  explained  and  justified  the 
labor-unions  as  the  sole  present  help  of  the  weak  against 
the  strong." 

They  discussed  dreams,  and  then  in  a  little  while 
Howells  rose  to  go.  I  went  also,  and  as  we  walked  to 
his  near-by  apartment  he  spoke  of  Mark  Twain's  su- 
premacy.   He  said: 

"  I  turn  to  his  books  for  cheer  when  I  am  down-hearted. 
There  was  never  anybody  like  him;  there  never  will  be." 


Clemens  sailed  next  morning.  They  did  not  meet 
again. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXCI 

LETTERS  PROM  BERMUDA 

OTORMFIELD  was  solemn  and  empty  without  Mark 
O  Twain;  but  he  wrote  by  every  steamer,  at  first  with 
his  own  hand,  and  during  the  last  week  by  the  hand 
of  one  of  his  enlisted  secretaries — some  member  of  the 
Allen  family — usually  Helen.  His  letters  were  full  of 
brightness  and  pleasantry — always  concerned  more  or 
less  with  business  matters,  though  he  was  no  longer  dis- 
turbed by  them,  for  Bermuda  was  too  peaceful  and  too 
far  away,  and,  besides,  he  had  faith  in  the  Mark  Twain 
Company's  ability  to  look  after  his  affairs.  I  cannot  do 
better,  I  believe,  than  to  offer  some  portions  of  these 
letters  here. 

He  reached  Bermuda  on  the  7  th  of  January,  1910,  and 
on  the  1  ith  he  wrote: 

Again  I  am  living  the  ideal  life.  There  is  nothing  to  mar  it 
but  the  bloody-minded  bandit  Arthur,1  who  still  fetches  and  car- 
ries Helen.  Presently  he  will  be  found  drowned.  Claude  comes 
to  Bay  House  twice  a  day  to  see  if  I  need  any  service.  He  is 
invaluable.  There  was  a  military  lecture  last  night  at  the 
Officers'  Mess  Prospect;  as  the  lecturer  honored  me  with  a 
special  urgent  invitation,  and  said  he  wanted  to  lecture  to  me 
particularly,  I  naturally  took  Helen  and  her  mother  into  the 
private  carriage  and  went. 

As  soon  as  we  landed  at  the  door  with  the  crowd  the  Governor 

1  A  small  playmate  of  Helen's  of  whom  Clemens  pretended  to  be 
fiercely  jealous.  Once  he  wrote  a  memorandum  to  Helen:  "Let 
Arthur  read  this  book.   There  is  a  page  in  it  that  is  poisoned." 

ISS8 


Digitized  by  Google 


LETTERS  FROM  BERMUDA 


came  to  me  &  was  very  cordial.  I  "  met  up  "  with  that  charming 
Colonel  Chapman  [we  had  known  him  on  the  previous  visit] 
and  other  officers  of  the  regiment  &  had  a  good  time. 

A  few  days  later  he  wrote: 

Thanks  for  your  letter  &  for  its  contenting  news  of  the  situa- 
tion in  that  foreign  &  far-off  &  vaguely  remembered  country 
where  you  &  Loomis  &  Lark  and  other  beloved  friends  are. 

I  had  a  letter  from  Clara  this  morning.  She  is  solicitous 
&  wants  me  well  &  watchfully  taken  care  of.  My,  my,  she 
ought  to  see  Helen  &  her  parents  &  Claude  administer  that 
trust.  Also  she  says,  "I  hope  to  hear  from  you  or  Mr.  Paine 
very  soon." 

I  am  writing  her  &  I  know  you  will  respond  to  your  part  of 
her  prayer.  She  is  pretty  desolate  now  after  Jean's  emancipation 
—the  only  kindness  that  God  ever  did  that  poor,  unoffending 
child  in  all  her  hard  life. 

Send  Clara  a  copy  of  Howells's  gorgeous  letter. 

The  "  gorgeous  letter  "  mentioned  was  an  appreciation 
of  his  recent  Bazar  article,  "The  Turning-point  in  My 
Life,"  and  here  follows: 

January  18,  igio. 

Dear  Clemens, — While  your  wonderful  words  are  warm  in 
my  mind  yet  I  want  to  tell  you  what  you  know  already:  that 
you  never  wrote  anything  greater,  finer,  than  that  turning-point 
paper  of  yours. 

I  shall  feel  it  honor  enough  if  they  put  on  my  tombstone 
"  He  was  born  in  the  same  century  and  general  section  of  Middle 
Western  country  with  Dr.  S.  L.  Clemens,  Oxon.,  and  had  his 
degree  three  years  before  him  through  a  mistake  of  the  Uni- 
versity." 

I  hope  you  are  worse.  You  will  never  be  riper  for  a  purely 
intellectual  life,  and  it  is  a  pity  to  have  you  lagging  along  with 
a  worn-out  material  body  on  top  of  your  soul. 

Yours  ever, 

W.  D.  Howells. 

i$59 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


On  the  margin  of  this  letter  Clemens  had  written: 

I  reckon  this  spontaneous  outburst  from  the  first  critic  of 
the  day  is  good  to  keep,  ain't  it,  Paine? 

January  24th  he  wrote  again  of  his  contentment: 

Life  continues  here  the  same  as  usual.  There  isn't  a  fault 
in  it — good  times,  good  home,  tranquil  contentment  all  day  & 
every  day  without  a  break.  I  know  familiarly  several  very 
satisfactory  people  &  meet  them  frequently:  Mr.  Hamilton, 
the  Sloanes,  Mr.  &  Mrs.  Eells,  Miss  Waterman,  &  so  on.  I 
shouldn't  know  how  to  go  about  bettering  my  situation. 

On  February  5th  he  wrote  that  the  climate  and  condi- 
tion of  his  health  might  require  him  to  stay  in  Bermuda 
pretty  continuously,  but  that  he  wished  Stormfield  kept 
open  so  that  he  might  come  to  it  at  any  time.  And  he 
added: 

Yesterday  Mr.  Allen  took  us  on  an  excursion  in  Mr.  Hamilton's 
big  motor-boat.  Present:  Mrs.  Allen,  Mr.  &  Mrs.  &  Miss  Sloane, 
Helen,  Mildred  Howells,  Claude,  &  me.  Several  hours'  swift 
skimming  over  ravishing  blue  seas,  a  brilliant  sun;  also  a  couple 
of  hours  of  picnicking  &  lazying  under  the  cedars  in  a  secluded 
place. 

The  Orotava  is  arriving  with  260  passengers— I  shall  get  letters 
by  her,  no  doubt. 

P.  S. — Please  send  me  the  Standard  Unabridged  that  is  on  the 
table  in  my  bedroom.   I  have  no  dictionary  here. 

There  is  no  mention  in  any  of  these  letters  of  his 
trouble;  but  he  was  having  occasional  spasms  of  pain, 
though  in  that  soft  climate  they  would  seem  to  have 
come  with  less  frequency,  and  there  was  so  little  to  disturb 
him,  and  much  that  contributed  to  his  peace.  Among 
the  callers  at  the  Bay  House  to  see  him  was  Woodrow 
Wilson,  and  the  two  put  in  some  pleasant  hours  at 
miniature  golf,  "putting"  on  the  Allen  lawn.  Of  course 
a  catastrophe  would  come  along  now  and  then — such 

1560 


Digitized  by  Google 


LETTERS  FROM  BERMUDA 


things  could  not  always  be  guarded  against.  In  a  letter 
toward  the  end  of  February  he  wrote: 

It  is  2.30  in  the  morning  &  I  am  writing  because  I  can't  sleep. 
I  can't  sleep  because  a  professional  pianist  is  coming  to-morrow 
afternoon  to  play  for  me.  My  God!  I  wouldn't  allow  Paderewski 
or  Gabrilowitsch  to  do  that.  I  would  rather  have  a  leg  ampu- 
tated. I  knew  he  was  coming,  but  I  never  dreamed  it  was  to 
play  for  me.  When  I  heard  the  horrible  news  4  hours  ago,  be 
d— d  if  I  didn't  come  near  screaming.  I  meant  to  slip  out  and 
be  absent,  but  now  I  can't.  Don't  pray  for  me.  The  thing  is 
just  as  d — d  bad  as  it  can  be  already. 

Clemens's  love  for  music  did  not  include  the  piano, 
except  for  very  gentle  melodies,  and  he  probably  did  not 
anticipate  these  from  a  professional  player.  He  did  not 
report  the  sequel  of  the  matter;  but  it  is  likely  that  his 
imagination  had  discounted  its  tortures.  Sometimes  his 
letters  were  pure  nonsense.  Once  he  sent  a  sheet,  on  one 
side  of  which  was  written: 

Bay  House, 
March  5,  igio. 

Received  of  S.  L.  C. 

Two  Dollars  and  Forty  Cents 
in  return  for  my  promise  to  believe 
everything  he  says  hereafter. 

Helen  S.  Allen. 

and  on  the  reverse: 

FOR  SALE 

The  proprietor  of  the  hereinbefore  mentioned  Promise  desires  to 
part  with  it  on  account  of  ill  health  and  obliged  to  go  away 
somewheres  so  as  to  let  it  recipricate,  and  will  take  any  reason- 
able amount  for  it  above  2  percent  of  its  face  because  experienced 
parties  think  it  will  not  keep  but  only  a  little  while  in  this  kind 
of  weather  &  is  a  kind  of  proppity  that  don't  give  a  cuss  for 
cold  storage  nohow. 

Clearly,  however  serious  Mark  Twain  regarded  his 

1561 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


physical  condition,  he  did  not  allow  it  to  make  him 
gloomy.  He  wrote  that  matters  were  going  everywhere 
to  his  satisfaction;  that  Clara  was  happy;  that  his 
household  and  business  affairs  no  longer  troubled  him; 
that  his  personal  surroundings  were  of  the  pleasantest 
sort.  Sometimes  he  wrote  of  what  he  was  reading,  and 
once  spoke  particularly  of  Prof.  William  Lyon  Phelps's 
Literary  Essays,  which  he  said  he  had  been  unable  to 
lay  down  until  he  had  finished  the  book.1 

So  his  days  seemed  full  of  comfort.  But  in  March  I 
noticed  that  he  generally  dictated  his  letters,  and  once 
when  he  sent  some  small  photographs  I  thought  he 
looked  thinner  and  older.  Still  he  kept  up  his  merri- 
ment.   In  one  letter  he  said: 

While  the  matter  is  in  my  mind  I  will  remark  that  if  you  ever 
send  me  another  letter  which  is  not  paged  at  the  top  I  will  write 
you  with  my  own  hand,  so  that  I  may  use  with  utter  freedom  & 
without  embarrassment  the  kind  of  words  which  alone  can  de- 
scribe such  a  criminal,  towit,  ;  you  will  have  to  put  into 

words  those  dashes  because  propriety  will  not  allow  me  to  do  it 
myself  in  my  secretary's  hearing.  You  are  forgiven,  but  don't 
let  it  occur  again. 

He  had  still  made  no  mention  of  his  illness;  but  on 
the  25th  of  March  he  wrote  something  of  his  plans  for 
coming  home.  He  had  engaged  passage  on  the  Ber- 
mudian  for  April  23d,  he  said;  and  he  added: 

But  don't  tell  anybody.  I  don't  want  it  known.  I  may  have 
to  go  sooner  if  the  pain  in  my  breast  does  not  mend  its  ways 
pretty  considerable.  I  don't  want  to  die  here,  for  this  is  an 
unkind  place  for  a  person  in  that  condition.   I  should  have  to 

1  To  Phelps  himself  he  wrote:  "I  thank  you  ever  so  much  for  the 
book,  which  I  find  charming — so  charming,  indeed,  that  I  read  it 
through  in  a  single  night,  &  did  not  regret  the  lost  night's  sleep.  I 
am  glad  if  I  deserve  what  you  have  said  about  me;  &  even  if 
I  don't  I  am  proud  &  well  contented,  since  you  think  I  deserve  it." 

1562 


Digitized  by  Google 


LETTERS  FROM  BERMUDA 


lie  in  the  undertaker's  cellar  until  the  ship  would  remove  me 
&  it  is  dark  down  there  &  unpleasant. 

The  Colliers  will  meet  me  on  the  pier,  &  I  may  stay  with  them 
a  week  or  two  before  going  home.  It  all  depends  on  the  breast 
pain.  I  don't  want  to  die  there.  I  am  growing  more  and  more 
particular  about  the  place. 

But  in  the  same  letter  he  spoke  of  plans  for  the  sum- 
mer, suggesting  that  we  must  look  into  the  magic-lantern 
possibilities,  so  that  library  entertainments  could  be  given 
at  Stormfield.  I  confess  that  this  letter,  in  spite  of  its 
light  tone,  made  me  uneasy,  and  I  was  tempted  to  sail 
for  Bermuda  to  bring  him  home.  Three  days  later  he 
wrote  again: 

I  have  been  having  a  most  uncomfortable  time  for  the  past 
four  days  with  that  breast  pain,  which  turns  out  to  be  an  affec- 
tion of  the  heart,  just  as  I  originally  suspected.  The  news  from 
New  York  is  to  the  effect  that  non-bronchial  weather  has  ar- 
rived there  at  last;  therefore,  if  I  can  get  my  breast  trouble  in 
traveling  condition  I  may  sail  for  home  a  week  or  two  earlier 
than  has  been  proposed. 

The  same  mail  that  brought  this  brought  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Allen,  who  frankly  stated  that  matters  had  become 
very  serious  indeed.  Mr.  Clemens  had  had  some  danger- 
ous attacks,  and  the  physicians  considered  his  condition 
critical. 

These  letters  arrived  April  ist.  I  went  to  New  York 
at  once  and  sailed  next  morning.  Before  sailing  I  con- 
sulted with  Dr.  Quintard,  who  provided  me  with  some 
opiates  and  instructed  me  in  the  use  of  the  hypodermic 
needle.  He  also  joined  me  in  a  cablegram  to  the  Gabri- 
lowitsches,  then  in  Italy,  advising  them  to  sail  without 
delay. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXCII 


THE  VOYAGE  HOME 

I SENT  no  word  to  Bermuda  that  I  was  coming,  and  when 
on  the  second  morning  I  arrived  at  Hamilton,  I  stepped 
quickly  ashore  from  the  tender  and  hurried  to  Bay 
House.  The  doors  were  all  open,  as  they  usually  are  in 
that  summer  island,  and  no  one  was  visible.  I  was 
familiar  with  the  place,  and,  without  knocking,  I  went 
through  to  the  room  occupied  by  Mark  Twain.  As  I 
entered  I  saw  that  he  was  alone,  sitting  in  a  large  chair, 
clad  in  the  familiar  dressing-gown. 

Bay  House  stands  upon  the  water,  and  the  morning 
light,  reflected  in  at  the  window,  had  an  unusual  quality. 
He  was  not  yet  shaven,  and  he  seemed  unnaturally  pale 
and  gray;  certainly  he  was  much  thinner.  I  was  too 
startled,  for  the  moment,  to  say  anything.  When  he 
turned  and  saw  me  he  seemed  a  little  dazed. 

"Why,"  he  said,  holding  out  his  hand,  "you  didn't  tell 
us  you  were  coming." 

"No,"  I  said,  "it  is  rather  sudden.  I  didn't  quite  like 
the  sound  of  your  last  letters." 

"But  those  were  not  serious,"  he  protested.  "You 
shouldn't  have  come  on  my  account." 

I  said  then  that  I  had  come  on  my  own  account;  that 
I  had  felt  the  need  of  recreation,  and  had  decided  to  run 
down  and  come  home  with  him. 

"That's — very — good,"  he  said,  in  his  slow,  gentle 
fashion.    "Now  I'm  glad  to  see  you." 

His  braakfast  came  in  and  he  ate  with  an  appetite. 

1564 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  VOYAGE  HOME 

When  he  had  been  shaved  and  freshly  propped  up  in  his 
pillows  it  seemed  to  me,  after  all,  that  I  must  have  been 
mistaken  in  thinking  him  so  changed.  Certainly  he  was 
thinner,  but  his  color  was  fine,  his  eyes  were  bright;  he 
had  no  appearance  of  a  man  whose  life  was  believed  to 
be  in  danger.  He  told  me  then  of  the  fierce  attacks  he 
had  gone  through,  how  the  pains  had  torn  at  him,  and 
how  it  had  been  necessary  for  him  to  have  hypodermic 
injections,  which  he  amusingly  termed  "hypnotic  injunc- 
tions" and  "subcutaneous  applications,"  and  he  had  his 
humor  out  of  it,  as  of  course  he  must  have,  even  though 
Death  should  stand  there  in  person. 

From  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Allen  and  from  the  physician  I 
learned  how  slender  had  been  his  chances  and  how  un- 
certain were  the  days  ahead.  Mr.  Allen  had  already 
engaged  passage  on  the  Oceana  for  the  12th,  and  the  one 
purpose  now  was  to  get  him  physically  in  condition  for 
the  trip. 

How  devoted  those  kind  friends  had  been  to  him! 
They  had  devised  every  imaginable  thing  for  his  com- 
fort. Mr.  Allen  had  rigged  an  electric  bell  which  con- 
nected with  his  own  room,  so  that  he  could  be  aroused 
instantly  at  any  hour  of  the  night.  Clemens  had  refused 
to  have  a  nurse,  for  it  was  only  during  the  period  of  his 
extreme  suffering  that  he  needed  any  one,  and  he  did  not 
wish  to  have  a  nurse  always  around.  When  the  pains 
were  gone  he  was  as  bright  and  cheerful,  and,  seemingly, 
as  well  as  ever. 

.  On  the  afternoon  of  my  arrival  we  drove  out,  as  for- 
merly, and  he  discussed  some  of  the  old  subjects  in  quite 
the  old  way.  He  had  been  re-reading  Macaulay,  he  said, 
and  spoke  at  considerable  length  of  the  hypocrisy  and 
intrigue  of  the  English  court  under  James  II.  He  spoke, 
too,  of  the  Redding  Library.  I  had  sold  for  him  that 
portion  of  the  land  where  Jean's  farm-house  had  stood, 
and  it  was  in  his  mind  to  use  the  money  for  some  sort  of 

1565 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


a  memorial  to  Jean.  I  had  written,  suggesting  that  per- 
haps he  would  like  to  put  up  a  small  library  building, 
as  the  Adams  lot  faced  the  corner  where  Jean  had  passed 
every  day  when  she  rode  to  the  station  for  the  mail.  He 
had  been  thinking  this  over,  he  said,  and  wished  the  idea 
carried  out.  He  asked  me  to  write  at  once  to  his  lawyer, 
Mr.  Lark,  and  have  a  paper  prepared  appointing  trustees 
for  a  memorial  library  fund. 

The  pain  did  not  trouble  him  that  afternoon,  nor  during 
several  succeeding  days.  He  was  gay  and  quite  himself, 
and  he  often  went  out  on  the  lawn;  but  we  did  not  drive 
out  again.  For  the  most  part,  he  sat  propped  up  in  his 
bed,  reading  or  smoking,  or  talking  in  the  old  way;  and  as 
I  looked  at  him  he  seemed  so  full  of  vigor  and  the  joy  of 
life  that  I  could  not  convince  myself  that  he  would  not 
outlive  us  all.  I  found  that  he  had  been  really  very 
much  alive  during  those  three  months — too  much  for  his 
own  good,  sometimes — for  he  had  not  been  careful  of  his 
hours  or  his  diet,  and  had  suffered  in  consequence. 

He  had  not  been  writing,  though  he  had  scribbled  some 
playful  valentines  and  he  had  amused  himself  one  day 
by  preparing  a  chapter  of  advice — for  me  it  appeared — 
which,  after  reading  it  aloud  to  the  Aliens  and  receiving 
their  approval,  he  declared  he  intended  to  have  printed 
for  my  benefit.  As  it  would  seem  to  have  been  the  last 
bit  of  continued  writing  he  ever  did,  and  because  it  is 
characteristic  and  amusing,  a  few  paragraphs  may  be 
admitted.  The  "advice"  is  concerning  deportment  on 
reaching  the  Gate  which  St.  Peter  is  supposed  to  guard: 

Upon  arrival  do  not  speak  to  St.  Peter  until  spoken  to.  It  is 
not  your  place  to  begin. 

Do  not  begin  any  remark  with  "Say." 

When  applying  for  a  ticket  avoid  trying  to  make  conversation. 
If  you  must  talk  let  the  weather  alone.  St.  Peter  cares  not  a 
damn  for  the  weather.  And  don't  ask  him  what  time  the  4.30 
train  goes;  there  aren't  any  trains  in  heaven,  except  through 

1566 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  VOYAGE  HOME 


trains,  and  the  less  information  you  get  about  them  the  better 
for  you. 

You  can  ask  him  for  his  autograph — there  is  no  harm  in  that — 
but  be  careful  and  don't  remark  that  it  is  one  of  the  penalties 
of  greatness.    He  has  heard  that  before. 

Don't  try  to  kodak  him.  Hell  is  full  of  people  who  have  made 
that  mistake. 

Leave  your  dog  outside.  Heaven  goes  by  favor.  If  it  went 
by  merit  you  would  stay  out  and  the  dog  would  go  in. 

You  will  be  wanting  to  slip  down  at  night  and  smuggle  wa- 
ter to  those  poor  little  chaps  (the  infant  damned),  but  don't 
you  try  it.  You  would  be  caught,  and  nobody  in  heaven  would 
respect  you  after  that. 

Explain  to  Helen  why  I  don't  come.   If  you  can. 

There  were  several  pages  of  this  counsel.  One  para- 
graph was  written  in  shorthand.  I  meant  to  ask  him  to 
translate  it;  but  there  were  many  other  things  to  think 
of,  and  I  did  not  remember. 

I  spent  most  of  each  day  with  him,  merely  sitting  by 
the  bed  and  reading  while  he  himself  read  or  dozed.  His 
nights  were  wakeful — he  found  it  easier  to  sleep  by  day — 
and  he  liked  to  think  that  some  one  was  there.  He  be- 
came interested  in  Hardy's  Jude,  and  spoke  of  it  with 
high  approval,  urging  me  to  read  it.  He  dwelt  a  good 
deal  on  the  morals  of  it,  or  rather  on  the  lack  of  them. 
He  followed  the  tale  to  the  end,  finishing  it  the  afternoon 
before  we  sailed.    It  was  his  last  continuous  reading. 

I  noticed,  when  he  slept,  that  his  breathing  was  dif- 
ficult, and  I  could  see  from  day  to  day  that  he  did  not 
improve;  but  each  evening  he  would  be  gay  and  lively, 
and  he  liked  the  entire  family  to  gather  around,  while  he 
became  really  hilarious  over  the  various  happenings  of 
the  day. 

It  was  only  a  few  days  before  we  sailed  that  the  very 
severe  attacks  returned.  The  night  of  the  8th  was  a 
hard  one.    The  doctors  were  summoned,  and  it  was  only 

J507 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


after  repeated  injections  of  morphine  that  the  pain  had 
been  eased.  When  I  returned  in  the  early  morning  he 
was  sitting  in  his  chair  trying  to  sing,  after  his  old  morning 
habit.    He  took  my  hand  and  said: 

"Well,  I  had  a  picturesque  night.  Every  pain  I  had 
was  on  exhibition."  He  looked  out  the  window  at  the 
sunlight  on  the  bay  and  green  dotted  islands.  "'Spark- 
ling and  bright  in  the  liquid  light,'  "  he  quoted.  "That's 
Hoffman.   Anything  left  of  Hoffman?" 

"No,"  I  said. 

"  I  must  watch  for  the  Bermudian  and  see  if  she  salutes," 
he  said,  presently.  "The  captain  knows  I  am  here  sick, 
and  he  blows  two  short  whistles  just  as  they  come  up 
behind  that  little  island.    Those  are  for  me." 

He  said  he  could  breathe  easier  if  he  could  lean  for- 
ward, and  I  placed  a  card-table  in  front  of  him.  His 
breakfast  came  in,  and  a  little  later  he  became  quite  gay. 
He  drifted  to  Macaulay  again,  and  spoke  of  King  James's 
plot  to  assassinate  William  II.,  and  how  the  clergy  had 
brought  themselves  to  see  that  there  was  no  difference 
between  killing  a  king  in  battle  and  by  assassination.  He 
had  taken  his  seat  by  the  window  to  watch  for  the  Ber- 
mudian. She  came  down  the  bay  presently,  her  bright- 
red  stacks  towering  vividly  above  the  green  island.  It 
was  a  brilliant  morning,  the  sky  and  the  water  a  mar- 
velous blue.  He  watched  her  anxiously  and  without 
speaking.  Suddenly  there  were  two  white  puffs  of 
steam,  and  two  short,  hoarse  notes  went  up  from  her. 

"Those  are  for  me,"  he  said,  his  face  full  of  content- 
ment.   "Captain  Fraser  does  not  forget  me." 

There  followed  another  bad  night.  My  room  was 
only  a  little  distance  away,  and  Claude  came  for  me.  I 
do  not  think  any  of  us  thought  he  would  survive  it;  but 
he  slept  at  last,  or  at  least  dozed.  In  the  morning  he 
said: 

"That  breast  pain  stands  watch  all  night  and  the  short 

1568 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  VOYAGE  HOME 


breath  all  day.  I  am  losing  enough  sleep  to  supply  a 
worn-out  army.  I  want  a  jugful  of  that  hypnotic  in- 
junction every  night  and  every  morning." 

We  began  to  fear  now  that  he  would  not  be  able  to 
sail  on  the  12th;  but  by  great  good-fortune  he  had  won- 
derfully improved  by  the  nth,  so  much  so  that  I  began 
to  believe,  if  once  he  could  be  in  Stormfield,  where  the 
air  was  more  vigorous,  he  might  easily  survive  the  sum- 
mer. The  humid  atmosphere  of  the  season  increased  the 
difficulty  of  his  breathing. 

That  evening  he  was  unusually  merry.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Allen  and  Helen  and  myself  went  in  to  wish  him  good 
night.  He  was  loath  to  let  us  leave,  but  was  reminded 
that  he  would  sail  in  the  morning,  and  that  the  doctor 
had  insisted  that  he  must  be  quiet  and  lie  still  in  bed  and 
rest.  He  was  never  one  to  be  very  obedient.  A  little 
later  Mrs.  Allen  and  I,  in  the  sitting-room,  heard  some 
one  walking  softly  outside  on  the  veranda.  We  went  out 
there,  and  he  was  marching  up  and  down  in  his  dressing- 
gown  as  unconcerned  as  if  he  were  not  an  invalid  at  all. 
He  hadn't  felt  sleepy,  he  said,  and  thought  a  little  exer- 
cise would  do  him  good.  Perhaps  it  did,  for  he  slept 
soundly  that  night — a  great  blessing. 

Mr.  Allen  had  chartered  a  special  tug  to  come  to  Bay 
House  landing  in  the  morning  and  take  him  to  the  ship. 
He  was  carried  in  a  little  hand-chair  to  the  tug,  and  all 
the  way  out  he  seemed  light-spirited,  anything  but  an 
invalid.  The  sailors  carried  him  again  in  the  chair  to 
his  state-room,  and  he  bade  those  dear  Bermuda  friends 
good-by,  and  we  sailed  away. 

As  long  as  I  remember  anything  I  shall  remember  the 
forty-eight  hours  of  that  homeward  voyage.  It  was  a  brief 
two  days  as  time  is  measured;  but  as  time  is  lived  it  has 
taken  its  place  among  those  unmeasured  periods  by  the 
side  of  which  even  years  do  not  count. 

At  first  he  seemed  quite  his  natural  self,  and  asked  for 

1569 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


a  catalogue  of  the  ship's  library,  and  selected  some  me- 
moirs of  the  Countess  of  Cardigan  for  his  reading.  He 
asked  also  for  the  second  volume  of  Carlyle's  French 
Revolution,  which  he  had  with  him.  But  we  ran  immedi- 
ately into  the  more  humid,  more  oppressive  air  of  the  Gulf 
Stream,  and  his  breathing  became  at  first  difficult,  then 
next  to  impossible.  There  were  two  large  port-holes, 
which  I  opened;  but  presently  he  suggested  that  it  would 
be  better  outside.  It  was  only  a  step  to  the  main-deck, 
and  no  passengers  were  there.  I  had  a  steamer-chair 
brought,  and  with  Claude  supported  him  to  it  and  bun- 
dled him  with  rugs;  but  it  had  grown  damp  and  chilly, 
and  his  breathing  did  not  improve.  It  seemed  to  me 
that  the  end  might  come  at  any  moment,  and  this  thought 
was  in  his  mind,  too,  for  once  in  the  effort  for  breath  he 
managed  to  say: 

"I  am  going — I  shall  be  gone  in  a  moment." 

Breath  came;  but  I  realized  then  that  even  his  cabin 
was  better  than  this.  I  steadied  him  back  to  his  berth 
and  shut  out  most  of  that  deadly  dampness.  He  asked 
for  the  "hypnotic  injunction"  (for  his  humor  never  left 
him),  and  though  it  was  not  yet  the  hour  prescribed  I 
could  not  deny  it.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  lie  down, 
even  to  recline,  without  great  distress.  The  opiate  made 
him  drowsy,  and  he  longed  for  the  relief  of  sleep;  but 
when  it  seemed  about  to  possess  him  the  struggle  for  air 
would  bring  him  upright. 

During  the  more  comfortable  moments  he  spoke  quite 
in  the  old  way,  and  time  and  again  made  an  effort  to 
read,  and  reached  for  his  pipe  or  a  cigar  which  lay  in  the 
little  berth  hammock  at  his  side.  I  held  the  match,  and 
he  would  take  a  puff  or  two  with  satisfaction.  Then  the 
peace  of  it  would  bring  drowsiness,  and  while  I  supported 
him  there  would  come  a  few  moments,  perhaps,  of  pre- 
cious sleep.  Only  a  few  moments,  for  the  devil  of  suffoca- 
tion was  always  lying  in  wait  to  bring  him  back  for  fresh 

iS7o 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  VOYAGE  HOME 


tortures.  Over  and  over  again  this  was  repeated,  varied 
by  him  being  steadied  on  his  feet  or  sitting  on  the  couch 
opposite  the  berth.  In  spite  of  his  suffering,  two  domi- 
nant characteristics  remained — the  sense  of  humor,  and 
tender  consideration  for  another. 

Once  when  the  ship  rolled  and  his  hat  fell  from  the  hook, 
and  made  the  circuit  of  the  cabin  floor,  he  said: 

"The  ship  is  passing  the  hat." 

Again  he  said: 

"I  am  sorry  for  you,  Paine,  but  I  can't  help  it — I  can't 
hurry  this  dying  business.  Can't  you  give  me  enough 
of  the  hypnotic  injunction  to  put  an  end  to  me?" 

He  thought  if  I  could  arrange  the  pillows  so  he  could  sit 
straight  up  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  support  him,  and 
then  I  could  sit  on  the  couch  and  read  while  he  tried  to 
doze.  He  wanted  me  to  read  Jude,  he  said,  so  we  could 
talk  about  it.  I  got  all  the  pillows  I  could  and  built 
them  up  around  him,  and  sat  down  with  the  book,  and 
this  seemed  to  give  him  contentment.  He  would  doze 
off  a  little  and  then  come  up  with  a  start,  his  piercing, 
agate  eyes  searching  me  out  to  see  if  I  was  still  there. 
Over  and  over — twenty  times  in  an  hour — this  was  re- 
peated. When  I  could  deny  him  no  longer  I  administered 
the  opiate,  but  it  never  completely  possessed  him  or  gave 
him  entire  relief. 

As  I  looked  at  him  there,  so  reduced  in  his  estate,  I 
could  not  but  remember  all  the  labor  of  his  years,  and 
all  the  splendid  honor  which  the  world  had  paid  to  him. 
Something  of  this  may  have  entered  his  mind,  too,  for 
once,  when  I  offered  him  some  of  the  milder  remedies 
which  we  had  brought,  he  said: 

"After  forty  years  of  public  effort  I  have  become  just 
a  target  for  medicines." 

The  program  of  change  from  berth  to  the  floor,  from 
floor  to  the  couch,  from  the  couch  back  to  the  berth 
among  the  pillows,  was  repeated  again  and  again,  he 

i57i 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


always  thinking  of  the  trouble  he  might  be  making, 
rarely  uttering  any  complaint;  but  once  he  said: 

"I  never  guessed  that  I  was  not  going  to  outlive  John 
Bigelow."    And  again: 

"This  is  such  a  mysterious  disease.  If  we  only  had 
a  bill  of  particulars  we'd  have  something  to  swear  at." 

Time  and  again  he  picked  up  Carlyle  or  the  Cardigan 
Memoirs,  and  read,  or  seemed  to  read,  a  few  lines;  but 
then  the  drowsiness  would  come  and  the  book  would  fall. 
Time  and  again  he  attempted  to  smoke,  or  in  his  drowse 
simulated  the  motion  of  placing  a  cigar  to  his  lips  and 
puffing  in  the  old  way. 

Two  dreams  beset  him  in  his  momentary  slumber — 
one  of  a  play  in  which  the  title-rdle  of  the  general  manager 
was  always  unfilled.  He  spoke  of  this  now  and  then 
when  it  had  passed,  and  it  seemed  to  amuse  him.  The 
other  was  a  discomfort :  a  college  assembly  was  attempt- 
ing to  confer  upon  him  some  degree  which  he  did  not 
want.  Once,  half  roused,  he  looked  at  me  searchingly 
and  asked: 

"Isn't  there  something  I  can  resign  and  be  out  of  all 
this?  They  keep  trying  to  confer  that  degree  upon  me 
and  I  don't  want  it."  Then  realizing,  he  said:  "I  am 
like  a  bird  in  a  cage:  always  expecting  to  get  out,  and 
always  beaten  back  by  the  wires."  And,  somewhat  later: 
"Oh,  it  is  such  a  mystery,  and  it  takes  so  long." 

Toward  the  evening  of  the  first  day,  when  it  grew  dark 
outside,  he  asked: 

"How  long  have  we  been  on  this  voyage?" 

I  answered  that  this  was  the  end  of  the  first  day. 

"How  many  more  are  there?"  he  asked. 

"Only  one,  and  two  nights." 

"We'll  never  make  it,"  he  said.    "It's  an  eternity." 

"But  we  must  on  Clara's  account,"  I  told  him,  and  I 
estimated  that  Clara  would  be  more  than  half-way  across 
the  ocean  by  now. 

1572 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  VOYAGE  HOME 


"It  is  a  losing  race,"  he  said;  "no  ship  can  outsail 
death." 

It  has  been  written — I  do  not  know  with  what  proof — 
that  certain  great  dissenters  have  recanted  with  the  ap- 
proach of  death — have  become  weak,  and  afraid  to  ignore 
old  traditions  in  the  face  of  the  great  mystery.  I  wish 
to  write  here  that  Mark  Twain,  as  he  neared  the  end, 
showed  never  a  single  tremor  of  fear  or  even  of  reluctance. 
I  have  dwelt  upon  these  hours  when  suffering  was  upon 
him,  and  death  the  imminent  shadow,  in  order  to  show 
that  at  the  end  he  was  as  he  had  always  been,  neither 
more  nor  less,  and  never  less  than  brave. 

Once,  during  a  moment  when  he  was  comfortable  and 
quite  himself,  he  said,  earnestly: 

"When  I  seem  to  be  dying  I  don't  want  to  be  stimu- 
lated back  to  life.    I  want  to  be  made  comfortable  to 

go- 
There  was  not  a  vestige  of  hesitation;  there  was  no 

grasping  at  straws,  no  suggestion  of  dread. 

Somehow  those  two  days  and  nights  went  by.  Once, 

when  he  was  partially  relieved  by  the  opiate,  I  slept,  while 

Claude  watched;  and  again,  in  the  fading  end  of  the  last 

night,  when  we  had  passed  at  length  into  the  cold,  bracing 

northern  air,  and  breath  had  come  back  to  him,  and  with 

it  sleep. 

Relatives,  physicians,  and  news-gatherers  were  at  the 
dock  to  welcome  him.  He  was  awake,  and  the  northern 
air  had  brightened  him,  though  it  was  the  chill,  I  suppose, 
that  brought  on  the  pains  in  his  breast,  which,  fortunately, 
he  had  escaped  during  the  voyage.  It  was  not  a  pro- 
longed attack,  and  it  was,  blessedly,  the  last  one. 

An  invalid-carriage  had  been  provided,  and  a  compart- 
ment secured  on  the  afternoon  express  to  Redding — the 
same  train  that  had  taken  him  there  two  years  before. 
Dr.  Robert  H.  Halsey  and  Dr.  Edward  Quintard  attended 
him,  and  he  made  the  journey  really  in  cheerful  comfort, 

1573 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

for  he  could  breathe  now,  and  in  the  relief  came  back 
old  interests.  Half  reclining  on  the  couch,  he  looked 
through  the  afternoon  papers.  It  happened  curiously 
that  Charles  Harvey  Genung,  who,  something  more 
than  four  years  earlier,  had  been  so  largely  responsible 
for  my  association  with  Mark  Twain,  was  on  the  same 
train,  in  the  same  coach,  bound  for  his  country-place  at 
New  Hartford. 

Lounsbury  was  waiting  with  the  carriage,  and  on  that 
still,  sweet  April  evening  we  drove  him  to  Stormfield  much 
as  we  had  driven  him  two  years  before.  Now  and  then 
he  mentioned  the  apparent  backwardness  of  the  season, 
for  only  a  few  of  the  trees  were  beginning  to  show  their 
green.  As  we  drove  into  the  lane  that  led  to  the  Storm- 
field  entrance,  he  said: 

"Can  we  see  where  you  have  built  your  billiard-room?" 

The  gable  showed  above  the  trees,  and  I  pointed  it 
out  to  him.  • 

"It  looks  quite  imposing,"  he  said. 

I  think  it  was  the  last  outside  interest  he  ever  showed 
in  anything. 

He  had  been  carried  from  the  ship  and  from  the  train, 
but  when  we  drew  up  to  Stormfield,  where  Mrs.  Paine, 
with  Katie  Leary  and  others  of  the  household,  was  wait- 
ing to  greet  him,  he  stepped  from  the  carriage  alone  with 
something  of  his  old  lightness,  and  with  all  his  old  court- 
liness, and  offered  each  one  his  hand.  Then,  in  the  canvas 
chair  which  we  had  brought,  Claude  and  I  carried  him 
up-stairs  to  his  room  and  delivered  him  to  the  physicians, 
and  to  the  comforts  and  blessed  air  of  home.  This  was 
Thursday  evening,  April  14,  19 10. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXCIII 


THE  RETURN  TO  THE  INVISIBLE 

THERE  would  be  two  days  more  before  Ossip  and 
Clara  Gabrilowitsch  could  arrive.  Clemens  remained 
fairly  bright  and  comfortable  during  this  interval,  though 
he  clearly  was  not  improving.  The  physicians  denied  him 
the  morphine,  now,  as  he  no  longer  suffered  acutely.  But 
he  craved  it,  and  once,  when  I  went  in,  he  said,  rather 
mournfully: 

"They  won't  give  me  the  subcutaneous  any  more." 

It  was  Sunday  morning  when  Clara  came.  He  was 
cheerful  and  able  to  talk  quite  freely.  He  did  not  dwell 
upon  his  condition,  I  think,  but  spoke  rather  of  his  plans 
for  the  summer.  At  all  events,  he  did  not  then  suggest 
that  he  counted  the  end  so  near;  but  a  day  later  it  became 
evident  to  all  that  his  stay  was  very  brief.  His  breathing 
was  becoming  heavier,  though  it  seemed  not  to  give  him 
much  discomfort.  His  articulation  also  became  affected. 
I  think  the  last  continuous  talking  he  did  was  to  Dr. 
Halsey  on  the  evening  of  April  17  th — the  day  of  Clara's 
arrival.  A  mild  opiate  had  been  administered,  and  he 
said  he  wished  to  talk  himself  to  sleep.  He  recalled  one 
of  his  old  subjects,  Dual  Personality,  and  discussed  various 
instances  that  flitted  through  his  mind— Jekyll  and  Hyde 
phases  in  literature  and  fact.  He  became  drowsier  as  he 
talked.    He  said  at  last: 

"This  is  a  peculiar  kind  of  disease.  It  does  not  in- 
vite you  to  read;  it  does  not  invite  you  to  be  read  to;  it 
does  not  invite  you  to  talk,  nor  to  enjoy  any  of  the  usual 

i57S 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

sick-room  methods  of  treatment.    What  kind  of  a  disease 
is  that?    Some  kinds  of  sicknesses  have  pleasant  features 
about  them.    You  can  read  and  smoke  and  have  only 
to  lie  still." 
And  a  little  later  he  added: 

"It  is  singular,  very  singular,  the  laws  of  mentality — 
vacuity.  I  put  out  my  hand  to  reach  a  book  or  news- 
paper which  I  have  been  reading  most  glibly,  and  it  isn't 
there,  not  a  suggestion  of  it." 

He  coughed  violently,  and  afterward  commented: 

"If  one  gets  to  meddling  with  a  cough  it  very  soon 
gets  the  upper  hand  and  is  meddling  with  you.  That 
is  my  opinion — of  seventy-four  years'  growth." 

The  news  of  his  condition,  everywhere  published, 
brought  great  heaps  of  letters,  but  he  could  not  see  them. 
A  few  messages  were  reported  to  him.  At  intervals  he 
read  a  little.  Suetonius  and  Carlyle  lay  on  the  bed  be- 
side him,  and  he  would  pick  them  up  as  the  spirit  moved 
him  and  read  a  paragraph  or  a  page.  Sometimes,  when 
I  saw  him  thus — the  high  color  still  in  his  face,  and  the 
clear  light  in  his  eyes — I  said:  "It  is  not  reality.  He  is 
not  going  to  die."  On  Tuesday,  the  19th,  he  asked  me 
to  tell  Clara  to  come  and  sing  to  him.  It  was  a  heavy 
requirement,  but  she  somehow  found  strength  to  sing 
some  of  the  Scotch  airs  which  he  loved,  and  he  seemed 
soothed  and  comforted.  When  she  came  away  he  bade 
her  good-by,  saying  that  he  might  not  see  her  again. 

But  he  lingered  through  the  next  day  and  the  next. 
His  mind  was  wandering  a  little  on  Wednesday,  and  his 
speech  became  less  and  less  articulate;  but  there  were 
intervals  when  he  was  quite  clear,  quite  vigorous,  and  he 
apparently  suffered  little.  We  did  not  know  it,  then, 
but  the  mysterious  messenger  of  his  birth-year,  so  long 
anticipated  by  him,  appeared  that  night  in  the  sky.1 

1  The  perihelion  of  Halley's  Comet  for  1835  was  November  16th; 
for  1910  it  was  April  20th. 

1576 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  RETURN  TO  THE  INVISIBLE 


On  Thursday  morning,  the  21st,  his  mind  was  generally 
clear,  and  it  was  said  by  the  nurses  that  he  read  a  little 
from  one  of  the  volumes  on  his  bed,  from  the  Suetonius, 
or  from  one  of  the  volumes  of  Carlyle.  Early  in  the  fore- 
noon he  sent  word  by  Clara  that  he  wished  to  see  me, 
and  when  I  came  in  he  spoke  of  two  unfinished  manu- 
scripts which  he  wished  me  to  "throw  away,"  as  he 
briefly  expressed  it,  for  he  had  not  many  words  left  now. 
I  assured  him  that  I  would  take  care  of  them,  and  he 
pressed  my  hand.    It  was  his  last  word  to  me. 

Once  or  twice  that  morning  he  tried  to  write  some  re- 
quest which  he  could  not  put  into  intelligible  words. 


MASK   TWAIN'S   LAST    WRITING:  A  REQUEST  FOR  HIS  SPECTACLES 

AND  A  CLASS  PITCHER 


And  once  he  spoke  to  Gabrilowitsch,  who,  he  said,  could 
understand  him  better  than  the  others.  Most  of  the 
time  he  dozed. 

Somewhat  after  midday,  when  Clara  was  by  him,  he 
roused  up  and  took  her  hand,  and  seemed  to  speak  with 
less  effort. 

"Good-by,"  he  said,  and  Dr.  Quintard,  who  was  stand- 
ing near,  thought  he  added:  "If  we  meet" — but  the 

1577 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


words  were  very  faint.  He  looked  at  her  for  a  little 
while,  without  speaking,  then  he  sank  into  a  doze,  and 
from  it  passed  into  a  deeper  slumber,  and  did  not  heed 
us  any  more. 

Through  that  peaceful  spring  afternoon  the  life-wave 
ebbed  lower  and  lower.  It  was  about  half  past  six,  and 
the  sun  lay  just  on  the  horizon  when  Dr.  Quintard  no- 
ticed that  the  breathing,  which  had  gradually  become 
more  subdued,  broke  a  little.  There  was  no  suggestion 
of  any  struggle.  The  noble  head  turned  a  little  to  one 
side,  there  was  a  fluttering  sigh,  and  the  breath  that  had 
been  unceasing  through  seventy-four  tumultuous  years 
had  stopped  forever. 

He  had  entered  into  the  estate  envied  so  long.  In 
his  own  words — the  words  of  one  of  his  latest  memoranda: 

"He  had  arrived  at  the  dignity  of  death— the  only 
earthly  dignity  that  is  not  artificial — the  only  safe  one. 
The  others  are  traps  that  can  beguile  to  humiliation. 

"Death — the  only  immortal  who  treats  us  all  alike, 
whose  pity  and  whose  peace  and  whose  refuge  are  for  all 
— the  soiled  and  the  pure — the  rich  and  the  poor — the 
loved  and  the  unloved." 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXCIV 


THE  LAST  RITES 

IT  is  not  often  that  a  whole  world  mourns.  Nations 
have  often  mourned  a  hero — and  races — but  perhaps 
never  before  had  the  entire  world  really  united  in  tender 
sorrow  for  the  death  of  any  man. 

In  one  of  his  aphorisms  he  wrote:  "Let  us  endeavor 
so  to  live  that  when  we  come  to  die  even  the  undertaker 
will  be  sorry."  And  it  was  thus  that  Mark  Twain  him- 
self had  lived. 

No  man  had  ever  so  reached  the  heart  of  the  world, 
and  one  may  not  even  attempt  to  explain  just  why.  Let 
us  only  say  that  it  was  because  he  was  so  limitlessly 
human  that  every  other  human  heart,  in  whatever  sphere 
or  circumstance,  responded  to  his  touch.  From  every 
remote  corner  of  the  globe  the  cables  of  condolence  swept 
in;  every  printed  sheet  in  Christendom  was  filled  with 
lavish  tribute;  pulpits  forgot  his  heresies  and  paid  him 
honor.  No  king  ever  died  that  received  so  rich  a  hom- 
age as  his.  To  quote  or  to  individualize  would  be  to 
cheapen  this  vast  offering. 

We  took  him  to  New  York  to  the  Brick  Church,  and 
Dr.  Henry  van  Dyke  spoke  only  a  few  simple  words, 
and  Joseph  Twichell  came  from  Hartford  and  delivered 
brokenly  a  prayer  from  a  heart  wrung  with  double  grief, 
for  Harmony,  his  wife,  was  nearing  the  journey's  end, 
and  a  telegram  that  summoned  him  to  her  death-bed 
came  before  the  services  ended. 

Mark  Twain,  dressed  in  the  white  he  loved  so  well, 

1579 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

lay  there  with  the  nobility  of  death  upon  him,  while  a 
multitude  of  those  who  loved  him  passed  by  and  looked 
at  his  face  for  the  last  time.  The  flowers,  of  which  so 
many  had  been  sent,  were  banked  around  him ;  but  on  the 
casket  itself  lay  a  single  laurel  wreath  which  Dan  Beard 
and  his  wife  had  woven  from  the  laurel  which  grows  on 
Stormfield  hill.  He  was  never  more  beautiful  than  as 
he  lay  there,  and  it  was  an  impressive  scene  to  see  those 
thousands  file  by,  regard  him  for  a  moment  gravely, 
thoughtfully,  and  pass  on.  All  sorts  were  there,  rich 
and  poor;  some  crossed  themselves,  some  saluted,  some 
paused  a  little  to  take  a  closer  look;  but  no  one  offered 
even  to  pick  a  flower.  Howells  came,  and  in  his  book 
he  says: 

I  looked  a  moment  at  the  face  I  knew  so  well;  and  it  was 
patient  with  the  patience  I  had  so  often  seen  in  it:  something  of 
a  puzzle,  a  great  silent  dignity,  an  assent  to  what  must  be  from 
the  depths  of  a  nature  whose  tragical  seriousness  broke  in  the 
laughter  which  the  unwise  took  for  the  whole  of  him. 

That  night  we  went  with  him  to  Elmira,  and  next  day — 
a  somber  day  of  rain — he  lay  in  those  stately  parlors  that 
had  seen  his  wedding-day,  and  where  Susy  had  lain,  and 
Mrs.  Clemens,  and  Jean,  while  Dr.  Eastman  spoke  the 
words  of  peace  which  separate  us  from  our  mortal  dead. 
Then  in  the  quiet,  steady  rain  of  that  Sunday  afternoon 
we  laid  him  beside  those  others,  where  he  sleeps  well, 
though  some  have  wished  that,  like  De  Soto,  he  might 
have  been  laid  to  rest  in  the  bed  of  that  great  river  which 
must  always  be  associated  with  his  name. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ccxcv 


MARK  TWAIN'S  RELIGION 

THERE  is  such  a  finality  about  death;  however  in-  j 
teres  ting  it  may  be  as  an  experience,  one  cannot 
discuss  it  afterward  with  one's  friends.  I  have  thought  it 
a  great  pity  that  Mark  Twain  could  not  discuss,  with 
Howells  say,  or  with  Twichell,  the  sensations  and  the 
particulars  of  the  change,  supposing  there  be  a  recogniz- 
able change,  in  that  transition  of  which  we  have  specu- 
lated so  much,  with  such  slender  returns.  No  one 
ever  debated  the  undiscovered  country  more  than  he. 
In  his  whimsical,  semi-serious  fashion  he  had  considered 
all  the  possibilities  of  the  future  state — orthodox  and 
otherwise — and  had  drawn  picturesquely  original  con- 
clusions. He  had  sent  Captain  Stormfield  in  a  dream  to 
report  the  aspects  of  the  early  Christian  heaven.  He  had 
examined  the  scientific  aspects  of  the  more  subtle  philoso- 
phies. He  had  considered  spiritualism,  transmigration, 
the  various  esoteric  doctrines,  and  in  the  end  he  had 
logically  made  up  his  mind  that  death  concludes  all, 
while  with  that  less  logical  hunger  which  survives  in 
every  human  heart  he  had  never  ceased  to  expect  an 
existence  beyond  the  grave.  His  disbelief  and  his  pessi- 
mism were  identical  in  their  structure.  They  were  of  his 
mind;  never  of  his  heart. 
Once  a  woman  said  to  him: 

"Mr.  Clemens,  you  are  not  a  pessimist,  you  only  think 
you  are."  And  she  might  have  added,  with  equal  force 
and  truth: 

III. — 30  I581 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


"You  are  not  a  disbeliever  in  immortality;  you  only 
think  you  are." 

Nothing  could  have  more  truly  conveyed  his  attitude 
toward  life  and  death.  His  belief  in  God,  the  Creator, 
was  absolute;  but  it  was  a  God  far  removed  from  the 
Creator  of  his  early  teaching.  Every  man  builds  his  God 
according  to  his  own  capacities.  Mark  Twain's  God  was 
of  colossal  proportions — so  vast,  indeed,  that  the  con- 
stellated stars  were  but  molecules  in  His  veins — a  God  as 
big  as  space  itself. 

Mark  Twain  had  many  moods,  and  he  did  not  always 
approve  of  his  own  God;  but  when  he  altered  his  con- 
ception, it  was  likely  to  be  in  the  direction  of  enlargement 
— a  further  removal  from  the  human  conception,  and  the 
problem  of  what  we  call  our  lives. 

In  1906  he  wrote: 1 

Let  us  now  consider  the  real  God,  the  genuine  God,  the  great 
God,  the  sublime  and  supreme  God,  the  authentic  Creator  of  the 
real  universe,  whose  remotenesses  are  visited  by  comets  only — 
comets  unto  which  incredible  distant  Neptune  is  merely  an  out- 
post, a  Sandy  Hook  to  homeward-bound  specters  of  the  deeps 
of  space  that  have  not  glimpsed  it  before  for  generations — a 
universe  not  made  with  hands  and  suited  to  an  astronomical 
nursery,  but  spread  abroad  through  the  illimitable  reaches  of 
space  by  the  fiat  of  the  real  God  just  mentioned,  by  comparison 
with  whom  the  gods  whose  myriads  infest  the  feeble  imaginations 
of  men  are  as  a  swarm  of  gnats  scattered  and  lost  in  the  infini- 
tudes of  the  empty  sky. 

At  an  earlier  period — the  date  is  not  exactly  fixable, 
but  the  stationery  used  and  the  handwriting  suggest 
the  early  eighties — he  set  down  a  few  concisely  written 
pages  of  conclusions — conclusions  from  which  he  did  not 
deviate  materially  in  after  years.   The  document  follows: 

1  See  also  1870,  chap,  lxxviii;  1899,  chap,  ccv;  and  various 
talks,  1906-07,  etc. 

1582 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN'S  RELIGION 


I  believe  in  God  the  Almighty. 

I  do  not  believe  He  has  ever  sent  a  message  to  man  by  anybody, 
or  delivered  one  to  him  by  word  of  mouth,  or  made  Himself 
visible  to  mortal  eyes  at  any  time  in  any  place. 

I  believe  that  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  were  imagined 
and  written  by  man,  and  that  no  line  in  them  was  authorized  by 
God,  much  less  inspired  by  Him. 

I  think  the  goodness,  the  justice,  and  the  mercy  of  God  are 
manifested  in  His  works:  I  perceive  that  they  are  manifested 
toward  me  in  this  life;  the  logical  conclusion  is  that  they  will  be 
manifested  toward  me  in  the  life  to  come,  if  there  should  be  one. 

I  do  not  believe  in  special  providences.  I  believe  that  the 
universe  is  governed  by  strict  and  immutable  laws.  If  one 
man's  family  is  swept  away  by  a  pestilence  and  another  man's 
spared  it  is  only  the  law  working:  God  is  not  interfering  in  that 
small  matter,  either  against  the  one  man  or  in  favor  of  the  other. 

I  cannot  see  how  eternal  punishment  hereafter  could  accom- 
plish any  good  end,  therefore  I  am  not  able  to  believe  in  it.  To 
chasten  a  man  in  order  to  perfect  him  might  be  reasonable 
enough;  to  annihilate  him  when  he  shall  have  proved  himself 
incapable  of  reaching  perfection  might  be  reasonable  enough; 
but  to  roast  him  forever  for  the  mere  satisfaction  of  seeing  him 
roast  would  not  be  reasonable — even  the  atrocious  God  imagined 
by  the  Jews  would  tire  of  the  spectacle  eventually. 

There  may  be  a  hereafter  and  there  may  not  be.  I  am  wholly 
indifferent  about  it.  If  I  am  appointed  to  live  again  I  feel  sure 
it  will  be  for  some  more  sane  and  useful  purpose  than  to  flounder 
about  for  ages  in  a  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone  for  having  violated 
a  confusion  of  ill-defined  and  contradictory  rules  said  (but  not 
evidenced)  to  be  of  divine  institution.  If  annihilation  is  to 
follow  death  I  shall  not  be  aware  of  the  annihilation,  and  there- 
fore shall  not  care  a  straw  about  it. 

I  believe  that  the  world's  moral  laws  are  the  outcome  of  the 
world's  experience.  It  needed  no  God  to  come  down  out  of 
heaven  to  tell  men  that  murder  and  theft  and  the  other  immo- 
ralities were  bad,  both  for  the  individual  who  commits  them 
and  for  society  which  suffers  from  them. 

If  I  break  alt  these  moral  laws  I  cannot  see  how  I  injure  God 
by  it,  for  He  is  beyond  the  reach  of  injury  from  me — I  could  as 
easily  injure  a  planet  by  throwing  mud  at  it.   It  seems  to  me  that 

1583 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


my  misconduct  could  only  injure  me  and  other  men.  I  cannot 
benefit  God  by  obeying  these  moral  laws — I  could  as  easily 
benefit  the  planet  by  withholding  my  mud.  (Let  these  sen- 
tences be  read  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  I  believe  I 
have  received  moral  laws  only  from  man  —  none  whatever 
from  God.)  Consequently  I  do  not  see  why  I  should  be 
either  punished  or  rewarded  hereafter  for  the  deeds  I  do  here. 

If  the  tragedies  of  life  shook  his  faith  in  the  goodness 
and  justice  and  the  mercy  of  God  as  manifested  toward 
himself,  he  at  any  rate  never  questioned  that  the  wider 
scheme  of  the  universe  was  attuned  to  the  immutable  law 
which  contemplates  nothing  less  than  absolute  harmony. 
I  never  knew  him  to  refer  to  this  particular  document;  but 
he  never  destroyed  it  and  never  amended  it,  nor  is  it  likely 
that  he  would  have  done  either  had  it  been  presented 
to  him  for  consideration  even  during  the  last  year  of  his  life. 

He  was  never  intentionally  dogmatic.  In  a  memoran- 
dum on  a  fly-leaf  of  Moncure  D.  Conway's  Sacred  An- 
thology he  wrote; 

RELIGION 

The  easy  confidence  with  which  I  know  another  man's  religion 
is  folly  teaches  me  to  suspect  that  my  own  is  also. 

Mark  Twain,  19th  Cent.  A.D. 

And  in  another  note: 

I  would  not  interfere  with  any  one's  religion,  either  to 
strengthen  it  or  to  weaken  it.  I  am  not  able  to  believe  one's 
religion  can  affect  his  hereafter  one  way  or  the  other,  no  matter 
what  that  religion  may  be.  But  it  may  easily  be  a  great  comfort 
to  him  in  this  life — hence  it  is  a  valuable  possession  to  him. 

Mark  Twain's  religion  was  a  faith  too  wide  for  doc- 
trines— a  benevolence  too  limitless  for  creeds.  From  the 
beginning  he  strove  against  oppression,  sham,  and  evil 
in  every  form.  He  despised  meanness;  he  resented  with 
every  drop  of  blood  in  him  anything  that  savored  of  per- 
secution or  a  curtailment  of  human  liberties.  It  was  a 
religion  identified  with  his  daily  life  and  his  work.  He 

iS34 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN'S  RELIGION 


lived  as  he  wrote,  and  he  wrote  as  he  believed.  His 
favorite  weapon  was  humor — good-humor — with  logic 
behind  it.  A  sort  of  glorified  truth  it  was — truth  wearing 
a  smile  of  gentleness,  hence  all  the  more  quickly  heeded. 

"He  will  be  remembered  with  the  great  humorists  of  all 
time,"  says  Howells,  "  with  Cervantes,  with  Swift,  or  with 
any  others  worthy  of  his  company ;  none  of  them  was  his 
equal  in  humanity." 

Mark  Twain  understood  the  needs  of  men  because  he  was 
himself  supremely  human.    In  one  of  his  dictations  he  said : 

I  have  found  that  there  is  no  ingredient  of  the  race  which  I 
do  not  possess  in  either  a  small  or  a  large  way.  When  it  is 
small,  as  compared  with  the  same  ingredient  in  somebody  else, 
there  is  still  enough  of  it  for  all  the  purposes  of  examination. 

With  his  strength  he  had  inherited  the  weaknesses  of 
our  kind.  With  him,  as  with  another,  a  myriad  of  dreams 
and  schemes  and  purposes  daily  flitted  by.  With  him, 
as  with  another,  the  spirit  of  desire  led  him  often  to  a 
high  mountain-top,  and  was  not  rudely  put  aside,  but 
lingeringly — and  often  invited  to  return.  With  him,  as 
with  another,  a  crowd  of  jealousies  and  resentments,  and 
wishes  for  the  ill  of  others,  daily  went  seething  and 
scorching  along  the  highways  of  the  soul.  With  him,  as 
with  another,  regret,  remorse,  and  shame  stood  at  the 
bedside  during  long  watches  of  the  night;  and  in  the  end, 
with  him,  the  better  thing  triumphed — forgiveness  and 
generosity  and  justice — in  a  word,  Humanity.  Certain  of 
his  aphorisms  and  memoranda  each  in  itself  constitutes 
an  epitome  of  Mark  Twain's  creed.  His  paraphrase, 
"When  in  doubt  tell  the  truth,"  is  one  of  these,  and  he 
embodied  his  whole  attitude  toward  Infinity  when  in 
one  of  his  stray  pencilings  he  wrote: 

Why,  even  poor  little  ungodlike  man  holds  himself  respon- 
sible for  the  welfare  of  his  child  to  the  extent  of  his  ability. 
It  is  all  that  we  require  of  God. 

1S85 


Digitized  by  Google 


CCXCVI 

POSTSCRIPT 

EVERY  life  is  a  drama— a  play  in  all  its  particulars; 
comedy,  farce,  tragedy — all  the  elements  are  there. 
To  examine  in  detail  any  life,  however  conspicuous  or 
obscure,  is  to  become  amazed  not  only  at  the  inevitable 
sequence  of  events,  but  at  the  interlinking  of  details, 
often  far  removed,  into  a  marvelously  intricate  pattern 
which  no  art  can  hope  to  reproduce,  and  can  only  feebly 
imitate. 

The  biographer  may  reconstruct  an  episode,  present 
a  picture,  or  reflect  a  mood  by  which  the  reader  is  enabled 
to  feel  something  of  the  glow  of  personality  and  know, 
perhaps,  a  little  of  the  substance  of  the  past.  In  so  far 
as  the  historian  can  accomplish  this  his  work  is  a  success. 
At  best  his  labor  will  be  pathetically  incomplete,  for  what- 
ever its  detail  and  its  resemblance  to  life,  these  will 
record  mainly  but  an  outward  expression,  behind  which 
was  the  mighty  sweep  and  tumult  of  unwritten  thought, 
the  overwhelming  proportion  of  any  life,  which  no  other 
human  soul  can  ever  really  know. 

Mark  Twain's  appearance  on  the  stage  of  the  world 
was  a  succession  of  dramatic  moments.  He  was  always 
exactly  in  the  setting.  Whatever  he  did,  or  whatever 
came  to  him,  was  timed  for  the  instant  of  greatest  effect. 
At  the  end  he  was  more  widely  observed  and  loved  and 
honored  than  ever  before,  and  at  the  right  moment  and 
in  the  right  manner  he  died. 

How  little  one  may  tell  of  such  a  life  as  his !   He  traveled 

1586 


Digitized  by  Google 


POSTSCRIPT 


always  such  a  broad  and  brilliant  highway,  with  plumes 
flying  and  crowds  following  after.  Such  a  whirling  pano- 
rama of  life,  and  death,  and  change!  I  have  written  so 
much,  and  yet  I  have  put  so  much  aside — and  often 
the  best  things,  it  seemed  afterward,  perhaps  because 
each  in  its  way  was  best  and  the  variety  infinite.  One 
may  only  strive  to  be  faithful — and  I  would  have  made 
it  better  if  I  could. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  A 


LETTER  FROM  ORION  CLEMENS  TO  MISS  WOOD 
CONCERNING  HENRY  CLEMENS 

(See  Chapter  xxvi) 

Keokuk,  Iowa,  October  j,  1858. 

Miss  Wood, — My  mother  having  sent  me  your  kind  letter, 
with  a  request  that  myself  and  wife  should  write  to  you,  I 
hasten  to  do  so. 

In  my  memory  I  can  go  away  back  to  Henry's  infancy;  I 
see  his  large,  blue  eyes  intently  regarding  my  father  when  he 
rebuked  him  for  his  credulity  in  giving  full  faith  to  the  boyish 
idea  of  planting  his  marbles,  expecting  a  crop  therefrom;  then 
comes  back  the  recollection  of  the  time  when,  standing  we  three 
alone  by  our  father's  grave,  I  told  them  always  to  remember 
that  brothers  should  be  kind  to  each  other;  afterward  I  see 
Henry  returning  from  school  with  his  books  for  the  last  time. 
He  must  go  into  my  printing-office.  He  learned  rapidly.  A 
word  of  encouragement  or  a  word  of  discouragement  told 
upon  his  organization  electrically.  I  could  see  the  effects  in 
his  day's  work.  Sometimes  I  would  say,  "Henry!"  He  would 
stand  full  front  with  his  eyes  upon  mine — all  attention.  If  I 
commanded  him  to  do  something,  without  a  word  he  was  off  in- 
stantly, probably  in  a  run.  If  a  cat  was  to  be  drowned  or  shot 
Sam  (though  unwilling  yet  firm)  was  selected  for  the  work. 
If  a  stray  kitten  was  to  be  fed  and  taken  care  of  Henry  was  ex- 
pected to  attend  to  it,  and  he  would  faithfully  do  so.  So  they 
grew  up,  and  many  was  the  grave  lecture  commenced  by  ma, 
to  the  effect  that  Sam  was  misleading  and  spoiling  Henry. 
But  the  lectures  were  never  concluded,  for  Sam  would  reply 
with  a  witticism,  or  dry,  unexpected  humor,  that  would  drive 
the  lecture  clean  out  of  my  mother's  mind,  and  change  it  to  a 

IS9I 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


laugh.  Those  were  happier  days.  My  mother  was  as  lively 
as  any  girl  of  sixteen.  She  is  not  so  now.  And  sister  Pamela 
I  have  described  in  describing  Henry;  for  she  was  his  counter- 
part. The  Wow  falls  crushingly  on  her.  But  the  boys  grew 
up — Sam  a  rugged,  brave,  quick-tempered,  generous-hearted 
fellow,  Henry  quiet,  observing,  thoughtful,  leaning  on  Sam  for 
protection;  Sam  and  I  too  leaning  on  him  for  knowledge  picked 
up  from  conversation  or  books,  for  Henry  seemed  never  to  for- 
get anything,  and  devoted  much  of  his  leisure  hours  to  reading. 

Henry  is  gone!  His  death  was  horrible!  How  I  could  have 
sat  by  him,  hung  over  him,  watched  day  and  night  every  change 
ot  expression,  and  ministered  to  every  want  in  my  power  that 
I  could  discover.  This  was  denied  to  me,  but  Sam,  whose  or- 
ganization is  such  as  to  feel  the  utmost  extreme  of  every  feeling, 
was  there.  Both  his  capacity  of  enjoyment  and  his  capacity 
of  suffering  are  greater  than  mine;  and  knowing  how  it  would 
have  affected  me  to  see  so  sad  a  scene,  I  can  somewhat  ap- 
preciate Sam's  sufferings.  In  this  time  of  great  trouble,  when 
my  two  brothers,  whose  heartstrings  have  always  been  a  part  of 
my  own,  were  suffering  the  utmost  stretch  of  mortal  endurance, 
you  were  there,  like  a  good  angel,  to  aid  and  console,  and  I  bless 
and  thank  you  for  it  with  my  whole  heart.  I  thank  all  who 
helped  them  then;  I  thank  them  for  the  flowers  they  sent  to 
Henry,  for  the  tears  that  fell  for  their  sufferings,  and  when  he 
died,  and  all  of  them  for  all  the  kind  attentions  they  bestowed 
upon  the  poor  boys.  We  thank  the  physicians,  and  we  shall 
always  gratefully  remember  the  kindness  of  the  gentleman  who 
at  so  much  expense  to  himself  enabled  us  to  deposit  Henry's 
remains  by  our  father. 

With  many  kind  wishes  for  your  future  welfare,  I  remain 
your  earnest  friend, 

Respectfully, 

Orion  Clemens. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  B 


MARK  TWAIN'S  BURLESQUE  OF  CAPTAIN  ISAIAH 

SELLERS 

(See  Chapter  xxvii) 

The  item  which  served  as  a  text  for  the  "Sergeant  Fathom" 
communication  was  as  follows: 

Vicksburg,  May  4,  i8$q. 

My  opinion  for  the  benefit  of  the  citizens  of  New  Orleans: 
The  water  is  higher  this  far  up  than  it  has  been  since  18 15. 
My  opinion  is  that  the  water  will  be  four  feet  deep  in  Canal 
Street  before  the  first  of  next  June.  Mrs.  Turner's  plantation 
at  the  head  of  Big  Black  Island  is  all  under  water,  and  it  has  not 
been  since  1815.  I.  Sellers.1 

THE  BURLESQUE 

INTRODUCTORY 

Our  friend  Sergeant  Fathom,  one  of  the  oldest  cub  pilots  on 
the  river,  and  now  on  the  Railroad  Line  steamer  Trombone, 
sends  us  a  rather  bad  account  concerning  the  state  of  the  river. 
Sergeant  Fathom  is  a  "cub"  of  much  experience,  and  although 
we  are  loath  to  coincide  in  his  view  of  the  matter,  we  give  his 
note  a  place  in  our  columns,  only  hoping  that  his  prophecy  will 
not  be  verified  in  this  instance.  While  introducing  the  Ser- 
geant, "we  consider  it  but  simple  justice  (we  quote  from  a  friend 
of  his)  to  remark  that  he  is  distinguished  for  being,  in  pilot 
phrase,  'close,'  as  well  as  superhumanly  'safe.'"  It  is  a  well- 
known  fact  that  he  has  made  fourteen  hundred  and  fifty  trips 
in  the  New  Orleans  and  St.  Louis  trade  without  causing  serious 

1  Captain  Seller?,  as  in  this  case,  sometimes  signed  his  own  name 
to  his  communications. 

1593 


Dig 


MARK  TWAIN 

damage  to  a  steamboat.  This  astonishing  success  is  attributed 
to  the  fact  that  he  seldom  runs  his  boat  after  early  candle-light. 
It  is  related  of  the  Sergeant  that  upon  one  occasion  he  actually 
ran  the  chute  of  Glasscock's  Island,  down-stream,  in  the  night, 
and  at  a  time,  too,  when  the  river  was  scarcely  more  than  bank 
full.  His  method  of  accomplishing  this  feat  proves  what  we 
have  just  said  of  his  "safeness" — he  sounded  the  chute  first, 
and  then  built  a  fire  at  the  head  of  the  island  to  run  by.  As 
to  the  Sergeant's  "closeness,"  we  have  heard  it  whispered  that 
he  once  went  up  to  the  right  of  the  "Old  Hen," 1  but  this  is  prob- 
ably a  pardonable  little  exaggeration,  prompted  by  the  love  and 
admiration  in  which  he  is  held  by  various  ancient  dames  of  his 
acquaintance  (for  albeit  the  Sergeant  may  have  already  num- 
bered the  allotted  years  of  man,  still  his  form  is  erect,  his  step 
is  firm,  his  hair  retains  its  sable  hue,  and,  more  than  all,  he  hath 
a  winning  way  about  him,  an  air  of  docility  and  sweetness,  if 
you  will,  and  a  smoothness  of  speech,  together  with  an  exhaust- 
less  fund  of  funny  sayings;  and,  lastly,  an  overflowing  stream, 
without  beginning,  or  middle,  or  end,  of  astonishing  reminis- 
cences of  the  ancient  Mississippi,  which,  taken  together,  form  a 
tout  ensemble  which  is  sufficient  excuse  for  the  tender  epithet 
which  is,  by  common  consent,  applied  to  him  by  all  those  an- 
cient dames  aforesaid,  of  "che-arming  creature!").  As  the  Ser- 
geant has  been  longer  on  the  river,  and  is  better  acquainted 
with  it  than  any  other  "cub"  extant,  his  remarks  are  entitled 
to  far  more  consideration,  and  are  always  read  with  the  deepest 
interest  by  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  from  "Kiho"  to  Kam- 
schatka,  for  let  it  be  known  that  his  fame  extends  to  the  utter- 
most parts  of  the  earth: 

THE  COMMUNICATION 

R.R.  Steamer  Trombone, 
Vicksburg,  May  8,  i8$g. 

The  river  from  New  Orleans  up  to  Natchez  is  higher  than  it 
has  been  since  the  niggers  were  executed  (which  was  in  the  fall 
of  1813),  and  my  opinion  is  that  if  the  rise  continues  at  this 
rate  the  water  will  be  on  the  roof  of  the  St.  Charles  Hotel  before 

1  Glasscock's  Island  and  the  "Old  Hen"  were  phenomenally  safe 
places. 

1594 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


the  middle  of  January.  The  point  at  Cairo,  which  has  not 
even  been  moistened  by  the  river  since  1813,  is  now  entirely 
under  water. 

However,  Mr.  Editor,  the  inhabitants  of  the  Mississippi 
Valley  should  not  act  precipitately  and  sell  their  plantations 
at  a  sacrifice  on  account  of  this  prophecy  of  mine,  for  I  shall 
proceed  to  convince  them  of  a  great  fact  in  regard  to  this  mat- 
ter, viz.:  that  the  tendency  of  the  Mississippi  is  to  rise  less  and 
less  high  every  year  (with  an  occasional  variation  of  the  rule), 
that  such  has  been  the  case  for  many  centuries,  and  eventually 
that  it  will  cease  to  rise  at  all.  Therefore,  I  would  hint  to  the 
planters,  as  we  say  in  an  innocent  little  parlor  game  commonly 
called  "draw,"  that  if  they  can  only  "stand  the  rise  "  this  time 
they  may  enjoy  the  comfortable  assurance  that  the  old  river's 
banks  will  never  hold  a  "  full "  again  during  their  natural  lives. 

In  the  summer  of  1 763  I  came  down  the  river  on  the  old  first 
Jubilee.  She  was  new  then,  however;  a  singular  sort  of  a  single- 
engine  boat,  with  a  Chinese  captain  and  a  Choctaw  crew,  fore- 
castle on  her  stern,  wheels  in  the  center,  and  the  jackstaff  "no- 
where," for  I  steered  her  with  a  window-shutter,  and  when  we 
wanted  to  land  we  sent  a  line  ashore  and  "rounded  her  to"  with 
a  yoke  of  oxen. 

Well,  sir,  we  wooded  off  the  top  of  the  big  bluff  above  Selma — 
the  only  dry  land  visible — and  waited  there  three  weeks,  swap- 
ping knives  and  playing  "seven  up"  with  the  Indians,  waiting 
for  the  river  to  fall.  Finally,  it  fell  about  a  hundred  feet,  and 
we  went  on.  One  day  we  rounded  to,  and  I  got  in  a  horse- 
trough,  which  my  partner  borrowed  from  the  Indians  up  there 
at  Selma  while  they  were  at  prayers,  and  went  down  to  sound 
around  No.  8,  and  while  I  was  gone  my  partner  got  aground 
on  the  hills  at  Hickman.  After  three  days'  labor  we  finally 
succeeded  in  sparring  her  off  with  a  capstan  bar,  and  went  on  to 
Memphis.  By  the  time  we  got  there  the  river  had  subsided 
to  such  an  extent  that  we  were  able  to  land  where  the  Gayoso 
House  now  stands.  We  finished  loading  at  Memphis,  and 
loaded  part  of  the  stone  for  the  present  St.  Louis  Court  House 
(which  was  then  in  process  of  erection),  to  be  taken  up  on  our 
return  trip. 

You  can  form  some  conception,  by  these  memoranda,  of  how 
high  the  water  was  in  1763.    In  1775  it  did  not  rise  so  high  by 

1595 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


thirty  feet;  in  1790  it  missed  the  original  mark  at  least  sixty- 
five  feet;  in  1797,  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet;  and  in  1806,  nearly 
two  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  These  were  "high-water"  years. 
The  "high  waters"  since  then  have  been  so  insignificant  that  I 
have  scarcely  taken  the  trouble  to  notice  them.  Thus,  you  will 
perceive  that  the  planters  need  not  feel  uneasy.  The  river  may 
make  an  occasional  spasmodic  effort  at  a  flood,  but  the  time  is 
approaching  when  it  will  cease  to  rise  altogether. 

In  conclusion,  sir,  I  will  condescend  to  hint  at  the  foundation 
of  these  arguments:  When  me  and  De  Soto  discovered  the 
Mississippi  I  could  stand  at  Bolivar  Landing  (several  miles 
above  "Roaring  Waters  Bar")  and  pitch  a  biscuit  to  the  main 
shore  on  the  other  side,  and  in  low  water  we  waded  across  at 
Donaldson ville.  The  gradual  widening  and  deepening  of  the 
river  is  the  whole  secret  of  the  matter. 

Yours,  etc. 

Sergeant  Fathom. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  C 


I 

MARK  TWAIN'S  EMPIRE  CITY  HOAX 
(See  Chapter  xli) 

THE  LATEST  SENSATION 

A  Victim  to  Jeremy  Diddling  Trustees — He  Cuts  his  Throat  from 
Ear  to  Ear,  Scalps  his  Wife,  and  Dashes  Out  the  Brains  of 
Six  Helpless  Children! 

From  Abram  Curry,  who  arrived  here  yesterday  afternoon 
from  Carson,  we  learn  the  following  particulars  concerning  a 
bloody  massacre  which  was  committed  in  Ormsby  County 
night  before  last.  It  seems  that  during  the  past  six  months  a 
man  named  P.  Hopkins,  or  Philip  Hopkins,  has  been  residing 
with  his  family  in  the  old  log-house  just  at  the  edge  of  the  great 
pine  forest  which  lies  between  Empire  City  and  Dutch  Nick's. 
The  family  consisted  of  nine  children — five  girls  and  four  boys — 
the  oldest  of  the  group,  Mary,  being  nineteen  years  old,  and  the 
youngest,  Tommy,  about  a  year  and  a  half.  Twice  in  the  past 
two  months  Mis.  Hopkins,  while  visiting  Carson,  expressed 
fears  concerning  the  sanity  of  her  husband,  remarking  that  of 
late  he  had  been  subject  to  fits  of  violence,  and  that  during  the 
prevalence  of  one  of  these  he  had  threatened  to  take  her  life. 
It  was  Mrs.  Hopkins's  misfortune  to  be  given  to  exaggeration, 
however,  and  but  little  attention  was  given  to  what  she  said. 

About  10  o'clock  on  Monday  evening  Hopkins  dashed  into 
Carson  on  horseback,  with  his  throat  cut  from  ear  to  ear,  and 
bearing  in  his  hand  a  reeking  scalp,  from  which  the  warm,  smok- 
ing blood  was  still  dripping,  and  fell  in  a  dying  condition  in  front 
of  the  Magnolia  saloon.  Hopkins  expired,  in  the  course  of  five 
minutes,  without  speaking.   The  long,  red  hair  of  the  scalp  he 

1597 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


bore  marked  it  as  that  of  Mrs.  Hopkins.  A  number  of  citizens, 
headed  by  Sheriff  Gasherie,  mounted  at  once  and  rode  down  to 
Hopkins's  house,  where  a  ghastly  scene  met  their  eyes.  The 
scalpless  corpse  of  Mrs.  Hopkins  lay  across  the  threshold,  with 
her  head  split  open  and  her  right  hand  almost  severed  from  the 
wrist.  Near  her  lay  the  ax  with  which  the  murderous  deed  had 
been  committed.  In  one  of  the  bedrooms  six  of  the  children 
were  found,  one  in  bed  and  the  others  scattered  about  the  floor. 
They  were  all  dead.  Their  brains  had  evidently  been  dashed 
out  with  a  club,  and  every  mark  about  them  seemed  to  have 
been  made  with  a  blunt  instrument.  The  children  must  have 
struggled  hard  for  their  lives,  as  articles  of  clothing  and  broken 
furniture  were  strewn  about  the  room  in  the  utmost  confusion. 
Julia  and  Emma,  aged  respectively  fourteen  and  seventeen,  were 
found  in  the  kitchen,  bruised  and  insensible,  but  it  is  thought 
their  recovery  is  possible.  The  eldest  girl,  Mary,  must  have 
sought  refuge,  in  her  terror,  in  the  garret,  as  her  body  was  found 
there  frightfully  mutilated,  and  the  knife  with  which  her  wounds 
had  been  inflicted  still  sticking  in  her  side.  The  two  girls  Julia 
and  Emma,  who  had  recovered  sufficiently  to  be  able  to  talk 
yesterday  morning,  declare  that  their  father  knocked  them  down 
with  a  billet  of  wood  and  stamped  on  them.  They  think  they 
were  the  first  attacked.  They  further  state  that  Hopkins  had 
shown  evidence  of  derangement  all  day,  but  had  exhibited  no 
violence.  He  flew  into  a  passion  and  attempted  to  murder 
them  because  they  advised  him  to  go  to  bed  and  compose  his 
mind. 

Curry  says  Hopkins  was  about  forty-two  years  of  age,  and  a 
native  of  western  Pennsylvania;  he  was  always  affable  and 
polite,  and  until  very  recently  no  one  had  ever  heard  of  his 
ill-treating  his  family.  He  had  been  a  heavy  owner  in  the  best 
mines  of  Virginia  and  Gold  Hill,  but  when  the  San  Francisco 
papers  exposed  our  game  of  cooking  dividends  in  order  to  bolster 
up  our  stocks  he  grew  afraid  and  sold  out,  and  invested  an 
immense  amount  in  the  Spring  Valley  Water  Company,  of  San 
Francisco.  He  was  advised  to  do  this  by  a  relative  of  his,  one 
of  the  editors  of  the  San  Francisco  Bulletin,  who  had  suffered 
pecuniarily  by  the  dividend-cooking  system  as  applied  to  the 
Daney  Mining  Company  recently.  Hopkins  had  not  long  ceased 
to  own  in  the  various  claims  on  the  Comstock  lead,  however, 

159* 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


when  several  dividends  were  cooked  on  his  newly  acquired  prop- 
erty, their  water  totally  dried  up,  and  Spring  Valley  stock  went 
down  to  nothing.  It  is  presumed  that  this  misfortune  drove 
him  mad,  and  resulted  in  his  killing  himself  and  the  greater  por- 
tion of  his  family.  The  newspapers  of  San  Francisco  permitted 
this  water  company  to  go  on  borrowing  money  and  cooking 
dividends,  under  cover  of  which  the  cunning  financiers  crept 
out  of  the  tottering  concern,  leaving  the  crash  to  come  upon 
poor  and  unsuspecting  stockholders,  without  offering  to  expose 
the  villainy  at  work.  We  hope  the  fearful  massacre  detailed 
above  may  prove  the  saddest  result  of  their  silence. 

II 

NEWS-GATHERING  WITH  MARK  TWAIN 

Alfred  Doten's  son  gives  the  following  account  of  a  report- 
ing trip  made  by  his  father  and  Mark  Twain,  when  the  two 
were  on  Comstock  papers: 

My  father  and  Mark  Twain  were  once  detailed  to  go  over  to 
Como  and  write  up  some  new  mines  that  had  been  discovered 
over  there.  My  father  was  on  the  Gold  Hill  News.  He  and 
Mark  had  not  met  before,  but  became  promptly  acquainted, 
and  were  soon  calling  each  other  by  their  first  names. 

They  went  to  a  little  hotel  at  Carson,  agreeing  to  do  their 
work  there  together  next  morning.  When  morning  came  they 
set  out,  and  suddenly  on  a  corner  Mark  stopped  and  turned  to 
my  father,  saying: 

"By  gracious,  Alfl    Isn't  that  a  brewery?" 

"It  is,  Mark.    Let's  go  in." 

They  did  so,  and  remained  there  all  day,  swapping  yarns, 
sipping  beer,  and  lunching,  going  back  to  the  hotel  that  night. 

The  next  morning  precisely  the  same  thing  occurred.  When 
they  were  on  the  same  corner,  Mark  stopped  as  if  he  had  never 
been  there  before,  and  said: 

"Good  gracious,  Alf!    Isn't  that  a  brewery?" 

"It  is,  Mark.   Let's  go  in." 

So  again  they  went  in,  and  again  stayed  all  day. 

This  happened  again  the  next  morning,  and  the  next.  Then 

1599 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


my  father  became  uneasy.  A  letter  had  come  from  Gold  Hill, 
asking  him  where  his  report  of  the  mines  was.  They  agreed 
that  next  morning,  they  would  really  begin  the  story;  that  they 
would  climb  to  the  top  of  a  hill  that  overlooked  the  mines,  and 
write  it  from  there. 

But  the  next  morning,  as  before,  Mark  was  surprised  to  dis- 
cover the  brewery,  and  once  more  they  went  in.  A  few  moments 
later,  however,  a  man  who  knew  all  about  the  mines— a  mining 
engineer  connected  with  them — came  in.  He  was  a  godsend. 
My  father  set  down  a  valuable,  informing  story,  while  Mark 
got  a  lot  of  entertaining  mining  yarns  out  of  him. 

Next  day  Virginia  City  and  Gold  Hill  were  gaining  informa- 
tion from  my  father's  article,  and  entertainment  from  Mark's 
story  of  the  mines. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  D 


FROM  MARK  TWAIN'S  FIRST  LECTURE, 
DELIVERED  OCTOBER  2,  1866 

(See  Chapter  liv) 
HAWAIIAN  IMPORTANCE  TO  AMERICA 

After  a  full  elucidation  of  the  sugar  industry  of  the  Sandwich 
Islands,  its  profits  and  possibilities,  he  said: 

I  have  dwelt  upon  this  subject  to  show  you  that  these  islands 
have  a  genuine  importance  to  America — an  importance  which 
is  not  generally  appreciated  by  our  citizens.  They  pay  revenues 
into  the  United  States  Treasury  now  amounting  to  over  a  half 
a  million  a  year. 

I  do  not  know  what  the  sugar  yield  of  the  world  is  now,  but 
ten  years  ago,  according  to  the  Patent  Office  reports,  it  was 
800,000  hogsheads.  The  Sandwich  Islands,  properly  cultivated 
by  go-ahead  Americans,  are  capable  of  providing  one-third  as 
much  themselves.  With  the  Pacific  Railroad  built,  the  great 
China  Mail  Line  of  steamers  touching  at  Honolulu — we  could 
stock  the  islands  with  Americans  and  supply  a  third  of  the 
civilized  world  with  sugar — and  with  the  silkiest,  longest-stapled 
cotton  this  side  of  the  Sea  Islands,  and  the  very  best  quality  of 

rice  The  property  has  got  to  fall  to  some  heir,  and  why  not 

the  United  States? 

NATIVE  PASSION  FOR  FUNERALS 

They  are  very  fond  of  funerals.  Big  funerals  are  their  main 
weakness.  Fine  grave  clothes,  fine  funeral  appointments,  and 
a  long  procession  are  things  they  take  a  generous  delight  in. 
They  are  fond  of  their  chief  and  their  king ;  they  reverence  them 
with  a  genuine  reverence  and  love  them  with  a  warm  affection, 

1601 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


and  often  look  forward  to  the  happiness  they  will  experience 
in  burying  them.  They  will  beg,  borrow,  or  steal  money  enough, 
and  flock  frcm  all  the  islands,  to  be  present  at  a  royal  funeral  on 
Oahu.  Years  ago  a  Kanaka  and  his  wife  were  condemned  to 
be  hanged  for  murder.  They  received  the  sentence  with  mani- 
fest satisfaction  because  it  gave  an  opening  for  a  funeral,  you 
know.  All  they  care  for  is  a  funeral.  It  makes  but  little  differ- 
ence to  them  whose  it  is ;  they  would  as  soon  attend  their  own  fu- 
neral as  anybody  else's.  This  couple  were  people  of  consequence, 
and  had  landed  estates.  They  sold  every  foot  of  ground  they 
had  and  laid  it  out  in  fine  clothes  to  be  hung  in.  And  the  woman 
appeared  on  the  scaffold  in  a  white  satin  dress  and  slippers  and 
fathoms  of  gaudy  ribbon,  and  the  man  was  arrayed  in  a  gorgeous 
vest,  blue  claw-hammer  coat  and  brass  buttons,  and  white  kid 
gloves.  As  the  noose  was  adjusted  around  his  neck,  he  blew 
his  nose  with  a  grand  theatrical  flourish,  so  as  to  show  his 
embroidered  white  handkerchief.  I  never,  never  knew  of  a 
couple  who  enjoyed  hanging  more  than  they  did. 

VIEW  FROM  HALEAKALA 

It  is  a  solemn  pleasure  to  stand  upon  the  summit  of  the  extinct 
crater  of  Haleakala,  ten  thousand  feet  above  the  sea,  and  gaze 
down  into  its  awful  crater,  27  miles  in  circumference  and  220 
feet  deep,  and  to  picture  to  yourself  the  seething  world  of  fire 
that  once  swept  up  out  of  the  tremendous  abyss  ages  ago. 

The  prodigious  funnel  is  dead  and  silent  now,  and  even  has 
bushes  growing  far  down  in  its  bottom,  where  the  deep-sea  line 
could  hardly  have  reached  in  the  old  times,  when  the  place  was 
filled  with  liquid  lava.  These  bushes  look  like  parlor  shrubs 
from  the  summit  where  you  stand,  and  the  file  of  visitors  mov- 
ing through  them  on  their  mules  is  diminished  to  a  detachment 
of  mice  almost;  and  to  them  you,  standing  so  high  up  against 
the  sun,  ten  thousand  feet  above  their  heads,  look  no  larger 
than  a  grasshopper. 

This  in  the  morning;  but  at  three  or  four  in  the  afternoon  a 
thousand  little  patches  of  white  clouds,  like  handfuls  of  wool, 
come  drifting  noiselessly,  one  after  another,  into  the  crater,  like 
a  procession  of  shrouded  phantoms,  and  circle  round  and  round 
the  vast  sides,  and  settle  gradually  down  and  mingle  together 

1602 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


until  the  colossal  basin  is  filled  to  the  brim  with  snowy  fog,  and 
all  its  seared  and  desolate  wonders  arc  hidden  from  sight. 

And  then  you  may  turn  your  back  to  the  crater  and  look  far 
away  upon  the  broad  valley  below,  with  its  sugar -houses  glint- 
ing like  white  specks  in  the  distance,  and  the  great  sugar-fields 
diminished  to  green  veils  amid  the  lighter-tinted  verdure  around 
them,  and  abroad  upon  the  limitless  ocean.  But  I  should  not 
say  you  look  down;  you  look  up  at  these  things. 

You  are  ten  thousand  feet  above  them,  but  yet  you  seem  to 
stand  in  a  basin,  with  the  green  islands  here  and  there,  and  the 
valleys  and  the  wide  ocean,  and  the  remote  snow-peak  of  Mauna 
Loa,  all  raised  up  before  and  above  you,  and  pictured  out  like 
a  brightly  tinted  map  hung  at  the  ceiling  of  a  room. 

You  look  up  at  everything:  nothing  is  below  you.  It  has  a 
singular  and  startling  effect  to  see  a  miniature  world  thus  seem- 
ingly hung  in  mid-air. 

But  soon  the  white  clouds  come  trooping  along  in  ghostly 
squadrons  and  mingle  together  in  heavy  masses  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  below  you  and  shut  out  everything — completely  hide  the  sea 
and  all  the  earth  save  the  pinnacle  you  stand  on.  As  far  as 
the  eye  can  reach,  it  finds  nothing  to  rest  upon  but  a  boundless 
plain  of  clouds  tumbled  into  all  manner  of  fantastic  shapes — a 
billowy  ocean  of  wool  aflame  with  the  gold  and  purple  and  crim- 
son splendors  of  the  setting  sun!  And  so  firm  does  this  grand 
cloud  pavement  look  that  you  can  hardly  persuade  yourself 
that  you  could  not  walk  upon  it;  that  if  you  stepped  upon  it 
you  would  plunge  headlong  and  astonish  your  friends  at  dinner 
ten  thousand  feet  below. 

Standing  on  that  peak,  with  all  the  world  shut  out  by  that  vast 
plain  of  clouds,  a  feeling  of  loneliness  comes  over  a  man  which 
suggests  to  his  mind  the  last  man  at  the  flood,  perched  high  upon 
the  last  rock,  with  nothing  visible  on  any  side  but  a  mournful 
waste  of  waters,  and  the  ark  departing  dimly  through  the  distant 
mists  and  leaving  him  to  storm  and  night  and  solitude  and  death ! 

NOTICE  OP  MARK  TWAIN'S  LECTURE 

"the  trouble  is  over" 

"The  inimitable  'Mark  Twain'  delivered  himself  last  night 
of  his  first  lecture  on  the  Sandwich  Islands,  or  anything  else. 

1603 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Some  time  before  the  hour  appointed  to  open  his  head  the 
Academy  of  Music  (on  Pine  Street)  was  densely  crowded  with 
one  of  the  most  fashionable  audiences  it  was  ever  my  privilege  to 
witness  during  my  long  residence  in  this  city.  The  elite  of  the 
town  were  there,  and  so  was  the  Governor  of  the  State,  occupy- 
ing one  of  the  boxes,  whose  rotund  face  was  suffused  with  a 
halo  of  mirth  during  the  whole  entertainment.  The  audience 
promptly  notified  Mark  by  the  usual  sign — stamping — that  the 
auspicious  hour  had  arrived,  and  presently  the  lecturer  came 
sidling  and  swinging  out  from  the  left  of  the  stage.  His  very 
manner  produced  a  generally  vociferous  laugh  from  the  assem- 
blage. He  opened  with  an  apology,  by  saying  that  he  had 
partly  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  band,  but  at  the  last  moment 
the  party  engaged  backed  out.  He  explained  that  he  had  hired 
a  man  to  play  the  trombone,  but  he,  on  learning  that  he  was  the 
only  person  engaged,  came  at  the  last  moment  and  informed  him 
that  he  could  not  play.  This  placed  Mark  in  a  bad  predica- 
ment, and  wishing  to  know  his  reasons  for  deserting  him  at  that 
critical  moment,  he  replied,  'That  he  wasn't  going  to  make  a 
fool  of  himself  by  sitting  up  there  on  the  stage  and  blowing  his 
horn  all  by  himself.'  After  the  applause  subsided,  he  assumed 
a  very  grave  countenance  and  commenced  his  remarks  proper 
with  the  following  well-known  sentence:  'When,  in  the  course  of 
human  events,'  etc.  He  lectured  fully  an  hour  and  a  quarter, 
and  his  humorous  sayings  were  interspersed  with  geographical, 
agricultural,  and  statistical  remarks,  sometimes  branching  off 
and  reaching  beyond,  soaring,  in  the  very  choicest  language, 
up  to  the  very  pinnacle  of  descriptive  power." 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  E 


FROM  "THE  JUMPING  FROG"  BOOK  (MARK  TWAIN'S 
FIRST  PUBLISHED  VOLUME) 

(See  Chapters  lviii  and  lis) 
I 

ADVERTISEMENT 

"Mark  Twain"  is  too  well  known  to  the  public  to  require  a 
formal  introduction  at  my  hands.  By  his  story  of  the  Frog 
he  scaled  the  heights  of  popularity  at  a  single  jump  and  won 
for  himself  the  sobriquet  of  The  Wild  Humorist  of  the  Pacific 
Slope.  He  is  also  known  to  fame  as  The  Moralist  of  the  Main; 
and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  as  such  he  will  go  down  to  posterity. 
It  is  in  his  secondary  character,  as  humorist,  however,  rather 
than  in  the  primal  one  of  moralist,  that  I  aim  to  present  him  in 
the  present  volume.  And  here  a  ready  explanation  will  be 
found  for  the  somewhat  fragmentary  character  of  many  of  these 
sketches;  for  it  was  necessary  to  snatch  threads  of  humor  wher- 
ever they  could  be  found — very  often  detaching  them  from 
serious  articles  and  moral  essays  with  which  they  were  woven 
and  entangled.  Originally  written  for  newspaper  publication, 
many  of  the  articles  referred  to  events  of  the  day,  the  interest  of 
which  has  now  passed  away,  and  contained  local  allusions,  which 
the  general  reader  would  fail  to  understand ;  in  such  cases  exci- 
sion became  imperative.  Further  than  this,  remark  or  comment 
is  unnecessary.  Mark  Twain  never  resorts  to  tricks  of  spelling 
nor  rhetorical  buffoonery  for  the  purpose  of  provoking  a  laugh ; 
the  vein  of  his  humor  runs  too  rich  and  deep  to  make  surface 
gliding  necessary.  But  there  are  few  who  can  resist  the  quaint 
similes,  keen  satire,  and  hard,  good  sense  which  form  the  staple 
of  his  writing.  J.  P. 

1605 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


II 

FROM  ANSWERS  TO  CORRESPONDENTS 

"Moral  Statistician" — I  don't  want  any  of  your  statistics. 
I  took  your  whole  batch  and  lit  my  pipe  with  it.  I  hate  your 
kind  of  people.  You  are  always  ciphering  out  how  much  a  man's 
health  is  injured,  and  how  much  his  intellect  is  impaired,  and  how 
many  pitiful  dollars  and  cents  he  wastes  in  the  course  of  ninety- 
two  years'  indulgence  in  the  fatal  practice  of  smoking;  and  in 
the  equally  fatal  practice  of  drinking  coffee;  and  in  playing 
billiards  occasionally;  and  in  taking  a  glass  of  wine  at  dinner, 
etc.,  etc.,  etc.  .  .  . 

Of  course  you  can  save  money  by  denying  yourself  all  these 
vicious  little  enjoyments  for  fifty  years;  but  then  what  can  you 
do  with  it?  What  use  can  you  put  it  to?  Money  can't  save 
your  infinitesimal  soul.  All  the  use  that  money  can  be  put  to 
is  to  purchase  comfort  and  enjoyment  in  this  life;  therefore,  as 
you  are  an  enemy  to  comfort  and  enjoyment,  where  is  the  use 
in  accumulating  cash?  It  won't  do  for  you  to  say  that  you  can 
use  it  to  better  purpose  in  furnishing  good  table,  and  in  chari- 
ties, and  in  supporting  tract  societies,  because  you  know  your- 
self that  you  people  who  have  no  petty  vices  are  never  known 
to  give  away  a  cent,  and  that  you  stint  yourselves  so  in  the 
matter  of  food  that  you  are  always  feeble  and  hungry.  And 
you  never  dare  to  laugh  in  the  daytime  for  fear  some  poor  wretch, 
seeing  you  in  a  good-humor,  will  try  to  borrow  a  dollar  of  you; 
and  in  church  you  are  always  down  on  your  knees,  with  your 
eyes  buried  in  the  cushion,  when  the  contribution-box  comes 
around;  and  you  never  give  the  revenue-officers  a  true  state- 
ment of  your  income.  Now  you  all  know  all  these  things  your- 
self, don't  you?  Very  well,  then,  what  is  the  use  of  your  string- 
ing out  your  miserable  lives  to  a  clean  and  withered  old  age? 
What  is  the  use  of  your  saving  money  that  is  so  utterly  worthless 
to  you?  In  a  word,  why  don't  you  go  off  somewhere  and  die,  and 
not  be  always  trying  to  seduce  people  into  becoming  as  "ornery  " 
and  unlovable  as  you  are  yourselves,  by  your  ceaseless  and  vil- 
lainous "moral  statistics"?  Now,  I  don't  approve  01  dissipa- 
tion, and  I  don't  indulge  in  it,  either;  but  I  haven't  a  particle 
of  confidence  in  a  man  who  has  no  redeeming  petty  vices  what- 

1606 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


ever,  and  so  I  don't  want  to  hear  from  you  any  more.  I  think 
you  are  the  very  same  man  who  read  me  a  long  lecture  last 
week  about  the  degrading  vice  of  smoking  cigars  and  then  came 
back,  in  my  absence,  with  your  vile,  reprehensible  fire-proof 
gloves  on,  and  carried  off  my  beautiful  parlor-stove. 

Ill 

FROM  "a  strange  dream" 

(Example  of  Mark  Twain's  Early  Descriptive  Writing) 

...  In  due  time  I  stood,  with  my  companion,  on  the  wall  of 
the  vast  caldron  which  the  natives,  ages  ago,  named  Hale  mau 
mau — the  abyss  wherein  they  were  wont  to  throw  the  remains 
of  their  chiefs,  to  the  end  that  vulgar  feet  might  never  tread 
above  them.  We  stood  there,  at  dead  of  night,  a  mile  above  the 
level  of  the  sea,  and  looked  down  a  thousand  feet  upon  a  boiling, 
surging,  roaring  ocean  of  fire!— shaded  our  eyes  from  the  blinding 
glare,  and  gazed  far  away  over  the  crimson  waves  with  a  vague 
notion  that  a  supernatural  Meet,  manned  by  demons  and  freighted 
with  the  damned,  might  presently  sail  up  out  of  the  remote  dis- 
tance; started  when  tremendous  thunder-bursts  shook  the  earth, 
and  followed  with  fascinated  eyes  the  grand  jets  of  molten  lava 
that  sprang  high  up  toward  the  zenith  and  exploded  in  a  world 
of  fiery  spray  that  lit  up  the  somber  heavens  with  an  infernal 
splendor. 

"What  is  your  little  bonfire  of  Vesuvius  to  this?" 

My  ejaculation  roused  my  companion  from  his  reverie,  and 
we  fell  into  a  conversation  appropriate  to  the  occasion  and  the 
surroundings.  We  came  at  last  to  speak  of  the  ancient  custom 
of  casting  the  bodies  of  dead  chieftains  into  this  fearful  caldron ; 
and  my  comrade,  who  is  of  the  blood  royal,  mentioned  that  the 
founder  of  his  race,  old  King  Kamehameha  the  First — that  in- 
vincible old  pagan  Alexander — had  found  other  sepulture  than 
the  burning  depths  of  the  Hale  mau  mau.  I  grew  interested  at 
once;  I  knew  that  the  mystery  of  what  became  of  the  corpse 
of  the  warrior  king  had  never  been  fathomed;  I  was  aware  that 
there  was  a  legend  connected  with  this  matter;  and  I  felt  as  if 

1607 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


there  could  be  no  more  fitting  time  to  listen  to  it  than  the 
present.   The  descendant  of  the  Kamehamehas  said: 

The  dead  king  was  brought  in  royal  state  down  the  long, 
winding  road  that  descends  from  the  rim  of  the  crater  to 
the  scorched  and  chasm-riven  plain  that  lies  between  the 
Hale  man  man  and  those  beetling  walls  yonder  in  the  dis- 
tance. The  guards  were  set  and  the  troops  of  mourners  began 
the  weird  wail  for  the  departed.  In  the  middle  of  the  night 
came  a  sound  of  innumerable  voices  in  the  air  and  the  rush  of 
invisible  wings;  the  funeral  torches  wavered,  burned  blue,  and 
went  out.  The  mourners  and  watchers  fell  to  the  ground 
paralyzed  by  fright,  and  many  minutes  elapsed  before  any  one 
dared  to  move  or  speak;  for  they  believed  that  the  phantom  mes- 
sengers of  the  dread  Goddess  of  Fire  had  been  in  their  midst. 
When  at  last  a  torch  was  lighted  the  bier  was  vacant — the  dead 
monarch  had  been  spirited  away! 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  F 


"THE  INNOCENTS  ABROAD" 
(See  Chapter  lx) 


LIST   OF   OFFICERS   AND   PASSENGERS,  "  QUAKER  CITY "  HOLY 

LAND  PLEASURE  EXCURSION 


Officers  of  the  skip: 
Captain,  Charles  C.  Duncan 
Executive  officer,  Ira  Bursley 
First  officer,  William  Jones 
Second  officer,  Mr.  Burdick 
Third  officer,  Mr.  Hinton 
First  engineer,  John  Harris 
First  assistant  engineer,  Mr. 

McDonald 
Second  assistant  engineer,  Mr. 

McArthur 
Purser,  J.  William  Davis 

The  passengers: 

Allen,  A.  B.,  New  York  City 

Andrews,  Dr.  E.,  Albany,  N.  Y. 

Barry,  Major  James  G.,  St. 
Louis,  Mo. 

Beach,  M.  S.  and  Miss  E.  B., 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 

Beckwith,  Thomas  S.,  Cleve- 
land, Mo. 

Bell,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  R.  A.  E., 
Portsmouth,  O. 

Birch,  Dr.  G.  B„  Hannibal,  O. 

Bond,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  John  W. 
and  Miss  Ada,  St.  Paul, 
Minn. 


Bond,  Miss  Mary  E.,  Plaque- 
mine,  La. 

Brown,  Dr.  L.  and  Miss  Kate 
L.,  Circleville,  O. 

Bullard,  the  Rev.  Henry,  Way- 
land,  Mass. 

Chadcyne,  Miss  Carrie  D., 
Jersey  City 

Church.William  F.,Cincinnati,0. 

Clemens,  Samuel  L.,  San  Fran- 


Crane,  Albert  and  A.,  New 
Orleans 

Crocker,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  D., 
Cleveland,  O. 

Cutter,  Bloodgood  H.,  Little 
Neck,  L.  I. 

Davis,  J.  W.,  New  York  City 

Denny,  Colonel  W.  R.,  Win- 
chester, Va. 

Dimon,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fred, 
Norwalk,  Conn. 

Duncan,  Mrs.  C.  C,  George, 
and  H.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 

Fairbanks,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  Cleve- 
land, O. 

Foster,  Colonel  J.  H.,  Pitts- 
burg, Pa. 

609 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Gibson,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  William, 

Jamestown,  Pa. 
Green,  Mrs.  J.  0.,  Washington 

City,  D.  C. 
Greenwood,    John,    Jr.,  New 

York  City 
Greer,  F.  H.,  Boston,  Mass. 
Griswold,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  M., 

Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 
Haldeman,  J.  S.,  Harrisburg, 

Pa. 

Heiss,  Goddard,  Philadelphia, 
Pa. 

Hoel,  Captain  W.  R.,  Waynes- 

ville,  O. 
Hutchinson,  the  Rev.  E.  Carter, 

D.D.,  St.  Louis,  Mo. 
Hyde,  James  K.,  Hydcville,  Vt. 
Isham,  John  G.,  Cincinnati,  O. 
Jackson,  A.  R.,  M.D.,  Strouds- 

burg,  Pa. 
James,    William    E.,  Boston, 

Mass. 

Jenkins,  F.  F.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Kinney,  Colonel  Peter,  Ports- 
mouth, O. 

Krauss,  George  W.,  Harris- 
burg, Pa. 

Langdon,  Charles  J.,  Elmira, 
N.  Y. 

Larrowe,  Mrs.  Nina,  San  Fran- 
cisco, Cal. 

II 


Leary,  Daniel  D.,  New  York 
City 

Lee,  Mrs.  S.  G.,  Brooklyn, 
N.  Y. 

Lock  wood,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  E. 
K.,  Norwalk,  Conn. 

McDonald,  Louis,  Bristol,  Eng- 
land 

Moody,  Captain  Lucius,  Canton, 
N.  Y. 

Moulton,  Julius,  St.  Louis,  Mo. 
Nelson,  Arba,  Alton,  111. 
Nesbit,  Dr.  B.  B.,  Louisville, 
Ky. 

Nesbit,  Thomas  B.,  Fulton,  Mo. 
Newell,  Miss  Julia,  Janesville, 
Wis. 

Parsons,  Samuel  B.,  New  York 
City 

Payne,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  J.  H., 

Boston,  Mass. 
Quereau,    the    Rev.    G.  W., 

Aurora,  III. 
Sanford,  A.  N.,  Cleveland,  O. 
Serfaty,  M.  A.,  Gibraltar 
Severance,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  L., 

Cleveland,  O. 
Sexton,   Nicholas,   New  York 

City 

Slote,  Daniel,  New  York  City 
Van  Nostrand,  John  A.,  Green- 
ville, N.  J. 


NEW   YORK   "  HERALD  "   EDITORIAL   ON   THE    RETURN  OF  THE 
"  QUAKER  CITY  "  PILGRIMAGE,  NOVEMBER   10,   1 867 

In  yesterday's  Herald  we  published  a  most  amusing  letter 
from  the  pen  of  that  most  amusing  American  genius,  Mark 
Twain,  giving  an  account  of  that  most  amusing  of  all  modern 
pilgrimages — the  pilgrimage  of  the  Quaker  City.  It  has  been 
amusing  all  through,  this  Quaker  City  affair.  It  might  have  be- 

1610 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


come  more  serious  than  amusing  if  the  ship  had  been  sold  at 
Jaffa,  Alexandria,  or  Yalta,  in  the  Black  Sea,  as  it  appears  might 
have  happened.  In  such  a  case  the  passengers  would  have  been 
more  effectually  sold  than  the  ship.  The  descendants  of  the 
Puritan  pilgrims  have,  naturally  enough,  some  of  them,  an 
affection  for  ships;  but  if  all  that  is  said  about  this  religious 
cruise  be  true  they  have  also  a  singularly  sharp  eye  to  business. 
It  was  scarcely  wise  on  the  part  of  the  pilgrims,  although  it  was 
well  for  the  public,  that  so  strange  a  genius  as  Mark  Twain 
should  have  found  admission  into  the  sacred  circle.  We  are 
not  aware  whether  Mr.  Twain  intends  giving  us  a  book  on  this 
pilgrimage,  but  we  do  know  that  a  book  written  from  his  own 
peculiar  standpoint,  giving  an  account  of  the  characters  and 
events  on  board  ship  and  of  the  scenes  which  the  pilgrims  wit- 
nessed, would  command  an  almost  unprecedented  sale.  There 
are  varieties  of  genius  peculiar  to  America.  Of  one  of  these 
varieties  Mark  Twain  is  a  striking  specimen.  For  the  develop- 
ment of  his  peculiar  genius  he  has  never  had  a  more  fitting 
opportunity.  Besides,  there  are  some  things  which  he  knows, 
and  which  the  world  ought  to  know,  about  this  last  edition  of 
the  Mayflower. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  G 

MARK  TWAIN  AT  THE  CORRESPONDENTS  CLUB, 

WASHINGTON 

(See  Chapter  bciii) 
WOMAN 

A  EULOGY  OF  THE  FAIR  SEX 

The  Washington  Correspondents  Club  held  its  anniversary 
on  Saturday  night.  Mr.  Clemens,  better  known  as  Mark  Twain, 
responded  to  the  toast,  "Woman,  the  pride  of  the  professions 
and  the  jewel  of  ours."    He  said: 

Mr.  President, — I  do  not  know  why  I  should  have  been  singled 
out  to  receive  the  greatest  distinction  of  the  evening — for  so  the 
office  of  replying  to  the  toast  to  woman  has  been  regarded  in 
every  age.  [Applause.]  I  do  not  know  why  I  have  received 
this  distinction,  unless  it  be  that  I  am  a  trifle  less  homely  than 
the  other  members  of  the  club.  But,  be  this  as  it  may,  Mr. 
President,  I  am  proud  of  the  position,  and  you  could  not  have 
chosen  any  one  who  would  have  accepted  it  more  gladly,  or 
labored  with  a  heartier  good  -  will  to  do  the  subject  justice, 
than  I.  Because,  sir,  I  love  the  sex.  (Laughter.]  I  love  all 
the  women,  sir,  irrespective  of  age  or  color.  (Laughter.] 

Human  intelligence  cannot  estimate  what  we  owe  to  woman, 
sir.  She  sews  on  our  buttons  (laughter] ;  she  mends  our  clothes 
(laughter];  she  ropes  us  in  at  the  church  fairs;  she  confides  in 
us;  she  tells  us  whatever  she  can  find  out  about  the  private 
affairs  of  the  neighbors;  she  gives  good  advice,  and  plenty  of  it; 
she  gives  us  a  piece  of  her  mind  sometimes — and  sometimes 
all  of  it;  she  soothes  our  aching  brows;  she  bears  our  children. 

1612 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


In  all  relations  of  life,  sir,  it  is  but  just  and  a  graceful  tribute  to 
woman  to  say  of  her  that  she  is  a  brick.    [Great  laughter.] 

Wheresoever  you  place  woman,  sir — in  whatsoever  position 
or  estate — she  is  an  ornament  to  that  place  she  occupies,  and  a 
treasure  to  the  world.  [Here  Mr.  Twain  paused,  looked  in- 
quiringly at  his  hearers,  and  remarked  that  the  applause  should 
come  in  at  this  point.  It  came  in.  Mr.  Twain  resumed  his 
eulogy. J  Look  at  the  noble  names  of  history!  Look  at  Cleo- 
patra! Look  at  Desdemona!  Look  at  Florence  Nightingale  1 
Look  at  Joan  of  Arc!  Look  at  Lucretia  Borgia!  [Disappro- 
bation expressed.  "Well," said  Mr.  Twain, scratching  his  head, 
doubtfully,  "suppose  we  let  Lucretia  slide."]  Look  at  Joyce 
Heth!  Look  at  Mother  Eve!  I  repeat,  sir,  look  at  the  illus- 
trious names  of  history!  Look  at  the  Widow  Machree!  Look 
at  Lucy  Stone!  Look  at  Elizabeth  Cady  Stanton!  Look  at 
George  Francis  Train!  [Great  laughter.]  And,  sir,  I  say  with 
bowed  head  and  deepest  veneration,  look  at  the  mother  of 
Washington!  She  raised  a  boy  that  could  not  lie — could  not 
lie.  [Applause.]  But  he  never  had  any  chance.  It  might 
have  been  different  with  him  if  he  had  belonged  to  a  newspaper 
correspondents'  club.  [Laughter,  groans,  hisses,  cries  of  "put 
him  out."  Mark  looked  around  placidly  upon  his  excited 
audience,  and  resumed.] 

I  repeat,  sir,  that  in  whatsoever  position  you  place  a  woman 
she  is  an  ornament  to  society  and  a  treasure  to  the  world.  As  a 
sweetheart  she  has  few  equals  and  no  superior  [laughter];  as 
a  cousin  she  is  convenient;  as  a  wealthy  grandmother  with 
an  incurable  distemper  she  is  precious;  as  a  wet  nurse  she  has 
no  equal  among  men!  [Laughter.] 

What,  sir,  would  the  people  of  this  earth  be  without  woman? 
They  would  be  scarce,  sir.  Then  let  us  cherish  her,  let  us  pro- 
tect her,  let  u9  give  her  our  support,  our  encouragement,  our 
sympathy — ourselves,  if  we  get  a  chance.  [Laughter.] 

But,  jesting  aside,  Mr.  President,  woman  is  lovable,  gracious, 
kind  of  heart,  beautiful;  worthy  of  all  respect,  of  all  esteem, 
of  all  deference.  Not  any  here  will  refuse  to  drink  her  health 
right  cordially,  for  each  and  every  one  of  us  has  personally 
known,  loved,  and  honored  the  very  best  one  of  them  all — his 
own  mother!  [Applause.] 
m.— 32 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  H 


ANNOUNCEMENT  FOR  LECTURE  OF  JULY  2,  1868 

(See  Chapter  lxvi) 

THE  PUBLIC  TO  MARK  TWAIN— CORRESPONDENCE 


San  Francisco,  June  jolh. 

Mr.  Mark  Twain — Dear  Sir,— Hearing  that  you  are  about 
to  sail  for  New  York  in  the  P.  M.  S.  S.  Company's  steamer  of 
the  6th  July,  to  publish  a  book,  and  learning  with  the  deepest 
concern  that  you  propose  to  read  a  chapter  or  two  of  that  book 
in  public  before  you  go,  we  take  this  method  of  expressing  our 
cordial  desire  that  you  will  not.  We  beg  and  implore  you  do 
not.   There  is  a  limit  to  human  endurance. 

We  are  your  personal  friends.  We  have  your  welfare  at  heart. 
We  desire  to  see  you  prosper.  And  it  is  upon  these  accounts, 
and  upon  these  only,  that  we  urge  you  to  desist  from  the  new 
atrocity  you  contemplate.   Yours  truly, 


Win.  H.  L.  Barnes 
Rcar-Ad'l  Thatcher 
Samuel  Williams 
Gen.  McCook 
Geo.  R.  Barnes 
Noah  Brooks 
Maj.-Gen.  Halleck 
J.  B.  Bowman 
Leland  Stanford 
John  McComb 
Capt.  Pease 
A.  Badlam 
John  Skae 
Abner  Barker 
Dr.  Bruner 


Cal.  Labor  Exch'c 
Ex-Gov.  Low 
Brig. -Gen.  Leonard 
Robt.  Rockwell 
Stephen  J.  Field 
B.  C.  Horn 
Geo.  Pen  Johnson 
Maj.-Gen.  Ord 
Bret  Harte 
J.  W.  Tucker 
R.  B.  Swain 
Ned  Ellis 
Judge  Lake 
Joseph  H.  Jones 
Col.  Catherwood 


1614 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


Louis  Cohn 
Mercantile  Library 
T.  J.  Lamb 
Prop'rs  Occidental 
Prop'rs  Russ  House 
Prop'rs  Cosmopolitan 
Prop'rs  Lick  House 
Michael  Reese 
Frank  Soule 
Dr.  Shorb 

Pioche  Bayerque  &  Co. 
Asa  D.  Nudd 
Ben.  Truman 
O.  O.  Eldridge 
Board  of  Aldermen 
The  Masons 


£.  B.  Rail 
R.  L.  Ogdcn  . 
Thos.  Cash 
M.  B.  Cox 
The  Citizen  Military 
The  Odd  Fellows 
The  Orphan  Asyl'm 
Various  Benevolent  Societies, 


Dr.  McNulty 
A.  J.  Marsh 
Sam.  Piatt 
Wm.  C.  Ralston 
Mayor  McCoppin 


Citizens  on  Foot  and  Horse- 
back, and  1,500  in  the  Steer- 
age 


(reply) 


San  Francisco,  June  30th. 


To  the  1,500  and  Others, — It  seems  to  me  that  your  course 
is  entirely  unprecedented.  Heretofore,  when  lecturers,  singers, 
actors,  and  other  frauds  have  said  they  were  about  to  leave 
town,  you  have  always  been  the  very  first  people  to  come  out 
in  a  card  beseeching  them  to  hold  on  for  just  one  night  more,  and 
inflict  just  one  more  performance  on  the  public,  but  as  soon  as  I 
want  to  take  a  farewell  benefit  you  come  after  me,  with  a  card 
signed  by  the  whole  community  and  the  board  of  aldermen, 
praying  me  not  to  do  it.  But  ic  isn't  of  any  use.  You  cannot 
move  me  from  my  fell  purpose.  I  will  torment  the  people  if  I 
want  to.  I  have  a  better  right  to  do  it  than  these  strange  lec- 
turers and  orators  that  come  here  from  abroad.  It  only  costs 
the  public  a  dollar  apiece,  and  if  they  can't  stand  it  what  do 
they  stay  here  for?  Am  I  to  go  away  and  let  them  have  peace 
and  quiet  for  a  year  and  a  half,  and  then  come  back  and  only 
lecture  them  twice?   What  do  you  take  me  for? 

No,  gentlemen,  ask  of  me  anything  else  and  I  will  do  it  cheer- 
fully; but  do  not  ask  me  not  to  afflict  the  people.  I  wish  to  tell 
them  all  I  know  about  VENICE.  I  wish  to  tell  them  about  the 
City  of  the  Sea — that  most  venerable,  most  brilliant,  and  proud- 
est Republic  the  world  has  ever  seen.  I  wish  to  hint  at  what  it 
achieved  in  twelve  hundred  years,  and  what  it  lost  in  two 


1615 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


hundred.  I  wish  to  furnish  a  deal  of  pleasant  information,  some- 
what highly  spiced,  but  still  palatable,  digestible,  and  eminently 
fitted  for  the  intellectual  stomach.  My  last  lecture  was  not  as 
fine  as  I  thought  it  was,  but  I  have  submitted  this  discourse  to 
several  able  critics,  and  they  have  pronounced  it  good.  Now, 
therefore,  why  should  I  withhold  it? 

Let  me  talk  only  just  this  once,  and  I  will  sail  positively  on  the 
6th  of  July,  and  stay  away  until  I  return  from  China — two 
years.  Yours  truly,  Mark  Twain. 

(further  remonstrance) 

San  Francisco,  June  30th . 

Mr.  Mark  Twain, — Learning  with  profound  regret  that 
you  have  concluded  to  postpone  your  departure  until  the  6th 
July,  and  learning  'also,  with  unspeakable  grief,  that  you  pro- 
pose to  read  from  your  forthcoming  book,  or  lecture  again 
before  you  go,  at  the  New  Mercantile  Library,  we  hasten  to 
beg  of  you  that  you  will  not  do  it.  Curb  this  spirit  of  lawless 
violence,  and  emigrate  at  once.  Have  the  vessel's  bill  for 
your  passage  sent  to  us.   We  will  pay  it. 

Your  friends, 

Pacific  Board  of  Brokers 
[and  other  important  finan- 
cial and  social  institutions]. 

San  Francisco,  June  30th. 

Mr.  Mark  Twain— Dear  Sir,— Will  you  start  now,  with- 
out any  unnecessary  delay? 

Yours  truly, 

Proprietors  of  the  Alia,  Bulletin,  Times,  Call,  Examiner 
[and  other  San  Francisco  publications). 

San  Francisco,  June  30th. 

Mr.  Mark  Twain — Dear  Sir, — Do  not  delay  your  depart- 
ure. You  can  come  back  and  lecture  another  time.  In  the 
language  of  the  worldly — you  can  "cut  and  come  again." 

Your  friends, 

The  Clergy. 

16 16 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


San  Francisco,  June  30th. 
Mr.  Mark  Twain— Dear  Sir —You  had  better  go. 

Yours,        The  Chief  of  Police. 

(reply) 

San  Francisco,  June  jotM. 
Gentleicen,— Restrain  your  emotions  ;  you  observe  that  they 
cannot  avail.  Read: 

NEW  MERCANTILE  LIBRARY 
Bush  Street 


Thursday  Evening,  July  2,  1868 
One  Night  Only 


FAREWELL  LECTURE 
of 

MARK  TWAIN 
Subject: 
The  Oldest  of  the  Republics 
VENICE 
Past  and  Present 


Box-Office  open  Wednesday  and  Thursday 
No  extra  charge  for  reserved  seats 
ADMISSION  ONE  DOLLAR 


Doors  open  at  7  Orgies  to  commence  at  8  P.  M. 


The  public  displays  and  ceremonies  projected  to  give  fitting 
Hlat  to  this  occasion  have  been  unavoidably  delayed  until 
the  4th.  The  lecture  will  be  delivered  certainly  on  the  2d,  and 
the  event  will  be  celebrated  two  days  afterward  by  a  discharge 
of  artillery  on  the  4th,  a  procession  of  citizens,  the  reading  of  the 
Declaration  of  Independence,  and  by  a  gorgeous  display  of  fire- 
works from  Russian  Hill  in  the  evening,  which  I  have  ordered  at 
my  sole  expense,  the  cost  amounting  to  eighty  thousand  dollars. 

 o  

AT  NEW  MERCANTILE  LIBRARY 
Bush  Street 
Thursday  Evening,  July  2,  1868 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  I 


MARK  TWAIN'S  CHAMPIONSHIP  OP 
THOMAS  K.  BEECHER 

(See  Chapter  Ixxiv) 

There  was  a  religious  turmoil  in  Elmira  in  1869;  a  disturbance 
among  the  ministers,  due  to  the  success  of  Thomas  K.  Beecher 
in  a  series  of  meetings  he  was  conducting  in  the  Opera  House. 
Mr.  Beecher 's  teachings  had  never  been  very  orthodox  or  doc- 
trinal, but  up  to  this  time  they  had  been  seemingly  unobjection- 
able to  his  brother  clergymen,  who  fraternized  with  him  and 
joined  with  him  in  the  Monday  meetings  of  the  Ministerial 
Union  of  Elmira,  when  each  Monday  a  sermon  was  read  by 
one  of  the  members.  The  situation  presently  changed.  Mr. 
Beecher  was  preaching  his  doubtful  theology  to  large  and  nightly 
increasing  audiences,  and  it  was  time  to  check  the  exodus.  The 
Ministerial  Union  of  Elmira  not  only  declined  to  recognize  and 
abet  the  Opera  House  gatherings,  but  they  requested  him  to  with- 
draw from  their  Monday  meetings,  on  the  ground  that  his  teach- 
ings were  pernicious.  Mr.  Beecher  said  nothing  of  the  matter, 
and  it  was  not  made  public  until  a  notice  of  it  appeared  in  a  re- 
ligious paper.  Naturally  such  a  course  did  not  meet  with  the 
approval  of  the  Langdon  family,  and  awoke  the  scorn  of  a  man 
who  so  detested  bigotry  in  any  form  as  Mark  Twain.  He  was 
a  stranger  in  the  place,  and  not  justified  to  speak  over  his  own 
signature,  but  he  wrote  an  article  and  read  it  to  members  of 
the  Langdon  family  and  to  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Taylor,  their  intimate 
friends,  who  were  spending  an  evening  in  the  Langdon  home. 
It  was  universally  approved,  and  the  next  morning  appeared  in 
the  Elmira  Advertiser,  over  the  signature  of  "S'cat."  It  created 
a  stir,  of  course.  * 

The  article  follows: 

161S 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


MR.  BEECHER  AND  THE  CLERGY 

"/The  Ministerial  Union  of  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  at  a  recent  meeting 
passed  resolutions  disapproving  the  teachings  of  Rev.  T.  K. 
Beecher,  declining  to  co-operate  with  him  in  his  Sunday  evening 
services  at  the  Opera  House,  and  requesting  him  to  withdraw 
from  their  Monday  morning  meeting.  This  has  resulted  in  his 
withdrawal,  and  thus  the  pastors  are  relieved  from  further  re- 
sponsibility as  to  his  action." — N.  Y.  Evangelist. 

Poor  Beecher!  All  this  time  he  could  do  whatever  he  pleased 
that  was  wrong,  and  then  be  perfectly  serene  and  comfortable 
over  it,  because  the  Ministerial  Union  of  Elmira  was  responsible 
to  God  for  it.  He  could  lie  if  he  wanted  to,  and  those  ministers 
had  to  answer  for  it;  he  could  promote  discord  in  the  church  of 
Christ,  and  those  parties  had  to  make  it  right  with  the  Deity  as 
best  they  could;  he  could  teach  false  doctrines  to  empty  opera- 
houses,  and  those  sorrowing  lambs  of  the  Ministerial  Union 
had  to  get  out  their  sackcloth  and  ashes  and  stand  responsible 
for  it.  He  had  such  a  comfortable  thing  of  it!  But  he  went  too 
far.  In  an  evil  hour  he  slaughtered  the  simple  geese  that  laid 
the  golden  egg  of  responsibility  for  him,  and  now  they  will  un- 
cover their  customary  complacency,  and  lift  up  their  customary 
cackle  in  his  behalf  no  more.  And  so,  at  last,  he  finds  himself 
in  the  novel  position  of  being  responsible  to  God  for  his  acts, 
instead  of  to  the  Ministerial  Union  of  Elmira.  To  say  that 
this  is  appalling  is  to  state  it  with  a  degree  of  mildness  which 
amounts  to  insipidity. 

We  cannot  justly  estimate  this  calamity,  without  first  re- 
viewing certain  facts  that  conspired  to  bring  it  about.  Mr. 
Beecher  was  and  is  in  the  habit  of  preaching  to  a  full  congrega- 
tion in  the  Independent  Congregational  Church,  in  this  city. 
The  meeting-house  was  not  large  enough  to  accommodate  all  the 
people  who  desired  admittance.  Mr.  Beecher  regularly  attended 
the  meetings  of  the  Ministerial  Union  of  Elmira  every  Monday 
morning,  and  they  received  him  into  their  fellowship,  and  never 
objected  to  the  doctrines  which  he  taught  in  his  church.  So, 
in  an  unfortunate  moment,  he  conceived  the  strange  idea  that 
they  would  connive  at  the  teaching  of  the  same  doctrines  in  the 
same  way  in  a  larger  house.   Therefore  he  secured  the  Opera 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

House  and  proceeded  to  preach  there  every  Sunday  evening  to 
assemblages  comprising  from  a  thousand  to  fifteen  hundred  per- 
sons. He  felt  warranted  in  this  course  by  a  passage  of  Scripture 
which  says,  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel 
unto  every  creature."  Opera-houses  were  not  ruled  out  spe- 
cifically in  this  passage,  and  so  he  considered  it  proper  to  re- 
gard opera-houses  as  a  part  of  "  all  the  world."  He  looked  upon 
the  people  who  assembled  there  as  coming  under  the  head  of 
"every  creature."  These  ideas  were  as  absurd  as  they  were  far- 
fetched, but  still  they  were  the  honest  ebullitions  of  a  diseased 
mind.  His  great  mistake  was  in  supposing  that  when  he  had 
the  Saviour's  indorsement  of  his  conduct  he  had  all  that  was 
necessary.  He  overlooked  the  fact  that  there  might  possibly 
be  a  conflict  of  opinion  between  the  Saviour  and  the  Ministerial 
Union  of  Elmira.  And  there  was.  Wherefore,  blind  and  foolish 
Mr.  Beecher  went  to  his  destruction.  The  Ministerial  Union 
withdrew  their  approbation,  and  left  him  dangling  in  the  air, 
with  no  other  support  than  the  countenance  and  approval  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ. 

Mr.  Beecher  invited  his  brother  ministers  to  join  forces  with 
him  and  help  him  conduct  the  Opera  House  meetings.  They 
declined  with  great  unanimity.  In  this  they  were  wrong. 
Since  they  did  not  approve  of  those  meetings,  it  was  a  duty  they 
owed  to  their  consciences  and  their  God  to  contrive  their  dis- 
continuance. They  knew  this.  They  felt  it.  Yet  they  turned 
coldly  away  and  refused  to  help  at  those  meetings,  when  they 
well  knew  that  their  help,  earnestly  and  persistently  given,  was 
able  to  kill  any  great  religious  enterprise  that  ever  was  con- 
ceived of. 

The  ministers  refused,  and  the  calamitous  meetings  at  the 
Opera  House  continued;  and  not  only  continued,  but  grew  in 
interest  and  importance,  and  sapped  of  their  congregations 
churches  where  the  Gospel  was  preached  with  that  sweet  monoto- 
nous tranquillity  and  that  impenetrable  profundity  which  stir  up 
such  consternation  in  the  strongholds  of  sin.  It  is  a  pity  to  have 
to  record  here  that  one  clergyman  refused  to  preach  at  the  Opera 
House  at  Mr.  Beecher's  request,  even  when  that  incendiary  was 
sick  and  disabled ;  and  if  that  man's  conscience  justifies  him  in 
that  refusal  I  do  not.  Under  the  plea  of  charity  for  a  sick  brother 
he  could  have  preached  to  that  Opera  House  multitude  a  sermon 

1620 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


that  would  have  done  incalculable  damage  to  the  Opera  House 
experiment.  And  he  need  not  have  been  particular  about  the 
sermon  he  chose,  either.  He  could  have  relied  on  any  he  had 
in  his  barrel. 

The  Opera  House  meetings  went  on ;  other  congregations  were 
thin,  and  grew  thinner,  but  the  Opera  House  assemblages  were 
vast.  Every  Sunday  night,  in  spite  of  sense  and  reason,  multi- 
tudes passed  by  the  churches  where  they  might  have  been  saved , 
and  marched  deliberately  to  the  Opera  House  to  be  damned. 
The  community  talked,  talked,  talked.  Everybody  discussed 
the  fact  that  the  Ministerial  Union  disapproved  of  the  Opera 
House  meetings;  also  the  fact  that  they  disapproved  of  the  teach- 
ings put  forth  there.  And  everybody  wondered  how  the  Minis- 
terial Union  could  tell  whether  to  approve  or  disapprove  of 
those  teachings,  seeing  that  those  clergymen  had  never  attended 
an  Opera  House  meeting,  and  therefore  didn't  know  what  was 
taught  there.  Everybody  wondered  over  that  curious  question, 
and  they  had  to  take  it  out  in  wondering. 

Mr.  Beecher  asked  the  Ministerial  Union  to  state  their  ob- 
jections to  the  Opera  House  matter.  They  could  not— at  least 
they  did  not.  He  said  to  them  that  if  they  would  come  squarely 
out  and  tell  him  that  they  desired  the  discontinuance  of  those 
meetings  he  would  discontinue  them.  They  declined  to  do  that. 
Why  should  they  have  declined?  They  had  no  right  to  decline, 
and  no  excuse  to  decline,  if  they  honestly  believed  that  those 
meetings  interfered  in  the  slightest  degree  with  the  best  interests 
of  religion.  (That  is  a  proposition  which  the  profoundest  head 
among  them  cannot  get  around.) 

But  the  Opera  House  meetings  went  on.  That  was  the  mis- 
chief of  it.  And  so,  one  Monday  morning,  when  Mr.  B.  appeared 
at  the  usual  Ministers'  meeting,  his  brother  clergymen  desired 
him  to  come  there  no  more.  He  asked  why.  They  gave  no 
reason.  They  simply  declined  to  have  his  company  longer. 
Mr.  B.  said  he  could  not  accept  of  this  execution  without  a  trial, 
and  since  he  loved  them  and  had  nothing  against  them  he  must 
insist  upon  meeting  with  them  in  the  future  just  the  same  as 
ever.  And  so,  after  that,  they  met  in  secret,  and  thus  got  rid 
of  this  man's  importunate  affection. 

The  Ministerial  Union  had  ruled  out  Beecher — a  point  gained. 
He  would  get  up  an  excitement  about  it  in  public.   But  that  was 

162 1 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


a  miscalculation.  He  never  mentioned  it.  They  waited  and 
waited  for  the  grand  crash,  but  it  never  came.  After  all  their 
labor-pains,  their  ministerial  mountain  had  brought  forth  only  a 
mouse — and  a  still-born  one  at  that.  Beecher  had  not  told  on 
them;  Beecher  malignantly  persisted  in  not  telling  on  them. 
The  opportunity  was  slipping  away.  Alas,  for  the  humiliation 
of  it,  they  had  to  come  out  and  tell  it  themselves!  And  after 
all,  their  bombshell  did  not  hurt  anybody  when  they  did  ex- 
plode it.  They  had  ceased  to  be  responsible  to  God  for  Beecher, 
and  yet  nobody  seemed  paralyzed  about  it.  Somehow,  it  was 
not  even  of  sufficient  importance,  apparently,  to  get  into  the 
papers,  though  even  the  poor  little  facts  that  Smith  has  bought 
a  trotting  team  and  Alderman  Jones's  child  has  the  measles  are 
chronicled  there  with  avidity.  Something  must  be  done.  As 
the  Ministerial  Union  had  told  about  their  desolating  action, 
when  nobody  else  considered  it  of  enough  importance  to  tell, 
they  would  also  publish  it,  now  that  the  reporters  failed  to  see 
anything  in  it  important  enough  to  print.  And  so  they  startled 
the  entire  religious  world  no  doubt  by  solemnly  printing  in  the 
Evangelist  the  paragraph  which  heads  this  article.  They  have 
got  their  excommunication-bull  started  at  last.  It  is  going 
along  quite  lively  now,  and  making  considerable  stir,  let  us 
hope.  They  even  know  it  in  Podunk,  wherever  that  may  be. 
It  excited  a  two-line  paragraph  there.  Happy,  happy  world, 
that  knows  at  last  that  a  little  congress  of  congregationless 
clergymen  of  whom  it  had  never  heard  before  have  crushed  a 
famous  Beecher,  and  reduced  his  audiences  from  fifteen  hundred 
down  to  fourteen  hundred  and  seventy-five  at  one  fell  blow! 
Happy,  happy  world,  that  knows  at  last  that  these  obscure 
innocents  are  no  longer  responsible  for  the  blemishless  teachings, 
the  power,  the  pathos,  the  logic,  and  the  other  and  manifold 
intellectual  pyrotechnics  that  seduce,  but  to  damn,  the  Opera 
House  assemblages  every  Sunday  night  in  Elmira!  And  mis- 
erable, O  thrice  miserable  Beecher  1  For  the  Ministerial  Union 
of  Elmira  will  never,  no,  never  more  be  responsible  to  God  for 
his  shortcomings.    (Excuse  these  tears.) 

(For  the  protection  of  a  man  who  is  uniformly  charged  with 
all  the  newspaper  deviltry  that  sees  the  light  in  Elmira  journals, 
I  take  this  opportunity  of  stating,  under  oath,  duly  subscribed 
before  a  magistrate,  that  Mr.  Beecher  did  not  write  this  article. 

1622 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 

And  further  still,  that  he  did  not  inspire  it.  And  further  still, 
the  Ministerial  Union  of  Elmira  did  not  write  it.  And  finally, 
the  Ministerial  Union  did  not  ask  me  to  write  it.  No,  I  have 
taken  up  this  cudgel  in  defense  of  the  Ministerial  Union  of 
Elmira  solely  from  a  love  of  justice.  Without  solicitation,  I 
have  constituted  myself  the  champion  of  the  Ministerial  Union 
of  Elmira,  and  it  shall  be  a  labor  of  love  with  me  to  conduct 
their  side  of  a  quarrel  in  print  for  them  whenever  they  desire 
me  to  do  it;  or  if  they  are  busy,  and  have  not  the  time  to  ask 
me,  I  will  cheerfully  do  it  anyhow.  In  closing  this  I  must  re- 
mark that  if  any  question  the  right  of  the  clergymen  of  Elmira 
to  turn  Mr.  Beecher  out  of  the  Ministerial  Union,  to  such  I 
answer  that  Mr.  Beecher  recreated  that  institution  after  it  had 
been  dead  for  many  years,  and  invited  those  gentlemen  to  come 
into  it,  which  they  did,  and  so  of  course  they  have  a  right  to 
turn  him  out  if  they  want  to.  The  difference  between  Beecher 
and  the  man  who  put  an  adder  in  his  bosom  is,  that  Beecher 
put  in  more  adders  than  he  did,  and  consequently  had  a  pro- 
portionately livelier  time  of  it  when  they  got  warmed  up.) 

Cheerfully, 

S'CAT. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  J 


THE   INDIGNITY   PUT   UPON   THE   REMAINS  OF 
GEORGE  HOLLAND  BY  THE  REV.  MR.  SABINE 

(See  Chapter  lxxvii) 

What  a  ludicrous  satire  it  was  upon  Christian  charity!— even 
upon  the  vague,  theoretical  idea  of  it  which  doubtless  this  small 
saint  mouths  from  his  own  pulpit  every  Sunday.  Contemplate 
this  freak  of  nature,  and  think  what  a  Cardiff  giant  of  self- 
righteousness  is  crowded  into  his  pigmy  skin.  If  we  probe,  and 
dissect,  and  lay  open  this  diseased,  this  cancerous  piety  of  his, 
we  are  forced  to  the  conviction  that  it  is  the  production  of  an 
impression  on  his  part  that  his  guild  do  about  all  the  good  that 
is  done  on  the  earth,  and  hence  are  better  than  common  clay — 
hence  are  competent  to  say  to  such  as  George  Holland,  "You 
are  unworthy;  you  are  a  play-actor,  and  consequently  a  sinner; 
I  cannot  take  the  responsibility  of  recommending  you  to  the 
mercy  of  Heaven."  It  must  have  had  its  origin  in  that  impres- 
sion, else  he  would  have  thought,  "We  are  all  instruments  for 
the  carrying  out  of  God's  purposes;  it  is  not  for  me  to  pass 
judgment  upon  your  appointed  share  of  the  work,  or  to  praise  or 
to  revile  it;  I  have  divine  authority  for  it  that  we  are  all  sinners, 
and  therefore  it  is  not  for  me  to  discriminate  and  say  we  will 
supplicate  for  this  sinner,  for  he  was  a  merchant  prince  or  a 
banker,  but  we  will  beseech  no  forgiveness  for  this  other  one, 
for  he  was  a  play-actor." 

It  surely  requires  the  furthest  possible  reach  of  self -righteous- 
ness to  enable  a  man  to  lift  his  scornful  nose  in  the  air  and  turn 
his  back  upon  so  poor  and  pitiable  a  thing  as  a  dead  stranger 
come  to  beg  the  last  kindness  that  humanity  can  do  in  its  behalf. 
This  creature  has  violated  the  letter  of  the  Gospel,  and  judged 
George  Holland — not  George  Holland,  either,  but  his  profession 
through  him.    Then  it  is,  in  a  measure,  fair  that  we  judge  this 

1624 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 

creature's  guild  through  him.  In  effect  he  has  said,  "We  are 
the  salt  of  the  earth;  we  do  all  the  good  work  that  is  done;  to 
learn  how  to  be  good  and  do  good  men  must  come  to  us;  actors 
and  such  are  obstacles  to  moral  progress."  Pray  look  at  the 
thing  reasonably  a  moment,  laying  aside  all  biases  of  education 
and  custom.  If  a  common  public  impression  is  fair  evidence  of 
a  thing  then  this  minister's  legitimate,  recognized,  and  accept- 
able business  is  to  tell  people  calmly,  coldly,  and  in  stiff,  written 
sentences,  from  the  pulpit,  to  go  and  do  right,  be  just,  be  merci- 
ful, be  charitable.  And  his  congregation  forget  it  all  between 
church  and  home.  But  for  fifty  years  it  was  George  Holland's 
business  on  the  stage  to  make  his  audience  go  and  do  right,  and 
be  just,  merciful,  and  charitable — because  by  his  living,  breath- 
ing, feeling  pictures  he  showed  them  what  it  was  to  do  these 
things,  and  how  to  do  them,  and  how  instant  and  ample  was 
the  reward!  Is  it  not  a  singular  teacher  of  men,  this  reverend 
gentleman  who  is  so  poorly  informed  himself  as  to  put  the  whole 
stage  under  ban,  and  say,  "I  do  not  think  it  teaches  moral 
lessons"?  Where  was  ever  a  sermon  preached  that  could  make 
filial  ingratitude  so  hateful  to  men  as  the  sinful  play  of  "King 
Lear"?  Or  where  was  there  ever  a  sermon  that  could  so  con- 
vince men  of  the  wrong  and  the  cruelty  of  harboring  a  pam- 
pered and  un analyzed  jealousy  as  the  sinful  play  of  "Othello"? 
And  where  are  there  ten  preachers  who  can  stand  in  the  pulpit 
preaching  heroism,  unselfish  devotion,  and  lofty  patriotism,  and 
hold  their  own  against  any  one  of  five  hundred  William  Tells 
that  can  be  raised  upon  five  hundred  stages  in  the  land  at  a  day's 
notice?  It  is  almost  fair  and  just  to  aver  (although  it  is  pro- 
fanity) that  nine-tenths  of  all  the  kindness  and  forbearance  and 
Christian  charity  and  generosity  in  the  hearts  of  the  American 
people  to-day  got  there  by  being  filtered  down  from  their  foun- 
tain-head, the  gospel  of  Christ,  through  dramas  and  tragedies 
and  comedies  on  the  stage,  and  through  the  despised  novel  and 
the  Christmas  story,  and  through  the  thousand  and  one  lessons, 
suggestions,  and  narratives  of  generous  deeds  that  stir  the  pulses, 
and  exalt  and  augment  the  nobility  of  the  nation  day  by  day  from 
the  teeming  columns  of  ten  thousand  newspapers,  and  not  from 
the  drowsy  pulpit. 

All  that  is  great  and  good  in  our  particular  civilization  came 
straight  from  the  hand  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  many  creatures,  and 

*625 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


of  divers  sorts,  were  doubtless  appointed  to  disseminate  it;  and 
let  tis  believe  that  this  seed  and  the  result  are  the  main  thing, 
and  not  the  cut  of  the  sower's  garment;  and  that  whosoever, 
in  his  way  and  according  to  his  opportunity,  sows  the  one  and 
produces  the  other,  has  done  high  service  and  worthy.  And 
further,  let  us  try  with  all  our  strength  to  believe  that  whenever 
old  simple-hearted  George  Holland  sowed  this  seed,  and  reared 
his  crop  of  broader  charities  and  better  impulses  in  men's  hearts, 
it  was  just  as  acceptable  before  the  Throne  as  if  the  seed  had 
been  scattered  in  vapid  platitudes  from  the  pulpit  of  the  ineffable 
Sabine  himself. 

Am  I  saying  that  the  pulpit  does  not  do  its  share  toward 
disseminating  the  marrow,  the  meat  of  the  gospel  of  Christ? 
(For  we  are  not  talking  of  ceremonies  and  wire-d^awn  creeds  now, 
but  the  living  heart  and  soul  of  what  is  prejty  often  only  a 
specter.) 

No,  I  am  not  saying  that.  The  pulpit  teaches  assemblages 
of  people  twice  a  week — nearly  two  hours  altogether — and  does 
what  it  can  in  that  time.  The  theater  teaches  large  audiences 
seven  times  a  week — 28  or  30  hours  altogether — and  the  novels 
and  newspapers  plead,  and  argue,  and  illustrate,  stir,  move, 
thrill,  thunder,  urge,  persuade,  and  supplicate,  at  the  feet  of 
millions  and  millions  of  people  every  single  day,  and  all  day 
long  and  far  into  the  night;  and  so  these  vast  agencies  till  nine- 
tenths  of  the  vineyard,  and  the  pulpit  tills  the  other  tenth. 
Yet  now  and  then  some  complacent  blind  idiot  says,  "You  un- 
anointed  are  coarse  clay  and  useless ;  you  are  not  as  we,  the  regen- 
erators of  the  world;  go,  bury  yourselves  elsewhere,  for  we  can- 
not take  the  responsibility  of  recommending  idlers  and  sinners 
to  the  yearning  mercy  of  Heaven."  How  does  a  soul  like  that 
stay  in  a  carcass  without  getting  mixed  with  the  secretions 
and  sweated  out  through  the  pores?  Think  of  this  insect  con- 
demning the  whole  theatrical  service  as  a  disseminator  of  bad 
morals  because  it  has  Black  Crooks  in  it;  forgetting  that  if 
that  were  sufficient  ground  people  would  condemn  the  pulpit 
because  it  had  Crooks  and  Kallochs  and  Sabines  in  it! 

No,  I  am  not  trying  to  rob  the  pulpit  of  any  atom  of  its  full 
share  and  credit  in  the  work  of  disseminating  the  meat  and  mar- 
row of  the  gospel  of  Christ;  but  I  am  trying  to  get  a  moment's 
hearing  for  worthy  agencies  in  the  same  work,  that  with  over- 

1626 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


wrought  modesty  seldom  or  never  claim  a  recognition  of  their 
great  services.  I  am  aware  that  the  pulpit  does  its  excellent  one- 
tenth  (and  credits  itself  with  it  now  and  then,  though  most  of 
the  time  a  press  of  business  causes  it  to  forget  it) ;  I  am  aware 
that  in  its  honest  and  well-meaning  way  it  bores  the  people  with 
uninflammable  truisms  about  doing  good ;  bores  them  with  correct 
compositions  on  charity;  bores  them,  chloroforms  them,  stupe- 
fies them  with  argumentative  mercy  without  a  flaw  in  the 
grammar  or  an  emotion  which  the  minister  could  put  in  in  the 
right  place  if  he  turned  his  back  and  took  his  finger  off  the 
manuscript.  And  in  doing  these  things  the  pulpit  is  doing  its 
duty,  and  let  us  believe  that  it  is  likewise  doing  its  best,  and 
doing  it  in  the  most  harmless  and  respectable  way.  And  so  I 
have  said,  and  shall  keep  on  saying,  let  us  give  the  pulpit  its 
full  share  of  credit  in  elevating  and  ennobling  the  people;  but 
when  a  pulpit  takes  to  itself  authority  to  pass  judgment  upon 
the  work  and  worth  of  just  as  legitimate  an  instrument  of  God 
as  itself,  who  spent  a  long  life  preaching  from  the  stage  the  self- 
same gospel  without  the  alteration  of  a  single  sentiment  or  a 
single  axiom  of  right,  it  is  fair  and  just  that  somebody  who 
believes  that  actors  were  made  for  a  high  and  good  purpose,  and 
that  they  accomplish  the  object  of  their  creation  and  accomplish 
it  well,  should  protest.  And  having  protested,  it  is  also  fair  and 
just — being  driven  to  it,  as  it  were — to  whisper  to  the  Sabine 
pattern  of  clergyman,  under  the  breath,  a  simple,  instructive 
truth,  and  say,  "Ministers  are  not  the  only  servants  of  God 
upon  earth,  nor  his  most  efficient  ones,  either,  by  a  very,  very 
long  distance!"  Sensible  ministers  already  know  this,  and  it 
may  do  the  other  kind  good  to  find  it  out. 

But  to  cease  teaching  and  go  back  to  the  rjeginning  again, 
was  it  not  pitiable — that  spectacle?  Honored  and  honorable  old 
George  Holland,  whose  theatrical  ministry  had  for  fifty  years 
softened  hard  hearts,  bred  generosity  in  cold  ones,  kindled 
emotion  in  dead  ones,  uplifted  base  ones,  broadened  bigoted 
ones,  and  made  many  and  many  a  stricken  one  glad  and  filled 
it  brimful  of  gratitude,  figuratively  spit  upon  in  his  unoffend- 
ing coffin  by  this  crawling,  slimy,  sanctimonious,  self-righteous 
reptile! 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  K 


A  SUBSTITUTE  FOR  RULOFF 

HAVE   WE   A   SIDNEY   CARTON   AMONG  US? 

(See  Chapter  lxxxii) 

To  Editor  of  Tribute. 

Sir, — I  believe  in  capital  punishment.  I  believe  that  when  a 
murder  has  been  done  it  should  be  answered  for  with  blood. 
I  have  all  my  life  been  taught  to  feel  this  way,  and  the  fetters  of 
education  are  strong.  The  fact  that  the  death-law  is  rendered 
almost  inoperative  by  its  very  severity  does  not  alter  my  belief 
in  its  righteousness.  The  fact  that  in  England  the  proportion 
of  executions  to  condemnations  is  one  to  sixteen,  and  in  this 
country  only  one  to  twenty-two,  and  in  France  only  one  to 
thirty-eight,  does  not  shake  my  steadfast  confidence  in  the 
propriety  of  retaining  the  death -penalty.  It  is  better  to  hang 
one  murderer  in  sixteen,  twenty- two,  thirty-eight  than  not  to 
hang  any  at  all. 

Feeling  as  I  do,  I  am  not  sorry  that  Ruloff  is  to  be  hanged, 
but  I  am  sincerely  sorry  that  he  himself  has  made  it  necessary 
that  his  vast  capabilities  for  usefulness  should  be  lost  to  the 
world.  In  this,  mine  and  the  public's  is  a  common  regret.  For 
it  is  plain  that  in  the  person  of  Ruloff  one  of  the  most  marvelous 
of  intellects  that  any  age  has  produced  is  about  to  be  sacrificed, 
and  that,  too,  while  half  the  mystery  of  its  strange  powers  is 
yet  a  secret.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  never  entered  the  doors  of 
a  college  or  a  university,  and  yet  by  the  sheer  might  of  his  innate 
gifts  has  made  himself  such  a  colossus  in  abstruse  learning  that 
the  ablest  of  our  scholars  are  but  pigmies  in  his  presence.  By 
the  evidence  of  Professor  Mather,  Mr.  Surbridge,  Mr.  Richmond, 
and  other  men  qualified  to  testify,  this  man  is  as  familiar  with 
the  broad  domain  of  philology  as  common  men  are  with  the 

1628 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 

passing  events  of  the  day.  His  memory  has  such  a  limitless 
grasp  that  he  is  able  to  quote  sentence  after  sentence,  paragraph 
after  paragraph,  chapter  after  chapter,  from  a  gnarled  and  knotty 
ancient  literature  that  ordinary  scholars  are  capable  of  achieving 
little  more  than  a  bowing  acquaintance  with.  But  his  memory 
is  the  least  of  his  great  endowments.  By  the  testimony  of  the 
gentlemen  above  referred  to  he  is  able  to  critically  analyze  the 
works  of  the  old  masters  of  literature,  and  while  pointing  out 
the  beauties  of  the  originals  with  a  pure  and  discriminating 
taste  is  as  quick  to  detect  the  defects  of  the  accepted  transla- 
tions; and  in  the  latter  case,  if  exceptions  be  taken  to  his  judg- 
ment, he  straightway  opens  up  the  quarries  of  his  exhaustless 
knowledge,  and  builds  a  very  Chinese  wall  of  evidence  around 
his  position.  Every  learned  man  who  enters  Ruloff's  presence 
leaves  it  amazed  and  confounded  by  his  prodigious  capabilities 
and  attainments.  One  scholar  said  he  did  not  believe  that  in 
matters  of  subtle  analysis,  vast  knowledge  in  his  peculiar  field  of 
research,  comprehensive  grasp  of  subject,  and  serene  kingship 
over  its  limitless  and  bewildering  details,  any  land  or  any  era 
of  modern  times  had  given  birth  to  Ruloff's  intellectual  equal. 
What  miracles  this  murderer  might  have  wrought,  and  what 
luster  he  might  have  shed  upon  his  country,  if  he  had  not  put  a 
forfeit  upon  his  life  so  foolishly!  But  what  if  the  law  could  be 
satisfied,  and  the  gifted  criminal  still  be  saved.  If  a  life  be 
offered  up  on  the  gallows  to  atone  for  the  murder  Ruloff  did, 
will  that  suffice?  If  so,  give  me  the  proofs,  for  in  all  earnestness 
and  truth  I  aver  that  in  such  a  case  I  will  instantly  bring  forward 
a  man  who,  in  the  interests  of  learning  and  science,  will  take 
Ruloff's  crime  upon  himself,  and  submit  to  be  hanged  in  Ruloff s 
place.  I  can,  and  will  do  this  thing;  and  I  propose  this  matter, 
and  make  this  offer  in  good  faith.  You  know  me,  and  know  my 
address. 

Samuel  Langhorne. 

April  29,  187 1. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  L 
ABOUT  LONDON 

ADDRESS  AT  A  DINNER  GIVEN  BY  THE  SAVAGE  CLUB,  LONDON, 

SEPTEMBER  28,  1872 

(See  Chapter  lxxxvii) 
Reported  by  Moncure  D.  Conway  in  the  Cincinnati  Commercial 

It  affords  me  sincere  pleasure  to  meet  this  distinguished  club, 
a  club  which  has  extended  its  hospitalities  and  its  cordial  wel- 
come to  so  many  of  my  countrymen.  I  hope  [and  here  the 
speaker's  voice  became  low  and  fluttering]  you  will  excuse  these 
clothes.  I  am  going  to  the  theater;  that  will  explain  these 
clothes.  I  have  other  clothes  than  these.  Judging  human 
nature  by  what  I  have  seen  of  it,  I  suppose  that  the  customary 
thing  for  a  stranger  to  do  when  he  stands  here  is  to  make  a  pun 
on  the  name  of  this  club,  under  the  impression,  of  course,  that 
he  is  the  first  man  that  that  idea  has  occurred  to.  It  is  a  credit 
to  our  human  nature,  not  a  blemish  upon  it;  for  it  shows  that 
underlying  all  our  depravity  (and  God  knows  and  you  know  we 
are  depraved  enough)  and  all  our  sophistication,  and  untarnished 
by  them,  there  is  a  sweet  germ  of  innocence  and  simplicity  still. 
When  a  stranger  says  to  me,  with  a  glow  of  inspiration  in  his 
eye,  some  gentle,  innocuous  little  thing  about  "Twain  and  one 
flesh  "  and  all  that  sort  of  thing,  I  don't  try  to  crush  that  man 
into  the  earth — no.  I  feel  like  saying,  "Let  me  take  you  by 
the  hand,  sir;  let  me  embrace  you;  I  have  not  heard  that  pun 
for  weeks."  We  will  deal  in  palpable  puns.  We  will  call  parties 
named  King  "your  Majesty"  and  we  will  say  to  the  Smiths  that 
we  think  we  have  heard  that  name  before  somewhere.  Such  is 
human  nature.  We  cannot  alter  this.  It  is  God  that  made  us 
so  for  some  good  and  wise  purpose.  Let  us  not  repine.  But 
though  I  may  seem  strange,  may  seem  eccentric,  I  mean  to  re- 

1630 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


frain  from  punning  upon  the  name  of  this  club,  though  I  could 
make  a  very  good  one  if  I  had  time  to  think  about  it — a  week. 

I  cannot  express  to  you  what  entire  enjoyment  I  find  in  this 
first  visit  to  this  prodigious  metropolis  of  yours.  Its  wonders 
seem  to  me  to  be  limitless.  I  go  about  as  in  a  dream — as  in  a 
realm  of  enchantment — where  many  things  are  rare  and  beauti- 
ful, and  all  things  are  strange  and  marvelous.  Hour  after  hour 
I  stand — I  stand  spellbound,  as  it  were — and  gaze  upon  the 
statuary  in  Leicester  Square.  (Leicester  Square  being  a  hor- 
rible chaos,  with  the  relic  of  an  equestrian  statue  in  the  center, 
the  king  being  headless  and  limbless,  and  the  horse  in  little  better 
condition.]  I  visit  the  mortuary  effigies  of  noble  old  Henry 
VIII.,  and  Judge  Jeffreys,  and  the  preserved  gorilla,  and  try  to 
make  up  my  mind  which  of  my  ancestors  I  admire  the  most. 
I  go  to  that  matchless  Hyde  Park  and  drive  all  around  it,  and 
then  I  start  to  enter  it  at  the  Marble  Arch— and  am  induced 
to  "change  my  mind."  [Cabs  are  not  permitted  in  Hyde  Park 
— nothing  less  aristocratic  than  a  private  carriage.]  It  is  a 
great  benefaction — is  Hyde  Park.  There,  in  his  hansom  cab, 
the  invalid  can  go — the  poor,  sad  child  of  misfortune — and  insert 
his  nose  between  the  railings,  and  breathe  the  pure,  health- 
giving  air  of  the  country  and  of  heaven.  And  if  he  is  a  swell 
invalid  who  isn't  obliged  to  depend  upon  parks  for  his  country 
air  he  can  drive  inside — if  he  owns  his  vehicle.  I  drive  round  and 
round  Hyde  Park  and  the  more  I  see  of  the  edges  of  it  the  more 
grateful  I  am  that  the  margin  is  extensive. 

And  I  have  been  to  the  Zoological  Gardens.  What  a  wonderful 
place  that  is  I  I  have  never  seen  such  a  curious  and  interesting 
variety  of  wild  animals  in  any  garden  before — except  Mabille. 
I  never  believed  before  there  were  so  many  different  kinds  of 
animals  in  the  world  as  you  can  find  there— and  I  don't  believe 
it  yet.  I  have  been  to  the  British  Museum.  I  would  advise 
you  to  drop  in  there  some  time  when  you  have  nothing  to  do 
for — five  minutes — if  you  have  never  been  there.  It  seems  to 
me  the  noblest  monument  this  nation  has  yet  erected  to  her 
greatness.  I  say  to  her,  our  greatness — as  a  nation.  True,  she 
has  built  other  monuments,  and  stately  ones,  as  well ;  but  these 
she  has  uplifted  in  honor  of  two  or  three  colossal  demigods  who 
have  stalked  across  the  world's  stage,  destroying  tyrants  and 
delivering  nations,  and  whose  prodigies  will  still  live  in  the 

163 1 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


memories  of  men  ages  after  their  monuments  shall  have  crumbled 
to  dust — I  refer  to  the  Wellington  and  Nelson  monuments,  and 
— the  Albert  memorial.  [Sarcasm.  The  Albert  memorial  is  the 
finest  monument  in  the  world,  and  celebrates  the  existence  of  as 
commonplace  a  person  as  good  luck  ever  lifted  out  of  obscurity.] 
The  Library  at  the  British  Museum  I  find  particularly  astound- 
ing. I  have  read  there  hours  together,  and  hardly  made  an 
impression  on  it.  I  revere  that  library.  It  is  the  author's 
friend.  I  don't  care  how  mean  a  book  is,  it  always  takes  one 
copy.  [A  copy  of  every  book  printed  in  Great  Britain  must  by 
law  be  sent  to  the  British  Museum,  a  law  much  complained  of  by 
publishers.]  And  then  every  day  that  author  goes  there  to  gaze 
at  that  book,  and  is  encouraged  to  go  on  in  the  good  work.  And 
what  a  touching  sight  it  is  of  a  Saturday  afternoon  to  see  the 
poor,  careworn  clergymen  gathered  together  in  that  vast  reading- 
room  cabbaging  sermons  for  Sunday!  You  will  pardon  my  re- 
ferring to  these  things.  Everything  in  this  monster  city  in- 
terests me,  and  I  cannot  keep  from  talking,  even  at  the  risk  of 
being  instructive.  People  here  seem  always  to  express  dis- 
tances by  parables.  To  a  stranger  it  is  just  a  little  confusing 
to  be  so  parabolic — so  to  speak.  I  collar  a  citizen,  and  I  think 
I  am  going  to  get  some  valuable  information  out  of  him.  I  ask 
him  how  far  it  is  to  Birmingham,  and  he  says  it  is  twenty-one 
shillings  and  sixpence.  Now  we  know  that  doesn't  help  a  man 
who  is  trying  to  learn.  I  find  myself  down-town  somewhere,  and 
I  want  to  get  some  sort  of  idea  where  I  am — being  usually  lost 
when  alone — and  I  stop  a  citizen  and  say,  "  How  far  is  it  to  Char- 
ing Cross?"  "Shilling  fare  in  a  cab,"  and  off  he  goes.  I  suppose 
if  I  were  to  ask  a  Londoner  how  far  it  is  from  the  sublime  to  the 
ridiculous  he  would  try  to  express  it  in  a  coin.  But  I  am  tres- 
passing upon  your  time  with  these  geological  statistics  and  his- 
torical reflections.  I  will  not  longer  keep  you  from  your  orgies. 
'Tis  a  real  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here,  and  I  thank  you  for  it. 
The  name  of  the  Savage  Club  is  associated  in  my  mind  with  the 
kindly  interest  and  the  friendly  offices  which  you  lavished  upon 
an  old  friend  of  mine  who  came  among  you  a  stranger,  and  you 
opened  your  English  hearts  to  him  and  gave  him  a  welcome  and 
a  home — Artemus  Ward.  Asking  that  you  will  join  me,  I  give 
you  his  Memory. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  M 


LETTER  WRITTEN  TO  MRS.  CLEMENS  FROM  BOSTON, 
NOVEMBER,  1874,  PROPHESYING  A  MONARCHY 
IN  SIXTY-ONE  YEARS 

(See  Chapter  xcvii) 

Boston,  November  i6,  1935. 

Dear  Livy,— You  observe  I  still  call  this  beloved  old  place  by 
the  name  it  had  when  I  was  young.  Limerick/  It  is  enough  to 
make  a  body  sick. 

The  gentlemen-in-waiting  stare  to  see  me  sit  here  telegraphing 
this  letter  to  you,  and  no  doubt  they  are  smiling  in  their  sleeves. 
But  let  theml  The  slow  old  fashions  are  good  enough  for  me, 
thank  God,  and  I  will  none  other.  When  I  see  one  of  these 
modern  fools  sit  absorbed,  holding  the  end  of  a  telegraph  wire 
in  his  hand,  and  reflect  that  a  thousand  miles  away  there  is 
another  fool  hitched  to  the  other  end  of  it,  it  makes  me  frantic 
with  rage;  and  then  I  am  more  implacably  fixed  and  resolved 
than  ever  to  continue  taking  twenty  minutes  to  telegraph  you 
what  I  might  communicate  in  ten  seconds  by  the  new  way  if  I 
would  so  debase  myself.  And  when  I  see  a  whole  silent,  solemn 
drawing-room  full  of  idiots  sitting  with  their  hands  on  each 
other's  foreheads  "communing"  I  tug  the  white  hairs  from  my 
head  and  curse  till  my  asthma  brings  me  the  blessed  relief  of 
suffocation.  In  our  old  day  such  a  gathering  talked  pure  drivel 
and  "rot,"  mostly,  but  better  that,  a  thousand  times,  than  these 
dreary  conversational  funerals  that  oppress  our  spirits  in  this 
mad  generation. 

It  is  sixty  years  since  I  was  here  before.  I  walked  hither  then 
with  my  precious  old  friend.  It  seems  incredible  now  that  we 
did  it  in  two  days,  but  such  is  my  recollection.  I  no  longer  men- 
tion that  we  walked  back  in  a  single  day,  it  makes  me  so  furious 
to  see  doubt  in  the  face  of  the  hearer.    Men  were  men  in  those 

1633 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


old  times.  Think  of  one  of  the  puerile  organisms  in  this  effemi- 
nate age  attempting  such  a  feat. 

My  air-ship  was  delayed  by  a  collision  with  a  fellow  from 
China  loaded  with  the  usual  cargo  of  jabbering,  copper-colored 
missionaries,  and  so  I  was  nearly  an  hour  on  my  journey.  But 
by  the  goodness  of  God  thirteen  of  the  missionaries  were  crippled 
and  several  killed,  so  I  was  content  to  lose  the  time.  I  love 
to  lose  time  anyway  because  it  brings  soothing  reminiscences 
of  the  creeping  railroad  days  of  old,  now  lost  to  us  forever. 

Our  game  was  neatly  played,  and  successfully.  None  ex- 
pected us,  of  course.  You  should  have  seen  the  guards  at  the 
ducal  palace  stare  when  I  said,  "Announce  his  Grace  the  Arch- 
bishop of  Dublin  and  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Hartford." 
Arrived  within,  we  were  all  eyes  to  see  the  Duke  of  Cambridge 
and  his  Duchess,  wondering  if  we  might  remember  their  faces 
and  they  ours.  In  a  moment  they  came  tottering  in;  he,  bent 
and  withered  and  bald;  she,  blooming  with  wholesome  old  age. 
He  peered  through  his  glasses  a  moment,  then  screeched  in  a  reedy 
voice,  "  Come  to  my  arms !  Away  with  titles — I'll  know  ye  by  no 
names  but  Twain  and  Twichell!"  Then  fell  he  on  our  necks  and 
jammed  his  trumpet  in  his  ear,  the  which  we  filled  with  shoutings 
to  this  effect:  "God  bless  you,  old  Howells,  what  is  left  of  you!" 

We  talked  late  that  night — none  of  your  silent  idiot  "commun- 
ings "  for  us — of  the  olden  time.  We  rolled  a  stream  of  ancient 
anecdotes  over  our  tongues  and  drank  till  the  Lord  Archbishop 
grew  so  mellow  in  the  mellow  past  that  Dublin  ceased  to  be 
Dublin  to  him,  and  resumed  its  sweeter,  forgotten  name  of  New 
York.  In  truth  he  almost  got  back  into  his  ancient  religion, 
too,  good  Jesuit  as  he  has  always  been  since  O'Mulligan  the 
First  established  that  faith  in  the  empire. 

And  we  canvassed  everybody.  Bailey  Aldrich,  Marquis  of 
Ponkapog,  came  in,  got  nobly  drunk,  and  told  us  all  about  how 
poor  Osgood  lost  his  earldom  and  was  hanged  for  conspiring 
against  the  second  Emperor;  but  he  didn't  mention  how  near 
he  himself  came  to  being  hanged,  too,  for  engaging  in  the  same 
enterprise.  He  was  as  chaffy  as  he  was  sixty  years  ago,  too,  and 
swore  the  Archbishop  and  I  never  walked  to  Boston;  but  there 
was  never  a  day  that  Ponkapog  wouldn't  lie,  so  be  it  by  the  grace 
of  God  he  got  the  opportunity. 

The  Lord  High  Admiral  came  in,  a  hale  gentleman  close  upon 

1634 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


seventy  and  bronzed  by  the  suns  and  storms  of  many  climes  and 
scarred  by  the  wounds  got  in  many  battles,  and  I  told  him  how 
I  had.seen  him  sit  in  a  high-chair  and  eat  fruit  and  cakes  and 
answer  to  the  name  of  Johnny.  His  granddaughter  (the  eldest) 
is  but  lately  married  to  the  youngest  of  the  Grand  Dukes,  and  so 
who  knows  but  a  day  may  come  when  the  blood  of  the  Howellses 
may  reign  in  the  land?  I  must  not  forget  to  say,  while  I  think  of 
it,  that  your  new  false  teeth  are  done,  my  dear,  and  your  wig. 
Keep  your  head  well  bundled  with  a  shawl  till  the  latter  comes, 
and  so  cheat  your  persecuting  neuralgias  and  rheumatisms. 
Would  you  believe  it? — the  Duchess  of  Cambridge  is  deafer  than 
you — deafer  than  her  husband.  They  call  her  to  breakfast  with 
a  salvo  of  artillery;  and  usually  when  it  thunders  she  looks  up 
expectantly  and  says,  "Come  in."  But  she  has  become  subdued 
and  gentle  with  age  and  never  destroys  the  furniture  now, 
except  when  uncc*nmonly  vexed.  God  knows,  my  dear,  it 
would  be  a  happy  thing  if  you  and  old  Lady  Harmony  would 
imitate  this  spirit.  But  indeed  the  older  you  grow  the  less  secure 
becomes  the  furniture.  When  /  throw  chairs  through  the  win- 
dow I  have  sufficient  reason  to  back  it.  But  you — you  are  but  a 
creature  of  passion. 

The  monument  to  the  author  of  Gloverson  and  His  Silent 
Partners  is  finished.1  It  is  the  stateliest  and  the  costliest  ever 
erected  to  the  memory  of  any  man.  This  noble  classic  has  now 
been  translated  into  all  the  languages  of  the  earth  and  is  adored 
by  all  nations  and  known  to  all  creatures.  Yet  I  have  conversed 
as  familiarly  with  the  author  of  it  as  I  do  with  my  own  great- 
grandchildren. 

I  wish  you  could  sec  old  Cambridge  and  Ponkapog.  I  love 
them  as  dearly  as  ever,  but  privately,  my  dear,  they  are  not 
much  improvement  on  idiots.  It  is  melancholy  to  hear  them 
jabber  over  the  same  pointless  anecdotes  three  and  four  times 
of  an  evening,  forgetting  that  they  had  jabbered  them  over  three 
or  four  times  the  evening  before.  Ponkapog  still  writes  poetry, 
but  the  old-time  fire  has  mostly  gone  out  of  it.  Perhaps  his 
best  effort  of  late  years  is  this: 

O  soul,  soul,  soul  of  mine! 
Soul,  soul,  soul  of  thine! 

1  Ralph  Keeler.    See  chap,  lxxxiii. 
l63S 


Digitized  by  Qoogle 


MARK  TWAIN 

Thy  soul,  my  soul,  two  souls  entwine, 
And  sing  thy  lauds  in  crystal  wine! 

This  he  goes  about  repeating  to  everybody,  daily  and  nightly, 
insomuch  that  he  is  become  a  sore  affliction  to  all  that  know 
him. 

But  I  must  desist.  There  are  draughts  here  everywhere  and 
my  gout  is  something  frightful.  My  left  foot  hath  resemblance 
to  a  snuff -bladder.   God  be  with  you.  Hartford. 

These  to  Lady  Hartford,  in  the  earldom  of  Hartford,  in  the 
upper  portion  of  the  city  of  Dublin. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  N 
MARK  TWAIN  AND  COPYRIGHT 

I 

PETITION 

Concerning  Copyright  (1875) 
(See  Chapter  cii) 

To  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives  op  the 
United  States  in  Congress  Assembled. 

We,  your  petitioners,  do  respectfully  represent  as  follows,  viz.: 
That  justice,  plain  and  simple,  is  a  thing  which  right-feeling 
men  stand  ready  at  all  times  to  accord  to  brothers  and  strangers 
alike.  All  such  men  will  concede  that  it  is  but  plain,  simple 
justice  that  American  authors  should  be  protected  by  copyright 
in  Europe;  also,  that  European  authors  should  be  protected  by 
copyright  here. 

Both  divisions  of  this  proposition  being  true,  it  behooves  our 
government  to  concern  itself  with  that  division  of  it  which  comes 
peculiarly  within  its  province — viz.,  the  latter  moiety — and  to 
grant  to  foreign  authors  with  all  convenient  despatch  a  full  and 
effective  copyright  in  America  without  marring  the  grace  of  the  act 
by  stopping  to  inquire  whether  a  similar  justice  will  be  done  our 
own  authors  by  foreign  governments.  If  it  were  even  known 
that  those  governments  would  not  extend  this  justice  to  us  it 
would  still  not  justify  us  in  withholding  this  manifest  right  from 
their  authors.  If  a  thing  is  right  it  ought  to  be  done — the  thing 
called  "expediency"  or  "policy"  has  no  concern  with  such  a 
matter.  And  we  desire  to  repeat,  with  all  respect,  that  it  is  not 
a  grace  or  a  privilege  we  ask  for  our  foreign  brethren,  but  a  right 
—a  right  received  from  God,  and  only  denied  them  by  man. 
We  hold  no  ownership  in  these  authors,  and  when  we  take  their 

1637 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


work  from  them,  as  at  present,  without  their  consent,  it  is  robbery. 
The  fact  that  the  handiwork  of  our  own  authors  is  seized  in  the 
same  way  in  foreign  lands  neither  excuses  nor  mitigates  our  sin. 

With  your  permission  we  will  say  here,  over  our  signatures,  and 
earnestly  and  sincerely,  that  we  very  greatly  desire  that  you 
shall  grant  a  full  copyright  to  foreign  authors  (the  copyright  fee 
for  the  entry  in  the  office  of  the  Congressional  Librarian  to  be 
the  same  as  we  pay  ourselves),  and  we  also  as  greatly  desire  that 
this  grant  shall  be  made  without  a  single  hampering  stipulation 
that  American  authors  shall  receive  in  turn  an  advantage  of  any 
kind  from  foreign  governments. 

Since  no  author  who  was  applied  to  hesitated  for  a  moment  to 
append  his  signature  to  this  petition  we  are  satisfied  that  if  time 
had  permitted  we  could  have  procured  the  signature  of  every 
writer  in  the  United  States,  great  and  small,  obscure  or  famous. 
As  it  is,  the  list  comprises  the  names  of  about  all  our  writers 
whose  works  have  at  present  a  European  market,  and  who  are 
therefore  chiefly  concerned  in  this  matter. 

No  objection  to  our  proposition  can  come  from  any  reputable 
publisher  among  us — or  does  come  from  such  a  quarter,  as  the 
appended  signatures  of  our  greatest  publishing  firms  will  attest. 
A  European  copyright  here  would  be  a  manifest  advantage  to 
them.  As  the  matter  stands  now  the  moment  they  have  thor^ 
oughly  advertised  a  desirable  foreign  book,  and  thus  at  great 
expense  aroused  public  interest  in  it,  some  small-spirited  specu- 
lator (who  has  lain  still  in  his  kennel  and  spent  nothing)  rushes 
the  same  book  on  the  market  and  robs  the  respectable  publisher 
of  half  the  gains. 

Then,  since  neither  our  authors  nor  the  decent  among  our 
publishing  firms  will  object  to  granting  an  American  copyright 
to  foreign  authors  and  artists,  who  can  there  be  to  object? 
Surely  nobody  whose  protest  is  entitled  to  any  weight. 

Trusting  in  the  righteousness  of  our  cause  we,  your  petitioners, 
will  ever  pray,  etc. 

With  great  respect,  Your  Ob't  Serv'ts. 

CIRCULAR  TO  AMERICAN  AUTHORS  AND  PUBLISHERS 

Dear  Sir, — We  believe  that  you  will  recognize  the  justice  and 
the  righteousness  of  the  thing  we  desire  to  accomplish  through 

1638 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


the  accompanying  petition.  And  we  believe  that  you  will  be 
willing  that  our  country  shall  be  the  first  in  the  world  to  grant 
to  all  authors  alike  the  free  exercise  of  their  manifest  right  to 
do  as  they  please  with  the  fruit  of  their  own  labor  without 
inquiring  what  flag  they  live  under.  If  the  sentiments  of  the 
petition  meet  your  views,  will  you  do  us  the  favor  to  sign  it  and 
forward  it  by  post  at  your  earliest  convenience  to  our  secretary? 

|  Committee 

Address 


Secretary  of  the  Committee. 
II 

Communications  supposed  to  have  been  written  by  the  Tsar 
of  Russia  and  the  Sultan  of  Turkey  to  Mark  Twain  on  the  sub- 
ject of  International  Copyright,  about  1890. 

St.  Petersburg,  February. 
Col.  Mark  Twain,  Washington. 

Your  cablegram  received.  It  should  have  been  transmitted 
through  my  minister,  but  let  that  pass.  I  am  opposed  to  inter- 
national copyright.  At  present  American  literature  is  harmless 
here  because  we  doctor  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  approve 
the  various  beneficent  devices  which  we  use  to  keep  our  people 
favorable  to  fetters  as  jewelry  and  pleased  with  Siberia  as  a 
summer  resort.  But  your  bill  would  spoil  this.  We  should  be 
obliged  to  let  you  say  your  say  in  your  own  way.  Voila!  my 
empire  would  be  a  republic  in  five  years  and  I  should  be  sampling 
Siberia  myself. 

If  you  should  run  across  Mr.  Kennan 1  please  ask  him  to  come 
over  and  give  some  readings.    I  will  take  good  care  of  him. 

Alexander  III. 

144 — Collect. 

1  George  Kennan,  who  had  graphically  pictured  the  fearful  condi- 
tions of  Siberian  exile. 

1639 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Constantinople,  February. 

Dr.  Mark  Twain,  Washington. 

Great  Scott,  not  By  the  beard  of  the  Prophet,  no!  How  can 
you  ask  such  a  thing  of  me?  I  am  a  man  of  family.  I  cannot 
take  chances,  like  other  people.  I  cannot  let  a  literature 
in  here  which  teaches  that  a  man's  wife  is  as  good  as  the  man 
himself.  Such  a  doctrine  cannot  do  any  particular  harm,  of 
course,  where  the  man  has  only  one  wife,  for  then  it  is  a  dead- 
level  between  them,  and  there  is  no  humiliating  inequality,  and 
no  resulting  disorder;  but  you  take  an  extremely  married  person, 
like  me,  and  go  to  teaching  that  his  wife  is  964  times  as  good  as 
he  is,  and  what's  hell  to  that  harem,  dear  friend?  I  never  saw 
such  a  fool  as  you.  Do  not  mind  that  expression;  I  already 
regret  it,  and  would  replace  it  with  a  softer  one  if  I  could  do  it 
without  debauching  the  truth.  I  beseech  you,  do  not  pass  that 
bill.  Roberts  College  is  quite  all  the  American  product  we  can 
stand  just  now.  On  top  of  that,  do  you  want  to  send  us  a  flood 
of  freedom-shrieking  literature  which  we  can't  edit  the  poison 
out  of,  but  must  let  it  go  among  our  people  just  as  it  is?  My 
friend,  we  should  be  a  republic  inside  of  ten  years. 


Ill 

MARK  TWAIN'S  LAST  SUGGESTION  ON  COPYRIGHT 

A  MEMORIAL  RESPECTFULLY  TENDERED  TO  THE  MEMBERS  OF  THE 
SENATE  AND  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES 

(Prepared  early  in  1009  at  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Champ  Clark 
but  not  offered.  A  bill  adding  fourteen  years  to  the  copy- 
right period  was  passed  about  this  time.) 

The  Policy  of  Nineteen  or  twenty  years  ago  James  Russell 
Congress  Lowell,  George  Haven  Putnam,  and  the  under- 
signed appeared  before  the  Senate  Committee  on  Patents  in  the 
interest  of  Copyright.  Up  to  that  time,  as  explained  by  Senator 
Piatt,  of  Connecticut,  the  policy  of  Congress  had  been  to  limit 
the  life  of  a  copyright  by  a  term  of  years,  with  one  definite  end 
in  view,  and  only  one — to  wit,  that  after  an  author  had  been 
permitted  to  enjoy  for  a  reasonable  length  of  time  the  income 

1640 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


from  literary  property  created  by  his  hand  and  brain  the  prop- 
erty should  then  be  transferred  "to  the  public"  as  a  free  gift. 
That  is  still  the  policy  of  Congress  to-day. 

The  Purpose  in    The  purpose  in  view  was  clear:  to  so  reduce 
Vicw  the  price  of  the  book  as  to  bring  it  within  the 

reach  of  all  purses,  and  spread  it  among  the  millions  who  had 
not  been  able  to  buy  it  while  it  was  still  under  the  protection  of 
copyright. 

The  Purpose     This  purpose  has  always  been  defeated.  That 
Defeated        jg  to  sayj  that  while  the  death  of  a  copyright 
has  sometimes  reduced  the  price  of  a  book  by  a  half  for  a  while, 
and  in  some  cases  by  even  more,  it  has  never  reduced  it  vastly, 
nor  accomplished  any  reduction  that  was  permanent  and  secure. 

The  reason  is  simple:  Congress  has  never  made 
a  reduction  compulsory.  Congress  was  con- 
vinced that  the  removal  of  the  author's  royalty  and  the  book's 
consequent  (or  at  least  probable)  dispersal  among  several  com- 
peting publishers  would  make  the  book  cheap  by  force  of  the 
competition.  It  was  an  error.  It  has  not  turned  out  so.  The 
reason  is,  a  publisher  cannot  find  profit  in  an  exceedingly  cheap 
edition  if  he  must  divide  the  market  with  competitors. 

The  natural  remedy  would  seem  to  be,  an 
amended  law  requiring  the  issue  of  cheap 
editions. 

Copyright  I  think  the  remedy  could  be  accomplished  in 
*««w*°n  the  following  way,  without  injury  to  author 
or  publisher,  and  with  extreme  advantage  to  the  public:  by  an 
amendment  to  the  existing  law  providing  as  follows — to  wit: 
that  at  any  time  between  the  beginning  of  a  book's  forty-first 
year  and  the  ending  of  its  forty-second  the  owner  of  the  copy- 
right may  extend  its  life  thirty  years  by  issuing  and  placing  on 
sale  an  edition  of  the  book  at  one-tenth  the  price  of  the  cheapest 
edition  hitherto  issued  at  any  time  during  the  ten  immediately 
preceding  years.  This  extension  to  lapse  and  become  null  and 
void  if  at  any  time  during  the  thirty  years  he  shall  fail  during 
the  space  of  three  consecutive  months  to  furnish  the  ten  per  cent, 
book  upon  demand  of  any  person  or  persons  desiring  to  buy  it. 

The  result  would  be  that  no  American  classic 
enjoying  the  thirty-year  extension  would  ever 
be  out  of  the  reach  of  any  American  purse,  let  its  uncompulsory 

1641 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


price  be  what  it  might.  He  would  get  a  two-dollar  book  for 
20  cents,  and  he  could  get  none  but  copyright-expired  classics  at 
any  such  rate. 

At  the  end  of  the  thirty-year  extension  the 
copyright  would  again  die,  and  the  price 
would  again  advance.  This  by  a  natural  law,  the  excessively 
cheap  edition  no  longer  carrying  with  it  an  advantage  to  any 
publisher. 

Reconstruction  of  ^  clause  of  the  suggested  amendment  could 
the  Present  Lew  read  about  as  follows,  and  would  obviate  the 

Not  Necessary  e  .    .  .  ,  . 

necessity  of  taking  the  present  law  to  pieces 
and  building  it  over  again: 

All  books  and  all  articles  enjoying  forty-two  years  copy- 
right-life under  the  present  law  shall  be  admitted  to  the 
privilege  of  the  thirty-year  extension  upon  complying 
with  the  condition  requiring  the  producing  and  placing 
upon  permanent  sale  of  one  grade  or  form  of  said  book  or 
article  at  a  price  of  90  per  cent,  below  the  cheapest  rate  at 
which  said  book  or  article  had  been  placed  upon  the 
market  at  any  time  during  the  immediately  preceding  ten 
years. 

REMARKS 

If  the  suggested  amendment  shall  meet  with  the  favor  of  the 
present  Congress  and  become  law — and  I  hope  it  will — I  shall 
have  personal  experience  of  its  effects  very  soon.  Next  year,  in 
fact,  in  the  person  of  my  first  book,  The  Innocents  Abroad.  For 
its  forty-two-year  copyright-life  will  then  cease  and  its  thirty- 
year  extension  begin — and  with  the  latter  the  permanent  low- 
rate  edition.  At  present  the  highest  price  of  the  book  is  eight 
dollars,  and  its  lowest  price  three  dollars  per  copy.  Thus  the 
permanent  low  rate  will  be  thirty  cents  per  copy.  A  sweeping 
reduction  like  this  is  what  Congress  from  the  beginning  has  de- 
sired to  achieve,  but  has  not  been  able  to  accomplish  because 
no  inducement  was  offered  to  publishers  to  run  the  risk. 

Respectfully  submitted, 

S.  L.  Clemens. 

(A  full  and  interesting  elucidation  of  Mark  Twain's  views  on 
Copyright  may  be  found  in  an  article  entitled  "  Concerning  Copy- 
right," published  in  the  North  American  Review  for  January,  1905.) 

1642 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  O 


(See  Chapter  cxiv) 

Address  of  Samuel  L.  Clemens  (Mark  Twain)  from  a  report 
of  the  dinner  given  by  the  publishers  of  the  Atlantic  Monthly 
in  honor  of  the  Seventieth  Anniversary  of  the  Birth  of 
John  Greenleaf  Whittier,  at  the  Hotel  Brunswick,  Boston, 
December  17,  1877,  as  published  in  the  Boston  Evening 
Transcript,  December  18,  1877. 

Mr.  Chairman, — This  is  an  occasion  peculiarly  meet  for  the 
digging  up  of  pleasant  reminiscences  concerning  literary  folk, 
therefore  I  will  drop  lightly  into  history  myself.  Standing  here 
on  the  shore  of  the  Atlantic,  and  contemplating  certain  of  its 
largest  literary  billows,  I  am  reminded  of  a  thing  which  happened 
to  me  thirteen  years  ago,  when  I  had  just  succeeded  in  stirring 
up  a  little  Nevadian  literary  puddle  myself,  whose  spume-flakes 
were  beginning  to  blow  thinly  Californiaward.  I  started  an 
inspection  tramp  through  the  southern  mines  of  California.  I 
was  callow  and  conceited,  and  I  resolved  to  try  the  virtue  of  my 
nom  de  guerre*  I  very  soon  had  an  opportunity.  I  knocked 
at  a  miner's  lonely  log  cabin  in  the  foothills  of  the  Sierras  just 
at  nightfall.  It  was  snowing  at  the  time.  A  jaded,  melancholy 
man  of  fifty,  barefooted,  opened  the  door  to  me.  When  he 
heard  my  nom  de  guerre  he  looked  more  dejected  than  before.  He 
let  me  in — pretty  reluctantly,  I  thought — and  after  the  custom- 
ary bacon  and  beans,  black  coffee  and  hot  whisky,  I  took  a  pipe. 
This  sorrowful  man  had  not  said  three  words  up  to  this  time. 
Now  he  spoke  up  and  said,  in  the  voice  of  one  who  is  secretly 
suffering,  "You're  the  fourth — I'm  going  to  move."  "The 
fourth  what?"  said  I.  "The  fourth  littery  man  that  has  been 
here  in  twenty-four  hours — I'm  going  to  move."  "You  don't 
tell  me!"  said  I;  "who  were  the  others?"  "Mr.  Longfellow,  Mr. 
Emerson,  and  Mr.  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes— consound  the  lotl" 

1643 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


You  can  easily  believe  I  was  interested.  I  supplicated — three 
hot  whiskies  did  the  rest — and  finally  the  melancholy  miner  be- 
gan.  Said  he: 

"They  came  here  just  at  dark  yesterday  evening,  and  I  let 
them  in,  of  course.  Said  they  were  going  to  the  Yosemite. 
They  were  a  rough  lot,  but  that's  nothing;  everybody  looks 
rough  that  travels  afoot.  Mr.  Emerson  was  a  seedy  little  bit 
of  a  chap,  red-headed.  Mr.  Holmes  was  as  fat  as  a  balloon; 
he  weighed  as  much  as  three  hundered,  and  had  double  chins 
all  the  way  down  to  his  stomach.  Mr.  Longfellow  was  built  like 
a  prize-fighter.  His  head  was  cropped  and  bristly,  like  as  if  he 
had  a  wig  made  of  hair-brushes.  His  nose  lay  straight  down  in 
his  face,  like  a  finger  with  the  end  joint  tilted  up.  They  had  been 
drinking,  I  could  see  that.  And  what  queer  talk  they  used! 
Mr.  Holmes  inspected  this  cabin,  then  he  took  me  by  the  button- 
hole and  says  he: 

"'Through  the  deep  caves  of  thought 
I  hear  a  voice  that  sings, 
"  Build  thee  more  stately  mansions, 
O  my  soul!" ' 

"Says  I, '  I  can't  afford  it,  Mr.  Holmes,  and  moreover  I  don't 
want  to.'  Blamed  if  I  liked  it  pretty  well,  either,  coming  from 
a  stranger  that  way.  However,  I  started  to  get  out  my  bacon 
and  beans  when  Mr.  Emerson  came  and  looked  on  awhile,  and 
then  he  takes  me  aside  by  the  buttonhole  and  says: 

"'Give  me  agates  for  my  meat; 
Give  me  cantharids  to  eat; 
Prom  air  and  ocean  bring  roe  foods, 
From  all  zones  and  altitudes.' 

"Says  I, ' Mr.  Emerson,  if  you'll  excuse  me,  this  ain't  no  hotel.' 
You  see,  it  sort  of  riled  me— I  warn't  used  to  the  ways  of  littery 
swells.  But  I  went  on  a-sweating  over  my  work,  and  next  comes 
Mr.  Longfellow  and  buttonholes  me  and  interrupts  me.  Says 
he: 

"'Honor  be  to  Mudjekeewis! 

You  shall  hear  how  Pau-Puk-Keewis — ' 

1644 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


"But  I  broke  in,  and  says  I,  'Beg  your  pardon,  Mr.  Long- 
fellow, if  you'll  be  so  kind  as  to  hold  your  yawp  for  about  five 
minutes  and  let  me  get  this  grub  ready,  you'll  do  me  proud.' 
Well,  sir,  after  they'd  filled  up  I  set  out  the  jug.  Mr.  Holmes 
looks  at  it  and  then  he  fires  up  all  of  a  sudden  and  yells: 

"'Flash  out  a  stream  of  blood-red  wine! 
For  I  would  drink  to  other  days.' 

"By  George,  I  was  getting  kind  of  worked  up.  I  don't  deny 
it,  I  was  getting  kind  of  worked  up.  I  turns  to  Mr.  Holmes  and 
says  I,  'Looky  here,  my  fat  friend,  I'm  a-running  this  shanty, 
and  if  the  court  knows  herself  you'll  take  whisky  straight  or 
you'll  go  dry.'  Them's  the  very  words  I  said  to  him.  Now  I 
don't  want  to  sass  such  famous  littery  people,  but  you  see  they 
kind  of  forced  me.  There  ain't  nothing  onreasonable  Txmt  me. 
I  don't  mind  a  passel  of  guests  a-treadin'  on  my  tail  three  or  four 
times,  but  when  it  comes  to  standing  on  it  it's  different,  'and  if 
the  court  knows  herself,'  I  says,  'you'll  take  whisky  straight 
or  you'll  go  dry.'  Well,  between  drinks  they'd  swell  around 
the  cabin  and  strike  attitudes  and  spout;  and  pretty  soon  they 
got  out  a  greasy  old  deck  and  went  to  playing  euchre  at  ten  cents 
a  corner— on  trust.  I  began  to  notice  some  pretty  suspicious 
things.  Mr.  Emerson  dealt,  looked  at  his  hand,  shook  his  head, 
says— 

"'I  am  the  doubter  and  the  doubt—' 

and  calmly  bunched  the  hands  and  went  to  shuffling  for  a  new 
lay-out.   Says  he: 

"'They  reckon  ill  who  leave  me  out; 
They  know  not  well  the  subtle  ways  I  keep. 
I  pass  and  deal  again!' 

Hang'd  if  he  didn't  go  ahead  and  do  it,  too!  Oh,  he  was  a  cool 
one!  Well,  in  about  a  minute  things  were  running  pretty  tight, 
but  all  of  a  sudden  I  see  by  Mr.  Emerson's  eye  he  judged  he  had 
'em.  He  had  already  corralled  two  tricks  and  each  of  the  others 
one.   So  now  he  kind  of  lifts  a  little  in  his  chair  and  says, 

"'I  tire  of  globes  and  aces! — 
Too  long  the  game  is  played!' 

in. — 34  1645 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


and  down  he  fetched  a  right  bower.  Mr.  Longfellow  smiles  as 
sweet  as  pie  and  says, 

'"Thanks,  thanks  to  thee,  my  worthy  friend, 
For  the  lesson  thou  hast  taught,' 

and  blamed  if  he  didn't  down  with  another  right  bower  1  Emer- 
son claps  his  hand  on  his  bowie,  Longfellow  claps  his  on  his 
revolver,  and  I  went  under  a  bunk.  There  was  going  to  be 
trouble;  but  that  monstrous  Holmes  rose  up,  wobbling  his 
double  chins,  and  says  he,  'Order,  gentlemen;  the  first  man  that 
draws  I'll  lay  down  on  him  and  smother  him  I'  All  quiet  on  the 
Potomac,  you  bet! 

"They  were  pretty  how-come-you-so  by  now,  and  they  begun 
to  blow.  Emerson  says,  'The  noblest  thing  I  ever  wrote  was 
"Barbara  Frietchie."'  Says  Longfellow,  'It  don't  begin  with 
my  "  Bigelow  Papers." '  Says  Holmes, '  My  "  Thanatopsis  "  lays 
over  'em  both.'  They  mighty  near  ended  in  a  fight.  Then  they 
wished  they  had  some  more  company,  and  Mr.  Emerson  pointed 
to  me  and  says: 

"'Is  yonder  squalid  peasant  all 
That  this  proud  nursery  could  breed?' 

He  was  a-whetting  his  bowie  on  his  boot — so  I  let  it  pass.  Well, 
sir,  next  they  took  it  into  their  heads  that  they  would  like  some 
music;  so  they  made  me  stand  up  and  sing, '  When  Johnny  Comes 
Marching  Home'  till  I  dropped— at  thirteen  minutes  past  four 
this  morning.  That's  what  I've  been  through,  my  friend. 
When  I  woke  at  seven  they  were  leaving,  thank  goodness,  and 
Mr.  Longfellow  had  my  only  boots  on  and  his'n  under  his  arm. 
Says  I,  'Hold  on  there,  Evangeline,  what  are  you  going  to  do 
with  them?  *  He  says, '  Going  to  make  tracks  with  'em,  because — 

"'Lives  of  great  men  all  remind  us 
We  can  make  our  lives  sublime; 
And,  departing,  leave  behind  us 
Footprints  on  the  sands  of  time.' 

As  I  said,  Mr.  Twain,  you  are  the  fourth  in  twenty-four  hours — 
and  I'm  going  to  move;  I  ain't  suited  to  a  littery  atmosphere." 

1646 


Digitized  by  Google 


o  0* 


^^^^  ^^f^^A^^^*^ 


o   o  o 


a*. 


o 

O 

o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 

o 
o 
o 


o 
o 


o 
o 
o 
o 
o 


o  o 
o  o 


o 

o 

o 

o 

0 

jL*  Wt  XJ  _  ¥  L  - 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 


w 


SEATING  PLAN  OF  THE  WBITTIER  BIRTHDAY  DINNER 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 

I  said  to  the  miner,  "Why,  my  dear  sir,  these  were  not  the 
gracious  singers  to  whom  we  and  the  world  pay  loving  reverence 
and  homage;  these  were  impostors." 

The  miner  investigated  me  with  a  calm  eye  for  a  while;  then 
said  he,  "Ah!  impostors,  were  they?   Are  you?" 

I  did  not  pursue  the  subject,  and  since  then  I  have  not  traveled 
on  my  nom  de  guerre  enough  to  hurt.  Such  was  the  reminiscence 
I  was  moved  to  contribute,  Mr.  Chairman.  In  my  enthusiasm 
I  may  have  exaggerated  the  details  a  little,  but  you  will  easily 
forgive  me  that  fault,  since  I  believe  it  is  the  first  time  I  have 
ever  deflected  from  Deroendicular  fact  on  an  occasion  like  this. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  P 


THE  ADAM  MONUMENT  PETITION 

(See  Chapter  cxxxiv) 

To  the  Honorable  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives 
of  the  United  States  in  Congress  Assembled. 

Whereas,  A  number  of  citizens  of  the  city  of  Elmira  in  the 
State  of  New  York  having  covenanted  among  themselves  to 
erect  in  that  city  a  monument  in  memory  of  Adam,  the  father 
of  mankind,  being  moved  thereto  by  a  sentiment  of  love  and 
duty,  and  these  having  appointed  the  undersigned  to  communi- 
cate with  your  honorable  body,  we  beg  leave  to  lay  before  you 
the  following  facts  and  append  to  the  same  our  humble  petition. 

1.  As  far  as  is  known  no  monument  has  ever  been  raised  in 
any  part  of  the  world  to  commemorate  the  services  rendered  to 
our  race  by  this  great  man,  whilst  many  men  of  far  less  note  and 
worship  have  been  rendered  immortal  by  means  of  stately  and 
indestructible  memorials. 

2.  The  common  father  of  mankind  has  been  suffered  to  lie 
in  entire  neglect,  although  even  the  Father  of  our  Country  has 
now,  and  has  had  for  many  years,  a  monument  in  course  of 
construction. 

3.  No  right-feeling  human  being  can  desire  to  see  this  neglect 
continued,  but  all  just  men,  even  to  the  farthest  regions  of  the 
globe,  should  and  will  rejoice  to  know  that  he  to  whom  we  owe 
existence  is  about  to  have  reverent  and  fitting  recognition  of 
his  works  at  the  hands  of  the  people  of  Elmira.  His  labors 
were  not  in  behalf  of  one  locality,  but  for  the  extension  of  human- 
ity at  large  and  the  blessings  which  go  therewith;  hence  all 
races  and  all  colors  and  all  religions  are  interested  in  seeing  that 
his  name  and  fame  shall  be  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  the  blight 
of  oblivion  by  a  permanent  and  suitable  monument. 

1648 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


4.  It  will  be  to  the  imperishable  credit  of  the  United  States 
if  this  monument  shall  be  set  up  within  her  borders;  moreover, 
it  will  be  a  peculiar  grace  to  the  beneficiary  if  this  testimonial 
of  affection  and  gratitude  shall  be  the  gift  of  the  youngest  of 
the  nations  that  have  sprung  from  his  loins  after  6,000  years  of 
unappreciation  on  the  part  of  its  elders. 

5.  The  idea  of  this  sacred  enterprise  having  originated  in  the 
city  of  Elmira,  she  will  be  always  grateful  if  the  general  govern- 
ment shall  encourage  her  in  the  good  work  by  securing  to  her  a 
certain  advantage  through  the  exercise  of  its  great  authority. 

Therefore,  Your  petitioners  beg  that  your  honorable  body  will 
be  pleased  to  issue  a  decree  restricting  to  Elmira  the  right  to 
build  a  monument  to  Adam  and  inflicting  a  heavy  penalty  upon 
any  other  community  within  the  United  States  that  shall  pro- 
pose or  attempt  to  erect  a  monument  or  other  memorial  to  the 
said  Adam,  and  to  this  end  we  will  ever  pray. 


NAMES 


NAMES 


F.  G.  Hall 
C.  Preswick 
Thad.  S.  Up  de  Graf! 
Thos.  K.  Beecher 
John  Arnot,  Jr. 
S.  De  Witt 
W.  F.  Sherwin 
S.  T.  Reynolds 
Chas.  J.  Langdon 
Henry  E.  Drake 
Delos  L.  Holden 

C.  W.  Brown 
E.  B.  Smith 
H.  G.  Gilbert 
E.  K.  Waver 
Wm.  H.  Ferguson 
William  E.  Hart 
J.  Richardson 

J.  D.  Baldwin 

D.  Atwater 
W.  A.  Ward 


M.  H.  Arnot 


C.  H.  Thomson 
Theron  A.  Wales 
Wm.  T.  Post 


Seymour  Dexter 
F.  H.  Atkinson 


J.  R.  Reid 
Ausburn  Towner 
J.  H.  Barney 
R.  R.  R.  Dumarz 


C.  L.  Harding 
J.  Hotchkiss 
M.  W.  Palnue 
Peter  Wright 


L.  A.  Humphrey 


G.  A.  Grinley 

H.  M.  Kent 
T.  C.  Cowen 
J.  J.  Bush 


H.  V.  Ransom 
A.  S.  Fitch 


1649 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


NAMES 

A.  Wyckoff 
Geo.  W.  Wyckoff 
C.  W.  Wyckoff 
F.  T.  Wyckoff 

E.  L.  Wyckoff 
J.  D.  Slee 

F.  W.  Crane 

W.  H.  Longstreet 
R.  W.  McDowell 
John  Brand 
Wm.  J.  Sosmore 
H.  A.  Phelps 
Walter  H.  Albro 
W.  H.  Stowell 
Jno.  Young 
E.  W.  Andrews 
John  Young 
L.  L.  Updyke 
Geo.  H.  Dickinson 
Robert  R.  Fuller 
J.  M.  Robinson 
W.  S.  Gerity 
Jno.  T.  Davidson 
L.  G.  Jackson 
J.  T.  Dewitt 
A.  B.  Hamilton 


NAMES 

J.  M.  Sly 
W.  E.  Shims 
Wm.  H.  Frost 
Chas.  Hazard 
Arthur  Pratt 

G.  S.  Dickinson 
Geo.  M.  Robinson 
E.  P.  Bement 
Lucuis  D.  Robinson 
Fred  D.  Hills 
Joseph  J.  Emerson 
Albert  J.  Vickery 

H.  E.  Millins 
Theo.  G.  Smith 
A.  D.  Symonds 
P.  E.  Lemunyan 
C.  R.  Gerity 
Isaac  Maxwell 
M.  M.  Conklin 
J.  T.  Morse 

J.  A.  Bundy 
L.  Howes 
A.  H.  Sherwood 
S.  H.  Wagner 
Alfred  B.  Dent 
Edwin  Warner 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  Q 


GENERAL  GRANT'S  GRAMMAR 

(Written  in  1886.    Delivered  at  an  Army  and  Navy 
Club  dinner  in  New  York  City) 

Lately  a  great  and  honored  author,  Matthew  Arnold,  has  been 
finding  fault  with  General  Grant's  English.  That  would  be  fair 
enough,  maybe,  if  the  examples  of  imperfect  English  averaged 
more  instances  to  the  page  in  General  Grant's  book  than  they 
do  in  Arnold's  criticism  on  the  book — but  they  do  not.  It  would 
be  fair  enough,  maybe,  if  such  instances  were  commoner  in 
General  Grant's  book  than  they  are  in  the  works  of  the  average 
standard  author — but  they  are  not.  In  fact,  General  Grant's 
derelictions  in  the  matter  of  grammar  and  construction  are  not 
more  frequent  than  such  derelictions  in  the  works  of  a  majority 
of  the  professional  authors  of  our  time,  and  of  all  previous  times 
— authors  as  exclusively  and  painstakingly  trained  to  the  lit- 
erary trade  as  was  General  Grant  to  the  trade  of  war.  This  is 
not  a  random  statement:  it  is  a  fact,  and  easily  demonstrable. 
I  have  a  book  at  home  called  Modern  English  Literature:  Its 
Blemishes  and  Dejects,  by  Henry  H.  Breen,  a  countryman  of 
Mr.  Arnold.  In  it  I  find  examples  of  bad  grammar  and  slovenly 
English  from  the  pens  of  Sydney  Smith,  Sheridan,  Hallam, 
Whately,  Carlyle,  Disraeli,  Allison,  Junius,  Blair,  Macaulay, 
Shakespeare,  Milton,  Gibbon,  Southey,  Lamb,  Landor,  Smollett, 
Walpole,  Walker  (of  the  dictionary),  Christopher  North,  Kirk 
White,  Benjamin  Franklin,  Sir  Walter  Scott,  and  Mr.  Lindley 
Murray  (who  made  the  grammar). 

In  Mr.  Arnold's  criticism  on  General  Grant's  book  we  find  two 
grammatical  crimes  and  more  than  several  examples  of  very 
crude  and  slovenly  English,  enough  of  them  to  entitle  him  to 
a  lofty  place  in  the  illustrious  list  of  delinquents  just  named. 

1651 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


The  following  passage  all  by  itself  ought  to  elect  him: 

"  Meade  suggested  to  Grant  that  he  might  wish  to  have  imme- 
diately under  him  Sherman,  who  had  been  serving  with  Grant  in 
the  West.  He  begged  him  not  to  hesitate  if  he  thought  it  for  the 
good  of  the  service.  Grant  assured  him  that  he  had  not  thought 
of  moving  him,  and  in  his  memoirs,  after  relating  what  had  passed, 
he  adds,  etc."  To  read  that  passage  a  couple  of  times  would 
make  a  man  dizzy;  to  read  it  four  times  would  make  him  drunk. 

Mr.  Breen  makes  this  discriminating  remark:  "To  suppose 
that  because  a  man  is  a  poet  or  a  historian  he  must  be  correct 
in  his  grammar  is  to  suppose  that  an  architect  must  be  a  joiner, 
or  a  physician  a  compounder  of  medicine." 

People  may  hunt  out  what  microscopic  motes  they  please,  but, 
after  all,  the  fact  remains,  and  cannot  be  dislodged,  that  General 
Grant's  book  is  a  great  and,  in  its  peculiar  department,  a  unique 
and  unapproachable  literary  masterpiece.  In  their  line  there  is 
no  higher  literature  than  those  modest,  simple  memoirs.  Their 
style  is  at  least  flawless  and  no  man  could  improve  upon  it,  and 
great  books  are  weighed  and  measured  by  their  style  and  matter, 
and  not  by  the  trimmings  and  shadings  of  their  grammar. 

There  is  that  about  the  sun  which  makes  us  forget  his  spots, 
and  when  we  think  of  General  Grant  our  pulses  quicken  and 
his  grammar  vanishes;  we  only  remember  that  this  is  the  simple 
soldier  who,  all  untaught  of  the  silken  phrase-makers,  linked 
words  together  with  an  art  surpassing  the  art  of  the  schools  and 
put  into  them  a  something  which  will  still  bring  to  American 
ears,  as  long  as  America  shall  last,  the  roll  of  his  vanished  drums 
and  the  tread  of  his  marching  hosts.  What  do  we  care  for 
grammar  when  we  think  of  those  thunderous  phrases,  "Uncon- 
ditional and  immediate  surrender,"  "I  propose  to  move  im- 
mediately upon  your  works,"  "  I  propose  to  fight  it  out  on  this 
line  if  it  takes  all  summer."  Mr.  Arnold  would  doubtless  claim 
that  that  last  phrase  is  not  strictly  grammatical,  and  yet  it  did 
certainly  wake  up  this  nation  as  a  hundred  million  tons  of 
A-number-one  fourth-proof,  hard-boiled,  hide-bound  grammar 
from  another  mouth  could  not  have  done.  And  finally  we  have 
that  gentler  phrase,  that  one  which  shows  you  another  true  side 
of  the  man,  shows  you  that  in  his  soldier  heart  there  was  room 
for  other  than  gory  war  mottoes  and  in  his  tongue  the  gift  to 
fitly  phrase  them:  "Let  us  have  peace." 

165.2 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  R 


PARTY  ALLEGIANCE 

BEING  A  PORTION  OF  A  PAPER  ON  "CONSISTENCY,"  READ  BEFORE 
THE  MONDAY  EVENING  CLUB  IN  1 887 

(See  Chapter  cbciii) 

...  I  have  referred  to  the  fact  that  when  a  man  retires  from 
his  political  party  he  is  a  traitor — that  he  is  so  pronounced  in 
plain  language.  That  is  bold ;  so  bold  as  to  deceive  many  into 
the  fancy  that  it  is  true.  Desertion,  treason — these  are  the 
terms  applied.  Their  military  form  reveals  the  thought  in  the 
man's  mind  who  uses  them:  to  him  a  political  party  is  an  army. 
Well,  is  it?  Are  the  two  things  identical?  Do  they  even  re- 
semble each  other?  Necessarily  a  political  party  is  not  an  army 
of  conscripts,  for  they  are  in  the  ranks  by  compulsion.  Then 
it  must  be  a  regular  army  or  an  army  of  volunteers.  Is  it  a 
regular  army?  No,  for  these  enlist  for  a  specified  and  well- 
understood  term,  and  can  retire  without  reproach  when  the  term 
is  up.  Is  it  an  army  of  volunteers  who  have  enlisted  for  the 
war,  and  may  righteously  be  shot  if  they  leave  before  the  war  is 
finished?  No,  it  is  not  even  an  army  in  that  sense.  Those  fine 
military  terms  are  high-sounding,  empty  lies,  and  are  no  more 
rationally  applicable  to  a  political  party  than  they  would  be 
to  an  oyster-bed.  The  volunteer  soldier  comes  to  the  recruiting 
office  and  strips  himself  and  proves  that  he  is  so  many  feet  high, 
and  has  sufficiently  good  teeth,  and  no  fingers  gone,  and  is 
sufficiently  sound  in  body  generally;  he  is  accepted;  but  not 
until  he  has  sworn  a  deep  oath  or  made  other  solemn  form  of 
promise  to  march  under  that  flag  until  that  war  is  done  or 
his  term  of  enlistment  completed.  What  is  the  process  when 
a  voter  joins  a  party?  Must  he  prove  that  he  is  sound  in 
any  way,  mind  or  body?  Must  he  prove  that  he  knows  any- 
thing— is  capable  of  anything — whatever?  Does  he  take  an 
oath  or  make  a  promise  of  any  sort?— or  doesn't  he  leave  himself 

1653 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


entirely  free?  If  he  were  informed  by  the  political  boss  that 
if  he  join,  it  must  be  forever;  that  he  must  be  that  party's  chattel 
and  wear  its  brass  collar  the  rest  of  his  days — would  not  that 
insult  him?  It  goes  without  saying.  He  would  say  some  rude, 
unprintable  thing,  and  turn  his  back  on  that  preposterous  organ- 
ization. But  the  political  boss  puts  no  conditions  upon  him  at 
all;  and  this  volunteer  makes  no  promises,  enlists  for  no  stated 
term.  He  has  in  no  sense  become  a  part  of  an  army;  he  is  in 
no  way  restrained  of  his  freedom.  Yet  he  will  presently  find  that 
his  bosses  and  his  newspapers  have  assumed  just  the  reverse 
of  that:  that  they  have  blandly  arrogated  to  themselves  an  iron- 
clad military  authority  over  him;  and  within  twelve  months,  if 
he  is  an  average  man,  he  will  have  surrendered  his  liberty,  and 
will  actually  be  silly  enough  to  believe  that  he  cannot  leave  that 
party,  for  any  cause  whatever,  without  being  a  shameful  traitor, 
a  deserter,  a  legitimately  dishonored  man. 

There  you  have  the  just  measure  of  that  freedom  of  con- 
science, freedom  of  opinion,  freedom  of  speech  and  action  which 
we  hear  so  much  inflated  foolishness  about  as  being  the  precious 
possession  of  the  republic.  Whereas,  in  truth,  the  surest  way 
for  a  man  to  make  of  himself  a  target  for  almost  universal 
scorn,  obloquy,  slander,  and  insult  is  to  stop  twaddling  about 
these  priceless  independencies  and  attempt  to  exercise  one  of 
them.  If  he  is  a  preacher  half  his  congregation  will  clamor  for 
his  expulsion — and  will  expel  him,  except  they  find  it  will  injure 
real  estate  in  the  neighborhood;  if  he  is  a  doctor  his  own  dead 
will  turn  against  him. 

I  repeat  that  the  new  party-member  who  supposed  himself 
independent  will  presently  find  that  the  party  have  somehow 
got  a  mortgage  on  his  soul,  and  that  within  a  year  he  will  recog- 
nize the  mortgage,  deliver  up  his  liberty,  and  actually  believe 
he  cannot  retire  from  that  party  from  any  motive  howsoever 
high  and  right  in  his  own  eyes  without  shame  and  dishonor. 

Is  it  possible  for  human  wickedness  to  invent  a  doctrine  more 
infernal  and  poisonous  than  this?  Is  there  imaginable  a  baser 
servitude  than  it  imposes?  What  slave  is  so  degraded  as  the 
slave  that  is  proud  that  he  is  a  slave?  What  is  the  essential 
difference  between  a  lifelong  democrat  and  any  other  kind  of 
lifelong  slave?  Is  it  less  humiliating  to  dance  to  the  lash  of  one 
master  than  another? 

1654 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


This  infamous  doctrine  of  allegiance  to  party  plays  directly 
into  the  hands  of  politicians  of  the  baser  sort — and  doubtless  for 
that  it  was  borrowed — or  stolen — from  the  monarchial  system. 
It  enables  them  to  foist  upon  the  country  officials  whom  no 
self-respecting  man  would  vote  for  if  he  could  but  come  to  un- 
derstand that  loyalty  to  himself  is  his  first  and  highest  duty, 
not  loyalty  to  any  party  name. 

Shall  you  say  the  best  good  of  the  country  demands  allegiance 
to  party?  Shall  you  also  say  that  it  demands  that  a  man  kick 
his  truth  and  his  conscience  into  the  gutter  and  become  a  mouth- 
ing lunatic  besides?  Oh  no,  you  say;  it  does  not  demand  that. 
But  what  if  it  produce  that  in  spite  of  you?  There  is  no  obliga- 
tion upon  a  man  to  do  things  which  he  ought  not  to  do  when 
drunk,  but  most  men  will  do  them  just  the  same;  and  so  we  hear 
no  arguments  about  obligations  in  the  matter — we  only  hear  men 
warned  to  avoid  the  habit  of  drinking;  get  rid  of  the  thing  that 
can  betray  men  into  such  things. 

This  is  a  funny  business  all  around.  The  same  men  who 
enthusiastically  preach  loyal  consistency  to  church  and  party 
are  always  ready  and  willing  and  anxious  to  persuade  a  Chinaman 
or  an  Indian  or  a  Kanaka  to  desert  his  church  or  a  fellow- 
American  to  desert  his  party.  The  man  who  deserts  to  them  is 
all  that  is  high  and  pure  and  beautiful— apparently;  the  man 
who  deserts  from  them  is  all  that  is  foul  and  despicable.  This 
is  Consistency — with  a  capital  C. 

With  the  daintiest  and  self-complacentest  sarcasm  the  lifelong 
loyalist  scoffs  at  the  Independent — or  as  he  calls  him,  with  cutting 
irony,  the  Mugwump;  makes  himself  too  killingly  funny  for 
anything  in  this  world  about  him.  But — the  Mugwump  can 
stand  it,  for  there  is  a  great  history  at  his  back,  stretching  down 
the  centuries,  and  he  comes  of  a  mighty  ancestry.  He  knows 
that  in  the  whole  history  of  the  race  of  men  no  single  great  and 
high  and  beneficent  thing  was  ever  done  for  the  souls  and  bodies, 
the  hearts  and  the  brains  of  the  children  of  this  world,  but  a 
Mugwump  started  it  and  Mugwumps  carried  it  to  victory. 
And  their  names  are  the  stateliest  in  history:  Washington, 
Garrison,  Galileo,  Luther,  Christ.  Loyalty  to  petrified  opinions 
never  yet  broke  a  chain  or  freed  a  human  soul  in  this  world — and 
never  will. 

1655 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  S 

ORIGINAL  PREFACE  FOR  "A  CONNECTICUT  YAN- 
KEE IN  KING  ARTHUR'S  COURT" 

(See  Chapter  clxxii) 

My  object  has  been  to  group  together  some  of  the  most  odious 
laws  which  have  had  vogue  in  the  Christian  countries  within 
the  past  eight  or  ten  centuries,  and  illustrate  them  by  the  in- 
cidents of  a  story. 

There  was  never  a  time  when  America  applied  the  death-pen- 
alty to  more  than  fourteen  crimes.  But  England,  within  the 
memory  of  men  still  living,  had  in  her  list  of  crimes  223  which 
were  punishable  by  death  1  And  yet  from  the  beginning  of  our 
existence  down  to  a  time  within  the  memory  of  babes  England 
has  distressed  herself  piteously  over  the  ungentleness  of  our 
Connecticut  Blue  Laws.  Those  Blue  Laws  should  have  been 
spared  English  criticism  for  two  reasons: 

1.  They  were  so  insipidly  mild,  by  contrast  with  the  bloody 
and  atrocious  laws  of  England  of  the  same  period,  as  to  seem 
characterless  and  colorless  when  one  brings  them  into  that  awful 
presence. 

2.  The  Blue  Laws  never  had  any  existence.  They  were  the 
fancy-work  of  an  English  clergyman;  they  were  never  a  part 
of  any  statute-book.  And  yet  they  could  have  been  made  to 
serve  a  useful  and  merciful  purpose;  if  they  had  been  injected 
into  the  English  law  the  dilution  would  have  given  to  the  whole 
a  less  lurid  aspect;  or,  to  figure  the  effect  in  another  way,  they 
would  have  been  coca  mixed  into  vitriol. 

I  have  drawn  no  laws  and  no  illustrations  from  the  twin 
civilizations  of  hell  and  Russia.  To  have  entered  into  that 
atmosphere  would  have  defeated  my  purpose,  which  was  to  show 
a  great  and  genuine  progress  in  Christendom  in  these  few  later 
generations  toward  mercifulness — a  wide  and  general  relaxing  of 

1656 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


the  grip  of  the  law.  Russia  had  to  be  left  out  because  exile  to  Si- 
beria remains,  and  in  that  single  punishment  is  gathered  together 
and  concentrated  all  the  bitter  inventions  of  all  the  black  ages 
for  the  infliction  of  suffering  upon  human  beings.  Exile  for  life 
from  one's  hearthstone  and  one's  idols— this  is  rack,  thumb-screw, 
the  water-drop,  fagot  and  stake,  tearing  asunder  by  horses,  flay- 
ing alive — all  these  in  one;  and  not  compact  into  hours,  but 
drawn  out  into  years,  each  year  a  century,  and  the  whole  a  mortal 
immortality  of  torture  and  despair.  While  exile  to  Siberia  re- 
mains one  will  be  obliged  to  admit  that  there  is  one  country 
in  Christendom  where  the  punishments  of  all  the  ages  are  still 
preserved  and  still  inflicted,  that  there  is  one  country  in  Christen- 
dom where  no  advance  has  been  made  toward  modifying  the 
medieval  penalties  for  offenses  against  societv  and  the  State. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  T 


A  TRIBUTE  TO  HENRY  H.  ROGERS 

(See  Chapter  cc  and  earlier) 

April  25,  1902.  I  owe  more  to  Henry  Rogers  than  to  any 
other  man  whom  I  have  known.  He  was  born  in  Fairhaven, 
Connecticut,  in  1839,  and  is  my  junior  by  four  years.  He  was 
graduated  from  the  high  school  there  in  1853,  when  he  was 
fourteen  years  old,  and  from  that  time  forward  he  earned  his 
own  living,  beginning  at  first  as  the  bottom  subordinate  in  the 
village  store  with  hard-work  privileges  and  a  low  salary.  When 
he  was  twenty-four  he  went  out  to  the  newly  discovered  petro- 
leum fields  in  Pennsylvania  and  got  work;  then  returned  home, 
with  enough  money  to  pay  passage,  married  a  schoolmate,  and 
took  her  to  the  oil  regions.  He  prospered,  and  by  and  by 
established  the  Standard  Oil  Trust  with  Mr.  Rockefeller  and 
others,  and  is  still  one  of  its  managers  and  directors. 

In  1893  we  fell  together  by  accident  one  evening  in  the  Murray 
Hill  Hotel,  and  our  friendship  began  on  the  spot  and  at  once. 
Ever  since  then  he  has  added  my  business  affairs  to  his  own  and 
carried  them  through,  and  I  have  had  no  further  trouble  with 
them.  Obstructions  and  perplexities  which  would  have  driven 
me  mad  were  simplicities  to  his  master  mind  and  furnished  him 
no  difficulties.  He  released  me  from  my  entanglements  with 
Paige  and  stopped  that  expensive  outgo;  when  Charles  L. 
Webster  &  Company  failed  he  saved  my  copyrights  for  Mrs. 
Clemens  when  she  would  have  sacrificed  them  to  the  creditors 
although  they  were  in  no  way  entitled  to  them;  he  offered  to 
lend  me  money  wherewith  to  save  the  life  of  that  worthless  firm; 
when  I  started  lecturing  around  the  world  to  make  the  money 
to  pay  off  the  Webster  debts  he  spent  more  than  a  year  trying 
to  reconcile  the  differences  between  Harper  &  Brothers  and  the 
American  Publishing  Company  and  patch  up  a  working-contract 
between  them  and  succeeded  where  any  other  man  would  have 

1658 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


failed;  as  fast  as  I  earned  money  and  sent  it  to  him  he  banked 
it  at  interest  and  held  onto  it,  refusing  to  pay  any  creditor 
until  he  could  pay  all  of  the  96  alike;  when  I  had  earned  enough 
to  pay  dollar  for  dollar  he  swept  off  the  indebtedness  and  sent 
me  the  whole  batch  of  complimentary  letters  which  the  creditors 
wrote  in  return;  when  I  had  earned  $28,500  more,  $18,500  of 
which  was  in  his  hands,  I  wrote  him  from  Vienna  to  put  the 
latter  into  Federal  Steel  and  leave  it  there;  he  obeyed  to  the 
extent  of  $17,500,  but  sold  it  in  two  months  at  $25,000  profit, 
and  said  it  would  go  ten  points  higher,  but  that  it  was  his  custom 
to  "give  the  other  man  a  chance"  (and  that  was  a  true  word — 
there  was  never  a  truer  one  spoken).  That  was  at  the  end  of 
'qq  and  beginning  of  1000;  and  from  that  day  to  this  he  has  con- 
tinued to  break  up  my  bad  schemes  and  put  better  ones  in  their 
place,  to  my  great  advantage.  I  do  things  which  ought  to  try 
man's  patience,  but  they  never  seem  to  try  his;  he  always  finds 
a  colorable  excuse  for  what  I  have  done.  His  soul  was  born 
superhumanly  sweet,  and  I  do  not  think  anything  can  sour  it. 
I  have  not  known  his  equal  among  men  for  lovable  qualities. 
But  for  his  cool  head  and  wise  guidance  I  should  never  have  come 
out  of  the  Webster  difficulties  on  top;  it  was  his  good  steering 
that  enabled  me  to  work  out  my  salvation  and  pay  a  hundred 
cents  on  the  dollar — the  most  valuable  service  any  man  ever 
did  me. 

His  character  is  full  of  fine  graces,  but  the  finest  is  this:  that 
he  can  load  you  down  with  crushing  obligations  and  then  so 
conduct  himself  that  you  never  feel  their  weight.  If  he  would 
only  require  something  in  return — but  that  is  not  in  his  nature; 
it  would  not  occur  to  him.  With  the  Harpers  and  the  American 
Company  at  war  those  copyrights  were  worth  but  little;  he 
engineered  a  peace  and  made  them  valuable.    He  invests  $ioo,- 

000  for  me  here,  and  in  a  few  months  returns  a  profit  of  $3 1 ,000. 

1  invest  (in  London  and  here)  $66,000  and  must  wait  consider- 
ably for  results  (in  case  there  shall  be  any).  I  tell  him  about 
it  and  he  finds  no  fault,  utters  not  a  sarcasm.  He  was  born 
serene,  patient,  all-enduring,  where  a  friend  is  concerned,  and 
nothing  can  extinguish  that  great  quality  in  him.  Such  a  man 
is  entitled  to  the  high  gift  of  humor:  he  has  it  at  its  very  best. 
He  is  not  only  the  best  friend  I  have  ever  had,  but  is  the  best  man 
I  have  known.  S.  L.  Clemens. 

1659 


* 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  U 


FROM  MARK  TWAIN'S  LAST  POEM 

BEGUN  AT  RIVE RD ALE,  NEW  YORE.    FINISHED  AT  YORE  HARBOR, 

MAINE,  AUGUST  l8,  I002 

(See  Chapter  ccxxiii) 
(A  bereft  and  demented  mother  speaks) 

.  .  .  O,  I  can  see  my  darling  yet:  the  little  form 
In  slip  of  flimsy  stuff  all  creamy  white, 
Pink-belted  waist  with  ample  bows, 
Blue  shoes  scarce  bigger  than  the  house-cat's  ears — 
Capering  in  delight  and  choked  with  glee. 

•  •  •  • 

It  was  a  summer  afternoon;  the  hill 
Rose  green  above  me  and  about,  and  in  the  vale  below 
The  distant  village  slept,  and  all  the  world 
Was  steeped  in  dreams.   Upon  me  lay  this  peace, 
And  I  forgot  my  sorrow  in  its  spell.   And  now 
My  little  maid  passed  by,  and  she 
Was  deep  in  thought  upon  a  solemn  thing: 
A  disobedience,  and  my  reproof.    Upon  my  face 
She  must  not  look  until  the  day  was  done; 
For  she  was  doing  penance  .  .  .  She? 
O,  it  was  //   What  mother  knows  not  that? 
And  so  she  passed,  I  worshiping  and  longing  .  .  . 
It  was  not  wrong?   You  do  not  think  me  wrong? 
I  did  it  for  the  best.    Indeed  I  meant  it  so. 
.... 

She  flits  before  me  now: 
The  peach -bloom  of  her  gauzy  cr£pe, 
The  plaited  tails  of  hair, 

1660 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


The  ribbons  floating  from  the  summer  hat, 

The  grieving  face,  dropp'd  head  absorbed  with  care, 

O,  dainty  little  form! — 

I  see  it  move,  receding  slow  along  the  path, 

By  hovering  butterflies  besieged;  I  see  it  reach 

The  breezy  top  clear-cut  against  the  sky  .  .  . 

Then  pass  beyond  and  sink  from  sight — forever  I 


Within,  was  light  and  cheer;  without, 
A  blustering  winter's  night.   There  was  a  play; 
It  was  her  own;  for  she  had  wrought  it  out 
Unhelped,  from  her  own  head — and  she 
But  turned  sixteen!   A  pretty  play, 
All  graced  with  cunning  fantasies, 
And  happy  songs,  and  peopled  all  with  fays, 
And  sylvan  gods  and  goddesses, 
And  shepherds,  too,  that  piped  and  danced, 
And  wore  the  guileless  hours  away 
In  care-free  romps  and  games. 

Her  girlhood  mates  played  in  the  piece, 
And  she  as  well:  a  goddess,  she, — 
And  looked  it,  as  it  seemed  to  me. 

'Twas  fairyland  restored— so  beautiful  it  was 
And  innocent.    It  made  us  cry,  we  elder  ones, 
To  live  our  lost  youth  o'er  again 
With  these  its  happy  heirs. 

Slowly,  at  last,  the  curtain  fell. 
Before  us,  there,  she  stood,  all  wreathed  and  draped 
In  roses  pearled  with  dew — so  sweet,  so  glad, 
So  radiant! — and  flung  us  kisses  through  the  storm 
Of  praise  that  crowned  her  triumph.  .  .  .  O, 
Across  the  mists  of  time  I  see  her  yet, 
My  Goddess  of  the  Flowers! 

.  .  .  The  curtain  hid  her.  .  .  . 
Do  you  comprehend?   Till  time  shall  end! 
Out  of  my  life  she  vanished  while  I  looked! 

.  .  .  Ten  years  are  flown. 
O,  I  have  watched  so  long, 

1661 


MARK  TWAIN 


So  long.  But  she  will  come  no  more.  .  .  . 
No,  she  will  come  no  more. 


It  seems  so  strange  ...  so  strange  .  .  . 
Struck  down  unwarned! 
In  the  unbought  grace  of  youth  laid  low- 
In  the  glory  of  her  fresh  young  bloom  laid  low- 
In  the  morning  of  her  life  cut  down! 

And  I  not  by!   Not  by 
When  the  shadows  fell,  the  night  of  death  closed  down, 
The  sun  that  lit  my  life  went  out.   Not  by  to  answer 
When  the  latest  whisper  passed  the  lips 
That  were  so  dear  to  me — my  name! 
Far  from  my  post!  the  world's  whole  breadth  away. 
O,  sinking  in  the  waves  of  death  she  cried  to  me 
For  mother-help,  and  got  for  answer- 
Silence! 

...» 

We  that  are  old — we  comprehend;  even  we 

That  are  not  mad:  whose  grown-up  scions  still  abide, 

Their  tale  complete: 

Their  earlier  selves  we  glimpse  at  intervals 
Far  in  the  dimming  past; 
We  see  the  little  forms  as  once  they  were, 
And  whilst  we  ache  to  take  them  to  our  hearts, 
The  vision  fades.   We  know  them  lost  to  us — 
Forever  lost;  we  cannot  have  them  back; 
We  miss  them  as  we  miss  the  dead, 
We  mourn  them  as  we  mourn  the  dead. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  V 


SELECTIONS  FROM  AN  UNFINISHED  BOOK,  "3,000 
YEARS  AMONG  THE  MICROBES" 

THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  A  MICROBE,  WHO,  IN  A  FORMER  EXIST- 
ENCE, HAD  BEEN  A  MAN— HIS  PRESENT  HABITAT  BEING 
THE  ORGANISM  OF  A  TRAMP,  BLITZ OWSKI.  (WRITTEN  AT 
DUBLIN,  NEW  HAMPSHIRE,  1 905) 

(See  Chapter  ccxxxvii) 

Our  world  (the  tramp)  is  as  large  and  grand  and  awe-compel- 
ling to  us  microscopic  creatures  as  is  man's  world  to  man.  Our 
tramp  is  mountainous,  there  are  vast  oceans  in  him,  and  lakes 
that  are  sea-like  for  size,  there  are  many  rivers  (veins  and 
arteries)  which  are  fifteen  miles  across,  and  of  a  length  so  stupen- 
dous as  to  make  the  Mississippi  and  the  Amazon  trifling  little 
Rhode  Island  brooks  by  comparison.  As  for  our  minor  rivers, 
they  are  multitudinous,  and  the  dutiable  commerce  of  disease 
which  they  carry  is  rich  beyond  the  dreams  of  the  American 
custom-house. 

Take  a  man  like  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  what  secret  of  Nature 
can  be  hidden  from  him?  He  says:  "A  billion,  that  is  a  million 
millions,  of  atoms  is  truly  an  immense  number,  but  the  resulting 
aggregate  is  still  excessively  minute.  A  portion  of  substance 
consisting  of  a  billion  atoms  is  only  barely  visible  with  the 
highest  power  of  a  microscope;  and  a  speck  or  granule,  in  order  to 
be  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  like  a  grain  of  lycopodium-dust, 
must  be  a  million  times  bigger  still." 

The  human  eye  could  see  it  then — that  dainty  little  speck. 
But  with  my  microbe-eye  I  could  see  every  individual  of  the  whirl- 
ing billions  of  atoms  that  compose  the  speck.  Nothing  is  ever  at 
rest— wood,  iron,  water,  everything  is  alive,  everything  is  raging, 
whirling,  whizzing,  day  and  night  and  night  and  day,  nothing 

1663 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


is  dead,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  death,  everything  is  full  of 
bristling  life,  tremendous  life,  even  the  bones  of  the  crusader 
that  perished  before  Jerusalem  eight  centuries  ago.  There  are 
no  vegetables,  all  things  are  animal;  each  electron  is  an  animal, 
each  molecule  is  a  collection  of  animals,  and  each  has  an  appoint- 
ed duty  to  perform  and  a  soul  to  be  saved.  Heaven  was  not 
made  for  man  alone,  and  oblivion  and  neglect  reserved  for  the 
rest  of  His  creatures.  He  gave  them  life,  He  gave  them  humble 
services  to  perform,  they  have  performed  them,  and  they  will 
not  be  forgotten,  they  will  have  their  reward.  Man — always 
vain,  windy,  conceited — thinks  he  will  be  in  the  majority  there. 
He  will  be  disappointed.  Let  him  humble  himself.  But  for 
the  despised  microbe  and  the  persecuted  bacillus,  who  needed  a 
home  and  nourishment,  he  would  not  have  been  created.  He 
has  a  mission,  therefore — a  reason  for  existing:  let  him  do  the 
service  he  was  made  for,  and  keep  quiet. 

Three  weeks  ago  I  was  a  man  myself,  and  thought  and  felt  as 
men  think  and  feel;  I  have  lived  3,000  years  since  then  [micro- 
bic  time],  and  I  see  the  foolishness  of  it  now.  We  live  to  leam, 
and  fortunate  are  we  when  we  are  wise  enough  to  profit  by  it. 

In  matters  pertaining  to  microscopy  we  necessarily  have  an 
advantage  here  over  the  scientist  of  the  earth,  because,  as  I  have 
just  been  indicating,  we  see  with  our  naked  eyes  minutenesses 
which  no  man-made  microscope  can  detect,  and  are  therefore 
able  to  register  as  facts  many  things  which  exist  for  him  as 
theories  only.  Indeed,  we  know  as  facts  several  things  which 
he  has  not  yet  divined  even  by  theory.  For  example,  he  does 
not  suspect  that  there  is  no  life  but  animal  life,  and  that  all 
atoms  are  individual  animals  endowed  each  with  a  certain  de- 
gree of  consciousness,  great  or  small,  each  with  likes  and  dis- 
likes, predilections  and  aversions— that,  in  a  word,  each  has  a 
character,  a  character  of  its  own.  Yet  such  is  the  case.  Some 
of  the  molecules  of  a  stone  have  an  aversion  for  some  of  those 
of  a  vegetable  or  any  other  creature  and  will  not  associate  with 
them — and  would  not  be  allowed  to,  if  they  tried.  Nothing 
is  more  particular  about  society  than  a  molecule.  And  so  there 
are  no  end  of  castes;  in  this  matter  India  is  not  a  circumstance. 

L 

"Tell  me,  Franklin  [a  microbe  of  great  learning],  is  the  ocean 
an  individual,  an  animal,  a  creature?" 

1664 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


"Yes." 

"Then  water — any  water — is  an  individual?" 
"Yes." 

"Suppose  you  remove  a  drop  of  it?  Is  what  is  left  an  individ- 
ual?" 

"Yes,  and  so  is  the  drop." 
"Suppose  you  divide  the  drop?" 
"Then  you  have  two  individuals." 
"Suppose  you  separate  the  hydrogen  and  the  oxygen?" 
"Again  you  have  two  individuals.    But  you  haven't  water 
any  more." 

"Of  course.  Certainly.  Well,  suppose  you  combine  them 
again,  but  in  a  new  way:  make  the  proportions  equal — one  part 
oxygen  to  one  of  hydrogen?" 

"  But  you  know  you  can't.  They  won't  combine  on  equal  terms." 

I  was  ashamed  to  have  made  that  blunder.  I  was  embar- 
rassed; to  cover  it  I  started  to  say  we  used  to  combine  them  like 
that  where  I  came  from,  but  thought  better  of  it,  and  stood  pat. 

"Now  then,"  I  said,  "it  amounts  to  this:  water  is  an  in- 
dividual, an  animal,  and  is  alive;  remove  the  hydrogen  and  it 
is  an  animal  and  is  alive;  the  remaining  oxygen  is  also  an  in- 
dividual, an  animal,  and  is  alive.  Recapitulation:  the  two  in- 
dividuals combined  constitute  a  third  individual — and  yet  each 
continues  to  be  an  individual." 

I  glanced  at  Franklin,  but  .  .  .  upon  reflection,  held  my 
peace.  I  could  have  pointed  out  to  him  that  here  was  mute 
Nature  explaining  the  sublime  mystery  of  the  Trinity  so  lumi- 
nously that  even  the  commonest  understanding  could  comprehend 
it,  whereas  many  a  trained  master  of  words  had  labored  to  do 
it  with  speech  and  failed.  But  he  would  not  have  known  what  I 
was  talking  about.   After  a  moment  I  resumed : 

"Listen— and  see  if  I  have  understood  you  rightly,  to  wit: 
All  the  atoms  that  constitute  each  oxygen  molecule  are  separate 
individuals,  and  each  is  a  living  animal;  all  the  atoms  that  con- 
stitute each  hydrogen  molecule  are  separate  individuals,  and 
each  one  is  a  living  animal ;  each  drop  of  water  consists  of  millions 
of  living  animals,  the  drop  itself  is  an  individual,  a  living  animal, 
and  the  wide  ocean  is  another.    Is  that  it?" 

"Yes,  that  is  correct." 

"By  George,  it  beats  the  band!" 

1665 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


He  liked  the  expression,  and  set  it  down  in  his  tablets. 

"Franklin,  we've  got  it  down  fine.  And  to  think — there  are 
other  animals  that  are  still  smaller  than  a  hydrogen  atom,  and 
yet  it  is  so  small  that  it  takes  five  thousand  of  them  to  make  a 
molecule— a  molecule  so  minute  that  it  could  get  into  a  microbe's 
eye  and  he  wouldn't  know  it  was  there!" 

"Yes,  the  wee  creatures  that  inhabit  the  bodies  of  us  germs 
and  feed  upon  us,  and  rot  us  with  disease.  Ah,  what  could 
they  have  been  created  for?  They  give  us  pain,  they  make  our 
lives  miserable,  they  murder  us — and  where  is  the  use  of  it  all, 
where  the  wisdom?  Ah,  friend  Bkskp  [microbic  orthography], 
we  live  in  a  strange  and  unaccountable  world;  our  birth  is  a  mys- 
tery, our  little  life  is  a  mystery,  a  trouble,  we  pass  and  are  seen 
no  more;  all  is  mystery,  mystery,  mystery;  we  know  not  whence 
we  came,  nor  why;  we  know  not  whither  we  go,  nor  why  we  go 
We  only  know  we  were  not  made  in  vain,  we  only  know  we  were 
made  for  a  wise  purpose,  and  that  all  is  well !  We  shall  not  be  cast 
aside  in  contumely  and  unblest  after  all  we  have  suffered.  Let  us 
be  patient,  let  us  not  repine,  let  us  trust.  The  humblest  of  us  is 
cared  for — oh,  believe  it!— and  this  fleeting  stay  is  not  the  end!" 

You  notice  that?  He  did  not  suspect  that  he,  also,  was 
engaged  in  gnawing,  torturing,  defiling,  rotting,  and  murdering  a 
fellow-creature — he  and  all  the  swarming  billions  of  his  race. 
None  of  them  suspects  it.  That  is  significant.  It  is  suggestive 
— irresistibly  suggestive — insistently  suggestive.  It  hints  at 
the  possibility  that  the  procession  of  known  and  listed  devourers 
and  persecutors  is  not  complete.  It  suggests  the  possibility, 
and  substantially  the  certainty,  that  man  is  himself  a  microbe, 
and  his  globe  a  blood-corpuscle  drifting  with  its  shining  brethren 
of  the  Milky  Way  down  a  vein  of  the  Master  and  Maker  of  all 
things,  whose  body,  mayhap — glimpsed  part  -wise  from  the  earth 
by  night,  and  receding  and  lost  to  view  in  the  measureless  re- 
motenesses of  space— is  what  men  name  the  Universe. 

Yes,  that  was  all  old  to  me,  but  to  find  that  our  little  old 
familiar  microbes  were  themselves  loaded  up  with  microbes  that 
fed  them,  enriched  them,  and  persistently  and  faithfully  preserved 
them  and  their  poor  old  tramp-planet  from  destruction — oh,  that 
was  new,  and  too  delicious! 

I  wanted  to  see  them!   I  was  in  a  fever  to  see  them!   I  had 

1666 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


lenses  to  two-million  power,  but  of  course  the  field  was  no  bigger 
than  a  person's  finger-nail,  and  so  it  wasn't  possible  to  compass 
a  considerable  spectacle  or  a  landscape  with  them;  whereas  what 
I  had  been  craving  was  a  thirty-foot  field,  which  would  rep- 
resent a  spread  of  several  miles  of  country  and  show  up  things 
in  a  way  to  make  them  worth  looking  at.  The  boys  and  I  had 
often  tried  to  contrive  this  improvement,  but  had  failed. 

I  mentioned  the  matter  to  the  Duke  and  it  made  him  smile. 
He  said  it  was  a  quite  simple  thing— he  had  it  at  home.  I  was 
eager  to  .bargain  for  the  secret,  but  he  said  it  was  a  trifle  and  not 
worth  bargaining  for.    He  said: 

"  Hasn't  it  occurred  to  you  that  all  you  have  to  do  is  to  bend 
an  X-ray  to  an  angle-value  of  8.4  and  refract  it  with  a  para- 
bolism,  and  there  you  are?" 

Upon  my  word,  I  had  never  thought  of  that  simple  thing  I 
You  could  have  knocked  me  down  with  a  feather. 

•  •  •  •  •  • 

We  rigged  a  microscope  for  an  exhibition  at  once  and  put  a 
drop  of  my  blood  under  it,  which  got  mashed  flat  when  the 
lens  got  shut  down  upon  it.  The  result  was  beyond  my  dreams. 
The  field  stretched  miles  away,  green  and  undulating,  threaded 
with  streams  and  roads,  and  bordered  all  down  the  mellowing 
distances  with  picturesque  hills.  And  there  was  a  great  white 
city  of  tents;  and  everywhere  were  parks  of  artillery  and  divi- 
sions of  cavalry  and  infantry — waiting.  We  had  hit  a  lucky 
moment,  evidently  there  was  going  to  be  a  march -past  or  some- 
thing like  that.  At  the  front  where  the  chief  banner  flew  there 
was  a  large  and  showy  tent,  with  showy  guards  on  duty,  and 
about  it  were  some  other  tents  of  a  swell  kind. 

The  warriors — particularly  the  officers — were  lovely  to  look 
at,  they  were  so  trim-built  and  so  graceful  and  so  handsomely 
uniformed.  They  were  quite  distinct,  vividly  distinct,  for  it 
was  a  fine  day,  and  they  were  so  immensely  magnified  that 
they  looked  to  be  fully  a  finger-nail  high.1  Everywhere  you 
could  see  officers  moving  smartly  about,  and  they  looked  gay, 

1  My  own  expression,  and  a  quite  happy  one.    I  said  to  the  Duke: 
"Your  Grace,  they're  just  about  finger- nailers!" 
"How  do  you  mean,  m'  lord?" 

"This.    You  notice  the  stately  General  standing  there  with  his 

1667 


Digitized  by  QbOgle 


MARK  TWAIN 


but  the  common  soldiers  looked  sad.  Many  wife-swinks 
["Swinks,"  an  atomic  race]  and  daughter-swinks  and  sweet- 
heart-swinks  were  about — crying,  mainly.  It  seemed  to  in- 
dicate that  this  was  a  case  of  war,  not  a  summer-camp  for 
exercise,  and  that  the  poor  labor-s winks  were  being  torn  from 
their  planet-saving  industries  to  go  and  distribute  civilization 
and  other  forms  of  suffering  among  the  feeble  benighted  some- 
where; else  why  should  the  swinkesses  cry? 

The  cavalry  was  very  fine— shiny  black  horses,  shapely  and 
spirited;  and  presently  when  a  flash  of  light  struck  a  lifted  bugle 
(delivering  a  command  which  we  couldn't  hear)  and  a  division 
came  tearing  down  on  a  gallop  it  was  a  stirring  and  gallant  sight, 
until  the  dust  rose  an  inch — the  Duke  thought  more — and 
swallowed  it  up  in  a  rolling  and  tumbling  long  gray  cloud,  with 
bright  weapons  glinting  and  sparkling  in  it. 

Before  long  the  real  business  of  the  occasion  began.  A  bat- 
talion of  priests  arrived  carrying  sacred  pictures.  That  settled 
it:  this  was  war;  these  far-stretching  masses  of  troops  were 
bound  for  the  front.  Their  little  monarch  came  out  now,  the 
sweetest  little  thing  that  ever  travestied  the  human  shape  I 
think,  and  he  lifted  up  his  hands  and  blessed  the  passing  armies, 
and  they  looked  as  grateful  as  they  could,  and  made  signs  of 
humble  and  real  reverence  as  they  drifted  by  the  holy  pictures. 

It  was  beautiful — the  whole  thing;  and  wonderful,  too,  when 
those  serried  masses  swung  into  line  and  went  marching  down 
the  valley  under  the  long  array  of  fluttering  flags. 

Evidently  they  were  going  somewhere  to  fight  for  their  king, 
which  was  the  little  manny  that  blessed  them;  and  to  preserve 
him  and  his  brethren  that  occupied  the  other  swell  tents;  to 
civilize  and  grasp  a  valuable  little  unwatched  country  for  them 
somewhere.  But  the  little  fellow  and  his  brethren  didn't  fall 
in — that  was  a  noticeable  particular.  They  didn't  fight;  they 
stayed  at  home,  where  it  was  safe,  and  waited  for  the  swag. 

Very  well,  then— what  ought  we  to  do?   Had  we  no  moral 

hand  resting  upon  the  muzzle  of  a  cannon?  Well,  if  you  could  stick 
your  little  finger  down  against  the  ground  alongside  of  him  his 
plumes  would  just  reach  up  to  where  your  nail  joins  the  flesh." 

The  Duke  said  "finger-nailers  was  good" — good  and  exact;  and 
he  afterward  used  it  several  times  himself. 

1668 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


duty  to  perform?  Ought  we  to  allow  this  war  to  begin?  Was 
it  not  our  duty  to  stop  it,  in  the  name  of  right  and  righteousness? 
Was  it  not  our  duty  to  administer  a  rebuke  to  this  selfish  and 
heartless  Family? 

The  Duke  was  struck  by  that,  and  greatly  moved.  He  felt 
as  I  did  about  it,  and  was  ready  to  do  whatever  was  right,  arid 
thought  we  ought  to  pour  boiling  water  on  the  Family  and 
extinguish  it,  which  we  did. 

It  extinguished  the  armies,  too,  which  was  not  intended.  We 
both  regretted  this,  but  the  Duke  said  that  these  people  were 
nothing  to  us,  and  deserved  extinction  anyway  for  being  so  poor- 
spirited  as  to  serve  such  a  Family.  He  was  loyally  doing  the 
like  himself,  and  so  was  I,  but  I  don't  think  we  thought  of  that. 
And  it  wasn't  just  the  same,  anyway,  because  we  were  sooflas- 
kies,  and  they  were  only  s winks. 

Franklin  realizes  that  no  atom  is  destructible;  that  it  has 
always  existed  and  will  exist  forever;  but  he  thinks  all  atoms  will 
go  out  of  this  world  some  day  and  continue  their  life  in  a  happier 
one.  Old  Tolliver  thinks  no  atom's  life  will  ever  end,  but  he 
also  thinks  Blitzowski  is  the  only  world  it  will  ever  see,  and  that 
at  no  time  in  its  eternity  will  it  be  either  worse  off  or  better  off 
than  it  is  now  and  always  has  been.  Of  course  he  thinks  the 
planet  Blitzowski  is  itself  eternal  and  indestructible — at  any  rate 
he  says  he  thinks  that.  It  could  make  me  sad,  only  I  know 
better.    D.  T.  will  fetch  Blitzy  yet  one  of  these  days. 

But  these  are  alien  thoughts,  human  thoughts,  and  they  falsely 
indicate  that  I  do  not  want  this  tramp  to  go  on  living.  What 
would  become  of  me  if  he  should  disintegrate?  My  molecules 
would  scatter  all  around  and  take  up  new  quarters  in  hundreds 
of  plants  and  animals;  each  would  carry  its  special  feelings  along 
with  it,  each  would  be  content  in  its  new  estate,  but  where 
should  /  be?  I  should  not  have  a  rag  of  a  feeling  left,  after 
my  disintegration— with  his— was  complete.  Nothing  to  think 
with,  nothing  to  grieve  or  rejoice  with,  nothing  to  hope  or 
despair  with.  There  would  be  no  more  me.  I  should  be  musing 
and  thinking  and  dreaming  somewhere  else — in  some  distant 
animal  maybe — perhaps  a  cat — by  proxy  of  my  oxygen  I  should 
be  raging  and  fuming  in  some  other  creatures — a  rat,  perhaps; 
I  should  be  smiling  and  hoping  in  still  another  child  of  Nature — 

1669 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


heir  to  my  hydrogen — a  weed,  or  a  cabbage,  or  something;  my 
carbonic  acid  (ambition)  would  be  dreaming  dreams  in  some 
lowly  wood -violet  that  was  longing  for  a  showy  career;  thus  my 
details  would  be  doing  as  much  feeling  as  ever,  but  I  should  not 
be  aware  of  it,  it  would  all  be  going  on  for  the  benefit  of  those 
others,  and  I  not  in  it  at  all.  I  should  be  gradually  wasting 
away,  atom  by  atom,  molecule  by  molecule,  as  the  years  went 
on,  and  at  last  I  should  be  all  distributed,  and  nothing  left  of 
what  had  once  been  Me.  It  is  curious,  and  not  without  im- 
press! veness:  I  should  still  be  alive,  intensely  alive,  but  so  scat- 
tered that  I  would  not  know  it.  I  should  not  be  dead — no, 
one  cannot  call  it  that — but  I  should  be  the  next  thing  to  it. 
And  to  think  what  centuries  and  ages  and  aeons  would  drift 
over  me  before  the  disintegration  was  finished,  the  last  bone 
turned  to  gas  and  blown  away  I  I  wish  I  knew  what  it  is  going 
to  feel  like,  to  lie  helpless  such  a  weary,  weary  time,  and  see  my 
faculties  decay  and  depart,  one  by  one,  like  lights  which  burn 
low,  and  flicker  and  perish,  until  the  ever-deepening  gloom  and 
darkness  which — oh,  away,  away  with  these  horrors,  and  let 
me  think  of  something  wholesome! 

My  tramp  is  only  85 ;  there  is  good  hope  that  he  will  live  ten 
years  longer — 500,000  of  my  microbe  years.   So  may  it  be. 

Oh,  dear,  we  are  all  so  wise!  Each  of  us  knows  it  all,  and 
knows  he  knows  it  all— the  rest,  to  a  man,  are  fools  and  deluded. 
One  man  knows  there  is  a  hell,  the  next  one  knows  there  isn't; 
one  man  knows  high  tariff  is  right,  the  next  man  knows  it  isn't; 
one  man  knows  monarchy  is  best,  the  next  one  knows  it  isn't; 
one  age  knows  there  are  witches,  the  next  one  knows  there  aren't; 
one  sect  knows  its  religion  is  the  only  true  one,  there  are  sixty- 
four  thousand  five  hundred  million  sects  that  know  it  isn't  so. 
There  is  not  a  mind  present  among  this  multitude  of  verdict- 
deliverers  that  is  the  superior  of  the  minds  that  persuade  and 
represent  the  rest  of  the  divisions  of  the  multitude.  Yet  this 
sarcastic  fact  does  not  humble  the  arrogance  nor  diminish  the 
know-it-all  bulk  of  a  single  verdict-maker  of  the  lot  by  so  much 
as  a  shade.  Mind  is  plainly  an  ass,  but  it  will  be  many  ages 
before  it  finds  it  out,  no  doubt.  Why  do  we  respect  the  opinions 
of  any  man  or  any  microbe  that  ever  lived?  I  swear  I  don't 
know.   Why  do  I  respect  my  own?  Well — that  is  different. 

1670 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  W 


LITTLE  BESSIE  WOULD  ASSIST  PROVIDENCE 

(See  Chapter  cclxxxii) 

(It  is  dull,  and  I  need  wholesome  excitements  and  distractions;  so  I 
will  go  lightly  excursioning  along  the  primrose  path  of  theology.] 

Little  Bessie  was  nearly  three  years  old.  She  was  a  good 
child,  and  not  shallow,  not  frivolous,  but  meditative  and  thought- 
ful, and  much  given  to  thinking  out  the  reasons  of  things  and 
trying  to  make  them  harmonize  with  results.   One  day  she  said : 

"  Mama,  why  is  there  so  much  pain  and  sorrow  and  suffering? 
What  is  it  all  for?" 

It  was  an  easy  question,  and  mama  had  no  difficulty  in  an- 
swering it: 

"It  is  for  our  good,  my  child.  In  His  wisdom  and  mercy 
the  Lord  sends  us  these  afflictions  to  discipline  us  and  make 
us  better." 

"  Is  it  He  that  sends  them?" 

"Yes." 

"Does  He  send  all  of  them,  mama?" 

"Yes,  dear,  all  of  them.  None  of  them  comes  by  accident; 
He  alone  sends  them,  and  always  out  of  love  for  us,  and  to  make 
us  better." 

"Isn't  it  strange?" 

"Strange?  Why,  no,  I  have  never  thought  of  it  in  that  way. 
I  have  not  heard  any  one  call  it  strange  before.  It  has  always 
seemed  natural  and  right  to  me,  and  wise  and  most  kindly  and 
merciful." 

"Who  first  thought  of  it  like  that,  mama?   Was  it  you?" 
"Oh  no,  child,  I  was  taught  it." 
"Who  taught  you  so,  mama?" 

"Why,  really,  I  don't  know— I  can't  remember.   My  mother, 

167 1 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


I  suppose;  or  the  preacher.  But  it's  a  thing  that  everybody 
knows." 

"Well,  anyway,  it  does  seem  strange.   Did  He  give  Billy 
Norris  the  typhus?" 
"Yes." 
"What  for?" 

"Why,  to  discipline  him  and  make  him  good." 
"  But  he  died,  mama,  and  so  it  couldn't  make  him  good." 
"Well,  then,  I  suppose  it  was  for  some  other  reason.  We 
know  it  was  a  good  reason,  whatever  it  was." 
"What  do  you  think  it  was,  mama?" 

"Oh,  you  ask  so  many  questions!  I  think  it  was  to  discipline 
his  parents." 

"Well,  then,  it  wasn't  fair,  mama.  Why  should  his  life  be 
taken  away  for  their  sake,  when  he  wasn't  doing  anything?" 

"Oh,  /  don't  know!  I  only  know  it  was  for  a  good  and  wise 
and  merciful  reason." 

"What  reason,  mama?" 

"I  think — I  think — well,  it  was  a  judgment;  it  was  to  punish 
them  for  some  sin  they  had  committed." 

"But  he  was  the  one  that  was  punished,  mama.  Was  that 
right?" 

"Certainly,  certainly.  He  does  nothing  that  isn't  right  and 
wise  and  merciful.  You  can't  understand  these  things  now,  dear, 
but  when  you  are  grown  up  you  will  understand  them,  and  then 
you  will  see  that  they  are  just  and  wise." 

After  a  pause: 

"  Did  He  make  the  roof  fall  in  on  the  stranger  that  was  trying 
to  save  the  crippled  old  woman  from  the  fire,  mama?" 

"Yes,  my  child.  Wait!  Don't  ask  me  why,  because  I  don't 
know.  I  only  know  it  was  to  discipline  some  one,  or  be  a 
judgment  upon  somebody,  or  to  show  His  power." 

"That  drunken  man  that  stuck  a  pitchfork  into  Mrs.  Welch's 
baby  when — " 

"  Never  mind  about  it,  you  needn't  go  into  particulars;  it  was 
to  discipline  the  child — that  much  is  certain,  anyway." 

"  Mama,  Mr.  Burgess  said  in  his  sermon  that  billions  of  little 
creatures  are  sent  into  us  to  give  us  cholera,  and  typhoid,  and 
lockjaw,  and  more  than  a  thousand  other  sicknesses  and— mama, 
does  He  send  them?" 

1672 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


"Oh,  certainly,  child,  certainly.   Of  course." 
"What  for?" 

"Oh,  to  <focipline  us!  Haven't  I  told  you  so,  over  and  over 
again?" 

"It's  awful  cruel,  mama!   And  silly!  and  if  I — " 

"Hush,  oh,  hush!   Do  you  want  to  bring  the  lightning?" 

"You  know  the  lightning  did  come  last  week,  mama,  and 
struck  the  new  church,  and  burnt  it  down.  Was  it  to  discipline 
the  church?" 

(Wearily.)    "Oh,  I  suppose  so." 

"But  it  killed  a  hog  that  wasn't  doing  anything.  Was  it  to 
discipline  the  hog,  mama?" 

"Dear  child,  don't  you  want  to  run  out  and  play  a  while? 
If  you  would  like  to — " 

"Mama,  only  think!  Mr.  Hollister  says  there  isn't  a  bird,  or 
fish,  or  reptile,  or  any  other  animal  that  hasn't  got  an  enemy  that 
Providence  has  sent  to  bite  it  and  chase  it  and  pester  it  and  kill 
it  and  suck  its  blood  and  discipline  it  and  make  it  good  and 
religious.  Is  that  true,  mother— because  if  it  is  true  why  did 
Mr.  Hollister  laugh  at  it?" 

"That  Hollister  is  a  scandalous  person,  and  I  don't  want  you 
to  listen  to  anything  he  says." 

"  Why,  mama,  he  is  very  interesting,  and  /  think  he  tries  to 
be  good.  He  says  the  wasps  catch  spiders  and  cram  them  down 
into  their  nests  in  the  ground — alive,  mama! — and  there  they 
live  and  suffer  days  and  days  and  days,  and  the  hungry  little 
wasps  chewing  their  legs  and  gnawing  into  their  bellies  all  the 
time,  to  make  them  good  and  religious  and  praise  God  for  His 
infinite  mercies.  /  think  Mr.  Hollister  is  just  lovely,  and  ever 
so  kind;  for  when  I  asked  him  if  he  would  treat  a  spider  like  that 
he  said  he  hoped  to  be  damned  if  he  would;  and  then  he — 
Dear  mama,  have  you  fainted!  I  will  run  and  bring  help! 
Now  this  comes  of  staying  in  town  this  hot  weather." 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  X 

A  CHRONOLOGICAL  LIST  OF  MARK  TWAIN'S  WORK- 
PUBLISHED  AND  OTHERWISE— FROM  1851-1910 

Note  1. — This  is  not  a  detailed  bibliography,  but  merely  a  general 
list  of  Mark  Twain's  literary  undertakings,  in  the  order  of  perform- 
ance, showing  when,  and  usually  where,  the  work  was  done,  when 
and  where  first  published,  etc.  An  excellent  Mark  Twain  bibliogra- 
phy has  been  compiled  by  Mr.  Merle  Johnson,  to  whom  acknowledg- 
ments are  due  for  important  items. 

Note  2. — Only  a  few  of  the  more  important  speeches  are  noted. 
Volumes  that  are  merely  collections  of  tales  or  articles  are  not  noted. 

Note  j. — Titles  are  shortened  to  those  most  commonly  in  use, 
as  "Huck  Finn"  or  "Huck"  for  "The  Adventures  of  Huckleberry 
Finn." 

Names  of  periodicals  are  abbreviated. 

The  initials  U.  E.  stand  for  the  "Uniform  Edition"  of  Mark 
Twain's  works. 

The  chapter  number  or  numbers  in  the  line  with  the  date  refers 
to  the  place  in  this  work  where  the  items  are  mentioned. 

1851.       (See  Chapter  xviii  of  this  work.) 

Edited  the  Hannibal  Journal  during  the  absence  of  the  owner  and 

editor,  Orion  Clemens. 
Wrote  local  items  for  the  Hannibal  Journal. 
Burlesque  of  a  rival  editor  in  the  Hannibal  Journal. 
Wrote  two  sketches  for  The  Sat.  Eve.  Post  (Philadelphia). 
To  Mary  in  H — l — Hannibal  Journal. 

1852-53.       (See  Chapter  xviii.) 

Jim  Wolfe  and  the  Fire — Hannibal  Journal. 

Burlesque  of  a  rival  editor  in  the  Hannibal  Journal. 

1853.       (See  Chapter  xix.) 

Wrote  obituary  poems — not  published. 

Wrote  first  letters  home. 

1855-56.       (See  Chapters  xx  and  xxi.) 

First  after-dinner  speech ;  delivered  at  a  printers'  banquet  in  Keokuk, 
Iowa. 

Letters  from  Cincinnati,  November  14,  1856,  signed  "Snodgrass" — 
Saturday  Post  (Keokuk). 

1674 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 
1857.       (Sec  Chapter  xxi.) 

Letters  from  Cincinnati,  March  14,  1857,  signed  "Snod  grass" — 
Saturday  Post  (Keokuk). 

1858. 

Anonymous  contributions  to  the  New  Orleans  Crescent  and  probably 
to  St.  Louis  papers. 

1859.       (See  Chapter  xxviif  also  Appendix  B.) 
Burlesque  of  Capt.  Isaiah  Sellers—  True  Delia  (New  Orleans),  May 
8  or  9. 

1861.  (See  Chapters  xxxiii  to  xxxv.) 

Letters  home,  published  in  The  Gate  City  (Keokuk). 

1862.  (See  Chapters  xxxv  to  xxxviii.) 

Letters  and  sketches,  signed  "Josh,"  for  the  Territorial  Enterprise 

(Virginia  City,  Nevada). 
Report  of  the  Lecture  of  Prof.  Personal  Pronoun— Enterprise. 
Report  of  a  Fourth  of  July  Oration — Enterprise. 
The  Petrified  Man — Enterprise. 
Local  news  reporter  for  the  Enterprise  from  August. 

1863.  (See  Chapters  xli  to  xliii;  also  Appendix  C.) 
Reported  the  Nevada  Legislature  for  the  Enterprise. 
First  used  the  name  "Mark  Twain,"  February  2. 
Advice  to  the  Unreliable — Enterprise. 

Curing  a  Cold — Enterprise.    U.  E. 
Information  for  the  Million— Enterprise. 
Advice  to  Good  Little  Girls — Enterprise. 
The  Dutch  Nick  Massacre — Enterprise. 
Many  other  Enterprise  sketches. 

The  Aged  Pilot  Man  (poem)— "  Roughing  It."   U.  E. 

1864.  (See  Chapters  xliv  to  xlvii.) 

Reported  the  Nevada  Legislature  for  the  Enterprise. 
Speech  as  "Governor  of  the  Third  House." 
Letters  to  New  York  Sunday  Mercury. 
Local  reporter  on  the  San  Francisco  Call. 
Articles  and  sketches  for  the  Golden  Era. 
Articles  and  sketches  for  the  Californian. 
Daily  letters  from  San  Francisco  to  the  Enterprise. 
(Several  of  the  Era  and  Californian  sketches  appear  in  Sketches 
New  and  Old.   U.  E.) 

1865.  (See  Chapters  xlix  to  li;  also  Appendix  E.) 
Notes  for  the  Jumping  Frog  story;  Angel's  Camp,  February. 
Sketches,  etc.,  for  the  Golden  Era  and  Calijorntan. 

Daily  letter  to  the  Enterprise. 

The  Jumping  Frog    (San  Francisco)— Saturday   Press.  New 
York,  November  18.   U.  E. 
iii.-3G  1675 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

1866.  (Sec  Chapters  Hi  to  lv;  also  Appendix  D.) 
Daily  letter  to  the  Enterprise. 

Sanuwich  Island  letters  to  the  Sacramento  Union. 
Lecture  on  the  Sandwich  Islands,  San  Francisco,  October  2. 
Forty-three   Days  in   an   Open   Boat— Harper's  Magazine, 
December  (error  in  signature  made  it  Mark  Swain). 

1867.  (See  Chapters  lvii  to  Ixv;  also  Appendices  E,  F,  and  G.) 
Letters  to  Alia  California  from  New  York. 

Jim  Wolfe  and  the  Cats— N.  Y.  Sunday  Mercury 

The  Jumping  Frog — book,  published  by  Charles  Henry  Webb, 

May  i.    U.  E. 
Lectured  at  Cooper  Union,  May,  '66. 

Letters  to  Alia  California  and  New  York  Tribune  from  the  Quaker 

City — Holy  Land  excursion. 
Letter  to  New  York  Herald  on  the  return  from  the  Holy  Land. 
After-dinner  speech  on  "Women"  (Washington). 
Began  arrangement  for  the  publication  of  The  Innocents 

Abroad. 


1868.  (See  Chapters  lxvi  to  lxix;  also  Appendices  H  and  I.) 
Newspaper  letters,  etc.,  from  Washington,  tor  New  York  Citizen, 

Tribune,  Herald,  and  other  papers  and  periodicals. 

Preparing  Quaker  City  letters  (in  Washington  and  San  Francisco) 
for  book  publication. 

Captain  Wakeman's  (Stormfield's)  Visit  to  Heaven  (San 
Francisco),  published  Harper's  Magazine,  December,  1907- Janu- 
ary, 1908  (also  book,  Harpers). 

Lectured  in  California  and  Nevada  on  the  "Holv  Land,"  July  2. 

S'cat!  Anonymous  article  on  T.  K.  Beecher  (Elmira),  published 
in  local  paper. 

Lecture- tour,  season  1868-69. 

1869.  (See  Chapters  lxx  to  lxxiii.) 

The  Innocents  Abroad — book  (Am.  Pub.  Co.),  July  20.    U.  E. 
Bought  one-third  ownership  in  the  Buffalo  Express. 
Contributed  editorials,  sketches,  etc.,  to  the  Express. 
Contributed  sketches  to  Packard's  Monthly,  Woodys  Magazine,  etc. 
Lecture-tour,  season  1869-70. 

•%  1870.       (See  Chapters  lxxiv  to  lxxx;  also  Appendix  J.) 

Contributed  various  matter  to  Buffalo  Express. 
Contributed  various  matter  under  general  head  of  41  MEMORANDA " 

to  Galaxy  Magazine,  May  to  April,  '71. 
Roughing  It  begun  in  September  (Buffalo). 
Shem's  Diary  (Buffalo)  (unfinished). 
God,  Ancient  and  Modern  (unpublished). 

1676 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 


1871.  (See  Chapters  Ixxxi  and  lxxxii;  also  Appendix  K.) 
Memoranda  continued  in  Galaxy  to  April. 

Autobiography  and  First  Romance1  —  booklet   (Sheldon  & 

Co.).   U.  E. 
Roughing  It  finished  (Quarry  Farm). 
Ruloff  letter — Tribune. 

Wrote  several  sketches  and  lectures  (Quarry  Farm). 
Western  play  (unfinished). 
Lecture-tour,  season  1871-72. 

1872.  (See  Chapters  lxxxiii  to  lxxxvii;  also  Appendix  L.) 
Roughing  It— book  (Am.  Pub.  Co.),  February.    U.  E. 

The  Mark  Twain  Scrap-book  invented  (Saybrook,  Connecticut). 
Tom  Sawyer  begun  as  a  play  (Saybrook,  Connecticut). 
A  few  unimportant  sketches  published  in  "Practical  Jokes,"  etc. 
Began  a  book  on  England  (London). 

1873.  (See  Chapters  Ixxxviii  to  xcii.) 

Letters  on  the  Sandwich  Islands — Tribune,  January  3  and  6. 
-*The  Gilded  Age  (with  C.  D.  Warner)— book  (Am.  Pub.  Co), 

December.    U.  E. 
The  License  of  the  Press — paper  for  The  Monday  Evening 

Club. 

Lectured  in  London,  October  18  and  season  1873-74. 

1874.  (See  Chapters  xciii  to  xcviii;  also  Appendix  M.) 
t%tfoM  Sawyer  continued  (in  the  new  study  at  Quarry  Farm). 

A  True  Story  (Quarry  Farm) — Atlantic,  November.    U.  E. 
Fables  (Quarry  Farm).  U.  E. 


Raymond. 

Undertaker's  Love-story  (Quarry  Farm)  (unpublished). 
-^Old  Times  on  the  Mississippi  (Hartford )—A Uantic,  January  to 
July,  1875. 

Monarchy  letter  to  Mrs.  Clemens,  dated  1935  (Boston). 

1875.       (See  Chapters  c  to  civ;  also  Appendix  N.) 
Universal  Suffrage — paper  for  The  Monday  Evening  Club. 
Sketches  New  and  Old — book  (Am.  Pub.  Co.),  July.   U.  E. 
Tom  Sawyer  concluded  (Hartford). 

The  Curious  Rep.  of  Gondour — Atlantic,  October  (unsigned). 

Punch,  Conductor,  Punch — Atlantic,  February,  1876.   U.  E. 

The  Second  Advent  (unfinished). 

The  Mysterious  Chamber  (unfinished). 

Autobiography  of  a  Damn  Fool  (unfinished). 

Petition  for  International  Copyright. 

»  Thb  First  Romance  had  appeared  in  the  Express  in  1870.    Later  included 
in  Sketches. 


(Quarry  Farm)  performed  by  John  T. 


1677 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

1876.  (See  Chapters  cvi  to  ex.) 

Performed  in  The  Loan  of  the  Lover  as  Peter  Spuyk  (Hart- 
ford). 

Carnival  of  Crime — paper  for  The  Monday  Evening  Club — 

Atlantic,  June.    U.  E. 
Huck  Finn  begun  (Quarry  Farm). 

Canvasser's  Story  (Quarry  Farm)— Atlantic,  December.   U.  E. 
"  1 60 1  "  (Quarry  Farm),  privately  printed. 
Ah  Sin  (with  Bret  Harte) — play  (Hartford). 
""Tom  Sawyer — book  (Am.  Pub.  Co.),  December.    U.  E. 
Speech  on  "The  Weather,"  New  England  Society,  December  22. 

1877.  (See  Chapters  cxii  to  cxv;  also  Appendix  0.) 

Loves  of  Alonzo  Fitz-Clarence,  etc.  (Quarry  Farm)— Atlantic. 

Idle  Excursion  (Quarry  Farm)— Atlantic,  October,  November, 
December.    U.  E. 

Simon  Wheeler,  Detective— play  (Quarry  Farm)  (not  pro- 
duced). 

Prince  and  Pauper  begun  (Quarry  Farm). 
Whittier  birthday  speech  (Boston),  December. 

1878.  (See  Chapters  cxvii  to  cxx.) 

Magnanimous  Incident  (Hartford)— Atlantic,  May.   U.  E. 
A  Tramp  Abroad  (Heidelberg  and  Munich). 
Mental  Telegraphy— Harper's  Magazine,  December,  1891.  U.  E. 
Gambetta  Duel — Atlantic,  February,  1879  (included  in  Tramp). 
U.  E. 

Rev.  in  Pitcairn — Atlantic,  March,  1879.    U.  E. 

Stolen  White  Elephant — book  (Osgood  &  Co.),  1882.  U.  E. 

(The  three  items  last  named  were  all  originally  a  part  of  the 
Tramp  Abroad.) 

1879.  (See  Chapters  exxi  to  exxiv;  also  Chapter  exxxiv  and 
Appendix  P.) 

A  Tramp  Abroad  continued  (Paris,  Elmira,  and  Hartford). 
Adam  monument  scheme  (Elmira). 

Speech  on  "The  Babies"  (Grant  dinner,  Chicago),  November. 
Speech  on  "Plagiarism"  (Holmes  breakfast,  Boston),  December. 

jtdBSO.       (See  Chapters  exxv  to  exxxii.) 

WPPrince  and  Pauper  concluded  (Hartford  and  Elmira). 

Huck  Finn  continued  (Quarry  Farm,  Elmira). 

A  Cat  Story  (Quarry  Farm)  (unpublished). 
^A  Tramp  Abroad — book  (Am.  Pub.  Co.),  March  13.   U.  E. 

Edward  Mills  and  Geo.  Benton  (Hartford)— A tlantic,  August. 
U.  E. 

Mrs.  McWh-liams  and  the  Lightning  (Hartford) — Atlantic, 
September.    U.  E. 

1678 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 

1881.  (See  Chapters  cxxxiv  to  cxxxvii.) 

A  Curious  Experience — Century,  November.    U.  E. 

A  Biography  of  (unfinished). 

■—Prince  and  Pauper— book  (Osgood  &  Co.),  December. 
Burlesque  Etiquette  (unfinished). 

1882.  (See  Chapters  cxl  and  cxli.) 

«**tiFE  on  the  Mississippi  (Elmira  and  Hartford). 

1883.  (See  Chapters  cxlii  to  cxlviii.) 

*^Life  on  the  Mississippi— book  (Osgood  &  Co.),  May.   U.  E. 
What  is  Happiness? — paper  for  The  Monday  Evening  Club. 
Introduction  to  Portuguese  conversation  book  (Hartford). 
Huck  Finn  concluded  (Quarry  Farm). 
History  Game  (Quarry  Farm). 

American  Claimant  (with  W.  D.  Howells)— play  (Hartford), 
produced  by  A.  P.  Burbank. 

Dramatized  Tom  Sawyer  and  Prince  and  Pauper  (not  pro- 
duced). 

1884.  (See  Chapters  cxlix  to  cliii.) 
Embarked  in  publishing  with  Charles  L.  Webster. 
The  Carson  Footprints — the  San  Franciscan. 

""Huck  Finn — book  (Charles  L.  Webster  &  Co.),  December.  U.  E. 
Platform  readings  with  George  W.  Cable,  season  '84- '85. 

1885.  (See  Chapters  cliv  to  clvii.) 
Contracted  for  General  Grant's  Memoirs. 

*"*A  Campaign  that  Failed — Century,  December.   U.  E. 
The  Universal  Tinker— Century,  December  (open  letter  signed 
X.  Y.  Z.). 

Letter  on  the  government  of  children — Christian  Union. 
Kiditchin  (children's  poem). 

1886.  (See  Chapters  clix  to  clxi;  also  Appendix  Q.) 
Introduced  Henry  M.  Stanley  (Boston). 
Connecticut  Yankee  begun  (Hartford). 

English  as  She  is  Taught—  Century,  April,  1887. 
Luck — Harper's,  August,  1891. 

General  Grant  and  Matthew  Arnold— Army  and  Navy 
dinner  speech. 

1887.  (See  Chapters  clxii  to  clxiv;  also  Appendix  R.) 
Meisterschaft — play  (Hartford) — Century,  January,  1888.  U.  E. 
Knights  of  Labor— essay  (not  published). 

To  the  Queen  of  England— Harper's  Magazine,  December. 
U.  E. 

Consistency— paper  for  The  Monday  Evening  Club. 

1679 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

1888.  (See  Chapters  clxv  to  clxviii.) 
Introductory  for  "Unsent  Letters"  (unpublished). 
Master  of  Arts  degree  from  Yale. 

Yale  Alumni  address  (unpublished). 

Copyright  controversy  with  Brander  Matthews — Princeton  Review. 
Replies  to  Matthew  Arnold's  American  criticisms  (unpublished). 
Yankee  continued  (Elmira  and  Hartford). 
Introduction  of  Nye  and  Riley  (Boston). 

1889.  (See  Chapters  clxix  to  clxxiii;  also  Appendix  S.) 

A  Majestic  Literary  Fossil — Harper's  Magazine,  February, 

1890.   U.  E. 
Huck  and  Toil  among  the  Indians  (unfinished). 
Introduction  to  Yankee  (not  used). 
Letter  to  Elsie  Leslie — St  Nicholas,  February,  1890. 
^ Connecticut  Yankee— book  (Webster  &  Co.),  December.   U.  E. 

1890.  (See  Chapters  clxxii  to  clxxiv.) 
Letter  to  Andrew  Lang  about  English  Criticism. 

(No  important  literary  matters  this  year.  Mark 
in  promoting  the  Paige  typesetting-machine.) 

1891.  (See  Chapters  clxxv  to  clxxvii.) 

^American  Claimant  (Hartford)  syndicated;  also  book  (Web- 
ster &  Co.),  May,  1892.    U.  E. 
European  letters  to  New  York  Sun. 
Down  the  Rhone  (unfinished). 
Kornerstrasse  (unpublished). 

1892.  (See  Chapters  clxxx  to  clxxxii.) 
The  German  Chicago  (Berlin) — Sun.    U.  E. 
All  Kinds  of  Ships  (at  sea).    U.  E. 

^  Tom  Sawyer  Abroad  (Nauheim) — St.  Nicholas,  November,  '93,  to 
April,  '94.    U.  E. 
Those  Extraordinary  Twins  (Nauheim).   U.  E. 
^Pudd'nhead  Wilson  (Nauheim  and  Florence) — Century,  Decem- 
ber, '93,  to  June,  '94.    U.  E. 
£1,000,000  Bank-note  (Florence)— Century,  January,  '93.  U.  E. 

1893.  (See  Chapters  clxxxiii  to  clxxxvii.) 

Joan  of  Arc  begun  (at  Villa  Viviani,  Florence)  and  completed  up 

to  the  raising  of  the  Siege  of  Orleans. 
Californian's  Tale  (Florence)— Liber  Scriptorum,  also  Harper's. 
^Adam's  Diary  (Florence)— Niagara  Book,  also  Harper's. 
Esquimau  Maiden's  Romance — Cosmopolitan,  November.  U.  E. 
Is  He  Living  or  Is  He  Dead? — Cosmopolitan,  September.  U.  E. 
Traveling  with  a  Reformer — Cosmopolitan,  December.  U.  E. 
In  Defense  of  Harriet  Shelley  (Florence)— N.  A.  Rev.,  July, 

•94.   U.  E. 

1680 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 

Fenimore  Cooper's  Literary  Offenses'  (Players,  New  York) 
— N.  A.  Rev.,  July,  '95.    U.  E. 

1894.  (See  Chapters  clxxxviii  to  cxc.) 
Joan  of  Arc  continued  (Etretat  and  Paris). 

What  Paul  Bourget  Thinks  of  Us  (fitretat) — N.  A.  Rev., 

January,  '95.    U.  E. 
Tom  Sawyer  Abroad — book  (Webster  &  Co.),  April.    U.  E. 
Pudd'nhead  Wilson— book  (Am.  Pub.  Co.),  November.    U.  E. 
The  failure  of  Charles  L.  Webster  &  Co.,  April  18. 
The  Derelict— poem  (Paris)  (unpublished). 

1895.  (See  Chapters  clxxxix  and  cxcii.) 

"^Joan  of  Arc  finished  (Paris),  January  28,  Harper's  Magazine, 

April  to  December. 
Mental  Telegraphy  Again— Harper's,  September.   U.  E. 
A  Little  Note  to  Paul  Bourget.    U.  E. 
Poem  to  Mrs.  Beecher  (Elmira)  (not  published).    U.  E. 
Lecture- tour  around  the  world,  begun  at  Elmira,  July  14,  ended 

July  31. 

1896.  (See  Chapters  exci  to  exciv.) 
Joan  of  Arc — book  (Harpers),  May.    U.  E. 

*^Tom  Sawyer,  Detective,  and  other  stories— book  (Harpers), 
November. 

Following  the  Equator  begun  (23  Tedworth  Square,  London). 

1897.  (See  Chapters  exevii  to  excix.) 

"""""Following  the  Equator — book  (Am.  Pub.  Co.),  November. 
Queen's  Jubilee  (London),  newspaper  syndicate;  book  privately 
printed. 

James  Hammond  Trumbull — Century,  November. 

Which  was  Which?  (London  and  Switzerland)  (unfinished). 

Tom  and  Huck  (Switzerland)  (unfinished). 

Hellfire  Hotchkiss  (Switzerland)  (unfinished). 

In  Memoriam — poem  (Switzerland) — Harper's  Magazine.  U.  E. 

Concordia  Club  speech  (Vienna). 

Stirring   Times   in   Austria    (Vienna)  —  Harper's  Magazine, 
March,  1898.   U.  E. 

1898.  (See  Chapters  cc  to  cciii;  also  Appendix  T.) 

The  Austrian  Edison  Keeping  School  Again  (Vienna)— 

Century,  August.    U.  E. 
At  the  Appetite  Cure  (Vienna) — Cosmopolitan,  August.    U.  E. 
From  the  London  Times,  1904  (Vienna)— Century,  November. 

U.  E. 

About  Play-acting  (Vienna) — Forum,  October.    U.  E. 

1  This  may  not  have  been  written  until  early  in  1894. 

l68l 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 

Concerning  the  Jews  (Vienna)— Harper's  Magazine,  September, 
'99.    U.  E. 

Christian  Science  and  Mrs.  Eddy  (Vienna)  —  Cosmopolitan, 
^     October.    U.  E. 

The  Man  that  Corrupted  Hadleyburg  (Vienna) — Harper's 

Magazine,  December,  '99.    U.  E. 
Autobiographical  chapters  (Vienna);  some  of  them  used  in  the 

N.  A.  Rev.,  1906-07. 
What  is  Man?  (Kaltenleutgeben)  —  book   (privately  printed), 
August,  1906. 

Assassination  of  an  Empress  (Kaltenleutgeben)  (unpublished). 

Mysterious  Stranger  (unfinished). 
Translations  of  German  plays  (unproduced). 

1899.  (See  Chapters  cciv  to  ccviii.) 

Diplomatic  Pay  and  Clothes  (Vienna) — Forum,  March.  U.  E. 

My  Literary  Debut  (Vienna) — Century,  December.   U.  E. 

Christian  Science  ^(Vienna)  —  N.  A.  Rev.,  December,  1902, 
January  and  February,  1903. 

Translated  German  plays  (Vienna)  (unproduced). 

Collaborated  with  Siegmund  Schlesinger  on  plays  (Vienna)  (un- 
finished). 

Planned  a  postal-check  scheme  (Vienna). 

Articles  about  the  Kellgrcn  treatment  (Sanna,  Sweden)  (unpub- 
lished). 

St.  Joan  op  Arc  (London) — Harper's  Magazine,  December,  1904. 
U.  E. 

My  First  Lie.  and  How  I  Got  Out  of  It  (London) — New  York 
World.    U.  E. 

Articles  on  South  African  War  (London)  (unpublished). 
Uniform  Edition  of  Mark  Twain's  works  (Am.  Pub.  Co.). 

1900.  (See  Chapters  ccix  to  ccxii.) 

Two  Little  Tales  (London) — Century,  November,  1901.    U.  E. 
Spoke  on  "Copyright"  before  the  House  of  Lords. 
Delivered  many  speeches  in  London  and  New  York. 

1901.  (See  Chapters  ccxiii  to  cexviii.) 

NTo  the  Person  Sitting  in  Darkness  (14  West  Tenth  Street,  New 

York)— N.  A.  Rev.,  February, 
^o  My  Missionary  Critics  (14  West  Tenth  Street,  New  York) 
— N.  A.  Rev.,  April. 

Double-barrel  Detective  Story  (Saranac  Lake,  "The  Lair 

Harper's  Magazine,  January  and  February,  1902. 
Lincoln  Birthday  Speech,  February  11. 
Many  other  speeches. 

Plan  for  Casting  Vote  Party  (Riverdale)  (unpublished). 
The  Stupendous  Procession  (Riverdale)  (unpublished). 
Ante-mortem  Obituaries— Harper's  Weekly. 
Received  degree  of  Doctor  of  Letters  from  Yale. 

1682 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX 

1902.  (See  Chapters  ccxix  to  ccxxiv;  also  Appendix  U.) 
Does  the  Race  of  Man  Love  a  Lord?  (Riverdale) — N.  A.  Rev., 

April.    U.  E. 

Five  Boons  of  Life  (Riverdale) — Harper's  Weekly,  July  5.    U.  E. 
Why  Not  Abolish  It?  (Riverdale) — Harper's  Weekly,  July  5. 
Defense  of  General  Funston  (Riverdale)— N.  A.  Rev.,  May. 
If  I  Could  Be  There  (Riverdale  (unpublished). 
Wrote  various  articles,  unfinished  or  unpublished. 
Received  degree  of  LL.D.  from  the  University  of  Missouri,  June. 
The  Belated  Passport  (York  Harbor)— Harper's  Weekly,  Decem- 
ber 6.    U.  E. 

Was  It  Heaven?  or  Hell?  (York  Harbor) — Harper's  Magazine, 

December.    U.  E. 
Poem  (Riverdale  and  York  Harbor)  (unpublished). 
Sixty-seventh  Birthday  speech  (New  York),  November  27. 

1903.  (Sec  Chapters  ccxxv  to  cexxx.) 

Mrs.  Eddy  in  Error  (Riverdale) — N.  A.  Rev.,  April. 
Instructions  in  Art  (Riverdale) — Metropolitan,  April  and  May. 
Eddypus,  and  other  C.  S.  articles  (unfinished). 
A  Dog's  Tale  (Elmira) — Harper's  Magazine,  December.    U.  E. 
Italian  without  a  Master  (Florence)— Harper's  Weekly,  January 

2i,  1904.   U.  E. 
Italian  with  Grammar  (Florence)— Harper's  Magazine,  August, 

1904.   U.  E. 

"^The  $30,000  Bequest  (Florence)— Harper's  Weekly,  December  10, 
1904.    U.  E. 

1904.  (See  Chapters  ccxxx  to  cexxxiv.) 

Autobiography  (Florence) — portions  published,  N.  A.  Rev  and 
Harper's  Weekly. 

Concerning  Copyright  (Tyringham,  Massachusetts) — N.  A.  Rev., 
January,  1905. 

Tsar's  Soliloquy  (21  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York)— N.  A.  Rev., 

March,  1905. 
Adam's  Diary— book  (Harpers),  April. 

1905.  (See"  Chapters  cexxxiv  to  ccxxxvii;  also  Appendix  V.) 
Leopold's  Soliloquy  (21  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York) — pamphlet, 

_      P.  R.  Warren  Company. 

The  War  Prayer  (21  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York)  (unpublished). 
Eve's  Diary   (Dublin,   New  Hampshire) — Harper's  Magazine, 
December. 

3,000  Years  among  the  Microbes  (unfinished). 

Interpreting  the  Deity  (Dublin,  New  Hampshire)  (unpublished). 

A  Horse's  Tale  (Dublin,  New  Hampshire)— Harper's  Magazine, 

August  and  September,  1906. 
Seventieth  Birthday  speech. 

W.  D.  Howells  (21  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York)— Harper's  Magazine, 
July,  1906. 

1683 


MARK  TWAIN 


1906.       (See  Chapters  ccxxxix  to  ccli.) 

Autobiography  dictation  (21  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York;  and  Dublin, 
New  Hampshire)— selections  published,  N.  A.  Rev.,  1906  and  1907. 


Farewell  lecture,  Carnegie  Hall,  April  19. 
What  is  Man?— book  (privately  printed). 
Copyright  speech  (Washington),  December. 

1907.  (See  Chapters  eclvi  to  eclxiii.)  ' 

Autobiography  dictations  (21  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York; and  Tuxedo). 

Degree  of  Doctor  of  Literature  conferred  by  Oxford,  June  26. 

Made  many  London  speeches. 

Begum  of  Bengal  speech  (Liverpool). 

Christian  Science — book  (Harpers),  February.    U.  E. 

Captain  Stormfield's  Visit  to  Heaven— book  (Harpers). 

1908.  (See  Chapters  eclxiv  to  eclxx.) 

Autobiography  dictations  (21  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York ;  and  Redding, 

Connecticut). 
Lotos  Club  and  other  speeches. 
Aldrich  memorial  speech. 

1909.  (See  Chapters  eclxxvi  to  eclxxxix;  also  Appendices  N  and  W.) 
Is  Shakespeare  Dead? — book  (Harpers),  April. 

A  Fable — Harper's  Magazine  December. 
Copyright  documents  (unpublished). 
Address  to  St.  Timothy  School. 

Marjorie  Fleming  (Stormfield) — Harper's  Bazar,  December. 
The  Turning-point  of  my  Life  (Stormfield) — Harper's  Bazar, 

February,  19 10. 
Bessie  Dialogue  (unpublished). 
Letters  from  the  Earth  (unfinished). 
The  Death  of  Je an— Harper's,  December,  1910. 
The  International  Lightning  Trust  (unpublished). 

1910.  (See  Chapter  cexcii.) 

Valentines  to  Helen  and  Others  (not  published). 
Advice  to  Paine  (not  published). 


Digitized  by  Google 


INDEX 


Abbey,  Edwin  A.,  ii.  643,  1104; 

iii.  1384. 
Aberdeen,  Lord  and  Lady,  ii. 

1005. 

About  Play- Acting,  ii.  1067. 
Adair  County,  Kentucky,  i.  2. 
Adams,    Charles    Francis,  iii. 

Adams,  Rev.  Fred  Winslow,  iii. 
1  1527. 

Adams,  Theodore,  iii.  1473, 
'475. 

Adam's  Diary,  ii.  962,  1010;  iii. 
1162,  1225. 

Adventures  of  Huckleberry  Finn, 
i.  33.  123;  «•  578,  696,  754, 
771-775.  793-798.  831,  895, 
897,  1032-1033;  iii.  IIQ4, 
1226,  1 263,  1280-1281. 

A  dvice  to  Good  Little  Girls,  i.  238. 

Agnew,  Joy,  iii.  1399-1400. 

Ah  Sin,  play  collaborated  with 
Bret  Hartc,  ii.  587-590,  596. 

Aix,  ii.  921. 

Albany,  ii.  786. 

Alden,  Henry  Mills,  ii.  917. 

Aldrich,  Thomas  Bailey,  i.  447- 
448;  at  Keeler  luncheon,  450; 
visits  Mark  Twain,  502;  ii. 
661,  764;  plans  subscription 
book  with  Howells,  i.  503; 
dinner  in  Boston  with  Mark 
Twain,  529,  536;  Mark  Twain's 
joke  on,  537-538l  compan- 
ionship with  Howells  and 
Mark  Twain,  ii.  572;  in 
Paris,  642;  at  Somerset  Club, 
743;  refuses  to  join  in  reading 
tour  with  Mark  Twain,  783; 


names  Players  Club,  866; 
sympathizes  with  Mark  Twain 
on  Mrs.  Clemcns's  death,  iii. 
1220:  at  Dublin,  N.  H., 
1237;  dedication  of  house  in 
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1455- 
1457. 

Allen,  Helen,  iii.   1471.  1543- 

Allen,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  111.  1560, 

1563.  1565.  1569. 
All  Sorts  and  Conditions  of  Ships, 

ii.  948. 

Alma  Tadema,  Sir  Lawrence,  iii. 
1384. 

Alia  California,  i.  292,  304,  309, 

3".  317.  321.  341.  348.  350- 
351.  359.  361-362,  423. 

Ament,  Joseph  P.,  i.  76,  78. 

Ament,  Rev.  Dr.,  iii.  1 128^1130. 

American  Claimant,  The,  ii.  707, 

757.  953;  L22iL 
American  News  Company,  i.  318. 
American  Publishing  Company, 

i.  349-350,  501;  ii.  697-725, 

765,  1000,  1093. 
Ampersand,  Saranac  Lake,  iii. 

1 135. 

Anderson,  P.  A.,  ii.  590. 
Anstey,  F.,  iii.  1253. 
Answers  to  Correspondents,  i.  261. 
Anthony,  James,  i.  281,  289. 
Archduchess  Maria  Theresa,  ii. 

1059-106 1. 
Armagh,   Lord  Archbishop  of, 

iii.  1392. 

Arnold,  Matthew,  ii.  758-759, 

840-841,  873. 
Around  the  World,  i.  401. 


MARK  TWAIN 


Arthur,  President  Chester,  ii. 

711-712. 
Arthur,  Prince  of  Connaught, 

iii.  I392-I393- 
Arthur,  Lee,  iii.  1 194. 
Ashcroft,  Ralph  W.,  iii.  1379. 
Athenaeum  Club,  i.  496.  " 
Athens,  i.  332. 

Atlantic  Monthly,  i.  513-514, 
531-534,  554;  579,  603,  61 1, 
623-624,  640,  673. 

At  the  Appetite- Cure,  ii.  1067. 

At  the  Shrine  of  St.  Wagner,  ii. 
922. 

"Auntie  Cord,"  i.  509,  513- 
515. 

Aurora,  mining  days  in,  i.  193- 
204. 

Austin,  Alfred,  iii.  1253,  1384- 
Australia,  ii.  1009-1010,  1012. 
Austrian  Edison  Keeping  School 

Again,  The,  ii.  1057. 
Avebury,   Lord,  ii.   1105;  iii. 

1399. 

Bachbller,  Irving,  iii.  1252. 
Backas,  C.  A.,  i.  408. 
Bacon,  Prof.  Francis,  ii.  765. 
Badeau,  Gen.  Adam,  ii.  809. 
Baldwin,  Judge  A.  W.  (Sandy), 

i.  246,  300-302. 
Balfour,  Arthur  James,  iii.  1253, 

13,99- 

Baltimore,  ii.  877;  iii.  1496- 
1499- 

Bancroft,  H.  H.,  iii.  1248. 
Bangs,  John  Kendrick,  iii.  1182. 
1252. 

Bardi,  Countess,  ii.  1059. 


Barnes,  George  £.,  i.  258,  262. 
Barnes,  James,  ii.  977. 
Barnum,  P.  T„  ii.  564. 
Barrett,  Lawrence,  ii.  661,  866- 
867. 

Barne,  James,  iii.  1253. 
Barstow  of  the  Enterprise,  i.  194, 

202-203. 
Bateman  s  Point,  R.  I.,  i.  549. 
Bates,  Edward,  1.  170. 

1686 


Baxter,  Sylvester,  ii.  890. 
Bayreuth,  ii.  922. 
Beach,  Emma,  i.  327-328,  355. 
Beach,  Moses,  i.  325,  327,  355, 
366. 

Beard,  Daniel  Carter,  ii.  887- 
889;  iii.  1122,  1234,  1255, 
1285,  MSI,  1473-1473.  158a 

Beckwith,  Carroll,  ii.  900-90 1 . 

Beecher,  Henry  Ward,  i.  355, 

357-358,  371,  394,  437,  544; 

ii.  778,  815,  856. 
Beecher,  Thomas  K.,  i.  394-395, 

434;  ii.  707-708. 
Beecher,  Mrs.  Thomas  K.,  ii. 

1001-1002. 
Beecher-Tilton  trial,  i.  544. 
Belasco,  Davis,  ii.  885;  iii.  1414. 
Belated  Passport,  The,  iii.  1177. 
Bell,  Graham,  ii.  726. 
Bell,  Moberly,  ii.  1097,  1104;  iii. 

nlB  I3?8-I39> 
Benedict,  E.  C,  u.  866. 
Benjamin,  William  Evarts,  ii. 

971;  iii.  1439. 
Bennett,  James  Gordon,  i.  347, 

357- 

Bennett,  Sir  John,  i.  463. 
Berlin,  ii.  929-944,  946. 
Bermuda,  ii.  59 1  -593 ;  iii.  1376. 

1 435- 1 44 1,  1 541- 1 546,  1555- 

1569- 

Bernhardt,  Sarah,  iii.  1254. 
Biddle,  Nicholas,  iii.  14 13. 
Bigelow,  John,  ii.  658;  iu.  1536- 

1537,  1572. 
Bigelow,  Poultney,  ii.  986,  1039, 
1085. 

Billings,  Josh,  i.  444-446. 
Bingham,  Theodore  A.,  ii.  933. 
Birch,  Dr.,  i.  332. 
Birdsall,  George,  i.  298. 
Birrell,    Augustine,    iii.  1389- 
1391. 

Bishop,  William  H.,  ii.  605. 
Bisland,  Miss,  iii.  1384. 
Bispham,  David,  iu.  1415,  1521- 
1522. 

Bispham,  William,  ii.  866-867. 


INDEX 


Bixby,  Horace,  i.  117 -120; 
teaches  Mark  Twain  piloting, 
121-126;  leaves  the  Mis- 
sissippi, 128-129;  takes  Mark 
Twain  as  partner,  145-146; 
opinion  of  Mark  Twain  as 
pilot,  155;  becomes  chief  of 
Union  river  service,  161; 
meets  Mark  Twain  again,  ii. 
738-740;  greets  Mark  Twain 
on  latter's  trip  west  in  1002, 
iii.  ii66j  visited  by  author, 
1377;  death,  1377- 

Blackburn,  Leslie,  1.  298. 

Blackmer,  Margaret,  iii.  1435- 
U38. 

Blaine,  James  G.,  ii.  778-782. 
Blanc,  Madame  (Theodore  Bent- 

zon),  i.  506,  550. 
Blankenship,  Ben,  L  26,  54-55, 

63-64. 

Blankenship,  Tom,  i.  54,  56-60, 
62,  66,  507;  ii.  585. 

Bliss,  Elisha,  proposes  to  pub- 
lish a  book  for  Mark  Twain,  i. 
349-351;  arrangements  with 
Mark  Twain,  356-358;  ad- 
vances royalty  to  Mark  Twain, 
362;  refuses  to  withdraw  In- 
nocents Abroad,  365;  Mark 
Twain's  visit  to,  370-37 1 ; 
proposes  publication  of  an- 
other book,  419-420,  423; 
takes  Orion  as  editor,  425; 
makes  a  success  of  Innocents 
Abroad,  426;  letter  of  Mark 
Twain  to,  440;  chooses  title  for 
Roughing  It,  452;  Orion  leaves 
him,  455;  copyrights  Rough- 
ing It  in  England,  458;  pub- 
lishes Gilded  Age,  501 ;  trades 
saddle   for    typewriter,  536; 

Sublishes  Wright's   The  Big 
onanza,  544;    Mark  Twain 
takes  copy  of  Tramp  Abroad 
to,  ii.  663;  death  of,  696. 
Bliss,  Frank,  ii.  765,  985. 
Booth,  Edwin,  i.  495;   ii,  661, 
865-867;   iii.  1148. 


Booth,  Gen.  William,  iii.  1392- 

Boston,    1.   389-399,  444-449, 

529,  $58;  n.  603-606,  658- 

660;  iii.  1455.  1457- 
Boucicault,  Dion,  a.  596. 
Bourget,  Paul,  ii.  1028. 
Boutell,  Henry  S.,  iii.  1349. 
Bowen,  Bart,  i.  139,  150. 
Bowen,  Marjorie,  iii.  1384. 
Bowen,  Sam,  i.  29,  64,  164,  166, 

168,  507;  ii.  585. 
Bowen,  Will,  i.  54"55.  58.  64, 

118,  507;  ii.  585. 
Bowker,  George,  iii.  1343. 
Boyesen,  Hjalmar  H.,  ii.  643- 

645- 

Boyesen,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  ii.  645. 

Brady,  Jennie,  i.  67. 

Bridges,  Robert,  iii.  1455. 

Brings,  Artemisia,  i.  67. 

Briggs,  John,  i.  47,  54,  55;  pranks 
of,  58,  69-70,  86-87;  treasure- 
digging,  62-63;  witnesses  slave 
drowning,  64;  future  position, 
66;  Mark  Twain's  recollec- 
tions of,  507 ;  ii.  585 ;  meeting 
with  Mark  Twain  in  1902, 
iii.  1 1 68- 1 169,  1170-1171:  rec- 
ollections  of,  1332;  death  of, 

1377- 

Brisbane,  Arthur,  iii.  1184. 
Bromley,  Isaac,  i.  555. 
Brooks,  Noah,  i.  309,  555. 
Brooks,  Shirley,  1.  500. 
Brooks,  Sidney,  iii.  1384. 
Brougham,  John,  ii.  596. 
Broughton,  Urban  H.,  ii.  991. 
Brown,  Buck,  i.  67,  69;  iii.  1168. 
Brown,  Dr.  John,  1.  486-488, 

494,  505,  509;  577,  599.  647, 
688,  689-739. 

Brown,  pilot,  i.  1 29-1 31,  135— 
138. 

Brownell,  Edward,  i.  104-107. 
Browning,  Robert,  i.  484;  ii. 

749- 

Brush,  George  de  Forest,  iii. 
"37.  I3H. 


1687 


MARK  TWAIN 


Bryce,  James,  ii.  1085,  1104; 

lii.  1253- 
Buchanan,  Polly  Ann,  i.  13. 
Budapest,  ii.  1078. 

Buffalo,   i.   385-388.  395-434; 

ii.  787. 

Buffalo  Express,  i.  385-388,  398- 

402,  434.  434.  443. 
Bull,  Ole,  ii.  673. 
Bulwer,  Edward,  Lord  Lytton, 

i.  427-428. 

Bunce,  Edward,  ii.  614,  642,  778, 
1074. 

Bunce,  William  Gedney,  ii.  946. 
Bunner,  H.  C,  ii.  769. 
Burbank,  elocutionist,  ii.  762. 
Burchard,  Dr.  Samuel  D.,  ii.  781. 
Burke,  Martin  G.,  i.  264-265. 
Burlesque  Map  of  Paris,  i.  407- 
408. 

Burlingame,  Anson,  i.  285-288, 

290,  360-361,  401. 
Burlingame,  Edward,  i.  285,  288, 

iii.  141 2. 

Burnand,  Francis,  iii.  1400. 
Burning  Shame,  i.  267. 
Burrough,  Frank  E.,  i.  103. 
Burton,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  542. 
Bushncll,  Dr.  Horace,  i.  542. 
Butler,  George,  i.  52. 

Cable,  George  W.,  meets  Mark 
Twain  in  New  Orleans,  ii.  739; 
in  Hartford,  743;  visit  to  Mark 
Twain,  764-766;  starts  April 
Fool  letters  to  Mark  Twain, 
768-770;  reading-tour  with 
Mark  Twain,  783-792;  at 
Mark  Twain's  seventieth  birth- 
day celebration,  iii.  1252. 

Calaveras  County,  i.  270-273. 

California's  Tale,  The,  ii.  962. 

Cameron,  John,  ii.  964. 

Campbell-Bannerman,  Sir  Henry, 

ii.  1062;  iii.  1318,  1392-1393- 
Canada,  ii.  715-716,  748-749. 
Cannon,  Joseph,  iii.  1341,  1343- 

'345.  1349, 
Canvasser  s  Story,  The,  ii.  578. 


Caprell,  Madame,  i.  156-159. 
Captain    Stormfield's    Visit  to 

Heaven,  i.  561;  ii.  61 1,  840; 

iii.  1312.  143071431,  1454- 
Carlcton  &  Co.,  i.  277,  279,  308. 
Carmen  Sylva  (Queen  of  Ru- 
mania), ii.  1062;  iii.  1 179. 
Carnegie,  Andrew,  ii.  964,  986, 

1026;    iii.    1132-1 133.  1252, 

14I4-I4I5.  I4A.V 
Carroll,  Lewis,  i.  484. 
Carson  City,  i.  174-178,  187- 

189,  219-223,  244-247,  363- 

364- 

Carstensen,  Rev.,  iii.  1142. 
Century  Magazine,  ii.  982,  999, 

1057,  1099. 
Chamberlain,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii. 

643- 

Champney,  J.  Wells,  ii.  703. 
Chase,  William  H.,  ii.  977. 
Chatto  &  Windus,  ii.  852,  1039, 
1090. 

Cheatham,  Kitty,  iii.  1428. 
Cheiro,  iii.  1206. 
Chesterton,  Gilbert  K.,  iii.  12 5.1- 
Chicago,  ii.  653-657,  947,  965, 
979- 

Child,  Prof.  Francis  J.,  i.  451. 
Childs,  George  W.,  ii.  802. 
Choate,  Joseph  H.,  iii.  1272- 

"73.  1434. 
Cholmondeley,  Mary,  iii.  1383. 
Cholmondeley,  Reginald,  i.  489; 

565.  646,  711;  iii.  1383. 
Christian    Science   articles^  ii. 

1 067- 1 068. 
Christian  Science  and  the  Book 

of  Mrs.  Eddy,  ii.  1067. 
Christian  Union  article,  ii.  819— 

820;  iii.  1409. 
Church,  William  F.,  i.  335"339.- 
Churchill,  Winston  Spencer,  iii. 

1121m 

Cincinnati,  i.  1 12-1 15. 
Cincinnati  Enquirer,  i.  430. 
Clagget,  W.  H.,  i.  183-187,  220, 
244. 

Clapp,  Henry,  1.  277. 


1688 


INDEX 


Clapp,  Keziah,  i.  247. 
Clark,  Champ,  iii.  I349t  I493~ 
U94- 

Clarke,  Charles  H.,  i.  542;  ii. 

707,  868-870. 
Clarke,  William  Fayal,  ii.  964. 
Claude,  butler,  iii.  1426,  1462, 

1523,  1560,  L568,  1570,  1573- 

1574. 

Clemens,  Benjamin,  i.  8,  15-18, 
28,  44. 

Clemens,  Clara,  birth,  i.  509; 
babyhood,  ii.  577-578;  trip 
to  Germany,  617-618;  in 
Italy,  634;  saved  from  fire, 
699;  childhood  at  Quarry 
Farm,  823-825,  842-843,  883; 
at  Onteora,  900;  attends 
school  in  Berlin,  957;  joins 
family  at  Munich,  967;  re- 
turns to  America,  1001;  ac- 
companies parents  on  trip 
around  the  world,  1002,  1009, 
1010,  1017;  returns  to  Ameri- 
ca, 1020,  1024;  winter  in 
London,  1024-1027;  studies 
music  with  Leschetizky  in 
Vienna,  1048;  at  Saranac 
Lake,  iii.  1155;  nurses  mother, 
II90-L193;  attack  of  measles, 
1 195;  writes  about  house  in 
Florence,  1200;  sings  at  con- 
cert in  Florence,  1 2 1 5 ;  at 
mother's  death-bed,  1217-1219; 
ill-health,  1224-1225,  1308, 
1323;  objects  to  certain  ex- 
pressions of  Mark  Twain, 
1 236 ;  Mark  Twain  forwards 
Twichell's  letters  to,  1241 ; 
chooses  situation  for  home  at 
Redding,  1323;  goes  to  coun- 
try for  health,  1333;  returns 
home,  1339-134,0;  approves 
of  father  s  white  costumes, 
1 342 ;  opinion  of  father's  mem- 
ory, 1 309- 1 370;  cables  Mark 
Twain  to  ' '  remember  proprie- 
ties," 1385;  hostess  at  Mark 
Twain's       doe"  luncheons, 


1434;  on  concert  tour,  1446; 
goes  to  Stormfield,  1484;  tells 
Mark  Twain  of  Rogers  s  death, 
1491 ;  prepares  for  concert  tour, 
1505;  sings  at  Redding  con- 
cert, 1 52 1 ;  engagement,  1522; 
marriage,  1523-IS24;  Mark 
Twain's  letter  to,  on  Jean's 
death,  1554;  anxiety  about 
Mark  Twain,  i.s.sq;  sum- 
moned to  America,  1572;  ar- 
rival at  Stormfield,  I575~ 
1577- 

Clemens,  Gregory,  i.  1-2. 

Clemens,  Henry,  birth,  i.  19; 
boyhood,  28,  36;  character- 
istics of,  52-53,  81;  illness  of, 
95;  works  in  Orion's  printing- 
office,  104;  letter  from  Mark 
Twain  to,  109;  clerk  on  Penn- 
sylvania, 133-138;  injury  and 
death,  139-143. 

Clemens,  James,  i.  44. 

Clemens,  James  Ross,  ii.  1025, 
1039. 

Clemen?,  Jane,  girlhood  and 
marriage,  i.  3-4;  life  in  Ten- 
nessee, 7-8;  in  Florida,  Mo., 
10-12;  temper  and  cares,  14, 
17;  opinion  of  Sam's  health, 
29-30,  32;  original  of  "Aunt 
Polly"  in  Tom  Sawyer,  35-36; 
consoles  Sam,  40;  views  on 
slavery,  4 1  -42 ;  takes  boarders , 
44,91;  advises  Sam  at  father's 
death,  76;  parting  with  Sam, 
93;  welcomes  him  back,  102; 
lives  with  Pamela,  108;  makes 
Sam  renew  promise  in  regard 
to  cards  and  liquor,  112; 
takes  trip  to  New  Orleans  with 
Sam,  156;  letters  from  Mark 
Twain  to,  175,  183,  184,  192, 
233.  238-239,  312,  323,  358- 
360,  378,  470;  ii.  696,  728; 
pride  in  Mark  Twain,  i.  308- 
309;  given  Bible  by  Mark 
Twain,  338;  moves  to  Fre- 
donia,  N.  Y.,  425;  lives  with 


MARK  TWAIN 


Orion  at  Keokuk,  ii.  791-792; 
visit  of  Mark  Twain  and 
family  to,  844-845;  death  of, 
901. 

Clemens,  Jean,  birth  of,  ii.  682; 
danger  from  fire,  699;  child- 
hood at  Quarry  Farm,  775- 
776,  822-824;  childhood  at 
Hartford,  883;  at  Onteora, 
900;  awed  by  royal  invitation 
to  father,  936;  letter  from 
Mark  Twain  to,  946;  winter 
in  Florence,  957;  summer  in 
Germany,  967;  return  to 
America,  1 001-1002;  grief  at 
George's  death,  1053;  invalid- 
ism of,  1084;  iii.  1190,  133ft; 
takes  Kcllgren  treatment  in 
Sweden,  ii.  1087;  slow  process 
of  recovery,  11 03;  learns  to 
typewrite,  iii.  1121.  1135;  has 
attack  of  measles,  1195;  sec- 
ond winter  in  Florence,  1216- 
1218;  thrown  from  horse, 
122^;  musical  favorites,  1227; 
advises  against  publication  of 
"War  Prayer,"  1 234 ;  chooses 
house  at  Dublin,  N.  H.,  1237; 
mountain-climbing,  1238;  love 
of  solitude,  1308;  acts  as 
father's  secretary,  1484;  Mark 
Twain  pleased  to  have  her 
home,  1 492 ;  delight  in  out- 
door life  at  Stormfield,  1505; 
dances  at  Redding  concert, 
1522;  bridesmaid  tor  Clara, 
1523;  anxious  regarding  fa- 
thers health,  1528;  busy  life 
at  Stormfield,  1529;  talents 
of,  1530;  death,  1547;  funeral, 
1550- 1 55 1 ;  Mark  Twain  wishes 
to  make  memorial  for,  1565- 
1566. 

Clemens,  Jennie,  i.  221. 

Clemens,  John  Marshall,  youth 
and  marriage,  i.  2-4;  birth  of 
Orion,  5;  speculations  in  Ten- 
nessee, 7;  personal  character- 
istics, 8-9,  14,  30;  moves  to 


Florida,    Mo.,    10-13;  dis- 
solves partnership  with  John 
Quarles,  19;  decides  to  leave 
Florida,  24;  settles  in  Hanni- 
bal, 27;  elected  justice  of  the 
peace,  41;  trip  to  Tennessee, 
43;  return  to  judicial  practice, 
44-45;     financial    ruin,  72; 
death,  73. 
Clemens,  Langdon,  i.  417,  456. 
Clemens,  Margaret,  i.  11,  15-18. 
Clemens,  Mary,  i.  104,  141,  221, 

446;  iii.  1213. 
Clemens,  Olivia,  miniature  of, 
shown  to  Mark  Twain,  i.  340; 
meets  Mark  Twain,  352;  girl- 
hood, 355;  impression  of  Mark 
Twain,  356-357;  Mark  Twain 
falls  in  love  with,  368;  court- 
ship, 374_376*.  engagement, 
378-380,  391-392;  marriage, 
394-396;  influence  over  Mark 
Twain,  409-413.  559-56i; 
summoned  to  father's  death- 
bed, 415-416;  birth  of  Lang- 
don, 417;  illness,  433;  visits 
to  Quarry  Farm,  434,  440, 
508-510;  ii.  577-578.  823- 
825,  1001;  iii.  1205;  grief  at 
Langdon's  death,  1.  457;  MS. 
of  unfinished  English  book  sent 
to,  465;  Mark  Twain  wishes 
her  to  join  him  in  London,  469 ; 
writes  to  sister  of  Mark  Twain's 
delight  in  Hartford  home,  480; 
stay  to  England,  481-485;  in 
Scotland,  486;  homesick,  489; 
returns  to  America,  495;  good 
health  of,  500;  consents  to 
American  lectures,  502;  un- 
easy at  increased  expenses, 
505;  pleased  with  new  home, 
520-523;  character  of,  524- 
525;  letter  from  Mark  Twain 
in  Boston  to,  529-530;  dis- 
likes Mark  Twain's  neckties, 
537;  anxious  for  Howells's 
opinion  of  Tom  Sawyer,  548- 
549;   visit  to  Mrs.  Howells, 


INDEX 


558 ;  birthday  letter  from  Mark 
Twain  to,  562;  disapproval  of, 
George,  ii.  573~574;  restrains 
Mark  Twain  s  tendency  to 
burlesque,  610;  sails  for  Ger- 
many, 616-618;  stay  in  Ger- 
many, 620-624;  joins  Mark 
Twain  at  Lausanne,  632;  en- 
joyment of  Italian  art,  633- 
634;  winter  in  Munich,  635- 
639;  stay  in  Paris,  641-645; 
stay  in  England,  645-648; 
loss  of  orthodoxy,  650-651; 
letter  to,  from  Mark  Twain, 
describing  Grant,  653-654; 
goes  to  Elmira  for  her  health, 
663;  delights  in  Prince  and 
Pauper,  664;  household  anec- 
dotes of,  672-673,  680-681, 
777;  letter  from  Mark  Twain 
about  Grant  procession,  691; 
Christmas  customs,  698;  in- 
terest in  Gerhardt's  talent, 
703-704;  calming  influence  of, 
721;  does  not  share  Mark 
Twain's  speculative  enthu- 
siasms, 728;  longs  for  simpler 
life,  730;  takes  part  in  Cable's 
joke,  768;  criticism  of  Huckle- 
berry Finn,  774-775;  adapts 
Prince  and  Pauper  for  acting, 
787-788;  Mark  Twain's  tri- 
bute to,  in  Christian  Union 
article,  819-820;  interest  in 
Meredith's  novels,  847;  en- 
tertains Charles  Dickens,  Jr., 
859;  Mrs.  Grover  Cleveland's 
message  to,  865;  depressed  by 
Mr.  Crane's  death,  882;  sum- 
mer at  Onteora,  899;  loss  of 
mother,  901 ;  criticism  of 
Mark  Twain's  portrait,  902; 
goes  to  England  for  her  health, 
919-920;  summer  abroad,  921- 
928;  winter  in  Berlin,  920- 
944;  trip  in  Southern  Europe, 
945-946;  supplies  funds  to 
Webster  &  Co.,  969;  waiting 
for  good  news,  972,  978-979; 


improvement  in  health,  950; 
in  Florence,  954"957.  959; 
gives  financial  aid  for  Paige 
machine,  961-962;  worry  over 
financial  matters,  965-966 ; 
H.  H.  Rogers  declares  her 
chief  creditor  of  Webster  & 
Co.,  984-985;  brave  recep- 
tion of  news  of  failure,  986- 
987;  summer  at  fitretat  and 
winter  at  Paris,  989-900;  neces- 
sary economy,  996;  accom- 
panies Mark  Twain  on  tour 
around  the  world,  1002-1019; 
improvement  in  health,  1004; 
advises  retention  of  anonymity 
in  Joan  of  Arc,  1006;  fiftieth 
birthday,  101 1 ;  letters  home, 
1017;  receives  news  of  Susy's 
illness,  1020;  sails  for  Ameri- 
ca, 102 1 ;  returns  to  England, 
1025-1027;  Joan  of  Arc  dedi- 
cated to,  1033;  edits  Mark 
Twain's  writings,  1040;  sum- 
mer in  Switzerland!,  1044- 
1047;  life  in  Vienna,  1051- 
1063;  opposes  new  lecture 
tour,  1073;  trip  to  Budapest, 
1078;  mental  telepathy  be- 
tween her  and  Mark  Twain, 
1083;  wearies  of  wandering, 
1 102;  enjoyment  of  Dollis 
Hill,  1 109;  cannot  bear  re- 
turn to- Hartford,  iii.  1 .141 ; 
wearies  of  hearing  about 
"damned  human  race,"  1153; 
letter  from  York  Harbor  to 
Mrs.  Crane,  11 76;  illness 
at  York  Harbor  and  return  to 
Riverdale,  u  78-1181 ;  critical 
health  of,  1190-UQ3.  HQS: 
voyage  to  Italy,  1209;  condi- 
tion of  health  in  Florence, 
1211-1212,  1214;  death,  1217- 
IliBj  funeral,  1222-1223;  au- 
thor's only  meeting  with,  125M; 
Mark  Twain's  recollections  of, 


1350.  1494215^1  '524.  I529- 
Clemens,  Orion,  birth,  i.  5 ;  boy- 


1691 


MARK  TWAIN 


hood,  ii,  15-18;  assists  father 
in  store,  19;  extract  from  au- 
tobiography, 24;  apprenticed 
as  printer,  27-28;  gets  posi- 
tion in  St.  Louis,  44;  takes 
Mark  Twain  to  Sunday-school, 
49;  tries  to  improve  the  Blank- 
enships,  55;  grief  at  father's 
death,  74;  work  in  St.  Louis, 
75;  buys  Hannibal  Journal, 
85;  hard  times,  89-91;  sells 
Journal,  92-93;  moves  to 
Muscatine,  Iowa,  100;  mar- 
riage, 103;  printing-office  in 
Keokuk,  104-110;  studies  law 
in  Tennessee,  140;  takes 
Henry's  body  to  Hannibal, 
143;  letters  from  Mark  Twain 
to,  157,  196,  203,  359,  421,  431 , 
433;  »•  697,  753,  858,  907, 
950;  helped  by  Mark  Twain, 
1.  146-147;  advice  of  clair- 
voyant to,  158-159;  aboli- 
tionist, 168;  appointed  ter- 
ritorial secretary  of  Nevada, 
170;  trip  to  Nevada,  1 71-173; 
official  duties,  177-178;  poli- 
tical honesty  and  financial 
difficulties,  188-192;  enthu- 
siasm for  mining,  198;  Mark 
Twain  lives  with  him  in  Car- 
son City,  22 1 ;  official  fees 
increased,  244;  refuses  offer 
for  Tennessee  land,  263;  loses 
office,  322;  Mark  Twain  tries 
to  get  government  position 
for,  346,  348;  returns  to  St. 
Louis,  360;  moves  to  Hart- 
ford, 424-425,  457;  receives 
royalty  check  for  Roughing 
It,  455;  leaves  Bliss,  455; 
cares  for  Hartford  home  in 
Mark  Twain's  absence,  457; 
original  of  character  in  GUded 
Age,  478;  projects  of,  495, 
506;  pensioned  by  Mark 
Twain,  507;  writes  on  type- 
writer, 535;  begins  auto- 
biography, ii.  674-677;  Christ- 


mas present  to  Mark  Twain 
from,  698;  Mark  Twain's  visit 
to,  at  Keokuk,  791;  meets 
Mark  Twain  in  Chicago,  965; 
death,  1052. 
Clemens,  Pamela,  birth,  i.  7; 
moves  to  Florida,  Mo.,  1 1 ; 
school-days,  22,  28,  39;  origi- 
nal of  Cousin  Mary  in  Tom 
Sawyer,  36;  given  piano,  44; 
loveliness  of,  73;  teaches 
music,  75-76,  91;  returns  to 
Hannibal,  84;  gives  candy- 
pull,  87;  marriage,  92;  let- 
ters from  Mark  Twain  to,  94- 
97,  101,  180-181,  190-192, 
204;  ii.  858;  Mark  Twain 
tells  dream  about  Henry's 
death  to,  i.  134;  visits  picture 
gallery  with  Mark  Twain,  155; 
at  Mark  Twain's  wedding,  394 ; 
moves  to  Fredonia,  N.  Y., 
424-425;  death,  iii.  1224. 
Clemens,  Samuel,  i.  2,  13. 
Clemens,  Susy  (Susan  Olivia), 
birth  of,  i.  456;  childhood, 

4.83.  485,  500,  509-5IO.  526; 
ii.  684;  friendship  with  Dr. 
Brown,  i.  487-488;  thought- 
fulness  of,  ii.  577-578;  pleased 
with  Millet's  portrait  of  Mark 
Twain,  583;  trip  to  Germany, 
617-618;  letter  from  Germany, 
622;  in  Italy,  634;  fluency  in 
German,  638;  danger  from 
fire,  699-670;  extracts  from 
biography,  774~776,  820-824, 
840,  842-845;  helps  enter- 
tain Rudyard  Kipling,  880; 
writes  play,  883;  at  Onteora, 
900;  goes  to  Bryn  Mawr,  901 ; 
ill-health  of,  919;  entertained 
in  Berlin,  933-934;  letter 
from  Mark  Twain  to,  945; 
winter  in  Florence,  957,  959; 
studies  singing  in  Paris,  966; 
illness  of,  978,  989;  improves 
in  Paris,  900;  literary  talent 
°f.  9971    remains  at  Elmira 


INDEX 


while  parents  travel  around 
the  world,  1002;  illness  and 
death  of,  1020- 1023;  funeral 
of,  1024;  Mark  Twain's  recol- 
lections of,  1027,  1039,  1074, 
1078;  iii.  inj.s,  1 206,  1209, 
1222.  1246,  1299,  1500. 

Cleveland,  Grover,  ii.  780-781, 
786,  863-865;  iii.  U54- 

Cleveland,  Mrs.  Grover,  u.  865; 
iii.  1454. 

Cleveland,  Ruth,  ii.  863-864. 

Coe,  Mrs.,  iii.  1209. 

Colfax,  Schuyler,  i.  348,  407. 

Collier,  Edmund,  ii.  590. 

Collier,  Robert  J.,  iii.  1374.  1470, 

I475-I477. 
Collier,  Mrs.  Robert,  iii.  1434, 
1470. 

Collins,  Wilkie,  i.  496. 
Colonel  Sellers,  ii.  755-756. 
Columbia,  Mo.,  iii.  1 172-1173. 
Colvin,  Sidney,  iii.  1392. 
Comstock,  Henry  T.  P.,  i.  206. 
Concerning  the  Jews,  ii.  1065. 
Concord,  Mass.,  ii.  735. 
Connecticut  Yankee  in  the  Court 

of  King  Arthur,  A,ii.  716,  790, 

840,  873-875,  878,  887-894, 

898;  iii.  1226. 
Consistency,  paper  on,  ii.  854. 
Constantinople,  i.  335. 
Conway,  Moncure  D.,  ii.  570, 

647. 

Cook,  Frederick  T.,  iii.  1 133. 
Cooke,  Rose  Terry,  ii.  674. 
Coon,  Ben,  i.  271. 
Coquelin,  Jean,  ii.  977. 
Corbett,  James  J.,  ii.  973-974. 
Corelli,  Marie,  ii.  1039;  iii.  1405. 
Cosmopolitan  Magazine,  ii.  1067- 
1068. 

Cox,  S.  S.,  iii.  1341.  1345. 

Crane,  Theodore,  i.  375;  friend- 
ship with  Mark  Twain,  510- 
511;  letter  from  Mark  Twain 
to,  ii.  874-875;  death,  882. 

Crane,  Mrs.  Theodore,  i.  368; 
letters  of  Olivia  Clemens  to, 


409,  1061;  iii.  1176;  Mark 
Twain's  letters  to,  i.  470;  ii. 
622,  964;  iii.  1218.  1227,  1240, 
I45Q;  visits  of  Clemens  family 
to  home  at  Quarry  Farm,  1. 
434,  507-509;  «.  880;  per- 
suades Mark  Twain  to  write 
"Auntie  Cord's"  story,  i.  515; 
sees  Flagg's  portrait  of  Mark 
Twain,  ii.  902;  travels  with 
the  Clemenses  abroad,  ii.  920; 
returns  to  America,  953,  1044; 
summoned  to  Susy's  death- 
bed, 1023;  goes  to  York  Har- 
bor, iii.  IIZ9J  visits  Storm- 
field,  iii.  1470;  coupe"  pre- 
sented to,  by  Mark  Twain, 
1487. 

Crawford,  Gen.  Sam.  W.,  ii.  832. 
Creel,  Ella,  i.  106,  156,  178. 
Crisp,  Henry,  ii.  590. 
Crocker,  T.  D.,  i.  332. 
Croker,  Richard,  iii.  1 1 45-1 147. 
Cross,  Mr.,  i.  37,  67-70. 
Curing  a  Cold,  i.  238. 
Curious  Dream,  A,i.  402. 
Curious  Experience,  A,  ii.  705, 

719-720. 
Curious  Republic  of  Gondour,  The, 

i.  554. 
Curry,  Abram,  i.  188. 

Curry,  Mrs.  Abram,  i.  247,  364. 

Curtis,  George  W.,  i.  400;  ii. 

778. 

Curzon,  Lord,  iii.  1392- 139 5. 

Custer,  Mrs.,  ii.  900. 

Cutler,  Bloodgood  H.,  i.  330-331. 

Daggett,  Rollin  M.,  i.  207, 

259;  ii.  686,  856. 
Dahlweiner,  Fraulcin,  ii.  636. 
Daly,   Augustin,   ii.   571,  589, 

866-867. 
Damon,  Samuel  M.,  i.  283. 
Damrcll,  Mrs.,  i.  13. 
Damrosch,  Walter,  ii.  975. 
Dana,  Charles  A.,  ii.  829. 
Darwin,  Charles,  ii.  647. 
Daulton,  George,  iii.  1207. 


1693 


MARK  TWAIN 


Davis,  Richard  Harding,  ii.  977. 
Davis,  Sam,  i.  207. 
Dean,  Alletta  F.,  iii.  1137. 
Death  Disk,  The,  ii.  763 ;  in.  1 194, 
1246. 

De  Blowitz,  Henry,  ii.  933. 
Defense  of  General  Funston,  iii. 
1165. 

Defense  of  Harriet  Shelley,  In,  ii. 
988. 

Denny,  Col.,  i.  33*~335.  337- 
Densmore,  Gilbert,  i.  260,  517- 
518. 

Depew,    Chauncey,    iii.  1182, 

U34.  L4Q6. 
Derelict,  The  (poem),  iii.  1409. 
Dick  &  Fitzgerald,  i.  321 
Dickens,  Charles,  i.  353. 
Dickens,  Charles,  Jr.,  u.  859. 
Dickinson,  Asa  Don,  iii.  1280- 

1282, 

Dilke,  Sir  Charles,  i.  484. 
Diplomatic  Pay  and  Clothes,  ii. 
1074. 

Disgraceful  Persecution  of  a  Boy, 
i.  404. 

Dobson,  Austin,  iii.  1253. 
Dodge,  "Jamie,"  ii.  964,  972. 
Dodge,  Mary  Mapcs,  ii.  579,  900, 

949.  964. 
Does  the  Race  of  Man  Love  a  Lord? 

iii.  1 164. 
Dog's  Tale,  A,  iii.  L2ftfL 
Dolby,  George,  i.  491-492,  496. 
Dollis  Hill  House,  ii.  1 108-1 1 10. 
Don  worth,  Grace,  iii.  1319. 
Doten,  Alf,  i.  207. 
Double-Barrelled  Detective  Story, 

The,  iii.  1 136-1 ,  1 38. 
Doubleday,  Frank  N.,  iii.  1112- 

II 13.  1208.  1 32 1. 
Doubleday,  Mrs.  Frank,  iii.  1434. 
Douglas,  Dr.,  ii.  803-804. 
Douglass,   Frederick,   ii.  701- 

702. 

Doyle,  Sir  Arthur  Conan,  iii. 

12^3,  1384... 
Drew,  John,  11.  977. 
Drummond,  Henry,  ii.  661. 

1624 


Dublin,  N.  H.,  iii.  1237-1245, 

1306-1323- 
Duff -Gordon,  Lady,  iii.  1325. 
Duncan,  Captain  of  Quaker  City, 

i.  324,  328,  332. 
Duneka,  Frederick  A.,  iii.  1221. 

1246,  1329,  I5I.7- 
Dunham,  A.  C,  u.  1071. 
Dunham,  Samuel  C,  ii.  614, 
778. 

Dunlap,  Jimmy,  i.  38. 
Dunne,  Peter  Finley,  iii.  1329, 

Dunraven,  Lord,  1.  484. 
Du  Plessis,  ii.  1018.- 
Dvorak,  Antonin,  ii.  1062. 

Ealer,  George,  i.  133-134,  145. 
Eastman,  Dr.  Charles  A.,  iii. 

1223.  1473,  IS80. 
Eddington,  Jimmy,  i.  298. 
Eddy,  Mrs.,  ii.  1067-1068,  1075; 

iii.  1 186-1188. 
Edinburgh,  i.  486-488. 
Edward  Mills  and  George  Benton, 

ii.  67.1. 

Eells,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  iii.  1560. 
Elcho,  Lord,  i.  485. 
Elizabeth,  Empress  of  Austria, 

ii.  1070-107 1. 
Elmira,  N.  Y.,  i.  367-369.  377- 

379,  392-394.  415,  456;  ii. 
682,    1002,   1024;    iii.  1141, 
1205-1206,  1222-1223. 
Ely,  \Villiam,  i.  166. 
Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  ii.  603- 

607,  658,  735. 
Emerson,  Miss  Ellen  T.,  ii.  608- 
609. 

Emperor  William  of  Germany, 

»•  936,  940-944- 
England,  first  visit  of  Mark 
Twain  to,  i.  458-470;  second 
visit,  482-494;  Mark  Twain's 
return  to,  after  month  in 
America,  496-500;  summer 
of  1879  in,  ii.  645-648;  re- 
turn in  1896,  1019-1044;  in 
1899,   1085-1087,  1090-1110; 


INDEX 


Mark  Twain's  sojourn  in  1907, 

iii.  1381. 
Uttretat,  11.  987-989. 
Eve's  Diary,  iii.  1225,  1245. 

Fackler,  Rev.  J.  G.,  i.  306. 
Facts  Concerning  the  Recent  Car- 

nival  of  Crime  in  Connecticut, 

The,  ii.  560,  733~734- 
Facts  in  the  Case  of  the  Great  Beef 

Contract,  The,  1.  404. 
Pair,  James  G.,  i.  237. 
Fairbanks,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  i.  326- 
„  328,  369,  394. 
Farrar,  Gerald ine,  iii.  1434. 
Farrar,  Lord,  ii.  1105. 
Field,  Eugene,  iii.  u 74-1 1 75- 
Field,  Kate,  i.  539. 
Fields,  James  T.,  i.  390,  450;  ii. 

Fields,  Mrs.  James  T.,  ii.  980. 
Finley,  John,  iii.  1413.  I443- 
Fireside  Conversation  in  the  Time 

of  Queen  Elizabeth,  ii.  580. 
First  Romance,  The,  i.  433. 
Fischer,  Henry  W.,  ii.  935. 
Fiske,  John,  iii.  1162, 
Fiske,  Minnie  Maddern,  iii.  1245- 

1247. 

Fiske,  Prof.  Willard,  ii.  945, 
1109;  iii.  1210. 

Fitch,  Tom,  i.  207,  236,  249. 

Fitz-Patrick,  Sir  Dennis,  ii.  1104. 

Five  Boons  of  Life,  The,  iii.  1 162. 

Flagg,  Charles  Noel,  ii.  902. 

Florence,  ii.  634,  945;  at  Villa 
Viviani,  954-966;  at  Villa 
Reale  di  Quarto,  iii.  1209- 
1219. 

Florida,  Mo.,  i.  9-25. 

Flower,  Charles,  ii.  647. 

Floyd,  Governor   Charles  M., 

iii.  1455. 
Foard,  J.  M.,  i.  259. 
Following  the  Equator,  i.  480;  ii. 

565,  711,  1000,  1054,  1095. 
Foote,  W.  T.,  iii.  Lite. 
Forbes,  W.  J.,  i.  207. 
Ford,  Prof.  D.  R.,  i.  401,  422. 


Ford,  J.  I.,  ii.  585. 
Ford,  James  L.,  hi.  1156. 
Forrest,  Edwin,  i.  97. 
Francis,  David  R.,  iii.  1173-1 174, 

120.1.  1348. 
Franz  Josef,  Emperor  of  Austria, 

ii.  1078-1079. 
Frechette,  Louis,  ii.  716. 
Fredonia,  N.  Y.,  i.  424-425. 
Freeman,  Zobette  S.,  iii.  1528. 
Frohman,  Charles,  ii.  1075. 
Frohman,  Daniel,  ii.  762,  883. 
From  the  London  Times  of  1904, 

ii.  1057. 

Frozen  Truth,  The  (lecture),  i.  356. 
Fuller,  Frank,  i.  312-317,  321. 
Fulton,  Robert,  iii.  1247. 
Funston,   Gen.    Frederick,  iii. 
1165- 

Gabrilowitsch,  Ossip,  ii.  1063; 
guest  at  Stormfield,  iii.  1505; 
plays  at  Redding  concert, 
1521;  engaged  to  Clara  Clem- 
ens, 1522;  wedding,  1523- 
1524;  cabled  for,  1563;  ar- 
rival at  Stormfield,  1575,  1577. 

Gainsborough,  Tenn.,  1.  5. 

Galaxy  Magazine,  i.  347,  403- 
407,  422,  428-331. 

Gambctta  Duel,  The,  ii.  640. 

Garfield,  President  James,  ii. 
691,  694,  701,  711.  * 

Garland,  Hamlin,  iii.  11 56. 

Garth,  John,  i.  67;  iii.  1332. 

Gay,  Edward  J.,  i.  150. 

Geikie,  Sir  Archibald,  iii.  1399. 

Genung,  Charles  'Harvey  m. 
1261-1262.  1265.  1574- 

George,  butler,  ii.  573-574.  588, 
679,  777-779,  782.  920,  1053; 

iii.  1512,  I  $57;, 

Gerhardt,  Karl,  ii.  702-703,  774, 

807-809. 
German  Chicago,  The,  ii.  936. 
German  for  the  Hungarians,  ii. 

1077. 

Gibson,  William,  i.  332. 
Gilbert,  W.  S.,  iii.  1427. 


1695 


MARK  TWAIN 


Gilded  Age,  The,  i.  6,  8-9,  11-12, 
23,  68,  80,  475-479.  500,  506, 
517-518;  iii.  I22ix. 

Gilder,  Jeannette,  ii.  826;  iii. 
U73.  1522. 

Gilder,  Joseph,  ii.  826. 

Gilder,  Richard  Watson,  dis- 
cusses Grant  memoirs  with 
Mark  Twain,  ii.  799-800; 
notes  from  Mark  Twain  to, 
iii.  1116,  1216;  letter  from 
Mark  Twain  to,  about  Tyring- 
ham,  1221 ;  at  Mark  Twain  s 
seventieth  birthday,  1252;  at 
Players'  dinner,  1260:  sees 
Mark  Twain  on  latter's 
seventy-first  birthday,  13,^2; 
at  dedication  of  Aldrich  house 
in  Portsmouth,  1 455 ;  at  Clara 
Clemens's  wedding,  1524; 
death,  1541. 

Gilder,  Rodman,  iii.  1224. 

Gillespie,  i.  218-219. 

Gillette,  William,  i.  539;  ii. 
883-884. 

Gillis,  James  N.,  i.  265-268,  270- 

273,  393;  1377.  I37Q- 
Gillis,  Stephen,  compositor  on 
Enterprise,  i.  213-214;  joke 
on  Mark  Twain,  224-227; 
account  of  Mark  Twain's  duel, 
250-252 ;  life  in  San  Francisco 
with  Mark  Twain,  253-256; 
indicted  for  assault,  265;  re- 
turns to  San  Francisco,  274; 
mock  robbery  instigated  by, 
297-302;  receives  set  of  works 
from  Mark  Twain,  iii.  1373- 
last  message  to  Mark  Twain, 

1377 


Gillis,  William,  i.  267-269. 
Gladstone,  Herbert,  ii.  1104. 
Glasscock,  Asa,  i.  166. 
Glenn,  Mr.,  ii.  964. 
God.i.  141.180,215,323,343,344, 
412,  441,  510,  553;   ii.  578, 
584,  619,  627,  631,  632,  637, 
647,  650,  651,  665,  670,  690, 
776,  871,  889,  1083,  1097;  iii. 

1696 


1157-1161,  1 195,  1232, 
1234,  1244,  1245,  1271, 
Lili  1 353-1 358, 
1 440-1441.  1444. 
M9Q,  I.SQ6,  1513. 
1537.  ' 553.  1554, 
1 582-1 P57 
Pamela,  1.  2. 
i.  15-16;  ii. 


1297. 
1431  > 

L53i 

1561. 
Goggin, 
Golden  A  rtn, 


12331 
1296, 

1420, 

*467. 
1529, 


1010- 


IOII. 

Golden  Era,  i.  259-261. 
Goldsmith's  Friend  Abroad  Again, 
i.  406. 

Goldthwaite,  Dora,  ii.  590. 
Goodale,  Dora  Reed,  iii.  1473. 
Goodman,  Joseph  T.,  owner  of 
Enterprise,  i.  202-203,  206, 
207,  210;  companionship  with 
Mark  Twain,  216;  apprecia- 
tion of  Mark  Twain's  style, 
217-218;  consents  to  use  of 
Mark  Twain  as  nom  de  plume, 
221;  visits  Mark  Twain  in 
Hartford,  227;  financially  af- 
fected by  Dutch  massacre 
hoax,  230-231;  jolly  days  at 
Virginia  City,  239-242;  leaves 
Mark  Twain  in  charge  of 
Enterprise,  249,  252;  engages 
Mark  Twain  to  write  daily 
letters  for  Enterprise,  263-264.; 
recollections  of  Mark  Twain  s 
San  Francisco  days,  275-276; 
advice  to  Mark  Twain  when 
lecturing,  295-296;  tells  true 
story  of  mock  highway  rob- 
bery, 300-303;  writes  Mark 
Twain  about  publication  in 
book  form  of  Alia  letters, 
359;  testimony  as  to  Mark 
Twain's  character,  376;  as- 
tonishment at  Mark  Twain's 
religious  observances,  411; 
visit  to  Quarry  Farm,  435- 
437*.  suggests  addition  to 
"Hamlet,'  495;  writes  Mark 
Twain  of  dramatization  in 
San  Francisco  of  Gilded  Age, 
517;   urged  by  Mark  Twain 


INDEX 


to  frequent  visits,  544;  helps 
organize  company  for  Paige 
machine,  ii.  911-912;  comes 
East  to  bid  Mark  Twain 
good-by,  iii.  1207;  takes  au- 
thor to  Jackass  Hill,  1377. 

Goodwin,  C.  C,  i.  207. 

Gore,  Patty,  i.  164. 

Gorky,  Maxim,  iii.  1282-12M5. 

Gospel,  iii.  1235,  1483  (see  also 
What  Is  Man?). 

Gosse,  Edmund,  iii.  1253,  1384. 

Grant,  Dr.,  i.  72. 

Grant,  Gen.  Fred.,  ii.  693,  800, 
802,  808,  810;  iii.  1287. 

Grant,  Mrs.  Jesse,  ii.  808. 

Grant,  Gen.  U.  S.,  i.  360;  elec- 
tion of,  471 ;  first  meeting  with 
Mark  Twain  and  Chicago 
reception,  ii.  652-657;  visit 
to  Hartford,  691-^693;  interest 
in  Chinese  mission,  694-695; 
interview  with  Mark  Twain, 
7 1 2-7 1 3 ;  writes  memoirs,  799- 
806;  illness  and  continued 
work  on  book,  807-814;  death, 
815. 

Grant,  Mrs.  U.  S.,  ii.  816. 
Gray,  David,  i.  413-414;  ii.  580. 
Gray  &  Green,  i.  96,  318. 
Great  Revolution  in  Pitcairn,  The, 
ii.  640. 

Greeley,  Horace,  i.  239,  303  437- 

438,  472. 
Greene,  Henry  Copley,  iii.  1237. 
Greenwood,  Mr.,  iii.  1407. 
Gregory,  Lady,  ii.  1104. 
Grimes,  Ab.,  i.  164,  168. 
Gross,  Ferdinand,  ii.  1049. 
Grumman,  William  E.,  iii.  1472- 

1473- 

Hale,  Edward  Everett,  iii. 
1346,  1498. 

HaUTF.  GTTu.  708. 

Hall,  Fred.  J.,  assistant  of  Charles 
L.  Webster,  ii.  857;  letters  of 
Mark  Twain  to,  888,  918,  921, 
932,  960,  961,  962,  966,  967; 


urges  increase  of  capital  in  pub- 
lishing business,  913;  sends 
optimistic  reports,  946;  has 
talk  with  Mark  Twain,  947; 
accompanies  Mark  Twain  to 
Chicago,  965;  announces  fail- 
ure of  Webster  &  Co.,  983. 
Halsey,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  iii.  1573, 
»S75- 

Halstead,  Murat,  ii.  567,  617- 
618. 

Hambourg,  Mark,  ii.  1062- 1063. 
Hamcrsley,  William,  ii.  904-905. 
Hamilton,  Mr.,  iii.  1560. 
Hammond,  John  Hays,  ii.  1017, 
1019. 

Hancock,  Simon,  i.  2. 
Hancock,  Gen.  Winfield  S.,  i. 

326;  ii.  691,  856. 
Handy,  Moses  P.,  i.  555. 
Hannibal,  Mo.,  i.  26-30,  35-93, 

143.  163,  309,  376;   ii.  79i; 

iii.  1 166-1 171. 
Hardy,  Thomas,  ii.  747;  iii.  1253. 
Harper,  J.  Henry,  ii.  1005. 
Harper  &  Brothers,  ii.  778,  1000; 

iii.  ll\Ai  1206,  1266.  1470. 
Harper's  Bazar,  iii.  1528,  1545. 
Harper's  Magazine,  i.  291,  293; 

ii.  899,  917,  962,  1028,  1051, 
1090,  1106;  iii.  1 1 36.  1189, 
1 100.  H94.  L2_IL  1226,  1246, 
U3Q. 

Harper's  Weekly,  iii.  n 54. 
Harrington,  Admiral  Purnell  F., 

iii.  1406. 

Harris,  Joel  Chandler,  ii.  739, 
827. 

Harris,  Tom,  i.  166-167. 

Harrison,  Carter,  ii.  653. 

Harrison,  Katharine  I.,  ii.  1056. 

Harrison,  Lovell  B.,  ii.  977. 

Harte,  Francis  Bret,  association 
with  Mark  Twain  in  San 
Francisco,  i.  259-261;  places 
associated  with,  265,  268; 
suggests  publication  of  Mark 
Twain's  sketches,  280;  Mark 
Twain's  letter  to,  about  Jump- 


1697 


MARK  TWAIN 


ing  Frog,  320;  fame  of,  363; 
in  Boston,  447-448,  450-451; 
Mark  Twain  finds  publisher 
for,  544;  collaborates  with 
Mark  Twain  on  "Ah  Sin" 
play,  ii.  587-590;  death  of, 
lii.  1258. 
Hartford,  i.  356,  365,  370-372, 
434,  442-617,  652,  920,  1023; 
iii.  1 1 12.  1I56»  1278. 
Hartwig,  Madame,  iii.  U79. 
Harvey,  Dorothy,  iii.  1453. 
Harvey,  George,  gives  dinner  to 
Mark  Twain  on  his  sixty- 
seventh  birthday,  iii.  1182; 
invites  Mark  Twain  to  dine 
with  Russian  peace  commis- 
sioners, 1 243-1 244;  gives  din- 
ner to  Mark  Twain  on  seven- 
tieth birthday,  1250;  prints 
selections  of  Mark  Twain's 
autobiography  in  North  Ameri- 
can Review,  1322;  plays  bil- 
liards with  Mark  Twain,  1329; 
at  Human  Race  Club,  1425; 
discusses  Mark  Twain's  roy- 
alties, 1426;  gives  Howells 
farewell  party  at  Lake  wood, 
1428;  speaks  at  Lotos  Club 
banquet,  1433;  visits  Mark 
Twain   at  Stoi 


jtormfield,  1 

Hawaiian  Islands,  i.  282-288. 

Hawkins,  Laura,  i.  68,  70,  80, 
392;  iii.  1167^  i .-M2.  1470- 

Hawley,  Father,  i.  540-541. 

Hawley,  Gen.  Joseph,  ii.  708- 
709,  778-779.  863. 

Hawthorne,  Rose,  i.  529. 

Hay,  John,  i.  414;  refuses  Mark 
Twain's  offer  of  Mississippi 
trip,  533;  theory  of  human 
zenith  at  forty,  ii.  563;  on 
New  York  Tribune,  567;  com- 
ment on  160 1,  580;  pro- 
posed by  Mark  Twain  for 
membership  in  "  Modest"  club, 
689-690,  April  Fool  letter  to 
Mark  Twain,  769-770;  Mark 


Twain  writes  to,  1076;  death 
of,  iii.  1249. 
Hayes,  Rutherford  B.,  iL  581- 
582. 

Heaton,  J.  Henniker,  iii.  1384, 
1387. 

Heidelberg,  ii.  619-625,  923. 
Helm,  W.  H.,  ii.  11 10. 
Helmholtz,    Herman    von,  ii. 

936-937,  939- 
Helps,  Sir  Arthur,  i.  485. 
Henderson,  Archibald,  iii.  1380, 

Henry,  Prince,  of  Prussia,  ii. 

940,  942;  iii.  1156. 
Herts,  Alice  M.,  iii.  1411-1412. 
Higbie,  Calvin  H.,  i.  193,  195- 

196,  202,  204. 
Higginson,  Thomas  Went  worth, 

iii.  1237,  1455. 
Hingham,  Dick,  i.  104-105. 
Hingston,  E.  P.,  i.  230,  464. 
History  Repeats  Itself,  i.  408. 
Hitchcock,  Mrs.,  i.  260. 
Hobby,  Josephine,  iii.  1266,  1270, 

1275,  13QI.  1308,  1333- 

Hohcnlohe,  Princess,  ii.  1083. 

Holland,  Dr.,  i.  382. 

Holland,  George,  i.  406-407. 

Holland,  Pat,  i.  298. 

Hollister,  Joseph,  iii.  L20JL 

Holmes,  Oliver  W.,  i.  382,  552; 
attends  Whittier  birthday  din- 
ner, ii.  603-607;  breakfast 
given  to,  658-660;  verses  on 
Mark  Twain's  fiftieth  birth- 
day, 826-827,  830;  letter  of 
Mark  Twain  to,  828;  dinner 
with  Mark  Twain  at  Mrs. 
Fields 's,  980. 

Homburg,  ii.  951-952. 

Home,  Mr.,  i.  484. 

Hood,  Tom,  i.  460-461. 

Hookway,  Amelia  D.,  iii.  14 12. 

Hope,  Anthony,  ii.   1038;  iii. 

1253,  1384. 
Hornet  article,  i.  286-289,  291. 
Horr,  Miss  E.,  i.  36-39. 
Horse's  Tale,  A,  iii.  1246. 


1698 


INDEX 


Hosmer,  Dr.,  i.  483. 
Hotten,  John  Camden,  i.  408, 

463-464. 
Houghton,  Lord,  i.  484. 
House,  Edward,  i.  311;  ii.  885. 
Howe,  Julia  Ward,  ii.  658. 
Howells,  John  M.,  ii.  572-574; 

iii.  1322,  1446.  1474- 
Howells,  Mildred,  u.  576;  iii. 

1560. 

Howells,  William  Dean,  reviews 
Innocents  Abroad,  i.  382-383; 
meeting  with  Mark  Twain, 

290;  says  Mark  Twain  has 
ecorae  "  deSouthcrnized, " 
400;  in  Boston,  447;  at 
Keeler  luncheon,  450;  remarks 
on  Boston's  slowness  to  ap- 
preciate Mark  Twain,  451; 
notes  English  appreciation  of 
Mark  Twain,  462 ;  visits  Hart- 
ford frequently,  502-504;  work- 
manship of,  appreciated  by 
Mark  Twain,  510;  speaks  of 
Mark  Twain's  first  connection 
with  Atlantic  Monthly,  513- 
514;  letter  of  Mark  Twain  to, 
in  regard  to  dramatization  of 
Gilded  Age,  517;  speaks  of 
Mark  Twain's  attitude  tow- 
ard money,  519;  describes 
Clemens's  home  in  Hartford, 
522-523;  description  of  Mrs. 
Clemens's  character,  524-525; 
reception  of  Mark  Twain  after 
walk  to  Boston,  528-530; 
welcomes  Mississippi  book, 
531-5341  Mark  Twain  sends 
typewritten  letter  to,  535; 
presents  Mark  Twain  with 
cravats,  537;  comments  on 
Mark  Twain's  feeling  about 
Beecher,  544;  trip  to  Concord, 
545~546;  approval  of  Tom 
Sawyer,  548-549;  ii.  584;  re- 
views Sketches,  1.  552;  visit  of 
Clemenses  to,  558;  recom- 
mends publication  of  Captain 
Storm  field,  561;  wants  "Gon- 

1692 


dour"  papers  continued,  554- 
555;  likes  Facts  Concerning 
the  Recent  Carnival  of  Crime 
in  Connecticut,  ii.  569;  visits 
between  Howells  and  Mark 
Twain,  572-576;  asks  Mark 
Twain  for  contributions  for 
Atlantic  Monthly,  579,  623; 
interest  in  Hayes-Tuden  cam- 
paign, 581-582;  likes  Mark 
Twain's  notes  from  Bermuda, 
503-594;    interest  in  Mark 


1  wain's  new  "  Detective  " 
play,  595-596;  attends  Whit- 
tier  birthday  dinner,  604-609; 
visit  to  Mark  Twain  before 
latter's  departure  to  Germany, 
617;  letter  to,  from  Mark 
Twain  in  Heidelberg,  620; 
other  letters  from  Mark  Twain, 
635-636,  640,  654-655,  663, 
672-673,  695,  777,  1027,  1038, 
1055,  1065,  1073,  1096;  iii. 
1 2 14,  1218.  1312.  1459;  urges 
Mark  Twain  to  attend  Holmes 
breakfast,  ii.  658;  praises 
Tramp  Abroad,  665-668;  ad- 
vises against  publication  of 
Orion's  autobiography,  676; 
urged  by  Mark  Twain  to  use 
stylographic  pen,  688;  other 
schemes  suggested  to,  by  Mark 
Twain,  689-690;  approves  of 
Prince  and  Pauper,  697 ;  tells 
of  Mark  Twain's  interest  in  the 
negro  race,  701;  suggestion 
from  Mark  Twain  to,  706-707; 
appeals  to  Mark  Twain  to  use 
his  influence  in  his  father's 
behalf,  71 1-7 13;  declines  to 
accompany  Mark  Twain  to 
Canada,  715;  writes  biograph- 
ical appreciation  of  Mark 
Twain  for  the  Century,  731— 
733:  goes  abroad,  735;  cor- 
respondence with  Mark  Twain, 
741-743;  opinion  of  ioo2d 
Arabian  Night,  751;  letter 
about  Huckleberry  Finn,  754; 


MARK  TWAIN 


collaborates  in  play  "Colonel 
Sellers"  with  Mark  Twain, 
755-757;  meets  Matthew  Ar- 
nold, 758;  negotiations  about 
play,  760-762;  more  dramatic 
plans,  763-764;  reads  Huckle- 
berry Finn  proofs  for  Mark 
Twain,  772;  votes  for  Blaine, 
780;  describes  Author's  Read- 
ings for  Longfellow  Memorial, 
817-818;  recalls  Mark  Twain's 
enthusiasm  over  Life  of  Leo 
XIII.,  833;  likes  Connecticut 
Yankee,  841,  889,  891-892; 
Mark  Twain  writes  to,  about 
literary  favorites,  848;  ap- 
preciation of  Mark  Twain's 
paper  on  Knights  of  Labor, 
849-850;  writes  on  popu- 
larity of  "Life  of  the  Pope," 
855;  advises  Mark  Twain  to 
use  phonograph,  918;  reunion 
with  Mark  Twain  in  New 
York,  963-964,  975;  appre- 
ciation of  Mark  Twain,  1079; 
compares  Mark  Twain's  hon- 1 
esty  in  financial  matters  to ' 
Scott's,  iii.  11 11;  discussions 
with  Mark  Twain,  11 1 8—1 1 19; 
frequent  guest  at  Riverdale, 
1142;  given  degree  at  Yale, 
1 1 43- 1 144;  Mark  Twain  tries 
to  interest  him  in  plasmon, 
1 1 5 1 ;  near  neighbor  of  Clem- 
ens at  York  Harbor,  1176- 
II 79;  correspondence  with 
Mark  Twain  about  proposed 
new  "Huck  Finn"  book,  1 1 8 1 ; 
attends  Mark  Twain's  sixty- 
seventh  birthday  dinner,  1183- 
L183;  comment  on  Mark- 
Twain's  Christian  Science  ar- 
ticles, 1 1 86,  1 1 88;  speaks  of 
Mark  Twain's  loyalty  to  Oli- 
via Clemens,  1 193 ;  calls  Mark 
Twain's  attention  to  military 
outrages  in  Philippines,  1 196; 
last  sight  of  Mrs.  Clemens, 
1 205;   sympathy  with  Mark 


Twain  on  wife's  death,  1220; 
Mark  Twain's  remarks  on  his 
age,  1236.  1248,  1277;  reads 
sonnet  at  Mark  Twain's  sev- 
entieth birthday,  1250-1251 ; 
calls  on  Maxim  Gorky,  1283- 
1284;  site  at  Redding  offered 
by  Mark  Twain  to,  1323;  goes 
to  Washington  on  behalf  of 
copyright  legislation,  1343, 
1345,  1347,  1349:  attends  din- 
ner at  Players  Club,  1413J  at 
Human  Race  Club,  1425-1426; 
luncheon  at  Lake  wood  given 
by  George  Harvey  to,  1428- 
1429;  urged  by  Mark  Twain 
to  live  at  Redding,  1452;  at- 
tends dedication  of  T.  B. 
Aldrich's  house,  1455;  tells 
of  Mark  Twain's  content  with 
Stormfield,  1461 ;  describe*  1 
visit  to  Stormfield,  1 486-1 487; 
urges  Mark  Twain  to  complete 
the  dream  tale,  1 5 1 5 ;  sug- 
gests the  writing  of  The  Turn- 
tng-Point  in  My  Life,  1545; 
last  meeting  with  Mark  Twain, 
I5.S7;  last  letter  to  Mark 
Twain,  1559;  at  Mark  Twain's 
funeral,  1580. 

Howells,  Mrs.  W.  D.,  i.  530,  536, 
546,  558  ;  ii.  576,  688. 

How  I  Edited  an  Agricultural 
Paper,  i.  407. 

How  to  Tell  a  Story,  ii.  981. 

Howland,  Bob,  i.  176-177,  193, 
204. 

Hughes,  Charles  Evans,  iii.  1460. 
Humboldt  County,  i.  182-187. 
Huntington,  Henry,  iii.  1244- 
1*45- 

Hurlbut,  Stephen  A.,  ii.  654. 
Hutton,  Laurence,  ii.  769,  866- 
867,  900;  iii.  1 162.  1273. 

//  /  Could  Be  There,  iii  1158- 
1161. 

India,  ii.  1012-1015. 

Indignity  Put  upon  the  Remains 


1  700 


INDEX 


of  George  Holland  by  the  Rev. 
Mr.  Sabine,  i.  406. 
Information  for  the  Million,  i. 
238. 

Ingersoll,  Robert  G.,  ii.  654. 
In  Memoriam,  ii.  1047. 
Innocents  Abroad,    The,  i.  64, 
185,  261,  291,  322,  326,  329, 

338.  340,  380.  384.  408.  419- 
420,  422,  426-429,  431,  453- 

455,  459,  464;    «•  659-660, 

667-671;  iii.  122& 
Instructions  in  Art,  iii.  1 196. 
Ireland,  i.  488. 

Irving,  Sir  Henry,  i.  460;  ii. 

571,  661,  769,  994,  1 106;  iii. 

1249-1250. 
Isaac  and  the  Prophets  of  Baal,  ii. 

593. 

Isbel,  Prof.,  i.  104-105. 
Is  He  Dead?  ii.  108 1. 
Is  Shakespeare  Dead?  iii.  1484, 
i486. 

Jackass  Hill,  i.  265-269;  iii. 
1377. 

Jackson,  Dr.  A.  Reeve,  i.  326, 
332. 

Jacobs,  Joseph,  iii.  1253. 
James,  Henry,  ii.  646;  iii.  1260. 
Jamestown,  Tenn.,  i.  5-8. 
Jennie  (slave-girl),  i.  11,  13,  15, 

17,  30,  41- 
Jerome,  Leonard,  iii.  1231. 

Jesse,  Pres.  R.  H.,  iii.  1166. 

Jewett,  Sarah  Orne,  ii.  634,  946, 

980. 

John  Chinaman  in  New  York,  i. 
408. 

Johnson,  Robert  Underwood,  ii. 

769;  i"-  1343.  1494-1495. 
Johnston,  Col.  Richard  M.,  ii. 

877-878. 
J6kai,  Maurus,  ii.  1062. 
Jolly,  Beck,  i.  128. 
Jones,  John  P.,  ii.  725-726,  911- 

913- 

"Josh"  letters,  i.  194-195,  202- 
203,  206. 


Journalism  in  Tennessee,  i.  402. 

Jumping  Frog,  The,  i.  261,  271- 
273.  277-28o,  308,  312,  313, 
318-321,  349,  408,  506,  550. 

Kaltenleutgeben,  Austria,  ii. 

1070-1071. 
Keeler,  Ralph,  i.  449-450. 
Keller,  Helen,  ii.  1035- 1037;  iii. 

1 199,  1220.  1253-1254.  1273- 

1275,  1365,  147".  Uyo. 
Kcllgren,    Heinrick,    11.  1085, 

1087. 

Kelvin,  Lord,  iii.  1399- 

Kemble,  E.  W.,  ii.  772,  856. 

Kendall,  W.  S.,  i.  260. 

Kennett,  Thomas  A.,  i.  386. 

Keokuk,  i.  103-112,  309,  376; 
ii.  791-792,  844-845,  901. 

Keokuk  Gate  City,  i.  194. 

Kercheval,  Helen,  i.  67;  iii.  1 167. 

Kerr,  Orpheus  C,  i.  260. 

Killing  of  Julius  Casar  Localized, 
The,  i.  261. 

King  Edward  of  England,  iii. 
1385-1386. 

King  Leopold's  Soliloquy,  iii. 
1230-1231. 

King  of  Sweden,  ii.  1104. 

Kingsley,  Charles,  i.  462,  484; 
ii.  749. 

Kinney,  John,  i.  179. 

Kinney,  Col.  Peter,  i.  332. 

Kipling,  Rudyard,  first  meeting 
with  Mark  Twain  at  Quarry 
Farm,  ii.  880-882;  dines  with 
Mark  Twain  in  New  York, 
964;  Mark  Twain's  letter  to, 
1006;  Mark  Twain's  tribute 
to,  at  Authors  Club,  1087; 
praises  Mark  Twain,  iii.  1 208 ; 
congratulates  Mark  Twain  on 
his  seventieth  birthday,  1253; 
receives  Oxford  degree,  1392- 
1393,  1395;  Mark  Twain's 
appreciation  of  poetry  of, 
144Q. 

Kirkham,  Mrs.,  ii.  591-592;  iii. 
I3J6. 


1 701 


MARK 


TWAIN 


Kleimburg,  Mr.,  ii.  1057. 
Klein,  Charles,  iii.  1305. 
Klinefelter,  Captain,  i.  135-137, 
139. 

Knutsford,  Lord,  ii.  1105. 
Komura,  Count,  iii.  1399. 
Kossuth,  Franz,  ii.  1078. 
Kumar    Shri    Samatsinhji,  ii. 

1013-1014. 
Kurtz,  Abram,  i.  74. 

La  Bamboule-les-  Bains,  ii. 
987. 

Labouchere,  Henry,  ii.  933. 

Lafayette,  Marquis  de,  iii.  1173. 

Laffan,  W.  M.,  ii.  919;  iii.  1541. 

Laird,  Mr.,  i.  249-251. 

Lake  Tahoe,  i.  1 79-181. 

Lampton,  Benjamin,  i.  10. 

Lampton,  James,  i.  12,  23,  i8of 
477;  ii.  792. 

Lampton,  Wharton,  i.  30. 

Lang,  Andrew,  ii.  827-828,  894- 
896,  898,  1032,  1039;  iii.  1253- 

Langattock,  Lady,  iii.  1399. 

Langdon,  Charles  J.,  meets  Mark 
Twain  on  Quaker  City,  i.  327; 
shows  Mark  Twain  Olivia 
Langdon 's  miniature,  329;  in- 
troduces Mark  Twain  to  Olivia 
Langdon,  352 ;  learns  of  Mark 
Twam's  love  for  sister,  368- 
369;  summoned  to  Susy  Clem- 
ens's  death-bed,  ii.  1023; 
visit  to  Vienna,  1063. 

Langdon,  Mrs.  Charles,  ii.  599. 

Langdon,  Ida,  ii.  824. 

Langdon,  Jervis,  meets  Mark 
Twain,  i.  352;  admires  Mark 
Twain,  354;  allows  provisional 
engagement  between  Mark 
Twain  and  Olivia  Langdon, 
374-377;  advances  money  for 
purchase  of  Buffalo  Express, 
386;  presents  house  to  Mrs. 
Clemens,  392,  396;  illness  and 
death,  415;  bought  Quarry 
Farm,  434. 

Langdon,  Mrs.  Jervis,  i.  415. 

17 


Langdon,  Jervis,  Jr.,   ii.  824, 

1063;  iii.  1528,  1548. 
Langdon,  Julia,  ii.  824,  1044. 
Lark,  Charles,  iii.  1 528,  1566. 
Lamed,  J.  L.,  i.  386,  398-399. 
Laschowska,    Madame   de,  ii. 

1062. 

Lathrop,  George  Parsons,  ii.  817. 

Lauder,  George  B.,  iii.  1423-142^. 

Lawrence,  Frank,  ii.  971;  ui. 
1116.  1432. 

Lawrence,  Joseph  E.,  i.  259. 

Leary,  Katie,  describes  Mark 
Twain,  ii.  837-839;  accom- 
panies Clemens  family  abroad, 
920;  was  to  bring  Susy  and 
Jean  to  England,  1020;  nurses 
Susy,  1023;  goes  to  England 
with  Mrs.  Clemens  and  Jean, 
1025;  keeps  house  in  New 
York,  iii.  1 125;  accompanies 
family  to  Florence,  1218; 
emotion  at  unpacking  old 
Hartford  furniture,  1225;  tells 
of  Jean's  childhood,  1530; 
prepares  Jean  for  burial,  1549; 
welcomes  Mark  Twain  to 
Stormfield,  I574« 

Leavenworth,  Zeb,  i.  128,  I, 
161-162,  243. 

Lecher,  Otto,  ii.  1050. 

Lecky,  William  E.  H.,  ii.  1104. 

Lee,  Harry,  i.  460-461. 

Lee,  Sidney,  iii.  1392. 

Leigh,  Frederick  T.,  iii.  1329, 
1426. 

Lenbach,  Franz  von,  ii.  1062. 
Leo  XIII.,  ii.  833-835. 
Leonard,  Jack,  i.  152-153. 
Leschetizky,  Theodor,  ii.  1062— 

1063,  1084;  iii.  1339. 
Leslie,  Elsie,  ii.  883,  885. 
Letter  to  the  Queen  of  England, 

ii.  852-854,  951. 
Letters  from  the  Earth,  iii.  1531- 

Lewisf  Fred,  iii.  1130. 
Lewis,  John,  i.  515-517;  599" 
600. 

02 


13*. 


INDEX 


License  of  the  Press  (paper),  i.  542. 

Life  on  the  Mississippi,  i.  11 6, 
127,  137,  145;  ii.  735,  738, 
745-747.  796;  iii.  L226. 

Li  Hung  Chang,  ii.  694-695. 

Lincoln,  Robert,  ii.  710. 

Lindau,  Paul,  ii.  746. 

Lindau,  Rudolf,  ii.  940. 

Lipton,  Sir  Thomas,  iii.  1383, 

I387- 

Literary  Nightmare,  A,  i.  556. 
Literary    Offenses   of  Fentmore 

Cooper,  ii.  081. 
Littleneld,   Charles  Edgar,  iii. 

»349.  ... 
Littleton,  Martin  W.,  iii.  1406- 

1407.  I4j»5,  1471. 
Lockyer,  Sir  Norman,  iii.  1384, 

1389,  1302.  I399- 
Loeb,  Louis,  ii.  999. 
Logan,  Gen.  John  A.,  ii.  654- 

655. 

Loisette,  Prof.,  ii.  850-851. 
Long,  John  D.,  iii.  1341. 
Long,  John  Luther,  in.  1414. 
Longfellow,  Ernest,  i.  557. 
Longfellow,  Henry  W.,  i.  552, 

558;  ii.  603-607,  658,  735. 
Longfellow,  Miss,  i.  529. 
Loomis,  Edward,  iii.  i486,  1528, 
.  1557- 

Lome,  Marquis  of,  ii.  748-749, 
1039. 

Lotos  Club,  iii.  1 1 16,  1434. 
Lounsbury,  H.  A.,  in.  1462- 

1463.  1476-1477,  1504. 
Lounsbury,  Mrs.,  iii.  1471. 
Loves  of  Alonzo  Fitz-Clarence  and 

Rosannah  Ethelton,  The,  ii.  595. 
Lowell,  James  Russell,  i.  322, 552 ; 

ii.  778. 
Lowenhaupt,  ii.  1062. 
Lucerne,  ii.  953-954- 
Luck,  ii.  1 1 06- 1 107. 
Lucy,  Sir  Henry,  ii.  1104;  iii. 

1384,  I40O- 
Lucy,  Mrs.,  in.  1384. 
Ludlow,  Fitzhugh,  i.  244,  260. 
Lyell,  Sir  Charles,  iii.  1399. 


Lynchburg,  Va.,  i.  2. 
Lyon,  Miss  I.  V.,  iii.  1446. 
Lyon,  Tom,  i.  165. 

Mabie,  Hamilton  W.,  iii.  1182, 
1455. 

MacAlister,  J.  Y.  W.,  ii.  1038; 
Mark  Twain's  letters  to,  1039, 
1041,  1090;  iii.  1  ILL  1 121. 
1 190-1200,  L2_IL  1214.  1250, 
1323 ;  supplied  with  five  thou- 
sand pounds  by  Mark  Twain 
to  invest  in  plasmon,  ii.  1058; 
interests  himself  in  plasmon's 
success,  1 098- 1 099;  meets 
Mark  Twain  in  London,  iii. 
1382. 

Mac  Arthur,  Dr.  John,  ii.  1432. 

MacDonald,  Dr.,  i.  484. 

Macfarlane,  i.  n  4- 115. 

Mackay,  John,  i.  237;  ii.  911- 
912,  976. 

Mac  Veagh,  Franklin,  iii.  1315. 

Mac  Veagh,  Wayne,  iii.  1182. 

McAleer,  Patrick,  coachman,  i. 
306;  ii.  678,  698,  920;  death 
of,  iii.  1275;  praised  by  Mark 
Twain,  1278. 

McCall,  Samuel  W.,  iii.  1349. 

McCarthy,  Denis  E.,  one  01  the 
proprietors  of  Virginia  City 
Enterprise,  i.  205-206;  joins 
in  pipe  joke  on  Mark  Twain, 
225-227;  other  jolly  days  at 
Virginia  City,  230;  manages 
Mark  Twain's  nrst  lecture 
tour,  294-296;  participates 
in  mock  robbery,  298-303. 

McCarthy,  Justin,  i.  404. 

McClure  syndicate,  ii.  919,  936, 
1099,  nor. 

McComb,  Col.  John,  i.  292,  304, 
310,  361-362. 

McCormick,  Wales,  i.  76-77. 

McCrackan,  William  D.,  iii. 
1187-1 18& 

McCrellish,  Mr.,  i.  361-362. 

McDaniel,  Jimmy,  i.  67,  88;  iii. 


1703 


MARK  TWAIN 


McEwen,  Arthur,  i.  207. 
McGlooral,  "Smiggy,"  i.  258. 
McKclway,  St.  Clair,  iii.  1182, 
1229. 

McMuiray,  Pet,  i.  77-78. 

Macy,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  iii.  1470. 

Maeterlinck,  Maurice,  iii.  i_Lfj2* 

Magnanimous  Incident  Litera- 
ture, ii.  611. 

Maguire,  Tom,  i.  275-276,  292. 

Maharajah  of  Bikanir,  iii.  1394. 

Majestic  Literary  Fossil,  A,  ii. 
899. 

Man  that  Corrupted  Hadleyburg, 

The,  ii.  1068-1069. 
Marchesi,  Madame,  ii.  967. 
Marienbad,  ii.  923. 
Mark  Twain's  Autobiography  and 

First  Romance,  i.  433. 
Martin,  Edward  S.,  iii.   1 134, 

1498. 

Mason,  Frank,  ii.  863-864,  950. 

Massiglia,  Countess,  iii.  1210. 
i^M.  121  \. 

Matson,  Nuck,  i.  165,  168. 

Matthews,  Brander,  i.  384;  sends 
letter  to  Mark  Twain  ad- 
dressed "God  knows  where," 
ii.  566;  delight  in  Tom  Sawyer, 
585;  praises  Tramp  Abroad, 
668;  sends  April  Fool  letter 
to  Mark  Twain,  769;  has 
copyright  controversy  with 
Mark  Twain  in  Princeton  Re- 
view, 872-873;  at  Ontcora, 
900;  critical  opinion  of  Huck 
Finn  and  Joan  of  Arc,  1032; 
writes  introduction  to  com- 
plete edition  of  Mark  Twain's 
works,  1093;  visits  Mark 
Twain  at  Dollis  Hill,  1 109; 
luncheons  with  Mark  Twain 
in  New  York,  iii.  1 156;  let- 
ters from  Mark  Twain  to, 
1 197-1 198;  attends  Mark 
Twain  s  seventieth  birthday 
celebration,  1 252 ;  presides  at 
Players  Club  dinner,  l26xl 

Mauntius,  ii.  1016. 


Maxim,  Sir  Hiram,  iii.  1134. 
Mayo,  Frank,  ii.  1000. 
Mead,  Larkin  B.,  i.  529. 
Mein,  Captain,  ii.  1018. 
Mcisterschaft,  ii.  849. 
Memphis,  Tenn.,  i.  139-143. 
Menken,  Ada  Isaacs,  i.  248,  260. 
Mental  Telegraphy,  i.  543;  ii. 

917,  1028. 
Mentone,  ii.  945. 
Meredith,  John,  i.  67. 
Metcalf,  Willard  L.,  ii.  977;  iii. 

L2&Q* 

Metropolitan  Magazine,  iii.  1196. 
Mettcrnich,  Princess,  ii.  1062. 
Mighcls,  H.  R.,  i.  207. 
Millais,  Sir  John,  i.  484;  ii.  647. 
Miller,  Joaquin,  i.  260,  461,  496, 
544- 

Miller,  Mary,  i.  67. 
Millet,  Frank,  ii.  583,  642;  iii. 
1442. 

Mills,  John  Harrison,  i.  388. 
Missouri  Courier,  i.  76,  79. 
Modjeska,  Madame  Helen,  ii. 
769. 

Moffett,  Annie,  niece  of  Mark 

Twain,  i.  181,  394,  424-425; 

visit  to  Rome,  ii.  834-835. 
Moffett,  Samuel  E.,  nephew  of 

Mark  Twain,  i.  169,  181,  471; 

ii.  906;  iii.  1344,  1458,  1465- 

1466. 

Moffett,  William  A.,  marries 
Pamela  Clemens,  i.  92;  lends 
money  to  Mark  Twain,  120; 
Mark  Twain  stakes  mining 
claims  for,  180-181. 

Mommsen,  Theodor,  ii.  937-939. 

Monday  Evening  Club,  i.  541- 
542;  ii.  569,  588,  743-744- 

Monkswell,  Lord,  ii.  1105. 

Mono  Lake,  i.  200. 

Montgomery,  the  Montgomery 
family,  i.  3. 

Moore,  J.  Howard,  iii.  1363. 

Moore,  John  T.,  i.  156. 

Morgan,  Angela,  iii.  1 529. 

Morrill,  Paul,  i.  281. 


1704 


INDEX 


Morristown,  N.  J.,  ii.  787. 
Moulton,  Julius,  i.  326. 
Mount  McGregor,  ii.  813-815. 
Mrs.  Eddy  in  Error,  iii.  11 87. 
Mrs.   Mc  Williams's  Experience 

with  the  Membranous  Croup, 

ii.  674. 

Mrs.  Mc  Williams  and  the  Light- 
ning, ii.  674,  734. 

Mulford,  Prentice,  i.  260,  497- 
499- 

Munich,  ii.  635-641. 

Munro,  David,  iii.  1259,  1260. 

1372,  1 41 3. 
Murphy,  Mrs.,  i.  176. 
Muscatine,  Iowa,  i.  loo,  102. 
My  Bloody  Massacre,  i.  211. 
My  First  Lie,  and  How  I  Cot  Out 

of  It,  ii.  1090. 
My  First  Literary  Venture,  i.  91. 

Nansen,  Frithjof,  ii.  1062. 

Nasby  (D.  R.  Locke),  i.  385- 
387,  424,  445-446,  536. 

Nast,  Thomas,  proposes  joint 
lecture  tour  to  Mark  Twain,  i. 
321;  congratulated  by  Mark 
Twain  for  his  share  in  elect- 
ing Grant,  472 ;  Mark  Twain's 
letter  to,  ii.  611  -61 2;  opposi- 
tion to  Blaine,  778;  enter- 
tains Mark  Twain  and  Cable 
in  Morristown,  787;  Mark 
Twain's  admiration  for,  iii. 
1258;  Mark  Twain  comments 
on  Nast's  tragedy,  1336. 

Nauheim,  ii.  946,  949-950.  952- 
953- 

Ncigra,  ii.  1062. 
Newcomb,  Ethel,  iii.  1523. 
New  Orleans,  i.  120,  1 31-132, 

155-156. 

Newton,  Dr.  Heber,  ii.  900. 

New  York,  i.  94-97,  101,  312- 
323,  352-355;  963-965, 
969-986,  1000;  14  West  10th 
Street,  iii.  1 1 12-1 134,  1206; 
21  Fifth  Avenue,  1224-1225, 
1227-1447.  1460. 


New  York  Citizen,  i.  347. 
New  York  Evening  Post,  iii.  1460. 
New  York  Herald,  i.  345,  347- 

348,  360. 
New  York  Saturday  Press,  i. 

277-279. 
New  York  Sunday  Mercury,  i. 

243,  249. 
New  York  Tribune,  i.  317,  341, 

347-351. 
New  York  World,  ii.  1090. 

New  Zealand,  ii.  1011. 

Norfolk,  Va.,  iii.  1490. 

North  American  Review,  i.  25, 
381,  538;  ii.  609,  981,  988, 
1028;  iii.  1 127,  11 29-1 130, 
1 1 33,  1 164.  1 165,  1186-1 187, 

1225,  I22Q,   1235,   1259,  1322- 

M23.  I493. 
Northcliffe,  Lord,  iii.  1470. 
Norton,  Charles  Eliot,  1.  451; 

ii.  606,  817. 
Nye,  Bill,  ii.  876-877. 
Nye,  Captain,  i.  179,  201. 
Nye,  Emma,  i.  417. 
Nye,  James  W.,  1.  170,  174,  177, 

188-189,  312,  315-316,  348. 

O'Connor,  T.  P.,  iii.  13QQ.  1401. 
Ogden,  Robert  C,  iii.  1272. 
Old  Times  on  the  Mississippi,  i. 

531-534;    ».  942-944. 
Oliver,  A.  W.,  i.  183-1S7. 

O'Neill,  Ellen,  ii.  920. 

O'Neill,  John,  ii.  920;  iii.  1276. 

ioo2d  Arabian  Night,  ii.  751. 

£1,000,000  Bank- Note,  The,  ii. 

957- 

Onteora,  ii.  899-901. 
Open  Letter  to  the  Register  of  Copy- 
rights, iii.  I4Q3. 
O'Reilly,  Monseigncur  Bernard, 

ii.  833,  835. 

O'Reilly,  John  Boyle,  ii.  743. 

Ormsley,  Bettie,  i.  67. 

Osgood,  James  R.,  i.  529,  532; 
publishes  The  Facts  Concerning 
the  Recent  Carnival  of  Crime  in 
Connecticut,   ii.   569;  hospi- 


I705 


T 


MARK  TWAIN 


tality  of,  572;  iii.  1428;  pub- 
lishes Prince  and  Pauper,  ii. 
707;  accompanies  Mark  Twain 
to  Canada,  715;  publishes  The 
Stolen  White  Elephant,  734; 
accompanies  Mark  Twain  on 
Mississippi  trip,  735;  urges 
Mark  Twain  to  lecture  on  life 
on  the  Mississippi,  745. 

O'Sullivan,  Denis,  iii.  1428-1429. 

Otrcmba,  F.  N.,  iii.  1474- 

Our  Fellow  Savages  of  Ike  Sand- 
vtich  Islands  (lecture),  i.  492. 

Overland  Monthly,  i.  363. 

Owen,  Robert  Dale,  i.  534. 

Oxford,  iii.  1378.  1392-1396- 

Paderewski,  Ignace,  iii.  1425. 

Page,  Thomas  Nelson,  ii.  877; 
iii.  1350. 

Paige,  James  W.,  type-setting 
machine  of,  ii.  832,  904-907, 
910-91 1,  913,  947,  965.  979. 
990-995;  iii.  1296,  1297- 

Paine,  Albert  Bigelow,  first  meet- 
ing with  Mark  Twain,  iii.  1257; 
sends  copy  of  Life  of  Nasi  to 
Mark  Twain,  1 258 ;  asks  per- 
mission to  write  Mark  Twain's 
biography,  1262=1264;  begins 
biography,  1 266-1 271 ;  pho- 
tographs Mark  Twain,  1292- 
1293;  work  at  Dublin,  N.  H., 
1309- 131 2,  billiard  games 
with  Mark  Twain,  1324- 1332, 
1366;  stays  with  Mark  Twain, 
1333 -1 337.  1352;  accompa- 
nies Mark  Twain  to  Wash- 
ington, I34i-i35i;  trip  to  Pa- 
cific coast,  1376-1378;  meets 
Mark  Twain  on  his  return  from 
England,  1404;  attends  Mark 
Twain's  party  to  Howells, 
1 426- 1 42  7;  accompanies  Mark 
Twain  to  Redding,  1 448-1 451 ; 
accompanies  Mark  Twain  to 
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1455-1457; 
sails  for  Mediterranean,  1484; 
returns    to    Redding,  1484; 


accompanies  Mark  Twain  to 
Mr.  Rogers's  funeral,  1491 ; 
accompanies  Mark  Twain  to 
Baltimore,  1496;  companion- 
ship with  Mark  Twain  at 
Stormfield,  1503- 1540;  memo- 
randa of,  concerning  Mark 
Twain,  1506-1512,  1516-15 18. 
1 533" » 535;  enjoyment  of  tel- 
lers from  the  Earth,  1531;  ac- 
companies Mark  Twain  to 
Bermuda,  1541  -  1546;  goes 
to  Bermuda  to  bring  Mark 
Twain  home,  1563-1574. 
Paine,  Mrs.  Albert  Bigelow,  iii. 

1574. 

Paine,  Col.  A.  G.,  iii.  1139.  I  l6_2_ 
Paine,  Frances,  iii.  1453. 
Paine,  Joy,  iii.  U53,  1525- 
Paine,  Louise,  in.  1448,  1453. 
Pall  Mall,  Tenn.,  iTWT 
Paraty,  ii.  1062. 

Paris,  ii.  641-645,  921,  989-999. 
Parker,  Rev.  Edwin  P.,  i.  542; 

ii.  724-725»  747.  758-759. 
1071. 

Parker,  Sir  Gilbert,  iii.  1253. 
Parsloe,  Charles  T.,  ii.  587-589. 
Partridge,  Bernard,  iii.  1400. 
Patton,  President  Francis  L., 


iii.  1380-1381. 

I£ 

K 

141. 


Pavey  family,  i.  103. 
Pennsylvania,  the  (boat),  i.  129- 


Perkins,  Charles  E.,  i.  481,  503; 
ii.  778. 

Personal  Recollections  of  Joan  of 
Arc,  i.  81-82;  ii.  956,  958- 
960,  989,  993,  996-998,  1000, 
1 005-1006,  1028-1034;  iii. 
1226, 

Petrified  Man,  The,  i.  211. 
Peyton,  Dr.,  i.  140-141. 
Pfersdoff,  i.  186-187. 
Phelps,  Roswell,  ii.  735. 
Phelps,   Prof.  William  L.,  iii. 

1373.  1562. 
Phelps,  William  Walter,  ii.  933- 

935- 


1706 


INDEX 


Philadelphia,  i.  97-101. 
Philadelphia  Inquirer,  i.  97-98. 
Philadelphia  Ledger,  i.  98,  101. 
Philadelphia  North  American,  i. 
101. 

Philadelphia   Saturday  Evening 

Post,  1.  90. 
Phillips,  Raish,  i.  178,  193,  204. 
Piatt,  S.  M.  B.,  i.  404. 
Pierce,  Ed,  iii.  t  tfifl.  • 
Pilgrims,  the,  dinner  of,  iii.  1389- 

1390. 

PittsTWill,  i.  65;  iii.  nfifl. 
Players   Club,    iii.  1257-1261, 
r  2  7  2 . 

Poetzl,  ii.  1048,  1063. 
Pole,  Mrs.,  iii.  1387-1388. 
Pond,  J.  B.,  ii.  783-784,  876- 

877,   980,    1000-1002,  1005, 

1007,  1044,  1073. 
Pope,  Gen.  John,  ii.  654. 
Porter,  Robert  P.,  iii.  1392.  1395. 

1425,  U32-1433. 
Portsmouth,  Lord,  iii.  1399. 
Portsmouth,  N.H., iii.  14S.S~»456- 
Potter,  Edward,  i.  481. 
Prague,  ii.  1084. 

Prince  and  the  Pauper,  The,  ii. 
597-598,  662-664,  683-684, 
696-697,  715-718,  734,  789- 
790,  883-885;  iii.  141 L  '41 4. 

Prince  of  Wales  {see "also  King 
Edward),  ii.  951-952. 

Princess  Louise,  ii.  748. 

Private  History  of  a  Campaign 
that  Failed,  i.  169. 

Privilege  of  the  Grave,  The,  iii. 
*244. 

Protap  Chunder  Mazoomdar,  ii. 
,759- 

Puda'nhead  Wilson,  ii.  597,  949- 
9.50,  957,  982,  985,  999-1000; 
iii.  122&. 

Pumpelly,  Raphael,  iii.  1237. 

Punch,  Brothers,  Punch,  ii.  61 1. 

Putnam,  Herbert,  iii.  1346. 

Quaker  City  Excursion,  i.  324- 
341. 


Quarles,  John,  i.  9;  induced  John 
Clemens  to  settle  in  Missouri, 
9-12;  character  of,  17-18; 
dissolved  partnership  with 
John  Clemens,  19;  comment 
on  Salt  River  legislation,  20; 
farm  near  Florida,  Mo.,  30-34. 

Quarles,  Patsey  Lampton,  i.  9-10. 

Quarles,  Tabitha  (Mrs.  Green- 
ing), i.  31,  51,  78. 

Quarry  Farm,  i.  434-440,  505- 
519;  ii.  577-600, 649-650,  682- 

685,  750-754.  774-777.  819- 
822,  873,  880-882,  1001-1002, 
1022;  iii.  1205-120(2. 
Quintard,  Dr.  Edward,  iii.  1250. 
'5Q3.  L5JL  1563,  1573.  1577- 
1578; 

Radolin,  Prince,  ii.  940. 

Ralls,  Col.,  i.  165. 

Raymond,  John  T.,  i.  517,  539- 

540;  ii.  760-761. 
Rcadc,  Charles,  i.  462,  496. 
Redding,  Conn.,  iii.  1293- 1294, 

1322-1323.  1446-1540,  1574- 
1580. 

Redpath,  James,  i.  373,  409,  441, 
443,  473,  502,  527-528;  ii.  818. 

Reed,  Thomas  B.,  iii.  1139-1140, 
1 162-1163,  1182-1 183,  1 185. 
1344- 

Rccs,  George,  i.  112. 

Reid,  Robert,  ii.  973,  977;  iii. 

1250-1260. 
Reid,  Whitclaw,  iii.  1379,  1384, 

1392-1393.  1397- 
Rcinhart,  C.  S.,  ii.  977. 

Reminiscences  of  Some  Pleasant 
Characters  1  Have  Known 
(lecture),  i.  441. 

Revue  des  deux  mondes,  i.  506, 
55o. 

Rhone,  ii.  924-928. 

Rice,  Dr.  Clarence  C,  ii.  970, 

973,    1024;    iii.    113^    1 162, 

1250. 

Rice,  Clement  T.f  i.  207,  220, 
232,  235. 


III.-  «8 


1707 


MARK  TWAIN 


Richardson,  Abby  Sage,  ii.  883. 
Richardson,  Robert,  ii.  1024. 
Riggs,  George  C,  iii.  1412.  142H. 
K'JJgs,  Kate  Douglas  Wiggin,  iii. 

1252.  1394.  1434-1435. 
Riley,  J.  H.,  i.  348,  422-424. 
Riley,  James  Whitcomb,  ii.  876- 

877,  1055. 
Rising,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  214-215,  283, 

371. 

Rivcrdale- on  -the -Hudson,  iii. 

1 1 4 1  —  1 165,  1180-1205. 
Roan,  Admiral,  ii.  645. 
Robards,  John,  i.  67,  70;  iii. 

IiM. 

Robbins,  Elizabeth,  ii.  1089. 
Robinson,  Henry  C,  ii.  614,  693, 

766,  778-779- 
Robinson,  Tracy,  i.  362. 
Rochambcau,  Count  and  Count- 
ess, iii.  H73-1 174. 
Rodin,  Auguste,  iii.  1392. 
Rogers,  Henry  H.,  ii.  600;  in- 
terests himself  in  Mark  Twain's 
financial  affairs,  971-973,  979- 
980,  982-984,  987,  991,  1000, 
1004,  1007,  1055;    iii.  1266; 


letters  from  Mark  Twain  to, 

ii.  998,  1066,  1073,  1080- 
1082;  interests  himself  in 
Helen  Keller's  education  and 
financial  affairs,  1035-1037, 
1273;  nature  of  aid  given 
Mark  Twain,  1057-1058;  cor- 
respondence with  Mark  Twain, 
1 100,  1 102;  takes  Mark  Twain 
and  party  on  yachting  cruise, 

iii.  1139,  1 162- 1 163;  takes 
Clemens  family  on  yacht  to 
Maine  and  back,  U76,  1179- 
1 180;  takes  Mrs.  Clemens  on 
yacht  down  the  river,  1 205 ; 
good  nature  of,  mentioned  by 
Mark  Twain,  1236;  helps 
Joseph  Twichell  out  of  finan- 
cial   difficulties,     1241-1242 ; 


wanted  by  Mark  Twain  at 
seventieth  birthday,  1250;  se- 
lects billiard-table  with  Mark 


Twain,  1324;  frequent  visitor 
to  Mark  Twain,  133 ,7- 133 8; 
meets  Mark  Twain  in  London, 
1389;  takes  Mark  Twain  to 
Jamestown  Exposition,  1406; 
stay  in  Bermuda  with  Mark 
Twain,  1 439 ;  attends  opening 
of  Virginia  Railway,  1490; 
death  of,  1491 ;  characteristics 
of,  1492. 
Rogers,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  presents 
library  to  Fair  Haven,  ii.  981; 
letters  of  Mark  Twain  to, 
1 035- 1 037;  iii.  1314.  13^6, 
1 43Q.  1470;  sends  flowers  on 
Mrs.  Clemens's  departure  for 


Italy,  I2( 


gives  billiard- 


table  to  Mark  Twain,  1324, 
1327. 

Rogers,  Harry,  Jr.,  iii.  u,y). 
Rogers,  W.  A.,  iii.  1130. 
Rome,  ii.  634,  945.  •  " 
Roosevelt,  Theodore,  iii.  1231- 

'-^t  I34Q. 
Rose,  German  maid,  ii.  617,  622, 

699. 

Rosen,  Baron,  iii.  1241. 
Ross,  Janet,  iii.  1325. 
Rouen,  ii.  989. 

Roughing  It,  1.  1 71-172,  175-176, 
179,  183,  186-187,  193,  199- 
201,  203,  209,  236,  249,  253, 
262,  266,  282,  284,  290,  293, 
297,  300,  303,  305,  337,  433- 
436,  444,  452-455.  458,  507; 

ii.  586;  iii.  L22iL 
Routledge,  publishers,  i.  408, 459, 

461,  498. 
Ruloff  letter,  i.  437. 
Rumscy,  Colonel,  i.  285. 

Sabine,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  406-407. 
Sacramento  Union,  i.  281,  286. 
Sage,  Dean,  ii.  769,  1 109. 
Saint-Gaudens,  Augustus,  ii.  764. 
St.  Joan  of  Arc,  ii.  1090;  iii.  122O. 
St.  Louis,  i.  94,  102-103,  120, 
134.  308-309,  376;    ii.  7355 

iii.  II 66.  1173-1 175- 


1708 


INDEX 


St.  Louis  Evening  News,  i.  94, 
103. 

St.  Maur,  Kate  V.,  iii.  1473. 
St.  Nicholas,  ii.  982 ;  iii. 
Saint-Saens,  Camille,  iii.  1392- 
'393- 

Salisbury,  Lord,  ii.  1085. 

Salt  River,  i.  19-21. 

Salutation  from  the  Nineteenth  to 

the  Twentieth  Century,  iii.  1 127. 

1 149. 

Sambourne,  Linley,  hi.  I4<h3. 
Sandwich  Islands,  ii.  1008. 
Sanford,  A.  N.,  i.  332. 
San  Francisco,  i.  232,  258-265, 
274-282,  289-294,  304,  362- 

365. 

San  Francisco  Bulletin,  1.  229- 
230. 

San    Francisco  Calif omian,  i. 

256,  259,  261,  277. 
San  Francisco  Call,  i.  253,  256- 

259,  261-263. 
Sarony,  ii.  769. 

Saturday  Morning  Club,  ii.  846; 

iii.  1539. 
Saturday  Review,  Tfie,  i.  428-430. 
Savage  Club,  i.  470,  1041,  1086; 

iii.  1399. 
Saybrook,  Conn.,  1.  457. 
S'rat!  i.  395. 

Schlenther,  Herr,  ii.,  1075. 
Schlesingcr,  Sigmund,  ii.  1075. 
Schofield,  John  M.,  ii.  653. 
Schurz,  Carl,  ii.  780. 
Selkirk,  George,  F.,  i.  386. 
Sellers,  Eschol,  i.  501-502. 
Sellers,  Capt.  Isaiah,  i.  149-150, 

221-222. 
Sclms,  i.  43-44,  59-6o- 
vSeverance,  S.  L.,  i.  327-328. 
Severance,  Mrs.  S.  L.,  i.  327,  341. 
Sewall,  i.  21 1-2 12. 
Shaw,  George  Bernard,  iii.  1135, 
1382. 


Sheridan,  Gen.  Phil,  ii.  653,  655, 

661,  831,  856. 
Sherman,  Gen.  William  T.,  ii. 
653,  657,  661,  710. 

1709 


Sherry,  Margaret,  iii.  1209. 

Shipman,  Evan,  iii.  141 3. 

Simmonds,  Edward,  11.  973. 

Simmons,  Jack,  i.  220,  244. 

Simon  Wheeler,  the  Amateur  De- 
tective (play),  ii.  596. 

1601.  ii.  580-581. 

Sketches  New  and  Old,  i.  238,  404, 
407-408,  550-553. 

Skrine,  Francis  H.,  ii.  1039,  1045. 

Slee,  J.  D.  F.,  i.  39»~392,  395- 

Sloane,  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Miss,  iii. 
1560- 

Slotc,  Dan,  room-mate  of  Mark 
Twain  on  Quaker  City,  i.  322, 
327,  332;  trip  through  Syria, 
335-337;  reunion  with  Mark 
Twain  in  New  York,  352; 
partner  in  Slote,  Woodman  & 
Co.,  457;  gets  hold  of  kaola- 
typc  process,  ii.  726-727. 

Slote,  Woodman  &  Co.,  i.  457; 
ii.  611. 

Smalley,   George,   i.   485;  iii. 

1228.  1384. 
Smedley,  William  T.,  ii.  977. 
Smith,  Dr.  Ernest  H.,  iii.  1472- 

U73.  1548- 
Smith,  Gerrit,  ii.  977. 
Smith,  Goldwin,  ii.  964. 
Smith,  Helen,  ii.  570. 
Smith,  Joseph  Lindon,  iii.  1314. 
Smith,  Rev.  Judson,  iii.  1 130- 

1131. 

Smith,  Roswell,  ii.  801. 
Smythe,  R.  S.,  ii.  1001,  1009. 
Some  Fables  for  Good  Old  Boys 

and  Girls,  i.  551. 
Some  Rambling  Notes  of  an  Idle 

Excursion,  ii.  593-594. 
Soulc,  Frank,  i.  259. 
South  Africa,  ii.  1016-1019. 
Spain,  i.  340-341. 
Spaulding,   Clara,  accompanies 
Mrs.  Clemens  abroad,  i.  481, 
483-484;   second  trip  abroad 
with  Mrs.  Clemens,  ii.  616, 
622,  624,  634-635,  638,  646; 
in  Hartlord,  703. 


MARK 


TWAIN 


Spencer,  Herbert,  i.  485. 
Spiridon,  ii.  1062. 
Splawn,  Bill,  i.  165-168. 
Springfield  Republican,  iii.  1137. 
Spurgeon,  Rev.  Thomas,  ii.  647. 
Stalberg,  Thorwald,  iii.  1225. 
Standring,  George,  ii.  909. 
Stanley,  Sir  Henry,  i.  460,  464; 

ii.  859,  1039,  1041;  ui-  '215. 
Stanley,  Lady,  iii.  1383-1384- 
Stanton,  Theodore,  u.  928,  1063. 
Stead,  William  T.,  ii.  898,  1072; 

iii.  1442. 
Steamboat  Springs,  i.  238. 
Stebbins,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  372,  376. 
Stedman,  Arthur,  ii.  967. 
Stedman,  Edmund  C,  attends 

Holmes's  breakfast,  ii.  658; 
sends  April  Fool  letter  to  Mark 
Twain,  769;  admires  Huckle- 
berry Finn,  793;  edits  Li- 
brary of  American  Literature, 
856;  suggests  changes  in  A 
Connecticut  Yankee,  889,  892- 
893;  death,  iii.  1434. 
Stepniak,  Sergei  M.,  iii.  !35Qt 
isoo. 

Stevens,  Ed,  i.  164. 
Stevens,  E.  W.,  iii.  Li 73. 
Stevenson,  Robert  Louis,  i.  538; 

ii.  794,  859-860. 
Stewart,  Senator  William,  i.  237, 

299,  322,  346-347. 
Stirring    Times  in  Austria,  ii. 

1050-1051,  1065. 
Stockton,  Frank  R.,  ii.  827. 
Stoddard,    Charles   Warren,  i. 

260,  496-497;  ii.  714. 
Stoker,  Bram,  ii.  954,  1038;  iii. 

I3»3"i384- 
Stoker,  Dick,  i.  266-267,  270, 

272-273. 
Stolen  White  Elephant,  The,  ii. 

640,  734. 
Stone,  Sir  Benjamin,  iii.  1399. 
Storrs,  Emory,  ii.  655. 
Story  of  the  Good  Little  Boy  Who 

Did  Not  Prosper,  The,  i.  404. 
Stotts,  Belle,  i.  106,  178. 


Stout,  Ira,  i.  72. 

Stowe,  Prof.  Calvin  E.,  i.  542. 

Stowe,  Harriet  Bccchcr,  i.  356, 
442.  503;  ».  566,  570,  658,  661. 

Strange  Dream,  A,  i.  319. 

Straus,  Isidore,  iii.  1442. 

Stupendous  International  Pro- 
cession, iii.  1 149-1 150. 

Sullivan,  Miss,  iii.  1199,  1274, 
1365. 

Sunderland,  Philip,  iii.  1446. 
Sunderland,  W.  W.,  iii.  1446. 
Sweden,  ii.  1087- 1089. 
Swinburne,  Algernon  Charles,  i. 
557- 

Swinton,  William,  i.  359. 
Switzerland,  the  Cradle  of  Liberty, 

ii.  923. 

Switzerland,    i.    626-632,  923, 

1044-1048. 
Syria,  i.  335"339- 
Szczepanik,  h.  1 056-1 058. 

Talmage,  T.  DeWitt,  i.  404- 
406. 

Tarbell,  Ida  M.,  iii.  1473. 
Taunchnitz,  Baron,  u.  643,  666. 
Taylor,  Bayard,  ii.  617. 
Taylor,  Douglas,  ii.  568,  986. 
Taylor,  Howard,  ii.  898. 
Tchaykoffsky,     Monsieur,  iii. 

1 282-1 283. 
Tenniel,  Sir  John,  iii.  1253. 
Terry,  Ellen,  ii.  769. 
Tesla,  Nikola,  ii.  077. 
Thayer,  Abbott  H.,  iii.  1237. 
$30,000  Bequest,  The,  111. 
Thomas,    Augustus,    iii.  1250, 

1425-1426. 
Thompson,  Mr.,  i.  482-483. 
Three  Forks  of  Wolfe,  i.  7. 
3,000  Years  Among  the  Microbes, 

iii.  1238-1239. 

Thurn  and  Taxis,  Prince  of,  ii. 
1084. 

Thwing,  Lord,  ii.  1105. 
Tiehborne  trial,  i.  4^96-497. 
Tildcn,  Samuel  J.,  ii.  581-582. 
Tillou,  i.  183-187. 


'7 


10 


INDEX 


Todd,  Charles  Burr,  Hi.  1473. 
Tom  Sawyer  Abroad,  ii.  949,  957, 

982.  985,  1028;  iii.  13X0-12X1. 
Tom  Sawyer,  Adventures  of,  i.  33, 

46,  52-54.  61,  507,  509,  536, 

547-549;  570,  5«3-586; 

iii.  1220,  1456. 
Tom  Sawyer,  Detective,  ii.  1028. 
To  My  Missionary  Critics,  iii. 

1 130. 

To  Raise  Poultry,  i.  408. 

To  the  Person  Sitting  in  Darkness, 

iii.  1 1 27-1 129. 
Tower,  Charlemagne,  ii.  1049. 
Tramp  Abroad,  A,  i.  267,  384; 

ii.  665-671,  677,  697,  942;  iii. 
1226. 

Traveling  with  a  Reformer,  ii.  981. 
Tree,  Sir  Beerbohm,  iii.  1426- 

,  '437-. 

Trowbriigc,  J.  T.,  iii.  1456. 
True  Story,  A,  i.  513-51 4,  55  »• 
Trumbull,  J.  Hammond,  i.  477- 

478,  542. 
Tsar's  Soliloquy,  The,  iii.  1229- 
123a 

Tufts,  James,  ii.  1043. 
TurgenicT,  Ivan,  i.  484;  ii.  749. 
Turning-Point  in  My  Life,  The, 

iii.  L528,  154.S-I546,  1559. 
Tuxeilo,  iii.  1378.  1405. 
Twain,  Mark,  ancestry,  i.  1-4; 

qualities  inherited  from  father, 
9;  birth,  12-13;  childhood,  14- 
18;  first sightof  death, 22;  tricks 
played  him  by  memory,  24-25; 
description  of  Hannibal  by, 
26;  delicate  health  of,  28-30; 
summer  spent  on  John  Quarles's 
farm,  31-34;  first  school  days, 
35-40;  childish  view  of  aboli- 
tion, 42;  youthful  experiences 
in  Hannibal,  46-58;  leader  of 
boyish  band,  60;  treasure- 
digging,  61-63;  gruesome  ex- 
periences, 64-65;  girl  friends, 
67-68;  later  school  days,  69- 
71;  grief  at  father's  death, 
74-75;  apprenticed  as  printer, 


76-80;  first  interest  in  history, 
81;  studies  German  and  Latin, 
82-83;     ambition    to    be  a 

Ereacher,  84;  work  on  Hanni- 
al  Journal,  85;  amusements, 
86-^88;  first  literary  efforts, 
89-91;  goes  to  St.  Louis,  92- 
94;  life  in  New  York,  94-97; 
goes  to  Philadelphia,  98-100; 
homesickness,  101;  end  of 
Wander jahr,  102;  work  on  St. 
Louis  Evening  News,  103;  life 
in  Keokuk,  104-m;  goes  to 
Cincinnati,  112;  letters  to 
Keokuk  Post,  1 13— 1 14;  life 
in  Cincinnati,  114-116;  be- 
comes a  Mississippi  River  pilot, 
1 17-130;  life  on  the  river,  131- 
x34;  fights  Brown,  136-137; 
leaves  the  Pennsylvania,  138; 
learns  of  Pennsylvania  tragedy, 
139-140;  grief  and  remorse  at 
Henry's  death,  141-144;  be- 
comes full  pilot,  145,  152-156; 
enjoys  his  success,  146-148; 
writes  burlesque  of  Captain 
Sellers's  letters,  149-150; 
studies  French,  151;  visits  a 
clairvoyant,  157-159;  Civil 
War  puts  an  end  to  piloting, 
161-162;  experience  in  volun- 
teer company,  163-168;  be- 
comes Orion's  secretary,  170; 
trip  to  Nevada,  1 71-173;  im- 
pressions of  Carson  City,  174- 
176;  conspicuous  figure  in 
Carson  City,  177-178;  trip 
to  Lake  Tahoe,  179-181;  pros- 
pecting in  Humboldt  County, 
182-186;  return  to  Carson 
City,  187;  calls  on  Governor 
Nye,  189;  letters  to  Pamela, 
190-192;  mining  days  in  Au- 
rora, 193-202;  writes  for  Vir- 
ginia City  Enterprise,  202-218; 
profanity  of,  214-215;  reports 
Nevada  legislature,  219-220, 
211-247;  adoption  of  nom  de 
plume,   221-223;    returns  to 


171 1 


MARK  TWAIN 


Virginia  City,  224;  presenta- 
tion of  "bogus  pipe"  to,  225- 
227;  "Dutch  Nick  Massacre," 
228-231 ;  trip  to  San  Francisco, 
232-233;  journalistic  jokes, 
234-235;  publishes  first  verses, 
236;  recuperates  at  Steamboat 
Springs,  238;  friendship  with 
Artemus  Ward,  239-242 ;  writes 
for  New  York  Sunday  Mercury, 
243;  challenges  to  a  duel  at 
Virginia  City,  249-252;  re- 
porter on  San  Francisco 
Call,  253-258;  San  Francisco 
friends,  259-261 ;  resigns  from 
the  Call,  262;  writes  daily 
letters  from  San  Francisco  for 
the  Enterprise,  263-264;  in 
seclusion  on  Jackass  Hill,  265- 
269;  pocket  -  mining,  270- 
272 ;  returns  to  San  Francisco, 
273-276;  publication  of  Jump- 
ing Frog,  277-280;  trip  to 
Sandwich  Islands,  281-286; 
reports  Hornet  disaster,  287; 
return  to  San  Francisco,  288; 
first  lecture  tour,  291-296; 
mock  highway  robbery,  297- 
303;  voyage  to  Atlantic  coast 
by  way  of  Isthmus,  304-307; 
visit  to  mother  at  St.  Louis, 
308;  plans  trip  in  Quaker  City, 
309-31 1 ;  lecture  in  New  York, 
312-317;  publication  of  first 
book,  318-321;  letters  home, 
322-323;  trip  on  Quaker  City, 
324-341;  in  Russia,  333~334l 
in  Syria,  335~339;  »"  Spain, 
340;  return  to  America,  341; 
travel -letters,  342-345;  sec- 
retarial position,  347-348; 
ne\vspaj>er  work  in  Washing- 
ton, 349;  proposal  of  American 
Publishing  Co.  to  publish  book 
for,  349-351;  meets  Olivia 
Langdon.  352-355;  arranges 
for  publication  of  Innocents 
Abroad,  356-358;  refuses  San 
Francisco  postmastership,  359; 


meeting  with  General  Grant, 
360;  goes  to  San  Francisco 
to  settle  with  A  Ita  people, 
361-362;  lecture  tour  in  the 
West,  363-364;  returns  East, 
365;  visit  to  Langdons,  367- 
369;  stay  in  Hartford,  370; 
meets  Joseph  Twichell,  371- 
372;  lecture  tour  of  1868-69, 
373;  courtship,  374-376;  ac- 
cepted suitor,  377-380;  pub-  • 
lication  of  Innocents  Abroad, 
381;  buys  share  in  Buffalo 
Express,  385;  editorial  work 
on  the  Express,  386-388,  398- 
402;  first  meeting  with  How- 
clls,  389-390;  plans  for  house- 
keeping, 391-392;  marriage, 
394-396;  belief  in  doctrine  of 
inevitability,  397;  contributes 
"Memoranda"  for  the  Gal- 
axy, 403-407 ;  home  happiness, 
409-410;  philosophy  and  re- 
ligious beliefs,  411-412;  ii. 
743-744;  iii.  1156-1162.  1194- 
» 139<>-I398t  1335-1338, 
1353-1363,  1431.  1460-14O9, 
1481-1483,  1506-1508.  1513- 
1514.  1581-158.5;  friends  in 
Buffalo,  i.  413-414;  nurses 
Jervis  Langdon,  415-416; 
birth  of  son,  417-418;  plans 
for  books,  419-423;  plans  to 
leave  Buffalo,  424;  advice  to 
Orion,  425 ;  popularity  brought 
by  Innocents  Abroad,  426-427; 
writes  imaginary  English  re- 
view of  Innocents  Abroad,  428- 
430;  terminates  connection 
with  Galaxy,  431;  publication 
of  Mark  Twain's  Autobiog- 
raphy and  First  Romance,  433; 
sells  interest  in  Express,  434; 
encouraged  by  Goodman  in 
regard  to  Roughing  It,  435- 
436;  skit  on  H.  W.  Beecher, 
437;  works  on  Roughing  It, 
438;  lecture  tour,  441,  443- 
441),  452;  moves  to  Hartford, 


1712 


INDEX 


442;  attends  luncheon  given 
by  Keelcr,  450;  Boston's  slow 
recognition  of,  451;  blames 
himself  for  Lanedon's  death, 
456;  invents  "Mark  Twain 
Scrap-book,"  457;  first  visit 
to  England,  458-470;  tells 
of  meeting  with  Greeley,  472; 
lectures  for  charity,  473-474; 
collaborates  with  Warner  on 
Cilded  Age,  474-479;  buys 
lot  on  Farmington  Avenue, 
480;  sails  with  family  for 
England,  481;  letter  to  Twi- 
chell  from  London,  483;  en- 
tertainment and  lectures  in 
London,  484-485,  490-494, 
496-499;  visits  Scotland,  486- 
488;  occasional  lectures  in 
America,  502;  Howell s's  visits 
to,  503-504;  grateful  for  hap- 
piness, 505;  opinion  of  Orion, 
506;  work  and  rest  at  Quarry 
Farm,  507-515;  dramatizes 
Gilded  Age,  517-519;  relations 
with  Mrs.  Clemens,  524-525, 
558-561 ;  letter  describing 
view  from  Hartford  house, 
526;  walk  to  Boston,  527-529; 
writes  Old  Times  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi, 531-534;  experience 
with  typewriter,  535-536;  suc- 
cess of  Sellers  play  in  Hartford, 
539;  lectures  and  readings 
in  Hartford,  540-541 ;  interest 
in  psychic  phenomena,  542; 
interest  in  Beecher-Tilton  trial, 
544;  trip  to  Concord,  545- 
546;  finishes  Tom  Sawyer,  547- 
549;  contributes  to  Atlantic 
Monthly,  554;  writes  A  Liter- 
ary Nightmare,  555"557;  Po- 
lishes Sketches,  550-551;  in- 
terest in  copyright,  552-553'. 
ii.  686,  872;  1105-1106,  hi. 
13AQ-I35I.  UQ.V-UQS;  fre- 
quent visits  to  Howclls,  i.  558; 
ii.  575-576;  birthday  letter  to 
wife,  i.  562;  anecdotes  of  pop- 


ularity and  kindness  of,  ii.  563- 
568;  appears  in  amateur 
theatricals,  570-571;  work  at 
Quarry  Farm,  577-580,  649, 
776-777;  interest  in  Hayes- 
Tildcn  campaign,  581-582; 
portrait  painted  by  F.  Millet, 
583;  publication  of  Tom  Saw- 
yer, 584-586;  collaborates  with 
Bret  Harte  on  A  h  Sin,  587- 
590;  first  trip  to  Bermuda, 
591-594;  writes  new  play, 
595-596;  begins  Prince  and 
Pauper,  597-598 ;  domestic 
dramas  at  Quarry  Farm,  599- 
602 ;  Wh;ttier  birthday  speech, 
603-609 ;  refuses  to  join  Thom- 
as Nast  in  lecture  tour,  611- 
612;  hours  with  his  children, 
612-615;  stay  hi  Germany, 
616-625;  tramp  with  Twichcll 
in  Switzerland,  626-632;  days 
in  Italy,  633-635;  winter  in 
Munich,  636-639;  letters  to 
Howclls,  640,  672-673,  741- 
742;  hi.  1218;  stay  in  Paris, 
ii.  641-645;  trip  to  England, 
645-648;  regret  that  he  had 
caused  wife's  loss  of  ortho- 
doxy, 651;  Grant  speech  in 
Chicago,  652-657;  attends 
Holmes's  breakfast,  658-660; 
home  life,  661-662;  renews 
work  on  Prince  and  Pauper, 
663-664;  publishes  Tramp 
A  broad,  665  -  67 1 ;  suggests 
writing  of  autobiography  to 
Orion,  674-677;  absent- 
mindedness  of,  678-681;  let- 
ter to  Twichell  telling  of  Jean's 
birth,  682-683;  fondness  for 
cats,  684-685;  iii.  1316-131 7; 
organizes  4 '  M odest '  club,  11 . 
689-690;  interest  in  Garfield 
campaign ,  69 1  -693 ;  sees  Grant 
about  Chinese  mission,  694- 
695 ;  dissatisfaction  with  Amer- 
ican Publishing  Co.,  696;  con- 
sideration for  negroes,  700- 


1713 


MARK 

701;  interest  in  Gcrhardt's 
talent,  703-704;  plan  for 
monument  to  Adam,  707-709; 
trip  with  Sherman,  710-71 1; 
asks  Grant's  aid  for  Howclls's 
father,  71 1— 713;  Canadian 
trips,  715,  748-749;  publishes 
Prince  and  Pauper,  716;  news- 
paper attacks  and  reprisals, 
719-722;  controversy  with 
post-office  department,  723 ; 
interest  in  patents,  724-728; 
large  financial  disbursements, 
729;  takes  Mississippi  trip, 
735-740;  fondness  for  Os- 
good, 745;  invents  history 
game,  752-754;  collaborates 
with  Howetls  in  play  Colonel 
Sellers,  755~757,  760-762; 
meets  Matthew  Arnold,  758- 
759;  interest  in  dramatic 
writing,  763-764;  entertains  G. 
W.  Cable,  765;  rides  bicycle, 
767;  April  Fool  letters  to, 
768-770;  engages  in  publish- 
ing business,  771-773;  work 
on  Huckleberry  Finn,  774-775; 
attitude  in  Blaine-Cleveland 
campaign,  778-782;  reading 
tour  with  Cable,  783-792; 
publishes  Huckleberry  Finn, 
793;  publication  of  Grant's 
memoirs,  799-814;  reads  for 
Longfellow  memorial,  8 1 7-8 1 8 ; 
publishes  tribute  to  Mrs.  Clem- 
ens in  Christian  Union,  819- 
820;  letter  to  Mrs.  Clemens, 
825;  fiftieth  birthday,  826- 
831;  suggestions  to  Webster, 
836;  work  on  Connecticut 
Yankee,  840-841,  873-875, 
887-888,  893 ;  interest  in  mind 
cure,  842-843;  visit  to  mother 
at  Keokuk,  844-845;  writes 
Meisterschaft,  648;  tries  mem- 
orizing system,  850-851 ;  letter 
to  Queen  of  England,  852- 
854;  financial  pressure  begins, 
857-858;    visits  to  President 


TWAIN 

Cleveland,  864-865;  member 
of  Players  Club,  866-867;  iii. 
1 257-1261,  1272 ;  degree  con- 
f erred  by  Yale,  ii.  867-869; 
introduces  Nye  and  Riley,  876; 
readings  for  charity,  877-879; 
meets  Rudyard  Kipling,  880- 
882;  embroiders  slipper  for 
Elsie  Leslie,  883-884;  attends 
New  York  performance  of 
Prince  and  Pauper,  885;  letter 
to  Andrew  Lang,  899-9^0; 
death  of  mother,  901 ;  por- 
trait painted  by  Flagg,  902; 
interest  in  Paige  typesetting 
machine,  903-914,  961-965, 
967-971,  983-985,  990-996; 
tries  phonograph,  919;  goes 
abroad,  920;  writes  travel- 
letters  from  Europe,  921-923; 
trip  down  the  Rhone,  924- 
928;  winter  in  Berlin,  929- 
939;  dines  with  Emperor,  940- 
944;  trip  through  France, 
Italy,  Switzerland,  Germany, 
457946;  trips  to  America  on 
usincss,  946-948,  963,  967- 
968;  literary  work  at  Nauhcim 
949-950;  meeting  with  Prince 
of  Wales,  951-952;  stay  at 
Villa  Viviani  in  Florence,  954- 
966;  work  on  Joan  of  Arc, 
956-960,  988,  989,  996-998; 
welcome  in  New  York,  964, 
971-979;  meets  H.  H.  Rogers, 
970;  dines  with  O.  W.  Holmes 
at  Mrs.  Ficlds's,  980;  con- 
tributions to  various  maga- 
zines, 981;  failure,  983-985; 
rests  in  France,  987;  writes 
In  Defence  of  Harriet  Shelley, 
988;  business  letters  to  Rogers, 
990-994,  1081-1082;  returns 
to  America,  1000-1001;  lecture 
tour  around  the  world,  1002- 
1019;  visit  to  President  Kruger, 
1019;  letter  to  Kipling,  1006; 
receives  news  of  Susy's  death, 
1020-1023;  offers  of  financial 


1714 


INDEX 


aid  to,  1 025- 1 026;  sadness  at 
Susy's  death,  1 026-1027;  Joan 
of  Arc  published  in  book  form, 
1028;  preference  for  Joan, 
1034;  interests  Rogers  in 
Helen  Keller,  1035-1037;  life 
in  London,  1038- 1039,  1 041; 
writes  for  American  papers 
about  Queen's  Jubilee,  1043; 
summer  in  Switzerland,  1044- 
1046;  life  in  Vienna,  1048- 
1052,  1059,  1063;  1072- 
1083;  improvement  in  fi- 
nancial affairs,  1054  -1055; 
makes  final  payment  to 
creditors,  1056;  interested 
in  various  commercial  enter- 
prises, 1056-1058;  letter  to 
Theodore  Stanton,  1063;  let- 
ter to  Twichell,  1064;  not 
given  to  race  distinctions, 
1 065- 1 066;  Christian  Science 
articles,  1068,  1075;  iii.  1186- 
11 88;  summer  at  Kaltenleut- 
geben,  ii.  1 070-1 071;  col- 
laborates with  Schlesinger  on 
German  play,  1075;  dinner 
at  Budapest,  1078;  audience 
with  Emperor  Francis  Joseph, 
1078;  visit  to  Prince  of  Thurn 
and  Taxis,  1084;  trip  to  Lon- 
don, 1085-1086;  summer  in 
Sweden,  1087-1088;  letter  to 
Elizabeth  Robbins,  1089;  re- 
turn to  London,  1090;  anger 
at  editing  of  MSS.,  109 1 -1093; 
issue  of  complete  works,  1093- 
1094;  sympathy  with  Boers, 
1 095- 1 097;  interest  in  plas- 
mon,  1098;  iii.  1 150;  plan  to 
edit  new  magazine  falls  through , 
ii.  1099-1 1 10;  appears  in  House 
of  Lords  to  explain  views  on 
copyright,  1105-1106;  ban- 
quets in  London,  1 106;  sum- 
mer at  Dollis  Hill  House, 
1 108-1 1 10;  return  to  Ameri- 
ca, nioj  takes  house,  14  West 
10th  Street,   New  York,  iii. 


U12:  arrangements  with  Har- 
per &  Brothers,  11 14^  1206; 
entertained  at  various  New 
York  clubs,  11 16-1 120;  inter- 
est in  Chinese  Boxers,  1120- 
1 121 ;  speech-making,  1121- 
1 124;  writes  To  the  Person 
Sitiing  in  Darkness,  and  other 
criticisms  of  missionaries,  1 127- 
1 134;  summer  at  Saranac  Lake, 
1 1 35-1139;  cruises  on  Rogers's 
yacht,  1139-1140,  1 1 62-1 163; 
takes  house  at  Riverdale,  1141 ; 
receives  degree  of  doctor  of 
letters  from  Yale,  114 3 ;  makes 
speech  against  Croker,  1145- 
1146;  address  at  Players  Club, 
1 1 48;  writes  Salutation  from 
Nineteenth  to  Twentieth  Cen- 
tury, 1 149-1  i.so;  various  in- 
vestments, 1 150-1 151 ;  writes 
papers  on  the  Philippines, 
1 164-1 165;  trip  to  Missouri 
to  receive  degree  conferred 
by  University  of  Missouri, 
1 1 66-1 175;  summer  at  York 
Harbor,  1 176-1 1 78 ;  worry 
over  Mrs.  Clemens's  health, 
1 1 79  -  1 1 8 1 ;  sixty  -  seventh 
birthday,  L184J  tribute  to 
Thomas  Reed,  1185;  records 
notes  of  Mrs.  Clemens's  ill- 
ness, 1190-1193;  second  win- 
ter at  Riverdale,  1 194-1204; 
fondness  for  mathematics, 
1199-1200;  lack  of  political 
ambition,  1201 ;  refuses  con- 
sent to  Mark  Twain  day  at 
St.  Louis  Fair,  1.202=120^; 
summer  at  Quarry  Farm, 
1205;  stay  at  Villa  Quarto 
Reale,  Florence,  120Q-1222; 
last  talk  with  Mrs.  Clemens, 
1217;  writes  to  Twichell  of 
Mrs.  Clemens's  death,  1218- 
L219;  sails  for  America,  1222; 
funeral  of  Mrs.  Clemens,  1222- 
1223;  summer  at  Tyringham, 
Mass.,  1224;   takes  house  in 


!715 


■ 

MARK  TWAIN 


New  York,  21  Fifth  Avenue, 
1225;  publishes  Eve's  Diary 
and  Saint  Joan,  1225-1226; 
taste  in  music,  1227-1228; 
plans  numerous  reforms,  122S- 
1229;  opinion  of  Theodore 
Roosevelt,  1231 ;  writes  War 
Prayer,  1232- 1234;  summers 
at  Dublin,  N.  H.,  1 237-1245, 
1308-1323;  takes  part  in 
Rogers  s  ruse  to  aid  Twichell, 
1241-1242;  opinion  on  Rus- 
sian- Japanese  peace,  1242- 
1244;  writes  A  Horse's  Tale, 
124(1;  cannot  accept  San  Fran- 
cisco invitation,  1247-1248; 
seventieth  birthday  celebra- 
tion,  1 250-1 254;  speaks  for 
Russian  sufferers,  1254;  first 
meets  author,  1257;  return 
to  Players  Club,  1260-1 261 ; 
agrees  to  writing  of  biography, 
1264;  work  on  biography, 
1 266-1 27 1,  1299-1302;  speaks 
at  Carnegie  Hall,  1272;  speaks 
at  Y.  M.  C.  A.,  1276;  speaks 
at  Women's  University  Club, 
1280;  attends  dinner  given 
Putzel,  1280;  interest  in  Max- 
im Gorky,  1282=1285 ;  lec- 
tures for  Fulton  Memorial 
Association,  1287- 1290;  buys 
land  at  Redding,  1 293-1 294; 
congratulations  to  Cam}  rat: 
Bannerman,  1318;  opinion  of 
English  spelling,  1319;  pub- 
lishes What  Is  Man?  132 1 ; 
billiard -playing,  1324-133  2; 
seventy-nrst  birthday,  1332; 
visit  to  Washington  in  behalf 
of  copyright  bill,  1340-135 1 ; 
interest  in  the  telharmonium, 
1364;  economies  of,  1371— 
1372;  goes  to  Bermuda,  1373- 
1374,  1376 ;  trip  to  England 
to  receive  Oxford  degree,  1379- 
1404;  entertained  in  London, 

'■V^-1391,  i.\97.-I4°^  gar- 
den party  at  Windsor,  1385: 

17 


dinner  at  Pilgrims,  1390;  din- 
ner at  Mansion  House,  1397; 
at  Savage  Club,  1399;  Punch 
dinner,  1400;  at  Tuxedo,  1405  ; 
attends  Jamestown  Exposi- 
tion, 1406;  interest  in  Chil- 
dren's Educational  Theater, 
1411-1412;  speaks  at  En- 
gineers Club,  1414;  curious 
correspondence,  1420  -  1424; 
gives  party  to  Howells,  1425- 
1426;  attends  farewell  dinner 
to  Howells  at  Lakewood,  1429; 
entertained  by  Lotos  Club, 
1432;  stay  in  Bermuda,  1435- 
1441;  speech  on  Queen  Vic- 
toria's birthday,  1442;  at- 
tends dedication  of  City  Col- 
lege, 1443;  goes  to  Redding, 
1 44 7-1 451 ;  life  at  Stormfield, 
1452.  1461-1487;  attends  dedi- 
cation of  Aldrich  House  in 
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1455- 
1457;  attends  nephew's  fu- 
neral, 1458;  establishes  li- 
brary at  Redding,  1471-1473; 
interest  in  Shakespeare-  Bacon 
controversy,  1479-1486;  in- 
corporates pen-name,  1485; 
visit  of  Howells  to,  1486-1487; 
makes  speech  at  opening  of 
Virginia  Railway,  1490;  at- 
tends Rogers's  funeral,  1491 ; 
corresixMidencc  with  Champ 
Clark  about  copyright,  1493- 
1495;  visit  to  Baltimore  school 
1496-1499;  first  attack  of 
angina,  1498;  taste  in  litera- 
ture, ii.   846-847;  iii.  1196- 

1197;  1501-1502;  1536-154°; 

increase  of  disease,  1 503-1 505, 
1527-1 528;  interest  in  astron- 
omy, 1509-1510.  15»*"- 1.519, 
1 542 ;  attends  Redding  library 
concert,  1521-1522;  pleased 
at  Clara  Clemens's  marriage, 
1 523-1 524;  writes  Letters  from 
the  Earth,  1531-1533;  trip  to 
Bermuda,    1909,    1 541 -1546; 

6 


INDEX 


returns  home  for  the  Christ- 
mas holidays,  1547;  Jean's 
death,  1 548-1550,  >  552-1 554; 
returns  to  Bermuda,  1555— 
1569;  welcomes  A.  B.  Paine 
on  arrival  in  Bermuda,  1564; 
illness  on  voyage  home,  1569- 
1573;  arrival  at  Stormheld, 
1574;  death,  157**;  funeral, 
1 579- 1580. 

Twiehell,  David,  ii.  1064. 

Twichell,  Rev.  Joseph,  beginning 
of  friendship  with  Mark  Twain, 
i-  37 1 -372;  performs  marriage 
ceremony  between  Olivia  Lang- 
don  and  Samuel  Clemens,  394; 
letters  from  Mark  Twain  to, 
417-418,  483-484,  499-500, 
508,  510;  ii.  682-683,  752, 
928,  ion,  1018,  1027,  1046, 
1060,  1064,  1070,  1074,  1077, 
1087-1088,  1093,  1095,  1 104, 
1 109;  iii.  1 139,  1 140,  1156- 
1158,  1 181 ,  1 195,  1205,  1211, 
1215,  1218,  1220,  1231,  1234, 
1235,  1238;  in  Hartford, 
i.  503;  opinion  of  Mark 
Twain's  marriage,  525;  walk 
to  Boston  with  Mark  Twain, 
526-529;  suggests  writing  of 
Mississippi  experiences  to 
Mark  Twain,  531;  member 
of  the  Monday  Evening  Club, 
542;  at  Beecher's  trial,  544; 
at  Concord  Centennial,  546; 
160 J  sent  to,  ii.  580;  trip  to 
Bermuda  with  Mark  Twain, 
591-594;  at  Quarry  Farm, 
601-602;  enthusiasm  for  the 
Kubaiyat,  615;  Swiss  ex- 
cursion with  Mark  Twain, 
621,  626-632;  Mark  Twain 
reports  progress  of  Tramp 
Abroad  to,  666-667;  intro- 
duced to  stylographic  pen, 
688-689;  meets  Gen.  Fred. 
Grant  at  Mark  Twain's,  693; 
interest  in  Chinese  mission, 
694-695;   trip  to  West  Point 


with  Mark  Twain,  710-71 1; 
entertains  Matthew  Arnold, 
758-759;  secures  copies  of 
rare  book  for  Mark  Twain, 
766:  learns  to  ride  a  bicycle, 
767-768 ;  opposition  to  Blaine, 
778-779;  letter  to  Mark  Twain, 
815;  Mark  Twain  works  at 
home  of,  874;  at  Nauheim, 
951 ;  summoned  to  Susy  Clem- 
ens's  death-bed,  1023;  meets 
Mrs.  Clemens  on  return  from 
Europe,  1024;  travels  in  Swit- 
zerland, 1088;  performs  fu- 
neral ceremony  for  Mrs. 
Clemens,  iii.  1222;  financial 
aid  extended  to,  by  H.  H. 
Rogers,  1 241 -1242;  conversa- 
tions with  Mark  Twain,  1335; 
second  trip  to  Bermuda  with 
Mark  Twain,  1376;  performs 
Clara  Clemens's  wedding  cere- 
mony, 1523;  at  Mark  Twain's 
funeral,  1579. 

Twichell,  Mrs.  Joseph,  i.  394, 
484;  iii.  1579. 

Twing,  Dan,  i.  204^. 

Two  Little  Tales,  ii.  1099. 

Tyringham,  Mass.,  iii.  1221, 1224. 

"Uncle  Dan'l,"  i.  33. 
"Uncle  Ned,"  i.  15-16. 
Undertaker  s  Story,  The,  i.  509. 
Unionville,    Humboldt    Co.,  i. 

185-186. 
Universal  Suffrage  (paper),  i.  541, 

554- 

Upton,  Mrs.  Millie,  i.  13. 

Vancouver,  ii.  1003-1007. 
Vandal  Abroad,  The,  i.  373. 
Van  Dyke,  Dr.  Henry,  iii.  1182, 
1579. 

Van  Nostrand,  Jack,  i.  326,  332, 

336-338,  352,  426. 
Van  Valkenburg,  Gen.,  i.  285. 
Venice,  ii.  633,  946. 
Vereshchagin,  Vasili,  ii.  1062. 
Versen,  Frau  von,  ii.  933,  1025. 


1717 


Digitized  by  Google 


MARK  TWAIN 


Versen,  Gen.  von,  ii.  935,  940, 
943- 

Very,  Joseph,  ii.  924-928,  944- 
945- 

Vienna,  it.  1048- 1069,  1072- 
1084. 

Vilas,  Gen.  William  F.,  ii.  654- 
655. 

Villa  Reale  di  Quarto,  Florence, 

iii.  1210-1219. 
Villa  Viviani,  Florence,  ii.  954- 

966. 

Virchow,  Rudolph,  ii.  936-937. 
Virginia  City,  i.  205-218,  221, 
224-231,    234-242,  248-252, 

295-303,  363. 
Virginia  City  Territorial  Enter- 
prise, i.  194,  205-214,  224,  230- 
231,  234,  239,  244,  248-249, 
262,  264,  274-275,  277,  348. 

Wakeman,  George,  i.  404. 

Wakeman,  Capt.  Ned,  i.  304~3°5- 
362;  ii.  593- 

Walford,  Cornelius,  ii.  726. 

Walker,  John  Brisben,  ii.  970, 
981,  1068. 

Wallace,  Elizabeth,  iii.  1438, 
I.S2I,  1527.  1531. 

Ward,  Artemus  (Charles  F. 
Browne),  lectures  in  Virginia 
City,  i.  239-242,  464;  writes 
for  Golden  Era,  260;  asks 
Mark  Twain  to  write  sketcn 
to  be  included  in  his  book,  274; 
suggests  the  writing  of  Jump- 
ing Frog  story,  277-279;  Mark 
Twain  writes  lecture  on,  441, 
443;  lectures  in  London,  492- 

493- 

Ward,  Ferdinand,  ii.  804-805. 
Ward,  John  Quincy  Adams,  ii. 
703- 

Ward,  L.  P.,  i.  254. 
Ward,  William,  i.  427. 
Ware,  Eugene  F.,  iii.  1 373-1 374. 
Warfield,  David,  iii.  1305. 
Waring,  Col.  George,  ii.  658,  769. 
Warner,  Charles  Dudley,  i.  442; 

17 


collaborates  with  Mark  Twain 
in  The  Gilded  Age,  476,  501; 
visit  of  Howells  to,  502;  re- 
signs to  Mark  Twain  the 
dramatization  of  The  Gilded 
Age,  517-518;  writes  to  Mark 
Twain  from  Egypt,  521 ;  mem- 
ber of  Monday  Evening  Club, 
542;  attends  Whittier  birth- 
day dinner,  ii.  605;  attends  O. 
W.  Holmes's  breakfast,  658; 
makes  speech  at  Republican 
rally,  693;  takes  interest 
in  Gerhardt's  talent,  703; 
sends  April  Fool  letter  to  Mark 
Twain,  769;  in  Blaine  cam- 
paign, 778-779;  letter  to 
Mark  Twain  on  fiftieth  birth- 
day, 827;  persuades  Mark 
Twain  to  read  in  Baltimore, 
877;  offers  financial  aid  to 
Mark  Twain,  896;  death,  iii. 

Warner,  George,  i.  476,  503. 
Warner,  Margaret,  ii.  883. 
War  Prayer,  iii.  1232-1234. 
Washington,  D.  C,  i.  101 ,  346- 
352,356,358-36i;      865;  iii. 

1340-1351- 
Washington,  Booker  T.,  iii.  1272. 

Was  It  Heaven?  or  Hell?  ii.  989; 
iii.  1177.  ii8q. 

Waterman,  Miss,  iii.  1 5<>o- 

Watson,  William,  iii.  1253. 

Watt,  Robert,  i.  505. 

Wattcrson,  Henry,  i.  497;  ii.  566- 
567,  586;  iii.  1 122-1 124. 

Webb,  Charles  Henry,  i.  259,  309, 
313,  319-320;  iii.  1249. 

Webster,  Charles  L.,  marries 
Mark  Twain's  niece,  ii.  727; 
manages  kaolatype  enterprise, 
727;  becomes  Osgood's  New 
York  manager,  741,  745;  takes 
charge  of  Mark  Twain's  busi- 
ness affairs,  *»6i,  764;  joins 
with  Mark  Twain  in  publish- 
ing business,  771-773;  pub- 
lishes Grant's  memoirs,  802- 

18 


INDEX 


806,  812;  other  important 
publications  of,  832-833,  855- 
856;  confers  with  the  Pope  in 
regard  to  publication  of  his 
Life,  834-835 :  correspondence 
of  Mark  Twain  with,  836; 
plans  for  publishing  Library 
of  Humor,  841;  breakdown 
in  health,  857;  death,  919. 

Webster  &  Co.,  ii.  967;.  liabili- 
ties of,  969,  973;  failure  of, 
983-986. 

Weggis,  Lake  Lucerne,  ii.  1044- 
1048. 

Wells,  Rolla,  iii.  11 73-1 174. 
West  Indies,  iii.  uh2=ili6£. 
West  Point,  ii.  878. 
What  Is  Happiness  ?  iii.  132L 
What  Is  Man?  i.  511;  ii.  743, 

1071,  1080;  iii.  1 32 1. 
Wheeler,  Mrs.  Candace,  ii.  899. 
Wheeler,  Dora,  ii.  900. 
Whipping  Boy's  Story,  The,  ii. 

719. 

Whipple,  Edwin,  i.  474. 
Whistler,    James    McNeill,  ii. 
646. 

White,  Andrew  W.,  iii.  1506. 

White,  Richard  Grant,  i.  404. 

White,  Stanford,  ii.  973. 

White,  William  Allen,  iii.  1313. 

Whiteing,  Richard,  ii.  643. 

Whitmorc,  F.  G.,  friendship  with 
Mark  Twain  in  Hartford,  ii. 
614,  678,  778;  acts  as  business 
agent  for  Mark  Twain,  837- 
838;  letter  from  Mark  Twain 
to,  874;  disapproves  of  Paige 
contract,  906. 

Whittier,  John  Greenleaf,  i.  552; 
ii.  603-604,  658. 


Wiggin,  Kate  Douglas,  see  Kate 
Douglas  Wiggin  Riggs. 

Wilberforce,  Archdeacon  Basil, 
ii.  1 085-1086;  iii.  1387,  1 39 1 . 

Wilbrandt,  Adolf,  ii.  1067,  1084. 

William,  Emperor  of  Germany, 
ii.  746. 

Williams,  Jesse  Lynch,  iii.  1413. 

Williams,  John  Sharp,  iii.  1349. 

Williams,  True,  i.  366,  384,  551 ; 
ii.  665. 

Willis,  Julia,  i.  164. 

Wilson,  Francis,  ii.  566. 

Wilson,  Woodrow,  iii.  1560. 

Winter,  William,  ii.  604. 

Winters,  Theodore,  i.  247. 

Witte,  M.  Sergius,  iii.  1343. 

Wolfe,  Jim,  i.  86-88,  92,  96. 

Woodford,  Gen.  Stewart  L.,  ii. 
654;  iii.  1413. 

Wright,  William  (Dan  de  Quille), 
association  with  Mark  Twain 
in  Virginia  City,  i.  205,  210, 
223,  225-228,  231-236,  239, 
248;  writes  up  mock  highway 
robbery,  298-300;  visits  Hart- 
ford, 543. 

Wrightson  &  Co.,  i.  114. 

Wyckoff,  W.  C,  i.  556. 

Wydenbouck-Esterhazy,  Count- 
ess of,  ii.  1070. 

Yalta,  Russia,  i.  332. 
York  Harbor,  Maine,  iii.  1176- 
1180. 

Youth's  Companion,  ii.  981. 
Yung  Wing,  ii.  694. 

Zangwill,  Israel,  iii.  1253. 
Zogbaum,  Rufus,  ii.  977. 
Zorn,  Mr.,  ii.  977. 


THE  END 


< 


Digitized  by  Go(  1 


i 


{'->* 


Stanford  University  Library 

Stanford,  California 

■ 
■ 

In  order  that  others  may  use  this  book, 
please  return  it  as  soon  as  possible,  but 
not  later  than  the  date  due. 

« 

i 
i 


9 

Digitized  by  Google 


