Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 





















OLIVER HERFORD 




1 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

AND AFTER-DINNER 

SPEAKERS 

A NEW COLLECTION 

OF HUMOROUS STORIES 

AND ANECDOTES 

• KLICTED AND ARRANalD BT 

WILLIAM PATTEN 

BiiBa <A AdhiIcu Slion Stoir CIibIci. 

VOL. I 




P. F. COLLIER & SOK 
NEW YORK 



Copyright 1909 
By p. F. Collier & Son 



PARTIAL LIST OF THE NAMES OF STORY- 
TELLERS IN THIS VOLUME 



George Ade 
Bret Harte 
Mark Twain 
Sec. of State P. C. Knox 
w. m. evarts 
De Wolf Hopper 
King Edward of England 
Joseph Jefferson 
Lord Beaconsfield 
Abraham Lincoln 
Alvey a. Adee 
Patrick A. Collins 
Horace T. Eastman 
d. g. rossetti 
J. M. Maclaren 
Dean Swift 
Clyde Fitch 
J. McNeill Whistler 
Leigh Hunt 
Edward Everett Hale 
Dean Hole 
Irving Bacheller 
Thomas B. Reed 
J. C. S. Blackburn 
N. C. Goodwin 
I— Vol. I 



Sir Wilfrid Lauriek 
Oliver Herford 
J. M. Barrie 
Richard Mansfield 
John Sharp Williams 
J. G. Blaine 
Phillips Brooks 
Daniel J. Sully 
Bill Nye 
John C. Spooner 
Robert Edeson 
Andrew Lang 
Benjamin R. Tillman 
WnxiAM E. Gladstone 
Charles Lamb 
Edwin Booth 
Weedon Grossmith 
Senator W. A. Clark 
FftANCis Wilson 
Chauncey M. Depew 
Albert J. Beveridgb 
Beerbohm Tree 
Herbert S. Stone 
Frank R. Stockton 
Henry James 



PARTIAL LIST OF NAMES 



Bkander Matthews 
Andrew Carnegie 
Speaker Cannon 
Walter Damrosch 
Rev. Robert Collyer 
Rev. Sam Jones 
Dean Kirchwey 
John Wanamaker 
Henry Guy Carleton 
Charles FkANas Adams 



WnxiAM Aluen White 

Bishop Brewster 

Frederic Remington 

Julian Ralph 

Senator John T. Morgan 

J. J. Ingalls 

Archbishop Ryan 

J. A. Tawney 

Thos. Bailey Aldrich 

Elihu Root 



PREFAC E 

rjTl HE collection of these humorous paragraphs has extended 
_£ over a number of years. Even a small beginning became 
a source of such entertainment that the collection grew and grew, 
always zvithout any thought of publication. 

The man who can not laugh has yet to be found. Therein lies 
that immediate appeal to a common ground which the sense of 
humor gives, and it has been a conspicuous characteristic of those 
who look to the public for appreciation and support. Lord 
Palmer St on and Abraham Lincoln were two notable examples of 
men for whom sympathy quickened through their ready wit, and 
no political speaker drives home his arguments half so well as he 
who can introduce a tvitty illustration. The joke has ever been 
a potent factor in combating oppression and corruption, in ridi- 
culing shams. It has embalmed some reputations, and has blasted 
others. It is the champion of the weak against the strong, and 
has often illuminated for us, as in a flash, a glimpse of character 
or custom that would otherwise have been lost to the world. 

There is only one similar collection of which I am aware, the 

"Jest Book" by Mark Lemon, who was for twenty-nine years the 

editor of "Punch." Alas that there should be fashions in jokes as 

well as in hats, for much of his book that we know must have 

been humorous reading to his contemporaries, leaves us, of the 

present generation in America, indifferent. 

3 



4 PREFACE 

/ shall be glad if^otne of my readers are minded to do a grace- 
ful act and send me, in return, some paragraphs to add to my 
collection. 

I wish to take this opportunity to thank the following publica- 
tions for the paragraphs borrowed from their columns: 

Evening Sun, Lippincotfs, Pittsburg Dispatch, San Francisco 
News-Letter, Ladies^ Home Journal, Washington Star, Mail and 
Express, Youth's Companion, Life, Good Housekeeping, Argo- 
naut, Buffalo Commercial, Tit-Bits, Punch, The Tattler, Harper's 
Weekly, Harper's Monthly, Democratic Telegram, Cleveland 
Plaindealer, Harvard Lampoon, Judge, Philadelphia Ledger, 
Saturday Evening Post, Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, Boston 
Herald, Kansas City Star, Washington Post, Success, Atchison 
Globe, New York Times, Woman's Home Companion, London 
Mail, Louisville Courier- Journal, Rochester Post-Express, New 
York Tribune, New York Observer, Chicago Daily News, Pitts- 
burg Post, Pittsburg Observer, Philadelphia Public Ledger, New 
York World, Pick-me-up, Harper's Basar, The Green Bag, 
Tacoma Ledger, Pittsburg Dispatch, The Wasp, Cornell Widow, 
Washington Post, Kansas City Independent, Short Stories. 

W.P. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

AND AFTER-DINNER SPEAKERS 



THERE is a delicious flavor about this story of 
a Virginia lady, married to a man who, though 
uniformly unsuccessful in his hunting trips, 
boastingly spoke of his "killings." 

One day, returning from a trip, with the usual ac- 
companiment of an empty bag, it occurred to him that 
his wife would make fun of him if he returned without 
even one proof of his oft-boasted skill. So he purr 
chased a brace of partridges to deceive his trusting 
spouse. As he threw them on the table in front of her, 
he observed : "Well, my dear, you see I am not so awk- 
ward with the gun after all." 

"Dick," replied the wife, turning from the birds with 
a grimace, after a brief examination, "you were quite 
right in shooting these birds to-day; to-morrow it 
would have been too late." 



Uncle Toby was aghast at finding a strange darky 
with his arm around Mandy's waist. 

"Mandy, tell dat niggah to take his ahm 'way from 
round yo' waist," he indignantly commanded. "Tell 
him yo'self," said Mandy haughtily. "He's a puffect 
stranger to me." 

5 



6 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

A Cockney tourist was on a visit to a Highland 
town famous for its golf-links. Through wearing a 
pair of stiff leather gaiters several sizes too large for 
him, he was compelled to walk bow-legged. Being a 
very slow player, others were forced to wait for him 
at every hole. At the fourth hole a Highlander after 
watching the visitor miss the ball three times was un- 
able to wait any longer, and drove his ball clean be- 
tween the tourist's legs. "What !" he of the gaitered 
legs yelled furiously. "Do you call that golf ?" "Mebbe 
no," replied the Gael, "but it's very good croquet." 



After the sermon on Sunday morning the rector 
welcomed and shook hands with a young German. 

"And are you a regular communicant?" said the 
rector. 

"Yes," said the German, "I take the 7.45 every 
morning." 



Meeting a negro, a certain Southern gentleman 
asked him how he was getting on. 

The negro assumed a troubled look, and replied : 

"Oh, so far's physicality goes, Fm all right; but I 
sure do have ma troubles wif ma wife." 

"Well, Sam, I'm sorry to hear that. What seems 
to be the matter?" 

"She thinks money grows on trees, I reckon. All 
de time she keeps pester in' me foh pinch o' change. If 
it ain't a doUah it's half or a quarter she wants.' 

"What on earth does she do with the money ?* 

"I dunno. Ain't nevah give her none yetJ 



ft 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 7 

A MOUNTAINEER of One of the back counties of 
North Carolina was arraigned with several others for 
illicit distilling. "Defendant," said the court, "what is 
your name?" 

"Joshua," was the reply. 

"Are you the man who made the sun stand still ?" 

Quick as a flash came the answer, "No, sir; I am 
the man who made the moonshine." 



"They thought more of the Legion of Honor in 
the time of the first Napoleon than they do now," said 
a well-known Frenchman. "The emperor one day 
met an old one-armed veteran. 

'How did you lose your arm ?' he asked. 
'Sire, at Austerlitz.' 
'And were you not decorated?" 
'No, sire.' 

Then here is my own cross for you ; I make you 
chevalier.' 

'Your Majesty names me chevalier because I have 
lost one arm ! What would your Majesty have done 
had I lost both arms ?' 

" *0h, in that case I should have made you Officer 
of the Legion.' 

"Whereupon the old soldier immediately drew his 
sword and cut off his other arm." 

There is no particular reason to doubt this story. 
The only question is, how did he do it? 



ii 

It r 

e\ 



A STRANGER in Boston was interested to discover, 
when dining with friends once, that the dessert he 



8 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

would have classed as cream layer cake at home was 
known in Boston as "Washington pie." And the next 
time he lunched at a restaurant, he ordered the same 
thing; but the waiter put before him a rather heavy 
looking square of cake covered with chocolate, instead 
of the cream cake the guest had made up his mind 
to enjoy. A puzzled expression came over his face as 
he said reprovingly, "I ordered Washington pie, 
waiter." 

"That is Washington pie, sir." 

"Well," expostulated the disappointed man, "I did 
not mean Booker T. — I want George T 



George Ade, automobiling in Indiana, dined at 
a country hotel among a roomful of ministers. 

The ministers, who were holding a convention in 
the town, were much amused when Mr. Ade's identity 
was disclosed to them. 

One of them said during dinner: 

"How does a htmiorist of your stamp feel, sir, in 
such reverend company as this ?" 

"I feel," said Mr. Ade promptly, "like a lion in a 
den of Daniels." 



It was a crowded tram car. Among those who 
could not find seats was a young lady. Close to where 
she stood an old man was sitting. He struggled as 
if to rise. The young woman cast a glance of scorn 
at one or two men hiding behind newspapers. "Please 
don*t get up," she said to the old man, "I beg you 
won't." The conductor rang the bell and the car went 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

on. The old man's features worked convulsively and 
he mopped his face with his handkerchief. At the 
next stopping place he again tried to rise and again 
the young woman tried to stop him. "I would much 
rather stand," she said, continuing to block his way. 
"I don't care whether you would or not," said the 
old man, crimson with fury, "I want ta get out. 
You've made me come half a mile too far already. 
Here, you, stop the car." But it was too late, the bell 
had already rung and he had to wait until the next 
stopping place was reached. 



I WANT some cigars for my husband for Christ- 



99 



mas. 



What kind, madam?" 
"Well, I don't know, exactly; but he is a middle- 
aged man and always dresses in black." 



John D. Rockefeller, Jr., tells a story of his 
father : 

"Father tells many stories. Sometimes he tells a 
new one. Not long ago he related one to me that con- 
cerned a man who had imbibed rather too freely. The 
man, in this condition, fell into a watering trough. 
To the officer who came to help him out as he wal- 
lowed in the water, he said : 

" 'Offzer, I ken save self. You save women an' 
shildern.' " 



"On Stmday, September 20, the wife of of a 

daughter. Otihers please copy." 



10 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Bret Harte was so frequently complimented aS 
the author of "Little Breeches" that he was almost 
as sorry it was ever written as was Colonel John 
Hay, who preferred his fame to rest on more am- 
bitious works. A gushing lady who prided herself 
upon her literary tastes, said to him once : "My dear 
Mr. Harte, I am so delighted to meet you. I have 
read everything you ever wrote, but of all your dia- 
lect verse there is none that compares to your 'Little 
Breeches.' '' 

"I quite agree with you, madam," said Mr. Harte, 
"but you have put the little breeches on the wrong 
man." 



Mr. Knox, the Secretary of State in Taft*s Cab- 
inet, was formerly engaged in the practise of law 
in Pittsburg. 

One day, says a friend, Mr. Knox was much put 
out to find on his arrival at his office that everything 
was topsy-turvy and that the temperature of his rooms 
was much too low for comfort. Summoning his 
office-boy, a lad but recently entered his employ, tlie 
lawyer asked who had raised every window in the 
place on such a cold morning. 

"Mr. Muldoon, sir," was the answer. 

"Who IS Mr. Muldoon ?" asked the attorney. 

"The janitor, sir." 

"Who carried off my waste-basket?" was the next 
question. 

"Mr. ReiUy, sir." 

"And who is Mr. Reilly?" 

"He's the man that cleans the rooms." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 11 

Mr. Knox lodced sternly at the boy and said : "See 
here, Richard, we call men by their first names here. 
We don't 'mister' them in this office. Do you under- 
stand ?" 

"Yes, sir." And the boy retired. 

In a few minutes he reappeared and in a shrill, 
piping voice announced : 

"There's a gentleman that wants to see you. 
Philander." 



A Scottish parson, still on the under side of forty, 
was driving home from an outlying hamlet when he 
overtook a young woman. He recognized her as the 
maid of all work at a farm which he would pass, so 
he pulled up and offered her a lift. Mary gladly 
accepted his offer and they chatted pleasantly all the 
way to the farm gate. 

"Thank you, sir," she said as she got down. 

"Don^t mention it, Mary. Don't mention it," he 
told her politely. 

"No, I won't," Mary obligingly assured him. 



A LITTLE girl was shown her newly-arrived baby 
brother. Looking at him lovingly she said, "When 
will he talk, mother ?" "Oh not for a long time yet," 
said the mother. "Yes, but when?" persisted the 
child. "Well, not for a year or so." After thinking 
for minute the child exclaimed, "How funny. Miss 
Clark read out of the Bible this morning that Job 
cursed the hour he was bom." 



12 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

W. A. Sponsler, when in the Pennsylvania State 
Legislature, was given to the making of very elabo- 
rate and florid speeches, and one day brought an ad- 
dress to a close with ''Vox populi, vox Dei." 

"I'll bet you don't know the meaning of what 
Sponsler just said," said Al Crawford to Hugh E. 
Mackin. 

"I don't know !" replied Mackin, indignantly. "Of 
course, I know !" 

"You don't know for ten dollars !" suggested Craw- 
ford. 

Mackin, still indignant, posted his part of the wager 
with another member of the Legislature, and Craw- 
ford said tauntingly: 

"Well, now, tell us, what does it mean ?" 

''Vox populi, vox Dei I' quoted Mackin, solemnly, 
"as everybody knows, is French for 'My God! why 
hast thou forsaken me ?' " 

"Give him the money," said Crawford. "Darned 
if he don't know after all !" 



There is an old lady living in a small town in 
southern Pennsylvania who makes great efforts to 
keep abreast of the times. Her opportunities, how- 
ever, are circumscribed, and she is sometimes com- 
pelled to resort to her imagination. She went to a 
church sociable lately, and as she entered the room 
one of the attendants said : 

"Good evening, auntie. I am glad you came. We 
are going to have tableaux this evening." 

"Yes, I know," replied the old lady; "I smelt 'em 
when I first came in." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 18 

FiFER was a dog of friendly and social habits, but 
when he wandered into the lecture-tent at a well- 
known New Thought summer school and went to 
sleep between the chairs, he did a very foolish thing.; 
A woman coming in poked him in the ribs with herl 
parasol, startling him from his peaceful dreams, and 
he sprang upon her with a savage bite. A man 
grabbed him and he grabbed the man. The excite- 
ment was intense when an earnest little woman stand- 
ing on a chair cried, "Some one hold the Thought!'* 

Hang the Thought!" shouted a man in the rear. 

Some one hold the dog!" 






The boy was going away to school, full of high 
hope. 

"I shall make the football team and color two 
pipes the first year!" he said bravely. 

His mother kissed him and wept. His father 
wrung his hand in silence. 

They were too full for speech then. 

But when he was gone, and they were calmer, they 
talked together of him, and prayed his ambition might 
not carry him beyond his strength. 



The car was entirely empty with the exception of 
one man, but as I entered he rose, made me an un- 
steady but magnificent bow, and said: "Madam, 
pleashe be kind 'nough to asshept thish plashe." 

There was nothing else for me to do, so I thanked 
him and sat down. And for twenty blocks that idiot 
hung from a strap, swaying in the breeze, with not 



14 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

a soul in the car but ourselves. Occasionally I have 
been taken for other women; but I never before had 
any one think that I was a earful." 



Husband (after the theater) — "Well, how do you 
like the piece?" 

Wife — "Very much. There's only one improbable 
thing in it. The second act takes place two years after 
the first, and they have the same servant." 



Thomas Hill (the original "Paul Pry") was en- 
deavoring one evening to cut up an orange in such 
a fashion as to represent a pig. After strewing the 
table with about a dozen peels, he gave up the futile 
experiment, saying, "Hang the pig 1 1 can't make him 
at all." 

"Nonsense, Hill," said Theodore Hook, pointing 
to the table ; " you have done splendidly. Instead of 
a pig you have made a litter." 



An elderly churchwarden in shaving himself one 
Sunday before church-time made a slight cut with the 
razor on the extreme end of his nose. Quickly calling 
to his wife, he asked her if she had any court-plaster in 
the house. "You will find some in my sewing basket," 
she said. The warden soon had the cut covered. At 
church in assisting with the collection he noticed every- 
one smile as he passed the plate, and some of the 
younger people laughed outright. Very much annoyed, 
he asked a friend if there was anything wrong with his 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 15 

appearance. "Well, I should think there is," was the 
answer. "What is that cwi your nose?" "Court-plas- 
ter." "No," said his friend, "it is the label from a reel 
of cotton. It says, Warranted 200 yd. long.' 



9 99 



A MAN who stuttered very badly went to a specialist, 
and after ten difficult lessons learned to say quite dis- 
tinctly, "Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers." 
His friends congratulated him upon this splendid 
achievement. 

"Yes," said the man, doubtfully, "but it's s-s-such a 
d-d-deucedly d-d-d-difficult rem-mark to w-work into 
an ordin-n-nary c-c-convers-s-sa-tion, y' know." 



ToASTMASTER (to chairman of public dinner) — 
"Would you like to propose your toast now, my lord, 
or should we let 'em enjoy themselves a bit longer?" 



A VISITOR to a Sunday-school was asked to address 
a few remarks to the children. He took the familiar 
theme of the children who mocked Elisha on his jour- 
ney to Bethel — how the youngsters taunted the poor 
old prophet and how they were punished when two she 
bears came out of the wood and ate forty-and-two of 
them. "And now, children," said he, wishing to learn 
if his talk had produced any moral effect, "what does 
this story show?" "Please, sir," came from a little 
girl well down in the front, "it shows how many chil- 
dren two she bears can hold." 



16 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

A CURATE who had left his parish on account of the 
attentions of his lady parishioners, meeting his suc- 
cessor one day in the street asked him how he got on in 
his new position. "Very well indeed/' returned the 
other. "But are not the ladies rather pressing in their 
attentions?" "Oh, my dear fellow, I manage that all 
right, I find safety in Numbers." "I see," returned 
his companion, "well, I found safety in Exodus." 



"I WANT some collars for my husband," said a lady 
in a department store, "but I am afraid I have for- 
gotten the size." 

"Thirteen and a half, ma'am ?" suggested the clerk. 

"That's it. How on earth did you know?" 

"Gentlemen who let their wives buy their collars 
for 'em are almost always about that size, ma'am," 
explained the observant clerk. 



On a recent occasion before leaving Marlborough 
House new clothes were ordered for Prince Edward, 
and according to custom a tailoress was sent to fit him 
at a time which would not interfere with his lessons. 
The tailoress duly arrived and was ushered to the 
Prince's sitting-room, but on the door being opened 
she paused as she saw that a gentleman, whose face 
was turned toward the fireplace, was sitting smoking 
and chatting with the children. Prince Edward, whose 
manner is most friendly, at once ran forward and told 
her to come in, and seeing that she still hesitated added 
in a reassuring voice, "You needn't mind, it's only 
grandpapa." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 17 

A PHYSICIAN engaged a nurse, recently graduated, 
for a case of delirium tremens. The physician suc- 
ceeded in quieting his patient and left some medicine, 
instructing the nurse to administer it to him if he "be- 
gan to see snakes again/' At the next call the phy- 
sician found the patient again raving. To his puzzled 
inquiry the nurse replied that the man had been going 
on that way for several hours, and that she had not 
given him any medicine. 

"But didn't I tell you to give it to him if he began 
to see snakes again ?" asked the physician. 

"But he didn't see snakes this time," replied the 
nurse confidently. "He saw red, white, and blue tur- 
keys with straw hats on." 



Shortly after his entrance into political life Dis- 
raeli stood for a certain Middlesex borough in the 
Conservative interest. It was a "personally conducted" 
canvass, and, among others, the future Prime Minister 
solicited the vote and interest of a well-to-do but some- 
what irascible farmer, who was supposed to be rather 
doubtful in his political convictions. 

"Vote for you !" he shouted when Mr. Disraeli made 
known the object of his call. "Why, I'd vote for the 
devil sooner." 

"Ah, quite so !" said Mr. Disraeli, suavely, "but in 
event of your friend not standing, may I hope for your 
interest ?" 



An ambitious youth once sent his first MS. to 
Dumas, asking the distinguished novelist to become his 



18 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

collaborateur. The latter was astounded at the im- 
pertinence. Angrily seizing his pen, he wrote : "How 
dare you, sir, yoke together a noble horse and a con- 
temptible ass?" 

He received the following reply : 

"How dare you sir, call me a horse ?" 

His anger vanished and he laughingly penned the 
following: 

"Send on your MS., my friend; I gladly accept your 
proposition." 



An old farmer recently came into possession of a 
check for $200. He finally summoned up nerve enough 
to go to the bank. 

"What denomination?" said the teller, hastily, as 
the check was passed in through the window. 

"Lutheran, gol darn it. But what has that got to do 
with it?" 



A YOUNG woman was in company with a university 
graduate, and naturally the talk ran upon books. By 
and by there was a lull in the conversation, broken 
presently by the young woman, who said : "What do 
you think of Fielding, Mr. Smith?" 

"Oh," was the answer, "fielding is important, of 
course ; but it isn't worth much unless you have good 
pitching and batting." 



General Frederick D. Grant said to his servant 
one morning : "James, I have left my mess boots out. 
I want them soled." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 19 

"Yes, sir," the servant answered. 

The general, dressing for dinner that night, said 
again: 

"I suppose, James, that you did as I told you about 
those boots?" 

James laid thirty-five cents on the bureau. 

"Yes, sir," said he, "and this is all I could get for 
them, though the corporal who bought 'em said he'd 
have given half a dollar if pay day hadn't been so 
far off." 



President Lincoln once wrote to General Mc- 
Clellan, when the latter was in command of the army. 
General McClellan, as is well known, conducted a 
waiting campaign, being so careful not to make any 
mistakes that he made very little headway. President 
Lincoln sent this brief but exceedingly pertinent letter : 

"My dear McClellan: If you don't want to use the 
army I should like to borrow it for a while. 

"Yours respectfully, 

"A. Lincoln." 



It was at a children's party in West Kensington. 
The youngsters had just done more than justice to 
the luxurious spread provided by their hostess, and 
games were now the order of the evening. 

"Now, children," said she, "we will play the zoo, 
and each of you must represent a different animal." 

Then, going to a little girl, she asked : 

"Now, Carrie, what are you going to be?" 

"I'll be an elephant." 

"And you, Reggie, what are you going to be?'* 



20 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 



<<T^ 



■rm going to be a lion." 

"And what arc you going to be, Hilda ?" 

"I'm going to be a tiger." 

Then, crossing to the other side of the room, the 
hostess, noticing a youngster sitting all alone, asked: 

"And what are you going to be, Tommy ?" 

"P-please," was the halting reply, "p-please — I'm 
going — ^to be sick." 



A MAN who had been convicted of stealing was 
brought before a certain "down East" judge, well 
known for his tender-heartedness, to be sentenced. 

"Have you ever been sentenced to imprisonment?'* 
asked the judge, not unkindly. 

"Never !" exclaimed the prisoner, suddenly bursting 
into tears. 

: "Well, well, don't cry, my man," said his honor con- 
solingly; "you're going to be now." 



The inventor of a new feeding bottle for infants 
sent out the following among his directions for using : 

"When the baby is done drinking it must be un- 
screwed and laid in a cool place under the hydrant. 
If the baby does not thrive on fresh milk, it should be 
boiled." 



A WELL-KNOWN Ncw York clergyman was telling 
his Bible class the story of the Prodigal Son at a recent 
session, and wishing to emphasize the disagreeable 
attitude of the elder brother on that occasion, he laid 
especial stress on this phase of the parable. After de- 



Among the humorists 21 

scribing the rejoicing of the household over the return 
of the wayward son, he spoke of one who, in the 
midst of the festivities, failed to share in the jubi- 
lant spirit of the occasion. 

"Can anybody in the class," he asked, "tell me who 
this was?" 

A small boy, who had been listening sympathetically 
to the story, put up his hand. 

"I know," he said, beamingly; "it was the fatted 
calf." 



"I UNDERSTAND," said the old-time friend, "that 
you are gettin' right exclusive." 

"Well," answered Mr. Cumrox, "that's what 
mother an' the girls call it." 

"What do you call it?" 

"Plain 'lonesome'." 



"Tommy/^ said the hostess, "you appear to be in 
deep thought." 

"Yes'm," replied Tommy; "ma told me somethin' 
to say if you should ask me to have some cake or 
anything, an' I bin here so long now I forgit what 
it was." 



A Boston minister once noticed a crowd of urchins 
clustered around a dog of doubtful pedigree. 

"What are you doing, my little men?" he asked 
with fatherly interest. 

"Swappin' lies," volunteered one of the boys. "The 
feller that tells the biggest one gets the purp." 



22 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Shocking!" exclaimed the minister. "Why, i;tthen 
I was your age I never even thought of telling an 
untruth." 

" Youse win," chorused the urchins. "The dog'3 
yours, mister." 



A Brooklyn Sunday-school teacher once had oc- 
casion to catechise a new pupil whose ignorance of 
his Testament would have been amusing had it not 
been so appalling. One Sunday she asked the little 
fellow how many commandments there were. 

To her surprise, the lad answered, glibly enough: 
"Ten, ma'am." 

"And now, Sammy," pleasantly asked the teacher, 
"what would the result be if you should break one 
of them?" 

"Then there'd be nine !" triumphantly answered the 
youngster. 



William J. Carr, of the State Department, had 
occasion to call at the house of a neighbor late at 
night. He rang the door-bell. After a long wait 
a head was poked out of a second-floor window. 

"Who's there?" asked a voice. 

"Mr. Carr," was the reply. 

"Well," said the voice as the window banged shut, 
"what do I care if you missed a car ? Why don't you 
walk, and not wake up people to tell them about it ?" 



A CLEVER veterinary has a system all his own. 
When he received an overfed toy dog he would con- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 28 

sign him to a disused brick oven, with a crust of bread, 
an onion and an old boot. When the dog began to 
gnaw the bread, the anxious mistress was informed 
that her darling was "doing nicely/' When it com- 
menced operation on the onion, word was sent that 
the pet was "decidedly better"; but when the animal 
tackled the boot, my lady was gratified to hear that 
her precious pet was "ready to be removed." 



A LADY while going downstairs to dinner had the 
misfortune to step slightly on the dress of a lady in 
front of her. The man on whose arm the former 
was leaning rudely said aloud so that the couple in 
front might hear, "Always getting in the way like 
Balaam's ass!" Upon which the lady whose gown 
had been trodden on, turning round, replied with a 
sweet smile, "Pardon me, it was the angel who stood 
in the way and the ass which spoke." 



A NUMBER of years ago, when the former Second 
Assistant Secretary of State, Alvey A. Adee, was 
Third Assistant, an employee of the State Department 
was called to the 'phone. 

"Will you kindly give me the name of the Third 
Assistant Secretary of State?" asked the voice at the 
other end of the wire. 

"Adee." 

"A. D. what?" 

"A. A. Adee." 

"Spell it, please." 

"A." 



,.*irtnx-t 



44 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 




"You go to the d !" and the receiver was in- 
dignantly hung up. 



Smith and Jones, talking about the Kaiser: 
Joiies — "They tell me that unfortunately he is very 

bellicose." 

Smith — "Dear me! You surprise me! I always 

understood he was rather tall and slim." 



"I WILL be your valentine," said the young man. 
. A shadow passed across the fair face of the girl. 
"I was so in hopes that I would not get any comics 
this year," she said. 



One of the favorite stories of Mayor Collins of 
Boston was about a man who, accompanied by his little 
boy, had occasion to cross a lot where a good-sized 
goat was feeding. 

The father was a Christian Scientist and always 
cairied a copy of Mrs. Eddy's works in his pocket. 
As they approached the goat the boy showed fear, 
whereat his father told him to think it not possible 
for the animal to harm them, but the boy, remember- 
ing a previous encounter with a goat, in which he 
came out second best, did not grow any braver. 

"Papa, you're a Christian Scientist, all right," he 
said, "and so am I ; but the goat doesn't know it." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 26 

Horace T. Eastman, the inventor of the locomo- 
tive pilot, said the other day: 

"This morning I was sitting in a drug store waiting 
to get a prescription filled when a young Irishitian 
entered. 

"The Irishman pointed to a stack of green Castite 
soap and said : 

" *Oi want a lump o' thot/ 

" 'Very well, sir,' said the clerk. 'Will you have it 
scented or unscented?' 

" 'Oi'll take ut with me,' said the Irishman/' 



Robert Smith, brother of Sydney Smith, and an 
ex- Advocate-General, on one occasion engaged in an 
argument with a physician over the relative merits 
of their respective professions. 

"I don't say that all lawyers are crooks," said the 
doctor, "but you'll have to admit that your profession 
doesn't make angels of men." 

"No," retorted Smith; "you doctors certainly have 
the best of us there." 



Small Chap — "Say, papa, what is the race prob- 
lem?" 

Papa — "Picking winners." 



The temperance society was to meet that afternoon. 
Mrs. Philpots dressed in a hurry and came panting 
downstairs. She was a short, plump woman. 

"Addie, run up to my room and get my blue ribbon 



26 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

rosette, the temperance badge/' she directed Her maid. 
"I have forgotten it. You will know it, Addie — blue 
ribbon and gold lettering/' 

"Yas'm, I knows it right well/' Addie could not 
read, but she knew a blue ribbon with gold lettering 
when she saw it, and therefore had no trouble in 
finding it and fastening it properly on the dress of her 
mistress. 

Mrs. Philpots was too busy greeting her friends or 
giving close attention to the speakers at the meeting to 
note that they smiled when they shook hands with her. 

When she reached home, supper was served, so she 
went directly to the dining-room, where the other 
members of the family were seated. 

"Gracious me, mother !" exclaimed her son. "That 
blue ribbon — ^have you been wearing that at the tem- 
perance meeting?" 

A loud laugh went up on all sides. 

"Why, what is it, Harry?" asked the good woman, 
clutching at the ribbon in surprise. 

"Why, mother, dear, didn't you know that was the 
ribbon I wore at the show ?" 

The gold lettering on the ribbon read: 

Atlanta Poultry Show. 
First Prize. Bantam. 



At a dinner party recently given the subject of reg- 
ular hours and plain diet was discussed. Several had 
spoken when one of the guests remarked, "You may 
not believe it, but for ten years I rose on the stroke 
of six, half an hour later was at breakfast, at seven 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 27 

was at work, dined at one, had supper at six, and was 
in bed at 9.30. In all that time I ate the plainest food 
and did not have a day's sickness." The silence that 
followed was awful, but finally another guest asked, 
**Will you permit a question?" "Certainly," was the 
reply; "what do you wish to know?" "Well, just 
out of curiosity," said the other, "I would like to 
know what you were in prison for ?" 



Watch— "Eight bells, and alFs well !" 

Mrs. Pohunk (feebly) — ^"I guess, Josiah, he hasn't 
looked on this side of the boat lately or he'd know 
better," 



When the minister, who was a bachelor, had been 
helped to Mrs. Porter's biscuits for the third time, he 
looked across the table at Rhoda, staring at him with 
round, wondering eyes. 

"I don't often have such a good supper as this, my 
dear," he said, in his most propitiatory tone, and 
Rhoda's face dimpled. 

"We don't, always," she said, in her clear little 
voice. "I'm awful glad you came." 



The late Qiarles Matthews now and then failed, 
like some of the rest of us, in meeting his bills as 
promptly as the tradespeople concerned could desire. 

On one occasion a brisk young tailor, named Berry, 
lately succeeded to his father's business, sent in his 
account somewhat ahead of time. 



28 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Whereupon Matthews, with virtuous rage, seized 
his pen and wrote him the following note : 

"You must be a goose — Berry, to send me your bill 
— Berry, before it is due — Berry. 

"Your father, the elder — Berry, would have had 



more sense. 



You may look very black — Berry, and feel very 
blue — Berry, but I don't care a straw — Berry, for you 
and your bill — Berry." 



A CLERGYMAN in a Lawrence church on a recent 
occasion discovered, after beginning the service, that 
he had forgotten his notes. As it was too late to send 
for them, he said to his audience, by way of apology, 
that this morning he should have to depend upon the 
Lord for what he might say, but in the afternoon he 
would come better prepared. 



An American visiting London for the first time, 
goaded to desperation by the incessant necessity for 
tips, finally entered the wash-room of his hotel, only 
to be faced with a large sign which read: "Please 
tip the basin after using." "Fm hanged if I will!" 
said the Yankee, turning on his heel, "FU go dirty 
first!" 



Mother could not attend church one Sunday. 
"But what a shame that little Mabel should have 
to lose the day's lesson, and she such a bright child," 
she sadly reflected. Accordingly, Mabel was sent 
alone. When she returned, in reply to her mother's 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 2f 

Iriterrogation as to the subject of the text, she replied, 
"Oh, yes, mother, I know; it was 'Don't get seated: 
You'll get the quilt/ " Questioning failed to throw 
any light on the matter. Some days later the mother 
met the pastor, who, in answer to her request for the 
subject of his last sermon, replied, "It was, madam, 
Tear not : Ye shall have the Comforter/ *' 



Mark Twain in his lecturing days, reached a 
small Eastern town one afternoon and went before 
dinner to a barber's to be shaved. 

"You are a stranger in town, sir V the barber asked. 

"Yes, I am a stranger here," was the reply. 

"WeVe having a good lecture here to-night, sir,'* 
said the barber, "a 'Mark Twain' lecture. Are you 
going to it ?" 

"Yes, I think I will," said Mr. Clemens. 

^Have you got your ticket yet?" the barber asked: 
'No, not yet," said the other. 

"Then, sir, you'll have to stand." • 

"Dear me!" Mr. Clemens exclaimed. "It seems 
as if I always do have to stand when I hear that man 
Twain lecture." 



a- 



During the visit of the Shah Nasr-ed-Din to Eng- 
land he dined one night with the then Prince of 
Wales, now King Edward. Among the courses was 
one of asparagus, a delicacy unknown to the Shah. 
He considered it for a time, discovered that the head 
alone was nice to eat, ate it accordingly and flung 
the rest of the stalk over his shoulder. The other 



80 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

diners were somewhat flabbergasted, but the tactful 
Prince, not wishing his Persian guest to feel that 
he had done an3rthing ridiculous, promptly followed 
his example, throwing his own stalks over his shoul- 
der. Naturally all the courtiers imitated him in turn, 
and the amazement of the royal servants was extreme 
to see the air suddenly full of flying asparagus stalks 
from one end of the lengthy room to the other. 



On one of his frequent trips to the other side, the 
weather being more than ordinarily rough, and the 
passengers on deck but few, the late Bishop Potter 
saw a lady reclining on one of the benches, and the 
unearthly pallor on her face and the hapless lan- 
guidity of her manner indicated that she had reached 
that state of collapse which marks the limit of sea- 
sickness. "Touched by this piteous spectacle and 
approaching the poor creature, in my most compas- 
sionate tone I asked, 'Madam, can I be of any service 
to you?' 

"She did not open her eyes, but I heard her mum- 
mur faintly: 'Thank you, sir, but there is nothing 
you can do — ^nothing at all.' 'At least, madam,' said 
I tenderly, 'permit me to bring you a glass of water.' 
She moved her head feebly and answered: 'No, I 
thank you — ^nothing at all.' 'But your husband, 
madam,' said I, 'the gentleman lying there with his 
head in your lap — ^shall I not bring something to 
revive him ?' The lady again moved her head feebly, 
and again she murmured faintly between gasps: 
'Thank you, sir, but — ^he — is — not — ^my — ^husband. I 
—don't — know — ^who he is I' " 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 81 

"Well, Bobby, how do you like church?" asked 
his father, as they walked homeward from the sanc- 
tuary, to which Bobby had just paid his first visit. 

"It's fine," ejaculated the young man. "How much 
did you get, father ?" 

"How much did I get ? Why, what do you mean ? 
How much what?" asked the parent, astonished at 
this evident irreverence. 

"Why, don't you remember when the funny old man 
passed the money around? I only got ten cents." 



One day a fussy fellow met Father Healy of Dub- 
lin by the seashore and thus accosted him: "Father 
Healy, I am undergoing a cure, and I take a tumbler 
of sea water three times a day. Now, IVe had my 
full allowance to-day, but do you think I might have 
one, just one, tumbler more?" 

Father Healy put his head on one side and looked 
at the ocean, lost in thought. "Well," he said, at last, 
with a gravely judicial air, "I don't think it would 
be missed." 



Wm. M. Evarts asked by a lady if he did not think 
that woman was the best judge of woman, he re- 
plied : "Not only the best judge, madam, but the best 
executioner." 



De Wolf Hopper was calling down a speaking- 
tube to the janitor of his apartment in New York. 
Mr. Hopper, unable to get the information he desired, 
finally blurted out, "Say, is there a blithering idiot 



92 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

at the end of this tube ?" The reply came back with 
startling rapidity, "Not at this end, sir." 



Mrs. S. — "Surely, John, you haven't brought any- 
one home to dinner?" 

Mr. S. — "Sure I have. Haven't you got anjrthing 
for them?" 

"Why no, you told me you'd bring home a couple 
of lobsters for dinner." 

"So I have, they're in the parlor." 



One of his grandma's maids of honor tells the fol- 
lowing story of Prince Eddie when he was a few 
years younger : 

Just after King Edward's coronation, when he un- 
derwent an operation for appendicitis and was lying 
convalescent, he sent for his grandchildren. 

The little ones trooped into the room, cautioned by 
their nurse that they must keep very quiet, and stood 
about their grandfather's bed. He talked with them 
for a few minutes and they replied in awed whispers. 
Then when the nurse told them they must go, Prince 
Eddie said : 

"But, grandpa, can't we see the baby ?'' 



RossETTfs fondness for humorous stories and his 
interest in a particular soldier of fortune, or rather of 
misfortune, are shown in Hall Caine's autobiography. 
Beginning life as the secretary of Ruskin, the man ulti- 
mately lived on his cleverness and audacity and made 



AMONG THE HtJMORISTS SS 

Rossetti in particular his conscious and delighted vic- 
tim. Feeble as Rossetti was, the visits of this man 
did him good, and he laughed all the evening and 
told droll stories himself. One of the latter was of 
a man near to death to whom the clergyman came 
and said: "Dear friend, do you know who died to 
save you?" "Oh, meenister, meenister," said the dying 
man, "is this a time for conundrums ?" 



It is interesting to recall, apropos of the recent 
Milton celebration, an anecdote of Milton that was 
told in an old family letter written in 1762, recently 
quoted in the columns of the London "Spectator" : 

"Possibly you may not have heard this anecdote con- 
cerning him. John Vallack — ^who, I believe, died 
after you came to Tavistock — ^told me it, and he lived 
in London in 1696. Milton, as you know, was blind. 
Charles the Second had the curiosity to see him, and 
said: "Grod hath punished you for your malice, etc., 
to my father by taking away your eyesight." 

" *Aye,' says Milton, *but before I lost my eyes he 
lost his head.' " 



In writing a sketch of Washington a pupil ended 
her essay by saying: "Washington married a famous 
belle, Martha Custis, and in due time became the father 
of his country." 



A CERTAIN regiment was on the march from Phila- 
delphia to Gettysburg and the companies were ordered 

to move with a few minutes' interval between them 
.2— Vol. I 



84 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

and to keep each other in sight, the band and drums 
leading. 

The band soon got a long way ahead, and on reach- 
ing a bend, halted for a few minutes' rest Presently 
up galloped a mounted officer in hot haste and shouted 
for the band sergeant 

"What do you mean," he said, "by getting out of 
sight of the leading company?'* 

"We were not out of sight, sir,'' answered the 
sergeant. 

"What do you mean by telling me that !" exclaimed 
the officer in a rage. "You were out of sight, I saw 
you myself." 



Several ladies sat after a card party at the Univer- 
sity Club a few mornings ago, discussing the virtues 
of their husbands. "Mr. Bingleton," said one of 
them, referring to her life partner, "never drinks and 
never swears — indeed, he has no bad habits." "Does 
he ever smoke?" some one asked. "Yes; he likes a 
cigar just after he has eaten a good meal. But, I sup- 
pose, on an average, he doesn't smdce more than once 
a month." 



Ian Maclaren was talking to a group of literary 
beginners in New York. "Begin your stories well," 
he said emphatically. "There's nothing like a good 
beginning. Indeed, it's half the battle." Then with 
a smile this excellent beginner of stories added : "Al- 
ways bear in mind the case of the young man who, 
desiring to marry, secured a favorable hearing from 
his sweetheart's irascible father by opening the inter- 



XMONG THE HUMORISTS 85 

view with the words: *I know a way, sir, whereby 
you can save money.' '* 



Benevolent Gentleman — "My little boy, have 
you no better way to spend this beautiful afternoon 
than by standing in front of the gate, idling away 
your time?*' 

Boy — "I ain't idling away my time. There's a 
chump inside with my sister, who is paying me ten 
cents an hour to watch for pa." 



That famous Scotch physician. Dr. George For- 
dyce, was unfortunately somewhat given to drink, and 
though he never was known to be dead drunk, yet 
he was often in a state which rendered him unfit for 
professional duties. One night when he was in such 
a condition, he was suddenly sent for to attend a lady 
of title who was very ill. He went, sat down, lis- 
tened to her story, and felt her pulse. He found he 
was not up to his work. He lost his wits and in a 
moment of forget fulness exclaimed, "Drunk, by Jove!" 
Still he managed to write out a mild prescription. 
Early next morning he received a message from the 
noble patient to call on her at once. Dr. Fordyce felt 
very uncomfortable. The lady evidently intended to 
upbraid him either for giving an improper prescrip- 
tion or for his disgraceful condition, but to his 
surprise and relief she thanked him for his prompt 
compliance with her pressing summons, and then con- 
fessed that he had rightly diagnosed her case. That 
unfortunately she occasionally indulged too freely in 



86 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

drink, but that she hoped he would preserve inviolable 
secrecy as to the condition in which he had found her. 
Fordyce listened to her as grave as a judge, then said : 
"Madam, you may depend on me. I shall be as 
silent as the grave." 



A FRIEND of Dean Swift one day sent him a turbot 
as a present by a servant lad who had frequently been 
on similar errands but had never received anything 
from the dean for his trouble. Having gained ad- 
mission he opened the study door, and putting down 
the fish on the floor cried out rudely, "Master has sent 
you a turbot." "Young man," said the dean rising 
from the chair, "is that the way you deliver a mes- 
sage? Let me teach you better manners. Sit down 
in my chair; we will change places, and I will show 
you how to behave in future." The boy sat down, 
and the dean going out came up to the door, and 
making a low bow said, "Sir, master presents his kind 
compliments, hopes you are well, and requests your 
acceptance of a small present." "Does he?" replied 
the boy. "Return him my best thanks, and there's 
half-a-crown for yourself." The dean thus caught 
in his own trap laughed heartily and gave the boy 
a crown for his ready wit. 



A SPUNKY little mule was trying to throw his 
darky rider and in kicking about caught his hoof in 
a stirrup, upon which the darky cried out in frightened 
tones, "Say, if you'se gwine to git on, I'se gwine to 
git off." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 87 

"I OUGHT not to be surprised by anything at my 
time of life," said a well-known minister, "but one of 
my flock did manage to take my breath away. I was 
preaching about the Father's tender wisdom in caring 
for us all," he said. "I illustrated by saying that the 
Father knows which of us grows best in sunlight and 
which of us must have shade. *You know you plant 
roses in the sunshine,' I said, *and heliotrope and gera- 
niums; but if you want your fuchsias to grow they 
must be kept in a shady nook.' After the sermon, 
which I hoped would be a comforting one, a woman 
came up to me, her face glowing with pleasure that 

was evidently deep and true. 'O, Dr. , I am 

so grateful for that sermon,' she said, clasping my 
hand and shaking it warmly. My heart glowed for 
a moment, while I wondered what tender place in 
her heart and life I had touched. Only for a moment, 
though. 'Yes,' she went on, fervently, 'I never knew 
before what was the matter with my fuchsias.' " 



There are some singular discounts allowed in the 
book trade. They were happily illustrated on one 
occasion by Mark Twain. One day while the hu- 
morist was connected with a publishing house he 
went into a book store and picking up a volume asked 
the price. He then suggested that as a publisher he 
was entitled to 50 per cent discount. To this the 
clerk assented. 

"As I am also an author," said Mark, "it would 
appear that I am again entitled to 50 per cent 
discount." 

Again the clerk bowed. 



38 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"And as a personal friend of the proprietor/' he 
modestly continued, "I presume that you will allow 
me the usual 25 per cent, discoimt." 

Another bow from the salesman. 

"Well," drawled the unblushing humorist, "under 
these conditions I think I may as well take the book. 
What's the tax?" 

The clerk took out his pencil and figured industri- 
ously. Then he said with the greatest obsequiousness : 

"As near as I can calculate we owe you the book 
and about 37J4 cents." 



Clyde Fitch tells a new story of Whistler. The 
artist was in Paris at the time of the coronation 
of King Edward, and at a reception one evening a 
duchess said to him : "I believe you know King Ed- 
ward, Mr. Whistler." 

"No, madame," replied Whistler. 

"Why, that's odd," she murmured ; "I met the King 
at a dinner-party last year, and he said that he knew 
you." 

"Oh," said the painter, "that was just his brag." 



A London friend who was a member of the same 
club as Mr. Whistler writes me this, which* I have not 
seen before in print. It seems that the gentle artist 
in making enemies had not paid his dues and was 
dunned for them in vain. He either took no notice 
of requests for a settlement, or replied to them with 
his usual airy mockery. Finally the secretary wrote 
to him: 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 8& 

"Dear Mr. Whistler — It is not a Nocturne in 
Purple, or a Symphony in Blue and Gray, that we are 
after, but An Arrangement in Gold and Silver." 

This drew forth the required pounds and shillings. 



Here is another story typical of the great maker 
of enemies : 

Whistler had a French poodle of which he was 
extravagantly fond. The poodle was seized with 
an affection of the throat, and Whistler had the 
audacity to send for the great throat specialist 
Mackenzie. 

Sir Morell, when he saw that he had been called 
in to treat a dog, didn't like it much, it was plain. 
But he said nothing. He prescribed, pocketed a big 
fee, and drove away. 

The next day he sent post-haste for Whistler; and 
Whistler, thinking he was summoned on some matter 
connected with his beloved dog, dropped his work and 
rushed like the wind to Mackenzie's. 

On his arrival Sir Morell said gravely: 

"How do you do, Mr. Whistler? I wanted to see 
you about having my front door painted." 



A STORY is told of a very popular cavalry officer. 
He was being tried for drunkenness, and among other 
witnesses was his Irish orderly. The court, anxious 
to give the officer every chance, put several questions 
to this witness with a view of eliciting any facts that 
might be in his master's favor. When the orderly 
said that his master, on going to bed, had expressed 



40 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

a wish to be called early, the members of the court- 
martial were distinctly pleased. 

A man who gave special instructions to be called 
early could not, surely — ^they argued to themselves — 
have been drunk. Hoping to get favorable particu- 
lars, the judge advocate put a further question. 

"And why did the major wish to be called early ?'* 
he asked. 

"Faith, an' he tould me it was because he was to 
be Queen of the May," came the answer. 

That settled it. 



A COLLEGE professor, noted for his concentration 
of thought, returned home from a scientific meeting 
one night, still pondering deeply upon the subject 
that had been discussed. As he entered his room he 
heard a noise that seemed to come from under the bed. 

"Is there some one there ?" he asked absently. 

"No, professor," answered the intruder, who knew 
of his peculiarities. 

"That's strange," muttered the professor. "I was 
almost sure I heard some one under the bed." 



Fond Mother — "Jane, has Johnny come home 
from school yet?" 

Jane — "I think so. I haven't seen him, but the cat 
is hiding under the stove." 



Somebody told Mr. Jenks that red flannel worn 
next to the skin would cure the rheumatism from 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 41 

which he suffered. So he purchased several sets of 
red flannel undergarments. The clerk assured him 
that the firm guaranteed the goods in every particular. 
About two months later, says the New York "Times/' 
Mr. Jenks revisited the shop, sought out the proprietor 
and told his woful story. 

"The goods are the best in the house," declared the 
proprietor. "Of course,'' he said, in a reasonable tone 
used on unreasonable persons, "of course the shirts 
may have shrunk or faded a little — " 

"Shrunk! Faded!" bellowed Mr. Jenks. "What 
do you think my wife said to me, when I came down 
to breakfast yesterday with one of them on ?" 

The proprietor looked bored. 

"Well, sir," said the aggrieved Jenks, "she looked 
at me a minute, and then said, 'What is that little red 
line round your neck John ? It isn't the baby's string 
of coral beads, is it ? 



» yy 



"Now, Tommy," said Mrs. Bull, "I want you to be 
good while I'm out." 

I'll be good for a nickel," replied Tommy. 

Tommy," she said, "I want you to remember that 
you can not be a son of mine unless you are good for 
nothinjg." 






Bill Jones is a country storekeeper down in 
Louisiana, and last spring he went to New Orleans to 
purchase a stock of goods. The goods were shipped 
immediately and reached home before he did. When 
the boxes of goods were delivered at his store by the 
drayman his wife happened to look at the largest; she 



42 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Uttered a loud cry and called for a hammer. A neigh- 
bor, hearing the screams, rushed to her assistance and 
asked what was the matter. The wife, pale and 
faint, pointed to an inscription on the box which read 
as follows: 
"Bill inside.'' 



Customer — "Are these five or six wedding rmgs 
all you have in stock ? Why, you've got a whole tray- 
ful of engagement rings." 

Jeweler — "Yes, sir, and it will take that whole tray- 
ful of engagement rings to work oflf those five or six 
wedding rings." 



They were newly married and on a honeymoon 
trip. They put up at a skyscraper hotel. The bride- 
groom felt indisposed, and the bride said she would 
slip out and do a little shopping. 

In due time she returned and tripped blithely up to 
her room, a little awed by the number of doors that 
looked all alike. But she was sure of her own and 
tapped gently on the panel. 

"I'm back, honey; let me in," she whispered. 

No answer. 

"Honey, honey, let me in !" she called again, rap- 
ping louder. Still no answer. 

"Honey, honey, it's Mabel. Let me in." 

There was silence for several seconds ; then a man's 
voice, cold and full of dignity, came from the other 
side of the door : 

"Madame, this is not a beehive; it's a bath- 



room." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 48 

Leigh Hunt was asked by a lady at dessert if he 
would not venture on an orange. "Madam," he re- 
plied, "I should be happy to do so, but I am afraid I 
should ttunble off." 



Mrs. Prattle looked at her visitor with reproach 
in her wide blue eyes. "Talk," she said eagerly, "our 
baby talk? Well, I guess he can. He's three months 
younger than my cousin's boy and he's a year ahead 
of him in language. You know often people tell you 
their children can say things, and when you hear them 
you have to work hard with your imagination to tell 
what they're saying. 

"Now, there's my cousin's baby — ^the one I spoke of. 
They declare that child has a vocabulary of fifteen 
words, but, my dear, if you could hear him. He says 
'bajr* for bread, and *flis' for fish, and *cang' for candle, 
and *hort' for horse, and 'apa' for father. Now I'll 
try Harold with thoee very words, and you'll see the 
difference. 

"Say bread, Harold — bread — ^bre-e-ad." 

"Wed," said the baby. 

"Now say fish, fi-sh." 

"Whish,'' said the baby. 

"And now horse," said Harold's mother. "Horse — 
ho-orse, ho-r-se." 

"Woss," said the baby. 

"And now will precious say father, fa-ather, fa-a- 
ar-ther?" 

"Wahwah," said the baby. 

"There, you see!" cried Mrs. Prattle in triumph. 
"He seems to catch the sound of every word. Now 



44 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

say good-by, darling, and then nurse will take you up- 
stairs. GcMxl-by — goo-ocxi-by-y-y." 
"Wy wy/' said the baby. 



The superintendent of a Sunday-school class in 
Philadelphia recently called upon a visitor to "say a 
few words" to the class, the members of which are 
mostly children of tender age. 

The visitor, a speaker well known for his verbose 
and circumlocutory mode of speech, began his address 
as follows: 

"This morning, children, I purpose to offer you an 
epitome of the life of St. Paul. It may be perhaps 
that there are among you some too young to grasp the 
meaning of the word 'epitome.' 

" 'Epitome,' children, is in its signification synony- 
mous with synopsis." 



A MILLINER endeavored to sell to a colored woman 
one of the last season's hats at a very moderate price. 
It was a big white picture-hat. 

"Law, no, honey !" exclaimed the woman. "I could 
nevah wear that. I'd look jes' like a blueberry in a 
pan of milk." 



A FEW years ago the celebrated Potter family, of 
which Bishop Potter was a member, held a reunion 
the chief feature of which was a banquet. During the 
banquet the various heads of the different families of 
Potters arose and gave a short account of the pedi- 
grees and deeds of their ancestors and each head 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 46 

seemed to be able to demonstrate that their branch was 
the oldest and most renowned. After all the speakers 
had finished, Honorable William M. Evarts, who was 
present as the legal adviser of the New York branch, 
was called upon for a speech and responded by saying 
that he felt there was little left for him to say, but 
after listening to the ancestry and history of the family 
he felt he could cast his eyes toward heaven and say, 
"Oh, Lord ! thou art the clay and we are the Potters/' 



A Massachusetts minister was making his first 
visit to Kentucky several years ago. He had to spend 
the night in a small mountain town where feuds and 
moonshine still abounded. Engaging in conversation 
with one of the natives, he said : 

'My friend, this is a very bibulous State, I hear." 
'Lord!" replied the man, "there hain't twenty-five 
Bibles in all Kentucky." 






An elderly gentleman opposed to the use of to- 
bacco approached a young man who stood on a street 
corner smoking a cigar, and asked him severely, "How 
many cigars a day do you smoke?" "Three," was the 
reply. "How much do you pay for them?" he went 
on. "Fifteen cents each," replied the young man pa- 
tiently. "Do you realize," went on his inquisitor, "that 
if you would save that money, by the time you are as 
old as I am you would own that big building on the 
comer?" "Do you own it?" inquired the smoker. 
"No," was the response. "Well, I do," said the young 
man. 



46 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

everybody's friend in nova SCOTIA 

J. R. FULLER, 

Dealer in 

Soft and Hard Coal, Ice Cream, 

Wood, Lime, Cement, Perfumery, Nails, 

Putty, Spectacles, and Horse Radish. 

Chocolate Caramels and Tar Roofing, 

Gas-Fitting and Undertaking in all 

its Branches. 

Hides, Tallow, and Maple Sirup, Fine Gold 

Jewelry, Silverware, and Salt, Glue, 

Codfish, and Gents' Neckwear. 

Undertaker and Confectioner. 

Diseases of Horses and Children a 

Specialty. 
Five Islands, N. S. 



A LADY going out for the day locked everything 
up carefully, and for the grocer's benefit left a card on 
the back door. 

"All out. Don't leave anything," it read. 

On her return she found her house ransacked and all 
her choicest possessions gone. To the card on the 
door was added, "Thanks. We haven't left much." 



"Edward Everett Hale," said a lawyer, "was one 
of the guests at a millionaire's dinner. 

"The millionaire was a free spender, but he wanted 
full credit for every dollar put out. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 47 

"And as the dinner progressed, he told his guests 
what the more expensive dishes had cost. 

" *This terrapin/ he would say, 'was shipped direct 
from Baltimore. A Baltimore cook came on to pre- 
pare it The dish actually cost one dollar a tea- 
spoonful/ 

"So he talked of the fresh peas, the hot-house aspar- 
agus, the Covent Garden peaches, and the other 
courses. He dwelt especially on the expense of the 
large and beautiful grapes, each bunch a foot long, 
each grape bigger than a pltun. He told down to a 
penny what he had figured it out that the grapes had 
cost him apiece. 

"The guests looked annoyed. They ate the expen- 
sive grapes charily. But Dr. Hale, smiling, extended 
his plate and said : 

"* Would you mind cutting me off about $1.87 
worth more, please ?" 



Joe Jefferson had but one person with him who 
did not reverence the man and the name. 

This individual, one Bagley by name, was the prop- 
erty man and annoyed the great comedian with undue 
familiarity. He had called Mr. Jefferson "Joey" 
during his entire thirty years' service. 

Just previous to an auspicious opening in one of the 
big cities, Mr. Jefferson discharged Bagley for hu- 
miliating him before a number of friends. Bagley got 
drunk right away, and that night paid his way to the 
gallery to see Mr. Jefferson present "Rip Van Winkle." 
The angry Frau has just driven poor, destitute Rip 
from the cottage when Rip turns and, with a world of 



48 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

pathos, asks: "Den haf I no interest in dis honse?" 
The house is deathly still, the audience half in tears, 
when Bagley's cracked voice responds: "Only eighty 
per cent, Joey — only eighty per cent/' 



Dean Hole, the noted English clergyman who died 
recently, was the leading figure in many humorous 
stories. On one occasion he was crossing the Channel 
after a visit to the Continent, the voyage being very 
stormy. 

The Dean was a bad sailor and had suffered a great 
deal on the trip. At Dover he was looking over the 
railway company's rules on the station wall as a pas- 
senger came up. Said the Dean : "After that stormy 
voyage we have at least one advant^ige in making the 
subsequent trip to London. I see the company carries 
returning empties at reduced rates." 



Gilbert Stuart, though a celebrated artist, was 
likewise a great braggart. On one occasion a great 
public dinner was given to Isaac Hull by the town of 
Boston, and he was asked to sit for his picture to the 
artist. 

When Hull visited the studio Stuart took great de- 
light in entertaining him with anecdotes of his English 
success, stories of the marquis of this and the baroness 
of that, which showed how elegant was the society to 
which he had been accustomed. 

Unfortunately, in the midst of this grandeur, Mrs: 
Stuart, who did not know that there wias a sitter, came 
in with apron on and her head tied up with some hand- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 49 

kerchiefs, from the kitchen, and cried out: "Do you 
mean to have that leg of mutton boiled or roasted ?" 
to which Stuart replied, with great presence of mind, 
"Ask your mistress." 



This story is related of an old-time Judge in Sulli- 
van County, N. Y. : 

During a session of court there was so much talking 
and laughter going on that the Judge, becoming angry 
and confused, shouted in great wrath : 

"Silence, here ! We have decided half a dozen cases 
this morning, and I have not heard a word of one of 
them." 



Irving Bacheller, the author of "Eben Holdcn," 
went a little farther north than usual one summer 
while on his vacation, and penetrated Newfoundland. 
He caught a good many fish, but this did not prevent 
his keeping an eye on the natives. He was particularly 
impressed by the men who spent the day lounging 
about the village stores. 

"What do you fellows do when you sit around the 
store like this ?" he asked of the crowd arranged in a 
circle of tilted chairs and empty boxes and maintaining 
a profound silence. 

"Well,"- drawled one of the oldest, "sometimes we 
set and think, and then again other times we jest set." 



Not long before his death Thomas B. Reed visited 
some friends at their summer residence at Watch Hill, 
R. I. Late in the afternoon he was driven up to 



60 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Westerly to take the 7 o'clock train for Boston. It 
was a warm evening, the horses lagged and he missed 
the train, the last Boston-bound train stopping at 
VVesterly that night. 

As Mr. Reed had an important engagement in 
Boston early the next day, he seemed worried until he 
learned that there was a Boston express which passed 
Westerly at 9 o'clock. Then he smiled. 

Going to the telegraph office, he directed a telegram 
to the superintendent of the road in Boston, and sent 
the following message: 

"Will you stop the 9 o'clock express at Westerly 
to-night for a large party for Boston." 

The answer came : "Yes. Will stop train." 

Mr. Reed read the message, and smiled. When the 
train pulled in Mr. Reed quietly started to board it, 
when the conductor said : "Where is that large party 
we were to stop for ?" 

"I am the large party," replied Mr. Reed, and he 
boarded the train. 



Wilfred was sitting upon his father's knee watch- 
ing his mother arranging her hair. 

"Papa hasn't any Marcel waves like that," said the 
father, laughingly. 

Wilfred, looking up at his father's bald pate, re- 
plied, "Nope; no waves; it's all beach." 



The Prince of Wales is fond of telling a good story 
to his friends in connection with his visit to Ottawa 
some few years ago. The Prince — ^then Duke of York 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 51 

* — stole away for a quiet bicycle spin early one morn- 
ing, and in his ramblings met a farmer, heading mar- 
ketward, his wagon temporarily stalled by the loss of 
a nut belonging to the whiffletree bolt. His Royal 
Highness, with his usual democratic kindness, assisted 
him in putting things right. On parting, the farmer 
expressed his rough thanks and asked if he might 
know the name of the person to whom he was in- 
debted. The royBl cyclist replied modestly : "I am the 
Duke of York. And may I ask whom I have the pleas- 
ure of addressing?*' A broad, amused smile beamed 
from the farmer's face as he said : "Me ! Me ! Why, 
I'm your uncle, the Czar of Russia 1" 



"All right on behind there ?" called the conductor 
from the front of the car. 

"Hold on/' aried a shrill voice. "Wait till I get my 
clothes on!" 

The passengers craned their necks expectantly. A 
small boy was struggling to get a basket of laundry 
aboard. 



One of the jokes of which Kentuckians never grow 
weary concerns Senator Blackburn and his loyal ap- 
preciation of the liquid products of his native State. 
The Senator had gone to pay a visit to a friend of his 
who lived many miles distant. His friend met the 
Senator as he alighted at the station. 

"How are you Joe?" his friend asked. 

"I'm up against it," was the reply. "I lost the 
best port of my baggage en route." 



52 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Did you misplace it, or was it stolen?" his friend 
inquired solicitously. 

"Neither," said the Senator. "The cork came out." 



Kentucky Tailor — "What size shall I make your 
hip pockets. Colonel, pint or quart ?" 



Once, during his second term, Grover Cleveland 
was asked to speak at a function in a certain town, and 
when he arrived at the depot the wind was blowing aj 
gale, sleet was driving, and hailstones nearly as large 
as marbles were fiercely falling. Of course, the in- 
evitable brass band was there, and at the sight of the 
President the performers struck up with all the strenu- 
osity at their command. 

"That is the most realistic music I ever heard," re- 
marked Cleveland. 

"What are they trying to play?" asked Secretary 
Olney, who accompanied him. 

" 'Hail to the Chief !" replied the President, with a 
cheerful smile. 



The chaplain of one of his Majesty's ships was giv- 
ing a magic-lantern lecture, the subject of which was 
"Scenes from the Bible." He arranged with a sailor 
who possessed a gramophone to discourse appropriate 
music between the slides. The first picture shown was 
Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. The sailor 
cudgeled his brain but could think of nothing suitable. 
"Play up," whispered the chaplain. Suddenly a large 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 58 

idea struck the jolly tar and to the great consternation 
of the chaplain and the delight of the audience the 
gramophone burst forth with the strains of "There's 
only one girl in the world for me." 



The craze for giving and accepting coupons for 
purchases of merchandise, to be redeemed by prizes, 
was given a more or less merited rebuke by Nat C. 
Goodwin. He bought a bill of goods, and the sales- 
man offered him the coupons that the amount of the 
purchase called for. Mr. Goodwin shook his head. 

I don't want 'em/' he said. 

You had better take them, sir," persisted the clerk ; 

we redeem them with very handsome prizes. If you 
can save up a thousand coupons we give a grand 
piano." 

"Say, look here," replied Mr. Goodwin, "if I ever 
drank enough of your whisky or smoked enough of 
your cigars to get a thousand of those coupons I 
wouldn't want a piano. I'd want a harp." 



(S 



He — "You've got to have a pull to get ahead." 
She — "Yes, and you've got to have a head to get 
a pull." 



A Southern lawyer tells of a case that came to him 
at the outset of his career, wherein his principal wit- 
ness was a darky named Jackson, supposed to have 
knowledge of certain transactions not at all to the 
credit of his employer, the defendant. 



54 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Now, Jackson," said the lawyer, "I want you to 
understand the importance of telling the truth when 
you are put on the stand. You know what will hap- 
pen, don't you, if you don't tell the truth ?" 

"Yassir," was Jackson's reply; "in dat case I ex- 
pects our side will win de case." 



The Suitor — "They say that Love is blind." 
The Heiress — "But nowadays he has a marvelous 
sense of touch." 



A SMALL boy who had recently passed his fifth 
birthday was riding in a suburban car with his mother, 
when they were asked the customary question, "How 
old is the boy?" After being told the correct age, 
which did not require a fare, the conductor passed on 
to the next person. 

The boy sat quite still as if pondering over some 
question, and then, concluding that full information 
had not been given, called loudly to the conductor, 
then at the other end of the car : "And mother's thirty- 
one!" 



One of the uptown banks, on a conspicuous comer, 
gained a bad name with the daily crowd of New York 
pedestrians. Its financial standing was of course be- 
yond question, but its clock ran on a very eccentric 
and confusing system. The timepiece stood in a spot 
easily observable and was consulted for years in spite 
of its tendency to wander from strict accuracy. A 
woman excusing her lateness for luncheon said 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 56 

she thought she was on time by the clock in the 
bank. 

"Oh, nobody can go by that," said her companion 
contemptuously. "We call that the bank where the 
wild time grows." 



In a certain home where the stork recently visited 
there is a six-year-old son of inquiring mind. When 
he was first taken in to see the new arrival he ex- 
claimed : "Oh, mamma, it hasn't any teeth ! And no 
hair !" Then, clasping his hands in despair, he cried : 
"Somebody has done us ! It's an old baby." 



A PROMINENT railroad man hurried down the lobby 
of a Binghamton hotel and up to the desk. He had 
just ten minutes in which to pay his bill and reach the 
station. Suddenly it occurred to him that he had for- 
gotten something. 

"Here, boy," he called to a negro bellboy, "run up 
to 48 and see if I left a box on the bureau. And be 
quick about it, will you?" 

The boy rushed up the stairs. The ten minutes 
dwindled to seven and the railroad man paced the 
office. At length the boy appeared. 

"Yas, suh," he panted breathlessly. "Yas, suh, yo' 
left it, suh!" 



A Boston minister tells of a little girl friend of his 
who, one day, proudly displayed for his admiration a 
candy cat. 

"Are you going to eat it?" the minister asked. 



56 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"No, sir; it's too pretty to eat. I'm going to keep 
it," the little girl replied, as she stroked it with a moist 
little hand. 

Several days later the minister saw her again, and 
inquired about the cat. 

A regretful look came into her eyes. 

"It's gone," she sighed. "You see, I saved it and 
saved it, till it got so dirty that I just had to eat it." 



(ft 



'Only fools are certain. Tommy; wise men hesi- 
tate." 

"Are you sure, uncle ?" 
'Yes, my boy ; certain of it." 



tr 



"My rubber," said Nat Goodwin, describing a 
Turkish bath that he once had in Mexico, "was a very 
strong man. He laid me on a slab and kneaded me and 
punched me and banged me in a most emphatic way. 
When it was over and I had gotten up, he came up 
behind me before my sheet was adjusted, and gave me 
three resounding slaps on the bare back with the palm 
of his enormous hand. 

"'What in blazes are you doing?' I gasped, stag- 
gering. 

" *No offense, sir,' said the man. 'It was only to let 
the office know that I was ready for the next bather. 
You see, sir, the bell's out of order in this room." 



"I WANT to know," said the irate matron, "how 
much money my husband drew out of this bank last 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 57 

week." "I can't give you that information, ma'am/' 
answered the man in the cage. "You're the paying 
teller, aren't you?" "Yes, but I'm not the telling 
payer." 



A LADY once showed her little girl a beautiful new 
silk dress which had just arrived from the dressmaker, 
and by way of improving the occasion she said : "You 
know, dear, all this was given us by a poor worm." 
The little girl looked puzzled for a minute or two and 
then said : "Do you mean dad, mama ?" 



When Blaine was a young lawyer, and cases were 
few, he was asked to defend a poverty-stricken tramp 
accused of stealing a watch. He pleaded with all the 
ardor at his command, drawing so pathetic a picture 
with such convincing energy that at the close of his 
argument the court was in tears and even the tramp 
wept. The jury deliberated but a few minutes and 
returned the verdict "not guilty." Then the tramp 
drew himself up, tears streaming down his face as he 
looked at the future "Plumed Knight," and said: 
"Sir, I have never heard so grand a plea, I have not 
cried before since I was a child. I have no money 
with which to reward you, but (drawing a package 
from the depths of his ragged clothes), here's that 
watch; take it and welcome." 



The other day an ingenious-looking person called 
with the message to the housewife that her husband 



68 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

had sent him for his dress suit, which was to be presse3 
and redone by the tailor. 

"Dear me," said the housewife, "he said nothing to 
me about it. Did he look quite well ?" 

"Yes, mum ; he wuz in good health and spirits." 

"And he seemed quite as if he knew what he was 
about?" 

"He did that, mum." 

"And did he look as if he were quite content with! 
things about him?" 

"He was all that, mum." 

"Well," said the lady, "it seems strange that he 
should only think of that dress suit now, because it's 
ten years since he's dead and buried, and I've often 
wondered how he's been getting on." 



Two friends were walking down Bond Street, Lon- 
don. A man came up and saluted the elder : "How do 
you do, Lord ?" 

"Ah! how-do? Glad to see you. How's the old 
complaint ?" 

The stranger's face clouded over and he shook his 
head. "No better." 

"Dear me; so sorry. Glad to have met you. 
Good-by." 

"Who's your friend?'' asked the other, when the 
strang^er was gone. 

"No idea." 

"Why, you asked him about his old complaint !" 

"Pooh, pooh !" replied the nobleman, unconcernedly. 
"The old fellow's well over sixty ; botmd to have some- 
thing the matter with him." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 69 



"Did you tip the waiter?'' 

"Yes, so to speak. I turned him down.^ 



Dr. Jowett of Oxford was a formidable wit. At 
a gathering at which he was present the talk ran upon 
the comparative gifts of two Balliol men who had 
been made respectively a judge and a bishop. Prof. 
Henry Smith, famous in his day for his brilliancy, 
pronounced the bishop to be the greater man of the 
two for this reason : "A judge, at the most, can only 
say, "You be hanged," whereas a bishop can say, "You 
be damned I" 

"Yes," said Dr. Jowett, but if the judge says, 
" *You be hanged,* you are hanged." 



"I'm so glad you've come. We're going to have a 
young married couple for dinner." 

"Fm glad too. They ought to be tender." 



"I PAY as I go," declared the pompous citizen. 
"Not while I'm running these apartments," declared 
the janitor. "You'll pay as you move in." 



Among seven distinguished men who were to speak 
at the opening exercises of a new school was a pro 
f essor well known for his lapses of memory. But his 
speech was clear that night, and as he seated himself 
his loving wife felt that he had fully earned the 
burst of applause that followed, and she clapped 



flO AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

her little hands enthusiastically. Then her cheeks 
crimsoned. 

"Did you see anything amusing about the close of 
my address, my dear?" asked the Professor as they 
started for home. "It seemed as if I, heard sounds 
suggestive of merriment about me." 

"Well, dear," said she, "of all the people who ap- 
plauded your address, you clapped the loudest and 
longest." 



^»> 



Teacher — "What is the Hague tribunal? 

Willie— "The Hague tribunal ar— " 

Teacher — "Don't say 'The Hague tribunal are/ 
Willie; use is." 

Willie — "The Hague tribunal isbitrates national 
controversies." 



Sir Wilfrid Laurier was once on an electioneering 
tour in Ontario and, as the elections were bitterly con- 
tested, every effort was made to stir up race and re- 
ligious prejudice. One day a Quebec Liberal sent this 
telegram to Sir Wilfrid : "Report in circulation in this 
country that your children have not been baptized. 
Telegraph denial." To this the Premier replied: 
"Sorry to say report is correct. I have no children." 



The teacher of one of the rooms in a school in the 
suburbs of Cleveland had been training her pupils in 
anticipation of a visit from the school commissioner. 
At last he came, and the classes were called out to show 
their attainments. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 61 

The arithmetic class was the first called, and in order 
to make a good impression the teacher put the first 
question to Johnny Smith, the star pupil. 

"Johnny, if coal is selling at $6 per ton, and you pay 
the coal dealer $24, how many tons of coal will he 
bring you ?" 

"Three," was the prompt reply from Johnny. 

The teacher, much embarrassed, said, "Why, 
Johnny, that isn't right." 

"Oh, I know it ain't, but they do it anyhow." 



A PUBLISHER who occupicd a loft in New York 
directed one of his clerks to hang out a "Boy 
wanted" sign at the entrance. The card had 
been swaying in the breeze only a few minutes, 
when a red-headed little tad climbed to the publisher's 
office with the sign under his arm. 

"Say, mister," he demanded of the publisher, "did 
youse hang out this here 'Boy Wanted ' sign?" 

"I did," replied the publisher sternly. "Why did 
you tear it down?" 

"Hully gee!" he blurted. "Why, I'm the boy!" 
And he was. 



A DISTINGUISHED surgeou, Dr. Abernethy by name, 
famed for his laconic speech as well as for his pro- 
fessional skill, met one day his equal in a woman of 
few words, who came to him with a hand badly 
swollen and inflamed. 

"Bum ?" asked the doctor. 

"Bruise." 



63 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Poultice." 

The next day the patient returned and the dialogue 
was resumed. 

"Better?" 

"Worse." 

"More poultice." 

Two days later the woman called again, and this was 
the conversation : 

"Better?" 

"Well. Fee?" 

"Nothing!" exclaimed the doctor. "Most sensible 
woman I ever met !" 



Visitor — "Well, Harold, what are you going to be 
when you grow up?" 

Harold — "Oh, I'm going to be a sailor; but baby's 
only going to be just an ordinary father." 



No amount of persuasion or punishment could 
keep Johnnie from running away. The excitement of 
being pursued and of being brought back to a tearful 
family appealed to his sense of the dramatic and offset 
the slight discomfort that sometimes followed. 

Finally his mother determined upon a new method. 
She decided, after many misgivings, that the next 
time Johnnie ran away no notice whatever should be 
taken of it. He should stay away as lonjf as he pleased 
and return when he saw fit. 

In a few days the youngster again disappeared. 
His mother was firm in her resolve and no search was 
made. Great was poor Johnnie's disappointment. He 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 68 

oaanag^d to stay away all day, but when it began to 
grow dark his courage failed and he started for home. 
He sneaked ignominiously into the kitchen. Nobody 
spoke to him. Apparently his absence had not been 
noticed. This was too much. As soon as opportunity 
offered he remarked casually, "Well, I see you've got 
the same old cat." 



A GENTLEMAN who happened to come in rather late 
at a dinner found that the guests had finished soup and 
were on with the next course. When he had sat down 
a waiter came up and said, "Soup, sir ?" "No, thanks," 
he replied, whereupon the waiter went away. An- 
other waiter, seeing he had nothing, said to him, 
"Soup, sir?" He replied rather testily, "No, thank 
you." A third waiter, who saw him come in and took 
compassion on him, placed the soup in front of him. 
"Look here, my man, is this compulsory?" "No, sir; 
it's mulligatawny," replied the waiter. 



A BIG, burly, fierce-looking man and a meek, in- 
offensive-looking little chap were sawing timber with 
a cross-cut saw. A strapping Irishman, passing that 
way, stopped to watch them. Back and forth, back 
and forth, they pulled at the saw. Finally the Irish- 
man could stand it no longer. With a whoop and a 
yell he rushed at the big man and brought him to the 
ground, burjring his knees deep into the sawyer's 
chest. 

Biff! Bang! Thump! Biff! 

"There/' he said, letting him have one parting blow 



64 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

square on the nose, "now m'bbe ye'U let the little felly 
hevitr 



Oliver Herford once entered a doubtful-looking 
restaurant in a small New York town and ordered a 
lamb-chop. After a long delay the waiter returned, 
bearing a plate on which reposed a dab of mashed po- 
tatoes and a much overdone chop of microscopical pro- 
portions with a remarkably long and slender rib 
attached. This the waiter set down before him and 
then hurried away. 

"See here," called Herford, "I ordered a chop." 
"Yessir," replied the man, "there it is." 
"Ah, so it is," replied Herford, peering at it closely. 
"I thought it was a crack in the plate." 



In one of the elevators of a city skyscraper, as the 
elevator shot toward the zenith, a stout man began to 
sputter. "Bub-but, rt-st-st-b'r'r'r," he said, as the 
veins stood out upon his neck. At the twenty-third 
story the stout man's eyes were nearly starting from 
his head, and as he grasped the arm of the elevator 
man the latter nervously pulled the lever, and the lift 
started for the bottom at a terrific rate. The solitary 
passenger danced about, gurgling spasmodically. As 
the car struck bottom, however, he rushed through 
the door and up to an important individual, whose cap 
bore the screed "Starter." "S-s-s-say," he sputtered, 
"t-t-this is the th-th-third trip I-I-IVe t-t-taken in the 
elevator, 'n' I-I-I-I w-w-wanter g-g-g-get off at the 
sev-sev-seventh fl-fl-fl-floor. Before I-I-I c-c-c-can 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS gg 

say sev-sev-seven I-I-I-I'm up to the t-t-top, 'n' be-be- 
before I-I-I can cat-cat-catch my br-br-breath I-I-Fm 
down h-h-here again, 'n' I-I-I-Fm in a de-de-vil of a 

hurry." 



Nervohs player ( deprecatingly playing card) — "I 
really don't know what to play. I'm afraid I've made 
a fool of myself." 

Partner (reassuringly) — "That all right. I don't 
see what else you could have done!" 



Some of Darwin's boy friends once plotted a sur- 
prise for the naturalist. They slew a centipede, glued 
on it a beetle's head, and also added to its body the 
wings of a butterfly and the long legs of a grass- 
hopper. Then they put the new insect in a box and 
knocked at the great man's door. "We found this 
in the fields," they cried with eager voices. "Do tell 
us what it can be." Darwin looked at the strange 
compound and then at the boys' innocent faces. "Did 
it hum when you caught it?" he asked. "Oh yes, 
sir," they answered quickly, nudging one another, "it 
hummed like anything." "Then," said the philoso- 
pher, "it is a humbug." 



A MAN had been sent by the house-agents to take 
an inventory of the drawing-room furniture. He was 
so long about his task that at last the mistress of the 
house went to see what was taking place. She found 
the man slumbering sweetly on the sofa with an empty 

3— Vol. i 



86 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

bottle beside him ; it was evident, however, that he had 
made a pathetic though solitary attempt to do his 
work, for in the inventory book was written, "One re- 
volving carpet/' 



The customs of military service require officers to 
visit the kitchens during cooking hours to see that the 
soldiers' food is properly prepared. One old colonel, 
who let it be pretty generally known that his orders 
must be obeyed without question or explanation, once 
stopped two soldiers who were carrying a soup-kettle 
out of a kitchen. 

"Here, you,'' he growled, "give me a taste of that." 

One of the soldiers ran and fetched a ladle and gave 
the colonel the desired taste. The colonel spat and 
spluttered. 

"Good heavens, man! You don't call that stuff 
soup, do you ?"' 

"No, sir," replied the soldier meekly, "it's dish- 
water we was emptyin', sir." 



The ship upon clearing the harbor ran into a half- 
pitching, half -rolling sea, that became particularly 
noticeable about the time the twenty-five passengers at 
the captain's table sat down to dinner. 

"I hope that all twenty-five of you will have a pleas- 
ant trip," the captain told them as the soup appeared, 
"and that this little assemblage of twenty-four will 
reach port much benefited by the voyage. I look upon 
these twenty-two smiling faces much as a father does 
upon his family, for I am responsible for the safety of 



AMONG THE MUMORISTS 67 

this group of seventeen. I hope that all thirteen of 
you will join me later in drinking to a merry trip. I 
believe that we seven fellow passengers are most con- 
genial and I applaud the judgment which chose from 
the passenger list these three persons for my table. 
You and I, my dear, sir, are — Here, steward ! Bring 
on the fish and clear away these dishes.*^ 



"Extra Billy'' Smith, the Confederate General, 
was one of the most irascible as well as one of the 
most patriotic of men. Upon one occasion he was 
leading a regiment on a long and difficult march. 
Weary and exhausted they halted for a rest by the 
wayside. When it became necessary to move on, the 
General gave the order, but the tired men remained 
stretched upon the ground. The order was repeated 
peremptorily. Still no motion. By this time the tem- 
per of the General was at white heat. He thundered 
out: 

"If you don't get up and start at once I'll march the 

regiment off and leave every d d one of you 

behind." 

They started. 



A Boston lawyer, who brought his wit from his 
native Dublin, while cross-examining the plaintiff in a 
divorce trial, brought forth the following : 

"You wish to divorce this woman because she 
drinks?" 

"Yes, sir." 

"Do you drink yourself ?*' 



US AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"That's my business I'' — ^angrily. 
Whereupon the unmoved lawyer asked 
"Have you any other business ?" 



One rainy afternoon Aunt Sue was explaining the 
meaning of various words to her young nephew. 
"Now, an heirloom, my dear, means something that 
has been handed down from father to son,"' she said. 

"Well," replied the boy thoughtfully, "that's a queer 
name for my pants." 



"The easiest money that I ever made," said a 
shipping man the other day, "was handed to me in 
New York not long ago. I was visiting there and had 
a little time to myself, so I bought a paper and went 
down to the river front. I saw an advertisement in 
the paper saying that a tug was to be auctioned off 
that day, so I went to the place and stood around ex- 
amining the tug. After a while a man who had been 
watching me came over and began asking questions. I 
told him I was interested in boats and was from Phila- 
delphia. Then he asked : 'What are you doing down 
here?' *I came down to this auction sale,' I said. 
'Well,' said the man, *if you want to keep on the right 
side of the boys you'll do something for me. Here's 
$ioo; do not bid on the tug.' I took the money and 
departed. I had not the slightest intention of 
bidding." 



A BRIDE and groom had been much troubled by the 
stares of people at hotels wherever they went. So 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 69 

when they arrived at the next hotel the groom called 
the colored head-waiter, 

"Now, George," he said, "we have been bothered to 
death by people staring at us because we are just mar- 
ried. We want to be free from that sort of thing here. 
Now, here's two dollars, and remember I trust you not 
to tell people that we are jiist married, if they ask you. 
Understand ?" 

"Yas, sah!" said George; "I un'stand." 

All went well that day. But the following morning 
when the couple came down to breakfast the staring 
was worse than ever. Chambermaids in the hall snick- 
ered; the clerks behind the desk nudged each other; 
everybody in the dining-room stared. When the 
couple returned to their room it was only to see 
a head sticking out of nearly every room down the 
long hall. 

This was too much. 

This was the limit ! 

Angered beyond control, the groom went to the desk 
and called for the head-waiter. 

"Look here, you old fool," said the groom, "didn't 
I give you two dollars to protect my wife and myself 
from the staring business ?" 

"Yas, sah, you did," said George. " Ton me soul, 
I didn't tell, sah." 

"Then how about this staring?" asked the irate 
groom. "It's worse here than anywhere. Did any- 
body ask if we were married?" 

"Yas, sah ; several folks did," replied George. 

"Well, what did you tell them?" 

"I tole 'em, sah," replied the honest negro, "you 
wuzn't married at all." 



70 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

A WITTY priest was once visiting a "self-made" 
millionaire, who took him to see his seldom-used 
library. 

"There," said the millionaire, pointing to a table 
covered with books, "there are my best friends." 

"Ah," replied the wit, as he glanced at the leaves, 
"I'm glad you don't cut them !" 



Mrs. Maloney was before the Judge, charged with 
assault on Policeman Casey. She had been unsually 
attentive throughout the proceedings, and now the 
Judge was summing up the evidence. 

"The evidence shows, Mrs. Maloney," he began, 
"that you threw a stone at Policeman Casey." 

"It shows more than that, yer Honor," interrupted 
Mrs. Maloney; "it shows that Oi hit him." 



When Mark Twain was a young and struggling 
newspaper writer, in San Francisco, a lady of his ac- 
quaintance saw him one day with a cigar-box under 
his arm looking in a shop window. 

"Mr. Clemens," she said, "I always see you with a 
cigar-box under your arm. I am afraid you are smok- 
ing too much." 

"It isn't that," said Mark. "I'm moving again." 



A THUNDERSTORM ovcrtook the Emperor Francis 
Joseph of Austria when out shooting in 1873 with old 
Emperor William of Germany and Victor Emmanuel. 
The three monarchs got separated from their party and 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 71 

lost their way. They were drenched to the skin, and, 
in search of shelter, hailed a peasant driving a covered 
cart drawn by oxen along the high road. The peasant 
took up the royal trio and drove on. 

"And who may you be, for you are a stranger in 
these parts?" he asked, after a while, of Emperor 
William. 

"I am the Emperor of Germany,'" replied his Teu- 
tonic majesty. 

"Ha, very good," said the peasant, and then, ad- 
dressing Victor Emmanuel, "and you, my friend ?" 

"Why, I am the King of Italy," came the prompt 
reply. 

"Ha, ha, very good, indeed! And who are you?" 
addressing Francis Joseph. 

"I am the Emperor of Austria," said the latter. 

The peasant then scratched his head and said with a 
knowing wink : "Very good, and who do you suppose 
I am?" 

Their majesties replied they would like very much 
to know. 

"Why, I am his Holiness the Pope." 



In a cemetery at Middlebury, Vt., is a stone, erected 
by a widow to her loving husband, bearing this in- 
scription : 

"Rest in peace — until we meet again." 



Mrs. Gilroy, prominent in the church work of her 
small city, had acquired a new servant, willing but 
ignorant. 



72 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Bridget/* she said, "I am going to lie down and do 
not wish to be disturbed. If any one calls, do not say 
I am not at home, but give an evasive answer." 

"What's that, mum ?" said Bridget. 

Having explained as well as she could, the good 
lady retired and later appeared below stairs, much 
refreshed. 

"Did any one call ?" she asked. 

"Yes, mum; the new minister, from your church." 

^Oh, Bridget. What did you tell him?" 

'Well," sez he, "is Mrs. Gilroy at home?" and I 
sez nuthin', and sez he a little louder, *Is Mrs. Gilroy 
at home ?' and sez I, * Was your grandmother a 
monkey ?' " 



"( 

(C 



A YOUNG kindergarten teacher, of Manhattan, who 
is made much of by her pupils — frequently meeting 
their parents — has a very affable manner, and, on 
entering a Broadway car recently, exclaimed in her 
most cordial way to one of the passengers: "Why, 
how do you do, Mr. Brown !" As the man addressed 
evidently did not know her and looked rather dazed, 
she saw her mistake and hurriedly apologized, saying : 
"Oh, I beg your pardon — I thought you were the 
father of one of my children." 

Then every one within hearing looked so amused 
that the young lady left the car at the next stop. 



A Mr. Johnson, of Boston, was the owner of a 
small yacht, in which he took much pleasure during 
the summer, cruising along the coast. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 78 

He had for a cook a young fellow from Denmark 
whose English was not always perfect, but who made 
himself so generally useful that Mr. Johnson kept 
him for several years at good wages. One sum- 
mer they landed at a place where a camp-meeting 
was in full blast. Our friend, the Dane, was greatly 
interested and took a front seat. 

Near the close of the meeting one of the brethren 
went about among the people exhorting them to "go 
forward." Coming to the Dane, he said, "My friend, 
don't you want to work for Jesus ?"' 

"No," said the Dane, "I've got a good yob with 
Yohnson." 



Johnny — "Pa, did Moses have the dyspepsia like 
you?" 

Father — "How on earth do I know ? What makes 
you ask such a question?" 

"Why, our Sunday-school teacher says the Lord 
gave Moses two tablets." 



Elderly Aunt — "I suppose you wondered, dear 
little Hans, why I left you so abruptly in the lane. 
I saw a man, and oh, how I ran !" 

Hans — "Did you get him?" 



A MAN returned home late one night after having 
partaken rather freely of the "cup that cheers." All 
might have been well had not one tree intercepted be- 
tween him and his destination— one solitary tree at 



74 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

the foot of his own steps; but Mr. B suddenly 

came into such forcible contact with that tree that he 
was almost stunned. After recovering his senses, he 
wandered about, but repeatedly bumped into the same 
inoffensive barrier. At length he sank down on the 
ground and muttered helplessly : 

**Lost! Lost! in an impenetrable forest!" 



The intoxicated individual who, after bumping into 
the same tree thirteen times, bemoaned the fact that 
he was lost in an impenetrable forest, is no greater 
disgrace to modem civilization than the hero of this 
story: 

A citizen of Seattle who had looked upon the wine 
when he was no longer sure what color it was, in the 
course of his journey home encountered a tree pro- 
tected by an iron tree-guard. Grasping the bars, he 
cautiously felt his way around it twice. 

"Curse it!" he moaned, sinking to the ground in 
despair. "Locked in!" 



Stanley, aged four, was one of a large family, 
Besides numerous sisters and brothers, there were 
aunts and uncles galore and many cousins. The only 
very young people, however, were those in his imme- 
diate household. 

One Thanksgiving dinner Stanley gazed solemnly 
around the table for a while, and then announced, 
oracularly : 

"My mother and the cat seem to be the only people 
in this whole family that have any children!" 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 75 

A CLERGYMAN was being shaved by a barber, who 
had evidently become unnerved by the previous night's 
dissipation. Finally he cut the clerg3mian's chin. The 
latter looked up at the artist reproachfully, and said : 
"You see, my man, what comes of hard drinking." 
"Yes, sir," replied the barber consolingly, "it makes 
the skin tender." 



Mistress — "Did the mustard plaster do you any 
good, Bridget?" 

Maid — "Yes; but, begorry, mum, ut do bite the 
tongue !" 



They had just met; conversation was somewhat 
fitful. Finally he decided to guide it into literary chan- 
nels, where he was more at home, and, turning to his 
companion, asked: 

"Are you fond of literature ?" 

"Passionately,'" she replied. "I love books dearly." 

"Then you must admire Sir Walter Scott," he ex- 
claimed with sudden animation. "Is not his *Lady of 
the Lake' exquisite in its flowing grace and poetic 
imagery? Is it not — " 

"It is perfectly lovely," she assented, clasping her 
hands in ecstasy. "I suppose I have read it a dozen 
times." 

"And Scott's 'Marmion,' " he continued, "with its 
rugged simplicity and marvelous description — one can 
almost smell the heather on the heath while perusing 
its splendid pages." 

"It is perfectly grand," she murmured. 

"And Scott's Teveril of the Peak' and his noble 



76 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

*Bride of Lammermoor' — where in the English lan- 
guage will you find anything more heroic than his 
grand auld Scottish characters and his graphic, force- 
ful pictures of feudal times and customs? You like 
them, I am sure." 

"I just dote upon them," she replied. 

"And Scott's Emulsion," he continued hastily, for 
a faint suspicion was beginning to dawn upon him. 

"I think," she interrupted rashly, "that it's the best 
thing he ever wrote." 



"Why is Jones growing a beard ?" 
"Oh, I believe his wife made him a present of some 
ties." 



Wife — "Do come over to Mrs. Barker's with me, 
John. She'll make you feel just as if you were at 
home." 

Her Husband — "Then what's the use of going?'* 



About forty years ago, walking down Market 
street, in this city, I heard a darky commenting on a 
sign he had just spelt out, stretched across the side- 
walk in front of a livery stable : 

"Jist like 'em. Aftah dars no moh slabry dey stick 
up signs f oh me : * Man-ure Free' !" 



In the audience at a lecture on China there was a 
very pious old lady who was slightly deaf. She 
thought the lecturer was preaching, and every time 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 77 

he came to a period she would say "Amen !" or some 
other pious exclamation. The people in the audience, 
which was composed mostly of the village church 
members, knew she was being reverent and did not 
even smile when she exclaimed, until finally the lec- 
turer mentioned some far-off city in China, saying, "I 
live there." At this point clearly and distinctly could 
be heard the old lady, saying, "Thank God for that." 



A PUSHING young actor who was playing tmdcr- 
study in one of Mr. Barriers plays found his oppor- 
tunity one night through the illness of his principal. 
He accordingly flooded his managerial and influential 
acquaintances with telegrams announcing : "I play So- 
and-So's part to-night." Except that the theater was 
comparatively empty this breathless disclosure pro- 
duced no result, except a telegram in reply from Mr. 
Barrie, to this effect : "Thanks for the warning." 



It was a busy day in the butcher-shop. The butcher 
yelled to the boy who helped him out in the shop: 
"Hurry up, John, and don't forget to cut off Mrs. 
Murphy's leg, and break Mrs. Jones's bones, and don't 
forget to slice Mrs. Johnson's tongue." 



Ralph Waldo Emerson, like other men of genius, 
was absent-minded, and, when a fit of inspiration 
seized him, he was oblivious to the things of earth to 
a ludicrous extent. A story that is vouched for as 
true illustrates this. 



78 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

The old-fashioned matches, in use in New England 
in Emerson's time, were made in cards, or flat slabs^ 
the matches being joined at the foot, and separating at 
the top, like the teeth of a deep comb. Emerson was 
accustomed, in the midnight watches, to lie awake 
communing with his own thoughts, and, if any especial 
inspiration developed itself, he would get up and write 
it down, lighting the lamp for that purpose. 

One night, Mrs. Emerson was awakened by her 
gifted husband's voice, as he called to her plaintively: 

"What is the matter with the matches, my dear? 
I have struck seven, and not one will light. Where 
can I get some good ones?" 

Mrs. Emerson got out of bed at once, and found 
the matches in their accustomed place. Her husband 
had not touched them. 

"Why, what can you have been striking, in mistake 
for matches?" she asked, anxiously, and beheld her 
best carved tortoise-shell comb, which the absorbed 
philosopher, had broken up, tooth by tooth, in mistake 
for the card of matches. 



Instructor in Public Speaking — "What is the 
matter with you, Mr. Jones ; can't you speak any 
louder? Be more enthusiastic. Open your mouth 
and throw yourself into it." 



"I CONFESS that the subject of psychical research 
makes no great appeal to me," Sir William Henry 
Perkin, the inventor of coal-tar dyes, told some friends 
in New York. "Personally, in the course of a fairly 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 79 

long career, I have heard at first hand but one ghost 
story. Its hero was a man whom I may as well call 
Snooks. 

"Snooks, visiting at a country house, was put in 
the haunted chamber for the night. He said that he 
did not feel the slightest uneasiness, but nevertheless, 
just as a matter of precaution, he took to bed with him 
a revolver of the latest American pattern, 

"He slept peacefully enough until the clock struck 
two, when he awoke with an unpleasant feeling of 
oppression. He raised his head and peered about him. 
The room was wanly illumined by the full moon, and 
in that weird, bluish light he thought he discerned a 
small, white hand clasping the rail at the foot of 
the bed. 

'Who's there?' he asked tremulously. 
There was no reply. The small, white hand did 
not move. 

"'Who's there?' he repeated. 'Answer me or FU 
shoot.' 

'Again there was no reply. 

'Snooks cautiously raised himself, took careful aim 
and fired. 

"From that night on he's limped. Shot off two of 
his own toes." 









When the Rev. Dr. Henson, then of Chicago, came 
to the New York Chautauqua to lecture on "Fools,'* 
Bishop Vincent introduced him thus : 

"Ladies and gentlemen, we are now to have a lecture 
on Tools' by one of the most distinguished " 

Here there was a long pause, the Bishop's inflection 



€0 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

indicating that he had finished. The audience roared 
with delight, and roared again, so that it was some 
time before the sentence was concluded — "men of 
Chicago." 

Dr. Henson, who is a man of ready wit, stepped to 
the front of the platform, and said : 

"Ladies and gentlemen, I am not so great a fool as 

Bishc^ Vincent " and then he paused as if he had 

finished, and the audience went fairly wild over the 
situation. When quiet was restored, Dr. Henson con- 
cluded — "would have you think." 



Doctor (feeling Sandy's pulse in bed) — "What do 
you drink?" 

Sandy (with brightening face) — "Oh, Fm nae par- 
ticular, doctor ! Anything you've got with ye." 



Every employee of the Bank of England is required 
to sign his name in a book on his arrival in the morn- 
ing, and, if late, must give the reason therefor. The 
chief cause of tardiness is usually fog, and the first 
man to arrive writes "fog" opposite his name, and 
those who follow write "ditto." One day, how- 
ever, the first late man gave as the reason, "wife had 
twins,** and twenty other late men mechanically signed 
"ditto" underneath. 



At a dinner in Washington there was told a Scotch 
story of a parishioner who had strayed from his 
own kirk. 



} 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 3X 

»• "Why weren't you at the kirk on Sunday?" asked 
the preacher of the culprit on meeting him a day or 
two later. 

I was at Mr. McClellan's kirk," said the other. 

I don't like you running about to strange kirks like 
that," continued the minister. "Not that I object to 
your hearing Mr. McClellan, but Fm sure you widna 
like your sheep s^traying into strange pastures." 

"I widna care a grain, sir, if it was better grass," 
responded the parishioner. 






Tommy, very sleepy, was saying his prayers. "Now 
I lay me down to sleep," he began. "I pray the Lord 
my soul to keep." 

" If,' " his mother prompted. 

"If he hollers let him go, eeny, meeny, miny, mo!" 



Perish the thought that the novelist or playwright 
should be tied down to historical accuracy! Lady 
Dorothy Neville quotes an amusing correspondence 
between Bulwer Lytton and her brother, Horace Wal- 
pole. 

"My dear Walpole : Here I am at Bath — ^bored to 
death. I am thinking of writing a play about your 
great ancestor Sir Robert. Had he not a sister Lucy, 
and did she not marry a Jacobite?" 

Walpole promptly replied: 

"My dear Lytton : I care little for my family, and 
less still for Sir Robert, but I know that he never 
had a sister Lucy, so she could not have married (a 
Jacobite." 



82 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

However, this mattered little to Lord Lyttcm, for 
his answer ran : 

"My dear Walpole : You are too late ! Sir Robert 
had a sister Lucy, and she did marry a Jacobite." 

So in defiance of history, the play "Walpole" was 
written. 



"Here's a curious item, Joshua!" exclaimed Mrs. 
Lemington, spreading out the Billeville "Mirror" in 
her ample lap. "The Nellie E, Williams of Gloucester 
reports that she saw two whales, a cow and a calf, 
floating off Cape Cod the day before yesterday." 

"Well, ma," replied old Mr. Lemington, "what's 
the matter with that?" 

"Why, it's all right about the two whales, Joshua, 
but what bothers me is how the cow and the calf got 
way out there." 



A Congressman once declared in an address to the 
House : 

"As Daniel Webster says in his great dictionary — *' 

"It was Noah who wrote the dictionary," whispered 
a colleague, who sat at the next desk. 

"Noah, nothing," replied the speaker. "Noah built 
the ark." 



Father (who has been called upon in the city and 
asked for his daughter's hand) — "Louise, do you 
know what a solemn thing it is to be married?" 

Louise — "Oh, yes, pa; but it is a good deal more 
solemn being single." 



f 






AMONG THE HUMORISTS 88 

Captain Roald Amundsen, Norway's famous ex- 
plorer, told this story about a National Guard encamp- 
ment: 

"A new volunteer, who had not quite learned his 
business, was on sentry duty, one night, when a friend 
brought him a pie from the canteen. 

"As he sat on the grass eating pie, the major saun- 
tered up in undress uniform. The sentry, not recog- 
nizing him, did not salute, and the major stopped and 
said: 

What's that you have there?' 
Tie,' said the sentry, good-naturedly. 'Apple pie. 
Have a bite ?' 

"The major frowned, 
'Do you know who I am?' he asked. 
'No,' said the sentry, 'unless you're the major's 
groom.' 

"The major shook his head. 

" 'Guess again,' he growled. 

" 'The barber from the village ?' 

" 'No.' 

" 'Maybe — ' here the sentry laughed — 'maybe 
you're the major himself?' 

" 'That's right. I am the major,' was the stem 
reply. 

"The sentry scrambled to his feet. 

" 'Good gracious !' he exclaimed. 'Hold the pie, 
will you, while I present arms !' " 



a r 

it V 



A PLAYER for many years associated with the late 
Richard Mansfield relates that one day in Philadel- 
phia, as he was standing by a huge poster in front 



Si AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

of the theater a poster that represented Mansfield in 
the character of "Henry V.," a man who was strolling 
by stopped to gaze at the bill. Finally, with a snort 
of disgust, he muttered as he turned to go : 
'Henry V.—' what?" 



at 



"There is an old negro down in my town," said 
John Sharp Williams, the former Democratic leader 
of the House, "who did me a service. I wanted to 
reward him, so I said : 

" * Uncle, which shall I give you — z ton of coal or 
a bottle of whisky ?' 

" 'Foh de Lo'd, Massa John,' he replied, 'you-all 
shorely knows I buhn wood/ '* 



"No/' remarked a determined lady to an indignant 
cabman who had received his legal fare, "you can not 
cheat me, my man. I haven't ridden in cabs for the 
last twenty-five years for nothing." 

"Haven't you, mum?" replied the cabman, bitterly, 
gathering up the reins. "Well, you've done your 
best!" 



On the mighty deep. 

The great ocean liner rolled and pitched. 

"Henry," faltered the young bride, "do you still 
love me?" 

"More than ever, darling!" was Henry's fervent 
answer. 

Then there was eloquent silence. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 86 

"Henry," she gasped, turning her pale, ghastly face 
away. "I thought that would make me feel better, 
but it doesn't !" 



Once in Nice an Englishman and a Frenchman 
were about to separate on the Promenade des Anglais. 

The Englishman, as he started toward the Ccrcle 
Mediterranee, called back : 

"Au reservoir!" 

And the Frenchman waved his hand and answered : 

"Tanks." 



During a Baptist convention held in Charles- 
ton the Rev. Dr. Greene of Washington strolled 
down to the Battery one morning to take a look across 
the harbor at Fort Sumter. An old negro was sitting 
on the seawall fishing. Dr. Greene watched the lone 
fisherman, and finally saw him pull up an odd-looking 
fish, a cross between a toad and a catfish. 

"What kind of a fish is that, old man?" inquired 
Dr. Greene. 

"Dey calls it de Baptist fish," replied the fisherman, 
as he tossed it away in deep disgust. 

"Why do they call it the Baptist fish?" asked the 
minister. 

"Because dey spoil so soon after dey comes outen 
de water," answered the fisherman. 



Blanche^ Wilbur, and Thomas were in the garden 
playing, and making a great deal of noise, but small 
Jack sat in a corner very quietly, which for Jack was 



86 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

an unusual proceeding. After watching them for some 
time, the mother's curiosity prompted her to ask : 

"What are you playing?" 

"We are pla)ring house," answered Wilbur. 
"Blanche and I are the mother and father, and 
Thomas is the child." 

"And what does Jack do ?" 

"Sh, sh ! he isn't born yet." 



Governor Chamberlain of Connecticut used to 
tell of an old friend who, because of his deafness, made 
some ludicrous and at times embarrassing mistakes. 
Once he was at a dinner party where the lady 
seated next to him tried to help him along in conver- 
sation. As the fruit was being passed, she asked him : 
Do you like bananas ?" 

No," said the old gentleman, with a look of mild 
surprise. "The fact is, he added in a confidential tone 
which could be heard in the next room, "I find the 
old-fashioned nightshirt is good enough for me." 



ft 



An Atchison woman with a little baby tells the fol- 
lowing story. She says that a woman caller said: 
"What a dear little baby; how old is it?" "Sixteen 
months," replied the Atchison woman. "Well, dear 
me, it looks older," said the caller, and then went on 
and talked and talked and finally turned again to the 
baby, and said : "That precious baby, how old is it ?'* 
"Sixteen months," replied the mother. "Well, dear 
me," smilingly said the caller. "Oh, such a big baby 
for its age," and went on talking and talking. Again 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 87 

turning to the baby the caller said : "What a darling 
angel the baby is; how old is it?" "Eighteen months," 
said the exasperated mother. "Well, I declare, it 
looks two years old," said the caller, and then talked 
and talked. Just as she was leaving the caller stooped 
and kissed the baby and said: "Bless its little heart; 
how old is it ?" "Ten months," shrieked the outraged 
mother, but the caller tripped gaily away ; she had not 
noticed the replies to her questions, and had no idea 
and did not care how old the baby was. 



A BOY went into a confectioner's shop and asked 
for a glass of lemonade. When it was given him he 
took it, looked at it, and said he would have a bun 
instead. The bun was given him; he ate it and was 
walking out of the shop when the confectioner called 
after him, "Hi, you haven't paid for your bun." 
"No," said the boy, "I gave you back the lemonade 
for that." "But," said the man, "you did not pay 
for the lemonade. "I didn't drink it," said the boy, 
and walked out of the shop leaving the confectioner 
calculating. 



Two women overheard talking in a poor district 
of London: "Did ye ever 'ear tell of Lot's wife?" 
"Well, no, Mrs. Brown, I can't say I ever did. Why ?" 
"Well, I don't know very much about 'er myself, but 
I 'ave 'eard tell of 'er that she turned into a pillar of 
salt." "Lord, did she ? What funny things one does 
'ear nowadays. It was only this morning I was out 
with my 'usband and 'e turned into a putflic-house." 



88 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Willie Green was not only chewing gum, but had 
his feet sprawled out in the aisle in a most unbecoming 
manner. 

"Willie," said the teacher, "take that gum out of 
your mouth this instant, and put in your feet." 



William was considered the brightest boy in his 
grade ; upon hearing a lesson recited in class once or 
twice he knew it quite well. Thus, while the other 
fellows were compelled to study hard he scarcely 
found it necessary to open a book. At the expiration 
of the term one of the questions in the written geog- 
raphy was, "What is the equator?" 

William, always to be depended upon, wrote with- 
out delay : 

"The equator is a menagerie lion running around 
the center of the earth." 



He was an earnest minister, and one Sunday, in the 
course of a sermon on the significance of little things, 
he said: 

"The hand which made the mighty heavens made 
a grain of sand; which made the lofty mountains 
made a drop of water; which made you made the grass 
of the field ; which made me made a daisy !" 



A YOUNG Scotchman, bashful but desperately in 
love, finding no notice was taken of his visits to the 
house of his sweetheart, summoned up sufficient cour- 
age to address the fair one thus : 






AMONG THE HUMORISTS 89 

"Jean, I was here on Monday nicht." 
"Ay, ye were that," replied she. 
"An' I was here on Tuesday nicht." 

'So ye were." 

'An' I was here on Wednesday," continued the 
ardent youth. 

"Ay, an' ye were on Thursday nicht an' a'." 

"An' I was here last nicht." 

"Weel," she says, "what if ye were?" 

'An' I am here the nicht again." 

'An' what about it even if ye came every nicht?" 
"What about it, did ye say? Did ye no' begin to 
smell a rat ?" 



it 



Rustic — "Well, Miss, I be fair mazed wi' the ways 

o' that 'ere fisherman — that I be I" 

Parson's Daughter — "Why is that. Carver?" 
Rustic — "The owd fool has been sittin' there for 

the last six hours and hasn't caught nothin'." 
Parson's Daughter — "How do you know that?" 
Rustic — "I've been a-watchin' o' he the whole 

time!" 



A STATELY and venerable professor one morning, 
being unable to attend to his class on account of a cold, 
wrote on the blackboard: 

"Dr. Dash, through indisposition, is unable to at- 
tend to his classes to-day." 

The students erased one letter in this notice, making 
it read: 

"Dr. Dash, through indisposition, is unable to 
attend to his lasses to-day." 



90 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

But it happened a few minutes later that the pro- 
fessor returned for a box he had forgotten. Amid 
a roar of laughter he detected the change in his notice, 
and, approaching the blackboard, calmly erased one 
letter in his turn. 

Now the notice read : 

"Dr. Dash, through indisposition, is unable to 
attend to his asses to-day." 



The man in the smoker was boasting of his un- 
erring ability to tell from a man's looks exactly what 
city he came from. "You, for example,'' he said to 
the man next to him, "you are from New Orleans?" 
He was right. 

"You, my friend," turning to the man on the other 
side of him, "I should say you are from Chicago?" 
Again he was right. 

The other two men got interested. 

'And you are from Boston?" he asked the third man. 

That's right, too," said the New Englander. 

"And you from Philadelphia, I should say ?" to the 
last man. 

"No, sir," answered the man with considerable 
warmth ; "I've been sick for three months : that's what 
makes me look that way 1" 






Five-year-old Nellie had been naughty all day. 
Finally her mama, a very portly woman, sat down 
and drew the little culprit across her ample lap to 
administer the long-delayed punishment. Nellie's face 
was fairly buried in the fold's of her mother's dress. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 91 

Before the maternal hand could descend Nellie turned 
her face to say, "Well, if Fm going to be spanked / 
mtist have air!' 



"John," said the woman with nine chapeaux, "I 
got another new hat to-day." "My dear!" expostu- 
lated her husband, "that is the last straw." "I know 
it," she said; "just from Paris." 



A PROMINENT Bostonian inquired of a London 
shopkeeper for Hare's "Walks in London." 

The shopkeeper, after much search, found it on his 
shelves, but in two volumes. 

"Ah," said the Bostonian, "you have your Hare 
parted in the middle over here." 

"What I" exclaimed the Englishman, blankly, pass- 
ing his hands over his head. 



Mr. Blaine used to tell this story : Once, in Dublin, 
toward the end of the opera, Mephistopheles was con- 
ducting Faust through a trap-door which represented 
the gates of hell. His majesty got through all right — 
he was used to going below- — but Faust was quite 
stout, got half-way in, and no squeezing would get 
him any farther. Suddenly an Irishman in the gal- 
lery exclaimed devoutly : "Thank God 1 hell's full." 



An Ohio man who was recently elected to Congress, 
went to Washington to look around and see what his 
duties were. He was hospitably received, and was 




92.' AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

wined and dined a great many times by his colleagues. 
Before he went home he said to his friends: "By 
George, I have had a good time ! I have had dinners 
and breakfasts and suppers galore given to me. In 
fa,ct, I haven't had my knife out of my mouth since 
I struck town." 



When Commissioner Allen had charge of the. 
Patent Office in Washington he was very punctilious 
about the respect due him and his position, and de- 
manded full tribute from everybody. 

One day, as he was sitting at his desk, two mert 
came in without knocking or. announcement and 
without removing their hats. 

Allen looked up and impaled the intruders with his 
glittering eye. "Gentlemen," he said severely, "who 
are visitors to this office to see me are always an- 
nounced, and always remove their hats." 

"Huh," replied one of the men, "we ain't visitors, 
and we don't give a hoot about seeing you. We came 
in to fix the steam pipes." 



One time there was a fire in a small town. It was 
being discussed in the hearing of several of the citi- 
zens. One man said he believed it was incendiary. 
Another replied : "Incendiary, nonsense! It was set on 
fire!" 



Addressing a political gathering the other day a 
speaker gave his hearers a touch of the pathetic. "I 
miss," he said, brushing away a not unmanly tear,, 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 84 

'T miss many of the old faces I used to snake hands 
with." 



The Rev. Moses Jackson was holding services in 
a small country church, and at the conclusion lent his 
hat to a member (as was the custom) to pass around 
for contributions. The brother canvassed the con- 
gregation thoroughly, but the hat was returned empty 
to its owner. 

Bre'r Jackson looked into it, turned it upside down> 
and shook it vigorously, but not a copper was forth- 
coming. He sniffed audibly. "Brederen," he said, 
*'I sho' is glad dat I got my hat back ergin.'* 



Pattern for all beneath the sun, 
To Taft award the palm and bunl 
They told him what they wanted done- 
He done it. 



Secretary Knox tells a good story of the last fight 
the late Senator Quay, of Pennsylvania, made in the 
Senate. Quay was working hard on the Oklahoma 
Statehood Bill, obstructing legislation, when a scheme 
was fixed up to get him away from the Senate for a 
time. Quay was very fond of tarpon fishing and had 
a winter place in Florida. One afternoon he received 
this telegram from a friend who thought the Senator 
might be in better business than pottering around 
about new States : 

"Fishing never so good. Tarpon biting cvery*- 
where, sport magnificent ; come." 



W AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Quay read the telegram and smiled a little smile. 
Then he answered : 

"Tarpon may be biting, but I am not. — M, S. 
Quay." 



"Now, children,*' said the teacher, "I want each of 
you to think of some animal or bird and try for the 
moment to be like the particular one you are thinking 
about, and make the same kind of noises they are in 
the habit of making/' 

Instantly the schoolroom became a menagerie. 
Lions roaring, dogs barking, birds singing and twit- 
tering, cows lowing, calves bleating, cats meowing, 
etc., all in an uproar and excitement — all with one ex- 
ception, off in a remote corner a little fellow was 
sitting perfectly still, apparently indifferent and un- 
mindful of the rest. The teacher observing him, ap- 
proached and said : "Waldo, why are you not taking 
part with the other children?" 

Waving her off with a deprecating hand and re- 
buking eyes he whispered: "Sh-sh-sh, teacher 1 I'm 
a rooster, and I'm a-layin' a aig!" 



Bishop Brewster, of Connecticut, while visiting 
some friends not long ago, tucked his napkin in his 
collar to avoid the juice of the grapefruit at break- 
fast. He laughed as he did it, and said it reminded 
him of a man he once knew who rushed into a res- 
taurant and, seating himself at a table, proceeded to 
tuck his napkin under his chin. He then called a 
waiter and said, "Can I get lunch here ?" "Yes," re- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 95 

sponded the waiter in a dignified manner, **but not a 
shampoo." 



A MAN and his wife were once staying at a hotel, 
when in the night they were aroused from their slum- 
bers by the cry that the hotel was afire. 

"Now, my dear," said the husband, "I will put 
into practise what I have preached. Put on all your 
indispensable apparel and keep cool." 

Then he slipped his watch into his vest pocket and 
walked with his wife out of the hotel. When all dan- 
ger was past, he said, "Now you see how necessary 
it is to keep cool." 

The wife for the first time glanced at her husband. 

"Yes, William," she said, "it is a grand thing, but 
if I were you I would have put on my trousers." 



One evening as the mother of the little niece of 
Phillips Brooks was tucking her snugly in bed the 
maid stepped in and said there was a caller waiting 
in the parlor. The mother told the child to say her 
prayers and promised that she would be back in a few 
minutes. 

The caller remained only a short time, and when 
the mother went upstairs again she asked the little 
girl if she had done as she was bidden. 
Tes, mama, I did and I didn't," she said. 
What do you mean by that, dear?" 

'"Well, mama, I was awfully sleepy, so I just 
asked God if he wouldn't excuse me to-night and He 
said, *Oh, don't mention it, Miss Brooks.' " 






96 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Would you mind walking the other w'y and not 
passing the 'orse?" said a London cabman with ex- 
aggerated politeness to the fat lady who had just paid 
a minimum fare. 

"Why?" she inquired. 

"Because if 'e sees wot 'e's been carryin' for a 
shilling 'e'U 'ave a fit.*' 



One afternoon during a recent sea vojrage of Ex- 
Ambassador Choate the waves were unpleasantly 
high, and the ship was rolling a bit, to the discom- 
fiture of some passengers. 

Mr. Choate remarked : " 'Tis better to have lunched 
and lost than never to have lunched at all." 



A CERTAIN minister was deeply impressed by an 
address on the evils of smoking given at a recent 
synod. He rose from his seat, went over to a fellow 
minister, and said : 

"Brother, this morning I received a present of lOO 
good cigars. I have smoked one of them, but now 
I'm going home to burn the remainder in the fire." 

The other minister arose, and said it was his in- 
tention to accompany his reverend brother. 

"I mean to rescue the ninety and nine," he added. 



Expecting a visit from the superintendent of an 
adjacent Sunday-school one Sunday afternoon, one 
enterprising teacher, anticipating the line of questions 
which would be asked of the scholars selected a boy 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 97 

from her class to answer each question. As she had 
figured it out, the visitor would first ask the pupils the 
question, "Who made you?" and the first pupil was, 
of course, to answer "God/' The next question was 
to be "Of what?" to which the answer was to be 
"Of the dust of the earth." Unfortunately between 
the time that Sunday-school was called to order and 
the visiting superintendent took the floor, the first 
pupil was taken sick and obliged to go home. The 
teacher did not have the opportunity to readjust her 
forces, and when the first question was asked, the 
second boy thought it a good opportunity for him to 
get in his answer and have it off his mind ; so to the 
question, "Who made you?" he answered, "Of the 
dust of the earth." 

"Oh, no," said the visitor. "God made you." 
"No, sir; He did not," said the youngster. "The 
little boy that God made has gone home sick, and 
I am the dust of the earth." 



When General Grant was in London on his trip 
around the world he was invited to Windsor Castle 
by Queen Victoria. The queen received the party in 
one of the private audience chambers and chatted with 
General Grant for a few moments before dinner was 
served. 

Jesse Grant, then a small boy, was with the general, 
and stood just behind him. As the general was talk- 
ing, Jesse pulled impatiently at his coat-tails a number 
of times. Finally, the general turned half-way, and 
Jesse whispered: 

"Pa, can't I be introduced?" 

4— Vou I 



98 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Your Majesty," said the general, "I should like 
to present my son. Master Jesse." 

The queen shocJc Jesse's hand cordially, and that 
young man, thinking it incumbent on him to say 
something, glanced approvingly around the rocxn 
and said : "Fine house you have here, ma'am/' 



Daniel J. Sully, the former Cotton King, made 
a trip through the South one winter, and when 
he came back he told a story of an old negro who had 
been working for a cotton planter time out of mind. 
One morning he came to his employer and said : 

"I'se gwineter quit, boss." 

"What's the matter, Mose ?" 

"Well, sah, yer manager, Mistah Winter, ain't 
kicked me in de las' free mirnifs." 

"I ordered him not to kick you any more. I don^t 
want anything like that around my place. I don't 
want any one to hurt your feelings, Mose." 

"Ef I don't git any more kicks I'se goin' to quit. 
Ebery time Mistah Winter used ter kick and cuff me 
when he wuz mad he always git 'shamed of hisself 
and gimme a quarter. I'se done los' enuff money 
a'ready wid dis heah foolishness TxDut hurtin' ma 
feelin's." 



A Chicago mistress had given the butcher her 
daily order over the telephone. Later in the day 
she decided to change it a little, and countermanded 
an order she had given for some liver. 

Calling up the butcher, she said: 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 99 

"You remember that I gave you an order this 
morning for a pound of liver?" 

"Yes/' answered the butcher. 

"Well, I find that I can get along without it, and 
you need not send it." 

Before she could put down the receiver she heard 
the butcher say to some one in the store : 

"Cut out Mrs. Blank's liver. She says she can get 
along without it." 



Tommy — "Ma, I met the minister on my way to 
Sunday-school and he asked me if I ever went fishing 
on Sunday." 

Mother — "And what did you say, darling?" 
Tommy — "I said, 'Get thee behind me, Satan,' and 
ran right away from him.' 



ff 



"My hair is falling out," admitted the timid man 
in the chemist's. "Can you recommend something to 
keep it in?" 

"Certainly," replied the obliging assistant. "Here is 
a nice cardboard box." 



An eloquent evangelist who was holding a series 
of protracted meetings had been interrupted on several 
occasions by the departure of some one of the audi- 
ence. He determined to prevent further annoyance 
by making an example of the next one so doing. 
Therefore, when a young man arose to depart in the 
middle of a discourse, he said: "Young man, would 



100 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

you rather go to hell than listen to this sermon ?" The 
individual addressed stopped midway up the aisle and, 
turning slowly about, answered: "Well, to tell the 
truth, I don't know but I would." 



Mr. Seabury and his wife were on the point of 
moving to another flat. Both of them were anxious 
that the transfer should be made at the least possible 
expense, and the nearness of the new home promised 
materially to further this aim. 

"I can carry loads of little things over in my brown 
bag," announced Mrs. Seabury. "And you can take 
books and so on in your big satchel." 

In discussing further the matter of transportation, 
Mrs. Seabury remarked that, notwithstanding the 
heat, she could wear her winter coat over, and leave 
it, and return for her spring coat. The idea charmed 
her impractical husband. 

"Why, I can do the same thing!" he said. "I'll 
wear over one suit and then come back for another !" 



The ghost of Noah Webster came to a spiritual 
medium in Alabama, not long ago, and wrote on a 
slip of paper : "It is tite times." Noah was right, but 
we are sorry to see he has gone back on his dictionary. 



Sydney Smith wrote to Jeffrey: "Tell Murray 
that I was much struck with the politeness of Miss 
Markham the day after he went. In carving a par- 
tridge I splashed her with gravy from head to foot; 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 101 

and, though I saw three distinct brown rills of juice 
trickling down her cheek, she had the complaisance 
to swear that not a drop had reached her. Such cir- 
cumstances are the triumphs of civilized life." 



During a certain battle the colonel of an Irish 
regiment noticed that one of his men was extremely 
devoted to him, and followed him everywhere. At 
length he remarked, "Well, my man, you have stuck 
by me well to-day." 

"Yis, sorr," replied Pat. "Shure me mither said to 
me, said she, "just stick to the colonel, Patrick, me 
bhoy, and you'll be all roight. Them colcwiels never 
gets hurted." 



Miss Frances Keller, of the Woman's Mimicipal 
League of New York, illustrated admirably at a recent 
dinner party a point which she wished to make in reply 
to a man who had said, "Women are vainer than men." 

"Of course," Miss Keller answered, "I admit that 
women are vain and men are not. There are a thou- 
sand proofs that this is so. Why, the necktie of the 
handsomest man in the room is even now up the back 
of his collar." 

There were six men present and each of them put 
his hand gently behind his neck. 



As father was leaving the house one morning he 
looked in vain for his umbrella. 

"I expect sister's beau took it last night," ventured 
six-year-old Willie. 



lOJ AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"OK, you naughty boy," said Sister Mabel; *^how 
can you say that ?" 

"Why, it's so,'' Willie insisted. "When he was 
^y'^T^g good night I heard him say, 'I am going to 
steal just one!' 



\9 99 



During a conversation with a young lady Mark 
Twain had occasion to mention the word drydock. 
"What is a drydock, Mr. Clemens?" she asked. 
"A thirsty physician," replied the humorist. 



Some officer had disobeyed or failed to comprehend 
an order. "I believe I'll sit down," said Secretary 
Stanton, "and give that man a piece of my mind." 

"Do so," said Lincoln, "write him now while you 
have it on your mind. Make it sharp. Cut him all 
up." Stanton did not need a second invitation. It 
was a bone crusher that he read to the President. 

"That's right," said Lincoln; "that's a good one." 

"Whom can I send it by?" mused the Secretary. 

"Send it!" replied Lincoln. "Why, don't send it 
at all. Tear it up. You have freed your mind on 
the subject, and that is all that is necessary. Tear 
it up. You never want to send such letters, I 
never do." 



A CERTAIN old gentleman's lack of "polish" is a 
sad trial to his eldest daughter. Not long ago the 
family were gathered in the library, one of the win- 
dows of which was open. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 108 

"That air — " the father began, but was quickly 
interrupted. 

"Father, dear, don't say *that air' — say 'that 
there,' " the daughter admonished. 

"Well, this ear — " he again attempted, but was 
as quickly brought to a halt. 

"Nor 'this 'ere' ; *this here' is correct," he was told. 

The old gentleman rose with an angry snort. "Look 
here, Mary," he said. "Of course I know you have 
been to school and all that, but I reckon I know what 
I want to say, an' I am going to say it. I believe I 
feel cold in this ear from that air, and I'm going to 
shut the window !" 



f9 

99 



"If you please, sir ?" 

"Well, Jimmy?" 

"Me grandmother, sir — ^ 

"Aha, your grandmother! Go on, Jimmy.' 

"Me grandmother an' me mother — " 

"What, and your mother, too ! Both very ill, eh ?" 

"No, sir. Me grandmother an' me mother are goin' 
to the baseball game this afternoon an' they want me 
to stay home an' take care of me little brudder." 



Office-boy — "Please, Mr. Jones, my grandmother 
is dead, and so I must get off early to go to the funeral 
match — I mean the baseball ceremonies — ^that is — " 



"That makes a difference," said Willie, snipping 
off the left ear of one of the twins. 



104 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Bill Nye, when a yoiing man, made an engage- 
ment with a lady to take her driving. The appointed 
day came, but at the livery stable all the horses were 
taken save one old, shaky, exceedingly gaunt beast. 
Mr. Nye hired it and drove to his friend's residence. 
The lady kept him waiting over an hour before she 
was ready and then, viewing the shabby outfit, flatly 
refused to accompany Mr. Nye. "Why," she ex- 
claimed, "that horse may die of old age any moment !" 

"Madam," Mr. Nye replied, "when I arrived that 
horse was a prancing young colt." 



In "Some Reminiscences" by William Rossetti is 
the following anecdote of Tennyson: "The witness 
was AUingham, to whom the incident happened. He 
was at breakfast at the house of the poet laureate, 
who, in a rather feeble moment of facetiousness, 
asked: *Will you have a hegg?' 'Yes, thank you,' 
replied AUingham, who had scarcely appropriated the 
proffered viand when Tennyson added, *I suppose you 
understand I was only joking when I said hegg?' 



>> 9f 



"Long introductions when a man has a speech to 
make are a bore," said former Senator John C. 
Spooner, one of the great Senate leaders. "I have 
had all kinds, but the most satisfactory one in my 
career was that of a German mayor of a small town 
in my State, Wisconsin. 

"I was to make a political address, and the opera- 
house was crowded. When it came time to begin, the 
mayor got up. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 106 

" 'Mine friends/ he said, 'I hafe asked been to in- 
cToduce Senator Spooner, who is to make a speech, 
yes. Veil, I haf dit so, und he vill now do so/ '* 



The "Outlook,'* of New York, tells a story of two 
church workers from a small town who came to New 
York on a slum hunt, and were more than satisfied. 
One of them was asked by a friend, on her return, 
where she and her husband had been. "In the slums 
of New York for a day and a night," she answered, 
enthusiastically. "My dear, it was hell upon earth. 
We had a splendid time !" 



On one occasion a schoolmaster was very much 
annoyed by the conduct of a certain boy in his class. 
At last, finding the culprit giggling for no apparent 
reason, he cried indignantly, "Now, then, W., what 
are you laughing at? Are you laughing at me?" 
''No, sir," replied the astonished boy. "Then I don't 
see what else there is to laugh at," came the reply. 



"Good by, Jessie !" 

"Good by. Auntie May. I hope I'll be a great, big 
girl before you come to make us another visit." 



The star pupil arose at the school entertainment to 
declaim his piece. "Lend me your ears !" he bawled. 
"Ha,''' sneered the mother of the opposition but de- 
feated pupil, "that's Sarah Jane Doran's boy. He 



106 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

wouldn't be his mother's son if he didn't want to 
borrow something." 



"While walking in one of the business thorough- 
fares of Pittsburg one year," says Robert Edeson, 
"my attention was arrested by a display of shirts in 
a haberdasher's window, which for variety of sunset 
colors far excelled a Turner landscape when the sun 
is red and low, and there in the window in glaring 
green type a large sign read, 'Listen V 



\9 99 



One of a party of gentlemen left his comer seat 
in an already crowded railway car to go in search of 
something to eat, leaving a rug to reserve his place. 
On returning he found that in spite of the rug and 
the protests of his fellow passengers, the seat had been 
usurped by a woman clad in handsome clothes. With 
flashing eyes she turned upon him: "Do you know, 
sir, that I am one of the directors' wives ?" "Madam," 
he replied, "were you the director's only wife I should 
still protest." 



Mr. C, a distinguished lawyer of Boston, was on 
his way to Denver to transact some important busi- 
ness. During the afternoon he noticed, in the oppo- 
site section of the Pullman, a sweet-faced, tired- 
appearing woman traveling with four small children. 
Being fond of children and feeling sorry for the 
mother, he soon made friends with the little ones. 

Early the next morning he heard their eager ques- 
tions and the patient "Yes, dear," of the mother as 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 107 

she tried to dress them, and looking out he saw a 
small white foot protruding beyond the opposite cur- 
tain. Reaching across the aisle, he took hold of the 
large toe and began to recite : "This little pig went to 
market; this little pig stayed at home; this little pig 
had roast beef; this little pig had none; this little pig 
cried wee wee all the way home." The foot was 
suddenly withdrawn and a cold, quiet voice said: 
"That is quite sufficient, thank you." 

Mr. C. hastily withdrew to the smoker, where he 
remained until the train arrived in Denver. 



f< <i 



'Deed I am going to get married," said little 
Winnie, the bright daughter of a tenant on a quiet 
farm in a quiet county in "The Northern Neck" of 
Virginia. 

**I don't believe anybody will have you," said Miss 
Mabel, the landlord's daughter, teasingly. 

"Yes, they will ; I'll make 'em," said Winnie. "I'm 
going to get married and have five children — ^two of 
'cm colored," thoughtfully, "to do my work." 



A REVEREND gentleman was addressing a Sunday- 
school class not long ago, and was trying to enforce 
the doctrine that when people's hearts were sinful 
they needed regulating. Taking out his watch, and 
holding it up, he said : 

"Now, here is my watch; suppose it doesn't keep 
good time — now goes too fast, and now too slow — • 
what shall I do with it?" 

"Sell it," promptly replied a boy. 



108 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

The high-born dame was breaking in a new foot- 
man — stupid but honest. 

In her brougham, about to make a round of visits, 
she found she had forgotten her bits of pasteboard. 
So she sent the lout back with orders to bring some 
of her cards that were on the mantelpiece in her 
boudoir, and put them in his pocket. 

Here and there she dropped one and sometimes a 
couple, until at last she told Jeames to leave three. 

"Can't do it, mum.'* 

''How's that?" 

"I've only got two left — the ace of spades and the 
seven of clubs !" 



The small son of a certain tmiversity professor, 
whose parents are deservedly popular for their tact 
and courteous speech, appeared at the home of a fel- 
low professor and hesitatingly asked Mrs. X. if he 
might look at the parlor rug. Permission was, of 
course, granted, and Mrs. X. felt some surprise to 
see the little fellow stoop over the rug and stare 
silently for some half-minute. He straightened him- 
self up and, meeting her wondering expression, said 
triumphantly : 

"It doesn't make me sick !'' 



Uncle Harry was a bachelor and not fond of 
babies. Even winsome four-year-old Helen failed to 
win his heart. Every one made too much fuss over 
the youngster. Uncle Harry declared. 

One dav Helen's mother was called downstairs and 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 109 

With fear and trembling asked Uncle Harry, who was 
stretched out on a sofa, if he would keep his eye on 
Helen. Uncle Harry grunted **Yes," but never stirred 
from his position — in truth his eyes were tight shut. 

By-and-by wee Helen tiptoed over to the sofa and 
leaning over Uncle Harry softly inquired : 

"Feepy?" 

"No,'* growled Uncle Harry. 

"Tired?'' ventured Helen. 

"No," said her uncle. 

"Sick ?" further inquired Helen, with real sympathy 
in her voice. 

"No," still insisted Uncle Harry. 

"Dus' feel bum, hey?" 

And that won the uncle ! 



A MEMBER of the faculty of the University of Wis- 
consin tells of some amusing replies made by a pupil 
imdergoing an examination in English. The can- 
didate had been instructed to write out examples of 
the indicative, the subjunctive, the potential, and the 
exclamatory moods. His effort resulted as follows: 

"I am endeavoring to pass an English examination. 
If I answer twenty questions I shall pass. If I answer 
twelve questions I may pass. God help me !" 



A CLERGYMAN was very anxious to introduce some 
hymn-books into the church, and arranged with his 
clerk that the latter was to give out the notice imme- 
diately after the sermon. The clerk, however, had 
a notice of his own to give out with reference to the 



110 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

baptism of infants. Accordingly, at the dose of the 
sermon he arose and announced that "All those who 
have children whom they wish to have baptized please 
send in their names at once to the clerk." The clergjrr 
man, who was stone deaf, assumed that the clerk was 
giving out the h)rmn-book notice, and immediately 
rose and said: "And I should say, for the benefit of 
those who haven't any, that they may obtain some 
from the ushers any day from three to four o'clock; 
the ordinary little ones at twenty-five cents each, and 
special ones at fifty cents.*' 



Clyde Fitch, the brilliant pla)nvright, said of 
a jeweled watch that had been sent him by a Scotch 
admirer in Peebles : 

"A jeweled watch from Peebles. How strangely 
unexpected ! It reminds me of an open-air perform- 
ance of *As You Like It' that I once rehearsed. 

"I rehearsed this amateur performance in a garden 
that was overlooked by a building operation. As my 
amateurs postured and chanted the bard's beautiful 
lines, bricklayers above us laid bricks, carpenters 
planed boards, and masons chipped stones. 

"And one afternoon, during a silent pause in our 
rehearsal, we heard a voice from the building opera- 
tion say gravely : 

" *I prithee, malapert, pass me yonder brick.' " 



A CLERGYMAN who was vcry popular with his con- 
gregation saw a lady about to call whom he was 
anxious not to meet. So he said to his wife: 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 111 

'*F11 run upstairs, my dear, and escape till she goes 
away." 

After about an hour he quietly tiptoed to the stair 
landing and listened. All was quiet below. Reas- 
sured, he began to descend, and called out over the 
balustrade : 

"Well, my dear, you got rid of that old bore at 
last?" 

The next instant a voice from below rooted him 
to the spot. It was the voice of the caller ! Then came 
a response which sounded inexpressibly sweet to him. 
It was the voice of his wife : 

"Yes, dear, she went away over an hour ago; but 
here is our good friend, Mrs. Blank, whom I am sure 
you want to meet" 



A LAPY and her little daughter were walking 
through a fashionable street when they came to a 
portion of the street strewn with straw, so as to 
deaden the noise of vehicles passing a certain house. 

"What's that for, ma ?" said the child, to which the 
mother replied, "The lady who lives in that house, 
my dear, has had a little baby girl sent her.*' The 
child thought a moment, looked at the quantity of 
straw, and said: "Awfully well packed, wasn't 
she, ma?** 



A POLITICIAN, upon his arrival at one of the small 
towns in North Dakota, where he was to make a 
speech the following day, found that the two so-called 
hotels were crowded to the doors. 

Not having telegraphed for accommodations, the 



112 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

politician discovered that he would have to make shift 
as best he could. 

He was compelled for that night to sleep on a wire 
cot which had only some blankets and a sheet on it. 
As the statesman is a fat man, he found his improvised 
bed an)rthing but comfortable. 

"Well/' asked a friend, when the politician ap- 
peared in the dining-room in the morning, "how did 
you sleep?" 

"Oh, fairly well, replied the statesman, noncha- 
lantly, "but I looked like a waffle when I got up.*' 



William Waldorf Astor, before he set out for 
his English home, said, apropos of the Russo-Japa- 
nese War: "Nations engaged in war not only harm 
each other, but they lay themselves open to harm at 
the hands of all sorts of other nations. In fact, two 
nations at war are in the defenseless and gullible 
position of a certain English married couple. 

"This couple will fall out and cease to speak to one 
another for a year or more at a time. They have 
a beautiful country house, and there is a certain 
elderly matron, a great bore, who visits them con- 
tinually. Some one asked this matron which of the 
pair was always inviting her. She answered, frankly, 
'Neither invites me ever, but since they don't speak 
to each other, each always thinks I am the other's 
guest.' " 



They were talking over the carelessness of well-to- 
do people who, by overlooking their small bills, f re- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 118 

^uently bring disaster upon the tradesmen who arc 
trying to do business on a small capital. 

"It sometimes happens that these poor devils have 
two or three times the amount of their capital out in 
bills that if paid promptly would make their com- 
mercial ways a path of roses," said the economist. 
''Little bills of three, four, and five dollars, not much 
in themselves, mount up high in the aggregate, and 
it sometimes happens that a seeming prosperity, 
through the failure of a lot of customers to pay their 
bills within a reasonable time, results in ruin. 

"And yet,'* said the reminiscencer, "it sometimes 
works the other way. I heard a story in England once 
of a harness dealer who on entering his shop one 
afternoon, after an absence of several hours, noticed 
that a rather handsome saddle that he had had in stock 
had di^ppeared. He made immediate inquiry of his 
salesmen, and one of them informed him that he 
had sold it to a gentleman who had come to the shop 
with his trap, that the purchaser had thrown it into 
his wagon and driven off, after telling him to charge 
it. Unfortunately, however, he had forgotten to ask 
the gentleman's name, and all effort to identify him 
by description failed. 

" 'Well,' said the shopkeeper, who was an ingenious 
man, 'there is only one thing left to be done. We 
will charge the saddle up on all our outstanding ac- 
counts. Those who did not buy the saddle will, of 
course, call our attention to our error, and the man 
who did take it will, of course, pay." 

"This method was adopted, and at the beginning 
of the next month the bills were sent out accordingly. 
Two weeks later the saddler approached his cashier, 



114 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

and asked if he had heard as yet about the matten 
*How about that missing saddle, Marcus?' he asked. 
*We are doing very well, sir,' replied the cashier* 
Torty of our customers have paid for it, and only two 
have discovered the mistake.' " 



The story is told of a young Oregon girl, a favorite 
in society, but who was poor and had to take care 
not to get her evening gowns soiled, as their number 
was limited. At a dance not long ago a great, big, 
red-faced, perspiring man came in and asked her to 
dance. He wore no gloves. She looked at the well- 
meaning moist hands despairingly, and thought o£ 
the immaculate back of her waist. She hesitated a 
bit, and then she said, with a winning smile: 

"Of course I will dance with you, but if you don't 
mind, won't you please use your handkerchief ?" 

The man looked at her blankly a moment or two. 
Then a light broke over his face. 

"Why, certainly," he said. 

And he pulled out his handkerchief and blew his 
nose. 



Willie finally persuaded his aunt to play train with 
him. The chairs were arranged in line and then he 
said: 

"Now, you be engineer and I'll be the conductor. 
Lend me your watch and get up into your cab." He 
then hurried down the platform, timepiece in hand. 

"Pull out there, you red-headed, pie-faced jay," he 
shouted to the astonished young woman. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 116 

"Why, Willie/' she exclaimed in amazement. 

"That's right, chew the rag," he retorted. "Pull 
out. We're five minutes late already." 

They have had to forbid his playing down by the 
tracks. 



Andrew Lang once wrote to Israel Zangwill to 
ask him to take part in an author's reading for the 
benefit of a charity, and received in reply the follow- 
ing laconic message: "If A. Lang will — I. Zangwill." 



Mr. Peet, a rather diffident man, was unable to 
prevent himself from being introduced one evening 
to a fascinating young lady, who, misunderstanding 
his name, constantly addressed him as Mr. Peters, 
much to the gentleman's distress. Finally, summon- 
ing courage, he bashfully but earnestly remonstrated : 
"Oh, don't call me Peters ; call me Peet !" 
"Ah, but I don't know you well enough, Mr. 
Peters," said the young lady, blushing as she playfully 
withdrew behind her fan. 



Senator Tillman, of South Carolina, tells of a 
little girl whose statements were always exaggerated 
until she became known in school and Sunday-school 
as a "little liar." Her parents were dreadfully 
worried about her, and made strenuous efforts to 
correct the bad habit. One afternoon her mother 
overheard an argument with her playmate, Willie 
Bangs, who seemed to fiinish the discussion by say- 



116 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

ing emphatically: "I'm older than you, 'ca£!€« my 
birthday comes first, in May, and yours don*t come 
until September." 

"Oh, of course your birthday comes first," sneer- 
ingly answered little Nellie; "but that is 'cause you 
came down first. I remember looking at the angels 
when they were making you." 

"Come here, Nellie ; come here instantly," cried her 
mother. "It is breaking mother's heart," said she, "to 
hear you tell such awful stories. Remember what 
happened to Ananias and Sapphira, don't you?" 

"Oh, yes, mama, I know. They were struck dead 
for lying. I saw them carried into the comer drug- 
store." 



The relationship between Mr. Gladstone and his 
wife was one of the most beautiful the world has 
known, and of all the millions who looked up to him, 
she was his greatest admirer. On one occasion when 
Mrs. Gladstone was entertaining visitors, conversation 
turned on the Bible, and there was a lively argument 
on the meaning of a certain passage. 

Presently one of the callers, hoping to end the dis- 
cussion, remarked devoutly : 

"There is One alone who knows all." 

The cloud vanished from Mrs. Gladstone's face and 
she smiled sunnily as she said : 

"Yes, and William will be down in a few minutes." 



Mabel (testing the wisdom of the grown-ups). — 
"Well, how did Martin Luther die?" 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 117 

Uncle Jim. — "Die ? Oh, in the ordinary way, I 
suppose." 

Mabel. — "Oh, Uncle! you really don't know any- 
thing. He was excommunicated by a bull." 



Small Robbie was laboring over a drawing which 
was obviously of great importance. 

His mother, who was sewing in the room, got up 
to see what he was doing. 

"What is it you're drawing, dear?" she said, as 
she stood behind him. 

Robbie was embarrassed. Struggling to cover his 
nervousness, he answered with an air of great non- 
chalance : 

"Oh, it's papa I'm drawing, but I don't care any- 
thing about it. Guess I'll put a tail to it, and have it 
for a dog." 



It is told of Charles Lamb, that one afternoon, 
returning from a dinner-party, having taken a seat 
in a crowded omnibus, a stout gentleman subsequently 
looked in, and politely asked, "All full inside?" "I 
don't know how it may be with the other passengers," 
answered Lamb, "but that last piece of oyster-pie did 
the business for me/' 



One of the ladies-in-waiting to the late Queen Vic- 
toria had a very bright little daughter about four years 
old of whom the Queen was very fond. 

The Queen invited the child to have lunch with her. 



118 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Of course the mother was highly pleased, and 
charged the little girl to be very careful about her table 
manners, and to be very polite and careful before the 
Queen. 

The little girl came home in high glee, and the 
mother asked her all about the luncheon. 

"Were you a very polite little girl ? and did you re- 
member to do all I told you at the table?" asked the 
proud mama. 

"Oh, yes. I was polite," said the little one, "but the 
Queen wasn't." 

"The Queen wasn't!" said the mother. "Why, 
what did she do?" 

"She took her chicken bone up in her fingers, and 
I just shook my finger at her like you did at me, and 
said, Tiggy, piggy, piggy!' " 



A YOUNG girl once asked Mark Twain if he liked 
books for Christmas gifts. 

"Well, that depends," drawled the great humorist. 
"If a book has a leather cover it is really valuable as 
a razor strop. If it is a brief, concise work, such as 
the French write, it is useful to put under the short 
leg of a wabbly table. An old-fashioned book with a 
clasp can't be beat as a missile to hurl at a dog, and 
a large book like a geography is as good as a piece 
of tin to nail over a broken pane of glass." 



One of the most candid tributes the late Edwin 
Booth ever received was rendered to him on his last 
Southern tour by one who knew neither of his pres- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 119 

ence nor of his identity in the play. Mr. Booth told 
the story to his friend, Dr. John H. Girdner. 
. "We evened our engagement in Atlanta, Ga., with 
'Othello/" said Mr. Booth, "and I played Othello. 
After the performance my friend, Mr. Malone, and I 
went to the Kimball House for some refreshment. 
The long bar was so crowded that we had to go 
around the comer of it before we could find a vacant 
space. While we were waiting to be served we 
couldn't help hearing the conversation of two fine-look- 
ing old boys, splendid old fellows with soft hats, flow- 
ipg mustaches, and chin tufts, black string ties and 
all the other paraphernalia. 

" 'I didn't see you at the theater this evening, Gun- 
nel,' said one. 

" *No,' replied the other. 'I didn't buy seats till this 
mawnin', and the best we could get were six rows 
back in the balcony. I presume, suh, you were in the 
orchestra.' 

" *Yes, Gunnel, I was in the orchestra,' said the 
first man. 'Madam and the girls were with me. We 
all agreed that we nevuh attended a mo' thrillin' play. 
The company was good, too, excellent company. And 
do you know, Gunnel, in my opinion that d — d nigguh 
did about as well as any of 'em !' " 



A Southern colonel had a colored valet by the 
name of George. George received nearly all of the 
colonel's cast-off clothing. He had his eyes on a cer- 
tain pair of light trousers which were not wearing out 
fast enough to suit him, so he thought he would hasten 
matters somewhat by rubbing grease on one knee. 



120 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

When the colonel saw the spot, he called George and 

asked if he had noticed it George said, "Yes, sah, 

Colonel, I noticed dat spot and tried mighty hard to 

git it out, but I couldn't." 

"Have you tried gasoline?'* the colonel asked. 
"Yes, sah, Colonel, but it didn't do no good.'* 
"Have you tried brown paper and a hot iron ?** 
"Yes, sah. Colonel, I'se done tried 'mos' ever)rthing 

I knows of, but dat spot wouldn't come out." 

"Well, George, have you tried ammonia?" the 

colonel asked as a last resort. 

"No, sah, Colonel, I ain't tried 'em on yet, but I 

knows dey'll fit." 



It was the first vaudeville performance the old 
colored lady had ever seen, and she was particularly 
excited over the marvelous feats of the magician. But 
when he covered a newspaper with a heavy flannel 
cloth and read the print through it, she grew a little 
nervous. He then doubled the cloth and again read 
the letters accurately. 

This was more than she could stand, and rising in 
her seat, she said : 

"I'm goin' home. This ain't no place for a lady in 
a thin calico dress !" 



At a certain railway junction the train divides, 
one portion going to Edinburgh, the other to Glasgow. 
The guard put his head in at one of the carriage win- 
dows and asked, "All here for Edinburgh?" All re- 
plied in the affirmative except one old woman, who 
after the train had started remarked with a smile, "I 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 121 

was just goin' to Glesca masel' but I wasna goin* to 
tell yon inquisitive deevil." 



A POMPOUS Bishop of Oxford was once stopped on 
a London street by a ragged urchin. 

"Well, my little man, what can I do for you?" in- 
quired the churchman. "The time o' day, please, 
your lordship/' 

With considerable difficulty the portly Bishop ex- 
tracted his watch. "It is exactly half-past five, my 
lad." 

"Well," said the boy, setting his feet for a good 
start, "at 'alf-past six you go to 'ell!" and he was 
off like a flash and around the comer. The Bishop, 
flushed and furious, his watch dangling from its chain, 
floundered wildly after him. But as he rounded the 
corner he ran plump into the outstretched arms of 
the venerable Bishop of London. 

"Oxford, Oxford," remonstrated that surprised 
dignitary, "why this unseemly haste?" 

Puffing, blowing, spluttering, the outraged Bishop 
gasped out: "That young ragamuffin — ^I told him 
it was half-past five — and — ^he— er — told me to go 
to hell at half-past six." 

"Yes, yes," said the Bishop of London with a 
twinkle in his kindly old eyes, "but why such haste? 
You've got almost an hour." 



A LADY entered a railway station not a hundred 
miles from Edinburgh and said she wanted a ticket 
for London. The pale-looking clerk asked: 



122 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Single?" 

"It ain't any of your business," she replied. "I 
might have been married a dozen times if I'd felt like 
providin' for some poor shiftless wreck of a man like 
you." 



"M-MY dear," said the muddled citizen, "I 'sure you 
I wouldn't been s'late, but footpad stopped me." 

"And you were so scared your tongue clove to the 
roof of your mouth." 

"How'd you know that?" 

"I smell the clove." 



A MAN addicted to walking in his sleep went to bed 
all right one night, but when he awoke he found him- 
self on the street in the grasp of a policeman. "Hold 
on," he cried, "you mustn't arrest me. I'm a som- 
nambulist." To which the policeman replied : "I don't 
care what your religion is — ^yer can't walk the streets 
in yer nightshirt." 



"I can't keep the visitors from coming up," said 
the office-boy dejectedly to the editor. "When I say 
you're out they don't believe me. They say they must 
see you." 

"Well," said the editor, "just tell them that's what 
they all say. I don't care if you 'cheek' them, but I 
must have quietness." 

That afternoon there called at the office a lady. She 
wanted to see the editor, and the boy assured her that 
it was impossible. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 128 

"But I must see him!" she protested. "I'm his 
wife!" 

"That's what they all say/' replied the boy. And 
forthwith a new boy was wanted there. 



Mr. Weedon Grossmith used to tell a good story 
about a play by Mr. Robert Ganthony, which that 
gentleman asked him to read. Mr. Grossmith took 
the comedy, but lost it on his way home. "Night 
after night," he said, "I would meet Ganthony and 
he would ask me how I liked his play. It was awful ; 
the perspiration used to come out on my forehead as 
I'd say sometimes, *I haven't had time to look at it 
yet!" or again, 'The first act was good, but I can't 
stop to explain,' etc., 'must catch a train.' That play 
was the bane of my existence, and haunted me even 
in my dreams." Some months passed, and Ganthony, 
a merry wag, still pursued him without mercy. At 
last it occurred to Mr. Grossmith that he might 
have left the comedy in the cab on the night it was 
given to him. He inquired at Scotland Yard. 

"Oh ! yes," was the reply. "Play marked with Mr. 
Ganthony's name, sent back to owner four months ago, 
as soon as found." 



Some years ago when Head Consul Book, of the 
Western jurisdiction, Woodmen of the World, was 
traveling through the South, the train stopped for 
some time in a small town, and Mr. Book alighted to 
make a purchase. The storekeeper could not make 
the correct change for the bill which was presented, 



124 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

SO Mr. Book started in search of some one who 
could. 

Sitting beside the door, whittling a stick, was an 
old darky. 

**Uncle," said Mr. Book, "can you change a ten- 
dollar bill?'* The old fellow looked up in surprise; 
then he touched his cap, and replied : " 'Deed, an' Ah 
can't, boss, but Ah' 'preciates de honah, jest de same." 



A GENTLEMAN riding with an Irishman came within 
sight of an old gallows and, to display his wit, said : 
"Pat, do you see that ?" 
To be sure Oi do," replied Pat. 
^And where would you be to-day if the gallows had 
its due?" 

"Oi'd be riding alone," replied Pat. 






Jerry O'Rafferty came from the north of Ireland. 
During all his life there and later in Chicago he had 
never been inside a Catholic Church. 

He was something of a scoffer at religious cere- 
monies, although he knew little about them. His 
good friend, Michael O'Brien, was troubled at this, 
and always used his influence to get Jerry into the 
church. At last he was successful. Jerry grudgingly 
consented to go to church Easter Sunday because 
of the importance of the occasion. 

The two sat together, Jerry an interested spectator, 
while Mike entered into the services like the devout 
man he was. 

Jerry was soon evidently impressed by the splendor 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 126 

of his surroundings and the grandeur of the services. 
He watched the lighting of the candles and listened 
attentively to the glorious burst of Easter music. 
Then he could refrain from commenting no longer. 

"Mike," he whispered, leaning over to his com- 
panion, "this bates h — 1." 

"Whist," replied Mike, in a loud whisper, "sich is 
the intintion." 



Bishop Wilmer of Alabama, famous as a story- 
teller, told of one of his friends who had lost a dearly 
beloved wife and, in his sorrow, caused these words to 
be inscribed on her tombstone : "The light of mine eyes 
has gone out." The bereaved married within a year. 
Shortly afterward the Bishop was walking through 
the graveyard with another gentleman. When they 
arrived at the tomb, the latter asked the Bishop what 
he would say of the present state of affairs, in view of 
the words on the tombstone. "I think," said the 
Bishop, "the words *But I have struck another match' 
should be added." 



A MAN of letters who visited Washington recently 
appeared at but one dinner-party during his stay. 
Then he sat next to the daughter of a noted naval 
officer. Her vocabulary is of a kind peculiar to very 
young girls, but she rattled away at the famous man 
without a moment's respite. It was during a pause in 
the general conversation that she said to him: "I'm 
awfully stuck on Shakespeare. Don't you think he's 
terribly interesting?" Everybody listened to hear the 
great man's brilliant reply, for as a Shakespearian 



126 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

scholar he has few peers. "Yes," he said, solemnly, 'T. 
do think he is interesting, I think he is more than that 
I think Shakespeare is just simply too cute for any- 
thing/' 



A WELL-KNOWN Scotch professor was occasionally 
called up to Bahnoral to attend the late Queen Vic- 
toria, and was extremely proud of the honor. One 
day a notice appeared in the university which stated 

that Professor could not attend his classes that 

day as he had been called up to Balmoral to see the 
Queen. A waggish student who saw the notice wrote 
underneath it, "God save the Queen." 



"The other day," said a man passenger in a street- 
car, "I saw a woman in a street-car open a satchel and 
take out a purse, close the satchel and open the purse, 
take out a dime and close the purse, open the satchel 
and put in the purse. Then she gave the dime to the 
conductor and took a nickel in exchange. Then she 
opened the satchel and took out the purse, closed the 
satchel and opened the purse, put in the nickel and 
closed the purse, opened the satchel and put in the 
purse, closed the satchel and locked both ends. Then 
she felt to see if her back hair was all right, and it was 
all right, and she was all right That was a woman.'^ 



As a couple of callers were in the parlor of a friend 
who is a firm Christian Scientist, the voice of five- 
year-old Florence could be heard from an upper room. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 127 

fretting. Upon their inquiries about her the mother 
replied simply she was suffering from a "belief" in a 
boil. 

One of the visitors was a rather grim great-aunt of 
the family who possesses a most lively scorn of Mrs. 
Eddy's so-called science as well as a deep-rooted affec- 
tion for little Florence. She immediately demanded 
what had been applied for her relief and as naturally 
the answer was, "Nothing." She assumed her most 
decided expression, drew off her gloves and started 
upstairs. 

"Aunt Molly, what are you going to do? I must 
repeat it is only a belief in a boil," expostulated the 
mother. 

"Very well," retorted Aunt Molly, continuing her 
march upstairs, "I am merely going to put on a dream 
of a poultice." 

And she did. 



Mistress — "Did the fisherman who stopped here 
this morning have frog's legs ?" 

Nora — "Sure, mum, I dinnaw. He wore pants." 



When the thermometer dropped below zero Mrs. 
Rogers was much disturbed by the thought that Hul- 
dah, the new kitchen maid, slept in an unheated room. 

"Huldah/^ she said, remembering the good old 
custom of her girlhood, "it's going to be pretty cold 
to-night. I think you had better take a flatiron to bed 
with you." 

"Yes, ma'am," assented Huldah without enthusiasm. 



^ 



128 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Mrs. Rogers, happy in the belief that her maid was 
comfortable, slept soundly. In the morning she visited 
the kitchen. 

"Well, Huldah, how did you get along with the 
flatiron?'' 

Huldah breathed a deep sigh of recollection. 

"Veil, ma'am, I got it 'most warm before morning.'* 



Many children are so crammed with everything that 
they really know nothing. 

In proof of this, read these veritable specimens of 
definitions, written by public-school children : 
"Stability is taking care of a stable." 
"A mosquito is the child of black and white 
parents." 

'Monastery is the place for monsters." 
Tocsin is swnething to do with getting drunk." 
'Expostulation is to have the smallpox." 
'Cannibal is two brothers who killed each other in 
the Bible." 

"Anatomy is the human body, which consists of 
three parts, the head, the chist, and the sttmimick. The 
head contains the eyes and brains, if any. The chist 
contains the lungs and a piece of the liver. The 
stummick is devoted to the bowels, of which there are 
five, a, e, i, o, u, and sometimes w and y." 



tr 
tit 



Little Polly, coming in from her walk one morn- 
ing, informed her mother that she had seen a lion in 
the park. No amount of persuasion or reasoning 
could make her vary her statement one hairbreadth,; 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 129 

That night, when she slipped down on her knees to 
say her prayers, her mother said, "Polly, ask God to 
forgive you for that fib." 

Polly hid her face for a moment. Then she looked 
straight into her mother's eyes, her own eyes shining 
like stars, and said, "I did ask him, mama, dearest, 
and he said, 'Don't mention it. Miss Polly; that big 
yellow dog has often fooled me.' 



9 99 



a- 



'BooHOO ! Boohoo !" wailed little Johnny. 
Why, what's the matter, dear?" his mother asked 
comfortingly. 

"Boohoo— -er — p-picture fell on papa's toes." 

"Well, dear, that's too bad, but you mustn't cry 
about it, you know.'" 

"I d-d-didn't. I 1-laughed. Boohoo! Boohoo!" 



Two candidates for office in Missouri were stump- 
ing the northern part of the State. In one town their 
appearance was almost simultaneous. The candidate 
last arriving stopped at a house for a drink of water. 
To the little girl who answered his knock at the door 
he said — when she had given him the desired drink 
and he had offered her some candy in recompense: 
"Did the man ahead of me give you anything?" 
"Oh, yes," replied the girl. "He gave me candy." 
"Ah!" exclaimed the candidate. "Here's five cents 
for you. I don't suppose that he gave you any 
money?" 

The youngster laughed. "Yes, he did, too! He 
gave me ten cents !" 

5— Vol. i 



i 



180 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Not to be outdone, the candidate gave the little one 
another nickel and picking her up in his arms, kissed 
her. 

"Did he kiss you, too ?" he asked genially. 

"Yes, he did, sir," responded the little girl, "and he 
kissed ma, too/' 



The owner of a dry-goods store heard a new clerk 
say to a customer, "No, madam, we have not had any 
for a long time." 

With a fierce glance at the clerk the smart employer 
rushed up to the woman and said: "We have plenty 
of everything in reserve ma'am ; plenty upstairs." 

The customer and the clerk looked dazed. Then the 
proprietor, seeing that something was wrong, said 
to the customer: "Excuse me, what did you ask 
for?" 

The woman simply replied, "Why, I said to your 
clerk that we hadn't had any rain lately." 



Senator W. A. Clark detests nothing more than 
to be interrupted when busy. One day he was in his 
office engaged in a business conversation when a petite 
woman, carrying a black bag, entered. With a com- 
pelling smile and an insinuating manner she ap- 
proached the surly millionaire. Utterly insensible to 
his repellent mood and indifferent to his abrupt man- 
ner she drew from the depths of a bag a handsomely 
bound volume, the merits and beauty of which she 
began eloquently to descant upon. 

Failing to embarrass her with arctic frigidity and 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 181 

impatient at her persistency under rebuffs all but vul- 
gar, he turned suddenly upon the chattering woman 
and asked: 

"Madam, do you know what my time is worth?" 

She confessed it was a conundrum. 

"Well," he said, petulantly, "it's worth $30 an 
hour!" 

He turned away with the air of one who had set- 
tled the matter definitely beyond any further contro- 
versy. But he didn't know the woman. 

"Oh, Fm so grateful to you, Mr. Clark," she re- 
plied, with a tone of pathos in her voice. "Thirty 
dollars an hour, did you say?" 

"Yes; that's what I said, and it's cheap at that," 
and he smiled cynically. 

"Oh, I know it's dirt cheap,^ she chirped with win- 
some blitheness. "I am so glad you told me" — rum- 
maging in her reticule, from which she quickly flashed 
out a purse gorged with currency. Moving near to 
the astonished millionaire, who now regarded her 
movements with unfeigned curiosity, she counted two 
bills, a ten and a five, off the roll. These she pushed 
along the top of the sloping desk toward him and said : 
"Yes, I'm glad you told me, because I hadn't expected 
to get it so cheap. There is $15. Now, I want a half 
hour of your uninterrupted attention while I talk to 
you about this book." 

Clark pushed the money back and subscribed and 
paid for two copies of the book. 



The following bit from a letter of thanks is cher- 
ished by its recipient: "The beautiful dock you sent 



182 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

us came in perfect condition, and is now in the parlor 
on top of the book-shelves, where we hope to see you 
soon, and your husband, also, if he can make it con- 
venient" 



Tourist (in French restaurant) — "This is awful! 
I've ordered three dishes from this menu and they are 
all potatoes !" 



"MiSTAH Brown," said the old colored woman, 
coming into the cross-roads store, "you ain't got no 
spool-cotton number thirty, is you?" 

"Why, aunt Sally, I didn't say I didn't have it, 
did I?" 

"You go long, Mistah Brown. I didn't ax you 'aint 
you got it ? I axed you *is you' ? — ain't you ?" 



An old "befo-de-wah" darky was called upon to 
make a few remarks over the gfrave of a friend. He 
removed his hat and stepped reverently and sadly 
toward the open grave and in solemn funereal tones 
said: "Friday Vizer, you is gone. We hope you is 
gone whar we spects you ain't 1" 



A New Yorker who does his bit of "globe trotting" 
tells of two odd entries that he saw in the visitors' 
book of a fashionable resort on the Rhine. 

A few years ago one of the Paris members of the 
Rothschild family had registered as follows : 

"R. de Paris," 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 188 

It chanced that the next visitor to inscribe his name 
in the book was Baron Oppenheim, the banker of 
Cologne, and he wrote beneath Rothschild's : 

"O. de Cologne." 



The Stranger — "And who are the Murphys' an- 
cestors ?*' 

Mr. M.—" Ancestors ? What's that?" 

The Stranger — "I mean who do the Murphys spring 
from?" 

Mr. M. — "The Murphys spring from no one. They 
spring at thim !" 



At a wedding-feast recently the bridegroom was 
called upon, as usual, to respond to the given toast, in 
spite of the fact that he had previously pleaded to be 
excused. Blushing to the roots of his hair, he rose to 
his feet. He intended to imply that he was unpre- 
pared for speechmaking, but he unfortunately placed 
his hand upon his bride's shoulder, and looked down at 
her as he stammered out his opening and concluding 
words : 

"This — er — thing has been forced upon me." 



Very much excited and out of breath, a young man 
who could not have been married very long rushed up 
to an attendant at one of the city hospitals and in- 
quired after Mrs. Brown, explaining between breaths 
that it was his wife whom he felt anxious about. 

The attendant looked at the register and replied that 
there was no Mrs. Brown in the hospital. 



184 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"My God I Don't keep me waiting in this manner," 
said the excited young man. "I must know how 
she is." 

"Well, she isn't here," again said the attendant. 

"She must be/' broke in the visitor, "for here is a 
note I f oimd on the kitchenrtable when I came home 
from work." 

The note read : 

''Dear Jack — ^Have gone to have my kimono cut 
out. Annie." 



While an Irishman was gazing in the window of a 
Washington bookstore the following sign caught his 
eye: 

Dickens' Works 
all this week for 

ONLY $4.00. 



"The diwle he does!" exclaimed Pat in disgust. 
The dirty scab I" 



A DEAR old New England spinster, the embodiment 
of the timid and shrinking, passed away at Carlsbad, 
where she had gone for her health. Her nearest kins- 
man, a nephew, ordered her body sent back to be 
buried — ^as was her last wish — in the quiet little coun- 
try churchyard. His surprise can be imagined, when 
on opening the casket, he beheld, instead of the placid 
features of his aunt Mary, the majestic port of an 
English General in full regimentals, whom he remem- 
bered had chanced to die at the same time and place as 
his aunt. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 185 

At once he cabled to the Generars heirs explaining 
the situation and requesting instructions. 

They came back as follows : "Give the General quiet 
funeral. Aunt Mary interred to-day with full military 
honors, six brass bands, saluting guns." 



Early in the morning session, when the pupils were 
feeling bright and happy, the teacher thought it a good 
plan to give them sentences to correct, both as to 
grammar and sense. She accordingly wrote on the 
blackboard: "The hen has four legs. He done it." 
Thoughtful little Ignatius, at the foot of the class, 
pondered deeply, and at the end of the fifteen minutes^ 
time allowed for correction he wrote : ^^He didn't done 
it: God done it/' 



The late John Stetson, famous in his day as a the- 
atrical manager, was having a yacht built, and a 
friend, meeting him on the street, asked him what he 
was going to name the boat "I haven't decided yet," 
replied John, "but it will be some name commencing 
with S, probably either Tsyche' or *Cinch/ '* 



A CLERGYMAN was On board a steamer which was 
caught in a severe gale. The rolling was constant and 
seemed to get worse as time went on. At last the 
good man got thoroughly frightened. He believed 
they were destined for a watery grave, so he went to 
the captain and asked if he might have prayers. The 
captain todc him by the arm and led him to the fore- 



186 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

castle, where the tars were singing and swearing. 
"There," said he, "when you hear the men swearing 
you may know there is no danger." The clergyman 
went back feeling better, but still the storm increased 
and his alarm also. Disconsolate, he managed to 
stagger to the forecastle again, where he heard the 
sailors swearing as hard as ever. "Mary," he said to 
his sympathetic wife as he crawled back to his berth, 
"Mary, thank Gk)d, they're swearing yet" 



''Hawaiian servants," said a woman with some 
experience of them, "are the best in the world, but 
they are strangely unsophisticated, strangely naive. 
They insist on calling you by your first name. Ours 
were always saying to my husband, 'Yes, John,' or 
'all right, John,' and to me Very well, Ann,' or 'Ann, 
I am going out.' At last I got tired of this and to 
John, when we got a new cook, I said: Don't ever 
call me by my first name in the cook's presence. Then, 
perhaps, not knowing my name, he'll have to say 'Mrs.' 
to me. So John was careful to address me as 'dearie,' 
or 'sweetheart,' the watchful chap gave me no title 
at all. One day we had some English officers to dine. 
I told them how I had overcome, in my new cook's 
case, the native servants' abuse of their employer's 
Christian names, and I said, "By this servant, at least, 
you won't hear me called 'Ann.' " Just then the new 
cook entered the room. He bowed to me respectfully 
and said: 

'"Sweetheart, dinner is served!' 

" 'What ?' I stammered. 

"'Dinner is served, dearie!' answered the cook." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 187 

Early one morning, on the second day out, a ter- 
ribly seasick passenger, pale and hollow-eyed, came 
out of his stateroom and ran into a lady, who was 
coming along the passageway, clad in the scantiest rai- 
ment. She screamed and started to run. "Don't be 
alarmed,'* groaned the man. "Don't be alarmed, 
madam; I shall never live to tell it." 



Mike and Pat worked for a wealthy farmer. They 
planned to turn burglars and steal the money which the 
farmer had hid in one of the rooms of his house. 
They waited until midnight, then started to do the 
job. 

In order to get the money they had to pass the farm- 
er's bedroom. Mike said, "I'll go first, and if it's all 
right you can follow and do just the same as I." 

Mike started to pass the room. Just as he got op- 
posite the door the floor creaked. This awoke the 
farmer, who called out, "Who's there?" 

Mike answered with a "meaow!" (imitating a cat). 
The farmer's wife being awake, too, said, "Oh, John, 
it's the cat," and all was quiet. 

Now Pat started to pass the door, and as he got 
opposite it the floor creaked again. The farmer called 
out again, louder than before, "Who's there ?" 

Pat answered, "Another cat" 



SoFTLEiGH — "Gkxxi evening, Mrs. Moran. I came 
to see if your daughter, Miss Mabel, would go for a 
walk with me." 

Miss Mabel — "How do you do, Mr. Softleigh? I 



188 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

shall be delighted. Mama, do I look fit to go to a 
restaurant ?" 



They were on their honeymoon. He had bought a 
catboat and had taken her out to show her how well 
he could handle a boat, putting her to tend the sheet. 
A puff of wind came, and he shouted in no uncertain 
tones, "Let go the sheet." No response. Then again, 
"Let go that sheet, quick." Still no movement. A 
few minutes later, when both were dinging to the 
bottom of the overturned boat, he said : 

"Why didn't you let go that sheet when I told you 
to, dear?" 

"I would have," said the bride, "if you had not been 
so rough about it. You ought to speak more kindly to 
your wife." 



Madam — "Put plenty of nuts in the cake." 
Cook — "I'll crack no more nuts to-day, niie jaw 
hurts me already." 



Mother — "Alice, it is bedtime. All the little 
chickens have gone to bed." 

Alice — "Yes, mama, and so has the hen." 



Few men have ever been so ready and witty as 
Mark Twain in introducing others to public audiences. 
At Hartford, December 12, 1877, he presented Mr. 
Howells, and, after a word or two as to his literary 
work, said, "But I am not here to speak of his literary 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 189 

reputation, but simply to (a long pause) back up his 
moral character." 



A Lancashire vicar was asked by the choir to call 
upon old Betty, who was deaf, but who insisted in 
joining in the solo of the anthem, and to ask her 
only to sing in the hymns. He shouted into her ear : 
"Betty! I've been requested to speak to you about 
your singing." At last she caught the word "sing- 
ing," and replied: " Not to me be the praise, sir; it's 
a gift." 



The proprietor of a large drug store recently re- 
ceived this curt and haughty note written in an angu- 
lar, feminine hand: "I do not want vasioline, but 
glisserine. Is that plain enough ? I persoom you can 
spell." 



It was in a Maine Sunday-school that a teacher 
recently asked a Chinese pupil she was teaching to 
read if he understood the meaning of the words "an 
old cow." 

"Been cow a long time,"' was the prompt answer. 



Upon moving into a new neighborhood the small 
boy of the family was cautioned not to fight with his 
new acquaintances. One day Willie came home with 
a black eye and very much spattered with dirt. 

"Why, Willie," said mama, "I thought I told you 
to count a hundred before you fought !" 



140 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"I did, mama/* said Willie, "and look what Tommy 
Smith did while I was counting!" 



"The rolling stone gathers no moss," quoted the 
man who had never been outside his home county. 

"True," rejoined the globe-trotter, "but it acquires 
an enviable polish." 



Curate (who is going to describe his little holiday 
in Lucerne) — "My dear friends — I will not call you 
ladies and gentlemen, since I know you too well." 



Daniel Purcell, the famous punster, was desired 
to make a pun extempore. 

"Upon what subject?" said Daniel. 

"The king," answered the other. 

"Oh ! sir," said he "the king is no subject." 



Illustrative of "that troublesome Henglish 
haitch" an American traveler relates the following: 

Once I dined with an English farmer. We had 
ham — ^very delicious baked ham. The farmer's son 
soon finished his portion and passed his plate again. 

"More 'am, father," he said. 

The farmer frowned. 

"Don't say 'am, son. Say ^amf 

"I did say 'am," the lad protested in an injured tone. 

"You said 'am'' cried the father fiercely. " 'Am's 
what it should be. 'Am, not 'am." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 141 

In the middle of the squabble the farmer's wife 
turned to me and, with a deprecatory little laugh, ex- 
plained : 

"They both think they're sayin' 'am, sir." 



Passing along Princes Street, Edinburgh, one day 
a herculean Scots Grey stopped at the post-office and 
called on a street arab to polish his boots. The feet of 
the dragoon were in proportion to his height and, 
looking at the tremendous boots before him, the arab 
knelt down on the pavement and shouted out to his 
chum across the road, "Jamie, come ower an' gie's a 
hand, I've got an army contract." 



The younger man had been complaining that he 
could not get his wife to mend his clothes. 

"I asked her to sew a button on this vest last night, 
and she hasn't touched it," he said. At this the older 
man assumed the air of a patriarch. 

"Never ask a woman to mend anything," he said. 
"You haven't been married very long, and I think I 
can give you some serviceable suggestions. When I 
want a shirt mended I take it to my wife, flourish it 
around a little and say, 'Where's that rag-bag?' 

" 'What do you want of the rag-bag?' asks my wife. 
Her suspicions are roused at once. 

" 'I want to throw this shirt away ; it's worn out,' 
I say, with a few more flourishes. 

" 'Let me see that shirt,' my wife says then. *Now, 
John, hand it to me at once.' 

Of course, I pass it over, and she examines it 



«i 



142 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

*Why, ]ohn Taylor/ she is sure to say, 'I never knew 
such extravagance! This is a perfectly good shirt. 
All it needs is ' And then she mends it." 



A BROWBEATING counscl asked a witness how far 
he had been from a certain place. "J^st four 3rards, 
two feet, and six inches," was the reply. ''How come 
you to be so exact, my friend?" "I expected some 
fool or other would ask me, so I measured it." 



"Now, see here, porter," said the drummer briskly, 
"I want you to put me off at Syracuse. You know we 
get in there about six o'clock in the morning, and I 
may over-sleep myself. But it is important that I 
should get out. Here's a five-dollar gold piece. Now, 
I may wake up hard. Don't mind if I kick. Pay no 
attention if I'm ugly. I want you to put me off the 
train no matter how hard I fight. Understand?" 

"Yes, sah," answered the sturdy Nubian. "It shall 
be did, sahl" 

The next morning the coin-giver was awakened by 
a stentorian voice calling : "Rochester !" 

"Rochester!" he exclaimed, sitting up. "Where's 
that porter?" 

Hastily slipping on his trousers, he went in search 
of the negro, and found him in the porter's closet, 
huddled up, with his head in a bandage, his clothes 
torn, and his arm in a sling. 

"Well," said the drummer, "you are a sight. Why 
didn't you put me off at Syracuse?" 

"Wha-atl" gasped the porter, jumping up, as his 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 148 

eyes bulged from his head. "Was you de gemman dat 
give me a five-doUah gold piece?" 

"Of course I was, you idiot !" 

"Well, den, befoah de Lawd, who was dat gem- 
man I put off at Syracuse?" 



A RIGHT reverend prelate, himself a man of extreme 
good-nature, was frequently much vexed in spirit by 
the proud, f reward, perverse, and untractable temper 
of his next vicar. The latter, after an absence much 
longer than usual, one day paid a visit to the bishop, 
who kindly inquired the cause of his absence, and was 
answered by the vicar that he had been confined to his 
house for some time past by an obstinate stiffness in 
his knee. "I am glad of that," replied the prelate; 
" ^tis a good symptom that the disorder has changed 
place, for I had a long time thought it immovably 
settled in your neck." 



Bride — "George, dear, when we reach our destina- 
tion let us try to avoid giving the impression that we 
are newly married.* 

George — "All right, Maud ; you can carry the suit- 
case and umbrellas." 



Francis Wilson was speaking at the Players Qub 
of New York City, not long ago, of the all too preva- 
lent ignorance of dramatic literature in the country 
to-day. 

"Why," said Mr. Wilson^ "a company was playing 



144 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

'She Stoops to Conquer' in a small Western town last 
winter when a man without any money, wishing to see 
the show, stepped up to the box office and said : 

" *Pass me in, please.' 

"The box office man gave a loud, harsh laugh. 

" Tass you in ? What for ?' he asked. 

"The applicant drew himself up and answered, 
haughtily: 'What for? Why, because I am Oliver 
Goldsmith, author of the play.'' 

" *Oh, I beg your pardon, sir,' replied the other in 
a meek voice, as he hurriedly wrote an order for a 
box.'' 



Lady Bountiful — "All I can say is, Jenkins, that 
if these people insist on building these horrid little 
villas near my gates, I shall leave the place." 

Jenkins — "Exactly what I told them at the meeting, 
your ladyship. I said, 'Do you want to drive away the 
goose that lays the golden eggs ?' " 



Old Lady (to conductor — ^her first drive on an 
electric tram). — "Would it be dangerous, conductor, 
if I was to put my foot on the rail ?" 

Conductor (an Edison manque). — "No, mum, not 
unless you was to put the other one on the overhead 
wire!" 



After a few weeks at boarding-school Alice wrote 
home as follows: 

^^Dear Father — Though I was homesick at first, now 
that I am getting acquainted, I like the school very 
much. Last evening Grayce and Kathryn (my room- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 145 

mates) and I had a nice little chafing-dish party, and 
we invited three other girls, Mayme and Carrye Miller 
and Edyth Kent. I hope you are all well at home. 
I can't write any more now for I have a lot of study- 
ing to do. With lots of love to all. 

"Your affectionate daughter, 

"Alyss." 
To this she received the following reply: 

^^My dear Daughter Alyss — I was glad to receive 
your letter and to know that you are enjoying your- 
self. Uncle Jaymes came the other day, bringing 
Charts and Albyrt with him. Your brother Henrie 
was delighted, for he has been lonely without you. I 
have bought a new gray horse whose name is Byllye. 
He matches nicely with old Fredde. With much 
love from us all, I am, 

" Your affectionate father, 

"Wyllyam Jones." 

The next letter from the absent daughter was signed 
"Alice." 



While Chauncey M. Depew was at the Omaha 
Exposition, he and President Callaway of the New 
York Central chanced to go into a booth on the Mid- 
way Plaisance. 

It was a tame entertainment and there was only a 
meager attendance when Mr. Depew and Mr. Calla- 
way entered. Their stay would have been very brief 
except for the fact that they had scarcely taken their 
seats before there began a steady inpouring of people, 
which continued until the small auditorium was 
crowded. 



146 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Taking this extraordinary increase of spectators as 
an indication that something of an interesting nature 
was about to be disclosed, the two New Yorkers con- 
cluded to sit it out. Half an hour's waiting failed to 
reward their patient expectancy, however, and Mr. 
Callaway suggested that they move on. 

Just then ex-Secretary of Agriculture J. Sterling 
Morton pushed his way through the crowd, and, ex- 
tending his hand to Mr. Depew, exclaimed : 

"Well, Doctor Depew, so you are really here! I 
thought that 'barker' was lying." 

"What do you mean?" inquired Mr. Depew. 

"Why, the 'barker* for this show is standing out- 
side and inviting the crowd to 'step up lively' and pay 
ten cents for the privilege of seeing the 'great and only 
Chauncey M. Depew.' " 



That the royal road to learning is full of strange 
pitfalls is shown by some of the definitions and state- 
ments given by school-children — some of whom are 
well along the way. The following are bona fide sam- 
ples coming under the knowledge of one teacher : 

"About this time Columbus was cursing aroun^ 
among the West Indies." 

"Jackson's campaign in the Valley was the greatest 
piece of millinery-work ever known." 

"The Valkyrie were the Choosers of the Slain, and 
the Valhalla the Haulers of the Slain." 

"The eldest son of the King of France is called The 
Dolphin." 

"The Duke of Clarence, according to his usual 
custom, was killed in battle." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS U7 

"Heathen are paragons (pagans) that wash up idle 
things." 

"The Indians call their women squabs/' 



A CERTAIN curate in the course of conversation at a 
dinner party some time ago remarked to a friend, "I 
had a curious dream last night, but as it was about 
my vicar I hardly like to tell it." On being pressed, 
however, he began : "I dreamt I was dead and was on 
my way to Heaven, which was reached by a very long 
ladder. At the foot I was met by an angel, who 
pressed a piece of chalk into my hand and said, *If 
you climb long enough you will reach Heaven, but 
for every sin you are conscious of having com- 
mitted you must mark a rung of the ladder with 
the chalk as you go up.' I took the chalk and 
started. I had climbed up very, very far and was 
feeling very tired when I suddenly met my vicar com- 
ing down. 'Hullo !' I said, 'what are you going down 
for?' 'More chalk.' " 



Mrs. McKinley used to tell of a colored widow 
whose children she had helped educate. The widow, 
rather late in life, married. 

"How are you getting on?" Mrs. McKinley asked 
her a few months after her marriage. 

"Fine, thank yo', ma'am,"' the bride answered. 

"And is your husband a good provider?" 

" 'Deed he am a good providah, ma'am," was the 
enthusiastic reply. "Why, jes' dis las' week he got 
me five new places to wash at" 



148 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

A CERTAIN curate was of a painfully nervous tem- 
perament, and in consequence was constantly making 
awkward remarks — intended as compliments — ^to the 
bishop and others. Having distinguished himself in 
an unusual degree during a gathering of clergy to an 
afternoon tea at the bishop's palace, he was taken to 
task for his failings by a senior curate, who was one 
of his companions on the way home. 

"Look here, Bruce," said the senior decidedly, "you 
are a donkey! Why can not you keep quiet, instead 
of making your asinine remarks? I am speaking to 
you now as a brother " 

Loud laughter interrupted him at this point, and for 
the moment he wondered why. 



An earnest clergyman one Sunday morning was ex- 
horting those who had anxious and troubled con- 
sciences to be sure and call on their pastor for guid- 
ance and prayer. 

"To show you, my brethren, the blessed results of 
these visits with your pastor," said he, "I will state 
to you that only yesterday a gentleman of wealth called 
upon me for counsel and instruction ; and now to-day, 
my friends — ^to-day he sits among us, not only a Chris- 
tian, but a happy husband and father." 

A young lady in the audience whispered to a 
matron : "Wasn't that pretty quick work ?" 



A GOOD story is told of the late George Augustus 
Sala in his early and impecunious days. At some 
festive gathering where Mr. Sala was present, Mr. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 149 

Attemborough, the famous pawnbroker, was also a 
guest. They recognized each other, and shook hands. 
"How do you do, Mr. Attemborough," said the 
journalist. "We have met often before, but I think 
this is the first time I have ever seen your legs." 



A CLERGYMAN in the West Country had two curates, 
one a comparatively old man, the other very young. 
With the former he had not been able to work agree- 
ably; and on being invited to another living, he ac- 
cepted it, and took the young curate with him. Nat- 
urally, there was a farewell sermon; and we can 
imagine the feelings of the curate who was to be left 
behind when he heard the text given out, "Abide ye 
here with the ass, and I and the lad will go yonder 
and worship." 



A BISHOP was staying with a friend in a country 
house. On Sunday morning as he passed through the 
library he found a small boy curled up in a big chair, 
deeply interested in a book. 

"Are you going to church, Tom?" he asked. 
"No, sir," he replied. 
Why, I am," said the Bishop. 
^Huh," said the boy, "you've got to go. It's 
your job." 






A CELEBRATED continental specialist to whom time 
was literally money and who was possessed of a fiery 
temper made it a rule that all patients should undress 
before entering his consulting room so as not to waste 



150 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

any of his valuable time. One day a meek-looking* 
little man entered with all his clothes on. "What do 
you mean by coming in like that ?" said the doctor in 
a rage. "Go and strip at once !" "But I — '' faltered 
the man. "I tell you I've no time to waste/' yelled 
the doctor, and the poor man left the room in haste. 
When his turn came he reentered the room. "Now 
then," said the doctor, "that's better. What can I do 
for you?" "I called to collect your subscription for 
the benevolent society." 



A TALL man, impatiently pacing the platform of a 
wayside station, accosted a red-haired boy of about 
twelve. 

"S-s-say," he said, "d-d-do y-you know ha-ha-how 
late this train is ?" 

The boy grinned but made no reply. The man 
stuttered out something about red-headed kids in gen- 
eral and gassed into the station. 

A stranger, overhearing the one-sided conversation, 
asked the boy why he hadn't answered the big man. 

"D-d-d^ye wanter see me g-g-get me fa-fa-face 
punched?" stammered the boy. "D-d-dat big g-g'* 
guy'd tink I was mo-mo-mocking him." 



"Mother/' said a college student who had brought 
his chum home for the holidays, "permit me to present 
my friend, Mr. Specknoodle." 

His mother, who was a little hard of hearing, placed 
her hand to her ear. 

"I'm sorry, George, but I didn't quite catch your 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 151 

» 

friend's name. You'll have to speak a little louder, I'm 
afraid," 

"I say, mother/' shouted George, "I want to present 
my friend Mr. Specknoodle/' 

"I'm sorry, George, but Mr. What was the 

name again?" 

*'Mr. Specknoodle I" George fairly yelled. 

The old lady shook her head sadly. 

*Tm sorry, George, but I'm afraid it's no use. It 
sounds just like Specknoodle to me." 



A YOUNG American lady on a visit to London was 
being shown some of the sights by a boastful English- 
man. "This is a cannon captured at Bunker Hill," 
said the Englishman. "How interesting," exclaimed 
the lady. "I must explain," said the gentleman taunt- 
ingly, "that this Ifeannon was captured f ronj the Ameri- 
cans by the English." The lady quietly retorted, 
•*Well, you have the cannon ; we have the hill." 



Former Congressman Fred Landis of Indiana has 
made a reputation for himself as an orator. A year 
•or so ago Landis, speaking at the unveiling of a 
monument to President Lincoln, uttered the phrase, 
•'Abraham Lincoln — ^that mystic mingling of star and 
dod." This was loudly applauded. After the 
speech a friend of Landis approached him, and, re- 
peating the phrase, said : "Fred, what in the name of 
heaven does that mean?" Putting his arm around his 
friend's shou!der, Landis replied: "I don't know, 
really, but it gets 'em every time." 



*^ 



152 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Captain Foretopp tells a story of a certain noted 
divine who was on his steamer when a great gale over- 
took them off the Oregon coast. "It looks pretty bad/' 
said the Bishop to the Captain. "Couldn't be much 
worse, Bishop," replied Foretopp. 

Half an hour later the steamer was diving under 
the waves as if she were a submarine and leaking like 
an old door. "Looks worse, I think. Captain," said 
the Bishop. "We must trust in Providence now. 
Bishop," answered Foretopp. 

"Oh, I hope it has not come to that," gasped the 
Bishop. 



A COUPLE of New Yorkers were playing golf on a 
New Jersey course on Election Day when they saw a 
fine-appearing old gentleman looking at them wist- 
fully. They asked him to join the game, which he did 
with alacrity. He was mild in speech and manner and 
played well. But once when he had made a foozle he 
ejaculated vehemently the word: "Croton!" A few 
minutes later when he made another bad play, he re- 
peated: "Croton!" The third time he said it, one 
of his new-made friends said : "I don't want to be in- 
quisitive, but will you tell me why you say *Croton' so 
often?" "Well," said the old gentleman, "isn't that 
the biggest dam near New York ?" He was a Presby- 
terian clergyman from Brooklyn. 



Willie, aged five, was taken by his father to his 
first football game. The feature that caught his chief 
approval, however, did not become evident until he 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 153 

said his prayers that night. To the horror of his par- 
ents WiUie prayed with true football snap : 

"God bless papa, 

"God bless mama, 

"God bless Willie; 

"Rah! Rah! Rah!'' 



A SUBURBAN minister during his discourse one Sab- 
bath morning said : "In each blade of grass there is a 
sermon." The following day one of his flock discov- 
ered the good man pushing a lawn mower about his 
garden and paused to say : "Well, parson, I'm glad to 
see you engaged in cutting your sermons short." 



"Now, Bobby," instructed the Fond Maternal Par- 
ent of the prodigy in velveteens, bound for a children's 
party, "the weather looks rather threatening. Here is 
half a dollar for you, and if it rains come back by cab." 

Two hours later it came down cats and dogs, and 
F. M. P. (Fond Maternal Parent) returned devout 
thanks for her forethought. 

But when little Bobby Velveteens returned he was 
wet to the skin. 

"Why, Bobby," cried the F. M. P., "didn't you come 
back by cab, as I told you ?" 

"Oh, yes, ma!" answered Bobby. "And it was 
simply splendid ! I rode on the box beside the driver!" 



A Bishop of the Episcopal Church lived all his life 
unwed. A friend mentioned that one of the States 



154 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

was imposing a tax on bachelors, to be increased a 
certain percentage every ten years of bachelorhood, 
and added: "Why, Bishop, at your age you would 
have to pay a hundred dollars a year." 

"Well," said the Bishop quietly, "it's worth it/' 



Two old women, on their way home from church, 
in a country district of Scotland, were speaking of 
Napoleon's overthrow, by the allied troops at Water- 
loo. The minister had been pointing a moral by aid of 
the Corsican hero's defeat. 

"Hoo is it," said one, in her narrow way, "the 
Scotch aye win their battles ?" 

"Weel, ye ken, it's because they aye pray afore they 
go in the fecht," replied the other. 

"Ay ! But mercy, wuman, canna the French pray, 
as weel?" 

"Nae doobt, they dae; but wha could understan' 
they jabberin' bodies?" snapped the interrogated one, 
in peremptory answer. 



Curiously worded advertisements that are funny 
without intent are common in the London papers. 
Here are a few examples : 

"A boy wanted who can open oysters with refer- 
ences." 

"Bulldog for sale; will eat anything, very fond of 
children." 

"Wanted an organist and a boy to blow the same." 

"Wanted, a boy to be partly outside and partly in- 
side the counter." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 155 

"Lost, near Highgate Archway, an umbrella be- 
longing to a gentleman with a bent rib and a bone 
handle." 

'*To be disposed of, a mail phaeton, the property 
of a gentleman with a movable headpiece as good as 
new." 



A TALL young man stalked with stately stride into 
the office of a small hotel in a remote part of the White 
Mountains. Behind him came a severe valet carrying 
bags and a gun-case, and on a wagon at the door were 
two prosperous trunks. In an armchair behind the 
hotel counter sat a spare old man placidly chewing to- 
bacco and reading the "Weekly Recorder." 

"Ah-h-h! Hm!" the tall young man began. "Is 
this Mr. Silas P. Meacham, proprietor of this hotel?" 

"Yaas," replied the old one, glancing up over his 
paper. 

"I am Mr. Hanningford Wattster van Derventer, 
of the Metropolis Club, of New York," said the visi- 
tor, impressively. "My friend, Mr. Vandergilt, told 
me you would take excellent care of me here." 

"Ya-as," replied Silas, still buried in his paper. 

"/ am Mr. Hanningford Wattster van Derventer, of 
New York," the visitor repeated. "My friend, Mr. 
Vandergilt, told me you would take excellent care of 
me here." 

"Ya-a-as," said Silas, still chewing and reading his 
paper. 

"/ am Mr. Hanningford Wattster van Derventer, 
of New York," the young man reiterated with the air 
of one who tells great news, also with rising indigna- 



156 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

tion. "My friend, Mr. Vandergilt, told me you would 
take excellent care of me — show me every attention." 
"Wa-al," exclaimed Silas P. Meacham, throwing 
down the paper and revealing his few yellow teeth in 
a mocking grin — "wa-al, what d'ye want me t' do — 
kiss ye ?" 



Court — (to prosecutor) — "Then you recognize this 
handkerchief as the one which was stolen ?" 

Prosecutor — "Yes, your honor." 

Court — "And yet it isn't the only handkerchief of 
the sort in the world. See, this one I have in my 
pocket is exactly like it." 

Prosecutor — "Very likely, your honor; there were 
two stolen." 



The company of soldiers had been receiving a 
lesson in minor tactics, and among other subjects was 
the method of patrols in getting information. The 
book said that information could be obtained from 
"mayors, postmasters, livery-stable keepers, doctors, 
peasants, etc." 

The lieutenant turned to Finnegan and said: "Do 
you know what a peasant is, Finnegan?" 

He answered promptly, "Yes, sor." 

"Well, what is it?" 

"It's a bird, sor," said Finnegan with evident pride. 



Senator Pettus, of Alabama, was writing with 
a noisy, spluttering pen. Laying it down, he smiled 
and said: "Once I was spending the evening with a 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 167 

friend of mine in Selma. We sat in the dining-room 
and from the kitchen came a dreadful scratching 
sound. 'Martha/ said my friend to the maid, 'what 
is that scratching? it must be the dog trying to get 
in/ 'Huh !' said Martha, 'Dat ain' no dog, dat's cook 
writin' a love-letter to heh honeysuckle/ " 



"No smoking in this coach, sir," said the conductor 
of a passenger train. "I'm not smokin'," answered 
the passenger with an injured air from the depths of 
his seat. 

"You've got your pipe in your mouth," declared 
the conductor with emphasis, sharply confident. "I 
hov," retorted the Hibernian, "and I hov me fut in 
me shoe, too, but I'm not walkin'." 



Little Alice is old for her years. One evening 
after she had gone to bed she heard mama and papa 
laughing in much enjoyment over a game of flinch; 
she longed to get up and join them, but knew she 
must not. The next morning at breakfast she was 
very quiet. Presently she drew a deep sigh, and said, 
"What a good time you and papa had last night. 
Oh, I feel the need of a husband, mama, I do feel it!" 



A TEACHER in one of the primary schools of New 
York recently read to her pupils "The Old Oaken 
Bucket." 

After explaining the song to them very carefully, 
she asked the class to copy the first stanza from the 



168 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

blackboard, where she had written it, and try to illus- 
trate the verse by drawings in the same way a story 
is illustrated. 

In a short while one little girl handed up her paper 
with several little dots between two lines, a circle, half 
a dozen dots, and three buckets. 

"I do not quite understand this, Mamie," said the 
^ teacher, kindly. "What is that circle ?" 

"Oh, that's the well," Mamie replied. 

"And why do you have three buckets ?" again asked 
the teacher. 

"One," answered the child, "is the oaken bucket, 
one is the iron-bound bucket, and the other is the 
moss-covered bucket that hung in the well." 

"But, Mamie, what are all these little dots for?" 

"Why those are the spots which my infancy knew,*' 
earnestly replied Mamie. 



Four gentlemen went out to dine. They were Ar- 
thur Balfour, Joseph Chamberlain, Lord Charles 
Beresford, and the Japanese Minister. Mr. Arthur 
Balfour was standing treat and said to Joey, "What 
will you take?" "Oh, thanks, FU take Scotch, Ar- 
thur." "And what will you take, Lord Charles?" 
"Oh, thanks, I'll take Irish, Arthur." "And now, 
what will you take?" addressing the Japanese Min- 
ister. "FU take Port Arthur, thanks." 



Not long after the great Chelsea fire some children 
in Newton, Massachusetts, held a Charity Fair by 
which eighteen dollars were realized. This they for- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 169 

warded to the rector of a certain Boston church who 
had taken a prominent part in the relief work, with a 
letter which read somewhat as follows : 

"We have had a fair and made eighteen dollars. 
We are sending it to you. Please give it to the Chel- 
sea sufferers. 

"Yours truly, etc. 

"P. S. We hope the suffering is not all over.'* 



A STORY is told of a certain committee meeting in 
which the proceedings commenced with noise and 
gradually became uproarious. At last one of the 
disputants, losing all control over his emotions, ex- 
claimed to his opponent: "Sir, you are, I think, the 
biggest ass that I ever had the misfortune to set eyes 
upon I'* "Order! order!" said the chairman, gravely; 
"you seem to forget that I am in the room." 



An Irish priest had labored hard with one of his 
flock to induce him to give up whisky. "I tell you, 
Michael," said the priest, "whisky is your worst 
enemy, and you should keep as far away from it as 
you can." "The enemy is it, father?" responded 
Michael, "and it was your riverence's self that was 
telling us in the pulpit last Sunday to love our ene- 
mies." "So I was, Michael," rejoined the priest, "but 
I didn't tell you to swallow them." 



A Sabbath-school worker was visiting a Sabbath- 
school some distance from home. Being called upon 



160 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

to address the school, he commenced by asking, "Who 
can tell me something about Peter?" (the lesson was 
about Peter that day). Having received no answer 
from either large or small pupils, he again made the 
request. This time a little girl put up her hand. He 
called the little girl to him and placed her upon a 
chair. After complimenting her on her bravery and 
brightness, he asked her to tell him all she knew 
about Peter. In return came the following : 

"Peter, Peter, pumpkin-eater. 
Had a wife and couldn't keep her ; 
Put her in a pumpkin shell 
Where he kept her very well." 



Senator Beveridge, in recommending broad and 
generous views to the graduating class of a medical 
school, told this story : 

"I once saw two famous physicians introduced at 
a reception. They were deservedly famous, but they 
were of opposing schools ; and the regular, as he shook 
the other by the hand, said loudly : 

" *I am glad to meet you as a gentleman, sir, though 
I can't admit that you are a physician.' 

" 'And I,' said the homeopathist, smiling faintly, 
'am glad to meet you as a physician, though I can't 
admit you are a gentleman.' " 



At a recent dinner in London the conversation 
turned to the subject of lynching in the United States. 
It was the general opinion that a large percentage of 
Americans met death at the end of a rope. Finally 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 161 

the hostess turned to an American, who had taken no 
part in the conversation, and said: 

"You, sir, must have often seen these affairs." 

"Yes," he replied, "we take a kind of municipal 
pride in seeing which city can show the greatest num- 
ber of lynchings yearly." 

"Oh, do tell us about a lynching you have seen your- 
self," broke in half a dozen voices at once. 

"The night before I sailed for England," said Eu- 
gene Field, "I was giving a dinner at a hotel to a 
party of intimate friends when a colored waiter spilled 
a plate of soup over the gown of a lady at an ad- 
joining table. The gown was utterly ruined, and the 
gentlemen of her party at once seized the waiter, tied 
a rope around his neck, and at a signal from the in- 
jured lady swung him into the air." 

"Horrible," said the hostess with a shudder. "And 
did you actually see this yourself ?" 

"Well, no," admitted the American apologetically. 
"Just at that moment I happened to be downstairs 
killing the chef for putting mustard in the blanc 
mange." 



Mrs. Jones recently spent a few days at a farm, 

and in a moment of originality bought some poultry 

from the farmer with a view to their providing fresh 

eggs for breakfast every morning. She sent them 

to town per the local carrier, despatching a note at 

the same time to her husband telling him to look out 

for the consignment. When Jones reached home from 

his office he inquired if the poultry had arrived. The 

servant told him they had, but the man had carelessly 
6-.V0L. I 



162 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

put them in the back yard, leaving the door open, 
and they had all escaped. Thereupon a fowl hunt 
was immediately organized. The next day Jones 
saw the carrier. "Nice trick you played me yester- 
day," said he; "spent three hours hunting those fowls 
and only found ten." "Then think yourself blessed 
lucky," replied the man. "I only brought six." 



A PATRONIZING young lord was seated opposite the 
late James McNeill Whistler at dinner one evening. 
During a lull in the conversation he adjusted his mon- 
ocle and leaned forward toward the artist. 

"Aw, y' know, Mr. Whistler," he drawled, "I 
pahssed your house this mawning." 

"Thank you," said Whistler quietly. "Thank you 
verry much." 



The new minister in a Georgia church was deliv- 
ering his first sermon. The darky janitor was a criti- 
cal listener from a back comer of the church. The 
minister's sermon was eloquent, and his prayers seemed 
to cover the whole category of human wants. 

After the services one of the deacons asked the old 
darky what he thought of the new minister. "Don't 
you think he offers up a good prayer, Joe?" 

"Ah mos' suhtainly does, boss. Why, dat man axed 
de good Lord fo' things dat de odder preacher didn't 
even know He had !" 



For weeks the kindergarten had been deluged with 
nature verses, and the process of absorption was far 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 163 

advanced. Sufficiently to admit of a little squeezing 
with results, thought the teacher. 

**Now, children," she said, "I want you each to 
bring in a little verse that you have made yourselves 
about the buds, or the trees, or the flowers, or any- 
thing that pleases you." 

Various specimens were produced next day, but the 
gem of the collection was little May Flynn's. With 
appropriate gestures she recited : 

"See the pretty gjold fish swimming in the globe ! 
See the pretty robin singing in the tree! 

Who teached these two to fly together? 

Who stucked the fur upon their breasts? 
*Twas God. 'Twas God. He done it." 



A STORY about King Edward is worth repeating. 
Just before the illness which caused the postponement 
of the coronation, he was racing down one of the 
country roads in his motor-car at a speed which was 
away beyond the legal limit. 

"Hi ! Hi !" called a policeman. "Stop there, in the 
name of the law !" 

His Majesty is said to have slackened speed and 
called out : "But Tm the king!" 

"Jest you come aht o* that," was the reply; "yer 
the third king wot*s come along this morning." 



In order to play "Rosemary" some years ago, John 
Drew shaved off his mustache, thereby greatly chang- 
ing his appearance. Shortly afterward he met Max 
Beerbohm in the lobby of a London theater, but could 



164 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

not just then recall who the latter was. Mr. Beer- 
bohm's memory was better. 

"Oh, Mr. Drew," he said, "I'm afraid you don't 
know me without your mustache." 



A TRULY eloquent parson had been preaching for 
an hour or so on the immortality of the soul. 

"I looked at the mountains," he declaimed, "and 
could not help thinking, ^Beautiful as you are, you will 
be destroyed, while my soul will not.' I gazed upon 
the ocean and cried, 'Mighty as you are you will even- 
tually dry up, but not L' 



f 99 



"Now if I don't git rid o' dis cold soon," com- 
plained Jimmy, the jockey, "I'll be a dead one." 

"Did you go to Dr. Goodman, as I told you ?" asked 
his friend. 

"Naw! De sign on his door said *io to i' an' I 
wouldn't monkey wid no long shot like dat." 



Herbert S. Stone, the publisher, described at a 
dinner in Washington the amusing methods of a news- 
paper writer who used to write articles at a set rate 
a column. 

He was once commissioned to do a serial story for 
a Chicago paper. The story, as it proceeded from 
week to week, was interesting, but it contained many 
passages like the following: 

"Did you hear him?** 

"I did" 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 165 



to 



Truly?" 
Truly." 

"Where?" 

"By the well." 

"When?" 

"To-day." 

"Then he lives?" 

"He does." 

"Ah." 

The editor, sending for the man, said: 

"Hereafter we will pay you by the letters in your 
serial. We will pay you so much a thousand letters." 

The young man, looking crestfallen, went away, 
but in the very next instalment of his story he intro- 
duced a character who stuttered, and all through the 
chapter were scattered passages like this : 

"B-b-b-b-believe me, s-s-s-sir, I am n-n-not g-g-g- 
guilty. M-m-m-my m-m-m-mother c-c-c-committed 
this c-c-c-crime." 



A MAN with a soft, low voice had just completed 
his purchases in a department store of the City of 
Churches. 

"What is the name?" asked the clerk. 

"Jepson," replied the man. 

"Chipson?" 

"No, Jepson." 

"Oh, yes, Jefferson." 

"No, Jepson; J-e-p-s-o-n." 

"Jepson?" 

"That's it. You have it. Sixteen eighty-two^ — ' 

"Your first name, initial, please.' 



166 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 



"( 



"Oh, K.'' 

"O. K. Jepson." 

"Excuse me, it isn't O. K. You did not understand 
me. I said *0h/ '' 

'O. Jepson." 

'No; rub out the O and let the K stand." 

The clerk looked annoyed. "Will you please give 
me your initials again ?" 

"I said K.'' 

"I beg your pardon, you said O. K. Perhaps you 
had better write it yourself." 

"I said 'Oh'—" 

•*Just now you said K." 

"Allow me to finish what I started to say. I said 
*Oh,' because I did not understand what you were ask- 
ing me. I did not mean that it was my initial. My 
name is Kirby Jepson."^ 

"Oh!" 

"No, not O., but K.," said the man. "Give me the 
pencil, and Til write it down for you myself. There, 
I guess it's O. K. now." 



The furnishing of the new house had gone on 
vociferously. All the family told stories of the beau- 
tiful and rare articles picked up at auctions, usually at 
such bargains as only amateurs in such matters are 
able to find. There was naturally much curiosity to 
see how the house looked. The first visitor who had 
the opportunity to inspect it was eagerly questioned 
by her friends. 

"I can't describe it myself," she explained. "All I 
can say is that auctions speak louder than words." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 167 

When Frank R. Stcdcton started out with hia 
Rudder Grange experiences he undertcx>k to keep 
chickens. One old motherly Pl)miouth Rock brought 
out a brood late in the fall, and Stockton named each 
of the chicks after some literary friend, among the 
rest Mary Mapes Dodge. Mrs. Dodge was visiting 
the farm some time later, and, happening to think of 
her namesake, she said : "By the way, Frank, how does 
little Mary Mapes Dodge get along?" "The funny 
thing about little Mary Mapes Dodge," said he, "is, 
she turns out to be Thomas Bailey Aldrich." 



A SHORT time ago a lady with an only child (agecl 
seven) was entertaining the bishop of the diocese to 
afternoon tea. The small girl was allowed to come 
to tea, but her mother had instilled into her mind the 
necessity of speaking reverently to the bishop. Tea 
came and with it the pangs of hunger, but at the same 
time her mother's warning, "speak reverently,*^ was 
always before her. After sitting for about ten minutes 
gazing at the good things and repeating over and over 
again, "speak reverently," she exclaimed, "For God's 
sake pass me the bread and butter." 



Hiram Hardscrabble and his load of hay, two 
horses, and a perfectly good wagon were pitdied so 
high and so far by a reckless railroad train that when 
they came down they weren't — any of 'em — good for 
much. The local Congressman took the case, and' 
after some months advised Hiram to accept the rail- 
road company's offer of lifelong employment at $15 a 



168 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

week. Hiram accepted. They put him out as a flag- 
man on a crossing near his native village. 

Cassidy, the section boss, stopped his handcar be- 
fore the flag-shanty, and after a searching look at 
Hiram advised as follows : 

"So you're the new flagman, are ye? And ye've 
niver railroaded before. No harm. We'll make a 
man iv ye. See, now, there's yer red flag and yer 
g^een flag and yer white flag, and yer thrain schedule 
within on the wall. All ye have to do is dhrop the 
gates befoor the thrains do come, so that they'll have 
a clear thrack. D'ye mind, now ? 

"But there's wan thing above all others — th' Im- 
pire Shtate Express! Putt yer gates down two min- 
yits before she comes and keep them down till she's 
pasht. Mind now, she must niver be late on this sec- 
tion. Niver wan minyit late. I won't sthand f'r it. 
Remimber — th' Impire Shtate Express. She must 
niver be late here." 

Hiram promised. At 2 p.m., when the Empire 
State Express was due in two minutes, he dropped the 
crossing gates and stood by with the white flag to 
wave her along. Three minutes passed, four, five — 
and still no train. As a matter of fact, she had lost 
half an hour at an open draw on the Harlem River in 
the morning, and was laboring mightily to regain lost 
time in spite of her fast schedule. 

Seven minutes late, and then Hiram heard a wild 
shriek a mile away and saw the express coming. He 
darted into the shanty, grabbed a red flag, and leaped 
out upon the track, waving it furiously. The engineer 
shut off, threw over the reverse lever, gave her sand 
and the air; and the mighty train stopped short, in a 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 169 

whirl of sand, cinders, and sparks, brakes creaking 
and passengers pitchpoling everywhere. 

"What's the matter now?" roared the engineer, 
thrusting half his body out of the cab and glaring 
down at Hiram. 

"Be yeou th' ingineer?" asked the flagman, peering 
at him with suspicion. 

"Yes, yes ! Whad-do-you want ?" 

"I want t' know whut's made ye so goldingcd late ? 
Cassidy says he wun't stand f'r it" 



During a match at St. Andrews, Scotland, a rustic 
was struck in the eye accidentally by a golf balL 
Running up to his assailant, he yelled : 

"This'll cost ye five pounds — ^five pounds !" 

"But I called out 'fore' as loudly as I could," ex- 
plained the golfer. 

"Did ye, sir?" replied the troubled one, much ap- 
peased. " Weel, I didna hear ; Til take f ower." 



Mark Twain observed once at a public dinner that 
he had written a friendly letter to Queen Victoria pro- 
testing against a tax being levied in England on his 
head, on the ground that it was a gas-works. "I don't 
know you," he wrote, "but Fve met your son. He was 
at the head of a procession in the Strand, and I was 
on a 'bus." Years afterward he met the King at 
Homburg, and they had a long talk. At parting the 
King said : "I am glad to have met you again." That 
last word troubled Mark, who asked whether the King 
had not mistaken him for some one else. The reply-— 



170 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Why, don't you remember meeting me in the Strand 
when I was at the head of a procession and you were 
on a 'bus?" revealed the strength of Royal memories. 



An Irishman and an Englishman were recounting 
feats of physical prowess. The Englishman, by way 
of showing his strength, said that he was accustomed 
to swim across the Thames three times before break- 
fast every morning. 

"Well," said the Irishman, "that may be all right, 
but it do seem to me that your clothes would be on the 
wrong side of the river all the time." 



An excess luggage porter at a large railway station 
said to a "commercial," "I see your luggage is over- 
weight, sir." "Ah ! your visionary powers are far too 
acute for me, my friend." "What did you say, sir?" 
"I say you can see too well for me." "Ah I to be sure, 

sir. I take you " "Could you see as well now if 

you had sixpence over one eye ?" "Well, I don't know, 
sir, but I'm darned well sure I couldn't see at all if I'd 
another over t'other one." 



Henry James, the American novelist, lives at Rye, 
one of the Cinque Ports, but recently he left Rye for 
a time and took a house in the country near the estate 
of a millionaire jam manufacturer, retired. This man, 
having married an earl's daughter, was ashamed of 
the trade whereby he had piled up his fortune. 

The jam manufacturer one day wrote Mr. James an 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 171 

impaident letter, vowing that it was outrageous the 
way the James servants were trespassing on his 
grounds. Mr. James wrote back: 

"Dear Sir: I am very sorry to hear that my servants 
have been poaching on your preserves. 

"P.S. — You'll excuse my mentioning your pre- 
serves, won't you ?" 



An Omaha man was taking an automobile trip 
through the ranching section of the State, and to save 
time took a short cut over a bad stretch of road, full 
of jolts and bumps. During the afternoon his machine 
broke down, and, as the monkey wrench was missing 
from his tool kit, he started on foot for the nearest 
ranch house to borrow one. On arriving he found the 
farmer repairing his fence. 

"Have you a monkey wrench about here that I can 
use?" he asked. 

"Ay tank not," replied the farmer. "Yonson in nax 
saction ha kape cattle ranch, Svenson down har ha 
kape sheep ranch. Faller bane big fool to make 
monkey ranch in dese place." 



Andrew Carnegie is fond of the Scots' national 
instrument, the bagpipe, and when he is at home at 
Skibo Castle usually has his pet piper to play for him 
at dinner. Particularly is the musician in attendance 
when the great philanthropist has guests. 

On one occasion a big company of men sat down to 
table, and the piper pranced up and down the room as 
he played. 



172 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

The whole thing was new to a French literary man, 
who politely asked the guest on his right, "Why does 
he walk up and down when he does this thing? Does 
it add to the volume of the sound, or does it make a 
cadence ?" 

"No," said the other, "I don't think it's that. I 
fancy it's to prevent the listeners getting his range with 
a knife or a water bottle." 



Some time ago Professor Brander Matthews went 
to dine at a certain dramatic club in New York. Go- 
ing to the club letter box he picked up and perused a 
letter which seemed to be addressed to him. It was a 
request from a tailor for the settlement of his little 
bill. As the man's name was quite strange to him he 
made a careful examination, and finding that he had 
been mistaken, put the missive back into its place. Im- 
mediately afterward he saw the real owner take pos- 
session of it, walk into the reading-room, read it . 
carefully, and tear it into shreds. Then, assured of an 
audience, the man whose clothes were still unpaid for, 
assumed the weary smile of an accomplished lady- 
killer and remarked audibly, "Poor, silly, little girl I" 



A STREET-CAR "masher" tried in every way to at- 
tract the attention of the pretty young girl opposite 
him. Just as he had about given up, the girl, entirely 
unconscious of what had been going on, happened to 
glance in his direction. The "masher" immediately 
took fresh courage. 

"It's cold out to-day, isn't it ?" he ventured. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 173 

The girl smiled and nodded assent, but had nothing 
to say. 

"My name is Specknoodle," he volunteered. 

"Oh, I am so sorry," she said sympathetically, as 
she left the car. 



A Jew crossing the Brooklyn Bridge met a friend 
who said, "Abe, I'll bet you ten dollars that I can tell 
you exactly what you're thinking about." 

"Veil," agreed Abe, producing a greasy bill, "I'll 
haf to take dot bet. Put up your money." 

The friend produced two fives. "Abe," he said, 
"you are thinking of going over to Brooklyn, buying a 
small stock of goods, renting a small store, taking out 
all the fire-insurance that you can possibly get, and 
then burning out. Do I win my bet ?" 

"Veil," replied Abe, "you don't egsactly vin, but the 
idea is worth de money. Take id." 



Andrew Carnegie tells a good story illustrating 
the canniness of the Scot. 

An Irish friend had insisted that a Scotchman 
should stay at his house, instead of at a hotel, and kept 
him there for a month, playing the host in detail, even 
to treating him to sundry visits to the theater, paying 
the cab fares and the rest. When the visitor was re- 
turning home, the Irishman saw him to the station, 
and they went together to have a last cigar. 

"Now, look here," said the Scot, "I'll hae nae mair 
o' this. Here ye've been keepin' me at your hoose for 
a month, an' payin' for a' the amusements and cabs 



174 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

and so on^ — I tell you I'll stan^ nae mair o' it ! We'll 
just hae a toss for this one!" 



"Uncle Joe** Cannon has a way of speaking his 
mind that is sometimes embarrassing to others. On 
one occasion an inexperienced young fellow was called 
upon to make a speech at a banquet at which Speaker 
Cannon was also present. 

"Gentlemen," began the young fellow, "my opinion 
is that the generality of mankind in general is disposed 
to take advantage of the generality of " 

"Sit down, son," interrupted "Uncle Joe." "You 
are coming out of the same hole you went in at" 



It is a well-established fact that the average school 
teacher experiences a great deal of difficulty when she 
attempts to enforce the clear pronunciation of the 
terminal "g" of each present participle. 

"Robert," said the teacher of one of the lower 
classes during the progress of a reading exercise, 
"please read the first sentence." 

A diminutive lad rose to his feet and, amid a series 
of labored gasps, breathed forth the following : 

"See the horse runnin'/' 

"Don't forget the 'g,* Robert," admonished the 
teacher. 

"Gee ! See the horse nmnin'." 



Miss Jeannette Gilder was one of the ardent en- 
thusiasts at the debut of Tetrazzini. After the first 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 175 

act she rushed to the bock of the house to greet one 
of her friends. "Don't you think she is a wonder?" 
she asked excitedly. 

"She is a great singer unquestionably," responded 
her more phlegmatic friend, "but the registers of her 
voice are not so even as, for instance, Melba's." 

"Oh, bother Melba," said Miss Gilder. "Tetraz- 
zini gives infinitely more heat from her registers." 



Walter Damrosch tells of a matron in Qiicago 
who, in company with her young nephew, was attend- 
ing a musical entertainment. 

The selections were apparently entirely unfamiliar 
to the youth; but when the "Wedding March" of 
Mendelssohn was begun he began to evince more 
interest 

"That sounds familiar," he said. "I'm not strong 
on these classical pieces, but that's a good one. What 
is it?" 

"That," gravely explained the matron, **is the 
'Maiden^s PrayerJ 



f ff 



A MESSENGER came tearing up to the White House 
in '63, and hurriedly gaining admission to Mr. Lin- 
coln, informed him in great excitement that a large 
wagon train had been surprised a short way across 
the Potomac and a brigadier-general taken prisoner. 

'Did they capture the train ?" inquired Old Abe. 

^No, sir, the regiment came up and saved it," an- 
swered the messenger, "but the general, Mr. President, 
is a prisoner." 



"] 

a- 



176 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Oh, never mind that/' said Lincoln. "I can make 
a dozen generals in a day, but mules cost $300 apiece." 



Two men were riding together one day through 
Paris. One was exceedingly bright and clever, while 
the other was correspondingly dull. As is usually the 
case, the latter monopolized the conversation. The 
talk of the dullard had become almost unendurable, 
when his companion saw a man on the street far ahead 
yawning. 

"Look," he exclaimed, "we are overheard 1" 



One afternoon Mrs. Murphy appeared at the settle- 
ment house, all dressed up in her best bonnet and shawl. 
A huge black and blue spot disfigured one side of her 
face, however, and one eye was nearly closed. "Why, 
Mrs. Murphy, what is the matter?" cried one of the 
teachers ; and then, realizing that she might have asked 
a tactless question, she hastily turned it off, by saying, 
"Well, cheer up, you might be worse off." "Sure an' 
I might," responded the indignant Mrs. Murphy. "I 
might not be married at all !" 



A YOUNG woman in Central Park overheard an old 
negress call to a piccaninny : "Come heah, Exy, Exy !" 

"Excuse me,'* but that's a queer name for a baby, 
aunty ?" 

"Dat ain't her full name," explained the old woman 
with pride; "dat's jes' de pet name I calls for short. 
Dat chile got a mighty grand name. Her ma picked 



^ 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 177 

it out in a medicine book — ^yessum, de child's full name 
is Eczema." 



Sir Richard Bethell, afterward Lord Westbury, 
with a suave voice and a stately manner, nevertheless 
had a way of bearing down the foe with almost savage 
wit. Once, in court, he had to follow a barrister who 
had delivered his remarks in very loud tones. "Now 
that the noise in court has subsided," murmured 
Bethell, "I will tell your Honor in two sentences the 
gist of the case." 



The resemblance of the Rev. Robert CoUyer to 
Henry Ward Beecher was often remarked. One day, 
when walking through Central Park, hat in hand, 
as the day was hot, at a sharp turn in the path he 
came upon an old lady seated on one of the park 
benches. At sight of him she jumped to her feet, ex- 
claiming : 

"Goodness me! This is not Mr. Beecher?" 
"No, madam," Dr. Collyer answered, "it is not. I 
hope Mr. Beecher is in a cooler place." 



It is not necessary that a lawyer should be eloquent 
to win verdicts, but he must have the tact which turns 
an apparent defeat to his own advantage. One of the 
most successful of verdict winners was Sir James 
Scarlett. His skill in turning a failure into a success 
was wonderful. In a breach-of-promise case the de- 
fendant, Scarlett's client, was alleged to have been 
cajoled into an engagement by the plaintiff's mother. 



178 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

She was a witness in behalf of her daughter, and com* 
pletely baffled Scarlett, who cross-examined her. But 
in his argument he exhibited his tact by this happy 
stroke of advocacy : "You saw, gentlemen of the jury, 
that I was but a child in her hands. What must my 
client have been?"' 



He was a young man — 2, candidate for an agri- 
cultural constituency — and he was sketching in glowing 
colors to an audience of rural voters the happy life the 
laborer would lead under an administration for the 
propagation of sweetness and light. "We have not 
yet three acres and a cow, but it will come. Old-age 
pensions are still of the future, but they will come.'* 
Similarly every item of his comprehensive program 
was endorsed by the same parrot cry. Then he went 
on to talk of prison reforms. "I have not yet person- 
ally," he said, "been inside a criminal lunatic asylum." 
Then there was a voice from the back of the hall, "But 
it will come." 



The judge had had his patience sorely tried by law- 
yers who wished to talk and by men who wished to 
evade jury service. 

"Shudge !" cried a little German in the jury box. 

"What is it?" demanded the judge. 

"I t'ink I like to go home to my wife," said the 
German. 

"You can't," retorted the judge. "Sit down." 

"But, shudge," persisted the German, "I don't t'ink 
I make a good shuror." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 179 

"You're the best in the box," said the judge. "Sit 
down." 

"What box ?" said the German. 

"Jury box," said the judge. 

"But, shudge," persisted the little German, "I don't 
speak good English." 

"You don't have to speak any at all," said the judge. 
"Sit down." 

The little German pointed at the lawyers to make 
his last desperate plea. 

"Shudge," he said, "I don't make noddings of what 
these fellers say." 

It was the judge's chance to get even for many an- 
noyances. 

"Neither can any one else," he said. "Sit down." 



A PARSON, diminutive in size and his head covered 
with hair of the most fiery hue, officiated one Sunday 
for a friend in a colliery village near Nottingham. The 
old-fashioned pulpit had a high desk over which the 
parson's red head was hardly visible. This was too 
much for a burly collier seated immediately under the 
pulpit, who when he heard the text, "I am the Light 
of the World," exclaimed to the clerk, "Push him up 
a bit higher, mate ; don't let him bum in the socket." 



"Biddy," said Pat timidly, "did ye iver think o' * 
marryin' ?*"' 

"Shure, now," said Biddy, looking demurely at her 
shoe — "shure, now, the subject has niver entered me 
mind at all, at all." 



180 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 






It's sorry Oi am/* said Pat, and he turned away. 
Wan minute, Pat," said Biddy softly. "Ye've set 
me thinkin'." 



From a French journal comes this little anecdote of 
a tutor and his royal pupil. 

The lesson was in Roman history, and the prince 
was unprepared. 

"We come now to the Emperor Caligula. What do 
you know about him, prince ?'* 

The question was followed by a silence that was be-" 
coming awkward when it was broken by the diplo- 
matic tutor. "Your highness is right," he said, 
"perfectly right. The less said about this emperor the 
better." 



The following copies of queer advertisements have 
been collected and printed by club women : 

"Bulldog for sale; will eat anything; is very fond of 
children." 

"Lost — Near Highgate Archway, an umbrella be- 
longing to a gentleman with a bent rib and a bone 
handle." 

"Mr. Brown, furrier, begs to announce that he will 
make up gowns, capes and so forth, for ladies out of 
their own skin." 

"Wanted, a herder for 500 sheep that can speak 
Spanish fluently." 

"For Sale — House in good neighborhood, by an in- 
valid lady three stories high and heated with furnace." 

A contemporary contains the startling news that "A 
carload of brick came in for a walk through the park. 



9f 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 181 

An error for which nervousness may have been r©- 
sponsible was that made by the boy who was told to 
take the Bishop's shaving water to him one morning 
and cautioned to answer the Bishop's inquiry "Who's 
there?" by saying, "The boy, my Lord." Whether, 
from nervousness or not, the boy managed to trans- 
pose the words of this sentence with ludicrous effect, 
and the Bishop was surprised and perhaps alarmed to 
hear in response to his inquiry the answer, "The Lord, 
my boy." 



Tailor — "Do you want padded shoulders, my little 
man?" 

Willie — "Naw ; pad de pants ! Dat's where I need 
it most" 



Dr. Tupper does not hesitate to take examples 
from his own profession, as witness his curious 
story of the young clergyman who, after preaching 
a funeral sermon, wished to invite the mourners 
to view the remains, but became confused and ex- 
claimed : 

"We will now pass around the bier." 



"WOSSATCHOOGOT ?" 

"Afnoonnoos. Lassdition." 
"Enthinkinnut ?" 

"Naw. Nothninnut 'cept lasspeechrosefelt's. Lot- 
tarot." 

'Donsayso ? Wosswetherpredickshun ?" 



«i 



182 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 



"Sesrain. Donbleevetho. Funthingthiswethemev- 
kintellwossgunnado/' 
"Thasrightl" 



President Euot of Harvard recently visited a 
hotel in New York, and when he left the dining-room 
the colored man in charge of the hats picked up his 
tile without hesitation and handed it to him. 

"How did you know that was my hat when you have 
a hundred there ?" asked Mr. Eliot. 

"I didn't know it, sah," said the negro. 

"Didn't know it was mine ? Then why did you give 
it to me ?" 

"Because you gave it to me, sah.*^ 



"How small have you felt?" she asked anxiously. 

"Well," he replied, "I have felt as small as a man 
in the presence of the head plumber." 

"That isn't enough." 

"I have felt as small as the Prohibition nominee for 
Vice-President." 

She shook her head. 

"Or as a man when his wife catches him in a He." 

"That isn't anything." 

"I have felt as small as the man who made a 
righteous complaint to the president of a trolley 
line." 

She shook her head again sadly. 

"That isn't anything to the way I feel," she said. 
"You know I have never been to Europe, and I've been 
talking with a girl who has just returned." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 18S 

In one of the Atlanta Sunday-schools recently the 
lesson for the day had to do with Mammon and the 
corrupting influences of great riches. 

Toward the close of the exercises the superintendent 
called upon the infant class to repeat the Golden Text, 
which had special reference to man's inability to serve 
his Creator and the money-god at one and the same 
time. The class failed to respond as it should, when 
the superintendent, noticing his own young hopeful in 
the ranks, who had that very morning been drilled 
thoroughly on the text, called on him. The response 
was immediate, though a slight departure from the 
original, for in a voice that was distinctly heard in all 
parts of the room there came the following modi- 
fication : 

"Ye can not serve God and mama !" 



"Any complaints, corporal ?" said the colonel, mak- 
ing one morning a personal inspection. 

"Yes, sir. Taste that, sir," said the corporal 
promptly. 

The colonel put the liquid to his lips. "Why,*' he 
said, "that's the best soup I ever tasted !'' 

"Yes, sir," said the corporal, "and the cook wants 
to call it coffee." 



Reporter — "To what do you attribute your great 
age?'^ 

Oldest Inhabitant — ^"I hain't sure yet, sir. There be 
several o' them patent-medicine companies as is bar- 
gainin' with me." 



184 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Mr. Choate, ex- Ambassador of the United States 
at London, tells of the address made by an Irish officer 
to his men who had just returned from a fruitless 
expedition. 

Rising to his feet with the utmost solemnity and 
seriousness, the officer said : 

"My men, I am fully aware of the fact that many 
of you brave fellows are disappointed because in this 
campaign you were afforded little opportunity to fight ; 
but, my brave boys, reflect upon this: that had there 
been any fighting, there would have been many absent 
faces here to-day!'* 



"Young man (23) with five years' experience in 
leading publishers, desires to better his position.'" 

But what better position could there be than that of 
leading our publishers? 



From Children's Chat, by "Grandma" in the 
"Times" of Natal : 

"I want you, my dears, to write me a short snake 
story, something that really happened to some one you 
know ; and if you can tell me of a child being really 
bitten I shall be glad to hear about it." 

Truly it is said that a child's best friend is his 
grandma. 



Wandering over Salisbury Plain on Whit Mon- 
day, a correspondent came across a large stone in- 
scribed: "Turn me over." After much difficulty he 
succeeded in turning it over, and found on the tmder 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 185 

side of the stone the words : "Now turn me back again, 
so that I can catch some other idiot." 



He — "Dearest, if I had known this tunnel was so 
long, I'd have given you a jolly hug." 
She— "Didn't you? Why— why— " 



Timid Lady (going up the Washington Monument 
elevator). — "Conductor, what if the rope breaks that 
holds us?" 

Conductor — "Oh, there are a number more attached 
as safety ropes." 

Timid Lady — "But if they all break, where shall 
we go?" 

Conductor — "Oh, well, m'm, that all depends upon 
what kind of a life you have been living before." 



Elmer, though only a little boy, was the oldest 
child of an already numerous family. He was in- 
vited to go in and see a little baby sister. Asked by his 
mother what he thought of the baby, he said, "W'y, 
mama, it's real nice. But do you think we needed it ?" 



Time : 2 a.m. 
"Ma, I want a drink !" 
"Hush, darling ; turn over and go to sleep." 
"I want a drink !" 

"No, you are restless. Turn over, dear, and go to 
sleep." 



186 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

(After five minutes.) "Ma, I want a drink." 

"Lie still, Ethel, and go to sleep/' 

"But 1 want a drink !" 

"No, you don't want a drink ; you had a drink just 
before you went to bed. Now be still and go right to 
sleep." 

(After five minutes.) "Ma, won't you please give 
me a drink?" 

"If you say another word I'll get up and spank you. 
Now go to sleep. You are a naughty girl." 

(After two minutes.) "Ma, when you get up to 
spank me will you give me a drink?" 



Once upon a time there was a young married man 
who had some slight bickerings with the woman of 
his choice. These having occurred with great fre- 
quency, he went to his father, who was older and much 
more married. 

"Father," he said, "is it not meet that I should be 
the ringmaster in my own wickiup ? Or must I kow- 
tow to the old lady?" 

Whereat the old man smiled wisely and said : 

"My son, yonder are a hundred chickens and here 
a fine team of horses. Do you place the feathered tribe 
on this wagon, hitch up the team, and start out 
Wherever you find a man and his wife living together, 
make diligent investigation to find out who the com- 
manding officer is, and where it is the woman give her 
a chicken. If you find a man running a house give 
him one of the horses." 

So the young man loaded up the fowls and started 
out upon his pilgrimage of self-education. And when 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 187 

he had but seven chickens left, he approached a habi- 
tation with his forlorn inquiry, to which the man 
replied : 

"I'm the ace-high cockalorum of this outfit/' 

And the wife, without fear or favor, corroborated 
the statement. Then the young man said : 

"Take your choice of the horses. Either one you 
fancy is yours.'* And after the man had walked 
around the team several times and looked in their 
mouths, he said, "Well, I'll take the bay." 

Now, the wife didn't like bay horses, and she called 
John aside, and after whispering in his ear she allowed 
him to return. 

"I guess I'll take the black horse," he said. 

"Not a bit of it," said the pilgrim. "You'll take a 
chicken." 



They were talking over the engagement of one of 
the daughters of the family when the negro servant 
came in. One of the girls asked : "Cindy, have you seen 
Edith's fiance?" "No'm, honey, hit ain't been in de 
wash yit." 



In the late financial stringency a clerk in one of the 
New York banks was trying to explain to a stolid old 
Dutchman why the bank could not pay cash to de- 
positors as formerly, and was insisting that he be 
satisfied with Clearing House checks. But the old man 
could not grasp the situation, and finally the president 
of the bank was called upon to enlighten the dissatis- 
fied customer. After a detailed explanation of the 



188 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

financial situation the president concluded, "Now, my 
good man, you understand, don't you ?" 

"Yes," dubiously replied the Dutchman, "I tinks I 
understand. It's just like this ; ven my baby vakes up 
in der night und cries for milk, I give her a milk 
ticket." 



Levinsky, despairing of his life, made an appoint- 
ment with a famous specialist. He was surprised to 
find fifteen or twenty people in the waiting-room. 

After a few minutes he leaned over to a gentleman 
near him and whispered, "Say, mine f rient, this must 
be a pretty goot doctor, ain't he?" 

"One of the best," the gentleman told him. 

Levinsky seemed to be worrying over something. 

"Veil, say," he whispered again, "he must be pretty 
exbensive, then, ain't he? Vat does he charge?" 

The stranger was annoyed by Levinsky's questions 
and answered rather shortly: "Fifty dollars for the 
first consultation and twenty-five dollars for each visit 
thereafter." 

"Mine Gott!" gasped Levinsky. "Fifty toUars the 
first time und twenty-five toUars each time after- 
wards !" 

For several minutes he seemed undecided whether to 
go or to wait. "Und twenty-five tollars each time 
afterward," he kept muttering. Finally, just as he 
was called into the office, he was seized with a brilliant 
inspiration. He rushed toward the doctor with out- 
stretched hands. 

"Hello, doctor," he said effusively. "Veil, here I 
am again." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 189 

A CLERGYMAN who WES holding a children's service 
at a Continental winter resort had occasion to catechize 
his hearers on the parable of the unjust steward. 
"What is a steward ?" he asked. A little boy who had 
arrived from England a few days before held up his 
hand. "He is a man, sir," he replied, "who brings you 
a basin." 



A TEACHER giving a lecture on the rhinoceros 
found his class was not giving him all the attention 
it should. "Now, gentlemen," he said, "if you want 
to realize the true hideous nature of this animal you 
must keep your eyes fixed on me." 



A NEGRO had made several ineffectual efforts to 
propose to the object of his affections, but on each 
occasion his courage failed him at the last moment. 
After thinking the matter over he finally decided to 
telephone, which he did. "Is that you, Samantha?" 
he inquired upon being given the proper number. 
"Yes, it's me," returned the lady. "Will you marry 
me, Samantha, and marry me quick ?" "Yes, I will," 
was the reply; "who's speaking?" 



He was a big, black, good-hearted, old negro, 
stranded near Boston, and he had decided, after con- 
siderable "cogitation," to work his way back to the 
South, where he would feel more at home. In Boston, 
in Springfield, in Hartford, in New Haven, it was 
always the same. When he rang a bell and asked for 



190 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

work and a bite to eat the answer usually was, "I'm 
very sorry, but there's not a thing to be done here 
to-day." There were occasional exceptions, of course, 
or uncle could never have got on, but the thing most 
to be counted upon was pleasing politeness coupled 
with nothing else. 

At last the old man left New York and then Phila- 
delphia behind, and one day found himself in Balti- 
more. His knowledge of geography was ml, but he 
thought he ought soon to be getting into "de Souf," 
and with that hope at heart rang the bell of a fine 
house on Charles Street. The door was opened by the 
host himself, who, after an instant's survey of the 
figure before him, blurted out: 

"Why, yo' black rascal ! How dare yo' ring 

this bell ? Get off mah steps this secon', bef o' I brek 
yo' haid !" 

" 'Deed I will, boss ; 'deed I will," came the hurried 
answer. "I wuz on'y lookin' f er a bite to eat, boss." 

"A bite to eat!" repeated the other. "An' don't 
yo' know whar to go for all yo' want? Get yo'self 
round back, an' they'll feed yo' full — ^but cyart yo' 
good-for-nuthin' black carcass off these steps, I say." 

And as uncle went around to the side door he raised 
his hands to heaven, and with tears of rejoicing run" 
ning down his furrowed cheeks, said : 

"Bress de Lord! I's back agin among mah own 
folks!" 



A LITTLE boy who had just joined Sunday-school 
was asked by his mother how he liked it. 

"Why!" exclaimed Charlie disgustedly, "they don't 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 191 

know much. The teacher asked what was the coUec', 
and I was the only one who knew." 

"And what did you say, dear?" 

"Why, I told them pretty quick that it was a pain 
in the stomach." 



Travelers' tales which often add charm to the 
conversation of an agreeable person frequently render 
a bore more tiresome than ever, a fact that was amus- 
ingly illustrated by an occurrence in a Baltimore club- 
house not long ago. 

"There I stood, gentlemen," the long-winded nar- 
rator was saying, after droning on for an hour with 
reference to his trip to Switzerland — "there I stood, 
with the abyss yawning in front of me." 

"Pardon me," hastily interjected one of the un- 
fortimate men who had been obliged to listen to the 
story, "but was that abyss yawning before you got 
there?" 



After a lesson on digestion the teacher, anxious to 
know how much her instruction had been understood, 
questioned the class. The first answer was rather 
discouraging, as the girl called upon made this start- 
ling statement: 

"Digestion begins in the mouth and ends in the big 
and little testament." 

It was the same teacher who received the following 
note: 

"Pleas teacher do not tel Mary any more about her 
incides it makes her so proud." 



192 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

When Sam Jones was holding his meetings in 
Dallas, on one occasion he said: "There's no such 
thing as a perfect man. Anybody present who has 
ever known a perfect man stand up." 

Nobody stood up. 

"Those who have ever known a perfect woman, 
stand up." 

One demure little woman stood up. 

'T)id you ever know an absolutely perfect woman ?" 
asked Sam, somewhat amazed. 

"I didn't know her personally," replied the little 
old woman, "but I have heard a great deal about her. 
She was my husband's first wife." 



Former President Scott, of the Cincinnati South- 
em Railroad, was greatly annoyed, when he first took 
hold of the road, by the claims for horses and cattle 
killed by trains on their way through Kentucky. It 
seemed as though it were not possible for a train to 
run north or south through Kentucky without killing 
either a horse or a cow. And every animal killed, how- 
ever scrawny, scrubby, or miserable it may have been 
before the accident, always figured in the claims sub- 
sequently presented as of the best blood in Kentucky. 
Well," said Scott one day, after examining a claim, 
I don't know an3rthing that improves stock in Ken- 
tucky like crossing it with a locomotive." 



ii 



One of a loving couple (watching a pile-driver at 
work) — "Dear, I feel so sorry for those poor men. 
They have been trying for the last half hour to lift 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 193 

that thing out, and every time they get it almost to 
the top, it falls back again." 



Sentinel (on guard) — ^*'Halt! Who comes 
there?" 

The Colonel— "Fool !" 

Sentinel — "Advance, fool, and give the counter- 
sign. 



"Oh, I'm so sorry I could not come to your *At 
Home' yesterday." 

"Dear me, weren't you there?" 

"Why of course I was — how very silly of me — I 
quite forgot." 



A THEOLOGICAL Student was sent one Sunday to 
supply a vacant pulpit in a Connecticut valley town. 
A few days after he received a copy of the weekly 
paper of that place with the following item marked : 

"Rev. of the senior class at Yale Seminary 

supplied the pulpit at the Congregational Church last 
Sunday, and the church will now be closed three weeks 
for repairs." 



A CERTAIN Ohio lady with a large sense of religious 
duty was recently importuned by a tramp. The good 
religionist, after considerable hesitation, produced a 
piece of dry bread which she delivered with the follow- 
ing formula, evidently prepared for such occasion: 
7— Vol. i 



194 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Now, sir, not for your sake, nor for my sake, but 
for God's sake, I give you this bread." 

The tramp accepted the offering and had got as 
far as the gate when he suddenly turned and came 
back where his benefactress was waiting to see him 
safely out. 

**Say, miss," he drawled, "not for your sake, nor 
for my sake, but for God's sake put some butter 
on It." 



"Mother, mother, mother, turn the hose on me!" 
sang little Willie, as his mama was dressing him one 
morning. 

"What do you mean ?" she asked. 

"YouVe put my stockin's on wrong side out," he 
said. 



The will of Stephen Girard provided that no 
clergyman should ever be allowed to enter the splen- 
did Girard College at Philadelphia. 

One day a very clerical looking man, with immacu- 
late white cravat and choker, approached the entrance. 

"You can't come in here," said the janitor. 

"The I can't !" said the stranger. 

"Oh," said the janitor, "excuse me. Step right in." 

It is said that the visitor was the late State Senator 
Sessions, of Western New York. 



The following anecdote of ex-President Roosevelt's 
youth is told : 

When Roosevelt was a student at Harvard he was 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 196 

required to recite a poem in public declamation. He 
got as far as a line which read: 

"When Greece her knees in suppliance bent/' 
when he stuck there. 

Again he tried : 

"When Greece her knees . . . /' but could get no 
farther. 

The teacher waited patiently, finally remarking : 

"Grease her knees again, Roosevelt, then perhaps 
she'll go." 



A YOUNG graduate in law, who had had some ex- 
perience in New York City, wrote to a prominent 
practitioner in Arkansas to inquire what chance there 
was in that section for such a one as he described 
himself to be. He said: "I am a Republican in poli- 
tics, and an honest young lawyer." The reply that 
came seemed encouraging in its interest : **If you are 
a Republican the game laws here will protect you, 
and if you are an honest lawyer you will have no 
competition." 



Brown — "Ah ! they've just dropped the anchor." 
Mrs. B. — "And served 'em right! It's been dan- 
gling outside all the morning !" 



As the immaculate young woman and the tired but 
happy-looking young man entered the Pullman, fol- 
lowed by a grinning porter, the other passengers be- 
came "wise" in a moment. The stout drummer leaned 
over to the man behind him and remarked : 



196 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Bride and groom — loo to i." 

Every one turned to view the newcomers, who 
had deposited themselves vis-a-vis in No. 4. As if 
unconscious of any scrutiny, the young man said, in 
a high, nasal voice : 

"Well, do as you like about it; either increase the 
margin or let it go. You didn't follow my advice in 
the first place, but if you want to pull out, you'd 
better do it now.*' 

"Oh, I know," the woman replied. "What's the 
use of going all over it again ?" 

"Huh!" said the stout man's companion. "Guess 
you lose. Been playing the market. Not much bride 
and groom talk in that." 

The rest of the passengers sniffed and then turned 
their backs on the new couple. Whereat the young 
man smiled at the young woman, and they softly 
joined hands as he whispered : 

"Millicent, dear, my shoes are full of rice." 



A SHORT time ago an old lady went on board Nel- 
son's flag-ship, the Victory. The different objects of 
interest were duly shown her, and on reaching the 
spot where the great naval hero was wounded (which 
is marked by a raised brass plate), the officer re- 
marked: "Here Nelson fell." "And no wonder!" ex- 
claimed the old lady ; "I nearly fell there myself." 



A GOOD Samaritan, passing an apartment-house in 
the small hours of the morning, noticed a man leaning 
limply against the doorway. 






AMONG THE HUMORISTS 197 

"What's the matter?" he asked. "Drunk?" 

"Yep." 

"Do you live in this house ?" 

"Yep." 
'Do you want me to help you upstairs ?" 

'Yep." 

With much difficulty he half dragged, half carried 
the drooping figure up the stairway to the second floor. 

"What floor do you live on?" he asked. "Is 
this it?" 

"Yep." 

Rather than face an irate wife who might, perhaps, 
take him for a companion more at fault than her 
spouse, he opened the first door he came to and pushed 
the limp figure in. 

The good Samaritan groped his way downstairs 
again. As he was passing through the vestibule he 
was able to make out the dim outlines of another man, 
apparently in worse condition than the first one. 

"What's the matter?" he asked. "Are you drunk, 
too?" 

"Yep," was the feeble reply. 

"Do you live in this house, too?" 

"Yep." 

"Shall I help you upstairs?" 

"Yep." 

Stopping on the second floor, where this man also 
said he lived, he opened the door and pushed him in. 
As he again reached the front door he discerned the 
shadow of a third man, evidently worse off than 
either of the other two. He was about to approach 
him when the object of his solicitude lurched out into 
the street and threw himself into the arms of a 



198 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

passing policeman. "For Heaven's sake, ofFcer," he 
gasped, "protect me from that man. He's done 
nothin' all night long but carry me upstairs 'n' throw 
me down th' elevator shaf '." 



Husband comes in to find his wife turning every- 
thing topsy-turvy. 

"Good gracious! Isabel, what are you doing?" 
"I just received a telegram from Aunt Jane saying 
she'll be here at 6.30 and I can't find her photograph 
anjrwhere." 



At the school at which the writer was educated 
there was a certain assistant master who invariably 
"put his foot in it" when he got the chance. On 
one occasion, being exasperated by the conduct of 
a boy, he turned to him and said, "Look here, X., I'll 
take care that you won't be the biggest fool in the 
class as long as I'm here." 



Mrs. Barron was one of the new "summer folk," 
and not acquainted with the vernacular. Conse- 
quently, she was somewhat surprised, upon sending an 
order for a roast of lamb to the nearest butcher, to 
receive the following note in reply: "Dear Mam. I 
am sorry I have not killed myself this week, but I 
can get you a leg off my brother (the butcher at the 
farther end of the town). He's full up of what you 
want. I seen him last night with five legs. Yours 
respectful. George Gimton." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS » 199 

An artist employed in repairing the properties of 
an old church in Belgium, being refused payment in 
a lump sum, was asked for details, and sent in his bill 
as follows : — 

1. Corrected the Ten Commandments . . £ i lo o 

2. Embellished Pbntius Pilate and put a ribbon in 

his bonnet . . . . . .081 

3. Put a New Tail on the Rooster of St. Peter 

and mended his Comb . . . . 12 o 

4. Re-plumed and Gilded the Left Wing of the 

Guardian Angel o 15 6 

5. Washed the Servant of the High Priest and 

put carmine on his cheek . . .010 

6. Renewed Heaven, adjusted two Stars, and 

cleaned the Moon i 16 o 

7. Re-animated the Flames of Purgatory and re- 

stored Souls 670 

8. Revived the Flames of Hell, put a New Tail 

on the Devil, mended his left hoof, and did 

several jobs for the damned , . . i 16 6 

9. Re-bordering the Robe of Herod and re-adjust- 

ing his Wig o 17 3 

10. Put new Spotted Dashes on the Son of Tobias 

and dressing on his sack . . .076 

11. Cleaned the Ears of Balaam's Ass and shod 

him 090 

12. Put Earrings in the Ears of Sarah . .092 

13. Put a New Stone in David's Sling, enlarged 

the Head of Goliath, and extended his Legs . 088 

14. Decorated Noah's Ark . . . . o 17 6 

15. Mended the Shirt of the Prodigal Son and 
cleaned his ears o 15 3 

— P. Sylvester, SummerHeld, Warham 

Road, Croydon. £ 17 10 5 



Shortly after two o'clock one bitter winter morn- 
ing a ph3rsician drove four miles in answer to a 



200 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

telephone call. On his arrival the man who had sum- 
moned him said: 

"Doctor, I ain't in any particular pain, but some- 
how or other I've got a feeling that death is nigh." 

The doctor felt the man's pulse and listened to his 
heart. 

**Have you made your will?" 

The man turned pale. 

"Why, no, doctor, at my age — oh. Doc, it ain't true 
is it? It can't be true !" 

"Who's your lawyer?" 

"Higginbotham." 

"Well, you'd better send for him at once." 

The patient, white and trembling, went to the 
'phone. 

"Who's your pastor?" continued the doctor. 

"The Rev. Kellogg M. Brown," mumbled the pa- 
tient. "But, doctor, do you think — " 

"Send for him immediately. Your father, too, 
should be summoned; also your — " 

"Say, doctor, do you really think I'm going to die?" 
The man began to blubber softly. 

The doctor looked at him hard. 

"No, I don't," he replied grimly. "There's nothing 
at all the matter with you. But I'd hate to be the 
only man you've made a fool of on a night like this." 



Dr. L. E. Wilson, a wealthy young Baltimore phy- 
sician, was awakened one stormy night by a man who 
declared the doctor's services were wanted three miles 
out in the country. Just before the doctor called up 
the stable for his horse, the visitor asked what the 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 201 

charge would be. , "Three dollars," was the reply. 
When the house containing the supposed patient was 
reached, the man alighted first, and, handing the 
doctor three dollars, remarked : "That will be all, doc- 
tor. I couldn't find a hackman who would do it for 
less than six dollars." 



A CERTAIN prosy preacher recently gave an endless 
discourse on the prophets. First he dwelt at length on 
the minor prophets. At last he finished them, and 
the congregation gave a sigh of relief. He took a 
long breath and continued : "Now I shall proceed to 
the major prophets." 

After the major prophets had received more than 
ample attention the congregation gave another sigh 
of relief. 

"Now that I have finished with the minor prophets 
and the major prophets, what about Jeremiah? 
Where is Jeremiah's place?" 

At this point a tall man arose in the back of the 
church. "Jeremiah can have my place," he said ; "I'm 
going home." 



Any one who has traveled on the New York sub- 
way in rush hours can easily appreciate the following : 

A little man, wedged into the middle of a car, sud- 
denly thought of pickpockets, and quite as suddenly 
remembered that he had some money in his overcoat. 
He plunged his hand into his pocket and was some- 
what shocked upon encountering the fist of a fat 
fellow-passenger. 



202 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 






'Aha" snorted the latter. "I caught you that time !" 
'Leggo I" snarled the little man. "Leggo my hand !" 
Tickpocket \" hissed the fat man. 
'Scoundrel!'' retorted the little one. 
Just then a tall man in their vicinity glanced up 
from his paper. 

"I'd like to get off here," he drawled, "if you fel- 
lows don't mind taking your hands out of my pocket." 



Aunt Mahaly, an old negress with a worthless 
husband, was relating her troubles to her minister. 
The usual condolences were offered by the latter and 
remedies suggested, but at each one Aunt Mahaly 
shook a doubting head — she had tried them all with- 
out avail. 

The minister sighed and pondered, and at last had 
an inspiration. He leaned to Aunt Mahaly, who 
brightened visibly. 

"Sis' Mahaly," he said, "hab you eber tried heapin' 
coals er fire on his haid ?" 

The gleam of hope faded from Aunt Mahaly's face. 

"No, Bre'r Jackson, I ain't never done dat, but I's 
tried po'in' hot water ovuh him." 



A BARBER in South Bend, having been out late the 
night before, had a shaky hand the next morning and 
cut a patron's cheek four times. After each accident 
the barber said, as he sponged away the blood : "Oh, 
dear me, how careless !" 

The patron took all these gashes in grave silence. 
But when the shave was over he filled a glass at the 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 208 

water-cooler, took a mouthful of water, and, with 
compressed lips, proceeded to shake his head from 
side to side. 

"What is the matter?" the barber asked. "You 
ain't got the toothache, have you ?'' 

"No,'' said the customer; "I only wanted to see if 
my mouth would still hold water without leaking." 



At one of the lectures by Professor George Kirch- 
wey, dean of Columbia Law College, New York, the 
students were uneasy. There was something wrong 
in the air. Books were dropped, chairs were pushed 
along the floor. There were various interruptions. 
The nerves of all were on edge. The members of 
the class kept their eyes on the clock and awaited the 
conclusion of the hour of the lecture. The clock beat 
Professor Kirchwey by perhaps a minute, but at the 
expiration of the schedule time the students started to 
their feet and prepared to leave. "Wait a minute," 
objected Professor Kirchwey; "don't go just yet. I 
have a few more pearls to cast." 



Mrs. Flint always demanded instant and unques- 
tioning obedience from her children. One afternoon 
a storm came up and she sent her son John to close 
the trapdoor leading to the roof. 

"But mother — " said John. 

"John, I told you to shut the trapdoor." 

'Yes, but, Mother—' 

John, shut that trapdoor.^ 

"All right, Mother, if you say so, but — * 



"Yes, but, Mother—" 

«T^1 -1— i. a1 A. i. A^^^ 99 

99 



204 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"John!" 

John slowly climbed the stairs and shut the trapdoor. 
The storm howled and raged. Two hours later the 
family gathered for tea. When the meal was half 
over Aunt Mary had not appeared, and Mrs. Flint 
started an investigation. She did not have to ask 
many questions ; John answered the first one : 

"Please, Mother, she is up on the roof.*' 



An absent-minded scientist, in the employ of the 
government at Washington, recently met his physician 
in the street. 

"I don't know what's the matter with me, Doctor,'' 
said the man of science. "I am limping badly to-day. 
Do you think it's locomotor ataxia ?" 

"Scarcely that," replied the physician. "You are 
walking with one foot on the curb and the other in 
the gutter." 



One Sunday John Wanamaker visited the Sunday- 
school classes in which he was greatly interested, 
and after talking the lesson over told the pupils he 
would try to answer any questions the boys or girls 
wanted to ask him. 

One little girl raised her hand, and spoke out tim- 
idly : "Will you please tell me, Mr. Wanamaker, how 
much those large French dolls are that you have in 
your show-window?" 



Judge — "Have you been arrested before?" 
Prisoner — "No, sir." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 206 

Judge — "Have you been in this court before?'* 

Prisoner — "No, sir." 

Judge — "Are you certain?'' 

Prisoner — "I am, sir." 

Judge — "But your face looks decidedly familiar. 
Where have I seen it before ?" 

Prisoner — "I'm the bartender in the saloon across 
the way, sir." 



Henry Guy Carleton, wit, journalist, and play- 
wright, has an impediment in his speech about which 
he is not in the least sensitive. Meeting Nat Gkxxiwin 
one day he asked: 

"G-g-goodwin, c-c-an you g-g-give m-m-me f-f-fif- 
teen m-m-minutes ?" 

"Certainly," replied the comedian, "what is it?" 

"I w-w-want to have f-f-five m-m-minutes' c-c-con- 
versation with you." 



A German pedler rapped timidly at the kitchen 
entrance. Mrs. Kelly, angry at being interrupted in 
her washing, flung open the door and glowered at 
him. 

"Did yez wish to see me?" she demanded in threat- 
ening tones. 

The pedler backed off a few steps. 

*^ell, if I did," he assured her with an apologetic 
grin, "I got my vish, thank you." 



A LADY from South America possessed of a decid- 
edly quick temper came to New York with a very in- 



206 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

complete knowledge of the English language. At her 
hotel she rang for the chambermaid. But a waiter 
came instead. Having ascertained that the name of 
the chambermaid was Susan, the lady marshaled her 
meager knowledge of English in a desperate effort 
to make the waiter understand that he should call 
the chambermaid. What she said to him, however, 
. was: 

"Call me Susan!" 

The waiter leaned against the wall much alarmed. 

"Call me Susan!" shouted the South American. 

The waiter became appalled. 

"Call me Susan !" roared the lady, her eyes flashing 
furiously. 

"Susan, then — if you will have it!" exclaimed the 
poor waiter. Then he fled precipitately. 



"Please^ mum," began the aged hero in appealing 
tones, as he stood at the kitchen-door on washday, 
"Fve lost my leg—" 

"Well, I ain't got it," snapped the woman, slam- 
ming the door. 



In the absence of the regularly appointed spokes- 
man, Mr. Makinbrakes had reluctantly consented to 
make a presentation speech. 

"Miss Higham," he said, "unfortunately it is my 
— er — fortunate lot to fulfill the embarrassing — ^the 
pleasant duty of — of inflicting a few remarks upon 
this occasion — which is highly appreciated, I assure 
you, and by none more so than myself, for the reason 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 207 

that — in short, as I may say, it falls to my lot to 
convey, so to speak, the assurances of — ^that is, with 
the assurances of those to whom^ — to whom I have oc- 
casion to refer to— more or less — in this connection, 
together with the best wishes, if I may so express my- 
self, of those who have clubbed together — ^who have 
associated themselves — ^not that you need anything 
of the kind, of course, but as a token of — as a token 
of — of — ^with which few remarks, Miss Higham, it 
is my — ^my pleasant surprise to hand you this gold 
watch and chain. I — I thank you." 



The reputed affinity between the Southern negro 
and unguarded poultry is the subject of a story told 
by Senator Bacon, of Georgia. An old colored man, 
nbtorious for his evil ways, after attending a revival 
meeting, desired to lead a better life. At a later meet- 
ing he was called up to be questioned. 

"Well, Rastus," said the revivalist, "I hope you are 
now trying to live a Christian life in accordance with 
the rules of the Church. Have you been stealing any 
chickens lately?" 

"No, sah ! I ain't stole no chicken ob late." 

"Any turkeys or pigs?" 

Rastus, grieved, replied : "No, sah !" 

"I am very glad to hear that you have been doing 
better lately," replied the evangelist. "Continue to 
lead a holy and Christian life, Rastus." 

After the meeting was over, Rastus drew a long 
breath of relief, and turning to his wife exclaimed : 

"Mandy, if he'd said ducks I'd been a lost nigger, 
suahl" 



208 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

The late Moses Coit Tyler, so long Professor of 
History in Cornell, was at one time a popular pro- 
fessor in the University of Michigan. One raw Feb- 
ruary morning as he was calling the roll of an 8 o'clock 
class in English, he called "Mr. Robbins," and receiv- 
ing no answer called again : "Mr. Robbins ?" Still no 
reply. "Ah," said Professor Tyler, looking around 
upon the class in his inimitable manner, "it is rather 
early for robins." 



He — "Isn't dinner ready yet?" 

She — "No, dear. I got it according to the time you 
set the clock when you came in last night, and dinner 
will be ready in four hours." 



A FOREIGNER, meeting an American friend, said to 
him, "How are you?" The latter replied, "Out of 
sight." 

The man considered this very clever, and decided to 
use the expression on the next occasion. Shortly after 
he was met by a friend, who asked, "How are you ? 
With visible pride he answered, "You don't see me. 



99 



There is a clerk in the employ of a Philadelphia 
business man who, while a fair worker, is yet an in- 
dividual of pronounced eccentricity. 

One day a wire basket fell off the top of the clerk's 
desk and scratched his cheek. Not having any court 
plaster at hand, he slapped on three two-cent postage 
stamps and continued his work. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 209 

A few minutes later he had occasion to take some 
papers to his employer's private office. When he en- 
tered, the "old man" observing the postage stamps on 
his cheek fixed him with an astonished stare. "Look 

« 

here, Jenkins !" he exclaimed. "You are carrying too 
much postage for second-class matter!" 



"I SUPPOSE," said the facetious stranger, watching 
a workman spread a carpet from the church door to 
the curb, "that's the high road to heaven you're fixing 
there ?" 

"No," replied the man; "this is merely a bridal 
path." 



"I HOPE my little Tommy has taken to heart 
mama's talk of last night about charity and useful- 
ness," said a fond mother. "How many acts of kind- 
ness has he done ? flow many hearts has my Tommy 
made grateful and glad?" 

Her Tommy replied : 

"I've done a lot of good, ma ; I gave your new hat 
to a beggar woman, and I gave the cook's shoes to 
a little girl in busted rubbers what I seen on the street, 
and I gave a poor, lame shoe-string seller pa's black 
suit, the open front one that he hardly ever wears." 



Charles Francis Adams was escorting a literary 
friend about Boston. They were viewing the different 
objects of attraction and finally came to Bunker Hill. 
They stood looking at the splendid monument when 



210 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Adams remarked : "This is the place, sir, where War- 
ren feU/' 

"Ahl" replied the Englishman, evidently not very 
familiar with American history. "Was he seriously 
hurt by his fall?" 

Mr. Adams looked at his friend. "Hurt !" said he. 
"He was killed, sir." 

"Ah, indeed," the Englishman replied, still eying 
the monument and commencing to compute its height 
in his own mind. "Well, I should think he might 
have been — falling so far." 



"Darling," said his bride," "I had a terrible feeling 
of sadness come over me this afternoon — a sort of 
feeling that you were doing something that would 
break my heart if I knew of it. Think, sweet, what 
were you doing this afternoon at four o'clock?" 

"Dearest," replied her husband, tenderly and re- 
assuringly, "at that hour I was licking stamps and 
pasting them on envelopes." 



A FEW years ago a dear old lady, who formerly 
lived in Ipswich, and was a relative of the poet Whit- 
tier, had occasion to go on a journey which necessi- 
tated a night's ride in a sleeping car. Being subject 
to attacks of acute indigestion, she took the precaution 
to place a few leaves of the commercial mustard 
plaster in her hand bag. 

During the night, pains, either real or imaginary, 
warned her of trouble and prevented sleep. Deciding 
upon the application of a plaster, she reached in the 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 211 

dark for the hand bag, and, having secured it, pro- 
ceeded to put one of the leaves where it would do the 
most good, and immediately felt comforted and en- 
joyed a refreshing sleep until morning." 

Upon removing the plaster, what was her aston- 
ishment to find that it was a $io bank note that had 
brought such speedy relief. 



Beerbohm Tree was once endeavoring to get a 
well-known actor back into his company. He invited 
the man to call and received him in his dressing room 
as he was making-up. *'How much would you want 
to come back to me?" inquired Mr. Tree, busy with 
his paint pots. The other named an exorbitant salary 
to which Tree merely retorted as he went on making 
up : "Don't slam the door when you go out, will you ?" 



"Oh, mama," she cried, rushing into her mother's 
room, and flinging her arms around her mother's 
neck, "He loves me ! He loves me !" 

"My dear child, I'm so glad! Has he told you? 
Has he asked you to be his wife ?" 

"No, but he's down in the library learning to play 
chess with papa." 



"If I had only known that this pleasure was in store 
for me," said the doctor, as he shook hands cordially 
with his wife's cousins, "I should certainly have ar- 
ranged my business so as to be home earlier." 
- "Why, pa," piped up little Tommy, "don't you re- 



212 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

member that ma told you they were coming, and you 
said, 'Oh, the devil !' " 



A MINISTER of a fashionable church had always left 
the greeting of strangers to be attended to by the 
ushers until he read some newspaper articles in refer- 
ence to the matter. 

"Suppose a representative should visit our church," 
said his wife. "Wouldn't it be awful ?" 

"It would/' the minister admitted. 

The following Sunday evening he noticed a plainly 
dressed woman in one of the free pews. She sat alone 
and was clearly not a member of the flock. After the 
benediction the minister hastened and intercepted her 
at the door. 

"How do you do?" he said, offering his hand. "I 
am very glad to have you with us." 

"Thank you," replied the young woman. 

"I hope we may see you often in our church home," 
he went on. "We are always glad to welcome new 
faces." 

Tes, sir." 

^Do you live in this parish ?" he asked. 

The girl looked blank. 

"If you will give me your address my wife and I 
will call on you some evening." 

"You wouldn't need to go far, sir," said the young 
woman. "I'm your cook." 



tr 



The mission-workers on the East Side frequently 
see the humorous as well as the sadder side of life. A 



"^ AMONG THE HUMORISTS 218 

man prominent in reform work in New York City 
recounts the experience of a certain young woman, 
new to the task, who set about posting herself as to 
conditions in a neighborhood near Avenue A. 

The ambitious missionary had entered the house of 
an Irishwoman, and had made some preliminary in- 
quiries, when she was suddenly interrupted by the 
woman, who said : 

"Say, youse is fresh at dis business, ain't youse ?'' 

The amateur in mission work blushingly admitted 
such to be the case, adding, "I have never visited you 
before, Mrs. Muldoon." 

"Thin," explained the Irishwoman, "I tell ye what 
to do. Ye sit down in that chair there, ye read me a 
short psalm, ye gives me fifty cints, an' thin ye goes." 



The following conversation was overheard during 
a hunting trip in Scotland : 

Fitz-*-"I say, are all your beaters out of the wood T* 

Keeper — "Yes, sir." 

Fitz — "Are you sure?" 

Keeper — "Yes, sir." 

Fitz — "Have you counted them?" 

Keeper — "No, sir; but I know they're all right." 

Fitz — "Then I've shot a deer!" 



Joe — "I love you; I love you. Won't you be my 
wife?" 

Jess — "You must see mama first." 

Joe — "I have seen her several times, but I love you 
just the same." 



214 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Long after the victories of Washington over the 
French and English had made his name familiar to 
all Europe, Benjamin Franklin chanced to dine with 
the English and French Ambassadors, when the fol- 
lowing toasts were drunk: 

" 'England' — ^The Sun, whose bright beams en- 
lighten and fructify the remotest comers of the 
earth." 

The French Ambassador, filled with national pride, 
but too polite to dispute the previous toast, offered 
the following: 

" 'France' — The Moon, whose mild, steady and 
cheering rays are the delight of all nations, consoling 
them in darkness and making their dreariness beau- 
tiful/' 

Doctor Franklin then arose, and, with his usual 
dignified simplicity, said : 

" 'George Washington' — The Joshua who com- 
manded the Sun and Moon to stand still, and they 
obeyed him." 



The following appeal of a Western editor is still 
going the rounds, although it is to be hoped that by 
this time the writer's only trouWe is in having his vest 
made large enough : 

"We see by an esteemed contemporary that a young 
lady in Chicago is so particular that she kneads bread 
with her gloves on. What of that? The editor of this 
paper needs bread with his coat on; he needs bread 
with his trousers on ; in fact he needs bread with all of 
his clothes on. And if some of his debtors don't pay 
up pretty quick he'll need bread without anything at all 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 215 

on, and this Western climate is no Garden of 
Eden." - 



The unconscious humors of country journalism, 
says William Allen White, are often more amusing 
than the best efforts of the alleged "funny man/' 

According to Mr. White there once appeared in a 
Kansas paper the following "personal notice" : 

"Our prominent townsman Theodore Monkton is 
seriously ill. He is being attended twice a day by 
Doctor Smith, in consultation with Doctor Morgan. 
His recovery, therefore, is in great doubt." 



A CROWD of small boys were gathered about the en- 
trance of a circus tent in one of the small cities in 
New Hampshire one day, trying to get a glimpse of 
the interior. A man* standing near watched them 
for a few moments, then walking up to the ticket- 
taker he said : 

"Let all these boys in, and count them as they pass." 

The man did as requested, and when the last one had 
gone, he turned and said, "Twenty-eight." 

"Good !" said the man, "I guessed just right," and 
walked off. 



The editor of a rural newspaper determined to 
adopt the idea of posting bulletins on a bulletin board 
for all important events that happened in the town. 
Soon afterward he was told one morning by the local 
physician that Deacon Jones was seriously ill. The 
deacon was a man of some distinction in the com- 



216 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

munity, so the editor posted a series of bulletins as 
follows : 

ID A. M. — Deacon Jones no better. 

II A. M. — ^Deacon Jones has relapse. 

12.30 p. M. — Deacon Jones weaker. Pulse failing. 

I p. M. — Deacon Jones has slight rally. 

2.15 p. M. — ^Deacon Jones's family has been sum- 
moned. 

3.10 p. M. — Deacon Jones has died and gone to 
heaven. 

Later in the afternoon a traveling salesman hap- 
pened by, stopped to read the bulletins, and going to 
the bulletin board, made another report concerning 
the deceased. It was : 

4.10 p. M. — Great excitement in heaven. Deacon 
Jones has not yet arrived. 



A GROUP of drummers were trading yams on the 
subject of hospitality, when one, a little Virginian with 
humorous eyes and a delightful drawl, took up his 
parable thus : 

"I was down in Louisiana last month, travelin' 'cross 
country with a friend, when we kinder got lost in a 
mighty lonesome sort of road just about dark. We 
rode along a right good piece after sundown, and when 
we saw a light ahead, I tell you it looked first-rate. 
We drove up to the light, finding 'twas a house, and 
when I hollered like a lost calf the man came out and 
we asked him to take us in for the night. He looked 
at us mighty hard, then said : 

" 'Wal, I reckon I kin stand it if you kin.' 

"So we went in and found 'twas only a two-room 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 217 

shanty, just swarmin' with children. He had six, 
from four to eleven years old ; as there didn't seem to 
be but one bed, me an' Stony wondered what in thun- 
der would become of us. 

"They gave us supper, good hog and hominy, the 
best they had, and then the old woman put the two 
youngest kids to bed. They went straight to sleep. 
Then she took those out, laid them over in the comer, 
put the next two to bed, and so on. 

"After all the children were asleep on the floor the 
old folk went in the other room and told us we could 
go to bed if we wanted to, and bein' powerful tired out, 
we did. 

"Well, sir, the next morning when we woke up we 
were lying over in the corner with the kids, and the 
old man and the old woman had the bed." 



"Waiter, what have you got?" said May Irwin in 
one of her plays. 

"Well, I've got pig's feet—" 

"Never mind telling me your troubles, I want to 
know what you've got to eat?" 



As every one knows, the great yon Moltke 
never wasted words and despised anything that ap- 
proached garrulity in others. German army officers 
are fond of telling an anecdote illustrative of this 
peculiarity : 

Von Moltke was leaving Berlin on a railway jour- 
ney. Just before the train pulled out of the station a 
captain of hussars entered the general's compartment 



218 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

and, recognizing him, saluted with "Guten Morgen, 
Excellenz I" 

Two hours later the train slowed up at a way 
station. The captain arose, saluted, and with another 
"Guten Morgen, Excellenz !" left the train. 

Turning to one of his companions, Von Moltke 
said, with an expression of the greatest disgust, "In- 
tolerable gas-bag!" 



A GENTLEMAN gavc a large dinner party in Dublin 
once and invited Mr. O'Connor, one of the wittiest 
men in the Emerald Isle, to amuse and divert his 
guests. Mr. O'Connor accepted the invitation with 
pleasure. But from the beginning to the end of 
dinner he preserved a solemn and serious face. The 
host thought this very strange, and just before rising 
from the table remarked to him jestingly, "Why, 
O'Connor, old fellow, I don't believe the biggest fool 
in Ireland could make you laugh to-night." Where- 
upon his guest answered in a solemn tone, speaking 
his first word that evening, "Try." 



Governor Guild of Massachusetts, who served 
in the Spanish War, tells a story of a New York 
regiment, many of whose members were recruited 
on the East Side. They were spoiling for a fight, 
and it became necessary to post a sentry to preserve 
order. 

A big husky Bowery recruit, of pugilistic propen- 
sities, was put on guard outside, and given special 
orders to see that quiet reigned, and above all things. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 219 

if trouble came his way, not to lose possession of his 
rifle. 

Soon a general row began, growing in proportions 
as the minutes passed. The soldier walked his post 
nervously, without interrupting, until the corpord of 
the guard appeared on the scene with reenforcements. 

"Why didn't you stop this row?" shouted the cor- 
poral. 

The sentry, balancing his rifle on his shoulder, 
raised his arms to the correct boxing position, and 
replied : 

"Sure, phwat could I do wid this gun in me hands !" 



A New Jersey man recently reached the conclusion 
that his eight-year-old boy is a trifle too bright. 

At dinner one evening the father had been enter- 
taining a number of friends from Philadelphia with 
a funny story. This was at dessert. The youngster 
had been very quiet throughout the previous courses ; 
but here he arose to the occasion in fine style. 

When the laughter induced by his father's humor 
had ceased, the boy, with a fine affectation of delight, 
said: 

"Now, dad, do tell the other one !" 



The June bride frowned. 

"These tomatoes," she said, "are just twice as dear 
as those across the street. Why is it?" 

"Ah, ma'am, these" — and the grocer smiled — 
"these are hand-picked." 

She blushed. 



220 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Of course," she said, hastily; "I might have 
known. Give me a bushel, please." 



Mistress — "Jane, I saw the milkman kiss you this 
morning. In the future I will take the milk in." 

Jane — "'Twouldn't be no use, mum. He's prom- 
ised never to kiss anybody but me." 



Not long ago a man was charged with shooting 
a number of pigeons, the property of a farmer. In 
giving his evidence the farmer was exceedingly care- 
ful, even nervous, and the solicitor for the defense 
endeavored to frighten him. "Now," he remarked, 
"are you prepared to swear that this man shot your 
pigeons?" "I didn't say he did shoot 'em," was the 
reply. "I said I suspected him o' doing it." "Ah! 
now we're coming to it. What made you suspect that 
man?" "Well, firstly, I caught him on my land wi' 
a gun. Secondly, I heerd a gun go off an' saw some 
pigeons fall. Thirdly, I found four o' my pigeons in 
his pocket — an' I don't think them birds flew there 
and committed suicide." 



"Mama, can't I go up to the next block and play 
with the Jones boys ?" asked Henry, a boy of six, who 
was being brought up very carefully. 

"No, indeed!" answered his mother. "They are 
very bad boys." 

"Then can't I go over to see Mrs. Smith's little 
girls?" 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 221 

*'No, Henry; I'm afraid to let you go." 

The little fellow left the room; later, he stuck his 

head inside with, "Say, mama, I'm going over next 

door an' play with the dc^." 



The Right Reverend Chauncey B. Brewster, D.D., 
Bishop of Connecticut, tells a story which he says 
is Mrs. Brewster's favorite. It seems the Bishop 
had caught a small boy stealing apples in his 
orchard; so, after reproving him severely for some 
time, he said, "And now, my boy, do you know why 
I tell you all this? There is One before whom even 
I am a crawling worm; do you know who?" 

"Sure," replied the boy, promptly ; "the missus." 



A BISHOP was once traveling third-class on a branch 
line in Devonshire, England. At one of the stations 
a countryman got in. After gazing at the Bishop's 
attire in a puzzled manner for some time, he ventured 
the remark, "Be you a curate, sir?" 

"Well," said the Bishop meditatively, "I was once." 
"A-ah," said the rustic, a comprehensive smile over- 
spreading his face, "the drink, I suppose?" 



A CELEBRATED parsou prcachcd a rather long ser- 
mon from the text "Thou art weighed and found 
wanting." After the congregation had listened about 
an hour, some began to get weary and went out; 
others soon followed, greatly to the annoyance of the 
minister. Another person was about to retire when 



222 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

the minister stopped his sermon and said: "That's 
right, gentlemen; as fast as you are weighed, pass 
out" 



"Here, hold my horse a minute, will you ?" 
"Sir! I'm a Member of Congress!" 
"Never mind. You look honest. I'll take 
chance." 



A RED-FACED man was holding the attention of a 
little group with some wonderful recitals. 

"The most exciting chase I ever had," he said, "hai>- 
pened a few years ago in Russia. One night, when 
sleighing about ten miles from my destination I dis- 
covered, to my intense horror, that I was being fol- 
lowed by a pack of wolves. I fired blindly into the 
pack, killing one of the brutes, and to my delight saw 
the others stop to devour it. After doing this, how- 
ever, they still came on. I kept on repeating the dose, 
with the same result, and each occasion gave me 
an opportunity to whip up my horse. Finally there 
was only one wolf left, yet on it came, with its 
fierce eyes glowing in anticipation of a good, hot 
supper." 

Here the man who had been sitting in the comer 
burst forth into a fit of laughter. 

"Why, man," said he, "by your way of reckoning 
that last wolf must have had the rest of the pack 
inside him I" 

"Ah!" said the red-faced man without a tremor, 
"now I remember, it did wobble a bit" 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 228 

Frederic Remington, the illustrator, fresh from 
a Western trip on which he had been making studies 
of Indians and cowpunchers and things outdoors, met 
an art editor who insisted upon dragging him up to 
an exhibition of very impressionistic pictures. 

"You don't seem enthusiastic," remarked the editor 
as they were coming out. "Didn't you like them?" 

Remington, remembering what he had been told as 
a boy, counted ten before replying. Then: 

"Like 'em? Say! I've got two maiden aunts in 
New Rochelle that can knit better pictures than those !" 



The wife of General S. was doing some shopping 
one morning recently when, coming out of a store, she 
noticed a small country wagon draw up to the curb. 
In it sat a woman whom the lady recognized as a for- 
mer servant in the family who had lost her husband 
some two or three years before. The woman was clad 
in deep mourning which had an air of newness about 
it. Mrs. S. hastened to greet the woman. "How is 
this, Bridget. I hope you haven't met with any recent 
bereavement ?" 

"No, mem, not so racent — it's for poor Mike. I 
alius said when I could I would — ^and so I cemr 



Those who know a certain Southern Senator will 
picture his ample proportions when they read this 
story: 

While journeying through the South, he was very 
much annoyed one day at the delay in getting food 
served in a certain cafe. He had given his order, and 



224 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

waited impatiently an unreasonable length of time, 
when the waiter appeared and was evidently looking 
for some one who must have gone out without waiting 
for his meal. 

When asked by the Senator whom he was looking 
for he replied. 

"A little boy who gave his order." 
The Senator replied : "I am that boy." 



Jack's mother had been walking up and down the 
piazza with him repeating Mother Goose. She began 
the "Solomon Grundy" one, going through it rapidly 
without taking breath, ending laughingly : 

"Worse on Friday, 
Died on Saturday, 
Buried on Sunday, 
And that was the end 
Of Solomon Grundy." 

Jack took his thumb out of his mouth, looked re- 
provingly at his mother and said : 
"Don't laugh, mama : that's awful/' 



"I'm a terror, I be," announced the new arrival in 

Frozen Dog to one of the men behind the bar. 

"Be ye?" 

"Take three men to handle me, once I get started," 

he went on. 

• •••••••• 

"Oh, well," he remarked, as he arose painfully and 
dusted off his clothes, "of course, if ye're short- 
handed, I suppose two kin do it on a pinch." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 226 

David B. Hill, former Governor of and Senator 
from New York, has a secluded hatter somewhere in 
the State who makes his high hats after elaborate 
plans drawn by Mr. Hill many years ago, and not 
changed since. 

One night Governor Odell, of New York, was giv- 
ing a reception in Albany, and President Roosevelt, 
then elected Vice-President, met Mr. Hill on the steps 
of the New York Executive mansion. 

Roosevelt wore a black rough-rider hat and Hill 
had one of his peculiar sky-pieces. 

"Senator,'' said Roosevelt, "you should wear a hat 
like this one that I have on. They are much easier on 
the head, preserve the hair and are altogether better 
than silk ones." 

Mr. Hill looked at the coming Vice-President. "My 
dear sir," he said, "I haven't worn a hat like that since 
I went out of the show business." 



A NEGRESS was brought before a magistrate charged 
with cruelly treating her child. Evidence was clear 
that she had severely beaten the youngster, who was 
in court to exhibit his marks and bruises. Before im- 
posing sentence the magistrate asked the woman if she 
had anything to say. "Kin Ah ask yo' honah a ques- 
tion?" His honor nodded. "Well, yo' honah, I'd 
like to ask yo' whether yo' was ever the father of a 
puffectly wuthless culled chile?" 



A MEMBER of an eminent St. Louis law firm went 
to Chicago to consult a client. When he arrived he 
&— Vol. I 



826 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

found that he had unaccountably forgotten the client^s 
name. He telegraphed his partner, "What is our 
client's name?" The answer read, "Brown, Walter E. 
Yours is Allen, William B." 



A TRAVELING man stopped at an Indiana hotel. 
The proprietor told him he had not a room in the 
house. The man said he must have a room. Finally 
the proprietor told him there was a roc«n, a little room 
separated by a thin partition from a nervous man who 
had lived in the house for ten years. 

"He is so nervous," said the landlord, "I don't dare 
put any one in that room. The least noise might give 
him a nervous spell that would endanger his life." 

"Oh, give me a room," said the traveler. "I'll be 
so quiet he'll not know I'm there." 

The room was given the traveler. He slipped in 
noiselessly and began to disrobe. He took off one 
article of clothing after another as quietly as a burglar. 
At last he came to his shoes. He unlaced a shoe and 
dropped it. 

The shoe fell to the floor with a great noise. The 
offending traveler, horrified at what he had done, 
waited to hear from the nervous man. Not a soimd. 
He took off the second shoe and placed it noiselessly 
upon the floor; then in absolute silence finished un- 
dressing and crawled between the sheets. 

Half an hour went by. He had dropped into a doze 
when there came a tremendous knocking on the par- 
tition. 

The traveler sat up in bed trembling and dismayed. 
"Wh-wha-what's the matter?" he asked. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 227 

Then came the voice of the nervous man : 
"Hang you ! Drop that other shoe, will you ?" 



There was once an Irishman, who sought employ- 
ment as a diver, bringing with him his native enthusi- 
asm and a certain amount of experience. Although 
he had never been beneath the water, he had crossed 
an ocean of one variety and swallowed nearly an ocean 
of another. But he had the Hiberniaii smile, which is 
convincing, and the firm chanced to need a new man. 
And so on the following Monday morning Pat hid his 
smile for the first time in a diving helmet. 

Now, the job upon which the crew to which Pat had 
attached himself was working in comparatively shal- 
low water, and Pat was provided with a pick and told 
to use it on a ledge below in a manner with which he 
was already familiar. 

Down he went with his pick, and for about fifteen 
minutes nothing was heard from him. Then came a 
strong, determined, deliberate pull on the signal rope, 
indicating that Pat had a very decided wish to come 
to the top. The assistants pulled him hastily to the raft 
and removed his hebnet 

"Take off the rest of it," said Pat. 

"Takeoff the rest of it?" 

"Yis,*' said Pat, "Oill worruk no longer in a dark 
place where Oi can't spit on me hands.'* 



On the first day that a young man began his duties 
as reporter on a popular paper a report came from a 
near-by town that there was a terrible fire raging. The 



228 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

editor of the paper immediately sent the new reporter 
to the place, and, upon arriving there, he found that 
the firemen were unable to get control of the fire, so 
he sent this telegram to the editor : "Fire still raging. 
What shall I do?" The editor was so mad that he 
wired back at once: "Find out where the fire is the 
hottest and jump in." 



"One day," related Denny to his friend Jerry, 
"when Oi had wandered too far inland on me shore 
leave Oi suddenly found thot there was a great big 
haythen, tin feet tall, chasin' me wid a knife as long 
as yer ar-rm. Oi took to me heels an' for fifty miles 
along the road we had it nip an* tuck. Thin Oi turned 
into the woods an' we run for one hundhred an' twinty 
miles more, wid him gainin' on me steadily, owin' to 
his knowledge of the counthry. Finally, just as Oi 
could feel his hot breath burnin' on the back of me 
neck, we came to a big lake. Wid one great leap Oi 
landed safe on the opposite shore, leavin' me pursuer 
confounded and impotent wid rage." 

"Faith an' thot was no great jump," commented 
Jerry, "considerin' the runnin' sthart ye had." 



Quite recently an old friend of the Browns went to 
see them at their new country home. As he ap- 
proached the house a large dog ran out to the gate 
and began barking at him through the fence. 

As he hesitated about opening the gate, Brown's 
wife came to the door and exclaimed : "How do you 
do ! Come right in. Don't mind the dog."' 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 229 

"But won't he bite ?" exclaimed the friend, not anx- 
ious to meet the canine without some assurance of his 
personal safety. 

"That's just what I want to find out," exclaimed! 
Mrs. Brown. "I just bought him this morning." 



The late Julian Ralph, one of the most gifted! 
newspaper men of his generation, while being shaved 
one day, was forced to listen to many of the barber's 
anecdotes. 

Stopping to strop his razor, and prepared, with 
brush in hand to recommence, he said, "Shall I go 
over it again?" 

"No, thanks," drawled Ralph, "It's hardly neces- 
sary. I think I can remember every word." 



The following is a typical Ian Maclaren story : 

"Who had this place last year?" asked a Southern 
shooting tenant of his keeper. 

"Well," said Donald, "I'm not denyin' that he wass 
an Englishman, but he wass a good man whatever. 
Oh, yess, he went to kirk and he shot very well, but 
he wass narrow, very narrow." 

"Narrow," said the other in amazement, for he sup- 
posed he meant bigoted, and the charge was generally 
the other way about. "What was he narrow in ?" 

"Well," said Donald, "I will be tellin' you, and it 
wass this way. The twelfth [the beginning of the 
grouse shooting] wass a very good day, and we had 
fifty-two brace. But it wass warm, oh! yess, very 
warm, and when we came back to the Lodge, the gen- 



280 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

tleman will say to me, *It is warm/ and I will not be 
contradicting him. Then he will be saying, 'Maybe 
you are thirsty,' and I will not be contradicting him. 
Afterwards he will take out his flask and be speaking 
about a dram. I will not be contradicting him, but will 
just say, 'Toots, toots.'' Then he will be pouring it out, 
and when the glass wass maybe half-full I will say, 
just for politeness, 'Stop.' And he stopped. Oh ! yess, 
a very narrow man." 



Mark Twain as a humorist is no respecter of per- 
sons, and a story is told of him and Bishop Doane 
which is worth repeating. It occurred when Mark 
Twain was living in Hartford, where Mr. Doane was 
then rector of an Episcopal church. Twain had lis- 
tened to one of the doctor's best sermons, on Sunday 
morning, when he approached him and said politely: 
"I have enjoyed your sermon this morning. I wel- 
comed it as I would an old friend. I have a book in 
my library that contains every word of it." "Im- 
possible, sir," replied the rector, indignantly. "Not 
at all. I assure you it is true,*^' said Twain. "Then 
I shall trouble you to send me that book," rejoined the 
rector with dignity. The next morning Dr. Doane 
received, with Mark Twain's compliments, a dic- 
tionary. 



A FRIEND of Mark Twain's tells of an amusing inci- 
dent in connection with the first meeting between the 
humorist and the late James McNeil Whistler, the 
artist. 

The friend having facetiously warned Clemens that 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 281 

the painter was a confinned joker, Mark solemnly 
averred that he would get the better of Whistler should 
the latter attempt "any fimny business." Further- 
more, Twain determined to anticipate Whistler, if 
possible. 

So, when the two had been introduced, which event 
took place in Whistler's studio, Clemens, assuming an 
air of hopeless stupidity, approached a just-completed 
painting, and said: 

"Not at all bad, Mr. Whistler, not at all bad. Only," 
he added, reflectively, with a motion as if to rub out a 
cloud effect, "if I were you I'd do away with that 
cloud." 

"Great Heavens, sir!" exclaimed Whistler, almost 
beside himself. "Do be careful not to touch that ; the 
paint is not yet dry !" 

"Oh, I don't mind that," responded Twain, with an 
air of perfect nonchalance; "I am wearing gloves." 



This is a story of Italian revenge. A vender of 
plaster statuettes saw a chance for a sale in a well- 
dressed, bibulous man who was tacking down the 
street. 

"You buy-a de statuette ?" he asked, alluringly hold- 
ing out his choicest offering. "Gar-r-ribaldi — I sell-a 
him verra cheep. De gr-reat-a Gar-r-ribaldi— only 
thirta cents !" 

"Oh, t'ell with Garibaldi," said the bibulous one, 
making a swipe with his arm that sent Garibaldi crash- 
ing to the sidewalk. 

For a moment the Italian regarded the fragments. 
Then, his eyes flashing fire, he seized from his stock 



282 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

a statuette of George Washington. "You t'ell-a with 
my Gar-r-ribaldi ?" he hissed between his teeth. "So." 
He raised the immortal George high above his head 
and — crash ! it flew into fragments alongside of the 
ill-fated Garibaldi. "Ha! I to hell-a wid your 
George-a Wash ! Ha, ha !'' 



Patrick arrived home much the worse for wear. 
One eye was closed, his nose was broken, and his face 
looked as though it had been stung by bees. 

"Glory be !" exclaimed his wife. 

"Thot Dutchman Schwartzheimer — 'twas him,''' ex- 
plained Patrick. 

"Shame on ye !" exploded his wife without sympa- 
thy. "A big shpalpeen the loikes of you to get bate 
up by a little omadhoun of a Dootchman the size of 
him I Why—" 

"Whist, Nora," said Patrick, "don't spake disre- 
spectfully of the dead !" 



One day a teacher in a kindergarten school in New 
York, preparatory to giving out an exercise said, 
"Now children I want you all to be very quiet, so quiet 
that you could hear a pin drop." Everything had 
quieted down nicely and the teacher was about to 
speak when a little voice in the rear of the room said, 
"Go ahead, teacher, and let her drop." 



It appears that the late Senator John T. Morgan, 
who was quite near-sighted, while at dessert one even- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 233 

ing in a hotel at Hot Springs, Virginia, experienced 
considerable difficulty in separating from the plate 
passed him by the colored waiter what he thought was 
a chocolate eclair. It stuck fast, so Senator Morgan 
pushed his fork quite under it, and tried again and 
again to pry it up. 

Suddenly he became aware that his friends at the 
table were convulsed with laughter, which much mysti- 
fied him. But his surprise was even greater when the 
waiter quietly remarked: 

"Pardon me. Senator, but that's my thumb!" 



A DOCTOR named Brown had been the adorer for 
many years of a Miss White. Unluckily his ardent 
love was not reciprocated. He had a reputation for 
ready wit and did not allow even his unfortunate love 
affair to stand in the way of his exercising it. One 
night over a glass of wine in the club the good doctor 
frequented a wag remarked, "What do you say, doc- 
tor, to my giving the toast of Miss White, your old 
flame ?" "You may, and you'll not do any harm either 
to her or to me by toasting her as often as you please, 
for I've toasted her all these years and there are still 
no S)miptoms of her turning Brown." 



Minister (who struggles to exist on $600 a year 
with wife and six children) — "We are giving up meat 
as a little experiment, Mrs. Dasher." 

Wealthy parishioner — "Oh, yes! One can live so 
well on fish, poultry, game, and plenty of nourishing 



wines." 



284 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

A WOMAN who traveled a great deal in the West 
was known as the most inveterate "kicker" a certain 
hotel had ever known. 

One evening after she had been served with dessert 
this lady, who was always complaining, asked the 
waiter why the dish served her was called "ice-cream 
pudding." 

"If you don't like it, ma'am, I'll bring you some- 
thing else," suggested the polite negro. 

"Oh, it's very nice," responded the lady. "What I 
object to is that it should be called ice-cream pudding. 
It's wrongly named. There should be ice cream served 
with it." 

"Yes, ma'am," replied the waiter, "but that's jest 
our name for it. Lots o' dishes that way. Dey don't 
bring you a cottage with cottage pudding, you know.*' 



During a certain cruise the first mate of a ship got 
to drinking to excess and was intoxicated for several 
days. One day, after having come out of this state, 
he examined the log book to see what had passed dur- 
ing his period of semi-f orgetf ulness. He was horrified 
to find entered in the book for the three days consecu- 
tively, "The first mate is drunk to-day." He did not 
want this to stand as it would hardly be a good recom- 
mendation for him to the ship owners and asked the 
captain to remove the entries. 

The captain replied, "It is the truth, is it not?" 
"Yes, but — " replied the mate. The captain inter- 
rupted him, "If it is the truth, the truth must stand. It 
is written in ink and can not be removed without in- 
juring the book." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 285 

A short time afterward the captain was taken ill and 
remained so for a week, and it devolved upon the mate 
to keep the log book. The captain on recovering from 
his illness got the book to examine it to see how the 
mate had done his duty. Imagine his consternation 
when he read in each of the seven days' entries, "The 
captain is sober to-day." 

The captain immediately called the mate and indig- 
nantly questioned him in regard to these entries. The 
mate replied, "It is the truth, is it not ?'* "Yes, but — " 
replied the captain. The mate interrupted him, "If it 
is the truth, the truth must stand, must it not ? I have 
your word that the writing in ink can not be erased." 



"It was the first week of his honeymoon," said the 
hotel barber, "and he came in and sat down near the 
door to wait his turn. I yelled 'Next' at him two or 
three times when my chair was vacant, but he was 
dreaming and didn't hear me. Finally I touched him 
on the shoulder and told him I was ready for him. 
What do you want me to do?' he asked. 
Why, get in the chair if you want anything,' I 
replied. 'This is a barber shop.' 

" 'Oh, yes,' he said, and then he got into the chair. 
He leaned back, so I let the chair down and shaved 
him. He didn't have a word to say. When I finished 
him up he got out of the chair and took the check over 
to the cashier. He paid and started out. When half- 
way through the door he stopped. 

" 'Say,' he said to me, 'what did you do to me ?' 

" 'I shaved you,' I said. 

" 'Darn the luck,' he replied, 'I wanted a haircut' *' 






236 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

The little daughter of a homeopathic physician re- 
ceived a ring with a pearl in it on the Christmas tree. 
Two days later she poked her head tearfully in at the 
door of her father's office. 

"Papa," she sobbed, "Papa, I've lost the little pill 
out of my ring." 



He was from Pittsburg, Pa., and was stopping at 
the Manhattan Hotel. He wanted to telephone to a 
town about thirty miles away. He asked the girl on 
the switchboard to get him long-distance, and followed 
it up with asking the price. 

"It will cost you 50 cents for three minutes," she 
said sweetly. 

"Fifty cents ! Ye gods !" cried the man. "I don't 
want to buy stock in the telephone company. I only 
want to talk a minute or so. Why-^why — out in 
Pittsburg we can call up all Hades for 50 cents!" 

"Yes, I know, sir," replied the girl, "but isn't that 
within your city limits?" 



General St. Clair Mulholland, veteran and 
historian of the civil war, tells an incident showing the 
utter worthlessness of Confederate paper money at the 
close of the war. "Shortly after Lee's surrender,'" 
says the General, "I was a short distance from Rich- 
mond. The Confederate soldiers were going home to 
become men of peace again and were thinking about 
their farms. One had a lame, broken-down horse 
which he viewed with pride. 'Wish I had him, Jim,' 
said the other. 'What'U you take for him? I'll give 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 237 

you $20,000 for him.' 'No/ said Jim. 'Give you $50,- 
000.' *No/ said Jim. 'Give you $100,000/ his friend 
said. 'Not much,'' replied Jim, 'I just gave $120,000 to 
have him shod.' " 



The Magistrate — "You seem to have committed 
a very grave assault on the defendant just because he 
differed from you in an argument." 

The Defendant — "There was no help for it, your 
worship. The man is a perfect idiot." 

The Magistrate — "Well, you must pay a fine of 50 
francs and costs, and in future you should try and un- 
derstand that idiots are human beings, the same as you 
and I." 



Sentimental Young Lady — "Ah Professor ! what 
would this old oak say if it could talk ?" 
Professor — "It would say, 'I am an elm.' " 



"You needn't begin jollying me," said the gruff man 
to the man who had land to sell. "I'm not a man that 
can be affected by flattery. When I — " 

"That's just what I said to my boss," interrupted 
the agent. "I told him, when he suggested your name 
to me, that it was a relief to call on a man who did not 
expect to be praised and flattered to his face all the 
time. I tell you, Mr. Grump, this city has mighty few 
men such as you. Nine men out of ten are simply 
dying to have some one tell them how g^eat they are, 
but you are above such weakness. Any one can see 
that at a glance. I'm glad of it It's helpful to me to 



288 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

meet a man who rises superior to the petty tactics of 
the average solicitor. It's a real and lasting benefit, 
and an instructive experience." 

Ten minutes later, after a few more such comments 
on the part of the agent, the man who could not be 
flattered into signing the contract was asking which 
line his name should be written upon. 



Billy Martin, aged four, came to his mother and 
in great ecstasy exclaimed, "Oh, mother! Louise and 
Carberry found such a nice dead cat, and they are 
going to have a funeral, and can I go?" Permission 
was given, and when Billy returned he was questioned 
as to the outcome of the funeral. 
They did not have it at all." 

'And why not?" 

"Mother," was the answer, "the cat was too dead." 






The late H. C. Bunner when editor of "Puck," once 
received a letter accompanying a number of would-be 
jokes in which the writer asked : "What will you give 
me for these ?" "Ten yards start," was Bunner's gen- 
erous offer, written beneath the query. 



, One day Riley was riding on top of a 'bus in Lon- 
don with his friend Casey. He was nearly worn out 
with several hours' sight-seeing and the bustle and 
excitement of the London street, the hoi poUoi, the 
Billingsgate and the din and rattle were becoming 
almost unbearable when they came in sight of West* 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 289 

minster Abbey. Just as they did so, the chimes burst 
forth in joyous melody, and he said to Casey, "Isn't it 
sublime ? Isn't it glorious to hear those chimes pealing 
and doesn't it inspire one with renewed vigor ?" Casey 
leaned over, with hand to his ear, and said, "You'll 
have to speak a little louder, Riley; I can't hear you." 
Riley continued, "Those magnificent chimes. Do you 
not hear them pealing? Do they not imbue you with 
a feeling of almost reverence? Do they not awaken 
tender memories of the past?" Casey again leaned 
forward and said, "I can't hear you. You'H have to 
speak louder." Riley got as close to him as possible 
and said, "Do you not hear the melodious pealing of 
the chimes? Do they not recall the salutation of old 
Trinity on a Sabbath morning? Do- they not take 
you back into the dim vistas of the past when the 
world was young, and touch your heart with a feeling 
of pathos ?" Casey put his mouth close to Riley^s ear 
and said, "Those d — bells are making such a racket, 
Riley, that I can't hear you." 



Four grinning urchins sat on the street curb eulo- 
gizing ex-President Roosevelt. 

"Say, dat guy Roosevelt '11 fight at de drop of de 
hat!" declared one youngster. "I read dat durin* a 
talk at de White House one of de party said somethin' 
the President wouldn' stan' for an' he leans over an 
gets de guy's ear!" 



"Have you ever had any experience in canvassing 
for subscription books ?" asked the man at the desk. 



240 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"No, sir," said the applicant for a job, "but I can 
put up a good talk." 

"^VelI, take a copy of this work and go and see if 
you can get an order. I'll give you half a day to make 
the trial" 

The applicant went away. 

In an hour or two he returned. 

"What luck?" inquired the man at the desk. 

"I've got an order for this book in full morocco 
from your wife, sir." 

"You'll do, young man." 



In Alabama they tell this story to illustrate Senator 
Morgan's ability as an advocate. A negro of well- 
known thieving proclivities was on trial for stealing 
a mule. Morgan defended and cleared him. As 
lawyer and client were walking out of the courtroom 
Mr. Morgan said: "Rastus, did you steal the mule?" 
"Well, Marse Morgan, it was jes like dis: I really 
thought I did steal dat mule, but after what you said 
to the jury I was convince' I didn't." 



Uncle Walter, with his little niece Ruth in his 
lap, was about to telephone a message to a distant city. 
While waiting for the connection to be made little 
Ruth asked if she might talk over the open wire. The 
young lady operator heard the question and said, 
"Yes, please let her." 

Ruth, taking the receiver, first told her name. 
Then the operator asked her where she was, and to 
this Ruth replied : 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 241 

"I am in Uncle Walter's lap — don't you wish you 
ire?" 



were 



Apropos of vanity, Senator Root told at Yale 
about a politician who, the day before he was to make 
a certain speech, sent a forty-one-page report of it 
to all the papers. On page 20 appeared this para- 
graph: "But the hour grows late, and I must close. 
(No, no! Go on! Go on!)" 



Two women from the country were at the circus 
for the first time. They were greatly taken with the 
menagerie. At last they came to the hippopotamus, 
and stood for several minutes in silent wonder, then 
one turned to the other and said, ''My, Mandy, ain't 
— ^he — plain r' 



Senator Ingalls was always quick at retort, al- 
though he was himself a subject of some sharp shafts. 
Once he was attacked by Senator Eli Saulsbury, of 
Delaware, the second smallest State in the Union. 
He disposed of the whole matter by saying, "I thank 
the gentleman from that great State, which has three 
counties at low tide and two counties at high tide, for 
his advice." 



A YOUNG and bashful professor was frequently em- 
barrassed by jokes his girl pupils would play on him. 
These jokes were so frequent that he decided to 
punish the next perpetrators, and the result of this 



%4H AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

decision was that two girls were detained an hour after 
school, and made to work some difficult problems, as 
punishment. 

It was the custom to answer the roll-call with quo- 
tations, so the following morning, when Miss A's 
name was called, she rose, and, looking straight in 
the professor's eye, repeated: **With all thy faults I 
love thee still,'* while Miss B's quotation was : "The 
hours I spend with thee, dear heart, are as a string 
of pearls to me." 



Archbishop Patrick J. Ryan, of Philadelphia, 
once received a call from Wayne McVeagh, in com- 
pany with Mr. Roberts, president of the Pennsylvania 
system at the time that McVeagh was counsel for that 
railroad. "Your Grace,*' said Mr. McVeagh, "Mr. 
Roberts, who always travels with his counsel, will, 
undoubtedly, get you passes over all the railroads in 
the United States, if in return you will get him a 
pass to Paradise." "I would do so gladly," flashed 
the archbishop, "if it were not for separating him 
from his counsel." 



On one of his collecting trips through Scotland the 
eminent English geologist, Hugh Miller, at the end 
of the day gave to a servant his bag of specimen stones 
which he had labored all day to collect, to be carried 
some miles to his home. Later, while sitting unob- 
served in a comer of the village inn, he heard the man 
communicating to a friend in Gaelic his experience 
with the "mad Englishman," as he called him, in the 
following manner: 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 248 

"He gave me his bag to carry home by a short-cut 
across the hills while he walked by another road. I 
was wondering why it was so fearfully heavy, and 
when I got out of his sight I made up my mind to see 
what was in it. I opened it, and what do you think 
it was? Stones!" 

"Stones!" exclaimed his companion, opening his 
eyes. "Stones! Well, that beats all I ever heard or 
knew of one of them. And did you carry it?" 

"Carry it ! Do you think I was as mad as himself ? 
No, no. I emptied them all out of the bag, but I filled 
it again from the stone-heap near the house, and gave 
him good measure for his money." 



Former Representative Gibson, of Tennessee, had 
a voice that would play tricks with him. It would 
work all right for a few minutes, and then it would 
stop entirely, and Gibson would be left gasping for a 
moment or two, high and dry in the middle of his 
argument, until his voice came back again. He was 
making a tariff speech one day, sailing along in fine 
shape. "Why, Mr. Speaker/* he shouted, "the tariff 
is like a pair of suspenders. Uncle Sam needs it to 
keep up his — " 

Right there his voice broke. Gibson couldn't say a 
word. 

"Trousers!" yelled one member. 

"Pants!" 

"Breeches !" 

By that time the voice came back — "to keep up his 
revenues," said Gibson, glaring around at his tor- 
mentors. 



244 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Senator Tillman not long ago piloted a plain 
farmer-constituent around the Capitol for a while, 
and then, having some work to do on the floor, con- 
ducted him to the Senate gallery. 

After an hour or so the visitor approached a gallery- 
doorkeeper and said: "My name is Swate. I am 
a friend of Senator Tillman. He brought me here 
and I want to go out and look around a bit. I thought 
I would tell you so I can get back in." 

"That's all right," said the doorkeeper, "but I may 
not be here when you return. In order to prevent any 
mistake I will give you the password so you can get 
your seat again." 

Swate's eyes rather popped out at this. "What's 
the word ?" he asked. 

"Idiosyncrasy." 

"What?" 

"Idiosyncrasy." 

"I guess I'll stay in," said Swate. 



The Willoughbys had said good-by to Mrs. Kent. 
Then Mr. Willoughby spoke thoughtfully: 

"It was pleasant of her to say that about wishing 
she could see more of people like us, who are in- 
terested in real things, instead of the foolish round 
of gaiety that takes up so much of her time and gives 
her so little satisfaction, wasn't it ?" 

His wife stole a sidewise glance at his gratified 
face and a satirical smile crossed her own countenance. 

"Very pleasant, George," she said clearly. "But 
what I knew she meant, and what she knew that I 
knew she meant, was that my walking-skirt is an inch 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 245 

too long and my sleeves are old style, and your coat, 
poor dear, is beginning to look shiny in the back." 

"Why — ^what — how — " began Mr. Willoughby 
helplessly ; then he shook his head and gave it up. 



Mrs. Wharton, the novelist, has never described 
any blunder of the so-called smart set quite as pathetic 
as one that actually happened to herself. A young 
man of a particularly old family, who sat next to her 
at dinner, said : "Fm terribly frightened to meet you, 
Mrs. Wharton," and when asked the origin of his 
terrors, explained: 'Tve always heard you're such a 
frightful blackleg." 



Rosenthal, the pianist, speaks eight or ten lan- 
guages. But his knowledge of idiomatic English has 
not always been sufficient to enable him to follow all 
the critics have said about his pyrotechnic playing. 
The other day, reading over the latest batch of clip- 
pings in the manager's office, he suddenly asked : "Vat 
iss Tourt' of July interpretation ?" 

"Fourth of July ?" was the reply, "Don't you know 
the Fourth of July? Why, the national holiday — 
everything noble and patriotic — George Washington 
— Battle of Bunker Hill — ^the Declaration of Inde- 
pendence — ^"Ah! I see," said the pianist, "Un grand 
compliment !" 



Representative Cushman, of Washington, once 
came to Speaker Cannon with a letter written by the 
speaker himself. 



246 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Mr. Speaker," he said, "I got this letter from you 
yesterday and I couldn't read it. I showed it to twenty 
or thirty fellows in the House and, between us, we 
have spelled out all but the last three words." Uncle 
Joe took the letter and studied it, "The last three 
words," he said, "are 'Personal and Confidential.' " 



At a banquet held in a room the walls of which 
were adorned with many beautiful paintings, a well- 
known college president was called upon to respond 
to a toast. In the course of his remarks, wishing to 
pay a compliment to the ladies present, and desig- 
nating the paintings with one of his characteristic 
gestures, he said : "What need is there of these painted 
beauties when we have so many with us at this table ?" 



The late Charles Eliot Norton was wont to deplore 
the modern youth's preference of brawn to brain. 
He used to tell of a football game he once witnessed : 
"Princeton had a splendid player in Poe — ^you will 
remember little Poe ?" and Professor Norton, thinking 
of "The Raven" and "Annabel Lee," said to the lad 
at his side : "He plays well, that Poe !" 

"Doesn't he ?" the youth cried. "Is he," said Pro- 
fessor Norton, "any relation to the great Poe?" 

"Any relation?" said the youth. "Why, he is the 
great Poe." 



A FIRE broke out one day in Francis Wilson's dress- 
ing-room at the theater where he was playing. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 247 

He had some of his books around him, and in an 
agony of despair asked himself: 

"Which shall I save?" He glanced at his precious 
Chaucer, at some Shakespearean volumes, when: 

"Come, Mr. Wilson," broke in at the door from 
a fireman, "you have not a moment to lose." 

"Yes, yes. Coming," replied Wilson absently. 

He was looking for a special illuminated volume 
yery dear to him. 

"Come, Wilson," cried his manager; "come, get 
out!" 

"AH right, all right," said Wilson, and, grabbing 
some clothes in one hand, he snatched with the other 
the nearest volume and ran to the street. There he 
looked at the huge voltime in his arms. It was the 
city directory. 



A CITY gentleman was recently invited down to the 
country for "a day with the birds." His aim was not 
remarkable for its accuracy, to the great disgust of the 
man in attendance, whose tip was generally regulated 
by the size of the bag. 

"Dear me!" at last exclaimed the sportsman, *1)ut 
the birds seem exceptionally strong on the wing this 
year." 

"Not all of *em, sir," was the answer. "You've 
shot at the same bird about a dozen times. 'E's a-fol- 
lerin' you about, sir." 

"Following me about? Nonsense! Why should a 
bird do that?" 

"Well, sir," came the reply. "I dunno, I'm sure, 
unless 'e's 'angin' 'round you for safety." 



248 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

A LADY was calling on some friends one summer 
afternoon. The talk buzzed along briskly, fans waved 
and the daughter of the house kept twitching un- 
comfortably, frowning and making little smothered 
exclamations of annoyance. Finally, with a sigh, she 
rose and left the room. 

"Your daughter," said the visitor, "seems to be 
suffering from the heat." 

"No," said the hostess. "She is just back home 
from college and she is suffering from the family 
grammar." 



"It ain't everybody Fd put to sleep in this room," 
said old Mrs. Jinks to the fastidious and extremely 
nervous young minister who was spending a night at 
her house. 

"This here room is full of sacred associations to 
me," she went on, as she bustled around opening shut- 
ters and arranging the curtains. "My first husband 
died in that bed with his head on these very pillers, 
and poor Mr. Jinks died settin' right in that corner. 
Sometimes when I come into the room in the dark 
I think I see him settin' there still. 

"My own father died layin' right on that lounge 
under the winder. Poor pa ! He was a Speeritualist, 
and he alius said he'd appear in this room after he 
died, and sometimes I'm foolish enough to look for 
him. If you should see anything of him to-night you'd 
better not tell me; for it'd be a sign to me that there 
was something in Speeritualism, and I'd hate to think 
that. 

"My son by my first man fell dead of heart disease 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 249 

right where you stand. He was a doctor, and there's 
two skeletons in that closet that belonged to him, and 
half a dozen skulls in that lower drawer. 

"There, I guess you'll be comfortable. 

"Well, good night, and pleasant dreams.'* 



A WOMAN suffrage lecturer brought down the house 
with the following argument: "I have no vote, but 
my groom has, but I am sure if I were to go to him 
and say, 'John, will you exercise the franchise?' he 
would reply, Tlease, mum, which horse be that?' 



» 9f 



"Maude was afraid the girls wouldn't notice her 
engagement ring." "Did they?" "i9id they? Six of 
them recognized it at once." 



Mr. George Broadhurst, author of the play, "The 
Man of the Hour/' is an Englishman, and recently 
made a visit to his native country. After having lived 
a week at one of the large hotels in London, he was 
surprised on the evening of his departure, although 
at a very late hour, to see an endless procession of 
waiters, maids, porters, and pages come forward with 
the expectant smile and empty hand. When each and 
all had been well bestowed, even boots and under-boots 
and then another boots, he dashed for the four-wheeler 
that WIS to carry him safely away. 

Settling himself with a sigh of relief, he was about 
to be off when a page popped his head into the win- 
dow and breathlessly exclaimed : 



250 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"I beg pardon, sir, but the night-lift man says he's 
waiting for a message from you, sir." 

"A message from me?" 

"Yes, sir; he says he cawn't go to sleep without a 
message from you, sir." 

"Really, he can't go to sleep without a message 
from me?" 

"No, sir." 

"How touching. Then tell him, 'Pleasant 
dreams.' " 



Representative Tawney, of Minnesota, chairman 
of the House Committee on Appropriations, sent out 
some of his quota of garden seeds to his constituents 
not long ago. One man in Winona wrote to Tawney : 
"Dear Jim: I received your seeds, but I don't care 
much for them. If you really want to do something 
for me, please send me up a suit of union underwear." 



In his younger days Thomas Bailey Aldrich was 
not a little of a dandy. This foible led an unusually 
energetic Boston bluestocking to refer to him in a 
caustic style on one occasion as "effeminate." 

When a friend told the poet of her remark he smiled 
grimly. 

"So I am," he assented, "compared with her." 



Tennyson's customary manner toward women was 
one of grave and stately courtesy. One evening at 
Aldworth, Sir Edward Hamley, the soldier and expert 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 251 

writer on the art of war, who had been visiting 
through the day, rose to take leave. Tennyson pressed 
him to stay over night, adding: "There are three 
ladies who wish it," meaning Mrs. Tennyson and the 
two guests who were in the house. 

"There are three other ladies who oppose it," Sir 
Edward answered. 

Who are they?" Tennyson asked. 
The Fates," Sir Edward replied. 

"The Fates may be on one side," Tennyson re- 
joined, "but the Graces are on the other." 






Douglas Jerrold's genius for repartee is perhaps 
best shown in his most famous reply to Albert Smith, 
whom he disliked and frequently abused Smith 
grew tired of being made the butt of the other's wit, 
and one day plaintively remarked: "After all, Jer- 
rold, we row in the same boat." "Yes," came the 
answer, "but not with the same skulls." 



Mr. Brown, a Kansas gentleman, is the proprietor 
of a boarding-house. Around his table at a recent 
dinner sat his wife, Mrs. Brown ; the village milliner, 
Mrs. Andrews; Mr. Black, the baker; Mr. Jordan, a 
carpenter; and Mr. Hadley, a flour, feed, and lumber 
merchant. Mr. Brown took a ten-dollar bill out of 
his pocketbook and handed it to Mrs. Brown, with 
the remark that there was ten dollars toward the 
twenty he had promised her. Mrs. Brown handed 
the bill to Mrs. Andrews, the milliner, saying, "That 
pays for my new bonnet." Mrs. Andrews, in turn, 



252 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

passed it on to Mr. Jordan, remarking that it would 
pay for the carpentry work he had done for her. Mr. 
Jordan handed it to Mr. Hadley, requesting his re- 
ceipted bill for flour, feed, and lumber. Mr. Hadley 
gave the bill back to Mr. Brown, saying, "That pays 
ten dollars on my board." Mr. Brown again passed 
it to Mrs. Brown, remarking that he had now paid 
her the twenty dollars he had promised her. She, in 
turn, paid it to Mr. Black to settle her bread and 
pastry account. Mr. Black handed it to Mr. Hadley, 
asking credit for the amount on his flour bill, Mr. 
Hadley again returning it to Mr. Brown, with the re- 
mark that it settled for that month's board; where- 
upon Brown put it back into his pocketbook, observing 
that he had not supposed a greenback would go so far. 



A DOCTOR came up to a patient in an insane asylum, 
slapped him on the back, and said: "Well, old man, 
you're all right, ypu can run along and write your 
folks that you'll be back home in two weeks as good 
as new." The patient went off gaily to write his 
letter. He had it finished and sealed, but when he 
was licking the stamp it slipped through his fingers 
to the floor, lighted on the back of a cockroach that 
was passing and stuck. The patient hadn't seen the 
cockroach — ^what he did see was his escaped postage 
stamp zig-zagging aimlessly across the floor to the 
baseboard, wavering up over the baseboard and fol- 
lowing a crooked track up the wall and across the 
ceiling. In depressed silence he tore up the letter and 
dropped the pieces on the floor. "Two weeks ! Hell ! 
he said. "I won't be out of here in three years. 



11 j" 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 258 

A BosTONiAN, arriving at the gate of Heaven, 
asked for admittance. 

"Where are you from ?" inquired the genial Saint. 

"Boston." 

"Well, you can come in, but you won't like it." 



A WELL-KNOWN bishop, after a long journey to 
conduct a service in a distant village, was asked by 
the spokesman of the reception committee if he would 
like a whisky and soda to keep out the cold. "No," 
he replied, "for three reasons. First, because I am 
chairman of the Temperance Society; secondly, I am 
just going to enter a church ; and — ^thirdly, because — 
I have just had one." 



A FRIVOLOUS young English girl, with no love for 
the Stars and Stripes, once exclaimed at a celebration 
where the American flag was very much in evidence : 
"Oh, what a silly-looking thing the American flag is ! 
It suggests nothing but checker-berry candy." 

"Yes," replied a bystander, "the kind of candy that 
has made everybody sick who ever tried to lick it." 



A HUNGRY Irishman went into a restaurant on Fri- 
day and said to the waiter : 
"Have yez any whale?" 
"No." 

"Have yez any shark?" 
"No." 
"Have yez any swordfish?" 



254 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"No." 

"Have yez any jellyfish?" 

"No." 

"All right," said the Irishman. "Then bring me 
ham and eggs and a beefsteak smothered wid onions. 
The Lord knows I asked for fish." 



Mr. Halloran returned from a political meeting 
with his interest aroused. "There's eight nations rep- 
resented in this ward of ours," he said, as he began 
to count them off on his fingers. "There's Irish, 
Frinch, Eyetalians, Poles, Germans, Rooshians, 
Greeks, an' — " Mr. Halloran stopped and began 
again : "There's Irish, Frinch, Eyetalians, Poles, Ger- 
mans, Rooshians, Greeks, an' — I can't seem to re- 
member the other wan. There's Irish, Frinch — " 
"Maybe 'twas Americans," suggested Mrs. Halloran. 
"Sure, that's it, I couldn't think." 



The solemnity of the meeting was somewhat dis- 
turbed when the eloquent young theologian pictured 
in glowing words the selfishness of men who spend 
their evenings at the club, leaving their wives in lone- 
liness at home at the holiday season. "Think, my 
hearers," said he, "of a poor, neglected wife, all alone 
in the great, dreary house, rocking the cradle of her 
sleeping babe with one foot and wiping away her tears 
with the other !" 



Two charming girls with Mr. Danvers, who was 
very shy, were watching the dancing waves. Conver- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 265 

sation was carried on with difficulty. Finally Maude 
ventured the remark : 

"Don't you hate the seaside, Mr. Danvers, with its 
glare and noise and general vulgarity?" 

Mr. Danvers replied fervently with a smile and 
downcast eyes : "Oh, d-d-d-don't I, that's all !" 

Then Miss Lilian followed up the subject and said : 
"What, hate the seaside, Mr. Danvers? — with the 
fresh air and blue waves, and the delightful lounge 
after bathing, and the lawn-tennis and the Cinderella 
dances ! I dote on it, and I should have thought you 
did, too!" 

Whereupon Mr. Danvers stammered still more fer- 
vently : "Oh— I— I— I should think I did !" 

And the waves kept on splashing merrily. 



Just before the collection was taken up one Sunday 
morning a negro clergyman announced that he re- 
gretted to state that a certain brother had forgotten 
to lock the door of his chicken-house the night before, 
and as a result in the morning he found that most 
of the fowls had disappeared. "I doan' want to be 
pussonal, bredr'n," he added, "but I hab my s'picions 
as to who stole dem chickens. I also hab reason fo' 
b'lievin' dat if I am right in dose s'picions dat pusson 
won't put any money in de plate which will now be 
passed around." 

The result was a fine collection ; not a single mem- 
ber of the congregation feigned sleep. After it was 
counted the old parson came forward. 

"Now, bredr'n," he said, "I doan' want your din- 
ners to be spoilt by wonderin' where dat brudder lives 



256 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

who doan' lock his chickens up at night. Dat brudder 
doan' exist, mah friends. He was a parable gotten 
up fo' purpose of finances." 



A MINISTER in a Western town was called upon one 
afternoon to perform the marriage ceremony between 
a negro couple — the negro preacher of the town being 
absent from home. 

After the ceremony the groom asked the price of 
the service. 

"Oh, well,'* said the minister, "you can pay me 
whatever you think it is worth to you." 

The negro turned and silently looked his bride over 
from head to foot, then slowly rolling up the whites 
of his eyes, said : 

"Lawd, sah, you has done ruined me for life, you 
has, for shuah." 



A PROFESSOR of sciences, well known for his absent- 
mindedness, was engaged in a deep controversy one 
day with a fellow-student when his wife hurriedly 
entered the room. "Oh, my dear," she cried, "I've 
swallowed a pin." 

The Professor smiled. "Don't worry about it, my 
dear," he said in a soothing tone. "It is of no con- 
sequence. Here" — ^he fumbled at his lapel — "Here 
is another pin." 



The late Theodore Thomas was rehearsing the 
Chicago Orchestra on the stage of the Auditorium 
Theater. He was disturbed by the whistling of Bur- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 257 

ridge, the well-known scene painter, who was at work 
in the loft above the stage. A few minutes later 
Mr. Thomas's librarian appeared on the "bridge," 
where Mr. Burridge, merrily whistling, was at work. 
"Mr. Thomas's compliments," said the librarian, "and 
he requests me to say that if Mr. Burridge wishes to 
whistle he will be glad to discontinue his rehearsal." 
To which Mr. Burridge replied suavely: "Mr. Bur- 
ridge's compliments to Mr. Thomas; and please in- 
form Mr. Thomas that, if Mr. Burridge can not 
whistle with the orchestra, he won't whistle at all." 



When trouble was more general and more destruc- 
tive in Ireland than at present, an Irish priest, a very 
good man, was disturbed by the inroads which strong 
drink was making on his flock. He preached a 
strong sermon against it. "What is it," he cried, "that 
keeps you poor? It's the drink. What is it keeps 
your children half-starved? The drink. What is it 
keeps your children half-clothed? The drink! The 
drink. What is it causes you to shoot at your land- 
lords — and miss them ? The drink." 



GoFF, the famous London barrister, has a humor 
peculiarly his own. He looks at the world in a half- 
amused, half-indulgent manner sometimes very an- 
noying to his friends. One day, when in town, he 
dropped into a restaurant for lunch. It was a tidy, 
although not a pretentious establishment. After a 
good meal he called to the waitress and inquired what 
kind of pie could be had. 

9 — Vol. i 



258 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Apple pie mince pie raisin pie blueberry pie cus- 
tard pie peach pie and strawberry shortcake/* the 
young women repeated glibly. 

" Will you please say that again V he asked, leaning 
a trifle forward. 

The girl went through the list at lightning tatfi. 
"And strawberry shortcake," she concluded with 
emphasis. 

"Would you mind doing it once more ?" he said* 

The waitress looked her disgust, and started lil a 
third time pronouncing the Words in a defiantly clfeftt* 
tone. 

Thank you," he remarked when she had finished. 
For the life of me I can not see how yoU do it But 
I like to hear it. It's very interesting, very. Give 
me apple pie, please, and thank you vefy mUch." 



it 



An elderly Bishop, a bachelor, who was Very fas- 
tidious about his toilet, was especially fond of his 
bath, and requested particular care of his tub ftom 
the maid. 

When about to leave town one day he gSiVe itrict 
orders to the housemaid about his "bawth-tub" and 
said that no one was to be allowed the use of it. 

Alas ! the temptation grew on the girl and sh^ took 
a plunge. 

The Bishop returned unexpectedly, and fiilditif 
traces of the recent stolen bath, questioned th^ maid 
so closely that she had to confess she was the eulj^fit, 
and W2ls very sorry. 

"I hope you do not think it a sin, Bishop?" al9k«d 
Mary in tears. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 269 

Eying her sternly, he said : "Mary your using my 
tub is not a sin, but what distresses me most is that 
you would do anything behind my back that you 
would not do before my face." 



Senator Dawes, in his young manhood, was a 
very poor speaker. One time he was in an important 
law case, and for his opponent he had an older attor- 
ney whose eloquence attracted a crowd that packed 
the courtroom. 

The day was very hot and the judge on the bench 
was freely perspiring. Finally the judge, drawing off 
his coat in the midst of the lawyer's eloquent address, 
said: 

"Mr. Attorney, excuse me, but suppose you sit 
down and let Dawes begin to speak. I want to thin 
out this crowd." 



A DOCTOR spending a rare and somewhat dull night 
at his own fireside received the following message 
from three fellow practitioners: 

"Please step over to the club and join us at a 
rubber of whist." 

"Jane, dear," he said to his wife, "I am called away 
again. It appears to be a difficult case — ^there are 
three other doctors on the spot already." 



George, the four-year-old grandson of an ex- 
tremely pious and devout grandfather, came rushing 
into the house in a state of wild excitement. "Grand- 



260 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

pa ! Grandpa !" he called. "Mr. Barton's cow is dead ! 

God called her home !" 



Philander C. Knox tells this story of Roosevelt : 
"Roosevelt," he said, "was surprised by a Kansas 
delegation at Oyster Bay one summer. The President 
appeared with his coat and collar off, trousers hitched 
by belt, and mopping his forehead. *Ah, gentlemen,' 
he said, 'delighted to see you, ddighted. But I am 
very busy putting in my hay^ you know. Just come 
down to the barn with me and we'll talk it over while 
I work.' Down to the bam hustled the delegation 
and Mr. Roosevelt seized a pitchfork. But, behold 
there was no hay on the floor! 'John/ shouted the 
President to sounds in the hayloft; 'where's all the 
hay?' 'I ain't had time to throw it back since you 
threw it up yesterday, sir.^ 



f ff 



Before the President of a certain Western college 
had attained his present high position, a boy entering 
college was recommended to his consideration. 

"Try to draw the boy out. Professor ; criticise him, 
and tell us what you think," the parents said. 

To facilitate acquaintance the Professor took the 
boy for a walk. After ten minutes' silence the youth 
ventured: "Fine day. Professor." 

"Yes," with a far-away look. 

Ten minutes more, and the young man, squirming 
uncomfortably, said: "This is a pleasant walk, Pro- 
fessor." 

"Yes." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 261 

■ Another silence, and then the young man blurted 
out that he thought they might have rain. 

"Yes," and this time the Professor went on saying, 
"Young man, we have been walking together for half 
an hour, and you have said nothing which was not 
commonplace and stupid." 

"Yes," said the boy, his irritation getting the better 
of his modesty, "and you endorsed every word I said." 

Word from the Professor to the parents was to 
the effect that the boy was all right. 



A DEAR old citizen went to the cars the other day 
to see his daughter off on a journey. Securing her a 
seat he passed out of the car and went around to the 
car window to say a last parting word. While he 
was leaving the car the daughter crossed the aisle 
to speak to a friend, and at the same time a grim old 
maid took the seat and moved up to the window. 

Unaware of the change the old gentleman hurriedly 
put his head up to the window and said : "One more 
kiss, pet." 

In another instant the point of a cotton umbrella 
was thrust from the window, followed by the wrathful 
injunction : "Scat, you gray-headed wretch !" 



There is a young physician who has never been 
able to smoke a cigar. "Just one poisons me," says 
the youthful doctor. 

Recently the doctor was invited to a large dinner- 
party. When the women had left the table cigars 
were accepted by all the men except the physician. 



282 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Seeing his friend refuse the cigar the host in astonish- 
ment exclaimed : 

"What, not smoking? Why, my dear fellow, you 
lose half your dinner I*^* 

"Yes, I know I do,*' meekly replied the doctor, **but 
if I smoked one I should lose the whole of itl'* 



Once, when Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes was at 
a charitable fair, he was asked to furnish a letter for 
the "post-office." So he placed a one-dollar note in- 
side a sheet of paper and wrote on the first page : 

"Dear lady, whosoe'er thou art. 

Turn this poor page with trembling care ; 
But hush, oh, hush, thy beating heart. 
The one thou lov'st best will be there." 

When the page was turned the one-dollar bill was re- 
vealed, and on the second page he wrote this verse : 

"Fair lady, lift thine eyes and tell 

If this is not a truthful letter ; 
This is the 'one' thou lovest well. 
And naught (o) would make thee love 
it better." 



As several travelers got into the station 'bus one of 
the men (who was quite a portly fellow) noticed that 
a certain young woman had a grip exactly like his„ 
but that it was placed with the rest of the luggage, on 
top. Thinking there might be some mistake made he 
kept his inside and placed it at his feet. He was soon 
engrossed in his paper, and did not notice the young 
woman reach over and draw the grip close to her 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 268 

Side. Being of a humorous turn of mind he waited 
until she was occupied with a book and then pulled 
the grip to its former position, the rest of the travelers 
lodcing on with amused expressions. 

In turning over a leaf she looked down and sud- 
denly became aware of the removal of the grip. She 
was quite indignant, and with some force in her voice 
and manner said, "That is mine!'' and jerked it back 
close to her feet. 

Touching his hat politely the owner said, with a 
merry twinkle in his eye : ''AH right, madam ; but may 
I please get my pipe and nightshirt out? You are 
welcome to the rest of the things !" 



President Eliot, of Harvard, is not a believer in 
spelling reform. Not long ago there was a student 
who was a candidate for the degree of doctor of phi- 
losophy. This student had adopted spelling reform 
as his particular line of work, and as commencement 
day drew near he went to President Eliot with a 
requesti "You know, Mr. President," he said "that 
you are proposing to make me a Ph.D. Now I have 
made a specialty of spelling reform and I always spell 
philosophy with an 'f.' I therefore called to ask you 
if you could not make my degree F. D., instead of 
Ph.D." 

"Certainly," replied the President. "In fact, if 
you insist, we shall make it a D. F." 



The following letter was received by the Post- 
office Department. It came from a Western post- 



264 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

master at a small office and read : "In accordance with 
the rules of the department, I write you to inform you 
that on next Saturday I will close the post-office for 
one day, as I am going on a bear hunt. I am not 
asking your permission to close up and don't give 
a damn if you discharge me; but I will advise now, 
that I am the only man in the county who can read 
and write." 



A YOUNG lady at a summer hotel asked an artipt 
friend, who was spending his vacation there, if he 
would mind doing a small favor for her. 

"Certainly not," he said eagerly; "what is it?" 

"Thank you so much," she exclaimed gratefully. 
"I wish you would stop at Mrs. Gannon's little shop 
and get three large bone buttons, the kind with two 
small holes in them. They're for my new bathing 
suit, you know. Just tell her who I am and it will be 
all right. You needn't pay for them." 

Now the artist was a bachelor, and had never 
bought anything but collar buttons before. So on the 
way to the store he kept repeating the instructions that 
he had received. Eager to relieve his mind he rushed 
up to Mrs. Gannon and reeled off this surprising 
speech : "I want three bone buttons for a small bathing 
suit with two large holes in it. Just tell me who I 
am and it will be all right." 



There was not even standing room in the six- 
o'clock crowded car, but one more passenger, a young 
woman, wedged her way along just inside the door- 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 266 

way. Each time the car took a sudden lurch forward 
she fell helplessly back, and three times she landed in 
the arms of a large, comfortable man on the back plat- 
form. The third time it happened he said quietly: 
"Hadn't you better stay here now?" 



The principal of one of Washington's high schools 
relates an incident in connection with the last com- 
mencement day. A clever girl had taken one of the 
principal prizes. At the close of the exercises her 
friends crowded about her to offer congratulations. 

"Weren't you awfully afraid you wouldn't get it, 
Hattie?" asked one, "when there were so many con- 
testants ?" 

"Oh, no!" cheerily exclaimed Hattie. "Because 
I knew when it came to English composition I had 
'em all skinned." 



The Guards' Band was playing on the terrace at 
Windsor Castle during luncheon, and the Queen was 
so pleased with a lively march that she sent a maid 
of honor to inquire what it was. The maid of honor 
blushed deeply as she answered on her return : " ^Come 
where the Booze is Cheaper,' your Majesty." 



Mark Twain once wrote to Andrew Carnegie as 
follows : 

^'My dear Mr. Carnegie' I see by the papers that 
you are very prosperous. I want to get a hymn-book. 
It costs two dollars. I will bless you, God will bless 



266 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

you, and it will do a great deal of good. Yours truly, 
Mark Twain." 

"P. S. — Don't send the hsrmn-book; send me the 
two dollars." 



A PHYSICIAN started a model insane asylum, says 
the New York '*Sun," and set apart one ward espe- 
cially for crazy motorists and chauffeurs. Taking a 
friend through the building he pointed out with par- 
ticular pride the automobile ward and called attention 
to its elegant furnishings and equipment. 

"But," said the friend, ''the place is empty; I don't 
see any patients." 

'*0h, they are all under the cots fixing the slats," 
explained the physician. 



An aged, gray-haired and very wrinkled old woman, 
arrayed in the outlandish calico costume of the moun- 
tains, was summoned as a witness in court to tell what 
she knew about a fight in her house. She took the wit- 
ness-stand with evidences of backwardness and pro- 
verbial Bourbon verdancy. The Judge asked her in a 
kindly voice what took place. She insisted it did not 
amount to much, but the Judge by his persistency 
finally got her to tell the story of the bloody fracas. 

"Now, I tell ye, Jedge, it didn't amount to nuthn'. 
The fust I knowed about it was when Bill Saunder 
called Tom Smith a liar, en Tom knocked him down 
with a stick o' wood. One o* Bill's friends then cut 
Tom with a knife, sHcin' a big chunk out o' him. Then 
Sam Jones^ who was a friend of Tom's, shot the other 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 267 

feller and two more shot him, en three or four others 
got cut right smart by somebody. That nachly caused 
some excitement, Jedge, en then they commenced 
fightin'." 



One morning, as Mr. Clemens returned from a 
neighborhood call, sans necktie, his wife met him 
at the door with the exclamation: "There, Sam, 
you have been over to the Stowes's again without a 
necktie! It's really disgraceful the way you neglect 
your dress !" 

Her husband said nothing, but went up to his room. 

A few minutes later his neighbor — Mrs. S. — ^was 
summoned to the door by a messenger, who presented 
her with a small box neatly done up. She opened it 
and found a black silk necktie, accompanied by the 
following note : "Here is a necktie. Take it out and 
look at it. I think I stayed half an hour this morning. 
At the end of that time will you kindly return it, as it 
is the only one I have? — Mark Twain.'* 



The teacher was teaching a class in the infant Sab- 
bath-school room and was making her pupils finish 
eaoh sentence to show that they understood her. 

"The idol had eyes,"^ the teacher said, "but it could 
not—" 

"See," cried the children. 

"It had ears, but it could not — " 

"Hear," was the answer. 

"It had lips," she said, "but it could not—" 

"Speak," once more replied the children. 



268 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 






It had a nose, but it could not — " 
Wipe it," shouted the children ; and the lesson had 
to stop a moment. 



She was the dearest and most affectionate little 
woman in the world, and so thoughtful of her hus- 
band's comfort and his needs. One evening, when 
company was expected, she inquired solicitously : 

"Aren't you going to wear that necktie I gave you 
on Christmas, dearie?" 

Of course I am, Henrietta," responded dearie. 
I was saving it up. I am going to wear that red 
necktie, and my Nile-green smoking-jacket, and my 
purple and yellow socks, and open that box of cigars 
you gave me, all at once — ^to-night." 



it 



When J. M. Barrie addressed an audience of one 
thousand girls at Smith College during an American 
visit, a friend asked him how he had found the 
experience. 

"Well," replied Mr. Barrie, "to tell you the truth 
rd much rather talk one thousand times to one girl 
than to talk one time to a thousand girls." 



The Rev. Mr. Goodman (inspecting himself in 
mirror) — "Caroline, I don't really believe I ought to 
wear this wig. It looks like living a lie." 

Bless your heart, Avery," said his better half, 
don't let that trouble you. That wig will never fool 
anybody for one moment." 






AMONG THE HUMORISTS 269 

A YOUNG man had been calling now and then on a 
young lady, when one night as he sat in the parlor 
waiting for her to come down, her mother entered the 
room instead and asked in a grave, stem way what his 
intentions were. He was about to stammer a reply, 
when suddenly the young lady called down from the 
head of the stairs, "Oh, mama, that isn't the one." 



A WOMAN hurried up to a policeman at the comer 
of Twenty-third Street in New York City. 

"Does this crosstown car take you down to the 
Bridge toward Brooklyn?" she demanded. 

"Why, madam," retumed the policeman, "do you 
want to go to Brooklyn?" 

"No, I don't want to," the woman replied, "but I 
have to." 



Walter Appleton Clark, whose artistic career was 
cut short by an untimely death, had a strong sense 
of humor. In going through a millionaire's stables, 
where the floors and walls were of white tiles, drink- 
ing fountains of marble, mahogany mangers, silver 
trimmings, and so forth and so on, "Well," said the 
millionaire proudly, "is there anything lacking?"* "I 
can think of nothing," said Clark, "except a sofa for 
each horse." 



Oliver Herford, equally famous as poet, illustra- 
tor, and brilliant wit, was entertaining four magazine 
editors at luncheon when the bell rang, and a maid 
entered with the mail. 



870 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

"Oh," said an editor, "an epistle." 
"No," said Mr. Herford, tearing open the envel- 
ope, "not an epistle, a collect." 



An old gentleman on board one of the numerous 
steamers which ply between Holyhead and the Irish 
coast missed his handkerchief, and accused a soldier 
standing by his side of stealing it, which the soldier, 
an Irishman, denied. Some few minutes afterward 
the gentleman found the missing article in his hat; 
he was then most profuse in his apologies to the 
soldier. 

"Not another wurrd," said Pat; "it was a mis- 
thake on both sides — ^ye took me for a thafe, and I 
took ye for a gintlemon." 



The family were gathered in the library enjoying 
a magnificent thunder-storm when the mother thought 
of Dorothy alone in the nursery. Fearing lest the 
little daughter should be awakened and feel afraid, she 
slipped away to quiet her. Pausing at the door, how- 
ever, in a vivid flash of lightning that illuminated the 
whole room, she saw the little girl sitting up in bed 
clapping her hands in excitement and shouting, "Bang 
it again, God ! Bang it again !" 



A LITTLE girl ate at a feast a great quantity of 
chocolate eggs and bananas and cakes and peanuts 
and things of that sort, and finally the time came for 
her to go. 



AMONq THE HUMORISTS 271 

"But you will have a little more cake before you 
§fo?" her hostess said politely, 

'•No, thank you, ma'am, Tm full," said the littlq 
girl. 

"Then,*^' said the hoste^e, "you'll put «ome nuts and 

candies in your pockets, won't you ?" 
The little girl shpok her head regretfully, 
"They're full, too," she said. 



"My dear, I couldn't match that dress goods." 

"You couldn't?" 

"No, and after what the various clerks said to me, 
I can't see why a person in tolerable circumstances 
should want to matdi it." 



T^i^i^-mpvr'— ^"^^"^ 



A BOY in a certain school would persist in saying 
"have went." One day the teacher kept him in, saying, 
"While I am out of the room you may write *have 
gone' fifty times." When the teacher returned she 
found he had dutifully performed the ta^k, but on the 
other side of the paper was a message from the absent 
one : "I have went. John White." 



Ok one of his trips abroad Mr. Evarts landed at 
Liverpool. The steamer was proceeding slowly up 
the river to the wharf, and Mr. Evarts, after looking 
at the muddy waters of the Mersey, said to his 
companion, "Evidently the quality of mercy is not 
strained." 



2ra AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Once, at breakfast at a friend's, Phillips Brooks 
noticed the diminutive but amusingly dignified daugh- 
ter of the house having constant trouble with the large 
fork that she was vainly trying to handle properly 
with her tiny fingers. In a spirit of kindness, mingled 
with mischief, the Bishop said : 

"Why don't you give up the fork, my dear, and use 
your fingers? You know, fingers were made before 
forks." 

Quick as a flash came the crushing retort: "Mine 
weren't." 



Two stout old Germans were enjoying their pipes 
and placidly listening to the strains of the summer- 
garden orchestra. One of them in tipping his chair 
back stepped on a parlor match, which exploded with 
a bang. 

"Dot vas not on de program," he said, turning to 
his companion. 

"Vat was not ?" 

"Vy, dot match." 

"Vat match?" 

"De match I valked on." 

"Veil, I didn't see no match; vat aboud it?" 

"Vy, I valked on a match and it vent bang, and I 
said it vas not on de program." 

The other picked up his program and read it 
through very carefully. "I don't see it on de pro- 
gram," he said. 

"Veil, I said it vas not on the program, didn't I?" 

"Veil, vat has it got to do mit de program, any- 
vay? Egsplain yourself." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 27$ 

Charles Dana Gibson, the creator of the "Gibson 
girl/' is one of the tallest men in his profession, stand- 
ing six feet two inches tall and weighing two hundred 
pounds. 

A fellow'illustrator, called upon Mr. Gibson in his 
studio one day and found him working at a specially 
constructed table accommodated to his height and 
breadth. He shook hands cordially with his visitor, 
but his frank face revealed deep discontent. His 
visitor expressed the fear that his visit was untimely. 

"Not at all, my dear fellow," Mr. Gibson re- 
sponded. "But I was just looking at this as you came 
in," and he showed him a very small pen, called a 
crow-quill, with which illustrators make their sketches. 
The crow-quill is smaller than the ordinary pen and 
holder, a fragile, perishable, and insignificant instru- 
ment. 

"Just look at it," cQmi)lained Mr. Gibson, "and 
thiidc of a man of my size earning his living with a 
thing like that!' 



Going into a port where the water was very deei>— 
Rio de Janeiro, I believe — relates Captain A. T. Mahan, 
the chain cables "got away," as the expression is, con- 
trol was lost, and shackle after shackle tore out of the 
hawse-holes with tremendous rattling and roaring. 
The admiral was on deck at the moment, and when 
the chain had been stopped and secured he said to the 
captain: "Alfred, send for the young man in charge 
of those chains and give him a good setting-down. 
Ask him what he means by letting such things hap- 
pen." Alfred was a mild person, and clearly did not 



JI74 AMONQ TJJP HUMORISTS 

like his job ; he could not have comt up to the admirars 
standard. The latter saw it, and said: "Perhaps you 
had better Jeave it to pie. I'll settle hirn/' Fixing bis 
eyes on the offender, he said, sternly : "What do you 
mean by this, sir ? Why the hell didn't you stop that 
chain?" The culprit locJced quietly ^t him and said} 
"How the hell could I ?*' After a moment the admiral 
turned to the captain and said rneekly : "That's true, 
Alfred; how the hell could he?" 



-TT' 



An old darky of the Blue Grass State was looking 
at the high steppers belonging to his new master, 
who said, "I suppose your master down South had 
a good many horses ?" " 'Deed we did, sah, dat w^ 
did ; an' ole massa had 'em all name' Bible nances. 
Faith, Hope, and Charity, Bustle, Stays, and Crinoline 
was all one springe's colts !" 



The wife of a well-known judge lost her coqk, ani 
since she had no other recourse she rolled up her 
sleeves and for a week provided such meals as the 
judge had not enjoyed since those happy days when 
they didn't keep a cook. The judge's delight was so 
great that by way of acknowledgment he presented 
his wife with a beautiful ermine coat. Naturally th^ 
incident was noised about among their acquaintance 
and a spirit of envious emulation was developed in 
certain quarters. Mrs. Jerome, after reciting the story 
to her husband, asked, "What do I get, Jerry, if I wiU 
do the cooking for a week ?" 

"At the end of the week, de;^r, you'll get one of 
those long crepe veils." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 275 

Perhaps one of Lord Beaconsfield's brightest flings 
was at the wife of his bitterest political foe. Mrs. 
Gladstone passed the Prime Minister one day, and he 
cast a glance at her over his shoulder, saying : "There 
goes a woman without one redeeming fault." 



A PRIVATE, anxious to secure leave of absence, 
sought his captain with a most convincing tale about 
a sick wife breaking her heart for his presence. 

The officer, familiar with the soldier's ways, re- 
plied : 

"I am afraid you are not telling the truth. I have 
just received a letter from your wife urging me not 
to let you come home because you get drunk, and mis- 
treat her shamefully." 

The private saluted and started to leave the room. 
He paused at the door, asking : "Sor, may I spake to 
you, not as an officer, but as mon to mon?" 

"Yes, what is it?" 

"You and I are two of the most illigant liars the 
Lord ever made. I'm not married at all." 



A VERY prosy gentleman, who was in the habit of 
waylaying Douglas Jerrold, met his victim and, plant- 
ing himself in the way, said : "Well, Jerrold, what is 
going on to-day?" 

Jerrold replied, darting past the inquirer, "I am !" 



FooTE, the English actor, was once praising the 
hospitality of the Irish, after one of his trips to 



27ft AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

Ireland. A gentleman in his audience asked him 
whether he had ever been at GDrk. "No, sir," replied 
Foote ; "but I have seen many drawings of it." 



A LADY one day meeting a girl who had formerly 
been in her employ inquired, "Well Mary, where do 
you live now?" "Please ma'am, I don't live nowhere 
now," rejoined the girl ; "I am married." 



When a Mr. Wilberforce was a candidate for 
election in Hull, England, his sister, an amiable and 
witty young lady offered to make a present of a new 
gown to each of the wives of the men who voted for 
her brother. Upon hearing this, the crowd whom she 
was addressing broke out into cries of "Miss Wilber* 
force forever." "I thank you gentlemen," the young 
lady replied, "but I do not wish to be Miss Wilberforce 
forever !" 



"How do you define 'black as your hat?' " said a 
schoolmaster to one of his pupils. 

"Darkness that may be felt," replied the budding 
genius. 



She — "He married her for her money. Wasn't 
that awful ?" 

He— "Did he get it?" 
She— "No." 
He— "It was." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 277 

' "My, but it is hot in your office," said a client to 
his lawyer. 

"It ought to be," replied the lawyer," I make my 
bread here." 



The town council of a small German community 
met to inspect a new site for a cemetery. They as- 
sembled at a chapel, and as it was a warm day some one 
suggested they leave their coats there. 

"Some one can stay behind and watch them," sug- 
gested Herr Botteles. 

"What for ?" demanded Herr Ehrlich. "If we are 
all going out together what need is there for any one 
to watch the clothes?" 



After a brief two weeks' acquaintance he invited 
her to go to the ball-game with him. 

"There's Jarvis ! He's a good one. He's a pitcher 
for your life. And .that's Johnson, over there. He's 
going to be our best man in a few weeks." 

"Oh, Walter! He'll do, all right," she lisped hur- 
riedly, "but it is so sudden, dear." 



Dr. Edward Waldo Emerson, of Concord, is fond 
of telling of an old servant whose heart was exceed- 
ingly kind, and in whom the qualities of pity and com- 
passion were developed nearly to perfection. He was 
once driving his master and Emerson through the 
country. As they approached a new house that the 
master was building, they saw an old woman sneaking 



278 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

away with a bundle of wood. "jBhez, Jabez," cried 
the master, "do you see that old woman taking my 
wood?" Jabez looked with pity at the old woman, 
then with scorn at his master. "No, sir," he said 
stoutly, "I don't see her, and I didn't think that you 
would see her either." 



"They said that we would never be happy," moaned 
the young bride. 

"But you are happy." 

"But now they say it won't last." 



"That fellow," said Alfred Henry Lewis, the other 
day, when a certain well-known Tammany man was 
mentioned, "puts up a good bluff, but there is nothing 
to him. Open the front door and you are in his 
back yard." 



Little Paul trying on his grandmother's glasses— 
"Grandma, what is it between my eyes and the glasses, 
I can't see anything." 

"Eighty years, my dear." 



To Richard Mansfield an enthusiastic woman ad- 
mirer had paid tribute of praise, adding: "I suppose, 
sir, that when in the spirit of those great roles you for- 
get your real self for days." 

"Yes, madam, for days, as well as nights. It is then 
I do those dreadful things — ^trample on the upturned 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 279 

features of my leading lady and hurl tenderloin steaks 
at waiters." 

"And you do not know of it at all ?" 

"Not a solitary thing, until I read the papers the 
next day," said Mr. Mansfield solemnly. 



When Marquis Ito was in the United States, in 
1 90 1, an inexperienced St. Paul reporter sought an 
interview with him. He met Ito's secretary, and 
made known his mission. "Me newspaper man. Me 
writee news. Me heardee marquis velly ill. He better 
to-day ? You sawe ?" began the reporter, to the secre- 
tary's amazement. But the latter was equal to the oc- 
casion. "Me sawe," he said gravely. "Marquis he 
no better. Belly blad. Catchee cold. Doctor him no 
lettee him leave bled to-day. You sawe ?" The inter- 
view proceeded in this way, but at its termination the 
secretary, with a twinkle in his eye, remarked: "The 
marquis is greatly fatigued by his arduous journey, 
but — " But the reporter had fled. 



Professor Phelps, who disliked mathematics, was 
once walking with Professor Newton, who began dis- 
cussing a problem so deep that his companion could 
not follow it. He fell into a brown study, from which 
he was aroused by Newton's emphatic assertion, "And 
that, you see, gives us xT "Does it?" asked Mr. 
Phelps, politely. "Why, doesn't it?" exclaimed the 
professor, excitedly, alarmed at the possibility of a 
flaw in his calculations. Quickly his mind ran back 
and detected a mistake. "You are right, Mr. Phelps. 



880. AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

You arc fight!'* shouted the professor. "It doesn't 
give us ^; it gives us y!* And from that time Pro- 
fessor Phelps was looked upon as a mathematical 
prodigy, the first man who ever tripped Newton. 



Ambassador Choate and his daughter visited the 
restaurant made famous by Dr. Samuel Johnson. It 
is the custom there to give the guests lark pie, such as 
Johnson used to eat, and the Choates were served with 
one of the pasties. Choate was in the chair that 
Johnson was wont to occupy, and had just begun his 
meal, when his daughter exclaimed: "Isn't it funny, 
papa ? You are in Johnson's chair and eating a tradi- 
tion." "Eating a tradition !" retorted the ambassador 
struggling valiantly; "I have got hold of one of 
Johnson's larks." 



A New England school-teacher recited "The 
Landing of the Pilgrims" to her pupils, then asked 
each of them to draw from their imagination a picture 
of Plymouth Rock. One little fellow hesitated and 
then raised his hand. "Well, Willie, what is it?" 
asked the teacher. "Please teacher, do you want us 
to draw a hen or a rooster ?" 



An English gentleman had sent a private note to a 
marquis, on a personal matter, by hand, and on the 
return of the man questioned him as to his reception. 
"Ah, sir," said the man, "there's no use writing him 
any letter, he can't see to read them. He's blind." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 281 

"Blind !" 

"Yes, sir. He asked me twice where my hat was, 
and I had it on my head all the time/' 



A MAGICIAN was performing in a Kentucky town, 
and during the evening announced that in his next 
trick he would need a pint flask of whisky. No move 
was made to supply the liquor. "Perhaps you did not 
understand me. Will some gentleman kindly loan me 
a pint flask of whisky ?" Then a lank man in the rear 
of the hall arose. "Mistah," said he, "will a quart 
flask do?" "Just as well, sir,'' replied the magician, 
and every gentleman in the hall arose with flask 
extended. 



"Phcebe/' said a mistress in reproof to her colored 
servant whom she found smoking a short pipe after 
having repeatedly threatened to discharge her if again 
caught in the act, "if you won't stop that bad habit 
for any other reason do so because it is right. You 
are a good church member — and, don't you know that 
smoking makes the breath unpleasant, and that noth- 
ing unclean can enter Heaven ?" " 'Deed, missie, I 
does," said the woman, "but bress' yo' heart, when I 
go to Heaben I'll leave my bref behin'." 



It was the custom of a certain deacon, when dining 
at the home of one of his best friends, to drink a glass 
of milk, as a prelude to his dinner. One day when the 
minister was scheduled to appear, instead of the rich, 



282 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

foamy glass of milk, his friend placed beside his plate 
a glass of milk punch. After the blessing, the deacon 
seized his glass and drank to the last drop, and then 
exclaimed as he closed his eyes and smacked his lips, 
''Oh, what a cow !'' 



Dean Hole of Rochester, England, told of a very 
innocent and obliging curate who went to a Yorkshire 
parish where many of the parishioners bred horses and 
sometimes raced them. A few Sundays after his ar- 
rival he was asked to invite the prayers of the congre- 
gation for Lucy Grey. He did so. They prayed for 
three Sundays for her. On the fourth, the church clerk 
told the curate that he need not do it any more. 
"Why," he asked, "is she dead?" "No," said the 
clerk, "she's won the steeplechase." 



The late Richard Henry Stoddard while endeavor- 
ing to procure an impromptu luncheon for a number of 
his friends after his wife and the servants had retired, 
found a box of sardines. His vigorous remarks, in- 
spired by the sardine-can's objections to the "open 
sesame" of a dull jack-knife, attracted the attention of 
Mrs. Stoddard on the floor above. 

"What are you doing?" she called down. 

"Opening a can of sardines." 

"With what?" 

"A dashed old jack-knife," cried the exasperated 
poet ; "what did you think I was opening it with ?" 

"Well, dear, she answered, "I didn't think you were 
opening it with prayer." 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 288 

"What is the matter with your father, Gladys?** 
asked the child's aunt. 

"He's awful sick with a headache," the little girl 
answered, "an' he's hurt, tcx>, 'cause mama said he's 
broke his resolution." 



Colored people are proverbially fond of funerals, 
and Mrs. Walker's cook was trying to make her mis- 
tress realize what she had missed by not attending the 
funeral of a prominent citizen of their village. 

"Mis' Fanny," she said, "you sholy orto hev been 
thar. I ain' nevvah seen sech a big funril in dis heah 
town. Dey had all de kerridges fum bofe liberty 
stables, 'mos' all de private conveniences, an' dat new 
fambly fum de North was dere in a two-hoss 
syringe 



v 



William Bourke Cochran took his seat in Con- 
gress on the day that the House went into turmoil 
over the special report on post-office affairs. "I sup- 
pose it looks like old times to you, Cochran," said a 
friend, who, with others, had crowded around to wel- 
come him back. Just then such epithets as "coward," 
"knave," "scoundrel," and "liar," hurtled across the 
chamber. "Well, I can't say it looks much like old 
times," replied Cockran, "too many new faces for that. 
But it certainly sounds like old times." 



This happened in Scotland : The last edition of the 
newspapers had been sold out and the newsboys were 
calculating their takings. "Hallo," said Jimmy, in 



284 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

alarm, "Fm a 'a'penny short !" "Well, wats the use of 
'arpin' on st?" growled Dick, as he calmly cracked a 
nut; "you don't think I took it, do you?" "I don't 
say you 'ave. But there it is, I'm a 'a'penny short, and 
you're eatin' nuts." 



In the "Diary of a Frenchman" by Flandrau, he 
makes a student say to his chum : "I've an idea that 
we're going to have *je suis bon' in French to- 
day. I wish you would write out a few tenses for 
me. 

Whereupon his friend wrote : 
"Je suis bon. 
Tu es bones, 
II est beans. 
Nous sommes bon bons, 
Vous etes bonbonnieres, 
lis sont bon-ton," 



Tolstoy told Isabel Habgard, who has translated 
many of his books, a good story of one of his an- 
cestors, an army officer, who was an excellent mimic. 
One day he was impersonating the Emperor Paul to 
a group of his friends, when Paul himself entered, and 
for some moments looked on, unperceived, at the antics 
of the young man. Tolstoy finally turned, and be- 
holding the emperor, bowed his head and was silent. 
"Go on, sir," said Paul; "continue the performance." 
The young man hesitated a moment, and then, folding 
his arms and imitating every gesture and intonation of 
his sovereign, he said: "Tolstoy, you deserve to be 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 285 

degraded, but I remember the thoughtlessness of youth, 
and you are pardoned." The czar smiling, said, 
"Well, be it so." 



When President Nicholas Murray Butler was at 
college, certain freshmen of his time made no scruple 
of stealing a pail of milk which a dairyman daily 
placed outside the door of Mr. Butler's room while 
the occupant was in class. In order to foil the boys. 
Mr. Butler printed a sign in big letters, "I have poi- 
soned this milk with arsenic." Upon his return he 
found the milk intact, but added to the notice were 
these words : "So have we." 



There is an amusing story told of a clergyman, 
who, upon one of his trips through the West, observed 
that almost every man he met and spoke with used 
profanity. Finally he found one man who talked to 
him for twenty minutes without using an oath. The 
clergyman shook hands with him at parting and said : 
"You don't know how glad I am to have a chance to 
have a talk with a man like you. You are the first man 
I have met for three days who could talk for five 
minutes without swearing." The stranger, shocked, 
instantly and innocently ejaculated: "Well, Til be 
d d!" 



The other day, while shopping, a lady accidentally 
picked up another lady's umbrella from the counter, 
and had the mistake pointed out to her in a rather 
frigid manner. She returned the umbrella with apol- 



286 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

ogies, and then remembered that she had no umbrella 
with her. 

As it had begun to rain, she bought one, as well as 
one for a birthday present for a friend. With the 
two umbrellas in her hand, she boarded a car and, as 
luck would have it, sat down opposite the lady whose 
umbrella she had picked up earlier in the store. As 
the latter swept out of the car she smiled again frigidly, 
and remarked to the lady of the umbrellas, "I see you 
have had a successful day." 



"If a fairy should appear to you and offer you three 
wishes," said the imaginative young woman, "what 
would you do?" "Fd sign the pledge," answered the 
matter-of-fact young man. 



A SUMMER tourist was passing through a German 
village in the West recently, when a stout German girl 
came to the front door and called to a small girl play- 
ing in front. "Gusty ! Gusty !" she said, "come in and 
eat yourself. Ma's on the table, and pa's half et 1" 



A UNIVERSITY of Illinois professor is very popular 
among the students. He was entertaining a group 
of them at his residence one night. Taking down a 
magnificent sword that hung over the fireplace, he 
brandished it about, exclaiming, "Never will I forget 
the day I drew this blade for the first time." "Where 
did you draw it, sir ?" an awe-struck freshman asked. 
"At a raffle/' said the professor. 



AMONG THE HUMORISTS 287 

In the vicinity of Germantown there lived a worthy 
old lady and her son John, who were once called upon 
to entertain a number of ladies at dinner during 
Quarterly meeting. As John began to carve the 
broiled chickens, he entered upon a flowery speech of 
Welcome, but in the midst of his flattering utterances 
his mother, who was somewhat deaf, piped up from 
the other end of the table : "Ybu needn't be praisin' of 
'em up, John, I'm afraid they're a lot of tough old 
hens, every one of 'em." 



One of Pere Ollivier's flock, a very beautiful and 
handsomely dressed woman, coming very late to church 
one Sunday morning, caused some disturbance and 
stir among the worshipers by her entrance and inter- 
rupted the flow of eloquence of the Worthy father, who, 
very irritable and easily put out, said : "Madame per- 
haps waited to take her chddokte before coming to 
church?" To this, tnadatne, unabashed, graciously 
replied : "Yes, mon pere ; and two foils With it." 



Of late years the House of Commons has seen some 
lively times. Many of them have been brought about 
by the irascible but delightful Irish member. Dr. 
Tanner. On one occasion, when he had been indulg- 
ing rather freely and his ever ready tongue being loos- 
ened, he met Sir Ellis Ashmead Bartlett in the lobby, 
and taking him to one side he said, in the greatest con- 
fidence, and without the slightest tinge of anger, but 
with a world of meaning: "Bartlett, you are a fool." 
"You are drunk," retorted the knight. "That's all 



288 AMONG THE HUMORISTS 

right," replied Dr. Tanner. "Tomorrow I shall be 
sober, but )rou will still be a fool." 



A READER for a New York publishing house gives 
the following, quoted from a story submitted by an 
Indiana authoress, as being about the choicest bit he 
has come across in many years : 

"Reginald was bewitched. Never had the baroness seemed to 
him so beautiful as at this moment, when, in her dumb grief, she 
hid her face." 



An old negro living in Carrollton was taken ill re- 
cently, and called in a physician of his race to pre- 
scribe for him. But the old man did not seem to be 
getting any better, and finally a white physician was 

called. Soon after arriving Dr. S= felt the darky's 

pulse for a moment, and then examined his tongue. 
"Did your other doctor take your temperature?" he 
asked. "I don't know, sah/' he answered, feebly; "I 
haint missed nuthin' but mah watch yit, boss." 



iiiiHiiiiTHiii 

3 bias BiS S11 11)0 



I 



STANFORD UNIVEKSITY lIBRAIilES 

CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY 

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 

|41S| 723-1493 

All books moy be recalled after 7 days 

DATE DUE 



