ClENTiffl AMERICAN 



[Entered at the Post Office of New York, N. Y., as Second Ciass Matter. Copyright, 1909, Dy Munn & Co., Inc.] 



A POPULAR ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY OF THE WORLD'S PROGRESS 



Vol. CI. -No. 25. "I 

Established 1845. J 



NEW YORK, DECEMBER 18, 1909. 



T10 CENTS A COPY 
L $3.00 A YEAR. 



Corn 
2-J67,zi 6,000 bu. 




Copyright 1909 by Munn & Co., Inc. 



If piled up in Madison Square the crops of this year would completely dwarf the Metropolitan tower. 

THE ENORMOUS CROPS OF 1909. -[See page 466.] 



462 



Scientific American, 



December 18, 1909. 



SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN 



ESTABLISHED 1845 



MUNN & CO.. Inc.. 



Editors and Proprietors 



Published Weekly at 
No. 361 Broa.dwa.y, New York 



Charles Allen Mctnn, President 

361 Broadway, New York. 

Frederick Coxverse Beach, Scc'y and Treas. 

36] Broadway. New York. 



TERMS TO SUBSCRIBERS. 

One copy, one year, for trie United States or Mexico $3.00 

One copy, one year, for Canada ........ 3.75 

One copy, one year, to any foreign country, postage prepaid, ISs. 6d. 4.50 

THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN PUBLICATIONS. 

Scientific American (established 1845) $3.00 a year 

Scientific American Supplement (established 1876) 5.00 '• 

American Homes and Gardens 3.00 " 

Scientific American Export Edition (established 1878) 3.00 ' L 

The combined subscription rates and rates to foreign countries, includ- 
ing Canada, will be furnished upon application. 

itemit by postal or express money order, or by bank draft or check. 
MUNN & CO., Inc., 361 Broadway, New York. 

NEW- YORK, SATURDAY, DECEMBER 18th, 1909. 

The Editor is always glad to receive for examination illustrated articles 
on subjects of timely interest. If the photographs are gftar'P, the articles 
short, and the facts autitentic, the contributions will receive special 
attention. Accepted articles will be paid for at regular space rates. 

A REVERSION TO TYPE. 

The old American eight-wheel passenger locomotive, 
with its flexible wheel base and comparatively high 
center of gravity, was admirably adapted to the tracks 
on which it ran. When, a few years ago, electric trac- 
tion was applied to our steam railroads, the designers 
of the electric motors made the mistake of ignoring 
altogether the steam locomotive, and basing their de- 
signs upon electric street car practice. Consequently, 
the first electric locomotives for this work were, in 
respect of their driving mechanism, nothing more nor 
less than exaggerated trolley cars, with the character- 
istic rigid wheel base and a low center of gravity. 

When the plans of the electric locomotives for the 
New York Central and New Haven railroads were 
made public, the Scientific American criticised these 
features, and predicted that they would prove very 
destructive to the track, particularly in their tendency 
to throw it out of alignment. The wreck at Woodlawn, 
followed later by another at Greenwich, established 
the truth of these criticisms, and both locomotives 
have subsequently been modified, with a view to elimi- 
nating as far as possible the defects referred to. 

In designing the powerful electric locomotives for 
the Pennsylvania tunnels, which are illustrated else- 
where in the present issue, the defects of rigid wheel 
base and low center of gravity were avoided by remov- 
ing the motor from the axle and placing it above the 
frames, and by reverting to the wheel plan of the 
American eight-wheel type, in which there are four 
coupled drivers and a leading four-wheel truck. It 
will be seen that if a pair of cylinders were placed 
above the truck, and the jack-shaft cranks and the 
coupling rods to the motor were replaced by a cross- 
head and piston, we would have the familiar steam 
locomotive arrangement. 

It will thus be seen that the locomotives are a 
compromise between the existing steam and electric 
locomotives, with the best features of each included. 
They will combine the even turning effort and absence 
of unbalanced weights of the electric, with the high 
center of gravity and flexible wheel base of the steam 
locomotive. Whether this is destined to be the endur- 
ing type, is a matter for the future to determine. 

NAVY DEPARTMENT REORGANIZATION. 

Since the new plan for the reorganization of 
the administration of the navy is described by its 
sponsors as "tentative," they evidently expect that 
experience will suggest some modifications. This 
being the case, we have no wish to indulge 
in what might seem to be captious criticism; 
for we believe that the Secretary has given his 
indorsement to the present plan only after a very 
serious consideration of its utility. Furthermore, we 
have personal reasons for believing that many of the 
naval officials who have taken an active part in the 
recent criticisms and discussions are weary of the pro- 
tracted controversy, and are anxious to welcome any 
plan which gives promise of harmonious and economi- 
cal administration. 

Surely, if special boards have done anything to solve 
the problem we ought by this time to have reached a 
clear road. The Sperry board, the Leutze board, and 
lastly the Swift board, were appointed, made their 
investigations, and duly reported to the Secretary. 
The present scheme may, therefore, be taken to repre- 
sent the combined wisdom of the many selected ex- 
perts who have passed upon the subject. 

On one point, however, we do doubt most strongly 
the wisdom of Secretary Meyer's proposed scheme. 
We refer to the proposal to take the administration 
of the navy yards out of the hands of the naval 



constructors and put the seagoing officers in con- 
trol. Look at the matter whatever way we will, 
this move seems about as unreasonable as to take 
the captains and executive officers of the trans- 
atlantic liners from their ships, and place them in 
full control of the yards in which their ships were 
built. Our seagoing officers have not the experience 
or the special technical and mechanical knowledge 
to qualify them for the position of "works mana- 
gers." An officer may have a perfect genius for 
naval strategy and tactics; he may have the most 
intimate knowledge of seamanship in its broadest 
sense, of navigation, and, in short, of. everything 
that has to do with the management of a warship 
when she is in commission, and yet be a very poor 
mechanic, and have only a very hazy idea of shop 
and yard management. 

If it be necessary — and we believe it is — for the 
present scheme of reorganization to receive the sanc- 
tion of Congress, we trust that body will make a 
very exhaustive investigation of this phase of the 
question. The Newberry scheme, which has now 
been for about a year in successful operation, estab- 
lished the naval constructors in practical charge of 
the administration of the yards, subject to a com- 
mandant; it created a single payroll, and placed the 
care of buildings and grounds, and of all the work 
coming under the head of civil engineering, under 
a single manager. The number of separate shops 
was greatly reduced, and the officers in charge of the 
various shops were practically inspectors of the work 
done for their several bureaus. The work of the 
yards was greatly simplified, expenses were reduced, 
and there was a greater all-round efficiency. We 
trust that Congress will modify the proposals of the 
present scheme as far as they affect the navy yards, 
and permit them to be run under the present ad- 
mirable plan. If this modification be made, we be- 
lieve that Secretary Meyer's reforms will prove to be 
of lasting benefit to the navy. 

THE VALUE OF EXHAUST STEAM. 

Apart from its own inherent excellence as a prime 
mover the steam turbine has been teaching us many 
valuable lessons about the steam engine; or, to speak 
more correctly, has been bringing into prominence 
many facts regarding the steam engine which were 
known, but whose great importance was being over- 
looked or neglected. We have all of us known in a 
general way, for instance, that a high-pressure engine 
exhausting directly into the atmosphere was extrava- 
gant; but it remained for the low-pressure steam 
turbine to teach us how much power was being lost, 
and what a large proportion of that power could be 
recovered by expanding the steam down in a suitable 
auxiliary chamber. It has already been established 
that when an exhaust steam turbine is installed as an 
auxiliary to a non-condensing engine, it can develop 
from the exhaust steam even more useful work 
than the engine does from the live steam. Propor- 
tionate economies also are realized where an exhaust 
steam turbine is interposed between the low-pressure 
cylinder of a compound or triple-expansion engine 
and the condenser. A notable instance of this is 
found in the 59th Street power station of the New 
York Subway, which was originally equipped with the 
well-known Allis-Chalmers cross-compound engine. 

The maximum economical rated power of these 
engines, as contracted for, was 6,000 kilowatts, with 
an overload capacity of about 8000 kilowatts. At 
their normal rating, the engines showed a water rate 
of about 18 pounds of steam per kilowatt hour, and 
at maximum overload the consumption ran up to 
about 22 pounds. By interposing a low-pressure tur- 
bine between the low-pressure cylinder and the con- 
denser, it has become possible not only to run the 
engines with an economical water rate at their full 
overload, but the total kilowatt output is about 
doubled, the combined unit developing about 16,000 
kilowatts on a water rate of 14 pounds per kilowatt 
hour. The steam enters the high-pressure cylinders 
at a gage pressure of from 190 to 195 pounds, the 
low pressure at from 45 to 48 pounds, the turbine at 
about one pound, and the condenser is maintained at 
about 28.8 inches of vacuum. In the expansion from 
195 pounds gage to atmospheric pressure 8000 horse- 
power is developed; and by the interposition of the 
steam turbine another 8000 horse-power is recovered 
between the atmospheric pressure and 28.8 inches of 
vacuum. This is a wonderful advance in steam- 
engine practice; but that we are still far removed 
from theoretical perfection is proved by the fact that, 
even with this successful combination, 60 per cent of 
the heat units is being carried away by the con- 
denser water into the North River. 

A STEAM-TURBINE ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE. 

Considerable interest has been aroused in British 
railroad circles by the announcement that the fore- 
most locomotive construction company have per- 
fected a new type of railroad engine, particulars of 
which were recently given to a Scottish university 



engineering society by the president of the company 
in question. It is described as a "steam-turbine elec- 
tric locomotive;" and as a turbo-electric combination. 
The first engine of this type, which is approaching 
completion in the company's shops, possesses many 
new and ingenious features. 

In general design the engine will not differ very 
materially from the ordinary locomotive now in use. 
Steam is raised in a boiler of the usual locomotive 
type, fitted with a superheater, the supplies of water 
being drawn from tanks disposed on either side of 
the boiler, and the coal is carried in side bunkers. 
The steam is led^from the boiler to a high-speed im- 
pulse turbine running at 3000 revolutions per minute, 
to which is directly coupled a continuous-current, 
variable-voltage dynamo. With this generator elec- 
trical energy ranging from 200 to 600 volts is supplied 
to four series-wound traction motors, the armatures 
of which are built on the four main or driving axles 
of the locomotive. 

The exhaust steam from the turbine is passed into 
an ejector condenser,, and is finally, with the circu- 
lating condensing water, discharged into the hot well. 
Owing to the steam turbine requiring no internal 
lubrication, the water of condensation is free from 
oil, and can consequently be discharged from the hot 
well direct into the boiler by means of a feed pump. 
In this manner the water can be used over and over 
again, and the water carried in the supply tanks 
actually serves as circulating water- in the condensing 
operations. Circulation is effected in a closed cycle 
by means of small centrifugal pumps, driven by aux- 
iliary steam turbines, placed alongside the main tur- 
bine and dynamo. The water thus flows from the- 
tanks through the first pump, by means of which it 
is forced through the condenser, where it serves to 
condense the exhaust steam from the turbine, then, 
to the hot well, from which it is pumped to a cooler 
at the front of the engine, where it comes into con- 
tact with a blast of cold air caused by the movement 
of the locomotive and a fan which serves to cool it, 
and then it returns to the tank for further use. 

In so cooling the water, however, the usual exhaust 
blast which induces the draft through the furnace and 
boiler tubes is lost. To remedy this deficiency, a 
forced draft is supplied by means of a small turbine- 
driven fan, placed within the radiator or cooler, so 
that while it serves to cool the circulating water it 
also induces a blast of hot air to the fire. The cab 
of the locomotive carries a small switchboard, on 
which are mounted the controller for grouping the 
four motors, according to what draw-bar pull is re- 
quired, in series or parallel, as well as the regulator 
for controlling the electrical circuit voltage, and con- 
sequently the speed of the train. 

The whole of this main and auxiliary machinery is 
mounted upon a strong underframe, carried on two 
eight-wheeled compound bogies, to facilitate negotia- 
tion of curves at high speed. Each bogie carries two 
of the four driving motors, as already mentioned. It 
will thus be seen that in reality an articulated sys- 
tem^is adopted. 

The first engine to be built on these lines is 
approaching completion, and its performances are 
awaited with great interest. ■ The experiments which 
have already been made by the company upon an 
extensive scale lead them to believe that such a loco- 
motive as this would possess great possibilities and 
offer a complete solution to the traction question of 
to-day. In any large well-equipped locomotive estab- 
lishment an engine can be produced for a low figure 
in comparison with the electric locomotive, and by 
the adoption of the new combination they do not anti- 
cipate that the prime cost will be very appreciably 
enhanced. 

» i » i » 

The Transvaal government have set aside a fairly 
large sum for the erection of an experimental scrap 
iron smelting works. Possibly, says Engineering, the 
movement may eventually extend so that larger works 
may be built to deal with the native ore. This ore 
has already been employed with good results in the 
manufacture of different articles. Speaking of Pre- 
toria ore, the foreman of the railroad workshops says 
that it is easily fluxed and good iron obtained free of 
sulphur and phosphorus. A test of local hematite was 
recently carried out and 633 pounds of iron was ob- 
tained from 1,100 pounds of ore usecl. The Transvaal 
mines' consumption of iron and steef is estimated at 
50,000 tons yearly, valued at £900,000; of this £600,- 
000 consists of rails, sleepers, pipes and pipe fittings, 
rock drills, and spares. The railroad also purchases 
about 32,000 tons of rails and sleepers annually. There 
is therefore scope for the opening of works, but the 
government mining engineer considers that the pro- 
vision of blast furnaces must be a matter for private 
enterprise. Perhaps some day South Africa may take 
its place among the great manufacturing countries of 
the world, but that state of affairs is a long way off at 
present, and for many years that country will have to 
depend on its gold and diamonds, and in a lesser de- 
gree on its agricultural productions. 



December 18, 1909. 

ENGINEERING. 

It is said that Russia will give a contract to an 
American syndicate to develop the Transsiberian Rail- 
way and double-track the line throughout. 

The third Pennsylvania tube under the East River to 
Sunnyside yard, Long Island City, has been practically 
completed. 

Five miles of the Panama Canal have been opened 
to navigation. This includes the channel from the 
point in the Bay of Panama, where the water is forty- 
five feet deep at mean tide, to the wharves at Balboa. 
Steamships are using this part of the canal daily. 

The number of railway accidents during the year 
ending June 30th, 1909, was 66,711, or 2,791 killed, 
and 63,920 injured. This is a decrease in the total 
number of 6,042, or 973 killed and 5,069 injured, as 
compared with the number reported in the previous 
year. Even the reduced figures do not speak very 
well for the safety on our railroads. 

The great railway bridge across the Sioule gorge in 
France was opened a short time ago. The height of 
the bridge is 450 feet above the ground. The bridge 
consists of a continuous girder 40 feet deep, divided 
into three spans by two intermediate masonry piers 
370 feet high. The main span is 470 feet long, and 
each of the outer spans has a length of 380 feet. 

The Public Service Commission has just issued a 
synopsis of the report of the Interborough Rapid 
Transit Company, including both the Subway and Ele- 
vated divisions, for the year ended June 30th, 1909. 
The subway carried 237,451,171 passengers at a total 
expense of $4,547,620 — something less than two cents a 
passenger. The elevated division carried 275,737,974 
passengers. The operating expenses on the subway 
were $4,457,620, and on the elevated $6,199,823. 

Arrangements are being made to consider proposals 
for a fast passenger and mail steamship and train serv- 
ice from London to Australia and New Zealand by way 
of Canada, and an 18-knot service on the Pacific. The 
subsidy aid which would have to be given by British 
colonial governments would be very heavy. The Aus- 
tralian government demurred at first, but has finally 
agreed to share in the cost, and a conference will meet 
in London early in the spring to consider the details 
and apportion the cost. 

A new steamship service will shortly be established 
between New York and Washington, and freight steam- 
ships will be in operation by the first of next year. 
It is estimated that the journey from New York to 
Washington will take from thirty-six to thirty-eight 
hours, including stops. A daily service of passenger 
steamers is in contemplation. The Potomac River 
serves an immense territory on either side, which is 
now largely without modern facilities for traveling or 
sending goods to market. Wharves are being built, 
and small steamboats will pick up the freight and 
carry it to the landings of the large steamships. The 
country on each side of the Potomac is very fertile; 
the eastern shore of Maryland produced 4,000,000 bar- 
rels of potatoes last year. The great difficulty has 
been to get the produce to market. 

The following notes concerning the storage of Cali- 
fornia or crude oil in concrete reservoirs were recently 
given in Concrete. A 1,000,000-barrel reservoir, lined 
with concrete, has recently been completed at Port 
Richmond, Cal., and one of 800,000-barrel capacity is 
under construction near Bakersfleld. The practice is 
to excavate the earth, which in most fields is a sandy 
loam, porous and very dry, to about one-third the depth 
of the proposed reservoir. With the material removed, 
a levee is built round the excavation, having side 
slopes of 1 : 1% on both faces. The bottom and sides 
are then covered with about 3-inch concrete, often re- 
inforced with expanded metal or some equivalent. 
Small cracks that occur at the junction of the sides 
and bottom and along the line between the cut and the 
embankment soon become filled with sediment and are 
believed to permit the leakage of very little oil. A 
number of such structures in southern California have 
recently been examined, and no signs of depreciation 
in the quality of the concrete were found. 

The recent deplorable mine accident at Cherry, 111., 
in which there were hundreds of deaths, brings up 
the question of expert direction in such disasters. 
Untrained volunteers are entirely useless, as was 
demonstrated in France a couple of years ago, when 
about twenty rescuers went down in a mine to 
their death. The expert life-savers from the West- 
phalia mines, who were sent by the Kaiser, with their 
tested ropes and other tackle, came too late, but their 
work demonstrated that if they had been called in 
earlier, they might have saved a large number. The 
cost of expert direction in accidents would not be very 
great, and it seems as though if we protect our coasts 
by guards, we might also do something to protect our 
miners. A few men who are especially fitted could be 
organized and drilled in each district, and the mine 
owners themselves might be made to furnish the neces- 
sary equipment, which would not be a very great tax 
on any operators. 



Scientific American 

SCIENCE. 

Dr. Percival Lowell is installing a 12-inch telescope 
on San Francisco Peak at an altitude of 13,000 feet. 
Prof. V. M. Slipher will have charge of the task of 
erecting the big telescope. 

The discovery of a new Alhambra at Ronda, south 
Spain, by Lawrence Perin of Baltimore is reported. 
Mr. Perin recently purchased the well-known Casa del 
Rey Moro, and proceeded to make excavations. He 
found large numbers of Roman and Arabian gold coins 
and revealed vast galleries. 

The Italian Parliament will soon be called upon to 
provide for a special department to unroll and de- 
cipher papyri discovered at Herculaneum. It is trusted 
that this action may be taken immediately. Some pre- 
vious documents have been damaged irrevocably be- 
cause of legislative delay and neglect. 

The American Museum of Natural History is to use 
designs of the famous Mitla ruina of Mexico for the 
new restaurant which is now being planned. The 
Mitla ruins were built of adobe and stone ornamented 
with mural painting and mosaic work produced by 
stones set in cement. The restaurant will therefore 
serve the purpose of an exhibition hall. 

Some time ago it was ascertained that radium ema- 
nations were absorbed by the surface of lungs and in- 
testines, but not by the skin, at least under ordinary 
conditions. The greater part of the absorbed emana- 
tion is quickly eliminated by the lungs; a small part 
passes away with fecal matter; and finally some has 
been found in the liver and the bile, but none is ejected 
with the urine or perspiration. 

An international conference is proposed for the 
preservation of the fur seal and all marine mammals, 
including whales, walruses, sea lions, and sea ele- 
phants. Some of these animals are now all but ex- 
tinct, and the government considers it time to formu- 
late an international law for their preservation. The 
Japanese seem to be the chief offenders, for they have 
even ventured within the three-mile limit to carry on 
their work of destruction. 

In a new process of keeping eggs in cold storage, 
500 eggs are packed in a tin box, and a little calcium 
chloride is added, to insure dryness. A lid, having a 
hole 1/5-inch diameter, is then soldered on and the 
box, with a number of others, is placed in a large 
iron cylinder, from which the air is then exhausted. 
By this operation the air and carbon dioxide dissolved 
in the albumen are removed, as well as the air which 
surrounds the eggs and fills their voids. The cylin- 
der is next filled with pure carbon dioxide, and a pres- 
sure slightly above that of the atmosphere is main- 
tained until the constancy of the manometer indicates 
that the eggs are saturated with the gas. But as 
eggs do not keep well in pure carbon dioxide, a cer- 
tain quantity of this gas is next withdrawn from the 
cylinder and replaced by nitrogen, obtained either 
from the cylinders in which it is sold in a compressed 
state or by passing air over red-hot copper. When the 
eggs have become saturated with the mixture of gases, 
the boxes are removed from the cylinder, sealed, and 
placed in rooms where the temperature is kept be- 
tween 32 and 36 deg. F. By this process the eggs are 
kept in an atmosphere which contains no free oxygen, 
and in which the proportions of carbon dioxide and 
nitrogen are the same as exist in the albumen of 
fresh-laid eggs. 

Whether or not there is a planet beyond Neptune is 
a problem which has long concerned mathematical 
astronomers. Among those who have taken the trouble 
mathematically to settle the problem of such a planet's 
existence is Prof. W. H. Pickering, who used the meth- 
od of Leverrier, the discoverer of Uranus. Prof. Pick- 
ering believes in the existence of at least one such 
planet, which he has designated by the letter O. A 
search for this planet was recently undertaken by the 
Rev. J. H. Metcalf with his 12-inch doublet, but without 
success. The reasons adduced in Science by Prof. 
Pickering for this failure are the following: (a) The 
planet may be unexpectedly faint, or reddish in color. 
Its computed magnitude is 13.5. (6) The orbit may 
be highly eccentric, the computation being based on 
an approximately circular orbit, (c) The orbit may 
be highly inclined to the ecliptic, and the planet at 
present situated far from its node. For various rea- 
sons the first two causes are not thought sufficiently 
effective to interfere with the discovery of the planet. 
We might, by analogy, compare planet O, on account 
of its relative size and position with regard to the 
other planets, to the sixth or seventh satellite of Jupi- 
ter. The inclinations of the orbits of these two bodies 
are 28 deg. and 26 deg., respectively. The region al- 
ready covered in the photographic search extends 
along the ecliptic for 25 deg., and reaches to a maxi- 
mum distance of 10 deg. to the north and south of it. 
It is expected therefore to make an examination of 
the higher latitudes next year. The number of stars 
already examined in the search is estimated at about 
300,000. 



463 



AERONAUTICS. 

Recognizing that all the leading European nations 
are rapidly developing aerial fleets of both lighter-than- 
air and heavier-than-air machines, Gen. James Allen, 
the chief signal officer of our army, made an especial 
plea in his annual report to the Secretary of War last 
week for a definite plan of aeronautical development 
in the army. It is to be hoped this will be given the 
attention it deserves. Our War Department was the 
first to order an aeroplane, and it should not fall be- 
hind now in aviation or aerostatics. 

The second week in December is noteworthy from 
the fact that Maurice Farman, a brother of Henry 
Farman, started to make the first cross-country tour 
ever attempted by aeroplane. Leaving Buc, near Ver- 
sailles (France), at 2:52 P. M. December 9th, he arrived 
at Chatres (42 miles distant) in 53 minutes, flying 
over Trappes and Rambouillet en route. His biplane, 
which resembles that of his brother, averaged 47 miles 
an hour in making this flight. The weather was fine, 
there being scarcely any wind. The flight formed the 
first stage of a trip to Bourdeaux, which M. Farman 
hoped to complete in four or five additional flights. 

The Wright Company has recently been incorpo- 
rated in New York for the manufacture of the Wright 
aeroplane in the United States. The company is capi- 
talized at $1,000,000, Wilbur Wright being president 
and Orville Wright vice-president. Among the direc- 
tors are such men as Cornelius Vanderbilt, Howard 
Gould, and August Belmont. The company will erect 
a factory at Dayton, Ohio — the home of the Wright 
brothers — and will also have an aviation field where 
purchasers can be taught the operation of the ma- 
chines. It is expected that many American sportsmen 
will soon become interested in aviation and own aero- 
planes. 

On the 8th instant Earl Gray, Governor General of 
Canada, Lord Lacelle, and several other prominent 
Canadians visited Dr. A. G. Bell's laboratory at Beinn 
Behreagh, near Baddeck, N. S., and, in the absence of 
Dr. Bell, were shown about by Messrs. Baldwin and 
McCurdy, who are still associated with him in his ex- 
perimental work. A demonstration was given of a 
new hydroplane boat, which rose completely out of the 
water in a short run of a few hundred feet. It is ex- 
pected to use this boat beneath an aeroplane, so as to 
make possible the ascent from water. Despite a hail 
storm and a soggy field, Mr. McCurdy treated the visi- 
tors to a flight of a mile in the "Baddeck No. 2," the 
second biplane that he and Mr. F. W. Baldwin have 
constructed this year, and the one with which a con- 
siderable number of successful flights have been accom- 
plished. Altogether, there are a half dozen different 
heavier-than-air machines ready to be tried out on the 
ice of the Bras d'Or lakes at Baddeck this winter. 

The first tests in the United States of firing at bal- 
loons were carried out at the Sandy Hook proving 
grounds on November 27th, when a small 3-man cap- 
tive balloon was anchored at a height of 300 feet and 
fired at from a distance of 2,000 yards. Fifteen shots 
were fired from a special 1-pounder having a range of 
movement from horizontal to vertical, without hitting 
the balloon. A larger field gun that could be elevated 
to about 40 degrees was also tried with smoke-produc- 
ing shells, several of which passed over and several be- 
low the balloon. A third kind of shot was a shrapnel 
which exploded at a certain set distance, and dis- 
charged backward a score or more of balls in a widely 
expanding cone. The balloon was brought to earth 
by one of these shot. Before the completion of the 
tests, which lasted several days, 90 shots were fired 
with but 3 hits. Two of these were without effect. 
As a result of the tests, army officers believe it will be 
almost as difficult to hit and destroy a dirigible balloon 
as an aeroplane. 

At the meeting of the Aeronautic Society on Decem- 
ber 2nd, Dr. Spratt of Coatesville, Pa., an intimate friend 
of Mr. Octave Chanute and an aeronautic experimenter 
of many gears' standing, gave a brief talk upon his 
work in connection with the aeroplane. After calling 
attention to the fact that all animals walk or move 
over the ground irrespective of the number or length 
of their legs, just the same as all flying creatures navi- 
gate the air no matter what the size or shape of their 
wings, Dr. Spratt said he believed flight depended 
upon a general principle as simple as that of the lever, 
which governs walking, but that man had difficulty in 
discovering this principle since he was not making use 
of it universally, as in the latter case. Of late years 
he has devoted himself to finding this principle, in 
which quest he believes he has met with success. As 
a result, he has lately applied for a patent upon an 
aeroplane in which it is embodied. He spoke of having 
discovered in his early experiments the curve now 
used on the Wright biplane surfaces. At the suggestion 
of Mr. Chanute the Wrights made quantitative tests of 
surfaces having this curve and, finding it satisfactory, 
adopted it. Dr. Spratt was with the two brothers 
three seasons at Kitty Hawk, and was an interested 
witness of their first flights with a motor. 



464 



Scientific American 



December 18, 1909. 



THE NEW PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD ELECTRIC 
LOCOMOTIVES. 

It is a curious instance of what might be called the 
vagaries of mechanical evolution that the latest and 
most powerful electric locomotives, of which we pre- 
sent illustrations, should be furnished with those side 
rods and connecting rods, the abolition of which from 
the electric locomotive was considered to be one of 
its principal points of improvement. 

Theoretically, to get rid of the reciprocating move- 
ments and unbalanced rotating weights of the steam 
locomotive was eminently desirable, for these unbal- 
anced weights were the cause of much destructive wear 
upon the track and roadbed. Furthermore, the sub- 
stitution of the compact electric motor, encircling the 
driving axle, was considered to be an ideal arrange- 
ment of compactness and efficiency. 

When the electric drive came to be applied to steam 
railroads, as in the case of the electrification of the 
New York Central and the New Haven roads, it was 
found that the above mentioned advantages were ob- 
tained at the expense of collateral disadvantages of a 
very serious character, for the low center of gravity, 
the rigid wheel base, and the large amount of non- 
Bpring-supported weight combined to make the locomo- 
tives very destructive of the track. Both locomotives 
met with serious accidents, the former bursting open 
the track on a curve near Woodlawn, and the latter 
doing the same thing when hauling the White 
Mountain express at high speed through Greenwich, 
Connecticut. The running of both types of locomotive 
has since been greatly improved by the substitution 
of four-wheeled leading trucks on the New York Cen- 
tral locomotive, and the introduction of pony trucks 
on the locomotives of the New Haven road. 

In designing the locomotives to be used in the New 
York tunnel extension of the Pennsylvania Railroad, 
the engineers of the railroad company and of the 
Westinghouse Electrical Manufacturing Company have 
profited by the valuable experience of the past few 
years, and have designed an engine which will have 
the high center of gravity and flexibility of wheel base 
which characterize the steam locomotive. It con- 
sists of two duplicate sections. The wheel plan of 
each section is the same as that of the old eight-wheel 
American steam locomotive, and consists of four 
coupled drivers and a four-wheeled truck. 

The sections are permanently coupled back to back 
by a special arrangement of Westinghouse friction 
draft gear and levers, so that the leading section ef- 
fectually pilots the rear one. This obviates all neces- 
sity of turning the engine, which runs equally well 
in either direction. All manipulating levers are dupli- 
cated in each section, so the operator simply changes 
ends. 

The most original feature of this engine, at least 
in American practice, is the removal of the motors 
from the wheel axles and the substitution of a single 
motor which is placed above the frames and within 
the cab. This motor weighs, without gear, 45,000 
pounds, and in weight and power it is the largest rail- 
way motor ever constructed. At each end of the rotor 
shaft is a crank, the two being set, as in steam loco- 
motive practice, at ninety degrees. From these cranks 
a pair of coupling rods lead down to a crank-shaft 
(known as a jack shaft) which is carried in the 
frame in a horizontal line with the axles of the driv- 
ing wheels. The jack shaft cranks are coupled to 
the drivers. 

Now it will readily be seen that this arrangement 
avoids all the difficulties of counter-balancing which 
have been such a nightmare to the steam locomotive 
designer and to the track superintendent, for, since 
the motor crank revolves uniformly and at constant ef- 
fort, differing therein from steam practice, the turn- 
ing effort of the drive wheels is the same as for the 
motor, and is constant throughout each revolution. 
Moreover, it will be seen that since the movements of 
all rods and moving parts are those of pure dota- 



tion only, it is possible to secure perfect counter- 
balance, and the engine delivers no more shock to the 
track and roadbed than a passenger car of equal 
weight. 

The motor and massive side frame, the jack shaft, 
and all other gear, are spring supported from the 
driver and truck wheels, so that there is no track 
stress other than that local to a single pair of wheels. 
In this arrangement of motor support and connection, 



operated overhead contact shoe, of which there are 
two on each locomotive. The first locomotive, which 
is now being tested both as to speed and hauling 
power on the Long Island Railroad, is giving satis- 
factory results. 




One of the 2,000 horse-power motors of the 
Pennsylvania electric locomotives. 

the center of gravity height closely approximates that 
in the best high-speed locomotives. 

A decided improvement in the "Pennsylvania" type 
is the use of a single motor for two pairs of drivers, 
and the benefits secured by its position. The motor is 
located high up from the roadbed, secure from snow, 
dirt and water, and its design embodies electrical 
features never before secured on an electric loco- 
motive. 

The first twenty-four locomotives to be built will 
have the following dimensions: 

Total weight, 166 tons; total hofse-power, 4,000; 
maximum draw bar pull, 60,000 pounds; maximum 



Electric Traction In Tunis. 

In the region of Tunis there has been installed an 
extensive system of electric traction lines. The new 
electric sections, which are now in regular running, 
are designed to replace the former steam railroad. 
This latter comprised three lines, one of these running 
from Tunis to La Goulette, about 10 miles distance, the 
second from the city to Marsa, 11 miles, and the third 
from La Goulette to Marsa, about 5 miles. The region 
covered by the lines is of interest as being the site of 
ancient Carthage and its extensive suburbs. The first 
two sections had a common portion of about 6 miles 
between Tunis and Aouina. The steam lines had been 
conceded in 1871 to an English company which turned 
them over to the Florio Rubattino company ten years 
later, and they afterward passed into the hands of the 
Bone-Gullma railroad company. The government made 
an arrangement in 1905 with the Tunis traction com- 
pany to have the lines changed to the electric system. 
This was carried out by the Paris Thomson-Houston 
firm, and the government wished to profit by the jetty 
which had been laid across the Tunis Lake so- as to 
use it for the line as far as La Goulette and thus run 
in a straight path. The old traject is kept between 
La Goulette and Marsa, but there is also a second 
branch which runs nearer the sea coast, traversing the 
site of Carthage and reaching the elevated locality of 
Sidi-bou-Said, then descending to the terminus at 
Marsa. 

The object of the new line is to enable the popula- 
tion of Tunis to reach the seashore easily and rapidly, 
and the new shore branch could not be realized by the 
steam road on account of the irregular ground cov- 
ered here. It is expected that the suburban region will 
be much more developed by the use of the electric line. 
At present the trains are made up on the multiple- 
unit system of two motor cars and from one to three 




Drive wheels, ( 



; inches diameter. Truck 

Chassis 01 the new 



wheels, 36 inches. Length over all, < 
electric locomotive. 



ifeet. 



speed, 60 to 70 miles per hour under load; diameter 
of drive wheels, 68 inches; diameter of truck wheels, 
36 inches; weight on drivers, 104 tons; length over 
all, 65 feet; total wheel base, 56 feet. 

The controller on the "Pennsylvania" type is 
scarcely as large as that on a Hoe printing press. 
None of the main power passes through it, as it is 
really a switch corresponding to a telegrapher's key, 
operated by electro-pneumatic means. With a lever 
which can be moved with one finger, the engineer can 
admit to the locomotive a current equal to that avail- 
able in a hundred trolley cars. 

The electric supply will be secured from an electric 
conductor, or third rail, by four contact shoes on each 
locomotive. At some points where the great number 
of track switches will not permit this, power will be 
secured from an overhead conductor through an air- 



trailers. The motor cars are fitted with two motors 
of the G E-66 type which run on 600 volts on the over- 
head wire or third rail, and give 125 horse-power, using 
two series-parallel controllers. With front and rear 
motorman's cabins, the cars have first and second-class 
compartments and also a baggage or light freight com- 
partment. The chassis has two bogies, one of which 
carries the motors. Current is taken by third rail for 
the suburban part of the line, and it is only within 
the city that the trolley is used. The motor cars 
weigh 28 tons and contain 100 places, while the trail- 
ers, of an equal capacity, weigh 22 tons. 




Weight, 166 tons. Horse-power, 4000. Drawbar pull, 60,000 pounds. 
TEE NEW PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE 



The Great St. Petersburg Ozone Plant. 

In view of the very satisfactory results obtained by 
the purification of the water of the Neva in ordinary 
sand filters, when the epidemic of cholera was preva- 
lent in St. Petersburg about a year ago, the municipal 
douma and the authorities of the city have decided 
to erect a large plant for ozonizing water. It is only 
just to say that the cholera infection is to be attrib- 
uted in this recent outbreak to the defective nature of 
the actual system of distribution, which is incapable of 
retaining the bacteria. On the other hand, the sani- 
tary authorities of the government, as «well as those 
of the city of St. Petersburg, are of the opinion that 
sterilization by ozone is the only method which is able 
to assure a radical purification of the drinking water 
of the city, their investigations, as well as those of the 
Instituts Pasteur and Koch, having demonstrated the 
perfect bactericidal quality of ozone as the best means 
for completely destroying the microbes contained in 
water. This large ozone plant, combined with an in- 
stallation of rapid filtration (Howatson system) will be 
laid out according to the combined systems Siemens-de- 
Frise-Otto. The electrical portions of the ozone ap- 
paratus will be constructed by the Siemens & Halske 
Company and the plant of Felten Guilleaume-Lah- 
meyer. — La Nature. 



December 18, 1909. 



Scientific American 



465 



THE LIFE OF A SPLASH. 

BT PEROT COLLINS. 

Probably many people have at times watched the 
splashes caused by rain drops falling upon the smooth 
surface of a pool or river. Some, too, may have gone 
so far as to differentiate between the splashes formed 
by the big drops of a thunder shower and those pro- 
duced by the smaller drops of a gentle rain. In the 
former case a conspicuous bubble floats for a moment, 
and then vanishes; in the latter a crystalline foun- 
tain seems to start from a surrounding coronet of 
lesser jets — though this is in part an illusion, for it 
is known that in reality the coronet has vanished be- 
fore the jet appears. The image of the coronet has 
not had time to fade from the eye ere that of the jet 
is superposed upon it. Moreover, it may have chanced 
to the reader to note the different effects, both of 
sound and of splash, produced by a stone dropped into 
the water — these differences apparently depending 
upon the height from which the stone descends, and 
upon the condition of its surface; i. e., whether it is 
smooth or rough, wet or dry. But if the reader has 
at one time or another made such naked-eye observa- 
tions of splashes, it must be clear to him that while 
he has seen something, he must also have missed see- 
ing very much more. For a splash, no matter in what 
way it may be produced, consists in the progress of a 
multitude of events, compressed within the limits of 
a few hundredths of a second, but none the less or- 
derly and inevitable, and of which the sequence is in 
part easy to anticipate and understand, while in part 
it taxes the highest mathematical powers to elucidate. 

Some fifteen years ago, Prof. A. M. Worthington, 
C.B., F.R.S. (Head Master of the Royal Naval Engi- 
neering College, Devonport, England), commenced a 
systematic study of splashes, and in order fully to 
appreciate the disturbance of the liquids with which 
he experimented, and their relations, he invoked the 
aid of photography. In these days of kinematographs 
and rapid snap-shot cameras, it might seem an easy 
matter to follow, by means of photography, even a 
splashing drop. But if the reader harbors this thought, 
he has failed to grasp the extraordinary rapidity of 
the movements which take place. As Prof. Worthing- 
ton reminds us, the problem of how to photograph a 
splash is by no means a simple one, for the changes 
of form that take place are far too rapid to come 
within reach of any ordinary kinematograph, while the 
quickest photographic shutter is also much too slow. 



Thus, it became necessary to have recourse to the far 
shorter exposure of an electric spark. It was found 
that the bright spark given by breaking the primary 
circuit of an induction coil at the surface of mercury 
was of much too long duration to be useful for the 
purpose of flash photography; so that the originals 
of the photographs reproduced on this page (for 
which we are indebted to the courtesy of Prof. Worth- 
ington) were taken by means of a spark the duration 





1. Primary column succeeding a drop into running water. 2. Col- 
umn succeeding a drop into still water. Time, 0.139 second 
each case. 3. Primary column caused by a rough 
sphere falling into liquid. 

of which was certainly less than three-millionths of a 
second — a period of time which bears to the whole 
second about the same proportion as a day to a thou- 
sand years. 

This flash is obtained by charging two Leyden jars 
by an electrical machine on their inner coats, one posi- 
tively and one negatively. Stout wires lead from the 
outer coats to the dark room (where the splash is to 
be photographed) and terminate in a spark-gap be- 
tween magnesium terminals and close over the surface 
of water contained in a bowl. The inner coats of the 
Leyden jars being now connected together, the posi- 
tive and negative charges unite in a dazzling flash, 
and a simultaneous discharge and flash take place be- 
tween the two outer coats across the spark-gap in the 
dark room. This latter is the illuminating spark, by 
means of which the photographic exposure is to be 



made. The exact timing of this spark is obviously of 
the greatest importance. This is effected by means of 
a falling metal sphere which passes (outside the dark 
room, of course) between two terminals connected one 
with the inside of one Leyden jar and one with the 
inside of the other. These terminals are just too far 
apart for a spark to jump across till the timing sphere 
passes between them. But when this occurs the dis- 
charge takes place, with the accompanying flash in 
the dark room. By means of an ingenious arrange- 
ment of magnets and springs, for full details of which 
the reader is referred to Prof. Worthington's work ("A 
Study of Splashes" ) , the timing sphere can be made 
to fall either simultaneously with the drop or sphere 
destined to cause the splash to be photographed, or 
slightly earlier or later. In this way it is possible 
brilliantly to illuminate the splash for one three-mill- 
ionth part of a second at . any desired period of its 
progress. For example, if a particular stage of the 
splash is photographed when the timing sphere falls 
just four feet to the gap between the terminals, then 
by raising its releasing-lever about two-fifths of an 
inch, the law of falling bodies insures that the flash 
will be postponed by just one-thousandth of a second, 
and the next photograph accordingly reveals a stage 
just so much later. 

From these brief particulars the reader will be able 
to form an idea of the way in which Prof. Worthing- 
ton's photographic studies of splashes are obtained. 
The camera being previously focused and arranged in 
the dark room, the timing sphere is minutely adjusted 
and released, and a record of any desired period of 
the splash is obtained upon the sensitized plate. Yet 
despite the rapidity of the plates employed, and the 
brilliancy of the flash, the duration of the illumina- 
tion is so short that the negatives are always "under- 
exposed." Hence tedious precautions have to be taken 
in their development. 

We may now glance rapidly at a few of the many 
interesting facts which have been established by Prof. 
Worthington's study of splashes. It will probably sur- 
prise the reader to learn what a lengthy series of 
events follows the contact of a small drop of water, 
falling from a height of about 16 inches, into a mix- 
ture of milk and water — the milk being added to ren- 
der the photographs more intelligible. First, as the 
drops strikes and penetrates the surface, there arises 
a crater, which rapidly increases in size until, upon 
(Continued on page 4H.) 



■ 




" 




The falling drop. 



T=0. 



T=0.012. T=0.016. T=0.023. T=0.039. T=0.055. 

The phenomena of a drop of water falling: 40 centimeters into water. 



T=0.070. 




8- i. 5a. Below surface. 6a. Below surf ace. 7a. Below surface. 10, 

THE VARIOUS STAGS! 07 A SPLASH PBOSVCXD ST A SOVOH 8PHSBS 7AUHT9 910 QSVTCKKBM (S3.S TUX) WTO WATEB, 



466 



Prof. Jonnesco and Spinal Anaesthesia. 

The visit of Prof. Thomas Jonnesco to New York 
has brought prominently before the public the method 
of producing local anaesthesia by the injection of an- 
aesthetic solutions into the spinal canal. 

Cocaine was introduced years ago as an anaesthetic 
for local application; it was welcomed by the medical 
profession, and equally by patients, on account of its 
invaluable services in operative procedures upon the 
eye, the nose, and the throat. By merely placing a drop 
or two of a solution of cocaine (or one of its salts) 
into the eye, or by painting a similar solution upon 
the mucous membrane of the nose or throat, it is 
possible to produce anaesthesia so complete as to en- 
able surgical operations to be performed upon these 
parts without inflicting the least pain or discomfort 
upon the patients. Certain objections to the use of 
cocaine were not long, however, in showing themselves. 
Cocaine is a powerful alkaloid; and if the usual dose 
be exceeded, very grave results follow, a number of 
patients having actually died as the result of cocaine 
poisoning. Investigators were therefore led to search 
for other substances, either like cocaine occurring nat- 
urally, or prepared synthetically, which would possess 
the properties of cocaine while being less poisonous. 

In this way, states . Nature, a number of anaesthetic 
drugs have been introduced, including alypin, holo- 
caine, eucaine (alpha and beta), scopolamine, novo- 
caine, stovaine and tropacocaine. Of these the three 
latter have been chiefly employed in producing spinal 
anaesthesia. The method consists in injecting, by 
means of a syringe and needle, a quantity (usually 
about one cubic centimeter) of a solution of one of these 
substances into the spinal canal. The injection is 
made in the back, close to the middle line, the needle 
bfcing inserted between two of the vertebrae. With re- 
gard to the details of the method, various procedures 
have been described, and no agreement has yet been 
reached as to which of these is to be considered the 
best. There is no doubt that modifications are desir- 
able to suit particular requirements. Thus, many oper- 
ators direct that the drug be dissolved in cerebro-spinal 
fluid or else in a saline solution having the same spe- 
cific gravity and the same osmotic tension as the blood- 
serum. Others consider that the anaesthetic solution 
should be considerably denser or more viscous than 
the cerebro-spinal fluid, and for this purpose recom- 
mend the addition of glucose or of gum-acacia to the 
solution. These thicker solutions tend to remain at 
the spot at which they are injected, while solutions 
in cerebro-spinal fluid or in normal saline tend to 
spread up and down the spinal canal, and thus have a 
more widespread anaesthetic effect. It is usual to with- 
draw a few cubic centimeters of cerebro-spinal fluid 
from the spinal canal before injecting the anaesthetic 
fluid. There are two reasons for this — first, the sur- 
geon is assured that he has actually introduced his 
needle into the spinal canal, and secondly he is certain 
to avoid increasing unduly the cerebro-spinal pressure 
when he introduces the anaesthetizing fluid. 
; On introducing the fluid into a particular part of 
the spinal column, anaesthesia is produced of all parts 
of the body deriving their nerve supply from this part 
of the spinal cord; and all parts below. If the fluid 
be allowed to ascend the spinal canal (e. g., by raising 
the hips) the anaesthesia rises higher and higher as 
the anaesthetic fluid reaches the trunks of the nerves 
arising from the higher parts of the spinal cord. If 
the patient be placed on one side while the injection 
is being performed, the anaesthetic fluid can be made 
to enter one lateral half of the spinal canal, and in 
this way it is possible to limit the anaesthesia to one 
lateral half of the body. 

The anaesthetic fluid can be allowed to ascend almost 
to the top- of the thoracic spine without fear of un- 
toward consequences. When it reaches- the base of the 
neck, however, the phrenic nerve, concerned with the 
movements of respiration, becomes involved, and it 
was deemed impracticable to produce anaesthesia of the 
head and neck by the spinal, method. Prof. Jonnesco, 
however, has shown that the addition of strychnine 
to the anaesthetic solution produces so powerful a 
stimulant effect upon the respiratory center in the 
brain that it is possible to introduce an anaesthetic 
fluid into the upper part of the thoracic spine, and to 
allow the fluid to ascend the spinal canal in the neck 
so as to enable operations to be performed on the neck 
and throat. But it is as yet too early to say whether 
this method may be considered a safe one. 

Of the three drugs which are now chiefly used for 
the production of spinal anaesthesia, stovaine is found 
to produce the most deleterious effect upon the kid- 
neys, acute nephritis having followed its injection in 
quite a number of cases. Novocaine and tropacocaine 
are less injurious in this way, while they are equally 
efficacious as anaesthetics. It thus appears likely that 
they will supplant stovaine in the near future, and, 
in fact, tropacocaine in a one per cent solution is 
arfeady being largely used for the purpose in this 
country, the usual dose injected being about 1% grain. 

No doubt further experience will lead to modifica- 
tions in the present method of performing spinal an- 



Scientific American 

aesthesia which will result in its widespread use, as 
there are a great many cases in which a local anaes- 
thetic is far more advantageous to both patient and 
surgeon .than a general anaesthetic. 



December 18, 1909. 



A SIMPLE AND RAPID METHOD OF MEASURING THE 
HEIGHT OF AN AEROPLANE ABOVE THE GROUND. 

The vertical plane in which the height of an aero- 
plane above the ground is to be taken, is determined be- 
forehand and marked on the ground by two stakes 
sufficiently far apart and long enough to allow the two 
observers commissioned to take the measurement to 
note the precise moment when the aeroplane comes 
into the plane determined by the two stakes. 

The base O, 2 , or line of this plane on the ground, 
is carefully measured and with as much precision as 
desired. This can be any desired length, say 500 feet. At 
1 and 0., two observers are placed, each provided with 
a theodolite-like instrument, or any other apparatus 
used in artillery for measuring the angles a and /3 
made by the straight lines 1 M and 2 M with the base 
1 0». This measurement must be taken simultane- 
ously by the two operators at the precise moment the 
aeroplane crosses the vertical plane O x AB 2 . This 
much given, we purpose determining the height m 
If or /1: a simple examination of the diagram shows 
that we can write: 

O l mr=h cot a 
Osm=h cot /3 
Adding these two equations, member to member, we 
have: 

h (cot a + cot /3) =0,m + 0,m=: Oj 2 
Whence 

0,0, 
h= 

COt a -f- cot /3 

If the angle measuring apparatus is graduated and 
gives directly the lengths of the cotangents, we shall 
have, supposing cot a=:a and cot /3 = 6 : 

500 

h = 

+ 6 
It is easy to see that with a slide rule a simple read- 
ing will immediately give the value of h. 

Instruments for measuring angles a and /3 are so 




MEASURING THE HEIGHT OF AN AEROPLANE 

well known in artillery that it is unnecessary to refer 
to them; but we will remark that this method of meas- 
uring is susceptible of great precision and should give 
satisfaction not only to the aviators themselves but 
also to the official observers. 

Although altitude trials are not made often, the 
writer hopes, in the near future, to make some height 
measurements by this method, with the help of a very 
ingenious apparatus that measures the angle and at 
the same time determines the plane. — A. Boyer-Guil- 
lon, C.B., in L'Aerophile. 



A Novel Science Entertainment, 
Mr. H. Snowden Ward of Hadlow-Kent, England, is 
giving a new science entertainment on the plan of 
Prof. Pepper's and others entitled "The Marvels of 
Photography." After a brief explanation accompanied 
by a few pictures of the developing tanks, by means 
of one brilliant light the audience is photographed 
simultaneously with several cameras directed to vari- 
ous parts of the hall. Two very large prints are made 
on developing-out paper in full view of the audience. 

An assistant at the same time makes natural color 
exposures with autochrome plates on a special sub- 
ject, and also transparencies from the regular nega- 
tives of the audience. The immense paper prints of 
the audience are then displayed, and later the trans- 
parencies and color pictures are projected by a lan- 
tern upon a large screen. Under the auspices of the 
Camera Club of New York, this entertainment is to be 
given in this city during the winter by Mr. Ward. 

♦< »! ♦ 

To Our Subscribers. 

We are at the close of another year — -the sixty-fourth 
of the Scientific American's life. Since the subscrip- 
tion of many a subscriber expires, it will not be amiss 
to call attention to the fact that the sending of the 
paper will be discontinued if the subscription be not 
renewed. In order to avoid any interruption in the re- 
ceipt of the paper, subscriptions should be renewed be- 
fore the publication of the first issue of the new year. 
To those who are not familiar with the Supplement, a 
word may not be out of place. The Supplement con- 
tains articles too long for insertion in the Scientific 
American, as well as translations from foreign periodi- 
cals, the information contained in which would other- 



wise be inaccessible. By taking the Scientific Ameri- 
can and Supplement the subscriber receives the bene- 
fit of a reduction in the subscription price. 

THE ENORMOUS CROPS OF 1909. 

About a month ago, the preliminary estimates of this 
year's crops were published by the Bureau of Statis- 
tics. While not establishing a record, the figures were 
considerably in excess of those of last year, and were 
not far from the record established in 1906. However, 
figures above a thousand mean nothing to the average 
man, and no conception of this enormous production 
can be obtained unless he actually sees the entire crop. 
We have estimated the size of these crops, and our 
front-page illustration this week shows what a stu- 
pendous heap they would make if the more impor- 
tant crops were piled up in Madison Square alongside 
the Metropolitan Tower. To be sure, Madison Square 
and many blocks surrounding it would be completely 
lost under the mass of cereals and potatoes. 

The corn, which is the bulkiest of the products 
shown, is represented as contained in huge bags piled 
up in pillars so as to represent mammoth corncobs, 
and though the piles reach up to a height of 1,780 
feet, this year's production of corn would make twelve 
of these pillars. Next to the corn we have the produc- 
tion of oats, amounting to a huge total of close to a 
billion bushels. The huge bag containing this quan- 
tity of oats would reach up to more than double the 
height of the Metropolitan Tower. The wheat, which 
comes next in order, would require a bag almost as 
large which, even when laid on its side, would over- 
top the tallest structures in New York. If this wheat 
was distributed among the inhabitants of this coun- 
try, every one, man, woman, and child, would receive 
over eight bushels for his share of the crop. If this 
quantity were taken to a flour mill, it would be con- 
verted into one and two-thirds barrels of flour, and 
out of this quantity of flour a baker could make nearly 
five hundred loaves of standard five-cent size. In other 
words, we grow enough wheat in this country to sup- 
ply every individual with a loaf and a half of bread 
per day. This is slightly more than the average sup- 
ply per capita for the last forty years. 

Comparing our crops with other countries, we find 
that the United States leads the world in the produc- 
tion of corn, oats, and wheat. Last year we did not 
equal European Russia's oats production, but this 
year's estimate is 176,000,000 bushels more than that 
of last year; and while the figures for the 1909 crop 
in Russia are not as yet available, it seems improb- 
able that they will equal our own figures for this year. 
When it comes to barley, we must take second place, 
acceding first place to Russia. Russia also leads the 
world in the production of rye. We stand fourth in 
the production of potatoes, with Germany, Russia, and 
Austria ahead of us. 

While we may flatter ourselves on our production 
of corn, oats, and wheat, the figures show that we do 
not make the best use of our acreage. The United 
Kingdom seems to be able to produce more wheat from 
an acre of land than any other country. For the years 
1898 to 1907 it has produced 32.6 bushels per acre, 
as against 13.9 in this country and 9.3 in Russia, 
which makes the poorest showing of the large wheat- 
growing countries. Germany leads in the yield of 
oats with 49.3 bushels per acre against 29.8 in this 
country. However, it seems very natural that the 
country having the largest tract under cultivation 
should have a poorer yield than those countries in 
which farming operations are carried "on on a smaller 
scale and more particular attention can be given to 
the treatment of the land, so as to obtain the maximum 
product. 

The crop estimate published in November was a pre- 
liminary estimate, and the final statistics for the year 
will be published while this issue of the Scientific 
American is on the press. The November figures are 
given below, showing a large increase over last year's 
figures in nearly every crop. 





Production (000 omitted). 


Crop. 


1909 
Preliminary. 


1908. 


Average, 

Five Years, 

1903-1907 


Total wheat " 

Rye " 


Per Cent. 

2,767,816 

432,920 

291,848 

724.768 

988,618 

164,636 

31,066 

16,692 

26,767 

367,478 

64,166 

895,185 


Per Cent, 

2,668,651 

487,908 

226.694 

664,602 

807,156 

166,756 

31,851 

15,874 

35,805 

21,890 

278,985 

70.798 

718,061 


Per Cent. 

2,587,877 
412,719 
237,791 
650,510 
870,251 
148.155 
30,0(16 




14;554 
26,121 

' 289, 400 

60,671 

698,004 



The above crops, which represent approximately 70 
per cent of the value of all farm products, ' are this 
year in the aggregate about 2 per cent greater than 
in 1908, and 9 per cent greater than the average of 
the preceding five years. 



December 18, 1909. 



Scientific American. 



467 



(&0vve&p0ttilence* 



THE CHEEKY MINE DISASTEE. 
To the Editor of the Scientific American: 

In the Scientific American of December 4th, page 
406, under the caption "The Cherry Mine Disaster," 
you say, among other things: 

"On Saturday, one week after the accident, the min- 
ers who had walled themselves up in some of the gal- 
leries of the second vein were taken out after their 
long confinement, a living rebuke to the experts of the 
State Mining Commission and of the Technologic 
Branch of the United States Geological Survey, who 
had declared positively from the first that there were 
no living men in the mine, and that a day or two 
more or less made little difference." 

It was with sincere regret that I read such a state- 
ment in a journal that has large influence among the 
intelligent people of the country. I fear that the state- 
ment you make will be largely believed, and that it will 
result inconsiderable injury to a movement which gives 
every promise of aiding materially in working out 
the causes of and of ■ preventing mine disasters, as 
well as actually aiding in the rescue work following 
such disasters. 

Whatever may have been the personal opinion of 
any of the government mining experts at the Cherry 
mine as to -the probability of the entombed miners be- 
ing alive -in the mine at any time following the disas- 
ter, I am sure no such opinion was given out or in 
any -way slackened their efforts — which were contin- 
ued night and day — to reach the entombed miners, 
whether dead or alive. On the othef hand, the mining 
engineers of the government and the members of the 
rescue corps were not only willing but insistent that 
the rescue work should go forward as rapidly as possi- 
ble. Your correspondent's statement also . does equal 
injustice to many State inspectors, who were doing 
everything possible to get into the mine with the 
same commendable purpose In view. 

As you may know, the mining engineers of the gov- 
ernment are entirely without authority for direct 
action in such rescue work. Their official work is that 
of investigations as to the causes of such disasters; 
but they were anxious to and did aid in every possi- 
ble way in. the work of opening up the mine with a 
view to saving life. 

Their use of helmets for artificial breathing while 
penetrating suffocating mine gas was in several in- 
stances effective at this mine, as it has been in sav- 
ing- life at several other mine disasters. Such use of 
the -oxygen helmets- has on a number of occasions been 
of even greater service in preventing mine explosions, 
and extinguishing mine fires. 

George Otis Smith, Director. 

Washington, D. C. United States Geological Survey. 

[It should be'noted that our correspondent, who vis- 
ited the Cherry mine, and informed himself fully in 
regard to the . situation there, stated that experts of 
the departments made the statement referred to. Of 
Course, such statements were entirely informal- and 
unofficial, and it was far from the- wish of the Editor 
to , have it inferred that any negligence on the part 
of the departments had occurred. The admirable work 
Of the. Geological Survey is too well known to require 
any- defense in our columns. — Editor.] 

An Important English Patent Decision. 

A patent decision which is of far-reaching impor- 
tance, to the mining world has been recently delivered 
in Great Britain by the House of Lords, which is the 
supreme legal tribunal. Mr. Alexander Stanley El- 
more,' of the United States, and the company exploit- 
ing his ail-acid process, .for the separation of ore by 
selective action, proceeded against Minerals Separation 
Limited, which he maintained were infringing .his 
method. Both parties depended upon the selective 
action of oil for the success of their process, but El- 
more contended that the pure use of oil did not achieve 
the desired result. In -the course of experiments he 
claimed to have discovered that if a small quantity 
of acid were added to the liquid, the selective action 
of the oil was considerably enhanced, and in fact con- 
stituted the whole secret of the success of the process. 
This discovery he duly protected in a patent completed 
in 1901. Minerals Separation Limited, however, con- 
tended that the oil-acid process was not new, and fur- 
thermore argued that their own process was distinctly 
superior to Elmore's, inasmuch as instead of using 
from one to one and a half tons of thick oil per ton 
of ore treated, as advocated by Elmore, they only used 
from two to three pounds of thin oil for the same quan- 
tity of treated ore. 

Elmore did not rigidly adhere to the patents he had 
secured prior to 1901, as it was ascertained that they 
lacked novelty; but he maintained "that the addition 
of a small quantity of acid to the mixture of water, 
oil, and pulverized ore was a distinct discovery. Min- 
erals Separation Limited also added acid to the solu- 
tion. The first court decided that the 1901 patent was 
Invalid and had not been infringed. Against this de- 



cision Elmore appealed, and the lower court's findings 
were reversed. Minerals Separation Limited conse- 
quently carried the matter to the House of Lords, and 
this supreme court has now pronounced definitely 
against the claims of the Elmore patent. 

In the course of their judgment the Lord Chancellor 
stated that the 1901 patent specification was framed 
with great subtlety, narrative and claim being so 
closely interwoven as to render it difficult to decide 
how much of the narrative ought to be read into the 
claim. Disentangled, however, the specification turned 
upon the point that Elmore claimed the sole right to 
add any acid to the solution. No statement is made 
as to the proportion of this agent, this varying accord- 
ing to the character of the material treated. The Lord 
Chancellor stated that this latter factor is so wide 
that it sought to cover any known process of separat- 
ing mineral substances by the selective action of oil 
and acid, and stated that he did not consider that 
Elmore had really discovered the enhanced effect pro- 
duced by the addition of acid. For this reason he 
pronounced against the 1901 patent, and decided that 
no infringement had been made of Elmore's patent, 
in which decision the four other judges unequivocally 
concurred. This final decision has terminated a pro- 
tracted litigation, and the Elmore claim cannot now 
be possibly sustained. 



The Scientific American Aeroplane Trophy. 

When the proprietors of this journal gave into the 
custody of the Aero Club of America their handsome 
aviation trophy nearly three years ago, it was with 
the belief that such a cup would help to create in- 
terest in the fascinating subject of human flight and 
would stimulate American inventors to renew their 
efforts toward its solution. It was at first thought 
advisable to hold contests upon a given date and at 
a stated place, and the first such contest was to have 
been held at the Jamestown Exhibition on September 
14th, 1907, but as there was only one uncompleted 
aeroplane ready at that time, and as the announce- 
ment of future competitions did not meet with any 
response, it was decided to change the rules so that 
any experimenter could try for the trophy at any 
place provided he gave a few days' notice to the Aero 
Club so that the proper officials could be present to 
time and observe the flight. Under the new rules 
Glenn H. Curtiss made the required flight of a kilo- 
meter in a straight line at Hammondsport, N. Y., on 
July 4th, 1908, as a result of which he was declared 
the winner of the first leg of the trophy. Instead of 
requiring a specified distance for 1909, it was decided 
to award the trophy this year to the aviator who 
covered the greatest distance in excess of 25 kilo- 
meters over a closed-circuit course. On July 17th 
Mr. Curtiss made .a new record of 24.94 miles in 
52% minutes above a triangular course at Mineola, 
L. I. This is the present record, and is the longest 
flight made in America by any aeroplane except the 
Wright. If it remains . unbroken up to sunset on De- 
cember 31st, Mr. Curtiss will have won the second 
leg of the trophy and will have to win it but one more 
year in order to hold it permanently. 

As there are several new aviators who have been 
making successful though brief flights of late with 
their own aeroplanes, we believe that it would require 
but a little practise upon the part of some of these 
to. enable them to surpass the present record. Flying 
an hour in December in the vicinity of New York 
should be no more arduous than automobiling for a 
like length of time, and when the prize to be won 
thereby is the first, the handsomest, and the most 
commemorative trophy ever offered in America, it is 
certainly well worth the attempt. We look for some 
budding aviator to send in- his entry during the last 
days of the present year. 



Nobel Prizes Awarded. 

This year's Nobel prizes will be distributed as fol- 
lows: For physics, divided between William Marconi 
and Prof . ■ Ferdinand Braun of Strasburg; for chem- 
istry, Prof. Wilhelm Ostwald of Leipsic; for physi- 
ology or medicine, Prof. Theodor Kocher of Berne; for 
literature, Selma Lagerlof, the Swedish authoress. 

The Nobel prizes, which are worth about $40,000 each, 
are awarded annually to those persons who are con- 
sidered to have conferred the greatest benefit on man- 
kind during the preceding year in the fields specified 
in the cable dispatch, with the addition of one for the 
best effort toward the- fraternity of nations and the 
promotion of pqace. 

Prof. Ferdinand Braun is Director of Physics at the 
University of Strasburg. He was born at Fulda, Ger- 
many, on June 6th, 1850, and was educated at the Uni- 
versity of Berlin. From 1876 to 1883 he was pro- 
fessor at the University of Marburg. 

Prof. Wilhelm Ostwald, who received the Nobel prize 
for chemistry, was born at Riga in 1853. In 1887 he 
became Professor of Chemistry at Leipsic. As an in- 
vestigator in connection with physical chemistry and 
chemical . affinity he has become particularly well 
known. His researches have concerned, among numer- 



ous subjects, the electric conductivity of organic acids, 
and the color of ions. He has published several vol- 
umes on this and other scientific subjects. 

Prof. Emil Theodor Kocher, who will receive the 
Nobel prize for physiology and medicine, is a Swiss 
surgeon. He is a native of Berne, where he was born 
in 1841. He was educated there, and after studying 
at Berlin, Paris, and London became Professor of Sur- 
gery in the university of his native city and Director 
of the Surgical Clinic. His especial field is the thyroid 
gland. 



The Current Supplement. 

Mr. Robert M. Strong's admirable comparison of the 
gasoline and alcohol engines is continued in the cur- 
rent Supplement, No. 1772. Mr. Vaughan H. Wilson 
contributes an excellent note on the future of alumi- 
nium as a substitute for copper wire. Mr. George S. 
Hodgins writes on time speed control signals, in which 
he explains how the New York Subway trains are auto- 
matically controlled. In view of the difficulty experi- 
enced by the New Theater in New York city with its 
acoustics, an article by Floyd R. Watson should be of 
interest. The wonderful wine-growing and wine-press- 
ing establishments of Kempinski & Co., the largest in 
Germany, are fully described and illustrated. Our 
Paris correspondent writes on the new electric' loco- 
motives for the Simplon tunnel. Action at a distance 
produced by drying oils is. the title of an article by 
Werner Schmidt. He shows that many substances 
apart from radio-active substances affect the photo- 
graphic plate. Among these is a class of so-called 
drying oils, the best known of which is linseed oil 
varnish. Mr. William H. Ballou contributes a popular 
article on some of the showy mushrooms in nature. In 
view of the return of Halley's comet, Prof. E. E. 
Barnard's contribution on photographing comets is 
most valuable. 

«ni» 

Daniel's Comet. 

Zaccheus Daniel of the Princeton observatory dis- 
covered a great comet on December 6 d. 599 Gr. M. 
T., in R. A. 6d. 16m. 30s. Dec. + 33 deg. 50 min. with 
a slow northerly motion. At the time of its discovery 
the comet was visible in a small telescope. 

Prof. E. E. Barnard of the Yerkes observatory ob- 
served Daniel's comet December 7 d. 6605 Greenwich 
Mean Time, in R. A. 6h. 16m. 42s. Dec. +34 deg. 44 
min. 22 sec. 

At Smith College observatory, Northampton, Mass., 
Daniel's comet was observed on December 8 d. 5870 
Greenwich Mean Time, in R. A. ~6h. 16m. 57.6s. Dec. 
+35 deg. 30 min. 53 sec. 

Metcalf reports Daniel's comet December 8th, 1909, 
at G. M. T. 12h. 30m., R. A. 6h. 16m. 52.5s. Dec. +35 
deg. 27.6 min. 



Contlnned Ephemeris of Halley's Comet. 

A letter has been received at Harvard Observatory 
from Father G. M. Searle, C.S.P., of New York, giving 
the following "Continued Ephemeris of Halley's Comet. 
T assumed to be Apr. 19 d. 692 G. M. T." 

Qr. Mean Noon R. A. (1910.0) Dee. Los. a Br. 

1910. h. m. s. Deg. Min. (Sept. 11 = 1.) 

January 2 2 14 37 +11 23.3 

January 4 2 7 50 +11 5.2 0.154 18 

January 6 2 1 21 +10 47.8 

January 8 1 55 11 +10 31.1 0.16b 18 

January 10 1 49 21 +10 15.3 

January 12 1 43 49 +10 0,4 0.176 18 

January 14 1 38 35 + 9 46.4 

January 16 1 33 39 + 9 33.4 0.188 18 

January 18 1 29 00 + 9 21.3 

January 20 1 24 38 + 9 10.2' 0.200 19 

January 22 1 20 31 + 9 0.0 

January 24 1 16 38 + 8 50.6 0.212 19 

January 26 1 12 59 + 8 42.1 

January 28 1 9.34 + 8 34.5 0.223 19 

January -30 1 6 21 +8 27.6 

February 1 1 3 18 + 8 21.5 0.234 20 



Official meteorological Summary, New York, N. Y., 
November, 1909. 

Atmospheric pressure: -Highest, 30.72; lowest, 29.48; 
mean, 30.16. Temperature: Highest, 74; date, 12th; 
lowest, 30; date, 25th; mean of warmest day, 62; date, 
12th; coolest day, 32; date, 25th; mean of maximum 
for the month, 54.1; mean of minimum, 41.3; absolute 
mean, 47.7; normal, 43.9; excess compared with the 
mean of 39 years, 3.8. Warmest mean temperature of 
November, 50, in 1902 ; coldest mean, 37, in 1873. Abso- 
lute maximum and minimum of November for 39 
years, 74 and 7. Average daily excess since January 
1st, 1.0. Precipitation: 1.58; greatest in 24 hours, 1.0; 
date, 24th and 25th; average for November for 39 
years, 3.38. Accumulated deficiency since January 1st, 
4.44. Greatest precipitation, 9.82, in 1889; least, 0.75, 
in 1908. Wind: Prevailing direction, northwest; total 
movement, 9,232 miles; average hourly velocity, 12.8; 
maximum velocity, 48 miles per hour. Weather: Clear 
days, 11; partly cloudy, 11; cloudy, 8; on which 0.01 
or more of precipitation occurred, 6. Snowfall: 1.0. 
Sleet: 23rd, 24th, 25th. Mean temperature of the au- 
tumn, 55.50; normal, 55.27. Precipitation of the au- 
tumn, 4.98; normal, 10.57. 



468 



Scientific American 



December 18, 1909. 



THE NINTH ANNUAL LEPINE EXHIBITION OF TOTS 

IN PARIS. 

BY JACQUES BOYER. 

This year's Lepine exhibition of toys, like that of 
last year, contains many toys relating to aviation. 
Kites of strange designs, aeroplanes, and dirigible bal- 
loons are shown in great numbers. 

Richer's "Modern War" represents an attack upon 
an airship, which carries a target consisting of two 
crossed flags. The projectile, which is shown in the 
center part of our photograph, is a small aeroplane 
made of wood and celluloid. It consists of a wooden 
spindle with a longitudinal slot for the reception of 
the wings. A screw propeller is attached at the stern. 
The projectile is launched by means of a pistol, the 
barrel of which also has a longitudinal slot through 
which the wings of the aeroplane pass. When the tar- 
get is struck the balloon separates into two parts, as 
shown in the illustration. 

The "Roulis-Bilboc" of the same inventor is a little 



axis of the flyer and two for steering at the other end, 
the axes of these being at right angles to that of the 
large one. Above this frame is a plane surface having 
two circular openings immediately above the lifting 
propellers, and four valves in the form of rectangular 
doors, hinged at their front edges, which open and 
allow the air to pass during the ascent of the "Avion," 
but close as soon as it begins to fall. All of these 
propellers are driven by explosion turbines of a type 
invented by M. Uhlenhuth. 

The "Fil-Vit" is a self-starting aeroplane, three forms 
of which are shown in one of the photographs. Part 
of the flight is accomplished by means of screw pro- 
pellers driven by stretched rubber bands, the other 
part by soaring. One of the types is a Wright biplane 
with two propellers at the bow. It rises from the 
ground by its own effort, and accomplishes a flight of 
fifty yards. Another is a monoplane with one bow and 
one stern propeller, which also rises unaided and 
flies fifty yards. The third is a biplane with two bow 



measuring 10 by 30 yards. These great birds of prey 
have for some time been seen soaring majestically over 
the Paris boulevards. 

Clement's "Whirlwind" is simply a seesaw having 
curved ends and a longitudinal grooved channel in 
which a car moves. The "Leaping Plate" (shown on 
the left of Fig. 6) is a platform resting upon four 
springs, which can be depressed more or less by pull- 
ing a cord. On the platform is placed a ball which, 
by operating a cord and thus tipping the platform, is 
caused to strike and knock down little puppets, seated 
on benches around the edge, 

Blin's "Polar Billiard Table" represents, in felief, the 
scene of the recent exploits of Cook and Peary. The 
North Pole is represented by a small depression. The 
convex polar region rests upon a square table with a 
raised edge. The game is played by four persons, and 
consists in pushing a pith ball, with the aid of a flat 
wooden blade, up the convex surface and into the hole 
at the pole. The rotundity of the surface and the 




1. The "Mechanical Bird" and its propeller. 2. The Flight Across the Channel. 3. The " Fil-Tit." 4. The North Pole dame. 5. "Modern War." 6. The 

" Whirlwind." 7. The " Avion." 8. The " Aigloplan." 9. The " Roulis-Bilboc." 

STRIKING TOYS AT THE NINTH ANNUAL LEPINE EXHIBITION, PARIS. 



billiard table mounted upon a spherical joint, which 
allows it to be turned and tipped in every direction. 
By the side of the table is a vertical support, on which 
slide three wires terminating in hooks, from which 
three balls are suspended at a determined height 
above the table. The game is played by means of a 
top, the upper part of which is hollowed out to form 
a hemispherical cup of a diameter equal to that of 
the balls. The player winds the top and sets it spin- 
ning on the table, which he then moves in such a 
manner, by means of the lever, as to bring the top 
directly under one of the three suspended balls, and 
then tips the table so as to catch the ball in the cup 
and remove it from its support. 

The "Avion" and the "Mechanical Birds" of Le 
Dantec are aeronautic novelties. The "Avion" is sup- 
ported, propelled, and steered entirely by screw pro- 
pellers driven by turbines. The "Avion" itself is 
formed of an assemblage of metal tubes which support 
a horizontal frame. This frame carries two horizontal 
propellers for support and ascension, and three verti- 
cal propellers, one for propulsion at one end of the 



propellers, which rises after running two yards on the 
ground and makes a flight of one hundred yards, grad- 
ually rising to a height of five yards. 

Blin's "Crossing the Channel" is a simple but novel 
and attractive racing game. Starting from the French 
coast as Bleriot did, the aviators, represented by little 
paper figures, endeavor to reach the cliffs of England. 
The aeroplanes are attached to elastic cords, which 
are stretched, between pulleys on the two coasts. Each 
player, by turning his pulley, causes his aeroplane to 
advance, but also produces vibrations which frequently 
result in a fall into the sea, which for. the sake of real- 
ism is dotted with little vessels. 

The "Aigloplan" is simply a large kite representing 
an eagle. The frame is formed of whalebone, steel, 
and bamboo. The wings and head of the bird are rigid 
planes, and the body is represented by four rectangu- 
lar pieces of very stiff canvas. The lifting power of the 
kite is sufficient to make it available for experiments 
in aerial photography and wireless telegraphy, and its 
constructor, M. Gueneau, uses it for advertising pur- 
poses. The largest of these kites can carry a banner 



flatness of the blade conspire to make this task more 
difficult than it might appear. 

These are some of the most striking novelties to be 
seen at the Ninth Lepine Exhibition. Many others 
might have been included if space allowed. For ex- 
ample: "The Luminous Flames," a game of skill 
which is enlivened and adorned by miniature electric 
lamps, many very curious toys, safety hat pins, auto- 
mobiles, boats, locomotives, and other artistic and 
original creations which demonstrate the skill and 
activity of the members of the "Societe Frangaise des 
Petits Fabricants." 



Petroleum as a disinfectant for checking the spread 
of plague is advocated by some medical officers in In- 
dia. It is pointed out that during the pestilence that 
swept Europe long ago the oil regions of Baku were 
untouched, although in the surrounding country 50 
per cent of the population perished. Lerche, who vis- 
ited Baku in 1735, wrote: "It is quite likely that the 
fact that the Black Death did not touch Baku was 
due to petroleum." 



December i8, 1909. 

cabnivobous plants of the ftttttee. 

BY 8. LEONARD BASTIN. 

It is a fact recognized by botanists as beyond dispute 
that the carnivorous habit among plants is more wide- 
spread than it was formerly supposed to be. The spe- 
cialized sundews (Droseras) are but the advance guard 
of a large army of species which depend for their ex- 
istence more or less upon the absorption of animal 
salts through their foliage. There is no gainsaying 
the statement, recently put forward by more than one 
scientist, that the tendency to rely upon a carnivorous 
diet is on the increase. Of course, this is only in a 
line with the simplest evolutionary principle. It is 
possible to trace the steps by which the highest types 
of species, which seize and* hold their prey, such as the 
Venus fly trap (Dionaea), have been evolved from those 
which merely capture their victims by the use of an 
adhesive fluid, such as the fly catcher of Portugal 
(Drosophyllum). Still lower "in the scale are the 
plants, such as the teasles (Dipsacus), which drown 
the insects in strange bucket-like contrivances located 
at the base of the leaves. Flies which may chance to 
fall into the water are of course drowned, and the 
plant absorbs the nitrogenous elements from their de- 
caying bodies. 

It is a startling conception that in ages to come the 
plant world as a whole may become so advanced in 
carnivorous tastes as to be a real menace to animal 
creation. Dreadful indeed must be the sundews and 
the Dionseas to their insect victims at the present 
time. The unfortunate fly which is captured by the 
leaf of the sundew finds itself held down by strong 
arms which are able to resist its violent struggles. 
The largest Drosera on earth at the present time pro- 
duces leaves which are perhaps nine inches in length. 
Magnify this plant until the leaves are ten feet in 



Scientific American 

length, and we have an exceedingly formidable speci- 
men. Many of the palms and other tropical species 
have foliage which is much in excess of this measure- 
ment, so that the idea of leaves as big as this is not 



469 




Possible enormous arlstolochia flowers of the future 
which may lure even men. 



altogether fantastic. To be in proportion, the tentacles 
could scarcely be less than ten inches in length, and 
these would be able to grapple with birds of consider- 
able size. We may conceive that the giant sundew 
would be able to hold out some special inducement 
for its intended victims to visit tho leaves. Probably 
the bait would be in the form of some sweet-tasting 
secretion. On alighting, the birds would probably not 
find the adhesive fluid which the leaves would pro- 
duce more than slightly annoying. The movements 
which they would make, in an endeavor to free them- 
selves, would be all-sufficient to give the stimulus to 
the sensitive tentacles. These would rapidly close in 
on their prey, and in a few moments escape would be 
out of the question. Finally, the unfortunate birds 
would perish miserably, the bodies in their decay yield- 
ing to the plant the nitrogenous matter desired. 

The Pinguiculas or butterworts are at the present 
time innocent-looking plants rather attractive in ap- 
pearance. These species, as is well known, find their 
home in boggy tracts, where they spread their foliage 
on the surface of the ground in the form of a rosette. 
If the leaves of the butterwort are closely examined, it 
will be seen that they are thickly covered with two 
sets of glands, one set of which is plainly visible to 
the naked eye. This visible set resembles a miniature 
mushroom, while the other set is microscopic and is 
formed of eight cells grouped after the manner of a 
wart or a knob. It is the practice of these glands 
whenever they come into contact with any object to 
pour out copiously a mucilaginous fluid, which acts 
much in the same way as bird lime. Acid secretion 
is also produced, which aids the leaf in the digestion 
of the object — supposing that the capture should be an 
insect. In order to make assurance doubly sure, the 
(Continued on page 477.) 





The great bladderwort swallowing a reptile. 



A man-eating Venus fly trap. 






From a giant pitcher plant a man could escape 
only with the help of a friend. 



A goat-eating butterwort of 
the future. 



A great sundew, millions of years hence, 
catching: a stork. 



CABNIVOBOTJS PLANTS OF THE FT/TUBE. 



47o 



Scientific American. 



December 18, 1909. 



THE HOST ANCIENT 07 HUMAN SKELETONS. 
In February, 1909, the skull of one of our most 
ancient known ancestors was found at Chapelle aux 
Saints, in the French department of Correze. In Sep- 
tember a nearly complete skeleton of approximately 
equal antiquity was exhumed at Ferrassie, in the de- 
partment of Dordogne, by Dr. Capitan and M. Peyrony. 
The strata which covered the skeleton were absolutely 
intact and the exhumation was performed so carefully 
that the bones were revealed in the precise positions 
in which they had been laid to rest, at least 20,000 
years ago. This is the first instance in which so 
ancient a skeleton, found in such well-marked and in- 
disputable geological surroundings, has been photo- 
graphed at the moment of exhumation and before it 
had been disturbed. 

The region surrounding Ferrassie is peculiarly rich 
in prehistoric human remains and documents. Ten 
miles eastward are the famous caves of Eyzies, where 
the oldest known drawings on bone, ivory and horn 
were discovered nearly fifty years ago. In the neigh- 
boring cave of Cro Magnon, Lartet and Christy, in 
1858, discovered portions of five skeletons and two 
skulls which have recently been determined to belong 
to the Aurignacian race, a less ancient race than the 
Neanderthal, to which the Correze 
skull and the Ferrassie skeleton ap- 
pear to belong. The same region in- 
cludes the terraces of Monstier where 
chipped flint tools of peculiar charac- 
ter were found in 1863. The name 
monsterian has been given to the 
period of these tools, which succeeded 
the acheulean and its predecessor, the 
chellean, the most ancient division of 
the quaternary. Relics of the cave 
dwellers have been found at various 
other points in the vicinity. 

This region has yielded, and will 
continue to yield, more human docu- 
ments than any other part of France, 
for the following reasons: During the 
monsterian period of the stone age 
the region was covered with prairies 
and forests and abounded in horses, 
cattle and deer, which, with the fish 
of the VSzere River and its tributaries, 
furnished a plentiful supply of food. 
Probably reindeer could also be found 
on the hills. Furthermore, the river 
valleys are bordered by chalk cliffs 
and terraces, often overhanging, and 
honeycombed with caves, hollows and 
fissures, which formed excellent shel- 
ters. The deeper caves seem to have 
been reserved for funereal and re- 
ligious uses, while savages dwelt in 
the shallower caves and, especially, 
beneath overhanging cliffs in front of 
which screens of boughs were con- 
structed. A region which offered such 
advantages in regard to food and shel- 
ter must have been very popular in a 
primitive age. 

On the other hand, it is certain that 
the general topography of the region 
has undergone little change since the 
monsterian period. No geological con- 
vulsion has occurred. The principal 
change is a deepening of the valley by 
about 30 feet, and this has further iso- 
lated the land at the base of the cliff, 
which was already well protected from 
inundation. Men doubtless dwelt on 
the plains also, in those remote times, 
but all vestiges of them and their 
works have been destroyed or washed away by floods. 
Finally, all bodies buried in places distant from human 
habitations were quickly devoured by the hyenas which 
then abounded in France, and during the centuries 
that followed, the pick and the plowshare completed 
the destruction of the few bones that remained.' This 
is the explanation of the exceedingly rare occurrences 
of very ancient human bones in most regions and their 
comparative abundance in Dordogne. 

The Ferrassie skeleton was discovered in the course 
of exploring a mass of debris about 100 feet long, 
sloping upward from the road to a low chalk cliff 
rising a few yards above it. The width of the mass 
varied from 30 to 60 feet and its height, at the cliff, 
from 15 to 30 feet. The appearance of the superficial 
layer and the fissures of the cliff indicated the fall of 
an overhanging cliff, which should have formed an 
extensive shelter at a much earlier epoch. As this 
view was confirmed by the discovery of chipped flints 
Where the edge of the mass was cut by the road, ex- 
plorations^ were undertaken several years ago, but 
nothing of especial importance was unearthed until 
recently. The excavation was begun by digging a 
broad trench from the road to the cliff in order to 
allow the mass to be removed in successive horizontal 
layers. Last Septetaber two bones were seen slightly 



projecting from the wall of the trench, near the bot- 
tom. On removing a little earth the bones were rec- 
ognized as a human tibia and femur. The earth over 
the bones was then removed, by horizontal layers, with 
extreme caution. When the greater part of the mon- 
sterian stratum had been removed, three flat stones, 
about eight inches square, covering the skull and parts 
of the arms, were discovered. The reddish brown sand 
which surrounded the skeleton contained many large 
splinters of bones of animals which showed marks of 
hammering. Very slowly and with infinite precaution 
the skeleton was laid bare without displacing a single 
bone. It lay on the back, with the trunk turned 
slightly to the left, and the legs sharply bent back 
under the thighs, which were half flexed on the pelvis. 
The knees were turned to the right. The left arm was 
extended beside the body, with the hand at the hip, 
while the right arm was bent, and the hand near the 
shoulder. The head was turned to the left, with the 
mouth wide open. 

The bones, though broken in places by the great 
weight of the earth above them, remained firm and 
in their normal positions. Only the bones of the right 
hand and foot had been displaced, and in part 
removed, probably by rodents or small carnivora. 




THE MOST ANCIENT OF HUMAN SKELETONS. 

The skeleton was photographed as it lay and the 
leg and arm bones were carefully removed. The pel- 
vis was then covered with tinfoil and a large plaster 
cast was formed around it, so that it could be taken 
op without injury. The thorax and the skull were 
treated in the same way. Hence these parts can be 
mounted without the loss of a single fragment, as the 
earth in which they lay will surround them, inside 
the plaster casts, until the casts are opened in the pre- 
paring room. This method is commonly employed by 
palaeontologists, but this is its first application to hu- 
man remains. 

The age of the skeleton is indicated, with certainty 
and precision, by the regularity and very characteris- 
tic appearance of the successive strata of the mass in 
which it was found. (Age, in prehistoric chronology, 
refers, not to a definite number of years, but to a 
period of more or less hypothetical duration.) The 
quaternary geological period, in which man appeared 
on earth, began with the comparatively warm chellean 
age, which has left remains of the rhinoceros, hippo- 
potamus, and elephant, and flint tools scarcely modified 
by man. Then came the cold acheulean age, the age 
of the mammoth, marked by crudely chipped flints. 
The ensuing monsterian age, at first cold but subse- 
quently mild, represents a higher civilization possess- 



ing a variety of more elaborate flint tools — daggers and 
picks, knives and scrapers, and disks of unknown use, 
very characteristic of the age. Flints of all of these 
types were found around and above the skeleton, while 
ruder acheulean flints were found beneath it. Hence 
the skeleton is monsterian. 

The stratum containing the skeleton was covered by 
two strata containing flint tools of the aurignacian 
age. The overhanging cliff then fell, and its debris 
subsequently became covered by a layer of earth and 
stones, five feet in depth, which has effectually pro- 
tected the human relics beneath. 

Dr. Capitan believes that the skeleton is that of a 
corpse regularly prepared for sepulture, which may 
have been covered with earth, but was not buried in a 
grave. Protected by the vicinity of the living inhabi- 
tants of the shelter, the skeleton escaped the hyenas 
and was only nibbled by small animals. This unique 
skeleton, which is at least 20,000 years old, will prob- 
ably be mounted and exhibited in the Museum of Nat- 
ural History at Paris. 

A New Substitute for Cotton. 

The busy town of Chemnitz, the largest manufactur- 
ing center in the kingdom of Saxony and one of the 
largest factory towns of the German 
empire, has just witnessed the birth 
of a new invention which will doubt- 
less cause considerable changes in the 
price of cotton ana which, further- 
more, will be of interest and impor- 
tance to our readers in kapok-growing 
countries. 

For some considerable time past the 
German textile world has been devot- 
ing unflagging attention to the discov- 
ery of fibrous plants which might in 
any way be rendered available as a 
substitute for cotton, and great inter- 
est has been given to the different 
more or less successful experiments 
made. Trials made with ramie and 
caravonica have been fairly successful, 
but have not met with that meed of 
success, nor attracted so much atten- 
tion, which has fallen to the share of 
the experiments made with the fiber 
of the kapok tree (the so-called "silk- 
wool tree") which flourishes in Amer- 
ica, Asia, and Africa. The fruit of 
this tree contains a seed which, like 
that of the cotton plant, is enveloped 
in soft silky hairs. These hairs, how- 
ever, are so short that they have hith- 
erto been useless to cotton spinners 
and have been used chiefly for uphol- 
stery and mattress-making purposes. 
Most kapok trees grow wild, and only 

1 recently have a few Europeans begun 

to cultivate them systematically in 
New Guinea and East Africa. Steps 
are also being taken to grow these 
trees properly in the German protec- 
torates. 

This new industry will be greatly 
favored by the process just discovered 
by a large German spinning mill, 
whereby it is now possible to render 
kapok fiber easily spinnable. So far, 
as an absolute matter of fact, the veri- 
table fiber of the kapok tree has not 
been dealt with, but. only the fibers 
of the Calotropis procera (a plant 
growing wild in East Africa);' how- 
ever, it is exactly the- same as kapok 
fiber in character, appearance, and 
qualities. Hence, if the one can -be spun, so can the 
other— a point on Which not the slightest doubt is 
entertained. By means of a process evolved by Prof. 
Goldberg of Chemnitz, the brittle and fragile fiber of 
the kapok tree is treated in- such a way as to render 
it easily spinnable, and yarn jup to No. 12 English, is 
now being spun from it. A sample, both of the" raw 
material and of the yarn, may be seen at the offices. 
As will be seen, the yarn is of fine quality and of a 
very soft, silky, and tenacious character. The process 
in question does not necessitate the employment of 
any new machinery, but is based entirely upon a novel 
and somewhat complicated system of preliminary prep- 
aration and spinning. What the actual process isjean- 
not yet be divulged. 

In the German' African colonies fiber stuffs of .all 
kinds are now being grown and, as Dr. Hindoct . re- 
cently pointed out. in a report to tliff KoloniaK&'Srt- 
schaftliche Komitg, the new plantations of si$Sl in 
German East Africa have now attained such ■ dimen- 
sions that in a few years time the annual outpuf will 
exceed 10,000 tons, and Germany will be able to meet 
her own .requirements. Togo appears highly suitable 
for the cultivation of sisal, and trial plantations are 
also being laid down there. Kapok is also grown in 
(Concluded, on page £79.} 



December i8, 1909. 



Scientific American 



47i 




IMPROVED NIPPLE GRIP. 

BY THOMAS DE LOOF. 

When one wishes to replace a few broken spokes 
in a bicycle wheel, he often finds that he has no nip- 
ple grip, while a bicycle wrench proves to be too 
long to get in around the spokes. A good nipple grip 




IMPROVED NIPPLE GRIP. 

can be made by putting two nuts on one bolt, as shown 
in the accompanying engraving. 
♦ m» 
HOW TO WATER-PROOF CLOTH. 
For rain coats or other water-proof clothing, woolen 
goods having a close weave are the best. Use goods 
in which the face is smooth and firm, although cloth 
having a soft face answers fairly well, provided the 
weave is tight and close. To water-proof the cloth, 
lay it out on a large table face up. Then take a block 
of parafBne about six inches square and rub it all over 
the face of the cloth, bearing down hard. This will 
leave a thin Aim of parafflne on the face of the cloth. 
Melt this film of parafflne into the goods, using a flat 
iron that is just warm. Too hot an iron will set the 
parafflne on fire and burn the goods. It is well to ex- 
periment with a small sample first, and learn how to do 
the water-proofing properly before starting in with a 
pattern of goods. To determine when the sample is 
properly water-proofed, hold it in a kind of bag, with 
the face in, and pour in some water. If the water- 
proofing has been properly done the water will not 
wet the face of the cloth, but it will stay in globules 
and act as if it were on a greased board or hot stove. 

* 1 1 1 m 

SLED RUNNER ATTACHMENT FOR GO-CARTS. 

BY MILTON STONE. 

The writer, made a pair of runnefs for his go-cart 
last winter which proved quite a success. They were 
made of 1-inch by %-inch iron, and weighed altogether 
six pounds. The construction was such that they 
could be applied or removed in a few seconds. Re- 
ferring to the accompanying illustration, it will be 
seen that two wooden side pieces A were provided, to 
which the runners B were fastened. The wooden side 
pieces were cut out and grooved to receive the wheels, 
and the runners were curved up to fit against the front 




SLED RUNNER ATTACHMENT FOR GO-CARTS. 

wheels. A U-shaped frame G of strap iron connected 
the runners at the forward end, while they were con- 
nected at the rear by a second and lower frame D. 
The frame of the go-cart is indicated by dotted lines 
at E. A pair of sliding members O were fitted onto the 
Urframe D, and attached to a lever F in such manner 
that they could be extended over the side bars E 
after the go-cart was fitted over the runners. A strap 



H extending forward to the frame C was formed with 
a hook, so that when the lever F is moved to extend 
the members O, the strap H is retracted, causing the 
hook to fit over the front cross piece E of the go-cart 
frame. In applying the I'unners to the go-cart, it is 
merely necessary to raise the front wheels so as to 
clear the side pieces A, and then move the cart into 
position, after which the lever F is moved to lock 
the runners fast. One of the advantages of this sys- 
tem is that the runners at the rear are so short that 
when the cart is tilted backward the wheels rest on the 
ground, and in that position they can be wheeled over 
any bare spots. 



A SNOW-BOUND SANTA CLAUS. 

BY JOHN A. BERGSTROM. 

The accompanying illustrations show how a very 
pretty effect may be obtained in Christmas tree decora- 
tion. It has the appearance of a Christmas tree in a 
snow storm. 

Stretch a cord above and in front of the Christmas 
tree with one end fastened to a hook or & nail and the 
other end to the armature of an electric bell. Hang 
from this cord a number of fine threads to which at 
intervals small pieces of cotton are fastened. The 
bell is connected up to a battery with a push button in 
the circuit. When this button is pushed, causing the 
armature and cord to vibrate, the quivering bits of cot- 
ton look like falling snow. The armature of the bell 
should be bent back a little so as not to strike the bell, 
which may be covered up with a wreath or other 
decoration. 

Fig. 1 illustrates how the cotton may be attached to 
the threads. 

A frame is first made a little longer than the cur- 




SANTA CLAUS IN A SNOW STORM. 

tain. This may be made out of any kind of rough 
lumber and nailed together. At one end of the frame 
two rows of pins are put, about % inch apart. The 
pins in each row should be about % inch apart. At 
the other end of the frame is put another row of pins 
% inch apart. 

Now wind the cord around the two rows of pins and 
fasten the ends, as shown. Then fasten the end of 
a fine thread to the cord at the first pin. Bring the 
thread down to the lower end of the frame and wind 
around two pins, then back again and fasten to the 
cord. Repeat until the required number of' threads are 
obtained. Now take a fine brush, preferably a painter's 
striping brush, and apply glue to the threads, cross- 
ways, about two inches apart, the whole length of the 
curtain. 

Cut some thin cotton batting into strips about % 




inch wide, and place them across the threads where 
the glue has been applied, pressing them down onto 
the threads. 

When dry cut the lower ends of the threads and pull 
each individual string away from the rest. Just 
enough cotton will stick to each string. After all the 
strings have been separated remove the cord at the 
upper end Of the frame and the curtain is ready to be 
hung up. Fig. 2 shows a part of the curtain when 
finished with threads about 1 inch apart. 



HOW TO MAKE LEAD PIPE INTO IRON PIPE WITHOUT 
A WIPED JOINT. 

BY HOWAKI) M. NICHOLS. 

It takes a skilled plumber to make a lead pipe into 
an iron pipe, using a wiped joint, but using the follow- 
ing method any mechanic can make a permanent joint 




SIMPLE METHOD OF CONNECTING LEAD AND IRON PIPE. 

which is equally as good as a wiped joint. The ac- 
companying drawing shows a lead 8 made into a gal- 
vanized-iron pipe. The large end of a reducing 
coupling is placed over the end of the lead 8, and 
the end is then flared out with a blunt piece of steel, 
so that it will flare out and fit the coupling snugly, 
as shown. The space between the lead pipe and the 
coupling is then filled with hot solder, which is al- 
lowed to round out on the pipe and make a smooth 
joint. To complete the job, the iron pipe is then 
screwed into the small end of the coupling. 

»-!»> — 

A METHOD FOR CONNECTING BATTERIES IN 
COMBINATIONS. 

BY CHAUNCEY W. MIEMAN. 

The inventor who deals much with electricity is 
bound to find himself sooner or later greatly ham- 
pered in experiments with batteries by the necessity 
of frequent changing from parallel to series, etc. It is 
one of the little routine details which makes most of 
the worry in experimenting, for the connecting up of 
a dozen wires may often cause the loss of a happy 
"inspiration." A convenient and easily made switch- 
board is illustrated herewith, and it will add its mite 
of comfort to the harassed inventor. This board, for 
six batteries, allows all possible connections, and by 
adding more points can be adapted to any number of 
batteries. 

It is made as follows: The "board" is a one-inch 
piece of wood, mounted if desired on feet. In thia 
bore ten holes, to receive an equal number of stove 
bolts, as per plan in Fig. 1. The bolts should be pro- 
vided with large washers, and the holes so bored as 
to allow a distance of % inch between the washers 
when in place. Next two metal strips should be 
fastened by two stove bolts each, one strip on either 
side of the rows of 
bolts. The distance be- 
tween the strips and the 
edges of the washers 
should be % inch also. 
At the points indicated 
by the dotted circles 
bore %-inch holes half 
way through the board. 
Plugs should then be 
made, and consist of 
strips of sheet copper or 
brass, % inch broad, 
bent as shown. Wires 
are then led from each 
pole of every battery 
and connected under- 
neath the board to the 
bolts. 

The wiring diagram is 
given in Fig. 2. Bat- 
teries are numbered 
from 1 to 6, and the 
positive and negative of 
each battery are con- 
nected to the bolt so 

marked. Current, is taken off at the points X and Y. 
An understanding of the key given below will enable 
anyone to make the combinations indicated with great 
speed and almost no trouble. 



"& : 




~T£3- 




A SIMPLE BATTERY 
SWITCHBOARD. 



APPARATUS FOR PRODUCING THE SNOW STORM EFFECT. 



Insert plugs at 
F, a, H, K, and L 
C, F, G, K, L and P 
B, D, F, H, L, N and Q 
A,B, C,D,E,M,N,P,(, 

and B 



to obtain 
all in series. 

2 parallel sets of 3 in series. 

3 parallel sets of 2 in series. 

all in parallel. 



472 



POWEB-DBIVEN SCOOTER. 

BY PBKDBBICK K. LORD. 

In the Issue of January 9th, 1909, there appeared 
plans for a scooter, with description of how it should 
be built. 

The accompanying illustrations show how this 
scooter may be converted into a sort of automobile 
ice boat or auto scooter. 

The motor should be preferably an air-cooled one, 
but as it may be difficult to get an outfit of ample 
power without high cost, a water-cooled motor is 
shown in the plan, as it is cheaper and there are a 
great variety to select from. It will probably be neces- 
sary to experiment with the water system. The plan 
contemplates a thin flat tank with a large cooling 
surface to act as a radiator. If the weather is very 
cold this may be sufficient; if not a simple radiator 
may be made by passing the water through thin 
copper tubing, coiled in a spiral. A seven-horse-power 
motor, as shown, weighing about one hundred and 
seventy-five pounds and running at seven hundred 



Scientific American. 

the Slot is 5 feet 5 inches from the bow, if the boat 
is built accurately to the plans. 

The old floor timber at station No. 7 will have to 
be cut amidships and a short one put in about two 
inches farther aft in order to allow sufficient space 
for the driving wheel. 

The two trunk posts are now put in. These are of 
oak; the forward one is 2% inches wide and 2% 
inches thick. It is jogged out as shown in the plan 
so that it rests on floor No. 5 and supports the deck 
beam. The post must be securely bolted to both floor 
and deck beam, as a large part of the strain comes 
upon it. The after post is 2% inches by 2 inches, 
securely fastened to floor No. 7. 

The sides of the trunk are of white pine % inch 
thick, and put on two pieces to a side. The joint 
should come in line with the wheel bearing, and be 
cut out around it to allow play for the driving wheel, 
as it jumps over rough ice. The lower boards 
should land on top of the bottom and be fastened to 
it with brass screws put in from underneath. If the 



December i8j 1909. 

The same figure shows in detail the flanges and 
bearings for carrying the wheel and delivering the 
power. The flanges should be bronze castings turned 
and fitted on a lathe. The cheapest way is to make 
one pattern large enough to enable all the flanges to 
be worked down from it. This would not be very 
expensive, but the flanges must be well made or else 
trouble will surely ensue. The driving shaft is of 1% 
steel, 14 inches long. A 7/16-inch driving sprocket 
about 7% inches diameter is riveted to the flange 
and then keyed on to the shaft. As Fig. 4 shows 
clearly the dimensions of flanges and rivets, it is not 
necessary to describe them in detail. The driving 
wheel is pinned to the shaft with two 5/16-inch taper 
pins driven in tightly and riveted enough to prevent 
working out. A couple of grease cups are put in as 
shown. 

To put the outfit - together first pin the driving 
wheel on the shaft and lay it in the trunk, the two 
upper side boards being, of course, removed. Fasten 
the two bearing flanges on the yokes and then slip 





CONSTBUCTIONAL DETAILS OF A POWEB-DBIVEN SCOOTEB. 



revolutions, should give the scooter a speed of about 
thirty miles an hour on good smooth ice. If a light- 
weight air-cooled motor of twenty horse-power is in- 
stalled a speed of sixty miles an hour can easily be 
obtained. 

The propelling outfit may be installed in such a 
manner that it does not interfere with the use of the 
boat for sailing. To do this it is only necessary to 
shift the gasoline tank forward and make the driv- 
ing wheel case watertight, the same as a centerboard 
trunk. The steering runner could have a removable 
pin through the stock at the tiller head, thus allow- 
ing the runner to be unshipped. If the wind died out 
one could "auto scoot" home by simply putting in 
the rudder and starting up the motor. Of course the 
extra weight and windage of the sails and rigging 
would retard the speed somewhat. 

The first step in construction is to put in the trunk 
in which the driving wheel runs. First cut a slot in 
the bottom 13 inches long and 3 inches wide to allow 
the wheel to touch the ice. The forward point of 



posts and boards are well fitted to the bottom and set 
in white lead the trunk should be fairly water-tight. 
A removable cap of % inch white pine allows the trunk 
to be inspected. 

The wheel yoke may next be shaped out. This com- 
prises two pieces of oak IJ4 inches thick, 2 feet 2%i 
inches long, 4% inches wide in the middle and 3 inches 
at the ends, with a 1% x 3 inch cross piece to hold 
them together. A 1%-inch hole is bored in them, 1 
foot 2 inches from the after end, to take the flanged 
bearing of the driving shaft. Fig. 2 shows the lay- 
out of the yoke and trunk, also the little %-inch oak 
strips AAA, which keep the yoke from chafing the 
sides of the trunk. 

The driving wheel is of 1%1-inch oak, 15% inches in 
diameter. The rim is rounded over and fitted with 
twelve spikes. These can be made from 2%-inch iron 
lag screws. Bore holes in the rim and screw them in. 
Then cut their heads off with a hack saw and file 
them to a chisel point at an angle of about 45 degrees, 
as shown in the upper portion of Fig. 4. 



each side over the shaft. The yoke is now fastened 
together at the rear end by two 14-inch through bolts, 
as shown in Fig. 2. The forward end has a %- 
inch pin passing through the oak post tightly and 
having two washers and pins to keep the yoke to- 
gether. As the thrust of the motor is taken on this 
pin be careful to get it to fit the wood tightly. A 
small through rivet forward of the pin will help pre- 
vent the wood from splitting. The sprocket may now 
be keyed on and grease cups fitted. As the driving 
wheel will move up and down, due to bumps in the 
ice, it must be made flexible. This is accomplished by 
means of the movable yoke and a spring fitted at the 
after end of the yoke to keep it pressed down hard on 
the ice and prevent the teeth from slipping. 

An oak block is fastened securely to the trunk post 
and a 3/16-inch spring about 1% inches in diameter 
and 4 inches long should be about right. Drive nails 
in a row around the spring to keep it in place. 

A means must be provided for raising the driving 
{Concluded on page 479.) 



December 18, 1909. 



Scientific American 



473 



RECENTLY PATENTED INVENTIONS. 

Of Interest to Farmers. 

GATE AND DOOR FASTENER.— F. J. S. 
Mielt, Gunnison, Col. In this patent the pur- 
pose of the inventor is to provide a novel, 
simple device for securing a door, gate, or the 
like in closed condition, the fastener being 
durable, and convenient to operate. The fast- 
ener is very desirable for use in the closure of 
an opening in a fence through which cattle 
are driven from one inclosure to another. 



Household Utilities. 

CANDELABRUM. — O. H. Van Goelpen, New 
York, N. Y. The candelabrum is so constructed 
that its arms can be turned around a central 
support, and the arms are so jointed and con- 
nected that their members can be placed in any 
position in relation to each other, and fastened 
in adjusted position, the adjustment being done 
with ease at the back or front of the device. 

ANTISEPTIC TOOTH-BRUSH HOLDER. — 
W. D. Jones, New York, N. Y. The holder is 
arranged to contain the brush in a tube filled 
with antiseptic vapors, to allow convenient re- 
moval of the brush for its legitimate use and 
replacing of the same in the tube, and to supply 
the latter continually with vapors to maintain 
the brush when not in use in an antiseptic con- 
dition. 



machines and Mechanical Devices. 

MACHINE FOR SHEARING METAL 
SHEETS. — G. B. Johnson, 8 Victoria Street, 
Westminster, London, England. This machine 
facilitates and reduces manual labor incidental 
to the accurate shearing of sheets to a rectan- 
gular form, and is designed to overcome difficul- 
ties in such operations when performed by a 
single shearing cutter to which tne edges of 
the sheet are successively presented, and more 
especially when it is required to simultaneously 
cut a number of roofing sheets in the "pack" 
as the latter is delivered from the rolling mill. 

Note. — Copies of any o f these patents will 
be furnished by Munn & Co. for ten cents each. 
Please state the name of the patentee, title of 
the invention, and date of this paper. 



Legal Notices 



PATENTS 



INVENTORS are invited to communicate with 
Mnnn & Co., 361 Broadway, New York, or 
625 F Street, Washington, D. C, in regard 
to securing valid patent protection for tbeir in- 
ventions. Trade-Marks and Copyrights 
registered. Design Patents and Foreign 
Patents secured. 

A Free Opinion as to the probable patenta- 
bility of an invention will be readily given to any 
inventor furnishing us with a model or sketch and 
a brief description of the device in question. All 
communications are strictly confidential. Our 
Hand-Book on Patents will be sent free on 
request. 

Ours is the Oldest agency for securing patents ; 
It was established over sixty years ago. 

MUNN & CO., 361 Broadway, New York 

Branch Office, 62E F St., Washington, D. C, 



INDEX OF INVENTIONS 

For which Letters Patent of the 

United States were Issued 

for the Week Ending 

December 7, 1909, 

AND BACH BEARING THAT DATE 

[See note at end of list ahout copies of these patents.] 



Abrasive composition and making same, L. 

H. Baekeland 942,808 

Acrobatic purposes, sphere for, O. F. De- 

Aerial navigation' apparatus, L. Felker g*3>2£$ 

Aeroplane, gyroscopic, S. S. Williams 9*2,691 

Air compressor, A. T. Newell 942,455 

Air trap, automatic, R. N. Dyer 942,368 

Alarm apparatus, H. R. Bretney 942,433 

Alloys, producing f erro, E. F. Price 942,349 

AmuBement apparatus, A. C. Wolf 942,230 

Amusement of the public, apparatus for the, 

W. Taylor 942,759 

Animal trap, A. Brecheisen 942,481 

Animal trap, R. M. Wilbur 942,528 

Antidrifting device, B. Gnnnell 942,855 

Arm chair and folding bed, J. 0. Smith 942,594 

Auto, baby, J. R. Spencer 942,679 

Automobile controller, electric, H. P. Dodge 942.488 
Automobile drip pans, valve for, T. A. 

Yapp 942,232 

Automobile radiator, Smith & Hooker 942,677 

Automobile wind shield, A. W. Towle 942,225 

Automobiles, sleigh attachment for, P. M. 

Knutson 942,082 

Axle, automobile, M. D. Tindal 942,151 

Baby gate, G. Heidt 942,067 

Bag holder, H. Woodman 942,231 

Baggage fastener, J. B. Moses 942,733 

Baking powder, J. H, Hooker 942,072 

Baling machine, Hansen & Price 942,257 

Bank, portable savings, J. H. Gunnes 942,638 

Bearing, ball, G. A. W. Koch 942,392 

Bearing, roller, F. M. Foote 942,252 

Beating and mixing machine, Van Houten 

& Bachman 942,116 

Bed attachment, P. H. Wilson 942,606 

Bed, couch, H. D. Penney : 942.459 

Bed head rest, .T. G. Ryan 942,354 

Bedstead, J. Westhaver 942,426 

Belt shifter, J. A. Long 942,384 

Belt shifter support, O. W. Levalley 942,837 

Binder, loose leaf, G. O. Olson 942.098 

Block mold, E. May 942,092 

Blowpipe, J. F. Williams 942,690 

Board. See Game board. 

Boat, compound, J. D. White 942,687 



Boat planking, securing means for, Alexan- 
der & Willhahn 942,478 

Boiler scale removers, container for, G. O. 

Leonard 942,836 

Boiler tube cleaner, W. S. Elliott 942,778 

Boiler tube cleaner, J. V. Symons 942,798 

Boots and socks, excluder for felt and knit- 
ted, F. W. Savage 942,672 

Boring machine, G. D. Wiggins 942,389 

Boring tool, automatic, Leland & Stebbins. 942,672 

Bottle closure, W. H. Reid 942,665 

Bottle closure and seal, Tevander & Mani- 

erre 942,421 

Bottle, drenching, O. B. Davis 942,057 

Bottle, non-refillable, F. S. Novotny 942,183 

Bottling machine, R. Littler 942,271 

Box, H. H. Kinsey 942,391 

Box cover fastening, F. H. Moellenbrock . . 942,336 

Box fastener, C. O. Mason 942,839 

Brake shoe, C. B. McPhiliips 942,343 

Brake shoe, interlocking, H. Jones 942,329 

Brooder, A. J. Blowers 942,769 

Brush chopper, J. Porteous 942,215 

Brush holder, A. Kimble 942,264 

Brush holder, tooth, 0. H. De Gowin 942,058 

Buckle, cross line, H. B. McGowan 942,404 

Building block, W. C. Denison 942,621 

Building block, fire clay, J. O. St. John... 942,850 
Building material, apparatus for distribut- 
ing, J. H. McCoy 942,403 

Button, cuff, H. Ginnel 942,635 

Button setting instrument, J. F. Thayer... 942,473 

Buttonhole cutter, F. F. Roby 942,519 

Cabinet, credit, R. M. Vick 942,387 

Calculating device, C. H. Miller 942,579 

Calculating machines, number wheel lock 

for, W. L. Dench 942,487 

Calipers, Young & Gleason 942,529 

Can body machine, automatic feed, W. E. 

Taylor 942,190 

Candy machine, J. Smith 942,595 

Candy twisting machine, W. D. Reeves 942,284 

Cans, discharge spout for, J. A. Sauer 942,522 

Car brake, dump, L. P. Gaston 942,320 

Car brake, railway, L. De Vito 942,684 

Car construction, J. F . Streib 942,224 

Car coupling, automatic, O. F. Richter 942,218 

Car couplings, uncoupling chain for, G. G. 

Davis 942,134 

Car door, F. X. Malocsay 942,862 

Car door, grain, W. S. Driskell 942,551 

Car door hanger and track, combined, E. A. 

Hill 942,324 

Car door mechanism, R. V. Sage 942,108 

Car, dump, H. E. Thompson 942,598 

Car fender, J. J. Kelly 942,566 

Car fender, J. Flynn 942,631 

Car fender, J. A. Home 924,727 

Car grain door, R. C. Russell 942,221 

Car, passenger, P. M. Kling 942,265 

Car replacers, ratchet clamp for, W. Gakle 942,632 

Car roof, E. C. Covert 942,249 

Car unloading apparatus, J. W. Page 942,840 

Car ventilator, F. J. Linehan 942,451 

Car wheel, forged steel, J. M. Hansen 942,381 

Car window, T. A. Legge 942,270 

Cars and similar structures, trap door for 

railway, E. F. Chaffee 942,711 

Cars and similar structures, trap' door for 

railway, O. M. Edwards 942,719 

Carbureter, McGWre & Hammick 942,181 

Carbureter for hydrocarbon engines, S. R. 

Jacobs 942,503 

Card and picture holder, J. A. Cope 942,713 

Carline, J. J. Hoffman 942,258 

Carpet fastener, stair, W. W. Hesson 942,641 

Carriage curtain fastener, F. S. Carr 942.612 

Cartridge and game belt, W. A. Wiley 942,390 

Cash register indicator, A. J. Postans 942,348 

Caster, J. E. Johnson 942,565 

Casting machine, F. H. Howard 942,073 

Catapult, R. C. Winchester 942,300 

Cattle guard, S. C. Dunn 942,059 

Cement kiln, T. M. Morgan 942,509 

Cement 1! led pipe and fittings, F. H. Caney 942,436 
Cement mixer feeding device, H. C. Baxter 942,051 

Chain manipulating tool, J. H. Shelley 942,356 

Chain securing and releasing device, Fergu- 
son & McMichael 942,061 

Chair. W. P. Lawrence 942,570 

Chair, J. Flindall 942,724 

Chair and couch, combination, J. Flindall.. 942,817 

Chair coupling, G. E. Linder , 942,085 

Chair head rest, barber, A. L. Undeland.. 942,603 

Chair iron, H. W. Bolens 942,432 

Chaplet riveting machine, V. Davis 942,618 

Check and seal, combined, W. E. Elliott... 942,314 

Chuck, drill, P. Steiner . . .' 942,417 

Chuck, self centering, Bomborn & Hoffmann 942,304 

Chute and can, garbage, E. Bradshaw 942,854 

Cigar lighter and cutter, combined, G. W. 

Britton 942,434 

Cigar presser, S. G. Lipschntz 942,397 

Cigarette tipping machine, S. Palmowsky.. 942,514 

Circular cutter, R. D. Kinyon 942,081 

Cistern cleaner, J. H. Fox 942,254 

Clamp locking device, J. Begins 942,239 

Clock and the like, J. Buhler 942,374 

Closure, F. Ecaubert 942,171 

Clothes drier for laundries, E. E. Wingate. 942,692 

Clothes pin, A. C. French 942,725 

Clothes pounder, C. A. Robertson 942,462 

Clutch, friction, H. A. Cumfer 942,056 

Clutch, friction, A. Lint 942,574 

Clutch, friction, P. B. Marfleld 942,452 

Clutch, magnetic, H. W. Ravenshaw, 

924,186, 942,187, 942,867 

Clutch mechanism, J. Boda 942,244 

Clutch or brake, magnetic, H. W. Raven- 
shaw 942,188 

Coal dust burner, J. W. Zell 942,696 

Coal or ore washer, E. Prochaska 942,461 

Coal separator, centrifugal dry, A. Ernst. . 942,251 

Coaster brake, C. A. Baylor 942,479 

Cock, non-scalding shower bath, D. W. 

McNeil 942,465 

Coffee pot, J. A. Holmgren 942,558 

Coke handling apparatus, D. McDonald 942,341 

Collar, metal framed horse, W. Hardwick.. 942,824 
Comb cutting device, Schatz & Van der 

Hoek 942,795 

Concentrator and amalgamator, J. I. E. 

Nelson 942,584 

Concrete columns, means for constructing, 

P. A. & L. P. Deslauriers 942,169 

Concrete construction, C. W. Horton 942,447 

Concrete construction, metallic reinforcing 

bar for, R. J. Grace 942,202 

Concrete dam, H. A. Icke 942,645 

Concrete piling, reinforced, J. P. Holmes. . 942,142 
Concrete structure, reinforced, M. Dumas.. 942,625 
Concrete structures, apparatus for building 

hollow, J. H. McCoy 942,402 

Condensation product and making same, L. 

H. Baekeland 942,809 

Condenser, surface, Y. Wadagaki 942,423 

Condiment shaker, E. Gebhardt 942,138 

Conduit, flexible, C. H. Miller 942,787 

Conduit, flexible electric, C. H. Miller 942,789 

Conduit for electric wires, C. H. Miller 942,788 

Conduit for electric wires, flexible, C. H. 

Miller 942,790 

Container top, B. T. B. Hyde 942,562 

Controller regulator, C. M. Feist 942,722 

Converter hood and flue, A. P. Turner 942,801 

Converter, metallurgical, W. H. Peirce. . . 942,661 

Cooker, can, J. Cook 942,812 

Cooking utensil, A. Speirs 942,111 

Copper matte converter, E. A. C. Smith... 942,675 
Copper matte, method of and converter ves- 
sel for bessemerizing, Peirce & Smith. 942,346 

Corn rack, J. S. Winton 942,894 

Corset, C. MacMahn 942,786 

Cotton chopper, N. T. Speer 942,294 

Cotton chopper, W. B. Alexander 942,371 

Cotton compressor, B. C. Gallaread 942,443 

Couch, suspensions, H. L. Hohlfeld 942,259 

Coupling" device, L. Iversen 942,780 

Crayon, lumber gage, and tally pencil, com- 
bined, C. P. Breining 942,771 

Crib and baby carriage, combination, A. 

Hendricks 942,174 

Cue, W. M. Dall 942,486 

Cultivator, C. W. Brown 942,540 

Culvert, L. Schnuerer 942,466 

Culvert, corrugated metal. A. G. Hague... 942,256 

Curtain fixture, B. W. Coddington 942.439 

Cushion wheel, E. J. Pone 942,741 

Cut-off, automatic, P. Dixon 942,623 

Cutting machine, A. C. Bolton 942,164 

Cutting mechanism, W. S. Metcalfe 942,209 

Cycle saddle, T. Bettney 942,363 



Desk, portable writing and drawing, T. B. 

Stark 942,148 

Detachable ' bracket, D. M. Ireland 942,564 

Die cutting machine, D. P. Robinson 942,146 

Diphenyl-ortho-oxalic esters, making, H. 

Schneider 942,674 

Direction and distance locator, W. H. Dolby 942,718 

Dish washing machine, H. Mury 942,179 

Dispensing apparatus, R. G. Marsh 942,273 

Display rack, J. A. Nickerson ?,fH5; 

Door attachment, screen, C. Spencer 9 TS'2„„ 

Door check, D. Desplats •■ 942,622 

Door closer and stop, combined, H. C. 

Moore 942,656 

Door closing device, swinging, W. H. 

Knapp 942,568 

Door hanger, J. H. Lawrence 942,860 

Door holder, H. M. Daly 942,310 

Door operating mechanism, R. M. Zimmer- 
man 942,234 

Door or other alarm, J. Seelhorst, Jr 942,593 

Door stop, J. L. Webb 942,686 

Dough in the manufacture of bread, ma- 
chine for rounding up lumps of, F. H. 

Van Houten, Jr 942,154 

Dough molding or shaping machine, F. H. 

Van Houten 942,153 

Draft appliance, Tiernan & Schreiber 942,599 

Draft rigging, friction, C. K. Brooks 942,773 

Drier. See Clothes drier. 

Drying timber and other moisture bearing 

substances, rapidly, H. D. Tiemann. . . 942,150 

Drill brace. Parsons & Leland 942,586 

Drill guide, A. C. Neal 942,581, 942,582 

Drinking tube, J. L. Clarke 942,306 

Dust collector, O. M. Morse 942,657 

Duster, R. S. Melchers 942,507 

Dyeing, Daniell & Hebden 942,166 

Dyeing, yarn support for, Hebden & Dan- 
iell 942,856 

Dynamo brushes, etc., manufacturing, G. 

Eglv 942,379 

Egg tester, E. Leiss 942,652 

Electric apparatus, vapor, H. I. Wood 942,157 

Electric apparatus, vapor, L. E. Dempster. 942,378 

Electric apparatus, vapor, H. I. Wood 942,871 

Electric circuit controlling relay, B. Menkin 942,508 

Electric drill, P. J. Lincoln 942,396 

Electric furnace, F. T. Snyder 942,110 

Electric furnace, E. F. Price 942,350 

Electric furnace with raised charging pit, 

A. Helf enstein 942,068 

Electric generator, G. A. Huber 942,325 

Electric heater, G. E. Stevens 942,874 

Electric lighting, C. P. Steinmetz 942,472 

Electric resistance apparatus, M. Hankin.. 942,555 

Electric switch, Emmet & Hewlett 942,491 

Electric transformer and governor, E. R. 

Cliff 942,544 

Electric wires, connection rosette for, J. L. 

Burton 942,710 

Electrical conductor, I. Kitsee 942,332 

Electrical contact device, C. F. Jenkins 942,647 

Electrodes, securing metal contacts to car- 
bon, S. Benko 942,704 

Electrolyte and electrodepositlng nickel, E. 

F. Kern 942,729 

Elevator door opener and closer, automatic 

safety, F. F. Boyd 942,770 

Engine primer, gasoline, A. H. Linaweaver 942,785 
Engines, fluid cooling means for gasoline or 

other, M. A. Fesier 942,493 

Envelop, L. R. Swett 942,420 

Evaporating apparatus, C. Ordway 942,407 

Excavating or hoisting apparatus, J. L. 

Potter 942,216 

Exhaust head, J. W. Parker 942,585 

Exhibiting apparatus, C. D. Whittredge 942,123 

Explosive engine, J. D. Hay 942,140 

Expressing press, A. W. French 942,442 

Eyeglass holder, W. H. Bradshaw 942,480 

Fastener, F. D. Broga 942,129 

Fastening device, C. W. Stark 942,470 

Fastening device, F. S. Carr 942,542 

Fastening for loops and the like, Jones & 

Stewart 942,330 

Fence brace, G. Schneider 942,592 

Fence post, metallic, E. C. Kahn 942,369 

Fence, snow, H. J. Schweitzer 942,147 

Fence wire clamp, Grayson & Hentz 942,064 

Fender, A. W. Shank 942,290 

Fibers, threads, and fabrics, improving 

textile, G. Kraemer 942,395 

Figure, jointed sheet metal, F. C. Sneyd... 942,524 

Filing cabinet, J. R. Ryan 942,414 

Filter, J. T. H. Paul, reissue 13,053 

Filter press, E. W. Heller 942,173 

Fire escape, J. B. Albert 942,477 

Fire escape, L. Vogl 942,604 

Floor dressing machine, L. H. Veronneau . . 942,474 

Floor dressing machine, S. D. Hoy 942,830 

Flower pot holder, C. H. Keitsch 942,177 

Flue block mold, O. C. Hiatt 942,779 

Flue cleaner, S. S. Poole 942,515 

Fluid pressure engine, C. P. Ebersole 942,441 

Folding box or crate, R. Hohenstein. 942,642 

Foot and leg rest, J. Flindall 942,630 

Foot, artificial, J. F. Rowley 942,521 

Foot power motor, W. Hargrove 942,556 

Fore carriage, J. W. Gamble 942.319 

Fruit picker, E. A. Ableman 942,302 

Fuel composition and producing the same, 

L. R. Palmer 942,213 

Fuel, economizing, Allen & Pyper 942,530 

Furnace, M. Zippier, Sr 942,872 

Furnace door, G. de Grahl 942,822 

Furnaces, gas analyzer for, Mailloux & 

Westover 942,861 

Furrow opener, L. T. Rasmnssen. .942,281 to 942,283 
Fuse, automatic self indicating, F. B. Cook 942,248 

Game apparatus, W. J. Rigney 942,103 

Game apparatus, W. Stevenson 942,757 

Game apparatus, base ball, J. W. E. Dean. 942,619 

Game board, F. G. Rempe 942,748 

Game schedule, C. H. Lovell 942,178 

Garbanzon hulling and separating machine, 

Brockett & Garver 942,053 

Garment, M. Lang -. 942,144 

Garment, inner, J. W. Appleton. 942,159 

Garment supporter, D. H. Haywood 942,323 

Gas burner, L. H. Brady 942,709 

Gas burner, H. S. Humphrey 942,831 

Gas, contrivance for saturating liquids with, 

F. Trosiener 942,115 

Gas cut-off, safety, H. Tullis 942,601 

Gas holders, low limit valve for, L. Shaw.. 942,796 
Gas lighting and extinguishing apparatus, A. 

E. Broadberry 942,772 

Gas lighting apparatus, G. E. Hulse 942,561 

Gas mains, automatic cut-off for, C. E. 

Lahmers 942,832 

Gas pressure regulator, O. Sprecher 942,112 

Gas producer, O. K. Zwingenberger 942,361 

Gas, retort for the manufacture of illuminat- 
ing, C. W. Isbell 942.501, 942,858 

Gas treating apparatus, D. C. Mclntyre 942,863 

Gate, W. D. Whitney 942,228 

Gearing, H. M. Baker, Jr 942,609 

Gearing, Potter & Johnston 942,843 

Gearing, double back, J. C. Pflanger 942,185 

Gearing, transmission, C. B. Kurtz 942,266 

Gearing, transmission, L. C. Norton 942,406 

Gin saw cleaner, A. N. Tumlin 942,800 

Glass articles, manufacture of, C. B. Law- 
ton 942,651 

Glass cutter, J. W. Tucker 942,152 

Glass panes, metal frame for, A. Busse 942,611 

Glass washing apparatus. C. W. Jaycox 942,074 

Glove, swimming, C. Iverson 942,262 

Gold, apparatus for washing out placer, S. 

Rachleman 942,663 

Golf club, F. E. Rigden 942,353 

Governor for internal-combustion engines, E. 

Higgins 942,071 

Grader and scraper, road, S. Richardson.... 942,749 

Grain cutter, L. Clark 942,614 

Grass digger, quack, J. Hopkins 942,559 

Grid resistance. H. J. Wiegand 942,156 

Grinding machine, portable, Danglemeyer & 

Connors 942,311 

Grinding mill, G. E. Sovereign 942,357 

Grinding mill, J. Bercha 942,768 

Grinding or pulverizing machine, A. H. 

Petersen 942,865 

Gun, automatic. Dawson & Buckham 942,167 

G*uns, single trigger mechanism for double 

barrel, J. D. Rnss 942,794 

Hair cutting Instrument. F. B. Walter 942,298 

Hair supporter, J. Latseh 942,833 

Hame, Price & Schenck 942,351 

Hame fastening. J. H. Rankson 942.160 

Hammer, drop, L. P. Blot 942,708 

Hammer, pneumatis power, A. Berner 942,163 



Hammer, power, Scott-King & Norris 942,756 

Hammocks, etc., resilient bottom for couch, 

I. E. Palmer 942,841 

Harmonic signaling system, R. H. Manson. 942,091 

Harrow, G. A. Olson 942,511 

Harrow, alfalfa, E. F. Price 942,516 

Harrow, drum, S. B. Clardy 942,376 

Harrow tooth fastener, E. M. Rich 942,412 

Harrows, connecting bar for, G. Anderson. . 942,532 

Harvester, corn, J. W. From 942,820 

Harvesting potatoes, onions, etc., apparatus 

for, Dnnham & Peck 942,626 

Hat guard, M. R. & M. J. Soden 942,678 

Hat retaining and ventilating means, R. D. 

Baker 942,303 

Hatchet, folding pocket, H. McNally 942,342 

Head rest, F. Corklns 942,485 

Heel counters, etc., machine for making 

skived blanks for, L. L. Hartwell 942,557 

Hinge, D. Wilde 942,689 

Hinge, J. Flindall 942,723 

Hinge hanger, G. E. Leverton 942,784 

Hoisting device, H. A. Myers 942,735 

Horse power, meter for indicating, W. E. 

Burt 942,130 

Horses' knees, dressing retainer and shield 

for, J. Donglas 942,624 

Horseshoe making machine, R. S. Matteson. 942,370 

Hose or pipe coupling, C. E. Atkinson 942,047 

Hose supporter and protector, combined, V. 

Robbins 942,751 

Hot air furnace, W. Miller 942,655 

Hub, variable speed coasting and braking, 

A. F. Rockwell 942,520 

Humidifier, F. B. Comins 942,712 

Hydrocarbon burner, J. A. Hunt 942,857 

Ice cream freezer, A. E. Hopley 942,260 

Igniting device, electric, J. A. & B. A. 

Jeffery 942,646 

Indurated product and preparing same, L. 

H. Baekeland 942,852 

Ink distributer for platen presses, A. E. 

Berreyesa 942,705 

Inking apparatus, H. F. Bechman 942,703 

Insect trap, R. Hazelrlgg 942,204 

Insulating support for high-tension conduc- 
tors, R. D. Mershon 942,335 

Internal combustion engine, E. Higgins 942,070 

Internal combustion engine, C. G. Wridgway 942,124 

Internal combustion engine, C. G. Weld 942,227 

Internal combustion engine, H. L. Jones... 942,782 

Iron heated by electricity, J. Collicott 942,308 

Iron heater, portable, E. C. Thompson 942,422 

Ironing table, folding, J. H. Hummer 942,643 

Jack-screw, shifting, S. M. Dunlap 942,170 

Jar and bottle closure, E. Hoffman 942,141 

Jar holder, J. Twohig 942,602 

Joint fastener, M. W. Wintermute 942,693 

Journal bearing for removable disks, dust 

proof, P. Broman 942,539 

Key fastener, P. J. Ryan 942.753 

Keyhole plug and guard therefor, C. S. Bat- 

dorf 942,537 

Knob, adjustable door, R. C. Walter 942,605 

Label holder, E. J. Middleton 942,094 

Ladder, J. Vaghi 942,683 

Lamp, H. Salsbury 942,589 

Lamp, E. E. Allbee 942,608 

Lamp, flaming arc, Martin & Schreiner 942,730 

Lamp holding device, plural, R. B. Benja- 
min 942,240, 942,242 

Lamp, miner's, R. L. Graves 942,823 

Lamp socket, plural, R. B. Benjamin 942,241 

Lamps or headlights, mechanism for vehicle, 

A. P. Prendergast 942,217 

Last, W. S. Hamm 942,554 

Lathes, stop motion for veneer, J. M. 

Rounds 942,105 

Laundried articles, carton or holder for, N. 

J. Goodman 942,201 

Lavatory fitting, P. Mneller 942,385, 942,386 

Leg fastening, G. W. Franzhelm 942,380 

Limbs, joint for artificial, F. W. Merrick... 942,093 

Line casting machine, J. R. Rogers 942,845 

Line casting machine, F. B. Converse 942,848 

Line casting machine, F. C. L. d'Aix, re- 
issue 13,048 

Liquid dispensing apparatus, H. S. Cornish . 942.165 

Lock indicator, Arens & Teich 942,806 

Locomotive ash pan, T. W. Anderson 942,765 

Locomotive ash pans, device for cleaning, 

N. Olson 942,737 

Locomotives, etc., arch for fire boxes of, J. 

Lof tns 942,575 

Loom dobby, T. Haworth et al 942,826 

Loss preventing device, W. K. Wolf 942,695 

Lubricating draper roller, J. D. Jones 942,728 

Luggage carrier, T. W. Tschiffely 942,526 

Mail bag handling apparatus, Pedersen & 

Christensen 942,278 

Mail box support, A. P. Kersey 942,859 

Mail catcher, railway, N. H. Campbell 942,055 

Mail exchanging device, H, Diefenbaugh 942,717 

Mail handling apparatus, railway, N. H. 

Campbell 942,055 

Mail pouch catching and delivering appara- 
tus, J. L. Ware 942,762 

Mail pouch transferring apparatus, J. W. 

Pepple 942,214 

Malt stirrer, M. Kondolf 942,649 

Massage apparatus, J. W. Jones 942,206 

Massage device, Wiking & Bengtsson 942,299 

Match safe, C. E. Birky 942,706 

Measurer, skirt, U. B. Morrison 942,338 

Measuring appliance, angle, A. Konig 942,393 

Measuring attachment for cloth folding ma- 
chines, K. von Thigpen 942,685 

Measuring machine, cloth, C. H. Lantz 942,084 

Meat tenderer, W. H. Humeston 942,448 

Metal, forming expanded, W. H. Cooley 942,309 

Metal pieces, joining, H. Goldschmidt, re- 
issue 13,050 

Metal rods or bars, apparatus for use in 

twisting, Hartel & Kissling 942,322 

Metallic tie, Emerley & Matschuk 942,721 

Milk sampling and measuring device, A. A. 

Johnson 942,648 

Milking cows, F. M. Berberich 942,243 

Milking machine, L. Burrell 942,482 

Milling machine, portable, R. P. Decker 942,168 

Mines, conveyer for, P. J. Riley 942,750 

Molding machine, S. F'. Nicolai 942,457 

Molding, machine for use in drawing pat- 
terns in, S. Strettles 942,419 

Mop wringer, M. E. Davis 942,135 

Motor controller, A. Kimble 942,382 

Motor controlling apparatus, electric, H. E. 

Dey 942,196 to 942,198 

Motor controlling device, T. E. Barnum 942,050 

Motor starting device, internal combustion, 

E. L. Sharpneck 942,467 

Motors, igniter for Internal combustion, H. 

A. Johnston 942,328 

Motors, method of and means for regulating 

the speed of electric, R. H. Rogers 942,463 

Mowing machine, M. Jewell 942.075 

Music holder and turner, H. M. Masters.... 942,399 

Mnsic leaf turner, R. A. Gibson 942,821 

Music record sheets, apparatus for produc- 
ing perforated, G. Machlet, Jr 942,398 

Musical instruments and other apparatus, 
contact device for self-playing, G. H. 

Davis 942,550 

Musical instruments, water key for, W. W. 

Allen 942,429 

Note sheets, receiving spool for, W. R. Crip- 
pen 942,548 

Nut lock, W. H. Beltz 942,193 

Nut lock. G. Bryar 942.194 

Nut locking expansion bolt, Vernon & Morn- 

ingstar 942.226 

Optical illusion apparatus. E. P. Hoyt 942.560 

Ore roasting pot, F. D. Baker 942.810 

Ore treating furnace, H. C. Bellinger 942,052 

Ores, securing the chlorldization of, W. 

Koehler 942.569 

Oven, gas range, W. J. Best 942.128 

Ozone, generating and storing, F. M. Ashley 942,046 

Packing pad, A. D. Alexander 942,191 

Paper bags, machinery or apparatus for 

forming or making. J. Day et al 942,715 

Paper bottle. R. Lundell 942,088 

Paper making machines, beater roll for, 

Rankin & Dwierick 942,746 

Paper mills, treating the spent liquor of, I. 

Kitsee 942.207 

Paving composition. J. H. Amies. 942,237 

Paving purposes, composition for, J. H. 

Amies . 942,236 

Pedal folding apparatus. F. C. White 942.359 

Pencil holder. R. C. R«it»r 942,747 



(Continued on page 477.) 



474 



Scientific American. 



December 18, 1909. 




Foot and 
Power 

Screw Cutting 



"Star" 
Lathes 



Automatic 
Cross 
Feed 

FOR FINE, ACCURATE WORK 

Send for Catalogue B. 
SENECA FALLS MFQ. CO. 

695 Water Street, 
Seneca Falls, N. Y„ U. S. A. 



Engine and Foot Lathes 

MACHINE SHOP OUTFITS, TOOLS AND 

SUPPLIES. BEST MATERIALS. BEST 

WORKMANSHIP. CATALOGUE FREE 

SEBASTIAN LATHE CO.. 120 Culvert St., Cincinnati. 0. 

Yonr PATENTS 
BUSINESS 
ARIZONA 

Laws the most liberal. Expense the least. Hold meetings, transact 
business anywhere. Blanks. By-Laws and forms for making stock 
full-paid for cash, property or services, free. President Stoddard, 
FORMER SECRETARY OF ARIZONA, resident agent for 
many thousand companies. Reference: Any bank in Arizona 

STODDARD INCORPORATING COMPANY, Box 8000 
PHOENIX, ARIZONA 



Incorporate? 



FRICTION DISK DRILL 

FOR LIGHT WORK. 
Has These Great Advantage*: 

The speed can be instantly changed from to 1600 without 
stopping or shifting belts. Power applied can be graduated 
to drive, with equal safety, the smallest or largest drills 
within its range — a wonderful economy in time and great 
saving in drill breakage. tW Send for Drill Catalogue. 

W. F. «fe JNO. BARNES CO., 

Established 1873. 

1999 Ruby Street, - - Roekford. HJL 




WORLD'S ELECTRICAL 
EXHIBITION 1W& 1910 

A.'range to visit Chicago at this Mm e and see every- 
thing new and wonderful In the field of Electrical 
Science, Invention and Industry. Manufacturers 
should reserve space now. ELECTBICAIi TRADES 
EXPOSITION Cd, Chicago, U. 8. A. 



WELL 



DRILLING 
MACHINES 



Over 70 sizes and styles, for drilling either deep or 
shallow wells in any kind of soil or rock. Mounted on 
wheels or on sills. With engines or borse powers. 
Strong, simple and durable. Any mechanic can operate 
them easily. Send for catalog. 

WILLIAMS BROS.. Ithaca, N. Y. 




H-G GAS ENGINE 

MAGNETOS 

They are made right — work 
right and the cost is not high. 
Send for Bulletin No. 1 5S7. 



The Holfzer-Cabot Electric Go. 



Boston (Broohllne'l Mass, 
and Chicago, HI- 



ESTABLISHED 1866 
'"THE STANDARD" THE OLDEST-ORIGINAL 

JUST ISSUED 

22nd Edition for 1909-10 

DOCKHAM'S 
American Report and Directory 

of the Textile Manufacture and Dry 

Goods Trade 

UNITED STATES, CANADA AND MEXICO 

All the New Mills. Over 20,000 Changes. 

DO YOU KNOW THEM ALL? 

CONTENTS 

Cotton, Woolen, Worsted, Carpet, Hosiery, Knit 

Goods, Silk, Shoddy, Linen, Jute, Flax, Waste and 

Wool Hat MANUFACTURERS^ 

Bleacheries, Print Works, 

Dyers and Finishers, Mercerizers, 

Converters of Cotton Goods, 

Yarn Dealers— Commission, Importers. Brokers, etc. 

Cotton Dealers — Merchants, Factors, Buyers, Commission, 
Importers, Exporters, Brokers, etc. 

Cotton Dealers — Liverpool, England; Bremen, Germany; 
Havre, France. 

Wool Dealers — Buyers, Commission, Brokers, Pullers, 
Scourers, etc. 

Waste Dealers -Cotton, Wool. 

Dry Goods — Commission, Manufacturers* Agents, Whole- 
sale, Jobbers, Importers, etc. „ 

Agencies and Offices of Manufacturing Companies 
in Boston, Providence, New York and Philadelphia. 

Directors of many of the leading incorporated companies. 

Textile Associations— Also interesting and valuable data 
relating to the great industry represented. 

The Mill Information is as follows: Name of manufac- 
tory ; officers and capital, if incorporated ; firm name ; kind 
of goods made, with a description of same, and, if yams, 
size and system ; number of ring and mule spindles ; num- 
ber of sets of wool cards; number of broad and narrow 
looms ; number of worsted combs; number of worsted 
spindles; number of knitting machines or cylinders; num- 
ber of sewing machines; KINDS AND NUMBER OF 
YARNS OR WARPS BOUGHT; selling agents, or if 
sell direct ; post office, telegraph and freight addresses ; loca- 
tion of mill; steam, water or electric power; if dye and finish 
own goods ; if carbonize, and who they are successors to 

Book sent, express prepaid, on receipt of price, $6. 

DOCKHAM PUBLISHING CO. 

6 Beacon Street, BOSTON, MASS. 



Best Light 



tSpectadesand 
Eyeglasses 

are a superfluity where onr lamps 
axe used. 

Portahle,100-candle power and 
produces a safe, white, power> 
ful, steady light with 

No odor, dirt, grease or 

smoXe. 

Every lamp warranted. Costs 2c 
per week. 

AGENTS WANTED 
EVERYWHERE. 

The BEST LIGHT CO. 

Owners of Original 

Patents. 
87 B. 6th St., Canton, O. 



THE LIFE 0E A SPLASH. 

{Continued from page 465.) 
attaining its greatest proportion, its walls 
begin to thicken, and gradually subside 
to form a mere ring of lobes on the sur- 
face, surrounding a central hollow. 

Then comes a rebound, manifested in 
the rising of a central column which, 
after attaining its full height and subsid- 
ing, is followed by a secondary column 
ere the series of events which we term 
"the splash" is complete. Prof^ Worth- 
ington shows that the separation in the 
form of a drop of the top of the primary 
column ere its complete subsidence re- 
sults in a series of events markedly dif- 
ferent from that which ensues when no 
separation takes place. Moreover, the 
manifestation of outspreading ripples is 
affected by the condition of the surface; 
and in order to secure the most favorable 
conditions by cleaning the surface, a con- 
tinous slow stream of fresh water is 
maintained. The contamination of the 
surface liquid, by the way, originates in 
lamp black brought down by each drop; 
for in order to prevent the drop from ad- 
hering to the watch glass in which it 
rests prior to its fall, it is found neces- 
sary carefully to smoke the glass in the 
flame of a candle. But the atoms of lamp 
black which adhere to and are brought 
down with each drop serve to make clear 
some important points connected with 
the formation of the splash. They prove 
by their presence that the interior of the 
crater is lined by the original liquid 
which formed the drop, and thus afford 
useful information as to the nature of 
its flow. When the primary column com- 
mences its ascent, the atoms of lamp 
black are carried upward at its summit, 
proving that the liquid of the original 
drop emerges at the head of the central 
column. This is confirmed by allowing 
a drop of milk to fall into pure water, 
when the photograph shows that the up- 
per part of the column contains' nearly 
all of the milk. This fact may be easily 
verified by naked-eye observation, as in- 
dicated by Prof. Worthington. Let the 
reader drop from a spoon into a cup of 
tea or coffee, from a height of fifteen or 
sixteen inches, a single drop of milk. 
He will have no difficulty in observing 
that the column which emerges carries 
with it the white milk-drop at the top 
only slightly stained by the liquid into 
which it has fallen. 

Upon increasing the height of the fall 
of a drop to about 40 inches, a new phe- 
nomenon is registered in the photo- 
graphs. The crater rises to a greater 
height; but instead of subsiding in the 
form of a ring, its mouth closes to form 
a bubble on the surface of the liquid. If 
the height be not too great, the closing 
is either incomplete or at any rate only 
temporary, and the bubble reopens at the 
top to make way for the column which 
rises as before from the base, but is now 
much thicker and hardly so high as be- 
fore. With a very high fall, however, 
the bubble becomes too firmly closed to 
reopen, and its summit is struck from 
within by the rising column, which be- 
comes entangled in the liquid of the bub- 
ble when the latter bursts. Thanks, how- 
ever, to the influence of surface tension, 
regularity of form is soon regained, so 
that the concluding events of a splash 
after a high fall agree in essentials with 
those which follow a low fall. 

The facts elucidated by experiments 
with a sphere dropped from varying 
heights into liquid proved to be of great 
interest and importance. Prof. Worthing- 
ton suggests that those who wish fully 
to grasp the significance of his photo- 
graphs and deductions should experiment 
for themselves by dropping marbles from 
a height of about a foot into a deep bowl 
of water, the bottom of which should be 
protected from the possibility of break- 
age by a few folds of fine copper gauze. 
A perfectly clean and highly polished 
marble so dropped will enter the water 
almost noiselessly with very little dis- 
turbance of the surface. In a word, the 
splash is singularly insignificant. Photo- 
( Continued on page 476.) 




^^^feL EG %S\ 



OtSTANCf- 
T£L£pHONt 







A Highway of 
Communication 



It goes by your door. Every 
home, every office, every factory, 
and every farm in the land is on 
that great highway or within 
reach of it It is a highway of 
communication and every Bell 
Telephone is a gateway by which 
it can be reached. 

Millions of messages travel over 
this highway every day. In the 
great cities they follow one another 
like the bullets from a machine 
gun, and over the wide reaches 
of the country they fly with the 
speed of shooting stars. 

The Bell service carries the 
thoughts and wishes of the people 
from room to room, from house to 
house, from community to com- 
munity, and from state to state. 



This service adds to the effi- 
ciency of each citizen, and multi- 
plies the power of the whole nation. 

The Bell system brings eighty 
million men, women and children 
into one telephone common- 
wealth, so that they may know 
one another and live together in 
harmonious understanding. 

A hundred thousand Bell em- 
ployees are working all the time 
on this highway of communica- 
tion. Every year it is made 
longer and broader, and its 
numerous branches are more 
widely extended. Every year it 
is furnished with a larger number 
of telephone gateways and be- 
comes the means of greater use- 
fulness. 



The Bell Long Distance Telephone will meet your 
new needs and serve your new purposes. It means 
— one policy, one system, universal service. 
Every Bell Telephone is the center of the System. 

American Telephone and Telegraph Company 
And Associated Companies 



Free 



Catalogue of 
Scientific and 
Technical Books 



Free 



1 



We have just issued a new edition 
of our Catalogue of Scientific and 
Technical Books, which contains 
144 pages, and a copy will be mailed 
free to any address on application. 



MUNN & CO. , Inc. , Publishers of Scientific American 
361 Broadway, New York 



THE INTERNAL WORK OP THE 

Wind. By S. P. Langley. A palnatakinsr discussion 
hy the leading authority on Aerodynamics, of a subject 
of value to all interested in alrahips. Sqi kt4tjfic 
American Supplements 946 and 947. Price 10 
cents each, by mail. Munn & Co., Inc., 361 Broadway, 
New -York City, and all newsdealers. 



TYPEWRITERS MA k l es 

Visible Writers or otherwise 

£■ C Smiths, Olivers, Underwoods, etc. 

Shim- i ANYWHERE for Free Trial, 

Or EENTED, stovfeu; RENT to APPLY. 

Prices $15.00 up 

First class M chines. Full guarantee. Write 
for Illustrated Catalog. Yonr opportunity. 
EMPORIUM (Est. 1892), 95-94 Lake St., CHICAGO 




ON THE PRESS ! 

THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

SIMPLY EXPLAINED 

WITH AN INTRODUCTION - BY 

HENRY P. MANNING 

Professor of Mathematics, Brown University 

Price, $1.50 net. 260 pages illustrated 

A FRIEND of the Scientific American's donated a prize of $500.00 for the best simply-worded 
non-mathematical explanation of the Fourth Dimension. The prize was won by Lieut.- 
Col. G. D. Fitch, U. S. A. This essay, together with three others which were accorded 
honorable mention, was published in the columns of the Scientific American. As a result, so 
much interest was aroused in the subject of the Fourth Dimension that it seemed advisable to 
collect, in permanent form, the more meritorious of the 245 essays which were sent in from all 
parts of the world. 

The present work presents twenty points of view, all of them interesting and no two quite, 
alike. Each essay is 2500 words in length. The reading of one essay does not involve the reading 
of the entire work, yet the entire book gives a comprehensive view of what the layman wishes ,to' 
know about the Fourth Dimension. No abstract mathematics will be found ki the volume. The. 
essayists endeavor the explain to Fourth Dimension both by imagining the effect of transporting an 
ordinary third-dimensional human being into fourth-dimensional space and also by explaining a 
third-dimensional man's possibilities in one and two dimensional space. 

Professor Manning, the leading American authority on the subject of the Fourth. Dimension,. 
contributes an introduction in which he explains how the concept of the Fourth Dimension gained 
mathematical prominence, and swiftly reviews the work that has been done in the field. He has 
also edited the essays and supplied explanatory footnotes where required. 

ORDER FROM YOUR BOOKDEALER OR FROM 

MUNN & COMPANY, Inc., 361 Broadway, NEW YORK 



Please mention the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN when writing to advertiser* 



December 18, 1909. 



Scientific American. 



475 



A $ 25,000.00 

Magazine 
For 15 Cents 




, HAMPTON'S represents the new type of magazine, which first of 
all gives news and information. The time has gone by for magazines 
that simply give entertainment, with articles mainly about travel, astron- 
omy, literature, etc. HAMPTON'S publishes the things live men and 
women want to know about, the things they ought to know, about their 
country, their politics, their financiers and their employers — the really 
big happenings in current history. 

I To get this important material HAMPTON'S employs the most 
expert writers in the country, and pays phenomenal sums of money for 
the work done. No newspaper publisher can afford to spend the im- 
mense amount of money and months of time which HAMPTON'S 
lavishes upon its marvelous series of articles. 

The editorial and art material in each month's issue of HAMP- 
TON'S cost $25,000, entirely in addition to cost of paper, printing, 
binding, etc. One feature, " Peary's Own Story," to appear in only 
*~tk eight numbers, cost over $50,000 alone. This means that you get 

$25,000 worth of reading material for 15c. or 1800 or more pages of 
the best reading matter in twelve numbers for $ 1 .50. gl 

HAMPTON'S during 1910 will be not only the best, but the & 
greatest magazine in America — the most interesting magazine published. k< 
It is the one magazine you simply must have. Subscribe NOW. 

0Aat^F f e Aurh C^/v,^. The greatest magazine feature tkat has ever 
JrCCViy O VVVIl OlUIy appeNred, is one of twenty big features in 

JANUARY 

HAMPTON'S 

On Sale December 17th 15 Cents a Copy 

To be sure of getting January HAMPTON'S you should order a copy from your newsdealer at once. A big edition is being printed but 
the demand will undoubtedly be tremendous. If you subscribe now you will be sure to get this immensely interesting story complete — also the 
great November and December numbers Free. Send HAMPTON'S to your friends as Holiday Gifts. It will give greater pleasure than anything 
else $1.50 could buy. Gift Announcement cards, beautifully printed in four colors and gold, sent FREE, make the gift doubly attractive. Send 
your orders immediately. Prompt attention assured. 

HAMPTON'S program for 1910 includes the biggest, most varied and important features ever before presented in any one magazine. 

ADMIRAL EVANS PEARY'S OWN STORY 

wffl contribute articles dealing with the Panama Canal and other matters Of the Discovery of the North Pole 

of national importance. No more valuable or popular magazine feature fe Ae Ljg^ price( j ^^1 f eature tliat has ever appeared in any maga- 

f ?? e ?^r™o g , t. P f St 7 ear ■ • Fl P tin & Bob s , n ? v y arbcle T s T m zine. It is the last of the world's great stories of discovery— told by the 

HAMPTON S His forthcoming series is of even wider interest His brave and sturdy Americans who through twenty-three years of privation 

opimon on the Panama Canal published in January HAMPTON S is ^ peri i Sought that spot on which he finally and triump h ant l y laced 

m e ?f™L y ™ a i™ e P le f? ° , anal y sls - lhe Manama Canal ™ U cost the Stars and Stripes. No man ever put up such a remarkable fight 

over $400,000,000 to build. It is the greatest business enterprise ever ^ natura i conditions as did Peary. His story is the mbst entertaining, 

undertaken by the United States Government. No one in the world is most exdting tale ever published Q f adven ture and discovery in the most 

better qualified than Admiral Evans to say whether it is worth the price. interesting part of the world. . Richly illustrated with hundreds of re- 

Scores of Other Great Features hampton's^SIaga^e "i^g i^fo^&ibSe^now^nd 

By World-Renowned Writers get the complete story. It begins in January HAMPTON'S. 

Articles of timely importance by Charles Ed ward Russell, Lincoln Steffens, Vance Thompson, —■.■■■■™m™~«™« — ■■■•■■>■ ™ — — - — ■•■■«™™«™ — — _ _ _ . 

ludson C. Welliver, Samuel Hopkins Adams, Judge Harris Dickson, John L. Mathews, Eugene P. n 

Lyte, Jr., General Theodore A. Bingham, Alexander Hume Ford, Rheta Childe Dorr, Thomas E, * C*^5 F E* to neW 8u ' 3sc "' 3er8 - November HAMPTON'S, containing thirty great pictures 

Green and others. r J* f\ TjI^j °' Roosevelt's African Hunt, and December (Christmas) numbers — both 

|7* ij of the big, vigorous, entertaining novel and humorous kind by such well-known writers | Free if you send $1.50 with this coupon at once. 

riCUOR as Rex Beach, Jack London, Harris Merton Lyon, F. Hopkinson Smith, James B. ■ uiunrnwc utr>7iuc .»« \\r .. ...i e^ xi ■«• ■ 

Connolly, Josephine Daskam Bacon, Mary R. S. Andrews, Gouverneur Morris, O. Henry, Reginald '. HAMPTON S MAGAZINE, 79 West 35th St, New York. 

Wright Kauffman, Edwin Balmer, Perceval Gibbon, Ruppert Hughes, Mary E. Wilkins Freeman, . For enclosed $1.50 send me HAMPTON'S for one year commencing with January 

Georgia W. Pangborn, Ellis Parker Butler, Arthur Stringer, f>tn''"n» Paez, Mary Heaton Vorse, ■ number, and send November and December numbers free. 

Lincoln Colcord, Myra Kelly, George Fitch, Lloyd Osboume. I 

Take advantage of our special offer to new subscribers and insure getting "The Best Magazine in I Name 

America" regularly every month during 1910. Price $1.50 a year. Through any newsdealer, ■ 
authorized canvasser or if more convenient direct to Street 

HAMPTON'S MAGAZINE, 79 West 35th St., NEW YORK J a* 

Please mention the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN when writing to advertiser* 



476 



Scientific American, 



December 18, 1909. 




The WONDERFUL NEW POST CARD PROJECTOR 

For showing on lhe screen Post Cards, Engravings, Pholoniapnaaod 
Book Illustrations, in natural colors. This New Profotft-ni- is 
built In a thoroughly scientific manner, aod while low In price Is 
marvelously effective. With it a collection of post cards becomes a 
constant source of amusement and instruction In the borne, the lodge 
or the schoolroom. 

Prices-$4.50, $13.50, $23.00 

Send for list of our projectors, Magic Lanterns and Slides 

William*, Brown & Earle, Depl. fi, 918 Chestnut St., Philadelphia 



CONSULTING ENGINEER. 

ERNEST L. RANSOMB 

Reinforced Concrete 
11 Broadway, New York 



NOVELTIES & PATENTED ARTICLES 

MANUFACTURED BY CONTRACT. PUNCHING DIES, SPECIAL MACHINERY. 
E.KOWGSLOW STAMPINS STOOL WORKS, CuvEl *N0. 0. 



SOUTHERN STAMPING & MFG. CO. 

Manufacturers of special and patented articles. 

It. £., Nashville, Tenu. 



rnraHamna 

ini ana Bottlers' ] 
1 *■ ■* ~ MFG. CO.. 899 



Corliss Eiisiiies, Brewers 
Machinery. THE VILTEIt 
1 Clinton St., Milwaukee, Wis 



MfinCIP A EXPERIMENTAL WORK. 
IrlUULLu Inventions developed. Special Machinery. 
E. V. BAILLARD CO.. 24 Frankfort Street. New York. 



1 1< 1*4=4 ChJ*l _ 

EBSTrooLS- 

ETAtSPECIALTlta* 

H. C4R5TEHS MFG, CO., 85-91 W.lakeSt.. CMOfl 



MANUFACTURERS 

UCT US 
FIGUB? 



nTTUHlPD Expert Manufacturers 

I\UDDLI\. Fine Jobbing Work 

PARKER, STEARNS & CO.. 288-290 Sheffield Av., B'klyn, N. V. 



HYPNOTISM 

Learned at honiei emnllcost; 2c stamp for particulars. 
<». A. lill ITU, Itiiiim lllli, IM Wltelow St., I'KOItIA, LLL. 



Aeroplanes^iMotors 

We are building monoplanes of the Bleriot cross- 
channel type. Delivery 3 weeks after receipt of order. 
Flight guaranteed. Price 15,000; one-thArd cash with 
order. 

We also build several binds of light-weight aeronautic 
motors and propellers. Particulars and prices furnished 
uuod application. 

SCIENTIFIC AEROPLANE AND AIRSHIP CO. 

Box 773, New York. 



THE BEtST CHRISTMAS GIFT FOR BOUTS. 

Small Hot Air EnpineH, ]~i0 to;^ H. P. 

Practical. Quiet, Safe, $t0.iiii ami upwards. 

VlHHKX A. SMITH CO., LoiJl Hrrs-1, IturTiilo, X* T« 



SCqe. 



\J . Catalogue 

7 W.& D. MO G EY. 
BAYONNE CITY. N.J, 



DRYING MACHINES 



For Granular Materials 

S. E. WO RKLL 
Hannibal, Mo., U.S. A. 



Are you interested in Patents, Model or Experimental 
work? Our booklet entitled 

WHAT WE D0-H0W WE 10 IT 

will b e sent t o you on request. 

KNICKERBOCKER MACHINE WORKS, Inc., 
8.10-18 Jones Street, New York 



MOEKX «Sl COMPAMY 



Die Ulakers, model makers, 
Light and Heavy Stampings. 



laehinery Builders, Punch Presses 
141 Michigan St., Chicago, 111., U.S. A 



Learn Watchmaking 

We teach it thoroughly in as many months as it 
formerly took years. Does away with tedious appren- 
ticeship. Money earmed while studying. Positions se- 
cured. Easy terms. Send for catalog. 
8T. LOUIS WATCHMAKING SCHOOL, St. Louie, M o. 



die: models special, 
work tools machinery 

national stamping and electric works 

2"l&-2 20 S Jefferson Street, Chicago, 111. 



THE BEST EQUIPPED SHOP 
For Mechanical and Electrical Manufacturing 

Special Machinery, Jigs, Tools, 
Repairs,Experimental Devices 

]>e*icniiijr mid Ct»i>tmci-<-liilizhi(? it Specialty 
THE ROWI.ANli TELEGRAPHIC COMPANY, Baltimore, Md. 



MARK TWAIN'S 
WORKS 

at ONE-HALF former price 



It has been Mark Twain 's ambition 
to have his books in every American 
home and he has made a great per- 
sonal sacrifice, which brings about 
this remarkable situation — for the 
first time in the history of publish- 
ing, copyrighted books are sold at 
the price of non-copyrighted books. 




AUTHOR'S NATIONAL EDITION 

25 Beautiful Volumes 

Mark Twain is the youngest man of his day. All his books are im- 
bued with his spirit — they are new books ; to own them is always to have 
new books, a fountain of youth. They never age because humor, kindliness, 
and truth never grow old. They are books for young people of all ages. 

Special Features of this Edition 

Mark Twain himself has written a preface to the edition. Brander Matthews 
has written the biographical criticism of Mark Twain and his work. There 
are portraits of the author from photographs and paintings taken at periods 
when the different books were in process of writing. This edition 
includes his later collected writings such as " A Dog's Tale," "Eve's 
Diary," etc- 
harper & NX There are beautiful pictures by such artists as Brown, Frost, 

BROTHERS NX xt r> T^, o ^ ^ 

r- ,,- <: \\ Newell, Heard, Dielman, Smedley, Thulstrup, Cline- 

Frankhn square XX . 

dinst, Mora, Weldon, Kemble, Gilbert, Du Mond, 
Merrill, Opper. 

The binding is a beautiful dark-red vellum 
book cloth, with blue title labels stamped in 
gold. The books are printed on white an- 
tique wove paper, especially made for this 



New York City 




Please send me for exami- 
nation, carriage free, a set of 
MARK TWAIN'S WORKS, 
Author's N«\'_ional Edition, 

twenty-five volumes, clotb binding. It 
is understood I may retain the set for 
five days, and at the expiration of that time 
if I do not care for the books, 1 will return 
them at your expense. If I keep the books, 1 

remit S2.00 a month until the full price, XX. edition 
S2S.00. has been paid. 



Signature 



Send books to. 



The size of each volume is 
5x7K inches- 

HARPER & BROTHERS 



{Continued from page .)7.}.) 
graphic records show that the liquid, in- 
stead of being driven away from the sur- 
face in the form of a crater (as is the 
case when a drop or a rough sphere 
strikes the surface) now rises in a thin, 
closely-fitting sheath which completely 
envelops the sphere even before its sum- 
mit has reached the water level. A com- 
paratively insignificant column consti- 
tutes the subsequent splash. Moreover, 
and as a result of the rapidly closing 
sheath, practically no air is carried into 
the water by the smooth sphere. This 
point, as well as many others of great 
importance, was shown photographically 
by means of illumination behind a thin 
glass vessel with parallel sides — an 
arrangement which rendered it possible 
to photograph the splash both above and 
below the surface of the fluid. Most of 
the photographs reproduced were taken 
in this way. 

So much for the splash caused by a 
smooth sphere. If the reader will now 
fish out the marble with which he is con- 
ducting his simple experiments, roughen 
its surface with sandpaper, and again 
drop it from a height of a foot or so into 
the water, he will find that a totally di- 
ferent splash results. There is now a 
great noise of bubbles, which may be 
seen rising through the liquid, while a 
tall jet is seen to be tossed into the air. 
Photographic, records of the surface dis- 
turbance closely resemble those which 
have already been described, caused by 
the fall of a drop. A crater is formed, 
and subsides, and a graceful jet rises 
from its depths, gathers volume from be- 
low, and rises ultimately as a tall col- 
umn whose height may be even greater 
than that from which the sphere fell. 
Photographs of the descent of the sphere 
below the surface show us how this col- 
umn originates. The sphere as it de- 
scends drags with it the surface film of 
the liquid in the form of a gradually 
deepening pocket or bag which ultimately 
forms a long cylindrical hollow. This 
eventually divides, and the lower part is 
dragged down by the sphere to the bot- 
tom (no matter what the depth), whence 
it rises to the surface as a bubble. Mean- 
while, the upper ha,f of the cylinder rap- 
idly fills up; and this running together 
of the liquid is responsible for the great 
velocity of the upward-spurting jet or 
column. 

On increasing the height of the fall of 
a rough sphere, a higher crater which 
closes and forms a bubble is obtained, 
just as when the height of fall of a liquid 
drop is increased. With a fall of two 
feet, this bubble is almost immediately 
destroyed by an upward jet. But if the 
height of fall be increased to four or five 
feet, no rebounding jet will be projected 
into the air, notwithstanding the fact 
that much air is still carried down by 
the roughened sphere. To the naked eye, 
a curious "seething" appearance at the 
surface is apparent; and Prof. Worthing- 
ton admits that he was at first disposed 
to regard this as evidence of the entangle- 
ment of the jet with the bubble — an en- 
tanglement likely to produce confused 
motions which could not be profitably 
studied. However, the persistence with 
which the seething motion again and 
again returned when a stone was dropped 
or thrown into the river, led him to sus- 
pect that something required investiga- 
tion. The remarkable change of proce- 
dure revealed in the series of photo- 
graphs which was subsequently taken 
will be best described by a word for word 
quotation from Prof. Worthington's writ- 
ings. "The earlier figures show the very 
rapid rise of the crater and its closing 
as a bubble, much before the entrapped 
column of air divides. Before the divi- 
sion takes place, the liquid now flowing 
in from all sides closes over the upper 
end of the long air tube, separates it 
from the air outside, and forms a down- 
ward jet which shoots down the middle 
of the air tube in pursuit of the sphere. 
The first formation of this jet is not easy 
to observe, because the view is obscured 
{Concluded on page |77.) 



"I MADE $88.16 

tint & clays," writes Mr. Reed of Ohio. Mr. Wood- 
ward earns 8170. a month. AGENTS 

■ all making money. Air. M. L. Smith turned 
I out $301.00 in two weeks. Rev. Crawford 
I made $7-00 first day. 

LET US START YOU 

in Gold, Silver, Nickel and Metal 

plating. Prof. Gray's new electro 

plating machine plates on watcher. 

jewelry* table ware and all metal 

goods. Prof. Gray*s new 

Royal immersion process. 

lateatraethod.Goodscoma 

out instantly with 

• fine brilliant, beautl* 

J t ii L il.uk plate ready 

I to deliver— do polish- 

J ingGrgrindmg.Uvery 

; f anil ly . hotel and res- 

S (inn suit. wuriM good* 

: pliif-eil. 

ACENTS HAVE ALL THEY CAN DO- 

Stioplu brine It. You can hire boys to do the plating 
as wo do. Moa and women gather work for email per 
cent. Work is fins— noway to do it batter, No ex- 
perience required— we teach you. Outfit! ready 
for work when received. Materials cost about 10 
cents to do $1.00 worth of plating. ti&'Demand for 
plating is enormous. WE ABE RESPONSIBLE 
and guarantee every thing. • 

Call Or write today. Our new plan, testimonials 
Circulars and SIMPLEFKEE. Don't wait. Send 
us your ad.lress anyway. Gray A Co. t-IatiiiK 
Werto, 1301 Gray Building, Cincinnati, Ohio. 




MOTOR DRIVEN 

CRESCENT 

MACHINES 

are neat, substantial, self COD- 

t.iined, uiui give satisfaction. 

Itiinil Saws, Siiir Tallies, 

Jointers, Simpers, Horers, 

Siting S.i ns, Disk ti.Imlcrs, 

Pinners, Planer and Matelier, 

ltaud Saw If littles 

The Crescent Machine Co. 

230 Main St. 
Leetonia, Ohio, IT. S. A t 




RUBBER STAMP MAKING. — THIS 

article describes a simple method of making rubber 
stamps with inexpensive apparatus. A thoroughly 
practical article written by an amateur who has had ex- 
perience in rubber stamp making. One illustration. 
Contained in Supplement 1110. Price 10 cents. For 
sale by Munn & Co., Inc. and all newsdealers. 



PATENTS 



^ 



^= 



in Manufacturing and Business 
EDWIN J. PRINDLE 

What is Patentable. 

What Protection a Patent Affords. 

Rules Governing Infringements and 

Contests. 
Patent Relations between Employers 

and Employees. 

Tells you How to do wisely and well the 
things often done wrong before you think of 
going to the Patent Attorney or Patent Office. 

I2mo. ; 132 pages; cloth binding 

$2.00 Postpaid 
THE ENGINEERING MAGAZINE 

142 Nassau Street, New York 



Two Good Books for Steel Workers 



Hardening, Temper- 
ing, Annealing and 
Forging of Steel 

By JOSEPH V. WOODWORTH 

Size 6 1 /ix9 l 4 inches. 288 pages. 201 illustra* 
tions. Price $2.50 postpaid 

THIS is a practical work, treating clearly and 
concisely modern processes for the heating, 
annealing, forging, welding, hardening and 
tempering of steel, making it a book of great 
value to toolmakers and metal-working mechanics 
in general. Special directions are given for the 
successful hardening and tempering of steel tools of 
all descriptions, including milling cutters, taps, 
thread dies, reamers, hollow mills, punches and 
dies and various metal-working tools, shear blades, 
saws, fine cutlery and other implements of steel, 
both large and small. The uses to which the lead- 
ing brands of steel may be adapted are discussed, 
and their treatment for working under different 
conditions explained; also special methods for the 
hardening and tempering of special brands. A 
chapter on case-hardening is also included. 



The American Steel 
Worker 

By E. R. MARKHAM 

Size 5 3 Ax8 inches. 367 pages. 163 illustra- 
tions. Price $2.50 postpaid 

THIS is a standard work on selecting, annealing, 
hardening and tempering all grades of steel, 
by an acknowledged authority. The author 
has had twenty-five years' practical experi- 
ence in steel-working, during which time he has 
collected much of the material for this book. Care- 
ful instructions are given for every detail of every 
tool. Among the subjects treated are, the selection 
of steel to meet various requirements; how to tell 
steel when you see it; reasons for different steels ; 
how to treat steel in the making of small tools, taps, 
reamers, drills, milling cutters ; hardening and tem- 
pering dies ; pack-hardening ; case-hardening; an- 
nealincr. heating apparatus; mixtures and baths, 
the best kind- and why ; and in fact everything that 
a steel-worker would want to know is contained in 
this book. 

OUR SPECIAL OFFER: SSSWmS 

each, but when the two volumes are ordered from 
us at one time, we send them prepaid to any address 
in the world on receipt of $4.00. 

MUNN & COMPANY, Inc. Publisher. 

361 Broadway, New York 



Ptsmtt mention the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN when writing to advertiters 



December 18, 1909. 



Scientific American 



477 



(Concluded from page 476.) 
by much splashing and turbulent vorti- 
cal motion resulting apparently from the 
streams that converge from all sides of 
the axis of the air tube at its upper end, 
. . . but (when) the turbulence has 
cleared away from the upper part, and 
from this stage onward the jet is well 
seen in all the figures, and it persists 
long after the segmentation of the air 
column has taken place. The reader 
must not suppose that this jet is a mere 
falling of the water under the action of 
gravity, for the rapidity with which it 
advances is far greater than could be ac- 
counted for in this way. . . . The 
great initial momentum of the sphere 
causes it to continue in rapid motion 
after the bubble has closed, thus the 
sphere acts as a sort of piston, which by 
increasing the length of the air tube di- 
minishes the pressure in it and so sucks 
in the bubble, which is driven down by 
the greater atmospheric pressure above. 
The converging horizontal inflow near the 
mouth of the air tube cannot, of course, 
produce the downward-directed jet with- 
out an equal and opposite generation of 
momentum upward; but this is now ex- 
pended, not in producing a similar up- 
ward jet, but in balancing the excess of 
atmospheric pressure. The reaction, in 
fact, to the projection of the jet down- 
ward is the force which holds up and 
slowly raises the roof of the long air 
shaft." The rising of the roof is well 
shown in some of the accompanying pho- 
tographs. 

Thus, as Prof. Worthington points out, 
the formation of a downward jet is not, 
in a sense, a new phenomenon, but one 
which, having existed unnoticed before, 
is now rendered visible by reason of its 
being produced in air instead of wateK. 
An increase in the height of fall to 22% 
feet was found to produce but little 
change in the phenomena coincident to 
the resulting splash. 

As an illustration of the possible ap- 
plication of knowledge gained from a 
study of splashes in an unexpected quar- 
ter, Prof. Worthington draws attention to 
the fact that photographs of the spla*sh 
of a projectile on striking the steel armor 
plate of a battleship bear a close resem- 
blance to photographs of splashes caused 
by a sphere falling into liquid. There is 
the same slight upheaval of the neighbor- 
ing surface, the same crater 1 , with the 
same curled lip, leading to the inference 
that under the immense and suddenly ap- 
plied pressure the steel has behaved like 
a liquid. The professor suggests that 
from a study of the motions set up in a 
liquid in an analogous case, it may be 
possible to deduce information about the 
distribution of internal stress, which 
may apply also to a solid, and thus lead 
to improvements in the construction of 
a plate that is intended to resist pene- 
tration. 

In conclusion it should be said that 
the number printed below each photo- 
graph here reproduced gives the time in 
decimal parts of a second which has 
elapsed since the first instant of contact. 
*~*~t 

CABNIVOBOUS PLANTS OF THE FUTURE. 

(Continued from page 469.) 
edge of the leaf in certain species is seen 
to curl slowly inward. Now we can im- 
agine that in the very far-away future 
with which we are dealing the Pingui- 
cula will develop leaves which will hardly 
be less than five or six feet in length. 
These lying along the surface of the 
ground will make a special appeal to 
grazing animals. Perhaps as with the 
sundew the allurement will be in the form 
of some pleasant-tasting secretion which 
is peculiarly attractive to sheep and 
goats. We can imagine how these ani- 
mals on first coming across the plants 
wouM start to regale themselves at the 
prepared feast. The strong sticky sub- 
stances would take a firm hold of the 
hairs surrounding the mouth parts of tne 
creatures, and in their endeavor to free 
themselves the animals would become 
more entangled. Gradually, too, the sides 

(Continued on page 478.) 




THE DYNATAK 

An absolutely new instrument for Automobiles and 
Motor Boats. Locates and shows up missing cylinders 
at once, indicates Correct Carburretor Adjustment, 
Power and Mileage and is in addition a precision 
SPEEDOMETER without a flexible shaft. If 
your dealer cannot supply you, write us direct. Hand- 
some Scientific Booklet fully descriptive sent upon request. 
DEPARTMENT "S" 



The Electric Speedometer and Dynamometer Manufacturing Go. 

1317-1319 New York Avenue, Washington, D. C. 



Handy Man's Workshop and Laboratory 

Compiled and Edited by A. RUSSELL BOND 

12mo. 467 Pages. 370 Illustrations. 
Price $2.00 postpaid. 

EVERY practical mechanic, whether amateur or professional, 
has been confronted many times with unexpected situa- 
tions calling for the exercise of considerable ingenuity. 
The resourceful man who has met an issue of this sort 
successfully seldom, if ever, is averse to making public his 
methods of procedure. After all he has little to gain by keeping 
the matter to himself and, appreciating the advice of other 
practical men in the same line of work, he is only too glad to 
contribute his own suggestions to the general fund of information. 
About a year ago it was decided to open a department in 
the Scientific American devoted to the interests of the handy 
man. There was an almost immediate response. Hundreds of 
valuable suggestions poured in from every part of this country 
and from abroad as well. Not only amateur mechanics, but 
professional men as well were eager to recount their experi- 
ences in emergencies and offer useful bits of information, in- 
genious ideas, wrinkles or "kinks," as they are called. Aside 
from these, many valuable contributions came from men in other 
walks of life — resourceful men, who showed their aptness at 
doing .things about the house, in the garden, on the farm. The 
electrician and the man in the physics and chemical laboratory 
furnished another tributary to the flood of ideas. Automobiles, motor cycles, motor 
boats and the like frequently call for a display of ingenuity among a class of men who 
otherwise would never touch a tool. These also contributed a large share of suggestions 
that poured in upon us. It was apparent from the outset that the Handy Man's Work- 
shop Department in the Scientific American would be utterly inadequate for so large 
a volume of material ; but rather than reject any really useful ideas for lack of space, 
we have collected the worthier suggestions, which we present in the present volume. 
They have all been classified and arranged in eight chapters, under the following 
headings : 

I, Pitting up a Workshop ; II, Shop Kinks ; III, Soldering of Metals ; IV, The 
Handy Man in the Factory ; V, The Handy Man's Experimental Laboratory ; VI, The 
Handy Man's Electrical Laboratory ; VII, The Handy Man About the House ; VIII, 
The Handy Sportsman ; IX, Model Toy Plying Machines. . Index. 





THEODORE 
ROOSEVELT'S 

OWN STORY OF HIS 

African= 



Hunting Trip 

NOW RUNNING IN 

SCRIBNER'S 
MAGAZINE 



Jfuwn Ms it ouuiiuiftic $o« 



is as popular as the man himself. 
Every one wants to read it. The first article appeared in the 
October number and the entire first edition of that number was 
sold out in four days. The Scribner presses are taxed to the 
utmost to supply the demand. The articles are fascinating, full of 
adventure, and reflect the wonderful personality of Mr. Roosevelt. 



We will send Mr. Roosevelt's First Article 
in Booklet Form and Two Big Numbers 
FREE all to Scientific American Readers who 
Subscribe to Scribner's for the Year 1910 

The subscription price of SCRIBNER'S MAGAZINE is $3.00 per year, but we will send 
to any reader of Scientific American, wbo subscribes for one year from January, 1910, 
the November and December, 1909, numbers FREE; also an attractive pamphlet con- 
taining Mr. Roosevelt's first article in the October, 1909, number FREE. We make 
this offer so that subscribers may have Mr. Roosevelt's complete story. 



THIS offer is good for a short time only and should be accepted at 
once, before the great demand exhausts our edition. Write to-day, 
inclosing $3.00, and get Mr. Roosevelt's story from its beginning. 

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, 153-157 Fifth Ave., New York City 



(Continued from page 473.) 



AN AGENT WANTED IN EVERY TOWN 

Send for Booklet Giving Terms 

mni Speciml Offers 



sllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll 

Send This Coupon With Your Order 

I ROOSEVELT 

I OFFER No. 330 - 



Pencil sharpener, A. Rydquist... 

Perforating and binding machines, assembly 
box for, 0. F. McBee 

Permutation lock, G. H. Hamilton 

Phenol and formaldehyde and making the 
same, condensation product of, L. H. 
Baekeland 

Phenol and formaldehyde, making insoluble 
products of, L. H. Baekeland 

Phonic apparatus, T. H. Macdonald 

Phonograph, P. Weber 

Picture mount, movable, H. O. Sauer 

Pile, W. N. Louque 

Pipe and rod threader, H. G'autschi 

Pipe fitting, soil, F. B. Morton 

Pipe or rod carrier, G. Holt 

Pipe, skelp treating apparatus for lapweld, 
H. W. Hock 

Pipes, air vessel for water supply, K. Rom- 
staedt 

Pipes, lining, J. 0. Persons 

Pipes with sand, apparatus for filling metal, 
C. O. Scbolz 

Piston for hot-air engines, F. B. Hubbard . . 
| Planter, Trammell & Hammack 

Planter and fertilizer distributer, combined 
seed, E. P. & J. T. Patterson 

Planter and marker, corn, A. W. Koage .... 

Planter, see, Fowler & Daly 

Plastic material, machine for forming, G. S. 
' & P. H. A. Balsley 

Plate dishing and flanging machine, C. Gab- 
riel 

Plated metal and making the same, J. Wil- 
der 

Pliers, H. F. Kellemen 

Pliers, W. Oronk 

Plow, J. T. Gantt ' 

Pole sleev e, C. B. Voynow 

Post. See Fence post. 

Post office box, H. O. Haywood 

Power device, W. H. H. Baker 

Power generating apparatus, C. J. Lake.... 

Press for expressing fluids from solids, F. 
G. Wiselogel 

Pressure generating and applying apparatus, 
hydraulic, J. W. Nelson 

Pressure regulator, G. W. Collin 

Printing apparatus, frame structure for 
blue, R. Herman 

Printing machinery, J. A. J. Hayes, reissue. 

Printing press paper feed mechanism, J. E. 
Tucker 

Printing press rotary folder, W. H. De Bush 

Printing press, throw-off mechanism for the 
inking rolls of rotary, L. A. Wheat 

Program holder, detachable leaf, F. E. 
Sauerwein et al 

Program bolder, transparent theater, F. E. 
Sauerwein et al 

Projectiles, attachment for, C. Davis 

Propelling means, vessel, F. Fanning 

Protractor and level, N. R. Thibert 

I Pulling over machine, H. Walther 

Pulverizing machine, E. E. Wann 

Pump, C. F. Presla r. 

Pump mechanism, M. B. Van Ness 

P uncand s har, C. Peterson 

Punchi ngmachine, hand, H. Siegrist 

Puch fag machine, multiple, C. E. Macbeth. 

Puzzle, W. F. Bartsch 

Quoin, E. J. Casey 

Rack, McGregor & Rudland 

Radiators, pressing device for push nipple, 
H. L. E. Peterson 

Rail clamp, D. S. Wert 

Rail controlling device, switch, W. F. Doner 

Rail joint, M. Barschall 

Rail joint, W. E. Ransom 

Rail joint, W. P. Perkins 

Railway block signaling system, J. Gaszper. 

Railway carriage doors, appliance for auto- 
matically and otherwise locking and un- 
locking, Andrews & Bickerton 

Railway crossing, I. O. Stant 

Railway crossing, W. C. Peters 

Railway gate, E. L. Kishpaugh 

Railway rail spike and chair, J. T. Nulty.. 

Railway signaling system, automatic, G. H. 
Sloane 

Railway spike, R. L. Smith 

Railway switch, J. F. Ober 

Railway switch, automatic, Rexach y Torres 
& Fena y Martinez 

Railway tie, H. C. Krepps 

Railway tie, H. H. Ranje.... 

Railway tie, metal reinforced, J. F 1 . Lahart. 

942,267 

Railway tie, self-adjusting steel, A. J. 
Schneider 

Railway ties, etc., composition for, J. Kirk- 
ham 

Railway track safety block, L. F. Learman. 

Railways, catenary suspension system for 
the trolley wires of electric, K. von 
Kando 

Razor case, W. L. Clark 

Reamer, adjustable, R. W. Bailey 

Receptacle closure, fluid, A. & T. A. De VII- 
biss, reissue 

Reclining chair, J. Flindall 

Rectal apparatus, J. P. Sanborn 

Record tablet, G. A. Eliason 

Refrigerating apparatus, J. Heinrich, 

942,445, 

Refrigerating machine, R. N. Dyer 

Refrigerating package, A. W. Folsom 

Registering device, R. Hunter, reissue 

Relay, S. D. Field 

Rivet feeding device, J. E. Peters 

Riveting machine, O. Greiner 

Road working machine, M. A. Popkess 

Roasting pan, P. Scott, reis sue 

Rock elimination, apparatus for waste, H. 
L. Kramer 

Rolling mill transfer table. C. L. Huston . . . 

Roof ventilator, W. W. Birnstock 

Roofing package, F. C. Overbury 

Rotary engine, H. Roux 

Rotary engine, W. W. Wheeler 

Rotary motor and pump, J. R. Kinney 

Rotary steam engine, J. W. Johnson 

Rotary steam engine, W. E. Minue 

Rule, Jewell & Westcott: 

Rule, W. L. Neeld 

Running gear, A. T. Newell 

Sand and slime separator and classifier, C. 
Allen 

Sanitary ware, J. J. Cosgrove 

Sapphires and other precious stones, ma- 
chine for cupping, J. L. Wennstrom . . . . 

Sash holder and lock, K. F. Deskins 

Sash holding device, O. M. Edwards 

Saw setting machine, A. C. Ambler 

Saw setting tool, J. L'hote 

Saw wheel, band, C. A. Putnam 

Scaffold, S. Pichler 

Scale, ice box and refrigerator, D. G. & A. 
H. Sansbury 

Scarf pin safety attachment, F. S. Reynolds 

Screens, fly attachment for, E. White 

Screw cutting machine, R. C. Nugent 

Screw driver, B. Presson 

Screw driver and tweezers, combined, Bjorn 
& Cashmore 

Screwdriver, spiral, J. A. Leland 

Screw, set, A. Levedahl 

Seal and spout for cans and other recep- 
tacles, H. A. Truesdale 

Seal, metallic, W. E. Elliott 942,315, 

Seal, snap, B. J. Brooks 

Seal, tag attaching, E. J. Brooks 

Seals, packing and registering, W. E. 
Elliott 

Sealing box fasteners, tool for, R. Schleicher 

Seam dampening machine, turn down collar, 
W. A. Zeidler : . . . 

Seeder, C. W. Stark 

Sewing machine, W. A. Mack 

Sewing machine gage, N. Friedman 

Sewing machine holder, combination, Walker 
& Parrish 

Shade bracket, window, C. W. Brown 

Shade holder, W. A. Painter 

Shaft, pneumatically operated, P. J. Grebel . 

Sharpener for lawn mowers, E. Merritt 

Sharpener, knife, M. L. Hawks 

Sharpening device, razor, J. J. Meehan 

Shaving appliance case, W. L. Olark 

(Continued on page 478.) 



942,180 
942,553 



942,700 

942,699 
942,089 
942,475 
942,565 
942,653 
942,200 
942,339 
942,446 

942,176 

942,666 
942,184 

942,355 
942,261 
942,760 

942,792 
942,394 
942,495 

942,238 

942,062 

942,803 
942,504 
942,549 
942,849 
942,761 

942,203 
942,534 
942,873 



942,736 
942,546 

942,175 
13,051 

942,296 
942,136 

942,119 

942,670 

942,669 
942,617 
942,199 
942,114 
942,155 
942,424 

9 4245 
942,297 

9 40)9 
942,291 

91272 
942,536 
942,543 
942,580 

942,410 
942,427 
942,313 
942,127 
942,411 
942,662 
942,255 



942,125 
942,358 
942,740 
942,783 
942,658 

942,468 
942,668 
942,458 

942,600 
942,650 
942,745 

942,268 

942,754 

942,505 
942,835 



942,143 
942.484 
942,533 

13,049 
942.818 
942,590 
942,627 

942,499 
942,367 
942.318 

13,052 
942,815 
942,864 
942,637 
942,866 

13,054 

942,083 
942,644 
942,707 
942,660 
942,413 
942,476 
942,080 
942,205 
942,275 
942,327 
942,583 
942,182 

942,697 
942,547 

942,425 
942,716 
942,720 
942,531 
942,573 
942,588 
942,347 

942,286 
942,517 
942,120 
942,791 
942,742 

942.373 
942,571 
942,506 

942,847 
942,316 
942,774 
942,435 

942.317 
942,673 

942,233 
942,868 
942,090 
942,496 

942.802 
942,775 
942,738 
942,065 
942,578 
942,172 
942,731 
942,483 



4%om mention tht SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN whan writing to md—TtiMT$ 



478 



Scientific American. 



December 18, 1909. 



Classified Advertisements 

Advertising in this column is 7o cents a line. No less 
than four nor more than 10 lines accepted. Count 
seven words to the line. All orders must be accom- 
panied by a remittance. Further information sent on 
request. 

BEAD THIS COLUMN CAREFULLY,- You -will find 
inquiries for certain classes of articles numbered in 
consecutive order. It you manufacture these goods 
write us at once and we will send you tbe name and 
address of the party desiring: the information. There 
is no charge for this service. In every case it is 
necessary to give the number of the inquiry. 
Where manufacturers do not respond promptly the 
inquiry may be repeated. 

MUNN & CO., Inc. 



BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES. 

HAIR GROWS when our Vacuum Cap Is used a few 
minutes daily. Sent on 60 days' free trial at our expense. 
No drugs or electricity. Stops falling hair. Cures 
dandruff. Postal brines illustrated booklet. Modern 
Vacuum Cap Co., 556 Barclay Block, Denver, Colo. 

Inquiry No. 891 8.— For manufacturers of "Wydt's 
Electro-Catalytic Sparking Plug." 



PATENTS FOR SALE. 

FOR SALE.— Patent rights and business on the well- 
known Craven Folding Hair Brush, at an exceptionally 
low figure, if taken before Feb. 1st. A splendidoppor- 
tunity. Address Perry-Austen Mfg. Co., Graemere, 
Staten Island, New York. 

Inquiry No. 8987.— Wanted, the manufacturers of 
the Van Winkle Woods & Sons, and the Weber power 
meters. 

FOR SALE.— Patent No.127,821, an Electric Heater for 
various neating and warming purposes. Durable, con- 
venient, economical and most useful. Price, $2,000.00. 
Moise Landry, Hotel Carolyn, Turlock, California. 

Inquiry No. 8990. -For information regarding 
shoes not made of leather but similar to the same and 
are as durable. 

FOR 8ALE.-U. S. Patent No. 911929. A pnmp to 
inflate automobile tires by tbe use of the car's own 
power. Can be attached to any auto in a moment's 
t.me. Also Belgium, French and Canadian patent 
of above invention for sale. For full particulars and 
information address Frank Woodhead, Glen Riddle, 
Del. Co., Pa., Box 43. 

Inquiry No. 8996,— Wanted addresses of manu- 
facturers of machinery for working orange wood mani- 
cure sticks. 



FOR SALE. 

FOR SALE.— Engine lathe, swings 9U in., takes 25 In. 
between centers. Coiuplete with full set change gears 
to cut all size threads, a to 40iu. Price only $43.50. Ad- 
dress L. F. Grammes & Sons, Allentown, Pa. 

Inquiry No. 9014.— For manufacturers of ma- 
chinery, supplies, etc., to equip a small plant for the 
manufacture of iridium-tipped gold nib making for 
fountain peas. 

HAVE several inventions for sale. R. Feldra & Co., 

professional inventors, 1 Palisade A v., W.Hoboken, N.J. 

Inquiry No. 9016.— Wanted, machinery necessary 
for an installation of a plant for refining salt by a 
modifjaction of the Bessemer process. 



WANTED. 



(.Continued from page 477.) 
of the huge leaves would close inward, 
and the fate of the victim could not long 
be delayed. A pitiable spectacle indeed 
to see these animals done to cfeafh by a 
plant, but the same process on a smaller 
scale is repeated thousands of times dur- 
ing the summer in any place where the 
Pinguiculas abound. 

We can hardly think in this advance 
of vegetable life that the many species of 
pitcher plants which catch their prey 
more by allurement than by force, would 
be behindhand in the forward movement. 
Even at the present time many of these 
species develop processes which are sev- 
eral feet in length, as exemplified in the 
case of the Sarracenias and Darlingtonias. 
In one of the accompanying illustrations 
is pictured one of the colossal pitcners 
which in the course of ages may be 
evolved from the comparatively small 
Cephalotus — a native of Australia. There 
is no knowing what inducements these 
plants might not be able to hold out for 
the capturing of even man himself. Per- 
haps the tissue inside the pitcher would 
be peculiarly succulent, and we know that 
where there is anything worth having, 
there will always be found men daring 
enough to take the risk of getting it. 
Once inside the pitcher of the Cephalotus, 
escape would be possible only with a 
friendly assistant at hand. From the 
bottom of the pitcher three barriers would 
confront the prisoner anxious to get out. 
First of all there is a circular ridge pro- 
jecting in such a way that it is most 
difficult to surmount. Secondly a stretch 
of wall thickly covered with processes re- 
sembling the teeth of a comb and all 
pointing downward. Last of all, on the 
involute rim round the mouth of the 
pitcher is arranged a fringe of decurved 
spines which resemble a row of formid- 
able bayonets. Indeed, it would be a far 
more simple matter to get out of the 
average well than to make one's escape 
from a giant Cephalotus pitcher. 

Although the matter does not involve 
death, the giant Aristolochia flower 
brings about the imprisonment of flies for 
quite a long time. The system is in con- 
nection with the cross-fertilization of the 
blossom. The insects are induced to enter 
the cavernous mouth of the great bloom 
by an odor strongly suggestive of carrion, 
which is peculiarly attractive to flies. 
Once inside, the flies are held captive by 
an ingenious arrangement whereby they 
are lost in the tortuous passages at the 
rear of the flower. After blundering 
around for some time the winged crea- 
tures are able to emerge again, not, how- 
ever, before they have become well dusted 
with pollen for transmission to another 
bloom. It is possible that the Aristolochia 
of years to come will assume much larger 
proportions, and we may imagine that 
(the flower will be able to hold out some 
Inquiry No. 9042.-Wanted the address of Farney [allurement which will tempt large anl- 
azoi < o. mals to enter its gloomy depths. It is 

more likely that escape from the colossal 
blossom would not be such a simple mat- 
ter, and there might be a danger of a 
creature's coming unpleasantly near to 
starvation before seeing daylight again. 

Far more dreadful than any of the 
plants described above would be the Venus 
fly trap of the future. This plant would 
be a vegetable terror. As is well known, 
the leaves of this plant are designed in 
the form of a trap. On the upper sur- 
face of each half of the leaf are three 
hairs. To touch any of them is to cause 
the organ to shut up, inclosing the object 
which has given rise to the irritation. 
The bordering of • the leaf is formed of 
sharp fringed hairs which when the trap 
is closed prevent escape. At the most the 
leaves of the Dionaea are not more than 
an inch in length, but we may get a little 
idea of what this plant may be in years 
to come if we imagine the foliage to be 
large enough to grapple with a man. It 
is the habit of this plant to grow with 
its leaves half concealed beneath the 
sphagnum moss in which it thrives. The 
leaves of the giant man trap partly hid- 
den by the undergrowth would form the 
(Concluded on page 479.) 



FORMULA wanted for a Metal Polish, non-inflamma- 
ble preferred. G. £L Krumiviede, 25 Manhattan Av„ N. Y 

Inquiry No. 90*^3.— Wanted, to buy silk machines 
from re-reeling, twisting, doubling, to the final process 
of making it into clothes. 



LISTS OF MANUFACTURERS. 

COMPLETE LISTS of manufacturers in all lines sup- 
plied at short notice at moderate rates. Small and' 
special lists compiled to order at various prices. Es- 
timates should be obtained in advance. Address 
Munn & Co., Inc., List Department, Box 773, New York. 

Inquiry No. 9025.— Wanted, address of rubber 
manufacturers in Germany. 

Inquiry No. 9039. — Wanted, catalogues and all 
information on machinery for braiding straw In manu- 
facturing straw hats. 

A LIST OF 1,500 mining and consulting engineers on 
c trds. A very valuable list for circularizing, etc 
Price $15.00. Address Munn & Co., Inc., List Depart- 
ment, Box 773, New York. 

Inquiry No. 9034.— For manufacturers of machin- 
ery that could reduce stumps to kindling wood. 

Inquiry No. 9036.— Wanted, the address of the 
manufacturers of " Cycle Ball Bearing Suspenders.'' 

Inquiry No. 9038.— Wanted, the address of the 
Chipman Electric Purifying Co. 



Pennsylvania R.R. 

Reminder Bulletin 

There are two trains that the 
world is watching. They are 
making records, . and records 
on land and sea and in the air 
are watched these days. The 

PENNSYLVANIA SPECIAL 

is saving time and money to 
the business man by permitting 
him to snap down his desk at 
4 o'clock and meet his asso- 
ciates in Chicago the next 
morning as they open theirs. 
In the mean time he may con- 
tinue his business with a free 
stenographer at his elbow, or 
loaf with the conveniences of 
the club at hand- 

The Special" leaves Up- 
town New York at 3.55 P.M., 
Downtown by Ferry at 4.00 
P.M., Downtown by Hudson 
& Manhattan Tube at 4.05 
P.M., and arrives in Chicago 
next morning at 8.55. It kills 
time because it runs in the night. 

"The 24-Hour St. Louis" 

is giving the business man an 
entire afternoon for recreation 
at the club, or elsewhere. He 
may leave Uptown New York 
at 6.25 P.M., Downtown at 
6.30 (by Ferry), Downtown at 
6.35 by Hudson & Manhattan 
Tube and reach St. Louis at 
5.25 the next afternoon. He 
may enjoy a good night on an 
easy-running train and con- 
tinue his work the next day 
with a stenographer at his beck 
and call, or he may do any- 
thing he can do at his club 
except play billiards. 

He gets a whole day in New 
York. 

These trains are not only 
time-savers, but nerve-resters. 

They exhilarate and refresh. 
They may be banked on for 
time. 



Inquiry No. 9044.— "Wanted to buy outfits neces- 
*i shine. 

9046.— Wanted, machinery used for 



Q 9 

sary for agate polishing. 



Inquiry No t _ - , — , _. - 

the manufacture of all kinds of fruit boxes, baskets and 
crates. 

Inquiry No. 9047. -Wanted, the address of parties 
who install plants for making oxygen orozonegas. 

Inquiry No. 904S.— Wanted, address of manufac- 
turers of metal table slides for extension tables. 

Inquiry No. 9049.— Wanted, to buy rotary brushes 
suitable for a shoe shining machine. 

Inquiry No. 9052.— Wanted, to buy machinery, etc., 
for a beer plant, that mauufa ctores beer by means or 
glucose. 

Inquiry No. 9053.— Wanted, address of firms who 
install plants to manufacture nitrogen. 

Inquiry No. 9054.— Wanted, address of manufac- 
turers of articles made from mica. 

Inquiry No. 9055.— Wanted, address of parties in- 
terested in Log Cleaning; Machines. 

Inquiry No. 9056.— For manufacturers of window 
shades. 

Inquiry No. 9057.— For manufacturers of glass 
and china balls, used as. fixtures or ornaments on light- 
ning rod equipment, also weather vanes for same pur- 
pose. 



How to Construct 
An Independent Interrupter 

In Scientific American Supplement, 1615. 
A. Frederick Collins describes fully and clearly with 
the help of good drawings how an independent multiple 
interrupter may be constructed for a large induction 
COIL 

This article should be read in connection with 
Mr. Collins' article in scientific American Supple- 
ment, 1605, "How to Construct a 100-Mile 
Wireless Telegraph Outfit." 

Each Supplement costs 10 cents; 20 cents for the 
two. Order from your newsdealer or from 

MUNN & CO., Inc., 361 Broadway, New York 



(instructive Scientific papersj 

ON TIMELY TOPICS 

Price 10 Cents each by mail 

ARTIFICIAL STONE. By I,. P. Ford. A 
paper of immense practical value to the 
architect and builder. Scientific Ameri- * 
can Supplement 1500. 

THE SHRINKAGE AND WARPING 
OF TIMBER. By Harold Busbridge. An 
excellent presentation of modern views; 
fully illustrated. Scientific American 
Supplement 1500. 

CONSTRVCTION OF AN INDICAT- 
ING OR RECORDING TIN PLATE 
ANEROID BAROMETER. By N. 
Monroe Hopkins. Fully illustrated. Scien- 
tific American Supplement 1500. 

DIRECT-VISION SPECTROSCOPES. 
By T. H. Blakesley, M.A. An admirably 
written, instructive and copiously illustrated 
article. Scientific American Supple- 
ment No. 1493. 

HOME MADE DYNAMOS. Scientific 
American Supplements 161 and 600 con- 
tain excellent articles with full drawings. 

PLATING DYNAMOS. Scientific Ame- 
rican Supplements 720 and 793 de- 
scribe their construction so clearly that any 
amateur can make them. 

DYNAMO AND MOTOR COMBINED. 

Fully described and illustrated in Scientific 
American Supplements 844 and 865. 
Themachinescanberuneither as dynamos 
or motors. 

ELECTRICAL MOTORS. Their Con- 
struction at Home. Scientific American 
Supplements 759, 761, 767. 641. 



Price 10 Cents each, by mail 

Order through your newsdealer or from 

MUNN & COMPANY. Inc. 

361 Broadway New York 



I (Continued from page lfl7.) 

Sheet feeding machine, H. K. King 942,078 

i Sheet metal plates, cutting disks from, D. 

IP. Robinson 942,104 
Sheet registering mechanism, H. K. King... 942,079 
Shingle and making* the same, metallic, 

Lunan & Rantsch 942,577 

Shingle stamp and packer's recorder, auto- 
matic, G. A. Ortwein 942,512 

Shoe nailing machine, V. Sandahl 942,591 

Shuttle operating mechanism, C. F. Arnold. 942,698 

Shuttle threading device, J. Jordan 942,263 

Sign manufacture, triple, T. P. Heinemann. 942,498 
Signal controlling apparatus, W. M. Chap- 
man 942,195 

Signaling device, mechanical code, F. A. 

Meissner 942,334 

Signaling system, F. B. Smith 942,676 

Silo, G . Moeke 942,095 

Silo, J. H. McCoy 942,340 

Silo, Harrison & Jacoby 942,640 

Sinker, G. W. Teasdale 942,597 

Sintering apparatus, R. Palmer 942,513 

Skate, loller, W. Lennox 942,333 

Skate, roller, J. Nuttall 942,344 

Skirt hanger and stretcher, W. J. Tetreault. 942,525 

Skirt marker, S. E. C. Campbell 942,375 

Sliding gate, J. M. Peterman 942,408 

Smoke preventer, time controlled, B. L. 

Ames 942,131 

Smoke washer, J. Altenhof en 942,430 

Smoking pipe, B. B. Whitney 942,688 

Snap, breast strap, W. Sedlacek 942,289 

Snatch block, B. Martin 942,274 

Snow melter, C. L. Moore 942,337 

Soap, antiseptic, W. A. Beatty 942,538 

Sock and garter, combined. L. O. Gitchell.. 942,552 
Socks, excluder for elastic, F. W. Savage.. 942,671 
Solder to rims of caps for cans, machine for 

applying, R. Flanigan 942,494 

Soldering furnace, E. T. Burgess 942,245 

Sole pressing pad, H. A. Davenport 942,133 

Solitaire board, F. B. S. Smith 942,667 

Spade or shovel blade, H. Dahlmann 942,616 

Spear, punch, and bending machine, com- 
bined, S. Takacs 942,680 

Speed changing mechanism, E. H. R. Bar- 
ton 942,192 

Speed measuring machine, Comstock & Kal- 

mus 942,132 

Speed mechanism, variable, A. F. Rockwell. 942,220 

Speed varying mechanism, A. C. Smith 942,416 

Speedometer, W. R. .Harris 942,497 

Spike puller, W. F. Scott 942,415 

Spinning and like machinery, thread guide 

for cotton, J. & B. Appleby 942,362 

Spinning mules, reversing mechanism for the 

band cylinders of, J. H. Ryalls 942,752 

Spinning spindle, J. y. CunnifT 942,777 

Spring wheel, A. Moore 942,276 

Stamp affixing machine, J. F. Monaghan... 942,454 
Stamps, reversible ribbon feed for dating, B. 

B. Hill 942,827 

Stanchion,. F. G. & A. E. Harris 942,639 

Stave jointing machine, N. M. Taylor 942,799 

Steel holding and packing means, drill, D. 

S. Waugh 942,869 

Stirrup, safety, W. V. Johnston 942,781 

Stock releaser, Lemon & Stoops 942,875 

Stoker, mechanical, T. V. Elliott 942,060 

Storage battery, D. P. Perry 942,279 

Stove, heating, H. F. Arenberg... 942,805 

Strainer, M. C. White 942,121 

Strainer, liquid, F. L. Williams.... 942,428 

Street and rrtad construction, preparing min- 
eral materials and the like for, J. H. 

Amies 942,235 

Supplemental seat, A. Reineke 942,793 

Support and Insulator, E. F. Lindsay 942,086 

Supports, adjusting device for, P. Colidge . . . 942,545 
Switch signaling and operating mechanism, 

W. R. Oyler 942,099 

Swivel hook, C. G. Theillng 942,681 

Syringe, irrigating, W. S. Sawyer 942,523 

Table. See Ironing table. 

Table attachment, J. A. Chow 942,613 

Tack, window shade, L. B. Girard 942,321 

Talking machine sound box, A. Fischer 942,816 

Target practice apparatus, H. H. Cummings 942,615 

Telegraph, automatic, L. M. Potts 942,844 

Telegraph, multiplex, S. D. Field 942,814 

Telegraphic repeating apparatus, W. E. 

Athearn 942,807 

Telegraphy, duplex cable, I. Kltsee 942,208 

Telegraphy, electric, J. A. L. Dearlove 942,620 

Telephone, portable, O. L. Mulot 942,401 

Telephone systems, signaling apparatus for, 

R. C. Welty 942,703 

Telescopic article, W. J. Dunn 942,490 

Thermostat, J. F. Williams 942,870 

Thread board, W. O. Aldrich 942,607 

Threshing machine, garbanzon, F. Garver... 942,063 
Tie and means for fastening rails thereon, 

I. C. Catton 942,438 

Tie plate and rail anticree: ?r - combined, M. 

S. Clarke , " 942,30" 

Tilling machine, G . Spalding 942,469 

Tire, B. F. Norcross 942,097 

Tire, J. C. Taylor 942,149 

Tire, W. R. & T. S. Stewart 942,418 

Tire, J. G. Maxwell 942,654 

Tire, automobile, I. B. Kempshall 942,567 

Tire for vehicle wheels, cushion, J. H. 

Poole 942,842 

Tire, pneumatic, P. G. Muenchinger 942,734 

Tire protector, F. Vacher 942.682 

Tire, vehicle wheel, J. A. Boyajean 942|364 

Tires, metallic protector for pneumatic, E. 

A. Hnltberg , 942,500 

Tobacco, aging and curing, S. G. Martin 

et al 942,838 

Tobacco cutting machine, Beall & Parker... 942,372 

Tomatoes, treating, O. Schroen 942,287 

Tongue switch. Strong & McPherson 942,295 

Tool, D. C. Southworth 942,293 

Tool handle, E. Kener, Jr 942,077 

Tools, feed for pneumatic, M. Hardsocg 942,066 

Towing device, C. W. Larson 942.450 

Toy derrick, M. T. C. Wing 942,229 

Toy, sounding, J. Berg 942,162 

Toy, sounding, W. Bartholomae 942,610 

Track sander, P. J Coady 942,377 

Track sander, A. W. Ham 942,726 

Traction coupling, M. Westra 942,764 

Train stop, automatic, W. J. Soseene 942,189 

Tramway, aerial, H. S. Robinson 942,518 

Tramway switch, N. Schwarz 942,288 

Transfer hanger, T. E. & B. Hudson 942,326 

Transferring material from a high to a lower 

level, apparatus for, A. C. Johnston 942,449 

Transportation system, W. C. Carr 942,437 

Trap, G. W. Hess , ; 942,069 

Trolley wheel, H. L. Baylies 942 767 

Trousers support, J. V. Backlund 942,126 

Truck, 0. J. Ingard 942,563 

Truck, car, J. C. Barber 942,048, 942,702 

Truck elevator, inclined, . W. Reno 942,352 

Truck, railway car, C. F. Murray 942,096 

Tube cleaner, rotary, P. J. Darlington 942,312 

Turbine, S. T. Holly 942,829 

Turbine regulator, S. T. Holly 942,828 

Turpentine cup, B. A. McKoy 942,210, 942,211 

Turpentine gathering apparatus, E. A. Mc- 
Koy 942,212 

Type bar and typographic form, F. H. Rich- 
ards • 942,102 

Type casting and composing machine, O. V. 

Sigurdsson 942,846 

Typewriter, L. Hauerstein 942,825 

Typewriting attachment, W. M. Deeter 942,366 

Typewriting machine, A. G. Snyder 942,109 

Typewriting machine, A. W. Steiger 942,113 

Typewriting machine, J. Felbel 942,137 

Typewriting machine, E. E. Barney 942,535 

Typewriting machine, H. Crutchley 942,776 

Typewriting machine, J. H. Barr. 942,583 

Typewriting machine clamp, E. E. Barney. . 942,049 
Typewriting machine ribbon reversing mech- 
anism, automatic. G. M. Kitzmiller 942,383 

Universal joint, W. C. Lipe 942,087 

Vacuum cleaning systems, handpiece for, C. 

R. Green 942,139 

Valve, F. M. Ashley 942,045 

Valve, F. N. Whitesell 942,122 

Valve, C. F. Fernald 942,492 

Valve, W. N. Long 942.576 

Valve, T. P. Lavigne 942,834 

Valve, dry, F. A. Phelps 942,100 

Valve for engines, O. Pearson 942,587 

(Concluded on page 479.) 



Please mention the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN when writing to advertisers 



Di:ci:.mhi:r iS, 1909. 



Scientific American, 



479 



(Concluded from page }7VS.) 
most terrible pitfall that the world has 
ever seen. Any unfortunate man who 
should chance to stumble into one of 
these leaves would be speedily crushed to 
death by the steady pressure of the in- 
closing sides. One can imagine that a 
country in which the man trap abounded 
would be avoided as much as a district 
inhabited by man-eating savages. 

The aquatic plants such as the bladder- 
worts (Utricularia) would scarcely be 
behindhand in this forward movement 
among the carnivorous species. These 
plants capture small water creatures by 
means of little bladders which are at- 
tached to their stems. The entrance to 
these receptacles is guarded by a little 
door, which can be opened easily from the 
exterior but may not be pushed aside 
from the interior. At the present time the 
bladders of the Utricularia are small, but 
there is no reason to suppose that they 
will always remain so. It is quite likely 
that they may increase in size so that 
they are able to grapple with good-sized 
fish and other water animals. 

In these far-away days of which we 
have been speculating, plants will be di- 
vided into wild and tame sorts in the very 
real sense of the words. The botanical 
gardens of the time will be far more ex- 
citing than are the zoological collections 
of to-day. It is fortunate that all natural 
changes come about with great slowness, 
and it may be that the condition of man 
himself will have changed considerably 
by the time he is called upon to face 
these aggressive plants. It is to be hoped 
that this may be so, otherwise the outlook 
for the human race is distinctly dis- 
quieting. 



A New Substitute lor Cotton. 

(Concluded from page .J70.) 
German East Africa, and the exports 
thence to Germany are steadily increas- 
ing. So far, little attention has been 
given to cocoanut fiber and the fiber of 
the many palms growing in the protecto- 
rates has been allowed to run to waste. 
With a view to becoming independent of 
foreign countries for her supplies of this 
fiber, Germany is also going to see what 
can be done with the product of her own 
colonies. The whole aim of the German 
is to become "independent" and, as far 
as possible, do without foreign goods and 
foreign labor. Other instances could be 
given of this, were they not quite outside 
the scope of the present article. 



Big Money In Drilling 

W Our customers all over the Country are making from S25 to 875 profit a day with the 
Cyclone Drill. No business offers such bi? returns for the money invested. 

Contractors, prospectors, well drillers, find the Cyclone Drill more economical, faster 
and easier to operate than any other. 

We make Hollow Rod. Cable and Core Drills, to meet every need. 

We also make combination machines that will handle any or all of the systems equally 
well, a machine that will enable you to cover the entire field of drilling. 

Cyclone Drill 

Our Diamondite and Steel Shot Core Drills cut faster and at fraction of the cost 
of the old diamond drills. We sell Cyclone Drills on an easy payment plan. Some of 
our customers have made more than the price of the machine within one month. Our 
new traction Gasoline machine — only one made— is of particular value where fueland 
water are scarce. Send for our free books on Drilling, and let us know in what 
branch of the work you are interested. 

CYCLONEDRILLCOMPANY.il Main St., Orrville.Ohio\ 

Oilmen OUlec, 41!) Fisher Building M 



•» .1 > .-■»>- 




POWER-DRIVEN SCOOTER. 

(Concluded from page .'i~t2.) 
wheel clear of the ice when the engine 
is being started. This is accomplished 
by a lever of % x 1-inch iron placed and 
bent as shown in Fig. 1. When starting 
the motor the lever is pulled back and 
a small wedge of wood is slipped be- 
tween it and the engine bed. After the 
motor has got going nicely it is slowed 
down and the lever gently relaxed, allow- 
ing the teeth to take a slight hold. As 
the craft gathers headway increase the 
power and also the pressure on the spikes 
until the lever is slack and the motor 
running at its maximum power. To stop, 
slow down and raise the wheel off the ice. 

The construction of the rudder is sim- 
ple. The stock is of %-inch iron 12 inches 
long. An lS-inch tiller of forged iron is 
pinned to the post with a %-incli pin. 
The stock is recessed and pinned to the 
iron yoke which carries the runner. This 
yoke is forged out of 1%-inch iron and 
has a collar slipped over its shoulder to 
wear against another collar or flange fast- 
ened to the bottom to act as a bearing. 
A V^-inch pin secures the yoke to the 
runner. The runner blade is of %-inch 
oak 1 foot 7 inches long and 2% inches 
high. 

For the shoe use a piece of soft iron 
% inch deep and % inch wide cut to a 
V edge at an angle of 45 degrees on each 
side. The shoe should have a rocker of 
about % iHCh for the 13% inches it is 
supposed to bear on the ice. It should 
have 8 inches bearing forward of the rud- 



THE AUTOMOBILE NUMBER 
of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN 




THIS year bigger and even better than it ever was. 
* It has been our purpose in publishing this annual 

review to give the automobile owner and the prospective 
purchaser truly helpful information, and to that end the 
number will contain the following articles : 

1. The Automobile and the Farmer. 

2. How to Overhaul Your Car. 

3. The Automobile Fire Engine. 

All the latest automobile pumping engines, chemical Cars, hook and 
ladder trucks, and hose carts are described. 

4. The Automobile and the Road. 

The automobile has presented to the road engineer new problems 
for solution. He must render his roads impervious to water and 
practically proof against the destructive effect of tires. The United 
States Government through the Office of Public Road Inquiry is now 
studying this subject. The article written by Mr. Page, Director of 
the Office of Public Roads, describes what has been done. 

5. Anti "Joy Ride" Devices. 

This article is a complete description of devices which have been 
invented for the purpose of preventing chauffeurs from taking out 
their owners' machines. 

6. The Modern Electric Automobile. 

7 . Making Your Own Repairs. 

8. The Cars of 1910. 

9. Automobile Identification Chart. 

Sometimes you have wondered what make of car was that which 
skimmed past your admiring eyes. The 1910 Automobile Number 
will enable you to identify any car by its radiator and engine bonnet. 
About thirty-five automobiles are thus illustrated for identification in 
a sketchy, artistic way. 

10. The Inexpensive Car. 

Any man with a good salary can now afford to own some kind of 
an automobile. How the machines are constructed and what may 
be expected of them is lucidly set forth. 

11. The Wonderful Rise of the Automobile Industry. 

12. Automobile Novelties. 

Order from your newsdealer or from 

MUNN & COMPANY, Inc., 361 Broadway, New York. 



der pin and b l /> aft. The shoe is held 
to the runner by three % through bolts 
riveted and smoothed off. A guard is 
placed under the boat to prevent the run- 
ner from catching in obstructions. 

The engine can now be installed. For 
a foundation use two 1%-inch oak string- 
ers running along four frames and shaped 
and spaced as per- requirements of engine 
used. The stringers should be through 
bolted from the outside of planking to 
top of the bed and drawn up tight and 
solid. 

Now set the motor in its bed and 
fasten down with % r inch lag screws 3 
inches long. The exhaust is piped over 
the side and the water and gasoline tanks 
ars situated on the forward deck. They 
each hold 3 gallons, and should be made 
out of 18-ounce copper. The piping is led 
down through the mast hole along the 
floor to the motor. It should be of copper 
tubing, ; >t inch for the gasoline and 1% 
inch for the water. 

The batteries and coil are placed just 
under the tanks. Six dry cells are suffi- 
cient. In order to have the scooter trim 
with one person on the seat it will be 
necessary to put about 60 pounds of lead 
up forward as shown. As the keels of 
these boats are rockered, attention must 
be paid to this or else the pressure on 
the rudder will be too great or it will be 
lifted clear. 

A %-inch heavy motor cycle roller 
chain should stand the strain with care; 
but as to the diameter of sprockets ex- 
periments would have to determine this, 
as it would vary for every type of motor. 
With the driving wheel turning up 700 
revolutions per minute the scooter would 
be going about 33 miles per hour. If 
the motor could turn up to that or over, 
it would be better to let it run up and 
gear it down. 

With a motor of six or seven horse- 
power and turning 700 to 800 per minute 
I would use for a starter an 8-inch 
sprocket on the driver and a 7-inch one 
on the engine. 



FLY PAPERS. — FORMULAS FOR 

Sticky Fly Papers are contained in Scientific AMERI- 
CAN SUPPLEMENT Xos. 1057 and l.t-4. Each ittsne 
contains several recipes. Price 10 cents each, from 
this office, and from all newsdealers. 



BABBITT METALS.— SIX IMPORTANT 
formulas. Scientific American Supplement 1 l*J.'{» 

Price 10 Cents. For sale by Muni) &. Co., Inc., and all 
newsdealers. Send for catalogue. 




I 



IF you want a complete text book on Solders 
and the art of Soldering, giving practical, 
working recipes and formulae which can be 
used by the metallurgist, the goldsmith, the 
silversmith, the jeweler, and the metal-worker 
in general, read the following Scientific 
American Supplements ; — 

III2, 1384. 1481. 1622. 1610. 1434. 1533 

Price 70 Cents by mail 

Order from your newsdealer or from 



MUNN & CO., Inc. 



361 Broadway, New York 



(Concluded from page J/78.) 

Valve for steam traps, U. L. & G. II. 

Clover 042.240 

Valve lor train brakes, engineer's, W. K. 

Rankin 942.2S0 

Valve grinder, I. C. Smith 042.222 

Valve, pressure retaining. It. W. Kelly 1142. 331 

Valve, quick action triple. I>. S. Gilbert.... 042.(134 

Valve, regulating, T. M. Wilkicis 042.300 

Valve, safety gas. Yockcy & McU'inl 1142.138 

Valve, sileoek and other, F. W. Carlson.... 1)42.541 

Valve, throttle, Z. Paul 042,345 

Valves, making records for setting slide, J. 

B. Michael 042.4:;:) 

Vault vestibule. .7. O. Giestiug 042.11:!:! 

Vehicle, A. P. Rockwell 042.210 

Vehicle sesits. shifting rail for. A. E. Smith 042.202 
Vending apparatus, coin controlled, M. J. 

Forth 942.253 

Vending machine, P. M. Welwr 042.117 

Vending machine, cigar, L. A. Vandiver. . . . 942.527 
Vending machine, stamp, .1. It. Arinington. . 042,70(1 
Veneer tapping machine, Xystrom & Taxon. 042,277 
Ventilator. See Car ventilator. 
Vessels, controlling device for tilling, G. 

Schollmc.ver 942.755 

Vessels, towing arrangement for canal and 

river, E. O. Nikel 042.510 

Vibrator, A. J. Stecker 042,500 

Waistband for garments, adjustable, M. S. 

Erlangcr 042,028 

Warning signal and stopping device for the 
safe movement of public conveyances, 

W. Whitman 942.388 

Warp balling machine, W. G. Denn 042. Si:! 

Warp carriage, II. I). Colman 042.247 

WashlHiard. D. < \ Juleson 042.070 

Washing machine, Itamthua & Gutekunst. .. 042.004 

Washing machine, J. Szava 042,758 

Water closet, II. S. Itumsey 042.404 

Water gage, R. II. Bucknor 042.305 

Water gate. J. IT. Phipps 042.400 

Water tube boiler, J. P. Sneddon 042.797 

Water wheel, J. L. Bell 942,811 

Weed cutter and cultivator, M. Pruyn 942,744 

Welding device, foot power, Garver & Bis- 

sell 042.444 

Well tube cutter, J. F. Baker 942.701 

Wells, trip wall packet for oil, \V. Palm... 042.730 

Wheel, Koss & White 942.S19 

Wheel block. A. J. A. Bennett 942.101 

Wheel, puller, and the like. P. Montupct... 942.400 

Wheel scraper, C. W. Stall; 042.471 

Whiff letree hook, It. F. Bloom 942,431 

Whip lock J. W. Robertson 942.2S5 

Winding indicator, O. Ohlson.- 942.059 

Window cleaning apparatus, <\ E. Prickett. 942.743 
Window grate, adjustable, S. Jnhlonovsky. .. 1142.502 

Window lock and lift, R. T. Axe 942.S51 

Window, metallic. '1'. Lee 042.200 

Wire bender, L. 1). Danforth 042.440 

Wire twister, I. X. Morford 042,732 

Wire tying machine, automatic, O. L. Bow- 
ers 042.305 

Wire wall pocket. T. V. Cromwell 042.714 

Wire winding machines, notching means for, 

W. I,. Wergin 942.118 

Woods, treatment of coniferous, W. II. Row- 
ley 042.100 

Woodworking machines, pressure device for. 

C. G. Wilderson 042.S04 

Wrapping machine, A. M. Price 042.101 

Wrapping machine, package. F. Girnnd 042 030 

Wrought articles, making, J. II. Dods 942. 4S9 



A printed copy of the specification and drawing 
of any patent in the foregoing list, or any patent 
in print issued since 1803, will be furnished from 
this office for 10 cents, provided the name and 
number of the patent desired and the date he 
given. Address Munn & Co., Inc., 361 Broadway, 
New York. 

Canadian patents may now be obtained by the In- 
ventors for any of the inventions named in the fore- 
going list. For terms and further particulars 
address Munn & Co., Inc., 361 Broadway, New 
York. 



Please mention the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN when writing to advertisers 



480 



Scientific American 



December 18, 1909. 



The Engine — Not The 
Operator 



All classes of 
operators get sat- 
isfactory service 
out of 




I LJ {% Gasoline 



Engines 



Not only efficient, but simple, sure, economical. 
Built on right lines for full power service. 

Styles of engines adapted to all usee, "Vertical, 
Horizontal (Portable and Stationary) and Traction. 
Air-cooled, Water-cooled, 1 to 25 horse power. For 
catalog and particulars address 

INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO. OF AMERICA 

(Incorporated) 

15 Harvester Bldg.. Chicago, U. S. A. 



LEARN 




A WATCHMAKER 

Bradley Polytechnic Institute 

Horolo<fical Department 

Peoria 1 Illinois 

Formerly Pntsons Horological Inat. 

Largest and Itest Wateb School 

in America 
We teach Watch Work, Jewelry, 
Engraving, Clock Work, Optics. 
Tuition reasonable. Board and 
rooms ne.tr school at moderate rates. 
Send for Cnt.ilog or' information. 




Free large Catalogue 

/CONTAINS list of 3,000 magazines, 
^^ newspapers and Club offers. It is the 
handsomest and most complete magazine 
guide ever published. Printed throughout 
in two colors. It is crowded with profitable- 
to-you suggestions. You cannot afford to be 
without it. The name HANSON is the 
accepted stamp of reliability and promptness 
■n Ihe magazine field. This Catalogue for 
,'91 — FREE for the asking — will 

Save You 
Magazine Money 

We have the largest Magazine Agency 
in the world, and we are known every 
where. Your address on a postal secures 
this valuable book FREE. Send us your 
name and address to-day — We will do 
the rest. 
J. M. Hanson's Magazine Agency 

240 Hanson Block, Lexington, Ky. 




ft/*~fC/Af 

TAPES AND RULES 

ARE THE BEST. 

for sale everywhere. Send for 
Catalog No. 16. 

LVFKIN RULE CO. 

Saginaw, Mich.. U. S. A. 

New York and London. 



Veeder Counters 

to register reciprocating 
movements or revolu- 
tions. Cut full size. 
Booklet Free. 

VEEDER MFG. CO. 

18 Sargeanl St., Hartford, Conn. 

Cyclometers, Odometers, 

Tachometers. Counters 

and Fine Castings. 

Represented in Great Britain by 
Messrs. Markt & Co., Ltd., 6 
City Road, 1* inshuTr Square, 
London, E. C, England. 




WE WILL MAKES 



your models 
1 give you 
' estimates on 
manufacture of any metal novelty. Automatic ma- 
chinery, tools, dies and expert work our soecialtv 
AUTOMATIC HOOK & EYE CO., Hoboken, N. J. 



COLD GALVANIZING. 

AMERICAN PROCESS MO ROYALTIES. 

SAMPLESandINFORMATIGN j» APPLICATION. 



NICKEL 

ABD 

Electro-Plating 
aracas no Mitt till 

TBS 

Hanson &VanWinkla 

Co., 

Ncwnrli. N. J. 

28 & 30 9 . Canal St. 
Chicaeo. 



Mclntyre Guaranteed 
Sure- 
Service 

Always-Ready 



BlOl Or bUL-L-ii-. ;.iii! fl r.i.-Mi-j-. 

bUTO prott-d their ->-■:■■:.-..■ 

worth us plnaaur? 

vehirlea m 4 

one i -.in i ■. :,- 

ark iehi.-1-s 

'fOr [!in!:-.-!.;i'i-. 

In eierj part 
WDrldj 




Little Book About 
Fort Smith 



Send to-day for it and find out about the opportunities offered in 
the most rapidly growing city between St. Louis and Dallas. 

Did you see our advertisement "WE WANT FACTORIES"? 

We want more now. 

Fort Smith, Arkansas, offers to capital seeking investment in fac- 
tories and to individuals or corporations having manufacturing plants 
and looking for new locations the best proposition possible to-day in 
the United States. 

Fort Smith is situated in the center of almost fabulously unde- 
veloped wealth of semi-anthracite coal ; the largest gas field in the 
United States ; vast deposits of building stone ; and in the close 
neighborhood of approximately twenty billion feet of commercial 
hard and soft wood timber. 

Fort Smith has forty thousand population — nine railways — and 
is the natural and logical center for the manufacturing and wholesale 
market for the Southwest. 

Fort Smith has splendid homes, fine schools and churches, beauti- 
ful parks and public buildings, and every street in the city is being 
paved. It presents magnificent opportunities for both labor and 
capital. Jobbing trade now $40,000,000 annually. 

We want factories of every kind and character, and will make 
every reasonable concession to parties desiring to locate here. 

For further information address the Commercial League, 
Fort Smith, Arkansas. 



Rem oh Gems 



Looks I lite a diamond— wears like 
, diH.uioii.d- brilliancy gn&ranteed 
forever— stands fll.ng like ad i amend 
-stands BAM like a diamond — has 
no paste, foil or artificial bncklmr- 
I-3tHh the coBtoftliAnm mis. Bftonly 
In solid sold mountings. A marvel' 
ousiy reconstructed ^m, nut im 
imitation. Sonton approval, write 
for our catalog, it's free. No canvnsucrt, wanted. 

If not satisfactory money refunded. 
Remoh Jewelry Co, , 453 N. Broadway, hU Louis 



^*. 






j$60 



GOES LIKE SIXTY 

sens LIKE SIXTY? 
'l SELLS FOR SIXTY 

i IfllUlUHrff GILSON 

IGASOLENE 

'ENGINE 

•ForPumpini, Cream 

LScparAtors,Chums,Wash Ma- 

^ciunrs. tie. rnzE rr.'AL 

I Aakfar catalog-ail sizes 

GILSON MFG. co. jog Park St. Port Washington, Wis. 



FOR 1^48 YEARS 

A.. VV . FABLK has made the highest grade of lead pencils 

11 



M 



l»>i 



DRAWING DtT 1 lVJaf^^ I ¥ ^2> 
COPYING M^ jC^l^l\_-*l L^>^9 

INK «_.._^_,^_^..._^_^i^i^i._~ 



represent that acme of perfection that can be obtained only by experience and long effort to produce 

the finest it is possible to manufacture. 

Sold by atl stationers and dealers in artists' and drawing materials. Sample will be sent you on receipt of 10c. 

A. ~W. FABER. 49 Dickerson Street, Newark, New Jersey 



Will You Try On< 
if we send it FREE? 

We waDt every merchant, dealer, 
bookkeeper and clerk who re- 
quires quick, accurate footings 
to prove for himself the worth 
and economy of the " little 
magician "—The 

Rapid Computer 
Adding Machine 

We'll send it to you on five days' 

free trial — if it pleases you, pay our 

price of only $25.00 — if it doesn't, send it 

back at our expense. It does its work perfectly 

" at any angle— can rest on any deslt or on bo»k 

I alongside figures you wish to add. A wonder as a 

I saver of time and errors. Capacity 9,999,999.99. 

I Save time and money — write us to-day if you'd 

e^LB^^^EEI like to try one. Catalogue free. (1) 

[*I1» COMri'THIt rO„ MHfl Trllume Bldg., Ca.in.gi> 




HORSE POWER COMPLETE S JK*a5WlMMt-DIATt 

,2 t» J Cfliflderi, 3t B aOH. p, T UV — DfLIIIEny, 
Crkce-tuQ and upwirdi. Writs for COloi vntalag t«idfly— With 
beautiful ccAct printer yacht Grayling— ftmt.ct)t motor borit of 
its length mid beam in tliu world — im^t complete marina 

crtak>gvvi?rpiiiili>=lnil. Craj Molar Co. 11 LribSf . Detroil, Midi. 



Polar Water Stills 

ALL CAPACITIES ' 

For colleges, clubs, 
hotels, hospitals, 
laboratories, fac- 
tories, bottlers, or 
the home ; wher- 
ever a chemically 
pure, palatable 
water is essential 

r desired. 
Automatic, 
e c o n o mical 
and depend- 
able appara- 
tus. 

Cities of 5,000 
population and 
over will sup- 
port a Distilled 
Water Busi- 
ness. Invest- 
ment sm a II. 
Profits large- 
Season all year. 

1 nv estimate. 
Send for Booklet. 

POLAR ICE MACHINE CO. 

83 E. Jackson Boulevard 
CHICAGO 




TheBall Transmission 



Automobiles &MotorBoats 

NEW YORK .GEAR WORKS. 

56 GRE.ENPOINT AVE ., BROOKLYN . N , V . 




TtTITTatrn Cards, circulars, book, news- 

.IT XtlXXH J. paper. Presses, I,arj>er?I8 Ru- 

— ■«■ __iar? SfX). Sbvc Honey. Prim 

If fhHr r " r other*, pic profit. All easy. 

Jfc^' *** rules sent. Write factory lor 

f| W VI press cattilon.TYl'K. paper, ate. 

X* W XI THE I'KKSS II) HrrldBi, Inn, 



HUMtTOlL 



.IIIBRICATIS^ 

ANYTHING *', 



KIND 
UHHI 

CLIWTON ST. 

c.H. b t s iv a co !Vf l£tf CUSA 



■s-ai 



Please mention the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN when writing to advertisers 



